BOOK Sigfried Giedion Space Time and Architecture.pdf
INTRODUCTION  Unknown in the United States and using a language that is foreign to me, I must seek the shortest way to direct contact with an American public. The way of personal contact is always the shortest route to understanding, not merely in personal but in general matters. Let me begin then by saying a few words about where I come from and where I intend to go — for these facts have a bearing upon the discussion that follows.  As an art historian I am a disciple of Heinrich Wolfflin. In our personal contacts with him as well as through his distinguished lectures, we, his pupils, learned to grasp the spirit of an epoch. Wolfflin’s incisive analysis made clear to us the true meaning and significance of a painting or a piece of sculpture.  He delighted in contrasting one period with another. He em- ployed this method most effectively both in his teaching and in his books —in his Renaissance and Baroque (1889), in Classical Art (1899), in which the fifteenth century is opposed to the sixteenth, and even in his Principles of Art (Kunst- geschichtliche Grundbegriffe, 1915), which had just appeared when I studied under him at Munich. Many of his pupils have tried to emulate this method of contrasting styles, but none have achieved the same depth and directness.  In my own first book, Late Baroque and Romantic Classicism (Munich, 1922, written as a thesis), I tried to follow Wolfflin’s method. The periods contrasted were the end of the eighteenth century and the beginning of the nineteenth, both periods of classicism. The Louis X VI style formed in shape and structure the end of late baroque tendencies, with classicism serving as its framework. The classicism of the beginning of the nine- teenth century found its most significant outlet in that country of romantics, Germany. In the architecture of the time the trend toward an individualistic isolation of rooms from each other was nowhere so strongly marked as it was in Germany — in the work of K. F. Schinkel, for example. This was the true architectural equivalent of the individualism of the romantic poets.  I called this period one of romantic classicism. Classicism in both periods was only a coloring — a transitory fact, as I would  7 PSremmeness ase  say now. The essential characteristic of this time was that, beneath the classic exterior, the baroque inheritance had begun to disintegrate and nineteenth century tendencies had begun to appear.  The problem which fascinated me was how our epoch had been formed, where the roots of present-day thought lay buried. This problem has fascinated me from the time I first became capable of reasoning about it until today.  Heinrich Wélfflin was the pupil of Jakob Burckhardt, and succeeded him as professor at the University of Basle when he was only twenty-seven years old. He later taught with great success at Berlin and Munich. Wolfflin always laid stress on the wide view taken by Jakob Burckhardt and often quoted Burckhardt’s words not only in his lectures but also in con- yersation. Thus the Swiss historical tradition formed the basis of our instruction in the science of art. But I am afraid that many of us did not grasp the significance of Burckhardt — a significance which reached beyond his métier — until much later.  Jakob Burckhardt (1818-1897) was the great discoverer of the age of the Renaissance. He first showed how a period should be treated in its entirety, with regard not only for its painting, sculpture, and architecture but for the social institutions of its daily life as well.  I shall mention only one book in this connection, his Civiliza- tion of the Renaissance, which first appeared in 1860. The English translation was produced in 1878. An extremely well- informed review of it appeared in the New York Herald for October 20, 1880. Burckhardt, who normally shrank from praise, was so pleased with this review that he wrote “ Bravo!” at the bottom.  In Cwilization of the Renaissance Burckhardt emphasized sources and records rather than his own opinions. He treated only fragments of the life of the period but treated them so skillfully thal a picture of the whole forms in his readers’ minds. Jakob Burckhardt had no love for his own time: he saw during the forties an artificially constituted Europe which was on the verge of being overwhelmed by a flood of brutal forces. The 
South at that Lime appeared to have withdrawn from history ; for Burckhardt it bad the quiet of a tomb. So it was to Lhe South, to [taly, that he turned for refuge from all those things for which he fell hatred and disgust. Bul Burckhardt was a man of great vitality, and a man of vitality cannot entirely desert his own time. His flight to Italy produced the finest traveler's guide that has ever been wrilten, his Cicerone (1855) -- a book which has opened the eyes of four generations to the unique qualities of the Italian scene, His Civilization of the Renaissance aimed at an objective ordering of factual material, but in it his greatest efforls are devoted to uncovering the origins of the man of loday. John Ruskin, Burekhardt's immediate contemporary, also hated the age and sought to draw the means for its regeneration from other periods (though not those which preoccupied the Swiss historian).  But I owe as large a debt to the artists of today as to these guides of my youth. It is they who have laught me to observe seriously objects which seemed unworthy of interest, or of interest only to specialists. Modern artists have shown that mere fragments lifted from Lhe life of a period can reveal ils habits and feelings; that one must have Lhe courage to take small things and raise them to large dimensions.  These artists have shown in their pictures that the furniture of daily life, the unnoticed articles that result from mass produc- tion — spoons, bottles, glasses, all the things we look at hourly without seeing — have become parts of our natures. They have welded themselves into our lives without our knowing it.  My activities have brought me into friendly contact with the architects of our day. We have sat together in small groups about many tables in Europe, from Stockholm to Athens — not to discuss problems in art or matters of specialized detail but to determine as clearly as possible what directions housing, town planning, or regional planning had lo take. This close and continual contact granted me the privilege of seeing architectural problems in their nascent slate.  THE IHSTORIAN’S RELATION TO HIS AGE  The historian. the historian of architecture especially, must be in close contact with conlemporary conceplions.  Only when he is permeated by the spirit of his own Ume is he prepared to detect those tracts of the past which previous genera lions have overlooked.  History is nol static but dynamic. No generation ts privileged to grasp a work of art from all sides: cach actively’ living generation discovers new aspects of it. But these new aspects will not be discovered unless the historian shows in his field the cournze and energy which artists have displayed in their use of methods developed in their own epoch.  Archilects have imitated other periods, taken over their special shapes and techniques, in the hope of escaping from transitory work and achieving a timeless rightness. And afler a short time their buildings have become lifeless masses of stone, in spite of the incorporation into them of details from works of eternal beauly. These men possessed the exact contrary of the * Midas touch “ — everything they pul their hands on turned to dust rather Lhan to gold. Today we can see why. History is nol simply the repository of unchanging facts, bul a process, a pattern of living and changing altitudes and interpretations. As such, itis deeply a part of our own natures. To turn back- ward lo a past age is not just to inspect it. to find a pattern which will be the same for all comers. The backward look transforms its object: every spectator at every period — at every moment, indeed — inevitably transforms the past according to his own nature. Absolute points of reference are no more open to the historian than they are to the physicist; both produce descriptions relative to a particular situation.  Likewise there are no absolute standards in the arts: the nine- tecnth-century painters and architects who thought certain forms were valid for every age were mistaken, Flistory cannot be Louched without changing it.  The painters of our period have formulated a different  atuitude: lo spetlatore nel centro del quadro. The observer must be placed in Lhe middle of the painting, not at some isolated 
observation point outside. Modern art, like modern science, recognizes the fact that observation and what is observed form one complex siLuation — to observe something is to act upon and alter it.  THlistorians quile generally distrust absorption into contempo- rary ways of thinking and feeling as a menace to their scientific detachment, dignity, and breadth of outlook. But one can be thoroughly the creature of one’s own period, embued with its methods, without sacrificing these qualities. Indeed. the historian in every field must be united with his own time by as widespread a system of roots as possible. The world of history, like the world of nature, explains itself only to Lhose who ask the right questions, raise the right problems. The his- lorian must be intimately a part of his own period to know what questions concerning the past are significant to it. Apart from this approach, history remains a wilderness of blank happenings in which no creative work is possible. Only dead chronologies and limited special studies will be produced. The historian detached from the life of his own time writes irrelevant history, deals in frozen facts. But it is his unique aud nontransferable task to uncover for his own age its vital interrelalionships with the past.  The historian cannot in actual fact detach himself from the life about him; he, too, stands in the stream. The ideal his- torian — out of the press of affairs, au-dessis de la mélée, sur- veying all time and all existence from a lofty pedestal — is a fiction.  The historian, like every other man, is the creature of his Lime and draws from it both his powers and his weaknesses. By virtue of lus calling he may survey a larger circle of events than his average conlemporary, bul this docs not lift him out of his own historical selling. It is even to his advantage lo be forced from his academic chair occasionally and made to participate in Lhe common struggles of the moment. For direct contact with life and its necessilies sharpens his abilities to penetrate the jungle of printed records to the unfalsified voices of the real actors.  It is the task of the historian to recognize the truth through all its disguises.  Unfortunately the historian has often used his office to pro- claim the eternal right of a static past. He has gone further and has used arguments based on past happenings to restrict  and distort the future.  THE DEMAND FOR CONT  ATY  For planning of any sort our knowledge must go beyond the state of affairs that actually prevails. To plan we must know what lias gone on in the past and feel what is coming in the future. This is not an invitation to prophecy but a demand for a universal outlook upon the world.  At the present time the difficult field of town planning seems to resist all handling. In times when a universal viewpoint existed no genius was required to produce urban treatments of high quality whose influence long outlasted the period of their creation. Achievements brought about for a specific purpose and # specific social class proved serviceable in a quite different period for different purposes and different groups. This was possible simply because the original crealion came out of a universal point of view.  Today the urge toward such universality is deeply felt by evervone. It is the reaction against a whole century spent in living from day to day. What we sce around us is the reckon- ing that this shortsightedness has piled up.  This living from day to day, from hour to hour, with no feeling for relationships, does not merely lack dignity; it is neither natural nor human. It leads to a pereeption of evenls as isolated points rather than as parts of a process with dimen- sions reaching out inlo history. The demand for a closer con- tact with history is the natural oulcome of this condition. To have a closer contact with history: in other words, to carry on our lives ina wider time-dimension. Present-day happen- ings are simply the most conspicuous sections of a continuum; they are like that small series of wave lengths between ullra- violet and infra-red which translate themselves into colors visible Lo the human cye. 
The destructive confusion of events in the world at large today is so great that the movement toward universality is clearly visible in the field of science and scholarship. The desire for similarity of methods in the separate sciences — including the social sciences — in philosophy, and in art, becomes more and more definite. Already the demand for a universal outlook upon the world has made itself felt in the college: intellectual connections between the various faculties are consciously being developed.  Everybody knows that we have far more means of bringing change under farsighted control than any of the peoples of earlier times. It is the new potentialities at our disposal which are the key to a new and balanced life for enormous numbers of men.  The desire for universality is an expression of the need we feel to master and codrdinate these new potentialities.  It is always dangerous to assume that one’s own time has an exceptional importance. Even so, the years through which we are living seem to constitute a test period for mankind, a test of man’s ability to organize his own life.  CONTEMPORARY HISTORY  A wider survey of the whole domain of human activity is the unmistakable need of the century. It is in this connection that history can play an important role. One of the functions of history is to help us to live in a lafger sense, in wider dimen- sions. This does not mean that we should copy the forms and attitudes of bygone periods, as the nineteenth century did, but that we should conduct our lives against a much wider histori- cal background.  In the part of contemporary history we shall be concerned with, the most important developments are the changes that have come about in daily life.  The eternal complaint of the nineteenth century was that all the dignity had gone out of ordinary life. And ordinary life did lose its dignity from the moment it was put on an exclu-  ively day-to-day basis. People lost all sense of playing a part st pistory: they were either indifferent to the period in which jhey lived or they hated it. When they compared themselves with the people of other periods their activities seemed unim- portal stand without significance, either good or bad.  The same feeling produced an extreme disregard for the immediate past — for contemporary history, Lhat is. Uncon- sciously, jn their matter-of-fact constructions, the men of the ninetcenth century were producing the constituent facts from which the future was to take its structure. They did not sce this. however; indeed, it is sometimes not recognized today, The result was not merely the neglect of contemporary history but something still worse —- the wanton destruction of the objects and the records which were essential to its understand- ing. Later periods will be forced to leave great gaps in their “accounts of the modes of existence of the nineteenth and twenLieth centuries and the origin of these.  On every band we hear the complaint that essential documents have been lost through sheer indifference to our own tradition. The town planner, for example, cannot find the detailed ac- counts of the evolution of great cities which he needs in his researches. The virtues and defects of the various types of cities — governmental centers, sea ports, factory towns — can- not be compared, simply because there has been no steady and unified research. The fact that research has been so irregular means that the historian anxious to complete a survey such as this one must sometimes fall back on his own investigations. The danger of overemphasis is, of course, always present.  The history of nineleenth-century industry has suffered heavily from our indifference to our own tradition and is full of gaps. The extremely interesting development of tools, for example, can be seen only from the few surviving ninetcenth- century hardware calalogues. For the most part these cata- logues of the thirties, fifties, and seventies have been lost. There are only a few places where these irreplaceable docu- ments have been preserved; the library of the Victoria and Albert Museum in London is one of them.  The period in America when complicated trades abandoned handwork and changed over to machine production is a unique 
one, without counterpart elsewhere in the world. I myself visited a great factory outside Boston where clocks and watches were first assembled from standardized parts shortly after 1850. (This principle later found its most extensive use in the manufacture of automobiles.) The early products of this fac- tory were mentioned by some European observers of the seventies. I wanted to see examples of them and to study the early catalogues of the company. There were no old cata- logues at all— the company destroyed them, on principle, when they were three years old — and the only old watches were those which had come in for repairs. ‘There was, on the other hand, a Jarge, valuable, but historically unimportant collection of European watches.  The oldest mail-order house in the country, with an annual business of $500,000,000, is located in Chicago. [ went there to see what changes had been made in articles of daily life since Civil War times. The company possessed some material — incomplete, however — and very properly kept it in a safe. The Otis Elevator Company in New York had comparatively full records of their products — and the literature dealing with elevators is none too precise — but even here material dealing with the earliest beginnings had not been preserved.  In the 1880’s, when European architecture seemed given over to a future of muddle, indecision, and despair, a new architec- ture was growing up on the American prairies. From 1880 to the time of the Columbian Exposition of 1893 the “ Loop ” area in Chicago (its business quarter, that is) was the center of architectural development uot merely for the United States but for the whole world.  It may be that after a few decades the skyscraper automati- cally becomes a sort of blighted area and must be torn down. It may be that the Marshall Field wholesale store -— one of Chicago’s finest buildings and Henry Hobson Richardson’s best work — had to be destroyed to create a parking lot. It may be that there was no other direction for a highway except one that will eventually lead over the site of the Adler and Sullivan Auditorium, with ils unique theater interior. It may be that John Root’s Monadnock Block — the most celebrated of the early skyscrapers — cannot be protected  e advance of the subway system. Whether or not  ajust th ; ae lt upon the recent past 1s unavoidable docs not  this assau concert: us here. . Tt does concern us, however, that there is no particular feeling for what is being destroyed. Chicago seems quite unaware of the signilicance of the Chicago school. i went searching in Chicugo for pictures of the interiors of ils great hotels and apartient houses in the cighties, buildings which in their whole organization foreshadow ed many present-day develop- ments. One pholographer told me that he had destroyed thousands of plates picturing these interiors; he needed the space, and was aware of no reason why they should be pre- served. For the past few years several institutions in Chicago have heen endeavoring to preserve material of this sort. It is doubtful, however, whether their endeavors are enough Lo stop the losses that constantly occur.  These remarks have been made simply to indicate the wide- spreacl indifference to the immediate past, to the century out of which our period grows and derives the basic elements for its own life.  THE IDENTITY OF METHODS  Our period is a period of transition. The tangle of different tendencies continuing from the past or pointing to the future, tendencies which mix confusedly and interpenetrate al every point, makes our period seem to lack any definite line of advance. To some it presents the appearance of a chaos of contradictory impulses. An‘ eminent French sociologist wrote recently that ‘ we see around us nothing save tumult, aimless agitation, hesitant opinions, vacillating thoughts.”  We must not forget, however, that this particular transition period has lasted fora whole century. It has made itself felt in cach country at the same rate and in the same proportion as the disorder which the process of industrialization produced every where.  Ever since the opening of this transitional period, our mental life hag been without equilibrium. Our inner being has under- 
gone division. This state of the contemporary spiril has been recognized often enough, bul its consequences have not been drawn.  if chaos had for its only definition the coexistence of tendencies contradictory to one another, our period would certainly de- serve to be called chaotic. But we believe that these contra- dictions are merely surface ones.  There is this remarkable circumstance which we can observe today: sciences which differ widely in their objects are begin- ning to resemble each other in their methods. A continued and extensive search for exact knowledge is at the bottom of this growing resemblance. It is being recognized in all quarters that the ideas which we have Laken over from the past are both too complex and too crude.  A transition period may affect two observers in verv different ways. One may see only the chaos of contradictory traits and mutually destructive principles: the other may see beneath all this confusion those elements which are working together to open the way for new solutions. It is not a simple thing to decide between two such judgments, to determine which has emphasized the essential marks of the time. We need some objective guide to what is going on in the depths of the period, some sign by which we can determine whether or nol its dis- persed energies are being brought into united action. A com- parison of the methods which govern its major activities, its thinking and feeling, may afford us such an objective crilerion.  John Dewey, in his Ari as Experience, points out that “com- partmentalization of occupations and interests brings about separation of that mode of activity commonly called * practise * from insight, of imagination from executive doing, of significant purpose from work, of emotion from thought and doing.” Each of these activities is Lhen assigned “its own place in which it must abide. Those who wrile the anatomy of experi- ence then suppose that these divisions inhere in the very conslitution of human nature.”  It is just such an evolution which lies behind the doubt as Lo whether science and art have anything in common. The ques- Uon would not be raised except in a period where thinking and  fecling proceed on different levels in opposition to each other. In such a period, people no longer expect a scientific discovery to have any repercussions in the realm of feeling. It seems unnatural for a theory in mathematical physics to meet with all equivalent in the arts. Bul thts is to forget that the two are formulated by men living in the same period, exposed lo the same general influences, and moved by similar impulses. Thought and feeling could be entirely separated only by cut- ting men in bwo.  We have behind us a period in which thinking and feeling were separated. This schism produced individuals whose inner development was uneven, who lacked inner equilibrium: split personalities. The split personality as a psychopathic case does not concern us here; we are speaking of the inner dis- harmony which is found in the structure of the normal person- ality of this period.  What are the effects of this inner division? Only very rarely do we encounter a master in one field who is capable of recog- nizing workers of the same stature and tendency in another. Contemporary artists and scientists have lost contact with each other; they speak the language of their Lime in their own work, but they cannot even understand it as it is expressed in work of a different character. The great physicist may lack all understanding of a painting which presents the artislic equivalent of his own ideas. A great painter. may fail entirely to grasp architecture which has developed out of his own principles. Men who produce poetry which is purely an expression of this time are indifferent to the music which is contemporary in the same sense and to the same degree. This is our inheritance from the nineteenth century, during which the dilferent departments of human activity steadily lost touch with one another. The principles of laissez-faire and laissez- aller were extended to the life of the spirit.  Throughout the nineteenth century the natural sciences went splendidly ahead, impelled by the great tradition which the previous two hundred years had established, and sustained by problems which had a direction and momentum of their own. The real spirit of the age came out in these researches - in the realm of thinking, thal is. But these achievements 
al ra rt  ry  n-  were regarded as emotionally neutral, as having no relation to the realm of feeling. Feeling could not keep up with the swift advances made in science and the techniques. The cen- tury’s genuine strength and special accomplishments remained largely irrelevant to man’s inner life.  This orientation of the vital energies of the period is reflected in the make-up of the man of today. Scarcely anyone can escape the unbalanced development which it encourages. The split personality, the unevenly adjusted man, is sympto- matic of our period.  But behind these disinlegraling forces in our period tendencies leading toward unity can be observed. From the first decade of this century on, we encounter curious parallelisms of method in the separate realms of thought and feeling, science and art. Problems whose roots lie entirely in our time are being treated in similar ways, even when their subject matter is very dif- ferent and their solutions are arrived al independently.  In 1908 the great mathematician Hermann Minkowski first conceived a world in four dimensions, with space and time coming together to form an indivisible continuum. His Space and Time of that year begins with the celebrated statement, “ Henceforth space by itself, and time by itself, are doomed to fade away into mere shadows, and only a kind of union of the two will preserve an independent reality.” It was just at this time thal in France and in Italy cubist and futurist painters developed the artistic equivalent of space-time in their search for means of expressing purely contemporaneous feelings.  Some less spectacular duplications of methods in the fields of thought and feeling also date from this period. Thus new basic elements designed to permit the solving of problems that had just been recognized were introduced in construction and paint- ing around 1908. The basic identity of these elements will be discussed in Part VI, ‘* Space-Time in Art, Architecture, and Construction.”  Only a small part of the full range of the sciences can be mastered by a single man. Their specialized inquiries and complicated techniques of research make any far-reaching competency impossible. Bul, even apart from this impossibil-  ity, we Move ina different direclion today in seeking to arrive ata general outlook. It is no longer specific scientific facts and achievements that call for popularization, as was the case in the nineteenth century. Then even the greatest scientists felt sp necessary to acquaint the public with what was being done in their fields. In the thirties of the nineteenth century Michael Faraday in England and Francois Arago in France were greatly concerned with increasing popular knowledge of the sciences. Faraday’s chair during his lifetime was associated with the Royal Institution in London, a society founded in 1799 for “the promotion and the diffusion and extension of useful knowledge.” To the present day the weekly evening meetings of this rather exclusive society are attended by mem- bers only (white ties obligatory) in Faraday’s old lecture thea- ter in Albemarle Street, London. Faraday himself introduced in 1826 a special course for juvenile auditors which until the present day has been delivered every year at Christmas time. Francois Arago, the well-known physicist who discovered fundamental laws of electricity and who was a pioneer in the undulatory theory of light, was most celebrated for his gift for trealing difficult subjects — such as astronomy — in a popular manner. In his courses at the observatory in Paris, he spoke to an audience unacquainted with mathematics. The larger part of the fourteen volumes embracing his work is devoted to such popularizing.  University extension in the modern sense, introduced in the seventies of the nineteenth century at Oxford and Cambridge, grew out of these efforts to popularize scientific results.  Today a leading scientist — a “Secrétaire perpétuel de I’ Acad- émie.” such as Arago was, for example — would not make the popularization of scientific research one of his chief con- cerns. Other problems are more important today. The methods of science are of more concern to us now than any of their separate results.  The problem of today is not lo popularize science. What our period needs much more than this is to gain an understanding and a general view of the dominant methods in different fields  of human activity, recognizing their differences and their likencsses. 
The scientific education of our day is designed to produce extreme specialists. That there is, on the other hand, an urge toward interrelation cannot be denied. Yet there is no insti- lution to help us understand the interrelations that exist between the different sciences or between the sciences and the realm of feeling.  A general contemporary understanding of scientific method is more important for our culture as a whole than widespread knowledge of scientific facts. It is through their increasing similarity of method thal the various activilics of our times are drawing Logether to consLitute one culture. Some grasp ol the way in which different sciences resemble each other in the employment of similar methods is needed for insight into contemporary life as a whole.  But science is not an activity which goes on indepeudently of all others. Lach period lives in a realm of feeling as well as in a realm of thought, and changes in cach realm affect the changes in the other. Each period finds outlets for its emotions through different means of expression. Emotions and ex- pressive means vary concomitantly wilh the concepts that dominate the epoch. Thus in the Renaissance the dommant space conceptions found their proper frame in perspective, while in our period the conception of space-time leads the artist Lo adopt very different means.  Economics and politics have been taken as points of departure for explanations of the structure of a period in all its aspects. The influence of feeling upon realily, its constant permeation of all human activities, has been largely disregarded or felt to be of negligible importance. In tracing the interrelaled develop- ments in art, architecture, and construction through the period we have selected, it is precisely the influence of fecling which we shall emphasize.  Our cullure has a slructure different in many of its aspects from the cultures that grew up in pre-industrial periods. In the baroque period, for example, Leibnil arrived at the dis- covery of the calculus from a starting point in philosophy. ITe moved from a general. - one might say a cosmological — out- look to this particular discovery.  With our inheritance from preceding generations, we are obliged lo adopt a different starting point and follow another roule. We must take our departure from a large number of specialized disciplines and go on from there Loward a coherent eeneral outlook on our world. It is beside the point whether or pot this route is more difficult, more precarious, and less certain to end te success than the path that lay open to Leibnitz. It is the roule that present realities force us to bake. Unity, for us, will have lo come about through the unintended parallelisims inamethod that are springing up im the specialized sciences and the equally specialized arts. These are the indications that we are nearing a spontancously established harmony of emo- tional and intellectual activities.  In both conlemporary science and contemporary art it is possible Lo detect elements of the general pattern which our culture will embody. The situation is a curious one: our cullure is like an orchestra where the instruments lic ready tuned but where every musician is cut off from his fellows by a sound- proof wall, It is impossible to foretell the events that will have to come before these barriers are broken down, The only serv- ice the historian can perform is to point out this situation, Lo bring it into consciousness.  The degree to which its methods of thinking and of feeling coincide determines the equilibrium of an epoch. When these methods move apart from each other there is no possibility of a culture and a tradition. These are not deliberations remote from our subject: we shall soon see that it was just this un- fortunate schism between its thought and fecling which struck down the magnificent power of the nineteenth century. Out of such a schism come split personalities and split civilizations.  TRANSITORY AND CONSTITUENT FACTS  It is not the historian’s task to tell the public what pleases or displeases him personally. That is a private affair which loses all its interest in the telling. The historian is not required to correct an epoch in the light of his own opinions. Ile has to explain it, to show why history took a certain direction. The 
people who lived in a period can best tell us, out of their own inner feelings, whelher its development was happy or unhappy. The voices which come to us out of the fortunes or misfortunes of an age furnish indispensable testimony. No man of a later time, however great the impartiality which distance from the events has brought, can approach Lhe direct and certain feeling for a period which belonged Lo Lhose in the midst of the strug- gle — a struggle which involved their destiny. Words uttered out of the needs of the time are the historian’s real guides, and itis from them that he must draw his explanation of the period. The true critique of an age can only be Laken from the testi- mony of that age.  Entirely objective judgment with no trace of personal bias is, on the face of things, quite impossible. Nevertheless, the in- filtration of the personal must be reduced to a minimum. The historian is not solely a calaloguer of facts; it is his right, and indeed his duty, to pass judgment. His judgments must, how- ever, spring directly from his facts.  The historian cannot speak with the direct authority of a con- temporary, but he has a breadth of outlook which the con- temporary inevitably lacks. He sees facts which were hidden from the people of the time he studies. He can tell more or Jess short-lived novelties from genuinely new trends. The facts of history fall into one or the other of these classes, and it is the business of the historian to distinguish accurately between them.  Constituent facts are those tendencies which, when they are suppressed, inevitably reappear. Their recurrence makes us aware Lhat these are clements which, all together, are produc- ing a new tradition. Constituent facts in architecture, for example, are the undulation of the wall, the juxtaposition of nature and the human dwelling, the open ground-plan. Con- stituent facts in the nineteenth century are the new potentiali- ties in construction, the use of mass production in industry, the changed organization of society.  Facts of the other sort — equally the work of the forces moving in a period — lack the stuff of permanence and fail to attach themselves to a new tradition. At first appearance they may have all the éclat and brilliance of a firework display, but they  have no greater durability. Sometimes they are interlaced with every refinement of fashion — the furniture of the Second Empire in France is an instance. These we shall call transitory facts.  Transitory facts in their dash and glitter often succeed in tak- ing over the center of the stage, This was the case with the experiments in historical styles that went on — with infinite changes of direction — throughout the whole nineteenth cen- tury. The entire output of official painting was a Lransitory fact of that period, almost wholly without significance to the present day.  A period may be dominated by transitory or by constiluent facts; both alternatives are open. There is, however, no doubt which of these two classes of trends is the more likely to pro- duce a solution of the real problems of the age.  It is in this field that the historian is not only free to use his judgment but obliged to. To make the not always obvious distinction between transitory and constituent facts is his own personal responsibility.  ARCHITECTURE AS AN ORGANISM  We are looking for the reflection in architecture of the progress our own period has made toward consciousness of itself — of ils special limitations and potentialities, needs, and aims. Archilecture can give us an insight into this process just be- cause it is so bound up with the life of a period as a whole. Everything in it, from ils fondness for certain shapes to the approaches to specific building problems which it finds most natural, reflects the conditions of the age from which it springs. It is the product of all sorts of factors -— social, economic, scientific, technical, ethnological.  However much a period may try to disguise itself, its real nature will still show through in its architecture, whether this uses original forms of expression or attempts to copy bygone epochs, We recognize the character of the age as casily as we identify a friend’s handwriting beneath alltempted disguises. It is as an unmistakable index to what was really going on in 
a period that architecture is indispensable when we are seek- ing to evaluate that period.  In the great architectural masterpicces, as im every great work of art, the human shortcomings which every period exhibits so liberally fall away. This is why these works are true monu- ments of their epochs; with the overlay of recurrent human weaknesses removed, the central drives of the time of their creation show plainly.  But if architecture is the result of so many condilions, is it either proper or possible to examine it out of ils context, as a finite organism in ils own right?  An architecture may be called into being by all sorts of external conditions, but once it appears it conslitutes an organism in itself, with ils own characler and its own continuing life. Its value cannot be stated in the sociological or economic Lerms by which we explain ils origin, and its influence may continue after its original environment has altered or disappeared. Architecture can teach out beyond the period of its birth, beyond the social class that called it into being, beyond the style Lo which it belongs.  When a Roman baroque archilect of the late seventeenth cen- tury invents the undulating church fagade we can account for the invention in various ways. This was the lime of the Counter Reformation; means were demanded of focusing all the attention of the people upon the Church. Or we might invoke economic factors and attribute the undulation of the wall to the constricted streets of Rome and the economy of front which they made necessary.  3oth factors were no doubt involved. The undulating wall, however, was used later on, when these factors were no longer operative, in the great dwelling complexes of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. The undulating wall, once invented, became a constituent fact in architecture, and con- tinued to work in the realm of architectural knowledge after the Counter Reformation and Roman late baroque had both come to an end.  The chateau of Versailles admits of a purely sociological ex- planation. Or, again, the shapes that compose it and the plan-  ying of its rooms can be analyzed in the light of the historical styles from which they derive. The Italian and Dutch influences in the great gardens can be disentangled. AU these studies restll ina picture of the Lime, taken from various angles, which is certainly informative and interesting They overlook, how- ever. the conslituent facts, the lasting lendencies, which made their first appearance at Versailles.  In a modern work of art it is the relationships between the elements in the composition that are decisive in determining its character. Modern science likewise seeks to fit the objects of its study into a relational scheme. [t is nol the qualities which make these objects unique among others that are of in- terest but rather the ways in which they function in their enviroument. History is always the last of the sciences to develop a method in harmony with its own period. Neverthe- less. a modern history seems to be taking form which is follow- ing the direction art and science have already adopted. The historian nowadays seems more concerned with the links be- tween periods, the lines of foree which persist and develop through several periods, Lhan with those special aspects which separate each period from every other.  In the arts, periods are differentiated by the “ styles * which became fixed and definite in cach stage of development. And ihe study of the history of styles was the special work of nine- teenth-century historiaus, a work most skillfully carried through. But it may be that the links and associations be- iween periods — the constiluent facts — are more important to us than self-enclosed entities such as styles.  When we consider the chateau of Versailles, for example, what we find most interesting in it is that here, for the first time. a great. dwelling complex (equal to a small lown in size) was placed in direct contact with nature. This had never been done before on such a large scale. The juxtaposition of resi- denees with nature was one of the constituent facts that grew out of the period of Louis XLV, A century later, this pattern for living was adopted in town planning for a completely dif- ferent social elass in another country.  The associations and interrelatious of events are what matter Most tous. We know thal there are no isolated or spontaneous 
happenings, and we look always for the connections between them.  Even though architecture is inseparable from life as a whole, it is still possible to write a history of architecture in which it is regarded as an independent organism. The case is no dif- ferent from that of mathematics or physical science. The evolution of mathematical knowledge is discussed ordinarily without reference to the social background against which it took place — this in spite of the fact that there is a baroque mathematics, as well as a baroque physics. The integral cal- culus is a perfectly consistent outgrowth of the baroque univer- salistic point of view. It is no coincidence that in this period lwo invesLigators bit upon it simullaneously, though the most promising of previous efforts in this direction invariably stopped short of a solution. And the two discoverers developed distinctively baroque schemes in other fields — Newton in his universally active laws of gravilation, Leibnitz in the monad’s internal relationships to the entire universe. But it would not occur to anyone to stress the baroque ori- gin of the integral calculus. It is independently a part of the whole body of mathematical knowledge, and its most significant aspect is the role it played in the evolution of mathematics.  The human factor obviously plays a much larger part in architecture than it does in science; the two are uot entirely comparable. Nevertheless there is a history of archilecture, and there are developments which are influenced by architec- tural considerations alone and can be evaluated solely in architectural terms. This history from baroque to ninetcenth- century times has its slormy moments and ils full share of dramatic episodes.  If it is the general line of evolution which interests us — the development which runs through different periods, social orders, and races — then the formal and stylistic variations which mark Lhe separate slages will lose some of their impor- tance. Our allention will shill to the history of architecture as an enterprise with a continuous and independent growth of its own, apart from questions of economics, class interests, race, or other issues.  Architecture is not exclusively an affair of styles and forms, por ig it completely determined by sociological or economic conditions. It has a life of its own, grows or dwindles, finds new potentialities and forgets them again. ‘The view of architecture as a growing organism is particularly useful in the study of American architecture. In this field concentration on styles, on particular outlels or manifestations of the life of architec- ture. leads us nowhere. The fundamental line of development that runs through the different periods, ignoring stylistic fashions. is the only way of escape from complete confusion. Styles and Lheir variations form a baffling maze, with all its alleys stopped.  From the beginning, styles in America were imported. They were nol developed in the country but came here full-grown. None of them in the nincleenth century — romantic, Victorian, Tudor, Gothic revival—is representative of the American spirit, whose adventures and changes went on outside their narrow limits. The manor houses of the romautics, the Victorian villas, even Lhe doorways and columns of colonial dwellings — charm- ing as they are —- mislead rather than inform us about that spirit. The elements of American architecture have their sources elsewhere.  PROCEDURE  We intend to see how our period has come to consciousness of itself in one field, architeclLure. To do this we must understand the architectural inheritance of our period, the knowledge which had been continuously evolved in the preceding periods. ‘These periods do not have to be examined in their entirety. Tt will be enough to see how a new space conception appears in Lie early Renaissance with the revival of the direct and dis- interested study of nature. Two and a half centuries after- ward, in late baroque times, this conception is given a new boldness and flexibility.  Qur next concern will be the ways in which outer space was  organized, first in Lhe South and then (in the seventeenth cen- tury) in northern countries -— France and England. These 
developments, employing the architectural experience which had accumulated since the Renaissance, raised town planning and the organization of space on a large scale to new heights. Throughout the eighteenth century this tradition in urbanism spread and developed. All over Europe we encounter examples of ils ability to bring separate and often already existent ele- ments inlo splendid, coherent, and surprising unity. At that time, just before industrialization set in, town planning was advancing toward solutions which artists of our day are once more atlempting — with the changed approach which new needs and new knowledge diclate.  The fact. Lhat we are considering architecture as an organism makes it natural for us to examine both ils beginning and its end, construction and town planning. And it will be easier for us to deal with our subject if we can, so Lo speak, use lwo handles to pick it up by. At all events, iL will be unecessary for us Lo give more attention Lo construction and town planning than would be the case if we were writing a history of styles.  It would be a mistake to look at modern engineering construc- lions only through the eyes of the engincer or to sce in them only efficient adjustments Lo useful purposes. Their technical aspects will not concern us so much as the general methods that appear in them and their content of fecling — prophetic of archilectonic expressions which come later.  In the nineteenth century, as in all periods when methods of production are changing, construction was particularly im- portaul for the architectural knowledge which lay hidden in it. The new potentialities of the period are shown much more clearly in its engineering constructions than in its strictly architectural works. For a hundred years architecture lay smothered in a dead, eclectic atmosphere in spite of its con- tinual attempts al escape. All that while, construction played the part of archileclure’s subconsciousness, contained things which it prophesied and half revealed long before they could become realities. ‘The constituent facts in the nineteenth century can often be found in construction when the ruling architecture gives no clue to them. It is construction and not architecture which offers the best guideposts through the century.  Architecture has caught up with construction very gradually. Our own period has been slowly finding the ability lo express in architecture what construction bas for a long while been mutely signifying in its abstract language. This process moved so slowly that around 1900 on the Continent most of the buildings from which the modern development stems lacked all connection with human residence. They were factories, stock exchanges, warehouses, and the like. The building schemes which represent the first solutions in the manner of the present day were set forward in a neutral atmosphere, one far removed from the range of intimate personal feelings. Architects today are perfectly aware thal. the future of archi- tecture is inseparably bound up with town planning. A single beautiful house or a single fine residential development ac- complishes very little. Kyerything depends on the unified organization of life. The interrelations between house, town, and conntry, or residence, labor. and leisure, can no longer be left to chance. Conscious planning is demanded.  In a single building something extraordinary may be sought after and achieved. The whole body of a cily, however, shows heyond dispute the slate of the architectural knowledge of a period. Tt shows the extent lo which the period was capable of organizing its own life.  Iu Europe during the nineties a demand for morality in archi- teclure arose in many different countries. As van de Velde puls i, people saw that the reigning architecture was a“ lie,” all posturing and no truth, and that greater purity of expression was needed. This means that, besides the urge to find new ways of expression suitable to the limes, there was the more general urge to bring arlislic expression into harmony with the new po- tentiiities born of the age. Or we might say that the desire grew up to reconcile methods of feeling with methods of thinking.  We shall observe the development which the demand for morality set under way through some close-ups of a few of its critical stages. The whole process is bound up with the pro- gressive awakening to the potentialities inherent in modern construction: with Lhe iron-skeleton building in Belgium of the nineties, for example, and with the ferroconcrete skeleton in France around 1900. 
Le  Architecture gradually threw off its confusion and indecision in Lhe face of the new building tasks of the century. I saw its way clearly first as regards those buildings which stood half- way between “neutral” industrial constructions and the hunian residence, with its inescapable associations of feeling. Thus the gap between bare construction and architeclure in the grand manner is first bridged in the Chicago business buildings of the 1880's. The architecture of the Chicago school shows with astonishing clarity the urge to use constructional discoveries expressively that is a keynote in this period.  It was the Chicago atmosphere that made it possible for a phenomenon like Frank Lloyd Wright to appear during the nineties. During his stay in Chicago, Wright reached solu- tions of the dwelling problem which furnished the basis for further developments in Europe at the hands of the post-war generation. These men resumed the problem at the point where Wright had left off.  Up to 1910 architects tried many ways of arriving at a new feeling for space — the basis and the strongest impulse for original architectonic creation. They could never quile break through. Only the narrow gates of *“ fitness for purpose ” and “ rejection of historical styles ’’ were open to such endeavors.  Around 1910 an event of decisive importance occurred: the discovery of a new space conception in the arts. Working in their studios as though in laboratories, painters and sculptors investigated the ways in which space, volumes, and materials existed for feeling.  The speculations of the mathematical physicists seem very far removed from realily and from practical affairs, but lhey have led to profound alterations in the human environment. In the same way the experiments of Lhe cubists seemed to have little significance for any kind of practice — even for architecture. Actually, however, it was just such work which gave the architects the hinls they needed to master realily in their particular sphere. These discoveries offered architecture the objective means of organizing space in ways that gave form to contemporary feelings.  Our interest is confined to the reflection in architecture of the process by which the period has moved toward self-  consciousness. We shall follow the development only to that int when architecture achieves a clear mastery of means of expression natural to our time. ‘This point is reached about 1926 oF 1927.  In the field of town planning we shall consider only those places » here the furthest advance was made at a given period. The Landon squares (1800-50) illustrate Lhe continuation into the nineteenth century of late baroque urban forms. The rue corridor, aD outstanding fact of nineteenth-century urbanism, has its first large-scale development in Haussmann’s transfor- mation of Paris (1850-70). The evolution to the city of today js summarized in the slep-by-slep development of Amsterdam that has continued from 1900 until the present time.  In town planning we cannot ignore the developments that are still in progress. Town planning, always Lhe last branch of architecture to reach full growth, has begun to arrive at new conceplions only quite recently — since about 1925. We shall try lo assemble the fragmentary and dispersed work that has been done and derive from it some insight into the tendencies which are still evolving.  The history of architecture could be treated by sketching, in yery broad strokes, all the great varicly of movements and the masses of facts connected with them. But in attempting lo determine the extent and the nature of our period’s conscious- ness of itself, it is more helpful to examine rather carefully cross sections of decisive stages in the history of archilecture. We prefer to deal with fewer events more penetratingly, in close-up view. A few facts seen clearly cnough may lead to a knowledge of something more important than the isolated facts themselves: the inner structure of architecture at the slage of growth which it has reached in our time.  There are some individual artists whom we shall also scrutinize at close range, men like Borromini, Labrouste, Berlage, Gro- pius. Le Corbusier, men in whom the spiril of an age crystallizes. Tn cach case we shall examine only those of their works which are most helpful in understanding the period,  Often we can learn more about the way in which nineleenth- century life developed from forgotten and unsuccessful figures  SI  to  al 
of the period than we can from its greal official celebrities. Simple utilitarian structures reveal more of its essential spirit than magnificent edifices intended to have an immortal appeal. The anonymous products of industry, unpretentious articles of daily use, often show more creative force than luxurious and immensely expensive furnishings.  Picasso once wrote, * The artist is a receptacle for emotions, regardless of whether they spring from heaven, from earth, from a scrap of paper, from a passing face, or from a spider's web. That is why he must not distinguish between things. Quarliers de noblesse do not exis among objects.” The his- torian has to take the same altilude toward his material: he wants to know the truth about life, and he must take it where he finds it. It will not do for him to study only the highest artistic realizations of a period. Often he can learn more about the forces that shape its life from the common objects and ulensils which are the undisguised products of its industry.  pve? Tf OUR ARCHITECTURAL INHERITANCE 
With no clear perception of the relation in which it stands to the past or of the route by which it must advance into the future, the life of any period will be lived on an aimless, day-to- day basis. Our time has suffered severely from this short- sighted, laissez-faire altitude, and from the complete lack of planning that is its result.  But it is plain that a revoll against this myopic outlook is under way, in science, art, and industr y. There is a growing demand for a wider survey of all realms of human activity.  It is in this connection that history has an important role to play. Ilislory can reveal to our period the forgotten elements of its being, just as our parents can recover for us those child- hood and ancestral peculiarities which continue to determine our natures though they are nol to be found in our memories. A connection with the past is a prerequisite for the appearance of a new and self-confident tradition.  THE NEW SPACE CONCEPTION: PERSPECTIVE  Jakob Burckhardt in The Civilization of the Renaissance as- serts that “‘ the most clevated political thought and the most varied forms of human development are found united in the history of Florence, which in this sense deserves the name of the first modern state in the world. ... That wondrous Flor- entine spirit, at once keenly crilical and artistically creative, was incessantly Wwanslorming the social and political condition of the state, and as incessantly describing and judging the change.”” But Florence around 1400, at the beginning of the quatlrocento, was important not merely as the home of political and social experiments; it was also Lhe place where the esprit nouvean of the Renaissance broke through most strongly. It was this peculiarly Florentine temper that made it the “ unique cily —- the most important workshop of the Ilalian and, in- deed, of the modern European spirit.”  The Renaissance ferment which was working in Florence showed itself under the widest variely of forms. We shall con- sider only one of the new developments in which it resulled: a new conception of space. At the start of the fifteenth century,  in Florence, this conception was translated inlo artistic terms tbrough the discovery of perspective. Throughout the fol- lowing five centuries perspective was to be one of the conslitu- ent facts in the history of art, the unchallenged canon to which every artistic representation had to conform.  In linear “ perspective - — elymologically ‘“‘clear-seeing ” -— objects are depicted upon a plane surface in conformity with the way they are seen, without reference to their absolute shapes or relations. The whole picture or design is calculated to be valid for one station or observation point only. To the fifteenth century the principle of perspective came as a com- plete revolution, involving an extreme and violent break with the medieval conception of space, and with the flat, floating arrangements which were its artistic expression.  With the invention of perspective the modern notion of in- dividualism found its artistic counterpart. Every element in a perspective representation is related to the unique point of view of the individual spectator.  This principle came as an entirely new invention, but seldom has a new invention been so much in harmony wilh a basic fceling of an epoch. From the time of its discovery no hesita- tion can be observed in its application; it was used at once with complete confidence and sureness. Artists and scientists elab- oraled its secrets wilh a readily understandable excitement and pride. Their feeling toward it appears in the enthusiastic exclamation of the painter Paolo Uccello, “How sweet is perspective!”  Perspective was not the discovery of any one person; it was the expression of Lhe whole era. We shall encounter a similar situa- lion later, when we come to discuss cubism. There, too, we shall find a whole movement arising in response to the new space conception developed in our time, rather than a single inventor, In both cases the significant thing is Lhe mixLure ‘of arl with science, but the two worked together far more closely in the development of perspective. Indeed, one rarcly sees so comple le a unity of thinking and feeling -- art and science — as is to be found in the early fifteenth century. There was nol only the important identily of method in these two spheres, but a complete union of artist and scientist in Lhe same person. 
o 3  e  3runelleschi (1377—1416), one of the great initiators of per- spective, was jusl such a figure. He began his career as a gold- smith and a student of ancient languages, and went on to be- comie at the same time a great architect, sculptor, engineer, and mathematician. We have no right lo say that such extreme versatility was possible only in earlier times. Ina certain senso, it is possible in any Lime when specialists do not rule inde- pendently, but are included within a unified conception of life. It is. in fact, one of the secrets of the high degree of perfection of Renaissance work that it was not divided among limited specialists. Thus Brunelleschi, when he undertook the task of building the dome of the cathedral at Florence, could set about it as, simultaneously, a daring architect and a bold constructor. He projected a cupola which was double-shelled, like carlicr Oriental constructions. ‘The vault was erected without scaf- folding, built freely up into the air to a height of around ninety feet. In its boldness as an enginecring work this dome is com- parable to the bridges of the French engineer, Eiffel, which were constructed straight out into space.  Do we realize, in comparing our own period with this one, what it means to find a single man uniting the capacities needed for executing both the most audacious engineering works and the finest sculpture? Yet such a union of talents is to be seen in nearly all the great artists of the Renaissance. Leonardo da Vinci represents a type, not an exception. And the tradition that the scientist and the creative artist are combined in the same person persists throughout the seventeenth and eight- eenth cenLuries.  In the Renaissance the longest step forward was taken during the ten years between 1420 and 1430.  Masaccio, the painter, was the youngest of the great Renais- sance masters, and the most advanced. Born with the new century — in 1.L01 — he was a true incarnation of the Renais- sance spirit. The history of painting in this period would cer- tainly have becn different but for his early death at the age of twenty-seven. Brunelleschi, the architect, was nearly twenty- five years older than Masaccio, and to a great exlent shared the Gothic spirit of the fourteenth century. Donatello, the sculptor, was eightcen years older than Masaccio; he too had to  Oy  break away from Gothic ways of feeling, and succeeded in doing so through his astonishing naturalistic genius. The fact that, among these three, the painter was the first to attain to the uew vision of his time is by no means unparalleled. We shall see, farther on, that modern painting anticipated modern architecture in much the same way.  \asaccio’s “Fresco of the Trinity ’( fig. 1) in Santa Maria No- vella at Florence was executed when he was about twenty-five years old. Painted during the twenties of the guallrocento, il was rediscovered in the late nineteenth century and exists today in a badly damaged condition. The Trinity fresco has long been famous for its naturalistic portraits of the founders of the church that contains it. [t is the first example of an endless series of paintings of this type. But it is of much more sig- uificance to us that the whole composilion is encircled by a majeslic barrel vault, The point of origin from which its per- spective is calculated is laken very low, so that the vault may he seen in all its grandeur. This fresco, painted at a time be- fore any Renaissance interior had been completed, represents what seems lo be the first successful expression, in archileclonic terms, of the Renaissance feeling that underlay the develop- ment of perspective. It reveals a surprising use of the newly discovered elements in combination with absolutely circum- seribed tectonic surroundings. Its impressiveness was un- deniable: even Vasari — familiar with daring perspective treatments of space — admired the way in which this painted vault pierced the flat surface of the wall.  It is possible that Masaccio was taught perspective by Brunel- eschi; it has even been argued that Brunelleschi himself may vave execuled the perspective architecture of the Trinity resco. Lt was quile common in the guallrecento for painters and sculptors to employ qualified specialists for this part of heir work. But Masaccio’s barrel vault is not a part incidental to the whole composition; it is not a simple background. In- stead it dominates the entire picture. At the lime it was painted Brunelleschi was occupied with the building of the sortico of the Innocenti and with the sacristy of San Lorenzo. Not even in his last works did he ever use the vault in this way; iw always kept some attachment lo medieval modes. The  
2. LEON BATTISTA AL- BERYL, S. Andrea, Mantua, JAT2-15L1. Almost five dec- ades after the Trinily fresco, the longitudinal barrel vault was used in the interior of Lhis church. Even in the exterior, the desire to use the receding barrel vanié led to ils employ- ment at the most unexpected  points.  1. MASACCIO, Fresco of the Trinity, Santa Maria Novella, Florence, ec. 1425. The longitudinal barrel vault which Masaccio painted nol only fulfilled the aim of perspective by receding deeply into space bul also anticipated the chief vaulting problem of the Renaissance builders,  Trinity fresco with its heavy coffcred vault has the greatness of a triumphal arch. The cheerful expression beloved by early Renaissance taste and present in all the works of Brunelleschi is absent. In its place there is the Roman gravity of a later age.  3. BRAMANTE, Illusion- i hoir in Santa Maria atiro, Milan, 1479-  
The longitudinal barrel vault that Masaccio painted was Lo prove the great solution to the vaulting problem that con- fronted the architects of the full Renaissance and baroque periods. It does not appear in concrete form before the church of San Andrea al Mantua (fig. 2), in 1472 — nearly forty-five years after Masaccio’s death. This church, with ils severe vaulting, is (he archilectural realization of the ideal prefigured in Masaecio’s painting. It is likewise significaut that San An- drea was designed by a member of Masaccio’s generation, by another man born just as the guadfrocento began: the Florentine humanist and architect, Leon Battista Alberti (1404-1172). Even in the exterior the desire to use the receding barrel vault led to its employment at the most unexpected points.  Bramante’s “ illusionistic * choir in Milan — a work of small size but great influence —-is one of the steps leading from Masaccio’s fresco to St. Peter’s in Rome. A continuous line of development connects the Trinity fresco, Bramante’s choir, and the immense baroque nave of St. Peter's — its culminating point.  Bramante’s illusionistic choir (fig. 3) in the church of Santa Maria presso San Satliro (1479-1514) is actually only a small niche. [t was half built up and half painted, in order to pro- duce the greatest possible effect of depth with the space at the arlist’s disposal. For us it has importance as one of the sleps leading from Masaccio’s fresco Lo St. Peter's.  Carlo Maderno executed the central nave of St. Peter's (fig. 4), along with its side chapels and facade, during the ten years between 1607 and 1617. Following the orders of a new pope, he altered Michelangelo’s scheme for ils ground plan, changing it from a Greek into a Latin cross. We are told that the change was made to afford more room for the congregation and to take up the entire site of the Early Christian basilica and some additional space as well,  Nevertheless, the scale for Uhis enterprise had already been set by Michelangelo in the height of the pillars for the central dome which he had built. Vlichelangelo had envisaged a con- centration in one place of all the arlistic energies represented in the cathedral: they came together in his cupola in one great  explosion. “The later generation of Maderno and his pope en-  1. CARLO MADERNO, Nave of St. Peter's. Rome, 1607-17. The most majestic solution of the Renaissance vaulting problem. Earlier slages leading up to this solution ap- pear in the San Gest and many olhier Roman churches.  larged this conception longitudinally, in accordance with late baroque desires for a long and unbroken expanse. The im- pression that the spectator receives on entering St. Peter's derives from the superhuman dimensions of this new nave.  Its height exceeds a hundred and fifty feet —— equal to that of the early skyserapers. Its width is relatively small, but Maderno knew how to keep the onlooker from becoming conseious of this. The fully developed art of the baroque period and its control over space appear in the way this is done: the side chapels, almost imperceptibly, expand the ac- tual dimensions of the naye and impart a new power to it.  Masaccio’s Trinity fresco marks the discovery of the niajesty aud strength which can be expressed through simple and vrand elements. Carlo Maderno’s nave in St. Peter’s differs from Masaccio’s painted vault both in its dimensions and ils complexity. But these differences ouly sum up the possibilities 
that were latent in the vision which had come to the fifteenth- century master.  The generation which immediately followed Carlo Maderno carried this unfolding to further and more special results. But before we deal with these we shall turn lo some of the archi- tectural works already executed in which the spirit of the early Renaissance first showed through.  The first building in which the Renaissance spirit appears is Brunelleschi’s loggia on the front of the Spedale degli Innocenti al Florence. The Spedale degli Innocenti, or the loundling Hospital, was built at the order of the silk-weavers’ guild, of which Brunelleschi, as a goldsmith, was also a member. Be- iween 1419 and 1124 he construcled the nine arches in the center of the building.  Since this lirst Renaissance building was intended for a practi- cal community service, il did not have to conform in its ap- pearance to the dignified and impressive standards that held for edifices of state — buildings which are often found Lo reflect the taste of the previous period. Thus Florentine palaces pre- served their resemblance to Gothic closed fortresses up to the middle of the fifteenth century. In the Foundling Hospital Brunelleschi had an opportunity to open up the closed, fortress- like block of the house. He did this by means of a round- arched porch, pleasant in its graceful lightness.  The upper wall of the Innocenti is not ruslicated, but is kept a flat surface, with sparsely distributed windows. A Renais- sance preference is revealed on the outside by the entablature which bisects the whole surface of the wall horizontally.  But the hospital's chief distinction is the portico, and the most interesting feature of the laller is Lhe manner in which the yault is treated. The diagonal Gothic cross ribs have disap- peared; a light coved vault, resembling wind-filled sails, re- places them. Binding arches are used for marking distinctly the boundaries between each vault and the one next it, thereby enforcing the Renaissance demand for the complete independ- ence of every seclion of a design.  There is no direct connection between classical archilecture and Brunelleschi’s Foundling Hospital. It has often been remarked that the chief features of Branelleschi’s architectural  style are closely related to buildings which he saw every day in Florence —- to the Baptistery, to San Miniato, and to the sadia of Fiesole. All these are in the tradition of medieval architecture from the eighth to the twelfth century. The coved or jienuspherical vault which Brunelleschi used with such great sureness in his churches and in the Innocenti —- and which was always the vaulting motif he preferred — was likewise unusual in antiquity, It was, however, quite common in Byzantine archilecture, especially for loggias and the entrance halls of ecclesiastical structures. There was a comparatively close connection between Florence and Byzantium in Brunelleschi’s lime. Recent researches have also made. it plain that some other carly Renaissance treatments of the vaulting problem owe more to the Middle Ages and to Byzantium than they do io classical antiquity.  Branclleschi’s Pazzi Chapel( fiy. 5) is the first Renaissance struc- turein which the interior as well as the exterior is of mouumental size and character. [t was begun in 1430, some ten years afler the Innocenti, and when Masaecio was already dead. The chapel itself was finished in 1442: its decoration was not com- pleted until 1469. Brunelleschi replaced the spherical vaults used in the Foundling Hospilal with barrel vaults arranged transversely, instead of receding as they do in Masaccio’s Trinity fresco. (Transverse barrel vaults are to be found in Byzantine and Syrian architecture.) These vaults, together with the dome over their place of intersection in the middle, produce a flat inypression rather than the depth-penetraling perspective which was sought by Masaccio and the Sater Renaissance.  The interior of the Pazzi Chapel forms the starting point for al Renaissance churches of the centralized type. It is devel- oped by the addition of compartments whose geometrical form can readily be grasped, all clearly marked off by stone frame- work in contrasting colors. It has all the inimitable freshness of a new birth, but the two small! barrel vaults, in their cautious dimensions, show that confidence in the new vision had not yet been attained. When contrasted with Masaccio’s Trinity fresco, for example, the handling of the vaulting problem shows ~~ in all thal involves the newly introduced shapes - - a 
5. BRUNELLESCII, Pazzi Chapel, Florence. begun in 1430 The barrel vantts are placed trans- enol receding as in Masac- inity fresea, Bold display  of Ue wall as ni flat surface.  noticeable limidity. It is from cases such as this that we learn how difficult it is for the human spirit to plunge into a new conception of space. The Brunelleschi who shows hesitancy here is the same man who, as long as he was working within the familiar Gothic tradition, threw himself into the most dar- ing enterprises. A conyplele confidence appears in his design for the Cathedral of Santa Maria del Fiore in Florence, with its immense dome over a system of radial ribs.  One feature of the exterior of the Pazzi Chapel requires men- tion here: the bold manner of displaying the wall as a flat surface. (The small roof which it exhibits today is a later addition.) This wall, with its delicate subdivisions, has nothing to support; it is like a screen. The emancipation of the wall that appears here is important for the whole future. The wall taken simply as a surface will soon be the subject of important archilectural innovations.  6. FRANCESCO BORROMINI, San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane, Rome, 1662-67. Exterior. The whole wall translated into undutating movement. The unditating wall — first used by Borromini in S. Filippa Neri, Rome — is one of the constituent facts in late ba- rugque archileclure.  THE LATE BAROQUE  The manner in which Renaissance modes shaded off into baroque, the way in which the new shapes became more and inmore evident until they were wholly transformed by the archi- tects of the lale seventeenth century — all this is quite familiar. 
In the hands of the baroque builders, the Renaissance shapes were no more than the primilive elements of architectural com- position. In just the way that Bach would transpose a simple melody into a great new harmony, elaborate and subtle, these architects transmuted the forms developed in the Renaissance. The interiors they produced are marked by an inseparable union of two kinds of interests usually encountered separately: they are at once the products of purely mathematical specula- tions of a high order of complexity, and completely visionary or mystical imaginalive creations. The same union of two such different spirils appears in the work of a baroque master of another medium, Blaise Pascal (1623-1662). At sixteen he had wrillen a classic work on conic sections; he went on to study the cycloid curve, Lo develop the theory of probability, and to do pioneer work in physical science. Pascal's religious mysti- cism had its roots in such speculations. “ The eternal silence of these infinite spaces terrifies me" comes out of his work on the mathematical implications of infinity, and leads up to his feel- ing for the insignificance of man without God.  The last phases of the baroque development are the true in- heritance of the epoch out of which we grow. We shall have to consider first the Italian products of the baroque era, and then go on to see what the north of Europe adds to these results.  It may perhaps be advisable —- in view of the history of the term — to offer the prefatory comment that “ baroque ” does not apply exclusively to an overdecorated building in Mexico or Spain. For more than fifty years the history of art has used “baroque to designate the period beginning with Michel- angelo and continuing until the eighteenth century, and even beyond in some fields - - Lown planning, for example. “ Late baroque ” would date a work as after 1660. The baroque age lasted therefore about as long as the Gothic. [ts name, curi- ously enough, has had much the same fale — thus * Gothic ” up to the nineteenth century remained a synonym for Lhe barbarous or the uncouth. Jn some contemporary English histories of architecture, baroque is slill taken to mean a “debased ” form of art. But the work of Heinrich Wolfflin had taught us, even before 1890, Lo appreciate the early Roman baroque that begins with Michelangelo. The German archi-  tect, Cornelius Gurlill, soon performed the same service for Lhe Jate baroque of nearly all countries. More recently, the ex- cellent. Viennese school of history has covered the late period with great thoroughness. “ Baroque ~ has by now an accepted imenning in the field of art history, as referring nol to a special shape but lo a whole period.  The distinguishing mark of the baroque age is the method of thinking and of feeling Lhat prevails in it; ils outstanding feature is the development of a specific kind of universality. In our field, this manifests itself as a new power to mold space, and to produce an aslonishing and unified whole from the most various parls. But itis worthy of note that, in all departments, baroque methods and ways of [celing survive until the disinte- gration produced by the industrial age sets in and brings with ita lemporary destruction of the universal point of view.  In the late seventeenth century we find the baroque universal- ity working with the infinite in the field of mathematics as a basis for practical caleulations. In painting and in architeclure the impression of infinity — the infinite im a linear sense, as an indefinitely exlended perspeclive — is being used as a means for arlistic effect. Thus, early in the century, the Dutch land- scape painters introduce an “ atmospheric infinity ” into their works; somewhat later the Roman architects succeed in realiz- ing the same mystical feeling of endlessness — oflen in aston- ishingly small churches — through a simullaneous exploitation of all the resources of painting, sculpture, archilecture, and optical theory. With the French landscape architects of the late seventeenth century there appears the artistic employ- ment of the infinity of nature (although much the same kind of thing had been done previously, on a smaller scale, in [taly and in Holland). For the first time in history their gardens incorporated great highways as essential parts of an architec- tonic expression, and were placed by this means in direct and obvious relation with the unending extension of space. Ver- sailles, with Lhe impressive open road leading from it to Parts, is the great example of such creations. These gardens, in their total effect, stood as models of the baroque universe, and retained its aspect of infinity.  
THE UNDULATING WALL AND THE FLEXIBLE GROUND PLAN  Francesco Borromini, 1599 -1667 !  There is an interval of nearly two hundred and fit tween the flat surface of the entrance wall of the Pazzi Chapel! and the last. work of francesco Borrominti: the facade of San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane (St. Charles of the Four loun- tains) in Rome, 1662-67 (figs. 6 and 42).  The flat surface of the outer wall of the Pazzi Chapel represents a clear succession of equal compartments, each of them closed within itself. The wall of Borromini’s San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane expresses movement. The individual compartments are no Jonger marked off from each other; a continuous chain of interrelations runs through them all and comes to a focus in the center of the structure to produce the impression of an upward sLraining.  The slatue of San Carlo Borromeo, to whom the church is dedicated, stands in a niche above the central porch. An angel is placed on each side of the statue: their wings arched over its head help to accentuate the figure’s upward gaze. This as- cending molif is conlinued through the whole facade until, above the vertically elongated medallion, even the surmount- ing balustrade melts away into a molded gable, which focuses and concludes the upward-surging impulse.  Rome at this time was a medieval Lown, with narrow streets and little space between ils buildings. The facade of San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane, in its extraordinary concentration, is no larger than a single pier of St. Peter’s. But the facade of this church embodies a conception which was of great influence on the lime that followed. Not merely a single form but the whole wall has been translated into undulating movement; the wavelike surface Lhal resulted was Borromini’s great invention. It is an invention which did not reappear merely as a means of  1 The work of Francesco Borromini embraces problems which are among lhe most com- plicated in the history of architecture. We treat it only in so fir as it concerns our architectural inheritance.  altracling the allention of passers-by in the small Roman streets. Tt is present again. in astonishing form, in the nglish “ereseents ” of the late eighteenth century, and it persists, in a somewhat altered way, in contemporary architecture.  If the intentions behind this undulation of the wall were simply deeoralive, they would not demand our attention. Such an atlitude toward it might even justify the opinion of Jakob Burckhardt, who angrily observed that the facade of San Carlo looked like something that had been dried in an oven. ut our present-day point of view springs out of conditions very different from those thal operated in 1855,2 when Burck- uurdt wrole his Cicerone — which still remains unexcelled as a guidebook to Italy. Nowadays it is easy for us to see the urce Lhat appears in the whole structure, in the stressing of 12 progression and regression of the wall through the hollow- ng out of niches and the building up of contradistinguished arts. There is to be seen here a real molding of space, a swell- ing and receding that causes the light to leap over the front of ie church. Francesco Borromini succeeded in creating, rough purely architectonic means, and in the open air, some- ting which is equivalent lo the mild chiaroscuro of his con- temporary, Rembrandt, at work on his own last paintings at us Same lime.  Several historians have found sources for Borromini’s treal- ment of the wall in antiquity. Lt is possible, but by no means certain, that Borromini knew a contemporary etching of the  * ‘The rediscovery of Franceseo Borromini began with Cornelius Gurlitt’s Geschichte des Rarockstils in Halien (Stuttgart, 1887): “All who have still not lost courage for the in-  vention of new means of expression to meet the new tasks... in construction will Bnd a congenial spirit in Borromini (pp. 363-366).  "he systematic study of Borromini was first undertaken by the “ School” after 1000, Hts leader, Max Dvofak, published a short article on Borromini’s work on the restoration of St. John Lateran in 1907: “ Francesco Borromini als Restaurater.”” Beihlatt zum Kunstgesch., Jahrb. der K. K. Zentralkommission (Vienna, 1907), 1, 89iT. Oscar Pollak, one of Dvorak’s eirele, published a biographical study of Berromini in Phicme-Becker, Allg. Lex, d. bild. Kiinstler (Leipzig, 1910}, vol. IV. ‘The influence of s work was pointed out by A. E. Brinckmann, Die Baukunst des 17. und 18,  Jhdls. in den romanischen Liéndern (Merlin, 1915). ‘The standard biography is Eber-  tard Hempel’s Francesco Borromini (Vienna, 1924), which contains a full bibli raphy. Vans Sedlmayr's Die Architectur Borraminis (Burlin, 1930) contains complicated “structural analyses” of bis work — sometimes very instructive, sometimes over- pointed. 
7. FRANCESCO BORROMINI, San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane. Interior: the dome, 1634-41.  rock temples at Petra in Asia Minor.’ But these temples (El Chasne is the best known) are cut into the stone face of a mountain, the wall does not undulate, and all of their elements — the columns, the broken gables, the “sentry boxes” — are isolated one from the other. It seems much more natural to suppose that Borromini started with the flat church facade used since Alberti’s Florentine Santa Maria Novella and  that he molded all its parts into conformity with his vision.  The comparison with the Kuppelsaal of the Piazza d'Oro at Hadrian’s villa near Tivoli is more interesting.* This late Roman Empire interior has a ground plan determined by eight segments of a circle, with columnal screens alternately convex and concave. The entire hall is set down in the middle of a great square chamber. But here as in other ancient build-  3 Sedlmayr suggests that Borromini knew these second-century temples through wis source, and that he was also familiar with Roman paiuted wall decorations (op. ¢t., p- 59).  4 Sedlmayr, op. cié., pp. 56-57.  ings there is no undulation of the wall in the sense of an un- broken flow of movement that carrics through its length. In the Piazza d’Oro there is no continuity of movement: there are breaks where the wall sections meet. Its treatment is the reverse of that appearing in the Temple of Venus at Baalbek, where concave entablatures were built onto a circular central part.  The undulating wall of Borromini’s invention gave flexibility to stone, changed the slone wall into an elastic material. The undulating wall is the natural accompaniment to the flowing spaces of the flexible ground plan.  San Carlo was built for the Spanish order of Discalced Trini- tarians out of their small means, and was the property of their monastery. Borromini does not achieve his effect through ornament and decoration. On the contrary, he is very sparing with both, as a glance at the small cloister would show.®> This court with its severe forms is an example of creation through purely architectonic means. Its out-curving edges offer an- other instance of Borromini’s power of infusing new life into all forms, even into the Palladian motif.  Borromini built the cloister and the interior of the church nearly thirty years before he completed the facade — in the interval between 1634 and 1641. The interior is thus one of his earliest productions. It is left almost entirely dark; on this account the way in which the light bursts into it through the lantern is all the more effective. The light shimmers over the curious combination of geometrical forms which are cut into the underside of the dome. As Borromini handles them, these forms give the dome an appearance Lhat suggests the cellular structure of a plant (fig. 7).  Borromini’s treatment of an inlerior space is best shown in Sant’ Ivo (fig. 8), the church which he built for the Sapienza (the University of Rome). He began work on the church in 1642, one year after finishing the interior of San Carlo, but it was not completed until twenty years later. Sant’ Ivo is situated at the back of the Renaissance court of the Sapienza. Bor- romini knew perfectly how to fuse together into an integral whole the loggia of the Renaissance court and the receding  ‘Cf. Hempel, op. cit., Pl. 13. 
& FRANCESCO BORROMUNE, Sant’ Ivo, Rome, 1612-62. Ground plan. Budlt within the Renaissance court of the Sapienza, Sant’ Ivo is fused with it into an integral  whole.  facade of his own church. His addition Lo it brings a new and vital movement into the quiet Renaissance enclosure. Sven the sensation of movement achieved through the unusually formed cupola, one full of new invention, is not in any way disturbing.  The interior of Sant’ Ivo exhibits in its wall the same flexibility that marks the outer wall of San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane. Every molif that is introduced is continued throughout the entire building, Lo the very topmost part of the dome. But the average onlooker probably notes only the wonderful animation and movement. The arlistic impulse of its creator can he grasped without analysis of the complicated space conception involved; indeed, the eye cannol pick out the simple mathe- matical basis of the ground plan. A six-pointed star —— Bor- romini’s favorite molif — is the invisible kernel from w hich the plan grows. But this governing form is hardly more obyious on the plan Lhan the skeleton is in a healthy animal: one can only detect it by a sort of X-ray examination. (The reproduc-  tion of Borromini’s plan given here has had some of its lines strenethencd to reveal the star basis more dislinctly.)®> The star is formed by the intersection of two equilateral triangles. Berlige. the well-known Dutch archilect, and some other investigators have shown that many medieval buildings are also based on Lhis pattern. ‘The six points where the sides of his pair of triangles intersect each other are used by Borromini as the master coordinates in his design. From the ideal hexagon which they bound he molds the six niches that transfer ‘the movement of the main elements of his composition upward into the sbell of the golden-starred dome. In this way the dome is intimately bound up with the whole interior (fig. 9).  Up to that ime, domes had always been round or oval. To cut oul seclions along the perfect circle of the dome, lo con- Unue the movement of a design by treating it as though il were flexible, must have had the same stunning effect upon Bor- romini s conlemporaries that Picasso’s disintegration of the hu- man face produced around 1910 (fig. 10.) A cross section of Sant’ Ivo (fig. 13) reveals what such trealment accomplished in its case: Ihe movement of the whole pattern made up by its design flows wilhout interruption from the ground to the lantern, with- oul entirely ending even there. Borromini, of course, did not have at his disposal the means that enabled Eiffel to bring about the complete interpenetration of inner and outer space achieved in his great Lower at Paris. But Borromini, by leading the movement which penetrates every division of the building's inner space on and out through its topmost spiral, is making an approach to the same problem.  The lantern which surmounts the church,’ with its coupled eolunins, boldly curved cornice, and the fantastic spiral which replaces the usual cupola cap, resembles some organic growth. Phe culminating spiral carries a narrow palhway which leads to its top (fig. PH). :  6 The vornplicated organization of Uhe interior space of Sant’ Ivo has received various explanations. Some authorities held that the interior was developed out of a sim dle prism with an equilateral triangle for its base — other volumes being added on to this te ameee of Peruzzi’s early Renaissance plan. Others hold that it was developed Hous e interpenetration of two such prisms, which together would form a six- Potted star. Cf, Sedimayr, op. eif., p. 70.  Tt has been compared to the Temple of Venus at Baalleck. 
Now, in our day, when the transition between inner and outer space can be completely effected, it is no wonder that projects appear which spring from the same spirit as that toward which Borromini groped. A clear expression of the same kind of feeling appears in a monument projected by the Russian con- structivist painter, Tallin, in 1920. Like Borromini, he em- ployed the spiral form, with its inherent movement (fig. 12). Borrontini, like most of the great baroque artists in Rome, came from the far north of Italy. He began as a stonemason employed in the work on St. Peter's. This was his calling for many years, and throughout his life he remained in personal contact with the actual working of materials. But he was also a sculptor, and one of the greatest of the baroque age, although he produced neither brilliant portrait busts nor figures of saints melting away in mystical-erotic eestasy. Indeed, he did no sculpture at all in the normal sense of the word. He ex- pressed himself — like some miodern maslers-— in abstract spirals, in Lhe wire sculptures on the tops of his churches. But he was, above all, a sculptor of buildings, expressing himself  ee 9, FRANCESCO BOR- ROMINT, Sant’ Ivo, Rome. Interior of dome. The continuous inner surface of the dome is broken up. It is made ta transmit the movement whieh runs throughout the whole elevation.  10. PICASSO, llead. Sculpture, e. 1910. Borro- muini’s interseelion of the continaous inner surface of the dome must have had the same stunning effect upon his contemporaries that Pi- easso’s disintegration of the fusman face produced.  
ay  12. VATLEN. Project for a monuntent i Moscow, 1920. This, tike the Hiffel Tower and sone other monuments of our  Hime. ts a contemporary realiza- tion of the urye toward the ine ferpeneiration af inner and ouler spitee.  Tt. FRANCESCO BORRO- MINI, Sant? lvoe, Rome. Lanter with coupled columus  and spiral, Culninating point for the morement that penetrates the srhole design.  13. FRANCESCO BORRG— MINI. Sant) fvo, Roe. Section through interior,  
most fully through an inseparable union of mathematically elaborated ground plans with fantastically hollowed spaces, in structures of which it is hard to say where architecture stops and sculpture begins.  Borromini’s chief interest was always the molding of space. Le worked with wavelike lines and surfaces, wilh the sphere (fig. 14), with the spiral, and with still more unusual shapes in the wire sculptures on the points of his towers. In his hands all the inherited fornis took on a new flexibility. He took nothing for granted. and almost from the beginning of his work he was accused of cultivating the bizarre and allowing himself too great liberties,  By his treatment of the wall and the ground plan Borromini gave a new flexibility to archilecture. He infused movement into the whole body of architecture. The undulating wall, the sections cul out of the dome of Sant’ Ivo, the cupola ending in a spiral loward the sky, are all means working toward the  same end,  14. FRANCESCO BORRO- MINI, Sant’ [vo, Rome. De- tail. (Pantheon in the back- ground.) These cement-like globes are of marble dust molded arer an iran armature.  my  Borromini’s influence spread all over Europe and was absorbed into architectural knowledge even in that part dealing with town planning — - this in spite of its condenmation by French and English academicians all through the eighteenth century and far into the nineteenth, : , For (vo centuries Borromini figured as aman who had no fecl- ing for the majestic simplicity of anliquily, but in actual faet he was iulimately related to the past. He was nol an imilator of shapes or facades and did not use history as a substitute for This revolutionary made careful studies of Golhic frescoes — «drawings which still survive. Max Dvorak, who did some of the earliest research on his restoration of St, John Lateran, was astonished at the pains Borromini took to preserve fragments of the old church wherever ik was possible, incorporaling them into his own work,  imagination.  Like every great creator, Borromini preserved connections with the past. Ele did not imitate the shapes of bygone epochs; he made them part of his own creations. \luch as we bry to do todiy, he found in his relations with history a source of power for further development.  Guarino Guarini, 1624-1682  The last phase of late baroque development appears at Turin in the northwest of Italy in the work of Guarino Guarini. Guarini, a Theatine monk and a distinguished savant, was born at Modena just a quarter-century after Borromini and Bernini. MWe first came to Rome at the time Borromini was at work on the interior of his San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane. The hormal course of his calling as a Theatine monk later brought hin 16 Messina in Sicily as professor of philosophy. Le de- signed several churches here, all of them destroyed in the last earthquake. In 1662 he was transferred to Paris, where he taugiit theology. Ife began to build another church in this city. This effort was even more unfortunate than his Sicilian enlerprises; gutted by fire while it was under construction, the building was never finished.  a 
persg  Guarini’s travels brought him into contact with the Gothic churches of France and the Moorish mosques of Cordova in Spain. He was a complete cosmopolitan. Although he never lost touch with his own country and his own time, he had an awareness of history in all its aesthetic manifestations.  Nothing is more characteristic of this late baroque period than the frequency with which it displays mathematician, empirical scientist, and artist combined in one person. There is an as- tonishing unity subsisting between methods of thought and of fecling; more precisely, there is a direct connection between artistic and mathematical knowledge. Whenever a new concep- tion appears in mathematics it at once finds an artistic counter- part. Thus the integral calculus, taking definite shape at the end of the seventeenth century, found its architectural equiva- Jent in Lhe complicated treatments of space thal appeared at tbe same time. Guarini’s own career is a perfect illustration of the intimate relation between art and mathematics in the late baroque. He was not only an architect and a scholar; he was likewise an eminently talented mathematician. His pub- lished work reveals him as anticipating, to a considerable ex- tent, the discovery of descriptive geometry made a century later by Gaspard Monge (1746-1818).  Guarini’s most important work was done at Turin, where he lived from 1666 until his death. He was a preposilus or abbot of the Theatine order and, at the same time, an engineer in the service of the Duke of Savoy. It was at Turin that he built his finesL churches and palaces. One of the latter, his Palazzo Carignano (1680), is an example of the way in which his archi- teclural creations took on a flexibility that was nearly equal to that of Borromini’s work. This palace, with ils convoluted front and the molding of its slaircases, certainly influenced palace archilecture of a later period in southern Germany. The large, vaulted entrance hall, elliptical in shape, forms the kernel of the design for the Palazzo Carignano. The elliptical movement of the hall is communicated to the two wings of the staircases on its right and left, and is carried from them into all parts of the undulating outer wall. But, in spite of the architectonic vigor Guarini shows in this work, the arrange- ment of the interior of the building makes no approach to a  15. GUARINO GUARINI, Lorenzo, Turin, 1668-87, cupol and the lantern, with intersecting binding arches.  Sectiun through the  solution of those stricUly residential problems confronting architects of the time. All the force of Italian architeclure in this period was being expended upon the interiors of churches To put it rather more technically, all this unbounded imagina- ion was given over to the molding of huge interior spaces, ‘The 
ed  16, GUARINO GUARINI, San Lorenzo, Turin. Cupola with intersecting binding arches. Architectural vision pushes to the limif of constructional resources in striving to produce the impression of infinity.  I. GUARINO GUARINI, San Lorenzo, Turin, Ground plan.  generalization holds true in Guarini’s own case; he produced his masterpiece in the church of San Lorenzo (figs. 15 and 17), at Turin (1668-87). ;  San Lorenzo was built for Guarini’s own order. ‘The basic form of the church is that of a solidly walled square. The dome is circular, Between the ground floor and the cupola there is in- serled an oclagon with its sides bent alternately in and out in  58  18. Mosque al Hakem, Cordova, 965. Dome of one of the Mih’rabs. First ase of the bind- ing arch as @ constructional device.  a complicated manner which serves to make the transition Lo the upper elements. The intention of Guarini was to satisfy by architectonic means the baroque fecling for Mystery and in- finity. The baroque period felt strongly attracted to construc- tious which seemed to defy the force of gravity. All the arts - — including even the use of colored lights —- were exploited to produce this exciting impression. In Rome there was a chapel where the lantern in the dome was borne aloft on the shoulders of sculptured angels. In San Lorenzo, Guarini uses purely architectonic means to put gravity at defiance. He proceeds copventionally until the ring of the cupola is reached: there he plunges at once into the reahn of fantasy. Interseeting binding arches are carried from one point to another on the ring like a network woven by some giant spider, They cross each other to forma kind of filigree-work star with an octugon-  shaped opening in its center. In this way the impression is 
h-  produced that the lantern above the arches is magically sus- pended in mid-air. In reality it rests on the octagon formed by their intersection (fig. 16).  The impression of unlimited space has been achieved not through the employment of perspective illusions or of a painled sky bul through exclusively architectural means. The dazzling light that penetrates the star-shaped filigree has the effect of dematerializing its surroundings. This is one of the rare cases where a fecling of infiniteness is produced by archi- tectonic means alone.  It is safe to assume that the dome of San Lorenzo would never have been conceived had Guarini not seen the domes of the Mih‘rab — the praving niche — of the mosque Al Hakem in Cordova (fig. 18). These domes were constructed toward the eud of the tenth cenlury — to be exact, in 965. The same method of construction was employed in the domes that Guarini used in San Lorenzo. They, too, were buill on a square base, with a system of binding arches intersecting overhead lo form an eight-pointed star, on which the suspended lan- tern rests.  The cupolas of the praying niches in the mosque at Cordova are Lhe earliest known specimens in which the binding arch is given a constructional function. It has even been asserted by some French historians that it was this Moorish invention which suggested to Gothic builders of a century and a half later the possibility of replacing the solid vault by a framework of ribs in stone. But the dimensions of these Moorish domes are humble in comparison with Guarini’s daring masterpiece. As far as I could ascertain, the binding arches of San Lorenzo are composed of long, massive stone beams, a dangerous and laborious method. In fact, the architect of San Lorenzo asked from construction almost more than it was prepared, at that date, to give. No later architect dared to follow the precedent Guarini set in this church. With San Lorenzo the technical possibilities of the age were exhausted, just at the moment when the vision of further architectural advances was begin- ning to dawn. We find oursclves quite spontaneously driven to think how easy the solution of such a problem would be with the means available to modern construction. But we must  reject such reflections as absolutely unhistorical. The dome of San Lorenzo presents the case of an architectural vision that gors 10 the very end of constructional resources, The situation today is just the reverse. There are available lo us construc tional possibilities which we have not been able lo exploit to anything like their full extent.  Soulh Germany: Vierzehnheiligen  Of the northern countries, only South Germany and Austria including Bohemia, adopted the complicated ‘space concep- tions of Borromini and Guarini. Germany has always been known architecturally as the land of late phases -— of Tate Gothic. late Renaissance, late baroque. In southern Germany especially, the best examples of these periods are to be found.  The late baroque of South Germany in the cighteenth century * does nol possess the constituent force which Borromini’s work spread far beyond his own time. It arose in a country cut up into small principalities, many of them ecclesiastical tt marks the close of a development reaching back to roots in Italy and France, to which it gave a new and exciting expres- sion. [t flowered throughout the Catholic lands of Sou th Germany —- Franconia, Baden, Bavaria — Austria, Bohemia  and parts of Switzerland. Its largest outgrowth is to be found in Franconia and Bavaria, and also its ripest solutions. These are like full-grown fruits just before they drop from the tree  with all the charm and flavor of a perfect maturity that final ripening before the beginning of decay. They fulfilled all unconsciously, their task of closing the period. ‘Instinct with hee uli gat same time t 1e whole orchestra of the arts, they were ultimate and crowning masLerpieces.  besoin or ve German baroque may be credited to Cornelius Gurlitt, w hose  wae fo ie Barorks ih und deg Rokoko in Deutschland (Stuttgart, 1889), prepared the  Deutschen hath of this period. The small booklet by Wilhelm Pinder,  materiale het rok ( cinzig. 1911), with excellent intreduetion and choice of illustrative  sold) “at the ; mue t fo popularize it ona large scale (more than 100,000 copies were  own spatiel ara haroque is not characterized simply by superficial ornament but has its wand artistic qualities was recognized in ingland only mm the thirties.  | 
ace  In the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries Franconia had already shown its arlislLic power by producing such figures as Albreeht Ditrer and Veit Sloss. At that time the social background was one of free cities and free citizens. as in Nuremberg. In the eighteenth century the background was an ecclesiastical one, the Counts of Schénborn, who at this time were for the most part the ruling bishops or archbishops of the ecclesiastical principalities of Mainz, Speyer, Bamberg. and Wiirzburg, being throughout the century the influence under which churches, cloisters, and residences were built.  We shall take from this late period the late work of a late master —- Balthazar Neumann (1687- 1753) and his Pilgrim’s Church of the Fourteen Saints, known as the Vierzehnheiligen.? Neumann was in the service of the Schénborns, for whom he built the castle of Wiirzburg, with the greal spatial refinement of ils interior evident in every detail from the wide Halian slaircase to the concentrated chapel like a jewel transmuted into space. He grew up in the German part of Bohemia, where he became familiar with the [alian baroque churches. He also traveled in France, and we know that he had in his library Guarini’s Archiletlura civile (frst edition, Turin, 1686, second edilion, 1737), which contained Guarini's principal buildings. In addition, Guarini’s ideas had in part made their way northward through the work of German-Italian architects such as Lucas von Hildebrandt, who built the Belvedere in Vienna. The Church of the Vierzehnheiligen, standing high on a moun- tain top overlooking the broad valley of the river Main, is the quintessence of Neumann's architectural experience (figs. 19- 21). Construction began at the very end of baroque ecclesi- astical architecture, in 1743, and was not completed until 1772, long afler Neumann’s death. The church has a comparatively simple exterior in the shape of a cruciform basilica and a slender facade with two towers of the sort that are so familiar in northern countries, though not in Italy. An Italian visitor would likewise be astonished to find this front pierced by many  ’ Richard Teufel, Die Wallfahriskirche Vierzehnheitigen (Berlin, 1930); Hans Eckstein,  Vierzehnheiligen (Leipzig, 1939).  62  large windows in story formation, testimony to the influe  upou chureb design of the northern chateaux. both Kron hand German. Flere. in other words. is an instance of as valet influence upon an ecclesiastical building. The statnes, in niches are almost wholly eliminated in this limestone front amit ad large windows are cut through into the undulating  The niertor (fig. 22). however, follows more closely the late Malin haroque. It does not continue the complicat a i on structional treatment of Guarini’s domes, nor has it B tte. minis plastic uitensity., AT] is lighter and without tragic olen Yet there Is also the use of intersecting and interpenetrating Spaces. I he ground plan (fig. 20) is worked oul on a 1 sais ot intersecting circles and ovals, curiously shifted fre th ‘ usual positions, Tn a church of this cruciform tvpe thee ' al crossing is customarily covered by the dome, Hove howeve the dome, the most important part of the chareh, has by on completely done away with, Its place is Laken hy the se ein which ur ‘ arlousls shaped (spherical and ellipsoidal) vault. mgs meet: the nave, the choir, an 0 short travsepie, rt uerbenetration of the complicated one Tan septs vaults requires the use of bindine arches formed in w ped planes, Their unusual curves reveal sys , ie van ped which the different spaces are Ienled inte mie No snele particle of space remains separable from the others K necessity of passing on from each subdivision to the ot i. paris ' ne shee that includes it produces the final impres. pe elt tie whole interior is in motion. The warp d : ree ; @ warped-plane canes la. *) that establish these relations onset of three dime rire degree -— that is, of curves developed in siitinea Mae nol “bable of heing embraced in a flat tienda Ulnteecdieen is jBleresting to note that in this the sid ot aha intetal cana oe es could be calculated by  Tn the lale baroque churches of Italy left M semidarkness, but here is Fourteen Saints, tions,  the cupola was often ree P in this white Church of the o = , } 1, " Coe ight is permitted lo pour in from all diree-  erlainty in no earlier peri ad lig flow inten wate rer pe tod had light been allowed to estastical building in such dazzling offulgence 
19. BALTHASAR NEUMANN, Vierzehnheiligen (Church of the Fourteen Saints), 1743-72. Fagade. Influence of secular architecture visible in the rows of windows; con- linuation of Borromini’s undulating wall.  Plain glass, without any decoration, was uscd for the large windows, so Lhat they might carry out their function — the leLting in of light — entirely without hindrance.  The principal force at work in this church is not preéminently architecture — as in the constructions of Borromini and  20. BALTHASAR NEUMANN, Vierzehnheiligen. Detail of the undulating wall of the facade. ‘  BALTHASAR NEUMANN, Vier zehnheiligen. Horizontal section, The usual dome has been done away with. Ls place is faken by the space in which the four vari ously shaped (spherical and ellipsoidal) vauilings meet: tose of the nave, the choir, and the ko short transepls.  
22, BALTHASAR NEUMANN, Vierzehnheiligen. Taterior. The allar is pushed ward into the nave of the church. Light pours in from all sides through great windows clear glass.  fas  23, BALTHASAR NEUMANN, Vierzehnheiligen. Warped-plane binding arches.  Guarini -— but rather a magnificent bulance between architec- ture, sculpture, and painting. In the atmosphere in which Neumann worked, the different arts had grown up in perfect associttion. Indeed, the secret of this lale eighteenth century was the production of a most effective unification of all the aris. The architects of the cighteenth century knew all the hidden secrets of architectural effect. Despite their letling in of light as never before, hecause of this perfect unily of the arts they kept the mystic power to impress. They could use natural lighting as brilliantly as the most inspired theatrical producer today uses footlights and limelight.  It should perhaps be remembered that these magnificent churches were created Just al the time when the Protestant workmen of Birmingham and Manchester were inventing their first cotton-spinning machine. 
THE ORGANIZATION OF OUTER SPACE The Residential Group and Nature  The work of the baroque architects was both continued and supplemented in France during the late seventeenth century, French contributions appear especially in two fields: in the development of more highly refined types of human residence, and in the organization of outer space.  The decisive influence upon developments in France, which had just become the leading European country, was the com- plete supremacy of a secular government. Absolutism was in the saddle, and, as a corollary, the personal life of the monarch had become the center of all social life.  But in addition a new power was making itself felt, a power of the greatest importance and one which did not affect the Ro- man baroque: the feminine influence. The growing demand for a better organization of human residences, for greater comfort, commodité, was intensified by the novel importance of women in French society. These two factors, of course, worked to- gether. In 1665, for example, Louis XIV asked the Pope to permit Lorenzo Bernini, his greatest architect, to come to Paris and draw up a plan for the new Louvre. Bernini’s design was rejected — with all possible politeness, of course, but not because it was too theatrical, as the usual explanation has it. An eighteenth-century architect. gives us the real reason: Bernini ne pouvait se préter 4 entrer dans tous les details de ces distributions, de ces commodités qui rendent le service d’un palais commode.” In other words, Bernini failed to show a grasp of the complicated problems set by a palace building where women played an important role; he quite lost sight of the ladies. The part that women play in the development of French architecture from this period onward is a very impor- tant one.  The elaborate routine of court ceremonies is another major conditioning circumstance. These changes in French social life dictated a more complicated arrangement of rooms in great houses. A new delicacy and refinement appears in their  treatment. At the same time changes are made in the designs of furniture, especially as concerns such pieces as are intended for sitting and lying: these become better accommodated to women, and to love-making.  At this period in France the general type of dwelling was being transformed; the chateau was replacing the villa of Italian style. The town mansions of the nobility and of high state officials, buildings like the Hétel Lambert which Louis Le Vau built at Paris in 1650, showed a highly developed dwelling culture that had arisen out of the special requirements of French life. But very soon the growth of this culture was to be impeded. The importance of the great nobles, the wealthy financiers, and the chief state functionaries alike was eclipsed by the demands of an absolute king.  In keeping with this change, the royal chateau — placed out- side the city — became both the social and the architectural center. It dominated the town behind it and the natural ter- rain that spread out before it. The idea of locating the chateau midway between town and country had originated in Italy considerably earlier. Michelangelo, for example, when build- ing the Palazzo Farnese in Rome, had conceived the fantastic notion of throwing a bridge across the Tiber as a means of prolonging the axis of the palace far beyond the other side of the river.  It was not the French king, however, but Fouquet, the great- est financier of his time, who was the first to carry this open style of chateau construction to its logical conclusion, in the chateau of Vaux-le-Vicomte. This chateau was built by the architect Louis Le Vau just past the middle of the seventeenth century, 1655-61 (fig. 24). It was comparatively modest in size, but it faced an immense park, the work of André Le Notre. The chateau is built on the principle of the French pavilion. The steep roofs with their tall chimneys are reminis- cent of Gothic tower-caps; they are in abrupt contrast with the cupola and its lantern of the middle pavilion. We can well imagine the kind of impression this mixture of building styles must, have made on Lorenzo Bernini, who was in Paris at the time the chateau was erected. Nevertheless, Vaux-le-Vicomte was the first instance of a dwelling designed in close unity with 
25. LOUIS LE VAU and JULES HARDOUIN-  ATA NSARTD Voerenies.  Ap  em of the ehddfeau.  nature, with a park on a grand scale. [Lt embodied this great experiment years before it was adopted, and carried much further, at Versailles. But, as is well known, Fouquet paid a heavy price for his daring. I]is chateau and park excited the envy of the King, who would not tolerate rivalry in any direc- tion. Louis XIV accordingly commanded the architect Le Vau and the park designer Le Nétre to build the palace at Versailles, in all its vaunting splendor — and he put Fouquet in prison for the rest of his life. The incident is not an isolated fact; ik represents one stage on the way Lo abso- lute rule. The power and prestige of great nobles and the greal financiers had to be broken to make Louis an absolute monarch,  The chateau of Versailles symbolizes the supplanting of the ecclesiastical authority of a pope by the secular absolutism of aking. It took Louis XJV nearly half a century (1661 -1708) to erect Versailles in all its magnilicence. He began the work when he was twenty-two, firmly rejecting the suggesLions of his minister Colbert, who advised him lo complete the residence of his ancestors, the Louvre in Paris. Of another generation than Colbert, Louis cared neither for the old palace nor for his capital city of Paris. Bernini, then nearly seventy years old, had been brought all the way from Rome to Paris and had been presented by Colbert with a complete list of the require-  ‘ments for a royal residence. But all this was quile in vain;  Louis NIV had other ideas.  In particular, the notion of mastering nature, forcer la nature, fascinated the King. Louis XIV detested the narrow streets of Paris. A dislike of large cilics was, indeed, one of the characteristics of baroque absolutism everywhere. ven when new towns were founded in connection with the new palaces, they failed to prosper. This was to prove true in the case of Versailles, as well as in those of Mannheim and Karlsruhe. Bul, in any event, Versailles and the idea of creating a new mode of life that would be unrestricted by the confines of a city preoccupied Louis intensely for more than thirty years — this in spite of the fact that it was an unprecedented thing for a ruling monarch to desert and neglect the capital of his courlry,  
The Versailles of Louis XIII’s day had been a mere hunting- seat, built on a low hill which was surrounded by woods. It was at first merely enlarged. But these alterations — carried through by the architect of Vanx-le-Vicomte, Louis Le Vau— did not suffice; larger dimensions were necessary. During the years 1668-74 a new conception took shape, a conception gigantic in scale (fig. 25). The great U-shaped, central block faces the park. Jules Hardouin-Mansard elongated the front of the palace by building a long wing at right angles to each end of the U. The left wing (1679-82) was built for the royal princes; the right wing (begun in 1684) was built as an office building for the various French ministries. (It was in 1683, when he decided to house the administration of France in his own palace, that Louis XIV proclaimed Versailles as_ his official residence. The proclamation almost caused a revoll in Paris.)  The two long wings combined with the U of the central block resulted in an open style of construction that had been hitherto unknown. The whole structure, complex and enormous, served three functions: it housed the King, the royal family, and the ministries of France. Building activity on these immense residential quarters was carried on at its greatest intensity in the years from 1668 to 1684; thirty thousand men were employed on the work. The interval in question corre- sponds exactly to the rise of the absolute monarchy. At the same time, Roman baroque architecture underwent the last phase of its development in the work of Borromini and Guarini.  What is the significance of Versailles? What is the important constituent fact it embodies? It is the close contact it effects with nature. An immense complex of buildings, more than two thousand fect long, has been directly confronted with nature; the grounds are a real part of the structure itself, and form with it a whole of great power and grandeur.  Lorenzo Bernini had not been permitted to carry out his project for the Louvre; nevertheless, when Louis XIV began the new enlargement of Versailles in 1668, Roman grandeur, grandezza, scored a success. Straight lines and flat roofs replaced the crabbed medieval silhouette. In the simplicity of  a long straight line, used without deviation, there lies a tre- mendous courage and self-assertiveness. The whole edifice is the architectural response to a new sociological demand: the demand for a new setting for the personal, the ceremonial, and the governmental life of an absolute king. The major functions combined under its one roof have already been noted. Less important ones were likewise provided for; the salons, for example, for all their mythological names, were acLually in- tended for gambling, dancing, and musical entertainments.  But the interesting thing is still the manner in which great complex buildings for social, residential, and administrative purposes have been welded together and closely juxtaposed with nature (fig. 27). Versailles is important not because of its royal splendor but because it clearly reveals the solution to a problem of living. Nature had been mastered before by man’s will, but never before had so large a community been housed under one roof, in open country, away from any big town. :  Versailles has a highway linking it with Paris (fig. 26). It slarts from between two buildings overlooked by the great court; it ends in Paris in the Champs-Elysées and the Louvre. The beautiful curving constructions which give its commence- ment at Versailles such power and dignity arc — almost incredibly — the royal stables. The accentuation of the high- way by means of these stables emphasizes the approach to the chateau. The highway, in other words, has been incorporated into an architectonic expression, is an essential part of it.  The baroque will to master the illimitable is best shown by the other side of the palace. The ground slowly declines from the terrace with its ornamental pools. The eye is led by the long lawns — the fapis veris — to the Grand Canal, cruciform in shape, with a length of one mile (fig. 27). In the time of Louis ALY it was graced by gondolas and other luxury craft. Be- yond the Grand Canal, the view fades into an endiess country- side. The woods and shrubbery of the enormous park — its area is one-fourth the area of all Paris — spread out to the right and to the left. Provision was made here for every sort of leisure activity, for sports, for hunting, for festivals, for love- miking. The woods are dotted with round clearings from 
ES, Great court, stables, and . Engraving by Perelle.  27.  VERSAILLES, View of the gardens, the and Canal, and the ter- ah  which paths emerge like the rays of a searchlight. These cir- cular areas with their radiating pathways or roads will find a place in eightcenth-century town planning.  The extensive and carefully ordered natural selting for the chalean of Versailles was the background not only of these greal new buildings but of the new kind of living that had been dev eloped there. The old myth that Versailles w as a kind of vasl. and sumptuous mausoleuwn in which Louis XIV was con- fined like a royal mummy has been destroyed by history, Louis Bertrand, one of his biographers, presents a picture which contradicts the old, familiar, and inaccurate one. He calls Louis “* the open-air king ” and tells us of those hunts on which he went alone, twice ey ery week, into the forests of Versailles, making hunting his exeuse for solitude. From the windows of his bedchamber in the palace he had an unbroken vista of forests and green meadows -—a view which, of course, is spoiled today. The constituent facts that are presented by Versailles, the trends that were to be coutinued in later periods, were nol bound up in its royal splendor. They lie in the new ways of living for which it provided a form. An enormous structure, almost a small town in itself, had — together with ihe life that went on within it —- been brought into close contact with nature.  Single Squares  Al the time when baroque architecture flourished in Rome, cities all over the world were crowded and lacked space within the walls that surrounded them. The first large open space Within a city-—in contrast to the enclosed Renaissance Square ~~ was the Piazza Obliqua (the “ Oval Place *) of St. Peter's in Rome (fig. 28). It was built Just after the middle of the seventeenth century. Its graduated areas are embraced within the fourfold colonnades of St. Peter’s as though by a giant pair of pincers, and linked by them with the portico. Three elements are combined here: the oval plaza, the rec- langular plaza, and the body of the church with the dome that crowns it. Bernini had intended to close the opening of the  B O 
23. LORENZO BERNINI, Piazza Obliqua, St. Peter's, Rome. Lithograph, 1870. Crowds awaiting the papal benediction.  Piazza Obliqua with another colonnade, leaving two narrow entrances. The plan was never executed, however.  André Le Notre had designed Vaux-le-Vicomte five years be- fore the appearance of Bernini's colonnades for St. Peter's. The work of both men sprang from an urge to dominate wide spaces that manifested itself all over Europe at this time. But Bernini’s colonnade is unique in the precision of its modeling, which is calculated to the last inch. The exactitude involved can be fully appreciated only during those church festivals when the Oval Place is filled by the crowds awaiting the papal benediction. The plaza slopes gently downward to the obelisk in its center; it then rises, in slightly inclined terraces and long steps, to the enormous portico. Bernini's architectural mastery is revealed when the onlooker, awaiting the blessing, discovers that he can overlook all the great congregation, 1 addition to seeing everything that takes place on the terraces immedi- ately in front of the church.  What did the north have to offer in comparison with work like this? Paris had the grands boulevards with which Vauban, the great, engineer of Louis XIV, replaced the city walls when he tore them down. Grass-covered earthworks, more suited to « modern ” defensive needs, were thrown up farther outside the city. The first great square of Paris was the Renaissance Place des Vosges (1612). Louis XIV did not build his first square until thirty years after Bernini’s colonnades of St. Petcr’s, and twenty-five years after the beginning of his reign. This was the Place des Victoires (1685-87). It had the form of a circle flattened on one side, and was quite modest in its dimensions. But it was the first circular place in Paris intended as a meeting point for streets.  The first really large public square built in the Paris of this period was the Place Vendéme, constructed at the beginning of the cighteenth century. It is worthy of note that the Place Vendéme was not built until after the completion of Versailles. The architect of Versailles, Jules Hardouin-Mansard, now had time for work on the important places in Paris itself. His first plan in 1699 provided for a simple rectangle; later its corners were cut off, and the new sides that were thus developed were bent outward. Seventy years earlier, Boriomini had used the same treatment in the small cloister-court of San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane. But the most significant development in Paris, one which could not be valued truly at the time, was the highroad that was carried directly across the countryside to connect the axis of the chateau of Versailles with the axis of the Chateau du Louvre. To this day, the Champs-Elysées follow exactly the plan originally laid down by Louis XIV and continue to provide the only sufficiently broad exit from Paris.  The eighteenth century is a century remarkable for the laying- out of squares. Just as the name of Louis XIV is associated with the building of palaces and gardens, so the name of Louis XV, who succeeded him, is linked with the construction of new town squares and public places. The plan of Paris drawn by Patte in 1748 (fig. 29), which shows all the places of the city, both those already in existence and those merely projected, shows at a glance the great amount of such construction under 
29. PATTE, Plan of Paris, 1748, with projected and executed squares. This plan  clearly demonstrates the mid-eighteerth century endeavor to orga: open spaces — squares — of every shape in all possible locations. Very few of them were ever executed.  Louis XV. Probably the best-known single example is the Place de la Concorde, designed by Jacques-Ange Gabriel and constructed in 1763. We shall soon have occasion to discuss its significance.  Series of Interrelated Squares  In many towns series of squares or plazas were laid out, not as a mere succession of mutually independent units bul in such a way that all together they constituted a rhythmical progres- sion. A compelling and thoroughly self-conscious desire for unity governed their location and the manner in which streets were made to radiate from them. Often whole towns were made to conform to a predetermined scheme of this sort. Karlsruhe, Germany, which was founded in 1715, is one in-  jnterrclated squ. Place Stanislas,  s at Naney, nD. Wiew,  31. HERE DEC interrelated squat Plan, New elemer these squares to bri isting features int spiring, and vital s 
32, HERE DE CORNY, Palais du Gouvernement with oval colonnades, Nancy.  stance. When whole towns were treated in this fashion as architectural units, already existing buildings frequently had additions made to them so that they would fit harmoniously into the system of relations the new scheme established.  Among all such series of squares, the most pleasing is that formed by the three places of Nancy, the capital of Lorraine. Nancy was at one time the residence of Louis X V’s father-in- law, the exiled king of Poland, Stanislas Leszinski. Its three places (fig. 31) were built by Héré de Corny between 1752 and 1755, just one century later than Bernini’s colonnades. The first place (Place Stanislas) — with the Hotel de Ville (fig. 30), which antedates it — is connected through a triumphal arch with the oblong Place Carriére. The charming rococo wrought- iron work of Lamour forms a transparent screen between the two. Avenues of trees and symmetrical rows of houses lead on to the third of these squares, the Place Royale. The Palace of Gov- ernment which faces Lhe Place Royale is another building that was already in existence when the plan for these places was be-  ing made, The building was made to fit into the whole new com- - position by the addition of an elegant colonnade to the square. This colonnade around the place repeated the motif already present in the arches of the Palace of Government (fig. 32).  An inunense fund of architectural knowledge is revealed in each one of these squares. It appears equally in the way the heights and proportions of the buildings are regulated and in the handling of the materials used. Walls, transparent iron-  work, fountains, trees, colonnades —~ all these materials are  “used with instinctive correctness, It is in this that we find the  secret of the architecture of the middle eighteenth century: each clement is coGrdinated with all the others; isolated phe- nomena are synthesized to form the most effective whole.  At the same time that the three squares at Nancy were being constructed, a small Lown existed in England which was the product of an equal wealth of architectural knowledge, al- though it had grown up to meet quite different purposes ~~ Bath. In cighteenth-century England, to “ take the waters » at Bath's hot springs was a fixed part of social routine; Bath was “the rallying place of good company and social inter-  JOUN WOOD THE ¥ OUNGER. The Circus, 1764, and the Royal Crescent, 1769,  Bath,  Lir view,  Ba me rest 
the  34. JACQUES-ANGE GABRIEL, Place Louis XV — Place de la Concorde. Paris, 1763. Here nature and an upen square are juxtaposed, the same principle as that involved in the Royal Crescent. Bath.  course.” There was no church or case to which the town had to conform. Bath was built for the entertainment of an anony- mous and mixed society. It attracted the aristocracy, artists, men of letters, and —as Oliver Goldsmith relates — types still more various: ‘* Clerks and factors from the East-Indies, loaded with the spoils of plundered provinces, planters, negro- drivers from our American Plantations, agents who have fattened in two successive wars, brokers and jobbers of every kind, men of low birth.” This sketch might have been written in the late nineteenth century, rather than in the eighteenth.  Bath was built for the new bourgeois society by a man who was * at once architect, builder, speculator and an artist’ — John Wood. His son and successor, John Wood the younger, com- pleted the Circus in 1764, and in 1769 built the famous Royal Crescent, in which thirty houses are joined together in the shape of an open ellipse (fig. 33).  The Royal Crescent is comparable, in many respects, to Jacques-Ange Gabriel's Place Louis XV (Place de la Concorde); compleled six years earlier (fig. 34). The latter remains, despite all changes, the most beautiful of Parisian places. It  a jon WwooD THE YOUNGER. The Royal Crescent, Bath, 1769 lairn in front of the Royal Crescent slopes down toward the floor of a valley .  The broad  owes its charm to the fact that its single houndary wall permit acountry view in the midst of a city: the gardens of the Tule i : are lo the left, the Champs-Elysées lie on the right, and the Seine is directly in front. Here is the opinion ofa conten i rary, the Abbé Laugier, who was already capable of di Sc ‘tung the intention behind this highly developed piece of Lown t lan. ning: Kn iourée de jardins et de bosquets, elle ne presente que Fimage dune esplanade embellie au milieu d'une campagne rianle. . Quite simply, this place is made an integral part of the outlying landscape. omen  The single boundary wall of the Place de la Concorde is lef pee in the center. In this manner the street — the Rue ao ~ which leads from this opening (to terminate in a  vurch built at a later date) becomes the axis of the place itself  T ree ‘ “pag  oe escent at Bath (fig. 35) has no axis and no central  ee eading out Loa church or a chateau. Nothing blocks  at a come there ig no building, whether representative  comin aro ece estastical authority, lo which it stands in a « or dependent relationship. There is only a broad lawn  which slopes ot ch slopes gently toward the town, and the countryside  
beyond lies at its front. A completely open view has been at- tained through a concentration of many individual lodgings, Thirty small standardized houses have been fused into a single unit to produce the Crescent, and its monumental impressive- ness derives from the fact that these standardized units are added together without any separations. Not until our own time do we encounter similar undertakings. For example, Gropius’ 1937 scheme for ecight-slory apartment houses to be erected at St. Leonard’s Hill — a park near Windsor — tends in the same direction. The wide expanse of the grounds, with their trees and meadows, is retained unbroken by concentrat- ing individual apartments into three eight-story buildings. In this way there is an open view for each tenant. Contrasted with such schemes as the Royal Crescent and that of Gropius,  the health and holiday resorts of the nineteenth century, with |  their rambling hotels and private houses, present the chaotic appearance of a mining camp.  Bath was built on speculation from the very beginning, when John Wood put up its first houses in 1727. The Place Vendéme in Paris (1701) likewise was the work of speculators for the major part, as were the London squares and crescents with their high architectural standards. Many of the best English archi- tects in the eighteenth century and at the beginning of the nineteenth — men like the Adams, John Nash, Soane, and others — were at one and the same time builders, artists, and speculators. For all that, this architecture manifests discipline and the working of a vigorous tradition. There is only a fragmentary knowledge of the part speculation has played in the development of architecture. And yet the extent of that influence would be worth knowing, not merely for architectural reasons but also for the sake of discovering both the initiative and the destructive roles of the speculator.  Nancy and Bath were not the only towns, nor Paris the only great city, in which Lown planning attained such astonishing proficiency. The same expertness was displayed throughout eighteenth-century Europe. Thus the basic principle common to the Place de la Concorde and the English crescents and terraces — the blending together of residences with their natura] surroundings — likewise governed Valadier’s adapta-  SEPTENTRIO  36. Piazza del Popolo Rome. Engraving by Tem- pesta, 1593. The Porta det Popolu, the Renaissance chureh of Santa Maria del Popoto, the obelisk, and te gardens of the Pincio.  37. Piazza del Popolo, Rome. View toward the lirin charches of Rainaldi,  tion of the Piazza del Popolo in Rome. Giuseppe Valadier (1762-1839) was, according to the Enciclopedia italiana, “ the first figure in modern Italian architecture who carried out Lown planning, together with Uhe preservation of green spaces, as a science.” Valadier’s choice of forms certainly makes him an architect of the classical reviral, but the scheme for this great 
square, with regard Lo the space conception on which it resls, follows the late baroque tradition in town planning.  Some knowledge of the condition of the Piazza before Valadier began his alterations is necessary if his work is lo be appre- ciated. The test of the Lown planner is his ability to instill order into the diversified complex that confronts him at the start.  Until the age of railroads, the Piazza del Popolo (fig. 36) was the main entrance to Rome for all visilors coming from the north. It was here that the stranger received his first impres- sions of the papal city. He entered the square through the Porta del Popolo, which had been restored and redecorated during the seventeenth century on the occasion of the visit of Queen Christina of Sweden to Rome. Facing him on the far side of the piazza there appeared — as the first symbols of Rome’s special importance — Carlo Rainaldi’s Lwin churches of 1662 (fig. 37). With their identical cupolas and porticos, they were like ecclesiastical sentries guarding Lhe three main arteries of the city, which since antiquity have radiated from this spot. Isolated in the center of the piazza stood the Egyp- tian obelisk which had been placed there at the end of the sixteenth century. On the left there was only the simple Renaissance facade of Santa Maria del Popolo, the church allached to the Augustinian monaslery where Martin Luther once stayed. The gardens of the monastery rose to the heights of the Pincio. On both sides of the square there was the same combination of high walls and insignificant buildings. These, together with the plain drinking Lroughs for animals thal were placed in il, gave the whole piazza the air of being a suburb. This was the situation that Valadier faced in 1794 when his first scheme for the piazza was prepared and published. The final scheme, however, was actually carried out between 1816 and 1820, the years when building activity in the squares of Bloomsbury was at its height ' (fig. 38).  Valadier touched none of the monumental buildings in or around the square; he tore down, however, all walls and build- ings that had no importance. He transformed the greater part  10 An exeellent study of the Piazza del Popolo, by Rowland Pierce and Thomas Ashby, is contained in Town Planning Review, vol. X1, December 1924.  38. GIUSEPPE VALADIER, Scheme of the Piazza del Popolo, Rome, 1816. The inal scheme followed in the actual rebuilding.  39. Piazza del Popolo, Rome. Section Uiough the different levels and rantps. Draw- ing hy Edward W. Armstrong, 1924.  of the gardens of the Augustinian monastery into a public park, giving access to the Pincio. Through this park he led a winding ramp which provided for the passage of vehicular trallie hetween the piazza and the Pincio. Upon the heights of the Pincio itself, Valadier built a terrace, giving it a large substructure whose proportions were related lo his other buildings lower down (fig. 40). Thus, despite ils being on a much higher level, it fits within and makes a unily of his whole 
40. Piazza del Popolo, Rome. View from the Pincio terrace, showing the different hori- zontal levels involved and their relations to the vertical planes in the Piazza. Valadier here touches upon a fundamental conception of our time: the relation between horizontal and vertical planes as a basis for aesthetic response.  spatial composition. It is possible to see from Figures 3 and 40 how successful Valadier was in bringing together into a new relationship buildings of quite different styles and periods.  In addition to these works, Valadier erected a few residential units bordering the piazza and built two elegant hemicycles which served — as they still do — to guide traffic. Beyond this, he provided very carefully for the introduction of land- scaped areas into the whole design. This careful infiltration of greenery is characteristic of all such work at this time. He further planned to leave the west side of the square permanently unenclosed and free of buildings so that the view might lead out upon a wide green area as it does in the Place de la Concorde and in the Royal Crescent at  Bath. Today this area is occupied by broad avenues and tall  houses.  41. THEO VAN DOESBURG, Relation of horizontal and vertical planes, c. 1920.  The Piazza del Popolo has remained to this day one of the most “modern” in appearance of all the great squares. Toa certain extent this is due to the thoroughgoing fusion of buildings and park. Its air of modernity is owing much more, however, to the way in which different levels are brought within the same composition. The series of places built at Nancy in the middle of the eighteenth century had exploited the relations that can be made to hold among the vertical surfaces of buildings of different heights. In the Piazza del Popolo, Valadier embodies a hovering sensation in the total effect produced by his design by bringing into relation with each other two horizontal areas of different levels: the terrace on the Pincio, and the piazza proper. A proportion in three dimensions — not merely in two, as at Nancy — is developed.  We have seen how Borromini, in striving to lead the movement of a design through the space of the interior into outer space, anticipated a concern of modern architecture. Valadier’s plazza touches upon another fundamental conception of our time: the relation between horizontal and vertical surfaces as a basis for aesthetic responses of a special sort. That this is one of the constituent facts in modern architecture, one of the tendencies determining its character, cannot be doubted. A drawing made about 1922 by the Dutch painter, Theo van 
Doesburg, shows a conscious recoguition of the presence of this tendency (fig. 41). Doeshurg, one of the most stimulating of the influences upon present-day arehitecture. made this draw- ing solely to demonstrate the fact that interrelations between planes are basic means of expression in architecture. The  always finds it both interesting and important to note carly beginnings of movements Chal only much later come lo a full realization.  Previous to the turbulent and overwhelming onset of indus- trialization, a high standard existed for housing on both simple  42. FRANCESCO BORROMINI, Undulating wall of San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane, 1662-67. This late baroque invention, the undulating wall, reappears in English (own plan- ning toward the end of the eighteenth century.  drawing shows the mutual relationships between hovering yerlical and horizontal plane surfaces.  To avoid misunderstanding, il may be worth repealing Lhat neither Borromini nor Valadier worked with space con- ceptions identical with those of today. The exact ways in which they differ will he discussed later. But the historian  ‘. Lansdowne Crescent. Bath, 1791. Is serpentine windings follow the contours of the site, ‘  and luxurious scales. The principles of town planning were a matter of common knowledge to everyone comnected with archilecture. When a period succeeds in developing its natural cullure, and when this culture is supported by a long tradition works of the highest quality can be produced by anonymous artists as well as by dislinguished ones. For example, it hap- peus that we do know the name of the architect who built the 
Lansdowne Crescent at Bath toward the beginning of the nineteenth century, but it is a name of no importance for history.  Lansdowne Crescent lies high above the town of Bath (fig. 43), Its three serpent-like windings give it an organic aspect which is strengthened by the way in which they follow the accidental rise and fall of ground to catch as much light and sun as pos- sible. This crescent embodies two of the constituent facts of  of movement, surprise, and openness make ils houses exactly what every residence should be: the adequate background for Jeisure.  During the last few decades, endeavors have been made to reconguer and to extend the lost knowledge of town planning which works like Lansdowne Crescent exhibit. The task is difficull, what with all the complications attendant upon new technical developments. Nevertheless it cannot be evaded.  44. Bath and its crescents. Air view. Near the center are the Royal Crescent and the Circus; below and to the left is Lansdowne Crescent.  the preceding centuries. Borromini’s use of undulating walls (fig. 42) to bring an unexpecled movement and flexibility into the narrow Roman streets reappears in the serpentine curves of ils outline. Its second predecessor was Versailles, the first great building to be sct at the front of an immense park instead of in the midst of a city’s narrow streets. The manner in  which this great residential group was placed in direct contact .  with nature, and the effect of unhampered freedom that re- sulted, made it the guide for all later experiments. A similar freedom characterizes Lansdowne Crescent. The combination  45. LE CORBUSIER, Scheme for skyscrapers in Algiers, 1931. fate baroque space conceptions came very near to contemporary solutions like this one.  The sort of solution to this problem that is possible to us today can be seen — to take only one example — in Le Corbusier’s scheme (1931) for the improvement of Algiers (fig. 45). Le Corbusier makes use of skyscrapers which have the * organic 7 outlines of the crescents at Bath. Like the latter, they are adj usled to the rise and fall of the ground, although the yaria- tions of level are much more extreme than those encountered in the English town. The individual apartments in these sky- scrapers each take up two stories, and are so arranged that their tenants have considerable control over the interior lay- 
oul. The plan provides for access to terraces and hanging gardens from every apartment, and all of them would com. mand a magnificent view of the city, the sea, and the sky.  Town planning is always the last department of architecture to reach full development. [t frequently attains maturity only when a period is nearing its close; this was the case in the late baroque. Late baroque town planning brings together the arlistic inheritance of four centuries. but it was nol al once applied to residences of all classes. Versailles, the first great experiment in placing a large residential and administrative block in contiguity with nature, was built for the use of court society and the ministerial staff. Bath marks the point when a middle-class development is given the same treatment; Charles Dickens, for example, lodges Mr. Pickwick in the Roval Cres- centat Bath. At the end of the century this type of residential development had become a general mode of expression in architecture, had been taken up by architects whose names never came into prominence. By the early nineteenth century the squares and crescents of London extended the baroque tradition of a juxtaposition of nature and human residences to the housing of still lower classes, and made it no longer the exclusive privilege of wealthy people.  But just at this time there came a sudden break. The kind of town planning that was summed up in contemporary architec- tural knowledge and concretcly exemplified in Bath did not suit the new condilions created by industry. With its demands for dignity and proportion it represented only an obstacle to a time of chaotic expansion, when towns and industrial centers were growing up wilh uncontrolled speed. Factory towns like Manchester and Birmingham have been scenes of architectural disorder from the day of their inception. From the first onset of the new forces of industry, the knowledge upon which town planning rests was lost with terrifying rapidily.  This disorganization spread from the industrial Lowns to the old capital cities. A new and deadly influence was at work; the pursuit of wealth through the new increase in the power of production became an end in itself. This led on the one hand to the appearance of slums, and on the other lo the building of  large and formless mansions. Leisure vanished: no one had the uinie to live gracefully: life lost its equilibrium. The result was a deep spiritual uncertainty —- and the more uncertain of hirscl man became, the more he tried to bolster up belief in the rightness and stability of things through the creation of buildings in the grand, pseudo-monumental manner.  But there is one branch of architecture where deceit is impos- sible. and that is town planning. Town planning can spring only from the full life: it is possible only when the different levels of human activity have attained a certain unity and equillbriuin, ‘ 
ll THE EVOLUTION  PART OF NEW POTENTIALITIES 
ule he  ry  We have hardly the right to compare our century with the ninelcenth so far as boldness and urge toward the unknown are concerned. But what will the final judgment on this period bed  Here the historian comes up against questions of destiny. The  final judgment on the nineteenth century cannot be passed | today. The main outlines are not settled; transitory and  constituent facts are confusingly intermingled.  Some think that we stand at the beginning of a great tradition, Others, seeing the disaster around them, think that we are at the utmost end of an age. The evaluation of the nineteenth century depends upon which of these is right.  If our culture should be destroyed by brutal forces -— or even if it should continue to be terrorized by them - - then the nine- teenth century will have to be judged as having misused men, materials, and human thought, as one of the most wretched of periods. If we prove capable of putting to their right use the potentialities which were handed down to us, then the nine- teenth century, in spite of the human disorder it created and in spite of the consequences which are still developing out of it, will grow into new and heroic dimensions.  For these reasons the evaluation of the ninetcenth century is inextricably connected with the destiny of our culture — that is to say, with our own destiny.  In treating the nineteenth century we should arrive at unsatis- factory results if we adopted the approach we used for the previous period. A sufliciently comprehensive insight into the period could not be derived from nineteenth-century monu- mental architecture — which remains, moreover, an incom- pletely explored subject. The sorting-out of good buildings is still to be done; the history even of transitory developments is not underslood. We shall concern ourselves instead with the evolution, during this period, of new architectural potentiali- ties, an evolution that proceeded anonymously and was born out of the depths of the age.  {ndastrialization as a Fundamental Event  ‘The Industrial Revolution, the abrupt increase in production brought about during the eighteenth century by the introduc- tion of the factory system and the machine, changed the whole appearance of the world, far more so than the social revolution in France. Its effect upon thought and feeling was so profound that even today we cannot estimate how deeply it has pene- trated into man’s very nature, what great changes it has made there. Certainly there is no one who has escaped these effects, for the Industrial Revolution was not a political upheaval, necessarily limited in its consequences. Rather, it Look pos- ssion of the whole man and of his whole world. Again, political revolutions subside, after a certain time, into a new sucial equilibrium, but the equilibrium that went out of human life with the coming of the Industrial Revolution has not been restored to this day. The destruction of man’s inner quiet and security has remained the most conspicuous effect of ihe Industrial Revolution. The individual goes under before the march of production; he is devoured by it.  Pals  The heyday of the machine and of unlimited production is heralded in the eighteenth century by the sudden appearance of a widespread urge toward invention. In the England of 1700 this urge had gripped people in all strata of society. Everyone was inventing, from unemployed weavers, small hand workers, farmers’ and shepherds’ sons like the bridge- builder Telford, to manufacturers like Wedgwood and members of the nobility such as the Duke of Bridgewater (whose tena- cious labor was responsible for the creation of the English canal system). Many of these inventors did not even take the trouble to protect their discoveries by taking out patents on them. Many, far from drawing profit from their inventions. were even persecuted because of them. Profit-making and unfair exploita- lion belong to a later period.  We must, in fact, take care to avoid the delusion that this activity had its source only in material ambitions or in the desire to shine. Its actual source lay much deeper and was one that had for a long time been artificially denied outlet. But at this date the urge to invent could no longer be stemmed. When, 
46. Automaton: weiting doll, made by Pierre Jaquet-Droz, Neuchatel, about 1770.  as in France, it was kept from entering into important regions of practical activily, it was only diverted, not destroyed. It manifested itself then in the creation of odd mechanical con- trivances and of marvelous automatons, lifelike mechanical dolls capable of performing the most amazing feats, from walk- ing lo playing musical instruments and drawing pictures. Some of these aulomatons, in the ingenuity and precision of their workmanship, even succeeded in anticipating the prin- ciple of the modern aulomatic telephone — for example, the “wriling doll” made at Neuchatel about 1770 by Pierre Jaquet- Droz. This doll (fig. 46) sill exists in a perfectly workable condition.  Invention. carried on in this way by men of all nations and all walks of life, led to the industrialization of almost every human pursuil. Bul this movement which was to give the nineteenth century its essential character is scarcely reflected at all in its official architecture. We should never be able to perceive the real nature of the period from a study of public buildings, slate residences, or great monuments, We must turn instead to an  examination of humbler structures. It was in rouline and entirely practical construction, and not in the Gothic or classical revivals of the early nineteenth century, that the decisive events occurred, the events that led to the evolution of new potentialities.  Bul. life is complex and irrational. When its evolution is blocked in one direction it seeks another (and often an entirely unexpected) outlet. The development of modern industry is essentially material. Nevertheless, in following its material urge, industry unconsciously creates new powers of expression and new possibilities of experience. These possibilitics at first remain bound up in guile matter-of-fact enterprises that do not in any way enter into the intimate and personal lives of men. But, slowly and gradually, the new potentialities become a part of private and individual life. Thus a devious line of development leads from innovations in industrial buildings of all kinds — mines, warehouses, railroads and factories — to the private home and personal life. The history of this meta- morphosis Is, in large measure, the history of the nineteenth century. Finally these potentialities come to be realized for what they are in themselves, apart from considerations of utility. The architecture of today stands al the end of such a process. Consequently, to understand it, we are obliged to survey in considerable detail developments in regions which seom far removed from aesthetic feeling.  IRON  Tron, as everyone knows, is far from being a new material; its use dates back to prehistoric times. It was employed only sparingly, however, in the great buildings of classical antiquity. Both the Greeks and the Romans preferred bronze, because of its greater resistance to weather. Neither had the Renaissance much faith in iron as a building material. Thus we find Leon Battista Alberti, the Florentine archilect and theorist of the qualtrocento, recommending materials which are ready for use in their natural state in preference to those which must be prepared by the hand and art of man — hominum manu et 
arle. ven the iron rings which Michelangelo used to hold together the cupola of St. Peter's must be considered merely ag fastenings. Even as late as the Victorian period, iron was still regarded as suitable only for fastenings by those men who -— like John Ruskin — hated industry. Poor resistance to expo- sure and lack of classical precedents in its use were not Lhe only reasons why iron played such a small part in construction of every kind. There was also the difficulty that it could not he produced except in relatively small quantities.  The moment its production was industrialized, iron took on an entirely new importance. In order to produce the metal industrially, an understanding of its molecular arrangement was requisite. But neither the equipment nor the knowledge essential to the study of the molecular structure of materials was available before the last quarter of the eighteenth century, The history of iron as a substance in wide use is accordingly a part of the history of chemistry, physics, and research into the comparative strengths of materials. Such studies, in making the industrial production of iron possible, converted it into what amounted to a new natural material. And the avail- ability of iron furthered in turn the sciences responsible for it.  England was the birthplace of the whole Industrial Revolution. The desire to advance from manual to industrialized produc- tion existed in other countries as well — in France, for example. But the preliminary experiments undertaken in these countries were all singularly unsuccessful, whether they concerned the building of bridges or the industrialization of silk weaving. An instance in point is the failure of the attempt that was made in 1755 to build a cast-iron bridge across the Rhone. It was more than twenty years later that the first cast-iron bridge in Eng- land was finally erected over the river Severn. The French effort proved premature and had to be given up simply because it was impossible to cast iron into members of the requisite dimensions.  Conditions in England were quite different from those prevail- ing elsewhere. At the end of the seventeenth century the wooded areas of England had been seriously diminished. As a result, attention turned to pit coal as a fuel that might pos- sibly make up for the increasing scarcity of wood and charcoal.  Mineral fuel had already supplanted wood to some extent. 3y the end of the seventeenth century it had become the normal fuel for heating the home, and had even come into pretly general use by tradespeople, bakers, brewers, sugar refiners, cloth weavers, and coppersmiths. During the century jls use was increased fourteen-fold. And of course in the eighteenth century demand for it was still further increased by jtg employment in the iron industry. By this time the use of mineral fuel had come to be regarded by everybody as the natural and ordinary thing. When Abraham Darby in the first half of the eighteenth century began experimenting with the blast furnace in the production of iron, he used coke and not charcoal.  Early Iron Construction in England  It often happens in England that one family dominates a certain trade or industry for several generations. The Darbys occupy this position in the opening stages of the industrialized production of iron. The first Abraham Darby leased an old furnace at Coalbrookdale in 1709, and it was here that the Darby family later succeeded in smelting iron ore with  ‘t. ABRAHAM DARBY, The first cast-iron bridge over the river Severn, 1775-79. Span. one hundred feet; height, forty feel.  Th  we 
coke instead of charcoal for fuel. The first printed account of these operations appeared in 1747. About 1750 he turned to the use of coal, employing it to turn out pig iron of a quality that could be forged into bar iron. Mass production of iron was now possible, and this advance from manual production of the metal was to change the face of the whole world.  The new material was at first employed only in making ma- chines. When John Smeaton, the great engineer who was one  48. Sunderland Bridge, 1793-96. Single arch of 236 feet. This comparatively large span was achieved by adapting methods of stone construction to work tn iron.  of James Watt’s antagonists, used cast-iron utensils for the first time (in 1755), he spoke of this application of cast iron as “4 totally new subject.” But with Abraham Darby the third, the time had come when cast iron could be used for a variety of entirely new purposes. In 1767 the first iron rails were cast, and at the beginning of the third quarter of the century the first cast-iron bridge was erected over the Severn.’  3John L. and Barbara Hammond, The Rise of Modern Industry (London, 1925), p. 136.  The Severn Bridge (fig. 47) represents one of the boldest experi- ments in the use of the newly available material. The idea for it seems to have originated in the year 1773 with John Wilkin- son, ‘‘the ingenious iron-master’” (who also invented the ceylinder-boring machine which made it possible for James Watt to build a really efficient steam engine), and with the third Abraham Darby. The bridge, executed during the years 1775— 79, consists of a single arch, with a span of 100.5 feet and a rise of 45 feet, made up of five cast-iron ribs. The whole arch is nearly a semicircle in shape. Since the Severn is subject to floods, the bridge had to be very strong. It was manufactured at Darby’s Coalbrookdale works, the only plant which was capable of casting arches of such large dimensions and com- posed of only two members.’  No artistic ambitions were involved in the design of this bridge, and, as architecture, it represents no very great achicve- ment. In these respects it admits of no comparison with the Church of the Fourteen Saints, which had been completed only a few years earlier. But if the church stands on the highest level reached by architecture in its period, it also stands at the end of that architectural tradition. None of its features points ahead into the future. This simply constructed bridge, for all its lack of interest as a work of art and even as a prob- lem in architecture, opens a path for developments of great importance.  The Sunderland Bridge  The Sunderland Bridge (1793-96) was one of the most daring experiments in construction of its time (fig. 48). As early as 1786 Thomas Paine, the famous American political writer, showed Benjamin Franklin the model of a bridge built on a novel system of his own. Franklin, secing the difficulty of carrying out work on such a system in America, where industry had hardly begun to develop, advised Paine to take it to Eng- land and provided him with recommendations.’ But in Eng-  * William Fairbairn, On the Application of Cast and Wrought Iron to Building Purposes (London, 1854), p. 201.  ‘Richard Blunck, Thomas Paine (Berlin, 1936), p. 115 et seq. 
land. as everywhere else. Paine had no luck. His experimental! bridge at Paddington (London) left him badly in debt. His name fell Into disrepute -and no deubt his political opin- ions contributed something to this process. Finally his patents were unscrupulously appropriated by a company directed by  49. LIIUMPHRY REPTON, Pheasantry for the Royal Pavilion, Brighton, 1808.  Rowland Burdon. Using Paine’s plans, Burdon built the Sunderland Bridge and took to himself all the credit for ils construction.*  This bridge at Sunderland had a single arch of a span of 236 feet. (The Severn Bridge had been only 100 feet.) The six  4 Blunck, p. 22.  ribs forming the arch were composed of cast-iron panels which acted as voussoirs. A series of 105 such panels made up each rib. In this manner stone vaulting was adapted to iron con- struction. To make a continuous girder of this span was beyond the capabilities of the time.  Jobert Stephenson's verdict on this bridge, delivered in 1856, is so much to the point that we shall quote it. Stephenson was the constructor of the Britannia Tubular Bridge (1849), the most famous bridge of its Lime and the outcome of three years of laboratory research. Stephenson has this to say of Paine’s work: “About the year 1790, Thomas Paine proposed to  50. JOHN NASH, Reyal Pavilion al. Brighton, 1818-21.  construct cast iron arches in the form of voussoirs, and with characteristic energy put his views to the test by constructing an experimental arch of 88 fect span...at Paddington. ... Ilis daring in engineering does full justice to the fervour of his political career — for successful as the result has proved... we are led rather to wonder al, than to admire a structure which, as regards its proportions and the small quantity of materials employed . .. will probably remain unrivalled.” *  In this period cast iron — like chromium plate around 1930 — was a new and fascinating material which could not be cm- ployed too much. Its unexplored possibilities quickened every- body's imagination. It was such an attitude that led John  ® Robert Stephenson, in Encyclopaedia Britannica (Boston, 1836). 
SL. VICTOR LOULS, Théatre-Frangais. [ron roofing, 1786. The form of the girders rea veals an instinelive knowledye of the moment of inertia, which had not as yel been given sct- entific formulation.  Wilkinson Lo want a cast-iron mausoleum, and even a cast-iron coffin. The imaginative possibilities in this lechnical advance were soon seen to affect architecture also. The association of the new material with exotic birds that appears in a design for a pheasantry with a cast-iron frame shows the imaginative flights that ironwork suggested (fig. 49). Humphry Repton, a famous English landscape gardener, included this aviary in a proposed design for the Royal Pavilion of Prince Regent George at Brighton which he submitted in 1808. It was John Nash, the architect of Regent’s Park and Regent Street in London, who finally built this royal pavilion in 1818. A fantastic creation in Indian style, it had a great bulbous cupola over the middle section. The cupola was built over a cast-iron framework that weighed sixty tons ° (fig. 50).  Early [ron Construction on the Continent  On the Continent iron was first used for building purposes as a roofing material. ‘The timberwork roofs of theaters and ware- houses were continually catching fire and burning like tinder. As soon as hand-wrought iron became available in suflicient  6 John Summerson, John Nash Condon, 1935), p. 162.  2  a2. ‘The Granary. Paris, 1811. Bellangé and Brunet used methods of wood construction here. just as lhe English ased methods of stone construction in their first cast-iron bridges. One of the first buildings in which the architect and the engineer were separale persons.  quantities, allempts were made to prevent such fires by its use. An early effort of this kind came in 1786 wilh the ‘con struction of a wrought-iron roof for the ThéAtre-lrancais in Paris (fig. 51), by the celebrated theater-builder, Victor Louis.?. The elegance and boldness required in the use of iron ina building of this type was to remain continuously character- istic of iron construction in France. The same qualities are exhibited by French work for more than a century after, until iron construction reaches its classic height in the Paris exhibi- tion of 1889.5  The iron roofing of the Thé&tre-Francais deserves notice for a more specific reason. The entire construction is counterbal- aneed in such a way that it needs only comparatively thin walls for its support. As some French theorists have pointed out, the form of ils girders reveals an inslinclive knowledge of  “Some years before this, Victor Louis produced the last great theater of the ancien régime at Bordeaux, one in which spatial relations of the different parts are handled with tuasterly skill. Victor Louis had some excellent etchings made of this theater. Cf. S Giedion. Spiifbarocker and romantischer Klassisismus (Munich, 1922), p. 184. a . The elegance of this construction has long been admired; cf. Charles T.. Mek, Tratté de Papplieation du fer, du forte, ef de la tole (Paris, 1811), p. 50.  
the moment of inerlia, which had nol as yet been given scien- tific formulation.  The wooden cupola of the Granary at Paris — covering the circular court —- was destroyed by fire in 1802. In 1811 il was replaced by an claborate construction in iron and copper (fig. 52). The architect Bellangé and the engineer Brunel col-  cally altered, iL survives as a part of the present Bourse de (commerce.  Ii was not until about 1850, in the cast-iron cupola of the rotunda of the British Museum, that cast-iron ribs extending from the ground to the top were used in the construction of a large building. In this example papier-maché was employed in  53. MARC SEGUIN, First French suspension bridge, of wire rope, over the Rhone, near Tournon, 182-4.  laborated in its erection. This was one of the first works in which the architect and the constructor were not the same person. The building shows little more than an adaptation of old constructional methods to the new material, a clever sub- stitution of iron ribs for the woodwork normally used. Never- theless, the Granary was much admired when it was completed. Napoleon I even found time to assist in its opening. Drasti-  4. Golden Gate Bridge, San Francisco, 1933-37. The longest single-span suspension bridge. Dimensions: over-all length, 9,200 feet; length of main span, 4,200 feel; width of roadway, GO feel.  covering the interior of the dome. About this same period — in 1855-63 — the old wooden dome of the United States Capitol in Washington was replaced by a dome with cast-iron ribs. Ils peristyle rests on an octagonal base and was interlaced with complicated iron constructional members. ‘Truss girders were required in the peristyle and the dome to help support the intricate marble profiles on the outside of the whole struc- 
ture. It is interesting to note how the conventions of the period  led, in the case of this important American building, to a ;  mantling of the iron construction by the architecture of the exterior surface.  The wire-cable suspension bridge goes back to the early nine- teenth century. The first French example was built over the Rhone, near Tournon, in 1824 (fig. 53). Marc Seguin, its constructor, was a nephew of Montgolfier and had already invented the tubular boiler which made long railway runs possible. The North American suspension bridges provided models for Seguin’s work at Tournon. These bridges were suspended on hemp or rawhide ropes; Seguin used wire cables  instead. This was the first time wire rope had been employed °  for such a purpose in Europe, and Seguin made careful scien- Lific tests of its strength before starting his project. The new material made possible constructions of an extreme elegance  and lightness. More than four hundred bridges of this type 4  were eventually erected.  In America, Seguin’s principles were applied on a larger scale by John Augustus Roebling in his bridges over the Mononga- hela River at Pittsburgh, 1846, and the Niagara River, 1851-55, and in the Brooklyn Bridge, on which the preliminary work was begun in 1868. And this principle — the transmission of all stresses to a continuous, elastic cable running the length of the structure — still forms the basis for the most daring bridges built today. Seguin’s bridge, incidentally, is still in use, although only pedestrian traffic is permitted on it nowa- days.  The suspension bridge was continuously developed throughout the nineteenth century as wider spans were demanded and traffic volumes increased. More elaborate constructional ap- plications of this apparently limited principle of elastic sus- pension were made, until fantastic spans were attained and voids were bridged that had hitherto seemed outside the range of human powers.  Often these bridges are set amidst landscapes of almost cosmic dimensions, and constitute with them new wholes on a more than human scale. The Golden Gate Bridge (fig. 54), the longest single-span suspension bridge in the world, crosses San  55. FONTAINE, Galerie d’Orléans, Palais Royal, Paris, 1829-31. A gathering place for elegant society and the precursor not only of such large galleries as the Galleria Vittorio  EY ele, Mil 186544 i ibitic ere o on (1865-67), but also of the glass and iron halls of the great exhibitions.  Francisco Bay against an overwhelming background of sea and rock.®  Tron and glass are the two materials whose conjunction in ninclcenth-century architecture led it to new solutions. They were first brought together in any considerable structure by Fontaine, some five years after the wire-cable bridge was developed. Fontaine (who, with Percier, founded the Empire style) in his later years (1829-31) used wrought iron to con- struct the glass roof of the Galerie d’Orléans, a part of the Palais Royal in Paris (fig. 55).  Earlier examples of such galleries in London made an alto- gether different use of glass. The Royal Opera Arcade, built in 1790 in conjunction with the old Her Majesty’s Theatre,  joa daring the years 1933-37, it has the following dimensions: length over ail feet: length of main span, 4,200 feet; width of roadway, 60 feet (accommodating six ufo lanes). The capacity of the two cables is 430,000,000 pounds. : 
‘y n  56. ROUHALULT, Greenhouses of the Botanical Gardens, Paris. 1833. The prototype of all the large iron-framed conservatories. In contrast to Paxton’s English conservatories of the period, the rigidity of these high pavilions is derived solely from the use of cast-iron columns and beams.  has circular openings cut into the vaulting. The light from the hidden glass roof pours inlo the building through these aper- tures. A dislinctly different impression was created by the Galerie d'Orléans, an impression of freedom and openness as though one were out-of-doors, vel shielded from the elements.  Situated at the end of the inner garden of the Palais Roval, the Galerie U’Orléans was the gathering place of elegant society. It was destroyed in 1935, when the Palais was remodeled, and an open colonnade was pul in its place. With ils destruction, one of the most charming specimens of early nineteenlh-cenlury archilecture disappeared, the precursor not only of such large galleries as the Galleria Vittorio Emmanuele, Milan (1865-67), but also of the glass and iron halls of the great exhibitions.  The first large structure consisting simply of an iron framework and glass panes was a French conservatory, les serres des Jardins du Musée d'histoire naturelle (fig. 56), the greenhouse  of the botanical gardens at Paris. Built by Rouhault in 1833, this greenhouse was the prototype of all large, iron-framed conservatories. The unusually large panes of glass, combined with the unrestricted influx of light that the elimination of wood made possible, caused this building to be named “ the glass gardens,” the jardins de verre. Rouhault's conseryatory, which is still standing, has an interior volume of nine thousand cubic meters. It is made up of two superimposed quarter- section barrel vaults (where the lower Lemperatures are main- tained), situated between two pavilions fifteen meters high which house the tropical plants. In an article written in 1849 a contemporary - - the architect Gottfried Semper - - tells of a mech more ambitious plan for these gardens. Prior lo the overthrow of Louis-Philippe in 1848, there existed a fantastic scheme for completely covering the Botanical Gardens with an immense portable glass roof which could be removed during the summer. -  FROM THE IRON COLUMN TO THE STEEL FRAME  Perhaps the most characteristic feature of nineteenth-century architecture is its addiction lo “period pieces.” All the important buildings, all Lhose edifices from which the spectalor imagined himself to gain a serious aesthetic impression, appeared in elaborate historical dress. The theoretical issues which received most attention at the time were those raised by the various “revivals” - - now classical. now Gothic, Ad- vances In building technique seem to have brought with them only the practical problems iuvolyed in using new methods to produce old effects. Bul even at that early date there were people who saw that no genuine and distinetiy e tradition could emerge from the medley of inherited forms that overlaid the urchilecture of the period. A hundred Years ago critics spoke of“ the Harlequin dress of architecture,” and indicated with thal phrase a disease which is still malignant in our day.  Nov ertheless, beneath all the masquerade, Londencies of lasting Importance lay hidden and were slowly gathering strength. The architecture of Wie present is a continuation of these 
tendencies: it is the product of a great stream of development that has covercd a whole century. The common opinion that contemporary architecture owes its foundation to a few inno. yators appearing around 1900 is both mistaken and superficial, The seeds of this new archilecLure were planted al the moment when handwork gave place to industrialized production. Like so many other aspects of our civilization, it owes its distine- tive character to influences stemming from the Industrial Revolution.  But why is it that these tendencies, so important to the future, are to be discovered almost nowhere except in the utilitarian structures of the nineteenth century? Why was their effect upon its official architecture so slight? We should of course expecl technological advances to make themselves felt first in the field of industrial construction, but this is not a complete explanation. ‘The Industrial Revolution may have begun in science and technology; that is no reason why it should not have acted upon the arts as well. We have already seen how, in baroque days, new scientific discoveries — even the most abstract and mathematical ones — immediately found their counterparts in the realm of feeling and were translated into artistic terms. In the nineteenth century the paths of science and the arts diverged; the connection between methods of thinking and methods of feeling was broken. The mutual isolation of these two kinds of enter- prise, far from being a consequence of |their different natures, is a phenomenon peculiar to the nineteenth century and responsible for much about its culture that is otherwise incomprehensible.  The historical posturing of nineteenth-century architecture is simply a special case of this separation, manifested in this field in the schism between the architect and the engineer. The architects of Gothic times did not merely employ the new engineering knowledge; they saw in it possibilities for express- ing the aims, emotions, and outlook peculiar to their age. Similarly, the progress of mathematics brought something more into baroque architecture than new instruments of cal- culation. In both cases new inventions were, so to speak, humanized; emotional and intellectual advances paralleled  each olher. The situation with regard to those nineteenth- century buildings which were expressly meant to symbolize the spirit of the century is exactly the opposite. Structural iron. for example, was simply a new tool enabling one to erect pscudo-monumental exteriors in the old modes. The new tool of course, by its very employment reduced these “ revived * forms to the status of false fronts.  Bul. as long as scientific and technological advances were used in architecture without being absorbed bv it, the engineer renutined subordinate to and detached from the architect The architect, on the other hand, was left isolated from the most important movemenls going on in the world about him. Until he suceeeded in coming to terms with the changed enviroument, until he recognized the architectonic possibilities in modern constructional meLhods, no new tradition relevant to the age could develop. It was out of those technical innovations which appear only behind the scenes in nineteenth- century architeclure that the architecture of the fulure had to grow. Construction was, as it were, the subconsciousness of archileclure; there lay dormant in it impulses that only much later found explicit theoretical statement.  Hence the interest these apparently trivial developments as dimatd | i 2 a : ” these timid introductions of new materials and new methods have for the historic \ i ill living active i ‘i rn storian, Tendencies still living and active in our (ay ie constituent facts of contemporary archilecture, trace ck to just such unpretentious beginnings, often of the most unexpected nature. The present chapter, in discussing the development leading from the cast-iron column lo the slecl frame. will be concerned with it from the point of view we have Jusl advanced. This evolution is important as a particular instance of the way in which, over the hundred years from 1780 to 188 > archi ialjti _ i" 1 880, new architectural potentialities grew out of strictly technical discoveries.  The Cast-Tron Column The cast-iron column was the first structural material pro-  fuced by the new industrial methods to be used in building AS ear . a . . . a s carly as 1780 — even before the introduction of steam 
57. Wooden attic of factory, Bolton, England, ¢. 1800. The hearv wooden roof trusses left the whole center line of the atlie clear for the long  spinning machines.  ron roof framework, ¢. 1835. The cast-iron roof framework ils invention has been erediled lo J. B. Papiorth in 1821. We * (about 1827).  58. Attic story with ci represents a later advance:  mention Papworth later as one af the earliest designers of “garden cities  power — such columns replaced wooden posts as roof sup- ports in the first English cotton mills. The size of the new machines demanded large rooms with a minimum of  obstructions.  The history of these mills has nol yet been thoroughly inves- tivated. One of the rare reports on such buildings — the source ol the illustration we shall discuss next — confesses that * the buildings have been treated merely as structures, no altempt being made to probe into their fascinating history. The -dates ° of the various factories have been reduced to an aver- age * period’ rather Lhan a conclusive and accurate date of actual erection.” A typical late cighteenth-century factory at Bolton shows how the atllic stories of existent buildings were converted to house the newly invented cotton-spinning ma- chines (fig. 57). This factory had been erected with the kind of heavy wooden framework that had been in use since Gothic times. At first the machinery was installed only in the attic; the Umber roof trusses- - soon to be replaced by trusses of cast. iron — left enough space down the center for the installa- tion of the long spinning frames. Later on, the use of cast-iron pillars made it possible to install machinery on all the floors.  These masonry buildings (a type which reappeared in Massa- chusetts when New England began to be industrialized) had the wide windows of late baroque structures, Standing amidst unspoiled rural surroundings near the rivers from which they drew their power, they present an appearance quile different from factory districts of the steam age. A factory near Man- chester, built in 1783, illustrates this stage in the development. This particular mill was among the first to have iron pillars in its interior. [tis still in operation, and still uses auxiliary water power.  The attic of a cotton-spinning factory about 1835 (fig. 58), with its cast-iron roof trusses, shows how room was made for the newly invented self-acting mule spinning frames. The neces- sily for rooms of very large dimensions is apparent. In this case the spinning frame had to be set up parallel with the long axis of the loft.  Tron pillars were used in combination with stone. brick, and Umber alike. Somewhat later, the cast-iron girder and Lhe brick-arch floor were used in mill construction. But for more  (icial Record of the Annual Conference af the Tectile Institute (Bolton, 1927), pp. AL, 
ntury the cast-iron column played a major role in  than a ce It was used  building of every sort, in all parts of the world. for a countless variely of architectural purposes during the enlire nineteenth century. In the Crystal Palace and in thoroughly workaday market halls, in libraries and in green- houses - - even in the first skyscrapers built in Chicago — the cast-iron pillar furnished the principal means of support. To some extent in England but much more often in America, the  sometimes for purposes of display. John Nash, the Royal A rchitect, was nol one to hesitale in delegating to others the work of designing, bul, according to Summierson he ers ally designed the “intricate carpentry and ironwork which supports the ceiling” "' (fig. 60). This was in 1818. So far as J know, it was the first time that cast-iron columns had heen used in a formal interior. Nash leads these columns freely through the space of the drawing room. Tw enty-live vents  I-  on  Lackinglon’s “Temple of ternal arrangement of the building ts perfectly novel. from the circumstance of the Wey  59. Early use of cast-iron columns. London bookshop, 1794. the Muses.” Finsbury Square: “The in _.. the eapaciousness of which may be readily conceived th four horses, having actually been driven around iLal... us roam... is supported by pillars of iron.” (“Ackerman’s Repository of Arts,” April f. gy; courtesy of Mrs. Albert ©, Koch, Cambridge, Mass.)  rst opening.  mouth mail, wi  1808  ‘ast-iron column was used, during the forties, to form the facades of buildings and to erect structures from prefabricated parts.  As a new material which still had something of the fabulous about it, cast iron even found a place in the Royal Pavilion at  Brighton. {ft was used Jiberally in this extraordinary edifice.  FOHIN NASH, Royal Pavilion, Brighton, 1818-21, Red drawing-room.  later Henri Labr imi a ! Henri Labrouste made a similar undisguised use of iron relnns in the small reading room (La Reserve) of the Biblio- x ; ue Sainte-Geneviéve in Paris. When some contemporary archileets -— ar 5 i n ng me leets - around 1925 — proposed doing the same thing hey mel with great opposition. ~ The Royal Pavili i al Pay pe cae yi avilion at Brighton was Lhe center of great festi- ‘i s: in il cast iron as a material for the architect found a set le . . 7 « vos rir ; ~~ ¢ very remote from labor or affairs. The enormous kilchen  1 John Nash, p. 162. 
ums, capital at its top.  enter four slender cast-iron supporting col- each fantaslically clongated and bearing a palm-leaf The unusual slenderness of cast-iron pillars and columns opened up the po ibility of new and strange pro- portions in architecture. Almost tifty years later, in the oval gar- den in the middle of the main building of the Paris exhibition of 1867, just such exotically slender cast-iron columns were placed in direct association wilh Lhe palm trees of the South (fig. 62).  (fig. 61) had in its €  fea  The kitchen.  61. JOHN NASH, Royal Pavilion, Brighton.  We can easily find important witnesses to testify thal cast ¢ron soon came to be au approved material for everything from steam engines to churches. Thus Thomas Tredgold, one of the first scientists Lo inLerest himself in the possibilities of Lhis material, writes in 1823 that “it is used for the principal sup- ports of churches, Uneatres, manufacturies, warehouses, and for the main parts of engines.” And Tredgold goes on to give some of the reasons for this popularity: * improvements in the processes of its manufacture had made it cheap even in com- parison with timber, and . it gave a certain protec Lion  \ fire sneh as wooden beams could not offer.” Thus tl reign of cast iron in the ninete pon : nineteenth century was {  reign of cast he C y was founde  its fire-resistant qualities. ths cheapnes ‘en facture, and resistance to heavy loads  . simplicity of manu- These adv: r ney ores! 1 ) se advantages were 2 to assure the domination of the cast-iron pillar i the efghties of the last century, when the steel fra eh re in Chicago, \ e steel frame was devel- , I! re “© ‘ PoP, ¥ Bu there was another reason for the use-— and misuse r cust irons ib is aterial whi ily: iy desire a is a material which can easily be given any desired cnt vist whie y be given any desires ay e catalogue of a French hardware manufacturer of  62. Paris Exbibiti  2. Paris Exhibition, 1867 z 7  erin ete at 7 fee. Oval garden in the center of the main building. Cast-i  oe Calaleanes we the century, bud their use reached ils high-water mark tind tht ref - ary. is hig R ares is  parla. Catalogues a aris hardware manufacturers offered them in every i 7 Weta  J ssmann’s great works of transformation Smagieaitesiape  abou as r ; ; wee has hundreds of pages devoted to cast iror | or all sorts rposes was © . in quit ain prs of purposes. It was even employed in quite “non ab Setations of sculptures by the great masters. TI ast-iron is, C S : Nich Hause. een v ats columns, and balustrades for which ITauss fete bui ding of Paris created a demand were available in hushed condition in every conceivable shape. Indeed cast-iron column -- used without ision. or testrai me pee se » precision or restraint — on ; - stramt ‘ je ene of e symbols of the nineteenth century. As lat as 1089 Vierendecl, the great Belgi i vad reason . Lhe great Belgian engineer, still had reason 
by alt chester, in 1801, is the second example (fig. 64).  to write, referring to the Paris exhibition, that ~ the enormous danger of this sort of support lies in its revolting vulgarity.” The charm that lay in the proper use of Uhe material was lost in a hopelessly misdirected mass production.  TOWARD THE STEEL FRAME  cast iron in construc- Both date from the very beginning The first, the Telford and Douglas was made in 1801 bul never exe-  Two other early examples of the use of tion must be mentioned.  of the nineteenth century. design for London Bridge.  63. Aquatint of Telford's proposed cast-iron bridge over the Thanses, London, 1801, This elegant and well-known design is for a really colossal work in cast iron, a bridge with a rise of 65 feet and a single span of 600 fect. Even five decades later Robert Stephenson's Britannia bridge fell short of this span. Neverthe- less the design for London Bridge could have been carried oul at the time it was made, since Telford, adopting the system proposed by Thomas Paine in 1783, suggested building it like a stone arch out of a number of small wedge-shaped sections.  The cotton mill of Philip and Lee, built at Salford, Man- This mill sur-  cuted (fig. 63).  of its lime in the boldness of its design. {1 of iron pillars and  The  passes all others represents Lhe first experiment in the use beams for the whole interior framework of a building.  erection of this factory was an event of the first importance i  the history of modern construction. This truly extraordit ary feat for builders of that date — a feat which in Lime came to he almost forgotten .— was accomplished by soullon and Watt's Soho foundry. The inventor of the steam engine as then concentra Ling most of his atlention upon a machine for making portrait statuary, and was meditating retirement tro  active business. ° "  The original drawings for Uhis mill, which have never before been published. are in the Boullon and Watt Collection of the Birmingham Reference Library. The plate shows, the ground plan and the elevation of the Salford mill. The building ix a large one, about 140 fect long and 42 fect wide; its height of seven stories is extraordinary for this carly date As the ground plan shows, there are two ranges of iron pillars set 6 each tloor. For the first time, iron beams are used in combina. tion with these iron columns. These beams, the first of the |-section type. extend across the building from wall to wall at regular distances. The Scottish engineer, William Pairbairn praises this first employment of the | beam as an example of intuitive recognition of the most efficient shape in advance f the calculations that would prove it to be such. CA similar in stance of the instinctively correct solution of an enginceri 2 problem has already been encountered in the iron roof of the Théatre-Frangais of 1786. Its wrought-iron girders were ad. justed Lo the moment of inertia, even though the theoretical basis for such an adjustment did not exist until much later.) Phe drawing also shows how the floors of the mill were bv ilt up from brick arches, brought to a level surface | ki y .  rough concrele. hy a leyer of  The second drawing gives a cross-section (fig. 65) of the width ol the building. It shows the special foundations provided for the iron columns of the ground floor, and the junctions between the cast-iron columns and beams of the first two floors.  | he third drawing shows the construction of the hollow cast won pillars, cach of which had an outside diameter of hit ° inches. This extremely careful treatment reflects the ex ne. rience acquired by Boulton and Watt in the making of steam engines (fig. 66). ‘The details of the assembly of pillar ‘and 
socket fon the right-hand side of ihe plan) show a precision . . . . a“ that had been learned in machinery construction. ; : ‘  As Fairbairn remarked in 1854, this experiment at Salford was ~ the pioneer of that system of fireproof structure which now distinguishes the manufacturing districts of this country. For _ a quarter of a century this mill wits a model for similar build-  tact  the form of beams.” The reason for Ubis was that Lime was needed to enable experiment and calculation to overtake 7 Watt’s astonishingly farsighted structure. The type of build- i ; ing represented by this seven-story mill of 1801 with ils cast- iron skeleton surrounded by outer walls of masonry became the j standard for warehouses throughout Uhe century and was  Bete PL Cay  | ings. From 1801 until 1824 litle or no variation took place in | ‘ ; | ; |  65. WATT and BOULTO  first seven-story mill with ca  ; M oral drawings for the 66. WATT and BOULTON, Working iron beams and coaduruns. drawings for the first. seven-story mill with  cast-iron beams and columns, Seetions of  a cast-iron eahiumn.  adopted for some advanced public buildings as well. Watt's Salford experiment was the first step in the development of the steo] frame which was finally to appear in Chicago during the eizh lies. 7 oO  peepee  William Fairbairn himself lai for further a y ' hin If laid a large share of the groundwork — Fairbairn im- advance. A builder of ships and bridges as well as | preves on Watt's  6h. WATT and BOULTON, Working drawings far the first seven-story mill with industrial str ;  cactiron beams and columns, Salford, Manchester, 1801, The first building ever designed strial struclures, the experiments with tubular iron which construction  aeessreated’ with a metal skeleton casl-iron coltrane and beams — enclosed in the outer he completed in 1846 at his laboratory in Manchester { in the forties : Lor) Ma ster made  masonry walls like the work: of a wateh in ils case. . wossible tT wa . . , . possible the building of the Britannia Tubular Bridge, the 
1S  most famous of its time, and encouraged the building of still larger spans later on. The decisive change in methods of in- dustrial construction that is to be observed shortly before the middle of the century owes much to other experiments con- ducted by this able engineer. Before this time, as he writes, “ we had little or no knowledge of the superior resisting powers of wrought iron in the shape of beams: . . . our knowledge of [its] properties may be considered as still very imperfect and confined within exceedingly narrow compass.” ”  In his attempts to make his buildings fireproof Fairbairn was led to employ a remarkable principle of construction. The eight-story, flat-roofed refinery which he built during the mid- dle forties introduces wrought-iron as well as cast-iron mem- bers (jig. 67). Wrought-iron |-section girders joined with iron tie bars are here supported by cast-iron pillars. Instead of the brick-arch floor, thin wrought-iron plates are used; running from column to column, they are bent in the segmental form of an arch and then filled to floor level with concrete (fig. 68). The jump from such a building to the building of ferroconcrete is not very great; the time had not yet arrived, however, for this suggestion to be taken up.  The use of iron as a structural material was further increased by the invention of machinery for producing rolled iron and steel joists. The American railroad builder, Robert Stevens of Hoboken, went to England in 1830 to buy locomotives. During his visit he tried to make rolled-iron railroad tracks, finally succeeding in this endeavor, despite its many difficul- ties, in a South Wales rolling mill. Rolled-iron | beams did not come into use until much later, however. The architect Boileau wrote in 1871 that a combination of exceptional cir- cumstances led to the introduction of rolled-iron beams in France. This was in 1845 at Paris; a strike of masons, the high price of timber, the fear of fire, and the demand for wider spans led a foundryman named Zorés to roll the first wrought- iron joist sections produced in France. They did not appear in England until still later.  12 William Fairbairn, The Application of Cast and Wrought Iron to Building Purposes,  p. 152.  67. WILLIAM FAIRBAIRN, English refinery, 68. c. 1815. Cross section. Developments moved very slowly during the first half of the century, with no fnportant changes in the methods used by Boulton and Watt. In this Fairbairn refinery “there are simply certain technical refinements.  WILLEAM FAIRBATRN, English refinery, ¢. 1815. Ceiling construction.  {mportant preliminary work for later construction was car- ried out in the show windows of stores, where, as industrializa- tion continued, ever-larger glassed surfaces were needed. The manuals of iron construction that were published from the fifties to the nineties are filled with instructions for supporting the brickwork of the upper stories on iron girders. These iron columns were the only structural clements of the building visible behind the wide display windows. In view of the fact that the set-back pillar is used in so many modern buildings, a continuous account of the evolution of this practice would be most interesting. It was from these store windows that we first learned how to use large glass areas in dwelling houses.  James Bogardus  The beginnings of the skeleton construction of the present day are met with as early as 1848 in the home of the skyscraper, the United States. The decisive step was the substitution of iron columns for the masonry of the outer walls as a means of support for the floors of a building. An early example of this type of construction is a five-story factory that was erected in New York in 1848. Its builder was the man who invented this method of construction, James Bogardus (1800-1874). Ameri- can department stores, warehouses, and office buildings of the period between 1850 and 1880 were based on this system of building. Using prefabricated parts, Bogardus erected these  ~~ FH —  
69. JAMES BOGARDUS, Design for a factory, 1856, showing the resistance of cast iron:  buildings in every section of the United States. According to the New York Herald of April 14, 1874, he even delivered an immense building to Santa Catalina, near Havana, Cuba. Excellent examples of these buildings still exist in most Ameri- can cilies. Some particularly fine specimens (warchouses and office buildings) are to be found in the river-front area of St. Louis. One of them, located at 7911 North First Street, is particularly interesting for the uncompromising way in which large areas of glass are introduced into the front wall. All have yalue as monuments not merely for the step forward in con- struction which they represent bul. for the restrained and sober quality of their architecture. This type of building is undoubl- edly one of the chief sources of a specifically American architec tural style. But in spite of its contemporary importance and its very real merit the work of Bogardus is almost unknown today.  James Bogardus’ best-known building was executed in Frank-  ng lin Square on Pearl Street in New York for the famous pub-  lishing house of Ilarper and Brothers, in 1854 (fiy. 70). A  single glance reveals the way in which Bogardus transformed the outer wall into a surface almost entirely of glass. The vonibination of wide expanses of glass with iron columns and arches in the Venetian Renaissance style is a perfect illustra- tion of the spirit of his time. Bogerdus himself gives a quite eaplicit statement of that spirit, Ena booklet bearing the title Cast fron Buildings: Their Construction and Advantages, by James Bogardus, “Architect in Iron’? (New York, 1838) he inpersonally relates that “* Mr. Bogardus first conceived the idea of emulating (the rich architectural designs of antiquity] in modern times, by the aid of cast-iron.” This was in the year 1840. (This small but important publication has fallen inlo such obscurity thal it is nol mentioned in the sketch of Bogardus in the Dictionary of American Biography.)  Like many of his eighteenth-century precursors, Bogardus helieved cast iron to be a material capable of satisfying all the demands of both the engineer and the artist. He ‘ ould have liked to apply his system lo the building of dwelling houses as well as commercial structures (fig. 69). He apparently felt that the exclusion of his methods from the residential field was due to mere chance. “* Mr. Bogardus firmly believes,” we read on page 14 of the booklet, ~ that had his necessities required  i. JAMES BOGARDUS, [larper & Brothers’ Building. New York. 185 b. 
Seren deny  ai ena 14  ne oe a ee 3  a geen stern) wey VN vy  TL. JAMES BOGARDUS, Project for the New York World's Fair, (853. The amphi- Uealer was leelre hundred feet in diameter, The theee-hundred-foot tower was intended to house what would hare been the first passenger elesator. Ina eircte of this size, straight girders -— capable of resale afterwards -— could be employed.  him to construct a dwelling house rather than a factory [this method] would be now as popular for this purpose, as it is for stores.” And he planned fantastic houses so de- signed thal even “with the greater part of their ironwork removed . . . or destroyed by violence . they will yet remain firm.”  James Bogardus’ most imaginalive work was the project which he submitted for the first of the American world’s fairs, held at New York in 1853 (fig. 71). He advaneed as the chief recom- mendation for his scheme its great economy — the tolal cost would be only two hundred thousand dollars — and “ ex- pressed a conviction that the whole structure would be worth very considerably more when dissected, for ordinary purposes, than in its present form, owing to the economy in reproducing so large a number of identical parts from Lhe same pattern.” Wilh future dissections in mind, Bogardus proposed building a great circular amphitheater bwelve hundred feet in diameter. A circle as huge us this could be assembled from straight gird- ers, easily disposed of afterwards.”  3 The main building at. the Paris exhibition of 1867 bad two hemicycles built on at its  ends, When the building was torn down at the close of the exhibition, it was very  Bogardus’ plan called for an immense coliseum in cast iron The exterior wall was sixty feet high, with arches and columns running in series about it to mark off the separate stories. A three-hundred-foot Lower tose in the center of the enclosure ~ Lo serve the double purpose of a support for Lhe hanging root of sheel-iron suspended from it by rods in a calenary curve and also as a grand observatory." Such supporting rods of catenary curvature were standard practice in suspension bridges. Bogardus planned to install an elevator in this lower lo carry spectators to ils Lop.  The shapes that figure in this design were borrowings front tradiional styles, but the structure as a whole was amazingly advanced, a daring prevision of future developments This building would have been as original a document for the ff ies as the French exhibitions from 1867 on were for their period,  The building actually crected for this fair had ne historical iniportance, and the other plans entered in the competition were either undistinguished in qualily or inappropriate lo the site. This includes even the scheme submitted by Jos pl Paxton.” * vesspn  The career of James Bogardus was a most interesting one. He began his active life as a watchmaker and an inventor of areat fertility. He had to his credit a new kind of pencil, the lead of w hieh was always sharp, the engraving machine that produced the first English postage stamps, a deep-sea sounding machine  and a variety of other devices, He was, in fact, a classical exemplar of a type of inventor peculiar to the beginning of the mneteenth century, when men were trying to invent, in one greal rash, everything that had nol been iny ented in the past  [tw asa time when it was common to find a single person con- ducting experinients in the most widely separated departments ol industry, The contrast with the Renaissance is striking  Phen the ideal figure was the * Universal man,” the erent  ha ull V0 fd a market for the curved ironwork used in these hemicveles esiny this situation, bat his projec rie, : ; Ss project bad been forgotten hy that time unt the uation orgotten by that time,  The American and remained so  “B. Silliman, Sr. TCLRLG i r r Ww York, HSU pa. ane Goodrich, The Work? of Setence, Art. and Indust vy (Nev  8 Thal. pp. 1-3,  Be of 
who could unite in his own life the greatest. number of dif-  ferent. kinds of activity, Lhe man who was at once artist, In the early nineteenth century the ideal uld do all things in one field of industry, type represented by  scientist, enginecr. was the man who co the w atchmaker-ironworker-engineer  Bogardus.?®  The St. Louis River Front  Commercial buildings with east-iron fronts, and often with cast-iron skeletons as well, sprang up all over the United States between 1850 and 1880 — the so-called ‘* cast-iron age.” Bogardus is simply Une best known of their many build- ers. Whether he was the first to introduce this type of struc- lure is something which cannot be determined at present. The lack of documents makes even a gencral survey of these build- ings inrpossible - - - and many of them were astonishingly fresh and straightforward in their design, showing a direct grasp of the functions thal had to be fulfilled. They were often erected by the foundries which produced their parls, with no architect taking a share in the work. The owners of hese foundries, unlike James Bogardus, had no Ltalian travels behind them and no desire lo maugurate a Renaissance revival in cast iron, From this anonymous development we select. a complete dis- tricL comprising about five hundred buildings —- the central river front of St. Louis. For more Lhan a century after ils founding in 1764 as a headquarters for the fur trade, St. Louis was the leading trading conter for the entire trans- Mississippi West. [ts most prosperous decade came in the 1850's: sLeam- boat traffic was at its height; the gold rushes to California and Colorado were under way ind new lands in the Missouri Val- ley had just been opened. AL this lime St. Louis is believed to have been the third steam port of the country, and by 1870 ib was the fourth largest cily im the United States. The river front was the city’s old business area. and most of it wag built up during this flourishing period.” Building began after the  16 James Watt and the Bruanmels are other instances of Chis same Type. 1 Seniar Landscape Architect in’ the  TY awe these data ta Mr. Charles b. Peters National Park Service, who is one of the architects at work on the Jetferson National being erected in this area.  Expansion Memori:  great lire of 1849 (the vear of the California gold rush, for which St. Louis was one of the crossroads) and continued until the oulbreak of the Civil War. During the post-war years St Louis steadily fell off in importance, while Chicago went on to iake tts place as the great mid-western market. Finally * with the entry of the eastern railroads over Ead’s Bridge in 1874 and the decline of the steamboat, the commercial con ler of th ; cily shifted and left the old river front in decline.” 1s .  The half-deserted river fronl has survived as a wilness to one of the most exciting periods in the development of America Some of its commercial buildings — fur and china warehouses, Pony Express offices, ordinary business blocks exhibit an architecture far in advance of the ordinary standards at tl  lime of their erection.!® * Stanesresees  , ese oramercial buildings are of various archilecLural types, yul even when they adapt motifs of stone architecLure to cast  ae an ‘ ons Meerlront win Evhibition of Architectural Studies in the Tistoric Arew of the Jefferson National Expansi i S i je Li ae pansion Memorial (St. Louis Public Library, [938), The importance of preservi i ne preserving nineteenth-century documents i specilic problem which is now being worked on : mls Teauls us to mention @ ae blocks of the St. Louis river front have recently been taken over by the United States government as the site for a JciTerson Nati IE i TL awhicl Tetle. National Expansion Memorial whi i extend along the bank of the Mississippi. T nth th il be the aie xen Ne a e Mississippi. The first step in the w i i exten Mons the baa Mi ; first stey he work will be the razing ot is Hivotic quarter. It was in connection with this memorial project that research A ade into the dates of ercction of these buildings and that they were systematical photographed — unusual happenings ut this date. , “sesematically The National ark Service has decided to preserve the fronts of sume important of these buildings. The pr ‘i ; oS. 8 proposal was made se DSc courtyard of a new building. S mune to se up these  of the most facades in the  LT visited s is i gs ind i ie “ St. Louis in Augnst 1939 on the kind invitation of Mr. Peterson and inspected rict just before the pickaxes went to work on it. It seemed to mie that the building  aborn aus First S  “ut Fe rth Ries Strcet at the extreme northern end of thi ¢, could be preserved  ara is ans ‘spalch, st. Louts Star-T imes, St. Louis Daily Globe-Demoerat,  ey tl ot e st examples from elsewhere in the section could be moved into of then: vould be fitted out as they were when the river frout was al its  peak complete with Pony Express offi stuffed animals under plass domes that. estaltishments.  stock in Lhe warehouses, and the typical stood in the windows of the old fur-trading  Some one ese buildi  Wa ; whe of tes buildings cowld even be used as a museum of the history of the Missi sippi region. Y + possible i i i wat in cent, se es _ t * ould be posse to display its relations with the past and the present 1 whele United States — north 1s ; se Hons Mein - | Hil ates and south, east and west. George Henri hen Tr a the Musée du Trocadéro produce peation of a Burs vali n ‘lle wrt the Musée cat al i re an Village ttc pars exhibition of 1937. Tt told the story of a community ina nianner which was it actually so very difficult to realize that commercial luildings of the  Nineteent hee - .  -eentury are aus puporta i i  * > i ant witnesses d aa ns any s  vhatenud I vesses toa period as any seventeenth-century  similar re-  
St. Louis. river front. Cast. iron front. of 29 North Firs Street, ¢. (870-71. The building has been variousiv a  iholesale bool. dry goods. and clothing store, Lt has been ex. empled fron: the demolition work going an in the viver-front arca,  73. St. Louis. river front. € iron front of Gantt Building, 219-221 Chestnut Street, facade dating from 877. Originally a lnever’s office. it later became a wholesale slationer’s. The facade is being removed by the National Park Service for future museum use.  iron they are nol without a certain French elegance. The build- ing at 523-529 North First Street (ec. 1870-71, fig. 72), at the very end of the Memorial area, should be preserved just as it is.” Another fine specimen is the five-story brick warehouse at. 7-9-I1 North First Street. Its upper stories are bound. to- gether into two pairs by slim columns. Its flat surfaces are reminiscent of the shapes of the simplified Romanesque style which Jater became so celebrated at the hands of Henry Hobson Richardson. Beyond this there are such simple con- structions as the building at 109-111 North First Street, which we shall later find occasion to compare with one of the first modern dwellings in Europe, the Horta house in the Rue de Turin of 18932! These structures carry the simplification of the front so far that the iron columns and lintels become scarcely more than the crosspicces in a great casement window spread across Lhe whole facade. For this treatment, and for its excellent proportions as well, the Gantt Building (1877) at  20 Mr, Peterson has since written me that this is being done. a Cf. Fig. 124.  
219-221 Chestnut Street (fig. 73) deserves to be known as one of the finest in the whole period.  Early Skeleton Buildings  The first building of true skeleton type was the chocolate works constructed in 1871-72 by Jules Saulnier at Noisiel-sur-Marne, near Paris (fig. 74). The factory resls on four piers set into the bed of the Marne, whose current supplied the power for its machinery. The building itself is erected upon four hollow iron girders, each square in section. The building whose base these girders constitute is the first lo employ the principles of skeleton construction, the first, that is, in which an iron skele- ton is made to carry the whole weight. This skeleton can be seen on the surfaces of the walls; the latter, made of hollow brick, function merely as filling. The diagonal iron stiffeners show clearly that Saulnier derived a part of his imspiration from methods used in wood construction.  All contemporary buildings intended to have any formal or stately character had their walls overloaded with decoration, The walls of this chocolate works are plane surfaces. As Saulnier himself explains, the construction was responsible for this: ** The system of construction used for the facades pro- duced a surface entirely plane from top lo bottom, with no projections either horizontal or vertical.” * Huropean Laste in the early seventies nevertheless required some concessions on Saulnier’s part. Although he scrupulously preserved the flat surfaces that followed from the logic of his method. the brickwork defining them embodies a pattern in varicolored tiles.  We can see in this building how the flat and unornamented surfaces of present-day architecture appeared simultaneously with the new structural means (fig. 75). Moreover, this took place in spile of the fact that monumental archilecture in the late nineleenth century was developing along entirely different lines, in a direction which led to an overdecorated confusion. And it is not the case that a desire to build cheaply was re-  ™ Fneyelopédie d'architecture, 1877, p. 92.  i  i  Hoos  5  7  a 74. JULES BAULNIER, Me: hen niet Chocolate Works, Noisiel- : sur-Marne. 1871-72. fron shel fon, So far as we know, the ' skeleon buitding in the nexkern ; sense of the word. with the outer * walls reduced to functioning sim- “re  ply as curtains,  Re ice La 73. JULES SAULNTIER. Menior Chocol  fartury is built over the riv “el tio the river bed,  ade Warks. Noisiel-sur-Maene, 1871-72  3 ; ‘ - This ee Marne, on four great iron Hove girders: supported  hy stone piers 
sponsible for the simplicity of the factory at Noisiel. Saul- nier’s type of construction was considerably more expensive than any other.  The plans of this chocolate mill were published several times in great detail by the best-known French reviews -- all of them available in American libraries. It is very curious, accordingly, that Saulnier’s work should have remained completely un- known in the United States, as it seenis to have done. One would have expected this first example of skeleton construc- tion to have played a considerable part in the development of the skyscraper.  The stages leading up to the American skyscraper are not known with any exactitude. As Is. M. Upjohn remarks, * At least three cities — New York, Chicago, and Minneapolis -— have sought the honor of being the birthplace of the sk scraper, and several architects have laid claim to distinction as ils inventor.” * The claims of the Minneapolis architect, Leroy 8. Bullington, have been advanced more often than any others. They were cerlainly urged quite strongly by Bufling- ton himself, who claims to have invented the skyscraper in 1880, deriving his inspiration from Viollet-le-Duc’s Leclures on Architecture, which appeared in translation at about that time. The passage that aroused his interest occurs in volume II of the Lectures, on pages 1-2, where Viollet-le-Duc remarks that “a practical architect might not unnaturally conceive the idea of erecting a vast edifice whose frame should be entirely of  iron, . . . preserving [that frame] by means of a casing of stone.” The possibilities of a building with a * frame of iron  clothed with masonry ” having been suggested to him, Buffington — so he relates -— looked through all the material available in public librarics for an account of such a structure, but without finding any. That being the case, he was quite justilied in supposing the system of skeleton construction which he finally developed to be entirely original.*!  s. M. Upjohn. ° Buffington and the Skyseraper.” Arf Bulletin, XVIL (March 1935), 48-70,  The late Willian: B. Mundic’s opinion on Bullington’s claim may be of interest. Mr. Mundie was a younger partaer of Wiliam J.e Baron Jenney. 1am indebted to Mr. E. C. Jensen of the architectural firm of Mundie, Jensen. Bourke & Havens for Ue opportunity of quoting these excerpts from one of Mundie’s unpublished papers:  vo. WELLTAM LE BARON JENNEY. Home Lasurance Company, Chieugo. 1883-35, The first’ skvseraper actually erected pon modern principles uf vonstraction, Ten sluries high and fireproof, it per- ed the marimun amount of Hal! in every ufier.  Nevert ieless M s ¢ ICS sev CT - althoug} > ~eunier’s method diffe in several  respects from those which Buffington proposed, the Frencl constructor had anticipated him. in one essential 10k 1 he an erected. almost a decade earlier, a building whose ote, Tem Neel a testeely by wrought-tron  in masonry,  : girders, essentially, an iron frame clothed  ; f it a loss Just how to approach this claim: of Mr. Baling  entor, and the City of Minneapolis as the birthplace of skel f iy Viewpoint it should be ignored, but it has bee “suekt the Patent Office did : ‘alling  ton’s for himself as @ ton construction. Fron ' letters patent pee t #iven such widespread publicity and Tron Building Construction,” Patent No 3B TsO. ‘h wonton LS. Buffon of  2 Pe 7 be Taventor LS. Buffington. Date  May 22. tay aun be controverted.?  880. That cannot. be ignored, but it c:  t Ste detat : vine details of the legal controversies belween  and Bullington, Mr. construction twhich ate colunm, composed of iats, thus forming a solid  Mundie goes on te observe, * All he patented was the  was the Ml-known) i i ake u t well-know NM? i connection with his laminated ste 1 pl tad ' steel riveted together side by side and breakin, steel coluam fron Thi ; P solid nt eee é hottom to top. This column being solid was so extravagant that ' ada desire to use it. Parties wh i caine L the ‘ Gat. Parties 10 called Lo interview r tien ah o Interview Mr, Jenney al 1 : afterwards proved to be Bulli ‘ rthatit thee ‘ s 2 Bulfington’s att 3 i onl teat wa ie attorneys, were told by him thati * : | anvone using thal extravagant column they certai I - ed using tnt ! + they certainly couls Using it:  Ube prosecuted for  fic knowledge w : jon i ze would be guitly Hon il was worthless.” auilty of  ut no archituct or engineer of any  in skeleton constrae  
raper actually built (and  It is well known that the first skysc not merely planned) along modern principles of construction was the ten-story building of the Home Insurance Company (fig. 76) of Chicago (1883- 85). The commission for its design was given to William Le Baron Jernney in 1883. The Ilome Insurance Company demanded a new Lype of office building which would be fireproof and offer the maximum amount of light for every room.?'  To summarize: a period of slightly more than eight decades lies between James Walt’s seven-story colton factory of 1801 with its tron columns and iron beams and the first iron-framed sk y- scraper. Jt is a curious fact that a similar cighty-year interval between the discovery of an important new principle and its assimilation into everyday life is lo he encountered in other fields. For example, just this length of Lime intervened be- tween Volla’s discovery of galvanic electricity in 1800 and the first transmission of electric power in the eighties.  Elevators  At the time when James Bogardus was proclaiming that his new cast-iron buildings could “ be raised to a height vastly ereater than by any other known means and the grealer their height, the firmer they would be,’ °*¢ the first mechanical elevators were being invented in Boston and New York. Like nearly all inventions of this period, elevators were first intended to serve industrial purposes only.  James Bogardus proposed to install “‘ a mechanism for hoist- ing observers lo the lop by steam power,” 7’ in the three- hundred-fool central lower of his projected building for the  *% Ts construction is noteworthy for the fact that it ineludes not only cast-iron columns hut aise a few of the first Bessemer steel girders ever used ina building. ‘Chis was thirty years after Bessemer had made public the process of making stect which he had invented. Other branches of iadustry had adopted El almost at once; thus it came very soon to be used in Lhe manufacture of railroad tracks and the armor plate for batleships. Further details of this celebrated building can be found in any history of the sk yseraper.  James Bogardus, Cast fron Buildings. Silliman and Goodrich, Phe World of Science. Art. and Indnstry. p. A.  ray  at. ELISHA GRAVES OTIS, 78, The world’s first safe elevator, 1653,  ELISHA GRAVES OTIS, Passenger ele- vator at the time of the Civil War.  Nave op] i Ia Dey Spy me rye New York W orld s Fair of 1853. Fhough the very word had not vel come into use, Boga :  hve heme? ardus here proposed what would j peen the first passenger elevator in the world.  Phie first completely salisfactory elevator was the wo rk of tlisha Graves Otis of New York (fig. 77). The world's fi . sale elevator was produced when he attached a safety ie vice to the ordinary hoisting platform. This elevator recei “edd its initial showing and demonstration at the Cry stal Palnoe ae position in New York in 1853. fy cach demonstration Mr.  Us stepped onto atl i aus . é platform, w ch owas ’ ad ahoye iL oe he It ! was then ho sled a IOVE ansare  the hoisting rope was cul, lo a slop, whereupon Mr. remark: “All safe. gentlemen!  ; the elevator Otis made the historical Perna A recent check of the archives of the Otis Company revealed that hes en Suv ning designs of this first cley only ite Approxiniate type from sketche later period,  ator. We know only its S$ Of machines of a slightly 
Ty, Eiffel Tower, Mlevatur lo the first. platform, 1889.  : . . fp » (pst passenger elevator What is considered to have been the first passens  is j Lore corner of was installed by Otis in a department store on the co  Broadway and Broome Street, New York, in 1857.5 1 hee passenger elevator was installed in the old Fifth Avenue ot c in 1859. Tts inventor was a Mr, Tufls of Boston, and the ¢ evice bore the name of * Vertical Screw Railway Contemporary pictures of these ~ railways ” are also lacking: sketches from about the period of the Civil War survive, however, wen et idea of the principles employed in their design (fig. 78).  The first European elevator, so far as we know now, x nent built until 1867, when one was inslalled at the great rats exhibition of Lhat year. A hydraalic ele yator exhibiting all L re ungainliness of some primordial monster, it transported V isilors from the grandiose Galerie des Machines Lo the corrugated iron roof of that immense hall. From these roof terraces the visilors  - the great ¢ aris but saw spread oul below them not only the great ctly of Pa  a whole new world of glass and iron.  7 Jtis Fleve . anys 28 Tain indebted to Mr. G Bebb, advertising manager of the Otis Elevator Company  for Udis date, whieh corre  OMINLON CLPOr.  It is pleasant to relate that the first elevator for a structure of modern skyscraper proportions was built to serve no commer- cial or narrowly practical purposes. Il was destined for a structure which sprang out of the vision rather than the daily needs of man — the Eiffel Tower. The Eiffel Tower, indeed, falls outside the usual connotations of Lhe word ** building ”: it might better be regarded as at once the manifesto and the monument of that Iron Age which embraced the second half of the nineteenth century. An unusual traffic problem was solved by constructing a whole system of elevators. Four large, double-decked elevators ran from the ground to the first platform (fig. 79), a height equal lo that of Notre Dame; two more ran from the terrace to the second platform, a height equal Lo that of the dome of St. Peter’s; the rest of the ascent was made in two slages by means of a pair of hydraulic eleva- lors operating on a sort of shuttle system. The total ascent to a height of a thousand feet took only seven minutes, and 2,350 passengers could be transported to the summit every hour.” This was achieved in 1889,  9 Those details are to be found in a contemporary pamphlet of great interest: Gaston Tirsandier, La Tour Ecffel de 300 m. (Paris, 1889), p. 68. 
THE SCHISM BETWEEN ARCHITECTURE AND TECHNOLOGY  We have already spoken in somewhat general terms of the gap that opened in the course of the nineteenth century between science and its techniques on the one hand and the arts on the other, and hence between architecture and construction. The previous chapter should lend support to the contention we made then that the seeds of the architecture of our day were to be found in technical developments little regarded at the time of their appearance. The present chapter will handle this topic in more detail. We shall deal with the question of the time at which this schism became evident, and the manner in which recognition of its existence led to the demand for a new architecture. Contemporary utterances will enable us to show that from this situation developed many questions the answers to which are still being sought today. [inally, in separating the constituent facts from the episodic trends of the nineteenth century, we shall be able to fill in manv of the gaps in the history of our own development, gaps of whose existence we have often been unconscious.  In the year 1806 Napoleon founded the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, thereby reviving an institution of the ancien régime. The pro- gram of the Ecole, covering the whole field of the plastic arts, maintained that unity of architecture with the other arts which had been both complete and spontaneous during the barocue period. Unfortunately, the school was administered in such a way that bad results soon followed. It fostered a constantly increasing isolation of the arts from the conditions of ordinary life. From the beginning of the century two opposed attitudes, each extreme and each represented by an official institute, face each other in France; the Ecole des Beaux-Arts is confronted by the Ecole Polytechnique.  The Ecole Polytechnique had been founded during the French Revolution, in 1794 — three years after the Proclamation de la liberté du travail, the document which abolished the legal hin- drances to the growth of modern industry in France. ‘The Ecole Polytechnique was an école spéciale; it offered a uniform scientific preparation for the higher technical schools —  lécole des ponts ef chaussées, Vécole des mines Cécole de Cartil- lerte. etc. The great mathematicians, physicists. and chemists of France acted as instructors, men like Monge Lagrange Berthollet, Chaptal. The Ecole Polytechnique had the im- portant function of combining theoretical and practical science That it directly influenced industry is beyond question In the first. decades of the century it became a center for those ine icrested in political economy and sociology and above all for the Saint-Simonists, whose membership included the creators of the large-scale industries and the railroad systems I it in France around the 1830's. “eee  Discussions  The separale existence of an Ecole des Beaux-Arts and an Ecale Polytechnique in itself points to the schisin between architecture and construction. A survey of the architectu ral journals of the nineteenth century will reveal that the two questions most debated at the time grew oul of the dissen-  “n between these schools. These questions can be stated as ollows:  1. Along what lines should the training of an architect pro- ceed?  2. What is the relation of the engineer to the What special functions are proper to each?  fa  architect?  All the other controversi i i  tural foo oe oversies and discussions regarding architec- ora’ fom are of minor and transitory importance in compari- son with the issues these lwo questions involved.  cole Polytechnique: the Connection belween Science and Life  lhe immense influence of the Ecole Polytechnique in the {irst three decades of the nineteenth century catty be allributed to the fact that it quite consciously set itself an enormous task: Mm if, for the first time, the atlempt was made to establish i connection between science and life, lo bring out the practical dpplications to industry of discoveries in the mathematical and Dlivsical sciences, Jean-Aitoine Chaptal, the great chemist 
and industrialist who was minister of the interior under Napo- leon I, laid down this aim for the Ecole at the beginning of the nineteenth century. He insisted that science must climb down from its pedestal and lend a hand in the work of creating a new world.  It was Rondelet — the theorist whose work on the Panthéon in Paris prevented its collapse — who first insisted that scien- tific techniques had an important role to play in architecture. His Discours pour Vouveriure du cours de construction @ Uécole spéciale d’archilecture (1816) argued that constructional meth- ods had to be allowed much more influence upon the character of a building design than had hitherto been given them. From this time on, the engineer slowly encroaches more and more upon the province of the architect. All unconsciously, the constructor during the nineteenth century played the role of scout for the architect. The new expedients which he kept pressing upon the architect continually forced the latter to venture upon unexplored paths. He broke down the archi- tect’s ritualistic and artificial formalism, hammered brusquely upon the door of his ivory tower. And it remains one of the chief functions of construction to furnish architecture with the stimulus and incentive for new growth.  The Demand for a New Architecture  With the quickening of the advance of industry in the middle of the nineteenth century there becomes evident a feeling on the part of the architect that his privileged position is menaced and the traditions of his art outmoded. That anxiety grew in intensity with the progress of industrialization. But contem- porary statements of this feeling are of more interest than any abstract deductions we might make concerning it. Let us first quote some evidence of the hopes for a new architecture that the appearance of the new potentialities aroused.  1849: “ A new architecture which will tuke us out of the sterility of the past and the servility of copying is what every-  body demands, and what the publie waits for.” *°  30 César Daly, Reone générale de Carchitecture, 1849, p. 26.  1849: * The new architecture is architecture in iron. Architec- tural revolutions always follow social revolutions. In the interim periods few changes are to be seen, 10 matter how long these periods may be. Men insist upon remolding the old forms vn a radical upset wipes the slate clean of banal schools and h1edas.  “y here are great periods in architecture just as there are ercat geological periods: a new race of plants or animals only a D~ pears afler the disappearance of the old. In architecture itis the same: The race of old authorities in architecture had to be superseded —- just as the masltodons were superseded — in order to make room for new kinds of arlists who will not preserve the traditional prejudices of the old schools.  ” B ul, you may say, where shall we find masters clever enough? We should not tell you to seck these people among old masons W hose hands have been so long oceupied with stone and mortar that it is safe to presume that their brains also move in an equally restricted orbit. To create what is new, you must have young people.” *! , _  ao. 6 <7 i  1850: Mankind will produce a completely new architecture out of its period exactly at the moment when the new methods created by recently born industry are made use of. The application of cast iron allows and enforces the use of many hew forms, as can be seen in railway stations, suspension hridges, and the arches of conservatories.” ®  1867: Tow : 5 mpi é  i ; ; ard the end of the Second Empire, César Daly once nore aments the continued influence of old traditions: “* One  perceives the eclectic atmosphere enveloping the world: all crane . : . . _—  organs of respiration absorb it and, mixed with our blood, it  acts on heart and brain.” *  3 Jobard, * L’Architectarre de Vavenir”’ Reaue générale architecture, 1819, Pp  Jobard was an engincer, the first director of the Musée de Vindustrie at B  of those tists most interested in the new proc : rials de  alkene rer contine himself simply to inveking the appearance af a new e and gts. For example, he suggested a type of stricture  and one  and materials developed in  Sle Ala a ean and elie, Ke gg vith double Hed with glass panes whieh would permit air-conditioning of the interior, The  ” te between the panes was to be filled with bot air in the winter, cold air in the summer °'The romantic poet Phéophile Gautier, in the new spaper La Presse  © Revue générale Warchilecture, 1867, p. 6. 
1889: Two decades later the situation had scarcely improved, Every time new and unusual constructions appeared to stimu- late the imagination by their boldness, the old cries went up again. Even the novelist Octave Mirbeau — not in general given to urge on the march into the future - - realized after seeing the Eiffel Tower and the Galerie des Machines that “ while art cultivates Uindimisme or attaches itself to the old formulas with its gaze still fixed on the past, industry moves forward and explores the unknown. It is not in the studios of the painters and sculptors Lhat the revolution so long awaited is preparing — it is in the factories! ” ™  The Interrelations of Architecture and Engineering  There grew up before the eyes of the world in the veurs after 1850 the iron constructions of the great exhibitions. In them the methods of engineering entered the field of architecture; with that entrance the question of the relation between archi- tect and engincer was raised and became ever more vexing and urgent. lor more than sixty years that question was agitated by various theorists.  1852: 7 Far be it from me to pretend thal the style pointed out by our mechanics is what is sometimes miscalled an economical, a cheap stvle. No! It is the dearest of all the styles! It costs the thought of men, much, very much thought, untiring investigation, ceaseless experiment. Its simplicity is that of justness; [ had almost said, of justice.  “... the mechanics of the Uniled States have already out- stripped the artists, and have, by their bold and unflinching adaptation, entered the (rue track and hold up the light for all who operate for American wants, be they what they will.  “ By beauty [mean the promise of function.  “ By action DT imean the presence of function. “ By character | mean the record of function.” ©  also Enevelopédie darchitecture, 1889/90, p. 92. % Horatio Greenough, the / sulptor, in The Travels, Observations, and Experi  ences of a Yankee Sloneculter; cited by Nancy Wynne and Beaumont Newhall, ‘* Horatio Greenough: Herald of Punctionalism.”” Magazine of Art, XXXIL Gianuary 1939), 15.  # Octave Mirbeau in Figaro, 1889; ef.  nerican  186% : Is " the fate of architecture to give way to the art of engineermg? Will the architect be eclipsed by the engineer? "35  LB: In this year the question entered the Académie, when prize was offered for the best paper discussing “ the union . : the separation of engineer and architect,” Davioud one of the architects of the Trocadéro, won the prize with this answ _ . Phe accord will never become real, complete and fruittal uertil the day that the engineer, the artist, and the scienti i" a re fused together in the same person. We have for a lor a time lived under the foolish persuasion that art is a kind of activity distinct from all other forms of human intelligence havin its sole source and origin in the personality of the artist hi oll and in his capricious fancy.” 37 , — _™ 1889: ° A long ume ago the influence of the architect declined and the engineer, [homme moderne par excellence, is begint i g to replace him... . It will not be [arbitrarily chosen) si i, es which will form the basis of the new architecture: in ; than phinning, in the real application of modern construction. the taking into account of the new situations which must he reckoned with will lead us lo the shapes so long sought in vain. But, you will say, what you propose are the methods af engineering today. T do not deny it, for these are correct." 1899: Thirty years after César Daly’s anxiety with regard the future of architecture one of the founders of the an nouveau sees quite clearly that “there is a class of men fr whom the title of artist can no longer be withheld Ti ose artists, the creators of new architecture, are the engineers _  . The extraordinary beauty innate in the work of engineers has its basis in their unconsciousness of its artistic possibilities ~— much as the creators of the beauty of the cathedrals re unaware of the magnificence of their achievements was “ae  Van de ¥ e already i i. de Velde already recognized that the engineer promised ( pece ae Pedy . regeneration of architecture and not ils destruction. It  : ‘ sar Daly. Leeue générale architecture, 1867. pe 6 Luevelapédie architecture, 1878, p. 67 Aug , , tatole de Bundot, at the first International Congress of Architects in Paris, 1889 8, .  ort va elde, er semeure in der modernen 4 wbektur,”” ir an de Vel is) i M : de, * Die Rolle d Ingenicure de | chitek t  Nie Renaissance im modernen Kunstgewerhe (Ber! 901) ‘e 
is still the case — as much so as when van de Velde wrote — that the latest works of the engineers embody possibilities of aesthetic experience not as yet exploited, which have still to find their place in architectonic expression. There are, for example, those fantastic, single-columned shelters built in France to protect freight while it is being transshipped, those curving Swiss bridges which are formed out of thin slabs of ferroconerete, and various other strikingly original construc- tions elsewhere, which embody unexplored potentialities for architecture.  1924: “ The century of the machine awakened the architect. New tasks and new possibilities produced him. Ile is at work now everywhere.” ®  Such an opinion -- one that is shared by the whole generation of architects to which Le Corbusier belongs -— marks the solution of the break between the architect and the engineer.  On the whole it is true that contemporary architects have succeeded at the end of a century of struggle in drawing abreast of construction. New tasks await architecture today. It must now meet needs other than the strictly rational, other than those which are pragmatically determined. A living architecture must also succeed in satisfying those subrational, emotional demands which are deeply rooted in our age.  HENRI LABROUSTE, ARCHITECT—-CONSTRUCTOR, 1801-1875  Until now we have had to dissect practically anonymous con- slruclions to find the first signs of the new developments which life, almost unconsciously, was bringing about. Toward the middle of the nineteenth century, we encounter for the first time in this period a man who unites the abilities of both the engineer and the architect: the architect-consLructor Henri Labrouste. Jlenri Labrouste was born in Paris in 1801. In the same year Telford offered his project for London Bridge, a plan calling for a colossal structure in cast iron. It was also  40 Le Corbusier in Lfsprié notvean (Paris, (924). no. 25.  in 1801 that James Watt's Soho foundry built the first cot- ion mill to embody cast-iron beams and pillars in its interior construction.  | abrouste was educated at the Académie des Beaux-Arts and was one of its outstanding pupils. When he was twenty-three he was awarded the grand prix de Rome, which made it possible for him to spend five years at the Villa Medici in Rome. Dur- ing those five years he came to see anlique Rome as something more than a monument or an arsenal of beautiful forms on which a student might draw. He took toward it very nearly the allilude of an onlooker of today; what astonished him was the skill in construction everywhere visible in these works While, as pensioner of the Academy, he was studying Roman ajueducts and examining the temples al Paestum, he sought always to grasp the spirit behind each construction, Vorganisme de chaque construction.! ,  For all that, he ended by regarding his stay in [taly — meant as the highest reward to talent — as a systematic estrangement from life. He preferred studies dealing with problems arising oul of his own time. Significantly enough, the last project which he sent to the Academy from Rome was a design for a bridge, one appropriate to stand on the frontiers of two friendly countries.  Labrouste, belonging to that generation which arrived at its maturity around 1830 and seemed to include among its mem- bers the most vigorous characters in the century, shared its fecling that social, moral, and intellectual life all alike de- mauded renewal. In the summer of 1830, when he returned to Paris, he found the routine of the Academy unchanged. He wrote to his brother Theodore on July 1, 1830: * What should [say to you about the Ecole? Hs programs of courses are always uninteresting and badly organized: its pupils lack enthusiasm. And even the master of an alelier would exhaust  please did not niake the usual picturesque reproductions of ancient: monuments. iM approached them with the sharp eyes of an engineer or un archaenlogist. His draw vet the temples at Paestum were the source of much controve aut the Vronch ma Me was anions the first to discover traces of the colors which had originally  tid the Jnildings and altempted reconstructions of them. Durine the late fifties the Questions raised by the use of polychromy in ancient art oceupied hiany architects i “arious vonntries ~- Schinkel, Hiltorf, Gottfried Semper, and others, | ™  a in es  fr 
himself through futile efforts on programs like these. .., Architecture must not be circumscribed within studics like those actually pursued at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts. Relorms are called for — what master will have the courage to make the pressing cause of our art his own} " #?  During this same summer he opened his own atelier, a school of design opposed to the principles of the Academy, in which he instructed the progressive youth of France. Once again a letLer Lo his brother (written in November 1830) will give some insight into his methods of instruction:  “1 am working prodigiously and- - what is harder: -f am making my pupils work.  “T have drawn up several schedules of study to drill the be- ginners in something useful: I want them to learn to compose with very simple means. It is necessary for them from the starl to see Lhe direction of their work so that they may arrange its parts according lo the importance which they can rcason- ably be given. Then ! explain to them that solidity depends more on the way materials are pul together than upon their and—as soon as they know the first principles of construction — I tell them that they must derive from the construction itself an ornamentation which is reasoned and expressive.  mass,  “ T often repeat to them that the arts have the power of making everything beautiful, but I insist that they understand that in architecture form must always be appropriate to the function for which it is intended.  “Winally, Tam happy to find myself in the midst of these young comrades, who are attentive, full of good-will, and resolved to continue along the path which we are following logether.”” #  The Academy waged a bitter war against the so-called * ra- Lionalistic school’ which Labrouste headed, This official opposition had ils consequences. On the occasions when Labrouste set foot on a building plot it was lo inspect the work  ©” Souvenirs @’Henri Labrousle, Notes recueillies ef elassées par ses enfants (Paris, 1928: privately printed), p. 2.  " [bid.  , Il J es . . ao i = PETER _ (TT I an WENBL LABROUSTIE, Library 81. HENRI LABROUSTE, Library oF Sainte-Genevidve, Paris, 1813 50, of Sainte-CGenevidve, Paris, [813-30  Neefion through the reading room and tie rraught-tron framenork of the rout.  Plan.  of other architects. The winner of the grand prix de Rome had lo wail more than twelve years for a chance to show his talents nan executed work of importance. Ht was not until he was past forty that Labrouste was commtissioned to Juild the  Bibliothéque Sainte-Genevieve in Paris (18-13-30)  fn the Hbrary of Sainte-Geneviéve he made the first atlempt fo use cast- and wrought-iron construction in an important public building from the foundations lo the roof. Sainte- Geney iéve was, In addition, the first library building in France designed to be a conplete and independent unit. Ax in the  I  3i  
English mills and warchouses, the iron construction is enclosed in the stonework of the exterior like the works of a watch in its case. Thick masonry outer walls still remain, but all structural members —- columns, beams, and roofing — are of iron (figs. 80, 81).  The framework of the long, double-naved reading room forms, with that of the roof, a single structure. Labrouste achieved an astonishing thinness in the barrel vaults by extending an iron network along them; this network at the same time afforded a base for the plaster covering of the vault. This construction recalls the eggshell-like reinforced concrete vaults In the dock buildings at Casablanca which the French architect Perret constructed in 1916. But Labrouste’s chief accomplishment in this library rests in the manner in which the iron construction is balanced in itself, so that it puts no stress on the walls. The achievement of just such a hovering equilibrium became the chief task for engineers in the second half of the nineteenth century.  Labrouste reached his full development with the building of the Bibliothéque Nationale in Paris, begun in 1858 and com- pleted after his death.“ The increase in the production of books during the nineteenth century made the provision of sufficient space the main problem in library building. The stacks took up more and more room. In earlier times, stack and reading rooms had been identical; now they had to be separated. There is no library which solved the problem this situation created so elegantly as Labrouste’s Bibliothéque Nationale.  In it Labrouste departed from the example sel by his English contemporary in the same field, Sydney Smirke (1798-1877). Smirke designed the monumental and frequently imitated circular reading room in the quadrangle of the British Museum. But the circular outline of this room feft only the remnants of the quadrangular space whose center it occupied available for the slack rooms. The inspiration for such an arrangement came nol. from the architect but from Sir Anthony Panizzi, the  Cf Michel Roux-Spitz. ° La Bibliothéque nationale de Par: L’ Architecture d'au-  jour hat, vol. IN, no. 3 (March 1938),  82. HENRI LABROUSTI:, Sitteen slim cast-iron cohamns thal all the desks are equally  Bibliothéque Nationale, Paris, 1858-68. ’ spherical vaults, each with a round openin  well-lighted. Hf is tvpie i all ; ¢ . is typteally nineteenth-century archtleetural shapes are borrowed from a variety of earlier periods, :  Reading roam. ig al the tap so in the way iis  83.0 TIENRE  LA- BROUSTE. Biblio- théque Nationale. Paris, 1858-68. Ground plan,  principal librarian of the British Muse forve behind much of its deve sponsible for having the rea radiating from a central obsery Brilish Museun: is worthy cule dome is constr the first of its kind,  um and the creative lopment. Panizzi was also re- ding desks placed along lines ation point. The library of the of note in another respect : its cir- ucted from Lop to bottom of iron and was 
Ey Pod eer. ienannepeatianl > 3 tates CE. ° oe.  : » ee ee! i 1 SOE RT Pn rem "a  i  PENS OREROTDDO EES EA POC EEE  84. HENRI LABROUSTE, Bibliothéque Nationale, Paris, 1858-68. The stacks (magasin central). Four stories above ground and one below, all surmounted by a glass ceiling. The gridiron floor plates permit the light to pene- trate to all parts of the stacks.  85. HENRI LABROUSTE, Bibliothéque Nationale, Paris, 1858-68. The stacks (magasin central}. Light pouring through the gridiron floor, Floor plates of this open design seem lo have been used first in the engine rooms of steamships. Lere they serve a purely utilitarian fanetion, bul at the same lime they contain the germ of new artistic possibilities,  86. INENRI LABROUSTE, Bibliothéque Nationale, Paris, 1858-68. The stacks (nagasin central). Detail of gridiron floor and banisters.  
om que  d  or  Sydney Smirke, its designer, remains an interesting figure in the architecture of the time. Though overshadowed by his brother, Robert, he did important work in the design and equipment of club buildings. His work on English club interiors is one of the points from which the evolution of modern furniture proceeds. JI{[e also designed those chairs in the British Museum reading room which arc stil] unique, in point of comfort, among the great libraries of the world.  The reading room (figs. 82, 83) which Labrouste designed for the Bibliothéque Nationale was square and contained sixteen cast-iron pillars. Immediately behind it was the large stack room known as the magasin central. Ve thus set the example of giving the stack room, the real heart of a modern library, the important position which it de- serves. The reading room in its construction follows the line Labrouste had already taken in the library of Sainte- Geneviéve: the iron construction is enclosed by the mas- sive walls. The tall, slender columns (one foot in diamcter and thirty-two feet high) impart an airy lightness to the room.  The columns are connected with each other by means of semi- circular girders which come together to form nine light, covered yaulls reminiscent of those in Brunelleschi’s Foundling Hos- pital at Florence. Labrouste’s spherical vaults are built up of thin plates of faience earthenware; there is a round opening in the top of each after the manner of the Roman Pantheon. In this way excellent lighting for every reading desk is assured. These details are mentioned only to show how the space conceptions of all periods arc mixed together in nineteenth- century architecture.  But Labrouste’s masterpiece is the grand magasin or slack room (fig. 84) built along the same axis. The magasin central has four slories above ground and one below, and was built to accommodate 900,000 volumes. In the recent renovation of the library Labrouste’s excellent work in ils construction was adjudged to be in perfect condition, and was left completely undisturbed. The whole area was covered with a glass ceiling. Cast-iron floor plates in a gridiron pattern permit the daylight  O  HENHE LABROLSTE, Nationale, Paris, 8-08. Glass wall heboven I the stacks (mayasin central and reading room Va Barly use of large areas of glass tn the interior Of a permanent public huilding. relent drapery suugests that Labrouste what alarmed by his own daring  Bibliotheque 88.0 Glass wall of the Cary  ao 1929, reeugn i= vilities of yl ingly into use throughout the century, ending in immense pares like the hose framework has ta be spended from overhead bridge girders,  Marboeaf. Pari Afler Labroustes: variy Y Hon of the qu : The heavy Hf i  came f HAS Solte~  lo penetrate the st  acks from lop to } ia this open de i nee  sign (fig. 86) seem to have bee envine roonis of steamships. ito library buildings Nevertheless. obse ving  g  Floor plates of ; n used first in the i No doubt Lhey were introduced with purely praeti : Q them in our day Manner to which light penetra ih the verm of new artistic  ‘al ends in view. We recognize in the Wes the grillwork of the iron floor play of light and shadow possibilities fi #5). This hovering me appears as an artistic means in cer-  %L, Latouste had been antic  “eved the pln for the cireu Using:  ipaled in this feature of h  jw lar reading room of the Nhe eridizon floor plates in Natonal Libraries of the Wor  is design. Panizzi not only con- British Museum b ic F readin the 3 ut alse the id its stack rooms. This was in 1852, Cr. \rundal [:  id Vondon. L934). pp. 10,  
tain works of modern sculpture as well as in conlLemporary architecture.  Labrouste took great care Lo provide for efficient communica. tion between all parts of the magasin central. The different stories are connected by bridges so that one can go from one section lo another by the shortest route. These bridges, quite aparl from their obvious utilily, give a certain effect of power to the room. Light stairways with gridiron treads permit casy access to all the books. Ixcept for the bookshelves, all the construction is of iron.  In view of the fact that the stack rooms were not open to the general public, Labrouste could proceed quile freely in their design and was not impeded by popular taste. He made good use of this freedom. He dispensed with all applied decoration, There is in ils slead an astonishing sureness of expression, resulting from a perfect fitness for purpose which only the hand of an artist could achieve.‘®  Jn this room — one never meant for public display — a great artist unfolded new possibilities for archilecture. It is true that the Crystal Palace of some years before was a much more spectacular and imaginative structure. In the magastn central, however, Labrouste had been set a problem in architecture that was detailed and specific. Using the means possible to an architect of his day, Labrouste solved it in a manner that bears the stamp of a timeless rightness. If there is a Pazzi Chapel to be found anywhere in contemporary architecture, it is here.  The magasin central connects with the main reading room through a large arched opening (fig. 87). Labrouste had the audacity that was needed in his day to erect a large glass screen in this opening, so that the magazine of books stored in the stacks could be glimpsed from the reading room. This was an early use on a large scale of the transparent areas so dear to our modern architects (fig. 88).7 Labrouste, as though a little  46 The stack rooms behind the circular reading room of the British Museuin used similar gridiron fluor plates (as we have just seen), but nothing was achieved by their use beyond an efficient organization of this part of the library.  * John Nash had used a glass partition to shul off the south end of the principal corridor of Buckingham Pal. But be interlaced this glass partition with ornaments, in the baroque manner. Cf. Henry D. Roberts, A History of the Pavilion at Brighton (London 1939), Fig. 25.  afraid of his own daring, partially covered his el  ; ass parlilion with heavy red-velyet drapery.  Henri Labrouste is without doubt the architect of the middle nineteenth century whose work possessed the most siznificance for the future. Tis time. of course, dictated the use of Reniais- sauce or classical shapes, and he used them with the evealest artistic distincuon, so  But tl was in his methods. in the way he analyzed and executed a task in building, that he stood tar in adyanee of his Limos of his colleagues. Tn spite of this, no studies of this f have appeared since his death. of the wearisome struge  and architect We have no precise knowledge le with the Académie in which he was involved after 1830. or of the resistance he encountered that made a full realization of his id as Impossible Perha 8 the details slill lie buried in the archives of the Nez o Somne years ago I tried to learn more about the ' ment of Labrouste’s most important Nationale.  adémie. Some planning and develop- work, the Bibliothéque ational A. search of the Building Department of the Bibhtothéque Nationale itself disclosed that Labrouste’s pk  had been lost. , ee pews 
NEW BUILDING PROBLEMS — NEW SOLUTIONS  In the nineteenth century, buildings which owe nothing to the past begin to appear. Their new lines originate in the new demands presented by big towns, multiplied means of com- munication, and an ever-expanding industry. All these build. ings have one thing in common: they are intended solely for a periodic use that involves rapid distribution of large volumes of merchandise. It is no accident that this type of construction should embody the solutions to the main architectural prob- lems of the century. Because Lhese unpretentious buildings contain the seeds of so much that followed, we must treat them at considerable length.  Market Halls  One of the new problems that were arising first finds a solution in the great public markets, three examples cf which will be given. The earliest of such structures Lo require discussion here was the market hall of the Madeleine, built in Paris in 1824. (fig. 89). The grace of ils slender cast-iron columns is reminiscent of Pompeian mural paintings. The lightness of the construction is unbroken by any purely decorative addi- tions. This is one of the earliest examples of the attempts nineteenth-century engineers were making to develop methods of construction which would combine elegance with economy of material.  The market which was built in London in 1835 to replace the old Hungerford Fish Market represents a somewhat greater advance, so far as construction alone is concerned. A detailed description of the new Hungerford Fish Market (fig. 90) appeared in the Transactions of the Institute of British Archi- tects in 1836.2 On sanitary grounds, the use of lumber in this building had been forbidden. The cast-iron construction dictated by this provision is particularly noteworthy for the wide roof span of thirty-two feet, with its straight line. It has all the elegance of a much later period. “ The chief particular- ity in the construction,” according to the report of 1836, “is  43 | (1836), 11-16.  the absence of any tie or lateral abutment.”’ Already we find the planes of the roof given an inward slope, so that rain water might be carried away through the central columns.  The Grandes Halles of Paris, begun in 1853, had both a more interesling origin and a greater future influence than either of the structures we have just discussed. This market, the first designed to serve a population in the millions, was a part of H aussmann’s great transformation of Paris. The Grandes [alles consist of two groups of pavilions connected by covered passageways. Their designer, Victor Baltard, is not by any means to be regarded as one of the great architects. His initial attempt —- a stone pavilion that was built in 1851 — aroused a public disapproval so clamorous that Haussmann then newly appointed prefect, ordered it pulled down.  It was only direct commands by Napoleon ITI and Haussmann that induced the academic Baltard to turn to iron construction in his second attempt (fig. 91). Napoleon III, greatly impressed by the recently built Gare de l'Est, had decided that a similar umbrella-like shelter was all that was required in the projected market hall. “ Ce sont de vastes parapluies qu’il me faut, rien de plus!’ And the prefect Haussmann thundered at Baltard “Du fer! Du fer! Rien que du fer!” The final design that Baltard produced under this pressure was a derivative patch- work of other men’s plans; for all that, it had an important influence on future work.  The new version, all iron and glass, once again amazed Na- polcon IIT when Haussmann brought it to him — this time for different reasons. “ Is it possible,’’ he asked, ‘“ that the same architect designed two such contradictory buildings? ” Hauss- mann replied, “ The architect is the same, but the prefect is different.” | The project actually realized in the Grandes Halles is less interesting than two designs which were rejected. The first was the work of Hector Horeau (1801-1872). Hector Horeau Was one of those architects who never know the satisfaction of fulfillment. His projects — all on a grand scale —- could not be exeeuted. Mathematical theory had not yet progressed to a point where the calculations required for such buildings could be carried through; it was still impossible to build spans as  pr H 
89. Market Uall of the Madeleine, Paris, 1824. One of the earliest examples of the al- tempts of nineteenth-century engineers to combine elegance with economy of materials.  :  90. Hungerford Fish Market, London. Metal roof, 1835. Particularly noteworthy for its wide roof span (thirty-two feet) with its straight line.  large as those included in his plans without using tie bars, or to turn out such large iron trusses. His plan for the Grandes Halles (1849) shows an immense hall with a span of three hun- dred feet, calling for enormously thick walls to take the heavy lateral thrust. It was not until decades later that such an intention could be achieved. Nevertheless, figures like Horeau — men who see the right way before it can be trodden — are not useless; they give the first impulse to what later becomes reality.  The second rejected design was the work of Eugéne Flachat (1802-1872), a contemporary of Horeau and of Labrouste.  49 A plan submitted in the Crystal Palace competition in 1850 won first prize for Heotet Horeau. It was a sort of basilica with five naves (Fig. 106), not to be compared will Paxton’s later design.  61. VICTOR BALTARD, Halles Centrales, Paris. Interior. Begun 1853. Baltard had to be forced to use iron in his second attempt (the first — in stone — was a disastrous failure). “Du fer! Du fer! Rien que du fer!” Haussmann insisted.  Flachat belonged to the most forceful generation of the nine- teenth century, that of 1830, which included De Lesseps, the builder of the Suez Canal, Victor Hugo, the painter Eugéne Delacroix, and Auguste Comte, the prophet of the scientific era. It was Flachat who, overcoming widespread resist- ance, built the first French railroad in 1837. He designed docks, warehouses, ports and canals, projected transatlantic steamship companies, and planned a tunnel through the Alps.  That Flachat was a follower of Saint-Simon is by no means irrelevant to this recital. The Saint-Simonists took it as axiomatic that “ la Société toute entiére repose sur l’industrie,” and were almost alone in foreseeing the scale and the extent of the progress that industry was embarking upon. The Grandes Halles (fig. 93), in its magnitude and social function, was a typical part of that new age the Saint-Simonists felt them- selves destined to call forth. In submitting a plan for it, Flachat was animated by the same spirit that stood behind his other more grandiose proposals.  The design itself, like Horeau’s, features a very wide span — one of 260 feet. It could, nevertheless, have been executed with 
the means available at the Lime. The Polonceau tie system is employed, and, with its minimum of support and widely spread horizontal lines, the plan achieves a most pleasing and functional solution to the problem posed.  Depariment Slores  The department store is a product of the industrial age; it results from the development of mass production and from the loss of direct contact between producer and consumer that was one of its consequences. The department store has no equally large forerunner in the past. In this respect it is like the market halls, railway stations, and exhibition buildings of the nine- teenth century, and the object it serves is the same: the rapid handling of business activities involving huge crowds of pedestrians. Like these other buildings, the department store arises out of the growth in the population of cities, the heightened tempo of living, and the demand for cheaper goods.  i eet  TLL uo Mme |  LTE  92, HECTOR DOREAU. Project for the Grandes Halles, 1819. Rejected designs were much more advanced. The three-hundred-fool span in IToreau’s project was not practicable until decades later. The principle used here was employed in the main building at the Paris  exposition of 1855.  The name “ store ” rather than “shop ” points to the condi- lions of its origin; it is more a storage place in the normal sense of that word. The early stores in Paris during the sixties for example, were known as docks & bon marché; they were simply places where goods were kept in quantity for cheap retail sale. To be fit for such a purpose, a department store — - like a library stack room or a market hall — must. offer a clear view of the articles it contains, a maximum of light, and ample facilities for communication. All these requirements could be met with the new means open to the builder.  The economists tell us that “ it is fairly certain that the depart- ment store originated in Europe, probably in Paris, and ante- dated American department stores by several years, The Bon Marché has often becn credited with being the first department store in the world.” * Lack of interest in research work into the origins of such contemporary institutions makes it impos- sible to speak more exactly than this. The origins of the American department store are particularly obscure: no one has definitely determined when and where the first store of this kind was opened. We can only outline the general types out of  which this important institution of our economic life has evolved.  2 ROT  i pa GENE I LACHAT, Project for the Grandes Halles, 1849. This project, using plonceau fie iystem ina span of 260 feet, could have been executed al the time. Tt was @ tnost pleasing and functional sotation to the problem.  Fy] - > we ae RLFL Nystrom, Economies of Retailing, 3rd ed. (New York, 1932), pp. 1-7. 
Even previous to the forties © commercial buildings,” as they were called, were erected in such business centers as Boston, St. Louis, and New York. These buildings comprised a row of stores all under one roof and so arranged that two or more units could be thrown together to house a single establishment. Most of them were built on speculation, and the builders rented the individual stores to both retail and wholesale dealers. The “ Boston Commercial Buildings,” the St. Louis river front warehouses and wholesale places, and the ‘‘ Wash- ington Stores? (1845) in New York (fig. 94) are all typi- cal of this stage in the development. The department store as a building type traces back to these “ commercial buildings.” As a business institution the American department store evolved from those establishments which first made cheap ready-to-wear clothing available to the masses. In the forties Boston — flourishing trading-center for the New England area —- had one of the largest of these enterprises. This was Oak Hall (fig. 95), a concern whose annual turnover was about five hundred thousand dollars.  The American stores which grew up from beginnings like these took on a character very different from that of the early Euro- pean concerns. European stores specialized in dry goods; they did not deal in ready-made clothing.  The majority opinion among economists is that genuine de- partment stores do not appear before the sixties." It seems to me likely that they started at an earlier date. We know — and this is one of the few exact dates available in these matters __ that the first installation of a passenger elevator in a depart- ment store was made in 1857, in a building on the corner of Broadway and Broome Street, New York City ” (fig. 96). The American department store building derives from the big seven- or eight-story warehouses which were so common dur- ing the second half of the nineteenth century. The many- storied English warehouse which the Manchester engineer, William Fairbairn, built in 1845 was an early example of such a building.®  5 Nystrom, op. eil., p. 134. @ Cf. p. 144. 5 Cf. p. 128.  Somewhat later, James Bogardus used a system of const:  tion im cast iron which made it possible ‘to erect rele tively tall buildings of the warehouse type from prefabricated ae : rhe A. T. Stewart store in New York -- believed to he the first  The  large deparinent store -—is a structure of this kind original building, now a part of . '  ‘ g, part of the Wanamaker es i original er es : i is sUIl in existence. ; tie isos  had two stories in the basement, five stories above eround. : attic, and six elevators. “8 7 an  The immense stores erecled in icag g cled in Chicago in the late eighties,  with their great unbroken areas of floor space, continued to  follow t a a ow the warchouse type. Examples from this period in  chicas are the Leiter Building of 1889 (built originally for cing ores and now owned by Sears, Roebuck & Company) and he Fair” of 1891 — both by William Le Baron Jenney.*#  \ ne ree store departed from the warehouse pattern — John Vanamaker’s “ Cr % Ths Wanamel ora end Depot” at Thirteenth and Market strects, hiladelphia — but even this buildit  ; P ve ug was another Pe or slorage place (fig. 97). The Grand Depot, opened as a department store in 1876 (the year of Eiffel and Boileau’s  94. Washington Stores ‘w Yor av u  a Stores, New York City, 1845. A rot ‘ores all under one ro sepa- >  rate units could be thrown logether to house a single sulablilon en under see  “Cf. pp. 295-296, 306-307.  completed and first oceupied in 1863, it 
8,  93. Qak Hall, Boston, c. 1850.” : j  Readv-made clothing. One of the | OAK HALL CLOTHING HOUSE, '  ready-made clothing concerns which were precursors of the depariment store in America.  UNRIVALLED EMPORIUM FOR GENTLEMEN'S, YOUTHS’ AND LITTLE CHILDREN'S  READTHADE GROTHING,  FURNISHING G00DS, HATS, CAPS, &t, WHOLESALE AND RETAIL,  GEO. W. SIMMONS, PIPER & co.,  | OAE HALI:, 32, 34, 36 and 38 North Street,  BOSTON, MASS.  Magasin au Bon Marché), was originally a freight depot of the Pennsylvania Railroad. It had served as a freight shelter for over twenty years before Wanamaker hit upon the daring idea of transforming it inlo an immense, single-story dry goods store.  The Grand Depot bad more than two acres of floor space. A circular counter ninety feet around occupied the center of the building. From this counter there radiated a series of aisles which were mtersected by other aisles and counters that were concentric with the big counter m the middle.*® The layout resembles that used for the Paris exhibition of 1867.  The first modern glass and iron department store with a free influx of natural light throughout was the Magasin au Bon Marché in Paris. It was in complete contrast to the warehouse type with its superimposed, artificially lighted stories. At the  36 J. (7. Appel, “ Reminiscences of Retailing,” Bulletin of the Business LIistorical Society, vol. XII, no. 6 (December 1938). 58 Ct, The Golden Book of the Wanamaker Store (Philadelphia, 1911), p. 52.  96. Br ¢ Stree ‘ York 7 6 Toone Street New York, 1837. The first department store to house a passenger elevator. The building is typical of these earty establishments. ;  97. John Wanamaker Store,  Philadelphia,  A freight shelter  rmed into an unt  mense, single-story dry goods store.  time of its building in 1876, it was regarded as a model of elegance.”  Che Bon Marché was the work of the engineer Eiffel (later to construct his famous tower) and the architect L. A. Boileau  7 The any er depa j . here were many older department stores in Paris; the Magasin au Bon Marché itself had been founded a quarter-century carlier, in 1852. 
98, EJFFEL and BOLLEAU, Bon Marché, Paris, 1876. [ron bridges in the interior. The creative fantasy of the nineteenth century can be felt in this combination of glass sky- lights, aerial bridges in iron, slim iron columns, and the curious ornamental shapes so char- acteristic of the period.  EIFFEL and BOLLEAU, Bon Mar- ché, Paris, 1876. Ground plan. Area, thirty thousand square feet. The “perforated” interior space is typical of French buildings.  ee FL NN 99.  ae IT ‘  (the son of one of the great French pioneers in the use of iron in architecture).  Boileau felt that thick walls were unsuited to buildings of this type; ‘“* only pillars of small diameter are permissible.” And he goes on to remark that these pillars ‘‘ should be no more  100. EIFFEL and BOLLEAU, Bon Marché, Paris, 1876. Glass roof over skylight. This glass architecture was invisible from the streel. The moment the nineteenth century feels itself unobserved and has no longer to make a show, then if is truly bold.  than the hors d’ceuvre of the construction.” * The ground floor of the building already shows the use of large glass surfaces sel in unbroken series. A glass shelter is carried in a continu- ous line along the whole front of the store above the show windows and reinforces the impression produced by the areas of glass they contain.  The corner of the store is built out, like a pavilion, reminding one of the round towers of the French chateaux. Later ex- anyples were unable to break away from this precedent. A similar treatment appears in Paul Sédille’s Magasin Printemps, Paris, of 1881-89. Even Louis Sullivan’s Carson, Pirie, Scott store in Chicago, built around 1900, reflects in the shape of its corner the persistent memory of the pavilion.®*  % 1. A. Boileau, fils, ‘‘ Les Magasins au Bon Marché,” Eneyelopédie d’architecture, 1880, p. 184. 69 CF. pp. 310-313.  aor 
The mark of the great constructor Fiffel is visible in the treat- ment of the interior of the Bon Marché. Its area of more than thirty thousand square feet is divided into a series of courts of yarious shapes, each covered by a large glass skylight. The passage from court to court is sinrplified by the presence of lofty iron bridges or passerelles like those Labrouste had used, nearly two decades earlier, in the stack room of the Biblio- théque Nationale (fig. 98).  Never before had light flowed into a store in such bright streams. A true glass architecture bad been erected over the framework of the building (fig. 100). The creative fantasy of the nineteenth century can be felt in its combination of glass skylights, aerial bridges in iron, slim iron columns, and the curious ornamental shapes so characteristic of the period. For all this variety, there is a seriousness and simplicity about the Magasin au Bon Marché taken as a whole. The architectonic pomp and boastfulness later called upon to attract and seduce the masses is avoided here.  The great masses of light which enter the building through its refined and even airy construction anticipate one of the chief concerns of contemporary architects. Five decades after Ejffel’s construction of the Bon Marché, the same joy in the play of light through space perforations is to be found in Le Corhusier’s interiors and exteriors and in the way he makes the two interpenetrate.  Eiffel’s imaginative approach to technical problems can be aeen in the exterior forms of the high glass roof which is built over the skylights of the courts. The ordinary speclator never gees this part of the building. The communicating passerelles are fantastically balanced over the inclined planes of this tent- like glass roof. The moment the nineteenth century feels itselt unobserved and is no longer conscious of any need for making a show — then it is truly bold!  From this time onward the undisguised shapes with their natural content of feeling that mark the rear and unobserved portions of railroad stations and factories begin to make them- selves felt in the front walls of buildings.  6e ‘The very early photograph made at the time of the erection of the building shows that even then people felt something unusual had been accomplished here.  100a, Winter Garden and Assembly i Pr l } Assembly Room, Paris, 1847. Joseph Paxten ‘ ‘ 1 . . . ; ; : 7 , y . ppt aclon. may well have fy 7 ti r wat Fi nsf rata! Palace by this once celebrated eross-shaped building, which, standing Deleon, Rand P uo present Avenue Marboeuf, changed the simple glass house into a social meeting place contain ‘i f mn CLIT, C ing ballroom,  café, reading room, and paintings on sale along the high glass walls.  ‘The magnificent building,” observed  audon's Wncyclopaedia of Gardening in 1850 (pp. 93-94), “is supposed to be one of the largest and finest i "ges Jinest in  fsurope .. . extreme length 300 feel, extreme breadth 180 feet, extreme height 60 feel.”  Comparing nineteenth-century department stores in France and America we may observe how a new building problem — apparently governed solely by practical considerations — i brought to a different solution in different countries. °  In America, as we have just seen, the department store fol- lowed the warchouse type: one unbroken floor area was built on top of another. In France the light court and “ perforated » interior space appear even before Eiffel in department. store  of wooden construction (fig. 99). The Eiffel and Boileau Magasin au Bon Marché reveals very clearly a tendency in  herent in French architecture. The urge to hollow out interior spaces to the greatest extent possible appears in French build ings from Romanesque times onward. It is visible in those daring Gothic choirs which seem to have been left almost too fragile to stand, and in the latest works of our own day The  audacity of French engineering is only a modified expression of this same trend.  Different ways to solve a new building problem 
amp-de-Mars, Paris, 1798.  101. First Industrial Exposition, Ch  THE GREAT EXHIBITIONS  In the second half of the nineteenth century, with industry undergoing its greatest expansion, industrial exhibitions afforded truly creative architecture its best opportunities. ‘Toward the end of the century, when industry had come to be taken as a matter of course and was no jonger looked upon as new and marvelous, they lost their creative force. New problems had emerged in the meantime which demanded new solutions. The exhibitions were born almost simultaneously with modern industry; they appeared at the time when the shift from hand- work to machine production made itself obvious. Throughout that period people in many countries were working feverishly to invent new machines and new processes. The chief purpose of the early exhibitions was to bring together the resulls of this work, to display the new discoveries side by side, and thus to facilitate their comparison and adoption. The development of industry in all its branches was accelerated by these exhibitions, in which every sphere of human activity was represented: the implements, methods, and products of mines, mills, machine shops, and farms were on display, together wilh work in the fine and the applied arts.  The industrial exhibition embodied a synthesis of the as yet unformulated aims of the nineteenth century. h. foretold the transformation that was to be effected in man as well as in industry, in human feelings as well as in human surroundings. The exhibitions were a part of the march of industry and were pound up in its destiny.  The history of the exhibition is divided into two periods. The earlier of these periods opens and closes in Paris; it begins with the first industrial exhibition ever held that of 1798 — and ends with the Paris exhibition of 1849. The exhibitions of this initial period were made possible by the collapse of the guilds in 1791, and were all purely national in character.  The premiére exposition des produils de Uindusirie frangaise was opened on the Champ-de-Mars in Paris in September 1798 (fig. 101). It inaugurated an exhibition movement which was to lead to some of the outstanding achievements of the nineteenth century. The start made at Paris in 1798 was a very modest one. There were some luxury articles displayed, but the precedent for nearly all future exhibitions was set by the central position given to articles of daily use: watches, wall paper, cloth, and cotton yarn — yarn which “ was carded and spun by means of machinery,” as the catalogue was careful to state.  There were only a hundred and ten exhibitors at this first exposition, but this does not detract from its imporLlance. It was primarily intended as a sort of people’s festival, in celebra- tion of the freedom from guild restrictions that the Revolution had brought. This festive motive accounted for its location in the Champ-de-Mars, the scene of all national celebrations since the fall of the monarchy. It was the proclamation de la liberlé da travail in 1791 that first gave every citizen the right to follow whatever trade he desired. What was more important, this proclamation, in according a new liberty to production, gave official encouragement to a progress of in- dustry and invention from which everyone expected great things. “Ces arts n’avaient pas pu encore se developper A cause des entraves sans nombre. Mais la liberté les vengerait. ... Sous Pégide de la liberté, les arts utiles étaient appelés a un brilliant avenir.”’ 
The second period occupies the latter half of the nineteenth century and owes its force to the principle of free trade. In this period the exhibition takes on a new character: it becomes international in its scope. The national exhibitions of industry during the first half of the century had followed upon the abolition of the legal obligation to belong to a guild. Some- thing else was demanded for an international exhibition; there was no reason to bring together products from all over the world unless there existed at the same time the possibility of selling to the whole world. An international exhibition could have value only in a world where trade restrictions of all kinds had been reduced to a minimum. These great exhibitions were the product of the liberal conception of economy: free trade, free communication, and improvement im production and performance through free competition.  The exhibitions also fostered a spirit of rivalry, a desire to equal or improve upon the last exhibition. Thus risks were taken in many departments, not least of all in architecture. Such a spirit of rivalry, together with the efficiency it promoted, is visible in the Crystal Palace world exhibition of 1851.  The history of exhibitions during the latter half of the nine- teenth century constitutes at the same time a history of iron construction. Exhibition buildings were planned for rapid erection and dismantling: both were facilitated by the use of iron. Again, iron parts for such buildings could be fabricated in widely separated workshops. Finally, iron was everywhere regarded at this date as ihe medium of expression most truly appropriate to the period. But exhibition buildings did not simply call for the use of iron; the fact that they appeared at short intervals and were meant to be only temporary encour- aged the experimental employment of iron in their construction. The exhibition became the trial ground for new methods. In all the great international exhibitions — from the first at Crystal Palace, London, in 1851 to the last at the end of the century — constructors attempted tasks that had never been faced before. When their experiments succeeded in this special Geld they became a part of standard building practice. Tt was in this way that the Eiffel Tower came. to be erected in 1889, despite the most doleful prophecies of disaster.  The history of the exhibition shows not only the development: in iron construction during the period but also impo ta t changes in habits of aesthetic response. The new street al treatments of load and support demanded new aesthetic reactions. In the past people had grown to expect the basi " the equilibrium between load and support in a building t hi visible ata glance, to lie open to inspection. But with the i tt : d uction of new methods of iron construction it became m rand more fitout to differentiate between load and support: a new ee of all the parts of a structure began to The optimism of the ninetcenth century and its faith in tk  possibilities of industry are reflected in ‘the great exhibit ‘. Industry would “unite the human race a or so Prince C ‘consort Albert dreamt in 1850. There seemed no limit to what industry could achieve at the start of its period of gr vost expansion ; people confidently expected it to solve “all the ancient problems of the world. °  The exhibitions sprang from and symbolize the urge to mast  the earth's resources and draw out all its wealth. Ina may or which is unparalleled in earlier periods they served as a con. centration point for human activities of every sort, the ‘om. phasis always falling on industry and its latest inventions. These exhibitions mark the points where the nineteenth c om tury drew aside from the rush of production in which it vas caught to survey the progress that had been made “  The concentration of the activities of the century in a singl  place attracted interested representatives from all ov tl ° world. _ The exhibitions becarne, naturally, the scen “of ‘l sorts of international congresses — of science, industry fin. ;  and labor. Beyond this, they attracted official observers from all those countries which were anxious to learn of and ‘ lopt the new developments. There are reports by Spanish Italisn, and Yurkish observers which fill many volumes Th 7 ‘ sort of the United States Commissioner to the Paris exhibi Gon of  1867 takes SIX ¥ T b ee n r up olumes, cach 0 : y J a thr te y page dred and  
The very complete surveys published by the countries where the exhibitions were held show a contemporary realization of their unique importance. They were edited with great care; later generations will find them the most satisfactory sources for a knowledge of what actually went on during the nine- teenth century. These reports were often made under the supervision of men who possessed real foresightedness and initiative. Henry Cole was responsible for the first of these large-scale surveys — the Official Descriptive and Illustrative Catalogue of the Great Exhibition (London, 1851), in four big blue volumes. The thirteen-volume report on the Paris exhibi-  tion of 1867 was prepared under Michel Chevalier, a former .  Saint-Simonist. As an exile, Chevalier had traveled in the United States during the thirties; after his return to France he worked continually to promote indusiry.  Exhibitions grew out of the old fairs, familiar to every century. The first French exhibition in 1798 was essentially a kind of people's festival, and all later exhibitions retained this festival motif.  The nineteenth century marks the point when leisure vanished from daily life. The ability to develop an original form for festivals vanished with it. During the second half of the nine- teenth century the exbibitions remained the great festivals in the life of nations. Warehouses, department stores, and office buildings remained closely bound up with immediate practical needs. The exhibitions had their practical function to fulfill also, but they operated in an atmosphere far removed from the rush of everyday life and were able to sustain a festive character. There was always a sharp contrast between their festive and their practical or official aspects. The sureness which appears in the construction of their great halls is not carried over into the social arrangements in the interiors of the halls, for example. But, even so, they represent the closest approach of the period to an original form of group celebration.  Even in the nineteenth century, when architecture was rooted in the background of industrial development, it was in these buildings of a certain festive intent that the great solutions of the period to the vaulting problem were made.  From the beginning of architecture the vaulting problem has always brought forth the highest architectural expressions of every epoch. Thus the barrel vault painted by Masaccio dur- ing the early Renaissance was developed into a ceremonious expression of the full Renaissance and early baroque world In the late baroque, changes in vaulting once again accom- panied changes in the outlook of the age.  Solutions to the vaulting problem played the same important role in the nineteenth century. The haut godi of the nine- teenth-century style in architecture requires — as we have already noted more than once — more careful study than it has yet been given. But, whatever results such a study may lead io, the constituent facts of architectural development will be found to be those original solutions of the vaulting problem which first took shape in the large halls of great exhibitions.  Objections to this view could readily be advanced. It might be said that these exhibition buildings represented nothing but the answers to very sober practical needs, while the vaulting problem had possessed an almost metaphysical significance in earlier periods. . ° :  These objections cannot be ignored. Furthermore, it is obvious that such exhibition buildings were out of direct contact with human needs. But in a certain sense this remark applies to the period as a whole. Their indifference to human needs makes these constructions a true — if harsh -—— expression of the times. Nevertheless we may succeed in showing that be- hind this indifference a new feeling lies hidden.  1 he Lwo most beautiful buildings of the period of the great exhibitions — the Crystal Palace of 1851 and the Galerie des Machines of 1889 — have disappeared. The first was de- stroyed by fire in 1937; the second was senselessly torn down in 1910. Their loss is a typical consequence of the day-to-da mood that governs our period. Only photographs and stchings remain as witness that the overcoming of gravity in apparently floating constructions (which is the essence of any solution to the problem of vaulting) was achieved in magnificent. form during the nineteenth century. . 
The Greal Exhibilion, London, 1851  The Crystal Palace (fig. 102) had the impact of a fairy story on all those who saw it opened in London in 1851. Industry, after all the blight and disorder it had brought about, now displayed another and a gentler side, aroused feclings that seemed to belong only to the world of dreams.  The Crystal Palace housed an exhibition that was the first of its kind, one that reflected the courage and enterprise of the early Victorian period. The Prince Consort, Albert, and Sir Henry Cole @ were its leading spirits, and it was the former who gave it a central theme. Cole relates a conversation he had with Prince Albert at Buckingham Palace on June 29, 1849: “ I asked the Prince if he had considered [whether] the exhibition should be a national or an international exhibition. The French had discussed whether their own exhibition should be international, and had preferred that it should be national only. The Prince reflected for a minute and then said, ‘It must embrace foreign productions ’ — to use his words — and added emphatically, ‘ International, certainly. ... Where do you think it should be?’ I answered, ‘ In Hyde Park.’”” The prince’s decision was by no means a casual reply. In 1850 he declared: “ None will doubt that we are living ina most remark- able period of transition, laboring forcefully toward that great aim indicated everywhere by history: the union of the human race... Gentlemen, the exhibition of 1851 shall give a vivid picture of the stage at which-industry has arrived in the solution of that great task.””  The Crystal Palace had behind it the highly developed industry of England and is an application of the most simple and rational system of manufacturing — that of serial production.  8 Sir Henry Cole (1808-1882) was an active influcnce upon English industry from 1845 on. Unlike the members of the movement begun by William Morris in the sixties, Cole tried to work with industry rather than to revive hand crafts. As he said ‘in 1845, his aim was to develop “ ‘art manufactures,” meaning fine art or beauty applied to mechan- ical production.” THis program included the founding of schools of design intended to raise the level of popular taste, Asa part of this program he founded the first museum of decorative art, the Victoria and Albert Museum in South Kensington. More space will be devoted to Tenry Cole in a book now in preparation.  ® Sir Henry Cole, Fifty Years of Public Service (London, 1881), I, 124-125.  192. Crystal Palace, London, 1851. General view. Lithograph.  103. Crys  aL Palace. 5 " re pondon, 1851. Plan. Ground area, eight hundred thousand vrvlent af nants “rysta alace made no real contribution lo the nineteenth-eentury b ting in tron, but if marks the first use on a grand scale of prefabrical id ” 4 Z ed  parts, and il arrives a artistic res: vy { ves al a new artistic expression throu: fe USE Rey materia mille es p ron through th se of the new material,  L.  syuare ft 
Its builder, Joseph Paxton, used the “ridge and furrow” construction employed in the greenhouses which were used to protect the tropical plants at Chatsworth in 1837. The de- sign of the whole building was planned around the largest standard sheet of glass, which was only four feet Jong, Larger panes could not be made at this time. The.panes used in the Palace were the work of the Chance Brothers’ Birmingham plant. (The furnace used in this work is still in service.)  It is astonishing to find Paxton able at this early date to dissect the whole building into a simple system of small prefabricated units. There are the wooden ridge and furrow frames for the glass, the iron lattice girders on which the panes rested, and the cast-iron supporting pillars — bolted together floor by floor. The wood and iron structural members were manu- factured in various shops in Birmingham and fitted together on the site at London. In this manner a building with a ground area of some eight hundred thousand square feet — about four times that of St. Peter’s, as contemporaries remarked with pride — arose within six months. Its length was 1,851 fect — to correspond with the date of its erection. But for all its architectural beauty, the Crystal Palace makes no contribu- tion to the problem of vaulting as it concerns iron construction. The barrel vault in its transept had a wooden framework, and its span of seventy-two feet was less than that of many medieval buildings (fig. 103).  The Crystal Palace was the realization of a new conception of building, one for which there was no precedent. It was, in addition, the first building of such dimensions constructed of glass, iron, and timber over a framework of cast- and wrought- iron girders accurately bolted together. The possibilities dormant in modern industrial civilization have never since, to my knowledge, been so clearly expressed. It was recog- nized at the time that this combination of wood, glass, and iron — incidentally a combination resulting in an admirably practical exhibition technique — had evoked a new kind of imagination which sprang directly from the spirit of the age. Only thus can we explain the confident prediction of com temporaries, since justified in all essentials, that “the Crystal  104, Crystal Palace, Sydenham. Interior. Photograph of the trans- planted Crystal Palace, taken in 1935, shortly before its destruction by fire.  105. “The Favorites’: popular sculpture of 1851. Jé is impor- fant not to lose sight of whal was really admired in the nineteenth century by officials, critics, and the public. Accordingly, we are publishing some specimens of anerage laste in paraliel series twith works exhibiting constituent facts which grew up during the period. sl contemporary opinion of “The Favorites’: “One of the most charming groups of the British Sculpture Court... life- Uke, interesting and beautiful... u is understood that the group is fo be... perfected in marble.”  
Palace is a revolution in architecture from which a new style will date.”  Lothar Bucher wrote in 1851 that . the building encounter no opposition, and the impression it produced on i ose ¥ v0 saw it was one of such romantic beauty that reproductions o it were soon hanging on the cottage walls of remote German villages. In contemplating the first great building w - w as not of solid masonry construction spectators were not s ov ‘e realize that here the standards by which architecture 1ad hitherto been judged no longer held good.  Bucher, a democratic political exile who was later to become Bismarck’s right-hand man in the Wilhelmstrasse, then goes on to describe the interior (figs. 104, 107). _The description reads almost exactly like a present-day analysis of architecture: “ We see a delicate network of lines without any clue by means of which we might judge their distance from the eye "i t ne real size. The side walls are too far apart to be embrace me single glance. Instead of moving from the wall at one en . fc) that at the other, the eye sweeps along an unending perspec ive which fades into the horizon. We cannot tell if this structure towers a hundred or a thousand feet above us, or whethes the roof is a flat platform or is built up from a succession of ri Bs for there is no play of shadows to enable our optic nerves to  gauge the measurements.  tition for the Crystal Palace, 1850. ber) won the first prize with extent have influenced the com-  Cc TORE Fi ize in the compe! 106. HECTOR HOREAU, First prize in t [lector Horeaw (whose project for the Grandes Tlalles we remem  a light iron construction of thecbasilica type. i may io some error ew ee mittee’s decision not fo ereel a monumental edifice, {heir original mien :  i st + Volker 6 Lothar Bucher, Kulturhistorische Skizzen aus der Industrieausstellung aller Volkel  (Frankfort, 1851), p- 174. &4 Bucher, ibid.  “Tf we let our gaze travel downward it encounters the blue- painted lattice girders. At first these occur only at wide intervals; then they range closer and closer together until they are interrupted by a dazzling band of light — the transept — which dissolves into a distant background where all materiality is blended into the atmosphere....It is sober economy of Janguage if I call the spectacle incomparable and fairylike. It is a Midsummer Night’s Dream seen in the clear light of midday.”  Are there counterparts of the Crystal Palace among the paintings of the period — any paintings, that is, which give “no idea of the actual size or distance involved,” and where “all materiality blends into the atmosphere’? There are none to be found outside the orbit of English painting. J. M. W. Tur- ner’s study of the Simplon Pass,® painted c. 1840 (fig. 108), uses a humid atmosphere to dematerialize landscape and dis- solve it into infinity. The Crystal Palace realizes the same intention through the agency of transparent glass surfaces and iron structural members. In the Turner picture the means employed are less abstract, but an equivalent insubstantial and hovering effect is produced. The deep hollows in the mountains — done in gray, brown, and blue — and the yel- lowish-brown road that winds up to the peaks in the back- ground combine to eliminate every naturalistic feature: they seem precisely to make up parts of a dream landscape, “ seen in the clear light of midday.”’  in the Crystal Palace an artistic conception outdisLances the technical possibilities of the era — something which is very rare in the nineteenth century. The whole building reflects the careful hand of its builder, the landscape gardener Joseph Paxton, who was more accustomed to work with plants than with machinery. The curious association of an unmistakable grandeur with a certain gentleness was never again to be achieved.°* From now on, development will come for decades at the hands of the engineer. He will achieve the new solutions.  ® In the Fogg Art Museum, Cambridge, Massachusetts.  °° During the fifties several attempts were made to construct a building exclusively of glass and iron — as in the New York exhibition of 1853, for example. The plan executed at New York in 1853 was a mediocre one which grafted a monumental dome upon Paxton’s ideas. Paxton himself submitted a design, but it. was unsatisfactory. The plan  
107. Crystal Palace, Interior. Etching. “We see a delicate network of lines without any clue by means of which we might jadge their distance from the eye, or the real size’ (Lothar Bucher, 1851).  The Universal Exhibition, Paris, 1855  The exhibition was inaugurated in France as a national festival in 1798 and continued to develop along such lines throughout the first half of the nineteenth century. In 1849 the French Minister of Commerce proposed making the Paris exhibition of that year an international one. The French chambers of commerce, however, lacked sufficient courage to open their frontiers to foreign industry. It was not until 1855, four years after the international exhibition at the Crystal Palace, that the first “ exposition universelle des produits de Vindustrie ”  of James Bogardus — an original and genuinely American solution to the problem — was also rejected (cf. Fig. 71). The beginnings Paxton had made in tbe Crystal Palace suffered another setback in the London World’s Fair of 1862. Its pseudo-monumental domes and triumphal arches followed in the path of the Palais de I’Industrie, Paris, 1855, but without equalling its constructive hardihood. For further details, ef. “Record of the Great Exhibition,” Practical Mechanic's Journal (London, 1862).  ee J. M. WwW. TURNER, Simplon Pass. Water color, c. 1840. Fogg Museum, Cambridge. Mass. The unsubstantial and hovering effect of the Crystal Palace is achieved here through a fumid atmosphere which dematerializes the landscape and dissolves it into infinity. :  was held in France. But from 1855 on, all the great exhibitions all those that had any historical importance, were held in France. During this period, as in Gothic times, France was the scene of the most audacious constructions. Both the public and the press adopted a certain waiting attitude toward the exhibition of 1855 which disappears with later French exhibi- tions. At first people were anxious not to commit themselves; finally new applications for exhibition space were made in such mu mbers that the area originally fixed upon proved too small. The exhibition consequently ended by showing numerous additions. °  Ground plan (fig. 110): The Palais de I'Industrie was a rec- langular structure with a high center aisle which was sur- rounded by a double row of galleries. The low side aisles were Supported by numerous cast-iron pillars. The center aisle connected with one of those circular panoramas so popular at  
109. International Exhibition, Paris, 1855. eight meters very great for the period, No tie bars were use  through the use of heavy bultresses.  110.  International Exhibition, Paris, 1855. Plan.  Interior of the main building. Span of forty-  d, but they were avoided artificially,  the time and with the twelve-hundred-meter Galerie des \lachines which extended along the Seine. The Galerie des Machines (fig. 111), in spile of the narrow barrel vault which seems lo link it with Fontaine’s gallery in the Palais d’Orléans, was the starting point for that succession of halles des machines which produced the most daring solutions to the vaulting problem.  Span: The Palais de l'Industrie had a span of forty-eight meters. This was the widest vaulting attempted in the period. lt represents a great advance over what was achieved in the Crystal Palace, with its span of about twenty-two meters.” Wrought-iron lattice girders, partially hand-forged, were used. It was the first time they had been employed for vaulting. The enormous areas of glass introduced into the vaulting al- most blinded contemporary spectators, who were unaccus- tomed to the amount of light that was admitted. The form of the vaulting recalls the manner in which great balls and stair- cases were covered during the first and second empires. Even al this early stage, the meaning of the new matcrials had been grasped; emphasis rests upon the opening-up of space rather than the walling-in of a volume (fig. 109).  Construction: The round, high-swung arches of the center aisle show how much progress had been made. No tie bars encroach upon the free space, in spite of the bold span of nearly fifty meters. Still, one feels that the construction lacks a certain lightness which is familiar to us from present-day work. In order to counteract the lateral stress there was still no allernative to the imitation of Gothie principles of con- struction. The immense blocks of lead that were used as abut- ments were as expensive as they were wasteful of space. Hector Horeau had used the same principle in his unexecuted design for the Grandes Halles (1849).®  In this exhibilion a combination of a wide span with a light construction was attempted before the appropriate methods had been discovered. But there is also a dangerous retrogres- sion from the advance which the Crystal Palace represents.  * Long before this, Gothic builders had attained a span of twenty-nine meters in the wooden vaulling of the Salone at Padua. 8 CE pp. 165-166, 168.  Vy Oo  b 
1. The Hall of Machines, Paris, 1855. A gallery twelve hundred meters long paralleling the Seine, the starting point for those Galeries des Machines which became more and more the pivotal - points of the industrial exhibitions.  The main building, the Palais de l’Industrie, was completely encased in heavy stone walls and included an immense trium- phal arch. This monumental stonework was unhappily taken as a pattern for later exhibitions in London (1862) and in Chicago (1893).°° a  The Palais de I’Industrie stood in the Champs-Elysées — during the whole Second Empire a central point in Hauss- mann’s project for building a new Paris. It was used for society gatherings and for shows of various kinds until 1897, when it was pulled down to make room for the exhibition of 1900.  Paris Exhibition of 1867  Ground plan: The external contour of the exhibition built ing was intended to symbolize the globe (fig. 113). W hen t e Champ-de-Mars was chosen as a site it became impossible to give the building a circular outline, and it was designed as an  #9 Cf, pp. 209-211, 315-317.  <  ellipse instead. The long axis was 490 meters (1,608 feet) and the short axis 386 meters (1,266 feet). Frédéric Le Play the distinguished engineer, economist, and expert on Euro- pean labor conditions whom Napoleon III appointed director of the exhibition— was responsible for the outline of its ground plan, and for its general program as well. From this time on, the Champ-de-Mars, the site in 1798 of the first of the small national exhibitions, was the accepted site for the great world exhibitions.  With regard to the ground plan, the question arose: How should the separate sections be arranged so as to give the spectator an ordered and undisturbed insight into the industry of all nations?  Within the elliptical main exhibition building seven concentric galleries were placed, each conforming to the main outline of the grounds (fig. 115). A garden was laid out inside the central ellipse of this colisée du travail. The galleries increased in size as one moved outwards from the center. The outermost gallery — the Galerie des Machines — was twice the height and width of the others (fig. 116). Industrial machinery was exhibited here. Clothing, furniture, and raw materials were displayed, in that order, in the next three galleries, counting toward the center. The two innermost and smallest galleries contained exhibits which concerned, respectively, (histoire du travail and the fine arts. A palm garden with statues occupied the innermost oval (fig. 62).7°  Transverse walks divided this building into separate seg- ments. From each segment a spectator could trace without effort the developments within a single country and compare them with the displays of other countries occupying adjacent segments. This was an attempt at “ living ” statistics.  The aim of the exhibition can be gathered from a quotation taken from an official publication of 1867. “To make the cireuit of this palace, circular, like the equator, is literally to go around the world. All peoples are here, enemies live in peace side by side. As in the beginning of things on the globe of waters, the divine spirit now floats on this globe of iron.”  Ct, L'berposition universelle de 1867, illustrée, publication internationale autorisée par ta commission impériale (Paris, 1867).  t  1  qi 
1i4. MANET, View of the Exhibition of 1867. Oil painting. Manet, whese pictures were denied eniry to this ex- hibition, showed his whole oulput on the Pont de (Alma. Manet has not only grasped externally the actuality of this building; he has set it forth in an ade- o quate artistic language. The thing that 113. International Exhibition, Paris, is important here is dynamic relation 1807. Aur view. between the masses of color.  The flowery language, somewhat reminiscent of Second Em- pire decoration, nevertheless reveals the essential motive.  Construction: The iron skeleton of the Galerie des Machines —span thirty-five meters, height twenty-five meters —con- sisted of pillars twenty-eight meters high. The arches of the vault girders reached twenty-five meters into the air.  The pillars did not stop at the level of the vaulting but were allowed to continue straight up into the air. The chief con- strucler, J. B. Krantz, did this to avoid the use of tie bars, and because the lateral stress could only be supported by girders built owt from the pillars to the basket arches. These pillars extending into the air were considered hideous, and an attempt was made to disguise them as flag poles.  Hydraulic lifts with all the clumsiness of newborn monsters afforded communication between the ground floor and the roof,  Pre rep 
ARR sta PALALS  et  wed  113. International Exhibition, Paris, 1867. Section of the galleries of the main building, Seven concentric galleries were placed within the elliptical main building; the Galerie des Machines was twice the height and width of the others.  116. International Exhibition, Paris, 1867. Galerie des Machines. The entire span of thirty-five meters was achieved without visible tie bars.  around which there ran a platform giving a striking view of this city of galleries in corrugated iron and glass.  Behind the chief constructer stood the young Eiffel, who bad founded his own factory a short time before. It was from him that the real inspiration for the Galerie des Machines came. In all sorts of ways — by the extensive use of new materials, by the employment of new devices like the elevator, by the provision of walks along the transparent glass surfaces of the promenoirs — the public was introduced not only to the new technical achievements but also to completely new aesthetic values.  q  Paris Exhibition of 1878 7  The exhibition of 1878 was intended to show the world that France had recovered from its defeat in 1870. The success of the exhibition of 1867 had been so great that in planning its  li. International Exhibition, Paris, 1878. The main entrance. The inflated sheet-melal architectare is of no importance as compared with the glass wall and the marquise vitrée The latier so intersects the vertical elements that the relation between load and support can no longer be grasped af sight.  i ‘The Philadelphia exhibition of 1876 is of interest as the first. example of the use of the pavilion system, This system was used again at Chicago in 1893 and at Paris in 1900. By the end of the century it had become the accepted method of organizing an exhibition. Phe increasing scope and complexity of industry made it necessary to segregate its different aspects in separate buildings. But all this falls outside the scope of our re- search, The Philadelphia exhibition brought no new solutions to the vaulting problem which was just on the verge of being solyed in France.  
successor a larger area was fixed upon. The exhibition was divided into two sections: one part was devoted to a monu- mental building in stone, the palace of the Trocadéro on the far side of the Seie; temporary constructions made up the rest of the exhibition.  The main exhibition building follows the reclangular outline of the Charap-de-Mars. The ellipsoidal shape was abandoned because it had proved very difficult, after an exhibition ended, io find a use for the curved girders such a shape dictated.  A. series of galleries in parallel formation extended over the length of the site, all of them flanked and dominated by the Galerie des Machines. Along the shorter sides of the grounds ran two vestibules constructed by Eiffel (who was also respon- sible for the main entrance facing the Seine).  The inflated sheet-metal architecture of the main entrance (fig. 117) and of the pavilions on both sides is a transitory fact of little consequence. Even at the time il was regarded as of questionable merit, fort disculable. But if we carry our atten- tion beyond the temporarily favored shapes it embodied, we shall find that the building exemplifies many important con- stituent phenomena. The courage shown in the glass wall at the front was important for the future. It was not until a half- century later, in the Bauhaus at Dessau, that the additional courage was found to juxtapose glass, jron, and concrete with- out any auxiliary pretexts, and thus to achieve an architec- tonic expression which stems directly from the unconditional use of pure materials.”  Another constituent fact of Jater architecture appears in the projecting glass canopy, or marquise vilrée, which is carried the length of the glass front wall. This marquise vilrée con- stitutes a hovering, horizontal plane surface, intersecting the vertical elements in such a way that the relations between load and support can no longer be grasped at sight.”  ® An intecmediate step is to be found in a ferroconerete loft building on Sutter Street, San Francisco, intended for wholesale merchandising, where a glass surface, covering the whole front, is suspended, cantilever fashion, in front of the supporting pillars.  7 [ijffel seems to have been fond of this device. He used another canopy of plain glass and iron on the front of his Magasin au Bon Marché in Paris (1876). This canopy remained unchanged until very recently. (CE. p. 175.)  tad  (18. Toternational Exhibition, Paris, 1878. Section and perspective of the Galerie des Machines. Span, thirty-five meters; height, tventy-five meters. Thanks to the engineer De Dion, a had become possible fo lead all the forces at work on « building directly into the foundations, without employing tie bars. .  From the very beginnings of architecture, a visible relation between load and support had been one of its outstanding facts. This sort of construction marks the beginning of a different kind of aesthetic feeling.  Construction: The main building of the exhibition of 1878 was flanked on both sides by the imposing Galerie des Machines (fig. 118). The Galerie resembled in form the hull of an over- turned ship. Its framework girders, mecting in the roof, were built up of separate parts, and already showed a differentiation between the specific functions that need to be fulfilled by iron vaulting. . Girders: The girders used are of the De Dion type. The en- gmeer De Dion was the real creator of girders fit for large spans. From a careful study of the tensile strength of materials he arrived at the proper form for a built-up girder capable of withstanding the various stresses put upon it without the as- sislance of tie bars. De Dion died shortly before the opening of the 1878 exhibition, while he was still engaged upon these calculations. (The arrangement of the framework girders shows a certain inner elasticity consequent upon the researches into the essential laws of materials.)  8c vi 
Stepped roof joists ran through the lattice girders and joined them into a continuous structure. On both sides, from the halfway point up, the walls were filled in with glass. (uch a union of glass and iron demands by its nature an exlensive dematerialization of a building, which can be felt when one studies the Galerie des Machines. The contemporary architect Boileau defines with perfect precision the impression produced by this union: ‘“‘ The spectator is nol aware of the weight of transparent surfaces. These surfaces are to him air and light, that is to say, an imponderable fluidity.” ™)  Thanks to the work of De Dion, it had become possible to con- duct all the forces bound up in a building straight into the foundations, without taking up any of them through the use of tie bars. However, this foundation was still rigidly connected with the pillars and framework. The pillars are riveted into U-shaped iron sockets which are sunk in the foundations. But an iron skeleton is subject to temperature changes and cannot be rigidly bound together in the manner of a stone palace. De Dion was a pioncer in the study of the problems that follow from this fact. The matter was dealt with quite directly in the 1878 Galerie des Machines. Every sixty meters along the ridge of the roof where the pairs of lattice columns met, there was a complicated system of bolts set in oval holes which automatically provided for the expansion and contrac- tion of the whole skeleton.  The rigid connection with the ground that is still maintained, together with the box-section girders and the canopy that rests on them like a capital, suggests that memory of the an- cient column and its simple relation of load and support still lingered. But from this time on, with the rise of the truss girder, a new system sets in, a system that in the iron skeleton demands a hovering balance of the forces acting upon it.  Paris Exhibition of 1889  The exhibition of 1889 marked at once the climax and the conclusion of a long development. In it great engineers like Eiffel reached the height of their powers. New conceptions in  14 Encyclopédie d’architecture, 1887-88, p. 97.  1 International Exhibition, Paris, 1889. Galerie des Machines. Span, 115 meters; length, 420 meters. The first lime a span of such size had ever been bridged. It embodies con.  structional experience accumulat Pr LOS, centur This building was ed during almost a whol le century. This wantonly destroyed. . ang  construction and new advances in industry united to give this exhibition expressive brilliance and an enormous influence The long but humble Galerie des Machines of 1855, the huge circular Galerie which Krantz and Eiffel built in 1867, and the lwo great aisles of De Dion’s Halle des Machines of 1878 are  sleps in a development which culminates in the Palais des Machines of 1889.  The exhibition of 1889 centered around the Eiffel Tower which Eiffel and his engineers had raised on the bank of the Seine in the short space of seventeen months. The exhibition 
buildings were spread out behind the tower. There were two wings, one housing the beaux-arls, the other the arls liberauz, which were joined together by a section devoted lo general exhibits. The immense metal bulk of the Galerie des Ma- chines rose in the background to dominate the whole complex.  A kind of traveling crane -— les ponts roulanis — was erected within the Galerie des Machines (fig. 119). It Wwansported spectators over the length of the immense hall and enabled them to inspect all the machinery (much of it in operation) which was displayed on the floor below. On good days as many as a hundred thousand passengers rode on this crane. For the last time industry aroused some of the wonder with which it was viewed at the time of its birth. Four years later at the Chicago World’s Fair a display of machinery on view from ponts roulanis could not have had this degree of success. But the progress made between 1878 and 1889 was so tremen- dous that visitors were stirred to the point of excitement by the boldness of the Galerie des Machines and the Eiffel Tower. These buildings attained a standard which has remained unexcelled.  Construction: The constructor of the “ Galerie des Ma- chines ” (actually named the “ Palais des Machines ’’) 7° was Cottancin; the architect, Dutert. The dimensions of the Galerie exceeded anything previously known. The largest vaulting attempted up to this time had heen that of the St. Pancras Station in London, 1868, which had a span of seventy- three meters and a height of twenty-five meters.”  Its skeleton was composed of twenty trusses. Tts length was four hundred and twenty meters. Huge glass walls enclosed the sides.”  78 This building, one of the high points reached in the evolution of construction, was torn down in 1910 — oat of “‘ artistic sadism,” as Frantz Jourdain correctly says.  76 The St. Pancras Station is similar in form to the Galerie des Machines and, like it, contains no pillars. The girder framework, however, is rigidly connected with the ground by heavy anchors, and tie bars buried in the ground are used to take up the lateral thrust. It was constructed by Barlow.  7?“ The great enclosure has a daring and grandiose outline — everywhere the metal shapes are formed in such a way as to ensure their being inherently decorative ” (Exposi- tion universelle de Paris de 1889: Monographie des palais, jardins, constructions diverses et installations générales, by Adolphe Alphand, Paris, 1892-95, p. 521). Somewhat earlier, and in a more unassuming way, J. W. Schwedler had attempted a similar Auflagerung in  The volume of free space included by the 1889 Galerie des Machines represented an entirely unprecedented conquest of matter. There is no earlier example that is comparable to it in this respect. But the glass end walls do not, strictly, close up the building; they constitute only a thin transparent mem- brane between the interior and outer space. And it is not as a building circumscribed within definite limits that the Galerie des Machines is important. The girders in its skeleton could have been either more or less numerous without thereby effect- ing any distinctive alteration. The aesthetic meaning of this hall is contained in the unionand interpenetration of the building and outer space, out of which there grows a completely new limitless- ness and movement in keeping with the machines it contains.  Each arched truss is made up of two segments. A pin unites them at a pivotal point high above the center line of the hall. Moving downward, the trusses become increasingly atten- uated until they appear scarcely to touch the ground: moving upward, they spread and gain weight and power (jig. 120). The usual proportions seem to be exactly reversed. These triply articulated arches disturb, or rather disrupt, traditional static feelings with regard to the rational relations of support and load. Elongated like immensely drawn-out cantilevers, the trusses embody movement in all their parts. Nothing remains of the quiet stone architecture of the barrel vault. A new sort of movement, penetrating space — as new in kind as that achieved in Borromini’s cupolas — is created here.  There is a further distortion of scale which must be noted: a section of these trusses would be about five times as deep as it was wide (three and a half meters deep by seventy-five centimeters wide). This is felt as a distortion, since the eye tends to take the dimensions of the stone architrave as its standard of comparison.  Pr a. - no, Pa ; When trusses were enlarged to such proportions there seemed to be a lack of filling materia]. In addition these girders were anusually light, since this was the first time steel framework  his Central Railway Station, Frankfort on Main (opened in 1888). It is true that the of his three halls come together almost. in a point along the peak of the roof, hese halls, however, do not break away from the barrel shape, which is ruled out in the Galerie ps Machines by the very nature of the triply articulated girders used. Dimen- sions of the Frankfort Station: length 186 m., width 56 in., height 29 ni.  
120.  t i | i t  \ i  *  arn me ne manne mers  Internationa) Exhibition, Paris, 1889,  Base of three-hinged arch.  j2l. EDGAR DE- GAS, “The Dancer.” Degas, the most dar- ing experimentalist among the painters of the period and the ex- act confemporary of Eiffel, projects his dancers stripped of all erotic fagade. He shows their — dis- tended nostrils and all the tenseness of straining effort. Max Liebermann remarks (in “Pan,” the most “precious” of the Ger- man avant-garde re- views, p. 195) that “he seems lo disguise his models and to see the nascent prostitute in the young dancer:  no other painter has so completely subdued the novelistie element.”  This painting exhibits  in ils field the imper-  sonal, precise, and ob- jective spirit which produced — construc- lions like the Galerie des Machines.  had been used to such an extent. The eye of the contemporary onlooker was confused by these strange dimensions. Even Anatole de Baudot, one of the first to open a path for con- temporary architecture, declares that the proportions are a failure, and the Belgian constructer Vierendeel complains that “ this lack of proportion produces a bad effect; the girder is not balanced; it has no base . . . it starts too low. . . . The eye is not reassured. . . . The supports of the Galerie des Machines show another fault: they are too empty.”  It is precisely the features that are criticized which pointed to later developments. Here construction is unconsciously moving toward aesthetic feelings which did not find  their equivalents in art and architecture until decades later,  
In this hall the light pouring in from above swallowed up the thin latticework. So far as the optical impression is concerned, the vault attains a floating or hovering state.  The last hint of the antique colump has disappeared. It is impossible to separate load and support.  Bent as though in the act of leaping, the vaulting starts at a very low Jevel to take up its load. If we wish, we may regard this vaulting as our equivalent of the caryatid. It does not carry its burden with the dignity of the maidens of the Erech- theum nor does it break down under it like the nude giants on baroque portals. It springs up against its load to unite with it.  The ends of the girders, narrowing as they approach the floor (fig. 120), are no longer rigidly connected with the ground but are left free to move. The girders transmit their own weight, plus the horizontal stress of 120,000 kilograms, directly through a hinged joint. With this system of support, even foundation movements could take place without setting up internal stresses.” This was the only means whereby the play of forces at all points of the system could be controlled.”  The division between load and support which was still indi- cated in De Dion’s halls of 1878 is here obliterated. Iron vaulting has found its true form. The play of enormous forces is held in equilibrium, an equilibrium that is floating rather than rigid.  It is the equilibrium of a balance beam daringly poised against continually varying forces.  ‘A new oscillating harmony is created.  An clastic counterpoise is achieved which absorbs changes in the interior, the exterior, and the foundation.  This counterpoise adjusts itself to fluctuations of the ground.  78 This is an example of the way in which during the nineteenth century inportant results followed from the application to building of discoveries made in purely technolog- ical fields. [inged joints were used in bridges around 1870 by Eiffel and others. (Cf. Erving Matheson, Works in Tron, London, 1873, p. 145.) The ontstanding example is Eiffel’s bridge over the Douro, in Portugal.  72 A single method of construction produced a mathematical determination of the dis- tribution of the forces in different sections of the arch, This was the articulation at base and apex. The system ensured a rational and completely exact distribution of the stresses and of the materials used ** (Alphand, p. 16).  An equilibrium is achieved against changes in the molecular structure of the building itself.  An equilibrium is achieved against external pressure, wind and snow.  Construction passes over into expression.  Chicago, 1893  It is a curious illustration of the complex character of the nineteenth century that the great exhibitions should have be- gun their decline in Chicago. At this period Chicago was the place: where the most daring and original work with office buildings and apartment houses was being done. While the Paris exhibitions — and especially that of 1889 — produced structures that opened up new ranges of feeling, the World’s Columbian Exhibition at Chicago was the beginning of ‘‘ mer- cantile classicism.”” The influence of its plaster architecture was widespread and tenacious. This was foreseen at the time  122.  t opulat painting, The Kiss of the Wave,” 1889. An immense woodcut filling hwo fae A no. 2 of Le Courrier de UE-xposition,” special edition, April 14. 1889. With its eile histrionics and ils full share of erotic facade it met all the demands of its day.  Page  Chi ady buil  ‘ce  clas 
who in his Aulobiography of an Idea pre-  by Louis Sullivan, nae  dicted that “the damage wrought to this country Chicago World’s Fair will last half a century. . It is true that there were good things al Chicago in 1893: Louis Sullivan’s own Transportation Building (his one contribution to the fair) and the covered piers that ran out Into Lake Michigan. The contemporary Belgian constructor Vierendee] was nevertheless quite justified in saying that the construc- tions were only imitations of what we have known in Europe for a long time. We expected better, much better, trom the well-known audacity, initiative, and originality of the meri- cans. We have been profoundly deceived.” The staff architec. ture enveloping the metal framework also lacked originality. “ In a new world they dared no innovations. They had doubts of themselves.” *°  It was not the pure curves of the piers extending out into the lake that delighted the public but rather the gondolas and gondoliers that had been especially imported. from Venice  423. World’s Fair, Chicago, 1893. Venetian gondoliers.  ~ 3 9 80 La Construction archilecturale en fer et acier (Brussels, 1902), p. 249.  (fig. 123). Louis Sullivan’s building also failed to achieve a popular success, which went instead to those “marble ” colonnades that were born out of the spirit of the French acad- emicians — the very men who had done everything in their power to prevent the erection of the Eiffel Tower. At the Chicago World’s Fair the architects believed that they were reviving the creative spirit of Medicean times and the public fancied that the radiance of Florence was being recalled for them to live in. These attitudes are easily understood; they represent only another one of those frequent and futile at- tempts to escape from the actual present, which — like finan- cial crises — recur constantly throughout the industrial era.  New Forms — New Shapes  It would have been very interesting — had space permitted — to discuss everything that falls under the heading of “ the Great Exhibitions,’”’ and to deal in some detail with their immense influence upon the industry and life of nations. The manner in which the “theme” of each exhibition found ex- pression certainly merits some discussion too. Thus it would be possible to establish with complete accuracy the date when “ the industry of all nations ” came to be the inevitable theme for any great exposition — and also came to be accepted with- out any of the wonder and excitement that had attached to it in the beginning. At that moment the exhibition as a problem in building lost all its creative force. It became simply an organized show like many others, and its success or failure was a matter of no historical importance. A new theme, the needs and desires of man, is required to give a new impetus to the exhibition movement. People are no longer vitally concerned with the question, ‘““ How can we produce the greatest number of objects?” The great problem for us is, “ How can produc- tion be regulated in the interests of the consumer? ”  Inf dec gre: 
GUSTAVE EIFFEL AND HIS TOWER  No otber century in the history of the western world devel- oped such hy pertrophic building activity as the nineteenth, and none produced such a small number of creative architects, We do not Uhink that this is due to any lack of talent, but rather believe the society gradually killed any creative impulse with the poison of ils ruling taste.  When revolutionary architects such as Heori Labrouste were finally admitled lo the French Academy, it was already recognized by their contemporaries thal they had left behind them “Ja passion el lespoir de confesser Jeur temps.” > Archi- tecture must stand up to wind and weather that it may have a chance to have its impact on man. Unlike painting. archi- tecture that never leaves the paper fades away like an old photograph.  Sheltered in the shadow of industry and protected by the authority of science, engineers were not hampered in their development, for they did not have to play up to the ruling taste. Although their names were unknown in their day, they are noted in history and will not be forgotten. In the same way most of their work remained anonymous, like Gustave Eiffel’s clegant skeleton (1886) that carries the hammered copper skin of the Statue of Liberty at the entrance of New York Harbor. That Eiffel’s name is familiar to the public is due only to the fact that the Eiffel Tower bore his name from the very beginning.  Gustave Eiffel (1832-1923) ° came from Burgundy. the birth- place of many great constructors. He got the best training available, at the Ecole Polytéchnique and the Ecole Centrale. We encountered his name earlier in connection with his cal- culations for the arches of Lhe Galerie des Machines (1867), the glass walls of the large enlrance hall for the inLernational exhibition of 1878, and the marvelously Jit Bon Marché de- partment store in Paris (1876). now deprived of its original charm through hopeless modernization.”  Ueniile Prdlal, in Bnevelopédic f {rehilecture (Paris), 1850, p. to.  2 See Joan Prevost’s small biography, Hiffel (Paris, 1929).  123a. International Exhibition, Paris, seas the elliptical main exhibition buildin the real inspirer. He calculated and ve modulus of elasticity ina large construction was tested tor the first lime.  1867. Tron sk  In the daring construction of bridges over deep rivers in furope and Africa, and also over the enormous slreams of Indo-China, he learned to master the elements of weather waler, and wind. By means of hydraulic pressure the piles of his first bridge near Bordeaux (1858), were driven twenty- five melers below the surface of the water. Later, when he rad Lo span deep gorges, he erected columms (pylons) in the shape of slender pyramids, lapering towards the traffie-way hey support. The large spans and. the lofty heights of these atticed supports, designed according Lo the newest methods and with the greatest elegance. made hin and his engineers femailiar with the impact of the wind. Early he was interested i meteorological research. and in bis later days he was one of the first to found — at his own expense aboratory.  | an aerodynamic rom the platform of his tower he dropped an a ype a . ] for n, * | , > apparatus be had invented for registering Ue influence of  wind pressure on plane surfaces. Later, in his laboratory at  B67. : elelon. Probably the first pure skeletor of this world’s fair. Behind the chief engineer stood the ed the construction of the pillars and the wide span. of  ei int 
Auteuil, he had a large wind tunnel built for experiments in the field of aviation. The action of moving air on rigid bodies continuously preoccupied him — an interest carefully reg- istered in many of bis publications.  Gustave Eiffel is the master of elegantly constructed iron towers — pylons — and airy two-hinged arches, which formed, connected by horizontal tralffic-ways, bridges like tbat over the Douro or the Garabit Viaduct. The grandiose display of equipoise which they offered had never been surpassed.  123b. G. EIFFEL, Bridge over the Douro, 1875. Span, 160 meters; height, 61 melers above the level of the water. In erecting the high pylons and assembling the arches in midair, Eiffel gained the necessary precision and experience to build the thousand-fool lower.  The river Douro ® in northern Portugal, with its strong and changing currents, its depth varying between forty-five and sixty feet, in addition to a very unstable soil, made the use of piles in the river bed not possible. Eiffel bridged it in a single span of about five hundred feet — 160 meters — the longest at that time (fig. 123b), with exception, of course, of suspension bridges. Eiffel built the two-hinged arch from the  3G. Eiffel, Notice sur le Port Douro (Clichy, 1879). Good descriptions, drawings and  woodcuts.  high iron pylons without scaffolding, by means of suspended cables (1876-77). The Americans in bridging the Mississippi River at St. Louis used a similar procedure.  The most daring of Eiffel’s bridges remains the Garabit Viaduct (1880-84).4 Its total length is nearly half a kilo- meter; it crosses the gorge 122.5 meters over the river Thuyére with an arch span of 165 meters (figs. 123e, 123d). Tle used every possible graphic, analytic, and experimental means to design his parabolic arches, which touch the ground in point supports.  It was here that Eiffel and his engineers learned to master the difficulties of assembling precisely dimensioned parts, so that later the rivet holes of the factory-made members of the Eiffel Tower could coincide to the tenth of a millimeter when being erected on the site.  The one-thousand-foot Eiffel Tower, erected for the Paris exhibition of 1889, embodied in one single work all his expe- rience with foundations and supports, against the intricacies of earth and wind. Even Eiffel himself was at first afraid to shock the ruling taste with the erection of an uncompromising bare structure in the heart of Paris, but he was urged on by the head of his ““ Bureau d’études,” the young Swiss engineer Maurice Koechlin (1856-1946), who had made calculations for the Garabit Viaduct.  In his artistic taste Eiffel was a true son of his time. His own residence was filled with ‘a mess of heteroclite and unbe- Nevably ugly works of art.’’® As is well known, even the creative persoualities of our time still suffer from the split between the methods of feeling and the methods of thinking. Kiffel does not differ in this respect from other great con- structors, like Freyssinet and Maillart.  4h, Eiffel, Mémoire présenté a Vappui du projet définitif du Viadue de Garabil (Paris, 1889). The importance of this bridge is shown in a large portfolio with all stages of the calculation, the procedures of assembly, and photographs.  * In 1900 Eiffel published La Tour de trois cents mélres in bwo monumental folio volumes, de xing the structure which will stand forever as a personification of “Vart de Vingénieur moderne et le siécle @'industrie et de science.” These are the words with which in 1885 he introduced his “ Tower in iron” before the Society of Civil Engineers in Paris,  ® Blaise Cendrars, Aujourd’hui (Paris, 1931), p. 148.  The 
ao  ifel’ i q {5 meters: 123e. j28e. G. EIFFEL, Garabit Viaduct, 1880-84 Lhe most daring of Hiffel’s bridges. Span, 165 me fers: total length almost half a kilometer; height above the water, 122.5 meters. 4 perfect erample of cobrdination of viston,  G. EIFFEL, Decorative arch of the Eiffel Tower, 1889. The arch is merely a decorative link, calculation, and experiment.  vomehou: a distraction for the eye from the heary horizontal girders which connect lie four pylons.  . .qwyepee sarabit Viaduct. Detail of abut-  pad. CG. EIFFEL, Garabit Viaduct. 2 / ar Go FEPRE rece nent. Inthe tate nineteenth century, pure forms — as far I Bf OG. Salt | EL, A pier of the Kiel ‘ ‘ sin lures are concerned -— are found in the works of Vower. ; Viewed fron the angle of construction th peat engine rs The plastic form of arch, hinged the Hiffel Tower is formed of four immense joinl and abulment transeend the realm of construction pylons, merging asymplotically together.  
Viewed from the standpoint of construction, the whole Lower is an adaptation of the lofty supports of iron bridges, in- creased to cosmic dimensions. It springs in three stages to its full height. Jts large dimensions made il necessary to com- pose the structure of four members meeting asymptotically at the lop and embracing an enormous space. The four pylons are anchored to separate foundations, for which Eiffel used, of course, the hydraulic press, as he had done for his bridges since 1858. Llevators run in the interior of the supports as far as the second platform. Another elevator runs within the core of the structure from the second to the third platform, 904 feet above the ground. The four arches which connect the supports (fig. 128e) are mainly decorative, remi- niscent nevertheless of Eiffel’s original intention of carrying the tower on four bridge arches.  The airiness one experiences when at the top of the tower makes it the terrestrial sister of the aeroplane. 1t is interesting that revenue from the entrance fees declined afler the enormous success of the exhibition in 1889, to rise again steadily from 1904,7 which corresponds with the time when the interest in flying machines began to arouse public curiosity. It was no accident that Santos-Dumont chose to circle about this Lower on his spectacular flight in his airship.  To a previously unknown extent, outer and inner space are interpenetrating (fig. 123g). This effect can only be expe- rienced in descending the spiral stairs from the top, when the soaring lines of the structure intersect with the trees, houses, churches, and the serpentine windings of the Seine. The mter- penetration of continuously changing viewpoints creates, in the eyes of the moving spectator, a glimpse into four- dimensional experience.  ‘The emotional content of the tower remained veiled during the next decades. The tower, which “ stood up from Paris like a hatpin” for the generation coming 10 the fore around 1910, was of course for the representatives of the ruling tasle a menace, a disgrace. In February 1887, a month after Gustave Eiffel had signed the contract with the French gov-  1 Journal du Crédit Publie, April 25, 1929.  ernment and the city of Paris, the famous protesl against the erection of the tower was handed to the chairman of the exhibition committee: “We, the writers, painters, sculptors and architects come in the name of French good taste and of this menace to French history to express our deep indig- nation that there should stand in the heart of our Capital this unnecessary and monstrous Tour Eiffel.” But fortu- nately, the chairman was the farsighted engineer and land- scape architect Alphand, the same man who had created under Haussman, the great parks of Paris. oS  Two decades later, an optical revolution shattered the static viewpoint of the Renaissance, and suddenly the hidden emotional content of the tower was revealed. Tt now became the symbol of the “Grande Ville.” “Such was Paris, with her great tower from which every night streamed the blue tresses of the wireless telegraph.” ® ,  It was now that the great tower found its artistic revelation The Parisian painter, Robert Delauney (1885-19-47), found in its structure a possibility of showing what was going on below in the changing apprehension of the outer world (fig 123i). Indeed since 1910 the lower, portrayed in all its multi-sidedness, accompanied Delauney through all the dif- ferent stages of his life. The poet Blaise Cendrars in his Aujourd hui gives us insight into the new approach of this young generation.  No longer is the tower a hideous monster. It grows in its emotional significance, and its contemporary, the Sacré Coeur of Montmarte, with its white cupolas, hecomes degraded to a sugarplum in the eye of the poet. a  “IT saw through my window the Eiffel Tower like a flask of clear water, the domes of the Invalides and the Pantheon as a teapot and sugar basin, and the Sacré Coeur a pink and white sugarplum, Delauney came almost every day to visit me lie was always haunted by the tower.” ° .  ‘Vor this and other quotations q quotations from contemporary ets, Se icedi ‘ ae i poets, see C. Gicdion-Wele ; Robert Delauney,” in Das Werk (Zurich), No. 8 (1916). odion Welekery Blaise Cendrars, Aujourd’hui, p. 136. 
G. ELPIEL, Spiral staircases between first and second floors of the Eivel Erer-changing viewpoints and interpenetration of inner and outer space were et- perienced here decades before architects or painters realized the new conception of space.  Tow  1231. ROBERT DELAUNEY, Eilfel Tower, 1910.  128h.  G. ELFFEL, Hiffel Tower. View fram the second platform to the first. The photo is made in the elevator shaft. Right and left, the elevator tvacks which penetrate into the ground floor.  
ae ares eta  pwr  123). ARNODIN, Ferry Bridge in the “ Vieux Port” of Marseilles, 1905. Jron strue- ture and stone architecture blend well together.  1231. ARNODIN, Ferry Bridge, Marseilles, 1905. Height, 54 meters; length of car- riage-way, 240 meters. , a  123k. ARNODIN, Ferry Bridge, Marseilles. View from upper platform to suspended ferry. Relation between fired and moving paris. Slender steel construction. Observe plal- . forms of staircase, julling boldly out inlo space. (Cf. Bauhaus balconies, 1926.)  
“ At thal time there was no artistic formula that could claim to express the plasticity of the Eiffel Tower. Under the laws of realism it crumbled. and the laws of Italian perspective could not catch il... . But Delauney wanted to find a plastic interpretation. He dismembered the tower so that he might enter within its frame; he tru neated it and inclined it to make it express the vertigo of its full three hundred meters; he took ten standpoints, fifteen outlooks; he looked at this part from below, that from above, the surrounding houses from the right, from the left, from the wings of a bird and from the hed of the earth.” 1  No doubt, in this hovering Lower some of the spirit has ma-  terialized of the technical Utopianism of Jules Verne, who helonged to Kiffel’s generation.  The rapid evolution from James Bogardus’ unexeculed. cast- iron tower for the New York World’s Fair of 1853 (fig. 7) to the Eifel Tower, conceived only three decades later, when viewed in historic dimension is indeed fantastic.  After reaching this peak, the evolution slowed down and turned in other directions. During the following half-century the steel skeleton of the skyscraper developed in America. In France, nearest to the airy sensitivity of the Eiffel Tower were the elegant ferry bridges, especially that of the Vieux Port at Marseilles, 1905 (figs. 123), k. D heavily damaged towards the end of the second world war.  The engineer. Arnodin, was a specialist in these clegant struc- tures. which he knew how to place excellenUy in French river ports as in Rouen (1889) or in Nantes, the latest having been erected in the late dwenties in Bordeaux.  The ferry bridge at Marseilles, the Pont Transbordeur. which must transport vehicles across the river withoul. hindering the passage of talianasted ships, consisis of two pairs of slender pylons touching the earth at two points. They sup- port at a lofty height a carriage-way for the traveling crane from which the ferry, hovering over the water, is suspended by cables.  Le Tbid., pp. 345-518, translated by JT.  PART IV  THE DEMAND FOR MORALITY IN ARCHITECTURE 
THE NINETIES: PRECURSORS OF CONTEMPORARY ARCHITECTURE  ‘There are whole decades in the second half of the nineteenth century in which no architectural work of any significance is encountered. Eclecticism smothered all creative energy. Here and there — especially as the century wore on -—~ voices were raised in protest, but they could do nothing to alter conditions.  It was just at this time that an unprecedented wave of building activity swept over Europe. Its cities took on the shapes from which we still suffer today.  The painter was able to withdraw from this overpowering environment. The men who did the important work at this period gave up all prospects of fame and an audience and practiced their art in seclusion. Cézanne and Van Gogh, for example, buried themselves in the solitude of Provence. The architect had no such course open to him; not a single one managed to escape from the atmosphere of eclecticism.  Dissatisfaction with this almost universal state of affairs reached its peak around 1890. Toward the end of the century H. P. Berlage was to produce a building which. would serve to purify architecture all over Europe, his Amsterdam Stock Exchange. In the nineties he was already denouncing the prevailing architecture as “ Scheinarchitektur, d-h. Imitation, ah. Liige ” (‘‘ Sham architecture; i.e., imitation; iLe., lying”). “ Our parents and grandparents as well as ourselves,” Berlage wrote, ‘ have lived and still live in surroundings more hideous than any known before. . . . Lying is the rule, truth is the exception.”  The smoldering hatred of eclecticism came to a head in Europe with startling suddenness. In the same way, a fish net can be hauled for a long time quite uneventfully and then, in a single moment, the whole catch shows up all bunched together. This moment in the history of architecture did not arrive by acci- dent: industry had at length reached its full development and the time was ripe for great changes. In the earlier part of the century decades go by with nothing achieved in architecture; toward the close of the century almost every year has impor-  tance. Ambition revives and brings with it courage and strength to oppose those forces which had kept life from finding its true forms. Developments come in one surge afler another. The diversity of movements with their variety of experimental gropings indicates the vilality of the period. Individual fail- ures and the mixture of transitory with constituent facts are of little imporlance. These are traits of every transitional period.  Much of what was attempted between 1890 and 1930 remained fragmentary and incomplete. This period, however, found the courage to undertake the building up of a tradition of its own.  What Were the Sources of this Movement?  According to the easy explanation that was advanced later, the movement developed as the application of two principles: the abandonment of historical styles, and — consequent upon this -— the use of “ fitness for purpose”’ as a criterion. The ex- planation is correct, inasmuch as both these factors were in- volved, but it does not go far enough. The movement took its strength from the moral demands which were its real source. The cry went up, “ Away with this infected atmosphere! ”  The young painter Henri van de Velde was among those who attacked the “ infected atmosphere ”’ most vigorously. In the late nineties he took the lead in the fight for art moderne. He campaigned for it first in his native Belgium, next in France, and then in a country which, at the time, lay wide open to any new movement — Germany. He has given the reasons why his development took the direction it did in his writings, where he preaches, explains, and defends his doctrines. But it may be that the moral impetus behind the art moderne movement appears more directly in some remarks which he made only a short while ago. :  I met van de Velde in Brussels during the summer of 1938. A great leader during the nineties, he still remains extremely active; he had, in fact, just returned from laying the corner- stone of the Belgian Pavilion at the New York World’s Fair. Knowing that he had begun his career as a painter, I asked him how he had come to turn to architecture. He answered by describing the situation that prevailed around 1890: “ The 
real forms of things were covered over. In this period the revolt against the falsification of forms and against the past was a moral revolt.” *  He went on to tell how, shortly before 1890, a nervous break- down had left him incapable of work. At this point he met a woman who gave him renewed courage to face life. Soon after, he wished to marry and establish his own household. “I told myself — this was in 1892 — that I would never allow my wife and family to find themselves in ‘immoral’ surround- ings.” ? But at that date everything that one could buy on the open market was smothered under the mensonge des formes which van de Velde hated. He had to design for himself every- thing in his house, from cutlery to doorknobs. Then — since these articles demanded a setting which would * ward off ugli- ness” — he was led to build his first house. “You asked me how I became an architect. Well, this house pushed me into architecture.”  “This house” was van de Velde’s home on the Avenue van der Raye in Uccle, a suburb of Brussels.? It showed a remark- able freedom in the treatment of the roof and in the way in which the windows were cut out to meet the special require- ments of each room. The revolution this house provoked when it was completed in 1896 derived from its pronounced simplic- ity, in strong contrast with the over-fanciful facades to which people were accustomed. In this respect van de Velde’s earli- est work pointed farther into the future than Horta’s house in the Rue de Turin.  A generation earlier the same disgust with the falsification of forms in all objects of trade had led William Morris to create and equip his ‘* Red House ” at Upton in Kent, England. Ac- cording to one of Morris’ biographers, Red House had much the same history as van de Velde’s house in Uccle: “ During the year 1858, William Morris plodded on as a painter with a  1 © Toutes les formes étaient cachées. A cette époque la révolte contre les mensonges des formes ct le passé était une révolle morale.”  26 Je me disais-e’était en 1892 — jamais je ne veux pas admettre que ma femme et ma famille se trouvent dans un milieu qui est immorale.”  3 There are some excellent illustrations of this house in a book by van de Velde’s biog- rapher and Maecenas, Karl Ernest Osthaus: Van de Velde (Hagen }. W, 1920).  growing dejection over the work accomplished despite the fact that he sold one picture for £70. But Morris’ wedding, in April 1859, turned his mind again and more intensely to those domestic arts which had attracted him at Red Lion Square Ile now set his heart on building a home that should fulfill his conception of the ‘house beautiful,’ and secured Webb’s serv- ices as architect. . .. The name of the house, which is built of red brick and tiles, expressed a revolt against the prevailing and tyrannous formula of stucco walls and slate roofs.” 4  Does this parallel mean that van de Velde simply followed the example Morris had already set? We do not think so. The parallel springs from the fact that the disorder introduced into human life by industry made itself felt in England more than thirty years earlier than on the Continent. Identical condi- tions led to identical reactions.  Brussels the Center of Contemporary Art, 1880-90  WwW hy was Belgium, rather than some other country on the Continent, the starting point of the new movement?  The pioneering spirit of Henri van de Velde can only be under- stood in relation to the background provided for it by Belgium in the eighties. Belgium was the first country on the Conti- nent to become heavily industrialized. The problems that grow  out of industrialization thus showed themselves first and most intensely in Belgium.  But there was another reason — at least as important as this one — why it was in Belgium that l’art nouveau first began to affect architecture and the industrial arts. Brussels between 1880 and 1890 was the one city in the entire cultural world which gave a welcome and a hearing to those creative artists who were despised or ignored by the great public. Painters like Seurat, Cézanne, and van Gogh, sculptors like Rodin and Meunier, musicians like Debussy and Vincent d’Indy and poets like Verhaercn were invited to Brussels to present their work for exhibition and discussion. The courage and  ntaaue Weekley, William Morris (London, 1934), p. 53. It was at Red Lion Square iat Morris had established bis first workshop, in conjunction with Burne-Jones m 
artistic instinct required to establish such a policy cannot be overestimated. These exhibitions, lectures, and concerts repre- sented the first sysLematic attack upon a public taste that for decades had been corrupted by the productions of an art entirely out of touch with life. The pseudo-monumental facades of the period and its peinture & la mode were poth alike examples of the mensonge des formes.  The work of education in Belgium was carried on by two men who loved the arts, and who themselves wrote, painted, and composed in the time allowed them by their professions: Octave Maus (1856-1919) and Edmond Picard (1836-1924). Both were well-to-do lawyers who entertained extensively.’  In 1881 Maus, Picard, and some others founded the weekly periodical, L’Art moderne. Each number contained only a few printed sheets; there were no illustrations, and the articles published were usually unsigned. One of these anonymous essays in the first issue of the magazine (dated March 6, 1881) announces a program directed not only against academic art but against fixed conceptions of all kinds:  “ Art is for us the contrary of every recipe and formula. Art is the eternally spontaneous and free action of man on his en- vironment for the purpose of transforming it and making it conform to a new idea.”  L’ Art moderne appeared regularly for over thirty years — ex- traordinary longevity in a review of this type — and served as a model for many of the later periodicals that took up the cause of the avani-garde. Its files offer a still unexplored mine of information to the historian of the period. It was this review that soon after its foundation brought together the group of young Belgian artists known as “ Les XX ” (“ The Twenty ”), Among its members were Ferdinand Knopff and A. W. Finch (who, according to Henri van de Velde, made the bridge be-  5 Picard was perhaps the more versatile of the two. In his youth be interrupted his studies for some time to become a sailor. Later he studied philosophy and law and became a valued advocate at court. Over and above his professional work he was active asa critic. In his review, L'Art moderne. he defended the victims of popular disapproval, and all the rest. Octave Maus was an jnitiator with a great range of  the impressionists e instinct and the tireless energy needed for organizing en-  interests. He had both th deavors on a large scale.  os  ——  tween Morris and his circle and the Belgian art nouv  Another member was James Ensor. Ensor was already vo nent as a painter when the first exhibition in 1884 showed a large number of his piclures. (Most of these now hang in tk ‘ Musées Royaux des Beaux Arts in Brussels.) _  Maus was the secretary and the leading spirit of Les XX for  long as the society existed, from 1884 to 1893. He went on to found La Libre Esthétique, the association which replaced Les XX in 1894, The Libre Esthétique showed the work of William Morris and gave the young Henri van de V olde « chance to put his ideas before the public. In a lecture on a ° 1 déblaiement dart” van de Velde told of what had heen tone van gland and France and pointed to America as the  Maus discerned in all countries the hidden forces that were at work, quite ignored by the public. He sought to persuade all those artists who — like Cézanne — were unwilling to show their work to exhibit at Brussels. At the first. exhibition i 1884 the Frenchman Rodin (who exhibited his bust of Vi vor Hugo), the American Whistler, and the German Max Licher. mann were represented. As year followed year, new names appeared on the list: in 1886 Auguste Renoir, in 1887 Georg  Seurat (who showed one of his principal works, “ Le Dimanche ae Grande Jatte,” now in the Chicago Art Institute). Pis srr and Berthe Morisot were also included in the 1887 The Seurat 7 Dimanche 4 la Grande Jatte,” arriving fresh from the artist’s studio with its flat treatment of landscap  and figures and all its poésie aérienne, caused a terrific u roar, This picture — whose value is no longer a subject for contro,  versy — was attacked with umbrellas at i i at its first 4 van de Velde told me. mst Showings $°  rn 88s van Gogh made his debut at Brussels. His feverish colors made the greatest impression on the young artists  Cézanne who exhibite same time, w OF over- 1 ¥ ted at the was almost T  v “have mentioned only one phase of the activity that went on russels during these years and have noted only the high . 5 
points in that phase. Even so, there is no need for further explanation of the sudden emergence there of so many talents. Henri van de Velde is one instance; Victor Horta and Paul Hankar are others. In Brussels between 1884 and 1894 the works of great con- temporary painters and sculptors found display. In England during the same period a different kind of contribution to the arts was made. It was at this time that the work of Morris and his circle began to bear fruit, and that a serious altempt was made to reform public taste in the field of household furnishings. Meanwhile a younger generation of artists had grown up—men like Arthur H. Mackmurdo, Cobden- Sanderson, and C. R. Ashbee — who did not share Morris’ hatred of modern techniques and business methods. The social point of view of Morris and Ruskin, however, was carried even further by this younger generation. Numerous associations, like Mackmurdo’s Art Workers’ Guild of 1884, rallied together the artists and architects who were interested in art and handicrafts. Even the dilettantes joined together in the same year to form the Home Arts and Indus- tries Association. The Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society organized great shows intended to prove that the so-called “minor arts” occupied as high a level as painting. This belief was — as is well known — taken up on the Continent about a decade later by the art nouveau movement, and vigor- ously argued by them. As early as 1892 the Brussels exhibition had included examples of industrial art, specimen pieces of stained glass and ceramic work. In 1894, the year La Libre Esthétique was founded, there appeared the creations of the Morris group, as well as a typical contribution from a French artist — a studio interior.  So once more it was Brussels which was the starting point from which the arts and crafts movement spread over the Continent. Henri van de Velde — tireless both as an artist and as the evangelist of the art nouveau — carried his version of the findings arrived at in Brussels first to Paris (1896) and then to Dresden (1897). The few interiors which he exhibited created a sensation such as was rarely aroused at the time by work of this nature. The demonstration stirred to full con-  _———-  sciousness talents in both countries which had hitherto been uncertain in what direction to turn for an outlet. The impact of the arts and crafts movement upon the all-too-long dormant Continent dates from this time.  Victor Horta’s Contribution  Considering the receptivity of Brussels to new work in the arts it is not surprising that the first really daring Continental residence should have been built there. This was Victor Horta’s house at 12 Rue de Turin (fig. 124). Completed in 1893, before there were any signs of a new European architec- ture, the Horta house marked a turning point in the treatment of the private home. From that time on, new artistic prin- ciples were to be applied to the problem of the dwelling, and new human needs were to be allowed to affect its design. This  jiouse roused Continental architecture fro s letha ie) from its l y vox U rey at one  Number 2 Rue de Turin stands in a row of conventional Brussels residences. Since it had to conform to the same con- ditions, it resembles them in being long and very narrow: the front is a bare twenty-three feet across. The ground plan developed within these predetermined proportions however is entirely original. In the typical Brussels house Horta tells me, the whole extent of the ground floor is visible from the entry. Horta avoided this by breaking the floor up into dif- ferent levels. Thus the drawing room is half a story higher than the entrance hall which leads into it. Differences in level represent only one of the devices which Horta employed to give new flexibility to the ground plan. He hollowed out the massive body of the house, introducing light-wells that pro- vided new and unusual sources of illumination in so narrow an exterior, The photographs do not reveal the surprising in- terrelations into which these rooms at their different levels are brought. And all this was done within the smallest. compas  imaginable (fig. 125). -_  7 , Horta 8 house was soon famous in every European circle in- terested in restoring the vitality of architecture. It was ad- 
124. VICTOR HORTA, 12 Rue de Turin, Brussels, 1893.  125. VICTOR HORTA, 12 Rue de Turin, Brussels. Plan. Horta achieves flexibility and some independence between floors through the use of the internal iron skeleton.  126, St. Louis, river front, 109-111 North First Street, 1849 or 1850. An earlier American combination of those elements developed for industrial buildings which Horta translates into resi- dential terms.  mired chiefly for two things: its perfect adjustment to its owner (a Mr. Tassel), and its freedom from any trace of his- torical styles. Five years after it was built, the Austrian critic, Ludwig Hevesi, published an article which shows the value his contemporaries placed on Horta’s work.  “ There lives in Brussels now, in 1898, the most inspired of the modern architects, Victor Horta. . . . His fame is exactly six years old, and dates from the residence of Mr. Tassel in the Rue de Turin. This is the first of these famous modern dwell- ings which fit their owners like faultlessly cut coats. It houses the man for whom it was built in the most perfect manner con- ccivable — as perfectly as the mussel shell does the mussel. It is most simple and logical . . . altogether new and just as delightful. But — and note this — there is in it not the faint- 
est echo of any of the historical styles. . . - No detail derives from anything at all in existence. It has the pure charm of lines, curves, and surfaces — and it is quite personal, as per- sonal as if Horta, instead of simply drawing the parts, had handed them to the workmen all modeled in advance.” §  John Nash, in the drawing room of the Royal Pavilion at Brighton (1818), had openly displayed the ornate cast-iron columns and girders that entered into its construction. No one before Horta had dared to follow this example and permit con- struction to intrude upon the intimacy of a private house. In Horta’s house the staircase clearly reveals pillars and girders, which hold the eye by their shape and ornamentation (fig. 127). The drawing room is even more notable in this respect; an |-section support is carried across its free space without any attempt at disguise.  The visitor receives his first impression of the interior of the house from the cast-iron column that rises from the elevated main floor next the staircase. Curved iron tendrils spring out of its vase-shaped capital. Their forms are partly like those of primitive plants, partly arbitrary creations. Their lines are freely continued on the smooth surfaces of the walls and vault- ing and on the mosaics of the floor in wild and swirling cur- vilinear patterns.  The house in the Rue de Turin marks the first appearance of the arf nouveau in the field of architecture. It is for this reason —— not merely because of the qualities Hevesi admired in it — that it finds a place in all histories of art. In Horta’s house the aims of the aré nouveau were fully carried out in architectural terms at the very first attempt. There are no earlier examples in architecture of this transitional style. Indeed its best representative, Aubrey Beardsley, did not arrive at his own artistic language until 1893 — the date of the Rue de Turin residence.’  In Horta’s house the point of origin of the art nouveau becomes patent: it is iron construction. What are these lines but the unrolled curls and rosettes that are to be found under the eaves  6 Wiener Tageblatt, November 11, 1898. 1 His drawings were included in the first volume of Studio, 1893.  s  et OE  127. VICTOR HORTA, 12 Ruc de Turin, Brussels. fron col- 128. umn and staircase. Ab the end of the cast-iron period, the east-  iron column is once more introduced into the house — and brings 1879 the art nouveau with if, ,  ALPIIONSE BALAT, Strap-iron ernaments on the conservatory, Laeken, One source of the art nouveau.  of so many Belgian railway stations? They have simply stripped off their Gothic or Renaissance clothing (fig. 128). . The art nouveau was an interesting intermezzo between the ninelcenth and twentieth centuries. It would be a digression how ever, to go into the various theories of its origin.® “Tn spite of the revolutionary intentions behind its fight against the use of historical styles, it succeeded only in matching shape against shape. It was essentially an “ anti” movement, and this ma  explain its comparatively short life. ,  * Cf. Fritz Schmalenbach, Jugendstil (Wiirzburg, 1935). 
The front of the Tassel house is as original in its modeling as the interior. The bow window —a standard feature of every house in Brussels —is preserved, but Horta transforms it into a curved, glassed-in surface. The smoothly treated wall is blended into this undulating section. For all its fresh model- ing, the facade is quite conservative in construction for the date it was built: it is simply the ordinary type of massive stone wall. Where a series of windows has been let in, horizon- tal supporting girders of wrought iron are introduced. These second-story windows run downward from the supporting girders to a point level with the floor. They are based on the principle of the display windows developed in the second half of the nineteenth century. The rivets in the girders are ac- centuated with the same fondness Otto Wagner shows in his handling of the aluminum bolts on the front of the Vienna Postal Savings Bank.  The revolutionary aspect of Horta’s work consists in this: he took over elements which had appeared in business and in- dustrial buildings of the fifties and incorporated them in a private house. Purely utilitarian structures erected in Amer- ica between 1850 and 1870 — for example, the St. Louis river front commercial buildings with their cast-iron fronts — are based on a principle which Horta uses. There are the same slim iron columns erected in front of a continuous range of glass windows. These earlier buildings make an even simpler and more convincing use of this principle, as appears from the 109-111 North First Street establishment (1849-50) which we reproduce here (fig. 126).°  What remains of importance in the house at 12 Rue de Turin? From our later point of view, it is neither its perfect adjust- ment to its owner nor the first appearance in it of the art nouveau. It is rather the flexible ground plan in which the consequences of the new materials were drawn — the free dis- position of the rooms at different levels, and the independ- ence of the partitions one from another. This is one of the European beginnings of what Le Corbusier was later to call  le plan libre.  9 Cf. also Figs. 72, 73.  In 1897 Horta built his Maison du Peuple at Brussels. Its curved glass and iron facade is one of the boldest achievements of the period (figs. 129, 130). The youthful freshness of his house in the Rue de Turin reappears in it; in this building Horta really is the chercheur that one of his contemporaries named him.”  The interior shows all the independence of his earlier work Without waste of either space or time, one is brought immedi- ately into the great dining hall, with its wide opening and its freely outspread iron structure. Horta did not hesitate to place the lecture hall— so seldom called into use — in the upper story. The Maison du Peuple reveals in its every detail the hand of a trained architect who is at the same time an Ingenious Inventor.  [forta had a brilliant career. Born in 1861, he was made head of the Academy at Brussels in 1913; later he became Baron Horta. He has built many important structures, and impor- tant tasks are still put into his hands. But comparatively soon he lost contact with youth and with the movement which continued his own efforts. This will concern us again when we speak of the competition for the League of Nations Palace (1927), in which Horta played a decisive role as a juror. During the summer of 1938, when I was in Brussels, I asked Baron Horta how he had come to build such a revolutionary structure as the house in the Rue de Turin. ,  W hen he was a young man, he explained, an architect at the beginning of his career had three courses open to him: he could establish himself as a specialist in Renaissance, classic, or Gothic modes. Horta found these restrictions illogical ey asked myself why architects could not be as independent and daring as painters were.” With that he pointed to a faded photograph which stood on his table: ‘‘ This is my teacher Balat, a classicist and a revolutionary — as well as the best Belgian architect of the nineteenth century.” I drew the milk of my youth from his instruction.” :  ‘01? femulation (Brussels, 1895), p. 187.  "Cf. p. 423.  2 se E 5 if a  " Alphonse Balat (1818-1905), architecte du roi. Besicles the Brussels niuseum, he was amous for his bell-shaped jardin d’hiver of the Residence of Laeken (1879). The iron 
129. VICTOR FIORTA, Maison du Peuple, Brussels, 1897. Exterior. The curved glass and iron facade is one of the most ad- vanced productions of the period.  130. VICTOR TORTA, Maison du Peuple, Brussels, 1897. Second- and third-floor plans. An intertor organized with great astuteness and inde- pendence, the liltle-used lecture hall relegated 0 the upper story.  Horta went on to explain the real individuality of Balat’s work. His museum in Brussels was an entirely independent masterpiece in spite of its classical facade. It was this building which determined Horta to follow his own bent.  “ Its fine ground plan — thoroughly organic and independent of conventional formulae — was entirely of Balat’s creation. Why then did he have to copy the classic in its fagade? Why not make a modern elevation, too, and be as independent and individual as the painters were) ”  Victor Horta did not work alone; he was simply the outstand- ing member of a group. “ En Belgique,” as a Parisian critic wrote at the time, ‘‘ on a toutes les temérités.”” In the Rue de lacque, not far from the Rue de Turin, Paul Hankar also built a house in the year 1893. While he does not show Horta’s imagination, Hankar was working in the same direction.”  But Hankar’s masterpiece was the installation of the colonial exhibition at Tervueren (1897), where the perfect unity of the spirit behind the iron construction and the interior aroused the interest of artistic Europe. Finished two years before the opening of Horta’s Maison du Peuple, the exposition was entirely the product of the younger generation in Belgium. At this exposition, intended by Leopold If to render the Congo problem more attractive (its motto was ‘‘ New State, New Woods, and New Shapes’), the young innovators were given charge of the equipment of the interior. Even in the ereat Paris exhibitions this had remained the work of the fapissiers. This unity in design of interior and exterior had a decisive influence upon later developments.“  construction here is exceptionally fine. The strap-iron ornaments on the trusses suggest Uorta’s art nouveau ornamentation of his house in the Rue de Turin.  ‘? Tfankar and Llorta were among the first Europeans to attack the design and equipment of department stores as an artistic problem, and Hankar’s solutions are sometimes the purer. Hankar had to his credit. the Magasins de la Maison Claessen, Rue de I’Ecuyer, Brussels (1896), and the Maison de Coumeric, Rue Lebeau, Brussels (1895-96).  ‘* For a more extended discussion of Hankar, cf. Charles Courady and Raymond Thibaut, * Paul Hankar, 1859-1901,” Revue la Cité (Brussels, 1923).  
131. WU. PP. BURLAGE, Stock Exchange, Amsterdam, 1898-1903. Wall treaiment. This — the Damrak Street side, which contains lhe offices of the irchange — is one of the first European facades to re- turn to the wall as @ plane surface.  Berlage’s Stock Exchange and the Demand for Morality  Dutch painting and architecture in the nineteenth century exhibited considerable moderation. The cities of Holland suc- ceeded in escaping much of the disfigurement that other Con- tinental cities experienced. The Rijks Museum and Cuyper’s railway station are examples of the mild eclecticism that governed large buildings in Amsterdam.  On the other hand, Holland failed to take effective part in the developments going on (under French leadership) in painting and construction, or in the arts and crafts movement which grew up in England. The Dutch stood aside from this activity: they never quite lost sight of the great tradition they had to preserve. And the seventeenth- and eighteenth-century man- sions that stood alongside their canals served as guiet and con- stant reminders of that past.  One man and a single building announced a new vitality’ in Holland — Hendrik Petrus Berlage (1856-1934) and’: his Amsterdam Stock Exchange of 1898. Even in his own life-  eoanard  MLAn  132. H. TH. RICHARDSON, § sr Hall, Cambridge, Mass.,  lime Berlage’s contemporaries recognized what his unique achievement had been. It was he who first succeeded in realizing, in an actual building, the demand for a purified architecture. Others had secn the need for morality in archi- tecture, but his Amsterdam Exchange actually embodied the thoroughgoing honesty they had only called for.  Berlage’s career as an architcct was a curious one. Like another leader of his generation, Chicago’s Louis Sullivan, his carly work in the middle cighties was confined to office build- ings of various types. They were in the mixed style —half Homanesdue, half Renaissance — which was favored at this period.  Berlage was always very cautious in the use of new forms. He received first prize in a competition for the Amsterdam Stock Exchange as early as 1885." Lf this plan for a quile conven- tional structure in Dutch Renaissance style had been fol-  © Fle was not awarded the building contr i 7 ed the # contract until 1897, however. Cf. Ja rratamé Dr. TH. P. Berlage (Rotterdam, 1925), p. 28. mm Gata. 
we a  et  133. J. P. BERLAGE, Stock Exchange, Amsterdam, 1898- 1908. Drawing.  lowed, the Exchange would have failed entirely to influence later architecture.  In his final version Berlage used forms slightly suggestive of the Romanesque (fig. 133). The Romanesque fascinated Berlage, as it had Henry Hobson Richardson some twenty years earlier. Berlage bad carefully examined medieval buildings and knew their laws of proportion. We shall soon sce, however, that Berlage’s approach to the Roman- esque differs from the transitory imitation of historical shapes.  We should not expect to find Berlage’s treatment of the construction of the exchange embodying any revolutionary advances. Holland did not possess the great tradition in con- structional matters which stood behind French architects, for example. It is nevertheless surprising that he did not avoid visible tie bars in the great hall of his Amsterdam Exchange by using the triply articulated girder. He is likewise very sparing in his use of glass and iron. All this just before the turn of the century, when elegance in iron construction hae been taken for granted for several decades. ‘The construction of the Amster- dam Stock Exchange does not go a significant step beyond Henri Labrouste’s work in the Bibliothéque Sainte-Genevieve of 1843. There too the iron work had been enclosed in a self- supporting masonry shell which was quite independent of it structurally.  Much greater daring in this respect was shown at this time by Viclor Horta, in his Maison du Peuple at Brussels (1897—99).1°  Horta broke the fagade wide open, and filled it with glass and iron. It was Berlage’s work, however, which had the deeper and the more widespread effect. By their own testimony, it acted upon his contemporaries like a revelation.  The Amsterdam Stock Exchange is a brick building without stucco surfacing on cither the interior or the exterior. Its ground plan, which includes three glass-roofed halls, is very compact. The largest of the halls is occupied by the Com- modity Exchange and dominales the whole building (fig. 135). Through the open arcades which lead to the brokerage and committee rooms the actual exchange in the center of the iall can be seen.  The exterior is the final result of many separate designs. In 1e earliest schemes everything was in a state of turbulence. n the final plan all the sections have been cleanly fused into he flat surface of the outer wall; not even the Lower is allowed o project. It is only at the monumentally treated corner of 1e building where the main entrance and the tower come ogether that a trace of the restlessness of European architec- ure appears. There is nothing restless in the treatment of the side that fronts on Damrak Street (fig. 131)... This wall of the Exchange has the aspect of a simple office building -- and that is just what it is on that side. The windows are flush with he wall, which is held to a flat surface, broken only by the square fall-pipes and the window sills.  The brick walls of the loggias enclosing the Commodity Ex- change also form a flat surface, from top to bottom (fig. 134). Berlage, working with great discretion and smoothness, intro-  . duced several different materials into these walls: majolica,  granite Gin the square pillars), and various bright stones in the capitals of the pillars. But these capitals do not protrude in the usual way; they are level with the wall, as though cut off with a razor.  Cf. p. 227.  "In the design of this front Berlage used as a module the Egyptian triangle with its sides in the ratio 5:8. 
134. H. P. BERLAGE, Stock Exchange, Amsterdam, 1898-1903. Hall; treatment of wall. “Above all we should show the naked wall in all its sleek beauty. ... Pillars and columns should have no projecting eapilals: the joint should be fused with the flat surface of the wall  (CH. P. Berlage, 1905).  This feature is by no means a casual one. In a lecture on style in architecture Berlage explains what he was aiming at: “ Above all we should show the naked wall in all its sleek beauty.... Pillars and columns should have no proj ecting cap tals: the joint should be fused with the flat surface of the wall.”  What is the source of the great influence exerted by the build- ing? The secret lies in the unshakeable consistency with which  18 TL, P. Berlage, Gedanken itber Sil in der Baukunst (Leipzig, 1905), pp. 52-53.  Berlage strives for sincerity and purity in its architecture. The granite steps of the staircase are only coarsely chiseled out; they are stillrough today. The brick arches of the ceilings in the committee rooms are shown entirely without disguise. The iron girders of the framework are emphasized with paint. The clean white joints of the brickwork in the unplastered walls stand out sharply. Used this way — as though for the very first time — these materials acl as unexpected decoration.  As he himself points out, Berlage sought to impart to this building something of “the quality which distinguishes old monuments from the buildings of today: quiet!’ With the least compromise possible at the time, he gave Lhe wall — until then cither chaotically dismembered or deceptively patched together — the reconquered unity of the flat surface.  The wall as a flat surface was soon to become the starting point for new principles in architecture, not merely in Holland but everywhere.  Berlage’s conscious asceticism — called barbarism by some of his contemporaries — joined with his fanatical zeal for truth at any price to produce in the Amsterdam Stock Exchange a building which served as a guidepost to many. He gave an example of the honorable treatment of a problem in building. No other building accords so well with the demand that lay behind the movement in architecture at that time — the demand for morality.  In Europe, where the entire previous generation had taken an altogether different line, the purity of the wall came with the impact of a revelation. It is improbable that it would have had the same revolutionary effect in America at that time — for reasons that we shall discuss later in some detail. At this point, however, some related work by an American architect may be mentioned.  Henry Hobson Richardson was onc of the first Americans in this period consciously to practice architecture as a fine art. Lis Sever Hall of 1878 (one of the Harvard College buildings, Cambridge, Massachusetts) has much in common with Ber- lage’s work (fig. 182). Berlage and Richardson both tend toward simplified Romanesque forms, forms which from the 
yas. IT. PP. BER- LAGE, Stock Ex- change, Amsterdam, 1898-1903. The great hail. The Commodity exchange, the largest of the three glass-roofed halls.  time of their inception have been bound up with the treatment of the wall as a flat surface.  It might scem that these two men, in taking over Romanesque forms, simply differ from others among their contemporaries 1D the direction of their choice. The majority of these eclectics appropriated classical and Gothic shapes. And certainly their followers — those of Richardson particularly — returned to the familiar path of historical imitation. The rows of little houses, each like a tiny Romanesque castle, which sprang up some years later in America and Europe demonstrate this. But the history of the nineteenth century is complicated. T he new aims derived from their study of Romanesque buildings, and not the fact that Berlage and Richardson used somewhat Romanesque shapes, are what matter. The time was not ripe  for the outright invention of new forms derived from a new space conception, and they turned — very naturally — to history for help. Romanesque methods started them on the way toward the new forms their own period still awaited.  The same relation exists between the Romanesque and their best buildings that links modern painting with primitive art. Picasso did not copy the patterns of African masks; he learned from them a new way of looking at his subjects. There was an aflinity between that art and the not fully conscious endeavor of his own period to compose in terms of planes. To a certain extent Berlage and Richardson also found in the Romanesque uot simply another transitory fashion but an inner affinily which aided them in moving toward the still-veiled expressions of their own period.  When we penetrate to what is significant in the Amsterdam Stock Exchange we understand why Berlage became the admirer az. 1 the European advocate of American architecture, particularly that of Frank Lloyd Wright. Berlage came to America in 1911, after his Stock Exchange had been finished, on the invitation of George E. Elmslie, Louis Sullivan’s part- ner. He found here in American buildings just those things he himself had been fighting for so passionately in complete isolation.  Berlage’s influence upon the rising generation was very great. Even when the younger men took other directions than those he had indicated, they retained all their reverence for his artistic integrity. In Holland his influence and the image of the Amsterdam Stock Exchange appear behind an early proj- ect for a swimming pool by J. J. P. Oud (1915). As one of the first to introduce Frank Lloyd Wright’s work to Europe, Berlage unconsciously made sure that the generation after him in Holland would be stimulated to production.'®  In Belgium, too, Berlage made a deep impression on the rising veneration. Victor Bourgeois, the Belgian architect whose Brussels garden settlement of 1922 — La Cité Moderne — gave  1 Curiously enough, Le Corbusier was first directed to Prank Lloyd Wright by a lecture Berlage delivered in Zurich (published in exfenso by the Schweizerische Bauzeifung, vol. LX, nos. 11-13, 1912). 
the signal for the present-day movement, told me that around 1914, when he was a student at the Brussels Academy, only two names fascinated young men: those of Berlage and Frank Lloyd Wright.  Berlage was almost a recluse, so far as personal relations were concerned, but be valued objective connections. Tle was the only representative of the older generation to take part in the founding of the C.I.A.M. (Congrés internalionauz @archilec- ture moderne) at Chateau de la Sarraz, Switzerland, in June 1928. At this first international rally of contemporary archi- tects, the younger men discussed nothing except the new points of departure. But Berlage, who, though he was the oldest participant, had not hesitated at the long journey from Holland, was the only one to read a carefully prepared paper, “The Relations between the State and Architecture.” ®°  This small man — wearing the inevitable black cravat — sat in the Gothic chapel at La Sarraz quite isolated in the midst of a younger generation, and read his essay with imperturbable earnestness.  Otto Wagner and the Viennese School  In the year 1894 Otto Wagner (1841-1918) was made professor of architecture at the Academy of Vienna. The Academy at the time appeared to have lost its attraction for the younger generation, and Wagner seemed the man to restore it. He was then just past fifty. He was a successful and energetic archi- tect whose buildings in the manner of early Florentine and full Renaissance work were celebrated for their excellent plans. The Academy could expect to gain in luster from his presence. Just at the moment of his election, however, a metamorphosis which had long been preparing showed itself in his work.  It was in that year — 1894 — that he began a small book for his students with the title Modern Architecture.” Soon trans- lated into many languages, it became the textbook of the new  moyement. In it Wagner asserted that “ our starting point for  20 This paper is preserved in the archives of the C.LAM., Zurich.  2 Moderne Architektur (Vienna, 1895; 1th edition, 1911). ‘ Architectural education  should cducate the architect as an artist and not as a mere specialist.”  artistic creation is to be found only in modern life.” ” He goes on to insist that new principles in co..struction and new ma- terials are not isolated facts, but that they must lead to new forms and be brought into harmony with human needs. The effect of Wagner’s writing was increased by the rare mixture of sarcasm with confidence in the future that marks tt. In addi- tion, his readers felt that mature experience in architecture stood behind his every word.  In this small book there is condensed the experience that every nineteenth-century artist underwent from the moment he set himself against accepted standards. Wagner makes it plain that he no longer hopes for help from the state in any new developments.” His disparagement of the layman's judgment. “ which always has been, and is, disastrous in its influence » reflects bitter experience of his own."* He holds with Goethe’s dictum: the artist must create what the public ought to like not what it does like.  This book speedily disillusioned the official circles responsible for Wagner’s appointment. “A fully developed architect has become a mere experimenter with art — a sensation-monger a train-bearer of fashion” — this judgment appears in a pamphlet of 1897.  in the year of his election to the Academy, Wagner built the system of elevated and underground railways which encircles Vienna on its outskirts. The elevated stretches were carried on heavy brick arches like a Roman aqueduct. Wagner carried out all the details involved in this railway, including the stations along the line. He made separate designs for each of these; those buill earliest show some classical influence, while the later ones move in the direction of l'art nouveau.  In Brussels, as we have seen, untiring efforts were made to create an atmosphere favorable to new movements. In Vienna u ere was No trace of such endeavors. We miss the significance ot Wagner’s work if we do not realize what it is to work in complete isolation. In 1894 no one in Wagner’s country was working along the same lines as he. The Austrians, “Josef  2 Page 115. * Pages 133-134. * Page LL3. 
The Karlsplatz station (fig. 136) of the Vienna subway serves to show that Wagner was moving toward modern architecture. Its ornamental ironwork and the hemispherical roof are a prolongation of nineteenth-century usages. They are a further development of French iron architecture as it ap- peared in Lhe domes and vaults out of which Eiffel formed the  We Rarleplaty Stn front for the main building of the Paris Exhibition of 1878.  NER, Karlsplatz Sta-  tion, Vienna, 1894, Wagner’s contemporaries seem to have recognized this: in one pela “T " he van of the many vicious pamphlets directed against him, we read endecture wt UE OM i= cee . .  nated by slablike tubu- that Wagner “is an adherent of the brutal Gallic architectural lar surfaces and the materialism.’’  prominent use of ma- © terials in @ pure stale” NL (Otto Wagner, 1895).  Cb  Vee a A ER  137. OTTO WAGNER, Savings Bank, Vienna. The hall. In this hall glass and iron 138. OTTO WAGNER, Drawing for 139. ANTONIO SANT’ ELIA, Proj- vaulting not only fulfills all functional requirements but also blends info and becomes @ bridge, subway, and different street levels, ect for a subway, 1914. Different vaulting if ad architectonic expression. Vienna, 1906. Parl of a system of elevated street levels, combined with apartment part of a unifies , , and underground railway lines encircling houses and elevators. Sant’ Elia’s Vtenna along its outskirts. Nuova Cilla reflects the futurislic de- . . . R light in intersecting streams of move-  Hoffmann, Adolf Loos, and Joseph Olbrich, and the German an  Peter Behrens were of the generation of 1870, and at this date Z were just starting their activity. Cf. Fig. 117. 
the |  Wagner did not merely continue the work of the French: he introduced new elements of bis own. In 1894 he prophesied that ‘the new architecture will be dominated by slablike, tabular surfaces and the prominent use of materials in a pure state.” 2° In the Karlsplatz station he himself used thin marble slabs for the outer walls, securing them with angle irons which are left visible. This treatment shows the wall as simply a slablike screen, with no load to carry. Ten years later in the Vienna Postal Savings Building (1904- 06) he stressed still more the function of the wall as a plane surface. The facade of this bank is covered with marble slabs attached by massive aluminum bolts whose heads can be scen plainly. The interior of the Postal Savings Building (fig. 137) reveals an astonishing purity of design. It is without doubt one of the most uncompromising rooms of the first years of the twentieth century. It is very characteristic of the work of Wagner (and of his contemporaries as well) that this purity follows upon the contact with new materials. Wagner gave this bank a glass- roofed interior court. Such courts had been common since the middle of the nineteenth century. Here in the white hall of the Postal Savings Building, however, the glass and iron vaulting does not merely fulfill all functional requirements but also blends into and becomes a part of a whole architectonic expression. In the pure and abstract forms of this glass and iron hall the touch of the architect is no longer apparent; yet his hand is everywhere present, in its curves, its colors, and the modeling of its space. The Continental successes of these architectural pioneers were won mainly by surprise attacks. Wagner’s experience fol- lowed the same pattern. A reaction against his early work in the new dircctions set in, and his later projects — for museums, public buildings, and towns — exist only on paper. Neverthe- less, Wagner’s influence on the younger generation in Austria was very strong. Although his students were men of talent, they never achieved work of his standard. One of his students  3° Moderne Architektur, p. 136.  was the architect Josef Hoffmann, who was the founder of the Wiener Werkstatte for handicrafts. Another, who died quite young, was Joseph Olbrich. Wagner showed these young men the direction they should take, but they were all more directly influenced by Charles Rennie Mackintosh and the Glasgow sroup. This was especially true of Hoffmann and the W ork- statte circle. This meant that in Austria around 1900 the movement was from handicrafts Lo architecLure and not from archilecture to handicrafts.  It resulted in the sort of overconcentration on decorative aims which appears also in Joseph Olbrich’s “Secession” gallery in Vienna (1898). This was bitterly denounced by Adolf Loos This Viennese architect had lived in England and America, and had learned to recognize the importance of the anonymous work being done in those countries in the production of articles of everyday life —from clothing to bathtubs and runks,  As late as 1914 in Hoffmann’s Stoclet house, Brussels, the influence of the cabinetmaker and of decorative art is still evident. The flat surfaces of this banker’s home are made up of white marble slabs, but they are treated like framed pictures.  The influence of Wagner and his Austrian school can be de- tected in an entirely unexpected quarter —in the work of Antonio Sant’ Elia (1888-1916), the young Italian futurist architect who was killed in 1916 in the war (figs. 138, 139). His scheme for a skyscraper connected with subways and elevators and with traffic lanes at different levels, brought together into one architectural unity, is quite in accord with the futurists’ love of motion and interest in its artistic possibilities.” Sant’ Elia cannot be called a disciple of Wagner; still, this unexecuted scheme points backward to a work of Wagner’s which remains one of his plainest links with the present. Wagner showed the same interest in the interpenetration of different streams of motion in his drawings for the Vienna subway, with their dif- ferent levels and their combination of railroads, streets, and bridges. _  * Design for a “ City of the Future,” 1913. 
FERROCONCRETE AND ITS INFLUENCE UPON ARCHITECTURE  The arl nouveau, in architecture at least, had its roots in the tradition of iron construction. At the beginning of the century, when this movement was spreading from Brussels, there ap- peared a new pbuilding material which achieved a surprisingly rapid influence upon architecture: ferroconcrete. It was at this time that architecture tore itself loose from the prejudices which had held it back for so long, and absorbed the new methods that had grown out of the period itself. It was this which promoted the use of ferroconcrete. Hardly had it been developed to the point where mills, silos, and reservoirs could be made from it than it was employed for more purely architectural purposes. Between 1910 and 1920 it became almost the trademark of the new architecture.  Although it was very late in reaching maturity, this material with its complicated composition has a past that goes very far back. There is no need to retrace its technical development, since there are many sources of information on the subject. We shall only consider a few matters that have a bearing on architecture.  John Smeaton, one of the great engineers of the eighteenth century, attained a triumph in the construction of the Eddy- stone Lighthouse (fig. 140) in England. Previous lighthouses on this spot had been destroyed by storms, and the site was exposed to the full strength of the sea. But Smeaton used a system in the construction of his stonework which bound it together into an extremely tenacious whole. He locked the stones into one another, and for the foundations and the bind- ing material he used a mixture of quicklime, clay, sand, and crushed iron-slag — concrete, that is. This occurred in 1774, five years before the first cast-iron bridge — the one over the Severn — was built. This — so far as we know — is the first use of concrete since the Roman period.  Smeaton’s experiments are described in detail in the mag- nificent volume, illustrated by etchings, dealing with the light-  140. JOVIN SMEATON, Lddystone Lighthouse, Eng- land, 1774. Htehing from Smeaton’s report on the light- house.  house which he published.?* These experiments began in th tif: ties of the eighteenth century, when he observed that hick. lime containing clay would harden under water. As ve have already seen, it was Smeaton again who first dared to use the new material, cast-iron, for pumps and other machinery  The success of Smeaton’s work on the Eddystone light led to numerous further experiments. In 1824 Joseph As din of Leeds produced the first “ hydraulic ” binding thaterial: Port- land cement. (A hydraulic cement is one which harden  in water.) ; Smeaton had used the constiluents as they OC. cr i ther natural state; Aspdin regulated the admixture Five years later, in 1829, a Dr. Fox developed a method of making concrete floors by using the concrete as a filling be- ween iron girders. In 1844 this method came to be protected xy patent. As we have seen, it was used (in a developed form)  hroughout the seven- and eight-story warehouses built by the  A Narrative of the Buildin, d eriptic f Lighthone theeton cea g and a Description of the Construction of the Eddystone 
141. HENNEBIQUE,  Resi- dence, Bourg-la-Reine. Henne- bique fries to display in one spot all the potentialilies of ferrocon- erete but finds no architectural language available beyond the common. idiom of the late nineties.  Manchester engineer, William Fairbairn. This system of con- struction, using tie bars embedded in concrete, comes very close to true ferroconcrete construction. Nevertheless, fifty years went by before scientific analysis revealed the exacl nature of the connections between the two elements in ferroconerete. During this interval all effort and attention were devoted to the development of the great iron construc-  tions.  So far as can be discovered, the first extensive use of concrete was at the Paris Exhibition of 1867, where it was employed for the floors of the sub-basements of the restaurants in the great main building.  Ferroconcrete, taking the term in its strict sense, made its initial appearance in 1868, when the gardener Monnier began to use wire network for the cores of concrete tubs. This pro- cedure involved nothing new in itself: Labrouste had made the vaulting in his Bibliothéque Sainte-Genevidve of interlaced wires covered with layers of plaster.  Reinforced concrete did not come into common employment ona Jarge scale until the 1890’s, when it was so used in America by Ernest Leslie Ransome (born in 18-44, in Ipswich, England)? and in France by Francois Hennebigque (1842-1921).  Francois Hennebique had as his guide preliminary work car- ried out by a number of constructors. He knew the separate requirements of the iron and of the compressed concrete, how to apportion one to the other, and how to dispose the iron rein- forcing rods — all the relevant laws, in short. But, beyond this, he was an excellent contractor and had built in every part of Europe: mills at Nantes, granaries at Genoa, silos at Stras- bourg, sanatoria in Switzerland.  The villa which he built for himself during the nineties at Bourg-la-Reine (jig. 141) served as a picce of propaganda for  142. ANATOLE DE BAUDOT, Saint-Jean de Montmartre, Paris. Begun 1894. The first church to be built with a ferroconcrete skeleton closed in by thin outer walls.  ** The employment of ferroconerete in America previous to the Leland Stanford Jr. Museum of about 1890 and the building of the Pacific Borax Cumpany deserves more eareful study, directed at the progressive stages of this early development. Shortly before this, Ransome had built the Academy of Science forced concrete floors and iron columns, For more details cf. Ernest L. Ransome and Saurbrey, Reinforced Concrete Buildings (New York, 1912), especially the first chapter, Personal Reminiscences.”  t San Francisco, using rein-  
the use of ferroconcrete. The villa makes its possibilities ob- vious at once to any observer. The octagonal Lower rests on two cantilevers which project four meters. Not content with this, the tower exhibits other projecting constructions higher up; these enclose a spiral staircase that leads to the uppermost roof garden (which is planted with trees). Roof gardens, ter- races, freely projected building elements: a verilable architec- tural tightrope dance! Done entirely in the architectonic idiom of the nineties, it is a fantastic mixture, one calculated to win the heart of any Surrealist.  French architecture of the nineties is not to be compared with its forceful Belgian counterpart: after reaching its high point +n the 1889 Galerie des Machines it entered upon a decline. There are some achievements which are of interest, however, even if they failed of international influence. In 1894 Anatole de Baudot began work on the first church to have a ferrocon- erete skeleton enclosed by thin walls, his Saint-Jean de Mont- martre in Paris (fig. 142). Anatole de Baudot in his official capacity was the “ Protector of Ancient Monuments ”; in his lectures, delivered over a period of twenty-five years, he stood for the regeneration of architecture. As soon as the new ma- terial, ferroconcrete, appeared, he used it for a church —a marked departure from outworn routine. In his “ Architecture and Reinforced Concrete’ * he informs us that he was awarded the contract because by using the new material he was able to underbid all his competitors.  The boldness of De Baudot’s work was recognized, but for many reasons it failed to equal the great effect produced by Victor Horta’s house in the Rue de Turin.”  By the first decade of the twentieth century reinforced concrete came into widespread use nearly everywhere. It was used in the Queen Alexandra sanatorium, built at Davos, Switzerland, in 1907 (fig. 143). Robert Maillart was responsible for its con- struction; the architects were Pfleghard and Haefeli. The  3 2 Architecture ef le ciment armé (Paris, n.d.).  4 Quiet pioneer work was also done by Louis Bonnier, who was responsible for the con- struction of a civie building at Pas-de-Calais (devoid of the usual decoration). Dutert, who had been in charge of the architectonic part of the Galerie des Machines of 1889, erected a muscum of uncovered brick for the Jardin des Plantes in Paris, a building which likewise honestly displayed the iron in its construction wherever it was used.  Queen Alexandra occupies a wide ledge halfway up a moun- tainside. Its three wings with their wide open terraces are carefully oriented to catch all the available sunlight.  In the same year work was begun in Chicago on a warehouse designed for Montgomery, Ward and Company.” Completed in 1908, this warehouse was the work of R. E. Schmid L, Garden and Martin —- members of the Chicago school’s second genera- tion. Some eight hundred feet long, it has large windows of the horizontally elongated Chicago type and broad horizontal bands running without interruption the full extent of its  I . = and  143. PFLEGHARD, HAEFE ¢ TA / . Davos, 1907, A AEFELI, and MAILLART, Queen Alexandra Sanatorium,  fi; Tht. . :  jacade. It sa huge aggregation of storage lofts, nine stories igh, a repetition of units of a monotony truly appalling.  tt is entirely of reinforced concrete construction — founda- tions, columns, floors, and walls.”’ *  Contemporary critics were thoroughly bewildered by this structure, one of the first in the United States, I believe ‘to use ferroconcrete with a clear recognition of its properties. c It is not intended to be an architectural monument .. . the  ® Cf. Fig. 195. 33° On American Architecture,” Architectural Record, XXUL (1908), 115-120. 
qualifications are functional, structural, and economical . .. in this building architectural expression was not wanted.” But “if it ig not in itself beautiful or graceful, it is at least logi- cal.” * Actually this warchouse is one of the few late buildings in which the spirit of the Chicago school still survives.  The further advance in reinforced concrete construction and in the exploitation of its artistic potentialities took place in France.  A.G. Perrel®  Auguste Perret (born in 1873) remained an archilecte-ingénieur throughout his career. Perret came from Burgundy, from a town near the great monastery of Cluny. It was the Cluniac monks who initiated the great reform and purification of church architecture carried out during the twelfth century.  Perret built his 25 bis Rue Franklin apartments in Paris in 1903 (fig. 144), ten years after Horta’s Rue de Turin house. This apartment house by no means embodies the pure forms of the Chicago office buildings, and it fails to match the strength of Frank Lloyd Wright’s work of the same period. The familiar European restlessness is still present to a considerable degree. Nevertheless, it represents the first employment of ferro- concrete as a medium for architectonic expression, and many of its features were Lo prove seeds for future developments.  The ferroconcrete skeleton is used without disguise; it stands out plainly as one of the constituent elements of the building. Earlier buildings in concrete — Hennebique’s Rue Danton apartments, for example — made no architectonic use of the skeleton. The facade as a simple support for ornament has been almost abandoned. A series of delicate progressions and recessions removes from it all associations with weight. This effect of lightness is reinforced by the way in which the seven upper stories are cantilevered out over the street. And the street floor (which at one time held Perret’s office) has been almost dissolved into pure glass, broken only by a few narrow  3 Archilectural Record, XX, 115-120.  38 Cf. Paul Jamot, AG. Perref et Carchilecture du béton armé (Paris and Brussels, 1927),  145. AUGUSTE PERRET, Rue Franklin.  146. AUGUSTE PERRET, lin. Plan. The flerible plan roconerete skeleton makes poss 
piers of reinforced concrete (fig. 147). A thin, narrow slab surmounts this floor — to provide a small area of shade and a support for a balcony. The ferroconcrete joists of the skeleton are brought out into the open in the top stories.  The total effect is reminiscent of some iron structures: every- thing seems to grow lighter and lighter toward the ground, until finally only a few thin members connect the building with the carth. This impression of fragility had its financial consequences. Banks refused to take a mortgage on the apart- ment house, since the experts predicted its speedy collapse. The flat roof, like several in Tony Garnier’s projected “ Cité Industriclle,’ exhibits a rudimentary roof garden (fig. 145). The light-well has been done away with, and the walls for the staircase are executed in glass bricks, which leave it entirely open to the daylight. Perret told me that he used these bricks because his neighbors could legally have forbidden the cutting of windows on this side of the building. This, of course, does not at all detract from Perret’s ingenuity in finding a new use for a familiar material. The same trait appears in his adoption of simple pipe railings lo replace the usual elaborate hand- wrought affairs.  147. AUGUSTE PERRET, 25 bis Rue Franklin. Office on ground floor. The street floor has been almost dissolved into pure glass.  But Perret made his most important contribution to the younger generation of French architects in the flexible treat- ment of the ground plan (fig. 146). Partitions are set in with complete freedom to connect separate ferroconcrete pillars. Perret was working here in the same spirit as [Iorta and, later on, Le Corbusier. Each story is planned as an independent unit. A short time later Perret built what he himself regards as the ** premiére tentative (au monde) de béton armé esthétique.” This was his garage in the Rue Ponthieu. Here the reinforced concrete skeleton is given full opportunity to determine the character of the facade.  There are other fine works of Perret’s which, unfortunately, we shall be unable to discuss: his ThéAtre des Champs-Elysées (1911-14), the source of so much controversy between him and Henri van de Velde; the docks at Casablanca (1916), with their eggshell-thin vaultings; his churches at Rancy (1922) and elsewhere, which exerted such influence upon contempo- rary church buildings; his private houses; and his latest works. Auguste Perret, with his sense for construction, gave Le Cor- busier a decisive impetus toward his own work.  And the next generation of architects as a whole carried Per- ret’s results still further. Per ret’sbuildings follow the best ninetcenth-century French tradition in construction. Like the earlier archilectes-ingénieurs, he drew his inspiration from his materials. Perret did for ferroconcrete what Henri La- brouste had done for iron.  Like Tony Garnier, Perret preserved some connections wilh the classic past. But classical canons remained alive and flex- ible for the best French architects, just as they had for the French masters of baroque days—for Racine, Molitre, and Descartes. Perhaps later on we shall come to see that something of the classic spirit is present even in the work of the men who came after Perret; that they too reflect the classic urge toward balance, symmetry, and repose.  Tony Garnier  The archilecte-constructeur Auguste Perret was the first to find new architectonic means in the unexplored potentialities of ferroconcrete. This material was, indeed, peculiarly attractive 
to French builders. Conerete accorded perfectly with their traditional penchant for daring and extensively hollowed out structures.  Tony Garnier (born in 1869) made reinforced concrete the basis of all his work. In his “ Cité Industrielle ” (1901-04) this new material was used to organize a whole town along original and strikingly farsighted lines. This is a scheme which we shall discuss in some detail later on.** The Cité Industrielle, planned when Garnier was only thirty, really laid down the outlines for his whole future output. The “ grands travaux  _aascigge:, NS  148. TONY GARNIER, Central Station, 1901-01. Project. Al a time when railroad stations were customarily executed in the style of huge monuments, Garnier returns to actual functions and exploits the new materials: glass and reinforced concrete.  de Lyon,” carried out under ¥idouard Herriot in Garnier’s native cily, were practical outgrowths of his youthful project. These “ grands travaux” were very extensive; they included the Lyons stockyard (1909), the city stadiam (1915), twenty- two pavilions of the Granges-Blanches hospital (begun in 1911, but erected over a period of some two decades), and part of a residential district —‘* Quartier des Etats-Unis” — which was begun in 1920. Garnier’s later work included pavilions at several French exhibitions, his own house, and a number of villas along the Riviera. All these buildings can be regarded as developing out of his first serious work, and it is his foresighted  % Cf. pp. 31] ff.  planning of this Cité Industrielle which gives Garnier his place in the history of architecture (fig. 148).  We are approaching the moment when European architecture could at last attain a mastery of contemporary problems through the means created by the engineers. By this time people could sce that modern techniques offered the only means of expression for feelings stemming from modern life. But we have first to retrace developments in America, whose influence was to become effective only when this European architecture had begun to recover from its own maladies. 
part VY  AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT 
The colonial and the republican periods were of great. impor- tance to American development; they provided a solid foun- dation for future advance. But the period between 1850 and 1890 is more important for American influence on the outside world. The preparations which made that influence possible were completed during these decades. The years between 1850 and 1890 produced not only the great surge toward the un- settled lands in the West but also strong manifestations of a new and specifically American spirit. This period has partlicu- lar significance to foreign eyes. The new forms which grew up in it had their roots in an organization of labor altogether dif- ferent from that which prevails in Europe.  The illustrative material published here was often unearthed with difficulty. Documents from this period are not readily accessible, just because there is so little interest in it and so little understanding of its importance. Material showing the development of the life of the period and the daily habits re- flected in it is very difficult to find. What is of more impor- tance, there is the constant danger that it will be lost forever.  Manufacturers simply laugh when asked for specimens of their early productions and for old catalogues. There is no time for and — above all — no interest in the sources of the tradition which governs the life of the man of today. In the future, his- torians who examine this period will certainly be more inter- ested in uncovering the roots of the great anonymous produc- tions of industry than they will be in the monumental or official architecture of the time. But what institute tries, out of a hwman rather than a technical interest, lo collect. the documents dealing with the anonymous beginnings of our period? We are too unaccustomed to considering interrela- tions between different realms of human activity to see clearly the points at which they are connected. The danger is that the material for reconstructing these relationships may be lost by the time their importance has been recognized.  Europe Observes American Production  The European public had its initial contact with American tools and furnishings at the first international exhibition — the  149. American clocks, ¢. 1850.  great London Exhibition of 1851. European observers were astonished by the simplicily, technical correctness and sure- ness of shape revealed in American productions. The astute Lothar Bucher called attention to ‘ the erandfather clock  with their excellently contrived works and simple walnut cases: the chairs — from simple wooden work benches to casy chairs -—with their freedom from the gingerbread carving which lears at our hands and clothing, and the absence of the right angles of those currently popular Gothic chairs which ‘are hunching everyone's shoulders. All that we see of American domestic equipment breathes the spirit of comfort and fitness for purpose’! (fig. 149),  Similarly, Count Léon de Laborde, a French observer, saw in the Americans “une nation industrielle, qui se fait artiste an industrial nation which was becoming artistic. He added that “ America would go her own way.” 2 , .  ‘Lothar Bucher, Kulturhistorische Shizz . (Frankfort, 1851), pp. 146 i. orische Skizzen aus der Industrieausstellung aller Vélker  * Léon de Laborde, De Punion des aris ef de U industrie, 1, 312 Ih. 
The height of thelower partof the top of the desk, is just equal to the highest part of the back of the chair, so as to allow it to pass under. .  The front edge of the seat is in a perpendicular line with the edge of the top of the desk, so that the scholar is required to sit erect, when engaged in writing or studying, and the same time that part of his back which re- quires support is fally in contact with the chair.  430. Standards of American school furniture, 1849.  Gottfried Semper expressed a similar opinion. Semper wag German architect who (like Richard Wagner) had om ot from his own country for revolutionary activities in mes ler . He was one of the founders of the first English school o esien. organized at London in this same year — 1851. Semper wit  that “ although there is very little evidence of era tsmanship in America, nevertheless a real national art will sprmg up  there first.” * The Americans showed schoolroom furniture with ee supports in which everything was carefully ear * 30) pupil’s age, occupation, and anatomical structure ; fo. ih i This furniture — most of it produced in the New Engla area, around Boston — was the product of a en th fight for better school equipment that had begun in 1 mt h W. J. Adams’ lecture, ‘ Schoolhouses and School Appar us, before the American Institute of Instruction. Tn 13 en Barnard completed one of the pioneer works in this ie t his essay on school architecture, for the Senate’s Stan ms come mittee on Education. Barnard was perfectly clear on ae ‘ tional demands that such furniture had to satis! yr vey pupil, young or old, should be provided with a chair st " : enough to allow, when properly occupied, the feet to rest on  i swick, 1852), pp. 73 ft. 3 Gottfried Semper, Wissenschaft, Indusirie und Kunst (Brunswick, 1852), pp.  floor without the muscles of the thigh being pressed hard upon the front edge of the seat. . . . The seats should be provided with a support for the muscles of the back, and, as a general rule, this support should rise above the shoulder blades, and should in all cases incline back as it rises, one inch in every foot.” 4  A quarter of a century later, at the Philadelphia Exposition of 1876, the European observers split into two camps. Those who expected to find European fashions in the American ex- hibits were disappointed. They found, as Jakob von Falke says, ‘“‘ neither furniture nor furniture covers, neither glass- ware nor fayence ware, which altracted us by reason of its taste, color-scheme, or beauty.” Certain objects of daily use which, according to von Falke, ought to be richly decorated — grandfather clocks, for example — ‘‘ show the sad state of American taste by their complete absence of ornamentation.” *  In this instance a European observer condemned the charac- teristic which gave American industrial art its individuality and significance for the future: simplicity.  On the other hand, those observers who did not judge on the basis of preconceived standards were impressed with “ the beauty of form in which the Americans cast their tools and machinery.” F. Reuleaux, the well-known scientist who headed the German delegation to the exposition, comments on this in his “* Letters from Philadelphia ’’ of 1876: “ The axes, hatchets, hoes, hunting knives, hammers, etc., are executed with such variety and beauty as cannot but excite admiration and astonishment. A constraint runs through all of them. They are designed so well for the purpose to be served that they seem actually to anticipate our needs.” ®  The Victoria and Albert Museum at South Kensington has preserved the catalogue of a Chicago hardware firm of the  ‘Henry Barnard, School Architecture, or Contributions to the Improvement of School- houses in the Uniled Slates, 5th ed. (New York, 185-4), p. 342. The Senate committee refused to publish Barnard’s essay, which did not appear until [841, and then only — as he relates — “t through the strenuous effort of a few intelligent friends of school improve- ments,” and with the author bearing a part of the expense.  5 Jakob von Falke, ‘ Vorbemerkungen zur Weltausstellung in Philadelphia,” Der Cewerbehalle, XUT (1875), Mek T.  * I. Reuleaux, Briefe aus Philadelphia (Brunswick. 1877), pp. 18 fT. 
MAYDOLE'S CAST STEEL HAMMERS.  -) Nos. Bt to 8.  eo. wee tes bose  81 Engineer's Ball-Pein Hammers, Extra Cast Steel, 2 Ih, $15 00  Po “ “ “ we Tegan 15 00  83 “ “ “ “ “ “ T ih, 2 oz. 11 oo  Gne-fourth Dozen in a Package, Nos. gi and 92. 91 Engineer's Hammers, Extra Cast Stecl, 2b gon 12 00 92 “ “ wow 1ihtz02 10 50 One-fourth Doren in a Package. 151. Ball-peen  machinist’s hammer; bk mith’s ham- mers. Chicago catalogue of 1877. Reuleauc remarked of tools like these that “they are Nos, Gt and 62, 5  designed so well for the purpose  Bl —_Blacksmith's Hand Iammers, Extra Cast Steel, 3 Ih. 15 00 . . :  sy te “ « vaaeraaman 2b. 802 13 50 to be served that they seem actu  ally to anticipate our needs” (1876).  One-fourth Dozen in 2 Package, ‘The Weights given above are for Single Hammers, without the Handles,  seventies. The precise and sensitive forms of the tools illus- trated in it show why Europeans were so astonished by them (fig. 151). Such articles as the “ engineer’s machine hammer” and the Yale lock were not even introduced into Europe until comparatively recent years (fig. 152).  Julius Lessing, the first director of the Museum of Industrial Arts in Berlin, when be saw the exhibit of American tools at the Paris World’s Fair of 1878, experienced — so he says — as intense an aesthetic pleasure from a display of American axes as from a real work of art. He remarked the beauty of line which was achieved without any ornamental embellishment, “simply by molding the axc to the human hand and to the movement of the human body as it is used.” 7  Lessing goes a step further. He points to the surprising paral- lelism between these Lools and the most beautiful of primitive  7 Julius Lessing, Berichte von der Pariser Wellausstellung von 1878 (Berlin, 1878), p. 99-  stone and bronze instruments. At the same time he regards as “ .  a “ lamentable retrogression every effort of the Americans to  imitate European art forms.”  The official French report on the exposition at Philadelphia in 1876 includes some comment on American furniture. Particu- lar attention is called to the fact that American furniture, in contrast with European, is marked by its use of flat surfaces, of fewer surface planes. “The moldings are simple, with very little carving. The parts are thus easy to make separately and are easily assembled.” * The French report argues that a new style has appeared on the other side of the Atlantic, a style which manifests itself in all forms of the industrial arts. To show how typically American these products were in their eyes, they called this the ‘ Pullman car style.” .  ‘ \   § y 152. Yale lock, Chi-  a i cago catalogue of 1877. One early instance of the way machinery came to displace the skilled erafisman — here the locksmith.  WO. £us4.  PUENTE A bony  NEW REXE STORE DOOR DEAD LOCK,  3 Hzposition internationale ed universelle de Philadelphie 1876 (Paris, 1877), pp. 185 [f. 
Elaborate and costly furniture appeared at the exhibitions, Thus the Paris Exposition of 1867 featured a French sideboard, valued at twenty thousand dollars, which awed all beholders. Regarded as a museum piece at the time, it now presents a somewhat dreadful appearance. American exhibitors — es- pecially after the seventies — preferred to display what was known as “ patent furniture.” A page from the official cata- logue of American exhibits at Paris in 1878, headed “ Cheap and Fancy Furniture, all Series Productions,” lists ‘* Per- forated Vencer Seats,” ““ Automatic Sofa-Spring Beds,” “* Fold- ing Chairs ” (they folded into a lounge), a “ Swing Convertible Cradle,” a‘ Child’s Crib,” a “ Reclining Chair,” ete. (fig. 153)"  All these things were developed just at the period when Euro- pean photomontages of historical styles were beginning to in- fluence American production.  By the time of the Chicago World’s Fair of 1893 Lessing found the Americans awarding all the prizes to heavily ornamented European articles. “But we who went over with the will to learn,” he writes, ‘‘ have found other things more important for future development. We are bringing back to Europe smooth wooden chairs, polished doorknobs, and gracefully curved utensils entirely devoid of embellishment.  “Here we saw utensils and tools created in the same spirit as railroads, ships, and wagons. Here we saw objects of daily use developed clearly and without any preconception — ob- jects appealing not so much to the calculating intellect as directly to the senses. They convey to the eye the satisfying sensalion which only beauty can. give.” °  & Patent furniture had its origin in the early industrialized England of the beginning of the ninetcenth century. ‘Thomas Sheraton, known to the public for the style that bears his name, is perhaps more important today as one of the first cabinetmakers to be interested in producing ‘‘ patent ” furniture. (Cf. Sheraton, Designs for Household Furniture, third ed.,. London, 1812: easy and hunting chairs, chairs which may he converted into beds, tables which may be converted into high desks, movable bookcases, ete.)  American furniture-makers followed this trend, which nearly disappeared in Europe through the influence of “ period ” furniture, and consciously developed very original solutions. No research seems to have been done on this important branch of American furniture manufacturing.  2 J, Lessing, “Neue Wege.” Kunstgewerbeblatt, VT (1895), 1 ff.  153, Folding bed, Philadelphia Exhibition, 1876. A specimen of the patent combination furniture which came into extensive use about this time.  As the last of the European observers, Gropius may be quoted. In 1913, just after his completion of the Fagus works, he wrote an essay on the development of modern industrial buildings for one of the publications of the German Werkbund, which did so much to introduce contemporary ideas into Germany. For the first time he gives illustrations and speaks of the uninten- tional beauty of American industrial architecture:  “Tn comparison with the other countries of Europe, Germany seems to have gone far ahead in the field of factory design. But in America, the motherland of industry, there are great industrial struclures which, in their unconscious majesty, are superior to even our best German buildings of that type. The grain elevators of Canada and South America, the coal con- veyors of great railway lines, and the more modern industrial plants of North America are almost as impressive in their raonumental power as the buildings of ancient Egypt. They present an architectural composition of such exactness that to the observer their meaning is forcefully and unequivocally clear. The natural integrity of these buildings resides not in the vastness of their physical proportions — herein the quality 
or, Chicago.  of a monumental work is certainly not to be sought — but in their designers’ independent and clear vision of these erand, impressive forms. They are not obscured by sentimental reverence for tradition nor by other intellectual scruples which prostrate our contemporary European design and bar true artistic originality” (fig. 154).  The Structure of American Industry  American industry differs from European industry in its struc- ture, These differences have to be kept in mind if one is to un- derstand clearly the process of evolution which American indus- try hasfollowed. Such structural differencesare also the grounds for the dissimilar altitudes toward the crafts—and later toward the “ arts and crafts  — which exist in these two areas.  1 European industry, springing inlo exislence on English soil in the late eighteenth century, substituted the machine for hand labor in the working of some simple raw materials — iron, and  10 Walter Gropius, ‘‘ Die Kunst in Industrie und Handel,” Jahrbuch des Deutschen Werkbundes (Jena, 1913), pp. 21-2:  plant and animal fibers. The spinning and weaving machines which were invented in England at this time served as unsur- passed trail-breakers in the mechanization of industry.  American industry became robust al a much later period, around 1850. Naturally, European inventions were adopted and introduced into this country. Divergeneces appear at the points where problems inherent in a totally different situation demanded new solutions.  To this day skilled craftsmen persist in Europe. For com- paratively low wages Lhey make ils bread and sausages, shoes, clothing, clocks and furniture, and build houses.  About 1850, in America, all these complicated crafts based on skilled Jabor became industrialized. The change came about yarlly through new inventions and partly through new meth- ods of organization. The major emphasis, indeed, rested on a new organization. Very early this new organization even penetrated the household. New tools were introduced to ighten hand labor in cooking — the apple parer (1868), for example. Before 1850 the manufacture of men’s and children’s clothes had been largely a household industry, but the inven- ion of the sewing machine transferred it to the factories. A eam of three to five, or more, persons produced the finished garment." By the 1840's the “Oak Hall” establishment in Boston was supposed to be the largest clothing store in the United States. It was housed in a building of the Gothic Revival style which resembled a medieval tomb.  From an author of the sixties we discover that “ few are aware of the vast extent to which the sale of ready-made clothing is carried on at the present day. Probably no branch of business has so rapidly increased.  “ But a few years ago it was confined to goods of very inferior  quality, style, and make, worn mostly by laborers and sea- 149  men,” 2?  Walter W. Jennings, A History of Economie Progress in the United States (New York, 1926), p. 430. "C.D. Goyer, History of Chicago, Its Commercial and Manufacturing Interests (Chicago, 862), p. 170. 
By 1876 Wanamaker was producing ready-made clothing for men and boys on a great scale, and with all the knowledge of service, advertising, and price policies best calculated to at- tract the masses.  In the manufacture of boots and shoes, machinery did not come into use until nearly the middle of the century.” At about the same time butchering was converted into the meat- packing industry, with stockyards, elaborate refrigeration methods, and the modern, endless-chain system of operation — including mechanical hog-scraping apparatus.! The first “ mechanical bakery ” was established in Brooklyn in Decem- ber 1856. The second mechanical bakery was set up shortly afterwards in Chicago. It had “ one oven passing from the basement to the third floor and within the oven . . . three endless chains supporting the cars containing the bread.” %®  To summarize: In America materials were plentiful and skilled labor scarce; in Europe skilled labor was plentiful and ma- terials scarce. It is this difference which accounts for the dif- ferences in the structure of American and European industry from the fifties on. In America just about that date, mechaniza- tion began to replace skilled labor in all the complicated crafts.  This trend can be observed astonishingly early in the field of housing; mechanized methods appear even before the fifties. In this period James Bogardus was producing cast-iron build- ings assembled from prefabricated parts which were forerun- ners of the skeleton frame. The encroachment of industrializa- tion upon skilled hand trades is shown much more plainly, however, in the introduction of a new type of wooden con- struction, one used for some 60 to 80 per cent of all the houses in the United States: the balloon frame. The balloon frame in its technical aspects has little interest for us, but a study of its origins may yield us an insight into an important period in the American development."*  1 Jennings, op. cit., p. 734.  UT, T. Warschow, Representative Industries in the United Slates (New York, 1882), pp. 444 if.  16 Goyer, op. cif., p. 122  16 Some of the quotations in this section are from Heinrich Waentig, Wirtschaft und Kunst (Jena, 1909). Waentig, as he remarks in his foreword, “ gathered together out of life and the libraries” the materials for one of the few really penetrating studies of  THE BALLOON FRAME AND INDUSTRIALIZATION  The balloon frame (fig. 155) is closely connected with the level of industrialization which had been reached in America. Its invention practically converted building in wood from a com- plicated craft, practiced by skilled labor, into an industry.  The principle of the balloon frame involves the substitution of thin plates and studs—running the entire height of the building and held together only by nails — for the ancient and expensive method of construction with mortised and tenoned joints. To put together a house like a box, using only nails — this must have seemed utterly revolutionary to carpenters. Naturally enough, the balloon frame met with attack at the start: “The Balloon Frame has passed through and survived the  155. Balloon-frame construction. /From G. i. Woodward, ‘“‘Woodward’s Country Homes” { New York, 1869).  156. St. Mary’s Church, Chicago, 1833. The first building in balloon frame. Razed and reérected three times during is short life.  the arts and crafts movement in the nineteenth century. Anyone who has done similar research into ninetcenth-century developments can understand his remark that he was more than once on the verge of abandoning the whole enterprise.  Wacntig goes directly to the constituent facts of the period. He was not an art historian but a political economist — that is, he had been trained to concentrate on the problems of his own age at greater length thaa a final appendix to a study of some earlier period permits. His book has great value for anyone interested in the nineteenth century. 
aa |  bao  ie nc eb BE ee a ce  157. Balloon frame. From W. E. Bell, “Carpentry Made Easy” (1859). “Ef it had not been for the knowledge of the balloon-frame, Chicago and San Francisco could never have arisen, as they did, from litle villages to great cities in a single vear” (Solon Robinson. 1855)  158, Windsor chair,  Par- allels the balloon frame both in its use of thin structural paris to produce a light and strong construction, and in its anonymous development.  159, R. J. NEUTRA, Elouse in Texas, 1937. Modern balloon-frame houses like this one reveal the elegance and lightness which are innale qualities of this type of skeleton construction.  theory, ridicule, and abuse of all who have seen fit to attack it... . [ts name was given in contempt by those old fogy mechanics who had been brought up to rob a stick of timber of all its strength aud durability, by cutting it full of mortices, tenons and auger holds, and then supposing it to be stronger than a far lighter stick differently applied, and with all its capabilities unimpaired. . . . The name of ‘ Basket I'rame’ would convey a better impression, but the name ‘ Balloon ’ has long ago outlived the derision which suggested it.”  The balloon frame marks the point at which industrialization legan to penetrate housing. Just as the trades of the watch- maker, the butcher, the baker, the tailor were transformed into industries, so too the balloon frame led to the replacement of the skilled carpenter by the unskilled laborer.  A man and a boy can now (1865) attain the same results, with ease, that twenty men could on an old-fashioned frame. 
. . The principle of Balloon Framing is the true one for strength, as well as for economy. Ifa mechanic is employed, the Balloon Frame can be put up for forty per cent less money than the mortice and tenon frame.” ”  Without machine-made nails the balloon frame would be eco- nomie nonsense. It was only when machinery had made nails cheaper, and “ cut nails of steel and iron and nails made of wire could be furnished of excellent quality and at a cost much less than old-fashioned wrought-iron nails [that] the com- paratively expensive system of house framing with mortise and tenon began to be supplanted by a more economic system dependent entirely upon the efficacy of nailing.” #8  The invention of the balloon frame really coincides with the improvement of sawmill machinery as well as with the mass production of nails (fig. 157).  Several machines for cutting and heading nails were developed in both England and the United States toward the end of the eighteenth century. Thomas Clifford patented such a device in 1790, and about the same time a similar machine was in- vented by Jacob Perkins of Newburyport. A machine which cut, shaped, and headed tacks in a single operation at the rate of sixty thousand a day was patented by Jesse Reed in 1807.18  “When the manufacture of cut nails was first undertaken, wrought nails cost 25¢ a pound. . . . This made their use for houses and fences difficult.” * All this changed with the introduction of machinery. The price of nails was suddenly reduced. “ In 1828 the production was so brisk that the price was reduced to 8c a pound. . . . In 1833 the rapidity of pro- duction had brought prices down to 5¢ . . . in 1842, 3c.”  17 The quotations are from G. E. Woodward, Weodward’s Country Homes (New York, 1869), pp. 152-164.  18 Russell Sturgis, Dictionary of Architecture and Building (New York, 1902), ITT, 1125. 19 Great Industries of the United States (Hartford, 1872), p. 1072.  20 William E. Bell, Carpeniry Made Easy (Philadelphia, 1839). Bell worked as a car- penter in Ottawa, Michigan. Writing in 1857 he claims (p. 53) to have had fifteen years’ experience constructing and repairing balloon frame buildings.  2 Albert S. Bolles, Industrial History of the United Slates (Norwich, Conn., 1889), p. 220.  The Balloon Frame and the Building-up of the West  The balloon frame has an established connection with the con- quest of the West from Chicago to the Pacific Coast.  Contemporaries knew quite well that houses would never have sprung up with such incredible rapidity — either on the  prairies or within the big cities—had it not been for this construction.  “ With the application of machinery, the labor of house build- ing has been greatly lessened, and the western prairies are dotted over with houses which have been shipped there all made, and the various pieces numbered.” ” Another observer goes further: “If it had not been for the knowledge of the balloon-frame, Chicago and San Francisco could never have arisen, as they did, from little villages to great cities in a single year.  At the period when the West was being built up, contempo- raries called “ the method of construction known as ‘ balloon  framing’ the most important contribution to our domestic architecture.”  t o me it seems very characteristic of the negligence with which contemporary history is treated that no dictionary of architecture or construction gives a precise answer to the  question of who invented the balloon frame and when it was invented.  The Invention of the Balloon Frame  iven as far back as the fifties and sixties there seems to have been no certainty with regard to the invention of the balloon frame. One early witness, writing in 1872, relates that “ when it was first used is not known with any definitencss, but it  has within the last fifty years replaced the old method of construction.” 4  “ Great Industries of the United States.  * Solon Robinson in New York Tri anu: 35 ; ern min New York Tribune, January 18, 1855. Quoted in Woodward, op.  * Great Industries of the United Slates. 
Woodward, in 1869, confesses that “ the early history of the Balloon Frame, is somewhat obscure, there being no well au- thenticated statements of its origin. It may, however, be traced back to the early settlement of our prairie countries, where it was impossible to obtain heavy timber and skillful mechanics. . . . The Balloon Frame belongs to no one per- son; nobody claims it as an invention, and yet in the art of construction it is one of the most sensible improvements that has ever been made.” *  Nevertheless, the balloon frame does seem to haye had an in- yentor and to have emanated from one particular town.  George Washinglon Snow, 1797-1870  The inventor of the balloon frame was George W. Snow.”* He was born at Keene, New Hampshire, September 16, 1797, of an old American family which traced back to the Mayflower.  He must have been rather a restless spirit, since he first left the family homestead for New York and afterwards went to Detroit with his wife. Under rather primitive conditions he crossed the state of Michigan, and finally, in a canoe paddled by an Indian guide, he reached the mouth of the Chicago River, July 12, 1832. The small community he found there — there were only two hundred and fifty inhabitants — pleased his pioneer temperament. He took an active part in its affairs for many years: in 1833, when Chicago became a city, Snow was appointed its first assessor and surveyor; he was elected alder- man in 1849, and made drainage commissioner the same year; he was at one time chief of the pioneer hook and ladder company.  ‘As one of his descendants remarks in a letter, like many of the first settlers Snow was something of a jack-of-all-trades. He was one of the earliest of the Chicago lumber dealers, purchas- ing “ Carver's Lumberyard ” in 1835. He owned considerable  2% Woodward, op. cif. pp. 151-154.  26 Until more exact researches have been made it cannot be taken as ce other men figured in the development of the balloon frame. Solon Robinson (to whom we have already referred) writes that he was using the balloon frame as early as 1835. Walker Field ina Marvard thesis, “A Reexamination into the Invention of the Bal- joon Frame.” shows bow difficult: iL is to give George Snow full eredit for the inven- tion of the balloon frame. Further investigation seeins to be necessary.  rtain thal no  land and conducted a real estate business. He was a building contractor, as well as a general contractor and financicr. °  Snow was not merely a surveyor; he had been educated as a civil engineer in his youth. This technical training may ha “ Jed him to the invention of the balloon frame. How this carne about and what his struggles were we do not know. The tag  balloon frame,’ was a mere nickname, a jocular refer to the lightness of this new type of construction nee?  Vhere are several confirmations of the tradition in Snow’s family that he invented the balloon frame. Its inventio is credited to him by Andreas in his History of Chicago,’ nd in Industrial Chicago, the most important book on the devel i. ment of Chicago, we read that “ the balloon frame is the joint idea of George W. Snow and necessity.” ?8 Andreas’ statement is based on the words of one of Snow’s fellow townsmen ith  architect J. M. Van Osdel, who arrived in Chicago in 837, In an article, “ The History of Chicago Architecture » b. lished in a Chicago monthly of the early eighties Van Ged | remarks that “Mr. Snow was the inventor of the “balloon  frame ’ method of constructing wooden buildings, which in this  cily completely superseded the old sly i i iby : slyle of fra r girts, beams and braces.” 2° , ming With posts  George Snow's name is nearly unknown. There is no portrait of him in any of the local histories, but one was obtained f on a family album which reveals a face al once full of itan energy and of human sensitivity.®° “eee  The first building in balloon frame was St. Mary’s Church in rcs the earliest of the Catholic churches of the city (fig. 56). “In July 1833 a number of men are found erectin  church on Lake Street near State Street.” = Old builders  3 | (Chicago, 1890), 50-4, "© T (Chicago, 1891), 51.  * {nland Architect and Builder, 1, no. 3 (April 1883), 36. This magazine was the or. agaZ as the org  the developing Chicago school of architects. avot  * Lam indebted for this bi i i$ biographical material to Miss Mari i i be ‘bted f 4 h Oo Miss Marion Rawls, libraria e cram Library of the Art Institute of Chicazo, and to Mrs George A ‘Carne vn we ia un abrary of the Axt Tnstit ! Mrs. Gee A. Carpentel i BO, now's granddaughter, who provided the portrait. I published tt is ra an article in the annual, New Direetions, 1939. ees EE * Industrial Chicago, I, 51.  
prophesied its collapse. In the short term of its existence this church was razed and reérected three times. Until the seventies the balloon frame was called simply “ Chicago construction,” as we learn from a report of United States Commissioner H. Bowen, published in Washington in 1869. Bowen speaks of the western farmhouse which was for- warded in sections to the Paris Universal Exposition of 1867 as being of ‘‘ Chicago construction.” The balloon frame, then, is associated with Chicago, like the skyscraper construction which, half a century later, was also called simply ‘“ Chicago construction.” The balloon-frame building with its skeleton of thin machine- cut studs and its covering of clapboards grew out of the seven- teenth-century farmhouses of the early settlers. Snow was familiar with such houses in his home state of New Hampshire and his wife’s home, Connecticut, where they were especially common. In these houses comparatively thin and narrow studs were used as intermediary framing, with the whole construc- tion tied together by the clapboard covering.” George Snow started with these traditional methods, changing and adapting them to meet the new possibilities of production in a way which was as simple as it was ingenious. The balloon frame has kept its vitality for a whole century and is still used extensively. This simple and efficient construction is thoroughly adapted to the requirements of contemporary architects. Many of Richard J. Neutra’s houses in Texas and southern California reveal the elegance and lightness which are innate gualities of the balloon-frame skeleton (fig. 159).  The Balloon Frame and the Windsor Chair  The thin two-inch studs of the balloon frame stick up into the air apparently without weight in comparison with the traditional timber construction. Even today the European observer finds their thinness really daring.  2 Cf. J. F. Kelly, The Early Domestic Architecture of Connecticut (New Haven, 1935), p. 40. Tere the “* studs or intermediary framing members ” are described as “ generally measuring about 23 X 3 inches in section.” Their beigh “ the distance between the horizontal members of construction.”  t, however, was only equal to  The same idea, the use of thin structural members to produce a most efficient whole construction, had figured a century earlier in the development of the Windsor chair. The Windsor ae as outstandingly important in the history of American urniture as the balloon frame is in the hist ; i  0 ! tein ry of American  There is a familiar anecdote attached to the name of this piece of furniture. The Prince of Wales, toward the end of the seventeenth century, is supposed to have seen the original specimen in a peasant’s cottage near Windsor Castle and to have ordered it copied for his own use, though England never gave the artistic consideration to the Windsor chair that America did. Windsor chairs were the strongest type of chair made in the colonies and easily movable. Their construction was of spindles (fig. 158), and the early ones were made by wheelwrights. It is very seldom that the vogue for furniture exten over area but that of the Windsor chair lasted vom 6 No & het ye  from as loin” single chair-maker won individual  For the historian it seems worth while to observe the curious interrelation existing between the development of the balloon frame and the Windsor chair in two different centuries.  There is the same tendency to counteract the American climate — wet and ary in turn — by assembling thin structural parts to produce a light type of construction. There is the same tendency rowan anonymous work and toward serial manu- acture, with lightness and efficiency achi i  facture -y achieved by the simplest  PLANE SURFACES IN AMERICAN ARCHITECTURE  In speaking earlier of architecture as an organism with its onn continuing life, we remarked that nowadays we are Weve jnterested in those persisting influences which give this th : on inuity. The lines of force which spread and develop  roughout several periods concern us more than the history  8 See Mz os. . ec Marta K. Sironen, A History of American Furnilure (New York, 1936), p. 18 
Ay  of styles, for styles are those special aspects of periods which mark them off one from the other.  Historical styles are particularly uninformative with regard to what was actually going on in America. They arrived here fully grown and give little insight into the constituent facts of the native American development.  During the eighties European architecture lost more and more of its dignity. The closer it clung to historical forms in the search for security the more insecure it really became. In barely fifty years the whole architectural inheritance of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries was lost in a weller of transitory detail. The inner unrest and uncertainty of the period appears time and again in unbalanced treatments of the wall and of the ground plan. The whole organism of architec- ture was riddled by a fatal disease.  American independence of Europe showed itself in the develop- ment of new and logical forms for tools and furniture, and in the informal and flexible ground plan of the American house. In the same way the wall maintained its unity and balance in America throughout this whole period of European uncer- tainty and confusion. America produced its share of grotesque work during these years, but —in contrast to Europe — attention never entirely strayed from the basic elements of architecture. These elements always remained dominant in American work, taken as a whole. It may be that this is why new architectural solutions were reached in America earlier than they were abroad.  The plane surface — the flat wall of wood, brick, or stone — bas always been a basic element in American architecture. In part this has been duc to the simplicity which a scarcity of skilled labor enforced; in part it directly continues late eight- eenth-century tendencies. The Georgian manner of treating the brick wall has been carried over into the nineteenth cen- tury; wooden houses have kept to traditions established by the first settlers.  The brick wall, to be cheap, must be kept flat and simple. All openings are cut very cleanly into the flat surtace of the wall.  Bahl  160. Old Larkin Building, Buffalo, 1837. Specimen brick building of a type omnipresent in the United States, with flat, undisguised walls and clean-cut openings.  Such undisguised brick walls (fig. 160) are familiar features of the American scene; they appear in New England mansions of the late eighteenth century, in small anonymous buildings on the main streets of all the cities, and in the big factories of the Civil War period. The plain brick wall was firmly estab- lished as a basic element in architecture when men like Henry Hobson Richardson began their work in the seventies. Rich- ardson’s Sever Hall was built in 1878. We found a European example of such scrupulously level surfaces in Berlage’s Amsterdam Stock Exchange. But the Stock Exchange was built two decades later; flat brick surfaces, such as Richardson used, were almost unknown in the Europe of the seventies.  Frank Lloyd Wright, too, was able to use the brick wall, taken as a simple surface, from the very start. Unlike van de Velde and Horta, there was no need for him to begin by crusading against the mutilation and overcrowding of the wall, or to invent an art nouveau to compete with established modes of ornamenta- tion. He was able to begin his work on a much higher level. 
161. Longfellow House, Cambridge, Mass., 1759. Clapboard wall of the sort which has been used continuously in America for three centuries.  The wooden wall has been governed by eighteenth-century American traditions to an even greater extent than the brick. The simple clapboard wall ( fig. 161) has remained a constituent element for three centuries, without any interruption, from the time of the first colonists to the present. Clapboards had been used in England, but only for unpretentious farmhouses. In America they dominated the whole field of wooden building. We find them everywhere, from the rudest huts to the finest mansions, churches, and town halls. Such a widespread and enduring authority for one type of wall treatment covering a period of three hundred years is entirely unknown on the other side of the Atlantic.  The use of clapboards automatically tends toward balanced and simple treatments of the wall. They are ill suited to breaks or interruptions in its flat expanse, and they discourage the use of applied ornament.  Stone walls were treated with the same simplicity in states  where stone was used as a building material. Excellent work- manship was displayed in the New England states: in the flat  162, Stone wall, Union Wharf ware- house, Boston, 1846. The granite posts and lintels for windows and doors were cul  in one piece at the Quincey quarries.  granite walls of the community houses of the Shakers (fig. 163), in the granite warehouses along the Boston wharves (fig. 162), and in the commercial buildings of Boston of the fifties and sixties (figs. 164, 165).*4  These commercial buildings with their rusticated walls display typical plane surfaces and economy of detail. Earlier ware- houses, dating from the forties, are built of huge plain blocks of rough-hewn granite, but no reminiscences of Florence are involved. Their impressive austerity is easily explained: the granite came from the Quincy quarries near-by, and labor was saved by cutting out the window or door pillars on the spot, in one piece.  Many of these buildings were designed by Alexander Parris, who also designed Quincy Market (the market buildings around Faneuil Hall, ¢. 1825). The earliest of the water- front buildings date from the middle twenties; the wharf warchouses were built in the forties; the mercantile blocks on Commercial Street were erected in the fifties; the re- mainder were mostly completed by 1869, when Franklin Street was opened.  
163. Shaker Community House, Concord, Vermont, 1832. A specimen of the excellent stonework that was produced by this religious sect.  Richardson was a student at Harvard in the period when these commercial buildings were erected. Later on he went to Paris and came under European influences. These new buildings along the Boston water front must nevertheless have con- stituted his earliest architectural impressions.  Richardson’s Marshall Field Wholesale Store in Chicago (1885- 87) was his best work (fig. 166). This building with its massive stone walls occupies a rather strange position in the Chicago development as a whole. For all that, it furnished a strong incitement to the work of the Chicago school, and something  Many of these mercantile buildings are excellent examples of a well-proportioned and logical pre-Richardson architecture which certainly played a larger part in later develop- ments than is generally believed.  In a seminar which T conducted during the summer of 1938 on Boston office buildings between 1830 and 1860 we endeavored to learn more about this work. An account of one of the carliest of the great commercial architects, Gridley J. Fox Bryant, was dis- covered in a copy of the New England Magazine (“ An Architect of the Old School,” yol. XXV, n.s., November, 1901). Between the fifties and the seventies, Bryant built hundreds of business blocks on the Boston water front, most of them granite buildings. According to the New England Magazine, he left all his papers to Henry ‘Curner Bailey. One of my students, Miss Lydia Jones, wrote to Bailey's widow. This material has ap- parently disappeared, for Mrs. Bailey replied that her husband had “ got rid of it one day.”  of its character was reflected in other buildings erected in the Loop during the eighties.  Louis Sullivan’s crilicisms of the architecture of his time were as uniquely severe as they were just. The Marshall Field ‘oasis’ in the midst of a “young man  Store, however, was to him an ‘ desert of doubtfully sincere edifices. The  ‘ ”  to  164, Commercial Block, 140 Commercial Street, Boston, Mass., 1856. Detail. One example of the well-proportioned and logical pre-Richardsen architecture that appeared in Boston during the fifties and sirties.  “MERCIAL BLOck  165. Commercial Block, 140 Commercial Street, Boston, Mz 1856. A conlemporary print of the building from which the detai  From Boston Almanac, in Fig. 164 was taken.  
166. H. H. RICHARDSON, Marshall Field Wholesale Store, Chicago, 1885. Rich- ardson here continues the American tradition of the plain and massive stone wall.  whom he so describes it in his Kindergarten Chats interrupts him with ironic astonishment:  “*¥Vou mean there is a good piece of architecture for me to look at?’  ‘““*No, I mean, here is a man for you to look at.... I mean that stone and mortar here spring into life and are no more material and sordid things... wholesomeness is there, the breath of Jife is there, an elemental urge is there.’ ” *  We break in upon this poetic vision only to ask, What is this building? Romanesque? Florentine Renaissance? ** But need we go so far back? Would it not be simpler to look for its origin in the rugged stone walls which gave Richardson his first architectural impressions? The plain and massive stone wall  38 Kindergarten Chats (Lawrence [?], Kansas, 1934), p. 15.  % Henry Russell Hitchcock in his biography of Richardson makes a very carefal effort to trace the stages by which Richardson arrived at his Romanesque style. The account (inevitably) presents large gaps.  had been one of the basic elements in American architecture from the very beginning, from the fortifications of the Revolu- tionary period to the commercial buildings contemporaneous with Richardson’s student days at Harvard. The sober im- pressiveness of this store could be Romanesque and at the same time thoroughly indigenous, an artistic transmutation of elements which had grown out of American life.  The Flexible and Informal Ground Plan  American architecture has been marked by one tendency since the arrival of the earliest settlers: the American house is given a ground plan which can be enlarged whenever new social and economic conditions make it desirable. This contrasts very sharply with European procedure. In Europe a farmhouse is planned as a solid, cubical unit from the very beginning. Sometimes the interior is left unfinished, to be fitted up by later generations when they come to need larger living quarters.  The American practice of adding new units to the original one can be seen in those New England houses which survive from the seventeenth century.*’ All these heavily timbered houses began as one and a half or (at most) two-story structures, with a single room on the ground floor. The next generation, with improving circumstances, enlarged this ancestral nucleus both horizontally and vertically. A new roof was spread over all these additions, quite asymmetrically. But the important thing was the addition of wings, which was very general. The L-shaped ground plan, the beginning of the flexible and informal layout, developed from this sort of planning.  Houses were not invariably enlarged. Sometimes — as in the William Pepperell house at Kittery, Maine — they proved too big for a later generation and were cut down. ‘ This family mansion was then much more imposing than at present, being 10 feet longer at cach end and surrounded by a beautiful park. It was reduced after the American Revolution when the estate was confiscated in 1779.” %  * For example, the Hancock house, Lexington, Mass. (1698, enlarged in 1734), the Jack- soa house, Portsmouth, N. IL. (c. 1664), and the Whipple house, Ipswich, Mass. (1642). * The Portsmouth Guide Book (Portsmouth, N. H., 1876), pp. 145-146. 
In the late eighteenth century people did not hesitate to cut through the solid oak framework of a house and divide it into several portions. These were then moved to a new site and reassembled, with whatever changes and enlargements sug- gested themselves. The house at 34 Chestnut Street, Salem, Massachusetts (fig. 167), is the product of such methods, al- though no one would ever suspect it. This charming residence, which seems to have been conceived as a unified whole, was really built in three sections. ‘It is the only house now stand- ing on the street which was not built in its present location but  167. House at 34 Chestnut Street, Salem, Mass., 1824. The fwo ends were originally part of another house and were moved on wheels to the Chestnut Street site; there the center portion was built.  was moved to the street... . It was originally a portion of the house on the West Farm at Oak Hill, Danvers [miles away], and was moved on wheels to Chestnut Street, in Lwo parts, about 1824.29 The architect added the center with its Palladian win- dow, and changed and adapted it to the so-called Palladian or academic ground plan which was in favor at this period,  The flexible treatment of the house which has been common practice in America since colonial days is one of the keys to  39 Richard Hall Wiswall, Notes on the Building of Chestnut Street (Salem, 1939), p. 18.  its domestic architecture. Opinions are supposed to change oftener in America than elsewhere, but this is not true in the field of housing. Here there has been continuous growth. American developments show more continuity than we find in Europe, and more of the power to develop new elements for the future out of the existing architectural inheritance.  American publications of the sixties and seventies show the great varicly of foreign influences which were at work in the country. England, Germany, France, Spain, the Orient — fashions from all these quarters came into favor. They re- mained, however, only the latest fashions at one: season or another; they did not permanently infect American architec- ture. When Wilhelm Bode visited the Chicago World’s Fair of 1893 he remarked that “‘in contrast to Germany, the modern American house is built entirely from the inside out. Jt not only corresponds to particular individual demands but above all to the peculiarities, customs, and needs of ihe Ameri- cans. That these customs are pronounced and distinctly marked gives domestic architecture in the United States a great advantage over our own German architecture.” “  It was precisely the things which still impress European ob- servers that surprised Bode almost fifly years ago. He notes that “‘ rooms along the hallway are fitted with sliding doors or partitions — often half as wide as their walls — and that these doors are nearly always left open.” In this way it is possible to look into the various rooms of the house.” The Continental apartment houses to which Bode was accustomed, with their ridiculously high ceilings, dark and overcrowded rooms, and luxuriant wall-coverings, were in sharp contrast to American  *© Wilhelm Bode, ‘ Moderne Kunst in der Vereinigten Staaten,” Kunstgewerbeblalt, V (1894), 115-117.  * To this day the European’s house remains, more or less, his castle. Its doors are real doors, and they are usually kept closed. Sliding partitions never open upon the hall- ways; Lhey are used only to connect interior rooms. In American houses there are not only these daringly placed partitions but even a lack of keys for half of the doors within the house, and a lack of locks in the case of closets and wardrobes. European windows are provided with both shades and curtains, and both — usually neither, in America — are drawn after nightfall. The American rarely even fences his house, and lately there are some signs that he may abandon the garage and iake to leaving his car under a mere shelter. “* A garage is no longer necessary, as cars are made,” says Frank Lloyd Wright. * A carport will do, with liberal overhead shelter and wails on two sides ” (Architectural Forum, January 1938, p. 79). 
x  Bubus Fanny Woazd  168. American kitchen and plan of a country house. From JZ. C. Gardner, “The House that Jill Built” (New York, 1882).  interiors. In America, Bode remarks, “ the rooms, according to our notions, are somewhat low. They are not overcrowded with furniture, and they have light-colored walls and ceilings.” * (These are features which contemporary architects have finally established in Europe, after considerable struggle.)  Bode’s report of an advanced American domestic architecture is supported by popular literature on home building published as early as the seventies. Books like Gardner’s Illustrated Homes, Describing Real Houses and Real People (Boston, 1875) ® did much to propagate sound housing. The way in which these books of the seventies approach the problem of the house is surprising, considering the period. Instead of the dis- cussion of details which one might expect, the house is con- sidered as a whole — as a unit which must vary in each special case. Their authors find this attitude so natural that the tone of the discussions is invariably light and easy and sometimes actually playful. They deal with houses planned not in some special style but for some special purpose: with houses for the newly married, doctors’ houses, well-to-do business men’s houses — even one-room houses for “ old maids.”  4 Op. cil., p. 117.  48 Eugene C. Gardner (1836-1915) was one of the popular authors in this field. He was principal of the Talmadge Academy, at Talmadge, Ohio, and editor of the Builder from 1885 to 1887.  The old maid and her house (figs. 169, 170) are particularly interesting. This is a lady who knows precisely what she wants: ‘I propose to build a house to live in, merely that and nothing more.... My house must have one room and of closets four; one for a little dressing room; one for my silk dresses, which will accumulate, as I have no one to give them to except to home missionaries’ wives, and they ought not to wear silk; one for my china, and one for my umbrella and overshoes.” “ The close-knit unity of the ground plan pro- duced to satisfy these demands and the economy with which its space is put to use recall one of J. J. P. Oud’s low-rental apartments of 1920.  The functional spirit which dominated Europe in the twenties is even more clearly apparent in the way the problem of the kitchen is handled. In another of his books Gardner proposes a space-saving treatment strikingly similar to the Frankfort kitchen of about 1920 (fig. 168). The later design was supposed to derive from the space economies effected in the modern dining-car. Gardner achieved his solution through a direct approach to the working problems of the cook and the house- wife. The kitchen is made long and narrow “so that it may  169. One-room house for an “old  170. The architect and his spinster maid.” From Gardner, “Tilusirated client. From Gardner, “Illustrated  Homes” (Boston, 1875). Homes” (Boston, 1875).  “ Gardner, op. cié., p. 114. 
have ample wall space and yet keep the distance between the range and the pantry as short as possible.” It has windows at opposite sides ‘‘ to admit plenty of light ’ and so that the summer breezes may sweep through it and keep a river of fresh air between the cooking range and the dining room.” *  The interior of the typical American house is subdivided ag little as possible. This urge to unite the various rooms and to open the interior is occasionally reflected in the use of different floor levels, as in certain large Classical Revival houses of the nineties.  Ninetcenth-century Americans who could afford to be stylish had houses whose exterior forms reflected the styles in favor at the time — romantic, Victorian, French Renaissance, Roman- esque, or classical. The ground plan, however, generally retained its soundness. The flexible and informal ground plan which was, on the whole, standard in America grew up without any great names being attached to it. Like tools and patent furniture, it remained strictly anonymous. It is the out- growth both of the urge for comfort in the dwelling and of the American tendency to tackle problems directly. Frank Lloyd Wright found the basic elements of the flexible ground plan ready at hand in its anonymous development. Undoubtedly Richardson gave a new artistic intensity to this sort of planning in his houses of the early eighties — particularly those built around Chicago and in New England. But open planning itself, the flexible and informal ground plan — this is a product of the American development as a whole.  © The House that Jill Built (New York, 1882), p. 82. Kitchens with a highly differentiated organization and highly developed technical installations are first, to be found in Eng- fand in the forties. Cf. the interesting description of the great kitchen of the Reform Club in London (built by Charles Barry in 1837) in the Larousse Dictionnaire da XLX° siecle, heading “* Club.”  THE CHICAGO SCHOOL “  During the eighties a whole colony of buildings suddenly sprang up in Chicago — to heights of twelve, fourteen, sixteen, and twenty-three stories. These buildings were erected not in isolation, as they were in other cities, but in close proximity to each other. Each had its own individual appearance and its own name, and yet the aggregate appearance was not chaotic. American buildings are commonly so short-lived that in a few decades, perhaps, these buildings will all have disappeared. Many of the best specimens have gone already and many more are destined to go soon.  The strongest growth of the Chicago school is to be found between 1883 and 1893. Two contemporary voices may in- form us of the state of development at the beginning and at the end of this period.  “ In no period since 1830 has the ciLy experienced such wonder- ful development in increase of population, trade and building up as... in 1882... . The character of the buildings are [sic} monstrous and costly... . There is such a demand for business and office quarters that the permit to build a block is no sooner obtained than applications are made for renting apartments, and before the building is completed it is all rented and the  ‘* The works concerned with the Chicago school in its development between 1883 and 1893 are for the most part anonymous. The first two volumes of Industrial Chicago, 6 vols. (Chicago, 1891-96), published by the Goodspeed Publishing Company, treat the building interests. These two volunies, rarcly found in American librarics, are the Vasari of the Chicago school. The volumes of the Inland Architect (Chicago) after 1883 also give some insight into the development of the school.  The best illustrations and plans (besides those in Industrial Chicago) are to be found in Prominent Buildings Erected by the George A. Fuller Company, Chicago (Chicago? 1893)) and Fireproof Building Construction: Prominent Buildings Erected by the Geo. A. Fuller Company (New York and Chicago, 1904), both published by the George A. Faller Company. George A. Fuller (1851~1900), a Massachusetts man, went into business in Chicago as a builder. He was one of the first building contractors to work with skeleton construction, and he was connected with the erection of many buildings with which we shall deal — the Tacoma, the Monadnock, the Pontiac. the Fair, the Reliance, and the Marquette buildings, the Ashland Block, and the Carson. Pirie, Scott and Company department store as long as Louis Sullivan worked on it.  Not to be overlooked are several guides, such as T.. Schick, Chicago and Its Environs: A Uandbook for Travellers (Chicago, 1891). Others will be mentioned later. For illustra- tions see Pictorial Chicago (Chicago: Rand, McNally, 1893).  For the earlier period see T. A. Andreas, History of Chicago (Chicago, 1884), which con- tains rare stalisties and illustrations. 
renters are ready to step in with their implements of trade, Block after block mount up into the clouds overhanging the city from every street and avenue.” “7  In 1893, shortly before a great crisis affected Chicago and its activities, another contemporary witness traces the end of thig period: ‘many times has it happened in Chicago that the morning papers have come out with accounts of the letting of the contract for the largest office building in the city and the evening papers of the same day have given news of other contracts for buildings far surpassing those told in the morning.” 48  In the eighties the Loop — the business center of the city — became the perfect illustration of American audacity in the direct assault that was made upon its problems. Whole streets were developed in a way that had never been seen before, Walking through the Loop, one is struck by the impression that Chicago is an outpost for the immense areas which are spread out behind it. At the time its great buildings went up, Chicago was the real point of concentration for the products of the West and Middle West, and not merely an enormous stock exchange, like New York. The rapid growth of this great center led to sudden enlargements of its needs. To meet them, the urge grew up to use the new potentialities of construction, potentialities which had hitherto been exploited only in bridges and industrial structures of various kinds.  Large office buildings for business firms and insurance com- panies were the first to appear. Buildings of equal power soon appeared to meet other demands — immense hotels for the travelers who passed through the city and combination office- theater-hotel buildings like the Adler and Sullivan Auditorium. At the same time the problem of the modern apartment house —which still remains unsolved — was attacked with great consistency and daring.  The Chicago school is bound up with the creation of the modern office building — in other words, with the creation of an administration center (fig. 177). All sorts of engineering  # Stranger’s Guide (Chicago, 1883). 48 World's Fair Souvenirs (Chicago, 1893).  problems entered into the solution reached in the Chicago puildings, and the founder of the Chicago school, William Le Baron Jenney (1832-1907),** was an engineer before he was an architect. He had received a thorough technical grounding and had been a major in Sherman’s corps of engineers. The future architects of Chicago received their training in Jenney’s office. William Le Baron Jenney played much the same role in the training of the younger generation of Chicago architects that Peter Behrens did in Germany around 1910, or Auguste Perret in France. He gave young architects the preparation they needed to tackle the new problems for which the schools could offer no solutions.  Today William Le Baron Jenney’s imagination and courage are not sufficiently recognized. Even Louis Sullivan describes him as rather a connoisseur than an architect, and in Chicago one of Sullivan’s collaborators told me that Jenney had no sense for detail and ornament. Architectonic detail and sty- listic remnants play, it is true, a negligible part in Jenney’s work. For all that, he was the man whose Leiter Building of 1889 was the earliest solution of the problem of the great build- ing in skeleton construction, a solution whose clarity and freedom from compromise were far above the average.  Jenney’s background was excellent. He had received the best technical training available in this period at the Ecole Poly- technique and the Ecole Centrale in Paris. In Jenney’s studio French engineering combined with the methods of his German specialists in ornament to produce a curious mixture. In 1873, as a young beginner, Louis Sullivan worked in this studio and had his eyes opened to ‘ suppressed functions ** in architecture. Besides Sullivan (who stayed here no longer than he did most places) Jenney’s staff at one time or other included many of the future builders of Chicago: Martin Roche, Holabird, and even Daniel Burnham — later the partner of John Root.  Jenney’s hand first showed itself clearly in a warehouse which he built at 280 West Monroe Street for Leiter in 1879 (fig. 171). This building (which is stil] in existence) has brick pillars on its outer walls, and wide glass openings similar to the ‘“ Chicago  * Cf. Charles B. Jenkins, “ W. L. B. Jenney and W. B. Mundie,” Architectural Reviewer (Chicago), February 1897. 
Wk. WILLIAM LE BARON JEN- NEY, First Leiter Building, Chicago, 1879. Brick pillars on outer walls: cast- iron columns in the inferior. The wide glass openings sug- gest the “Chicago windows” of a later dale.  windows” of a later date. The interior has the cast-iron columns which were standard during this period.  Jenney’s first building of a type new both in respect to its height and its construction was erected for the Home Insur- ance Company in 1884-85.” In it a complicated construction was made to produce a thoroughly integrated whole.  Richardson planned the Marshall Field Wholesale Store and Warehouse (fig. 166) while Jenney was at work on his Home Insurance Company building. This store showed Chicago architects how unobtrusively a great volume could be inte- grated. Richardson injected into this building something of the vitality of the rising city, in a treatment which was full of dignity. The dominance of the windows is emphasized, as it is in Jenney’s Home Insurance offices, but the construction is rather conservative. Richardson’s massive stone walls belong to an earlier period. When Adler and Sullivan came to build  6° Cf. p. 141. This building was still sound in 1929 when it was torn down.  172. WILLIAM LE BARON JENNEY, Man- hattan Building, Chicago, 189). The bay windows of many different forms are intended to calch all the light available on this nar- row street. They disuppear entirely in the unobstructed apper stories.  their Auditorium, they used similarly massive outer walls, even though the interior iron structure was very daring.  Architects did not at once follow Jenney in his adoption of skeleton construction. In 1889, however, three years after his Home Insurance Company, Holabird and Roche put up the Tacoma Building, a twelve-story skeleton structure.™  Meanwhile William Le Baron Jenney kept to his own course. He erected his second Leiter Building in 1889. His Manhattan Building (fig. 172) — at this period the highest building of pure skeleton construction — was finished in 1891. The Manhat-  “ In a building of the Tacoma’s dimensions, the gain in renting area through the use of skeleton rather than masonry construction was equivalent to the rent on an additional Noor. It was for this reason that skeleton construction was used. A certain indecision is still apparent in the design of the Tacoma. ‘The total window : is exceptionally great, but the.individual windows themselves are quite small. The ‘Facoma was torn down in 1929.  ®“ The Manhattan, fronting on Dearborn Street, is the pioneer of the sixteen-story and basement building. .. 204 feet high... designed May 1890 and completed in the sum- mer of 1891 (industrial Chicago, vot. I, 1891, p. 69).  
tan is on Dearborn Street, which is comparatively narrow. In order to catch as much sunlight as possible, Jenney — like Holabird and Roche in the Tacoma Building — filled its front with bay windows.® But these windows are very carefully diversified in shape, and they disappear entirely in the unob- structed upper stories.™  Jenney built ‘‘ The Fair,” one of Chicago’s great department stores, in 1891. With this nine-story building on Dearborn, Adams, and State strcets, Jenney returned to his principle of making the skeleton the determining factor in the design. The first two stories of The Fair are almost pure glass (figs. 173, 174). This feature was demanded by the owners of the store, who wanted the largest possible amount of display area.  The spirit of the Chicago school, its impulsion toward the sim- plest and most self-evident solutions, soon dominated the en- tire Loop. Its works sprang up one beside another.  Burnham and Root erected their Monadnock Block at the corner of Dearborn and Jackson streets in 1891. This was the last of the high buildings with walls of solid masonry. A con- temporary critic-—— Montgomery Schuyler — called it “ the best of all tall office-buildings,” * but it is not too typical of the Chicago school. Its expression derives more from architectonic refinements than from the new potentialities.°° And heavy masonry walls were not the solution to the problem of the many-storied building. The rather small dimensions of the windows indicate the extent to which they hampered the architects.  s3** Light and space are preferred to any definite style” (idem).  5 The Manhattan was reproduced in Inland Architect, vol. XIII (1889), no. 8.  88 Farrict Monroe, John Wellborn Root (New York, 1896), pp. 141-142.  6 At this period the taste of speculators and investment counselors was sometimes more advanced than that of architects — a rare phenomenon. ‘‘ The Monadnock — ‘ Jumbo,’ Root used to call it — was the last of the tall buildings to show walls of solid masonry. For this building Mr. Aldis [Owen F. Aldis, of Boston], who controlled the investment, kept urging upon his architects extreme simplicity, rejecting one or two of Root’s sketches as too ornate. During Root’s absence of a fortnight at the seashore, Mr. Burn- ham ordered from one of the draughtsmen a design of a straight-up-and-down, uncompro- mising, unornamented facade. When Root returned, he was indignant at first over this project of a brick box. Gradually, however, he threw himself into the spirit of the thing, and one day he told Mr. Aldis that the heavy sloping lines of an Egyptian pylon had gotten into his mind as the basis of this design, and that he would ‘ throw the thing up without a single ornament’ ” (Harriet Monroe, op. cit., p. 141).  173. WILLIAM LE BARON JENNEY, The Fair Building, Chicago, 1891. the determining factor in this design.  wy Be  The skeleton  
Diagonally across the street from the Monadnock Block is another Burnham and Root building, the Great Northern Hotel (1891; fig. 178). Its clean brick fagades carried over to the hotel room the “ Chicago windows ”’ used for offices. The Fair, Jenney’s department store, was also built around this time. Three years later, in 1894, Holabird and Roche con- structed their Marquette Building farther down the street (fig. 175).  The front of the Marquette is exceptionally well-proportioned, imposing in its simplicity and its wide expanse of “ Chicago windows.” It remains the typical Chicago office building of the nineties. The demand of the owners that not one inch of the interior be unlighted is exactly satisfied. From the street the Marquette looks like a closed block, but actually it is cut out at the back somewhat like a letter E. The middle bar of the E — relatively the darkest part of the building — is used as an elevator hall, with all the elevators massed together in it. As in most such buildings, large parts of its floor space were built without partitions so that they could be subdivided later on to suit the tenants (fig. 176).*”  The Apartment House **  In Chicago the problems of large-scale housing, of the hotel and the apartment house, were attacked with the same clear- headedness that appears in the office buildings of the city. During the seventies, just after the great fire, a trend away from the small private home and toward the big many-storied apartment house set in — this on the authority of the anony- mous author of Industrial Chicago. As he puts it, “ the modern  31 J. K. Freitag, Architectural Engineering, with Special Reference to High Building Con- struction, 3rd ed. (New York, 1912), p. 38. Freitag’s book is one of the few technical publications dating from the most flourishing period of the Chicago school. It contains the ground plans of many important buildings as well as a wealth of technical details.  88 Cf, Industrial Chicago, vol.T, chap.7, on modern flats and other residences, and illustra- tions and comments in the following issues of the Inland Architect: August 1884, pp. 8, 15; January 1887, p. 101; December 1890, plate (Ricardi apartments); October 1897, plate (Cary apartments); March 1887, p. 28 and plate; February 1893, plate (the “ Kenwood ”); November 1893, plate (the ‘‘ Omaha”).  re  175. HOLABIRD and ROCHE, Marquette Building, Chicago, 1894. The front is ex- ceptionally well-propor- tioned, imposing in ils stnplicity and its wide ecpanse of “Chicago windows.”  176. HOLABIRD and ROCTIE, Bailding, Chicago, 1894. Plan of one story wih undivided offices. Ja most of these build- ings large portions of every floor were left without partitions, so that they could be sub- divided later (o suit the fenants.  Marquette  wal  AN  =  "  aNatut ALANNA  at ‘=  TT  \ i  ULE ATHHtL  ae a  3 8 g  iw 4  
flat is the palace of those who wish to be relieved of house owning and its cares.” °°  The interior organization and the architectonic details of some  of these buildings are astonishingly daring and advanced. Solutions which today are still in process of being formulated appeared in outline in these flats and hotels of a generation back — just as contemporary business and civic centers were anticipated by the Chicago office blocks.  The Adler and Sullivan Auditorium marks one of the early stages in this development. This huge and complicated struc- ture housed not only the actual auditorium and an office building but also a large hotel. The hotel is noteworthy in many respects: the staircase is modeled with an impressive strength; the great length of the bar is emphasized by a heavy beam carried along the ceiling parallel to its front edge in a clear span with no vertical supports; the top-floor dining hall (since converted to other uses) is developed as a broad barrel yault, thereby matching the auditorium proper.*™  The Hyde Park Hotel on the south side of the city was built in 1887-91 by Theodore Starrett and George A. Faller. Its site on Fifty-first Street, near the lake shore, was then almost rural; it has since been heavily developed. “ The hotel has 300 rooms, finished in suites of 2 to 5 apartments, . . . 50 suites are furnished with private baths and incandescent lamps... and heated by steam.” © The building was of eight stories, with broad windows, and——once more according to Indastrial Chicago — “a very large verandah extending around the building.”  Some of these apartment houses had removable partitions so that a suite of five rooms could be thrown together into one. This was the case in the Leander McCormick flats, later the Virginia Hotel, at the northwest corner of Ohio and Rush streets. Its architect was Clinton J. Warren, a product of the Burnham and Root offices."  8° Industrial Chicago, I, 254.  592 Tor a detailed description of this theater, the best of the period, with plans, see Hugh Morrison, Louis Sullican (New York, 1935).  Industrial Chicago, I, 460.  6 This building was torn down a few years ago; the site is now used as a parking lot. In  Vs Ohtaaen tn the early nineties: Ran-  
qa  T aH PE  ‘aq 178. Great Northern Hotel, Nee Chicago, 1891. Advances made in Chicago office build- ings were taken over to create the type of holel and apariment house suifed to the industrial age.  The Brewster apartments on Pine Grove Avenue, built during the early nineties, are still in existence. The architect, R. H. Turnock, had done his early work under William Le Baron Jenney. The main staircase has treads of plate glass so that the light can flow through the entire eight stories of the build- ing from the skylight on the roof. As is well known, Le Cor- busier came to a similar solution some forty years later in his Clarté apartments in Geneva (1932).  We have been able to do no more here than simply point to a few of the buildings which were included in the field of the Chicago development. It is a field whose importance has been overlooked for too long — so long, in fact, that buildings and documents alike may have disappeared betore any real insight into what they represent has been gained. These Chicago apartment houses represent the first steps toward a kind of large-scale housing which is very different from anything we  its time the Virginia was one of the finest residential hotels in the city, on a par with the Drake. Cf. the illustration in P. T. Gilbert and C. L. Bryson, Chicago and Its Makers (Chicago, 1929), p. 529.  find in Europe. Progress in this direction was largely canceled in the next generation, however. A reaction set in against the big apartment house and the residential hotel, coupled with a fresh concentration of attention on the private, one-family dwelling. Frank Lloyd Wright is the outstanding figure in this later movement.”  In 1893 this Chicago architeclure impressed a French ob- server — the novelist Paul Bourget — with “ the simple force of need as a principle of beauty. . . . There is so little caprice aud fancy in these monuments and these streets that they seem to be the work of some impersonal power, irresistible, unconscious, like a force of nature, in the service of which man has been but a docile instrument. It is this expression of the overpowering immensity of modern commerce which gives to the city something of tragedy, and, to my feeling, a poetry.” ®  The Chicago school has many claims to importance. Its mem- bers made the first expressive use of the new technical poten- lialities in buildings which were permanent and essential parts of the structure of Chicago’s daily life. They produced not just a few isolated specimen structures but covered the whole business district with a new architecture. Their work changed the entire face of a great modern city.  TOWARD PURE FORMS  The architects of the Chicago school employed a new type of construction: the iron skeleton. At that time it was called quite simply “ Chicago construction.”  They invented a new kind of foundation to cope with the prob- lem of the muddy ground of Chicago: the floating foundation.  %2 For information concerning its course, ef. Purcell, Feick, and Elnistic, “ The Statics and Dynamics of Architecture,” Western Archifect, January 1913, p. 1, and the article on Irving J. Gill’s work in California on p. 35 of the issue of April 1913. The issue of August 1913 contains an account by Walter Burley Griffin of some of his own suburban developments (p. 66).  53 Paul Bourget, Ouére Mer, vol. I, chap. V, as quoted in Harriet Monroe, op. cit., pp. 136-137. 
They introduced the horizontally elongated window: the Chicago window.  They created the modern business and administration building,  The importance of the school for the history of architecture lies in this fact: for the first time in the nineteenth century the schism between construction and architecture, between the engineer and the architect, was healed. This schism marked the whole preceding part of the century. With surprising boldness, the Chicago school strove to break through to pure forms, forms which would unite construction and architecture in an identical expression.  These Chicago architects of the eighties were quite conscious of their own boldness. In 1890 John Root — the constructor of the Monadnock Block — said, speaking of modern business buildings, that “‘ to lavish upon them profusion of delicate ornament is worse than useless. . . . Rather should they by their mass and proportion convey in some large elemental sense an idea of the great, stable, conserving forces of modern civilization.  “ One result of methods such as I have indicated will be the resolution of our architectural designs into their essential ele- ments. So vital has the underlying structure of these buildings become, that it must dictate absolutely the general departure of external forms; and so imperative are all the commercial and constructive demands, that all architectural detail employed in expressing them must become modified by them. Under these conditions we are compelled to work definitely with definite aims, permeating ourselves with the full spirit of the age, that we may give its architecture true art forms.” ©  The amount of work which came out of the Chicago school in the course of its development was very great. We shall take three buildings, each by a different architect but all showing clearly the inherent urge of the Chicago school toward purity of form.  * From a paper read at the Chicago Art Institute and published in the Inland Architect, June 1890. Quoted in Monroe, op. cit., p. 107.  The Leiter Building, 1889  William Le Baron Jenney not only produced the first example of Chicago construction in his Home Insurance Building of 1884-85, but he also erected the first building in which there was not even one self-supporting wall, the Leiter Building. With it purity of constructional methods seemed to find its equivalent in architecture; the Leiter Building attains to an expression in which the lingering memories of historical styles play a negligible part.  The Leiter Building, planned in 1889, fills a whole block at Van Buren and State streets (fig. 179). Jenney dealt with and mastered a front four hundred feet long and eight stories high through the use of great and simple units. The skeleton fur- nishes the dominating accents of the building, appearing in the huge squares into which the outer wall is divided. These panels are filled by plate-glass windows which “ are separated only by fireproofed metal columns.” *  The spirit behind this employment of the skeleton as an ar- chitectonic means has received further development in con- temporary architecture. Le Corbusier’s Maison de Verre, a Geneva apartment house of 1932, represents a later stage in its evolution (fig. 180).  Jenney’s contemporaries seem to have recognized the signifi- cance of his work. Even the anonymous author of Industrial Chicago (1891) momentarily discards his accustomed sobriety in speaking of it: “It has been constructed with the same science and all the careful inspection that would be used in the construction of a steel railroad bridge of the first order. The severely plain exterior is grand in its proportions. The great corner piers are carried upward to a chaste cornice. Designed for space, light, ventilation, and security, the Leiter Building meets the object sought in every particular.” With its building, he goes on to exclaim, “a giant structure . . . healthy to look  % The building will be located on the East side of State Street and will extend from Van Buren to Congress Strect. It will be eight stories; the three street fronts will be of light gray New England granite, the construction a steel skeleton, the masonry protecting the external columns. It is intended that the whole building should be one great retail store” (Irdand Architect, vol. XIV, no. 1, August 1889, p. 10).  86 Industrial Chicago, 1, 205. 
at, lightsome and airy while substantial, was added to the great houses of a great city . . . a commercial pile in a style undreamed of when Buonarroti erected the greatest temple of Christianity.” °  Although the Leiter Building scems to be the first of the high buildings Lo exhibit the trend toward the use of pure forms, it is loday almost unknown, except to a handful of specialists.  180. LE CORBUSIER, Maison Clarté, Geneva, 1930-32. The properties of the skeleton uxed in the service of residential needs.  Its importance consists not in its height — which happens to be of eight, rather than twelve or twenty stories — but in the identity between what is expressed in its construction and in its architecture. The Leiter Building marks a starting point for this kind of architecLural purity and should not be ignored  179. WILLIAM LE BARON JENNEY, Leiter Building, Van Buren Street, Chicago, . . . . oie 1889. The skeleton becomes a means of architectonic expresston. in the histor vy of architecture.  * Industrial Chicago, I, 201-205.  
181. BURNHAM AND COMPANY, Reliance Building, Chicago, 1894. In its airiness and purity of proportion, this building serves to symbolize the spirit of the Chicago school, whose swan song it was.  182. M1ES VAN DER ROHE, Project for a glass tower, 1921. A modern exeursion into the realm of fantasy, something of whose spirit, nevertheless, had been anticipated in the Reliance Building.  The Reliance Building, 1894  John Root died in 1891; Daniel Burnham, his partner, swung over into the classical school and took his cues from New York.** But in 1894 one more building in the spirit of his dead partner emerged from Burnham’s office, the Reliance Building on State Street — the ‘‘ swan song” of the Chicago school. Speaking in a broader sense, il might perhaps be said to have grown out of the Chicago soil itself, to be a reflection of the high architectural level that has been reached in that city.  The Reliance Building is a glass tower fifteen stories high (fig. 181). The base is formed from some dark and unobtrusive stone, in sharp contrast to the glass and glazed white tile tower  ®S Peter B. Wight, * Daniel Tudson Burnham and His Ass vol. XXXVIIL, no. 1 (uly 1915).  "3 © The Reliance Building was the ‘ swan song ’ to the old traditions, based on independ- ence of design. for ¥ symbol of our inconsistency and an ample proof that no sooner do we approach a com- ton way of working than the promise of a truly expressive style of American architecture is broken by the capricious introduction of a new fashion ” (A, N. Rebori, “ The Work of Burnham and Root,” Architectural Record, vol. XXXVI, no. 1, July 1915, p. 62.  siates,” Architectural Record,  ich were noted the works of Burnham and Root. It stands today a  
which springs up from it. The eaves of the flat roof are only thin slabs, emphasized no more than they must be to serve as protections. There is no overbearing cornice of stone.”  Ten years’ experience lies behind the understanding treatment of the horizontally proportioned ‘ Chicago windows.” In earlier office buildings of the Chicago school (the now-de- stroyed Tacoma Building by Root and Burnham, for example) the bow windows tend somewhat to be independent and iso- lated parts of the design. In the Reliance Building they project no more than they are required to in order to pick up light, They are wholly incorporated into the glass body of the building.  This glass tower is still standing, and, although its glazed white tiles have become encrusted with dirt, its airiness and pure proportions make it a symbol of the spirit of the Chicago school. It is curious that this building too has been left unnoticed in the history of architecture. It has its place there as a witness to the best of the spirit of the nineteenth century.  Miés van der Rohe’s scheme for a skyscraper of glass and iron is the dream of a European architect in the year 1921 (fig. 182). The points of departure for dream projects of this sort should perhaps be sought in works like the Reliance Building of some three decades earlier. But it may be that this Chicago building is something more than an incentive for fantasy: an architec- tonic anticipation of the future.  Sullivan: The Carson, Pirie, Scotl Store, 1899-1906  In 1899 Louis Sullivan began to remodel the Schlesinger & Mayer store at Stale and Madison streets, on the famous “World's Busiest Corner.’’ The work was done in three sec- tions, in 1899, 1903-04, and 1906." In the summer of 1904 the  78 Jn this respect it differs markedly from Burnham’s Flatiron Building in New York (1902), with its immense cornice and its skeleton cluttered with heavy stonework.  1 The first unit was nine stories high and three bays (some 60 feet) in width; the second was twelve stories high and 150 feet wide, but otherwise identical in design with the first. The final unit was 105 feet wide. Hugh Morrison (one of the first to recognize the archi- tectural importance of this store) gives a detailed account of its building in his careful study, Louis Sullivan, Prophet of Modern Architecture (New York, 1935), pp. 197 ff.  $$. ______.  183, LOUIS SUL- LIVAN, Carson, Pi- rie, Seott and Com- pany, department store, Chicago, 1899- 1904. Built in three unils on State and Madison streets, the “World's Busiest Cor- ner.” The round lower af the corner was in- eluded at the insistence of the owners.  establishment was taken over by the Carson, Pirie, Scott. firm. The third unit was built for it by Daniel Burnham & Com- pany, but Louis Sullivan’s scheme for the first two sections was retained, with only a few unimportant changes (fig. 183),  In spite of its complexity Sullivan’s building remains unsur-  passed in its expressive strength. The interior is still of the  warehouse type, with continuous, unbroken floor areas. The front is designed to fulfill its indispensable function, the ad- mission of light. Its basic elements are the horizontally elon- gated “Chicago windows,” admirably homogeneous and treated to coincide with the framework of the skeleton. The whole front is executed with a strength and precision that is matched by no other building of the period. The slightest dif- ferences in proportion can be felt at once against a background of this definiteness. The windows, with their thin metal frames, are sharply cut into the facade (fig. 184). The windows in the lower stories are connected by a narrow line of ornament pressed into the terra cotta. Too thin to be visible in the 
photograph, this line nevertheless helps to accentuate the horizontal organization of the front.”  Even when architects of Sullivan’s generation pressed on toward new solutions they sometimes found themselves held back by nineteenth-century traditions. They suffered from the sort of split personality which we spoke of earlier. The split personality of the nineteenth-century architect makes itself felt. in Sullivan’s Carson, Pirie, Scott building. The round  184. LOUIS SULLIVAN, Carson, Piric, Scott and Company Department Store, Chicago, 1899-1904. Detail. Outstanding for strength and purity of expression even in the work of Louis Sullivan. The neutral and impartial equilibrium inherent in cage constrac- tion is emphasized, rather than ils vertical elements.  tower at the corner with ils narrow vertical ribs and glass panes suddenly introduces a motif quite out of character with the rest of the building. The owners had asked for this cur- vilinear addition (which we noted as a stylistic remnant in Eiffel and Boileau’s Bon Marché of 1876) as a reminiscence of  ® George Elmslie, whom we have already mentioned as one of Sullivan’s staunchest collaborators, was the designer of most of the ornamentation on his buildings. It was not influenced by the contemporary arf nouvean.  he pavilion attached to their old store. But this alone would not have affected the work of as strong-minded a man as Sullivan.  Around 1900, on its completion, this store appeared old- fashioned to contemporaries. By this time they had lost their iearts and heads to the “ commercial classicism ” of the New York architects and its distortion of business buildings into mercantile palaces. For three decades the New York prac- itioners of the academic architecture ruled the whole country.  et Fide  id we See a  185. WALTER GROPIUS, Project for the competition on the Tribune Tower, Chicago, 1923. Constituent facts developed by the Chieayo school reappear independently in this Earopean project.  The Carson, Pirie, Scott store, one of the late productions of the Chicago school, seems to be molded more by the anony- mous spirit which ruled the work of that school than by Louis Sullivan’s personal tendencies. In Sullivan’s best-known buildings — from the Wainwright in St. Louis (1890-91) to the Prudential in Buftalo (1894-95) and the Bayard Building  ‘in New York (1897-98) —- he continually increased the stress  upon the vertical elements in the design, emphasizing the piers al the corners. He uses narrow pillars and gives the whole building a strictly upward orientation, a movement as marked as that which we encounter in the Gothic cathedrals. 
But the skeleton — whether iron or steel or reinforced con- crete — is essentially a neutral spatial network. Its “ cage construction ” bounds a certain volume of space with complete impartiality, and no one intrinsic direction. In his typical buildings Sullivan picks out and emphasizes the vertical lines of force in this network. In the Carson, Pirie, Scott store, however, it is the neutral and impartial equilibrium inherent in the skeleton construction which Sullivan chooses to project upon the facade of the building.  The influence of the Chicago school was cut short by the in- flux of eclecticism. Louis Sullivan — the great architect of the school — did leave his mark upon the next generation of architects in the Middle West. (Frank Lloyd Wright was to emerge as the outstanding figure in this generation.) And during the first decade of our century, the traditions of the Chicago school survived in works by some of its younger members: George Elmslie, Hugh Garden, George Maher, Griffin, Thomas Tallmadge, and a few others. Some of their buildings might have served as a revelation to the rising gen- eration in Europe. They failed entirely, however, to influence the corresponding groups in their own country. A literary architectural education cut the younger men off from the principles of the Chicago school and destroyed their individ- uality as well. Left in isolation, the surviving members of the Chicago school grew discouraged, and many of them lost the force which they had shown in a more favorable period.  In the 1922 competition for the Chicago Tribune Building, the plans of a competent American architect — Raymond Hood — won the first prize. By this time, however, the confidence and belief in its own forces which had sustained the Chicago school had completely disappeared. The school might just as well have never existed; its principles were crowded out by the vogue of “ Woolworth Gothic.” #  The hundred thousand dollar international competition for the Tribune Building drew entries from everywhere. The projects submitted give an invaluable cross section of the architecture  % Stemming from the Woolworth Building in New York, 1911-13.  $n ge  of this period.“ One of the foreign entrants was Walter Gro- pius. Both the jury and the public must have considered his scheme quite unstylish and old-fashioned. There is no doubt, however, that it was much closer in spirit to the Chicago school than the Gothic tower which was executed. When we compare Gropius’ 1922 project and Sullivan’s Carson, Piric, Scott store they seem like Uwo stages in the development of the same set of ideas. In both of them the network of the skeleton is the basis of and inextricable from the architectonic expression. There are the same hovering and sharply cut surfaces. Gropius even employs the “ Chicago window,” with a fixed glass panel in the middle and narrow ventilating windows at the sides (fig. 185). The whole plan seems an outgrowth of the Chicago school, but actually Chicago windows and the Chicago sky- scraper were unknown in Europe. This coincidence, the way in which these two men arrived independently at similar solutions, shows that the Chicago school really was “ permeated by the spirit of the age,” in the phrase of one of its best representa- tives. It could therefore create constituent facts for architec- ture, facts that reappeared in later periods just as Borromini’s undulating wall reappeared in English residential quarters.”  The Influence of the Chicago World's Fair, 1893  At the very moment when the Chicago school gained a mastery of the new means which it had created, its further development and influence were abruptly choked off. The event which di-  7 All these projects, with the exception of K. Lonberg-Holm’s entry, were published in International Competition for a New Administration Building for the Chicago Tribune (Chicago, 1923), issued by the Tribune Company. The American entries fall tragically short of the level reached in Chicago during the eighties and nineties. Fashionable architects submitted typical specimens of the now dominant “ Woolworth Gothic,” and all the entries show a secondhand fancifulness instead of a sense for scale and proportion. The competition chiefly inspired an unhappy excursion into romanticism. An cqually distressing helplessness appears in the European projects, with the exception of a few entries from the northern countries: Bruno Taut (project #231), Max Taut (229), Rijvoet and Dujker, K. Lonberg-Holm, Walter Gropius, and Adolpl: Meyer (197). (The numbers refer to the plans published in The International Competition.) These men produced schemes which represented endeavors to escape from familiar routines.  % Hood, whose Gothic Tribune Tower was completed in 1925, was himself on the verge of a change which achieved its full expression about 1930. In that year he built the McGraw-Hill building in New York, whose architecture recognizes in part the new Eu- ropean developments. He was to arrive at far more impressive solutions later on in the buildings at Rockefeller Center. 
rectly effected this change was the Chicago World’s Fair of 1893 (the World’s Columbian Exposition), but influences working in this direction had set in long before in another section of the country.  American architecture came under many different influences during the ninetcenth century, but none was so strong or came at such a critical moment as the rise to power of the mercantile classicism developed in the East.  The 1893 World’s Fair elicited a variety of responses. The public and most of the architects were rapturous in their de- light. While I was in Chicago, one architect who had worked on it quoted from memory the rather ironical comment of William James: ‘‘ Everyone says one ouglit to sell all one has and mortgage one’s soul to go there; it is esteemed such a revelation of beauty. People cast away all sin and baseness, burst into tears, and grow religious, etc., under the influence.”  Some European observers were more sceptical. The extremely well-informed Belgian constructer Vierendeel found both its staff architecture and the construction it enveloped timid and secondhand — as we saw toward the end of our discussion of the great nineteenth-century exhibitions.  The lonely American voices raised against the unexampled seduction of the public taste underlying the Fair’s pseudo- splendor went unheard. Louis Sullivan said bitterly that “ the damage wrought to this country by the Chicago World’s Fair will last half a century.” At the time this may have seemed only the exaggerated expression of an outraged artist; it turned out to be a precise prophecy of what was actually to follow.  Public, artists, and literary people believed themselves to be witnessing a splendid rebirth of the great traditions of past ages. The immense appeal of this re-created past in “ the White City ” can only be laid to a quite unnecessary national inferiority complex. It was the same feeling — reinforced by the prestige of the Paris exhibition of 1889 — which gave the French academicians a dominating role at this Chicago fair. The contemporary biographer of John Root expresses it quite clearly: “At that time few hoped to rival Paris; the  artistic capacity and experience of the French made us dis- irustful of ourselves. We should have a great American fair, but in points of grouping and design we must expect inferiority to French taste.” 1 And it was to France that the builders of the Fair turned in their search for beauty. Its beautics were taken out of the preserve jars of the Académie des Beaux-Arts -— where they had been laid up during what was certainly its worst period. Grand prix de Rome facades were copied, and men like Burnham (who had assisted in raising the Chicago school to a level much higher than the Academy’s) acted like docile children in the presence of the French masters. All this is another instance of the split between thought and feeling in the nineteenth century. Only Louis Sullivan had sufficient inner strength to hold fast in the midst of a general surrender. But his Transportation Building for the Chicago fair marked the beginning of his unpopularity as an architect.  Mercantile classicism had been developing and gaining sLrength in New York since the eighties, but it won its country-wide ascendency at the World’s Columbian Exhibition of 1893.77  The spirit behind it had now come to possess authority for American architecture as a whole.”* The Fair should, indeed, have stood in New York; it so thoroughly represented the in- fluence of that city. But as soon as a Columbian exposition was proposed, the people of Chicago leaped at the idea. “‘ The enthusiasm of the city was set on its mettle; an aggressive campaign was organized, and five million dollars pledged by private subscription before other cities had begun to act.” 7  The hypnotic spell which mercantile classicism exerted appears from some lines in Frank Lloyd Wright’s Autobiography. Shortly after the close of the Fair (and after the completion of Wright's Winslow house), Daniel Burnham called on him.  ‘6 Larriet Monroe, op. eft., p. 218.  7 Immense and thoroughly businesslike New York building firms (McKim, Mead, and White) carried out the greater part of the Pair.  78 Professor Hamlin observes that “ by 1880 there were constantly a dozen or fifteen Americans in the Ecole of Paris. In all the schools, Paris-trained men were in deniand as instructors. . .. The Ecole lad furnished the model upon which all our American schools were shaping the teaching of design ” (‘ The Influence of the Ecole des Beaux Arts on Our Arebitectural Education,” Architectural Record, April 1908, p. 242).  7 Nlonroe, op. cif., p. 216. 
“To be brief, he would take care of my wife and children if I would go to Paris, four years of the Beaux Arts. Then Rome — two years. Expenses all paid. A job with him when Icame back... .  “* Another year and it will be too late, Frank,’ said Uncle Dan... .  “*Ves, too late, Uncle Dan. It’s too late now, I’m afraid. Tam spoiled already.  “*Tve been too close to Mr. Sullivan. He has helped spoil the Beaux Arts for me, or spoiled me for the Beaux Arts, I guess I mean.’  ee  ... The Fair is going to have a great influence in our country. The American people have seen the “Classics” on a grand scale for the first time. . . . I can see all America con- structed along the lines of the Fair, in noble “dignified” classic style. The great men of the day all feel that way about it — all of them.’ ” ®  9 FL. Wright, An Autobiography (New York, 1932), pp. 123-124.  ———  FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT  Wright and the American Development  Of all present-day architects whose span of work reachcs back into the nineteenth century, Frank Lloyd Wright is without doubt the most farsighted, a genius of inexplicably rich and continuing vitality. He ranges the wide expanse of historical interrelations, drawing particularly upon the architecture of the Far East — not, however, in the manner of the last cen- tury, as a substitute for creative impulse, but, like Matisse with negro or Persian art, out of an inner sympathetic relation- ship. At the same time he springs out of the American soil and the American tradition more directly perhaps than any other of the great American architects. True insight into his work demands a somewhat subtle approach, for Wright’s dominat- ing personality, present in every touch of what he does, is not at all simple. He bears in himself the marks of the late nineteenth century; yet isolated and singlehanded, without aid from his contemporaries among painters and sculptors, he has introduced the beginnings of a new conception.  When he began work in 1887, he was — in Chicago — at the very center, the fountainhead, of architectural development. Ie was apprentice in the atelier of two of the best men, Louis Sullivan, “ lieber Meister,”’ he calls him, and Dankmar Adler, the grand old chief,” at the very time when they were on the ascendant creatively, working on the Auditorium Building. He had as the principal influence of his youth the culmination of the Chicago renascence. And yet when he began to work independently, Wright did not continue directly in the Chicago school; he did not carry over the use of the new materials — the iron skeleton and the great glass surfaces of the office buildings — into his own sphere: housing. Instead he was rather conservative; in many respects he followed Richardson more than Sullivan. It was not until as late as the thirties, when European architects were already utilizing the inherent possibilities of ferroconcrete to the fullest, that Wright, as he says himself, used it for the first time to any great extent for one of his houses.*! This was duc not to any lack of technical ability but to his own will and character.  * The Kaufman house, “ Falling Water,” Bear Run, Pennsylvania, 1937. 
In Europe Wright was very shortly accepted and understood by the generation which was responsible for the modern move- ment. In 1908 he was visited by Kuno Francke, then a German exchange professor lecturing at Harvard University on aesthet- ics. The result of this visit was the publication in Germany in 1910 of a monumental work on Wright’s architecture.” This was supplemented in 1911 by a smaller work on the same sub- ject, which enjoyed a very wide circulalion.* These two books marked the beginning of Wright’s forcign influence; the book published in 1910 has not since been approached in compre- hensiveness.  What is the explanation of the fact that Wright is the only architect so far ahead of his own generation, a man who is even today creating works that have a strong impact? The answer is rather simple: he had less debris to clear away than the Europeans. He had been born in the Middle West, within the shadow of the place possessing the greatest architectural vital- ity of the period: Chicago.  From the outset Wright devoted himself to the problem which was to be his life interest — the house as a shelter. He had at his disposal the anonymous American tradition, the example of Sullivan, and the conscious artistry which Richardson had cultivated in home building. The secret of Wright’s work is that he saw in the tradition of the American house those ele- ments which could be used as a basis for the future. He takes these basic elements and adds new ones, enlarging — with all the force of genius-— the structure of the house delivered to him.  The objection may be advanced that the English had been working on the problem of the dwelling house since 1860. But the English at this time had no architects of the stature of Sullivan or Richardson. Philip Webb and Norman Shaw are not to be compared with the two Americans. The crux of the difference between the English and American architects lies in their point of departure: the Englishmen began with a re- form, through handicraft, of furniture, rugs, wallpaper, and  8 Frank Lloyd Wright, ausgefiihrie Baten und Entwiirfe (Berlin, 1910), with a preface in German by Wright. 8 Frank Lloyd Wright, ausgefiihrle Bauten (Berlin, 1911); foreword by C. R. Ashbee.  _—_—$_—$$?__$——————  other small household objects which had been debased by industrial production. The Americans, on the other hand, started from the house as a whole, and were not seduced by an overemphasis upon handicraft.  It would be not without interest to make a comparative study of Frank Lloyd Wright and his Scotch contemporary, Charles Rennie Mackintosh,** who was born in the same year — to remark their differences and the traits they possess in com- mon; to consider the way in which they treat wall surfaces, how ‘hey use and expose wooden posts and beams, and how they conceive their furniture. They both began by working in terms of their own generation, Mackintosh in Glasgow, Wright on this side of the Atlantic. Some of Wright’s early peculiari- ies, especially in his furnishings, persist in bis work up to the resent time.  The Charnley house on Astor Street, Chicago (fig. 186), with its projecting wings (execuled in 1892 while Wright was suillin the employ of Adler and Sullivan, and usually attributed © that firm) is not very different from the Mary Ward Seltle- ment of 1896 in the Bloomsbury district of London.® In the final analysis the facades of European buildings cannot avoid restlessness and are to a certain extent split into details. Their architects never dare to use rigorously, as Wright did in the Charnley house, the flat surfaces of the American tradition, cutling in the windows sharply and clearly as if with an axe and molding the house with few but persistent accents.*° Yet  * The Scottish architect, Charles Rennie Mackintosh (1869-1928), noted for his art school in Glasgow and especially for his country houses (c.g., the house of Dr. Blackie, Heleasborough, 1902). Mackintosh had a direct influence on the arf decoralif movement in Vienna, the Wiener Werkstétte. The founder of this institution took his artists to Scotland to show them how bouschold furnishings and architecture should he designed. The influence was a complete one for the moment, but restricted 10 matters of taste. No new architectural vision cane out of it. Nikolaus Pevsner, in his Pioneers of the Modern Movement (London and New York, 1937), gives an excellent survey of Mackintosh’s work, with a bibliography (pp. 221-222). Pevsner may be consulted also on other ques- tions concerning the British development. A sharply unfavorable attitude toward Mackintosh is taken by his close compatriot, P. M. Shand, in ‘ Glasgow Interlude,” Architectural Review, LX XVIL (January 1935), 23.  °° Cf. Pevsner, op. cil., p. 157.  6 Speaking of the Charnley house, Hugh Morrison, in his Louis Sudlivan (New York, 1935), says that it was ‘“ broader in conception than any of Sullivan's ether residences, with more feeling for the organization of plane surfaces, skillfully punctuated by window voids ” (pp. 132-133). 
and  186. FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT, Charnley house, Astor Street, Chicago, 1892. The Charnley house is from Wright's earliest period, designed while he was still an employee of Adler and Sullivan. (The extension of the right wing is of a later date.) In ul he uses the flat surfaces of the American tradilion, culling in the windows sharply as if with an axe.  as a whole Wright’s earliest houses, even the first built on his own account, are not fundamentally different from the best English examples. The change, however, was not to be long in coming. England produced nothing more. Europe was adrift, seeking solutions. Frank Lloyd Wright went ahead.  The Cruciform and the Elongated Plan  Before I had seen any of Wright’s houses, I stopped once for a rest ina hunting lodge in the Vermont hills. It had an immense stone chimney which stood massively in its center, rising the entire height from the ground up through the roof. The in- terior space was undivided, except for a partition which cut off the kitchen and the sleeping room. There was no ceiling, but simply open rafters from which hung fox and bear skins. At that moment I began to understand the way Wright con- ceives his interior spaces. He works fundamentally and as far as possible with the house as one room. Its inner space is dif- ferentiated to meet special needs. As he points out, he “ de- clared the whole . . . floor as one room, cutting off the kitchen  as a laboratory, putting servants’ sleeping and living quarters next to it, semi-detached, on the ground floor, screening vari- ous portions in the big room, for certain domestic purposes — like dining or reading, or receiving a formal caller.”’ 87  In organizing his plans Wright goes back to the seventeenth century in the use of the Jarge chimney in the center of the house as starting point for the whole layout. He spreads out the different rooms from this massive kernel. What first im- pressed European architects was his “‘ windmill” plan, so called because of the way the rooms were extended outward from the center like the vanes of a windmill (fig. 189). This “windmill ” plan is really cruciform, an interpenetration of two parts of the house, which cut each other transversely to form a cross. Often they are of different heights; then the effect is of one crossbar superimposed upon and penetrating the other.  This early American practice of using a central chimney as the core of the house, as the point about which the whole is or- ganized, was kept alive also through the nineteenth century (fig. 187). Again we may cite as evidence one of those unknown writers who reflect the common taste. In one of the small popular books on suburban and country houses in the early seventies, there is proposed a country house built completely around a fourfold, four-sided chimney, with rooms leading off in wings from each of the four sides. The author’s reason for this cruciform arrangement is very close to Wright’s own intention, both in the stress placed upon light — Wright em- phasizes the fact that rooms in his layout can get light from three sides — and in the urge to treat the several rooms as a unit: “ The design of this house was made for the purpose of giving each room a sunny southern exposure, and out of ten rooms nine have at least one lookout to the southeast. The principal floor is so managed that the spacious hall with wind- ing staircase presents an attractive feature on entering. The chimney is in the center of the house and sliding doors connect each of the principal rooms so that when occasion requires, hall, parlor, library, and dining room may be thrown together, the  “ Modern Architecture (Princeton, 1931), Princeton Monographs in Art and Archae- ology, p. 72. 
189. FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT, Isabel Roberts house, River Forest, Hlinois, 1907. Plan. Built late in the Chicago period, when Wright had found freedom of expres-  LIBRARY. FSX 184  PARLOR  Nac  187. G. E, WOODWARD, Plan of a cruciform country house, 1873. From Woodward, “Subur- ban and Country Houses’ (New York, c. 1873), Buill around a fourfold, four-sided chimney with diagonally sliding doors to con- vert the house, lo a certain ertent, inlo a single room.  188. G. E. WOODWARD, Cruciform country house, 1873. As always in this period, the exterior has nothing of the precision of the plan. One of Wright's great accomplishments was to find an equivalent for the ground plan in spatial and exterior treatment.  sion.  HEASEPER  octagon form of these rooms adding much to their beauty.” ® As always in this period, the exterior of the house has nothing of the precision of the plan (fig. 188). Nevertheless, there are suggestions of the interpenetration of two volumes, for which in his Chicago period Wright was to find artistic solutions.  Most of Wright’s houses, especially the smaller ones, are based on the cruciform plan issuing out of and produced by this in- terpenctration of two volumes of different heights. Such are the Hickox house, Kankakee, Illinois, 1900; the Ward house, Willett Park, Tlinois, 1901; the Willitts house, Highland Park, Illinois, 1901; the small country house of Charles Ross at Lake Delavan, Wisconsin, 1902; the Robert Evans house in Long- wood, Illinois, 1904; the Isabel Roberts house, 1907; the Hor- ner house, Birchwood, 1908.  88 George E. Woodward, Suburban and Country Houses (New York, copr. 1873), pp- 15-16.  190, The slab roof and the low horizontal extension of the wings are interesting. This exterior shows  Sater Bait ae  FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT, Isabel Roberts house, River Forest, Ulinois, 1907.  
191, FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT, Isabel Roberts house, River Forest, Illinois, 1907. Two-story living room. Wright uses the higher volume to mold the space of the living room from the ground up through the entire height to the inner planes of the roof.  Of these, the Isabel Roberts house in River Forest, Illinois (figs. 189, 190), one of the most charming of Wright’s smaller houses, shows an interesting employment of the interpenetra- tion of two volumes of different heights, in which Wright uses the higher volume to mold, not the hallway, but the space of the living room from the ground up through the whole height to the inner planes of the roof (fig. 191). It represents an effort to satisfy the feeling of a need for the full height as living space. This feeling finds expression not only in the houses of American settlers of the seventeenth century but in many early civilizations, and it has reappearcd in our own period. Wright was one of the first to recognize this feeling, to for- mulate it and give it expression. In the Isabel Roberts house the living room dominates, rising up to the gently sloping roof, and divided in height by a gallery, so that there are recessed spaces both above and below. This gives an unaccustomed  and new plasticity to the whole room, which is enhanced by the use of various planes in different materials—the brick faccof the chimney, the several wall surfaces, and the slope of the roof.  Miés van de Rohe, the German architect — one of the few whose early work reflects Wright’s influence without either being absorbed by it or reducing it to a merely decorative use -~ developed the “ windmill ” plan in several of his schemes.*° Wright himself never abandoned the idea of the house spread out from a central core. When in 1939 he built a low-cost four- family housing unit (Suntop Houses, Ardmore, Pa.; figs. 192, 193),°° he separated the different apartments by brick walls crossing at right angles. At the central core he put not a chim- ney but all the utilities — plumbing, heating, electricity, and ventilation — so that they were concentrated in the darkest spot in the building.  When it is possible, Wright likes to spread his structures out freely over the ground. In the introduction to the study of his work published in Berlin in 1910, he points out that the first floor was often built principally as a cellar. The main living quarters lie in the upper story on one floor, as in the Coonley house (1911), where only the entrance hall and the game room are on the ground floor; in Taliesin, his own house, they are set into and connected with the ground. This led him to the flexible and informal ground plan so deeply embedded in the American architectural development from its beginning. As a consequence of this development Wright now let the different rooms flow out horizontally, just as, in houses like the Isabel Roberts house, he had molded them vertically.  By 1910 Wright had achieved a flexibility of open planning unapproached hitherto. In other countries at that time the flexible ground plan and the flexibly molded interior and ex- terior were almost unknown. Wright’s realization of a flexible treatment of the inner space of a building is probably his greatest service to architecture. It brought life, movement, freedom into the whole rigid and benumbed body of modern architecture.  #9 Project for a brick house in 1922. *® See Archifectural Forum, August 1939. 
PENTHOUSE MEZZANINE  leper Part LR  SLIN- TERRACE  Seate wn feet Q 5 40 15  FOUNDATION  GROUND FL  192, FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT, Suntop Houses, Ardoiore, Pennsylvania, 1939, Plan. In this low-cost, four-family housing unit, Wright separates the different apart- ments by brick walls crossing al right angles. Al the central core he has pulall the ulilities — plumbing, heating, electricity, and ventilation, so thal thev are concentrated in the darkest spot in the building.  193. FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT, Suntop Houses, Ardmore, Pennsylvania, 1939.  Plane Surfaces and Structure  The Japanese house impressed Frank Lloyd Wright as “a supreme study in elimination — not only of dirl, but the elimination, too, of the insignificant.” For the American house he accomplished just such an elimination, a rejection of the confused and the trivial. But he did more than this. He took up those elements lying about everywhere unobserved - -- ele- ments arising from purely utilitarian solutions — and dis- covered in this raw material ils hidden expressiveness, just as  194, Central Park Casino, New York City, 1871.  the following generation was to discover the hidden expressive- ness in engineering and construction. Wright brought forward these elements and changed them, opened our eyes to their secret potentialities and their inherent beauty, revealing their symbolic strength as a poct does in showing forth what inner content of feeling the trees and mountains, the rivers and lakes, of his native land bold for him and for us.  * Joseph Hudnut, in the foreword to the catalogue of Wright’s first exhibition in New 
In the treatment of the house as a spatial unit he seized upon these elements wherever he could find them. He also sought to shape the whole house in terms of its own period. The earliest American houses — those of the settlers along the fron- tier — had to afford protection against attack, and conse- quently were meagerly supplied with openings on the first floor, being without rows of windows and open galleries like those that have given the peasant houses of Switzerland and  195. R. E. SCHMIDT, GARDEN & MARTIN, Warehouse of ferroconcrete for Mont- gomery, Ward & Co., Chicago, 1908. Immense warehouse built in the same year as the Robie house. With unbroken horizontal lines.  southern Germany — at any rate since the early seventeenth century —so distinctive an exterior. Much later, with the appearance of the porch on the houses of southern rice and cotton planters, there was a corresponding opening up of the American house in the southern part of the country. In nine- teenth-century America the porch was used much more exten-  England (Institute of Modern Art, Boston, January-February 1940), emphasizes the fact that to understand Wright ‘ we must think of him... as a poet.”  sively as the recreation area of the home than the veranda of the European peasant house, even becoming a decisive ele- ment in the appearance of suburban and country houses. Sometimes it stretched out in long, unbroken horizontal lines, covered with a slightly sloping roof. The appearance of the Central Park Casino, New York, 1871 (fig. 194)—one of many anonymous examples — is due to an extension of this peculiarly American employment of the porch. Apparently  >  196. FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT, Robie house, Woodlawn Avenue, Chicago, 1908. In this house, which has had far-reaching influence, Wright has used plane surfaces at dif- ferent depths, advancing and receding. The Robie house, a town villa, is in close relation  to the aims of the Chicago school.  Americans like a strong and unbroken horizontal line equally in their houses and in the Pullman car.  Wright adopts the porch for his houses — not, however, en- circling his buildings with it, but pushing it forward, in keep- ing with his cruciform or elongated plans, as an extension of the wings. Very often it thrusts out into space as a pure canti- lever hovering above the earth. Such a treatment had never 
been altemp led before. True, it is the old element of the porch but it is not simply something attached to the house; rather it is am essential part of the structure, molded as an inseparable part of il. For several reasons, which he has explained over and over in his writings, Wright uses overhanging eaves. He treats them, too, as horizontal planes — “ broad protecting roof shelters,” as he calls them — just as Burnham, before he turned classicist, roofed his Reliance Building with a thin slab (fig. 181).  To these hovering horizontal elements Wright has added the plane of vertical surfaces. When he built the Charnley house in 1892 (fig. 186), he used the clean-cut level surfaces of the American tradition. But soon he became more daring, espe- cially in his elongated schemes, such as the D. D. Martin house in Buffalo (1904), and in the house which has had perhaps the most far-reaching influence of all his works, the Robie house, a town villa on Woodlawn Avenue, Chicago (fig. 196). In the nineteenth century the exterior of the American house was not up to the level of the floor plan in quality and artistic expres- sion. Wright brought about a change. He took the plane surfaces presented to him and organized them variously, mul- tiplying them, intersecting them or placing them in different depths one behind another, incorporating the plane of the garden wall with the different advancing and receding planes of the house itself so that often its solid volume is not at all apparent. This handling is not without relation to what was being explored in space conceptions in France during the very years when Wright was building the Robie house. To speak of his houses of the late Chicago period as being in the “ prairie style,” as having been inspired by the long lines of the prairie, is a pat explanation, but it does not go to the root of the mat- ter. The forms of the Robie house, the long horizontal bands, the series of windows, the garden walls, are sharply cut as if by a machine. These houses are to be explained as a pure arlistic expression which is deeply connected with the anony- mous aims of their period.  Chicagoans who did not like the Robie house, who were of- fended by the novelty of its appearance and its long stretched- out horizontal lines, sought to deride it by comparing it to a  steamship, just as later Le Corbusicr’s critics were to refer similarly to his buildings. Without knowing it, they were im- plying that the house was built in the spirit of the age out of which it came, that, like the steamship, it had been born naturally out of its period. What is decisive in it is not a super- ficial and misunderstood similarity to a steamship but its inner relationship with the aims of its time. The warehouse of Mont- gomery, Ward and Company (fig. 195), with its unbroken front of eight hundred feet and the undisguised expression of its structural body,” was built in the same year (1908) as the Robie house.  From the beginuing Wright treated the inner as well as the outer wall as a plane surface. It never occurred to him to do what European architects did about 1896 —- replace rococo decoration with the serpentine lines of the art nouveau. In his interiors, too, there is a constant endeavor to find interrcla- tions between the various separate elements — walls, ceilings, windows, and door openings. Different ceiling heights are some- times introduced into the same room, a treatment which paral- lels Wright's use of horizontal planes at different heights, such as cantilevered porches, overhanging caves, and levels varying according to the grades of the site.  Correlative with the use of abstract plane surfaces is the use of various materials and contrasting structures. The broad brick wall of a chimney and light-colored walls wilh wooden parti- tions are often juxtaposed. Very early Wright introduced the rough structure of a rusticated wall into the house, bringing it unbroken from the outside, as in primitive Limes. In this feel- ing for different materials and the search 1o find a new quality of lighting, Wright has developed an even greater refinement as he has grown older. The buildings of the Johnson Wax Company at Racine, Wisconsin (1937-39), are lighted by means of Pyrex glass tubes (fig. 201). In the winter home of the Taliesin fellowship in the Arizona desert (1939) many con- trasting materials are used — desert stone, walls of rubble conerete, wooden trusses, and inclined canvas planes forming in one surface windows and ceilings, creating, as in the Johnson  ° CP, the section on Ferroconcrete. The warehouse was built by Richard FE. Sehinidt,  Garden, and Martin. 
Wax Company buildings, a specific quality in accordance with the existing circumstances.  To use plane surfaces, on the one hand, and to give them force and expression by the frank use of undisguised materials, on the other, is to employ, as we shall soon see, one of the means of painting, which at this time in France was opening the way for our new spatial conceptions.  Wright had around him no painters and sculptors who were inspired by the same spirit. He is one of those rare exceptions, the architect who is in advance of the contemporary painter in his optical vision, In Europe, where the new spatial concep- tions flowered about 1910, the case was just the opposite; there the painter showed the way. But Wright had to do his work alone, design his own stained-glass windows, architectural details, and pictorial ornamentation. He did the capitals of the Larkin Building (fig. 197) as “ straight-edged and sharp- cornered groups of ornaments at the top of the great piers and directly below the skylights . . . strange masses of square- edge patterning.” * The fresco of the Midway Gardens, a restaurant in Chicago, now lost with the tearing down of the building, he designed out of interpenetrating circles of differ- ent sizes and different colors. In its pictorial intention this fresco stands midway between the designs of the English group around Mackintosh and the new spatial treatments which Wassily Kandinsky was undertaking in Munich at about the same time.  In his houses Wright takes the traditional flat surfaces and dissects them in strips horizontally organized and in a juxta- posed play with solid volumes, his vertical chimneys penc- trating the roof in opposition to the horizontal planes of the cantilevered porches and overhanging eaves, thus giving the exterior of Lhe American house an expression synonymous with ils plan. He dissects the wall and puts it together again with an unprecedented — after all, we are in the first decade of the twentieth century — keenness of imagination. He is impelled unconsciously by the same forces that worked in Europe about  ® Russell Sturgis, “ The Larkin Building, Buffalo, N. Y.,” Architectural Record, XX11 (1908), 320.  197. FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT, Larkin Administration Building, Buffalo, 1901. Defails of capitals of pillars. These slraiyht-edged, sharp-cornered forms appear at the lop of great piers, occupying the place usually taken by capitals, Though they are decorative, nevertheless, like all Wrighfs work, they have another impact than the purely ornamental.  198. FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT, Tennis Club, River Forest, Hlinvis, 1906. Bench of concrete slabs. Wright's way of working with slabs and interpenetration of volumes may be observed even in small details, such as this bench, in which conerele slabs are used to elongate one level, pushing through the wall and hovering above the ground.  
len years later; there, however, the concern was to explore new penetrations of inner and outer space rather than, as with Wright, to treat the house as an enclosed spatial unit.  Wright often uses the same elements as the Dutch architects of the “ Stijl” group, Mondrian and Doesburg, or the Russian constructivists like Malewitsch — for example, the abstract quadrangle, which is still the hallmark of Wright’s work. Male- witsch, however, used it as an absolute form, as a protest against academic lrompe Ceil. The Dutch organized geometri- cal forms not for ornamentation but for the expression of pure and undisguised interrelations between surfaces and colors, Behind the European research lies, to a certain extent, another will and another spatial conception.  The Urge toward the Organic  Throughout history there persist two distinct trends — the one toward the rational and the geometrical, the other toward the irrational and the organic: two different ways of dealing with or of mastering the environment. These contrasting ap- proaches to the problem have been evident in all cultures, both early and late. Since the beginning of civilization there have been cities planned according to regular schemes and cities which have grown up organically like trees. The ancient Greeks put their mathematically proportioned temples on the top of rocky acropolises, outlined against their southern skies; the villages of the Greek islands, whitewashed on the crests of hills, are easily distinguishable far out at sea because of their clearly marked and periodically rewhitened walls.  The difference between organic and geometrical perceptions is present even today in contemporary painting and contem- porary architecture. They are constantly recurrent ways of approach; one cannot be considered superior to the other. The artist has the right of choice, of saying according to his own point of view which pleases him and which he will follow. From the beginning Frank Lloyd Wright has faced toward an organic perception of the world.  Wright’s whole career has been an endeavor to express himself in what he calls “ organic architecture,” whatever that may be. fe likes to work within the shadow of this feeling. As recently as January 25, 1940, when he lectured in Jackson Hall, Boston, he devoted his entire discussion to this problem of his life. He tried by a sort of Socratic dialogue, a give-and-take between himself and his audience, to define and explain it. But his effort was fulile. It was clear, finally, that no explanation was possible in words, that what he meant by organic architecture could be revealed only in his work.  Around 1900 Louis Sullivan, in his Kindergarten Chals,™ sought to arrive at “ the true meaning of the words ‘ Organic Architec- ture’ ” through contrast, by exploring “ what the word ‘ or- ganic’ doesn’t mean.” Organic, he said, means living, means devclopment, and not, as in the reigning American architec- ture of 1900, “ pitiful in its folly, . . . functions without forms, forms without functions; details unrelated to masses, and masses unrelated to anything but folly... .” Of this he adds: ‘‘ Organic it is not. Inorganic it is becoming.’ “ Or- ganic” means for him the “ searching for realities, — a word I love because I love the sense of life it stands for, the ten- fingered grasp of things it implies... .” “ Organic,” in the sense of Sullivan and of Wright, is a protest against the split personality, against a split culture. It is identical with “ the ten-fingered grasp of reality’ or with that development in which thinking and fecling approach coincidence.  On a deep blue day in July 1939 we stood on the top of the hill on which is built Wright’s own home, Taliesin (jig. 199). The dome of the hill was so precise in shape, especially the hill- crown which became a low-walled garden above the surround- ing courts, reached by stone steps walled into the slopes,% that I asked if it had been built up in artificial regularity from below. “ No, it is the natural soil,’ Wright said. “I never build houses on the top of a hill. I build them around it, like  * Kindergarten Chats, first published in 1901-02 in Inferstale Architect and Builder, is the testament of Louis Sullivan to American youth. It is full of prophecies, some of which have already been fulfilled. Others, 1 believe, will be. The quotations are from the revised edition published in book form by Claude Bragdon (Lawrence [3], Kansas, 1931), pp. 46-49.  *® See Wright, Autobiography.  Ww tre 
an eyebrow.” And [ saw that it was indeed the house itself which brought mto consciousness the pure curve of the ground, that in a certain sense its many-layered and unobtrusive forms gave meaning and definition 1o the contours out of which it rose.  At the time when he was isolated in his profession and without public support, when America had turned against him, Wright even built houses in the folds of the earth, so that they seem to  199. FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT, Residence, Taliesin.  grow into nature and out of it. But even in his carlier houses, like the Coonley house of 1911, with its projecting eaves and its plants growing along and spreading over wooden cantile- vers, we may sce this tendency of the house to melt into its surroundings, so that it is oflen impossible to say where it begins. There are also contemporary sculptors, like Hans Arp, who would prefer to set their works in the midst of the forest so that, like a part of nature, they cannot be distinguished from other stones.  This urge toward the organic may partly explain why Wright prefers to use materials taken directly from nature, rugged stone walls, rough granite floors, and heavy unfinished timbers. Throughout his Chicago period he made no use of the skeleton either of iron or ferroconercte; °° he is most reticent in the use of glass and of while, and so cautious with openings that it is sometimes difficult even to find the entrance door. Likewise his urge toward the organic accounts for his developing his flexible, open plan — in the age of central heating — from the huge chimneys of the early colonial house.  The usual criticism of the houses of his Chicago period — the Martin house in Buffalo (1904), for example, and even the Robie house (1908) — is that they are rather dark. They have overhanging eaves and deep, low rooms. It is not completely clear what he was Lrying to express with them, nor what his real motives were. lt may be that, having grown up in Chi- cago’s most vigorous period, he reacted against the big city and its heavily glassed-in areas. In his houses and even his administration buildings he seeks to make a spatial unit of the structure, but to seal it rather than to open it up.  Behind this cautiousness in the use of new materials and this hesitation about opening up the house with glass walls, as was done in the Chicago office buildings of the eighties and the European houses of the twenties, seems to lie a special concep- tion of the needs of human nature. Wright binds the human dwelling to the earth as intimately as possible, introducing the carth into the house in the form of rough walls, and attached to it as if, in the words of Louis Sullivan, by “ the ten-fingered grasp of reality.” For Wright the house is a shelter, a covert into which the human animal can retire as into a cave, pro- tected from rain and wind and — light. There he may crouch, as it were, in complete security and relaxation, like an animal in its lair. Is there back of this the desire for shadowed dim- ness that prevailed in the late nineteenth century, or is it an  °° When he did employ concrete, it was, as in the Oak Park Temple, in the form of con- crele walls without glass surfaces. For his watls and porch pillars Wright prefers brick or small Roman brick such as was used by McIntire in the early and Richardson in the late nineteenth century. He avoids even clapboards and has used them — so far as I know -- only in a single house in Chicago, designed when he was still working with Sullivan,  
urge toward primitive eternal instincts which sooner or later must be satisfied? This we do not know. Always in the study of Wright's personality a distinction must be made between his use of elements belonging to his generation, on the one hand, and, on the other, his own genius, overleaping its natural frontiers.  The European development based on constructive means and the new visual approach had first to clear the atmosphere by pure functionalism. This was necessary, unavoidable, and healthful, but the moment the means of expression had been found, the clearing up accomplished, then again the urge to the organic could be felt. On another level and by other ways than Wright’s it is moving toward the organic. In the north- ern countries the work of the Finnish architect Alvar Aalto indicates this — and not only there. On another level Euro- pean and American architecture together may find a new and common path.  Office Buildings  Frank Lloyd Wright’s distinctively individual feeling for the house as a shelter and his handling of it as an enclosed spatial unit are reflected in his two office buildings — the Larkin Soap Company administration building in Buffalo (1904; fig. 200) and the Johnson Wax Company administration building in Racine, Wisconsin (1939; fig. 201). Though they were erected a quarter of a century apart and are very different in appear- ance, they show the same spirit and give an equal insight into Wright’s architectural treatment. Both are treated primarily as one room; both are separated from the outdoors; both are enclosed by massive walls and receive their light through sky- lights and high-placed windows or glass tubing. They are shells shutting out the outer world, isolated and self-contained units, and thus in the slrongest contrast, on the one hand, to the buildings of the Chicago school of the eighties with their wide open glass areas and, on the other, to the designs of the European movement of the twenties.  The Larkin Building stands a resolutely independent mass embraced by the extended wings of the much larger factory  building of the company. There is an interplay between the volume of its spatial unit and the square towers at either end and flanking the entrance. These towers, which encase the stairways and rise starkly without interruption upward over a hundred feet, were the despair of contemporary critics, who protested that they thrust up so strongly that there was no play of light and shadow, and who thought that they should be relieved by moldings or softened by glazed tiles in a variety of color patterns.°’ The building itself had for these critics a erimness of aspect which repelled them. It was for them an “accumulation of strange sharp-edged solids, offering no modulation of surface,” ils features “ the square corner, the right angle, the straight edge, the sharp arris, the firm vertical and horizontal lines, unbroken, unmodified, uncompromising in their geometrical precision.” ** Curiously enough, is not this very much the same sort of attack which Wright himself later made upon the right angles, flat surfaces, and triangles of the curopean architects of the twenties?  No skeleton was used in the Larkin Building. Just as in his small dwelling-houses, Wright employs brick; the towers are square brick shafts; the walls are a massive brick shell closed above by a flat roof pierced by skylights. The architect him- self characterizes the structure thus: “ Building sealed. . . . Furnishing and filing systems built-in of steel. . . . First air conditioned office building.®® . . . First metal bound plate glass doors and windows. .. .”'” Its inner core is a large space five stories high surrounded by galleries, forming a great nave open to the skylight. Square, sand-colored brick piers, rising with a Gothic strength, divide the nave from the galler- ies. That the owners later on placed an organ in this vast room is an indication of the serenity of the whole. Standing on the uppermost floor and looking down into the nave and the gal- levies, we can observe how the light falls upon the metal desk- tables from high-placed windows invisible to us.  “Cf Russell Sturgis, ** The Larkin Building, ButTalo, N. Y.,"" Arefiteetural Record, ANILL (1908), 321, 319, It is interesting to note how an earnest critic who appreciates the high quality of the plan and organization of the building cannot, however hard he tries, accept it emotionally.  % [hid., p. B19.  “ Buffalo was the birthplace of air-conditioning.  1" Architectural Forum, LXVIIT (January 1938), 88. 
The administration building of the Johnson Wax Company (1937-39) is also treated as a spatial unit, but primarily in one story. It soon became famous on account of ils unusually formed columns. But the accent here again is on the manner  201. FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT, Johnson Wax Company, Administra- tion Building, Racine, Wisconsin, 1938—  . a 39. Interior. 200. FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT,  Larkin Administration Building, Buf- falo. 1904. Nave with surrounding galleries,  
in which the lighting is achieved. I had occasion to see the building just before it was completed, and I should like to give here my first impressions:  “We come to Racine, thirty miles north of Chicago, one of those places which have neither an end nor a beginning. In the middle of the town is the Building Office for which we are looking, and in front of us there is a curved brick wall with strange, long glass strips let into the top, just visible in the winter light. . . . From a dark entrance, we arrive in a big hall filled with mushroom pillars. All the engineers have shaken their heads over these pillars which taper toward their bases and are fitted into steel shoes." At the top there are widespreading circular discs which seem to float like leaves of the Vicloria regia among the tubes of heat-resisting (Pyrex) glass. Most of the pillars carry nothing but the air above them. This glass is manufactured in small lengths, and it is very difficult to fix. But it does not discolor, and that is what Wright wanted. The pillars are a luxury, and so is the special glass, bul why should not an administrative building, which is a work-building, for once be based on poetry? The light that shimmers through the tubes is of a marvelous quality. The impression of the hall is magic. We look up into the light, like fish from the bottom of a pond, and the plates seem to swim in the flowing glass. The hall is the most fantastic thing that has been conceived in the architectural imagination for a long time. Its apparent pointlessness irritates many people !”  10 This type of column was challenged by the authorities. 1t “ was 22 ft. high, carried about 12 tons, had a base 9 in. in diameter, flagrantly disregarding the code which called for a 30 inch thickness on a column of this height. To demonstrate the soundness of his design Wright poured a test column, let it stand seven days, and watched workmen load it with 60 tons of material. Convinced, doubters piled on no more, pulled it down. On the basis of the Lest the column would be good for a minimum of 80 tons at 28 days. Secret of its amazing strength is wire mesh, welded into a cone.” (‘ Frank Lloyd Wright Tests a Column,” Architectural Forum, vol. LXVII, August 1937, p. 10.)  12 The Johnson Wax Company building has been harshly attacked by the younger architects not only for its streamilined exterior, but also because they say it lacks response to function and is theatrical in effect. Certainly, as in every one of Wright's buildings, there are to be found in the details many reminiscences of a bygone generation, but over against all these objections it seems to us ne ary to set into relief the fact that the importance of this building lies mm its experimentation with plastic forms and a new quality of light, a new technical means. for broadening the emotional scale. Like a  baroque church, the building cannot be judged without being seen, gone through, ex- perienced.  — one could have spanned the whole space with a single truss. But the magic effect would have been lost.  “This building is said to have cost double the amount orig- inally contemplated, but the firm is able and willing to afford this luxury. There have always existed buildings which satis- fied this need for luxury, and they will exist again. The point that matters is what we are to understand by luxury. Luxury does not simply mean waste of material, but only makes sense when if broadens emolional experience by means of new discovery. Only a few can fulfill this. Frank Lloyd Wright achieves in this building by means of silver light and plasticity of form, a new spatial sensation without which it is not possible to think of architecture. He shows us here, after half a century of build- ing, how luxury can still be creative in architecture” (fig. 202).°%  202. 1938-39, Interior of cornice of glass tubing, outer wall.  FRANK LLOYD WRIGIIT, Johnson Wax Company, Administration Building,  18, Giedion, “ The Dangers and Advantages of Luxury,” Foeus (London), no. 3,  Spring 1939, pp. 34-39. 
Influence of Frank Lloyd Wright  Frank Lloyd Wright is not only an architect. He belongs among the great preachers of his country; he has by nature the will and the courage to protest, Lo revolt, and to persevere. He carries on in architecture that tradition of sturdy individ- ualism of which in the middle of the last century Walt Whit- man and Henry Thoreau were the literary spokesmen. He regards this tradition as part of himself. As prophet, preacher, and agrarian individualist, he preaches hatred of the city and return to the soil and to the productive, self-sufficient. com- munity — in a land where man’s relation to the soil is too often remote and impersonal; where at the same moment, according to the varying demands of the economic trend, forests are being changed into farms and acres of growing grain changed hack into forests; where food to a great extent comes to the table out of tins; and where now it is even being advocated that tomatoes should be grown in water treated with chemical salts.  Frank Lloyd Wright belongs, in one sense of the word, to a sacrificed generation. When he began building, he had every prospect of commercial success; he built more houses in his early period than any of his European precursors. But what he built was only for the individual client. Not that his houses — all of them erected in the Middle West and the West '™* — are purely local, limited by the region and the personal tastes and requirements of the single client; like any work of art, they embody something that overreaches all restrictions of place and personal ownership. But they have had no influence on the country; they have not become an impelling creative force.  The reason is that Wright began work at the very moment when American archilecture was undermined by the most dan- gerous reaction since the time of its origin. The classic and Gothic fashions which in those years overwhelmed the con- stituent facts of American architecture had, of course, nothing to do with tradition. They meant nothing more than the giving of an artificial backbone to people who were weak in their emo-  1 Not one house was built by Wright in the country’s financial center, New York; not one in Boston.  a ="  ional structure. Behind the screens of their houses — minia- ture Versailles, Tuscan villa, or medieval manor — or their skyscrapers in sacred Gothic shapes, these people could hide their inner uncertainty. This had its deplorable consequences or the business of architecture. The architect who wished to live by his profession had to conform to the vogue or give up.  During this dominance of classic and Gothic imitations, which became stronger and stronger between 1910 and 1925, Wright and Louis Sullivan had to live almost as exiles in their own country. In the last year of his life, so an older Chicago ar- chitect has told me, Sullivan received monetary assistance monthly from some of his colleagues. And Wright in 1940, speaking at his exhibition in Boston, summed it up when he said simply: ‘* They killed Sullivan, and they nearly killed me!”  In this period he and Sullivan became, in the eyes of their contemporaries, the representatives of a lost cause. But ac- tually it was not they who had lost the cause. Rather it was the country which had lost, for later on it was the country, and not Wright, which had to change. At this Lime, when Europe was beginning to purify architectural means, when the demand for truth appeared in architecture, America had no organ with which to hear what was going on. All that was being expressed abroad was cut off like a silenced radio. The cffects are stil] to be felt. today.  The foundation bearing Wright’s work is a strong tripod: the American tradition, his urge toward the organic, and his power (o find an artistic language for his own period. By the time the definitive publication of his buildings appeared in Berlin in 1910, all this had been realized. At forty years of age Wright had already achieved a body of work great enough and in- fluential enough Lo assure him his place in history.  What is to be grasped, what can be observed of his direct in- fluence, is often only superficial and leads to misunderstanding. Whoever as an architect has Lricd to imitate or even to follow him, whether in Europe or America, has misused his work and misinterpreted his spirit. Much more important perhaps than Wright’s direct influence is his significance as an index, as a sort of signpost of new directions, for no equivalent could be found for his work in Europe between 1900 and 1910. 
After 1910 the best brains of Europe began to understand what he had achieved in America. One of the finest, H. P. Berlage, introduced Wright’s work extensively into Europe through his own exhibitions and lectures. By his moral authority he en- sured the next Dutch generation a stimulus to their own devel- opment.'* The Dutch people were best prepared to receive help from Wright’s impulse. In this connection we are not thinking so much of the work of Dudok in Hilversum, who in the early twenties had a great success with his sentimentalized buildings, but rather with such a sensitive and fine-spiriled architect as Robert van t’ Hoff, who built two massive concrete houses at Huisterheide in 1914-15. These houses, the only ones van tHoff ever built, were a direct reflection of Wright's ideas. Although they stood alone and isolated in Europe, nevertheless they performed a clarifying function there. They were made known to the European advance guard in 1919 by an article of Theo van Doesburg in his review, Style.  In the early work of several Dutch architects, and also in some projects of J. J. P. Oud, it was undoubtedly the stimulus that was to be found in Wright's work which helped them to clear a way to self-realization. But it would be completely super- ficial and wrong to try to find detailed evidence of his influence on them, to refer in their case to models and pictures for simi- larities to his designs. For there are other elements in European architecture — as we shall soon see — which formed their specific character. No. Wright’s real influence, his great and educative influence, cannot be shown ina few poor photographs; his real influence is that of his methods and ideas, as they are reflected in his work. We shall see how later on Wright's conception of space, coming into contact with the European movement, was developed and changed in the hands of its leading figures.  195 Curiously enough, Le Corbusier was also directed to Wright through an article which appeared in the Schweizerische Bauzeitung in 1912, and which was an extensive résumé by Berlage himself of a lecture he had given in Zurich.  PART VI  SPACE-TIME IN ART, ARCHITECTURE, AND CONSTRUCTION 
THE NEW SPACE CONCEPTION: SPACE-TIME  Social, economic, and functional influences play a vital part in all human activities, from the sciences to the arts. But there are other factors which also have to be taken into account — our feelings and emotions. These factors are often dismissed as trivial, but actually their effect upon men’s actions is im- mense. A good share of the misfortunes of the past century came out of its belief that industry and techniques had only a functional import, with no emotional content. The arts were exiled to an isolated realm of their own, completely insulated from everyday realities. As a result, life lost unity and bal- ance; science and industry made steady advances, but in the now detached realm of feeling there was nothing but a vacil- lation from one extreme to the other.  The scope and strength of the emotions are both greater than we sometimes suppose. Emotion or feeling enters into all our affairs — speculation is never completely “‘ pure,” just as action is never entirely practical. And, of course, we are far from having free choice in this matter of feeling. Large tracts of our emotional life are determined by circumstances over which we have no control: by the fact that we happen to be men, of such or such a kind, living at this or that period. Thus a thoroughly integrated culture produces a marked unity of feeling among its representatives. For example, a recognizable common spirit runs through the whole baroque period. It makes itself felt in activities as distinct from each other as painting and philosophy or architecture and mathematics. This is not particularly surprising. Techniques, sciences, the arts — all these are carried on by men who have grown up together in the same period, exposed to its characteristic in- fluences. The feelings which it is the special concern of the artist to express are also at work within the engineer and the mathematician. This emotional background shared by such otherwise divergent pursuits is what we must try to discover.  Do We Need Artists?  Some people question whether any pervasive unity of feeling is possible in a period like ours. They regard science and industry  as inimical to art and feeling: where the former prosper, the latter decline. Or they see science taking over the arts, opening up new means of self-expression which make us independent of them. There is some basis for views like these. It is obvious that the serious artist plays no very important role in con- temporary life — usually he cannot even make a living by his work. At the same time, this civilization is too intimately a part of us to be simply abandoned. Do we, then, really need artists any longer?  In any civilization, feeling continues to filter through every activity and situation. An environment whose chief aspects remain opaque to feeling is as unsatisfying as one which resists practical or intellectual control. But just this sort of emotional frustration has prevailed for a long time past. An official art has turned its back upon the contemporary world and given up the attempt to interpret it emotionally. The feelings which that world elicits have remained formless, have never met with those objects which are at once their symbols and their satis- faction.  Such symbols, however, are vital necessities. Feelings build up within us and form systems; they cannot be discharged through instantaneous animal outcries or grimaces. We need to discover harmonies between our own inner states and our surroundings. And no level of development can be maintained if it remains detached from our emotional life. The whole machinery runs down.  This is the reason why the most familiar and ordinary things have importance for the genuinely creative artists of our gen- eration. Painters like Picasso, Juan Gris, the lyricist. of cub- ism, and Le Corbusier have devoted themselves to the common objects of daily use: bowls, pipes, bottles, glasses, guitars. Natural materials have received the same attention: stones holNowed out by the sea, roots, bits of bark — even weather- bleached bones. Anonymous and unpretentious things like these scarcely figure at all in our normal consciousness, but they attain their true stature and significance under the artist’s hand. They become revealed as objets & réaction poéliques, to borrow Le Corbusier’s phrase. Or, to put it somewhat dif- ferently, new parts of the world are made accessible to feeling. 
The opening up of such new realms of feeling has always been the artist’s chicf mission. A great deal of our world would lack all emotional significance if it were not for his work. As re- cently as the eighteenth century, mountain scenery was felt to exhibit nothing except a formless and alarming confusion. Winckelmann, the discoverer of Greck art, could not bear to look out the windows of his carriage when he crossed the Alps into aly, around 1760. Ue found the jumbled granite masses of the St. Gotthard so frightful that he pulled down the blinds and sat back to await the smooth outlines of the Italian coun- tryside. A century later, Ruskin was seeking out the moun- tains of Chamonix as a refuge from an industrial world that made no kind of aesthetic sense. Ships, bridges, iron con- structions — the new artistic potentialities of his period, in short — these were the things Ruskin pulled down the blinds on. Right now there are great areas of our experience which are still waiting to be claimed by feeling. Thus we are no longer limited to seeing objects from the distances normal for earth-bound animals. The bird’s-eye view has opened up to us whole new aspects of the world. Such new modes of perception carry with them new feelings which the artist must formulate.  The artist, in fact, functions a great deal like an inventor or a scientific discoverer: all three seck new relations between man and his world. In the artist’s case these relations are emotional instead of practical or cognitive. The creative art- ist does not want to copy his surroundings, on the one hand, or to make us see them through his eyes, on the other. He is a specialist who shows us in his work as if in a mirror some- thing we have not realized for ourselves: the state of our own souls. He finds the outer symbols for the feelings which really possess us but which for us are only chaotic and — therefore —disquicling, obsessive stirrings. This is why we still need artists, however difficult it may be for them to hold their place in the modern world.  But if the artist is so necessary to us, how is it that he seems to have lost contact with all but a small number of his contem- poraries? Ordinary people make it almost a point of pride to insist that, so far as they are concerned, his vocabulary of forms is totally incomprehensible.  a  This is often said to be a consequence of the revolt against naturalism. Actually, however, it dates from quite another event: the proclamation de la liberté du travail of March 17, 1791, which dissolved the guild system. The abolition of all legal restraints upon the choice of a trade was the sLarting point for the tremendous growth of modern industry.  Cut off from the crafts, the artist was faced with the serious problem of competing with the factory system for his living. One solution was to set himself up in the luxury trades, to cater, quite unashamed, to the lowest common denominator of public taste. Art-to-public-order flooded the world, filled the salons, and won the gold medals of all the academies. With no serious aims and no standards of its own, the most such an art could hope for was a financial success, and this it often achieved. The most favored of these cultivated drudges —a Meisso- nier, for example — sometimes saw their canvases sold at a thousand francs the square inch.  As far as the public and the critics were concerned, this was art — and this the work the artist was meant to do. The half- dozen painters who carried on the arList’s real work of invention and research were absolutely ignored. The constituent facts in the painting of our period were developed against the will of the public and almost in secret. And this from the begin- ning to the end of the century, from Ingres to Cézanne.  The same situation held for architecture. Here too the ad- vances were made surreptitiously, in the department of con- struction. The architect and the painter were faced with the same long struggle against trompe l’eil. Both had to combat entrenched styles by returning to the pure means of expression. For some four decades painter after painter makes the effort lo reconquer the plane surface. We have seen how the same struggle arose in architecture as a consequence of the demand for morality. Painters very different in type but sharing a common isolation from the public worked steadily toward a new conceplion of space. And no one can understand con- temporary architecture, become aware of the feelings hidden behind it, unless he has grasped the spirit animating this painting. 
The fact that modern painting bewilders the public is not strange: for a full century the public has ignored all the devel- opments which have led up to it, There would be cause for surprise if the public could read at sight an artistic language elaborated while its attention was elsewhere, absorbed by the pseudo art of the salon.  THE RESEARCH INTO SPACE: CUBISM  In many places, about 1910, a consciousness thal the painter’s means of expression had lost contact with modern life was beginning to emerge. But it was in Paris, with cubism, that these efforts first attained a visible result. The method of presenting spatial relationships which the cubists developed has furnished the plastic principles of present-day visual approach.!  The half-century previous to the rise of cubism had seen paint- ing flourish almost nowhere outside of France. It was the high cullure of painting that grew up in France during this period which formed the fostering soil for our contemporary art. Young people of talent — whether Spanish like Picasso, or Swiss like Le Corbusier — found their inspiration in Paris, in the union of their powers with the artistic tradition of that city. The vitality of French culture served to the advantage of the whole world. Among the general public, however, there was no sympathetic response to this achievement. It was from a form of art which the public despised that nineteenth-century painting drew its positive strength. Cubism, growing up in this soil, absorbed all its vigor.  Picasso has been called the inventor of cubism, but cubism is not the invention of any individual. It is rather the expres- sion of a collective and almost unconscious attitude. A painter who participated in the movement says of its beginnings: “ There was no invention. Still more, there could not be one. Soon it was twitching in everybody’s fingers. There was a presentiment of what should come, and experiments were made. We avoided one another; a discovery was on the point of being  ‘We shall treat contemporary movements in act here only so far as their methods are directly related to the space conceptions of our period, and in order to understand the common background of art, architecture, and construction. For an understanding of these movements the elaborate catalogues of the Museum of Modern Art, New York, are very useful. Cf. Alfred UH. Barr, Jr., Cubism and Abstract Art (New York, 1936), Por a short survey with emphasis on historical relations, see J. J. Sweeney, Plastic Redirections of the Twentieth Century (Chicago, 1935); for the relation of contemporary art to education, industrial design, and daily life, see L. Moholy-Nagy, The New Vision ‘New York, 1938), The close relation of contemporary sculpture to primitive art, on the  ene hand, and, on the other, to an enlargement of our outlook into nature is stressed in , Giedion-Welcker, Modern Plastic Art (Zurich, 1937). 
made, and each of us distrusted his neighbors. We were stand- ing at the end of a decadent epoch.”  From the Renaissance to the first decade of the present cen- tury perspective had been one of the most important constit- uent facts in painting. It had remained a constant element through all changes of style. The four-century-old habit of secing the outer world in the Renaissance manner — that is, in terms of three dimensions — rooted itself so deeply in the human mind that no other form of perception could be imag- ined. This in spite of the fact that the art of different previous cultures had been two-dimensional. When earlier periods es- tablished perspective as a constituent fact they were always able to find new expressions for it. In the nineteenth century perspective was misused. This led to its dissolution.  The three-dimensional space of the Renaissance is the space of Euclidean geometry. But about 1830 a new sort of geometry was created, one which differed from that of Euclid in employ- ing more than three dimensions. Such geometries have con- tinued to be developed, until now a stage has been reached where mathematicians deal with figures and dimensions that cannot be grasped by the imagination.  These considerations interest us only in so far as they affect the sense of space. Like the scientist, the artist has come to recognize that classic conceptions of space and volumes are limited and one-sided. In particular, it has become plain that the aesthetic qualities of space are not limited to its infinity for sight, as in the gardens of Versailles. The essence of space as it is conceived today is ils many-sidedness, the infinite poten- tiality for relations within it. Exhaustive description of an area from one point of reference is, accordingly, impossible; its characler changes with the point from which it is viewed. In order to grasp the true nature of space the observer must pro- ject himself through it. The stairways in the upper levels of the Eiffel Tower are among the earliest architectural cxpres- sion of the continuous interpenetration of outer and inner space.  Space in modern physics is conceived of as relative to a moving point of reference, not as the absolute and static entity of the baroque system of Newton. And in modern art, for the first  time since the Renaissance, a new conception of space leads to a self-conscious enlargement of our ways of perceiving space. It was in cubism that this was most fully achieved.  The cubists did not seek to reproduce the appearance of objects from one vantage point; they went round them, tried to lay hold of their internal constilution. They sought to extend the scale of feeling, just as contemporary science extends its de- scriptions to cover new levels of material phenomena.  Cubism breaks with Renaissance perspective. It views objects relatively: that is, from several points of view, no one of which has exclusive authority. And in so dissecting objects il sees them simultaneously from all sides — from above and below, from inside and outside. It goes around and into its objects. Thus, to the three dimensions of the Renaissance which have held good as constituent facls throughout so many centuries, there is added a fourth one—time. The poet Guillaume Apollinaire was the first to recognize and express this change, around 1911. The same year saw the first cubist exhibition in the Salon des Indépendants. Considering the history of the principles from which they broke, it can well be understood that the paintings should have been thought a menace to the public peace, and have become the subject of remarks in the Chamber of Deputies.  The presentation of objects from several points of view intro- duces a principle which is intimatcly bound up with modern life — simultaneity. It is a temporal coincidence that Einstein should have begun his famous work, Elekirodynamik bewegter Kérper, in 1905 with a careful definition of simultaneity.  The Artistic Means  * Abstract art ” is as misleading a Lerm for the different move- ments which depart from the spatial approach as “ cubism ” is for the beginnings of the contemporary image. It is not the “ abstract,” it is not the “ cubical,’ which are significant in their content. What is decisive is the invention of a new ap- proach, of a new spatial representation, and the means by which it is attained. 
This new representation of space was accomplished step by step, much as laboratory research gradually arrives at ils con- clusions through long experimentation; and yet, as always with real art and great science, the results came up out of the subconscious suddenly.  The cubists dissect the object, try to lay hold of its inner com- position. They seck to extend the scale of optical vision as contemporary science extends the law of matter. Therefore contemporary spatial approach has to get away from the single point of reference. During the first period (shorUly before 1910) this dissection of objects was accomplished, as Alfred Barr expresses it, by breaking up “ the surfaces of the natural forms into angular facets.’’ Concentration was entirely upon research into a new representation of space — thus the extreme scarcity of colors in this early period. The pictures are gray- toned or earthen, like the grisaille of the Renaissance or the photographs of the nineteenth century. Fragments of lines hover over the surface, often forming open angles which be- come the gathering places of darker tones. These angles and lines began to grow, to be extended, and suddenly out of them developed one of the constituent facts of space-time represen- tation — the plane (fig. 203).  The advancing and retreating planes of cubism, interpenetra- ting, hovering, often transparent, without anything to fix them in realistic position, are in fundamental contrast to the lines of perspective, which converge to a single focal point.  Hitherto planes in themselves, without naturalistic features, had lacked emotional content. Now they came to the fore as an artistic means, employed in various and very different ways, at times representing fragments of identifiable objects, at others such things as bottles or pipes flattened out so that interior and exterior could be seen simultaneously, at still others completely irrational forms equivalent only to psychic responses.  Around 1912 new clements entered; the planes were accen- tualed, assumed strength and dominance, and were given an additional appeal — to the tactile sense — by means of new materials (scraps of paper, sawdust, glass, sand, elc.). And when, though always meagerly, color was employed, it was  203. PICASSO, “Still Life,” c. 1914.  often corrugated and roughened in order to strengthen the pig- ment. In such collages fragments of newspapers, fabrics, or handwriting, sometimes even single words, achieved the force of new symbols.  The process continued, from the grayish background of the first period through the collage, to the reappearance of color, which gradually became stronger and more varied, until its brilliant culmination in Picasso’s and Braque’s still-lifes to- ward and at the beginning of the twenties. In this period, per- haps cubism’s happiest, color was used in pure strength. At the same time curvilinear forms were introduced, taken from such everyday objects as bowls and guitars, or simply invented. Color no longer had the exclusive function of naturalistic reproduction. Used in a spatial pattern, it was often divorced from any object, asserting a right to existence in itself.  Cubism originated among artists belonging to the oldest cul- tures of the western world, the French and the Spanish. More and more clearly it appears that this new conception of space was nourished by the elements of bygone periods. Its symbols 
were not rational, were not to be utilized directly in architec- ture and the applied arts, but they did give force and direction to artistic imagination in other fields. Following upon the first efforts of the cubists, there came, as has already been said, an awakening in various countries. In France appeared Le Cor- busier and Ozenfant; in Russia, Malewitsch; in Hungary, Moholy-Nagy; in Holland, Mondrian and van Doesburg, Common to them was an attempt to rationalize cubism or, as they felt was necessary, to correct its aberrations. The pro- cedure was sometimes very different in different groups, but all moved toward rationalization and into architecture.  When Ozenfant and Jeanneret (Le Corbusier) came together as young painters in 1917, they called their painting Purisme (fig. 232). In comparison with the movements preceding it (constructivism in Russia or neo-plasticism in Holland), pur- ism, coming out of French soil, was the closest of all to the aim of cubism and, at the same time, to architecture.  Two years after the exhibition of the cubists in the Salon des Indépendants, there appeared in Russia an abstract-art move- ment, fostered by Kasimir Malewitsch, which completely eliminated the object. It was a flight from and a protest against the naturalistic object, with painting reduced to a few signs of symbolic intensity. What its paintings achieve are fundamentally only pure interrelationships. Flatly extended rectangles and strips float in continuous interrelation in space for which there is no true human measure.  Interrelation, hovering, and penetration form the basis of Malewitsch’s half-plastic architectural studies, which he calls ‘‘architectonen.’’ These objects are not intended for a par- ticular purpose but are to be understood simply as spatial research. Interrelations are created between these prisms, slabs, and surfaces when they penetrate or dislodge each other (fig. 206).  Neo-plasticism, an expression used by the Dutch painter Mondrian, signifies that three-dimensional volume is reduced to the new element of plasticity, the plane. Mondrian sacri- fices every contact with illusionistic reproduction, going back to the fundamental elements of pure color, of planes, their equipoise and interrelations.  The small circle of young artists who gathered around Theo van Doesburg and his periodical, Style, after 1917 progressed much more radically than the French painters and architects. Van Doesburg and Mondrian sought “pure art” not in any way de- flected by external motives. With them everything rests on the distribution and juxtaposition of planes of pure color: blue, red, yellow. To these are added black and various tones of white, all being placed in a network of panels.  The Belgian Vantongerloo, who also belongs to this circle, demonstrated with the prisms, slabs, and hollows of his plastic of 1918 that contemporary sculpture, like painting, was not to he limited to a single point of view.  Van Doesburg, the moving spirit of the circle, was painter, man of letters, and architect. Although he executed few buildings, he cannot be omitted from the history of architecture, since, like Malewitsch, he possessed the gift of recognizing the new extension of the space sense and the ability to present and explain it as though by laboratory experiments.  One of van Doesburg’s drawings in which an attempt is made to present “ the elementary forms of architecture ” (lines, sur- face, volume, space, time) may very well have appeared to many at that time as so much disjointed nonsense (fig. 41). The present-day observer, who has the advantage of being able to look back upon intervening developments, has a very different attitude toward these mutually penetrating flat sur- faces. He sees how the enormous amount of contemporary architecture which has since appeared acknowledges this vision of space.  In 1923 van Doesburg, together with van Eesteren (fig. 207), who later became a town planner of Amsterdam, produced a house that is bolder than any other building executed during the period. The breaking-up of the compact mass of the house, the accessibility of the roof, the horizontal rows of windows — in fact, all the features that were later to be realized in numer- ous examples were indicated in it. If a collage by Georges Braque (fig. 204), produced ten years earlier, consisting of different papers, scraps of newspaper and fragments of planes, is placed alongside a reproduction of this house, no words are necessary to indicate the identity of artistic expression. An 
204. BRAQUE, Collage, 1913.  205. MONDRIAN.  architectonic study of Malewitsch might be likened to it equally well. The effect is as if the blind surfaces of the Male- witsch sculpture had suddenly received sight. Tt is obvious that in the second decade of this century the same spirit emerged in different forms, in different spheres, and in totally different countries.  206. MALEWITSCH, Architectonies, ¢. 1920.  \  | ' || 207. ‘T11EO VAN DOESBURG and C. VAN EESTEREN, Scheme for a villa, 1923.  WALTER GROPIUS, The Bauhaus, 1926. 
THE RESEARCH INTO MOVEMENT: FUTURISM  In the first decade of this century the physical sciences were profoundly shaken by an inner change, the most revolutionary perhaps since Aristotle and the Pythagoreans. It concerned, above all, the notion of time. Previously time had been re- garded in one of two ways: either realistically, as something going on and existing without an observer, independent of the existence of other objects and without any necessary relation to other phenomena; or subjectively, as something having no existence apart from an observer and present only in sense experience. Now came another and new way of regarding time, one involving implications of the greatest significance, the consequences of which cannot today be minimized or ignored.  As was stated at the beginning of this book, it was in 1908 that Hermann Minkowski, the great mathematician, speaking before the Naturforschenden Gesellschaft, proclaimed for the first time with full certainty and precision this fundamental change of conception. ‘‘ Henceforth,” he said, “ space alone or time alone is doomed to fade into a mere shadow; only a kind of union of both will preserve their existence.”  Concurrently the arts were concerned with the same problem. Artistic movements with inherent constituent facts, such as cubism and futurism, tried to enlarge our optical vision by introducing the new unit of space-time into the language of art. It is one of the indications of a common culture that the same problems should have arisen simultaneously and inde- pendently in both the methods of thinking and the methods of feeling.  During the Renaissance the common artistic perception, per- spective, was expressed by one group of artists primarily through lines, and by another primarily through colors. So in our own day the common background of space-time has been explored by the cubists through spatial representation and by the futurists through research into movement.  For Jakob Burckhardt there reigned in Italy ‘the quiet of the tomb.” The futurists were a reaction against this quietness;  they felt ashamed that Italy had become simply a refuge for those seeking to escape from the demands and realities of the present. They called upon art to come forth from the twilit caves of the muscums, to assert itself in the fullness of modern thought and feeling, to speak out in authentic Lerms of the moment. Life was their cry — explosive life, movement, ac- tion, heroism — in every phase of human life, in polities, in war, in art: the discovery of new beauties and a new sensibility through the forces of our period. Not without right did they claim to be “ the first Italian youth in centuries.”’ ?  So, from the beginning, they plunged into the full struggle, carried their cause militantly to the public. The poet Mari- netti, whose apartment in Rome even to this day bears the escutcheon of the “Movimento futurista,” proclaimed in the Parisian Figaro of February 20, 1909, “We affirm that the splendor of the world has been enriched by a new beauty: the beauty of speed.’’ And later, in 1912, in the ‘Second Technical Manifesto of Futurist Painting,” the futurists de- veloped their principal discovery, that “objects in motion multiply and distort themselves, just as do vibrations, which indeed they are, in passing through space.” The most exciting of their paintings realize this artistic principle.  The productions of futurist painting, sculpture, and architec- ture are based on the representation of movement and its corre- lates: interpenetration and simultaneity. One of the futur- ists’ best minds and without any doubt their best sculptor, Umberto Boccioni, who died much too early, in 1916, has most clearly defined their purposes. In an effort to penetrate more deeply into the very essence of painting, he sought terms for his art, terms which, now obscurely felt, now shining clear and im- mediate in his increasing creative experience, anticipated those that later appeared in the atomic theory. ‘‘We should start,” he said, “from the central nucleus of the object wanting to create itself, in order to discover those new forms which con- nect the object invisibly with the infinite of the apparent plasticily and the infinite of the inner plasticity.”  "Wor the literary intentions of futurism cf. the article of its founder, F. T. Marinetti, in Kneielopedia italiana, vol. XVI, 1932. 
Boccioni tried in these words to circumscribe the sense of a new plasticity which conceives objects (as they are in reality) in a stale of movement. This was reflected directly in his plastic, * Bottle Evolving in Space,’’ 1911-12, with its intersecting spatial planes. One of the few sculptural masterpieces of the epoch, this sculpture expresses the inherent significance of an object of daily use by treating it with new artistic invention. Sometimes, as in this instance, cubistic and futuristic works are closely bound together on a common basis of the same spa- tial conception.  209. BOCCIONI, “Bottle Evolving in Space,” 1911-12.  The French painter, Marcel Duchamp, who belonged neither to the futurists nor to the cubists, painted at the same time (1912) his ‘‘ Nude Descending the Staircase,” in which the movement is dissected mathematically and yet fully sur- rounded by the multi-significance of irrational art.  Usually the futurists present movement as such, as subject matter (‘ Elasticit Boccioni, 1911; “* Dynamisme mus- culaire, Simultanéité,” Carra, 1912; “Speed,’’ Balla, 1913), or show objects and bodies in motion (Gino Severini’s study of the dance as a movement in mass, “ The Dance Pan-Pan,”  1911; ‘ Walking Dog,” Balla, 1913; “‘ Rattling Cab,” Carra, 1913)3  In both futurism and cubism this enlargement of the optical was achieved before 1914, before the first world war. The cubists were the more passive and Jess vocal. Not fighters in the futuristic sense, more purely research men in their work, they kept to their atclicrs, preparing quietly and without fan- fare the symbols of our artistic language. Braque and Picasso wrote no ponderous tomes expounding their theories. Even the name “cubist” was a label fixed upon them by outsiders. They did not try to paint “movement” itself, or the dyna-  210. BALLA, “Speed,” 1913.  mism of muscles, or the automobile, but through their still lifes of things of daily use sought to find artistic means for our spatial conceptions. This is the reason cubism found exten- sion into so many ramifications. This is why laboratory paint- ers, who had no thought beyond their own artistic problems, could also give an impulse to the expression of the new spatial conceptions in architecture.  To try to introduce the principle of movernent directly into architecture did not touch the fundamental problem. In his  2 Por illustrations of this first and most important futuristic development cf. Boccioni, Pittara, scultura futuriste (Milan, 1914), a volume of over 400 pages, with bibliography of exhibitions, manifestoes, ete.  
projects for his “Citta Nuova,” in his skyscraper apartment houses connected with subways, elevators, and traflic lanes at different levels, Antonio Sant’ Elia tried, as we have already said, to introduce the futuristic love of movement as an artistic element in the contemporary city (fig. 139). But we do not know how his talent would have developed. He died in 1916, at a time when his contemporary, Le Corbusier, was still far from self-realization. However, while Sant’ Elia’s schemes were not quite in the direction which was to be followed by later  he condensed into the few words: “ Every generation ils own house! ”’  There are times when the man of the laboratory is compelled to go forth into the strect to fight for his work. On occasion this may be advisable. But normally he endangers his work by so doing. The futurists were perhaps too much bound up in trying to apply their ideas to all kinds of human activilies; the result was that their movement — which, it must he re- membered, cannot be overlooked by the historian as one of the  211. EDGERTON, Speed photograph of a tennis player, 1939.  architecture, he did point the way in a period when everyone was looking for a signpost, for something by which to fix his point of view. In his manifesto of July 14, 1914, which he published in connection with the exhibition of his schemes in Milan, he demanded an architecture imbued with the utmost elasticity and lightness, utilizing all the newly developed ele- ments of construction from iron and ferroconcrete to com- posite materials made by chemical processes, including textile fiber and paper. Behind these technical demands loomed his artistic aim: mobility and change. What he wanted to realize  212, PICASSO, “Guernica,” 1937. Detail.  pivotal points in formulating any judgment of our period — had a comparatively short span of volcanic productivity. It was unfortunate in that some of its ablest exponents died too early and even more unfortunate in that others, often for very different reasons, ended in regrettable routine, bequeathing nothing to the future except the few years of their youth. Futurism did not have the opportunity of the cubist move- ment: to accumulate, through all the many-sided stages of modern development, the results of artistic research, until they should appear united and in full power in a single great work — Guernica. 
PAINTING TODAY  Since the first decade of this century the research into space has broadened through various successive stages, never losing, how- ever, its original and primary concern with the new conception. What it had arrived at in the late thirlies may be compre- hended in a single painting which in itself sums up the entire experience of three decades — the “Guernica” of Picasso. In it are embodied the principle of simultaneity, the penetration of inner and outer space, the working with curved planes and different textures.’ Nevertheless, this mural of the Spanish war seems to be the first real historical painting since the beginning of the Renaissance and the work of Paolo Uccello. It is the tragedy of a country distilled to its full strength by an artist able to transmute physical suffering and destruction into powerful symbols — a mother with her dead child, a woman falling in a burning house, a spear-transfixed horse, fragments of a mutilated warrior, one severed hand clutching a broken sword, all triumphantly surveyed by a great bull and lit by a lamp held in an outstretched hand. Above the carnage shines “the radiant eye of day with the electric bulb of night for a pupil.” In the course of its composition, the picture went through many variations and preliminary studies, but one detail remained un- changed almost from the beginning — the rush of flight con- densed into a symbol of two elongated human heads with hair streaming back, chin and neck in one sweeping line, the faces as if enclosed in spherical triangles (fig. 212). How charged with inner truth this symbol of Picasso’s is has recently been revealed by the stroboscope of Edgerton, which is able photo- graphically to disintegrate a movement into single parts which the human eye is incapable of grasping. A study of one of these stroboscopic photographs (fig. 211) makes clear how closely connected are the realizations of the creative artist and those of the scientist. Out of the unknown, an artist like Picasso can produce intuitively symbols for a reality which, as in this instance, is afterwards confirmed by scientific techniques.  4A connection with earlier periods is likewise evident, the figure of the woman falling in the burning house being referable, as a French architect bas remarked, to Raphael's “Fire of Borgo.”  CONSTRUCTION AND AESTHETICS: SLAB AND PLANE  The Bridges of Robert Maillart  We spoke earlier * of the way in which the methods of science and the methods of art came unconsciously to parallel each other about 1908. Among other more spectacular instances, we noted that construction and painting arrived at similar basic elements in their search for solutions to problems that had not previously been attempted. With the bridges of the Swiss engineer Robert Maillart we are brought back to this topic. They offer us the chance to compare these basic elements and to investigate the way in which the aesthetic effect produced by a new type of construction arises.’  Those whose aesthetic sense has been formed or developed by the art of the present age can hardly fail to be stirred by Mail- lart’s bridges, for their appearance may be trusted to arrest such observers before they can even ask themselves why. Maillart’s surprising designs, which attract some as much as they repel others,’ are the product of the uncompromising application of a new method of construction. They have almost as little in common with the solid arches, stout piers, and  * Page 376. 6 This investigation appeared in more extensive form in Cirele, International Survey of Constructive Art, edited by J. L. Martin, Ben Nicholson, and N. Gabo (London, 1937) pp. 220-236. It was published there under the title “ Construction and Acsthetics > (English version by P, Morton Shand).  § Although the first of his bridges have been standing these thirty years, and their adequacy for their purpose has long since ceased to be questioned, they still continue to arouse antagonism among local bodies, many of which regard them as positively hide- ous. Tt happened that most were built across remote Alpine valleys, where they were considerably cheaper to erect than other types and (an equally important consideration) where comparatively few people would sec them. ‘The stark, lean assurance of their construction belics the aesthetic lights of a wide section of the public through its elimina- tion of emphasis on means of support and through the taut, weblike appearance of the arcl-spans which results. “* Iam sick of these puff-paste bridges ” was the way the chair- man of one of these local bodies expressed his aversion. This remark is worth mention- ing, since it shows what an influence aesthetic feelings exercise alike on those who conumission the building of bridges and those who merely chance to look at them, and how often these feelings are the  n sret determining factor of decisions apparently dic- lated solely by questions of cost and efficiency. 
monumentally emphasized abutments of the usual “* massive ” type of bridge as an airplane has with a mail coach.  What, then, is the peculiarity of Maillart’s methods of building?  In the early days of reinforced concrete the same methods of construction were used as were employed with timber and iron. Timber, being the trunks of trees, has length, just as iron has when rolled into long girders. One dimension always domi- nates, which is the one that transmils the load. As Maillart himself puts it: * The engineer was so accustomed to using those basic materials which provide only one-dimensional support that they became second nature to him, and restrained him from exploiting other possibilities. This was the state of affairs when reinforced concrete was introduced, and at first no change ensued.”  Maillart was a pupil of Hennebique;’ and Hennebique’s rein- forced concrete structures had beams and columns like timber- framed buildings. Following the model of timber construction, his beams reached from wall to wall and from column to col- umn, the roof stretching across them in the form of a flat, inert slab. This was the point where Maillart began his life’s work. Like all great constructors, he has consistently followed a single line of thought which he has progressively developed and ex- panded in the course of his career.  In designing a bridge Maillart began by eliminating ali that was nonfunctional; thus everything that remained was an im- mediate part of its structure. He did this by improving the reinforced concrete slab until he had turned it mto a new structural element. What Maillart has achieved since then is based on one idea: that it is possible to reinforce a flat or curved concrete slab in such a manner as to dispense with the need for beams in flooring or solid arches in bridges. It is very difficult to determine the forces present in slabs of this nature by calculation alone. To obtain positive results entailed a complicated process which cannot be entered into here, except to say that it was based partly on calculation and partly on experiment.  ? Karly in his career Maillart was the engineer in charge of the construction of a concrete sanatorium at Davos for which Hennebique was the coutractor.  213. MAILLART, Warehouse in Zurich, 1910. First mushroom ceiling in Europe. The important innovation is the disappearance of the beams: the whole floor is treated like a slab. A new element is the reinforced slab which supports the same amount of weight at each point of its surface.  Slabs had hitherto played a neutral or passive part in con- struction. Maillart transformed them into active bearing surfaces capable of assuming all forms of stress, and he subse- quently developed this principle into a comprehensive system of support that is now adopted for types of building in which it had previously been considered impossible to use concrete. Whether engaged in perfecting a new form of flooring or in striking out new principles in bridge constraction, he has al- ways adhered to the same basic method of using reinforced concrete slabs as active structural elements.  Maillart’s experiments with beamless flooring date from 1908. He treated a floor as a concrete slab, converting it into an actively codperative structural member by distributing the reinforcement throughout its whole area (fig. 213). Since every part of the surface now became self-supporting, beams dis- appeared, their function being resolved into the floor itself. 
The heavier the load this homogencous type of flooring is called upon to bear, the greater the practical inducement to adopt it, Consequently it is usually found in warchouses, factories, and other large, many-sloried buildings.  The appearance of the branching columns which support this  type of flooring somewhat recalls certain traditional styles, for in the basements of warehouses they resemble the heavy pillars  As floors of this type provide a uniform bearing surface throughout their length and breadth, their ends can be can- tilevered out to carry supplementary loads. They are there- forge ideal in combination with nonsupporting walls, such as continuous expanses of horizontal fenestration. It is hard to realize this in the obscurity of a warehouse, for the latent pos- sibilities of mushroom slab construction can only find architec-  213a. MAILLART, Tavanasa Bridge over the Rhine, Grisons, 1905. Span, 54 meters; width, 3.60 meters; cost 28,000 Swiss francs; system, three-hinged arch. Maillart for the first lime achieved here a monolithic construction by integrating arch and roadway into a structural unil, and the creation of new aesthetic values — transparency and hovering lightness — by stripping the construction of all disguise. The bridge was destroyed in 1927 by a landslide.  of a Romanesque crypt and in the upper stories they suggest the slender palmlike columns of late Gothic. In point of fact, however, mushroom-headed columns have nothing beyond these superficial resemblances in common with either, since the peculiarity of the system resides neither in the formation of the shafts nor in the extruded corbeling of the capitals that crown them, but wholly in forces in the ceiling above, which do not meet the eye.  ae  213h. MAILLART, Salginatobel Bridge, 1929-30, Span, ninety-two meters.  tural vindication in buildings which are flooded with the light of day from all sides.®  The American engineer C. A. P. Turner had been experiment- ing with the mushroom system a year before Maillart, but the Swiss engineer had employed slabs as basic elements in bridges since the beginning of the century.* American designers have  * The first specifically architectural endorsements of this principle did not occur until twenty years after Maillart’s initial experiments. Brinckmann and van der Vlugt’s splendid van Nelle factory in Rotterdam (1927-28) is the outstanding example, although it embodies the ponderous American type of mushroom-headed columns.  °C C. A. P. Turner, Conerete Steel Construction (Minneapolis, 1909). ‘Turner's article, “The Mushroom System of Construction” (Western Architect, 1908, p. 51), gives an 
Maillart  214. MAILLART, Schwandbach-Briicke, Canton Berne, 1933. Air vie resolved bridge-building into a system of flat and curved slabs. In Maillarl's hands the rigidity of the slab, hitherto an incalculable factor in construction, became an active bearing surface. The lorsional strain that would have fo be allowed for in a conerele bridge buill on a curving alignment can be udilized only by this method of construction.  215.  MAILLART, Schwandbach-Briicke, Canton Berne, 1933.  . Slabs. 
not rid themselves of the idea thal a slab is subject Lo stress in separate directions, and they embed their rods diagonally across the floor like intersecting beams. American practice has not fully grasped the structural role of the slab; conse- quently the forms of its mushroom-headed columns manifest a certain characteristic heavyhandedness. They can be recog- nized at the first glance by the presence of an intermediate slab introduced between the head of the pillar and the ceiling, as in the Doric order of columniation. To the best of my knowl- edge, the Americans have not even yet thought of using the slab as a basic element in bridge construction.  Maillart had embodied this principle in a bridge as early as 1900; and in that over the Tavanasa (1905) he dared to strip his construction of all disguise. The Tavanasa bridge (span, 51m.) represented a wholly unprecedented form, for in it Maillart discarded massive beams just as he was also shortly to eliminate the beams from floors. Instead, he employed a shallow, curved, reinforced concrete slab for the arch, which, with the horizontal slab of the platform and a series of stif- fened vertical slabs used as ties to articulate them, constituted the entire structure.  Thus Maillart resolved bridge-building into a system of flat and curved slabs so juxtaposed as to achieve a positively uncanny counterbalance of all stresses and strains arising between them. The first realization of a stiffened elliptical concrete bridge with an arch of eggshell thickness (his Valtschiel-Briicke) followed in 1925.  The elimination of all nonfunctional members has led Maillart during the last few years to dispense with the usual separate decking slab. In these later bridges trains and motor cars run directly upon their naked structural framework: that is to say, on the longitudinal slab of the platform itself.  earlier account of his invention: “It was first used in the construction of the Bovey Building in Minneapolis. . . . The essential feature of this new construction is the forma- tion of a so-called mushroom at the top of cach column, by extending its reinforcing rods laterally, some four feet or more out into the slab in a radial direction and supporting on these ring rods, which in turn carry the lighter reinforcement for the slab construction. The top of the column is enlarged, forming a neat capital, which assists in taking the additional stress, and is advantageous from the fact that there are no ribs to interfere with light or to reduce the clear story height of the building.”  ‘aes ST  216. Rainbow Bridge near Carmel, California. The same problem — a narrow gorge — as in the Swiss valley. Using the normal construction, the approach had to be built in stag- yered sections; the alignment of the bridge could not be curved.  In Maillart’s hands the rigidity of the slab, hitherto an in- calculable factor in construction, became an active bearing surface, which, being under initial tension, opened up possi- bilities that had remained a closed book for reinforced concrete engineering. Thus the torsional strains that would have to be allowed for in a concrete bridge built on a curving alignment had previously been deemed to defy calculation.” Maillart’s Schwandbach-Briicke in the Canton of Berne, opened in 1933 (figs. 214, 215), is the most beautiful example of a road bridge carried out in that material with a sickle-shaped platform.  One of the few large bridges which could pass an inimical jury carries the recently reconstructed main road between Zurich and Saint-Gall over the river Thur (fig. 217) at a point where it traverses broken country with a flat-topped hill in the back- ground. A single arch spans the river bed, flanked on each side by a short approach viaduct supported by remarkably slender pillars.  The problem of bridging mountain gorges with curved spans occurs in every moun- tainous country. When girders and arches are used in the ordinary fashion the bridge must be held toa rigidly straight line. At most, aeurvecan be produced by building the ap- proaches in staggered sections, as inthe Rainbow Bridge ncar Carmel, California (fig. 216). 
To appreciate the full plastic beauty of the form of this bridge — the flattened curves of the twin hollow ribs, and the manner in which they are yoked together; their three-pin articulation on a level with the crown and at the abutments (the slightly ogival pointing of the summit of the arch which results should be noted); the upright slabs that act as vertical ties between the ribs of the arch and the platform, as also the interplay of the pattern of these members with that produced by the un- usual section of the columns of the viaducts — it is necessary not only to go and see it, but to clamber down the shingle to the river bank so as to gain a view of the structure from be- neath. There are few contemporary buildings in which the solution of the structural problem approaches so closely to pure plastic expression.  Before I throw out the question which underlies this analysis, one or two striking features of Maillart’s bridges may be touched on without entering into the technique of his struc- tural methods.  One of the problems in art in which research has not yet made much headway is the relation between sculpture and nature — and, beyond this, the interrelations between sculpture, paint- ing, and architecture. It is easier for the constructor to find a convincing solution than the artist, because physical factors (like the width of the interval to be spanned, the nature of the foundations, etc.) dictate its conditions. All the same, there is something altogether out of the ordinary in the way Maillart succeeds both in expressing and in sublimating the breadth of a chasm cleft between two walls of rock (i.e., in his Sal- ginatobel-Briicke, 1929-30; fig. 213a). [lis shapely bridges spring out of shapeless crags with the serene inevitability of Greek temples. The lithe, elastic resilience with which they leap their chasms, the attenuation of their dimensions, merges into the codrdinated rhythms of arch, platform, and the upended slabs between them.  A bridge designed of slabs of various shapes no longer resem- bles the ordinary kind of bridge either in its form or in its proportions. To eyes that are blind to the vision of our own day, slanting columns with grotesquely splayed-out heads, like those of the approach viaducts of the Thur bridge —a  form imposed by purely structural considerations that enabled Maillart to make two columns do the work of four — are bound to appear somewhat ugly; whereas eyes schooled by con- temporary art recognize in these shapes an echo of those with which modern painting has already familiarized them.”  When Picasso paints half-geometric, half-organic plastic images on canvas — forms which in spite of their apparently capricious projection somehow achieve a singular degree of equipoise- -and the constructor (proceeding from purely technical premises) arrives at similar absolute forms by sub- stituting two vertical supports for four, there is a clear infer- ence that mechanical shapes and the shapes evolved by art as the mirror of a higher reality rank pari passu in terms of development.  It is, of course, easy enough to retort that this is simply the result of chance, and that such resemblances are purely super- ficial. But we cannot afford to leave the matter there, for what concerns us is the question which must serve as our point of departure: Are the methods which underlie the artist’s work related to those of the modern structural engineer? Is there in fact a direct affinity between the principles now current in painting and construction?  We know the great importance which surface has acquired in the composition of a picture, and the long road that had to be traversed — starting with Manet’s light-fusion of paint, ad- yancing by way of Cézanne’s flat coloration and the work of Matisse, and ending with cubism — before this was finally recognized.  Surface, which was formerly held to possess no intrinsic capac- ity for expression, and so at best could only find decorative utilization, has now become the basis of composition, thereby supplanting perspective, which had triumphed over cach suc- cessive change of style ever since the Renaissance.  With the cubist’s conquest of space, and the abandonment of one predetermined angle of vision which went hand in hand with it, surface acquired a significance it had never known  0 Cf. the strangely formed pillars of the Arve bridge (fig. 218). 
before. Our powers of perception became widened and shar- pened in consequence. We discovered the interplay of im- ponderably floating elements irrationally penetrating or fusing with each other, as also the optical tensions which arise from the contrasts between various textural effects (the handling of color qua color, or the use of other media, such as sand, bits of dress fabrics, and scraps of paper, to supplement pigments), The human eye awoke to the spectacle of form, line, and color —that is, the whole grammar of composition — reacting to one  217. MAILLART, Bridge over the river Thur near Saint-Gall, Switzerland, 1933. Single span, seventy-two meters; cost, $42,000.  another within an orbit of hovering planes, or, as J. J. Sweeney calls it, “ the plastic organization of forms suggested by line and colour on a flat surface.”  If Maillart, speaking as an engineer, can claim to have devel- oped the slab into a basic element of construction, modern painters can answer with equal justice that they have made surface an essential factor in the composition of a picture. The slab long remained unheeded and unmastered: an inert inadaptable thing which defied calculation and so utilization. But just as a great constructor has transformed it into a me- dium for solving structural problems that had always been considered insuperable, so the development of surface into a  basic principle of composition in painting has resulted in open- ing up untapped fields of optical expression.  This is no longer a fortuilous optical comcidence, as might be objected, but a definite parallelism of methods. By whal mental processes the constructor and the painter arrived at it defies analysis. We can only authenticate a particular phenomenon  218. MAILLART, Bridge over the river Arve near Geneva, 1936-37. Span, fifty-siz meters; width, ten meters; cost, 80,000 Swiss francs. This bridge on the outskirls of Genera was buil€ mainly by the private means of the landed proprietors. It had to serne for heavy toads and yet be buill at minimum cost. This was a case where Maillart could reali:  Lie precedented construction ideas. The triple boe-like arches as well as the rows of elaslie sup- ports are evident here.  in a particular case: a new method of construction has found its simultaneous echo in a parallel method in art. But this proves that underlying the special power of visualization im- plicit in each of these fields similar elements have emerged which provide a creative impetus for both of them.  If the constructor, who necessarily proceeds from quite dif- ferent considerations, finds he has to adopt substantially the 
same basic elements as the artist in order to solve his own technical problems, this signifies that in each case similar meth- ods have informed optical imagination.  Contemporary artists continually reiterate the claim that their work forms part of Nature. This they explain as follows: “* Modern art has reached the same results as modern science  218a. MAILLART, Arve Bridge, 1936-37. 218h. MAILLART, Arve Bridge. Support. Instead of steel joints, Maillarl shaped Reinforcement of the support. To take up the cross-like elastic slab support. By tapering the changing loads and stresses, Maillart il in the middle he gave the rigid slab the prop- reduced the cross section like a hip joint, erlies of a flexible joint. thus approaching organic form.  by entirely independent, intuitive steps. Like science it has resolved the shape of things into their basic elements with the object of reconstituting them in consonance with the universal laws of Nature.’’ Now those forms in concrete which ignore former conventions in design are likewise the product of a process of “ resolution into basic elements ’”’ (for a slab is an irreducible element) that uses reconstruction as a means of attaining a more rational synthesis.  In this connection mention should be made of the “ eggshell” concrete vaulting which Freyssinet used for some locomotive sheds he built at Bagneux, outside Paris, in 1929, though since then that particular branch of reinforced concrete engineering has produced forms of almost fantastic daring. On the same principle of using the slab as an active structural member, the  ee Geers  + *  et 9  a YF.  218e. MAILLART, Arve Bridge, 1936-37. Sup- 218d. Dipylon Vase, sevent ports and liwo of the box-like arches. Like archaic Greek On archaic Dipvlon vases the ge idols, they stand in rows under the platform of le human bodies are characlerized bridge. ulation of the hip joint. Mail  ts conceiving struetiral elements  growl.  Finnish architect, Alvar Aalto, has struck out an entirely new line in furniture design. He uses thin sheets of plywood, which, like the concrete slab, was formerly regarded as useless for purposes of structural support (Fig. 221).  ln the community of method which now prevails in so many departments of human activity we may read a presage of far- reaching developments. The growth of this spontaneous iden- lity of approach and its repercussions on society are being 
separately studied in every branch of knowledge. That there is a remarkable analogy between recent departures in philoso- phy, physies, literature, art, and music is a fact which has fre- quently been commented on. In the light of the particular case we have just examined, it is worth considering whether the field of structural engineering cannot be included as well, New methods are new tools for the creation of new types of reality. The greater the degree of identity in respect to what is fundamental to each of the crealive spheres, and the closer the extent of their approximation Lo one another in terms of achievement, the sooner will the requisites for a new phase of culture be forthcoming.  Robert Maillart was born in 1872 and died in April 1940. He died at the age of sixty-eighlL; nevertheless one feels (hat it was too early and that his life work was not accomplished.  His bridges, immaterially spun in space, belong through their supreme sensitiveness to the purest. expression that our period has been able to achieve.  During his lifetime his country did not recognize his signifi- cance. He was often hampered and his intentions misunder- stood, so that he did not give all that he might have given. We know that this is to be explained as a result of the difference between the advanced intellectual and the undeveloped emo- tional perception that exists today in so many of us — one of the factors that most effectively prevents the organic devclop- ment of our culture.  Afterword  Maillart’s life was a continuous fight against economic pres- sures and public apathy.  In 1912 he was called to Russia, where he constructed large factories and warehouses - - most of which were Swiss invest- ments — in Kharkov, Riga, Leningrad. After the revolution of 1917, he returned to his own country, penniless and heavily in debt to Swiss banks.  It is not the prerogative of the historian to speculate on what  could have happened if developments had moved in another direction. But in the case of Maillart one cannot stop think-  |  ing what would haye come about if a call from the United states instead of from the Czarist empire had reached him in 1912.  Like Brancusi. Viaillart limited himself to a few forms and fundamental ideas which he never abandoned and which de- manded a Jifetime to be developed to their last crystalline shape.  Jlis main inventions. the bridge conceived as a single struc- tural unit and the building conceived as a unil, were achieved hefore he was forty.  © Maillart’s development in thirty years of research unfolds organically, springing from that inner power which enables every great arlisl or scientist Lo transcend the existing tech- nical knowledge through his vision. One had only to talk with Maillart to realize at once that he was a man who had ahsolute confidence in his imagination. Ife often designed his bridges with a single curve on a scrap of paper while en route from his Zurich office to his Bern office. The specialist's simple calculations would have been too insufficient’ a guide toward new solutions where invention, in the fullest sense of the word, plays a more decisive part than calculation. TL is significant of Maillart: that he made calculation a servant und nol a master. His bridges satisfy the feeling by the poctic expression which pervades them, and the mind by their deli- cate equipoise.” ™  Maillar?s most important works, however. were nearly all accomplished during the last ten vears of his life. As he ad- vanced in age. his bridges became more daring in their aspect and more imbued with the vigor of youth.  He fool  Cahiers  “Since these lines were written in 193 band two pages were devoted toa sin bridge over a creck near Zurich (3. Giedion, “ Nouveaux Ponts de Maillar Art, Vol. EX, 1934, Nos. J 5), Maillarts name has acquired the weight ile during his life and in his own country. The general public was introduced to his works through an exhibition initiated by the Muscum of Modern Art, which commissioned  ed hin  us to assemble the nicterial in Switzerland. For the first article on Maillart, see S. Gicdion, “ Maillart, Constructenrs des Planchers a Champignons,” Cahiers @ Ard, Vol. ¥ (1930), No. 38. For further information, see Max Bill, Robert Maiflart (Zurich, 1919), a compilation of his work with pictures and drawings. Specialists may be di- reeted to the excellent monugrapbs of Professur M. Bo’, Federal Institute of Tech- nology, Zurich, for research ou text reports of some of Maillart’s bridges.  
A bridge is like a house. Each bridge and cach house is a special case: each must be constructed and shaped according to the environment with which it must cope and the function it is to have.  As we have seen, Maillart conceived different systems for the construction of bridges. The stiffened arch, which is nowhere more beautifully realized than in the curved Schwandbach- Briicke (figs. 214, 215) led to almost eggshell-thin members, Unfortunately, none of his later projects employing the stif- fened arch ever saw execution. It is the most daring of his constructions, the least verifiable by calculation and the most opposed to the ruling taste.  Another system which he used for narrow and long spans with heavy loads is based on the principle of the continuous beam. This he further enhanced by hollowing out the heavy structure so that it gave an aspect of astonishing lightness. He built several very interesting smaller bridges in this way (for instance, the oblique river crossing at Giindlischwand, Berner Oberland, 1937) but reached highest perfection in the bridge over the Rhone at Aire-la-Ville-Peney in 1937. Here the slablike columm supports merge with the platform and the arches, which seem to be imbued with the elasticity of a steel spring and the suppleness of a willow branch. This bridge was never executed. A jury incapable of judgment rejected it.  From his-early beginnings — about 1901 — to his last bridges, he developed the three-hinged arch with hollowed-out boxlike sections. He gave an elasticity to this type such as was pre- viously known only in iron bridges. The Tavanasa Bridge of 1905 Cfig. 213a) was the first conceived out of a pure form. The Salginatobel Bridge built in 1929-30 (fig. 213b) uses this system under daring conditions.  The section of the arch takes on a more and more precise U-sectioned form. [In the bridge over the Thur, 1933 (fig. 217), two arches are placed parallel to one another. The Arve Bridge, 1936-37 (fig. 218) uses three parallel U-sectioned arches, combining them with utmost skill and sensitivity with the elastic supports. The repetitive use of standardized ele- ments is of great economical advantage, for the same scaf-  folding and shuttering can be used several times. From the viewpoint of aesthetics. the reémployment of identical cle- ments is even more decisive.  In Maillart’s last bridges. the problems to he solved become more complicated but conversely the solutions more simple, The bridge over the Sime built in 1910 Cfig. 221b) and the bridge near Lachen (fig. 221) completed in 1910 after his death are his solution lo the problem of an oblique crossing. The bridge near Lachen with its twin arches forms a highway overpass on the Zurich-Arlberg railway line where highway and tracks inlersect alan acute angle. Maillart used parallel U-shaped girders here as in the Thur and Arve bridges. Ac- cording to the needs of this situation, the abutments and the arches starl at different levels and one behind the other. Maillart was awarded this last contract because he was able o produce a design for this unusual situation within a few days. faster than any of his competitors.  n the Simme Bridge. 1940 (fig. 221b) Maillart reaches his lighest. degree of simplification. The girders meet in the center like a pair of knives. The question cannot be wholly dis- niissed: Was this the limit? What would the next step have veend  Some hints, if only very fragmentary, should be given on the relation of Maillart’s constructional methods with practical achievements and their aesthetic impact.  Together with the lowering of the height of the arch between center pin and abutment goes the new shaping of the arch. The bridge over the Salginatohel (1929-30) still clings to the continuous masonry arch (fig. 213b) even if the construction is completely revolutionized. The bridge over the Thur (1933) shows how reinforcement of this type leads from the*curved masonry arch to the pointed arch (fig. 217). In the bridge over the Simme (1940), a straight line of enormous strength springs from the abulment to the center hinge (fig. 221b). It is as if one could see the unbent reinforcing rods embedded in the concrete. Nothing is left of the traditional arch; the ul- timate simplification secms to have been reached. 
219. MOLLOLY-NAGY, Painting, 1924.  219b, FREYSSINET, Locomotive sheds at Bagneux, near Paris, 1929. £ggshell-thin reinforced slabs which can be bent like cardboard.  2394, ALVAR AALTO, Armchair,  219e. FRIEYSSEINET, Locomotive sheds at Bagneux, near Paris, 929. The former straight shed is changed info a vaull, pro- viding excellent lighting.  220. MATLLART, Cement Hall, Swiss National Exhibition, Zurich, 1939. Para- bolic barrel vault of ertreme thinness (sir centimeters) touches the unsolved vaulting problem of our period. A sturdy construetion and vel hovering over the earth like a silken balloon ready to rise. Span of the vault, six- teen meters; height of vault, twelve meters.  Ascending and encompassing the vault are  iffening ribs ending in fwo pairs of slender supports. A connecting gangway spanning the interval between them is used —as in Maillart’s bridges -as an active part of the construction.  
221, MAILLART, Bridge at Lachen, 1910. Span, forly meters: width, eight meters; syste, three-hinged arch. The bridge forms a highway crossing over the raiheay line from Zurich lo Artberg. Highway and tracks cross al acute angles. This bridge was finished afler Maillart’s death.  Maillart had a particular sensitivity. an almost intuilive un- derstanding of the forces which act. upon a structure. He felt, like a dowser discovering the course of subterranean waters, movements and forces running through it and tried to form it as the artist tries to reveal emotions through irra- tional curves. Steel rods and concrete were not dead ma- terials to him. ,  What he formed out of an artifact — ferroconcrete — was an organism in which every particle throbs with life. lle never permitted dead masses or excess weight where shrinkage- cracks easily develop. He hollowed out his girders, reduced the dimensions of supports Lo the utmost.  This requires an imaginative. flexible mind in close contact with nature, and not the bookkeeper’s mentality of the merc calculator. Against such as these and their academic repre- sentatives, Maillart waged a lifelong struggle.  Mvery part of a construction had its active role. ven an aqueduct crossing a valley (Chatelard, Cantou Valais, 1925 - 26) assumes under his hand an astonishing shape that strikes the senses tmmediately without the explanation that in this case the water conduit is formed like the box girders of his  bridges and the inclined supports are so conceived that they form with the bottom of the conduit the active parts of a vault.  Maillart’s almost organic formations can be best understood hy means of the various ways he treats supports and the ‘thanges they undergo in accordance with the conditions vith which they must cope. We only direct attention to the musual form of the articulated supports of the triple arch of the Arve bridge of 1930 (fig. 218). Maillart simply said he did not employ steel joints as elastic supports for reasons of conomy. Using only ferroconerele. he shaped the cross-like elastic slab supports (fig. 2184) which stand, like archaic Greek idols Cfigs. 218e, d), in double rows of three under the platform of the bridge. By tapering the supports in the middle und inserling an ingenious armament. he gave the rigid slab the properties of a flexible joint (fig. 218b).  The system of these bridges, in which all parts are active. keeps them in a state of continual tension, The inexplicable  MAILLART, Bridge at Lachen, 1940. View of the independently constructed hos-seclioned arches starting al different levels and one behind the other, solving in this way fhe problem of the oblique crossing.  
urge of this period lo impart the highest tension to people, material, and things is symbolized in Maillart’s work.  Toward the end of his life. Maillart was at last given an oppor- tunity of expressing himself. without the constricling ne- cessity of solving practical problems, in the pavilion of the Swiss Portland Cement Company at the Swiss national ex- hibition of 1939 (fig. 220). Here he could reveal the art and elegance that a ferroconcrete structure can display. This hall was destined from the oulsct to be destroyed for the sake of experiments in tensile strength. And yet this mere “ test- tube building ” became a part of history.  A parabolic barrel vault of extreme thinness (six centimeters) — the back part of it slightly conical — touches the earth by two pairs of slender supports in the middle (fig. 220a). Ascend- ing and encompassing the vault, they form two stiffening ribs which. logether with the connecting gangway spanning the interval between them, are all that Maillart needed to produce a sturdy construction boyering over the earth like a silken balloon about to rise.  Kurt Schwitters, the Dadaist poet and painter, once remarked: “When an artist spits, it is art.” In the hands of a great en- gineer, this pavilion, conceived only to combine strength and the utmost lightness, became al once a work of art.  This light and solid barrel vault could easily be Uhought of as a part of a civie center. Maillart touches unconsciously on the unsolved vaulling problem of our period. With a- very few exceptions — Le Corbusier, Aalto, and some others —- the contemporary architect is rather hesitant as soon as he touches on the sphere of the ceiling, where he can let loose his imagi- nation. The nineteenth-century genius gave form to the airy spans of the great exhibition buildings. But iron lattice girders are ephemeral in nature. The most brilliant halls have disappeared, and the Eiffel Tower will only stand as long as its rivets are continually checked and its structural members safeguarded from rust.  What will be the vault of our period in the great public build- ings to come? Reinforced concrete and especially eggshell-thin slabs which can be bent like cardboard have both the buoyancy  221b. MAILLART, Bridge over the Simme, Berner Oberland, 1910. Span width, 7.9 meter. traditional arch.  32 meters: tent, tiree-hinged arch of tivo hollow rib girders. Nothing is left of the Ai straight line of enormous strength springs center pin. The girders meet in the  from the abutment up to the enter like a pair of kniv This bridge shies the highest degree of simplification. Compure the Uree-hinged girders of the Galerie des Ma- chines, Paris, 1889, page 206.  we like and the permanence we like. The slab with mesh re- inforcement was used by Maillart and by Freyssinet (fig. 219b, ¢) in the form of eggshells curved in one direction. Ut was employed in circular form in flattened domes for market halls in Algeciras, water tanks in the United States, and gam- bling casinos in Brazil. The engineer Ove Arup. Logether with the Architects’ Cobperative Partnership. roofed an English factory building (1917-18) with nine concrete shells, nineteen thirty-seconds of an inch thick and curved in two directions.  All that is needed are architects who know how to stir the imagination of the engineer. The engineer is capable of ful- filling emotional needs just as he is capable of solving the most intricale practical problems. Maillarl’s Cement [fall points in this direction. Tle. as the humble servant of architects, constructed a very large number of buildings which do not reveal that he had anything to do with them. Ele never en-  * Shell Conerete Construction,” Dr. K. Ulajnal-RKoényi, in Architects’ Yearbook, vol, [1 (London, 1947). 
countered an archilect who fully knew how to integrate his genius. Where he was great, he was alone.  Maillart is not an isolated case. It belongs to the unhappy constitution of this period that engineers like Maillart, sculp-  tors like Brancusi, Arp, or Pevsner, painters like Picasso or -  Léger, have to create their works in isolation. They do not find a concomitant receptiveness, and therefore this period has produced fragments. worthy entities in themselves, bul an  orchestration in an encompassing whole seems to be denied it,  WALTER GROPIUS AND THE GERMAN DEVELOP- MENT  Germany in the Nineteenth Century  Manual production methods are deeply rooted in the German temperament. Industrial liberty, proclaimed in France in 1791, was not adopted in Prussia until 1846. It did not come to the south of Germany until 1862. There was a great crisis in England during the second decade of the nincteenth cen- tury as a consequence of the change from hand to mechanized production. In France in 1835 hand weavers were declared to be “in the last spasms of agony.’ Gustav Schmoller, the economist, notes that this period in Germany witnessed an increase in the percentage of manual workers and a marked trend toward production by small artisans.  During the nineteenth century the number of power spindles in a country was an accurate index of its degree of industrializa- tion. In the year 1865 there was one such spindle in Germany to three in France and eight in England. Other branches of industry showed parallel stages of development, including the steamship and the railroad, which, as Sombart says, entered Germany “ on the crutches of English industry.”  American industry was only in the first stages of its develop- ment in the first half of the nineteenth century. But, as later developments indicate, there was a fundamental difference between the two countries. From the start, the American spirit was orientated toward mechanized production.  But around 1870 a rapid transformation sets in and steadily gains speed. Germany, the country of the hand worker and the farmer, drives on with the aim of becoming not only an indus- trialized state but the leader of the industrial age.  This early indifference to the machine and the factory followed by a headlong acceptance had serious human and psychological consequences. The deep uncertainty that prevailed at this period in Germany is reflected in its architecture. Other coun- tries were expanding, but their architecture shows nothing like so complete a loss of inner equilibrium and confusion with regard to fundamental principles as was seen in Germany. There was nothing that resembled William Morris’ work in 
England during the sixties, nothing comparable to the Chicago school of 1880 or the Belgian movement in the nineties. About 1900 there was another sudden change in Germany of quite a different kind. In the seventies there had been a great drive to catch up with the advance of industry; now there was the same kind of violent effort to overtake the developments in the realm of human feeling. It was at this Lime that Morris and Ruskin aroused the greatest admiration in Germany, Henri van de Velde was invited to exhibit there in 1897 and created a huge sensalion. New movements sprang up in both Germany and Austria. For the next three decades Germany remained the country most hospitable to forcign ideas. The magnificent German edition of Frank Lloyd Wright’s works that appeared in 1910 is only one among many instances of this receptivity. There were exhibitions by the advanced painters like those held in Brussels between 1880 and 1890, and the outstanding foreign architects were invited to build on an equal footing with their German colleagues.  In the late nineties the impulse for new movements in architec- Lure came first from Austria, from Otto Wagner and even from Adolf Loos, whose work held more hints for the future than that of the long-overestimated Alfred Messel (1853-1909). Messel’s huge Berlin department store — built at the same time as Ber- lage’s Amsterdam Stock Exchange -— had only local influence.  Peter Behrens (born in 1868) epitomizes German architecture at the start of the twentieth century. He rapidly became famous as a result of approaching the industrial plant as an architectonic problem. Behrens consciously transformed the factory into a dignified place of work. Despite the classical severity and the Cyclopean forms of his buildings, Behrens trained the eye to grasp the expressive forces concealed in such new materials as steel and glass, as his Berlin turbine factory of 1909 shows.  The atelier of Peter Behrens was the most important in Ger- many. Miés van der Rohe, Gropius, and even Le Corbusier worked there, the latter for five months.”  "8 Le Corbusier's first, and now very rare, book is called, Elude sur le mouvement d'art decoratif en Allemagne (Chaux-de-Fonds, 1912). It was one of the first criticisms of the German movement.  ‘OECTA AE |  221e. WALTER GROPIUS, Fagus works, 1911-13.  When a freshly industrialized Germany sel out to make up lost ground im the realm of feeling, the effort produced several minor Renaissances in the courts of the small principalities.  At Darmstadt, for example, the Grossherzog Ludwig von Hessen altempted to revive the spirit of artistic creation by forming a colony of artists and fine craftsmen.“ The Grand Duke of Sachsen-Weimar called Henri van de Velde to his court — thereby following, with less energy and conviction, the example of Goethe's patron, his ancestor. Numerous Ger- man Maecenases appeared. There was Kk. KE. Osthaus, who gave van de Velde his first chance to build in Germany and commissioned sculptors like (Georges Minne and Aristide Maillol to execute work for his gardens and his museum. Then there were leading industrialists like J¢mil Rathenau, the president of the A.E.G. (the General Electric Company), who engaged Peter Behrens as artistic supervisor of every- thing from the trade-mark of the company to the design of street lamps and the erection of new plants.  All these endeavors of a country which had grown rich and self-consciously progressive during the past three decades found their natural center in the Deutsche Werkbund, estab-  * first house was one of n the arls and crafts, lis was the first of those  8 The houses which they produced for themselves (Peter Belire them), together with their interior equipment and specimen wor were exhibited at the Mathildenhéke, Darmstadt. in 190]  oo yg  
lished in 1907.4 Its chief aim was ‘“ the refinement of work- manship and the enhancement of the quality of production.” Artist, workman, and industrialist were to collaborate in pro- ducing honest goods of artistic value.  The idea behind the Werkbund was not in itself a new one. Sir Henry Cole, one of the early English industrial reformers, founded “‘ Art Manufacturers ’’ in 1847 to “‘ promote public taste’ through ‘“‘ beauty applied to mechanical production.” It was his efforts that led to the Great London Exhibition of 1851 and the Crystal Palace. The generation that followed William Morris made peace with industry and returned to Cole’s line of attack with the formation of the arts and crafts guilds. In 1907, sixty years after the Art Manufacturers, the ground seemed to have been prepared for a final reconciliation: it seemed quite possible to bring art and industry into full collaboration.  The clash of opposed opinions marked the Werkbund almost from its inception. Throughout these controversies, however, the group worked steadily to create openings for youthful talents and found responsible roles for them at just the right moments. Both the rising generation and the generation that was at its height were represented in the Deutsche Werk- bund’s 1914 exhibition at Cologne. Next to works by Peter Behrens, Josef Hoffmann, and Henri van de Velde stood Bruno Taut’s glass house and the office building by Walter Gropius. The Gropius building was the work most discussed at the exhibition, and embodied the most seeds for future development.  Even after the war years and the period of inflation, the Werk- bund was capable of actions that ensure it a place in history. The Weissenhof settlement of 1927 is evidence of the group’s steady efforts to bring the creative forces of the period to reali- zation. Germany was impoverished, and there was a shortage of materials, when the magnificent gesture was made of invit- ing creative artists from every country to erect buildings at Stuttgart.  4 There is an excellent account of its founding in Heinrich Waentig’s Wirtschaft und Kunst (Tena, 1909), pp. 292 ff.  222, WALTER GROPIUS, Fa- gus works (shoe-last factory), Ahlfeld a.d. Leine, 1911. The glass and tron walls are cleanly Joined at the corners, withoul the intervention of piers. “The role of the walls [is] restricted to that of mere screens stretched between the upright columns of the frame- work”?  At about the same time the architect Ernst May was called in to organize the housing development on the outskirts of Frank- fort-on-Main. May worked with Haussmannean speed and energy; he was not fortunate enough, however, to be granted a seventeen-year period for his operations. After a few years the whole enterprise was cut short — a familiar happening in German history. While the work continued, May showed the open-mindedness which marked the Deutsche Werkbund by employing foreign architects, several Austrians and a Dutch- man, Mart Stam.  In 1929 the government — through the Deutsche Werkbund — gave Miés van der Rohe full charge of the German pavilion at the Barcelona exhibition. In 1930 Walter Gropius was chosen to organize the first German exhibition at the Paris Salon since the war.  The Werkbund period witnessed a complete change in the status of the architect in Germany. In this period he ceased to be subservient to clients and contractors, as he is in so many countries even now. It was recognized that the architect had a part in forming the spirit of his times. 
Walter Gropius  Walter Gropius entered upon his career in the Germany of the Werkbund period. After finishing his studies he worked in the office of Peter Behrens. This was from 1907 to 1910, when Behrens was engaged on the turbine plant of the General Elec- tric Company in Berlin. Gropius at the same lime took part in discussions at the newly founded Deutsche Werkbund, which helped to crystallize his ideas “ as to what the essential nature of building ought to be.” *  The first large commission which Gropius received after open- ing his own offices was from the Fagus works. The shoe-last factory which he built for them at Alfeld a.d. Leine in 1911 was a sudden and unexpected statement of a new architec- tonic language. While he was with Behrens, Gropius had seen his turbine plant — at that time “ the modern building par excellence’? — take form. The moment he set to work for himself he dropped his master’s classical solemnity entirely and made the new aims of architecture clearly apparent. In the Fagus works, Gropius brought together the accomplishments of the past fifteen years, and in doing so he furnished an incen- tive for that “honesty of thought and feeling” which he himself yalues.!® The break between thinking and feeling which had been the bone-sickness of European architecture was healed.  Plane surfaces predominate in this factory. The glass and iron walls are joined cleanly at the corners without the intervention of piers (fig. 222). The contrast with the massive corners of Behrens’ turbine plant of 1907 is marked. “ The role of the walls [is] restricted to that of mere screens stretched between the upright columns of the framework to keep out rain, cold, and noise.” It is “as a direct result of the growing preponder- ance of voids over solids” that “ glass is assuming an ever greater structural importance.” 7  The building still retains all its original freshness. It marks an outright leap over the transition period that usually pre- cedes the crystallization in a building of a new architectonic concept. The American critic, Henry Russell Hitchcock, is not  16 Walter Gropius, The New Architecture and the Bauhaus (London, 1937), p. 33.  16 Gropius, op. cit., p. 17. 17 Gropius, op. ei., pp. 22-23. Pp PP  likely to be challenged when he calls it “the most advanced piece of architecture built before the war.”"* The hint of the theatrical in Behrens’ work has disappeared. The new poten- tialities of iron, glass, and conerete, the cleaner treatment of the wall, the organic illumination of the interior — all these are brought into a clearly thought-out balance. Regarded simply as a structure, the building is part of a tradition that reaches back to the great iron constructions of Eiffel in the last quarter of the nineteenth century. The duality that  223. WALTER GROPIUS, Court elevation of the Fabrik,” Werkbund exhibition, Gologne, 1914. Glass-walled offices and the covered terrace on the roof.  marked the nineteenth century has been overcome, however; architeclonic and constructional means contribute equally to a unified expression. The walls are developed as planes, and conceived as sheer curtains between inner and outer space. This view of their function “ naturally leads to a progressively bolder (i.c., wider) opening up of the wall surfaces, which allows rooms to be much better lit.” !® The pillars are set behind the facade so that its curtain character is fully realized. It is un-  ‘8 Catalogue of the Museum of Modern Art, Modern Architecture (New York, 1932), p. 57.  19) W. Gropius, op. cit., p. 22. 
224. WALTER GROPICS, Spi- ral stai eon corner of the “Fabrik,” Cologne, 194 These staircases entirely enclosed in glass seem like movernents seized and immobilized in space.  deniable that the way in which the volumes of the various buildings are freely juxtaposed foreshadows the scheme for the 1925 Bauhaus at Dessau. It is not only the fagade which gives the factory its novel brightness; glass walls instead of the normal closed partitions are used in the offices. Behrens made a factory which was Jike a monument; Gropius gave it a simple and more humane interpretation.  The “ Fabrik,” Gropius’ model factory and office building at the Werkbund’s Cologne exhibition of 1914 (fig. 223), had a covered terrace for dancing on the roof, a hall of machinery and open garages at the rear. It has, however, some architec- tonic features which give it a new character. Before this, in the Fagus works, Gropius had discarded the normal stone en- closure of the staircase and replaced it by a shell of glass and iron. He repeated this practice in his Cologne building but handled it in an entirely new way. Here there were spiral staircases entirely encased in glass. They seem like a move- ment seized and immobilized in space (fig. 224).  Our senses: - slaves to habits built up during the centuries — automatically seek for the supports of projecling parts such  as these staircases. The new conception of space, with its urge toward freely hovering parts and surfaces, leads one in exactly the contrary direction. It seeks the kind of aesthetic sensation that resulls when the relalion between load and support is no Jonger traditionally obvious.  In the Gropius building al the Cologne exhibition Qinfor- tunately destroyed by fire during the war years) it is notable that the roof was treated with the same care and skill that was devoted to other integral parts of the structure. The upper terraces provided space for the elevator and for dancing, with the whole area unified by a covered garden. Such details are never casual or accidental results; just because they outrun contemporary developments, they can only be created by minds unconsciously touched by the future. ”  Post-War Germany and the Bauhaus  All the vigorous efforts of the decade before the war ended in disillusionment. The arts and crafls movement was seen to have worked itself out. It had, indeed, done much to climi- nate fashions that were carry-overs from the previous period, but improvements in furniture and reforms in lhousehold taste opened up no real outlet for continued fulure development. In the German movement, architecture was swallowed up by the applied arts. This in ilself shows that the movement pro- duced reforms but no new posilive conceptions. since without a new conception there can be no new archilecture. Solutions such as the Fagus works (1911-14) were isolated exceptions that could not make their influence felt at the moment.  A state of widespread uncertainty once more prevailed. This uncertainty was, so to speak, the working-capital — not the object of attack — of the expressionist movement. German expressionism had its beginnings previous lo the war, con- tinued to develop while the war lasted, and reached its height in the years immediately after the war. The movement elo- quently states the grievances of mishandled humanity and indicts a tragic situation. But there is a fundamental dif-  "0 Contemporaries were rather undecided about the “ Fabrik.” Cf. the eritique of Walter Gropius by Theodor Heuss in Die Hilfe (Berlin), July 2, 1911. 
ference between expressionism and other movements we have encountered — cubism, futurism, and the rest. Faustean outbursts against an inimical world and the cries of outraged humanity cannot create new levels of achievement. They re- main transitory facts — however moving they may be — and not constituent ones. The other movements had the spirit of invention in them: they did not weep over a time out of joint; they pointed to the way out, found — amidst the chaos — concealed patterns for a new life.  The expressionist influence could not be a healthy one or per- form any service for architecture. Nevertheless it touched almost every German worker in the arts. Men who were later to do grimly serious work in housing developments abandoned themselves to a romantic mysticism, dreamed of fairy castles to stand on the peak of Monte Rosa. Others built concrete towers as flaccid as jellyfish.  This was the situation into which the Bauhaus came at its birth. The surviving ideals of the Werkbund proved its sal- vation: from the very beginning it set itself to unite art and industrial life and to find the keynote for a sound contempo- rary architecture. But even here, in the early productions of the Bauhaus and in some lesser works by Walter Gropius, traces of the literary, expressionistic approach appear. Expres- sionism infiltrated all German art.  Gropius was instinctively aware of the inadequacy of expres sionism and of the need to escape from it. The war had left some vacancies on the staffs of the two schools at Weimar, the school of design and the school of applied arts. When Gropius united these schools to form the Bauhaus he tried to find teachers who had not worked in the field of applied arts. He gave the preliminary course to the young Swiss painter, Johannes Itten. Itten, while teaching in Vienna, had devel- oped a completely new method for educating the tactile sense, the sense of color, and the sense of space and composition. It was this method of approach that baffled the public all through the Bauhaus period. The German sculptor Gerhard Marcks and the American-born Lyonel Feininger also came in with Itten at the beginning. Feininger was one of the few ex- pressionists interested in problems of space.  z  ; :  225, WALTER GROPIUS, Club lounge shown in cut-away section of a slablike many- storied apartment house. Deutsche Werkbund exhibilion, Paris, 1930.  The Swiss-German Paul Klee joined the staff in 1921. After this more and more men were recruited from the abstrac- tionist groups: first Oskar Schlemmer, in 1921; then, in 1922, Wassily Kandinsky (who had been working on abstract compo- sitions since 1911), and in 1923, L. Moholy-Nagy. The suc- cessive appointments of these men mark an ever stronger tendency toward the abstract movements and reflect the stages through which the Bauhaus passed.  Moholy-Nagy, a young Hungarian, was linked with the whole abstractionist movement by personal associations as well as through his own productions. His role in the Bauhaus has often been misunderstood. As editor of the Bauhaus books # he actively defended its ideas and gave the initiators of new movements in many countries the chance to address the Ger-  = Cf. The Bauhaus, 1919-1928 (New York, 1938), pp. 222-223, edited by Herbert Hoyer, Walter Gropius, and Ise Gropius. The bibliography by Beaumont Newhall entbraces all the relevant literature on the subject. The book as a whole gives such an excellent account of the details of the Bauhaus devclopment that there is no need in this discussion to retrace the same ground.  
man public directly. Besides this, he helped through his own activities to overcome the lingering remnants of romantic mysticism.  The third stage in the development of the Bauhaus, bringing iL into closer contact with industry, came about when it moved from Weimar to Dessau. At that time the Bauhaus showed ils powers of self-renewal by adding to its staff from the groups of its former students. Among those who became masters in the school were Josef Albers, Herbert Bayer (typography), and Marcel Breuer.  The Bauhaus was soon well known all over Europe in those circles where the elements of a contemporary art were being  226. WALTER GROPIUS. Project for an international academy of philosophical studies, 19°94. This advanced scheme was produced tivo vears before the Bauhaus, whieh is  foreshadowed in its open planning. Meant for the university town of Erlangen, it would have  combined dormitories and common rooms. The idea of such an academy was typical of the internationalist spirit which prevailed in Germany during this period.  sought — the Dutch * Stijl” group, for example. Theo von Doesburg himself came to Weimar in 1922 but, for various reasons, never acted as one of the Bauhaus teachers. The Stijl group’s influence on the Bauhaus ~ - underrated and overrated with about equal frequency — was on the side of the formal approach to aesthetic problems, of their reduction to basic elements and basic relations.  As far as public opinion was concerned, all the Bauhaus lead- ers were taken, in spite of their actual differences, as advocates of one artistic doctrine. a doctrine which was as cordially detested by the expressionists as it was by the conventional and the academic. Political divisions were likewise forgotten: Gropius and the Bauhaus came under attack by Left and Right wing elements equally. According to Leftist critics, ** no art school, however good, could be anything but an anachro- nism at this time” (1928). Critics of the Right, seeing the Bauhaus program of education as only so many unrelated aclivilies, and judging them from either the academic or the arts and crafts point of view, could see no sense al all lo the venture.  The work of the Bauhaus can be grasped only when the con- ception behind modern painting has been understood. With- out an understanding of the feeling which has developed out of the new sense for space and the new interest in textures and plain surfaces, the studics of the Bauhaus fall to pieces.  The Ecole Polytechnique of 1797 was dedicated to the fusion of science and life. At the Bauhaus under Gropius the effort was made to unite art and industry, art and daily life, using architecture as the intermediary. Now that it is possible to see the whole Bauhaus institution in its historical relationships, we recognize what an important outlet it was for the German gift of teaching and organizing. The principles of contempo- rary art were there for the first time translated into Lhe field of education. Dispersed tendencies were brought together and concentrated.” This treatment of the Bauhaus has heen lim-  arly in his career Gropius saw that the exhibition could serve as an instrument.  such a codrdination of new tendencies and conceptions. He wanted to use the  exhibition systematically as a means for presenting ideas — that is. with all its features adjusted to one general point of view. He worked in this direction, at first quite alone, later with his old associates at the Bauhaus — Meholy-Nagy. Breuer, Bayer, and others. Their collaborative efforts developed a new type of exbibition in which every modern (echnique of display was called into service.  At the 1930 exhibition of the Salon d invited to participate, “Phis was the foreign exhibition since the war to admit German entries. Gropius and Breuer showed a club lounge interior mounted in a sec- tion of a slablike modern apartment block (fig.  Paris, the Werkbund was  } designed by Gropius. By this time the old animosities had subsided. and the French critics  greeted the display with sur- prise and admiration. For many of them it was the first revelation of what had been accomplished in Germany during the post-war years. 
227. WALTER GRO- PLUS, The Bauhaus, Dessau, 1926. Air view. This air view shows how the different unils blend together. The eye cannot  sum up such a compler al one glance.  228. WALTER GRO- PLUS, The Bauhaus, Dessau. 1926. Plot plan. Thiscomples reaches out over the ground and exr- pands into a kind of pin- wheel with tree hooked arms,  yo Tachechule  teopaauank  tiecitensate  ited to those of its aspects which have a bearing on our constant concern: the way in which this period has moved toward con- sciousness of itself. The vital and difficult development of the Bauhaus reflects that process in the circumscribed realm of education as no other institution of the period does.  The establishment of practical connections between industry and the Bauhaus and the manner in which these relations functioned fall outside our subject. We can only note how a system of education based upon fundamental conceptions of our period and conducted by genuinely creative artists sup- plied industry with a variety of models for its products. Ex- perimental handiwork in the Bauhaus shops led to articles of industry which were reproduced all over the world: lighting fixtures, carpets, fabrics, and the famous tubular steel furni- ture. Manufacturers in neighboring countries began to seek Bauhaus-trained supervisors of their productions.  The Bauhaus Buildings at Dessau, 1926  The building program for the new school at Dessau had to meet many different requirements. There was first the Bau- haus — the School of Design — itself; then the school of the city of Dessau for continuation courses in the trades; finally, combination studio and dwelling quarters for the students had to be provided. A dining hall, a stage, administration rooms, and a private studio for Gropius were also necessary. The instructors were given houses, also designed by Gropius, in a small pine wood. The architect’s chief aim was to produce a clear separation of each of these functions from the others, at the same time not isolating them but bringing them together into efficient interrelation.  The chief accents fall on the Bauhaus, the nucleus of the whole school (fig. 227). The Bauhaus combines “ laboratories of de- sign” with exhibition spaces, classrooms, and lecture halls. The laboratories of design were devoted to such various ac-  Exhibitions in which Gropius participated are: World’s Exhibition, Antwerp, 1912 (interior); Werkbund Exhibition, Cologne, 1914 (the “ Fabrik,” series of interior rooms; officers’ quarters for warships, automobile bodies); Werkbund Exhibition, Paris, 1930, Building Exhibition, Berlin, 1931 (scheme for a many-storied apartinent block, with Schawinsk y); Berlin Exhibition, 1933 (display in nonferrous metals, with Joost Schmidt). 
1  tivities as cabinclmaking, theatrical crafts, dy eing, weaving, printing, wall coverings, and metalworking. On the third floor the lecture halls and the laboratories for metalworking and wall painting could be thrown together to make a single room. The Bauhaus is enclosed by the famous glass curtains, The section containing the pupils’ studio-dormitory rooms rises six stories. The lwenty-cight rooms it contains require the byphenated title because each is intended not only for the student’s residence but for his private work as well. Each has a small baleony, a concrete slab which juts out into open space. These slabs, hovering close to the massive wall, give the building its singular and exciting aspect. The students’ building connects directly with the School of Design through a one-story wing. The wing ingeniously combines an assembly hall, the dining hall, and the stage of the school. These rooms can be thrown open to form a single hall accessible from the * aula,” or main entrance hall of the whole school.  A separate wing was reserved for the Dessau trade school. A short two-story bridge, supported by four pillars and cross- ing an intervening sLrect, connects it with the School of Design. This passerelle or connecting bridge was reserved for adminis- tration rooms, meeting places for the masters’ and students’ councils, the architectural department, and the private atelier of Gropius.  The Bauhaus has a skeleton of reinforced concrete. Because of the German building ordinances, the supporting pillars are much heavier than they would have been in France or Switz- erland. The continuous glass curtain is brought into abr upt juxtaposition with the horizontal ribbons of white curtain wall at the top and bottom of the building. An aerial photograph shows them plainly for what they are: mere ribbons, support- ing nothing. Ina bird's-eye view the whole cube seems like two immense horizontal planes floating over the ground.  The glass curtain is not the limited and marked-off ansparent area which Eiffel had already exploited in the 1878 exhibition: it flows smoothly around the building, the corners showing no vertical supporting or binding members. As in the Fagus works, the pillars from which it hangs are set behind the glass, making the curtain a specimen of pure cantilever construc-  tion. The glass curtain is simply folded about the corners of the building; in other words, the glass walls blend into each other at just the point where the human eye expects to en- counter guaranteed support for the load of the building  (fig. 230).  Two major endeavors of modern architecture are fulfilled here, not as unconscious outgrowths of advances in enginecring but as the conscious realization of an artist’s intent; there is the hovering, vertical grouping of planes which satisfics our [ecl- ing for a relational space, and there is the exlensive transpar- ency that permits interior and exterior to be seen simulta- neously, en face and en profile, like Picasso’s “ L’Arlésienne” of 1911-12 (fig. 229): variety of levels of reference, or of points of reference, and simultaneity — the conception of spacc- time, in short. In this building Gropius goes far beyond anything that might be regarded as an achievement in con- struction alone.  The glass curtain wall is famous, but the really important function of the Bauhaus was fulfilled by it as a unit. When it was erected in 1926 it showed how the new space conception could be used to organize a great building complex; nothing comparable to this had until then been achieved in contempo- rary architecture.  There is no doubt that Frank Lloyd Wright, in the first decades of this century, worked with hovering vertical and horizontal planes in his houses. In this Chicago period he also realized open planning in some of his large houses — the Martin house in Buffalo (190-4), for example, and the Coonley house at River Forest (1908). Their ground plans are extended and complicated, and the different parts are sometimes con- nected by bridges. But these wings are strongly attached to the ground, reach out over the plot like the exploratory tentacles of some earth-bound animal. They do not hover over the ground, and they embody no wish to do so. The whole treatment of the walls -— their sudden structural changes, their overhanging caves, their complicated relief — indicates this. This may explain why Wright is somewhat repelled by what has been done in Iurope since his appearance. 
3 BAVA A NAAM  229. PICASSO, “I.Arlésienne,? 1911-12. Off. “En the head may be seen the cubist device of simultaneity — 230. WALTER GROPIUS, The Bauhaus, Dessau, 1926. Corner of the workshop wing. In this case it is showing lo aspects of a single object al the same time, in this case the profile and the full face. The transpar- ency of overlapping planes ts also characteristic” (Catulague of the Picasso Exhibition, Aluseum of Modern Art, New York, 1989, p. 77).  {he interior und the exterior of a building which are presented simultaneously. The ectensive transparent areas. hy dematerializing the corners, permil the hovering relations of planes and the kind of “overlapping” which ap- pears in contemporary painting. 
By 1926 a new generation had set to work in archilecture. They were in contact both with the artistic discoveries that had been made since 1910 and with the new methods and materials of construction. They brought these two formerly separate realms together and out of their conjunction de- veloped what we know as contemporary architecture. The generation of Le Corbusier, Gropius, Miés van der Rohe, and the others knew the work of the artistic explorers and the new spatial feelimgs which they had discovered. Finally they were able to select from the accumulated developments in enginccr- ing just the means that were needed to give architectonic expression to this new space sense.  The Bauhaus complex is an arrangement of cubes, one jux- taposed against another — cubes differing in size, material, and location. The aim is not to anchor them to the ground but to have them float or hover upon the site. This is the reason for the winglike connecting bridges and the liberal use of glass, The glass was called in for its dematerializing quality; the previous generation had used it either for practical purposes or (in private houses) had stained or painted it.  These cubes are juxtaposed and interrelated. Indeed, they interpenetrate each other so subtly and intimately that the boundaries of the various volumes cannot be sharply picked out. The views from the air show how thoroughly each is blended into a unified composition. The eye cannot sum up this complex at one view; it is necessary to go around it on all sides, to see it from above as well as from below. This means new dimensions for the artistic imagination, an unprecedented many-sidedness.  The ground plan lacks all tendency to contract inward upon itself; it expands, on the contrary, and reaches out over the ground. In outline it resembles one of those fireworks called “pinwhecls,” with three hooked arms extending from a center (fig. 228). The impression one receives from it is similar to that produced by the glassed staircase in Gropius’ exhibi- tion building of 1914: it suggests a movement in space that has been seized and held.  The Bauhaus was the only large building of its date which was so complete a crystallization of the new space conception. Its  appearance is in a way testimony to the irrational course of history. Germany in the second half of the nineteenth century showed a greater loss of architectonic honesty than any other country. Bul il was in this very country, after less Lhan thirty vears of effort, that the way was opened to new levels of accomplishment in architecture.  Architectural Aims  Gropius is happiest when he is planning on a large scale; he is the architect of buildings for whole social groups —- factories, offices, schools, theaters of new types.” [t was natural thal he should take part in the building that went on in the twenties, when Germany sect oul to make up its shortage of middle- and working-class dwellings. Gropius built a large number of such apartments and housing colonies — in Berlin, Dessau, Frank- fort-on-Main, Karlsruhe, and elsewhere. His most interesting work in this field was a scheme for a government institute for housing research.** The colony was eventually built, but not as Gropius had proposed. We shall discuss later on, in dealing with the new scale in cily planning, the sort of slablike block unit which Gropius worked with in this scheme.  The fact thal so many of his works — even those of his youth — have retained all their original freshness is evidence of Gropius’ creative force. This holds true not only for his archilectural productions — the Fagus works, for example but for his work in other fields as well. Gropius designed a Diesel locomotive as far back as 1913. On a carefully studied functional basis he arrived at an artistic solution thal was astonishingly advanced. He produced, in fact, a design which two decades later would have been recognized as *‘ stream- lined.’’ > His 1932 memorial at Jena to those who fell in the Revolution — a composition of cement planes and prisms —-  “= Wtis Totalthealer, for example, is completely adjusted to the new space conceptions The stage is no longer a fixed focal point for every perspective in the body of ihe theater as it had been since Renaissance and baroque times. It is placed in the middie of the building and fitted for circular and vertical movement, so that a many-sided speclacte is presented. Cf. W. Gropius, Theaterbau (Rome, 193-4).  * The Reichsforschungsgeselischaft. © Hlustrated by 8. Giedion, Waller Gropius (Paris, 1931). 
has also remained completely timely, and shows no signs of “dating.” 6  The fact that a man’s work had kept its contemporancous character for two or Lhree decades would have required no special comment in a period where thought and feeling moved in parallel channels. It is far from being a matter of course in periods like ours, however. Among us such sureness of production is -— unfortunately — - possessed by few arlisls. Gropius, like many German artists, has a strong and solid rather than a quick imagination. But, working very quiclly, he arrives al new and startling conclusions. Albrecht Diirer’s ponderous figures lack Uhe grace of the Venetian school; never- theless, Diirer’s conceptions are characterized by an inherent depth.  26 As a design, that is, since it was destroyed by the Nazis when Lhey came into power,  LE CORBUSIER AND THE MEANS OF ARCHI- TECTONIC EXPRESSION  Le Corbusier (Charles Edouard Jeanneret} was born at La Chaux-de-Fonds, in the French part of Switzerland. Since the seventeenth century Chaux-de-Fonds has been the center o a very precise and delicate industry — the manufacture of swiss watches.?? Le Corbusier spent his youth here, under careful tutelage. [is family, the Jeannerets, had been painters and engravers for generations. Le Corbusier himself learnec io engrave walches.  Ss  Le Corbusier's spirit was never ground to a smooth specializa- tion at a university. Ite showed the instinctive prescience o venius by Lurning up wherever new things were being done, or wherever a stimulating relationship to a bygoue era could be established. From 1909 to 1910 he was in Paris, learning lo use ferroconercte in Perret’s atelier. At Berlin he worked in the studio of Peter Behrens. His first published book -- an ex- amination and criticism of the German industrial art move- ment — was a product of this experience.** He saw Vienna and the Wiener Werkstiitte, but made his excuses when Josef Hoffmann (Otto Wagner’s best-known pupil) asked him to come and work with him.  Iustead, Le Corbusier set out- - with emply pockets - - to visit Athens and the Near East. St. Peter’s in Rome, the Acropolis, the white houses indigenous to Mediterranean cul- ture everywhere from all these things he derived just the kind of assistance that was needed for the work of today. Another influence must be mentioned: Le Corbusier’s contact with (and share in) modern painting. Contemporary painting was at the high point of its development in 1917, the year Le Corbusier finally returned to Paris. He had the advantage not merely of living there at this time but of being himself a painter.  In contrast to the Renaissance, when versatility was the rule, our specialized period rarely produces a combination of  71 was in this district, during the eighteenth century, that the marvelous aifomaton already mentioned (ef. fig. 16) originated.  8 Hude sur le mouvement d'art decoratif en Allemagne (Chaux-de-Fonds, 1912), 
painter and architect in the same person. Le Corbusier is one of the exceptions; in his scheme of daily work the morning is devoted to painting, the afternoon to architecture. Architec- tural creations come easily to him, but for twenty years he hag been struggling with painting. The foundation of his work in both fields is his conception of space. Architecture and paint- ing are merely two different instruments through which he expresses the same conception.  The architecture of our day is a very complicated fabric, inter- woven with threads both visible and invisible which do not come from any single source. In the face of this complicated fabric Le Corbusier fulfills a very definite function. Through his artistic instinct he understands just how to arrange the various strands so as to bring out from the existing tracery a pattern which is clear to everyone.  The spirit of Le Corbusier’s houses shows an absolute identity with the spirit that animates modern painting. The floating transparency achieved in the works of modern painters finds its echo in Le Corbusier’s own paintings (fig. 232). He himself assures us in his Peinture moderne” that he has deliberately chosen the most uninteresting of objects — bottles, drinking glasses, and the like — so that attention will not stray away from the actual painting. A historian is not likely to view this choice as an accident, however. He sees in it a preference for floating, transparent objects whose mass and outlines flow into each other in a mariage des contours that leads us from Le Cor- busier’s pictures to his architecture (fig. 233).  Around 1910 Picasso and Braque, as the consequence of a new conception of space, exhibited the interiors and exteriors of objects simultaneously. In architecture Le Corbusier devel- oped, on the same principle, the interpenetration of inner and outer space. We have already observed gropings toward such an interpenetration in the seventeenth-century buildings of Francesco Borromini. But this interpenetration of space at large and space-particles could have further development only in an age whose science and art both perceived space as essen- tially many-sided and relational.  29 Amedée Ozenfant and Le Corbusier, La Peinture moderne (Paris, 1925),  231, LE CORBU- SILER,  Ferroconc skeleton for a dwelling house, 1915. Le Cor- busier was able to trans- mute the concrete skele- fon developed by the engineer into an archi-  fectural means.  Le Corbusicr takes ferroconcrete as the instrument for the expression in architecture of his ideas.*° In this he joins the Trench tradition, continues the work of Perret and Tony Garnier. It was only in France that architects could use ferro- concrete unrestrictedly and without hesitation. Building legislators in Germany and England distrusted elegant con- structions in reinforced concrete and insisted upon an unneces- saty bulkiness. The French had always sought for lightness and precision in their buildings, and they made corresponding laws.  The real starting point of Le Corbusier’s career is a drawing dated 1915 (fig. 231). It shows nothing but four reinforced concrete pillars and three horizontal slabs which are connected by a mere hint of a staircase. Le Corbusier was able — as no one before him had been — to transmute the concrete skeleton developed by the engineer into a means of architectonic expres- sion. He knew how to bring out the secret affinity that existed between ferroconcrete construction and the human needs and cravings that were just coming to the surface.  To create houses of unprecedented lightness and to carry still farther the kind of “open planning” which Frank Lloyd Wright bad begun, Le Corbusier used those properties of the support- ing framework of reinforced concrete which make the disposi- tion of the inner walls a matter of choice. This new interpreta-  * For a survey of the output of Le Corbusier and Jeanneret, cf. Le Corbusier et Pierre Jeannerel, Guvre complete, three volumes published, with slight variations in title, in Zurich, 1929, 1934, 1938. 
lion of the conercte skeleton is the significant park of Le Cor- busier’s work.  The problem of the dwelling is the unequivocal center of Le Corbusier's activity, both theoretical and practical. His first house, built in the Swiss Jura in 1916, is externally of conven- tional form. It already shows, however, the reinforced con- crete skeleton which appears in all its successors. ‘The skeleton is actually turned to the purposes of housing.  232. LE CORBUSIER, “Still Life,” 1921. Oi. Like the cubists. Le Corbusier and Ozenfant were greatly interested in commonplace objects and in the problems of transparency. The “mariage de contour” between the different objects and outlines in this painting poinls ahead to the inlerpenetrations of inner and outer space which Le Corbusier achieved later in his buildings.  Le Corbusier has laid down five points of liaison between con- temporary archilecture and contemporary construction:  1. The pillar, which is to be left {ree to rise through the open space of a dwelling.  Such a use of the pillar had been made early in the nineteenth century by John Nash. Henri Labrouste in 18.13 had also used a free-standing cast-iron pillar in one of the rooms of his  | |  J  Bibliothéque Sainte-Geneviéve, Le Corbusier uses the free  pillar with a difference, however: through the girders of the framework it lakes up all the load in the structure and leaves the walls with nothing lo support." This leads directly to Le Corbusicr’s second principle.  2, The functional independence of skeleton and wall, in the case not only of the outer walls bul of the inner partitions also. William Le Baron Jenney, in the first true skeleton construc-  at Pessac, near  233. LIE CORBUSIER and P. JEANNIERET, Settlement. houscs Bordeaux, 1926. fn this early experimental work, Le Corbusier plays with screens, volumes, light, shadow, and color. Soon to be followed by solutions of great plastic sureness.  uon, his Leiter Building of 1889 (Chicago), also look advantage of the complete freedom this type of framework building per- mitted in the disposition of the nonsupporting inner walls. Vietor Horta. in his house in the Rue de Turin (1893), and Perret, in his house in the Rue Franklin (1903), gave impetus to the flexible treatment of the ground plan which the mutual independence of the separate stories made possible.  “The machine shop which Walter Gropius built at Uie Pagus works in 1911 also placed the steel coluimms behind the outer wall. 
3. Le plan libre. Le Corbusier converted the ferroconcrete skeleton from a technical device into an aesthetic means. Le Corbusier uses the partition walls to model the interior space of the house in the most varied manner, employing curved staircases and curving or flat partition walls for both func. tional and expressive purposes. The same means allow him to hollow out large portions of the house, and to bring abowt inter- penetrations of outer and inner space which are unfamiliar and daring.  This whole treatment, the completely free and individualized organization of separate stories, is what is meant by ‘“ open planning ” or le plan libre. By now the difference between the open planning of Frank Lloyd Wright and that of European architects should be apparent. The work of the latter is based upon the new conception of space as essentially many-sided which grew out of cubism.  4. The free facade, which is a direct consequence of skeleton construction.  5. The roof garden. Frank Lloyd Wright’s houses demand that we go around them if we wish to understand their formation. Now a house can also be looked at from above or below; in a sense it presents a surface that opens on the sky. The flat roof is a recognition of that additional space-relation in the dwelling —although the flat roof can, of course, be used with many different intentions. Its employment by contemporary archi- tects — often in conjunction with flat slabs that form free- standing dividing walls or hovering partial coverings — does not serve practical ends alone. Such treatments express the sense of space of our period.  The Villa Savoie, 1928-30  Since 1922, when he first began to build regularly, Le Corbusier has made use of and developed these five principles.” The ex- perience gained in the construction of several private homes has enabled him to use them in his work in more and more clarified  * Cf. S. Giedion, ‘‘ Le Corbusier et architecture contemporaine,” Cahiers d’arl, V (Paris, 1930), 205-215.  form. They appear at their purest, perhaps, in his Villa Savoie, built at Poissy in 1928-30.  All Le Corbusier’s houses attack the same problem. He is always endeavoring to open up the house, to create new possi- bilities for connections between its interior and exterior and within the interior itsclf. We want rooms which can be thrown open or enclosed at will, rooms whese outer partitions fall away when we wish. Briefly, it is a question of achieving dwellings of a sort which, up to the present, have been beyond the reach of conception and execution alike. The armature construction is here in secret alliance with our half-realized desires; it anticipates them, in fact.  Previously to this, Le Corbusier's houses had been built on rather cramped plots, in more or less close proximity to their neighbors. The site of the Savoie house, on the contrary, was completely isolated (fig. 234).  The problem involved here was one which affects every man when he leaves his work and seeks to regain contact with nature, with growing things, the countryside, and the sky. This attempt to renew our connections with nature raises the same fundamental questions wherever we build, by the sea- shore, in the mountains, or — as in this case — on the undu- lating expanses of the Seine valley just outside Paris.  At one period in his development Frank Lloyd Wright used to employ the smallest crevices in the rocks to help bind his houses still more closely to the earth. In the Savoie house Le Corbusier does exactly the opposite. The city-dweller for whom it was designed wanted to look out over the countryside rather than to be set down among trees and shrubbery. He wanted to enjoy the view, the breezes, and the sun—to experience that un- hurricd natural freedom which his work deprived him of. This is another instance of two eternally opposed responses to nature: a contemporary reflection of the difference between the Greek temple, sharply outlined against its background, and the medie- yal town, attached like a plant to the site on which it stands. This house is a cube elevated on pillars. The cube part is not a solid mass; it is hollowed out on both the southeast and southwest sides so that when the sun comes up the light floods the whole interior instead of mercly skimming the outer wall. 
234, LE CORBUSIER and P. JEANNERET, Villa Savoie at Poissy, 1928-30.  235. LIE CORBUSIER and P. JEANNERET, Villa Savoie, 1928-30. Cross section. The hollowing out of the house from above and from below is accomplished with astonishing sureness.  236. LE CORBU- SIER and P. FEAN- NERET, Villa Savoie, 1928-30. Terrace and roof garden. Large glass areas of the living room are directed toward the qreat terrace, which gives the landscape as well as the sky only in silhouelle. The ramp leads from the first to the second floor inside the house and from the second floor to the roof garden outside.  237. LE CORBU- SIER and P. JEAN- NERET, Villa Savoie, 1928-30. Plan. 
The entrance hall is on the northwest, but in coming in from the road one has to go all around the south side of the house to reach it. Of course there is really no fagade and no back or front, since the house is open on every side.  The living room — five meters by fourteen — has horizon- tally sliding windows on two sides. The third wall (facing onto the terrace) is glass from floor to ceiling for some two-thirds of its length (figs. 236, 237). Half of this glass partition can be slid back by an easily manipulated lever. As a result, the room can be arranged quite freely, while the occupant is brought into connection with both the interior and the out- doors. The surrounding landscape, however, never appears in its full sweep. It is always shown in segments — framed, as it were — not only in the interior rooms but also on the terrace,  Since his La Roche house at Auteuil (1923-24), Le Corbusier has been preoccupied by the problem of the ramp in the in- terior of the house. When there is room enough, the elimination of the staircase permits an almost insensible transition from one level in the house to another. The ramp in the Savoie house is in two sections (fig. 235): one wing is inside; the other wing continues along an outer wall to the roof garden. Besides the ramp, there is a spiral staircase which leads from the ground to the roof.  It is impossible to comprehend the Savoie house by a view from a single point; quite literally, it is a construction in space- time. The body of the house has been hollowed out in every direction: from above and below, within and without. A cross section at any point shows inner and outer space penetrating each other inextricably.  Borromini had been on the verge of achieving the interpenetra- tion of inner and outer space in some of his late baroque churches. This interpenetration was first realized in our period, through the methods of modern engineering, with the Eiffel Tower of 1889. Now, in the late twenties, it had become pos- sible to achieve it in a dwelling. This possibility was latent in the skeleton system of construction, but the skeleton had to be used as Le Corbusier uses it: in the service of a new concep- tion of space. That is what he means when he defines architec- ture as construction spiriluelle.  The League of Nations Competition, 1927: Contemporary Archi- teclure Comes to the Front  The 1927 international competition for the League of Nations Palace at Geneva is one of the most illuminating episodes in the history of contemporary architecture. For the first time present-day architects challenged the routine of the Academy ina field which it had dominated for generations, the design of monumentally impressive state buildings. The Academy won this particular engagement, but its victory injured the prestige of its methods.  The conventional routines showed themselves incapable of producing architectonic solutions to problems of modern organization. The proof of that helplessness did much to break down popular resistance to modern treatments.  It was plain from the start that, among the 337 projects sub- mitted, one — the work of Le Corbusier and Pierre Jcanneret -— was peculiarly important and significant. Later develop- ments verified this first judgment.  What made it important? It unexpectedly forced high officials from everywhere in Europe to consider seriously a kind of architecture which they had always dismissed as aesthetic trifling. For decades there had been an established style for the stately official building — an international style that hardly varied from country to country. Custom had made its validity seem guaranteed for all time, and the official element automatically turned to it when the matter of their Geneva setting came up. The scheme that came to the forefront, how- ever, shockingly disregarded the stylistic approach in order to tackle, quite openly, the specific problems which the building raised.  The idea of a league of nations is one which we encounter time and again in history. Its realization, however — the actual establishment of a neutral center where representatives of every country might meet to maintain the equilibrium of the world — was a completely new thing and brought a highly complex institution into being. [ts varied functions required a division of its headquarters into three main parts: a secretariat, where the daily work of its administration could be carried on; 
amecting place for committees of various sorts whose sessions occurred intermittently (the Conseil and the Grandes Commis. sions); and a hall for the yearly sitting of the Assemblée generale. Besides this, a great library had to be incorporated into the whole complex.  The outstanding fact about the scheme submitted by Le Corbusier and Jeanneret * is that they found the most com- pact and best-conceived solution to these needs (fig. 238).**  238. LE CORBUSLER and P. JEANNERET, League of Nations Palace, Geneva, 1927. The first contemporary project for a monumental state building to gain serious al- tention from the public and the official element. Open planning in ferroconerele achieved an efficient solution fo a complex and variegated set of demands.  3 Cf. Le Corbusier, Une Maison, un palais (Paris, 1928). Here the architect himself explains what he was aiming at in this scheme.  #0 At the suggestion of the Friends of Modern Architecture — an association connected with the International Congress for Modern Architecture (C.LLA.M.) — Le Corbusier’s plaus for the palace of the League of Nations were sayed and purchased by the Uni- versity of Zurich in 1939. ‘The great view of the palace (fig. 238) hangs near the mathe- matics seminar of the University of Zurich. he other seventeen plans are preserved in the archives and are always available for study.  239. LE CORBUSIER and P. JEANNERET, Leaguc of Nations Palace, 1927. Cross section of the Grande Salle. The ceiling has the form of an acoustic sheil with polished sur- faces; itis hung from bridge girders in the roof. (The same problem was met and solved by Adler and Sullivan in their Chicago Auditorium of 1887.) Le Corbusier takes a technical de- rice and converts it into an aesthetic expression.  LE CORBUSIER and P. NERET, League of Nations Palace, 1927. Sheltered, platform-like entrance. The railroad platform has been purified in line and transformed into archilecture with a elassic sureness, just as the traffic ramp was in the Villa Savoie.  The Secretariat (fig. 241), the great administration building near the enlrance to the grounds, was given a slender wing whieh paralleled the lake. The rows of horizontally sliding  
windows gaye every clerk or typist an unimpeded view over water and mountains. A roof garden was available for rest periods. The building had a ferroconcrete skeleton and seemed to hover above its site on supporting pillars sel hack of the curtain walls. Le Corbusier had used the same Lreat- ment, a short time before and on a smaller scale, in his Villa Cook at Boulogne-sur-Seine.  The great Assembly Building was moved forward to the lake front. Two huge expanses of glass made up its side walls. The Grande Salle des Assemblées (fig. 239), meant for twenty-six hundred auditors, was designed with the needs of a large audi- ence as the determining factors. It had to be possible to hear and see perfectly from every one of its seats. To eusure this, the ceiling was given a nearly parabolic curvature. This was on the advice of the specialist, Gustave Lyon.* But the ceiling is not simply introduced into the design as an acoustical aid: it is taken up into and influences the whole form of the hall. Le Corbusier conyerts what was offered simply as a technical expedient into aesthelic means.  In the treatment of the ceiling Le Corbusier unconsciously followed the example of earlier men. Thus Davioud in the seventies used a parabolic ceiling in a project for a theater of a capacity of five thousand. The Adler and Sullivan Auditorium of 1887 in Chicago — the finest assembly hall of its period -- is similarly modeled by considerations of acoustics, but to an even greater extent than in the Grande Salle at Geneva.  Le Corbusier’s plans show a thoroughly considered treatment of the traffic problem. The problem was acute when the General Assembly was in session, and it had to be possible to move great streams of cars in short order. The rear entrance of the Assembly Building accordingly took its form from an everyday solution to the same difficulty — the sheltered rail- way platform set between two transit lines (fig. 240). But once again a purely utililarian development is transmuted into an expressive means.  34 Lyon had already constructed the Salle Pleyel at Paris. Le Corbusier’s hall was de- signed before the loud-speaker cate into use and simplified the problem of hearing. Such methods may be called for again in the future, however. We can reasonably expect a revived demand on the part of the public for the natural tones of the human voice. unaltered by electrical transmission.  Ju the requirements of the Secretariat simply as an office building, in the need for making it possible to hear from every bench in the Grand Salle, in the traffic problems that arose al general sessions—in the needs of contemporary life, that is — Le Corbusier and Jeanneret found incentives to artistic creation.  But it was exactly those requirements which proved stum- bling blocks to the architects who adopted the familiar monu- mental routine. As a consequence there is no need to consider which of these composilions was, ag a whole, the best — for all alike were incapable of functioning. The requirements of a complex new social organism like the League of Nations could not be met by schemes whose general outline was determined in cailyance by the need for a certain type of impressive external appearance. Everything was smothered by the ostentatious exterior of the building, as impossible here as plate armor for a man driving a car. And an architecture which cannot mold itself to the essential needs of its own time has lost its vital force.  The conventionally monumental schemes broke down in an- other respect. AU Versailles, where a great building complex was first juxtaposed to nature, unlimited space was available, and the absolute will behind this endeavor stamped ils own imyprint upon the surrounding landscape. At Geneva the site was strictly limited. Moreover, in this period we no longer desire to forcer la nature: we seek to preserve it intact and to bring it and our buildings into harmonious unity. This the academic schemes were unable to do; they found no way of avoiding extensive terracing of the site, which destroved its natural contours and left the huge bulk of the Palace perched upon a ridiculously small pediment of lawn.  The Le Corbusier -Jeanneret project would have preserved the integrity of the plot. The flexibly arranged Assembly Building, the narrow Secretariat, the Library, and the elevated passage- ways connecting all three achieved a perfect adjustment to the actual site.  Means developed during previous years are here brought to- gether in the solution of a purely contemporary social prob- lem. The plane surfaces which a long period of development 
had brought to a position of dominance are joimed with the new lightness and charm achieved by construction. The result is a kind of informality and flexibility such as had been attained years carlier in the ground plan of the house. A build- ing complex is evolved which goes beyond Renaissance concep- tions of space and cannot be grasped by a view from any one point. In its entirety the Palace realizes the new conception of space-time.  241. LE CORBUSIER and P. JEANNERET, League of Nations Palace, 1927. Ad- ministration Building (Secrétarial général), rear view,  The projects thal were entered in the 1927 international com- petition permit an exceptionally wide survey of the state of architecture at that time. All the architectural fashions of the late nineteenth century are represented, together with all the experimental developments in contemporary architecture.  The adherents of the Academy submitted beautifully executed schemes which treated the Palace as if it were a pri de Rome problem worked out in the quiet of the Villa Medici. From  the northern countries and from Germany there came either smooth and placidly decorative projects or Faustean expres- sionisUc sketches in soft charcoal. The work from Italy and from eastern ISurope featured cupolas or mosque-like edifices .-- one of which had no fewer than twenty interior light wells iv provide adequate ventilation. And from various countries the most radical experimentalists sent plans- - not always ripe for execution — of structures imbued with Russian con- struclivism or of dream fantasies in glass. The jury was left to Unread ils way through this confusion of crosscurrents, a confusion that was reflected in ils own composition.  in fact, the state of architecture in each of the European countries appeared in its choice of a distinguished man to represent it on the jury. Those countries which had witnessed genuine struggles for a new architecture rather than total neglect of avant-garde movements sent men who had stood in the midst of the fighting. The Dutch sent II. P. Berlage; the Austrians, Josef Hoffmann; the Belgians, Victor Horta. Switzerland was represented by Karl Moser, the man whose efforts have brought about the present high standard of architectural education in that country.  The opposition, not only on the jury but in political circles, came from countries which the thirty-year war for a new architecture had scarcely touched — countries like England and France, where the new movements had no influence upon the public or upon state functionaries. The English juror was sir John Burnett; the French was M. Lemaresquier, one of the leads of the Académie. He was the most active and influential member of the academic party.  Berlage, Hoffmann, and Moser made up the group favoring ihe choice of a work in the modern spirit: with the support of Horta they would have constituted a clear majority. And there was an intimate connection between Baron Horta’s early productions and the work of the younger architects. tis house in the Rue de Turin of 1893 and his Maison du Peuple of 1896 had signaled the whole of Europe to abandon methods thal were in opposition to the times. For all that, Horta joined the advocates of the conventions and made it impossible for a nonacademic project to be selected for execu- 
tion. Le Corbusier's project was one of these. The task of making the final choice was passed on to the diplomatic arm.  The jury finally reached a verdict by awarding nine first prizes ex aequo. Not unreasonably, some of the diplomats regarded this action as an evasion of duly on the part of the jury. As a last compromise, the creators of four schemes in the estab- lished international monumental style were selected to collub- orate in a final version.**  A new social organization of the type envisaged by the idca of the League of Nations cannot arrive at its proper framework by borrowing scattered features of an original scheme and executing the whole work in the opposed spirit of routine, This is certainly true in architecture; perhaps it is also true in politics.  We have paid particular attention lo the League of Nations Palace because it served as the general public’s first introduc- lion to contemporary architecture. The same year also marked its introduction to modern solutions of the housing problem, solutions that in this case were executed. It was in 1927 that the Deutsche Werkbund put Miés van der Rohe in complete charge of the Weissenhof settlement at Stuttgart. Miés van der Rohe entrusted the design of the houses to those architects from all over Europe who had been most active in the new developments. Le Corbusier’s Geneva plan remained a project, but the principles embodied in it were partially realized in the Centrosoyus at Moscow (1928-34). The erection of the Centrosoyus — now the Ministry of Light Industry — was retarded partly by the requirements of the Five-Year Plan and partly by the emergence of an architectural reaction. It was one of the last modern structures erected in Russia.  * Vurther complications arose when a new and larger site was made availuble for the Palace. In the effort to satisfy the daily needs of the League while at the same time re- taining a majestic interior, several plans were drawn up. In the end it was found that the only possible solution was to follow Le Corbusier's general layout. ‘Uhis general arrangemicnt the architects treated in a spirit of routine thal shows in their use of color- less historical shapes to produce a formal exterior appearance. In 1937, ten years after the competition was held, the building was opened and put into service. Everyone, from typists to diplomats, agreed that it was a failure.  Large Constructions and Architectural Atms  In Paris, at about the same lime, two large constructions by Le Corbusier appeared in quick succession: the Salvation Army hospice (1929-33) and the Swiss Pavilion of the University City (1931-33), Both show additions to Le Corbusier's equip- ment of aesthetic means.  The pavilion of the Swiss dormitory is one of Le Corbusier's freest and most imaginalive creations. The whole building is supported by immense ferroconerele pillars which run deep into the soil to the underlying rock. One side of the building consists of the glass curtain wall of the studios; the other is modeled carefully in a curved wall of rugged stone and smooth slabs (figs. 242, 243) 3  But what strikes one from the very first as extraordinary is the molding of volumes and space in the entrance hall. Although ihe room at his disposal was relatively limited, the imagina- tion of the architect has created a space that is living, free, and vast. In the inventiveness it displays it is comparable to the work of the great periods. It is significant that the means employed are apparently very simple: the exact place- ment of the slaircase, the unexpected undulations in the walls (the principle of the plan libre), and the use of microphoto- vraph murals, sel out checkerboard fashion. The incorpora- tion into modern architecture of such imaginalive clements is necessary to maintain its vitality.  Quite different inquiries and quile different solutions are involved in the Salvation Army hospice, the Cité de Refuge. This building — the largest Le Corbusier and his partner have yet built — is on the cast side of Paris. Although there was a very limited budget and the building equipment had to he quite primitive, the hospice represents a really daring achievement. It is one of the first many-storied buildings in t:urope to allempl a very simplified type of air conditioning.  “Yor further illustrations cf. Le Corbuster ef Pierre Jeannerel, Gfurres complele, 1929- (934, vol. IL (Zurich, 1934), with introduction by Sigfried Giedion.  * Vrank Lloyd Wright's Larkin Building, Buffalo ((904) was, according to its architect, * the first air-conditioned office building.” 
But here too the astonishing thing is the impression of grandcur produced by the interrelations between its volumes and space at large. It is such relations that give modern architecture its vitality. Notice how smoothly the entry leads into the semi- circular reception room, how smoothly the latter finds its continuation in the main hall, and how smoothly this in turn leads the men and women to their respective quarters. The building is a moving and unaffected assertion of the right of even the most humble to a human and dignified life.  At this point, however, we are obliged to cut short the examina- tion of Le Corbusier’s work. It has been published extensively, and he himself has discussed its principles in his writings. These writings — ranging in subject from painting to city plan- ning — have had as much influence as his buildings, not only in Europe and the United States but in Latin America as well, Le Corbusier’s literary connections are not even restricted to the arts. The articles in the periodical L'Esprit nouveau which Jeanneret (alias Le Corbusier) and Ozenfant published during the years 1919-25 deal with developments in every field which had a formative influence upon the thought of the period.  Le Corbusier has two great gifts: he can reduce a complicated problem to astonishingly simple basic elements, and he can summarize these results in formulas of lapidary clearness. But however summary the manner of treatment may be, basic . concepts and principles are never lost sight of. The first tree chapters of Le Corbusier’s Vers une architecture (originally pub- lished in L'Esprit nouveau, 1920) cannot be ignored in any study of our time. In turning “ les yeux qui ne voient pas ” to the beauty of “ les autos, les avions, les paquebots ” he pointed out the bridge between the present age and its forgotten nine- teenth-century forerunners.  On what does Le Corbusier’s achievement rest? His construc- tions do not show Auguste Perret’s precise engineering, and his houses do not match J. J. P. Oud’s infinitely painstaking attention to detail. Le Corbusier, however, approached the house with a seismographic delicacy of perception and freed it from its inherited ponderousness. It has been his aim to incorporate in the house the floating counterbalance of forces, the lightness and openness, which nineteenth-century iron  
construction succeeded in expressing in abstract terms. He has shown us how lo model all the surfaces of a house — above and below as well as at the sides.  The elements Le Corbusier uses are often Lo be found ready to hand in industry. The pillars on which his houses are poised occur in many warehouses: the elongated window - - fenétre en longueur — is a familiar consequence of methods of construe- tion used in factories. The railroad platform which he in- corporates in state buildings and the ramps he employs in some of his houses for an interpenetration of inner and outer space are used in many lrench railway stations (for example, the Gare Montparnasse).  Le Corbusier lifted these elements out of their everyday exist- tence and changed them as the painters changed scraps of paper or pipes into art. Ile fused these elements on the basis of our spatial conception into a new architectonic language.  <— WA fi = = BOON GZ To) \ 7) \) }  e |  > ) 7  |FeS (= i= VL 244. PICASSO, “Woman in an 21a. LE CORBUSIER, Project for  Armchair,” 1938. Detail. exhibition at Liége, 1937.  ALVAR AALTO: ELEMENTAL AND CONTEMPORARY  Aalto is the strongest exponent of the that  First and foremost. combination of standardization with irrationality. so standardization becomes no Jonger master but servant.  The moral force behind the development of architecture in recent decades has had one supreme concern: to reéstablish a union between life and architecture. Attempt after attempt has been made to close the gap which has separated them for healing process from within.  over a century by means of a  By slow degrees the cure has been taking effect. architects who have heen Earlier, Frank  Alvar Aalto is the youngest of thos the creators of the present-day vocabulary. Lloyd Wright had evolved a language of forms. direct. would appear. from the prairie. His private houses buill ahout 1900 in the residential districts of Chicago and Bulfalo cmphasized the human aspect and stood in complete contrast to the early skyscrapers, business buildings, and apartment houses that the young Wright had watched as they grew.  as il  The road thal Kurope had to Lake to free itself from the deval- uated architectural language of the ruling taste proved to be a puch more difficull one. When Walter Gropius put for- ward a new means of architectural expression In Hurope about 1913, he could not begin directly with the home: he had to begin by confining himself to those forms of construction and types of buildings that had remained uncorrupted: frame structures, factories. exhibition buildings. In the twenties. Le Corbusier shaped the house on the basis of a new space conception. Elis points of departure were the ferro- concrete skeleton and the means of artistic expression that had developed since cubism. At the same time. through the work of the * Sujl” group. Holand contributed theories of artistic fundanientals as well as practical solutions. The movement centered around Theo van Doesburg, Mondrian, Rietveld, van Kesteren, and others. J.J. P. Oud expressed its social concepts in the workers’ quarters that he built, from 1919 onwards. in whieh Che marriage of funclion and aes-  early 
thetics is handled in a masterly fashion. These means of ex- pression and their clements — standardization, new methods of construction, and, above all, a new space conception — had developed so far between 1920 and 1930 that an architectural language already lay at the disposal of anyone capable of using it.  The Complementarity of the Differentiated and the Primitive  About 1930 Alvar Aalto’s name began to be known outside Finland. What part was he to play? At this time, painters like Joan Miré and Paul Klee, whose work is closely bound to the organic and the irrational, were coming to the fore. A similar event was about to happen in architecture.  Already in 1925, in Le Corbusier’s Pavillon de |’Esprit Nou- veau in Paris, objects of natural growth — stones, shells, and grotesque roots — lay alongside mechanically formed objects which have acquired a perfect standard type through man’s long experience with them, such as everyday drinking glasses, wine bottles, or laboratory equipment. It seems today to be requisite that we should live both with objects shaped by man and with objects of organic growth.  We have seen how the new architecture had first to develop out of those elements that had remained sound: iron con- struction and ferroconcrete. But by about 1930 the new means of expression had been attained. Now it was possible to strive for further development and to dare the leap from the rational-functional to the irrational-organic. This need al- ready lay concealed within the functional conception. To avoid misunderstanding, let it be stated that this development towards the organic in no way approximates the German. re- action of the 1930's, or certain Nordic evasions of the real problem curiously labeled “* New Empiricism,” which means, as has been pointed out, that ‘‘ coziness is coming back into domestic work.” The feeling for mass production and for standardization has not been discarded at all, only now we have at hand not only the necessary techniques but also per- haps an insight inlo the use of these from a human standpoint.  Alongside iron and ferroconcrete construction, the ancient ma- terial, wood, came again to the fore. By 1930 it appeared  hat wood had been squcezed by manufacturers of all its po- entialities. Tt seemed as though the constellation under which Aalto was born predestined him to discover the new poten- ialities of this organic material, with which his name will ever ye associated. Alvar Aalto is as near lo the highly trained chemist as he is to the artistic principles of our period.  inland is with Aalto wherever he goes. It provides him with hat inner source of energy which always flows through his work. [tis as Spain is Lo Picasso or Ireland to James Joyce. Part of the essence of present-day art is that its true repre- sentatives originate in a definite human environment and their work is not created in a vacuum. But it is also part of its essence that barriers between space and time, barriers be- tween countries, and barriers between future and past are torn down, and with a bold sweep our own period, the whole world, and the whole of history are embraced. Georges Braque ex- presses this in a Bergsonian manner in his recently published sketchbook: “ L’avenir est la projection du passé, conditionée par le présent.”” !  Perhaps later periods will observe that one of our good qual- ilies was our endeavor to combine the technical with the primeval. This same phenomenon appears in all the arts: out of forgotten strata of consciousness the elements of primitive man which are dormant in us are again brought to light, and at the same time a unity is sought with present-day de- velopments.  Aalto is restless. He does not always remain in the pine and hirch forests of Finland. First he made contact with the continent; since 1939 he has stood with one foot in America. {lis nature Jeads him to come into contact with whatever the place and the period have to offer for the forces of artistic development. In addition, he bas personal friend- ships with such artists as Fernand Léger, Hans Arp, and srancusi, the sculptor. He recognizes modern art as a great reservoir which, though often invisible, provides the decisive power for his own creativeness. One senses this in his sana-  1 Cahier de Georges Braque 1917-1947 (Paris, 1918). 
torium. in his factories. in his Viipuri Library, as well as in the simplest schemes that he sketches on the wall. In 193] when we first directed attention lo Aalto,’ we pointed out that he possessed that rather rare ability to atkack building prob- lems functionally and lo solve them in an organic way. In this respect. Aallo has in no way changed.  When Aalto was in the United States in 1939. building the Finnish Pavilion for the New York World’s Fair, he and J] were once silting together with Brancusi. the sculptor. Bran- cusi had been telling of some work that he had done for an Indian Maharajah when Aalto suddenly exclaimed. [see now. Brancusi! You stand at the crossroads of Asia and Europe!” Finland is also at the crossroads of East and West, but for the moment we would only stress the fact that many remnants of primeval and medieval times still remain alive there and intermingle with modern civilization. This double nature is instilled in Aallo loo, and gives creative tension to his work.  Finland  Finland is one of the countries that were longest covered with glaciers. Civilization, as it lraveled over the earth, always reached this country very lale- -from the neolithic period onward to this century. Often eastern and western influences have intermingled here.  Of all the countries of Europe. Finland is in many respects one of the most. peculiar. Its people have never risen to imperial- isc power and splendor, like the Vikings of Norway in early days, the Danes in medieval Limes, or the Swedes in the seven- teenth century, For hundreds of years, Finland formed a part of Sweden. till Napoleon delivered it, in a moment of rage. to the Russians. Each of the rulers left his imprint on the country: but not one of the invaders could really curb the people. The only way to get along with the Finns was to treat them ina friendly manner and. as far as possible, to leave them undisturbed. This has remained true throughout Fin- land’s whole history. [tis a unique mixture of smoothness and  * Bauwell, Welt  Berlin, 1931).  | | |  215. Pransportation of wood. After deving inthe forests, the lays start a vear-lony jour- ney over lakes and rivers dawn lo the sea, there thes are con- certed tuo pulp at eel.  Iiloge plants.  friendliness, with an imperturbable firmness in the depths of their soul. thal makes up the strength of these people.  Finland, covered with its network of lakes and forests. sug- vests in ils structure the days of the Crealion, when water and earth were first separated. Tt is a country of vast dimen- sions and solitudes: although ten times the size of Switzerland, it contains only the same number of inhabitants. Metals, limber. water- these are ils principal resources. Finland is favored in that its ten-thousands of lakes are connected in four or five systems and have outlets to the sea. not lo the frozen north as in Russia. but to the west and to the south.  linland’s chief raw material is wood. The trees are felled in the nerth during the summer season. After drying in the forests for six months. Uiey start a year-long journey over lakes and rivers, hundreds of miles. down lo the sea. There 
in large cellulose plants at the rivers’ mouths they are con- verted into pulp (fig. 245).  Finnish Architecture Before 1930  Shortly before the first world war, Central Europe and Scan- dinavia, including Finland, all experienced a period of pros- perity. It was the result of long years of peace. The efforts that Finland made at this time to establish a strong archi- tectural expression of its own were immediately noticeable.’ Lars Sonck, a man of over eighty when I met him in the autumn of 1948 at a luncheon in the Liberal Club of Helsinki, is doubt- less the strongest personality among the older Finnish archi- tects. Himself resembling a block of unhewn granite, he built the best churches of the whole Art Nouveau movement in the first decade of this century. Their expressive directness and the manner in which granite, concrete, and space are treated still immediately capture the onlooker of 1919.4  Long before Eliel Saarinen left Finland for America, he was known outside his own country for his railway station in Helsinki (1906-14). In this celebrated building it is very easy to be reminded of South German influences; but, just like its architect, it is more elegant and flexible than its prototypes.  J.S. Sirén’s House of Parliament in Helsinki, built in the late twenties, is an example of Swedish classicism (especially that of Ivar Tengboom and his circle); yet from this building there does not emanate thal over-perfumed flavor which makes Oestherg’s Town Hall in Stockholm unsupportable after a lime.  Aalto’s First Buildings  Alvar Aalto’s active life coincides with the most consistently agitated period of Finland’s existence. First came liberation, followed by only a short span of undisturbed freedom, and then two wars. By normal reasoning, either of these should  8 Architecture in Finland (Helsinki, 1932), published by the Finlands Architek tfoerbund, is the only book which gives an insight into Finnish development up to that tinie. 1Perhaps we are considering his rough granite church in Tampere, the Finnish Man- chester, more than the Kallio Kirk (1908), a kind of landmark in Helsinki.  have been sufficient to wipe out Finland once and for all. After these catastrophes very little money remained for the rebuilding of the damaged instruments of production. Hlous- ing had to be reduced to the utmost. and there were no funds at all for town halls, museums, civic centers, and other such signs of financial prosperity. Great public buildings will not he found in Aalto’s work, and such schemes as the sanitorium at Paimio, the factory complex of Sunila, the lixury of \airea, were created during the short period before Finland’s two great fights for ils very existence.  Tn Finland, architects and foresters have a much higher social standing than in other countries, and they form a kind of aristocracy, lo which Alvar Aallo’s forehears (who were for- esters) belonged. Aallo himself was brought up ina village, Alajarvi. close to the northwestern end of the most densely populated region of Finland. He had an early start in his career, and while still a student at the Institute of Technology in Helsinki he built his first house, for his parents, in Alajarvi.  In these early days, Aalto had much to do with several Finnish exhibitions, but only one of these temporary buildings shall be mentioned here: the Orchestra Platform in the ex- hibition that celebrated the 700-year Jubilee of the founding of Finland’s old capital of Turku (Abo). This slightly curved wooden sound hox (fig. 245c), reduced to the utmost in all its parts and delicately outlined, works, together with the in- clined orchestra floor, to assure perfect sound transmission, and reveals simultaneously its plastic finesse. It was con- ceived at the same time that Aalto was marrying ceiling and wall in his Vitpuri lecture hall.  Jn the mid-twenties, three young Finnish architects began work: Aalto, Bryggman, and Huttunen. They all used the ferroconcrete skeleton in the way that had been developed in France and elsewhere. It is difficult to distinguish their ar- listic handwriting at the time when Huttunen built his excel- Jent flour mills, Bryggman his hotels, chapels, and insurance offices, and Aalto his first large block for an Agricultural Co- operative, containing offices. flals. and a theater for 600 persons. This was in 1928, in Turku, where Aalto had opened his own office.  
Then, in 1928-30, came the office building for the Turun- Sanomat in Turku, the first of Aalto’s buildings to become known outside Finland. Here can already be seen a coalition of western technique with an artistic language all his own: the ferrocoucrete skeleton, bands of horizontal windows, roof terrace, and, especially, the mushroom ceiling of Lhe sub- terranean hall that houses the printing press. The tapered  North Finland. detertor, This structure of unhewn logs seems rather a patisade fortress against Indians than an exhibition building for forestry and agriculture. Buill in 1938 in a Northern Finnish forest, if shows in its roughness thal Aalto had not become conventional through his contact with Western Europe.  245b. Pavilion for an exhibition of forestry and agriculture in the village of Lapua, North Finland. nlerior.  245e. ALVAR AALTO, Orchestra platform for the 700-year Jubilee of Turku, 1929.  2454. Pavilion for an exhibition of forestry and agriculture in the village of Lapua, columns of this skylight-illuminated hall, with their sensuous one-sided mushroom capitals, show Aalto’s hand at its best (figs. 245d, 245e). Soon, in Paimio, the whole man will come to the fore.  Aalto started between the years 1927 and 1929. Before he was thirty he had been commissioned to execute the Agricul- tural Codperative, the Turun-Sanomal building, the Viipuri : Library, the sanatorium at Paimio — all of them as a result of  winning competitions. These facts are mentioned more to give an insight into Finland’s atmosphere than to give proof of Aalto’s genius. Had Aalto grown up in one of the other  
ALVAR AALTO, Turun-Sanomat building,  Turku, Printing room, 1928-10.  ALVAR AALTO, Building for  Turun-Sanomal, Exterior, 1928-2  244f, ALVAR AALTO, Puberculosis Sanatorium, Paimio, 1929-33, Rest hall on lop af patients’ wing.  democratic countries, Switzerland for example, or the United States, he could never, as carly as 1929, have been given first prize for a scheme such as the sanatorium at Paimio. Elis wings would have been broken before be had flown. or have been crushed down by conipromises. Nothing reveals more clearly the spiritual leadership of a country than the capacity of its administration lo recognize the best talents right from the start, and to trust them.  Paimio: The Sanatorium, 1929-1933  \s far as we can see, there are three institutional buildings in- separably linked lo the rise of contemporary architecture: the Bauhaus ab Dessau by Walter Gropius (1926): the League oF Nations Palace al) Geneva by Le Corbusier (1927): and Alvar Aalto’s sanatorium al Paimio (1929-33) in the south- west part of Finland. not far from the former capital Turku.  This instution is a medium-sized tuberculosis sanatorium  with accommodation for about 290 patients. The main build-  
245g. ALVAR AALTO, Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Paimio, South Finland, 1929 33, View of the entrance.  ing. an unbroken line of six ‘stories, is oriented to the south- southwest; the solarium with its cantilevered balconies ad- joins it at a slight angle Cfig. 245g). At the end of 1928, when Aalto won the competition for this public sanatorium, courage was needed to rest the solarium on a single row of ferroconcrete pillars. to close it at the back with one flat wall, and to let  25h, ALVAL culosis: Sanalori SSL View af the rest hall.  215i. ALVAL culosis Sanatocit 33. Ground plan  seyen rows of balconies protrude in an unbroken line. Ina sanatorium we have been accustomed to conceive room and baleony as a single unit. to allow the patient direct access Lo the open air. There are no balconies connected with the rooms at Paimio. But this separation between room and baleony is intentional. Physicians considered it as a very im- portant factor in the rest cure that fpaients be brought logether in small groups according to their own choice, their  
own preference. To avoid the impression of endless rows of patients, small partition walls have been introduced so that the patients can be divided up into these small groups (fig. 245h). The top floor is used as a rest hall and runs the whole length of the building (fig. 245f). At the point where the main building and the rest hall intersect, Aalto links them together by giving the shelter an undulating curve. From the lounge chairs one can look into the tops of near-by fir trees and see the forests beyond them. But Aalto also planted pine trees in tubs along the balconies, to soften Lhe concrete planes, When I saw them, in the autumn of 1918. they looked strong and healthy in their stout green growth,  The human side also comes into consideration in the basic layout of the individual rooms. This is made clearly evident by the position of the electric light near the bed, by the oval- shaped plywood doors of the small closet, by the simple ar- rangement at the window to provide fresh air without causing drafts, by the specially designed wash basins which permit a noiseless flow of water, and by the early use of ceiling heat- ing. These illustrate the minute elaboration of details.  Set at a right angle to the main building which houses the patients is a short wing with staircases and elevators which forms the link to the dining and social fooms. Slightly lower wings for clinic and administration and still lower sections for kitchen, laundry, and power station radiate therefrom (fig. 245i).  Wherever you stand, new aspects enrich the space-time con- ception of this complex. Each of the walls has its own ex- istence and is formed according to the function of the rooms behind it, but all are modeled and related to each other by a strong plastic vision. At the time of its construction no building in the northern countries could compare with the sanatorium at Paimio in its purity of form and boldness of conceplion. As in Le Corbusier’s League of Nations Palace, as in the Bauhaus, the various parts are fully integrated — like the organs of a body — each having its distinct functions and yet being inseparable from the others. Only by encom- passing the whole compound can one perceive its space-time planning and its relation with earth and woods.  The Undulating Wall  One of the few buildings in which Aalto could freely express himself was the Viipuri Library, built with difficulty between 1927 and 1934. It was damaged in the first Russo-Finnish war and almost razed to the ground in the following conflict. It consisted of the library proper, which had carefully con- structed circular overhead lights, and an unusually shaped lecture hall with a spacious connecting vestibule.’  Aalto’s treatment of the undulating wooden ceiling of the lecture hall is of great historical importance. The architect  245j. ALVAR AALTO, Viipnri Library, 1927-1931. Undulaling ceiling of the lecture hall.  today appears nowhere so hesitant as in the region of the ceiling, above the reach of everyday functions. Ilere, to a large extent, is a freedom of opportunity to excite the plastic imagination of an artist. The solution of the problem of spanning space has always been an indication of the crealive- ness of a period.  *For a complete description see Alfred Roth, The New Architecture (Zurich, 1940), pp. 181-194, 
Alvar Aalto is, like Le Corbusier, one of the few architects who in our times has tried anew to attack the vaulting problem in a way peculiar to this period.* In the intimate hall of the Viipuri Library the irrational curves of the ceiling glide through space like the serpentine lines of a Miro painting (fig. 2455). From the floor behind the speaker, narrow strips of redwood sweep upward, curving irrationally along the glass wall. Of course, the architect himself can prove, with metic- ulous acoustic diagrams, that the undulating form he gave the ceiling enables sound to reach the human ear more perfectly. Here, therefore, scientific reasoning and artistic imagination have merged to free architecture from that rigidity which is today an ever present menace.  Aalto treated the walls of his Finnish Pavilion with even greater freedom. This was without doubt the most daring piece of architecture in the New York World’s Fair of 1939: an inclined wooden screen three stories high embraces the interior space in a freely drawn curve. The screen consists of three sections,*each cantilevered over the other; at the same time the whole structure leans forward, intensifying thereby the impression of continuous movement. A series of vertical ribs and the rhythm of their changing shadows animate the surface of the huge screen (fig. 245k).  Each detail has a well-reasoned explanation. In the tech- nique of poster display, the undulating surface provides more space for large photographs; the forward tilting brings the uppermost pictures closer to the angle of vision; the series of vertical ribs thrust the photographs forward; the cantilever of the upper stories, which so intensifies the impression of hov- ering movement, provides room for a concentrated display of objects.  The outstanding feature is the new modeling of inner space that is involved in this experiment, which to many still ap- pears rude and almost barbaric (fig. 245m).  $lig., Le Corbusier's original plan for the large assembly hall of the United Nations building (New York, 19:17), which linked ceiling, wall, and floor by consecutive, yet seginented parts,  Jlaving given flexibility to the ceiling and to partition walls, Aalto then attacks the outer wall in his Dormitory for the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Cambridge, 1947).  The sober program of a dormitory is given a new interpreta- tion. All means are employed in the attempt to avoid the ant-hill atmosphere often emanated by such buildings. Aalto gives the individual his personal rights through a great va- riely of means: by the way he arranges the staircases, by the blending of spaces, by allernating the capacity, form, and arrangement of the bedrooms. He dares to free the fagade in an undulating wall so that, as he explains, every student has a clear view of the Charles River without being made aware of the large expanse of the building (figs. 2450, p).  In March 1947 Aalto showed me the scheme, but I have not as yet had an opportunity to see it in construction, and archi- tecture can only be grasped by direct contact. Therefore, I may be permitted to quote some first impressions from a letter of an English observer.  ‘* | went over the [unfinished] dormitory building.... It is itself so full of life that it literally makes one feel oneself more consciously alive.  “The great curving walls are made of small bricks and these too he brings to life. A small brick can go this way or that way, or it can be Jaid very smoothly as though it were poured concrete. [t has variety in colour and also, within the limits of its function, in size and shape.  * Then the great curve is no sudden anachronism... just down the road is a row of rippling Boston bay windows, and Aalto has kept the same semicircular curve, only projecting it into the twentieth century.  * Perhaps the most exciting aspects of the building to me were the half-glimpsed end view where the windows, projecting as a series of buttresses, form a wonderfully rich linen paneling in the foreshortened view; then, the great main entrance (past a Maillart support) when one sees immediately, transparently, (through the whole building: through to the great playing fields to the right, Lo the sweep of the river in front, the curve of the 
2451. Finnish lakes and forests, Aulenko.  245m. Finnish Fair, N Ground 7  215n. ALVAR AALTO,  Glass vases  
2450. ALVAR AALTO, Senior Dormitory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1947-49, View.  interior space and the (future!) hubbub and life of the students.”  Aalto’s attempt to free architecture from the threat of rigidity points, like every constituent work, forward and backward, and is rooted at the same time in its own soil. He continues what Le Corbusier had attempted in the curved walls of the Swiss Pavilion in the Cité Universitaire (Paris, 1930-32), and in his project for Algiers (1931). As we have pointed out earlier, these continue the tradition of the undulating wall as a means of modulating space from Francesco Borromini’s facade of San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane, 1662-67 (fig. 42). to the serpentine windings of English crescents in the late eighteenth century (fig. 43).  Aalto’s endeavor to imbue things with an almost organic flex- ibility has another source: the nature of his country. As Joan Miré is rooted in the Catalan landscape, as the cubists trans- mitted the experiences — tables, glasses, bottles, newspapers — of a Parisian cafe into a new conception of space, so Aalto found a direct incentive in the curved contours of the Finnish lakes, shaped with asLonishing smoothness by nature itself and sct in high relief by forest masses pressing on all sides down to the waler’s edge (figs. 2451, n).  2445p. ALVAR AALTO, Senior Dormitory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1917-49, Detail of yround plan, showing arrangement of furniture.  
Sunila: Factory and Landscape, 1937-1939  Aalto’s main activity in Finland is industrial planning. from the factory ilself to the resettlement of whole industrial areas, This was the case in the Vuoksi river valley development (1947), where the left bank, annexed by. the Russians, had to be abandoned, and all industry, settlements, and community centers lransplanted and a new road system laid out.  Aalto has built several cellulose factories’ and sawmills *. Theirs are not the grand dimensions of American industrial plants, nor the elegant luxury of the van Nelle factory in Rotterdam (1927). Yet Aalto knows how to raise a plant from a purely professional instrument up to a piece of architecture in which the site, the use of different materials, and the organ- ization of volumes in space are given as much attention as the production line. Nowhere is this more apparent than in Sunila (1937-39),  Sunila, with a yearly output of 80,000 tons of cellulose sheets, was built jointly by five Finnish wood concerns. Good fac- tories are Laken for granted today, and production figures often provoke alarm rather than amazement. But Sunila is not merely a factory. It is a complex of hornogenous living zones and production areas. The living quarters were started before the factory ilself and are strewn around in the fir forest, to- gether with their saunas and laundries (fig. 245t).  Sunila stands on an island ina small bay. Its aspect is defined by the Jong horizontality of the warehouse, extending along the seashore (fig. 245r), and the vertical accents of the dif ferent codrdinated buildings of the plant. The inclined diag- onals of the conveyors, leading to and from the storage towers, aggressively penetrate the whole complex.  Aalto took care that the rounded granite rocks on which the faclory stands were not blasted to the level of the shore  7 For instance, the Toppila pulp nuills al Oulu (1933), where the suggestive form of the flake bins is not completely mastered.  8 Sawmills, with their flat boarded walls, generally recall the lifelessness of barracks. In Aalto’s Warkhaus sawmill (19-17), the usual dreariness of a sawmill is imbued with vitality just by the use of carefully profiled round limber and by giving the wall a lively contour.  (fig. 245q). Tle knew how to use the contrast between the massiveness of these granite rocks on the one hand and the delicate steel structure of the row of pylons which support the conveyor and the different texture of the flat brick walls on the other.  Sunila has a most perfect production line. In the interior there are Immense containers, boilers and digesters. There are pipe tunnels through which fluids and wood pulp flow, and a large machine for drying cellulose standing isolated in a spacious hall. But no men are to be seen. Only forty-five men are required to supervise the daily lwansformation of 30,000 logs into wood pulp; but more than three thousand men work in the forests lo keep the plant supplied. No one is to be seen on the stairways connecting the different levels or in the numerous halls. There is an atmosphere lke that in Captain Nemo’s Nautilus in Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea. The problem of the production line here reaches a perfect solution. Here no human being is misused to become an adjunct to a machine.  One stands finally on the top level, on the flat roof-terrace of the high brick-clad slorage building, from which the material, obeying the law of gravity, is conducted into the production process. Below radiates the organism of the factory, the large covered flake conveyor mounts almost to the terrace, and the eye passing over the granite rocks meets the Iinnish Jand- scape (fig. 245s): water, water, trees, and a vast expanse of space.  Close to the shore is an island of logs which have been floated down the river from distances of hundreds of miles. A cable crane picks them out to feed the machines. Ships wait in the bay lo carry the brown cellulose sheets overseas. It is a laustian prospect.  Mairea  \allo’s genius eannot be apprehended in a single piece of fur- niture, a living room, or a house. These must be seen together with his large-scale planning and the structure of the country. In Finland in these unsettled times there has been no oppor- 
215t, ALVAR AALTO, Sunila, 1937-39. Plan of factory and living qnarte  245q. ALVAR AALTO, Sunila, 1937~ : 39. Conveyors, faelory, and granile blocks. 215s. ALVAR AALPO, Sunila, 1937-39. View dowards the open sea. F w  245r. ALVAR AALTO, Simila, 1937-39, Warehouse, conveyors.  
245u. ALVAR AALTO, Mairea, 1938-39. Hxlerior.  245v. ALVAR AALTO, Mairea, 1938-39. Ground plan.  25w. ALVAR AALTO, Mairca, 1938-39. View fowards the Finnish fireplace and deauing room,  tunity for one-family houses and luxury villas. Aalto built a small house for himself and a larger one for his friend Gul- lichsen, president of one of the Finnish wood concerns. Gullichsen’s house, named “* Mairea”’ in honor of his wife, was built in 1938-39 in a clearing hewn out of the pine forest on the crown of a hill not far from the coast. Behind the house are a garden and a swimming pool with a group of gray silver willows in the background. It is a large mansion, yet it is intimate.  Mairea is a house poured, as it were, from a single crucible, for architect and client worked together, as in the eighteenth century. They had the same will and the same inclinations, a rather rare coincidence in this period when the architect has lo spend most of his energy convincing a hesitating client in whom the last century still lingers. Moreover, nothing leads the modern architect farther astray than building for a client of large financial means, whose main concern it is to Invent extravagant needs and an endless series of superfluous gadgets. 
eal  Even one accustomed to judge immediately the qualilies of a building will not easily comprehend the architectural instru- mentation of Mairea. It is architectural chamber music which demands the strictest attention to pereeive the subtleties in the resolution of its motifs and intentions — and especially to grasp fully the handling of space and the extraordinary han- dling of materials. The broad windows permit the mterpenc- tration of inner and ouler space: the forest seems to enter the house and find ils concomitant echo in the slender wooden poles employed there.  The spatial organization can perhaps be experienced to a cer- tain extent from illustrations. It is otherwise with the use of the many materials and the lyricism which results from their juxtaposition. This is already apparent from the outside. The rough-hewn slabs of black slate beneath the window - — whose texture il is impossible to recognize in the illustration (fig. 245a)— are combined with the warm brown of the teak- wood shutters and the yellow band of birch of the parapet running ahove.  The interior has a more delicate use of texture. In conjunction with the spatial accentuation, the vestibule has large Liles of a curious brown, set diagonally — tiles used normally for the restoration of churches. In contrast to these, smaller reddish tiles cover the floor of the drawing room with the heavy Finnish fireplace and continue into the dining room, placed at right angles in Lhe other wing. The four steps leading from the ves- tibule to the slightly raised level of the rooms opening fron: it are of a wood with a strikingly lucid quality. [ asked Aalto later what kind of wood he had used here. Jt is rather rarely used, he said- -a kind of white beech. the same as that used for the small strip which runs around the hull of a yacht. To indicate that the different parts of the main Living room blend into each other, the tile zones merge with the wooden floor in an undulating curve,  A sublle juxtaposition of materials appears everywhere. The shiny twin columns of the living quarters are of an ebony black which is relieved by small bands of wickerwork, placed at varying heights around the columns, sometimes individually wrapped, sometimes bound together Cfig. 245w). The large  Finnish fireplace (Finnish because il follows the old tradition of the country of building the hearth about on table level) has cantilevered granite shelves above the floor level so that one may stretch out along them. In contrast to the American custom, the granite blocks are not continued in the surround- ing wall. which is left white and smooth. One has to observe very precisely Lo apprehend the textual effect of the contig- uous wall of roughly whilewashed brick.  ALVAR AALPO, Mauirea, 245y. ALVARAALTO, Vairea, Details of the staircase. 1938-39. Staircase, drawing route.  This use of diferent textures has the same meaning as the use of the rocaille in the eighteenth century; it helps to modulate spaces in flux.  li is the spatial organization which interests us most here. You enter the vestibule. The undulating wall of eye-level height that faces you gives a hint of other rooms to the right. Four steps lead to the level of the main living room, which un- folds in different directions. Diagonally in the background ex- pands the area of the fireplace, and, on stepping toward il, you are drawn, diagonally again, into the depth of the large music 
room with its black wicker-clad columns and generously di- mensioned windows. Only the library is granted complete privacy.  The moment you are on the level of the main living room, the slender poles arranged at irregular intervals on both sides of the wooden staircase captivate you by the way they sep- arate it and yet permit space to penetrale. Incidentally, it is often the manner in which the staircase is integrated into the spatial organization of a house that betrays the architect’s capacity for handling space. In this case, the hght wooden staircase flows into the main room, announces the existence of other rooms and yet preserves its own identity. I[t is treated like a transparent sculpture (figs. 245x, y).  Tn this house a rare thing has been achieved; the feeling of an uninterrupted flow of space throughout the house is never lost, and yet the feeling of intimacy is preserved, wherever you are.  Organic Town Planning  Town planning is only another term for integration. In this heyday of narrow-minded specialization, nothing is more dif- ficult than to conceive or to build up a whole from a number of different parts.  The ability to integrate is normally developed towards the end of a period, when it is at its cultural peak. This is particularly true in relation to town planning.  We are now at the beginning of a period; yet, it is already necessary for us to possess those qualities that normally de- velop much later. As far as I know, this situation is unique. But it exists, and we must act accordingly. We are confronted here and now with the necessity of finding a solution to the complex problems of the city, although specialists are still sharply discussing what kind of city it should be, and al- though we ourselves are perhaps not even quite sure what-a town hall should look like. Let us not forget the present sit- uation: that our imagination begins to freeze as soon as problems of integration are involved.  What is Aalto’s contribution in the field of town planning? We can only touch on a few points here. The same qualities which enliven his buildings are even more obvious in his plan- ping schemes. With the same freedom that he has employed to loosen up the structure of walls and ceilings, he loosens up the rigid framework of the human settlement. Rows of houses scattered in all directions seem to have been strewn by the wind, and yet they are held together by an invisible force, like filings in a magnetic field.  In the layout of Sunila, 1937-39 (fig. 245t), Alvar Aalto’s approach to town planning is already manifest. ‘The whole sequence of his later schemes will reflect the same principles. These may be briefly described as establishing an equipoise between the primary demands for a human environment: an equipoise between the living area, the center of production, and nature.  To secure the right of the individual to privacy, to a simple community life, and to the most intimate contact with the earth is today the preoccupation of every planner. This aim is no longer original. Today these demands have become a matter of course. What is still lacking is their realization.  We will not easily find, as early as 1937, many achievements like Sunila, where both the production area and the living area have been conceived in such a way that each has been given its necessary rights without disturbing the other. The grasp of a town planner can be felt in the layout of one-family houses upon the narrowest strip of the available Jand; in the grouping of row houses freely in the forest; in the slight varia- tions of the engineers’ row houses, which lie nearer to the waterfront and are arranged in a slight curve, to ensure the utmost privacy for each dwelling. It goes without saying that the necessary social facilities (especially several saunas — communal bathing houses) are located at strategic intervals.  Aalto’s integrated approach enables him to have the struc- tural completion of the whole cornnmunity in his mind, even when he begins with only the first few cells. Together with other architects, he has been working, since 194-4, on the so- lution of the large-scale problem of the reconstruction of 
‘imental 1 1910  2452. ALVAR AALTO, Experimental Town Scheme, 1910.  Rovaniemi, the principal town of Finnish Lapland, which was completely destroyed al the end of the second Russo- Finnish war.  In his scheme for “An [experimental Town" which Aallo published in 1940, he had already indicated how he would synchronize, from the very beginning, the simultaneous growth of the single house, the town, and the processes of pro- duction (fig. 2457). Taking an area of hilly woodland scat- tered with lakes, so typical of the Finnish landscape, he laid out the various types of dwellings in the freest possible way. The terraced houses (f) circle about the hilltops in amoebic spirals, so that the structure of the landscape breaks through: the apartment houses (¢) are turned at a slight angle one to another and siled at right angles to the slope of the hillside; the wood infillrates inlo the area of the one-family houses (d); public buildings, schools, and sports grounds (b, ¢) are close to every part of the Lown, though each is laid oul to its own  245aa. ALVAR AALTO,  Ya Iwaultua. Ground plan. pa  _ ie a - 2A5ec. ALVAR AALTO, Kauttua.  245bb. ALVAR AALTO, Terraced houses showing entrances on Kauttua. Terraced houses. different levels,  
advantage. The standardized and the irrational here flow together, as in all Aalto’s works.  In 1940, this scheme was only a scrap of paper, designed for the students of M.LT. When I went to Finland, in the fall of 1948, the Finnish government had just granted the necessary funds for the erection of several such experimental towns in Finland. :  Bul by 1938, Aalto had already planned Kauttua. Well hidden, in a narrow valley cut by a creek and about three to four hours’ drive from Turku, lies a paper mill called Kauttua, On the opposite side of the valley, Aalto built, amidst the forest, a row of workers’ houses. These climb the steep hill- side in four great steps (fig. 245bb). The flat roof-terrace of one house forms the large veranda of the next. Jt may well be that Aalto remembered the peasant houses on the Greek isles. Here, too, the children play on their neighbor’s roof — something that is only possible in countries where people do not immediately become anxious if they have to share some- thing. As on the Greek island of Santorin, the houses of Kauttua use the natural slope to avoid the expense of stair- cases (fig. 245cc). Jn their form and shape they express man’s relation to the soil from which he springs.  The wars interfered. Up to 1948, only one row of houses had been built, owing to lack of money and materials.  The matter of real importance here is not this single row of houses, but the realization of the whole plan, one of the best proposals for the shaping of a rural settlement (fig. 245aa). Four rows of these terraced houses have been planned, each placed so that the natural forms of the slope are perfectly utilized. The brow of the hill is, as Frank Lloyd Wright likes to see it, untouched. Connected with these units, there are a school and a small community center, and, further down the slope, close to the river, is a steam bath, the sauna, built as usual together with the communal laundry — the only fa- cility that is already erected. This corresponds to an old habit of the Finns, to start the small bath hut before build- ing the dwelling.  Rapids rush through the city of Oulu, situated at the mouth of the river Oulu in northwestern Finland. An architectural problem here had to be solyed: How could one make full use of the water power without destroying the beauty of the marshy islands that lie at the mouth of the river? Aalto wanted to create a Venetianstyle development (fig. 245dd). He accomplishes this by taking the hundreds of thousands of cubic meters of stone and rubble resulting from excavation of a canal and the necessary dredging of the river and using this material to enlarge the islands and to raise their ground level a few inches.  2145dd. ALVAR AALTO, Oulu, 1913. Model.  25ee. ALVAR AALTO, Oulu, 1943.  The etty with the new eivie centers.  
The islands nearest to the power plant will then support the dwelling quarters of the workers. An administrative civic center and a sports center will be created on the now desolate isles that face the open water. A large highway will connect all with the two parts of the existing city of Oulu (fig. 245ee). Tn front of the publie center, a number of fountains will spring, geyser-like, from the surface of Lhe water.  Finally, there is the immense scheme for the transplantation of industry from the left bank of the Vuoksi river. now eccu- pied by the Russians, to the right bank, and the concom- itant opening of new highways, the building up of rich indus- tries, villages, and community centers, freely strewn into the depths of the countryside. Both in size and in codrdination, this greal regional enterprise will stimulate all planning ac- tivity in our period, provided that circumstances permit its completion.  Furniture in Standard Units  In Alvar Aalto’s opinion, a house is not only a far more com- plicated organ than an automobile; there is also a real dif- ference between an object which one may live in for a gen- eration and a vehicle of transport which one may conveniently exchange every second season. Furthermore, no two sites are the same. Above all, the house reaches too far into the psychic to admit of total mass fabrication.  Only elements of it should be standardized: doors, windows. mechanical equipment, and constructional members, whether they consist of skeleton or panel. The important matter is that architectural freedom should be preserved. The stan- dardized elements should awaken, not destroy, architectural vision.  Both house and furniture today are composed of machine- made parts. The comparison can be taken no further, how- ever. The type house, the prefabricated house. kills the phantasy of the architect and administers a deathblow to organic town planning. But furniture is predestined to be conceived in standardized types. | have discussed this ques- lion at length elsewhere? yet [ cannot close these remarks  * Mechanization Takes Command (Oxford University Press, 19-48).  upon Aalto without mentioning his stimulation of furniture design in the middle thirties. The cause lies once again in his integration of the regional element with the latest mechanical processes and his full awareness of contemporary means of expression. The substance which he took in his hands and made flexible, as he had made walls, ceilings, and town plan- ning flexible, was that organic material wood.  The constituent element of Aalto’s furniture. like the slab in a bridge by Maillart or the plane surface in a modern painting, is a sheet of plywood. Aalto received the impetus for his first experiments when he had to furnish the Paimio sanatorium from top to bottom in 1929. Here can be found the first. mass- produced plywood chairs, consisting of a ribbon-like wood frame, within which is suspended the undulated plywood seat (fig. 219a). About 1935, Aalto dared to do away with the closed plywood frame and built the chair as a free cantilever. a con- struction that, till then. had only been expected of steel.  Like all those who succced in taking the plunge into the un- known, Aalto possesses the gift of seeing things as freshly as though they had never been touched before. ‘This is the kind of talent that is urgently needed today. lo discover an emo- tional equivalent that may rescue us from drowning in the flood of technical processes thal is being poured over us.  Aalto now announces a new development in the manufacture of furniture. By a special suction process it is possible for wood to acquire such suppleness and flexibility that the archi- lect may twist it and turn it as he pleases. Further, chemists have found a method of forming a cable-like structure from a number of small rod-like pieces of wood tapered at both ends - »“* wood macaroni” Aalto calls them. A physician, on seeing them, was at once reminded of certain organisms within the large intestine.  The Rococo developed the greatest mastery and finesse in wood carving, The skeleton of the chair was then reduced to astonishing slenderness and shaped in elegant forms. Today, entirely new possibilities have been opened up from within, through the aid of chemical changes. We wonder whether this chemical processing will be assimilated emotionally. 
The Human Side  One cannot speak about Aalto the architect without speaking about Aalto the man. People are at least as important to him as architecture. Aalto is interested in every human being, in each of their particular desires and experiences, no matter where they come from or to what social class they belong. He draws incentive and stimulation from contact with men of varied callings, much as James Joyce did. Indeed, Aalto can- not set foot outside his door without becoming involved in some human episode. He approaches people directly and without inhibitions, in the same way that he approaches the organic material wood.  When Aalto first appeared, unknown to the rest of us, within the circle of the newly formed CIAM, in Frankfurt in 1929, he did not talk about his buildings but instead told us of a delicate adventure that had befallen him at nine o’clock that morning, on his way from the station to the hotel. In 1933, when he was traveling from Finland to the Athens Congress by plane, rail, and automobile, to take part in the formulation of the Charte d’Athénes, the Jong conversations that he had on his journey were of the greatest interest to him. Travel- ing with him was an elderly woman in a plaster cast —a grandmother, as he told us — whom he attended and assisted from train to train.  Aalto came to America for the first time in 1939 to build the Finnish Pavilion at the New York World’s Fair. His English vocabulary was far from extensive, yet he lectured to the pampered public of the Museum of Modern Art in New York. The way that he stood there, the way in which he was able to express what he had to say with his fragmentary vocab- ulary and a few “‘okay’’s, captivated his audience from the start.  Aalto’s call to a professorship at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology was a natural consequence of his personality, the success of the Finnish Pavilion, and the approval ac- corded to his furniture. Thus Walter Gropius and Alvar Aalto are at work in the same town,  Aalto divides his time and his work, as is well known, between the rebuilding of Finland and his American professorship. The  dormitory thal he has just crected for M.L. is a particularly pold undertaking when one considers that American college architecture has traditionally been decked with pseudo- gothic or colonial forms.  Aalto’s relationship with man in his completeness cannot be defined on a rational basis. His personality radiates in di- rect contact. But, when he is gone, there does not seem to be any possible means of contact with him. It is probable that he has never carried on a regular mail correspondence in his life. However, immediately he appears, his tales, flavored by a whimsical understanding of human situations, and the radiance of his whole being, make it seem as though he had only left the day before.  There are certain architecls whose work develops almost of itself. Aalto’s work is of a different kind. Each line tells of his close contact with human destiny. This may be one of the reasons why his architecture encounters less difficulty in overcoming the resistance of the common man than that of others of his contemporaries.  I agree with Ernst Cassirer, the philosopher, who, in his last work,!° demands so fervently that history should be written only with an intimate knowledge of the human side.  While these lines were being prepared for the press, a cable arrived from Helsinki on January 13, 1949, announcing the premature death of Aino Aalto.  All Aalto’s exhibitions and his work have been signed “Aino and Alvar Aalto.” It was not a gesture of chivalry that in- duced him to place the name of his wife before his own. This marriage was as singular as everything else related to him. Its steadfastness was based upon common sharing of all struggles and successes ever since their joint student days. But its real secret lay more likely in a profound reciprocation of human contrasts. Aalto is restless, effervescent, incal- culable. Aino was thorough, persevering, and contained.  Sometimes it is a good thing when a volcano is encircled by a quietly flowing stream.  irer, An Essay on Man (New Haven, 1944), p. 181.  
Aino’s name will always be connected with the work of Alvar Aalto. Yes, he always put her name before his own, but Aino herself always insisted, “ [ am not creative, Alvar is the cre- ative one.’ This is not the moment to determine the extent of Aino’s influence on Aalto’s production. But we know that she had her quiet say as an architect at all stages of his work and life. She never appeared in the foreground or admitted what had really been designed by her. She was always at work behind the scenes, as when I last saw her in the fall of 1948: by day, director of Artek, the corporation engaged in the designing and manufacture of Aalto’s furniture; in the evening, hostess at a dinner party for Finland’s intellectual elite, sitting relaxed in a white gown among her guests, quiet as the Finnish lakes and forests from which she had sprung, active only in an unobtrusive way, as Nordic women often can be.  THE DEVELOPMENT OF CONTEMPORARY ARCHITECTURE  It would be a complete misunderstanding to suppose that con- temporary architecture has been evolved by a few isolated geniuses. Vigorous artists, creative spirits strong enough to push beyond the dominant conventions — without these, of course, nothing could have been achieved. But contemporary architecture is no longer dependent upon a few individuals; it has its roots deep in the life of our day. It grows more and more anonymous; innumerable workers in every part of the world contribute to its nourishment and progress.  The emphasis falls increasingly upon solutions, rather than upon the individual architect. This is the difference between the generation of the pioneers and the generation that has come afler them. Individual crealive work remains necessary, but the complicated problems which have to be solved (along with a growing unity of expression) are leading to more and more collaborative work. Architects are collaborating not only wilh other architects but also with specialists of every de- scription — landscape gardeners, physicians, statisticians, and many others.  This inspired a new collectivity and united the leading archi- tects of many countries in the CIAM (the Congrés interna- tionaux d’architecture moderne)... The CIAM sets itself to analyze and work out problems which no solitary worker could handle. It dealt first with the problem of dwellings for the lower income classes (Frankfort, in 1929), went on to the treatment of block units (Brussels, 1930), and then to town planning (Athens, 1933).  The principles governing the attack upon these problems were always the same. To gain a universal insight into actual facts and conditions, groups in various countries carried out careful analyses. The same methods were used by each group, the same modes of representation, the same scale. Low-cost  * June 1928, at the instigation of Mme Héléne de Mandrot de la Sarraz, who offered the association every possible help and made available the old Chateau de la Sarraz for its first meeting. 
housing, block units, and town layouts were studied in Europe and elsewhere.  Architecture has ceased to be the concern of passive and busi- nesslike specialists who build precisely what their clients bar- gain for. Architecture has cast off this passivity; it has gained the courage to deal actively with life, to help mold it. It starts with intimately vital questions, inquiring into the needs of the child, the woman, and the man. It asks, “What kind of life are you leading? Are we responsible for the conditions you have to put up with? How must we plan — not just in the case of houses, but clear through to regional areas — so that you may have a life worthy of the name? ”  When we go to the bottom of questions like these, we see that contemporary architecture takes its start in a moral problem. Architecture has emerged from the realm of narrow specializa- tion to plunge into the realities of ordinary life. And by taking off his specialist’s blinders, the architect has greatly extended his influence. Architecture is a highly complex activity; it works in the boundary area halfway between the regions of aesthetic feeling and practical doing. But this is just the reason why we look to it to give us the kind of surroundings that will express the life of our period.  Modern painters have enlarged our visual experience by work- ing with relations between objects which we had never taken cognizance of in our ordinary, half-automatic seeing. Con- temporary architects have been just as willing to anticipate public understanding. They too have refused to wait until they could be sure of universal approbation for their work. Following an impulse which was half ethical, half artistic, they have sought to provide our life with its corresponding shell or framework. And where contemporary architecture has been allowed to provide a new setting for contemporary life, this new setting has acted in its turn upon the life from which it springs. The new atmosphere has led to change and development in the conceptions of the people who live in it. This is understandable enough if we regard architecture as Louis Aragon does painting: as a language, and not as a mere matter of taste.  In the past (and to some extent even now) really creative art has met with resistance from a public whose conceptual de- yelopment had outdistanced its emotional growth. The fight which contemporary architecture in Europe had to wage to establish itself was due to just this gap between thinking and feeling. That fight would never have succeeded if architecture had waited for other branches of knowledge to arrive at a coordinated and universal outlook. Builders, sociologists, economists, political theorists — none of these have as yet fulfilled all their aims. Meanwhile the architects have worked with whatever means were at hand — sometimes yery primitive ones, with which completely satisfactory solutions were impossible — to establish the contours of a new kind of life.  Many different countries have contributed to the development which we have been discussing. It would be interesting to observe the spread of the new movements, through Holland, France, Germany, Sweden, England, and elsewhere; to see what direction was taken in each of these countries and the special dangers which each involves; to note the influence of environment and tradition upon the solution of architectural problems. Such local differences have a more than superficial importance. Those countries which accepted contemporary architecture as a kind of universal coinage — a collection of particular shapes which retained their full value wherever they were transplanted — invited architectural bankruptcy. Mod- ern architecture is something more than a universally appli- cable means of decoration. It is too much the product of our whole period not to exhibit some universal tendencies, but, on the other hand, it is too much concerned with problems of actual living to ignore local differences in needs, customs, and materials. Finland, under the leadership of Alvar Aalto, has shown how contributions can be made to architecture univer- sally through solutions adapted to the specific conditions of their native setting.  We must break off here, however, in spite of the interest and importance of these branches of the main movement. As always, our purpose is to follow developments only to the point where full consciousness of their import and direction 
has been reached. Today the most urgent and unsettled prob- lems arise in another field, in that of town planning. To gain some insight into these problems, to become aware of whal lies behind present conditions, to see if there is any escape from the desolate city of our times: these are things we cannot avoid  attempting.  —  pret VU  CITY PLANNING IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY 
Early Nineleenth Century  Once again we must turn back to the nineteenth century. We can appreciate what is required in the sphere of town planning today only if we understand how the present situation has come about.  Ifa universal attitude is needed anywhere at all in architecture, then it is in town planning. Apart from a wide survey, a far- sighted point of view, there can be no urban order. Periods incapable of arriving at a consistent outlook on the world are also incapable of carrying out the kind of town planning that goes beyond mere patchwork. And armies of specialists are no help when what is missing is a universal attitude covering the whole of life.  On the contrary, specialists who lack the universal attitude are incapable of grasping real relationships. Valuable and precise as their work may be, its results will be limited and out of balance — perhaps even harmful, since one task is overstressed at the expense of another. Periods which depend on specialists are incapable of successful town planning. Whal happens in such times is something like the case of a man who reads a book, and from extreme exactitude never manages to get be- yond the first. ten pages. He loses the meaning of the whole in attending to the details. The situation nowadays is an anal- ogous one. In spite of the existence of many conscientious town-planning associations and of trained specialists in the planning and administration of towns, there prevails a shock- ing lack of direction and an inability to remove the most obvious inconveniences.  The penalty cannot be evaded when, for a hundred years, there has been almost nothing but chaos in town planning. Regula- lions alone offer no solution, for the regulations also bear the stamp of the men who make them: a new universal vision is needed.  lt would be unreasonable to expect new solutions to town- planning problems from a period like the nineteenth century. A century which (especially in its later course) was so domi- nated by the spirit of laissez-faire, and so much under the rule  |  of specialists. was no time for town planning, which by its very nature must come out of broad vision and foresight.  There is no doubt that the charm of many of the personal expressions and forms of living of the last century will be more and more fully recognized in the near future. But its town planning will not be included in this coming revaluation.  Our interest in town planning can be reduced to three ques- tions: Was the highly developed late baroque art of town planning continued during the nineteenth century? «What arose to take its place afterwards? Finally, whal new solutions has the twentieth century to offer?  In times when there is a universal vision resting on a long and solid tradition, town planning is taken as a matter of course. We have considered some eighteenth-century solutions which were interesting for their farsightedness and for the feeling for space which they manifest. Many of an amazingly high quality are the work of anonymous architects, even of specu- lators. It is important to notice that solutions which come out of the universal vision of the eighteenth century still remain valid long after the death of the society —- or the ideal of a society — for which they were formulated, and after changes in circumstance which the designers could never have fore- seen. But when the vision of a period is predominately in- lluenced by spectalists, the solutions arrived al do not even satisfy the needs of the time of their creation.  The late baroque showed a magnificent power of dominating outer space. This period was thoroughly aware of the different relationships that held between one building and another and between buildings and nature: between constructions and organisms.  The feeling from which baroque town planning sprang — one made natural by its social life. - limited attention to the con- nections between palatial residences and to the spatial treat- ment of the beautiful plazas of the great towns.  Late baroque town planning is the expression of two-absolut- isms: the first produced by the Counter Reformation, the second by monarchy. All the constructions which benefited from the great fund of experience of the period were built for 
the Church, for the king, or for those who helped these two to rule.  The lodgings of the common people did not enter into these schemes; they were not thought of as presenling anv problem, The people formed the invisible foundation and support of the state; all that rose above the ground was meant, without question, for the ruling class. People of great experience and wide vision - - like Vauban, Louis XIV’s great military en. gineer — saw the danger in a system which put such burdens upon the people. But Vauban’s Projet d'une dizme royale (1709) cost him the monarch’s favor by its assertion that “ what is wrongly called the dregs of the people ” merited the * celestial king’s ” serious attention. “ This mass is... very important,” Vauban continued, * in view of its numbers and the services it renders to the stale.” The system itself inevi- tably dictated the rejection of Vauban’s main proposal that the nobility and clergy should be taxed (to the extent of one-Lenth of their incomes) as well as the people.  In this way it came about that a great town, as far as the mass of the people was concerned, was simply a crowd of houses, neglected in every respect. On the other hand, historical jus- tice forces us to state that great towns in the eighteenth century in no way played the part they did in the nineteenth. The cighteenth-century city lay outside the interest and attention of the chief forces in the period. After the departure of Louis XIV for Versailles, town planning was entirely neglected except in so far as it concerned the building of places and great avenues of communication.  tverything that affected the people was either abandoned to disorder or arranged merely provisionally. The confusion und filth, the neglected approaches to the houses, and even the tragicomedy of the city-dweller’s longing for flowers and greenery appear in an etching of 1786 (fig. 246). The etching, hearing the title Pol de fleures, is from Mercier’s Tableau de Paris, a book which so fascinated Diderot that he described iL as “ pensé dans la rue et écrit sur la borne.”’ The illustration shows the ordinary houses of Paris and the misfortune of one of the fifth-story tenants who has just seen his aerial garden tumble into the dirty disorder below. But such houses were  216. MERCIER, Tableau de Paris, 1786.  sparsely populated and cannol be compared with the slums created by the nineteenth century.  During the century between Versailles (1668-84) and Lans- owne Crescent in Bath (179-1)! the residential group was placed im direelL contact with nature. IL belonged at first to the monarch, uext to the nobility, then to anonymous wealthy ‘itizens. The increased stress in the eighteenth century upon iv connection of the dwelling with nature may be laid in large  ie “natural man.”  Space is necessary if houses are to be disposed facing grecnery;  would have been impossible in the old walled towns. In ve seventeenth century Vauban moved the defenses of Paris mach further out in order to protect it against new develop-  Cf p. 91.  varl to Lhe trend of the Limes toward the Rousseauistic cull of 
ments in armaments. It was this which permitted the eight. eenth-century places in Paris to grow up.  It will be recalled that, in the north and south alike, baroque architects of the second half. of the eighteenth century took pains to preserve the association of architecture and greenery, This new phase of town planning continued and was extended for a long while in the nineteenth century. Just because town planning is the last department of architecture to take form in any period, this phase remained in evidence in the nine- teenth century until daily life, long under the influence of industrialization, was seriously altered. It is true, of course, that the industrial towns grew up around slums from the very start, and show no traces of this tradition.  Now we should like to demonstrate how long baroque knowl- edge of town planning lasted — it continued even into the nineteenth century — and when it came to an end.  The Rue de Rivoli of Napoleon I  When Napoleon I commissioned Percier and Fontaine, the founders of the Empire style, to design the Rue de Rivoli, the main outlines of the design were established in advance by existing conditions.  The Rue de Rivoli of Napoleon I, still the most beautiful street in Paris, is not a rue corridor. It has only one wall, and this faces upon the gardens of the Tuileries and, what is more important, upon an avenue. The avenue had been laid out under Louis XIV (as an eighteenth-century engraving by Mariette plainly shows), and at first led to the royal stables (fig. 247). These stables occupied the site upon which the Rue de Rivoli was built.  The Place de la Concorde, where the Rue de Rivoli begins, was built under Louis XV and Louis XVI, and the bridge over the Seme was built just at the beginning of the Revolution, in 1790.  Louis XIV laid out the park, Louis XV the square, and Napo- leon the street. It was quite typical of the building programs of the period that Napoleon should have commanded the  building of a street (this was at the time of his consulate, in 1801). The street was intended for the rich bourgeoisie and offered a view of the royal gardens.  In marked contrast with the English practice of making busi- ness and residential streets entirely separate, the Rue de Rivoli was both in one.? Continuous pillared arcades pro- tected shoppers from the weather and at the same time pre- yented the shop fronts from diminishing the dignity of the street. Placards and grocers’ shops were excluded. These arcades continue the tradition of the seventeenth-century Place des Vosges.  In working out their new task Percier and Fontaine used a form which is as neutral as it is appealing (fig. 249). It goes without saying that the houses were treated as a unit. To preserve the effect, there are but few accents. The pillared arches of the ground floor are in strict alignment; the bal- conies of the first, third, and attic floors are continuous; the walls are smooth-surfaced.  The Rue de Rivoli of the time of Napoleon I is a part of the late baroque tradition (fig. 248). Its single row of houses per- mits as free an outlook as the brothers Adam provided for the occupants of their splendid Adelphi Terrace, built in 1768, overlooking the banks of the Thames. The Rue de Rivoli, at this stage of its development, inspired John Nash and his employer, the Prince Regent, in their plans for the laying out of Regent’s Park and its terraces.  The various continuations of the Rue de Rivoli — the last completed as a part of Haussmann’s percement de Paris — changed its whole character and made it over into one of those “endless streets’’ born out of the ninetcenth century (fig. 250).  * This separation appcars in the Bloomsbury section of London, built up around the same time. 
247. Tuileries, gardens laid out by Lendtre. Engraving by Mariette. The avenue of trees to the right, leading to the royal stables, still exists, and borders the Rue de Rivoli along one side.  THE DOMINANCE OF GREENERY: THE LOND: SQUARES  In the garden squares of London we have for the first time since the Middle Ages the outward appearance of the city as conditioned by the building activities of the upper middle classes. These classes created a residential style as self-con- fident as it is lasting. Like the Flemish Lowns of the fifteenth century, these London squares of the early nineteenth will bear witness for generations to the sureness with which the middle classes set about providing a framework for their living — that is, unless they are quite destroyed in the mean- time by insensale building.  To understand the true nature of their development we must remember first of all the English preoccupation with the idea of comfort, the Englishman’s insistence especially upon com-  248. Rue de Rivoli, Paris, c. 1825. The part of the Rue de Rivoli first buill by Pereier and Fontaine for Na- poleon I, looking toward the Place de la Concorde. Ils single row of houses facing across the roadway onto green- ery inspired the Regent, later George IV, fo develop the Regent's Park ter- ruces shortly thereafter.  219, PERCIER and FON- TAINE, Elevation of a house on the Rue de Rivoli, 1806. This charming and unified facade is a basis for Laussmann’s boulevards half a century later. Shops are hid- den behind the arcades. Thus this street of Napoleon I has already, in germ al least, that mixture of residence and business functions which the English avoided.  
250. Rue de Rivoli, view toward the Louvre. i810.  fort in the home, all the way from the comfortable chair before the fire lo the undisturbed privacy of the individual house. This strong urge toward bienséance does not appear for the first time in the eightecnth century. To see how far back it goes and how early it influenced the organization of the dwelling, one need only compare the English manor houses, with their spacious sellings and arrangement, with their Con- linental counterparts. Lt is to this desire for comfort and privacy Lhal the garden squares owe their particular pattern. Indeed, if the development of London may be said to follow any rule, it is an unwritten one — like so many in England which carry most weight --- deriving from the democratic insistence that a man shall not be disturbed in his private life. The rule runs roughly as follows: The residential quarters of a cily should, as far as possible, merge into the greenery. They should be as inconspicuous as possible.  If any city can be accused of having grown irrationally, that city is London. It developed with an almost total disregard for definite axes. Instead, it was at the mercy of the divisive influence of the great landowners, of the Crown, the nobility, the Church. Because of its lack of such guiding axes as those  which make Paris so easy to survey, it is almost impossible to orient. On the other hand, the small districts into which. it solves ilself are all refuges from the sheer immensily of a y which has outgrown the human scale,  r  ¢ The comprehensive unity sought by the baroque was not accepLlable Lo seventeenth-century England. The coérdinated plan of Christopher Wren for the general rebuilding of London following the great fire of 1666 was rejected by Charles II after only three days’ consideration (fig. 251). And this just at the time when Bernini was laying out the Piazza in front of St. Peter's, and Le Nétre the gardens of Versailles! The sweep of Wren's scheme — half baroque, half Renaissance in character  -was too thoroughgoing to permit its execution.” but for a reason more fundamental than the one usually given. The popular belief is that, Wren’s plan was not used because it was mupossible to reach agreements with the owners of a half- dozen burned-over sites through which Wren's axes incon- veniently ran. But it was not merely a complicated question of ownership which blocked the lining out of axes in the Renais-  London w  self-governing and independent of the Crown, Neither Wren nor any other architect would have thaght of using the Continental idea of arranging London about the Royal Palace. Wren's intended point of accent lay -— almost in the Renais- sinee manner- - in the center of the town, at the Stock Exchange. All his lines of force radiated outward from that point to penetrate the whale hody of London. St. Paul's stood near the town gates. at Uke confluence of two main arteries; in the same fashion, two decades later Rainaldi placed twin churches faving the Piazza del Popolo.  
sance or baroque manner; there was also an inner repugnance to them. This same repugnance operaled to prevent any systematically related arrangement of terraces, squares, and streets in those areas where it could have been most easily achieved - - within the great eslates. The Crown and the Duke of Bedford ignored such schemes in the Covent Garden district; the Earl of Southampton did likewise in Bloomsbury, The way in which these squares are irrationally scattered over a site, separated and yet not quite cut off from each other, is like the pattern of an Oriental carpet or a painting by Paul lee.  * The square,” according to a Dictionary of Architecture pub- lished in 1887, “is a piece of land in which is an enclosed garden, surrounded by a public roadway, giving access to the houses on cach side of it.” For all its brevity, this definition is an excellenl statement of the nature of the London squares, It very properly begins with the “‘ piece of land “; next it stresses as an essential feature the enclosed garden (enclosed because it is only for tenants, who have keys): Jast of all, it mentions the houses which invariably surround it. It does not specify the shape of the square, which may be four-sided, three-sided, regular or irregular. There is no rule requiring that the square must bear any certain relation to neighboring squares, places, streets, or crescents.  The squares of the seventeenth and eighteenth eentury have great significance for the town planner. In them for the first lime the countryside was built upon without being obliterated beneath masses of stone and networks of streels. As living flesh gleams warmly through sheer material, so the one-time gardens of the Duke of Bedford still disclose themselves be- neath the residential developments of Bloomsbury with which they have been overlaid. Modern architects oflen boast of the attention they pay to trees: indeed, they sometimes build a house around one, In the best of the London squares a whole district is composed archilecturally around the existing countryside. Herein lies the prescience of the squares. The main constituent of all the London squares is a central garden of grass and plane Lrees ( fig. 252). When newly planted, the rows of plane trees did nol achieve the effect of a romantic  garden which they were intended later to produce. Such a picture required the predominance of a wall of greenery, which, grateful both to eyes and to lungs, had also the advan- tuge of ensuring one’s privacy from one’s neighbors. The gardens were treated as a unil, just as the houses were. Here ig no ridiculous breaking up into small allotments. There are wide expanses where the residents may stretch themsclyes out on the grass on sunny days or play tennis on the green lawns in front of their own houses.‘ And all this within five minutes’ walk of the surging traffic of Tottenham Court Road or Oxford Strect.  These areas by no means began as garden spots. “ Originally these open spaces were neither so aesthetically pleasing nor so valthful as they might have been, owing to the fact that it was the inevilable fate of open ground in every European city of the seventeenth century lo become a dumping place for ilth of all kinds. This was prevented only when the inhabit- ants of squares applied for powers to enclose, clean, and beau- ify them; St. James Square, in 1726, was one of the first to seek such permission.” ®  The architecture of the houses in these squares is also affected xy the unwrillen rule that residential quarters shall be as inconspicuous as possible. They are arranged serially in apposition, a treatment which was used for more than half a century in the newly erected parts of London without ever coming either tiresome or antiquated. Everything is avoided hat might obtrude; there are simply smooth, continuous sur- aces with as little subdivision as possible. The building material — brick, without stucco — is admirably suiled to con- ditions. Plain brick, instead of suffering from the dampness and fog of London, becomes mellowed and dignified with the passage of Lime, like a well-smoked meerschaum pipe. Paint is used only, and then sparingly, in places where weather can- not harm it.and where it can be easily renewed: on the inside of the window casements, along the narrow molding at the  ‘Onions and cabbages have been seen growing in the garden of one crescent near Euston Road, but this is a crescent that has degenerated into a slum.  “WR. Davidge. ** The Planning of London,” Journal of the Royal Institute of British rchiteets, March 10, 19%-£, p. 138,  
entrance, and on the pediment of the house. Nash’s use of stucco in Park Crescent, London (begun in 1812), shows a Continental influence which has already departed somewhat from the main tradition.  How did the London squares originate? This question requires an answer only in so far as it will help us to understand better the architectural inheritance which is theirs. The desire for green spaces within London reaches back to Gothic times. In  252. Queen Square, Bloomsbury, London, 1812. Around 1800 the open spaces in the middle of the London squares were laid out with freely planted trees and lawns, the beginning of that luxuriant greenery which natural growth brought in due course of time. “Queen Square, situated to the eastward of Bloomsbury Square, is a handsome area, surrounded on three sides by good houses, having an extensive garden in the center.... The north side formerly commanded fine views of Hampstead and Ilighgate.” (°Ackermann’s Repository of Arts,” September 1812.)  the fifteenth century the court of Lincoln’s Inn was laid out as a lawn and converted into walks. At the same time a piece of land outside the town, Moorfields, was being used by the  inhabitants as a recreation ground for archery and other sports. As early as the seventeenth century, the most impor- tant of the popular parks, Hyde Park — far out of London, and the property of the Crown — was opened to the public.*  Tt was in the seventeenth century also that the first squares were built. They originated in the desire of various noble landowners to build up portions of their estates. These con- structions followed the baroque pattern of places rather than  253. Square in the Bloonisbury district, ¢. 1825. Although Bloomsbury was originally a suburb, even then the separation of traffic and residential quarters was carefully observed. The result is that even today, only a step from the most congested London traffic, the houses are intimately and directly related to their pleasure grounds. :  streets. About 1630 the Earl of Bedford gave over seven acres of his land to building purposes. The result was the first London square: Covent Garden. It has often been pointed out that this first square — never quite completed, by the way — resembles the Place des Vosges in Paris (1612). Both are typical seventeenth-century places, rectangular, and with  § Steen Eiler Rasmussen, London, the Unique City (New York, 1937), pp. 86, 92. 
arcades running through the ground floor of the houses. As a matter of course they were open to the public and devoid of lawn or trees. The application to them and other such spaces of the name “ piazza” clearly shows a recognition of their Ttalian origin.  The Earl of Bedford’s example was soon followed by the Ear] of Leicester. Leicester Square, in front of Leicester House, was laid out by him on the same principles in 1633. It is a business center today and has been totally disfigured. In  254. Grosvenor Square, London, begun in 1095. An eighteenth-century square set in the midst of open fields with the enclosed area laid out as a formal yarden. The gardens behind the houses stretch oul into the fields.  1663 the Karl of Southampton * was building a noble square or piazza, a little town,” “ which became a fashionable quarter. This later became Bloomsbury Square. Several other squares followed: Soho Square in 1681, SL. James Square in 168+, and Grosvenor Square (Mayfair) in 1695 (fig. 254).  From this brief account the pertinent point emerges that as early as the lale seventeenth century London, unlike Paris,  ? The Builder, July 28, 1855, p. 349.  was becoming attractive as a residence for the upper classes. Furthermore, the London squares were separate, widely scat- tered areas like the lrenech and Italian places.  ‘There was inereascd building activity during the eighteenth ceutury. About fifteen squares in all appear to have come into existence during this century.* To some extent this activity was devoled to completing the seventeenth-century squares. Thus Grosvenor and Ilanover squares were completed in 1720, and Berkeley Square around 1730. Then building took an- other spart just as the century began its last quarter: the \delphi Terrace on the banks of the Thames was built by the brothers Adam around 1770, Manchester Square in 177-4, Bed- ford Square in 1775, Portland Place in 1778, and Fitzroy Place in 1790. The greatest activity went on in Bath from about 1730 — the time of the emergence of the elder Wood - - until the construction of the Royal Crescent in L767. What is important at Bath is the interrelations between the various squares and crescents, relations so much more subtle than the purely axial ones employed in French town planning. Such carefully thought-out relationships were arrived at in London only toward the end of the eighteenth century.  THE GARDEN SQUARES OF BLOOMSBURY  That harmonious interrelation of squares, places, and crescents upon which alone rests London’s claim to a high level of urban planning came about during the years between 1775 and 1850.° On such sites as Bloomsbury, well-ordered spaces of every shape — oblong, circular, square, elliptical - - accumulated to form a new and composite organism. In them the late baroque inheritance was carried on in a completely native manner, per- fectly adapted to the conditions peculiar lo London.  The development of Bloomsbury occupied more than a century and a half, approximately from the time Louis NIV began  +The Report of the Royal Commission on London Squares (London, 1928).  ° The Report of the Royal Commission on Londun Squares (1928) places the building peak between 1800 and 1850: “ The activity in the development of the squares reaches its height in the early part of the nineteenth century. By 1850 practically all the well- known squares were completed “ (p. 11).  
255. Bloomsbury al the eud of the eighteenth cculury. Parl of the es- tal This shows the original  onan a tT 93 map,  hountdaries of the district just belore the period of ity greatest development, when it i till largely composed of estates of the Duke of Belford.  256. Vloomsbury in 1828. Aap of dames Wyld, en- graved by N. BR. Hewitt. The whole plan follows late baroque tradition in emphasizing the squares, but they are faid out flesi- blv and informally. In their caretul, vel irrational planning they resenble the pattern of an Oriental carpel or a painting by Paul Nlee more lan they do the rigid French  ares,  planning the removal of his court to Versailles down to the rise of greal industrial cities like Manchester. It is the one cnown instance over such a long period of urban development o a constantly increasing perfection. As an architectural composition, Bloomsbury is, in its way, fully the equal of such different organizations as the monumental harague squares before St. Peter's and, later on, the Place de la Concorde. There is no doubt that, playing with the whole orchestra of monumental voices, they are much the more impressive, but he Bloomsbury district has its place beside them. ior al- hough it employs shapes of an anonymous and humble charac- er. they are right with a timeless validity, and the way in which they were successively added together to form eyver- arger units - places, squares, terraces —- produced a district which for its human treatment remains unsurpassed to this duty.  lis all of a piece, a simple aud democratic fabric in which any touch of the monumental is a violation. The comparatively small mansions of the Bedfords and Montagues,. around which il grew up, were no intrusion upon this unity, but the building of the British Museum early in the nineteenth century intro- duced an element harshly out of scale. Today the huge, ar- lificially gigantic buildings of the University of London (as yet uncompleted) threaten to destroy Bloomsbury utterly. Dominating them is a monstrous three-hundred-foot tower which thrusts itself upward like an explosion to shatter forever the serenity and cohesion of the district lying below.  llowever, the Lower does serve one good purpose. It affords a unique vantage point from which to survey Bloomsbury and trace the pattern of its squares. From no other place can the disposition of Lhe squares be comprehended. Laid out so that there are no extended vistas, their relationship to each other is not discernible from any one of them. Only from above is it possible to see the balanced proportion between building and  ~ Artificially gigantic " not only because the skyscraper tower in the center is entirely false to the prevailing scale, but also because it is a misunderstood insitation of an \merican model. Chis unfortunate tower was meant to lwuse the stack rooms of the university library. In 1938 the majority of the upper stories were entirely vacant; tH liad been discovered that the building laws forbade their use. 
open space, a balance so nicely maintained as to give every resident an equal sense both of his privacy and his freedom (fig. 257).  The great thoroughfares thal bound Bloomsbury are also sasily distinguished from the tower -- Holborn and New Oxford streets on the south, and Tottenham Court on the west; Bloomsbury itself stretches away to the east, to the gardens of Gray's Lin and the squares beyond, until it fades out of sight in the distance. The original boundaries of the district, as shown on a map of 1795 (fig. 255),"' were Tottenham Court Road, New Road, Southamplon Row, and Holborn Street. This map defines Bloomsbury just before the period of its greatest development, when it was still largely composed of the estates of the Duke of Bedford, with Bedford House and its gardens the conspicuous architectural organization.  The beginnings of the Bloomsbury district date back to Res- toration Limes. Southampton Square — later called Blooms- bury Square —- was laid out in 1667 by the Earl of Southamp- ton along the axis of Bedford House, his town mansion in Bloomsbury. Bedford House, with its cour @honneur and extensive grounds and gardens, dominated the square. Thus the houses and the green but treeless areas of Bloomsbury Square were dependent, like any French place or Italian piazza, on a noble residence. Bedford House was still standing when new and greatly increased building activity began in the late cighteenth century.  The first of the new squares was Bedford Square. It was located at some distance from the gardens of Bedford House and on an axis at right angles to Bloomsbury Square. On the 1795 map it appears isolated and treeless and completely in- dependent of its surroundings. Executed about 1775, this noble square, with its oval enclosure, is one of the few associ- ated with the name of an archilect — in this instance, Thomas Leverton.” Montague House, the Lown mansion of a family  1 University of London, The Bloomsbury Sile (ce. 1933), a paniphlet. by Eliza Jeifries Davis. Cf. also London Topographical Record, XVIL, 78 ff.  12 yen this attribution has been questioned recently and, pending more evidence, is not to be taken as established. Cf. John Sunimerson, Journal of the Royal Institute of British Architects, March 6, 1939, p. 4410.  related to the Bedfords, also appears on the map of 1795. It resembled Bedford House and had, like il, a cour d'honneur. {nu 1753 the British Museum was housed in it.  Thus at the end of the eighteenth century, Bloomsbury had three points of accent: Bloomsbury Square, Bedford Square, and the British Museum with its gardens.  The third and decisive stage in the evolution of Bloomsbury accuptes the first quarter of the nineteenth century. The fifth Duke of Bedford pulled down his house in Bloomsbury Square in 1800; its groves and avenues fell with il. On the site arose Bedford Place with its magnificently codrdinated houses fig. 258). What was left of the gardens was also turned over io residential development; the largest and most lordly of the squares, Russell Square, was really the very heart of the gar- dens cut out and preserved intact in the midst of ils new buildings.  237, Bloomsbury. air view of Russell, Bedford. Bloomsbury, and adjacent squares.  Only from abore is il possible to see the balance between buildings and open spaces and the relationship of the squares to each other. 
258. Bedford Place, from Bloomsbury Square to Russell Square, begun in 1800. This street, lined by houses the neutral architecture of which is the result of an old and highly re- fined tradition, is nol a long extended street in the Continental sense bul a short connecting link between two places. It is purely residential and without shops.  The Duke did not undertake these projects himself. Instead he leased his lands to James Burton, a speculator and builder, who planned, designed, and executed Russell Square (1800- 14) ® and al the same Lime carried out work on several streets that open off that square — Keppel Street, Montague Place, and Southampton Row. Burton constantly pushed farther eastward, always striving Lo evolve appropriate dispositions of large open spaces." He planted the land behind the houses on Bedford Place, which runs between Bloomsbury and Russell squares, with lawns and shrubbery. The result was particu- larly pleasing, for the low mews or stables behind the houses  8 These dates are the result of John Summerson’s recent researches. [arlier sources — for example, [Tenry Clutton, “ The Squares of London,” Builder, July 28, 1855, p. 349 — give the date as 180-4.  4 The segmented North and South crescents and Alfred Place (the broad connecting link  between them) represent some of the solutions al which he arrived.  did not obstruct the view, and the openings at the euds of the rows of houses linked the parallel areas of greenery so that there were no closed blocks.  After 1820 Burton’s work in this district was taken over hy Thomas Cubitt (1788-1855). ** He was thirty-two and already famous m the building world for his great workshops in Gray's Inn Road where he was doing what had never been done before --employing all the Wades on a permanent collective basis. Yo keep his organisalion going he took land and built wher- ever a good opportunity occurred.” 4 Cubitt completed Tor- rington Square in 1827,° using a greatly elongaled quadrangu- ar pattern which, although il maintained sufficient distance for privacy between the opposile rows of houses, wasted no and. The intentions of its unknown architect are shown by a map of 1828, only one vear after its completion, on which already there is indicated a row of trees planted along the middle axis of the enclosure (fig. 256). This central garden has remained ULill today one of the most attractive in the district.!7  n every particular Bloomsbury is imbued with the architec- ural tradition of the eighteenth century. The delicacy and imagination which marked its town planning are here con- tinued and very graciously united with the naturalistic land- scape gardening of Lhe carly nineteenth century. The basic unit is the single-family house. The dwellings were intended for the professional upper middle class. for the lawyers and judges of Gray’s Inn near-by, for writers and others of similar intellectual pursuits. The houses are treated like the gardens,  © Summerson, Journal of the Royal Instilule of British Architects, March 6, 1939, p. 1412. * According to Summerson. According to Davis (London Topographical Record, XVIE, 2) iL was completed in 1829.  * Cubitt was a pioncer in the construction of great building units, one of the few con- tractors to undertake works on a large scale and carry them through su sfully. But it is perhaps of more juterest that, although he was essentially a builder of streets, squares, and places in the late baroque tradition, he had nevertheless a detinite con- nection with the new potentialities. In [839 he became a member of the Institution of il Engineers. One of his two contributions to its proceedings was a paper entilled, Experiments on the Strength of Cast-[ron Girders.” Toward the end of bis life, when the Crystal Palace Exhibition was being undertaken with doubtful success, Cubite did  everything possible to promote Hand was among those who offered to guarantee the necessary funds. 
in homogeneous units. IIere again is the exercise of a wise distinction between what must be private and what is best held in common.  The architecture has that timelessness, that independence of fashion, so often found in farmhouses. Yet every detail of these buildings has refinement, from their apparently paper- thin slate or cast-iron balconies to the graceful sweep of their interior staircases. Sometimes the balcony is overhung with a small canopy which is carried on slim, cast-iron trellis work so delicate that it is more like the veining of a leaf than a design in metal.  The ground plan of the individual houses follows late cight- eenth-century practice. At the core of the house is a stairway rising in spaciously curved flights through the entire height of the building to a skylight. This arrangement, first employed by the brothers Adam in their Adelphi Terrace (begun in 1768), leaves the exterior walls unblocked. Thus every room receives direct outside light. The rooms themselves are per- fectly proportioned, being neither too large nor too small. It can only be said of their dimensions that they are human.  The location of the servants’ quarters in the basement where they are exposed to the dust of the street has often been thought callous. Certainly it is a defect in planning. Even so, it is more humane than the Continental use of cramped attic stories.  The light-well, used later on with disastrous effect by Con- tinental speculators, is in these houses happily avoided. Ample space both at front and back gives every room, whether open- ing on the court or on the street, its full amount of light. And the location of the stables and coachmen’s quarters in one- story buildings at some distance to the rear of the houses re- moves any possible obstruction to openness of view. This com- bination of tall houses and low mews back of the gardens appeared as carly as the late sixteenth century. Up to the sixties of the nincleenth, il sometimes appeared in duplicate, with twice the ordinary amount of space between the backs of two rows of houses. Occupying the wide distance between the houses were the two mews, forming a service street exclu- sively for coaches.  59. Bloomsbury district, Woburn Square, row of houses, 1825-30,  These London quarters condense and continue architectural experience going back lo Renaissance times. Nevertheless, they were as much the products of speculation as those later Continental residential blocks which brought chaos into the structure of the city. The difference was one of control, The contractors active during the reconstruction of Paris had lo build facades according to Haussmann’s requirements, but that was all. What lay behind was subject to no real control, and they adopled the quickest means to the largest profits. In their hands buildings became part facade and part light-well. [n London a much more careful control was exercised by the ereal. landowners on whose estates the buildings were erected. These owners were accustomed lo reckoning in terms of hun- dreds of years. The land and everything on it usually reverted to them in not more than nincly-nine years. Knowing very well that estates could be destructively exploited, they retained in their leases control over the utilization of the ground, and  
their trustees had the power to undertake maintenance work in cases of neglect.  Wandering through London, one frequently comes upon squares buill between 1830 and 1860 in the most diverse and unexpected parts of the Lown.?® Some of these almost unknown places (for example, Lloyd Square of about 1840) were laid out for people of small means; though simpler in execution than those of Bloomsbury, they loo were treated in a manner that adapted them to human living.'® Others, like the squares of Kensington (1840), are also comparatively modest in area, but show a fine freedom of planning and achievement of new organic shapes (fig. 260). All of them, whatever their location and proportions, are Lhe products of a town planning which strives for a plastic modeling of space. They continuc the eighteenth-century tradition of towns like Bath and [Edin- burgh. They achieve a unity at once charming and reassuring, and demonstrate the vitality which can be introduced into the structure of a city through the laying out of quile freely formed complexes.  There is an obvious degencration in the treatment of the houses after 1860, particularly in their architectonic features. The hitherto discreet front becomes loud: the windows are over- loaded with detail; the whole house disintegrates into separate and conflicting parts. In addition, other influences were at work. The uniformly treated square was being supplanted by the semidetached suburban house with its miniature garden. There were also growing up along the great roads settlements consisting of endless rows of tiny houses lining the thorough- fares like boxes, merging into other settlements without dis- tinction. Devastating in themselves, they are the ruin of all comprehensive town-planning schemes.  In 1858 Building News is still able to announce new work: “ At present there are ten new squares in actual progress in the suburbs of London.” It lists Kensington Gardens, Leinster Square, Bayswater Square, with its “first-class dwelling houses.” Princes Square, and Norfolk Square. All these are in Bayswater and Paddington. (Building News, May 7, 1858, p. 470.)  "Cf. Christopher Hussey, ‘“‘ Georgian London, the Lesser-Known Squares,’ Life, LAXXY (January 28 and March 4, 1939), 91-94, 22 5  Country  De  5  260. Kensington, London, 1830-10. Air view. Though comparatively modest in area, the squares of Kensingfon show « fine freedom of planning and the achievement of new organic shapes toward the end of the development.  LARGE-SCALE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT: REGENT’S PARK  During the last stages of the development of Bloomsbury, John Nash was commissioned to design a scheme of buildings and gardens for what was then Marylebone Park, a large, irregularly shaped tract of meadow land belonging to the  
Crown at the north edge of London. The Regent wished it developed for residential purposes, though without being crowded with buildings. He particularly desired the creation of a large new park accessible to the inhabitants of the city, Nash drew up his first plan in 1812 (fig. 263): alter some modi- fication and delay, Lhe project was carried out with amazing speed during the twenties. The result was Regent's Park and its terraces. ;  In making Jiis plan Nash * declared his aims to be threefold: firstly, to assure the greatest possible revenue to the Crown; secondly, to add to the beauty of the Metropolis; and thirdly, lo study the health and convenience of the public.” His work was another essay in the free disposition of large build- ing complexes facing nature. It followed not so much the example of the London squares as that line which begins with Versailles and continues through the Bath crescents and the arrangement of some other English towns.  Regent's Park lies along the axis of the Adams’ Portland Place (1778). Connecting it and Portland Place with Piccadilly Circus in the heart of London is Regent Street, also Nash's work. This imposing London business street was built around 1820, being finished just as the Regent’s Park terraces were begun. The two are the English counterpart of Napoleon’s Rue de Rivoli. Nash had started his Park Crescent in 1812 (fig. 261) at the end of Portland Place. The time, however, was not yet ripe; Napoleon was still unbeaten, commercial conditions were unsellled, bankruptcies were frequent. But by 1825 everything had been sct straight, and a new wealthy class had sprung up.  It was for this new class that the Regent’s Park residences were intended. An opulent and anonymous class who had been made rich by industry, the development. of trade with the colonies, or the exploitation of English victories in the field,” they were quite able to afford the magnificent houses which Nash designed for them. Almost overnight there appeared in  7 WR. Davidge, “ The Planning of London,” Journal ef the Hoval Institute of British Architects, March 10, 1934, p. 443.  Tt ts said that observers sent by the London financiers followed all Wellington's cam- paigns and reported everything of importance by carrier pigeon.  261. JOHN NASH, Park Cr nt, London, begun in 1812. Phe individual houses are treated as parts of a anit, organized in a single semicireular block behind a facade of a uni- ued design. Park Crescent was the beginning uf the large-scale housing development of  Hegenl’s Park,  1825 those long rows of terraces which, starting from Park Crescent, embrace Regent’s Park like a pair of giant lobster claws. Set well back from the road encircling the park, most of the houses are on raised plots with the ground between them and the road terraced to separate them from it. They face directly on the extensive grounds of the park, which they over- look without dominating.  In Park Crescent the individual houses are once again treated as parts of a unit —a unit often consisting of fifty separate houses (fig. 262). But this regard for the effect of the whole does not achieve the completely neutral result attained in Bloomsbury. The terraces were consciously conceived as at- tenuated houses with an accent on monumentality. They remind one of the Royal Crescent at Bath, but in their pilas- lered central portions they already reveal the seeds ol late uineteenth-century form. 
r  Definitely more important to us than the actual execution of the park and terraces is Nash’s original plan of 1812, which unfortunately was not carried out. For in that plan are shown a boldness of imagination and a daring treatment of outer space which are highly significant today. The simple sketch of it which appears in Summerson’s biography proves the origi- nality and sweep of Nash’s thought.” Its boldness of con- ception is illustrated by several striking details.  For one thing, Nash planned to erect two huge semicircular crescents in the north of the park, which would have stood like two enormous half-cylinders in the midst of a sea of greenery. IIe also wanted to place a double circle in the center of the  262. JOIIN NASH, Large-scale housing adjacent to Regent’s Park.  park. The houses of its concentric rings were to face in op- posite directions, those of one inward, those of the other out- ward.” But even more interesting is his proposal to enclose the eastern side of the park with a series of terraces. He planned to push greal complexes of buildings into the park, with a liberty of disposition that would be daring even today. At the southeast corner, supporting the main entrance,” an  2 John Summerson, John Nash, Archilect to George IV (London, 1935), p. 113.  23 Summierson has discovered that the huge double circle was not entirely original with Nash. He finds in a scheme of 1794 what “ was obviously the prototype for Nash’s plan” (Journal of the Royal Instilule of British Architects, vol. XLVI, March 6, 1939, pp. 444-415). This was the work of quite obscure architects — more evidence that town planning was within the reach of everyone at this period, as machine design is now.  * On Nash's plan the main entrance lies at the south of the park, as it does today. T1 was given the form of a circle which led into Portland Place. As is well known, only the  open square, intended by Nash to be larger than Russell Squaré, joined with the open space of the park. Near the short upper arm of this square he placed a long building, parallel to it and receding still further, and at right angles to that a single unit which, quite asymmetrically, extended half the length of the park. (See fig. 263.)  I  x a he  \  ves vil  —e ary, 1 ! Mae phan cites LAT I [er  gi)  263. JOILN NASH, First project of the housing development in Re- gent’s Park, 1812. This plan, which was not carried out as designed, is an essay in the free disposition of large building complexes in open spaces. It followed not so much the example of the London squares as thal trend which begins with Versailles and continues through the Bath crescents and the arrangement of some other English towns, and has its continuation in our period.  Such an organization of exterior space, with advancing and receding complexes which cannot be embraced in a single glance, was never actually realized during this period. How- ever, the free disposition of large building units in contact with nature that appears in this first plan of Nash's was a premonition of what we are venturing today. Just as Francesco Borromini in the late seventeenth century extended building 
263a. View of Birmingham, 1850. The squares of Bloomsbury do nol give a full picture of what happened during the first half of the century to the English cities which endured the impael of mechanization. Ms devastating effect on the urban pattern appears in this bird's.  e p of Birmingham. Living quarters and industry are inertricably mized; inner euurts are choked with chimneys and factories.  frontiers by seeking to accomplish an interpenetration of inner and outer space, so Nash in this project approached in the realm of town planning that freedom of spatial organization  which we are now exploring on even a larger scale.  We have seen that the fundamental requirement for town planning is the maintenance of one controlling authority, with no dispersion among independent owners of control over the ground. But perhaps as important is the necessity for this controlling authority to possess an instinct for town planning. At the present time enormous blocks of residential or business premises have been thrust into the beautiful late baroque squares — Berkeley Square, for example — and are destroying everything. Business is not alone the offender. The University of London is steadily reducing the noblest district of the city to insignificance. Various influential London groups have raised the cry of “ Save the Squares!’ A Royal Commission has been set up and a Preservation Act passed.2*> None of these efforts is likely to accomplish much. Thanks partly to Continental, partly to American influences, London seems to have lost that instinct for scale which was responsible for Bloomsbury.  % Cf. “ The London Squares Preservation Act,” Journal of the London Sociely, no. 169 (March 1932), p. 39.  THE STREET BECOMES DOMINANT: THE TRANSFORMATION OF PARIS, 1853-68  The London squares antedate the railroad; the transformation of Paris, on the other hand, took place during the feverish riddle years of the railway age. The London squares were designed primarily to be lived in, with busy thoroughfares excluded. Thus the traffic of London — at this period a city three times as big as Paris — circled the Bloomsbury district ata distance, and the same thing was true of many other sec- tions of the town. Residential quarters were kept intact and systematically isolated from traffic routes.  The situation in the Paris of Napoleon III was quite different. One element dominates all others: the street, the “ cannon- shot boulevard,” seemingly without an end. The great town of the latter half of the nineteenth century, the metropolis of the industrial era, suddenly takes its typical form in Paris between 1850 and 1870. In no other city of this period do the changes consequent upon the development of industry proceed  with such impetus.  Paris in the First Half of the Nineteenth Century  A large map of Paris hung on the wall of Napoleon ITI’s study at Saint-Cloud. With his own hand— “his own august hand,’ Haussmann prefers to say — he plotted on it the alter- ations he intended to make in the city. These proposed altera- tions were marked out in red, blue, and green, in descending order of urgency. For the most part, those sketched in green were never executed.  The original and all but one of the copies later made of it were lost in a fire. The surviving copy was found quite recently in the library of the castle in Berlin by a French historian.?* The King of Prussia had been presented with this copy by Napo- leon ITI on the occasion of the German monarch’s visit to the Paris Exhibition of 1867 — the apogee of the Second Empire.  26 André Morizet, Du vieux Paris au Paris moderne (Paris, 1932), p. 130 
[t is not quite identical with the original, as certain works — the extension of the Ruc de Rivoli, for example — are pre- maturely shown as existing (fig. 264). Nevertheless it af- fords at one glance an idea of the vast amount of town planning that was compressed within the short span of seven- teen years.  At first sight, the thick lines crisscrossing through the dense confusion of houses in the center of the city suggest not so much town planning as the layout of a trench defense system for some difficult piece of terrain. And in fact it was a kind of trench system, erected with an internal foe in mind. According io a French authority,” during the quarter century between 1827 and 1851 the streets and alleys of Paris had seen barri- cades thrown up on nine separate occasions. This called for drastic remedies, and wide, unbroken lines of streets were the best means of controlling incipient riots.  But since hislory refuses to progress in straight lines or in ac- cordance with rational schemes, these streets and boulevards of the Second Empire never proved of service in its defense. The cnemy which overthrew Napoleon came elsewhere than from the interior of his capital city.  The rapid growth of big cities — the increase in their number as well as the violent expansion of their populations — is the outstanding phenomenon of nineteenth-century urbanism. It was in the second half of the century, just when there was the greatest uncertainty about how life should be organized to meet new conditions, that the major part of this growth took place. This speed and uncertainty were responsible for the heaviest of the tasks town planners of the next period found themselves confronted with. We have already argued that the social disorder which is clearly reflected in mid nineteenth- century town planning is connected with the break between methods of thinking and methods of feeling during the period.  The increase in the numbers and the populations of cities and the spread of industry are interrelated events. Thus the evo- lution of London into a great nineteenth-century city pre-  % Morizet, p. 133. 
cedes the similar change in Paris by, roughly, a half century. The same interval lies between the industrialization of England and the industrialization of France.  As a consequence of the French Revolution the population of aris fell off by a hundred thousand. But between 1801 and 1848, after Uhis first decrease, the population doubled, rising from a half million lo more than one million. During the cighteen years of Louis-Philippe's reign, a total of only forty- one and a half million francs was spent on street undertakings for Paris. This averaged somewhat less than half a million dollars per year. Over the same interval — 1831 to 1848 —- the population grew from three-quarters to more Lhan one million,  The guiding formula of Count Rambuteau, prefect under Louis-Philippe, was lo give the Parisians water, air, and shade — “donner aux Parisiens de l’cau, de lair, de lombre.” He cannol be said to have been entirely successful in his en- deayors, since at the end of them twenty thousand water- sarriers suill patrolled the streets of Paris-— and they still depended on the Seine to supply their stock in trade. And in general the achievements of this Burgundian nobleman have not been given a very high rating. A French historian regards him as a half-ridiculous figure who conducted his work in pelty-bourgeois fashion, never undertaking anything which threatened Lo exceed the amount of spare cash on hand.?® On the other hand, an English authority regards him as the fore- runner of Haussmann, one who anticipated him as a maker of modern Paris.°®  Rambuteau (earlier a prefect under the first Napoleon) was in fact a most amiable person. Tactful and considerate, pos- sessed of a social conscience and regard for his fellows, Ram- huteau genuinely loved nature as well. As prefect of the Swiss Department of Valais under Napoleon I, he imported the vintage grapes of Burgundy to these valleys, so favorable Lo their growth. In exchange he took back to Burgundy the pine trees of the Valais district. During the fifteen years of  23 Morizet, pp. 101.  4, F. Abbott, * A Maker of Modern Paris,” Contemporary Review (London), no 873 (September 1938), pp. 330-356.  his prefecture in the Department of the Seine (terminated by the collapse of the July Monarchy) he leveled and paved the Boulevard Saint-Denis and the Boulevard des Bonnes Nou- velles, carefully planting them with trees and imparting to them the aspect which they wear today.  Rambuteau worked untiringly lo humanize institutions for the unfortunate — prisoners, the sick, the insane, and the destitute. His name remains associated with the model prison of Mazas, the hospital of Lariboisiére, and the Salpétriére, whose barbarous methods and equipment for treating the in- sane were changed al his initiative. He founded playgrounds, and placed benches in the squares and public parks, where before his time there had been only chairs for hire.  In short, Rambuteau was neither ridiculous nor the maker of modern Paris: he simply typilied the July Monarchy as Haussmann did the Second Empire. Achievements on a grand seale are possible only under regimes that ask for them and seck out the proper instruments for the work. Under Louis- Philippe, Haussmann would have remained a provincial prefect for life, and would never have found an opening for his talents.  The “ Trois Réseau” of Eugéne Haussmann  Time after Lime, in many different fields, Paris had heen the center of Europe. The guiding spirit of every age is crystal- ized in its monuments — from the Sainte-Chapelle to the Rue de Rivoli. But this splendid heritage was set in the midst of a horoughly disorganized town, the monuments surrounded and isolated by a tangle of streets. The herculean efforts of Georges-Eugéne Haussmann (1809. 1891), Préfet de la Scine under Napoleon III, drastically altered this situation. us desire lo provide a splendid framework lor the great. tra- dition preserved in Paris. And he wished at the same time to make Paris the first of the greal cities lo be brought into con- ormity with the industrial age.  It was  We have already mentioned the lact that Napoleon LIT had outlined the transformation of Paris before Haussmann was called in. He had even begun actial operations on sonte of his projects: the extension of the Rue de Rivoli, the Boulevard de 
Strasbourg (whose starting point, the Gare de l’Est, was in process of construction), the preparatory work on the Bois de Boulogne, and the erection of the Grandes Halles (for which there had been a demand since the late thirties).  Napoleon was none too successful with these undertakings, however. He proposed, for example, to lead a river through the Bois de Boulogne, in the style of Hyde Park. The bed for it had already been dug, under the direction of an old jar- dinier-paysagiste who had worked on the estates of Napoleon's father — when IIlaussmann arrived on the scene. He discoy- ered that the water would have had to run uphill in one sec- tion. The old gardener ‘‘ avait commis une erreur, sinon un complet oubli de nivellement.” *! There was nothing for it but to substitute two lakes on different levels for the projected river. A similar neglect of the elementary rules of surveying in the work on the extension of the Rue de Rivoli led to serious difficulties later on. The start on the great markets was not much more encouraging. We have already seen that the first stone pavilion had to be torn down.  In these matters Napoleon behaved as he did in politics: he drew up great schemes, but when serious difficulties arose he tried to twist his way through by making numerous petty concessions. This instinctive attempt to bargain his way out at the cheapest price was what undermined his regime from the beginning. In a similar way Napoleon allowed Hauss- mann to rule Paris, while things went smoothly. As soon as he became a political storm center, Napoleon to all intents and purposes abandoned him. But except for Haussmann’s energy and determination, the transformation of Paris would never have been carried through — certainly not in the short space of seventeen years.  Between 1853 and 1869 Haussmann expended on his works some two and one-half billions of frances in “ extraordinary expenses,” about forty times what had been spent under Louis- Philippe. Easily the largest portion — nearly one and one- half billions — was spent on street construction and on the  0 Cf. the account of Horeau’s design, p. 165. 2 Georges-Eugéne Haussmann, Mémoires (Paris, 1890-93), III, 122.  265. The transformation of Paris by Maussmann. Afap by Alphand.  demolition program that the decision to run new streets through closely packed quarters made necessary. Paris in [Taussmann’s Lime was adapted to the totally changed condi- lions of the nineteenth century (fig. 265).  The fundamental aims behind Haussmann’s schemes — com- municated by him to the city council as he began his duties —are strongly colored by the fear of street fighting.” The latest outbreak of such rioting had occurred in 1852, shortly before his appointment.  The first of these aims was ‘‘ to disencumber the large build- ings, palaces, and barracks in such a way as to make them more pleasing to the eye, afford easier access on days of cele- bration, and a simplified defense on days of riot.”  The second fundamental principle aimed at “ the amelioration of the state of health of the lown through the systematic destruction of infected alleyways and centers of epidemics.” The central part of Paris was littered with these dreadful alleys. Many of them (including the one in which Gérard  * ‘This policy is summarized in E. M. Bouillat, Georges-Eugéne Haussmann (Paris, 1901), pp. 8-9, 
de Nerval, the romantic poet, hanged himself) were photo- graphed by Atget.* TTaussmann never really succeeded in cleaning up these areas, and the middle of Paris is still in bad condition.  The third point was “ to assure the public peace by the crea- tion of large boulevards which will permit the circulation not only of air and light but also of troops. Thus by an ingenious combination the lot of the people will be improved, and they will be rendered less disposed to revolt.” This point shows even more clearly than the others why the Second Empire took such pains to build wide streets.  Haussmann’s fourth principle was “ to facilitate circulation to and from railway stations by means of penetrating lines which will lead travelers straight to the cenLlers of commerce and pleasure, and will prevent delay, congestion, and acci- dents.” Here the traflic problem was the main consideration.  I[aussmann’s operations were conducted in three seetions — en trois réseaur, to use his own terms. These réseaux do not constitute topographical units; the “ first,” “second,” and “third ” refer to different methods of financing. Thus works forming parts of the third réseau might be located in the areas of the first or second and might be completed before these were.*#  The first réseau was in full swing when Haussmann took office. It was financed, withoul any difficulties, by the state and the city of Paris jointly, under the act for the prolongement of the Rue de Rivoli (18419). The chief work under this act was the extension of the Rue de Rivoli from the Place de la Concorde to the Bastille. This operation, which provided for cross-town, east to west communication in Paris, was carried out in the years 1854-55.  Haussmann began with the Rue de Rivoli. Demolition and consLruction went on piece by piece, first as far as the Pavillon de Marsan, then to the Louvre. Forty-seven houses were pulled down, then twenty more, then a group of one hundred seventy-two (to clear the Palais-Royal and the Louvre on both  3 One of the early photographers.  4 TTaussmann, op. eff., I, 55.  $$,  sides of the Rue de Rivoli). [If we consider in this connection the entirely new market halls (fig. 91) which were constructed near-by, it may be said that a new district and not merely a new street was organized.  The Rue de Rivoli was next carried to the Hotel de Ville - the starting point of all Parisian revolts. The confusion of narrow streets in front of the Hétel de Ville was cleared away; on their site appeared the Place du Chatelet (fig. 267), soon to connect with the Boulevard Sébastopol (1858).  The first réseate also included the transformation of the Bois de  Boulogne into a place of recreation for the elegant world. In  connection with this there were also built the Longchamp race  track and the magnilicent approach to the Bois de Boulogne,  the Avenue de l'Impératrice, today the Avenue Foch (fig. 269).  Haussmann was responsible for its great width of nearly four  hundred feet, three times as wide as its architect had proposed  making It.  In the second réseau the city was required to provide the  greater part (threc-quarters) of the cost. A decree of March 18,  1858, authorized the slate to pay the remaining fraclion, pro-  vided that the total amount did not exceed a hundred and. eighty million francs, and thal all the work was finished within  ten years. This particular piece of legislation became known  as “ the decree of the hundred and eighty millions.”  With the second réseau north to south communications re-  ceived further extension: Haussmann led the Boulevard  Sébaslopol across the Seine to the fle de la Cité and the Latin  Quarter on the Left Bank. From there it was continued as Lhe  Boulevard Saint-Michel (fig. 268). The extension transformed  ihe Lle-de Ja Cité into an administrative center. The adapta-  tion to working-class use of the Bois de Vincennes (1860) —  the eastern counterpart of the Bois de Boulogne - nanced under the same arrangements. Another of the works in this réseau was the percement de lest; the interlacing of the working-class quarters with wide, straight roads—~é plan royant — proceeded from 1858 onward, and was more carefully carried out here than in any other district. By it the last  was fi-  = Cf. pp. 163 fl. 
hikelihood of really dangerous rioting was removed. As a result of this clearance, the Hétel de Ville seems almost to float in space, but it remains isolated and unrelated to its neighbors, The Napoleon Barracks were erected next to the Hétel to ensure its safety.  The final stage was the extension of the Rue de Rivoli de- cided upon in 1854. .Crosswise communication in Paris was achieved in this extension. It embraced those points at which the political regime was most sensitive — the Hétel de Ville and the Louvre — and formed the first of those streets reach-  work involved the demolition of several luxurious houses which had been built quite recently, in the time of Louis- Philippe. This final part of the sccond réseau was opened with great pomp and ceremony on the fourteenth of August, 1861.  Haussmann took this opportunity to complain that the mo- ment he interfered with the “ habits of the people who have been favored by fortune” he found himself assailed by a storm of complaints. He observed, rather pointedly, that the mer- chants, shopkeepers, and workmen had borne with great pa-  266. Square de la Tour Saint-Jacques, 1855. One of Napoleon III's endeavors lo imitate the London squares. The great difference is that if is set in the midst of traffic.  ing beyond the compass of the eye which were soon to deter- mine the picture of Paris.  The route of east to west communication — the Rue de Rivoli — joins the north to south route; the Boulevard Sébas- topol was Haussmann’s prolongation of Napoleon’s Boulevard de Strasbourg. All this work by which la grande croisée of Paris was achieved had to be carried on in a densely populated section.  Haussmann now turned to what he called the Weslend du nouveau Paris. In spite of the strongest resistance, the Boule- vard Malesherbes was cul through from the Madeleine. This  267. Place du Chatelet.  tience the “ highly penalizing removals ” made necessary by the work on the Boulevard Sébastopol.  The second réseau was affected by a development of great moment — the decree of June 16, 1859, which incorporated the suburbs into the city of Paris. The area of Paris was thereby increased by more than half. The incorporation was essential for the future, but it seriously handicapped Hauss- mann in his calculations of the moment and set him his most extensive task. Eighteen communities were spread out about Paris and had to be incorporated, with all their chaotic ag- glomerations of buildings and their neglected street sysLems. (ireat additional expense could not be avoided; the budget 
at  estimate was exceeded by a hundred and sixty million francs, Napoleon and Haussmann did not stop at simple incorpora- tion. Although the expression did not exist at the time Haussmann arrived at the notion of regional planning. Ac. cording to his Afémoires, he wanted to make the entire Depart- ment of Seine-et-Oise a single unit. This would ensure contro] over the smaller communities and over the course of develop- ment of the great city; in so far as it related to them.  A belt of greenery was to be created all around Paris, following the line of its fortifications. The project adopted by the Emperor in June 1859 used the land attached to these forti-  268. Boulevard Saint-Michel, 1869.  fications, and a strip, two hundred and fifly meters wide, of the terrain that lay beyond them. This latter area was subject to military restrictions and had greatly depreciated in value as a consequence, The Emperor wished to acquire this land for a boulevard and to provide “ vast plantations ’ with walks for the residents of the new faubourgs and of the contiguous com- munities. The belt would have completely encircled the city, connecting ils two great parks in the east and west, the Bois de Boulogne and the Bois de Vincennes.  But when Napoleon left for the Italian battle front his own Conseil dEtal found opportunity to defeat his intentions.  flaussmann, the implacable enemy of all shortsighted politi- clans, gives this account of what happened: The president of the council, M. Baroche, “a bourgeois full of the narrow and hidebound ideas of the Parisian middle class and opposed at heart to our great works,” fought and defeated the whole project.2°  Paris never got its belt of greenery. After his return from Italy Napoleon hoped to find a chance to repair this shortsighted- ness, but he never did. Public parks in this area would have prevented the erection of the seven- and eight-story tenements which stand there now and continue to be added to. These  269, Avenue de I’Inipératrice (Avenue Foch), 1862. The great width (nearly four hun- dred feet) of this approach to the Bois de Boulogne was insisted upon by Haussmann. His architects’ original version was only a third as wide.  enormous buildings — magnificent slums, in effect —- stand much more in the way of the possibility of replanning Paris than fortifications would.  The third réseau had to be supported in its entircty by the city: the deputies wanted nothing more to do with the building or the financing of Paris. Haussmann was left standing alone; in financing these works he had to manipulate the machinery of credit singlehanded. It was these financial operations (the  3¢ Flanssmann. on. cit.. I]. 2 
whole cost of the third réseau had not yet been raised when he left his post) which enabled the deputies to bring about his downfall.  Haussmann’s operations over a seventeen-year period had called for eight hundred million francs in excess of normal ex. penditures. The sum had been raised without creating any new taxes or increasing the old ones. And was not Paris becoming more prosperous daily? Its population was growing at an unheard-of rate: within a bare two decades it had almost doubled. The five or six hundred million francs beyond what was actually on hand would certainly be found. The cost of the work could be paid off through annuities based on the in- creasing revenues of the city. Nothing was involved except time.  Two parks— Montsouris in the south and the Buttes- Chaumont in the north — were created by the third réseau, Both were conversions of useless and neglected areas; the Buttes-Chaumont replaced an abandoned quarry.  The suburbs needed more and more streets. Streets leading out from Paris were extended, and new crosswise roads were made. In this manner the budget for the suburbs increased to double the amount estimated.  Haussmann pressed rapidly on with the development of Paris as though he knew there was no time to be wasted. To the west was a field for new town planning. The old toll barriers marked the western edge of the city; beyond them stretched the open country. The Champs-Elysées led up to the toll barriers. Just behind them stood the Arc de Triomphe de l’Etoile in its circular place. From the thirties on, the Champs- Elysées was one of the places where Parisians with any claim to smartness were expected to make an appearance.  Haussmann could work with a free hand in this district. There was open land for the twelve avenues which he led out from the Place de I’Etoile; no demolition was necessary. His ene- mies accused him of running these avenues out into the open country and destroying the graintfields of Passy. But once more Haussmann’s foresight was justified; the Paris of 1900 was to stand on this area.  The interconnection of the various streets that pierced Paris greatly occupied Haussmann. Thus he insisted that the Ruc Lafayette should reach a length of five kilometers so that it might lead travelers from the north and east railway stations to the Opéra and the Grands Boulevards in the heart of the city.  The Avenue Napoléon, now the Avenue de l’Opéra, is his master work in town planning. Besides being a magnificent  270. Boulevard Richard-Lenoir, 1861-63. Planned by Haussmann to cover an old canal. Behind the regular and endless street fronts a tremendous disorder is crammed, as though in a wardrobe.  street in itself, it functions as a traffic bridge between several main thoroughfares. The Rue de Rivoli and the opposite bank of the Seine achieve direct contact, through this avenue, with the Grands Boulevards and the northern parts of the city.  None of Haussmann’s schemes appeared so foolish to his con- temporaries as this comparatively short street. So far as they 
Os,  could see, it could only serve to connect the ThéAtre Francais with the Opéra - - and who could possibly want to attend both on the same evening? Actually, if it were not for this street, the circulation of traffic in Paris in the present day would be impossible (fig. 271).  Haussmann built only the beginning and the end of this thoroughfare. Between the two sprawled a network of streets which was not cleared away until much later. The whole length of the Avenue de Opéra was opened to traffic in 1879, This was under the Third Republic, long after Haussmann had left office.  If Haussmann anywhere succeeded in leaving a monument to himself and to that Second Enipire in which he believed so thoroughly, it is in this avenue and its opera house. The grand staircase of the Opéra neyer served its original purpose, never furnished a background for the gliding train of the Em- press Eugénie. Designed in 1861, when the Second Empire wag at its zenith, the Opéra was not completed until 1875. It remains, nevertheless, the purest expression of the transitory glories of the Second Empire.  Squares, Boulevards, Gardens and Plants  We have observed the interrelations since the seventeenth century between groups of buildings and nature, and since the eighteenth century between squares and greenery. [t is true that in Lhe transformation of Paris other questions are in Lhe foreground, but we must not overlook the great efforts made to save the city from becoming simply a vast acreage of asphalt and masses of stone. In discussing this work it is necessary Lo distinguish between the layout of squares with their gardens and the old and new parks and pleasure grounds.  As a refugee in London, Louis Napoleon was much impressed hy the English squares and parks. When he came to power, he desired to provide his capital with similar open green spaces — immense romantic parks and squares planled with trees and shrubs. Both were unknown in Paris. From the point of view of town planning, too, the squares of Paris differed from those of London in one important respect: the London squares were  isolated from traflic, whereas those in Paris were no more than the enlargement of streets. For example, the Place des Arts- el-Métiers was a broadening of the Boulevard Sébastopol; that around the ‘Tour Saint-Jacques (fig. 266), of the Rue de Rivoli. The houses were so placed in straight, continuous lines along the streets as to permit no free spaces apart from paye- nents and traffic passages.” It was inevitable that the small parks created out of these squares, quite unlike those of Lon- don, should be set amidst the noise and dust of traffic.  No innovation in urban planning was more generally imitated in the years immediately following than this arrangement of squares filled with greenery in the midst of traffic. Jsspecially pleasing and completely new to people was the fact that they were open to the public. W. Robinson, the English landscape gardener, whose books had had great influence up Lo this time ou English landscape gardening, expresses the conlemporary reaction to one bit of Ilaussmann’s work: * The first thing that strikes the visitor in this square is its freshness, perfect keeping, and the number of people who are seated in it, reading, working, or playing.” He recognized also the social significance of squares created for and open to the public: ‘ but while we sull persist in keeping the squares for a few privileged persons, and usually without the faintest trace of any but the very poorest plant ornament, they make them as open as our parks and decorate them with a variety and richness of vegetation.’ *8  Soulevard ” means literally a walk on the walls of a fortified town, the word going back lo the German Bollwerk (bulwark). The first boulevard in Paris was opened by Louis XLV in 1670 and extended from the Porte Saint-Denis to the Bastille, occu- pying the site of the ancient walls leveled by Vauban. These houlevards were formal footways, designed like gardens for the promeneur —- not, like Haussmann’s boulevards of the nineteenth century, intended as lanes for heavy traffic.  * If not already the brightest, airiest, and most beautiful of all vilies, Paris is in a fair way to become so: and the greatest part  * ‘The evils inherent in the * block system ” of houses were recognized about Lwo decades later by the critic of straight-line thoroughfares. Camillo Sitte (Der Stédfebax, Vienna, 1901, p. 203; first edition, 1889}.  * W. Robinson, The Parks, Promenades, and Gardens of Paris (London, 1869), pp. 82, 85.  B 
271. Avenue de POpéra, from the Opéra to the Louvre and the Rue de Rivoli. /faussmann’s masterpiece, carried — through against great opposition. Few people could see how necessary it would be later on as a traffic bridge.  eo  272. Grand staircase of the Tuilerics, Imperial Ball, 1860.  of her beauty is due to her gardens and her trees.” Such was the impression on Robinson of the Paris of the new boulevards at the height of their splendor (1869), and he continues: “ What would the new boulevards of white stone be without the softening and refreshing aid of those long lanes of well- cared-for trees that everywhere rise around the buildings, xelping them somewhat as the grass does the buttercups? . . . In Paris, public gardening assumes an importance which it does  not possess with us... . It follows the street builders with trees, turns the little squares into gardens unsurpassed for good taste and beauty . . . presents to the eye of the poorest  workman every charm of vegetation.” *  The speed with which these boulevards were created was amazing. They seemed to come into being overnight - - great thoroughfares lined with thirty-year-old trees in full leaf. In- deed, “ the chief gardeners and the city architects were often  * Robinson, op. eil., pp. 1, 2. 
f  \  S wW SS  \S  273. Tree-lifting machine for transplanting full-grown trees. Through the use of such contrivances, thirty-year-old trees sprang up along the boulevards overnight.  274. Place de la Concorde and Champs-Elysées. Air view, 1855.  275. Hardy subtropi- cal plants: Wigandia, These huge-leaved and impressive plants which Alphand introduced stood out at great dis- lances.  called upon to extemporize shady avenues in a few days.” ” They were able to accomplish such extraordinary tasks by the use of a tree-lifting machine which they invented, a cart by which in a simple and ingenious way they were able to transplant trecs as much as thirty feet high (figs. 273, 274). Like the squares with their greenery, these tree-lined streets leading to the heart of the city were accepted and copied every- where. But they represented a solution of the problem which forced town planning to take a very dangerous direction that could not continue.  The great range of Haussmann’s talent as an organizer is evident even today in the system of parks which he created on  ‘© fzdouard André, quoted by Robinson, op. cit.. p. 551. 
a large scale and in the grand manner. They derived from that class of English landscape gardens which imitated nature  a . . . . . , often with romantic aim, encompassing within their limits  mountains, valleys, lakes, and brooks in miniature. Their function was to give Paris the lungs that were tacking. They  were designed for the promeneur, for the workman on his day off, for the Sunday stroller, who was thus enabled to take the air along their broad paths like a seigneur walking in contem. plation through his estate. They were made to be looked at. lo be enjoyed for their wide vistas and the massing of their  tobacco (Nicotiana macrophylla), were “readily raised from seeds and [grew] luxuriously in rich soil.” ? Lt was a character- istic of them all that their enormous leaves and the grandeur of their aspect could be perceived from greater distances than usual, so that they were not lost when planted in spacious  lawns.?  The lwo great parks in the west and east of Paris, the Bois de Boulogne (1853-58: fig. 276) and the Bois de Vincennes (1857— 6b: fig. 277), look on the map of Paris like the two lungs of the city. Lf Haussmann’s idea had been carried out properly, they  276, Bois de Boulogne, 1853-58,  herbage. And into them plants were introduced which had not appeared before in public gardens.  As a result, the old masters of gardening, the English, now came to Paris to learn how “a new aspect of vegetation ° could also be given to English gardens. These new plants were hardy subtropical species (fig. 273) which Jean Alphand and his collaborators discovered and brought to Europe in the greatest variely. They were large, vigorous, and easily grown. Some of them attained a height of ten or twelve fect (Cen- taurus babvlonius); others. like pampas grass (Gynerium argen- fium). were remarkable for the “ rapid vigor and great size of their herbaceous vegetations,” or, like a type of the common  Bois de Vincennes, from Plateau de Gravelles, 1857-61.  would have been connected with one another by a wide green belt around the girdle of forlifications. [ach contains about Iwo thousand acres. To them, besides the already existing parks, which were reorganized, must be added the Pare Mon- ceau in Lhe center of Paris, the charming Pare Montsouris in the south, and in the north the Bulles-Chaumont for the laboring classes. In keeping with the taste of the period, they  “Cf, W. Robinson, op. eff, chapter on “ Subtropical Plants for the Flawee Garde,” pp. 182 ff, and chap. XT, ‘‘ Hardy Plants for the Subtropical (carden,” p. 210.  Jerein lies the principal reason for their choice by Alpband and his gardeners, aud for  their general use in European gardens up to the beginning of this contary. Then they seem to have been forgotten. Today we are rediscovering in them a charm and vigor of  srowth which commends them to our own period. 
were laid out on the most. extensive scale as leisure grounds for the promeneur. The next siep in development was nol reached until more than three decades later, when the park of the promeneur gave way to the playground system, as in the south parks of Chicago.  The City as a Technical Problem  Haussmann stands as a symbol of the faith of the nineteenth century in production.  It took Borromini nearly thirty years to erect a small church and even then il was not quile complete. Louis XIV spent a lifetime in building Versailles, despite the fact that he had all the resources of France at his disposal. In seventeen years, by a mixture of determination and foresight, Haussmann created the great nincteenth-century city. The speed of the work reflects the tempo and enterprise of the industrial expan- sion which occasioned it.  To solve the problems connected with the city of the indus- trial age, Haussmann brought together the first precisely codrdinated staff of technicians.” He could rely on very litule assistance from the quarters one would have expected to fur- nish it. There were at that date no town planners to aid him in avoiding mistakes. The architects were of singularly little help. They could not even adjust themselves to the scale of his projects; on many occasions he had to send their work back and insist upon its enlargement. He remarks that the Second Empire was unfortunate in not producing a single artist equal to the problems of the demps nouveau. Fauss- mann seems to have resigned himself to this fact. The Bureau of Architects with its staff of academicians and celebrities was the one department which he left almost undisturbed when he took over the administration. His problems were too novel and too extensive for Lhese men to handle; as Henri Labrouste had already seen, their training left them completely out of touch with their own period. This detachment from reality  “ Haussmann gives a lively account of the way this staff was built up in his Mémoires,  vol. VIL, chaps. iV, VIII, IX, X1, XIV-XVI.  Rm  =  had gone so far that they could no longer even figure Lhe costs on their own projects. “ As artists . . . [they] had little con- cern for expenses. | might add that in general they possessed neitber the knowledge required for drawing up an estimate nor he earetul and detailed attention which is needed for checking a bill * Estimates and bills alike had to be referred to two special commissions which Haussmann created for tus pur- ose. Such men could have no undertanding of the new and pressingly practical problems which town planning involved. They were prepared at best to design single buildings, for ereclion on siles pointed out by someone else. Architects at his period were like those old-style tragedians who would not rave thought they were acting if they had been given prose paris to read.  Haussmann had to look in other fields for his helpers. And in any case buildings were for him only the décor de la vie. From ihe beginning he looked on his work as a technical problem and carried his real difficulties to the engineers, his closest collaborators. Most of these men were relatively unknown when he engaged them, but he was very astute in his choice, and his assistants grew up with him and with the work. ITaussmann had been prefect of the Yonne and later of Bor- deaux; he knew the able men in these southern districts and looked for his helpers there. Belgrand, for many years a sub- ordinate engineer in a small provincial town, constructed in a faultless manner Lhe enormous sewer system of Paris and the aqueducts which, for the first time in its history, provided Paris with an adequale water supply, drawn from the reservoirs of the Yonne and the Dhuis. Belgrand was of the inventor type: “aman of genius.” he was always “ modifying his original ideas in some respect or other.” As engineer-in-chief and in- spector-general of the bridges and highways department ~ he took upon himself all the work connected with the projects which he had most at heart, even though he had his choice of the most competent collaborators.” This trait, Haussmann remarks, was “ no doubt due to his long service in the inferior grades.” “  + Haussmann, op. ett, II], StL.  ** Haussmann, op. etf., HL, 118-119. 