BOOK Aldolf Behne The Modern Functional Building.pdf
Introduction  Rosemarie Haag Bletter  Adolf Behne’s Der moderne Zweckbau (The Modern Functional Building) pre- sciently unmasked many of the ideologies of functionalism, rationalism, and European Modernism of the 1920s. Written in 1923 (though not published until 1926), it preceded the later German publications of Walter Gropius, Ludwig Hilberseimer, Walter Curt Behrendt, and Bruno Taut and sheds much light on them.? Today the Anglo-American audience remains largely familiar with European Modernism through the narrow focus of Henry-Russel Hitchcock and Philip Johnson’s The International Style, 1932, although Hitch- cock’s earlier Modern Architecture: Romanticism and Reintegration, 1929, had presented a somewhat more varied picture of recent developments. By con- trast, arguments about Modernism were articulated in surprisingly rich and complex ways in the aforementioned European works of the 1920s.  Behne's Der moderne Zweckbau is crucial for understanding modernist polernics contextually, especially those later subsumed under the notion of functionalism. In a general sense, the increasing concern with purpose and Sachlichkeit in early Modernism signifies the change from older, aristo- cratic value systems to an emphasis on everyday and common experience as the new paradigm. Behne’s text is also helpful in reconsidering some of the standard assumptions and questions about this period, especially the presumption of a visually coherent style. Instead of emphasizing the exter- nal appearance of buildings, German texts dealing with Modernism in the 19208 identified the new architecture through its underlying conceptua premises. Contemporary expression was therefore seen as a reflection of philosophical attitudes toward modernity, and this view allowed for greater visual diversity— perhaps only because an exact correspondence between idea and form was difficult to establish.  The three-year delay in the publication of Der moderne Zweckbau reveals much about the competitive nature of early Modernism. Gropius had sought  Behne’s assistance in preparing the Bauhaus exhibition Internationale Archi- tektur in 1923; but when Behne in turn asked Gropius to change the con- tent or delay the publication date of the book of the same title (the first entry in the Bauhausbiicher, or Bauhaus book series, which was projected for publication in 1924) because of its similarity to Behne’s own work, Gropius 
refused. Gropius’s decision to start a book series hampered Behne’s efforts on other fronts as well. When Behne shortly thereafter approached J. J. P. Oud (whose work Behne had promoted in 1922 in his monograph on Dutch architecture) and asked him for material for his own book, Oud responded that he would prefer to have his work published in the Bauhaus book series. He clearly expected more publicity and credibility given the Bauhaus’s insti- tutional backing.  Nevertheless, books such as Gropius's Internationale Architektur, 1925, portrayed contemporary architecture —as did Behne —in an astonishingly varied way. Frank Lloyd Wright's Larkin Building and Erich Mendeisohn’s equally massive-looking double house in Berlin were included among Inter- nationale Architektur’s illustrations. Hilberseimer’s Internationale neue Bau- kunst (New international architecture), which appeared in 1927 under the auspices of the German Werkbund, was similarly diverse in scope. Its exam- ples ranged from an apartment house by Jan Wils to housing by Taut, in addition to unexecuted schemes by Russian Constructivists. In Die neue Baukunst in Europa und Amerika (simultaneously published in English as Modern Architecture), 1929, Bruno Taut was also extraordinarily inclusive in his selection of examples. Whereas several of these books alluded to the perceived internationalism of contemporary architecture, only Behrendt’s Der Sieg des newen Baustils The victory of the new building style), 1927, treated the new architecture as a style, as would Hitchcock and Johnson’s later study.* Notwithstanding his title, even Behrendt presented a varied picture of contemporary architecture, one that included works by Hans Poelzig, Mendelsohn, and Willem Dudok. ie saw Wright's Robie House and Henry van de Velde’s theater at the Werk- bund exhibition of 1914 as the key precedents to modern architecture; and he presented an organic plan by Hugo Haring next to Ludwig Mies van der Rohe’s De Stijl-inspired plan for a brick country house so that side-by-side they appeared as equally central examples of the new style. But because Ger- man proselytizers of Modernism tended to downplay the aesthetic aspects of architecture, their criteria depended less on visual elements than did Hitchcock and Johnson’s work. Reinforcing this attitudinal difference was the fact that contemporary architecture was commonly referred to in Ger- many as “Neues Bauen” (new building), just as in Holland it was known as  “Nieuw Bouwen.”5 It is not entirely clear why the term Neues Bawen became prevalent in the 19208. The word modern was more commonly used prior to 1923, as for  example in Karl Scheffler’s Moderne Baukunst, 1907, or, for that matter, Behne’s Der moderne Zweckbau.’ Possibly under the influence of the general Expressionist conception of the new man, and more specifically the Neues Bauen exhibition of 1920 at J. B. Neumann's gallery in Berlin,’ and the popu- larization after 1923 of Gustav Hartlaub’s “Neue Sachlichkeit” (conceived by him as a further evolution of Expressionism, nota reaction to it), the term new attained wide currency among the German avant-garde. Taut’s Die neue Woh- nung (The new dwelling), 1924, suggests the link to Expressionism.® Neu seems to have implied change and the progressivism associated with the new movement more clearly than the term modern. The latter seerns almost to have been perceived as a neutral chronological marker synonymous with contemporary. Behne himself signifies the shift from modern to neu in his Neues Wohnen — Neues Bauen (New dwelling — New building), 1927, and the emphasis on the new is apparent in the titles of Hilberseimer’s Interna- tionale neue Baukunst, Behrendt’s Der Sieg des neuen Baustils, or Taut’s Bauen— Der neue Wohnbau (Building — The new domestic architecture), 1927.°  It is also possible that neu carried political overtones that had prewar origins in Germany. The weekly newspaper of the Social Democrats was called Die neve Zeit. Behne wrote an essay for this paper in 1914 on the rep- resentation of workers in art. His first book (subsequent to publication of his doctoral thesis) was titled Zur neuen Kunst (Toward the new art) and was published in 1915 by Der Sturm. Modern in a political context may have meant simply “of the present time,” whereas neue Zeit — and by implication neu — suggested a rupture with past times.  Such contextual or regional shifts in terminology do not apply in the same way to the Anglo-American sphere, where modern continued to be the preferred term. It is significant that Taut’s Die neue Baukunst in Europa und Amerika, 1929, appeared in its English edition of the same year under the title Modern Architecture. And Behrendt, the author of Der Sieg des neuen Baustils, 1927, later, while living in America, wrote Modern Building, 1937.1 There are, however, subtle variations even within the more general discus- sion of “modern” developments, as Alan Colquhoun has recently pointed out.'! Whereas in England in the 1950s the avant-garde of the 1920s was generally referred to as the Modern Movement — suggesting a degree of activism and ongoing development — today we tend to prefer Modernism, a word that seems to denote a historical period.  To understand the ideology and intricacies of the modernist debate that fueled the Neues Bauen, one needs to study more closely the polemics of 
books by the aforementioned German authors. For this purpose Behne’s Der moderne Zweckbau is the most revealing text. It fully explores and carefully sets the stage for later arguments and for the development of concepts such as Sachlichkeit (objectivity, functionalism) and Zweck (purpose, function). In this respect Behne’s role is comparable to that of Hartlaub in the staging of the exhibition of 1925 on the Neue Sachlichkeit in painting.’ Beyond that, Behne, a critic of both art and architecture, was also an astute observer of the con- temporary scene. Although his writings do not have the acerbic consistency of Adolf Loos, many of his essays and books contain sharp, perceptive com- ments and critiques of the Werkbund, Expressionism, and the Bauhaus, as well as the work of close friends. He was not a practicing architect, yet he was not exactly a completely detached observer. Bene was a major partici- pant in Expressionist architectural groups after World War 1. Like Sigfried Giedion, he had the advantage of an academic education in art history and a close acquaintance with nearly all of the principal architects of his time.  Adolf Bruno Behne was born in Magdeburg on 13  uly 1885, the son of an  architect. When he was a year old his parents moved with him and his two  older brothers, Erich and Karl, to Berlin. He grew up class districts of eastern Berlin near the Centralvie  in one of the working- hhof (main slaughter-  house) and attended a Gymnasium from which he graduated in 1905. His academic training commenced with the study of architecture at the Techni- sche Hochschule (Polytechnic school) in Berlin-Charlottenburg, but in 1907 he decided to study art history at the Friedrich-Wilhelm Universitat. After a  stay in Italy, he produced his dissertation, “Der Inkrustationssti] in Toscana” (The incrustation style in Tuscany), in 1912. Among his teachers were Hein- rich Wolfflin (with whom Giedion had also studied) and Georg Simmel, the great philosopher and sociologist. Thereafter he taught in a Hochschule as well as a Volkshochschule (an adult education program), and he became part of the Volksbildungsbewegung (People’s education movement). This move- ment was concerned with furthering education outside of academic institu- tions, and it remained an interest for Behne throughout his career. In 1913 he married Elfriede Schneider, the daughter of a railroad engineer, whom he had met through the mathematics club at the university. They had two daughters — Karla, born in 1913, and Julia, born in 1921.4  Before the war Behne also belonged to the Choriner Kreis (Chorin circle), a group of young writers, artists, and architects that met on weekends for walks in the woods around the small town of Chorin near Berlin. Max Beckmann and Taut were also members of the group, and Behne formed a  4  long-lasting friendship with Taut.!* Among Behne’s earliest articles were those in Die Hilfe—the weekly journal published by Friedrich Naumann, a politician, former Protestant pastor, and one of the key organizers of the Werkbund. Naumann had founded Die Hilfe in 1894 as the organ of the pro- gressive wing of the Christian-Social movement. He had been interested in using the arts to improve the quality of products because he believed that doing so “would raise the value of labor, improve the worker's status, increase his joy in work, and thus reverse the trend to proletarianization hitherto associated with the advance of capitalism.”"5 Together with the soci- ologist Max Weber, with whom he was closely associated, Naumann rejected the Marxist view that economics is the central factor in social change. Both men stressed the plurality and interdependence of causes.  Behne’s name appears for the first time as a member of the Werkbund in 1913, the year after he received his doctorate. Before World War 1 he published articles on the work of Peter Behrens and Taut. His articles appeared in Der Sturm, Die Welibiihne, Sozialistische Monatshefte, and Das neue Frankfurt, among many other periodicals. He wrote frequently on the role of the museum in the general education of the public and more specifically on the ambigu- ous nature of the framed picture in the museum setting. Since the museum imposes a change in context on all works of art, he saw the common concern with “original” art as a false issue. In his essay “Das reproduktive Zeitalter” (The reproductive era} of 1917, he seems to prefigure Walter Benjamin’s well- known thesis about the effect of mass produced images on art.'¢ Behne was also interested in advertising and its wide-ranging effects on culture: he once referred to Mendelsohn’s urban buildings as Reklamearchitektur (adver- tising architecture). He did not, however, see eye-to-eye with the prevailing Werkbund policy imposing aesthetic standards on all aspects of daily life. Advertising, he wrote in 1924, was as central to a modern economy as money, and any attempt to control it through aesthetic regulations was bound to be counterproductive in that it would treat advertising as a purely formal problem. On the one hand, Behne did not believe that using art to mask a subject was necessarily good.'? On the other hand, he wrote about films as art as early as 1921, and he included the important role of film in his discussion of pedagogy.'®  As noted above, Behne’s first book, Zur neuen Kunst was published in 1915 by Der Sturm, the major disseminator of contemporary, and particu- larly Expressionist, art. An excerpt from the book titled “Expressionistische Architektur” appeared in the magazine Der Sturm in the same year. This  
essay was among the earliest attempts to define Expressionism, and it certainly was the first to do so within the context of architecture. Behne’s description of Expressionism was not narrowly Germanic or medievalizing, and his essay included Cubism and Futurism as equally important aspects of this contemporary expression.’  In 1915 Behne also wrote an article in Die Tat entitled “Der Hass der Neutralen” (The hatred of the neutrals), in which he complained about the lack of support for Germany during the early war years. He returned the idea of an “avant-garde” to its original military meaning when he wrote that those who did not commit themselves were fearful of the new. Behne was hardly alone in this attitude. The sociologist Weber described the war as “great and wonderful,” and Thomas Mann saw it as “purification, liberation ...an immense hope.”2¢  Behne’s position during the war years has led to a diverse set of assess- ments concerning his political beliefs. lain Boyd Whyte in his otherwise exceptionally informative Bruno Taut and the Architecture of Activism, 1982, uses this essay and Behne’s association with the Choriner Kreis (among other things) to show that he (and Taut) were essentially conservative.?! Fol- lowing the Marxist, or more correctly Stalinist, argument of Georg Lukacs in his attack on Expressionism of 1934 (by this time he had become an apologist for Stalinism), Whyte finds conservatism endemic. Lukacs viewed Expres- sionism as counterrevolutionary because it was a product of imperialist cap- italism and therefore responsible for fascism. According to the Lukacsian formula, the association of Behne and Taut with the Choriner Kreis estab- lishes them as conservative, because the group's back-to-nature component can be regarded as part of the Wandervégel Movement, which began in the 1890s. By the 1930s this movement was clearly an extension of the National Socialists’ nationalism and racialism; however, before World War 1, it was perhaps patriotic but not nationalist.”? As with the Werkbund, however, political uniformity cannot be ascribed to the members of any large orga- nization, By the same token, one cannot say that the Expressionists or mod-  ernists were all liberal. A similar restrictive Lukacsian formula led Magdalena Bushart in Der Geist der Gotik und die Expressionistische Kunst (The spirit of the Gothic and Expressionist art), 1990, to categorize Behne as an oppor- tunist because of his later shift in political opinion.”? But not all changes of attitude reflect ulterior motives. Walter Benjamin, for instance, who was generally recognized as a Marxist in the 1920s, had participated in the Ger- man youth movement before 1914.%4  Lukacs’s reductive argument was countered in the late 1930s by one of his former friends, the Marxist philosopher Ernst Bloch (they had met in Simmel’s seminar). Bloch wrote that Lukacs’s opinions were based primarily on literary Expressionism, as opposed to painting and architecture. He argued further that Expressionism did in fact question basic social values and asserted the constructive value of utopianism. Bloch also found the Expressionists' inclusion of folk art from many countries more meaningful than the Neoclassicism that Lukacs had endorsed.*® Most contemporary Neo-Marxist historians such as Manfredo Tafuri and Francesco Dal Co cite only Lukacs and not Bloch, thereby overlooking the vigorous debate and dis- agreements about a politically engaged art that took place in the 1920s and 19308.” Possibly because of Lukacs’s influence on recent literary criticism, his opinions about Expressionist literature have been carried over into the other arts of the period with which, however, he was not as familiar.  Whyte is correct when he maintains that a shift in beliefs took place as World War 1 progressed. Some, like Taut, became pacifists. Behne joined the alternative service as a medical orderly during the war. As early as 1914 three of Behne's lectures were published by the educational committee of the Social Democratic Party (spp), and he wrote for the party’s weekly, Die neue Zeit.’” In 1917, on the other hand, he wrote a book that was published under the auspices of the Diirerbund, a fairly conservative educational asso- ciation for the appreciation of art founded in 1902. In 1917 he also wrote an essay in praise of the Russian Revolution.’8 It is clear that at the beginning of his career his interest in a populist approach to art colored most of his associations. However, sometime during these early years he joined the spp, and in 1913 he had begun writing for Sozialistische Monatshefe, which publi- cized the international socialist movement. After the war he joined the uspp, the Independent Social Democratic Party and the schismatic left wing of the majority Socialists; this group had been founded in 1917 to call for an end to the war and to help politicize the labor force.29  Lukacs, in fact, had coupled his critique of Expressionism with an attack on the uspp. In his opinion the uspn’s attitude toward revolution, like that of the Expressionists, was half-hearted. Lukdcs’s scorn directed at Expression- ists and the uspp reflects the uneasy alliance between these groups and the Spartacists — from 1919 on the Communists (krp}—and their later extreme doctrinal split. By the late 1920s the kpp and the uspp had become arch- enemies. But in the last year of the war the Spartacists were loosely asso- ciated with the uspp,’° and in reality the uspp participated in the mislabeled  
“Spartacus Uprising” of January 1919. Both the spp and the KPD were working-class parties. The kpp, however, contained more unskilled and unemployed workers. The parties’ respective social programs reflected the differences in their makeups. The Social Democrats sought to develop orthodox Marxism into a Volkssozialismus (popular socialism) and Kultur- sozialismus (cultural socialism) within the capitalist system; the Com- munists, however, demanded radical change and regarded any reform as illusory. Much of the energy of the labor movement was dissipated by the intense enmity between these parties. After 1928 the change of policy of the Soviet Communist Party and the Comintern imposed complete sepa- ratism on the xpp, which became openly confrontational with the spp.?! If one talks about the fate of the Weimar Republic and the responsibility for the onset of fascism, a great deal of blame can be meted out not just to con- servatives but also to the Communists for their refusal to form an alliance with the Socialists.  Lukécs’s simultaneous attack of Expressionism and the uspp in 1934 must therefore be viewed not just in contrast with Bloch’s response but even more as an instance of the hard-left approach of the German xpp and its ongoing internecine struggle with the competing workers’ party, the Social Democrats. By the end of the war Behne had become unquestion- ably associated with the uspp. In rg19 he complained in an article titled “Unsere moralische Krisis” (Our moral crisis), published in the Soziali- stische Monatshefte, that nothing had changed and that there had really been no break with old attitudes of nationalist arrogance.}? At the same time, Behne, although often critical of German society, retained the Social Demo- crats’ belief in the possiblity of reform. While some of his books were addressed to a cultural elite, many more of his publications in the 1920s were directed to a larger audience. Among these were his introductions to art and contemporary art respectively, both published in 1925 by the Arbeiter-Jugend Verlag, Die Uberfahrt am Schreckenstein: Eine Einfithrung in die Kunst (The passage to the Schreckenstein: An introduction to art) and Von Kunst zur Gestaltung: Eine Einfithrung in die moderne Kunst (From art to design: An introduction to modern art). His deep commitment as a teacher to the Volkshochschule Movement is another indication of his general agreement with the Social Democrats’ attempt to develop a popular and cul- tural socialism.*?  Does Modernism Equal Functionalism?  For many architectural historians, even those who are well acquainted with German developments in the 1920s, Modernism and functionalism have become nearly synonymous.** Within the comparatively brief period of Modernism, however, functionalism assumed many guises. Although it is not within the scope of this essay to do justice to the complexity of function- alist beliefs in modern architecture, some arguments about functionalism are useful to consider in order to understand both the underlying conven- tions of functionalism in the 19208 and the considerable misunderstand- ings that have become embedded in postmodern discussions.  Two extreme positions regarding functionalism help to introduce suc- cinctly the conflicting issues of the history of the term and current reac- tions to it. Characteristic of the positive view of functionalism in the 1950s is Edward Robert de Zurko’s excessively broad and uncritical history Origins of Functionalist Theory, 1957. Typical of the early postmodernist reaction against functionalism is David Watkin’s rather narrowly conceived Morality and Architecture, 1977. The shared assumption in both works is that func- tionalism is synonymous with Modernism.  Using a rather circular argument, de Zurko writes that “the literature of functionalism consists largely of the writings of recognized functional- ists (such as Horatio Greenough, Louis Sullivan, and Taut).”3* Whereas de Zurko’s book is perhaps too inclusive regarding ideas of purpose and utility, Watkin’s tone is that of a postmodern scold. He belittles Le Corbusier's Vers une architecture, 1923, because, in Watkin's words, “What is simple, suppos- edly functional, and materialistic in aim, light in colour, and immediately apprehensible in form enjoys advantages in terms of health and morality over other different or more complex solutions. Thus it must be imposed on society as soon as possible if we are to avoid revolution.” He goes on to insist that the apocalyptic overtones of Le Corbusier’s functionalist argument were later exaggerated by Taut in his Modern Architecture, 1929, and cites the fol- lowing passage from Taut to prove his point:  If everything is founded on sound efficiency, this efficiency itself, or rather its utility, will form its own aesthetic law. A building must be beautiful when seen from outside if it reflects all these qualities... The architect who achieves this task becomes a creator of an ethical and social character; the people who use the building for any purpose, will, through the structure of the house, be brought  9 
to a better behaviour in their mutual dealings and relationship with each  other. Thus architecture becomes the creator of new social observances.**  If Watkin himself takes on a moralizing voice in his critique of moralizing theories (in this instance a Puginian trust in social control through architec- ture), de Zurko is more open-minded than most modernist historians in his belief that “modern discussions of functionalism show a dual approach: the rational and the poetic.” He cautions also that “the frequency of statements by modern architects regarding functionalism indicates that functionalism is neither a clear and unchallenged law of architecture nor a spent force, but a vital concept requiring clarification.”  Important for understanding modern functionalism and Behne’s attempt to categorize the various tendencies is de Zurko’s discussion of two major nineteenth-century functionalist trends: the mechanical and the organic analogies. The former uses machines as a paradigm for aesthetic theory and is a response to the Industrial Revolution. Although the latter trend draws its references from nature and the former employs models of mechanical production, both could be invoked together. A clear and early example is the theory of the American sculptor Horatio Greenough, who in 1843 proposed a functionalist approach to architecture in order to create what he thought of as a tabula rasa, or hedge against the influence of the older European styles. He believed that functionalism could foster an indigenous American approach to design and recommended, “Let us consult nature, and in the assurance that she will disclose a mine richer than was ever dreamed of by the Greeks.” He went on to say that “the law of adaptation is the fundamen- tal law of nature in all structure.” Together with this organic justification, Greenough drew a parallel between natural selection and the production of man-made artifacts in general and machines in particular, “If we compare the form of a newly invented machine with the perfected type of the same instrument, we observe, as we trace it through the phases of improvement,  how weight is shaken off where strength is less needed, how functions are made to approach without impeding each other, how straight becomes curved, and the curve is straightened, till the straggling and cumbersome machine becomes the compact effective and beautiful engine.”*  In addition to the organic and mechanical paradigm, Greenough, through his close relationship with Ralph Waldo Emerson, gave his ideas an ethical dimension as well. Behne would also address all three functional concepts present in Modernism — the organic, the mechanical, and the social — but  10  whereas he described the first two in his role as a historian of the 19208, he only advocated a type including a social dimension. His advocacy of a social functionalism, in fact, resembles Louis Sullivan's polemics.  Sullivan’s dictum “form follows function,” stated first in 1888, employed two components of Greenough’s functionalism. Its Lamarckian organi- cism is the most evident, and disregarding Greenough's mechanical anal- ogy, Sullivan gave the ethical aspect of functionalism greater importance. Although initially indebted to Transcendentalism as much as to Greenough, Sullivan came under the influence of Chicago School pragmatic realism and John Dewey’s utilitarian instrumentalism in the 1890s. These philoso- phies assumed a complex interrelationship between human thought and action and the environment. This interrelationship contrasts with the simple behaviorist model of Pugin, in which the environment affects human action but not vice versa. Hugh Dalziel Duncan explains the Chicago School and Sullivan's dictum thus, “Forms arise in attempts to solve problems in social action, form and function are real, not because of their relationship to an essence outside of or beyond action, but within action in society”?  The distinctly utilitarian ethics of “form follows function” do not seem to have—on the surface at least—a direct relationship with Central Euro- pean ideas in the early twentieth century. However, Beline’s stress on the social implications of functionalism, despite his rejection of “utilitarian- ism” as he understood it, cannot be divorced altogether from the social meaning of utilitarianism or from Sullivan’s understanding of function as a social tool.  Because “form follows function” is such an easy-to-recall, alliterative,  and concise phrase, it has unfortunately been remembered far too often. In popular usage throughout the second half of the twentieth century, it has usually been forgotten that the phrase was coined by Sullivan, and today it is frequently associated with European Modernism in general or, just as often, with the Bauhaus specifically. In fact, “form follows function” and “Bauhaus functionalism” have become imprecise, interchangeable clichés that are used either descriptively by modernists or critically by postmodernists as a presumed shorthand for Modernism. n Hitchcock and Johnson's The International Style—so important for introducing an American audience to European Modernism — this confu- sion had not yet occurred. Hitchcock and Johnson, in fact, tried to discredit modern functionalism for its lack of aesthetic concerns:  Il 
Some modern critics and groups of architects both in Europe and in America deny that the aesthetic element in architecture is important, or even that it exists. All aesthetic principles of style are to them meaningless and unreal. This new conception, that building is science and not art, developed as an exaggera- tion of the idea of functionalism.  In its most generally accepted form the idea of function is sufficiently elas- tic. It derives its sanctions from both Greek and Gothic architecture, for in the temple as well as in the cathedral the aesthetic expression is based on structure and function.*”  They held Hannes Meyer, in particular, responsible for a contemporary doc- trinaire functionalism, because he was an “anti-aesthetic functionalist” who claimed that the basis of all design must be economic.  Lewis Mumford in an essay of 1951, “Function and Expression in Archi- tecture,” saw the failure of modern architecture, by contrast, to be its lack of symbolic communication. He identified an excessive reliance on a machine aesthetic and a misunderstanding of “form follows function” as the central problem in the later development of Modernism:  Now all this is not to say that the doctrine that form follows function was a misleading one. What was false and meretricious were the narrow applications that were made of this formula. Actually, functionalism is subject to two main modifications. The first is that we must not take function solely in a mechani- cal sense, as applying only to the physical functions of the building. Certainly new technical facilities and mechanical functions required new forms; but so, likewise, did new social purposes and new psychological insights.*!  For Mumford the modern period is an “age of deep psychological explo- ration and heightened social responsibility.” It is not just the age of Albert Einstein, Henry Bessemer, and Frederick Taylor but also the age of Charles Darwin, Henri Bergson, Sigmund Freud, and Pyotr Alekseyevich Kropotkin.  Mumford’s analysis is similar to that of Joseph Hudnut in his essay “The Post-Modern House,” 1945.*? Hudnut was then the dean of Harvard’s influ- ential Graduate School of Design and was responsible for bringing Gropius to Harvard. He criticized the use of a dogmatic functionalism and struc- tural invention for its own sake. As early as 1931 (that is, before Hitchcock and Johnson), he had complained that the doctrine of functionalism could be obfuscating and mystifying if a rigid utilitarianism became the sole  12  principle of design. He regarded as naive the belief that beauty is automati- cally created by building logically, the shibboleth of “form follows function.” If this were correct, no school of architecture would have to concern itself with the teaching of beauty; it would be enough to teach economics, busi- ness, and the cost of materials.  The present-day misunderstanding of modernist functionalism does not in fact spring from either Taut’s or Hannes Meyer's conception; it is based on an overly narrow definition of function as a single issue that is presumed to be a practical design response within a specific building, one that does not seem to embrace environmental, social, or economic factors. In this later, simplistic version of functionalism, biological and utilitarian ideas have become not only hopelessly abbreviated, frozen, and canonical but also nearly meaningless.  One problem with interpreting functionalism as if it were a law or mathematical theorem (the belief that there is indeed a specific form for each possible function) is that it is based on a fundamental misappre- hension of design procedures. In truth, a single function — if it can ever be completely segregated conceptually from all other functions —can be inter- preted by the architect in many appropriate formal expressions. Never- theless, “form follows function” in its popular conception may be difficult to dislodge because it provides a semblance of rules in an area where there are none.  Not all architectural histories that address functionalism are as extreme as de Zurko’s in their apparent unpolemical neutrality or as hotly polemi- cal as Watkin’s. For instance, Heinrich Klotz in The History of Postmodern Architecture, 1988, makes a fair assessment of the difference between the functionalism of classical Modernism and a later “vulgar” or “doctrinaire” functionalism. He even takes time to discuss the less well-known organic functionalism of Haring, a form of modernist functionalism that Behne also deals with at length. The postmodern reaction against Modernism —as well as the consequent tendency to present Modernism in an overly simplis- tic form —has been most apparent in the Anglo-American sphere, whereas elsewhere attitudes have reflected a calmer evolutionary approach. In this context it is significant that Klotz’s book, when it was first published in Ger- many in 1984, was called Moderne und Postmoderne: Architektur der Gegen- wart. The German title suggests that Modernism and postmodernism are simultaneously present in contemporary architecture; in the title of the American version Modernism has been banished.  %3 
Whereas de Zurko described the progress of functionalism uncritically, Colquhoun in his Essays in Architectural Criticism: Modern Architecture and Historical Change, 1981, assessed the possible meaning of functionalism in a few words but with far greater cogency:  Positivism, in separating pure instrumentality from meaning, impelled architecture simultaneously toward eclecticism and functionalism. Ever since the late eighteenth century, architecture has oscillated between two poles of thought: that according to which all styles are possible and that according to which all styles are forbidden — between synchronic and diachronic relativism. But diachronic relativism — the belief in the continuous evolution of architec- tural form—can be seen, from another point of view, as the continuation of the eighteenth-century search for the origins of architecture. There is still the sense of a return to the primitive statement unsullied by the historical accumu- lation of metaphor. We see then that the origins of modern functionalism lie in a very complex intermixture of the notion of architecture as relative and evolu- tionary and the notion of architecture as based on natural law.**  Equally suggestive, Stanford Anderson in his essay “The Fiction of Func- tion,” 1987, has argued that “‘functionalism’ is a weak concept, inadequate for the characterization or analysis of any architecture.” He continues: “It may be useful to recognize ‘functionalism’ to the extent that one can find some naive functionalist arguments to contrast with Hitchcock and John- son’s antifunctionalist rhetoric. However, any serious examination of the buildings at issue will reveal that none of them, whatever the surround- ing rhetoric, can be explained functionally. It was a fiction that function provided a crucial line of demarcation within modern architecture.”*5 He goes on to describe functionalism in modern architecture as a specific form of fiction—not a lie but a storyline that was used to describe a vision of the world that is richer and broader than the postmodern, truncated notion of functionalism projected onto Modernism. Of course, postmodernists demonized Modernism in the same manner that modernists demonized nineteenth-century eclecticism — another form of fictionalizing the past, in this case with Gothic horror stories. Anderson's suggestion for studying the functionalist storyline of the modernists will allow us to comprehend their understanding and self-presentation vis-a-vis theory and architecture in its widest implications. Modernist texts need to be examined, therefore, in order to discover both their constructive and constructed fiction.  14  To date, a general awareness of specific modernist books is inadequate, perhaps because so few of these texts of the 19208 have been translated. Taut’s Modern Architecture was the only one of the German books of this time that also appeared in English. Le Corbusier's Vers une architecture, translated into English in 1927, is really his own vision for a new architecture and is not about the work and ideas of his colleagues. In addition, many of the cen- tral texts of this period are not readily accessible. They are usually found in special collections of only the best libraries. It is not surprising, therefore, that the historically important International Style or Giedion’s Space, Time, and Architecture, 1941, still form the basis for understanding Modernism.  The Background to the Debate in Germany: The Structure and Politics of Education As a Competitive System  During the 1920s Germany became the center of Modernism in architec- ture. The creation of the Bauhaus in 1919; the Werkbund Ausstellung “Die Wohnung” (a housing exposition held at Weissenhof in Stuttgart) in 1927 (with an international group of architects that included Mies, Le Corbusier, and Oud); and the meeting of cram 11 (Congrés Internationaux d’Architec- ture Moderne) in 1929 in Frankfurt are only a few of the more publicized events. Germany’s centrality in the architectural avant-garde is not entirely due to the presumed liberalism of the Weimar Republic, with which the revolutionary tendencies of the decade are often equated.  The prelude to Germany (and Central Europe) becoming the interna- tional focus of modernist theory and debate must be sought, at least in part, in the exceptionally competitive and pluralistic educational system estab- lished in the course of the nineteenth century and fully in place by the end of the century.*°  This was not the case in France. The Académie Royale de Peinture et de Sculpture and the Académie Royale d’Architecture (which merged in the nineteenth century to become the Ecole des Beaux-Arts) had been cen- tralized under Louis xrv in order to preernpt the power of the guilds.‘” Similarly, the Ecole Polytechnique, founded in the late eighteenth century, followed in the tradition of the older Ecole des Ponts et Chaussées (School of bridges and roadways). Although both the Ecole des Beaux-Arts and the Ecole Polytechnique underwent considerable restructuring over the years, neither was decentralized until after the student protests of 1968.  5 
The difference in Germany was not the quality of the schools as such but the structural variation determined by the country’s political history. In Ger- many, for instance, the struggle for control between the older guild system and the newer academies was not changed by the fiat of a powerful monarch as it had been in France. Debates about the respective merit of each contin- ued into the early 1920s and the beginning years of the Bauhaus, when the school vacillated between being a lodge for artisans and an elite academy turning out designers for industry.  More importantly, because Germany consisted of a large number of inde- pendent principalities, the growth and development of architectural edu- cation differed from region to region. In the late eighteenth century, for instance, Prussia experimented with architectural instruction carried out in an art academy, but apparently because of an overemphasis on rules of taste and purely ceremonial expression, a separate school of architecture was founded in 1799, the Bauakademie in Berlin. Here construction and civic planning were given greater importance. The Berlin Bauakademie was united with the Gewerbeakademie (Crafts academy) in 1879 to form the Technische Hochschule (Polytechnic school). In the course of the nine- teenth century separate polytechnic schools, rather than architecture depart- ments attached to art academies, became the most prestigious schools of architecture, although those within art academies continued into the twenti- eth century. A polytechnic school was founded in Karlsruhe in 1825, in Dres- den in 1838, in Stuttgart in 1840, in Hannover in 1862, in Darmstadt in 1864, in Munich in 1865, and in Aachen in 1870. Still others were founded after Germany’s unification in 1871.*8  Even after unification, polytechnic schools remained extraordinarily var- ied. Local traditions, once established, were not readily surrendered. Further- more, member states were not treated equally. The larger southern states, such as the kingdomis of Wiirttemberg and Bavaria, had exacted special priv- ileges not extended to other states. At any rate, the control of civil liberties, the police, and education belonged to the separate states, not the federal gov- ernment. Despite Prussia’s attempt in the 1880s to establish educational standards for polytechnic schools in the Reich, it is not surprising that schools continued to differ in their pedagogical emphases, nor that those in the southern states, which had had a strong anti-Prussian history before 1871, were the most liberal institutions. Both the Technische Hochschule in Stuttgart and that in Munich, for example, were less pedantic in their educa- tion than the Berlin polytechnic school, which emphasized memorization  16  and extremely long examinations. The schools in Karlsruhe, Darmstadt, and Dresden were more middle-of-the-road, somewhere between Berlin’s con- servative institution and the more liberal ones in Stuttgart and Munich.*?  The most important unifying factor among the various polytechnic schools was of course the German language, allowing professors and stu- dents to move from one school to another. Gropius, for instance, attended both the Berlin and the Munich Technische Hochschule. For this reason students and teachers were kept aware of pedagogical differences. Where students were unable to influence curricula, they could certainly vote with their feet. Add to this matrix the polytechnic schools in German-speaking countries — among them, those in Vienna, Prague, Graz, Brno, and Zurich — and one can see the obvious potential for a lively competition.  At the same time, Germany, like most other countries, continued to rely on the older apprenticeship system. But unlike other countries, it also had a Bauschule (building school) or Baugewerksschule (building trade school); in 1957 such institutions were given the more impressive name Ingenieur- schulen fiir Bauwesen (engineering schools for the construction trade). The polytechnic school was the most academically structured of these options, requiring graduation from a Gymnasium, the higher secondary school attended only by those who plan to go on to a university. A diploma from a polytechnic school was also the prerequisite for administrative jobs with the governmental bureaucracy. In this respect, the German polytechnic school was comparable to attending the Ecole des Beaux-Arts or Ecole Poly- technique in France.  The Bauschule, on the other hand, required only previous work as an apprentice. In Germany compulsory education ends at age fourteen with education in a Volksschule. For most of those entering an apprenticeship system, however, education continues in a “trade school” where classroom attendance is combined with on-the-job training. The Bauschule was close in conception to the trade schools set up for apprentices in other fields. Courses were usually given during the winter months when there was little construction, and summers were spent as an apprentice. The Bauschule, therefore, combined academic and apprenticeship training. It was in effect a part-time academy that retained the advantages of practical experience. The Munich Bauschule, the oldest, was founded in 1820, and the Weimar Bauschule was founded by Goethe in 1828.  By the early twentieth century, architectural education had attained a hierarchic configuration with the greatest prestige residing in the most  17 
academic training. Nonetheless, it was entirely possible for architecture stu- dents to avail themselves of ail three systems — polytechnic school, Bau- schule, or apprenticeship — really four systems if one includes the architecture departments in art academies. Thus the picture became even more cormn- plex and competitive. Taut, for example, studied at a Bauschule, then was apprenticed to several architects, and thereafter attended selected courses at the Berlin Technische Hochschule. Given the diversity of schools within the Reich —as well as the ability of students to attend several schools of the same academic rank in different states and to participate in the various hier- archic levels of architectural training —it becomes extremely difficult for the historian to make succinct generalizations about architectural education in Germany. One can only speculate that its basic structural complexity exposed young architects to a variety of competing approaches and philoso- phies, which in turn may account for the intensive debates surrounding architecture in the early twentieth century. The political change after 1918 would not have made an immediate impact, because the structure of these competing and interrelated pedagogical systems did not change drastically. Moreover, the modernists of the 1920s were all educated before 1918, at a time when these varied educational systems were all in place.  A comparison of two influential architects and mentors, Behrens and Theodor Fischer, can perhaps explain why certain architects became impor- tant teachers for the generation that came into prominence in the 1920s and how these teachers were affected by their own varied regional and educa- tional backgrounds. Today, Behrens is still unfortunately seen as a “proto- modernist” to whom Gropius, Mies, and Le Corbusier were all apprenticed. As Stanford Anderson has pointed out, this definition of Behrens is a kind of “back-forrnation” introduced by such historians as Nikolaus Pevsner and Hitchcock;3° they saw Behrens through the work of his pupils and decided that he was the originator of modern industrial forms. A better case can be made, however, for viewing Behrens as an influential, if somewhat conser- vative, architect who received important commissions from German indus- try as well as from the Reich. His case is also interesting for demonstrating the shift from aristocratic to industrial, corporate patronage of crafts and architecture — symptomatic of Germany’s late industrialization, which was burgeoning in the early twentieth century and transforming the country into one of Europe’s foremost manufacturing centers.  Behrens’s education as an architect was of the most unconventional sort, even in the context of the German pedagogical system. After receiving his  18  training as a painter, he worked in Munich, where in 1897 he became one of the cofounders of the Vereinigte Werkstitten fiir Kunst im Handwerk (United workshops for art in craft}, one of the several reformist arts and crafts associations that took their cue from the English Arts and Crafts Movement. In 1899 Behrens was one of seven artists invited by Grand Duke Ernst Ludwig of Hesse to become a member of the Darmstadt Artists’ Colony. Because Ernst Ludwig was Queen Victoria’s grandson, he had made many trips to England, where he had come in direct contact with the English Arts and Crafts Movement, and he had commissioned M. H. Baillie Scott and C. R. Ashbee to design rooms for him in Darmstadt. The Darmstadt Artists’ Colony was the only one of such turn-of-the-century ventures to be orga- nized by an aristocratic patron, as opposed to the artists themselves. On the Mathildenhohe, a hill overlooking the city, Ernst Ludwig wanted to establish a “New Athens” in order to compete with nearby, more established cultural centers. The artists were paid a salary and were expected to produce a Volks- kultur. Their communal studio building, designed by the Austrian Joseph Maria Olbrich (the only architect in residence), was initially called the Arbeitshaus (house of work) and later the Ernst-Ludwig-Haus. The location of such an exclusive colony on the Mathildenhéhe— above both city and palace, inverting the traditional hierarchy — vividly revealed the grand duke’s high regard for the arts. It was an arrangement that remains, nevertheless, intrinsically hierarchic. It simply placed the artist at the top of the pyramid in place of the ruler.  If Ernst Ludwig expected a trickle-down effect from his New Athens, the architecture and crafts exhibited on the Mathildenhdhe never fostered a Volkskultur. On the contrary, some contemporary critics saw only an expression of luxury in the form of a Gesamtkunstwerk. In 1901, the year of the Mathildenhéhe’s first exhibition, a deficit of 300,000 Marks was in- curred by the Artists’ Colony; this huge amount indicates that the artists were living like princes in the grand duke’s not-so-rich Hesse.5! Similarly, the Wiener Werkstatte went through a series of near-bankruptcies and bailouts by wealthy patrons.%? This is not to question the beauty of many designs made by the Darmstadt group or the Wiener Werkstatte but rather their ability to bring their reforms to a wider audience as they intended. If they had studied the English Arts and Crafts development more diligently, they might have also discovered that William Morris had already encoun- tered the problem of crafts production as something only the well-to-do could afford.  19 
Despite the Artists’ Colony’s shortcomings, Behrens’s contact with this group was important for his subsequent career change. At Darmstadt, Behrens was the only artist who was allowed to design his own house; all other buildings were designed by Olbrich. Without even an architectural apprenticeship, Behrens made the transition from painting and arts and crafts to architecture. He left Darmstadt in 1903 to take over the directorship of the Kunstgewerbeschule (Arts and crafts school) in Diisseldorf. During his Diisseldorf period Behrens met the wealthy, young Karl Ernst Osthaus, who quickly replaced Grand Duke Ernst Ludwig as a more “modern” patron of the arts and architecture. Osthaus came from a banking and industrialist family and at the age of twenty-two had inherited 65 million Marks. He established the Folkwang Museum in Hagen, an exhibition space for con- temporary art with an interior designed by Henry van de Velde. Between 1904 and 1912 Behrens designed eight projects for Osthaus, including a plan of 1907 for Hagen-Eppenhausen, a garden suburb. Osthaus also became closely associated with the Werkbund and in 1909 helped to create the Deutsches Museum fiir Kunst im Handel und Gewerbe (German museum for art in trade and craft), in effect a Werkbund museum for traveling exhibitions. With Osthaus’s patronage Hagen became a new cultural center, significantly in the middle of the industrial Ruhr district. In 1907 Behrens was named the chief architect and designer of the az, then Germany’s foremost manu- facturer of electrical products, which had its headquarters in Berlin. His fac- tories for the arc and his designs of the company’s electric products were, if not frank industrial expressions, symbolic expressions of industrial might.  It was during this period that Gropius, Mies, and Le Corbusier were apprenticed to Behrens (not all at the same time). Each arrived with a differ- ent background, rather characteristic of any group of architects in Germany at the time. Gropius had the most formal education with four years of schooling at two different polytechnic schools. Mies had gone through sev- eral apprenticeships before joining Behrens, and Le Corbusier had attended an arts and crafts school at La Chaux-de-Fonds in the Swiss Jura, where he had initially learned to engrave watches. He arrived in Berlin, however, after an apprenticeship with Auguste and Gustave Perret in Paris. Behrens was not much their senior in terms of actual building experience, yet all chose to work for this “artist-architect” who had an ability to evoke powerful images. Le Corbusier in his report on German crafts and architecture, published in Switzerland in 1912, writes that Behrens’s aEG Turbine Factory was referred to as a “cathedral of labor,” suggesting perhaps the reason for Behrens’s  20  rapid progression from high art at the Mathildenhohe to industrial image- making in Berlin.*’ Behne would later take issue with Behrens as a modernist.  Though less well known today, even among architectural historians, Fischer had a greater reputation as an architect and teacher than Behrens before 1914. Le Corbusier first set out for Munich hoping to work for Fischer, and only when Fischer did not have a place for him in his office did he ven- ture on to Berlin in 1910 (with recommendations and letters of introduction from Fischer). During this period Le Corbusier also met with Hermann Muthesius, Osthaus, Bruno Paul, Wolf Dohrn, and Heinrich Tessenow, all among the more recognized figures of the early Werkbund.5+ Le Corbusier may have preferred to work with Fischer because he dealt with issues of city planning and was much better and more conventionally trained as an archi- tect than Behrens. Fischer had been a student at the Munich Technische Hochschule and served an apprenticeship under Paul Wallot, the architect of the Reichstag in Berlin. In 1893 Fischer established himself as a practic- ing architect in Munich. He moved to Stuttgart in 1901 when he received an offer to teach at the Technische Hochschule there. He returned to Munich in 1909 and taught at the Munich Technische Hochschule until 1928. Among his many students and apprentices were Taut, Mendelsohn, Dominikus Béhm, Haring, Oud, Ernst May, Alois Welzenbacher, Fred Forbat, Martin Elsasser, and Paul Bonatz. His Swiss student Peter Meyer wrote in the 1930s that more than two hundred Swiss architects received their training with Fischer. Fritz Schumacher, professor of architecture at the Dreseden Tech- nische Hochschule and the keynote speaker at the first Werkbund meeting in Munich in 1907, referred to him as the real teacher of a whole generation of architects. The historians of the Neues Bauen in the 1920s — Behrendt and Gustav Adolf Platz — still spoke of him as a great teacher. In 1932 he was one of the few to protest the closing of the Dessau Bauhaus ~ not because he was especially sympathetic to its pedagogy but because he believed on prin-  ciple that an experimental school should be allowed to continue.  Throughout his career Fischer concerned himself with architectural edu- cation and was disturbed by its academic trend. He insisted on greater emphasis on learning through practical experience. One of his moitoes reveals his openness to his students’ ideas: “I do not have a fixed conviction. I like to hear the opinion of the next generation in order to measure myself against it.”* He also encouraged his students to follow their own interests and inclinations in order to gain confidence about their work, and he advised them to look for examples not in books but in their surroundings.  21 
Fig. 1. Theodor Fischer, Bird’s-eye view of a housing project in Gmindersdorf, near  Reutlingen, 1903-1915. Munich, Architektursammlung, Technische Universitat Miinchen.  Fig. 2. Theodor Fischer, Bird’s-eye view of a housing project in Munich-Laim, 1910-1911. Munich, Architektursammlung, Technische Universitat Miinchen. Photo: Courtesy Dipl. Ing. Klaus Kinold.  Fischer, whose own architecture was referred to as “South German” because of its modest regionalism, was particularly concerned with ques- tions of urbanism and housing. His work has occasionally been associated with the artistic planning principles and the emphasis on picturesque urban views of Camillo Sitte as reflected in the latter’s Der Stddte-Bau nach seinen kiinstlerischen Grundséitzen (City planning according to artistic principles), 1889. While Sitte had not dealt with the social and economic issues of plan- ning, his approach was based more on developing principles of psychologi- cal perception rather than on romantic, aestheticized imagery. Like Sitte, Fischer sought a practical aesthetics that was based on empirical studies and anthropological constants.**  Appointed as the director of Munich’s municipal expansion office in 1893, Fischer had considerable influence on the development of new con- struction. Just as Sitte before him, he was critical of monumental, freestand- ing structures and preferred instead building sequences that maintain an urban texture and form a continuous enclosure. In addition to private commissions he built five schools and three bridges for the municipal gov- ernment during his early Munich period. He received a large number of commissions for institutional buildings, such as museums and theaters. Among his larger projects were the Stadttheater in Heilbronn (t902-1913); the Universitat in Jena (1905-1908), for which Taut produced one of the renderings; the reinforced concrete Garnisonskirche in Ulm (1908-1910); the Hessisches Landesmuseum in Kassel (1907-1913); the Museum in Wiesbaden (1911-1920); and the Kunstgebaude in Stuttgart (1909-1913), the last probably his most superbly sited public building.  Fischer completed two houses for Tessenow’s garden city of Hellerau near Dresden (1909-1910) and a school project that remained unexecuted. His numerous housing projects include the factory town of Gmindersdorf, near Reutlingen (1903-1915; fig. 1), as well as housing in Munich-Laim (1910-1911; fig. 2). In his Alte Heide housing estate in Munich (1918-1930), executed for workers by a cooperative housing association in response to the postwar housing shortages, he turned to the severe scheme of a Zeilenbau (housing set in parallel rows) arrangement in order to rationalize as many small apartments as possible. It was quite unusual within the context of his previous work. His earlier projects influenced the housing of Taut, May, and Oud. Alte Heide, on the other hand, prefigures the rigidly rationalized Zeilenbau projects of the late 1920s, ostensibly produced to deal with the increasing housing shortage and worsening economy.  23 
Like the work of Behrens and Josef Hoffmann, Fischer’s approach became more conservative stylistically and therefore less influential by the 1920s. Most of his students cannot be called mainstream modernists, but several became pivotal figures in the Expressionist Movement in architec- ture after World War 1, and many turned to social issues of housing. But sore, like Elsdsser and Bonatz, remained traditionalists. Bonatz, who had become Fischer’s successor at the Stuttgart Technische Hochschule and who later became a National Socialist, railed against Fischer as a “wrecker of order.” In the end Fischer regretted the increasing stylistic and political conservatism of the “Stuttgart School” even though it had originally been inspired by his work.  In 1907 both Behrens and Fischer became founding members of the German Werkbund, the association of architects and industrial firms that (according to modernist histories) left behind the retrospective ideals of the Arts and Crafts Movement and looked instead to progressivist notions of art and industry.5? Fischer became the first president of the Werkbund in 1907, and he designed the main hall for the German Werkbund exhibi- tion in Cologne in 1914 (fig. 3). Fischer's low-slung, Renaissance-inspired structure was flanked on either side by the templelike buildings by Behrens and Hoffmann. This group of Werkbund pavilions reveals the relative power of these traditionalists vis-a-vis the younger generation of  Gropius and Taut, whose Werkbund buildings were assigned compara- tively marginal sites. Although Fischer occupied a central position in the early Werkbund, he soon withdrew from its ideological struggles and came to believe that “this organization for the raising of the production stan- dard” should have been dissolved after a few years.%*  Julius Posener in his text of 1964, Anfange des Funktionalismus (The beginnings of functionalism), has already shown that most of the found- ing firms — such as the Deutsche Werkstatten fiir Handwerkskunst Dresden, Vereinigte Werkstatten fiir Kunst im Handwerk Miinchen, the Wiener Werkstatte, and several publishers — were more closely tied to the crafts than to modern industry, even though the intention of some of the members was certainly to move in the direction of design for industrial production.*® The group had contemplated holding its first meeting in Nuremberg, site of Richard Wagner's Meistersinger, in part to emphasize a relationship to medieval guilds rather than to industry. In the end the first meeting was held in Munich, home of the Werkbund’s first presi- dent, Fischer.  24  fiat ted ae  Fig. 3. Theodor Fischer, Main hall, German Werkbund exhibition, Cologne, 1914. Munich,  Architektursammlung, Technische Universitat Miinchen.  
In addition to architects such as Behrens and Fischer, the Werkbund included among its founding members an architect who all historians will agree was conservative both aesthetically and politically, Paul Schultze- Naumburg. Hermann Muthesius, who might also be included among the conservatives, was instrumental in the creation of the Werkbund as well, but for political reasons he had stayed in the background during its first meeting, so as not to jeopardize its foundation. As a bureaucrat of the Prussian Ministry of Trade in Berlin, Muthesius had criticized the imita- tion of styles in art and industry in a speech he made in early 1907; this in turn had provoked angry reactions and appeals to Kaiser Wilhelm for his dismissal from the Fachverband fiir die wirtschaftlichen Interessen des Kunstgewerbes (Trade association to further the economic interests of the art industries).°°  Because of the Werkbund’s extraordinarily varied makeup and the broad range of backgrounds among its members, by 1914 (that is, the year of its first major exhibition in Cologne), it was already split into hostile factions of arts-and-crafis individualists and progressive rationalists, as well as liberal  and conservative camps. It was referred to at the time as an association of the most intimate enemies."?  Despite the Werkbund’s lack of a clear direction, it became an important extra-academic transmitter of architectural ideas through its extensive mem- bership, publications, and exhibitions. Stanislaus von Moos has shown that Le Corbusier appropriated some of the ideas and images he used in Vers une architecture (first published in L’esprit nouveau) from prewar Werkbund pub- lications.*? The Werkbund in its very makeup and heterogeneity was a reflection of the complex German educational scene in the early twentieth century. The debate at the Werkbund meeting of 1914 was in fact a political one, but it also hinged in part on a misunderstanding of the word Typisierung (standardization), prefiguring arguments and differences of opinion in the 1920s. Modernism as both practice and ideology was not a uniform concept, but it changed in the course of the 1920s and was constantly challenged from within and without the movement. The Werkbund, to which Behne belonged by 1913, illustrates perfectly the numerous academic and quasi- academic prewar institutions that fostered public discussion of the social implications of architecture and design.  Behne, in addition to his association with the Werkbund and his even- tual critique of its goals, was a loyal supporter of the Volkshochschule Move- ment: a crucial but not well known aspect of nineteenth-century German  26  educational reform. The Volkshochschule in Germany evolved in the second half of the nineteenth century and was based on Scandinavian models. It did not fall within the complex system of professional architectural education but added yet another layer to the already pluralistic professional educa- tional possibilities. Volkshochschule teaching was like a mixture of American adult education and the courses taught to workers and new immigrants under Jane Addams at Chicago’s Hull House and many later settlement houses in the early twentieth century. It might further be compared to the turn-of-the-century art education movement in Germany, inspired by Alfred Lichtwark, who was appointed the director of the Hamburg Kunst- halle in 1886. Lichtwark directed his efforts especially toward the art edu- cation of young people. Volkshochschule lectures did not require entrance examinations, nor did they lead to diplomas (they were not set up for high school equivalency degrees as some such programs are in the United States). Courses, lectures, and study trips were meant to further the education of the public at large. Behne taught from the beginning until the end of his career within this open-ended, unstructured, and completely nonhierarchic educational program. Behne’s central role in the Expressionist Arbeitsrat fitr Kunst (Work council on the arts) immediately after the war may also explain the group’s concern in its manifestos with art education outside of estab- lished institutions.  Questions about the place of architecture and design that had arisen before the war against the background of a socially complex education sys- tem were not resolved after the war. In his well-known opening manifesto of 1919 for the Bauhaus (which was initially a state school, then a munici- pal school, and finally a private academy), Gropius insisted that only crafts can be taught, not art. He used the medieval guilds as his model of instruc- tion. In 1922-1923 the Bauhaus curriculum began to address the design of industrial prototypes, but at the same time it hardly moved beyond a machine aesthetic; and only from 1928 to 1930, under Hannes Meyer's directorship, did Bauhaus instruction concern itself expressly with functionalism. Under Mies'’s directorship (1930-1933), the Bauhaus changed focus yet again toward straightforward architectural training without regard for the integra- tion of the arts, which had been the mainstay of early Bauhaus teaching. Today, however, the Bauhaus is known for its “Bauhaus style” and “Bauhaus functionalism.” Gropius later insisted that there was no such thing as a Bauhaus style. He was only partly correct. There were in fact several Bauhaus styles, suggesting an eclectic amalgam of several modernisms.  27 
Behne's relationship with Gropius and the Bauhaus was an uneasy one. As early as 1923 Behne criticized Gropius and the first Bauhaus exhibition for its superficial use of several styles at the same time.  When Gropius had a chance to design a new building for the Bauhaus in Dessau, he was asked by his patron, the mayor of that city, to include space for the local crafts schoo!. Thus, he could have brought together in a real sense traditional crafts training with Bauhaus instruction, but by the mid-1920s his pedagogical paradigm had become more technocentric. The two schools remained entirely separate entities within the new building, each with its own entry. Old hierarchies in the actual relationship between the avant- garde school and the municipal crafts school were disguised in the modern- looking plan of the building: it appears as if it has no center, but Gropius’s office was in the bridge that both connected and separated the two schools.  Behne, Critic of Modernisms  Even before the end of the war, in 1917, Behne wrote a critique of the Werk- bund that questioned its nationalist economic goals. He wrote that the Werkbund’s attempt to bring art to bourgeois, commercial, and political life would lead only to sentimentality. He considered “artless” utensils far preferable to designed ones. He further questioned the “art-into-life” beliefs of the Jugendstil and of the Darmstadt Artists’ Colony (which continued to form an underpinning of the Werkbund’s principles), as well as the Werk- bund’s emphasis on economic competition. The introduction of aesthetics to the everyday object does not bring about an improvement in quality, he went on to argue, but turns it into kitsch. Somewhat perversely he stated that he preferred kitsch to the imposition of “art” on ordinary objects. He concluded (and here his argument is revealed as proto-Expressionist) that art should always remain a separate enterprise.“ His belief suggested the bifurcation of art and the everyday, so common in Expressionism and probably best known in Gropius's assertion that art cannot be taught.  in 1920 Behne criticized the Werkbund again in the pages of Sozialistische Monatshefte. Once more he complained about its obsession with everything artistic, from “artistic norms” to “artistic advertisements.” He hoped that the new members on its executive committee (twenty altogether, including Gropius, Osthaus, Taut, Bernhard Pankok, César Klein, and Poelzig as direc- tor) would bring about a change. He also conceded that the Werkbund was  28  correct in rejecting Scheffler’s “Ein Arbeitsprogramm fir den Deutschen Werkbund” (A working program for the German Werkbund), which had insisted on a boycott of all foreign products.%  After the war Behne became closely associated with the Arbeitsrat fiir Kunst, which was founded in 1918, initially under Taut’s leadership, and taken over a year later by Gropius. The Arbeitsrat consisted of a group of architects, critics, and artists and was modeled on the Arbeiterrate of the German Revolution of 1918. It sponsored publications, exhibitions, dis- cussions, and circulars that raised questions about art education, public architecture, and the role of institutions in a postrevolutionary society. Behne became the business manager of the Arbeitsrat in 1919 and wrote the texts of several of its publications.** Although the Arbeitsrat maintained the Expressionist interest in mysticism, utopianism, and art as a transfiguring enterprise, it also became concerned with bringing art to a wider public by sponsoring exhibitions in the taverns of Berlin's working quarters. In March 1919 the Arbeitsrat followed a suggestion made by Taut and Behne and proposed a joint venture with the Werkbund to help with the reconstruction of northern France.* This idea for helping war-torn France is a succinct example of the groups’ activist pacifism and especially of Taut’s constructive utopianism. Behne, however, was not hopeful about the success of this effort. He was afraid that if German architects were sent to France, the French might wrongly assume that the Germans believed that the French did not have qualified architects of their own. The Werkbund, in any case, voted the project down.  By early 1921 when the artists of the Berlin Dada group had begun to intensify their critique of Expressionism for its emphasis on individualism and for not producing art that appealed to the worker,** the Arbeitsrat had already disbanded. As it became clear that the Arbeiisrat’s expectations for a new society were far from the political reality, a disillusionment and with- drawal from the intense utopianism of the immediate postwar years took hold among its former members. As for the Dada effort to create a public art, it was no more successful than that of the Expressionists. Nevertheless, Dada’s use of collages containing elements taken from the mass media, while not necessarily any clearer to the public than the Expressionists’ use of folk art or children’s art, proved to be an immensely fruitful artistic direc- tion and prefigured the other “modernisms” of the later 19208. Like the Expressionists, Dada artists believed that art could be used to revitalize soci- ety, a recurrent theme in early twentieth-century German art.  29 
In an article in Die Weltbiihne in 1926, entitled “An den Verein kom- munistischer Kunstmaler” (To the Union of communist painters), Behne engaged in a direct confrontation with John Heartfield on the issue of politi- cal art. The debate was occasioned by an earlier comment Behne had made about an exhibition organized by his friend Otto Nagel, a communist painter, in a store in the working-class district in Berlin-Wedding. Heart- field, then representing the official position of the kpp, insisted that the masses first have to be seized emotionally before art can be discussed. Behne, on the other hand, believed that the best art would, in the end, pro- duce the best political art. The work on view was intended to show the suf- fering of the working class. Behne thought that the working class needed no instruction about its suffering and believed that this kind of art was regres- sive because it used the same means as bourgeois art. During a lecture Behne gave at the exhibition, workers demanded that pictures by Otto Dix showing proletarian women be removed. Their realism was found offensive. The xpp’s attitude, Behne thought, was not unlike that expressed by the National Socialists, and he concluded that if one wants to “seize” the masses, one had better understand their psychology. Behne repeated similar ideas in an unpublished essay of 1932, “Sozialistische Kunst” (Socialist art).”° He praised as successful the paintings of the German section of the Inter- national Exhibition of Socialist Art in Amsterdam in 1920, as well as the Frauen in Not (Women in distress) exhibition, organized by himself and Nagel in 1931; the latter was again held in the working-class district of Wed- ding.’! The great irony in this debate was that although John Heartfield was an outstanding artist, the kpp vacillated in its support of his work.  In 1921 Behne also became the German correspondent for the English periodical The Studio. In 1920 he made a trip to Holland, probably in con- nection with the International Exhibition of Socialist Art, where he met Theo van Doesburg, Hendrik Berlage, H. Th. Wijdeveld, and Oud.”? At the same time he was preparing a book on Dutch architecture, Hollandische Baukunst in der Gegenwart (Contemporary Dutch architecture), which was published in 1922.7? An excerpt from this book was published in De Stijl.  As the various modern art movements were becoming increasingly international in the early 1920s, Behne also made contact with architects and artists from other countries. Through his contact with Laszl6 Moholy- Nagy, Behne had even tried to get Oud a commnission for a house in Berlin. Moholy-Nagy had seen an article by Behne on Oud’s work and through him Oud received the commission for a Mrs. Kallenbach. Oud came to  30  visit Berlin to see the site, but the project fell through in 1922.74 It was also Behne who first introduced Moholy-Nagy to Gropius.”> In 1920 Gropius met van Doesburg at the house of Taut during van Doesburg’s trip to prose- lytize De Stijl.’6 It is revealing that the two figures who in 1922-1923 were instrumental in directing the Bauhaus away from its Expressionist begin- nings — Moholy-Nagy and van Doesburg— were not known to Gropius before Taut and Behne introduced them to him. Thus the key figures of the Expressionist Arbeitsrat played a direct role in bringing about the change toward international Modernism, particularly the incorporation of De Stijl and Constructivism, in the Bauhaus after 1922.  During the early 1920s Behne, as well as Taut, was among the founding members of the Gesellschaft der Freunde des neuen Russland (Society of friends of the new Russia}. Behne thereafter occasionally wrote articles for  Neues Russland, the society’s publication. In 1923, because of his association with this group, he was invited by the Soviet government to visit Petrograd and Moscow, In 1923 he also wrote one of his most insightful reviews of the first public exhibition at the Bauhaus:  The exhibition suffers, I believe, because it takes place at a time when the Bauhaus is in a period of change. The new attitude toward linkage with technol- ogy, that is, standardization, is already recognizable, but does not yet appear with any consistency at all. The small-mindedness of handicrafts is also present and confuses the work, and even turns pure machine form into crafts. ... The rejected decorative principle...celebrates triumphs in other places... why did this happen? In order to show that the new, the so-called Constructivist forms have been mastered. ... The [model] house “Am Horn” stands among all these difficulties as somewhat uninteresting and unknowing. It is half-luxurious,  half-primitive; half-ideal, half-time-bound; half-crafts, half-industrial; half-stan- dardization, half-idyll. It is in no sense pure and convincing, but again an aes- thetic, papery affair.  Behne held Gropius responsible for this attitude, because he found the same problems within the Internationale Architektur exhibition that was organized solely by Gropius as part of the larger Bauhaus exhibition. Behne felt that Gropius sought to disguise his uncertainty with an abrupt one-sidedness. Because of Gropius’s “pseudoradical” attitude, sachlich tendencies, accord- ing to Behne, were simply presented as yet another “direction.” Behne con- cluded that the future of the Bauhaus would depend on whether Gropius  31 
could find his way to an absolute Sachlichkeit: “This would allow him to take up all inspirations openly and without prejudice and competitiveness and to incorporate them together with his assistants. This would protect him from dipping into surface features here and there (in five projects Gropius changed his style of representation five times).’7”  The same year that Behne wrote this cogent analysis of Bauhaus styles, he assembled material for his most important book, Der moderne Zweckbau. He apparently completed the text in 1923. When he could not find a pub- lisher, he asked Gropius in 1924 to hold back his publication of Interna- tionale Architektur, but Gropius refused. The latter was in fact surprised that as a result Rehne considered him uncollegial and responded that there was room for more than one publication, even if many of the illustrated build- ings were similar. Gropius must have known, however, that a book pub-  lished under the auspices of the Bauhaus would have a greater impact on public perception. As noted earlier, Behne encountered further difficulties in assembling the material for his book because of the projected Bauhaus book series. Specifically, Oud no longer wanted to supply Behne with a copy of a lecture because he preferred to have it published by the Bauhaus.’* Behne must have found all this extraordinarily ironic. In May of 1923, before the Bauhaus exhibition, Gropius had written to Behne requesting his assis- tance in the planning of the Internationale Architektur exhibition. In the same letter, however, Gropius announced that he could not give photo- graphs of the Bauhaus to Behne because he was already planning a “special publication” that “obligated” him not to release illustrations beforehand.” While asking for Behne’s help with his own project, Gropius (even before  Behne’s critical review of the Internationale Architektur exhibition) was un- willing to share information. Behne was probably less concerned about any similarity between his and Gropius's books than the prospect of having his serious analysis of Modernism overshadowed by the reputation of Bauhaus publications, a fear that was entirely justified.  In 1928, two years after Der moderne Zweckbau eventually appeared and shortly before Hannes Meyer replaced Gropius as the director of the Bauhaus, Behne wrote an appreciative article on Meyer's school in Bernau, near Berlin (fig. 4). In a letter Meyer had informed Behne of his deep interest in the cooperative movement in Scandinavia and its influence on his own work.*° In 1929 Behne edited the periodical Newes Berlin with Martin Wagner, an early advocate of cooperative housing associations and later the socialist chief city planner for Berlin.  32  Fig. 4. Hannes Meyer, Axonometric view of the Bundesschule des Allgemeinen Deutschen  Gewerkschaftsbundes (ADGB), Bernau, 1928. Dessau, Stiftung Bauhaus Dessau, inv. no. I 1737 D.  
bites’  Behne was forbidden to teach by the Nazis as early as 1933. This was ave to hig membership on the executive committee of PEN, the ae - eraty organization, which had been founded in gat to fight for free me speech and humanitarian rights, and against racism. pen had express t about the threat of Nazi rule.*! After his dismissal as a faculty mem er wn the Humboldt-Hochschule and as a docent at the Stidtische Berliner Vo! - hochschule, Behne published a number of politically neutral books on i" historical subjects. Six weeks after the war ended he gave a recta @ tl . opening of the Volkshochschule Berlin-Wilmersdorf, titled Entartete on (Degenerate art). It was about the artists who had been forced to emigrate w : the Nazis. This lecture was published as a book in 1947. Behne died in 1948.  That he was forbidden to teach after 1933 does not, in itself, tell us pe cisely what Behne’s po itical convictions were. After all, Een Noe we was sympathetic to the Nazis, was forbidden to paint. On the one an , Bel did not leave Germany, as did Taut, Mendelsohn, Gropius, Martin Wagne  and many others. On the other hand, Mies, who eventually did emigrate, di so only after he had tried unsuccessfully to work for the Nazis. vs that bi What is clear from Behne’s writings, at least up until 1933, is t vat s incisive criticism was rarely held back. Together with his more specialize texts on art and architecture, he pursued his lifelong concern for wider ia - lic education through popular books on illustrators such as Heinrich Zille, who was known for his humorous and satirical drawings of the Berlin pro < tarjat.82 Behne also wrote critical essays about the pedagogical function o their acquisitions policies. me nehne’s a vees always have historical, contextual interest, but many of his critiques have not lost their power and meaning for the ne reader. As Fritz Neumeyer wrote in The Artless Word: Mies van der Rohe on tne  Building Art, 1991:  The most explicit critique of Mies’s theme was formulated by Adolf Behne in his work Der moderne Zweckbau.... It ranked among the most important publications up to then dealing with the New Building and has retained its significance as key work on the discussion of the theory of architecture. Behne’s merit was that he had undertaken a summary of all the ee impulses that originated in the years from 1990 to 1923 and arranged t em in their contextual sequence, whereby he stressed the various concepts 0 rationalism and functionalism, illuminating their respective dogmas and  prejudices.  Der moderne Zweckbau  Despite its title, Der moderne Zweckbau is not a narrow interpretation of functionalism of the sort ascribed to Hannes Meyer by Hitchcock and John- son, nor of the sort that postmodernists assume defines Modernism. From the outset Behne makes his approach abundantly clear. He defines the original need for building traditionally, that is, as a protective device against climate, animals, and enemies. The first building, he writes, fulfilled spe- cific needs and had a purely functional character. In this sense buildings are essentially like tools. But from the beginning of human culture, he contin- ues, there has been an urge toward playfulness, coupled with the need to be practical. He writes that primitive man was not strictly utilitarian as this  double urge is verified in tools that are also beautiful and ornamented. The  house is no exception: a house is as much a toy as a tool. What does change  over time, in his opinion, is the balance between these two impulses,  between function and form. In times when formalism has become para-  mount and tyrannical, it is necessary to stress function. Design, no matter  what the current emphasis, should always aim for an equilibrium between  these two competing factors.  Thus Behne did not insist on the primacy of function as such but consid- ered it from a larger historical context that requires periodic adjustment. It could be an adjustment that moved toward function or form, but Behne per- ceived his own time to be so overwhelmed by formalism that he thought emphasis should be placed on functionalism. One might argue at this point that Behne was simply employing a larger picture of architecture in order to give contemporary functionalism historical legitimacy. His extensive expla- nation of the drawbacks of the functionalist position in later segments of the book, however, reveals that he was not a mere advocate of functionalism.  His linking the production of tools to the design of architecture is, of course, hardly new. With the rise of archaeology and anthropology in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, an interest in relating all human artifacts became increasingly pronounced. This new concern eventually came to include a consideration of crafts in any developmental process. Gottfried Semper’s writings, especially his incomplete text on style, are probably the best-known instances of such an inclusive approach.** By the late nineteenth century Semper's influence could be seen in the art histori- cal theories of Cornelius Gurlitt, as well as in Alois Riegl’s Altorientalische Teppiche (Old oriental carpets), 1891.%° Riegl had been keeper of textiles at  35 
ak he”  the Osterreichisches Museum fur angewandte Kunst (Austrian museum of applied arts) and thus was well aware of the importance of ol in oP ‘ain ing cultural production. This allowed him to move beyon it e san nt notion of a “high period” of Roman art in his book Die sparomite e " rs industrie (Late Roman art industry), 1901. Using late Roman crafts pre : tion as his model, he not only directed art historical studies away rom specific high period but included what used to be called the minor ar = The incorporation of tools and crafts in theoretical considerations ne and architecture was not only affected by new fields of research suc as anthropology but also by the changing value systems of the nineteent ee tury, which now stressed the everyday, bourgeois values of an essen ially postaristocratic society. More importantly, while tools and crafts in an i creasingly industrialized society became the foci of discussion because they were affected by industrial production, production in itself (because i i moved from the artisanal workshop to the factory) must also have assume a larger role in the conception of arguments about developmental * cores Significantly, Riegl’s book was about Roman Kunstindustrie (art in fst Behne’s balancing of form and function, although it seems a high y cone ceptual binary device, does not take on a hierarchic order. The notion building as both a “toy” and a “tool” no matter what the current mn al ances does not imply any cultural progression or regression. He writes thata er at gulf opened up in architecture between formal and functional approat because form and function were separated. Thus, while employing tl ‘se two apparently opposing concepts, Behne objects merely to their segreg tion. The balance between formal and functional building, Behne argues, has undergone a sea change in the last decade with the realization t at a functional building can be formally pleasing and that formal buildings in themselves are not necessarily beautiful. Then he goes on to examine the  current condition:  Attitudes really had changed fundamentally. Architectural form was seen “ danger, and fulfillment of function was seen almost as a guarantee ‘a i genesis of a good building. Whereas before people believed that artists ied to be very clever in order to produce good buildings despite function ...that 1s, buildings were again being seen much more as tools. wa Functional architectural concepts replaced formal ones. Functional nt - ings used to be specifically defined by their use, a link between the nee creations of architects and the bare utilitarian structures of engineers an  ak  technicians. Now every building became a functional building, that is, was tack- led on the basis of its type and function. Fulfillment of purpose became one of the means of architectural design as it had been ever since Otto Wagner in 1895 wrote in Baukunst unserer Zeit: “Something impractical cannot be beautiful.”**  Although Behne is not an advocate of functionalism, his occasional tan- gents on nineteenth-century historicism do reveal some of the prejudices of a modernist. Yet his belief that function and form must be balanced allows him to be critical of an overemphasis on function, and —unlike Pevsner or Giedion in their early writings — he does not see current trends as the only course for modern architecture. His model presumes that the present focus on functionalism would, at some point in the future, have to be adjusted in favor of formalism. In this sense Behne’s Der moderne Zweckbau is about a modernist theory that contains within it the possibility of postmodernism.  The progression of his discussion spreads splendidly in ever-widening circles throughout the chapters of the book. After his analogy of tools and toys to architecture in the introduction, he moves from chapter 1, “No Longer a Facade but a House,” to chapter 2, “No Longer a House but Shaped Space,” and to chapter 3, “No Longer Shaped Space but Designed Reality.” Here he brings us back to the larger social context of architecture,  In addition to singling out Otto Wagner in his opening chapter, he also speaks of Berlage’s Amsterdam Stock Exchange and the demand for a sach- lich development of architecture in Berlage’s collected lectures Grundlagen und Entwicklung der Architektur (Foundations and development of architec- ture), 1908,*” He also commends Alfred Messel’s Wertheim Department Store in Berlin, which, on first view, he believes to be the most revolutionary  work of these three architects (figs. 5, 6). On further reflection, however, he finds that the fulfillment of function in Messel’s building is not absolutely sachlich. The department store’s emphatic piers, which appear to be the most “structural” of its elements, reveal their intrinsically decorative nature in the way they merge with an overhanging roof line. Behne sees Taut’s com- petition design of rgio for the store's expansion as much more consistent fig. 7), and he agrees with Le Corbusier’s comment that German modern architecture frequently looks like “elevator-shaft architecture.”* Behne includes the country house in his broad conception of functional building, because he writes that in the houses of Frank Lloyd Wright (which he assumes to be country houses), the plan was freed of formalist rigidity and was used for a free balancing of space based “on the most careful inclusion  37 
Fig. 5. Alfred Messel, View of the Wertheim Department Store from Leipzigerstra&e, Berlin,  1904. From Gustav Adolf Platz, Die Baukwnst der neuesten Zeit (Berlin: Propylien, 1927),  230. Photo: Courtesy Verlag Ulistein GmbH, Berlin.  Fig. 6. Alfred Messel, Detail of the Wertheim Department Store from Rosenthalerstrafe, Berlin, t904. From Deutscher Werkbund, Die Kunst in Industrie und Handel, Jahrbuch des Deutschen Werkbundes (Jena: E, Diederichs, 1913), 65.  
Fig. 7. Bruno Taut, Competition design for expansion of the Wertheim Department Store  showing view from the street, 1910. From Kurt Junghanns, Bruno Taut: 1880-1938 (Berlin: Henschelverlag Kunst und Gesellschaft, 1983), fig. 24. Photo: Courtesy Professor Dr. phil. habil. Heinrich Taut, Lehnitz.  Introduction  of all requirements of comfort, quiet, and clear design. There is no longer any trace of symmetry or an axis, simply walls succinctly marking and accompanying the most comfortable traffic patterns for all the rooms. The accommodation to living functions goes so far that each piece of furniture has its specific place in the floor plan.”® For Behne, Wright's plans “set Space in motion as asymmetric as life itself.” The description of Wright's interiors and furniture as accommodating living functions may have resulted from Behne’s personal sympathy with this arrangement, but it may also have been based on his lack of direct experience with Wright's houses. Even though their plans are indeed fluid and asymmetrical, there is another sort of stasis and control in assigning every piece of furniture and built-in elements a fixed place, and this makes Wright’s interiors actually quite inflexible. For Behne, as for Le Corbusier, the plan, rather than the eleva- tion, has the most important value for contemporary architecture (Hitch- cock and Johnson also state that functionalism had its strongest influence on the plan).  Behne then moves on to a discussion of industrial buildings, which he, like other modernists, believes are the most impressive in the United States. He quotes extensively from Henry Ford’s Autobiography, which had just appeared as a best-seller in a German translation in 1923. The popularity of Ford’s book was but an indication of the cult of Amerikanismus that swept Germany in the mid-i920s.* Ford’s description of factory buildings seemed to combine the toughness of the demanding industrialist with Taylorism and an almost surreal emphasis on the Protestant work ethic and clean- liness. It is, in fact, a succinct example of the devolution from the Protestant work ethic to capitalism that Weber had described so convincingly in his Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism of 1920. Behne quotes Ford thus: “Our machines... are scientifically arranged, not only in the sequence of operations, but so as to give every man and every machine every square inch that he requires and, if possible, not a square inch... more than he requires.... The dark corners which invite expectoration are painted white. One cannot have morale without cleanliness.”*! Behne also cited Ford’s opin- ion on art: “We need artists who master industrial relationships. We need  masters of industrial methods,” and “We will not put up elaborate buildings as monuments to our success. The interest on the investrnent and the cost of their upkeep would only serve to add uselessly to the cost of our products —so these monuments of success are apt to end as tombs.” Although Behne may not have agreed with Ford in general, by using this (and the  41 
architecture of Behrens for the akc in particular) as his introduction to the design of German factories, he is able to highlight Behrens’s aesthetic inter- pretation of form, which Behne earlier had criticized as exhibiting too much pathos.®? Henry Ford’s phrase “monuments of success are apt to end as tombs” is thus left in place as a signpost to Behne’s interpretation of Behrens’s turbine factory.  Behrens, in Behne’s opinion, defines the machine as a pseudoaesthetic form. On the other hand, he regarded van de Velde as the first representa- tive of a romantic machine cult, in which function is expressed as “dra- matic” form. Behne detects van de Velde’s continuing influence with younger architects, such as Mendelsohn. In Mendelsohn's work the decorative self- satisfaction of Hermann Finsterlin’s organic projects is transformed into an engineerlike tension and energy. The attenuated character of Mendelsohn’s Einstein Tower borders on anthropomorphism and is “dramatic” in the sense of van de Velde’s work. Behne agrees with the Dutch architect J. F. Staal that the tower is more memorial than workshop. However, he finds Mendelsohn’s Luckenwalde Hat Factory more sachlich with a purposeful organization of its production spaces.  Behne then further defines his concept of the functional plan, which he had touched upon in discussing the work of Wright. He describes orthogo- nal space not as a functional form but as a mechanical one. Organic life is not determined by the right angle. He gives as examples designs by Haring and Hans Scharoun, which on first sight are reminiscent of Finsterlin but have none of that painter’s romantic willfulness. He also concedes that only an approximate, rather than absolute, adaptation to the natural fluidity of movement is possible.  He makes his expanded notion of functionalism even clearer when he goes on to insist that although the functionalist can be extremely practical, he is not to be confused with the utilitarian. Whereas the solutions of func- tionalists and utilitarians on some occasions may be related, their attitudes toward the problem of function are quite different:  Functionalists are concerned with solving a problem of general significance to our culture. The utilitarian only asks: “What is the most practical way for me to act in this case?” But the functionalist asks: “How do I act most correctly in principle?” Their attitude inclines toward philosophy and has a metaphysical basis.... There is no question but that the functionalists, even the most [sach- lich] ones, could more readily be classified as romantics than as rationalists.™  42  Behne’s functionalism at its most extreme would turn the building into a pure tool and negate form (play) entirely. Would such an ultimate function- alism not lead to a dead end? He responds that the functionalist is right only as long as he is concerned with the individual room. Invoking his earlier description of the organic functionalist plan, he writes that it is correct that orthogonal space is not economical, that the curve describes functional space with greater precision. But when we group together several such “functional” rooms there is a loss of space because of poor tessellation, Haring’s device of widening and narrowing corridors to accommodate the amount of traffic they bear, for instance, is based on the example of organic arteries. A building in this sense, however, is not analogous to a living organism that always performs the same function. Haring’s undulating corridors assume that they will always carry the same distribution of traffic over the life of a building. Behne argues that this type of organic solution, which appears functional as a specific response at a certain moment in time, may also be too individualistic in a larger built context. Thus, from a social point of view, orthogonal space may in fact be more functional because it is more neutral when we consider a series of rooms or a group of buildings over time. He concludes that the deciding factor must be the gen- eral attitude of society.  Behne’s argument for a neutral architecture in the public realm resem- bles the ideas of Loos. Although Behne mentions Loos only in passing in his text, he does list several of his books and essays in a footnote and in his rec- ommended bibliography. But in an earlier article in Frihlicht of 1921-1922, Behne had specifically pointed to Loos's centrality in the demands for a sach- lich architecture.%  Behne is at the same time always insistent that Sachlichkeit and the ques- tion of a functional architecture must be used to serve people. Staying close to postwar Expressionist beliefs, he therefore rejects outright technocentric justifications or machine metaphors. He writes that Le Corbusier's concept of a “machine for living” is acceptable if we view the machine as a prototype for a full-fledged human achievernent. Le Corbusier’s phrase will be misun- derstood, according to Behne, if it is applied as a stylistic notion, that is, if it is used in the name of a falsely understood Constructivism that assumes that buildings and furniture must look smooth, cold, and polished, like machines. If it is misconceived, we will only arrive at a new subcategory of the Jugendstil, that is, a new taste or a new fashion that is nothing but a new pseudo-Constructivist machine formalism.  43 
Behne further defines the differences between functionalism, rational- ism, and utilitarianism:  When the functionalist refers to the machine, he sees it as the moving tool, the perfect approximation to an organism.  When the utilitarian refers to the machine, he sees it as an economic prin- ciple of saving work, power, and time.  When the rationalist refers to the machine, he sees it as the representative and patron of standardization and typification.**  His description of the functionalist as someone who interprets the machine as an organic model is not much different from Greenough’s mid-nineteenth- century functionalism. He does not suggest that functionalism is preferable to rationalism but instead describes the pitfalls of both these positions: the rationalist, who is concerned first of all with general principles (he places Le Corbusier in this category}, must guard against becoming a rigid formalist. The functionalist, who is concerned with the specific principle, must be careful not to fall into the trap of individually expressed functions.  In his summary of German architecture in the context of European developments, Behne writes that Germany “is somewhat inclined to devote itself to an extreme that changes fairly frequently and then gives way to the opposite extreme — the consequence of an inner uncertainty."°” He sees Rus- sia (the East) and France (the West) as countervailing forces to Germany's persistent individualism: “It is a feature common to the East and West that ...they proceed from the collective. But the collective is fundamentally dif- ferent here and there: France has a structurally articulated society, Russia is dominated by the masses.” Behne, using a social interpretation of interna- tionalism, calls for a fusion of these tendencies. He quotes from Heinrich Mann to support such a linkage: “We are in the middle and it is our task to link East and West; one does not shut off nature. In the future we will be the republic in which representation of class and parliamentarianism are interlinked.”98  Behne finds that recent Dutch architecture is also a good model: it exhibits a political realism and confidence that save it from the extremes of German architecture. He concludes the book with quotations from van Doesburg and Oud and an illustration of Vladimir Tatlin’s Monwment to the Third Inter- national. In Der moderne Zweckbau Behne does not allude to the conflict in Dutch architecture between the Amsterdam School and De Stijl, although  44  he had mentioned it in his book Hollandische Baukunst in der Gegenwart, 1922. This may have been due to his acquaintance with van Doesburg and Oud, or more likely to the fact that by 1923 the Expressionist Amsterdam School had waned in importance in the face of van Doesburg’s concerted efforts to prose- lytize De Stijl. Behne’s change in emphasis also reflects the shift in Ger- many from Expressionism to the Neue Sachlichkeit between 1920 and 1923.  In general, however, his definition of architectural problems as moving between form and function, and between East and West in the cultural realm, resorts to a dualistic conception. In fact, he recommends a book by the German sociologist Alfred Vierkandt, Dualismus im modernen Weltbild (Dualism in the modern world picture}, published in 1923. Vierkandt’s methodology was phenomenological, not inductive. In this, he followed Simmel’s sociology of human interaction. Vierkandt also invoked the treat- ment of community and society as irreducible phenomena in the sense of Ferdinand Toennies’s Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft (Community and soci- ety), 1887.°° In Behne’s use of this dualism one is also reminded of Wolfflin’s reliance on a more formalist dualistic model in his first book, Renaissance und Barock, 1888. In Der moderne Zweckbau the dualistic paradigm is never reduced to a set of rules, however, since Behne investigates the differences between form and function only in order to draw them together without ever assuming the possiblity of a complete balance.  Within Behne’s own writings this book was prefigured in his short essay “Architekten,” which appeared in Friihlicht, a periodical edited by Taut from 1920 to 1922.' Friihlicht was initially an extension of and a voice for the Expressionist Glaserne Kette (Glass chain) group and was first published as an appendix to the periodical Stadtbaukunst alter und neuer Zeit (Art of city planning of past and new times). From the fall of 1921 until the summer of 1922, it was published as an independent journal in Magdeburg, where Taut had been appointed that city’s chief planner. During its Magdeburg phase, when Behne’s essay was published, the magazine had shifted away from the utopian Expressionism of the postwar years and increasingly covered issues of architecture and city planning. The period between 1920 and the stabi- lization of the runaway inflation at the end of 1923 (after which architectural construction resumed a normal level} is, therefore, a transitional period between Expressionism and what is commonly called the Neue Sachlich- keit.!°! Friihlicht’s articles during 1922 dealt primarily with urban issues but also included an essay by Kurt Schwitters and articles about Russian archi-  tecture, among them one on Tatlin’s Monument to the Third International.  45 
Behne's “Architekten” rejects what he calls Expressionism’s “understand- able utopianism” and is directed instead toward an internationalism that became important after 1919, possibly under the influence of the Third (Communist) International or the revival of the Second International by more moderate Socialists also in 1919. In this essay he also mentions the publication of Mendelsohn’s work in Wendingen and a lecture he gave in Holland. Loos, Oud, and Le Corbusier are all cited in terms of their demands for a sachlich architecture. He quotes from Le Corbusier in L’esprit nouveau — as he was later to do in Der moderne Zweckbau—on the primacy of the plan in modern architecture, the banishment of all decoration, as well as the idiosyncratic.  He believes that the new architecture is collective and supraindividual. Behne’s anti-individualism also clearly sets this essay apart from his own earlier Expressionism. The idea of the “supraindividual” seems to be indebted to van Doesburg’s critique of Expressionism and his stress on apparently rational forms. What Behne does not address — whereas he exposes many forms of pseudofunctionalism and pseudorationalism —is De Stijl’s own mystical, Platonic component.'” De Stijl represents an ideology of the objec- tive that effectively disguises its spiritual and transcendent beliefs.  Behne ends his essay by pointing to the transition from belief to action. He singles out in particular the work of the German cooperative housing associations that are helping to introduce rationalization and social concerns to the building industry. Quoting Martin Wagner, who headed one of these cooperative societies, he details the resistance of the larger building industry to change in conventional building methods.’ He asserts that those forms belonging to the tradition of handicrafts will change in any case (and here he uses an economic argument that had been employed by Loos earlier} because they are becoming a luxury. Oud, who had distanced himself from De Stijl in 1922, became an important architect of social housing in Holland, which in turn provided a model for German housing. The cooperative building societies in Germany, which were generally set up by unions, benefited in the 1920s from funds that were collected as taxes on speculative building.  As already noted, in Holldndische Baukunst in der Gegenwart, 1922, Bene mentions the tension between the Amsterdam School and De Stij] but writes that he prefers the impersonal and sachlich architecture of Rotterdam.'© In another essay of 1922, “Kunst, Handwerk, Technik” (Art, craft, technology), he makes comparable statements about technology vis-a-vis crafts and sati- rizes Gropius’s opening manifesto for the Bauhaus:  46  Depersonalization, which is in logical terms a process of objectivization, will bring nota creative revival of the crafts and folk art but rather a new and techni- cal concept of labor. It is sufficient to glance at the important new European art, such as that of Léger, Malevich, Archipenko, Schlemmer, Baumeister, Tatlin, Mondrian, van Doesburg. Does it still have any inner connections to craft? It is antimanual, and instead intellectually constructive and technical. The phase of expressionism still cherished the cult of the crafts, but today, when the young European art has at last achieved a unison with the time and location of its crea- tivity, the infatuation with the crafts (which, as the Dutch architect Oud rightly  declares, blossoms at times when the delight in singular forms flourishes) is finished.  Architects, sculptors, painters... all of us must return to the crafts??? — No, we must move forward toward the demanding service of the intellect!!5  As in his Expressionist writings, Behne is openly polemical, but now he has become an advocate for De Stijl. In his critique of the Werkbund in 1917 he had still argued that the aesthetic aura of art kept it from being applied meaningfully to the common, everyday object, and in his Expressionist Die Wiederkehr der Kunst (The return of art), 1919, he had proclaimed art as the only true reality. He now questions the essential unity of the arts, as he will later question the idea of Gesamtkumstwerk, which had been an under- pinning of design theory from Jugendstil to Expressionism and the early Bauhaus. By 1927 in an essay titled “Von der Sachlichkeit,” he refers to the ideal of a Gesamtkunstwerk as a fata morgana.'  In 1924 he wrote a brief article, “Funktion und Form,” in Sozialistische Monatshefte. It is basically his introduction to Der moderne Zweckbau and uses his toy and tool analogy to form and function.’ He may have pub- lished this when he realized that Gropius would neither share his illustra- tions nor delay the publication of Internationale Architektur.  The Terms of the Debate  Behne's frequent use of Sachlichkeit and Zweck in his book raises questions concerning the meaning these terms had for him and whether his usage remained the same in the 1920s. Also of interest is the relationship between his understanding of these words and that of earlier and later writers. Zweck means purpose or function, while Sachlichkeit, although sometimes trans-  47 
Brerrer  lated as function, literally means “thingness.” Sachlichkeit is more properly translated as “the simple, practical, straightforward solution to a problem,” as “matter-of-facmess” and occasionally as “objectivity.” Sachlichkeit simul- taneously suggests the world of real objects and that of a conceptual ratio- nalism. The philosophical allusions of Sachlichkeit in fact become more prevalent in the avant-garde books of the later 19208 and displace to some degree the term’s “simple, practical” overtones. Because of its complexity and also because of its very particular associations with German culture, we have retained the German in this text and the translation. Sometimes Behne also uses the terms Funktion and funktionell. On many occasions he uses Zweck, Sachlichkeit, and Funktion interchangeably or as a series. But in his larger argument, as explained earlier, he draws a clear distinction between functionalism, rationalism, and utilitarianism.  As Harry Mallgrave has shown in his introduction to Otto Wagner’s Mod- em Architecture and elsewhere, the architect Richard Streiter used the term Sachlichkeit as early as 1896 to define realist tendencies that had been a part of the German debate for nearly a decade.’ Streiter raised the term in con- junction with Zweckméafigkeit and Funktion, establishing a linked meaning of these concepts from the beginning. Yet, the precise meaning of Sach- lichkeit was not altogether clearly defined. Streiter, for instance, used the word to describe the vernacular architecture of the Bavarian Gabriel von Seidl. The following year Lichtwark invoked the term in relation to the design of Messel’s Wertheim Department Store in Berlin. This new linguis- tic preference within German theory for Sachlichkeit over the older term Realismus is made fully transparent in 1899 when Lichtwark, in the course of republishing an essay of 1897, changed its title from “Realistische Archi- tektur” to “Sachliche Baukunst.”!  Stanford Anderson has examined the use of such concepts in the early twentieth century. He writes that Muthesius did not advocate the pure Sachlichkeit of machines but rather a sachliche Kunst, an approach in which aesthetics seems to be paramount. Anderson has summed up a turn-of-the- century definition as follows:  It was commonplace to recognize the engineering achievements of the nine- teenth century, from tools or instruments to the great bridges and railroad sheds. Whether the critics saw these works as exemplary achievements or, resignedly, as the representative objects of a materialist epoch, they could agree that such works and the processes that produced them were marked by ratio-  48  PHITOGUC ton  nality, functionalism, and Zweckmafigkeit. Muthesius subsumed such qualities under the term “pure” Sachlichkeit....  Sachlichkeit is, then, a convenient umbrella term that invokes simplicity, a rational and straightforward attention to needs as well as to materials and processes, !1°  Anderson cautions at the same time that Sachlichkeit cannot be understood completely by such a generalization. Variations of meaning existed in the work of Otto Wagner and Behrens, who — Anderson believes — employed a symbolic functionalism.""'  Behne and the Neue Sachlichkeit  Since there was already a degree of variation in the way Sachlichkeit was used at the turn of the century, we should not expect that the term ever assumed a completely uniform connotation. The Neues Bauen in general and the references in architectural texts to Sachlichkeit have understandably been associated with the Neue Sachlichkeit, a name first popularized by Hartlaub in May 1923 when he used it in a circular announcing an exhibi- tion at the Mannheim Kunsthalle that took place in 1925. Ina letter to Alfred Barr of July 1929 Hartlaub explained that the term applied to the new real- ism with a socialist flavor.'2 In 1923 in a review of the Bauhaus exhibition Giedion also mentioned the “neue Gegenstdndlichkeit” (new objectivity) that is everywhere in evidence in painting.'? Gegenstand refers to a concrete object and is the same as the Russian veshch, which formed part of the Con- structivist debate. A Sache, by contrast, is a more general fact or thing with abstract connotations.  The art historian Fritz Schmalenbach, who during the 1930s was at work ona book on the Neue Sachlichkeit, noted in an essay of 1940 that Wolfflin in his Kunstgeschichtliche Grundbegriffe (Principles of art history) and August Grisebach in Die Baukunst im 19. und 20. Jahrhundert, both of 1915, had used the term neue Sachlichkeit in passing. Schmalenbach, however, believed that Hartlaub’s use of Sachlichkeit should be traced back to its architectural ori- gins in the writings of Muthesius, Lichtwark, and Loos.''*  The use of neve in Neue Sachlichkeit, according to Hartlaub in a letter to Schmalenbach, was intended to position the artists in his exhibition against the “old bourgeois naturalism of the Diisseldorf Academy.”''® As early as  49 
1920 Hartlaub began to criticize Expressionist art for its utopianism and argued for a more sachlich Expressionism. In this conjunction of sachlich with Expressionistn we find a similarity to Behne’s use of Sachlichkeit, that is, at least in the early 19208; the combination was used to suggest a transi- tion away from Expressionism without implying a complete rupture with Expressionism. Even Giedion, who later formed an intense dislike toward Expressionism, wrote in 1923 that the “neue Gegenstdndlichkeit... has ab- sorbed the results of Expressionism.”'!© Dennis Crockett in his disserta- tion, “Die ‘Neue Sachlichkeit’: Post-Expressionism in Germany, 1919-1925,” which contains a more detailed discussion of these issues and a thorough overview of the transitional nature of Neue Sachlichkeit in painting, has also pointed out that for Hartlaub himself the Neue Sachlichkeit exhibition was not about al! of German art at the time — it did not include abstract art, for instance, nor did it cover, in Hartlaub’s opinion, all of realist art. He never regarded it as a counterdevelopment to Expressionism but rather as only one tendency in an evolution away from Expressionism. Hartlaub wrote that the “new art was already contained in the old” and “retains much of the vision-  ary quality of the older art.”"? In 1929 Hartlaub noted in his aforemen- tioned letter to Barr that  the expression ought really to apply as a label to the new realism bearing a socialist flavour. It was related to the general contemporary feeling in Germany of resignation and cynicism after a period of exuberant hopes (which had found an outlet in expressionism). Cynicism and resignation are the negative side of the Neue Sachlichkeit, the positive side expresses itself in the enthusiasm for the immediate reality as a result of a desire to take things entirely objectively on a material basis without immediately investing them with ideal implications.!'§  Schmalenbach, however, in his essay of 1940 did not agree with Hartlaub’s specific understanding of the term: “In reality, it was not the ‘objectivity’ of the new painting which the term was intended in the first place and above all to formulate, but something more universal underlying this objectivity, and of which it was the expression, a revolution in the general mental atti- tude of the times, a general new Sachlichkeit of thought and feeling.” He also wrote that it constituted a “radical rejection of all emotional bias, a deliber- ately cultivated unsentimentality."’ Most later historians defined Neue Sachlichkeit in terms of its “sobriety” and “resignation” but usually in oppo- sition to Expressionism. Marxist historians in particular saw it as the victory  50  of capitalism, Amerikanismus, and Fordism— see, for example, Helmut Lethen, Neue Sachlichkeit, 1924-1932, 1970 — or as an instance of a reac- tionary culture produced during the period of economic stabilization — as in Jost Hermand’s study of Neue Sachlichkeit, 1977.17  At any rate, the label from the outset, even Hartlaub’s own early desig- nation, was somewhat tenuous because the title of the exhibition itself changed as it traveled throughout Germany. Also, Hartlaub’s terminology initially competed with Franz Roh’s preferred term Magischer Realismus (Magic Realism), which was influenced by Italian metaphysical painting. Occasionally historians have categorized two constituent wings of Neue Sachlichkeit, a left and a right: respectively, those artists who fall under Hartlaub’s notion of realism with a socialist flavor, and those who fall under Roh’s concept of Magic Realism.!21 In the second half of the decade Neue Sachlichkeit became a popular label without the distinctions Hartlaub had conceived; it was viewed as one example of the several coexisting mod- ernisms. Schmalenbach clearly preferred to use the term in its later, gener- alized, more all-encompassing sense.  As noted above, in his letter to Alfred Barr of 1929, Hartlaub discussed the positive aspect of Neue Sachlichkeit as an enthusiasm for immediate reality, whereas its negative side was its cynicism and resignation. Hartlaub also explained that “this healthy disillusionment finds its clearest expression in Germany in architecture. In the last analysis this battle cry is today much misused and it is high time to withdraw it from currency.” Thus Hartlaub, who had coined the label in 1923, believed the term to have become mean- ingless by 1929. Of course, one does not have to agree with Hartlaub’s complete rejection of Neue Sachlichkeit. His complaint about its misuse, however, tells us a great deal about its volatility over a brief six-year period. Behne, as early as 1926, had referred with a sense of irony to the “gebildete Spiessertum’s” (cultured philistines’) enthusiastic embrace of a vulgarized version of Neue Sachlichkeit.'?? Most interesting for a discussion of Behne’s Der moderne Zweckbau is Hartlaub’s subtle understanding of a multifarious, ayered Modernism. To the degree that Hartlaub does not accept Neue Sach- ichkeit as a unified, comprehensive term, he seems to be in accord with Behne's definition of several directions present in 1923.  Even more important for understanding the use of Sachlichkeit within the architectural debates of the r920s is Schmalenbach’s suggestion that the abel Neue Sachlichkeit had its origins in architectural texts written before the war. This is supported by Hartlaub’s belief, expressed in 1929, that Neue  5I 
Sachlichkeit finds its “clearest expression” in German architecture. If the polemics at this stage have become too circular—those in the arts look to architecture for justification, and those in architecture look to the arts for an explanation — we can at least gain some insight from the intensity and back- and-forth of definitions that surround the controversies of the Neue Sach- lichkeit. We realize that it was by no means a static concept; it was in fact continually redefined. The same is true for Behne’s notion of Sachlichkeit and his attitude toward Neue Sachlichkeit: meanings and emphases changed in his writings in the course of the 19208.  In Die Wiederkehr der Kunst, 1919, Behne had elevated the study of folk art even above the study of Albrecht Diirer or any high art. He wrote in char- acteristic Expressionist fashion that “we must rid ourselves of the rule of technology. Folk art dies where technique appears.”'4 He also complained about Behrens’s use of Sachlichkeit as if it could be employed as a template. In Behne’s essay “Architekten,” 1921-1922, where he frequently refers to Sachlichkeit, his outright rejection of naturalism still has much in common with the Expressionists’ opposition to it, rather than with a resurgent real- ism of the Neue Sachlichkeit. He writes that art is a complete product of the human spirit and in this sense is antithetical to naturalism. He speaks of a tension between the natural and artistic, and he recommends replacing naturalism with Oud’s belief in man’s spiritual equality with nature. And using one of De Stijl’s curious technospiritual metaphors, Behne concluded by exalting the “spiritual freedom of the machine.’ 25  When he wrote Der moderne Zweckbau, however, Behne seems to have been more or less in agreement with Hartlaub, even though he uses the term naturalism, rather than realism, as was more common in painting:  Academic and historical styles have been abandoned and the concept of the facade has been disposed of. Yet the “house” is still standing. Success is achieved by returning to purpose in an architectural development that has its precise counterpart in painting of the period, which likewise disposed of aca- demic and historical styles. Its medium is naturalism, which in the develop- ment of painting always allows a new freedom from prejudice, quite analogous to the significance that a return to function had for building. “Naturalism in architecture is functional fitness” (Karl Scheffler: Messel, p. 14).  In Der moderne Zweckbau Behne did not satisfactorily explain why Zweck, Funktion, and Sachlichkeit are often used to form a constellation of words  52  that seem to stand for slightly different aspects of Modernism, or why Zweckbau is used in the title, and not Funktion or Sachlichkeit. Perhaps these were evolving concepts at the time. In his later writings, however, his defi- nition becomes clearer and the word Sachlichkeit begins to dominate other usages, probably in response to the increasingly widespread use of the term Neue Sachlichkett. In one of his books intended for a mass audience, Eine Stunde Architektur (One hour of architecture), 1928, he is more explicit re- garding the meaning of these terms: “Zweckmédfigkeit is only our minimum expectation. We conceive function in a more thoroughgoing way. The archi- tect must not only fulfill given traditional functions, he must also establish new and higher functions. For this reason we shall prefer to speak of Sach- lichkeit.... Therefore, fulfillment of function is for us not an end-in-itself but a means to get closer to life.... Reality as a medium of work must be conquered.”}?7  In 1927 Behne expanded his definition of Sachlichkeit in Neues Wohnen — Neues Bauen, and Zweck no longer appears as often as it had in 1923. He writes that Sachlichkeit does not imply, as most assume, dryness, sobriety, or a solution from a purely mathematical point of view. Sachlichkeit simply means that the solution is adjusted to the Sache. He then goes on to explain what a Sache is: “Each Sache is a nodal point, a crossing point of relations between human being and human being.... To work sachlich means there- fore to work socially in each discipline. To build sachlich means to build socially."8 Behne’s explanation of Sachlichkeit as a primarily social enter- prise is similar to Simmel and Weber's notion of social action, and it aligns him in fact completely with Hartlaub’s explanation of Neue Sachlichkeit. At the same time, his warning that it has nothing to do with a mathematical outlook, as most assume, indicates that by 192'7 a mechanistic and techno- centric understanding of the term had probably become prevalent.  In Newes Wohnen — Neues Bauen Behne further addresses some of the social issues that he had begun to explore in his earlier Frithlicht article in which he had praised Martin Wagner and the cooperative housing associa- tions as a “transition to action” (fig. 8}. He regards the housing shortage as the most pressing question in architecture, but goes on to say that housing is a political issue from the outset because it cannot be dealt with without also confronting the ownership of land (fig. 9). As in his and others’ Expres- sionist writings, the idea of the “new man” is still used. This is why he refers in the title of the book to dwelling before building.!2° In his Expressionist writings he had stressed the harmonious, unifying elements of folk art and  533 
Fig. 8. Martin Wagner, Site plan for Lindenhof housing project, Berlin-Schéneberg, 1919. From Ludovica Scarpa, Martin Wagner und Berlin (Braunschweig: Vieweg, 1986), 173, fig. 4. Photo: Courtesy Friedrich Vieweg & Sohn, Verlagsgesellschaft mbH, Wiesbaden.  Fig. 9. Adolf Behne, Photographs of garret-dwellers with a handwritten quotation from  Heinrich Zille: “One can kill people as readily with a home as with an From Adolf  Behne, Neues Wohnen —Neues Bauen (Leipzig: Hesse & Becker, 1927), facing page 4.  
the Gothic cathedral; the retrospective element of Expressionism here, how- ever, has given way to an international socialism, which had been merely a subtext in Expressionism’s anarchist inheritance. This shift in Behne's atti- tude completely parallels changes seen in Taut’s work and writings.  Behne explains in greater detail in Neues Wohnen — Neues Bauen what he means by building “socially.” He cites, among other examples such housing complexes as the Siedlung Reichsverband fiir Kriegsbeschidigte in Berlin- Friedrichsfeld, 1925-1926, for which concrete panels were cast on the site and put in place with the help of cranes on tracks —a method adopted from Holland and further refined by Ernst May in Frankfurt. Yet Behne sees stan- dardization only as the precondition for social building.”  In a chapter called “Diktatur oder Sachlichkeit” (Dictatorship or Sach- lichkeit) he writes that Sachlichkeit can help to limit the dictatorship of the architect from above and the dictatorship of the tenant from below. He also points out that while some housing may took welcoming when new, it will look cramped once occupied because the tenants cannot afford new furni- ture. Often tenants themselves will add a petit bourgeois feeling to the interior by adding valances or antimacassars. But he also sees a tendency in modern architecture toward dictatorship if the building looks too much like a prison, and here he cites some of the housing by Oud. Whereas in his ear- lier writing he had been apologetic for the plain, apparently “uninteresting” look of Oud’s work, he is now more critical, perhaps because Oud had refused to provide him with materials for Der moderne Zweckbau. Be that as it may, Behne maintains that if ornament is absent, the tenant feels his habitation looks like a penal institution and may automatically feel debased to the level of the proletariat because ornament is associated with the houses of the rich. He concludes that the architect has a tendency toward dictatorship in his attitude toward tenants and that tenants are partly right if they expect that architects are to serve them. At the same time he suggests that the tenant must be educated to become a “ruling type” just like the architect. His call for mutual education is rather characteristic of his trust in public education."  In place of the Gothic cathedral of his Expressionist writings, Behne now turns to the image of a medieval knight encased in cumbersome armor as a metaphor for the general resistance to the concept of a social Sachlichkeit. In addition, he uses the walled city and its moat as an analogy for excluding Sachlichkeit in urban issues. He describes the Mietskaserne (literally, rental barracks) as the last castle, an example of an isolated, defensive space.132 Though the normal five-story apartment block with forty to sixty families is  56  a proper planning unit, it is in his opinion not an economic unit because ownership may change every twenty meters. There may also be a rigorous exploitation of the terrain, but this is not a “sachliche, funktional zweckmafige solution.” The knight in armor, he writes, has been placed at the disposal of high capitalism (figs. 10, 11).133  In his “Von der Sachlichkeit,” 1927, an introduction to a book on the work of Max Taut, Behne writes that a building can have many functiona requirements and that Sachlichkeit is really the disciplined thought required to weigh them against each other. Here he also launches a very early critique of the Zeilenbau, the placement of parallel rows of buildings running north and south without regard to the site or street configuration. Behne regards the Zeilenbau method as too dogmatic because hygiene has been allowed to become the sole determining factor of architecture. This solution, he believes, is completely unsachlich and, in the end, formalistic. Behne and Bruno Taut among the modernists (fig. 12) —in contrast to Gropius, May, and Hannes Meyer—criticized the Zeilenbau, which was used as a plan- ning scheme with increasing frequency in the late 1920s. Behne in an essay of 1930 would find fault with Gropius’s Dammerstock Siedlung for this reason. Martin Wagner, associated with both Behne and Bruno Taut, also objected to the Existenzminimum, or minimum housing standard, as defined at cIAM 11 in Frankfurt, even though he strongly supported a rationalized system of production throughout the 1920s.134  In Neues Wohnen — Neues Bauen Behne summarizes his argument with the statement that the greatest work of art results from the creation of a “maximum of human respect for the most.”"5 This assertion in effect seems to be simply a slight reformulation of Jeremy Bentham’s eighteenth- century utilitarianism, which held that the greatest happiness of the greatest number is the self-evident, fundamental principle of morality. Just as utili- tarianism later came to be understood as a purely pragmatic, economic con- cept — Behne himself uses it in its debased form in Der moderne Zweckbau — so the social implication of Behne’s notion of Sachlichkeit, shared by Hart- laub’s concept of Neue Sachlichkeit, was made blander and more uniform in its popularized form.  In his Eine Stunde Architektur, 1928, Behne maintained his basically antimechanistic notion of Sachlichkeit by writing that fantasy need not be left behind.#3* Contrasting the image of the armored knight as a metaphor for regression, he introduces the saint as the prophet of Sachlichkeit: “Func- tion is the real saint in art history. It helped people to be free.”'4 The cover of  57 
Fig. 10. Adolf Behne, Collage showing a knight and a modern man in combat. From Adolf  Behne, Neues Wohnen — Neues Bauen (Leipzig: Hesse & Becker, 1927), 8.  Fig. 11. Adolf Behne, Collage contrasting a miniature from the Book of Hours of the Duc de Berry with an aerial view of speculative houses in southwestern Berlin. From Adolf Behne, Eine Stunde Architektur (Stuttgart: Akademischer Verlag Dr. Fritz Wedekind, 1928}, 8. Photo: Courtesy Karl Kramer Fachbuchhandhung und Verlag, Stuttgart.  
0  1 PPIFELMIEN NALS § j BRIT  Fig. 12. Martin Wagner and Bruno Taut, View from Fritz-Reuter Allee into the “horseshoe  building” of the Gehag Housing Association, Berlin-Britz, 1925-1926. From Kurt  Junghanns, Bruno Taut: 1880-1938 (Berlin: Henschelverlag Kunst und Gesellschaft, 1983), fig. 163. Photo: Courtesy Professor Dr. phil. habil. Heinrich Taut, Lehnitz.  the book (fig. 13) shows a collage by Max Fischer of Diirer’s Saint Jerome in His Study, superimposed on the roof terrace of Le Corbusier's double house at the Weissenhof Siedlung (Le Corbusier's double house and a general view of Weissenhof are also contrasted with the walled castle in the book’s illus- trations). Saint Jerome, the scholar-monk on whose translation of the Bible the Latin Vulgate was based, has been brought out of his study into the open air of a Siedlung (housing development}. The mysticism with which the Middle Ages was often invested in Expressionism has now simply become a shorthand device for revealing the “new man” at the center of Sachlichkeit.  Behne’s Blick tiber die Grenze: Baukunst des Auslandes (View across the border: Architecture of foreign countries), published in 1925 in association with the Werkbund, contains the same internationalism and many of the same ideas expressed the following year in Der moderne Zweckbau. Like his “Funktion und Form” article of 1924, this may have been an attempt on his part to stake out his position vis-a-vis Gropius’s Internationale Architektur. In Blick iiber die Grenze Behne expands upon his critique of German culture as moving from one extreme to the other and on its position between East and West. He writes that countries with a strong identifiable culture tend to be evolutionary and rarely succumb to dictators. He then makes one of his politically most insightful statements: “Germany ...lacks a common culture and would be easy prey for a dictator, if it did not have a chronic shortage of strong authoritarians [Wilensmensch]. No country has a harder time making unequivocal decisions. It swings between mistrust and belief, between democracy and dictatorship; between union with and isolation from Europe, between East and West, between yesterday and tomorrow.”'3* Although criti- cal in his assessment, Behne is not sufficiently prescient in believing that there is a shortage of authoritarian figures. By 1925, however, he is less san- guine than he had been in 1923 when he quoted Heinrich Mann on the need for a union between East and West. Still using his dualistic paradigm, he describes Russia as Europe’s dynamic pole (speaking about Futurism and Constructivism) in whose revolutionary setting time becomes defined as experience. On the other hand, France to him represents a static pole in which time becomes a measure defined by tradition. More interestingly, he asks whether politics is not always the determining factor and writes that in Italy and Russia political methods have become dictatorial because both Bolshevists and Fascists are antidemocratic.  Just because it was conceived as early as 1923 Der moderne Zweckbau does not in every respect prefigure topics that became important in the later  61 
19208. After all, much of what is today considered modern architecture had not yet been built. Behne is, nevertheless, more comprehensive than Hitch- cock and Johnson when it comes, for example, to Russian architecture. He is one of the few authors who during this period included the work of a female architect, Alexandra Exter’s Isvestia Pavilion (1923). Chronologically, Behne’s work might be compared with Mendelsohn’s lecture “Dynamik und Funk- tion,” delivered in Amsterdam in 1923, in which Mendelsohn noted:  Whereas the grasping, pulling, and tearing activities of the machine are purely utilitarian functions, and function as conceived of in construction demon- strates only mathematical inevitability, function in architecture can only mean  spatial and formal dependence on the givens derived from the program, the  material and the construction. Therefore it seems impossible to me to some- how want to transfer the purposeful function of machines to the space, or the technological organization to the organism of architecture.... The machine, previously the obedient handyman of deadly exploitation, becomes a construc- tive element of a new living organism. ... Thus the machine simultaneously becomes a symbol of decay as well as an element of a newly ordered life."  {In general, Mendelsohn’s concern with expression and the representation of dynamic tension clearly differentiates this practicing architect-polemicist from the more analytical considerations of Behne, who grouped Mendel- sohn with the romantic functionalists.'4°  Behne continued to be concerned about the belated publication of Der moderne Zweckbau, even after its appearance in 1926. In Neues Wohnen — Neues Bauen, 1927, he lists Der moderne Zweckbau both in the text and in the bibliography as having been published in 1925, probably a deliberate pre- dating that was inadvertently picked up in a bibliography of Behine’s writings by the Werkbund Archiv in 1972 and in some other publications." At the sare time, Behne, while listing Gropius’s Internationale Architektur in his  bibliography, does not give it a date. His initial conflict with Gropius over the publication of their respective books was clearly not forgotten. Behne today, however, has the last word: in the republication of his book in the Ullstein Bauwelt Fundamente series in 1964, the date of its conception and writing, not of its publication, appears prominently on the cover.  Gropius and Behne were often on opposite sides of the architectural debate in the late 19208, but they also never stopped communicating with each other. In October of 1934 Gropius sent a letter to Behne, who by that  62  Fig. 13. Max Fischer, Collage of Albrecht Diirer’s Saint Jerome and Le Corbusier's roof garden at Stuttgart-Weissenhof. From Adolf Behe, Eine Stunde Architektur (Stuttgart: Akademischer Verlag Dr. Fritz Wedekind, 1928), cover. Photo: Courtesy Karl Kramer Fachbuckhhandlung und Verlag, Stuttgart.  
time had been dismissed from his teaching position at the Humboldt- Hochschule, as well as at the Stadtische Berliner Volkshochschule (his Sieg der Farbe was confiscated as a degenerate text), and was taking a rest cure at a sanatorium because he suffered from tuberculosis. Gropius wrote that he hoped that Behne was not too depressed and remarked that sometimes such an involuntary break is useful in sorting out those events that are truly meaningful: “You are not really missing anything here. The conditions are so terribly distasteful, because an unparalleled irresolution reigns. Even in the camp of those in power opinions swing from one extreme to the other. The cultural area, which we think we know especially well, seems gro-  tesque, and no one, even responsible people with whom I spoke in the min- istry of propaganda and in the Reichskulturkammer, know where the trip is headed.”!#? Behne’s supposition of 1925 — that Germany would be an easy prey for a dictator but lacked authoritarian figures —had turned out to be overly optimistic.  Sachlichkeit in the Publications of Other Modernists  None of the later books by Behne’s friends and colleagues carried the detailed precision of Der moderne Zweckbau. They tended to rely more on their illustrations than had Behne’s book. In Internationale Architektur Gropius freely admitted the existence of individual and national characteris- tics in current architecture, but despite this he discerned certain unifying characteristics, in effect the “international architecture” that had been the subject of his Bauhaus exhibition of 1923. He saw the common characteris- tics as a manifestation of a shared Gestaltungswille, or creative will. Any notion of Sachlichkeit that he perceived as yet another aspect of the new mode was subsumed under this idealistic concept of a creative will.!3 In his Internationale neue Baukunst, first published in 1927 under the auspices of the Werkbund, Hilberseimer finds a unity in contemporary architecture much as Gropius had, in the existence of a “creative wil!” rather than a style: “The creative will of the architect dominates everything ...[The new archi- tecture is the] expression of spiritual permeation. ... It is not based on a styl- istic conception.”'*4 Neither Gropius nor Hilberseimer defines the new architecture as a style or in mechanistic terms. However, their reliance on the idea of a creative will seems to be indebted to Schopenhauer or Riegl’s idea of Kunstwollen. Sachlichkeit here seems to be an extension of the creative will  64  and not, as in Behne’s explanation, a social issue. Bruno Taut’s definition of functional architecture in his book Modern Architecture, 1929, does address social and ethical questions, although in a less subtle way than Behne. By the 1930s, however, Taut would criticize his own earlier definition as too reductive."  German writers were, of course, not unique in presenting Modernism as more than a technocentric polemic. Alberto Sartoris’s Gli elementi dell’archi- tettura funzionale (Elements of a functional architecture), first published in 1932, defined functional architecture in terms of paired opposites. He saw contemporary building characterized by both logic and lyricism, the practi- cal and the aesthetic, both matter and spirit.1“¢  There were also noteworthy exceptions to this modulated analysis of con- temporary architecture. Behrendt’s Der Sieg des neuen Baustils, 1927, pub- ished in conjunction with the Stuttgart Werkbund Exhibition, emphasized the style of the new architecture: its simple forms, flat planes, and absence of ornament. Behrendt regarded this as a proper expression of contem- porary life, which he equated with machines, cars, and airplanes in the uninflected manner of early Futurism.” And Giedion, for example, in his Bauen in Frankreich, Bauen in Eisen, Bauen in Eisenbeton (Building in France, Building in Iron, Building in Ferroconcrete), 1928, based his methodology as he would later in Space, Time, and Architecture) almost entirely on a materialistic premise, the development of “new” materials like iron and concrete, and the expectation of a yet-to-be-invented, even newer material for the twentieth century. In his review of the Bauhaus exhibition of 1923 he had already set out a similarly deterministic viewpoint. He wrote that while each material imposes absolute requirements, the “Stilwille” (style  will) of our time will select instinctively those materials that are most adapted to its psyche, such as glass, concrete, and iron. He adds further that above this automatic response to ideal form is the machine.'#* Giedion’s curious combination of idealism (Stilwille) with materialism is, of course, what prevailed as the standard reading of architectural history into the mid- twentieth century.  More moderate books published in the second half of the 1920s do not differ substantially from those of the avant-garde in a broad and usually non- mechanistic interpretation of functionalism. Gustav Platz in Die Baukunst der neuesten Zeit (Architecture of the most recent time), 1927, saw current architecture as existing between two poles: between the social, collective problems of the period and an unbridled activity of individual impulses.  65 
Like Behne before him, Platz distinguished between functionalism and util- itarianism. Function for Platz could even be a “spiritual, artistic agent.”¥49  Another one of these moderate books is Berliner Architektur der Nach- kriegszeit (Berlin architecture of the postwar period), 1928, edited by E. M. Hajos and L. Zahn. And although its subject was more circumscribed, it had a perceptive introductory text by Edwin Redslob. Redslob, an art historian, later became (with the Werkbund’s urging) Reichskunstwart, or overseer of all federal art projects. He defined modern architecture as follows: “Cre- ation, not imitation should be the appropriate expression of our day. For the architect this means an end to the repetition of old styles... , but at the same time [creation] also mitigates against copying of engineering motifs, some- thing the fashion of the day has decreed as a substitute for the despised imi- tation of styles.’"*° Not unlike Behne, Redslob regarded both approaches as potentially dangerous. He called the imitation of older styles a “decorative formalism” produced by the “romanticizers of history”; the copying of engi- neering motifs he referred to as “functional formalism” practiced by the “romanticizers of technology.”  What makes it impossible to associate the general notion of Sachlich- keit exclusively with Modernism in Germany is that conservatives claimed it as well. The most influential among these was undoubtedly Schultze- Naumburg, who since the start of the century had produced a series of books under the general title Kulturarbeiten (Cultural works). These dealt largely with anonymous urban, rural, and garden architecture. Schultze- Naumburg’s didactic books were intended for a general public, and they were indeed widely read. In addition to texts they also contained pictorial contrasts of good and bad architecture, or examples and counterexamples, as he called them. In almost all of his comparisons older buildings are seen as preferable to more recent ones. Further, his categorical good and bad con- trasts made his books a simple, efficient, and popular teaching tool.15!  In his book Kunst und Rasse (Art and race}, 1928, Schultze-Naumburg turned to a racial explanation of visual expression. The best art, he claimed, was always produced by pure, unmixed races. He did not insist on the supremacy of the Aryan race as some other writers had. Instead, he blamed what he regarded as the current low state of the arts on a greater mixture of formerly discrete racial types, a racial hodgepodge that he felt was made possible by modern technology, especially by the new faster modes of trans- portation. Behne castigated Kunst und Rasse in a review of 1929. He wrote that aside from its racism, it was patently absurd art history, because  66  Schultze-Naumburg assumed a clear analogy between pictorial figural rep- resentations and the way the human body actually looks.'5?  Most interestingly, Schultze-Naumburg criticized modern buildings not because they were too abstract nor because they had no ornament, but because he linked them with the debased expressions of an industrialized society. For this reason he disliked buildings from the late nineteenth century as much as current architecture, He made this point over and over in another one of his books of the late 19208, Das Gesicht des deutschen Hauses (The face of the German house), 1929, which was really a sequel to Kunst und Rasse, but one that dealt exclusively with architecture.’ Schultze- Naumburg, for instance, contrasted an old rural town, which for him expressed coherence, with modern architecture that displayed what he  regarded as the incoherence of the machine age. Schultze-Naumburg’s good-and-bad juxtapositions do not have quite the moralizing conviction of Augustus Welby Pugin’s Contrasts of 1836. Nevertheless, as in Pugin, there is in all of Schultze-Naumburg’s writings a high degree of nostalgia for a less confusing past. Both men reacted against industrialization and urban- ization. While the Industrial Revolution had occurred in England over a long period of time, in Germany it was telescoped into a few decades of the late nineteenth century, producing disturbingly rapid social changes that, in the words of the historian Golo Mann, “could be compared to an explosion.”!54 What Schultze-Naumburg seemed to look for in preindustrial architecture was the security of calm simplicity and also, surprisingly, Sach- lichkeit. In the preface to Das Gesicht des deutschen Hauses he wrote that his object with the earlier Kulturarbeiten had been to call attention to the then little-noticed, simple, bourgeois architecture before 1800. In fact, Schultze- Naumburg’s selections are almost analogous to those of Pau] Mebes in his influential Um 1800 (Around 1800) of 1908.'* It represents, in effect, a Bie- dermeier revival of sorts with parallel implications of a withdrawal from the contemporary world and its social upheavals into a more comfortable realm of older conventions.  Although Schultze-Naumburg objected to the Werkbund’s Weissenhof Siedlung — illustrated by him without proper identification (ail counter- examples are condemned in his books to eternal anonymity) —he rejected not its severity, abstract quality, or even modern “style.” What he disliked was the absence of pitched roofs. While Schultze-Naumburg had been an early member of the Werkbund, by 1925 he had distanced himself from its activities. For Schultze-Naumburg the pitched roof was the primordial  67 
Figs. 1qa, Bruno Taut, Photograph of the SS Australia as modern architecture. From Bruno Taut, Modern Ai {New York: Albert & Charles Boni, 1929), 6. Photo: Courtesy  Professor Dr. phil. habil. Heinrich Taut, Lehnitz.  Fig. 14b. Brunc Taut, Appropriation of the SS Australia (see fig. 14a) for a caricature of the  modern house. From Bruno Taut, Modern Architecture (New York: Albert & Charles Boni,  1929}, 7. Photo: Courtesy Professor Dr. phil. habil. Heinrich Taut, Lehnitz.  
element of the house. He wrote that to omit it would be like having a face without a nose (a rather awkward physiognomic analogy). His general objec- tion, symptomatic of contemporary conservative reactions to Modernism, is part and parcel of a racial theory of physiognomic expression. But at the game time he also couched his critique in a rational argument. He wrote that the flat roof may be quite suitable for a Mediterranean setting, where it can be regarded as an indigenous ethnic expression, but he found it totally inappropriate in the North, where it lacks tradition and is impractical. He complained that the new architecture pretends to be sachlich but is nothing of the sort. Although his argument was rife with inconsistencies, he and other traditionalists claimed Sachlichkeit for themselves. Possibly because of the inflammatory quality of Schultze-Naumburg’s writings, the flat roof of modern architecture became a major issue of the architectural debate in Germany."** This was surely an instance of the negative side of the intense architectural polemics in Germany in the early twentieth century.  To summarize attitudes in Germany in the 1920s, questions of function-  alism ranged from the nuanced discussion of Behne, to the more simplis- tic idealizing interpretation of Gropius and Hilberseimer, to the reductive utilitarian-pragmatic explanation of Schultze-Naumburg, in whose writing Sachlichkeit is a cover for ethnic appropriateness. The functionalism ascribed by Hitchcock and Johnson to Hannes Meyer was hardly symptomatic of the whole conceptual development and complexities of this issue in German theory.  Taut’s Modern Architecture, used by David Watkin to criticize the mod- ernist notion of functionalism, contains the following passage: “The out- ward characteristics of the new construction — flat roofs, huge sheets of glass... horizontal ribbon windows with pillars...were finally reduced to the level of a kind of sport, as has happened and is still happening to the admirable ancient styles.... In the same way, the ‘modern’ style has been imitating itself” (figs, 14a, b).!5” Thus three years before Hitchcock and John- son elevated conternporary aesthetic tendencies to stylistic principles, Taut had already satirized them as fashionable clichés. Like Taut, his friend Behne had demonstrated even earlier that the definition of a modern style should not be of central concern. By investigating the ideologies behind the various approaches to functionalism in the early 1920s, he uncovered at the same time the eclecticism and pluralism of early Modernism.  qo  Notes  References of the type “The Modern Functional Building (oo}” direct the reader to the appro- priate page of the translation of Behne’s text that appears in this volume. Unless otherwise  indicated, all translations given in the introduction are mine.  1. Adolf Behne, Der moderne Zweckbau (Munich: Drei Masken-Verlag, 1926).  2. Walter Gropius, Internationale Architektur, Bauhausbiicher 1 (Munich: Albert Langen, 1925); Ludwig Hilberseimer, Internationale neue Baukunst (Stuttgart: Hoffmann, 1927); Walter Curt Behrendt, Der Sieg des neuen Baustils (Stuttgart: Akademischer Verlag Fr. Wede- kind, 1927}; Bruno Taut, Die neue Baukunst in Europa und Amerika (Stuttgart: Hoffmann, 1929), published in English as Modern Architecture (London: Studio; New York: Albert & Charles Boni, 1929). Although Taut does not say so in his foreword, the English publication of his book was presumably made possible through Behne’s contacts with the journal Studio, for which he was a correspondent.  3. Henry-Russell Hitchcock, Modern Architecture: Romanticism and Reintegration (New York: Payson & Clark, 1929}: Henry-Russell Hitchcock and Philip Johnson, The International Style: Architecture since 1922 (New York: Norton, 1932).  4. The Getty Research Institute is currently preparing a translation of Behrendt’s book as part of its Text & Documents series,  5. Helen Searing, “The Dutch Scene: Black and White and Red All Over” Art Journal 43 {summer 1983}: 170-77, esp. n. 1.  6. Karl Scheffler, Moderne Baukunst (Berlin: Bard, 1907).  7. Akademie der Kiinste, Arbeitsrat fiir Kunst Berlin, 1918-1921, exh. cat. (Berlin: Akademie der Kiinste, 1980), 124 n.  8. Bruno Taut, Die neue Wohnung: Die Frau als Schépferin (Leipzig: Klinkhardt & Bier- mann, 1924).  g. Adolf Behne, Neues Wohnen — Neues Bauen, Prometheus-Biicher (Leipzig: Hesse & Becker, 1927); Bruno Taut, Bauen — Der neue Wohinban (Leipzig & Berlin: Klinkhardt & Bier- mann, 1927). In Neues Bauen, 1918-1933: Moderne Architektur in der Weimarer Republik (Munich: Moos, 1975), Norbert Huse writes that the term Neues Bauen stresses the act of  building, whereas the usc of modern places morc value on the end product. He does not deal with the possible origins of Neues Bauen. Interestingly, in the section of his book titled “Form und Zweck: Hiring und Behne” (n.p.), Huse describes Behne's Der moderne Zweck- bau fairly but fails to point out that while Behne dealt with Haring’s organic functionalism,  he rejected it because it was not workable in a larger social context.  7T 

1. No Longer a Facade but a House  In the last few decades of European architecture, Baroque design has congealed into an arid academicism. Among the very rare buildings of char- acter are Franz Schwechten’s Stettin and Anhalt railroad stations in Berlin (1878).  The plan was dominated by facades overloaded with decorative motifs, Heidelberg castles with a “composition” irrelevant to their functional requirements. The most grotesque example: Ihne’s Staatsbibliothek in Berlin, a concrete building that needs an artifical, complicated iron frame to support its sandstone Baroque facade, like a mask; or, by the same (hne, the Kaiser-Friedrich-Museum, in whose plan the flight of stairs in the vestibule could be moved from one side to the other without having the slightest effect on the architecture of the building as a whole.®  At almost the same time a determined opposition, associated with the names of H. P. Berlage, Alfred Messel, and Otto Wagner, was successfully asserting itself in Holland, Germany, and Austria.” Buildings by these lead- ing architects, which became benchmarks, are the Amsterdam Stock Exchange, the Wertheim Department Store in Berlin, and the buildings for the Vienna Stadtbahn. Work on the Amsterdam Stock Exchange started in 1897, the first phase of the Wertheim Building on LeipzigerstraBe was com- pleted in 1898, and the Vienna Stadtbahn dates from 1894 to 1897. The casino in Saint-Malo by the brothers Auguste and Gustave Perret, with a reinforced concrete vault that is very bold for its period, dates from the same time (1899/1900). But, as was so often also the case with the Perret brothers’ later buildings, the architecture remained untouched by the con- structional innovations.§  Berlage (b. 1856), Messel (b. 1853), and Otto Wagner (b. 1841) are the first generation of leaders in the fight for the renewal of architecture.”  * America’s first modern architect, Arthur [Louis Henry] Sullivan, born 1856 in 
Berlage, Messel, and Wagner were all trained during the period of acade- micism and eclecticism, and their own early works were eclectic. It suffices to name Berlage’s fantastic plan for a mausoleum in which he actually intended to use all historical styles side by side (1889), Messel’s Werder-Haus and his office building on KrausenstraBe (Berlin, 1894/1895), and Otto Wagner's ideal design, “Artibus” (1880). This makes their historical achieve- ment all the more important. They developed the first sound modern buildings in which form was no longer a finished, independent construct based on books and rules, with only very superficial connection with the  Berlage: Stock exchange elevation  object, but actually became an always new, young, and specific function of the project, or at least approached it. Berlage, Messel, and Wagner provided the new architecture with the gift of Sachlichkeit; they were the first who dared affirm consciously and consistently and to make into a positive design tool something that until then had been avoided and pushed aside: purpose.?  This development is particularly clear in the case of Berlage. His first competition sketch for the stock exchange, from 1895 — academic architec. ture in a Dutch Renaissance style, scarcely distinguishable from Cuypers’s railroad station or his Rijksmuseum —has such a confused abundance of motifs that it looks tike a small town.'° in 1897 three designs rapidly devel- oped into a modern stock exchange.  ——— Boston, died 1924 in Chicago, belongs to the same generation. His Wainwright Building in St. Louis was the earliest skyscraper.  he first already shaws an extraordinary degree of simplification.  A unified building emerges from the gables, towers, and onion domes; a single roof runs fram the entrance, stripped of its peculiar architecture, right through to the last room. The confident strength of the quiet masses replaces the uncertainty of many facades fitted over one another. The new feature of the strong corner tower emphasizes the building’s unshakable strength. The second design shows no fundamental progress but translates the first design’s very arid institutional Gothic into a suppler, more personal ecclesiastical Gothic. The third version almost completely replaces ele- ments of historical style with a very energetic reassurance and an increas- ing respect for rectangularity, a tendency further strengthened in the  built version. Incidentally the small De Nederianden office building in The Hague, built in 1895 and much improved by remodeling in 1905, acted  as a harbinger for the work on the stock exchange.  n his book Grundlagen und Entwicklung der Architektur [The foundations and development of architecture} (Berlin, 1908), based on lectures given in Zurich in 1907, Berlage defines the path  that we must now adopt, the path that will be available for the future, and that will lead us to a new art:  1. A geometric scheme should once again provide the basis of architectural corn- position.  2. The characteristic forms of earlier styles should not be used.  3. Architectural forms should be developed in the spirit of Sachlichkeit (p. 100).)  The successive versions of the building Berlage put up in Amsterdam more and more resembied a commercial conference center or office block. The first design could equally weil have been interpreted as a theater, museum, railroad station, restaurant, palace, or town hall, The final build- ing does not unmistakably say “stock exchange,” but it no longer contains misleading elements, with the possible exception of the tower. At least it has a general physiognomy, and that is the main thing. A French critic (l’architecte, 1924, p. 8) compares the creator of the Amsterdam Stock Exchange with Vaudremer: “But Vaudremer did not have the honor of defi- nitively leading the young generation down the path of a French national architecture. Berlage has that honor in Dutch architecture.”?  When Messel was building the Wertheim store on Leipzigerstraf@e in Berlin, he found that his task offered the occasion for a really clear character.  
He was in a position to create a new type, the department store, practica out of nothing. (The stages of his own work were the Werder-Haus, the house on Krausenstra@Be, the Wertheim store on OranienstraBe, the Wert- heim store on RosenthalerstraBe.)  y  To his contemporaries the Wertheim store represented a more forcefu and lucid sally against the tradition of form than any other building of its period. Here a desire to do complete justice to purpose and to resist aes- thetic cliché was more successful than anywhere else. It was not Messel’s ambition to build a beautiful facade behind which enough space could ul mately be found to accommodate the business of a department store but  rather to provide an entirely distinct, concise form for the management of a department store, one arising from the most refined and alert sense of its  quite particular and specific requirements and needs. Thus out of the require-  ment for maximum light and display window area, Messel designed for LeipzigerstraBe a glass wall hung between slender stone piers; he designed open light wells that reveal the structure of the building as if in cross section.  Here a new type arose from the fulfillment of purpose. This building could be nothing other than a department store, a warehouse, an emporium, a gigantic department store.  Otto Wagner’s contemporary buildings for the Vienna Stadtbahn are seemingly much less revolutionary (incidentally, in 1884, Wagner, too, pro- duced a project for the Amsterdam Stock Exchange). A certain classicism persists but yet they are essentially modern. They have an austerity, clarity, and coolness that enable them to accommodate constructional parts remarkably well, even when highly traditional elements remain. Consistent with their building sequence: “The stations of the Stadtbahn show the grad- ual development of this utilitarian style. On the Gilrtellinie, Wagner is still working freely with classical forms, predominantly with the Doric style; on the Wientallinie, the iron construction is formally ermphasized in the great decorative arches of the outer halls; the Donaukanallinie represents another step forward: everything becomes simpler and more structural as iron  arches are replaced by stanchions with braced girders” (Dagobert Frey).8  Simple horizontais and verticals are retained almost throughout, placed strictly parallel to the always dominant track; and in their emotionless, dis- tant cooiness they absolutely produce the effect of “transport buildings.” They remain perfectly within their sphere, whereas Messel’s Wertheim  Building contains a strongly alien artistic element, which was to appear increasingly in Messel’s later work.  It is indeed curious that Messel, who at first showed the most revolu- tionary achievement among the three architects, did not continue along the newly opened path, whereas both Berlage and Otto Wagner moved step by step toward their goal. Berlage’s route led from the stock exchange to the Diamantbewerkersbond (1899), the De Nederlanden office building in Rotterdam (1910), Muller & Cos office building in London (1914), and the sketch for the Upper House in The Hague (1921). And Otto Wagner created the Postsparkasse building in Vienna after 1903 at a time when Messel had already returned to a traditional building style that in 1910 fed to his sketches for a Berlin museum, that is, to a style that once more completely suppressed purpose in favor of a beautiful facade. In contrast, Otto Wagner’s development went as follows: Kirche Am Steinhof (1906), Universitatsbibliotek (1910), block of flats in Vienna vii (1911), Lupusheil- statte [Sanatorium] (1913).  From Otto Wagner’s Baukunst unserer Zeit (first edition, 1895);  Here it is appropriate to shout a loud and encouraging “forward” to the modern creative architect and to warn him against an excessive and heartfelt devotion to the old, so that he might regain a (however modest) self-confidence, without which no great act whatsoever can arise.!4  ... If | were to summarize what has been said in this book and try to coin in a few words what is essential, in order to show the young architect the shortest and best way to the goal in any kind of work, these words and the sequence of their application would run approximately as follows:  1. A scrupulously exact apprehension and compiete fulfillment of the purpose (down to the smallest detail);  2. A happy choice of the material of construction to be used (meaning one that is readily available, easily workable, long-lasting, economical);  3. Simple and economic construction; and only considering these three main points;  4, The form arising from these premises (it will flow from the pen as if of its  own accord and will always be easily understandable).”!>  lf we look more closely, we ought to recognize that the Wertheim Building—to put it paradoxically —is more revolutionary than its architect, yet not as revolutionary as it seems. This is because, despite the energy and lack of prejudice with which it fulfills its purpose, it is not absolutely sachiich. It quickly turned out to be a mistake to try to see the Wertheim 
Building as the prototypical department store; for apart from Sehring’s Tietz store at the other end of LeipzigerstraBe, which adopted the glass surfaces on an even bigger scale, subsequent developments did not follow Messel’s exampie.!6 Furthermore, outside Germany it had absolutely no effect at all. But even in Germany, beginning with Olbrich's Tietz store in Dusseldorf,  we soon see walls once again gaining mass, the system of piers receding, and horizontals again reappearing, so that by the time we get to Emil Schaudt’s Kaufhaus des Westens in Charlottenburg, there is nothing at all left of Messel’s system. No doubt this development was affected by building codes that for fire protection required a solid wall at least one meter high between every two floors; thus, horizontal articulation was arrested, but the  ultimate reasons went deeper than this. Messel’s facade seemed highly structural in its intention, but in the  shadow of the roof and behind the capital-like ornamental headwork the  piers are without much ado transformed into a harmless wall, thus revealing  that the grandiloquent profile is merely decorative. The connection between roof and wall is very superficial, and the roof is a feeble, spaceless stopgap. In a competition design of 1910 for an extension to Messel’s building, Bruno Taut underlined Messel’s principle with greater purity: his smooth piers are arched above to form the wall supporting the roof.!” In his design for a Mittag department store in Magdeburg (1913), the same architect carried Messel’s idea of verticality to its logical constructional solution by supporting the roof from above with concrete piers using a system of arches. Messel’s piers were not really the strong element that they first  appeared but rather the weak element of his building. They were a conse- quence of the unclear thinking that led Messel to stack five ground floors on top of one another. The idea of increasing display space fivefold is—looking at the matter rationally—a mistake, as only the ground-floor windows are actually display windows. The upper rows of windows have little or no signifi- cance for advertising purposes; in fact, displays were very quickly removed from them and replaced with screenlike stands. Thus one did not even  take full advantage of an additional light source. This is why we said that Messel’s idea, directed solely at light and display space, was not entirely  sachlich. It led him to stack five floors of display windows atop one another, and this in turn led to a verticality that brought piers into being as a stop- gap measure; basically the piers are nothing more than the additive lifting above the street level, a fivefold raising of the street elevation — making  Le Corbusier’s remark that modern German architecture is frequently an  “elevator-shaft architecture” absolutely accurate in the case of the Wertheim Buiiding.18 And it is also because of the internal inconsistency of these apparently so grandiloquent piers that the roof sits on them as it does: unrelated, thin, and random, like a makeshift roof. (Anyone wishing to adopt the terminology of Leo Frobenius in Das unbekannte Afrika could see verticalism as a continuing effect of Ethiopian-tellurian pile-frame architec- ture and horizontalism as a persisting element of Hamitic-chthonic building. It is incidentally also remarkable that Frobenius describes Hamitic social structure as horizonta! layering [castes] and Ethiopian social structure as vertical layering [clans].)}!9 There is thus a great deal to criticize in this building of 1898, which when it was expanded, probably contrary to Messel's original conception, acquired multiple axes. And yet at the time it was of the greatest signifi- cance, although this was probably more psychological than strictly tectonic. The department store as a type did not develop in this direction, not in Germany, indeed not even in Berlin, and Messel himself recognized why in the way he terminated the building facing Leipzigerplatz. Here, warmly applauded by cultured people, he adopted an ecclesiastical note with a strong Gothic element, which led a Berlin critic to remark that the opening of a new department store in the Lustgarten (Raschdorff's cathedral) cain- cided with the consecration of a new cathedral on Leipzigerplatz.2 The ecclesiastical note had already been struck in the first building phase with the system of tall monumental piers. When foreshortened, they closed to form a solemn church wall. It rather gave the impression of a gigantic Gothic church converted into a store by installing intermediate ceil- ings and glass paneling. In the first building phase this tendency may have derived from an inner uncertainty, but in the section facing the square it became a conscious game with Gothicizing style elements. Allin all this building, apparently designed more radically in pursuit of purpose than any other of its period, is a very artificial construction, which is probably clearest when one compares it with, for instance, the architec- ture of the Louvre Department Store in Paris. It cannot be said, however, that this establishes a new type —if there really is such a thing! The fact that a department store has become much larger has not changed the basis for the French architect. He thinks per- haps more conservatively but also genuinely more sachlich. He places large display windows where they are appropriate and have a purpose: on the ground floor. On the upper stories there are many windows arranged in  
regularly ordered rows. One story is placed above another: not as a repeated ground floor but as second, third, fourth, and fifth floor, i.e., with conscious emphasis on the horizontal, corresponding to reality. Finally the vaulted roof with its many skylights and chimneys makes the whole thing look like a warehouse, a gigantic storehouse accommodating a large number of things at the same time. in brief, the modern department store ultimately finds a mode of expression here where it was not being sought, an expression more genuine and purer than in Messel’s work —simply because the tendency to grandiose stylization is absent, a tendency that inclined excessively toward art and thus led to a falsely ecclesiastical character, isolating the building fram its neighbors, although its purpose is not particularly different from theirs. The Louvre Department Store remains entirely a part of the street, and precisely this is part of its truth. As the department store was built quite specifically in, on, and for the street, it is not allowed to be the most alien, conspicuous, and isolated building along the entire street, which was the case with Messel’s store along LeipzigerstraBe.  Messel’s pointed, one-sided emphasis on a single function —display— made him untrue to the whole; the building lacked integration.  If we nevertheless assign Messel’s building such an important place, it is because it had enormous psychological impact. He gave others the courage to break away from conventional schemes, to dare to create new types— even though his own attempt was far less happy and far less sachlich than it first appeared.  The modern country-house plan was also developed in the mid-1890s by the Chicago architect Frank Lloyd Wright, Sullivan's student.2! Conventional ter- minology would not place the country house in the category of functional buildings, but the sensibility articulated in Wright's new floor plans is extra- ordinarily important as it is characterized by the liberation of the plan from formalist rigidity by returning to the functional element. This development begins somewhere between the plans for the Winslow House in River Forest (1893) and the Heller House in Chicago (1896) and reaches its peak in the plan for the Coonley House in Riverside (1908). Here Wright has given up fitting the rooms together in an ornamental scheme in favor of “free balanc- ing in space” (Herre), based on the most careful inclusion of all require- ments of comfort, quiet, and clear design.?? There is no longer any trace of symmetry or axis, simply walls succinctly marking and accompanying the most comfortable traffic patterns for all the rooms. The accommodation to  living functions goes so far that each piece of furniture has its specific place in the floor plan. This plan “unfolds.” The house is not complicated by stairs ascending to the upstairs —a rudiment of medieval castle and masonry wall architecture. The plot of land has space enough to allow the building and almost all its rooms to develop directly at ground level.  In Wright’s plans the rooms are not inserted next to one another but set in motion —as asymmetrically as life itself, strangely enough. Influenced by the Japanese, Wright already started building unusually flat roofs, mostly with wide overhangs. This means suppressing the picturesque and stressing constructional and cubic elements. It is logical that a house organized as reely balanced spaces should reject the roof as a hat that unites every- thing. Even the roof changes from a “motif” into a “function.”  Wright's influence on European architecture was significant: in Germany (Peter Behrens, Gropius, Mendelsohn, Mies van der Rohe); in Holland (Oud b. 1890], Jan Wils, van t'Hoff, Greve); in Switzerland (Le Corbusier); in Czechoslovakia (Obrtel, Krejcar, Tyl, Cerny, Vigek, Fragner, Feuerstein) — at irst probably affecting the elevation more than the plan, which has only recently come to be fully understood.??  Compositionally, Wright's country houses are of the greatest significance because they consistently emphasize the horizontal. Their high-tension, nervy force, always contrasting ingeniously with concise verticals, actually  makes the houses look as though they are a component of the street, although in their very idiosyncratic interpenetration of public and private space they almost never open to the roadside. Eschewing all ornament, which to our taste often plays a surprising role in the interior (recently increasing also on the exterior), he achieves the aesthetic composition of the house from the basic elements of accelerated horizontal movement, subtly and strikingly stopped verticals, and textured walis that never appear as supporting but always as supported parts. All visible parts are com- pletely conveyed as function: the precise relationship of open and closed areas produces the “building”  Every attentive observer senses the close connection with machine aes- thetics, completely new in the history of architecture. In an essay for the New York Architectural Record in 1908, Wright says:  The machine cannot be removed from the world, it is here to stay. It is the fore- runner of the democracy that is the final goal of our hopes and dreams.  There is no more important work before the architect now than to use this 
modern tool to the greatest possible extent. But what does he do instead? He abuses this tool in reproducing forms born of other times, under distant skies, forms that today seem boring because one cannot avoid them anywhere; all  of this happens with the help of the machine, whase main task it is to destroy  just these forms.?4  Berlage, Otto Wagner, and Alfred Messel (the latter with the reservations mentioned above) had successfully championed the cause of Sachlichkeit. But their Sachlichkeit was restricted primarily to resisting and avoiding Unsachlichkeit. Common sense, a feeling for cleanliness and its practice found acceptance, and fear of purpose ceased. But they still failed to address the task directly enough. They remained house builders. It may be that their commissions (stock exchange, office building, etc.) had some- thing to do with this. At any rate, they did not approach the plan in a new way. Even Otto Wagner expressly stresses the importance of symmetry in the plan: “A simple, clear plan in most cases requires the symmetry of the work. In a symmetrical arrangement there is some measure of self- containment, completeness, balance; an impossibility of enlargement; even self-assurance. Gravity and dignity, the constant companions of architec- ure, also demand symmetry.”25  Wright provided the first real breakthrough. Through a positive Sach- lichkeit, he developed the country-house plan as something new and directly based on life, by returning to the most elementary functions of the inhabi- ants. This was the decisive turn from formal restraint to a commitment to ife itself—in the confidence that a form appropriate to a healthy and  orderly life will of necessity be beautiful — space newly conquered by purpose and function. This attitude, when applied to the great tasks typical of the times, could  ead to a new architecture. And to an increasing extent in the first decade of the century, factory buildings and industrial problems represented just such tasks.  Academic and historical styles have been abandoned and the concept of the facade has been disposed of. Yet the “house” is still standing. Success is achieved by returning to purpose in an architectural development that has its precise counterpart in painting of the period, which likewise disposed  of academic and historical styles. Its medium is naturalism, which in the development of painting always allows a new freedom from prejudice, quite  analogous to the significance that a return to function had for building. “Naturalism in architecture is functional fitness” (Kar! Scheffler: Messe, p. 14).26  Virgilio Marchi, Rome: Telegraph station 
Il. No Longer a House but Shaped Space  Industrial commissions had already produced surprising solutions in America. Walter Gropius put together an interesting selection in his essay “Die Entwicklung moderner Industriebaukunst” [The development of mod- ern industrial architecture} in the German Werkbund yearbook of 1913.27 The distinguishing feature of these American buildings (without exception the work of engineers, not architects) is their complete absence of compul- sive ideas about form, their quite unprejudiced design, and their spatial ealization of production and working processes. Take the grain silos for he Washbury-Crosby Company in Buffalo: a group of vertical tubes of dif- erent heights and widths, with bracing quite openly revealed —no hint of adding, balancing, or refinement. Note also the contrast of angular eleva- tor sections and connecting tracks extending horizontally, an absolutely asymmetrical and irregular plant that for this reason is so convincingly a legitimate and thrilling example of functional or dynamic building. It is a building that seizes upon tensions arising from the production process, and in working with them it actively articulates space without inhibitions or sup- pressions. It is completely analogous to the approach of Wright, who has had no industrial commissions himself with the exception of the Larkin Building in Buffalo. (The film studios [sic] in Olive Hill, California, also can- not be classified as such.) In order to show the strong effect of these works (an excellent compilation appeared in ingenieurbauten, published by Ernst Wasmuth, Berlin, 1923) on the younger European architects, | quote a few sentences from the above-mentioned essay by Walter Gropius:  =  a  fe)  In the motherland of industry, in America, large industrial plants have been built whose unknown majesty excels even that of our best German buildings in this genre. The grain silos in Canada and South America, the coal stores for the great railway lines, and the ultramodern factories for North American industries are almost comparable to the buildings of ancient Egypt in their monumental power.  Their architectural features have such assurance that the purpose of the complex 
is made unambiguously comprehensible to the observer with convincing force. The self-evident truth of these buildings does not come from their materia! superiority in extent and scale—this is certainly not where the reason for their monumental effect is to be found. It is much more that those who built them seem to have retained a natural sense for large-scale, concise forms in a way that is indepen- dent, healthy, and pure. There is a valuable lesson in all this for us. We should once and for all cease paying attention to historical yearnings and other misgivings of an intellectual nature, which are crippling modern European artistic creativity  and obstructing artistic naiveté.°6 Henry Ford’s remarks on the subject of factory building are very typical:  One point that is absolutely essential to high capacity, as well as to humane pro- duction, is a clean, well-lighted and well-ventilated factory. Our machines are placed very close together — every foot of floor space in the factory carries, of course, the same overhead charge. The consumer must pay the extra overhead and the extra transportation involved in having machines even six inches farther apart than they have to be.... This brings our machines closer together than  in probably any other factory in the world. To a stranger they may seem piled right on top of one another, but they are scientifically arranged, not only in the sequence of operations but so as to give every man and every machine every square inch that he requires and, if possible, not a square inch, and certainly not a square foot, more than he requires... When we put up the older buildings, we did not understand so much about ventilation as we do today. In all the later build- ings, the supporting columns are made hollow and through them the bad air is pumped out and the good air introduced. A nearly even temperature is kept every- where the year round and, during daylight, there is nowhere the necessity for arti- ficial light.... The dark corners which invite expectoration are painted white. One cannot have morale without cleanliness, We tolerate makeshift cleanliness no more than makeshift methods” (p. 113 ff.).29  Ford writes about his hospital: “Because of the arrangements it is easily possible for a nurse to care for seven patients who are not desperately ill. In the ordinary hospital the nurses must make many useless steps. More of their time is spent running around than caring for the patient. This hospital is designed to save steps” (p. 55).3°  It will not take us too far away from the point at hand to quote the longer passage in which Ford formulates his attitude toward art:  We seemingly limit the creative functions to productions that may be hung on walls, or heard in concert halls, or otherwise displayed where idle and fastidious people gather to admire each other's culture. Bui if a man wants a field for vital creative work, let him come where he is dealing with higher laws than those of sound, or line, or colour; let him come where he may deal with the laws of person- ality. We need artists who master industrial relationships. We need masters of industrial methods. We need those who can mould the shapeless mass in political, social, industrial, and moral respects into a sound and shapely whole. We have limited the creative faculty much too much and have misused it for too trivia! ends. We need men who can create the working design for all that is right and good and desirable (p. 104).3!  Ford is also being entirely consistent with this when he says:  We will not put up elaborate buildings as monuments to aur success. The interest on the investment and the cost of their upkeep would only serve to add uselessly to the cost of our products —so these monuments of success are apt to end as tombs. A great administration buiiding may sometimes be necessary, although it arouses my suspicion that perhaps there is too much administration. We have never found a need for elaborate administration and would prefer to be advertised by our product, rather than where we make our product (p. 173).32  The first European to solve industrial tasks in the grand style was Peter Behrens (b. 1868), whom Emil Rathenau called to be artistic adviser to the AEG in 1907.33  Peter Behrens started his career as a painter in Munich, moved on to decorative and applied artwork at an early stage, and risked the leap to architecture in Darmstadt in 1901. The house in Darmstadt was followed by the Dusseldorf exhibition garden (1904), the Oldenburg exhibition pavil- ions (1905), a private house in Saarbriicken, some rooms for the Dresden Applied Arts exhibition [Kunstgewerbeausstellung] (1906), and the crema- torium in Hagen, Westphalia (1907), all works then outstanding for their stereometric simplicity and conscious return to clear, cubic proportions. It is certainly not yet possible to talk about a real creation of space; there is more reduction than production, more graphics than architecture. But there was an unmistakable hint of a modern attitude in the work, a pleasure in concise, precise, and technical form—elements that make Rathenau’s choice seem the happiest that could have been made at the time.  
What had been happening in German industrial architecture until then?  Factories were thrown up here, as everywhere, in the rawest and cheap- est way with, in fact, insulting contempt. Not even a minimum of design consideration was wasted on them, and if occasionally a bit of Gothic trac- ery or a Renaissance gable was added, the effect was all the more artificial. Factories with dark courtyards, narrow passages, blind windows, and low, dark rooms, more like prisons than places for productive work, repellent, stifling, joyless hammer mills mirrored perfectly the ever more terrible back premises of the urban tenements in which the majority of toilers in the fac- tory had to live. No one has drawn the horrific misery of these buildings — with their hordes of subtenants, lodgers, transients, and illicit stills — more accurately and movingly than Heinrich Zille.44  This hopeless brutality, this contemptuous negation of all design con- sciousness was highly fitting for a period dominated by middle-class culture. Art was Raphael and Hans Makart, and what did a factory have to do with Raphael and Hans Makart?!35  Peter Behrens’s early work for the AEG was on a small scale. Arc lamps, fans, electrical cooking and heating equipment were designed simply, clearly, and logically, entirely without ornament. Behrens’s great gift for creating new aesthetic values with the object itself was already beginning to show, and this was probably the first time in our age that things emerged that were typical rather than individual in form. Great emphasis was placed upon precise proportions and appropriate handling of materials. These works aroused general interest, for instance, at the Berlin shipbuilding exhi-  bition of 1908. They were an early attempt at a clear and pure form for our times.  The AEG’s most important buildings are the HuttenstraGe Turbine Factory (1909), high-voltage factory (1910), small-motor factory (1911), assembly plant (1912)—all at Humboldt-Hain. Later came buildings for other indus- rial concerns, such as the administration building for the Mannesmann Factory in Dusseldorf (1911/1912), the Frankfurt Gasworks (1911/1912), the NAG [Nationale Automobil-Gesellschaft] Factory in Berlin-Oberschéneweide (1920), and more recently, the administration building for the Héchst Dye Factory.  We should not underestimate the contribution made by Peter Behrens in recognizing the historical meaning of the task that fell to him. Early on he correctly sensed that here was a jab to do that had to be fundamental for he formation of a style for our times. From the start, Behrens had no  doubts that he had to adapt his work to typical solutions. The poorly imi- tated, dissipated, ornate Baroque motifs jumbled together to suffocate, inhibit, and dislocate any life there might have been in the original architec- tural rhythms were, with a new pride, replaced by the beauty of the pure surface, of taut smoothness, of precise and concise outline, and of exact edges — fitting things for an age in which the machine had started to orga- nize a fundamentally new working process. Wright was unmistakably a model for all this.  Here are some striking passages from an essay by Peter Behrens for the AEG (Plakat, June 1920):  In questions of form for all industrial plants it is always a matter of creating char- acter from the very nature of the things to be designed, to discover the type, just as all past art is seen today to reveal sublime greatness by being typical of the respective condition of the times. This means no less than that one must address all the artistic and technical conditions that a plant imposes, support them, indeed elevate them to a fundamental principle and let this principle become a visible expression.  This applies first to the placement of the building. It has to follow the scale of the production process. The location of railroad tracks is crucial to the siting of the building. Staggering the buildings allows for the proper entry of rail tracks through the gates of the factory buildings. At the same time spacious storage yards should be provided, and this touches upon a city planning principle of great aesthetic significance. It is precisely this staggering of buildings, necessary in Practical terms, that will give the plant an effective silhouette; and the necessary layout of the yards fulfills a demand by a past master of city planning, Camillo Sitte, who described a square enclosed by buildings as one of the most necessary aspects of architectural effects.  Whenever the opportunity arises to compare plants designed from such a purely practical point of view with others based on random factors or built in stages, one is astonished to see how such different impressions can be created with the same expenditure of construction and materials.  But the same is also true of a factory’s interior layout. The spatial arrangement grows out of the organization of the production process. Clear layout, ease of interchange and forward movement of products, and unhampered mobility of tools, machines, or trucks require open, uncluttered, well-lit halls. Workplaces should be as well lit and spacious as possible. It is therefore recommended that staircases  and elevators be moved to the exterior; this will at the same time make the archi- 
tectural effect more impressive, producing a long sequence of work spaces inside and on the outside rows of windows picturesquely enlivened by protruding stair- wells and elevator shafts towering above the roof. Since light is a prerequisite for good work, factory buildings should have large window openings; they should dominate, control the surface of the building, and lend support in their effect as windows. For this reason they should not seem like large holes in the wall but  appear flush with the outer wall, giving the exterior a friendly appearance .3¢  At this point | should like to draw attention to an important essay by H. Lulwes, “Was mu beim Entwurf neuer Werke beachtet werden?” [What has to be considered in the design of new works?] (Hawa-Nachrichten, January 1922),3”  If we compare Peter Behrens’s achievements with American examples, the crucial difference is that Behrens is still intent on stylization, on artistic interpretation through form, whereas the Americans present the object com- pletely bare. There is no doubt that Behrens was extraordinarily refreshed, broadened, and strengthened in his forms by an unprejudiced accommeda- tion to the living process of industry, but in the end his behavior was not altogether without prejudice. He abandoned a number of conventions, gave up a great deal of rigidity and tradition, but he did not unquestioningly devote himself to the purpose, to function. Many concepts persisted for him, even the concept of a “house.” And it is just this clinging to this notion of a house that compels him to stylize. For how could the small-motor factory on VoltastraBe express itself as such —and Peter Behrens cared for “expres- sion” — other than by applied forms (in this case strongly stressed piers) if the basic layout of the plan is not fully and unconditionally committed to the thing, and then of course it is no longer a “house.”  A duality still remains in the case of Behrens: a good fulfillment of pur- pose and its integration into a normal body — wall, roof, window, etc. But because he wanted to destroy the normal house for the sake of a greater and more powerful concept, Peter Behrens’s pathos was born, which unfor- tunately found many imitators. For example, Stoffregen’s Delmenhorst Factory showed an inclination toward the vertical, perhaps still under the influence of Messel.#8  It is now very interesting to see that the earliest of Behrens’s AEG build. ings makes the greatest and freest break with the conventional house type, and that his last industrial buildings (Oberschéneweide) are classical. There seems to be a certain analogy with Messel's development.  With the Turbine Hall in HuttenstraBe there suddenly emerged an indus- trial building that was a new type, a new life: no longer a “house,” no longer a shed, no longer convention, and no longer a cross between various his- torical types. For the first time in this country, industry built a workspace solely according to work requirements, not as a trivial stopgap but with self- confident strength, using the new materials iron, concrete, and glass. The new feature of this building was the stronger unification of a more massive body. The body built here to house the working process was an indivisible, unbroken whole: from socle to ridgeline its mass is informed with a will and a life; it stands like an improbable giant amid the childishly stuccoed tene- ment facades of the area. Decoration, ornament, and form were swep away. The building was itself form, it needed no forms. The shaping force was directed away from an obsolete concern with facade ballast and toward  the body, toward fulfilling purpose, and toward exploiting the new materi- als. They had of course been used before (Perret), but with a few exceptions their style-forming possibilities had never been recognized.  In contrast to this, in the Frankfurt Gasworks we find once again the method of delimiting and dividing, and the reduction of the design to a few abstract forms (“sphere, cone, and cylinder”). In the NAG buildings in Oberschéneweide we definitely find the emphasis on classical form, the neutralization of function and purpose behind impenetrable calm, here con- sistently also forgoing any expression. The house reasserts itself.  We could establish a parallel between the Turbine Hall and the Wertheim Building with the following observation: the Turbine Hall, more than any other building by Behrens, is devoted to function. This makes it the most unusual, revolutionary, and influential of his buildings and at the same time, very analogous to the Wertheim Building, the one most isolated and alien in its surroundings, so that the juxtaposition of tenement buildings and the Turbine Hall borders on the grotesque. Just as the desired typology led the Wertheim Building toward the ecclesiastical, the Turbine Hall was driven toward the heroic. The hail arose in the style of a Cyclopean force, for which there was no basis. The assembly hail in Humboidt-Hain was essen- tially more sober, more sachlich, thus more honest and also more consistent, making better use of the materials.  Allin all, Peter Behrens still “builds” factories. The same is true of Hans Poelzig, whose chemical plant for Milch & Co. in Lubin near Posen is proba- bly the best and most sachiich of all “built” factories. Unfortunately the excellent Werder Mill design has not been executed. Poelzig's attitude  
toward purpose was made surprisingly clear in a speech he delivered in Salzburg in 1921 explaining his Festspielhaus [theater] design (Kunstbiatt, 1921, no. 3, p. 77 ff.):  All purely technical considerations are an abomination to the artist from the start. Even if he knows that these purely technical matters cannot be avoided, that they have to be tackled, he also knows and continually feeis that technology plays far too large a part in the life of the present age, and he will continue to struggle against its dominance. Technical and artistic intentions are and remain complete contrasts, and the artist knows only too well how German art expresses this confused, rowdy, deviate, utter and complete irrational charm.... He (the artist) thinks of nothing but the chance that he may plant this piece of land with the constructs of his imagination — to the extent they are at his disposal—and only then does he try to whittle down his constructs to the level on which present-day  life moves.39  Purpose? “What a dreadful epithet for a work of art.”  Result? The Salzburg Festspielhaus!  Elsewhere Poelzig says: “Art begins only where one is building for the good Lord” (Neubau, 10 January 1924). “For the good Lord” —in other words, for no one!  The Fagus factory in Alfeld an der Leine, built in phases by Walter Gropius (b. 1883) beginning in 1913 [1911], may be considered, along with his build- ings for the Cologne Werkbund exhibition (1914), to be the first factory that was no longer built but “constructed” from iron, concrete, and glass. The  following sentence from the essay mentioned above may serve to character-  ize Gropius’s approach:  A clear internal pian that also from the outside clearly expresses the layout simpli- fies the production process considerably. But it is by no means socially immaterial whether the modern factory worker does his work in a dreary, ugly, industrial barracks or in well-proportioned rooms. He will work with much greater pleasure on large collective projects if his workplace, designed by an artist, complies with the sense of beauty innate in all of us, one that has an enlivening effect on the monotony of mechanical work. Thus the increasing contentment will increase the  working spirit and the business performance.*°  (Sept arts, 15 February 1923 [Brussels], demands that the noise and racket of a large factory should also not be allowed to rage unchecked: “Doubtiess, one will never arrive at some sweet harmony, but it is necessary to strive for a rational organization of all sonorous brutality.”)#  It is clear from the Alfeld factory how much Gropius's study of American utilitarian buildings had a liberating effect —and just as clear that Gropius nevertheless subjects American directness to a certain aesthetic filtering. There is a sense of distant refinement, even caution, that detracts from the unconditional inner unity of the first phase of this important building. The way in which all false pathos is coolly avoided is very admirable, but a certain aesthetic urge deprives the work as a whole of its ultimate simplic ity. This simplicity could almost be called complicated. It vacillates between object and form, between “America” and “Osterndorf.” But there is no doubt that it is still the most modern, the most exemplary German factory of the prewar period, not perhaps as compelling or as direct as Poelzig's plant in Lubin but unquestionably bolder. Gropius’s view coincides with Jean Cocteau’s, for instance, who writes in Le cog et l'arlequin: “American machines and buildings resemble Greek art in the sense that utility confers on them a spareness and a grandeur stripped of the superfluous. But this is not art. The role of art consists in grasping the sense of the time and drawing upon the spectacle of this applied spareness to create an antidote  to the beauty of the useless that encourages the superfluous.”42 Fritz [Friedrich] Kaidenbach’s Seeck [Sack] Factory in Dresden also deserves an honorable mention.%3  Apart from a relatively unimportant factory for Vorster & Co. in Hagen, West- phalia, Henry van de Velde (b. 1863) has produced no industrial buildings. And yet his work is important for the further development of functional archi- tecture because of its consistent emphasis on functional form. By including the element of movement in architecture, van de Velde gave the younger European generation courage to devote itself with real frankness and with- out classical prejudice to the force of technical and economic functions.  We have already talked about the element of “movement” in the case of Wright. For van de Velde it Is an essentially different matter. The difference is between a sober, sachlich American and a romantic European; for there is a romantic in van de Velde as well as a rationalist.  Wright's “movement” is a more consistent and conscious conception of space (in plan) and a tighter relationship of tension between the parts of 
he building (in elevation). The building parts themselves are absolutely “expressionless”; they are immobile, technically determined, standardized, ready-made pieces. Movement works as a mechanical force from the out- side. A human will, with the machine’s help, has constructed the building rom prefabricated parts, with all its angles and corners.  Van de Velde takes movement in a more titeral sense, as a force plasti- cally organizing the building from the inside. He arrives at curves and lourishes, at forms that could be true once only, i.e., they are valid in only one context. He arrives at expressive forms that speak. Human will, which  is seen as limited, does not determine and fix the work, but the will of Sachlichkeiten, of purposes, of materials is itself translated into reality: hus the human being is more the mediator. Van de Velde injects an empa-  hy into the function, and from there he arrives at a formal expression  of movement that Wright definitely avoids. Van de Velde’s conception paral- els the Expressionist Movement, making its appearance somewhat later  in painting. Function —movement— expression as well —symbolism — romanticism — individualism — and finally anthropomorphism are logically very closely  related, that is, van de Velde's influence was important and valuable but not completely harmless. It also contained a danger.  n Wright’s conception the “house” type could continue to exist despite all innovations and improvements. Unequivocalness, clarity, and the assur- ance of edges delimited a space that the human will had conquered and arranged, n van de Velde’s conception these limits are easily blurred. The freely given forces of strong curves and flourishes could very well destroy the box  and replace it with a free organism of a completely different nature—a small example: the Osthaus desk.  Van de Velde’s houses (for Esche and Korner in Chemnitz; Hohenhof and Springmann in Hagen, Westphalia; Diurckheim and Henneberg in Weimar; and Schulenberg in Gera) do not show dissolution of the conven- tional “house” concept and they therefore do not show any dissolution (the one that comes closest is the house for Dr. Leuring, a physician in Scheveningen). The reason for this is that van de Veide is both a romantic and a constructor. As such, he only abandons the “house” type where there is a sachlich imperative, as in the Weimar Kunstschule or the Werk- bund Theater in Cologne, which unfortunately has been pulled down for no obvious reason.  These last two buildings show how valuable van de Velde’s view of move- ment can be regarding the renewal of the building mass—despite the many echoes of the Jugendstil still resounding here.  Of course if we want to see the ultimate consequence of a functionalism colored with a romantic and pantheistic tinge, then the best place to look is among Hermann Finsterlin’s designs, the most radical dissolution of the “house” concept imaginable, approaching the forms of organic, growing nature.  The formal type that is the last greatest genial invention of the terrestrial spirit— organic form—lies between the crystalline and the amorphous. My architecture also sprouts at this transition point. Inside the new house one will not only feel as though one is the occupant of a fabulous crystal druse, but like the internal resi- dent of an organism, wandering from organ to organ, a symbiont of giving and receiving within a fossil of a gigantic mother’s body. A small fragment of the trans- posed set of boxes of world forms is to be found in the sequence of town, house, furniture, and vessel; growing out of one another like the gonads of an organism, these hollow creatures need no longer be displaced foreign bodies as they have been hitherto. Tell me, are you never irritated by the brutal scheme of your six walls and the injected material coffin of your thousand necessities? Has the mys- terious urge never crept over you to rearrange yourselves in accordance with the rhythm of your breathing souls? (Fruhilicht, no. 2, p. 36).  Finsterlin, who refers to his designs as “glacier crevice systems for the |” [Seelengletschermuhlensysteme], is an unabashed romantic. Van de Velde is not just a romantic but a rationalist at the same time, Neither van de Velde the romantic nor Finsterlin are backward-looking in their views — and the rationalist is emphatically a man of our times.  “Nothing is ugly in the world of technical inventions, machines, and  Sou  the thousand everyday objects that serve purposes just as important as architecture and the applied arts. Yes, their forms so shaken by truth  and boldness have elicited the greatest admiration from all those who were passionately waiting for a new beauty, the beauty of the future” (Die drei Suinden wider die Schdnheit [The three sins against beauty], p. 41).45  The thing that seems most to bother people who oppose these principles is the fact that they are just principles, that they moreover require an intellectual effort  to which people are no longer accustomed.... Are we at the end of the world, or 
have we wandered into the blind alley of the driest puritanism because we plead for a formal and simple rule of construction in which | have perhaps discovered the secret trait of our times. It is a rule that, after everything is examined and checked off, one only includes those things (no matter what field) that still seem reasonable, powerful, and capable of being followed up by things that are even  more reasonable and powerful (Innen-Dekoration, November 1902),%¢  The bridge between van de Velde the romantic and van de Velde the rationalist is construction. !n summing up his comments on the shape of his column in the Folkwang-Museum vestibule, van de Velde says: “Its form shows its soul or, to put it more precisely, its bones (Innen-Dekoration, October-November 1902).*”  In searching for expressive form he found those forms arising from construction to be the most expressive; or rather, reason leads him to can- struction and feeling interprets construction.  Another passage characteristic of van de Velde is his commentary on the Folkwang-Museum:  ( searched a long time for a solution to the banister, which was made significantly more difficult by the design of the steps. When | had found a way of attaching a wrought-iron baluster to every step (a shallow bracket is attached below the profile of the tread with a bolt, while the two outside stiles of this railing, resting on the tread, thrust upward in a horseshoe shape), it seemed so clear and simple to me that | was almost ashamed to have taken so long thinking about such a thing.*8  The functional suppleness of his early rooms for Bing’s L’Art Nouveau in Paris (1897), still thoroughly Jugendstil, already delighted one of the Goncourts, who in his review coined the apt word yachting-style (Osthaus,  p. 18).49  Van de Velde's attitude toward technology and construction is thus aes- thetic, just as his enthusiasm for machines is not incompatible with empa- thy. Van de Velde even sees machines in formal and aesthetic terms, for he bitterly rejects their consequences. Whereas Peter Behrens somewhat coolly defines machines as pseudo-aesthetic structures, van de Velde is the first representative of a romantic machine cult that has found many followers.  Machine: that means standardization, typification, collectivism —but van de Velde is a passionate individualist! At the Cologne Werkbund conference (1914) he led the “artists” group against Muthesius’s proposals for types.  He declared: “The artist is in his innermost essence a fervent individualist; he will never of his own free will submit to a discipline that imposes a type upon him.” The essay “Devant l’architecture” indicates a change. It is imbued with a profound understanding of the collective architectural task of our times and a fine confidence in the work of the younger generation in all countries (Europe, 15 July 1924).5°  Van de Velde was less prone to notions of historical-monumental form than Behrens. He was drawn more to the idea of movement in every living thing and thus developed form determined by function, a dynamic form that he himself was fond of describing as “dramatic,” that is, a less histori- cal form, an emergent form, with its character rooted in engineering and  construction. It is revealing to compare a utensil by van de Velde with Peter Behrens’s AEG lamps, for instance. Van de Velde tries to find the unifying thrust of movement through empathy and the fulfillment of the functions of  standing, rising, gripping, carrying, etc. He frequently says of his forms: “| reveal their innermost nature, their soul.” Peter Behrens, closer to Wright, contrasts simple stereometric forms, There temperament, here distance.  Van de Velde’s marked influence on the younger generation of European architects is seen very clearly in Erich Mendelsofn’s (b. 1887) Einstein Tower near Potsdam (1920/21). A certain hint of Olbrich (early Darmstadt exhibition buildings) can be traced in Mendelsohn. Early sketches for the Einstein Tower (the title page of the Wendingen issue [of 1919], for instance) show how very close Finsterlin was to him at the time as well. Compare, for example, Finsterlin's works on pages eleven or fourteen in this Wendingen issue to the drawing by Mendelsohn cited above. Finsterlin's decorative self- sufficiency is certainly transformed into an engineer-like energy and tension  by Mendeisohn. Incidentally, it is very characteristic that the journal of the Amsterdam Movement in Holland, which inclines to romanticism (De Klerk d. 1923], van der Meij, Kropholler, Wijdeveld, etc.), should devote special issues to these two Germans: Mendelsohn and Finsterlin.®!  The desire for exaggerated characterization and expressive individuality brought Mendelsohn, with his Einstein Tower and also—less markedly — his Mosse Building (Berlin, 1921-1923), to an architecture that worked a great deal with movement and anthropomorphism, that really can be called “dra- matic” in van de Velde’s sense, and that must definitely be placed within he Expressionist Movement. The entrance “draws us in,” the walls “lead,” he steps “sway,” etc. (On the Mosse Building: “no passive spectator of the  
rushing cars, of the traffic flowing to and fro, but it has become an assimi- ating, contributing element of this motion.”) The exhibition gallery built by Richard Décker for a Werkbund exhibition in Stuttgart (1921) was the prod- uct of a similar attitude, whereas certain early works by Hans and Wassili Luckhardt had the special nuance of Novembergruppe Expressionism, which they soon grew out of with their Norma Factory and Wender Garage.5? Décker's gallery was only a transition as well.  The exaggerated character of the Einstein Tower places it within the  series Wertheim Building and Turbine Hall. In his critique of the tower, the Dutch architect J. F. Staal remarked quite aptly that it was more a monu- ment than a workshop: “It is the best German [building], it ranks among his  best individual works, but it is still German and still individual" (Wendingen, October 1920).53  Some of Mendelsohn’s industrial designs are more sachlich and more objective, and now for the first time they show the benefit derived from all the work, Disregarding, as always, American engineering buildings, it is only here that the “house” type of vertical walls, roof, and windows is completely overcome by the concept of shaped space. It is subdued from the inside, not just concealed from the outside, by pathos and stylization. That which, from the inside out, necessarily led to the break with the old type was the consistent use of the iron truss. In his lecture “Problem einer neuen Bau- kunst” (1919) Mendelsohn stresses how a new chapter of architectural his- tory started with the appearance of the iron truss: “From the columns and marble beams of the Greek temple to the piers and stone vaulting of the Gothic cathedral come the flexible trusses of iron halls. After the balance of loads of antiquity and neutralization of structural loads of medieval times comes the dynamic tension of ferroconcrete construction” (Wasmuth’s Monatshefte, 1924, p. 3).54  His model of 1919 for an optical factory is already convincing. Here and in the Luckenwalde Hat Factory of 1921-1923 there develops from the most expedient organization of the production process a tight, closely fitting, Spatial form, a form intended to follow and be appropriate to the functions of the business, to the production sequence, like the parts of a machine. Mendelsohn achieved an admirable simplicity and repose in his renovation of the Wustegiersdorf Textile Works (1922/23), and especially in his compe- tition project (with Richard Neutra) for the Haifa business center (1923),5°  Hans Scharoun— Insterburg: Chicago Tribune competition sketch 
Ill. No Longer Shaped Space  but Designed Reality  From this point forward, two trends in contemporary European architecture diverge fairly sharply; they can be called eastern and western. Both are aligned with Sachlichkeit, both like to make reference to machines, both want an expression of our time and our region, but they arrive at very difter- ent results. Otherwise, the boundaries are entirely fluid.  At the time of the Russian Revolution artists in Russia and Germany began to negate the concept of “art.” They no longer wanted to be producers of luxuries, they wanted to fulfill a necessary function in the life process of society. They rejected decoration entirely, commited themselves to construc: tion and artistic production, and opposed any sort of aesthetics or concern with form.  The Russian engineer Lapshin declared, for example: “There is no archi- tecture as such and no separate architecture as such, there is only uniform, strictly scientific design.... So-called artistic matters still dominate build- ing.’55 We have to come closer to the style of our times. (The demand for an independent “style for our times” is found already with Schinkel and has been echoed by every architect since. Schinkel says: “Why should we always want to build in the style of another period? Why should we not try to invent a style of our own!?") No artists were summoned to build the Palace of Labor in Moscow, but factory managers with great technical expertise were  brought in. Lapshin is against treating building from an aesthetic point of view and suggests that it should become part of engineering.  The surest guiding principle to absolutely sachlich, necessary, extra-aesthetic design seemed to be adaptation to technical and economic functions, which with consistent work must in fact lead to the dissolution of the concept of form. Thus building would unconditionally become a tool. Strict suitability to functions —what could the building gain by that? When the parts of a building are arranged according to a sense of their use, when aesthetic space becomes living space —and this is the kind of  19 
order we call dynamic—the building throws off the fetters of the old, fos- silized, static order, axes, symmetry, etc., and achieves a new starting point. A cramped, material, stable equilibrium (symmetry) gives way to a new, boider equilibrium, delicately balanced in broad tensions (polarity) that cor- respond better to our essence, and with this comes a form that is entirely new and alive, free from constraints and stabilization.  And then, through this suitability to function, a building achieves a much broader and better inner unity: it becomes more organic by abandoning the old conventions and formalisms of representation, which inhibit the materi- alization of necessary form.  It is therefore no wonder that architects tried to exploit the possibilities of functionalism to the full. Building presumes the optimum functional articulation of the proposed living space; architecture is no more than a fixed and visible structure of the final organization of every movement, every occupation, every purpose and use of the building.” It is no small architectural achievement if all the paths through a building relate to each other clearly and coherently, absolutely free and open to every possible combination, and not just in a mechanical sense — “twelve doors in a long corridor” — but with the aim of achieving the finest and most ambitious organization and best possible construction. The architect can only grasp and carry out his truly artistic work, that is, the creative work, when he addresses questions of his client’s attitude to life, way of living, business methods — something that of course he can only do with him, not without him or against him. For this reason “being a client” is not just buying a piece of land, some bricks, and an architect. The client must be an activity, whose taking possession of the acquired space is so definite, clear, rich, and organic that it can be transformed into the relationships of masonry walls, indeed relationships governed not by convention or mere custom but by necessity and a living sense.  — * Von Crancin, Director of Building in Hessen, wrote in 1792: "There are still architects —at least this character is often ascribed to them—who arrange the symmetry of windows, doors, and other such parts of the building according to the beds and other things that they want to put in the rooms, or even according to the greater or lesser quantity of light needed in a room or chamber, or even according to the occupations to be pursued there” (Ehmig (Pau! Ehmig, Das deutsche Haus (Berlin: Ernst Wasmuth Verlag, 1914)]).  +n  It is the architect's task to balance spaces freely against each other, sim- ply according to their sachlich functions, excluding anything arbitrary; only then is it possible to have the ambition— from floors, circulation, size of interior and exterior space, the best spatial sequence, the disposition to light, to garden, to street, to traffic —of creating the final tectonic order of all factors: the building. In this process all symmetrical axes, all drawing board geometry, all floor plan ornaments must completely disappear; archi- tecture becomes shaped reality (see also Richard Docker, “Uber Baukunst.” Volkswohnung 5, no. 13).57  As an example of a logical form in this sense, let us take a plan and ele- vation for a farm being built by the Berlin architect Hugo Haring.58 (Some fine plans by Fritz Kaldenbach, who died young in 1918, show a transition from formalism to functionalism, not via Wright but more via van de Velde and Lauweriks.)®? Haring finds a way of working with curves that is at first reminiscent of Finsterlin’s projects, and it is of course related to these as weil, but it is also fundamentally different because of the strict Sachlichkeit of its curves, as opposed to Finsterlin’s romantic arbitrariness. For similar  reasons Hans Scharoun of Insterburg comes to use the curve in plan and elevation, and so occasionally does Adolf Rading of Bresiau.®  Is there an internal logic for such use of the curve, one that has little to do with the illustrative, symbolic use of van de Velde? Certainly!  The rectangular room and the straight line are not functional but mechanical creations, If | were to work consistently from biological function, then the rectangular room is nonsensical, for its four corners are unusable  dead space. If | were to outline the areas in a room that are actually used and walked upon, then | would inevitably arrive at a curve.  The flow of organic life knows no right angles and no straight lines. And as the functionalist always appeals to the flow of organic life as the finest example of pure functionalism, his fondness for the curve is entirely  understandable. Straight lines will always resist the ultimate adaptation to functional mobility and fluidity. They allow only a general, approximate adaptation, nothing absolute. Thus the consistent functionalist has to take curves rather than straight lines as his starting point, as Hans Scharoun does when he writes: “Why does everything have to be straight, when straightness only evoives from material values and our milieu!”  Scharoun’s competition entry for a new post office in Bremen (rejected in the first round) ts a fine example of functional work. An officially pre- pared floor plan combined counter hall, parcel room, and check office under  aaa 
the same roof and behind a facade, for which the competition really only sought a style. Scharoun differentiates and articulates the mass. His work carried the typical motto: “Business —not official image!” Counter hall and parcel room can and should be flat. As a purely administrative building with no public traffic to speak of, the check office can be concentrated upward. The parcel room lies long and narrow next to the railway line, The counter hall evolves practically from a circular plan, and a building with a clear physiognomy emerges, articulated in height, width, and length, a building appropriate to the dynamic tensions of its functions — just as Haring’s plan solves this problem in the most subtle, sensitive, and functional way for an agricultural enterprise.  Functional thinking, almost in the spirit of Roux’s “evolutionary mechan- ics of animal organisms,” is shown when Haring and Scharoun, working  on office plans for Berlin (FriedrichstraBe office building) and Kénigsberg (Borsenhof), choose to run corridors not as channels with a consistently regular cross section, independent of the volume of traffic flow, but as paths that are wider where many people have to use them and narrower at the end where fewer people need to use the doors.®! Functional thinking  is shown in Heinrich de Fries’s plan for an office and large tenement buiid- ing, similar to the planned Bérsenhof in Kénigsberg, which is formed not around the individual office room as a cellular unit (as Peter Behrens had rightly done in his Dusseldorf Mannesmann building, in which the entire space belonged to one firm) but around the unit of the smallest possible group (for instance director’s office, typing room, public room), whose inter- nal traffic is not dependent upon the public corridor.®2 Here is what de Fries was aiming for: “Fusing maximum organizational usefulness and economy in the floor plan with the strongest possible rhythm of masses by dissolving hitherto customary surface facades.” It seems to be carried out more con- sistently in his competition entry for the office building in Prinz-Albrecht- Garten, Berlin (1924).  This consideration shows functionalists concerned with very practical mat- ters. And yet it would be a mistake to see functionalists as utilitarians. Results produced by both groups overlap here and there, but they derive from quite different attitudes.  Functionalists are concerned with solving a problem of general signifi- cance fo our culture. The utilitarian only asks: “What is the most practical way for me to act in this case?" But the functionalist asks: "How do | act  most correctly in principle?” Their attitude inclines toward philosophy and has a metaphysical basis. Their thinking will be in sympathy with the thought processes of someane like Frobenius considering chthonic and tel- lurian architecture, and there is no question but that the functionalists, even the most sachlich ones, could more readily be classified as romantics than as rationalists.  The utilitarian who absolutely must derive all phenomena from the pur- pose in many cases achieves this only by wrongly equating “purpose” with “meaning,” as, for example, when he asserts that ornaments in prehistoric caves also had their “purpose.” They certainly have a “meaning” but not a “purpose.” Even Lu Marten’s Resultate historisch-materialistischer Unter- suchungen [Results of historical-materialist investigations] (nature and change of forms) only explains the general fact of existence, not the partic- ular way in which existence is manitested (Frankfurt am Main: Taifun-Verlag, 1924).63  The utilitarian subordinates himself to purposes in a commonsensical way that the citizen of today indeed knows and recognizes. He can, as a result, easily become a materialist.  The functionalist is clearly no less decisive in approving of purpose, but he does not see it as something complete, unalterable, rigidly prescribed; rather, it is a means to broaden and refine, intensify and sublimate, move and mold human beings. For him every satisfied purpose is an implement for creating new, more refined human beings. Residents in his building have everything at hand —the architect has the residents in hand—through Purpose. The architect creates purpose as much as purpose creates the architect!  To be fully consistent the functionalist would make a building into a pure tool. He would necessarily arrive at a negation of form, as he could only completely achieve his ideal of absolute adaptation to the events in a space by means of movement.  Is consistent functionalism not a dead-end street? It certainly leads to biological relativism,” which in the end not only dlis-  —s * Viktor Engelhardt speaks of a biological influence in later philosophical positivism and of its relativistic consequences (Weltanschauung und Technik (Leipzig, 1922-1923], p. 40). 
solves the conventions of decorative art forms (which would be an advan- tage) but of building itself. One can, as Jennings does, define an animal as a mere incident, but not a house. And why can one not do that?  An animal is a moving organism with its own limited, temporally measured ife. Its forms are forms of being, identical with the individual, not utilitarian forms for the many. A snail shell, for example, is part of the body of an indi- vidual snail and cannot serve as a house — organically — for anyone else.  t grows with the individual snail and dies with it. (When nature needs space ‘or a number of creatures she organizes it on the basis of a mechanical principle that can be standardized: the mass tenement of the honeycomb.)  The built house neither grows nor dies. When the functionalist neverthe- ess compares it with an organism (in a cinema design Scharoun mentions its “maw,” “stomach,” “digestion,” and “backside”), he is trying to express hat it should be as appropriate in its parts and as logical and unified in its classification as a grown organism.  The objection to an ultimately consistent functionalism is the exagger- ated and overstated individualization of its body, a potentially dangerous tendency for Germans. Take, for example, the Wertheim Building — Turbine Hall—Einstein Tower sequence. We stressed that a functional attitude is capable of furthering and enhancing the inner unity of a building to a very  large extent, but we must now add that it makes it equally difficult for greater objective unity to emerge from several or many entities. Once more: Wertheim Building — Turbine Hall — Einstein Tower.  Are we really dealing with inevitabilities here?  If we consider nature’s ideal functional constructions, then we recognize that the richer and more subtle a living creature’s organization, the more distinctively it is individualized. In the same way it is quite logical that a perfectly good, tried and tested tool does not have an “environment,” and it is quite immaterial where a machine is placed. Its elements and propor- tions relate only and exclusively to itself. Therefore if the guideline tor shap- ing a building is only the optimal fulfillment of function, then concern for what has to be taken into consideration also ends at the four walls of that building.  Here one might raise the objection that individuals in organic nature do form a unit. Be that as it may, these individuals are, in any case, distin-  guished by the possibility afforded them of movement and change of place. Their unity is probably fundamentally based on this possibility, and this is the very thing that is denied the house on principle. A house stands firmly  on its site, in permanent surroundings, and can only endure time, never create it.* This is important because all the efforts of functionalists to give the outside of their buildings the unity they so markedly exhibit on the inside necessarily lead to seizing the element of movement that has sug- gested itself since van de Velde —movement that of course can only be apparent, a surrogate of movement.  (am thinking, for example, of Hans Scharoun’s conceptual sketch for the Chicago Tribune building (see page 117). To be sure, this work consciously embodies its environment. It considers “the articulated point connecting a low building to a tall one” and connecting the indifference of a frantically busy street to formal clarity. And it is typical that in doing this Scharoun arrives at concepts expressly concerned with movement: “(1) The front is fixed; (2) seeks a standpoint; (3) collects tension; (4) rises steeply; and (5) carries working platforms.” You could describe a machine in operation like that. In fact Scharoun wants a tower block to be perceived as a “machine,” not as “house or monument.” Other functionalists as well like to refer to machines, which as moving tools are bound to attract their greatest attention.  Scharoun's work certainly reflects its environment, but the referential process remains one-sided. The building devours the environment and digests it for itself, so that some of its features appear in its functional accounting; but the result remains completely individualistic in principle, even where the work takes on a large collective form. Despite its relation to the street, the form remains unique and particular; indeed it may be that with this approach the assimilation of the environmenta! elements only rein- forces the building’s emphatic individuality. This is easily proved. Is it pos- sible to make Scharoun’s solution into a type? That is no more possible than it is for Bruno Taut’s Chicago Tribune design, which may be impeccable in  constructional-functional terms but, when taken as a type (and this is the yardstick for every modern building), would turn downtown Chicago into a Negro village [Negerdorf].  In German architecture we repeatedly find an inclination to a one-sided  verticalism: individual elements exaggerated in character and usually exag- gerated in form as well, not relating to each other, with nothing in common. Parallelism is the only bond. Our political attitude suggests itself here. From  * Note Theo van Doesburg’s opposite view (De Stijl, nos. 6/7 [1924}). 
this perspective we can understand the Bismarck Tower epidemic and the epidemic of ideal designs for skyscrapers. With an approach like this, the basis for every new building is always different and always new. “The sys- tematic use of the vertical in Germany is a kind of mysticism—a mysticism in matters of physics is the poison of German architecture. A simple fact refutes all this: we live in a building floor by floor, horizontally layered, not vertically” (Le Corbusier in L’esprit nouveau).  From this point of view, whose essence is unconscious separation (“sin- gularity”) and a one-sided direction of creative forces inward (“introspec- tion”), it is therefore to some extent difficult to imagine how we could arrive at the totality of a city. When Scharoun calls buildings like cinemas or the- aters components of an urban development plan, one is skeptical as long as the riddie remains unsolved of how a whole can be formed from elements that do not desire this whole but only themselves.  An essay in the Flemish magazine Het Overzicht (September 1923) on “Stedenbouw" is interesting in this context. Although the author, Louis van der Swaelmen, does persistently speak the language of a functionalist — “It here concerns functions and organs" —in practical terms he opts for Le Nétre and Haussmann.®  We said that the element of movement in architecture can never play more than a surrogate role, but it should be added here that there are attempts in Russia to turn actual movement (change of place) into an architectural device.  The most radical and earliest attempt is Tatlin's model for the Monument to the Third international in Moscow (1919/1920) (page 147).  The model is 20 m high. The building itself would be over 400 m high. [...] It con- sists of two cylinders and a pyramid of glass that turn at different speeds. Within these glass structures are the great halls for meetings, reunions, accords, etc. Then there are great plants for climate control: heating the assembly rooms in winter and cooling them in summer. These building units are surrounded by an iron spiral soaring into the sky.” [...] His monument has the same practical beauty  as a crane or an industrial bridge. Tatlin says that he made the triangle the pre-  — * Trotsky said of an essay by Lenin written in 1917 that it was like “a massive steel spi-  ral surrounded by a solid ring, and that the spiral in the future would extend, expand  waar  dominant form in order to express Renaissance statics. He expresses the dynam- ics of our time in a wonderful spiral, For his material he chose glass as well as  iron, already commonly in use for modern construction.®  (Here one should mention Bruno Taut’s glass house at the Cologne Werk- bund exhibition [1914], the first to try out the constructive and aesthetic possibilities of building with glass [Elias Ehrenburg, Friihlicht, no. 3}.)& Bruno Taut's lron Monument of 1913, height 30 m, can be considered the orthogonal-static miniature ancestor of Tatlin’s monument, and some designs for exhibition towers by Wenzel August Hablik of Itzehoe (1918/19) can be seen as intermediate links in the evolutionary chain.*” Here the dynamic elements of rotation and oblique position begin to appear.  Recently the less than satisfactory outcome of a competition for a Palace of Labor in Mosow Ied to a discussion in the Russian press, stimulated by a very bold essay by K. Selinski, entitled “Stil und Stahl” which ended with the words: “Architects, engineers, adapt to the pace and meaning of history — build movement."6  But it would be a mistake to believe that movement, as Selinski under- stands it here, had much to do with the movement of individualistically minded functionalists. Selinski does not make his demand based on soul and expression (war has been declared on these factors in the new Russia; see René Fuldp Miller: “Der kollektive Mensch,” Vossische Zeitung 3, October 1923) —but for the sake of a setting for the new human collective. For this  reason we shall return to Selinski’s essay later.  f for the functionalists the basis of every new building is forever new and different, then it seems reasonable that in working they rely on eternal nature. In fact their ideal is the total merger with nature: the buitding not as a body foreign to nature but as its organic component.  Haring tries to design the rooms in his clubhouse in Rio de Janeiro in such a way that they are not general, transposable, interchangeable spaces  but are fundamentally determined by their particular situation in nature. The ocean bay, mountain structure, color of vegetation, coastline, qualities of light, etc., should all play an active part in the quite particular, unique, and nonrepeatable form of halls and rooms. Nature should be embraced  — and ideologically embrace the entire content of the Revolution” (L. Trotsky, Uber Lenin, German edition [Berlin, 1924).  ant 
within the building and likewise every room should be embraced in every other one— following the model of organic life. One is reminded of Chinese féng shui and the interpretation that Ernst Boerschmann places on the concept.® The functionalist tends to depersonalize the building process. He is reluctant to adopt an imperatorial attitude toward the world. He inte- grates himself and his product. The person who builds is ultimately only the mediator. For him the perfect building would be one that grew out of the ground tike an organic plant. (Finsterlin—an example is an issue on snail shells published by Wendingen.  One could thus raise the objection here, contrary to what has been said above, that the functionalist is defined just by the idea of integration, by the negation of any form of individualism!  But no! For integration into nature means integration into endless ambi- guity, that is to say, into everything and nothing; it does not contradict indi- vidualism, as the hermit demonstrates. Nature enthusiasts love solitude. Integration into nature is only a euphemism for individualism, for the rejec- tion of society.  In the end experience shows that precisely in this functionalist attitude that wants to dehumanize architecture, anthropomorphism prevails — more so than in any other humanist approach. For it is always the human being that places one space next to another. And if he does not accept responsi- bility for this task because he finds it imperatorial and rejects it, but instead wants to let things evolve from the inner nature of the materials and the spaces, then (in order to be able to grasp it) he will always have to inter- pret this nature first, because this inner nature of spaces and materials will always remain foreign to him—and how else should he interpret it but according to his own human, indeed personal condition?!  n fact dehumanization is the very thing that leads to humanization, to anthropomorphism.  When steps collide with a wall and | prepare for the steps by means of contrasting stripes in the wali, | do not know whether the wall or the steps find this pleasing and whether | have done what is right for them: | am thus bringing precisely the subjectively human concepts that | wanted to avoid into the objective world.  solation, absolute individualism is the ultimate driving force behind consistent functionalism. Even its reference to the organic is not primary but simply the consequence of an individualistic attitude. Thus the deciding factor is the relationship with society!  Functionalist deliberations are correct so long as they concern a specific matter, and they go wrong as soon as things have to fit together. It is cor- rect to say that a single rectangular room is uneconomical, that a curve is a better biological transcription of real usable space. But if it is a matter of arranging several rooms together, the result js different. If several oval, cir- cular, or curved rooms are put together, far more space is lost than ina group of rectangular rooms that fit together much better. The honeycomb can be cited once more as an example from nature. In individual organisms the single organs are certainly curved, but they fit snugly together because they are made of flexible, pliable material.  Haring and Scharoun sometimes choose different widths for their corri- dors, allowing them, like living arteries, to narrow, to shrink, in places where there is less traffic. This is all right provided that traffic always fol- lows this same path until the death of the building, that the same condi- tions prevail as on the first day, in the same way as is the case for blood  corpuscles in an organism. But it is wrong, and the functional becomes antifunctional as soon as the traffic finds different conditions—such as through a change of owner or when purpose alters traffic requirements — whereby it could be heaviest in precisely those places where the plan requires it to be lightest.  Thus in view of the fact that an individual item, even if it functions excel- lently in and for itself, and even if it is competely adapted to an infinitely manifold nature, is not adequate for society’s living requirements, it indeed  closes itself to them because it is exaggerated for the sake of uniqueness in space, time, and personality and is not open to duration, change, and multiplicity. In such a case it is questionable whether the mechanical struc- tures of rectangularity are not socially more correct in functional terms! Once more then: the deciding factor is the attitude toward society. The human being stands between nature and society. He opts for  human community and thus places himself in a certain state of tension with nature. He opts for nature and is in a certain state of tension with society.  Expressed differently, the human being bases his actions and work either on the fact, the awareness of human community and his membership in it, or on a feeling of unity with nature. As a creator he works from the whole to the individual or from the individuai to the whole!  According to this, two clear types can be distinguished: at their extremes are the rationalist and the romantic.  ann 
In the context of architecture we have identified the consistent function- alist as representing one of these types, the romantic. His opposite is the consistent rationalist who has congealed into formalism.  When van de Velde referred to the machine, he saw it as the neat, concise, modern, and elegant form.  When the functionalist refers to the machine, he sees it as the moving tool, the perfect approximation to an organism.  When the utilitarian refers to the machine, he sees it as an economic principle of saving work, power, and time.  When the rationalist refers to the machine, he sees it as the representa- tive and patron of standardization and typification.  Let us now turn to the clear-thinking representative of the Western view, the Swiss Charles-Edouard Jeanneret (b. 1887), who has already been quoted several times. He is known as a purist painter and publisher of L’esprit nou- veau in Paris and is better known as an architect under the pseudonym Le Corbusier-Saugnier, who worked for Peter Behrens for a short time. Le Corbusier adopts a position of absolute Sachlichkeit. Naturally he rejects the facade: “Architecture has nothing to do with styles. Louis xiv, Xv, XVI, or Gothic are to architecture as the feather on a woman’s head — occasionally pretty but not always, and never more than that.” He admires the work of modern engineers. “Without pursuing an architectural idea, guided only by the conditions of functional calculations derived from the laws that govern the universe, and by the concept of a living organism, modern engineers have taken the fundamental elements and by putting them together accord- ing to firm rules, they have come close to great works of art and allow the work of the human hand to resonate with the universal order.”  In a series of essays in L’esprit nouveau, “Des yeux qui ne voient pas,” Le Corbusier contrasted types of modern motorcars, airplanes, etc., with con- ventional contemporary architecture and came to this result: “If problems of the dwelling and its layout were studied like a chassis, we should very soon see our houses transformed and improved. If houses were produced industrially, serially like a chassis, we would see unexpected forms, but they would be healthy, defensible forms, and an aesthetic would be formulated with surprising precision.”  A house: protection against heat, cold, rain, thieves, the curious — a receptacle for  light and sun. A certain number of compartments for cooking, work, intimate life.  A room: a surface upon which one can move freely; a bed on which to stretch out; a chair for comfort and another for work; a table for work; drawers so that every object can quickly be put in its place. Number of rooms: one for cooking, one for eating, one for working, one for bathing, and one for sleeping. Such are the stan-  dards of a dwelling.  In order to arrive at a definition of a simple, clear, and defensible type for such “machines for living,’ Le Corbusier recommends the use of standards:  One has to set up a standard in order to face the problem of perfection. When a standard is established, competition immediately and violently comes into play.  !n order to win, one has to do things better than one’s rival, in every part, in the line of the whole, and in every detail. That is what all parties are compelled to: progress! The standard is a necessity. The standard is based on sure foundations, not arbitrariness, but with the certainty of intention and with a logic controlled by experiment.... The establishment of a standard means exhausting all practical and reasonable possibilities, deriving a type that will be recognized as appropriate to the maximum performance of functions, using minimal means, as little hand  assembly as possible, and a minimum of materials: words, sounds, colors, forms.  This emphasis on the type, on the universally valid, the need for a norm is what makes Le Corbusier fundamentally different from the functional- ists. The basis of his work is the primary awareness of belonging to human society. To be sure, functionalists will agree with many, perhaps all, of Le Corbusier's pronouncements, but there then remains the distinction that what is heterogeneous for them is autogenous for Le Corbusier, to use Paul Tillich’s terminology (Das System der Wissenschaften nach Gegenstanden und Methoden).”°  A recurring and vigorously emphasized aspect of Le Corbusier's  approach is the importance of the floor plan, because it is the floor plan that primarily contains the social element of building.  “Mass and surface are determined by the plan. The plan is the genera- tor. All the worse for those people with no imagination.”  The whole structure rises on a foundation and develops according to a rule drawn on the ground in the floor plan. Good forms, variety of form, unity of a geometric  nature, communication of harmonies —that is architecture. The plan is the basis.  aa 
Without a plan there can be no greatness of invention and of expression, no rhythm, no volume, no coherence. Without a plan we have only the sensation intolerable  to man of formlessness, misery, disorder, and arbitrariness. The plan demands the most active invention, At the same time it demands the strictest discipline. The plan is the determining factor for the whole. It is the decisive moment. A plan is not a pretty thing to draw, like a Madonna’s face. ft is a severe abstraction, nothing but dry mathematics for the eye. But the work of the mathematician remains one of the highest activities of the human mind. The unity of the law is the law of the good floor plan—a simple, infinitely variable law.  What is already clear in these statements by Le Corbusier is his social view of architecture. His thinking moves from the whole to details, that is, for him the fundamental element is order, which is inseparable from any overview, whereas architecture can just as logically be directed toward expression, at the point where it creates and forms a single object, an indi- vidual body, something that exists for itself. Even an architect concerned with expression will, of course, draw plans and will not underestimate how very important they are, but it is right that we should hear a paean of praise to the pian from an architect who makes the totality his starting point. The plan is the element that fits the structure into the floor, the universal: it is the union of the enduring base with the earth common to all. But the eleva: tion is the more individual element, the differentiating factor. A plan beiongs to the wor'd of the horizontal, an elevation to the world of the vertical.  The pian conveys, in the most compressed form possible, the order and overview of the building; the elevation conveys the construction. It is there- fore not surprising that someone who lays such emphasis upon the plan should emphatically underline the element of order. “Architecture is art in he highest sense —mathematical order” “More and more, constructions and machines can be represented in proportions and in a play of volumes and materials; many of them are true works of art as they contain number — hat is order”  Order — universal validity — rejection of all subjective elements in building, rejection of precisely that movement that van de Velde called “dramatic.” “The cathedral is not a plastic work of art, it is a drama: a struggle against he law of gravity, concern with the sphere of emotions. For this reason we search in it for complementary values of a subjective nature beyond the plastic element.” If order is to be visible in built space it needs elementary primary forms. For the architect concerned with expression, such demands  aan  do not exist: what is most irregular can at the same time be most expres- sive. Le Corbusier works with clear, recurring, unambiguously comprehensible masses: “Cube, cone, cylinder, sphere, and pyramid are the great primary forms that light reveals to advantage. They give us a clear and tangible image without ambiguity. For this reason these forms are beautiful forms, the most beautiful forms.” “If the fundamentals of architecture are sphere, cone, and cylinder (one thinks of Cézanne’s statement), as creators and emphasizers of form, they are purely geometrical by nature. But geometry frightens today’s architect.” The first European architect to recognize the positive role of geometry for architecture would seem to have been Berlage, who praised geometrical form as early as his Zurich lectures of 1907. It stands above the ali too personal and often ugly character of the idiosyn- cratic because it is “not individual and essentially always beautiful in itself.” Something that is very important to our case now emerges, justifying and explaining the extent to which we have followed Le Corbusier's pro- nouncements: whereas an architect who is concerned with the individual work, and is therefore looking for expression, always places the demands of purpose clearly in the foreground and consequently stresses construction,  the architect proceeding from the whole, and thus concerned with order, will stress an element that has no fundamental significance for functionalists — play! Functionalists want to make their buildings into tools, but rationalists (and this is surprising at first) are equally determined to see them as toys!  Expression isolates, is always serious by nature, and in attempting to overcome its seriousness does not transcend the half-measures of the grotesque.  The overview may well be able to be lighthearted. Play requires commu- nity, order, rules.  Le Corbusier does not expressly talk about these relationships, but the expression “play” repeatedly occurs in his writings—a concept that appar- ently seems to him to be the best analogy for his ideas. A sentence like this one: “Architecture is the masterly, correct, and magnificent play of masses brought together under light” recurs frequently in many variations,” and elsewhere Le Corbusier makes supplementary remarks on the subject of  — * Emile Malespine writes similarly in Manometre, Lyons, 1923, p. 50. “Health is line, surface, light, the great geometrical masses, which in their play give the impression of  security, reason, and repose.” 
“ourpose” and “construction” — not in Poelzig's romantically disapproving way but by integrating these important elements, which he continually stresses himself, into the whole and entirely rejecting their isalation and indepen- dence, (isolation and independence of individual factors are potentially dan- gerous for German artists; for example the element of expression and mime is unquestionably part of dance, but it is a mistake to isolate this factor and make modern dance out of expressive mime.) Le Carbusier says:  A commonplace for young architects states: one must express construction. And another: a thing is beautiful when it corresponds to its purpose. (Compare the much | more correct version by Otto Wagner quoted above: “Something impractical can  never be beautiful!”) The good Lord may have emphasized joints and vertebrae, but  there is still something else. Architecture has a different meaning and different  tasks from showing constructions and fulfilling purposes. Purpose is here under  stood as a matter of pure utility, of comfort, and of practical elegance. Architecture  is art in the highest sense, mathematical order, speculation, perfect harmony  through the proportionality of all relationships: that is the “purpose” of architecture.  Therefore the conception of architecture as an art is the conscious repre- sentation of aesthetic demands, whereas functionalists and utilitarians will always tend to negate building as an art. Adolf Loos (b. 1870): “Only a very small part of architecture belongs to art: the gravestone and the monu ment. Everything else that serves a purpose must be eliminated from the ranks of art” (Sturm, 1911, p. 334).* 7!  Le Corbusier consciously starts with man. Human will is the decisive fac- tor: “Brutal materiality can only accept the idea through the order that one imposes upon it.” The aim of the human desire to build is standardization: “Every problem that will emerge tomorrow is a problem of synthesis; it requires a stricter standardization than any age has ever known.”  Just as striving to dehumanize building, to eliminate the element of will, actually brings the functionalists to humanization, so the rationalists are led  —  * Other formulations by Adolf Loos, for example his reference to standardization, cor respond very closely with those of Le Corbusier, who must have been stimulated by Loos in Vienna. Here are some pronouncements by Loos: “To change a form when no sachlich improvement is possible... is the greatest absurdity. | can only invent some-  thing new when | have a new problem, in architecture, for example: a building for  134  Hh. WM LUN eee Oe  by a conscious emphasis of human will to objectivity and Sachlichkeit. There is no doubt that someone whose starting point is the consciousness of human community is in a certain state of tension with nature. He is not inclined to make buildings harmonize with the existence of evolved organ- isms in a kind of mimicry, where the result can only be a hybrid, not an organism and not a building; he creates the embodiment of his human will. In opposing nature's rule, his house disputes nature’s space and orders it according to human requirements: the house is in a state of tension with nature. The house has its own center and expresses its will almost aggres- sively (Mendelsohn: “Nature is organic development, the house individua will”). But far from standing brutal and alien in nature for this reason, it enters into closer unity with it as a result of tensions. The house is mathe- matics, and because it is mathematics — that is, law, order, purity, health,  and logical consistency in its requirements and tendencies — it binds itself to the liveliness of nature, which is never possible through dissolution or relativization but always only through concentration and absolute architec- tural logic. “The more human creations move away from direct contact, the more strongly they incline to pure geometry. A violin or a car that touches our body has a low degree of geometrical rigor, but a city is pure geometry” (L'esprit nouveau, p. 18).  Here we must briefly mention the two French architects who taught Le Corbusier's generation (Mallet-Stevens, Guévrékian, Dufour, Lemaire, Jour- dain, etc.): Auguste Perret of Paris, who works with his brother Gustave, and Tony Garnier of Lyons.” Perret was first and foremost a builder. The decla- ration that he wrote for the Stavba issue devoted to him (Prague, July 1923) is astonishingly reminiscent of Otto Wagner: “A living architecture is that which faithfully expresses its epoch. One looks for examples of it in every field of construction. One will choose works that are strictly subordinates to  —  turbines, hangars for airplanes. But a chair, table, wardrobe? | will never admit that we, for the sake of the imagination, should change forms tried and tested over cen- turies” ("Von der Sparsamkeit”). Loos's most important works are a theater project (1896); the Café Museum in Vienna (1898); the Steiner Villa in Hietzing (1898); the Goldmann and Salatsch Department Store in Vienna (1900), the Amencan Bar in Vienna (1907); the design for the Chicago Tribune (1922); the Terrace Hotel project, “Babylon” (1923) (L’architecture vivante, Paris, 1923).  135 
eer a  their use and are built with the judicious use of material, that achieve beauty by their design and harmonious proportions, and that are inspired by the necessary elements that compose them.”?3 Perret is from the same mold as Eiffel, whose spirit also recurs in the wonderful structure erected by Freyssinet in Orly for the great dirigible hangars.” Perret used ferroconcrete to create a skeleton into which walls are placed as light membranes. This technique is most consistently used in the church at Le Raincy. Perret’s main works are the casino in Saint-Malo hat has already been mentioned (1899/1900), an apartment house on the rue Franklin in Paris (1902/03), which was the decisive turning point in Perret's output, a garage on the rue du Ponthieu in Paris (1908/09), and he Théatre des Champs Elysées in Paris (1911/12). The story of this build- ing has become a quarrel between Perret and van de Velde, in which not only German friends such as Karl Ernst Osthaus (who, however, does not do justice to Perret's achievement) took van de Velde’s side but (among others) also Jacques Mesnil in an essay called “Henry van de Velde et le théatre des Champs Elysées."”5 There can be no question but that the spatial design in the Théatre des Champs Elysées was due to van de Velde. But the extent to which the forcing out of van de Velde was caused by personal intrigue on the part of the Perrets and how far (beyond the personalities) it represents a victory of modern construction over architecture can scarcely be decided from Mesnil's essay. More recent buildings by Perret are the docks in Casa- blanca (1916), the Esders Workshops (1919), a high-rise project (1922), the church at Le Raincy (1923), a bank for the Société Marseillaise de Crédit in Paris, and a decorator's studio also in Paris. All of these buildings show great imagination in their constructional design and at the same time offer bad taste in architectural form.  Garnier (b. 1869) is an architect through and through. In two large publi- cations he provides an insight into his work, which is admirable both for he grandeur of its concepts and for the most scrupulously detailed work in execution. The book Les grands travaux de la ville de Lyon contains buildings by Garnier that he erected or planned for that community when he was city architect: the Franco-American Sanatorium, the Grange-Blanche Hospital, the stadium, the art school, the slaughterhouses, the municipal residential buildings, the main post office, the telephone exchange, and the imposing Bourse du travail with its congress halls, libraries, museums, administration  offices, etc.” Edouard Herriot, then mayor of Lyons, wrote a few introduc- ory sentences for the portfolio. Even more comprehensive and bold is the  portfolio Une cité industrielle, étude pour la construction des villes, in which a modern industrial town with all its residential, traffic, hygiene, and edu- cational problems is worked out in masterly and minute detail and with a wealth of valuable ideas.’? This labor was completed in 1905. Whereas Herriot says in his foreword to the Lyons portfolio that “our French cities still lack all the institutions essential for their up-to-date functioning,’ one can praise the Cité industriefle for the fact that its creator, probably more than any other French architect, respected and liberated healthy function, as his plan for the sanatorium demonstrates in particular. On his relation- ship with German architecture Garnier says: “| have never had a chance to see the architectural designs that impressed me, but | noticed on the other hand the often great ingenuity in the technical installations that | have seen in Germany” (Reisen in Deutschland, 1907 and 1911).  Nothing is more self-evident than that a rationalist should stress form. Form is nothing more than the consequence of establishing a relationship  between human beings. For the isolated and unique figure in nature there is  no problem of form. Individuals, even individuals in nature, are free. The problem of form arises when an overview is demanded. Form is the prereq- uisite under which an overview becomes possible. Form is an eminently social matter. Anyone who recognizes the right of society recognizes the right of form.  If humanity were just a sum of individuals, it would probably be possible to see the house as a pure tool, as purely functional. Anyone who sees a form in humanity, a pattern articulated in time and space, approaches the house with formal requirements, in which case “formal” is not to be con- fused with “decorative.”  \f every building is part of a built whole, then it recognizes from its aes- thetic and formal requirements certain universally valid rules, rules that do not arise from its individual functional character [Z2weckcharakter] but from the requirements of this whole. For here, in the social sphere after all, must lie the primeval elements of the aesthetic (Guyau: Art is tenderness).”? A one-sided fulfillment of function [Zweckerfullung] leads to anarchy. Where a building is perceived as part of a whole, the character of a toy is added to the character of a tool, the absolute to the relative element.  The concept of “form” does not deal with accessories, decoration, taste, or style (from Gothic to Biedermeier) but with the consequences arising from a building’s ability to be an enduring structure, The functionalist prefers to exaggerate the purpose to the point of making it unique and 
momentary (a house for each function!) but the rationalist takes the pur- pose broadly and generally as readiness for many cases, simply because he gives thought to the enduring qualities of buildings, which perhaps see many generations with changing requirements and therefore cannot live without leeway. The rationalist is no more indifferent to purpose than the functionalist. Although he does not have the perspective of the Baraque genius opposing purpose, he avoids the tyrannical rule of purpose. As the functionalist looks for the greatest possible adaptation to the most special- ized purpose, so the rationalist looks for the most appropriate solution  for many cases. The former wants what is absolutely fitting and unique for the particular case; the latter wants what is most fitting for general need, the norm. The former is all for adaptation, relation, formlessness growing from selflessness, and mimicry; the latter is also for personal will, self- consideration, play, and form.  There is no doubt that the West leads in its determination to see archi- tecture as a whole and from a social point of view. | quote from a program- matic essay by Victor Bourgeois for the Brussels magazine Sept arts: “Since the building is inseparable from its neighbor and since a street extends into another street, all powerful architecture tends to style, that is to say,  a superior collective equilibrium.”8° The following passage explains how per- sonal and psychological work comes to be rejected: “A modern architect who is compelled to build today on any street in Brussels is almost insolent with regard to his art if he realizes an interesting building —what progess is this if this hostile architecture becomes an indifferent architecture."8!  In Western Europe the feeling is not that an architect should work in a special, original, and personal style (which he had best protect from imita- tions by official patent). Here conspicuous work is considered bad eo ipso— simply because it is conspicuous: “A home must be made a measure of man” (Malespine) and “Originality is, moreover, a form of insubordination” (Georges Linze).82 From this point of view it is understandable when Roland Holst emphatically points Dutch artists toward “the correction that the romantic always and under all circumstances signifies” (Architektura, February 1924),83  it is not surprising that Le Corbusier addresses the problems of the modern metropolis, for these accord with the basic thrust of rationalism, that is, working from an awareness of community, moving from the whole to the individual. (It is precisely by this means that form emerges since form Is correspondence, and tact comes from fangere = to touch.) In his Principes  fondamentaux d’urbanisme moderne, Le Corbusier maintains the clarity of his rationalism throughout, but at the same time demonstrates that the consis- tent rationalist gets stuck in just the same cul-de-sac as the consistent func- tionalist.2* Functionalism may court the danger of exaggerating to the point of becoming grotesque, but rationalism courts the danger of reducing every- thing to the schematic.  It is quite logical that the individual aiming at expression will arrive at moving curves with maximum fluidity, fulfilling every function, and will therefore see concrete as a plastic mass that can be modeled. Contrast this with R. van t’Hoff: “Only with ferroconcrete are the horizontal and vertical adaptations consistent” (De Stiji 2, no. 5).8° The rationalist who is inclined toward an overview likewise emphasizes straight lines and right angles. “Why,” asks Scharoun, “must everything be straight, when the straight line is produced only by the environment?” Le Corbusier might reply: “Precisely because nothing can remain isolated, because we all stand within an envi- ronment, everything must be straight and the curve is individualistic lack of discipline.”  There is no question that only the straight line and right angle can be the basis of the modern creation, which seeks to eliminate arbitrariness and rejects all anthropomorphic curves — and yet it would be wrong to turn the straight line and right angle into a dogma or rigid principle. The modern metropolis sketched by Le Corbusier, which in fact hardly touches upon many problems, is certainly consistently straight-lined and right-angled down to the last detail, but it can be so only because and for as long as it remains on paper. Here Le Corbusier can certainly decree: “The curve —that’s paraly- sis,’ but if he were to realize his plan and did not find a field as flat as a silver platter, he would be forced by every bend in a river or by every hill to depart from the rigid straight lines and strict right angles; otherwise one could say, “This straight line is senility.” and thus the functionalist would be justified.  Le Corbusier's city plan shows fairly clearly the dangers of a consistent rationalism: form becomes an overbearing, life-constraining, stifling mask, and the result is no longer the integration into a living whole but an academic division that turns play into a show. And then it is time again to emphasize purpose and underline function to lead the way to recovery and reflection.  It seems to us that all building contains an element of compromise: between purpose and form, between individual and society, between econ- 
omy and politics, between dynamics and statics, between forcefulness and uniformity, between mass and space —and that style in each case is noth ing more than the particular version of this compromise. Kurt Schwitters’s view (Merz 6) is similar in principle: “Style expresses the commen will of many, ideally all, the democracy of the will to design. But since most people —even the occasional artist —are idiots by and large, and since idiots are usually most doggedly convinced about what they think, and as agreement by all can only take the middle road, so Style is usually a compromise between art and non-art, between play and purpose.’86  Today the East shows a passionate emphasis on the dynamic element. Such an emphasis is already hinted at in German functionalism. Just as the dynamic element here, in accordance with our entire constitution and past, is oriented individually, so we find in Russia that dynamism is collectively oriented, indeed dynamism seems to be virtually the means by which the life of collective human beings is expressed architecturally, Let us return to Selinski’s essay “Baut Bewegung!” [Build movement!], from which | have already quoted.®7 It shows that this problem can be solved only with the aid of every possible technical and mechanical device, but it also lets us see that a strong emphasis on dynamism aiways tends toward the romantic. revolutionary. We share here the most important sections of Selinski’s essay (Neue Kultur-Korrespondenz 1, nos. 4/5, Berlin 1923):  Stone is becoming extinct. Stone is becoming a retrograde element. It serves only to hinder the evolution of architecture and is thus becoming socially reactionary. Immobile, cramped, and crooked in its dynamic possibilities, stone cannot follow the rapid tempo of life. But life is becoming dynamic with enormous rapidity. Today people still move along city streets in carriages and traps. Tomorrow there will be moving sidewalks, just as advertisement boards, neon signs, pneumatic doors, etc., are already on the move. But a clay-footed colossus like the one pro- posed by architects (meaning the competition entries for the Palace of Labor in Moscow) will never contain within its gates the tens and hundreds of thousands of people who will surge to the Pantheon of the Revolution on November 7th, Its walls will stand too silent and immobile, its doors will be too narrow, its acoustics will be unsuited for the hundred thousand voices of the jubilant people.  Why not erect a gigantic building on an enormous, rotating steel foundation with removable glass and aluminium wails? Such a palace would be capable of  guiding the masses of people from roam to room, opening itself up to magnificent  halls. bringing masses of listeners closer to speakers from its various platforms. Instead of elevators, continuously rotating spiral ladders will carry people up to the roof. Why should one not, for example, set up some rooms, classes, laborato- ries, and operation theaters that can in turn swing around to the south and the sun, and in the evening flood the street with light to be exploited for general artis- tic and educational purposes?  We must proceed to a new building material: steel, ferroconcrete, and espe- cially Duralumin, glass, and asbestos. We now see a shift to these materials across the whole cultural front. It would be a disgrace to build a palace in the heart of Red Moscow, in the residence of the Federation of the Soviet Union, whose physiognomy is directed to the past when it should serve the revolutionary present.  Aside from dynamic building, a number of other constructional problems must be solved in the Palace of Labor. Acoustics in the large halls must be strengthened with an electric membrane. Walls must literally speak with the assistance of radio telephones. Walls, ceilings, and vestibule must become translucent when neces. sary. The radio must be exploited to full advantage. Radio waves must beam through glass corridars to activate electric motors driving ventilation and various other devices like cooking facilities, for example. The roof must be suitable for  walking in the open air, cinema, lighting effects, sport, etc.#8  (In discussing this, Akseiski said the following: “Things like this have not even been carried out in America. Without disputing the possibility in princi- ple of such a building in the future, it must be said that it would be ridicu- fous to try to build it at the moment.”) It is impossible to think of a sharper contrast with the Russian Selinski than the Frenchman Albert Gleizes, who in his Vom Kubismus writes in the chapter on “Dynamism”: “A flower is immobile. It can be moved by outside forces — otherwise it remains static. A painting is a silent and immobile manifestation. To speak of dynamism when dealing with a painting is to give words a meaning that they do not havet” (p. 30).8%  The element of movement is shared by German functionalism and Russian dynamism (biomechanics). (Italian Futurist architecture falls into the same category, although after the early death of Sant’Elia, killed in 1916, Virgilio Marchi is probably the only one who still represents it. Marchi emphasizes and underlines individualistic, dramatic, dynamic, and lyrical elements. “Every architect has his own rhythm and his own law that does not coincide with that of anyone else.”)9° In Germany one is dealing with 
movement as an expression of individual life, with a pseudo-organic, plastic movement working from within, whereas in Russia one is dealing with instal- ation, montage, and constructing frameworks. Working from the outside  ike this, almost without a plan, produces ingenious constructivist works that ultimately remain always studio objects, as is seen, for instance in Ladovski’s class at VAHUTEMAS Moscow,?!  Plasticity and construction are both features of architecture, but they are not themselves architecture.  tis a feature common to the East and West that, in contrast to individualist Germany, they proceed from the collective. But the collective is fundamen- ally different here and there: France has a structurally articulated society; Russia is dominated by the masses. A by-product of this is that the plan is a major feature in the West but is addressed strikingly tittle in the East. here and in fascist Italy the plan is replaced by direct tension of masses. The problem is to fuse the two tendencies, statics and dynamics. In an excellent essay “Der jung-europaische Staat” (Vossische Zeitung, 25 Sep- tember 1923), Willy Hellpach recommended this task to Germany in terms of national law: “The remedy is not to compe! emergent professional forces  to submit to the imaginary authority of Platonic powers again — in history attempts of that kind always end with the complete ruin of the formal powers — but to create a new state with real authority by taking those forces that have emerged as a result of powerful spiritual processes of radical change in the nation and integrating them into the state as legal, synarchic forces, thus putting an end to their unlawful, anarchic effects."92  Heinrich Mann takes a similar line: “We are in the middie and it is our task to link East and West; one does not shut off nature. In the future we will be the republic in which representation of class and parliamentarianism are interlinked.”93 The exclusive fulfillment of purpose, the one-sided focus on function makes the individual building dynamic and qualifies it. It becomes one “con- sequence” within a flow of biological dependencies, with a logical inclination  to include the temporal factor. One-sided focus on form gives statics the rigidity of a general, abstract “law.” Interpenetration of the two elements makes the building a living, concrete “form” [Gestalt]. “Consequence” — “law” — “form.” This is the terminology of Paul Tillich’s Das System der Wissenschaften nach Gegenstanden und Methoden. The law: “The thinking person can look away from individual being to create some-  142  thing general, comprehensive” (physics). Consequence: “The individual becomes part of a (temporal) context” (history). Form: "The individual being becomes a general being. Form is actually the concrete, the real being” (technology) (Christian Herrmann in a critique of Tillich, Sozialistische Monatshefte, 1923, p. 569).*  Alfred Vierkandt in his Dualismus im modernen Weltbild [Dualism in the modern world image] seems close to such a view.% Christian Herrmann sums up his doctrine like this:  In this sense every culture is by its very nature built upon a dualism of principles. For on the one hand culture represents the epitome of the meaning of life, derived from life, or aimed at its preservation and furtherance, in brief, things that exist from the point of view of utility; but on the other hand, such things have their own intrinsic value that opposes the content as that which formed it. Tension of this kind can be seen in all spheres of culture. This dysfunction between a utilitarian and a defined content and it’s pure formation as form can be seen everywhere, in law, art, religion, economics, society, science, and technology. In the life of the soul we find the same dualistic confrontation, for on the one hand it is a process entirely determined by biology, on the other hand, however, it leads to patterns with their own meaning and value. Spiritual acts are causally determined by their antecedents, but they are also determined by the meaning that they serve. Thus human beings are closely attached to two worlds: the world of biological necessity, a dark natural bedrock full of hardships, and a spiritual world with specific content and substance. (Sozialistische Monatshefte, 1923, p. 287).**  If we return to the building, we can say that its concrete form is a com- promise between individual (function) and society (form). In its pure devel- opment this compromise is inhibited by “expression” and “soul.” Its pure  — * Similar trains of thought in Kurt Riezler, Gestalt und Gesetz (Munich, 1924), p. 171; Felix Weltsch, Gnade und Freiheit (Munich, 1920); Viktor Engelhardt, Weltanschauung und Technik (Leipzig, 1922-1923); S. Friedlander, Schdpferische Indifferenz (Munich, 1918); Albert Lewkowitz, “Simmels religiéses Denken,’ in Religiése Denker der Gegenwart (Berlin, 1924); R. N. Coudenhove-Kalergi, Apologie der Technik (Leipzig, 1922).  ** | add here a passage from Piet Mondrian’s “Neue Gestaltung in der Musik und die  futuristischen italienischen Bruitisten,” German trans. Max Burchartz (De Stiji 6,  143 
form is living equilibrium, realization of a behavior that plays to many sides, open and yet determined. We may join Theo van Doesburg in calling it “formless” provided that we do not confuse “formless” [formics] with “shape- less” [gestaltios].9° Closed form in the sense of a “figure” is today no longer a satisfying element in art, either in architecture or in other fields. A drive toward the final fusion breaks the bounds of closed form (in painting this was done by Cubism) and tries to achieve pure relationships, spatial ten- sions that are never arbitrarily limited. “Art is equilibrium achieved by evalu- ation of all parts” (Schwitters). “Proportian” is the interpenetration of “function” and “form,” that is, a plastics of proportion replaces a morpho- plastics (Piet Mondrian). “As long as design uses any form, it is impossib to shape pure proportionalities. For this reason the new design has liber- ated itself from all creation of form” (Piet Mondrian).9” The younger generation of German architects insists on strict Sachlich-  le  keit. Mies van der Rohe explains: “We reject all aesthetic speculation, all doctrine, and all formalism. Let form be shaped by the nature of the task, using the means of our time. That is our work.” Otto Wagner had already insisted on the same thing in a very similar formulation.  The necessary and only sound approach is to reject aesthetic specula- tion, formalism, and doctrine, but it seerns to us quite a frequent error to make this rejection from an anti-aesthetic point of view, even if we inveigh against the aestheticism of aesthetes one hundred times a day. Rejecting aesthetic demands (which is not the same as aesthetic speculation) would be to saw off the branch on which one sits. As long as individual objects are being deait with, the fulfillment of purpose may suffice to create a healthy form. But if we accept the demands of a monumental architecture, that is, of an architectural whole, the bringing together of forms— even genuinely sound ones — does not suffice. The demand for unity is through and through an elementary aesthetic or artistic demand, and to assume that all strictly sachlich works “in themselves” would form a unity, even if they were devel- oped in a vacuum, is to draw a false conclusion. The task is not merely an overview of new buildings but also an overview of their landscape or urban environment.  Del no. 1): “Pure expression of the new spirit always remains true to itself in life as in art. It is the exact and conscious protection of balance, accordingly the balance between  the individual and the universal, between the natural and the spiritual.”  House, human being, sun, and landscape form a complex of mutual relationships. Just as the individual form gets its face and body organically from these relation- ships, so, for the sake of the overall idea, must a housing complex, as an overall urban composition of a complicated organism, fulfill more and various environ- mental demands in order to absorb, integrate, and subordinate the personality of individual organisms converted to something impersonal. Only when they are all conjoined do the parts attain the validity and meaning each intends. The types that result from such architectural tasks are not a necessary evil of an anxious economy; they are a necessity of life in terms of what a housing complex demands and means and what the individual objects, considered within the same framework,  must be, namely an organic unit (Richard Docker, Volkswohnung, 10 July 1923).  We should not abandon this demand because we are prejudiced — rightly! — against previous romantic methods of doing it justice, The demand itself remains as long as we do not abandon the full claim of design. A bridge over a river is not just a utilitarian problem but also a town planning problem, that is, the demand to insert its mass into the movement of the bank, into the rhythm of the streets and squares, by means other than for- mal nonsense and naturalistic mimicry is compietely an artistic-aesthetic one. One can deny these demands only by including under the concept of utility the consideration of the optical and logical, of the perceptually cor- rect, But then one has done nothing more than give aesthetic demands another name. in fact, according to utilitarian dogmatists, there is a double demand: the accord with sachlich-constructional demands and the accord with demands arising from the the nature of our organs of perception. And it is precisely these that we call aesthetic demands in the pure, original sense of the word (aiceé&vonot =| perceive). We do not doubt for a moment that these demands, just as much as sachiich-constructional ones, belong to the realm of human reason; these demands are not mystical and arbi-  trary nor are they in any way satisfied by that.  To care whether and if things relate to one another is under no circum- stances a matter of utility. But if we abandon the demand for unity, we can no longer speak well of design. The problem is not solved by the fact that hitherto peaple have always tried to create unity in an emotional or roman- tic fashion, using only the values and realities of the landscape, We have to solve it on the basis of reason.  We find that German architecture is somewhat inclined to devote itself to an extreme that changes fairly frequently and then gives way to the opposite 
extreme — the consequence of inner uncertainty. It is all too rarely recog: nized that the aim should be to stabilize the strong dynamic tensions that living architecture must absorb in order not to become aesthetic, and this certainly includes tensions of extreme revolutionary power and force, the kind demanded by Selinski's essay.  It is erroneous to think that dynamism can only be expressed in the elevation, in the animated “form” [Form]; instead, it is to a great degree a matter of the floor plan. And it is just as erroneous to believe that structural requirements are assured by a quadrature of the plan, which often enough remains a drawing-board ornament. In contrast Mendelsohn says: “Architec- ture establishes the conditions of its animated masses from its own laws: the dynamic condition, movement of space (seen in outline as its linear ele- ment), the rhythmic condition, the relationship of masses (seen in elevation as tts surface projection), and the structural condition or balance of move- ment (seen in plan and section as their structural elements).”  We find a clear and secure attitude in recent Dutch architecture as well as in recent Czech architecture, which is getting under way with surprising élan,  Theo van Doesberg, editor of De Stij!, stresses the double function of building: “Function from the perspective of practice; proportionality from the perspective of art.” Function and play. “Intentional artistic design and utilitarian constructivism combine to produce complete equilibrium” (De Stijl 6, nos. 6~7).9% Political realism and confidence of this kind spare Dutch architecture from swinging from extreme to extreme between opposing dogmas; it allows it the possibility of coping with all the dynamic tensions of ! our time openly and freely, without abandoning the demand for monumen- tality; it allows Dutch architecture the possibility of steady development.  Under the pressure of circumstances and through the expansion of aesthetic insight, it is only now that an architecture shaped by and through itself seems possible, an architecture in which the other arts will not be applied and thus sub- ordinated but one that will work organically together with the other arts; it makes possible an architecture that from the beginning experiences beauty in its con structional functions, that is, an architecture that through the tension of its pro- portions raises the construction itself above its material necessity to aesthetic form (J. J. P Oud).  Tatlin: Model for the Monument to the Third international 
The illustrations are arranged by country and within each country alphabeti- cally by architects’ names.  We should like to thank Messrs Theo van Doesburg (Paris), Karl Lonberg- Hoim (Detroit), Professor Markalous (Brno), and Karl Teige (Prague), for kindly providing material; we should also like to thank the following publish- ers: Albert Levy, Paris (L'architecte); Ch. Massin, Paris (Les grands travaux de la ville de Lyon); Auguste Vincent, Paris (Une cité industrielle); Ernst Wasmuth, Berlin; Delphin, Munich; Photo-Libraire de France, Paris (Guevrékian and Mallet-Stevens); Franco Campitelli, Foligno (illustration in text p. 101); and Karl Peters, Magdeburg (Fruhlicht, |, {J. J.] P. Oud factory, p. 37).  [In the interest of clarity, Behne’s English captions have been minimally edited. His German  and French captions remain essentially unchanged — ed.]  arn  Frank Lloyd Wright  San Francisco, 1920 
Albert Kahn  SuPTEESCHOSSES AS MOBEL  Seamless stee  ( Lloyd Wright  Coonley [House], Riverside, Ill, 1908 nice  n d'habitation  1aUs  
Albert Kahn  Link Belt Co., Nicetown  New York, 1924 [1923]  Office building with advertising lighting Maison pour bureaux avec éclairage réclame Burohaus mit Reklamebeleuchtung  John Root  Monadnock Building, Chicago, 1891  Plain brickwork, without steel framing  Elevée sans échafaudage d’acier uniquement en briques  In reiner Backstein-Konstruktion, ohne Stahlgertist, gebaut 
Henry van de Velde  Vorster & Co., Hagen, Westphalia, 1910 Engine room , : Halle des machines Sta Jasinski Maschinensaal Bathing establishment Henry van de Veide Etablissement de bains  Badeanstalt  W. H. Muller & Co., Rotterdam, 1924 Passage office; poster: van der Leck Bureau de passage; affiche: van der Leck Passage-Bureau; Piakat: van der Leck  GERMANY L'ALLEMAGNE DEUTSCHLAND  Otto Bartning  Berlin-Tempelhof, 1924/25 Ceramic factory  Fabrique de céramique Keramische Fabrik  
Peter Behrens  Berlin, 1911/12  The AEG mounting hal! (30 m wide)  Halle de montage de la AEG (30 m de largeur) Montagehalle der AEG (Breite 30 m)  Peter Behrens  Berlin, 1910/11  Haliway of the small-motor factory of the AEG Corridor de Ja fabrique de petits moteurs de la AEG Flur der Kleinmotorenfabrik der AEG 
Max Berg  Breslau, 1913 Century Hall, sectional view and interior, height 40 m Halle commemorative des fétes du centenaire,  section et vue intérieure, hauteur 40 métres Jahrhunderthalle, Schnitt und Innenansicht, Héhe 40 Meter  Richard Docker  Zurich, 1924  Design for a bridge across the Limmat Projet pour un pont sur La Limmat Entwurf fur eine Bracke Uber die Limmat 
Alfred Gellhorn, Martin Knauthe, and Rudolf Belling  Halle an der Saale, 1923 Gasoline tank  Réservoir a benzine Benzintank  H[einrich] de Fries  Berlin, 1924  Competition design for the offices and businesses in the Prince Albrecht Gardens  Travaux de concours pour les constructions de bureaux et de magasins dans les jardins Prince-Albrecht Wettbewerb fur die Bliro- und Geschaftsbauten in den Prinz-Albrecht-Garten  Walter Gropius and Adolf Meyer  Fagus Factory, Alfeld an der Leine, after 1913 [1911]  Factory producing shoe lasts and stamping molds, ground plan and elevation Fabrique de formes pour chaussures et de couteaux d'estampe, plans et élévation Schuhleisten-Fabrik und Stanzmesser-Fabrik, GrundriBe und Aufri8 
Walter Gropius and Adolf Meyer  Fagus Factory, Alfeld an der Leine, after 1913 [1911] Staircase  Escalier  Treppenhaus  Walter Gropius and Adolf Meyer  Fagus Factory, Alfeld an der Leine, after 1913 (1911] Machine hall  Halle des machines  Maschinenhaus 
Walter Gropius and Adolf Meyer  Cologne, 1914  The exhibition buildings of the “German Werkbund,” courtyard in front of the engine hall and a view of the offices at the rear  Constructions pour exposition du “Deutscher Werkbund" cour devant la halle des machines et face postérieure du batiment des bureaux Bauten flr die Ausstellung des “Deutschen Werkbundes", Hof vor der Maschinenhalle und Ruckseite des Burogebaudes  Wilhelm Deffke  Bulgaria, 1922 Sito for Varna Silo pour Varna Silo fur Varna  M. Luz  Konigsberg, Prussia, 1922  Competition design for the stock exchange Travail de concours pour le “Borsenhof” Wettbewerbs-Arbeit fur den “Borsenhof”  Hugo Haring  Berlin, 1922  Competition design for a business building in the TiergartenstraBe  Travail de concours pour une maison d’affaires dans la TiergartenstraBe Wettbewerbs-Arbeit fiir ein Geschaftshaus in der TiergartenstraBe 
Hugo Haring  Rio de Janeiro, 1923  German Club Building Maison pour le Club allemand Haus far den Deutschen Club  evenitzer See,  Hugo Haring  Garkau Property, Mecklenburg [Holstein], 1924 Farm buildings  Batiments pour !'exploitation rurale Wirtschaftsbauten 
ZIMMER  UNTEROESCHOSS HAUPTGESCHOSS, OBERGESCHOSD  it! hl bel oo kal minha.  al  oll  i HOt nOndkonomoooood  DEOOOOQDOOODnDeoonpoooo po ooonogoooooon  Ludwig Hilberseimer  Berlin, 1924  Row houses, plan and elevation  Maisons construites a l'alignement, plan et élévation Reihenhauser, Grundri® und Aufri8  Fritz [Friedrich] Kaldenbach with Breest & Co.  Dresden, 1918  Seck’s [Sack’s] millwright’s workshop Fabrique de moulins Seck Mohienfabrik Seck  
Erich Mendelsohn  Luckenwaide near Berlin, 1921/23  Hat factory. View through the gatehouse to the dye works and factory halls  Fabrique de chapeaux. Vue de la porte de 1a conciergerie sur la teinturerie et {es halles Hutfabrik, Blick durch das Torhduschen auf die Farberei und die Hallen  Erich Mendelsohn with Erich Laaser  Wistegiersdorf, Silesia, 1922/23  Reconstruction of the textile works, part of building with tower Reconstruction de la fabrique textile, corps de tour  Umbau der Textil-Werke, Turmtrakt 
L. Mies van der Rohe  Berlin, 1923 [1922]  Business offices, concrete, iron, glass Maison pour bureaux, béton, fer, verre Barohaus, Beton, Eisen, Glas  Note: The most functional layout of the working spaces determined the depth of the room: 16 m. A two-way frame with a span of 8 m and cantilever of 4 m, on all sides, was found to be the most economical structural principle. The trusses are 5 m apart. This system of trusses carries the ceiling slab, which at the end of the cantilevers turned upward to become the outer skin and  serves as the rear wall for the shelves, which were trans-  ferred from the interior to the outer wails to create an open plan. Above the 2 m high shelves is a continuous strip of ceiling-high windows.  Hans Poelzig  Luban near Posen, 1911/12 Chemical works  Fabrique de produits chimiques Chemische Fabrik 
ON ETA DA woersroe, Choe SanmTTEaebAy  Adolf Rading  Breslau, 1922  Garage, model and plan of ground floor Garage, modéle et plan du rez-de-chaussée Garage, Modell und Erdgescho8-Grundri8  Hans Scharoun  Kénigsberg, Prussia, 1922  Competition design for the stock exchange (hotel, offices, post office, bank), plan of ground floor Travail de concours pour le “Bérsenhot" (hétel, bureaux, poste, banque),plan du rez-de-chaussée Wettbewerbs-Arbeit flr den “Borsenhof” (Hotel, Buros, Post, Bank), Grundri8 des Erdgeschosses  Kart Schneider  Hamburg, 1924  Joiner’s workshop and residence  Atelier de menuiserie avec maison d'habitation Tischlerwerkstatte mit Wohnhaus 
Hans Séder  Kénigsberg, Prussia, 1922  Competition design for the stock exchange Projet de concours pour le “Bérsenhof" Wettbewerbs-Entwurf fur den “Bérsenhof” 
Bruno Taut  Leipzig, 1913 Exhibition pavilion Pavillon d'exposition Ausstellungspavillon  J. D. Peters and K. Lénberg-Holm  Kénigsberg, Prussia, 1922  Mode! for the stock exchange, office, hotel, post office Modéle pour le “Bérsenhof", bureau, héte!, poste Modell zum “Bérsenhof", Baro, Hotel, Post  Max Taut  Berlin, 1923/24  Offices of the “Allgerneiner Deutscher Gewerkschaftsbund,” safe deposit vault Bureaux du “Allgemeiner Deutscher Gewerkschaftsbund” trésor  Burohaus des “Allegemeinen Deutschen Gewerkschaftsbundes” Tresor  
Max Taut  Hans and Wassili Luckhardt Berlin-Schéneberg, 1923  Competition design for the Norma Too! Factory Berlin-Schéneberg, 1923 Plan de concours pour ta fabrique d'outils “Norma” Competition design for the Norma Tool Factory Wettbewerbs-Entwurf flr die Werkzeugfabrik “Norma” Plan de concours pour la fabrique d'outils “Norma”  Wettbewerbs-Entwurf flr die Werkzeugfabrik “Norma” 
Karl Lénberg-Holm  Chicago-Tribune, 1923 [1922]  Competition design, side view, elevation, and plan of ground floor  Projet de concours, fagade latérale, facade et plan du rez-de-chaussée Wettbewerbs-Entwurf, Seitenansicht, Front und Erdgescho8-GrundriB 
Robert Mallet-Stevens  Paris, 1924 Bookshop Librairie Buchladen  F. Le Coeur  Paris, 1923 [1911-1913]  Main telephone office  Administration centrale des téléphones (Central téléphonique “Bergére”] Telephon-Hauptamt 
Tony Garnier  Lyons, 1905 [25 May 1917] Factories Fabriques Fabriken 
Tony Garnier  Lyons, 1905 [3 July 1917] Blast furnaces Hauts-fourneaux Hochéten 
Tony Garnier  Lyons, 1905  Pavition for helio-therapeutics Pavillon d'héliothérapie Pavillon fur Heliotherapie 
Tony Garnier  Lyons, 1913  Slaughterhouse (80 m width, 210 m length)  Halle d’abbatoirs (80 m de largeur, 210 m de longueur) Schlachthalle (80 m breit, 210 m lang)  
Auguste and Gustave Perret  Paris, 1919 Studio for decorative painting (51 m length, 12,85 m width)  Atelier de décoration (51 m de longueur, 12.85 m de largeur) Dekorations-Atelier (Lange 51 m, Breite 12.85 m)  Auguste and Gustave Perret  Paris, 1919 The Esders Workshops for ready-made clothing Atellers de confection Esders  Konfektions-Ateliers Esders  
E[ugéne] Freyssinet  Orly, 1924  Concrete and iron hail for dirigible airships (275 m length, 60 m height, 91 m width)  Halle de béten armé pour ballons dirigeables (275 m de longueur, 60 m de hauteur, 91 m de largeur) Eisenbeton-Halle fiir Lenkluftschiffe (Lange 275 m, Hohe 60 m, Breite 91 m)  Gry chart Haus KON Id “BERG,  enpee chy 7 SE pe, ik. can Mea, a.  Mart Stam  Konigsberg , Prussia, 1922  Competition design for the stock exchange, rendering and plan of the ground floor  Plan de concours pour le “Bérsenhof’, perspective et plan du rez-de-chaussée Wettbewerbs-Entwurf flir den “Borsenhof", Perspektive und Grundri@ des Erdgeschosses 
thi ESET NES ATONE  G. W. van Heukelom  Utrecht, 1918/21  Head office of the Dutch Government Railways  Edifice de l'administration des Chemins de fer des Pays-Bas  Verwaltungsgebaude der Niederlandischen Staatsbahnen  H. P. Berlage  1914  London  Muller & Co., Office building  Maison pour bureaux  Burohaus 
Karl [Cornelis] van Eesteren with Theo van Doesburg  1923 Design for a university hall, ceiling in colored glass (50 m width, 50 m length)  Plan pour la salle des fates dans une université, plafond en verre de couleurs (50 m de largeur, 50 m de longueur) Entwurf fur eine Universitats-Aula, Decke in farbigem Glas (50 m breit und 50 m lang)  W. van Leusden  1923  Waiting hall for the electric tramway with kiosk Salle d’attente des tramways avec kiosque Wartehalle der StraBenbahn mit Kiosk  J.J. P. Oud  [Purmerend], 1919  Two factory designs: waretiouse with distillery, factory with offices  Deux plans de fabrique: entrepdts avec distillerie, fabrique avec bureaux  Zwei Fabrik-Entwurfe: Lagerhaus mit eingebauter Brennerei, Fabrik mit eingebautem Kontor [© 1995 Estate of J. J.P: Oud/VAGA, New York) 
R. D. Roosenburg  Eindhoven, 1923  Engineers’ office at the Philips incandescent lamp factory  Bureau des ingénieurs de la fabrique d'ampoules électriques Philips Ingenieur-Baro der Gluhlampenfabrik Philips  Antonio Sant'Elia  1914  Sketch for an office building Plan d’une maison d’affaires Geschaftshaus-Entwurf  Mario Chiattone  1919  Sketch of a factory Plan de fabrique Fabriks-Entwurf 
Friedrich Kiesler  Vienna, 1924  System and construction of the international Theater Exhibition Systéme et contruction de /’exposition internationale du théétre System und Aufbau der Internationalen Theater-Ausstellung  
Adolf Loos  1923  Type of small house Type de petite maison Kleinhaus-Typ  Adolf Loos  1924  Apartment block Bloc de maison louée Miethaus-Block 
Otto Wagner  Vienna, 1905  Cashiers’ windows of the Post Office Savings Bank Salle des caisses de la “Caisse d'Epargne Postale” Kassensaal der Postsparkasse  
PASSAGE ‘  cae 7 san g +!  mp; ar a eannar Pove—t  morecyceetes [Li i i 4] |  t in : PASSAGE by OFmce CUPSINE \e et KS : 4 Are a. a . Satveraua wee tt a " bP ran ‘ “ he J : vest i Y ' - |. seranreneny route i} Teare + mustavzant . ti — teeeasse oeereun a cee ¢  U ‘i ee ne Lose | sata rom f B , : Bae cont puRay : tt i B " 7 2 8 \ oD pureau mls H hoy ok = + = al a  1 H i F t  Gabriel Guevrékian  1924 Hotel with garages, model and plan of the lower and upper floors  Hétel avec garages, modéle et plan du rez-de-chaussée et des étages supérieurs Hotel mit Garagen, Modell und Grundri8 des Erdgeschosses und der Obergeschosse  
Ladovski  Architecture studio, VéhUTEMAS school of arts (former academy), Moscow, 1923 Tower for the chemical preparation of lyes  Tour pour emploi des lessives dans une fabrique chimique  Turm zur Verarbeitung von Laugen in einer chemischen Fabrik  Vesnin  1924  Competition design for the “Palace of Labor” in Moscow, third prize Plan de concours pour le “Palais du Travail” 4 Moscou, lime prix Wettbewerbs-Entwurf fur das Palais der Arbeit" in Moskau, III Preis  
Alexandra Exter  Moscow, 1923  “Isvestiia” pavilion at the First Pan-Russian Exhibition  Pavitlon de la “Iswestija” dans la Premiére exposition Pan-Russe Pavillon der “Iswestija” auf der 1. Allrussischen Ausstellung  El Lissitzky Studio  “Unovis? 1920  Platform for public speakers Tribune d’orateur Rednertribtine 
Le Corbusier-Saugnier [sic]  1912/1922 City skyscrapers and apartment blocks in a modern city  Maisons de ville avec nombreux étages et blocs de batiments d’une grande ville moderne City-Hochhauser und Wohnhausblécke einer modernen GroBstadt 
Le Corbusier-Saugnier [sic]  1922  Prototype for mass-produced housing Projet de maison a batir par séries Serienhaus-Entwurf  J. Krejcar  Prague, 1923  Design for a hotel on the Moldau, ground plan and elevation Projet pour un hétel au bord de la Moldau, plan et fagade Entwurf fur ein Hotel an der Moldau, Grundri® und Aufri8  Vit Obrtel  Pavilion for art exhibitions, ground plan and elevation Pavillon pour expositions artistiques, plan et élévation Pavillon fur Kunstausstellungen, Grundri® und Aufrif8 (Vordertrakt) 
Oldrich Tyl  Prague, 1924  Competition design for the buildings of the Model Exhibition—tirst prize—bird’'s-eye view  Travail de concours pour les constructions de la foire d’échantillons—l" prix—Vue a vol d'oiseau Wettbewerbs-Arbeit flr die Bauten der Mustermesse—|. Preis—Vogelschau  Ladislaus Peri  Lenin Monument (mausoleum and museum), 1924 Concrete, red glass, black glass  Béton, verre rouge, verre noir  Beton, rotes Glas, schwarzes Glas 
gen is fl  Aoi & I  om G&G  ¥ Fred Forbat ATELIER MAUS 1923 Group of three studios i= : : : Groupe de trois maisons pour atetiers  Gruppe von drei Atelierhausern  seat arecere ben at aregetx areyien i i . er saunnsnd Fred Forbat ° L a +  1923 Studio building, elevation and ground plan  Maison pour ateliers, élévation et plan Atelierhaus, AufriB und Grundri8 + 5 .  
Editor's Notes  In those instances where Behne does not provide full biographical or bibliographical data in his own bibliography, we have attempted to supply that information in these notes. In some  cases this information is not available,  1. Elfriede Schneider.  2, Karl Friedrich Schinkel (781-1841).  3. Henry van de Velde (1863-1957); August Endell (1871-1925); Joseph Maria Olbrich (1867-1908).  4. Otto Wagner (1841-1918): Die Baukunst unserer Zeit. Vienna: Anton Schroll, t914), 44; translated in Otto Wagner, Modern Architecture, intro. and trans. Harry Francis Mall- grave (Santa Monica: The Getty Center for the History of Art and the Humanities, 1988), 82. This is the 4th ed. of Wagner's Moderne Architektur, which was first published in 1896.  5. Franz Heinrich Schwechten (1841-1924). The Anhalt Station (1877-1880) is by Schwechten, but the Stettin Station (1874-1876) is by Theodor Stein.  6. Emst von thne (1848-1917).  7, Hendrik Petrus Berlage (1856-1934); Alfred Messel (1853-1909).  8. Perret brothers: Auguste (1874-1954) and Gustave (1876-1952).  9. The concepts embodied in the word Sachlichkeit and its adjectival form, sachlich, are central to Behne’s argument in Der moderne Zweckbau. The Introduction attempts to present a nuanced view of the use of these terms in the early decades of the twentieth century. Please refer to pages 47-49 of the Introduction for more information regarding the chang- ing meanings of these terms.  xo. Petrus Josephus Hubertus Cuypers (1827-1921).  31. Hendrik Petrus Berlage, “The Foundations and Development of Architecture,” in Hendrik Petrus Berloge: Thoughts on Style, 1886-1909 {Santa Monica: The Getty Center for the History of Art and the Humanities, 1996). Original edition, Grundlagen und Entwicklung der Architektur (Berlin: Julius Bard, 1908).  1a. Joseph Auguste E, Vaudremer (1829-1914): L’architecte (1924), 8: “Mais Vaudremer weut pas la gloire d’engager définitivement les jeunes générations dans la voie d’une architecture francaise rationelle. Pour Varchitecture hollandaise Berlage a cette gloire.”  13. Dagobert Frey, “Otto Wagner,’ Neue Osterreichische Biographie, 1815-1918 (Vienna: Amalthea, 1923), 178ff.  14. Wagner 1914 (see note 4), 45; translated in Wagner 1988, 83-84.  232  Editor’s Notes  15. Wagner 1914 (see note 4), 135-36 n. 155; this passage appears only in the 1914 edition of Moderne Architektur,  16. Bernhard Sehring (1855-1941).  17. Bruno Taut (1880-1938).  18, Charles Edouard Jeanneret, known as Le Corbusier (1887-1965).  19. Leo Frobenius (1873-1938): Das unbekannte Afrika, Aufhellung der Schicksale eines Erdteils (Munich: Beck, 1923).  20. Julius Raschdorff (1823-1914).  ai. Frank Lloyd Wright (1867-1959); Louis Henry Sullivan (1856-1924).  22. Richard Herre.  23. Peter Behrens (1868-1940); Walter Gropius (1883-1969); Erich Mendelsohn (1837-1953); Ludwig Mies van der Rohe (1886-1969); J. J. P. Oud (1890-1963); Jan Wils (1891-1972); Robert van t'Hoff (1887-1979); W. Greve; Jaromir Krejcar; Oldrich Tyl; Jaroslav Fragner; Bedtich Feuerstein (1892-1936).  24. This is Behne’s very loose translation of Wright’s passage into German. Wright’s actual words were as follows: “The machine is here to stay. It is the forerunner of the [real] democracy that is our dearest hope. There is no more important work before the architect now than to use this normal tool of civilization to the best advantage instead of prostituting it as he has hitherto done in reproducing with murderous ubiquity forms born of other  times and other conditions and which it can only serve to destroy.” See Frank Lloyd Wright,  “In the Cause of Architecture” Architectural Record 23, no. 3 (March 1908): 163.  25. Wagner 1914 (see note 4), 47; translated in Wagner 1988, 86.  26. Karl Scheffler (1869-1951).  27. Walter Gropius, “Die Entwicklung moderner Industriebaukunst,” in Jahrbuch des Deutschen Werkbundes (Jena: Eugen Diederichs, 1913}, 17-22.  28. Gropius (see note 27), 21-22.  ag. Henry Ford (1863-1947): Mein Leben und Werk (Leipzig: Paul List, 1923), 113 ff.  30. Ford {see note 29), 218.  31. Ford (see note 29), 104.  32. Ford (sce note 29), 173.  33. Emil Rathenau (1838-1915).  34. Heinrich Zille (1858-1929).  35. Raphael (1483-1520); Hans Makart (1840-1884).  36. Peter Behrens, “Werbende kiistlerische Werte im Fabrikbau,” Plakat 11, no. 6 (June 1920): 269-73.  37. H. Ltilwes: “Was mu& beim Entwurf neuer Werke beachtet werden?” Hawa- Nachrichten, no. 1 (January 1922).  38. Heinz Stoffregen (1879-1929).  233 
Editor’s Notes  39. Hans Poelzig (1869~1936): “Rede in Salzburg,” Kunstblatt, no. 3 (19aq): 77 ff.  40. Gropius (see note 27), 20.  AL. Sept arts (15 February 1923): “Sans doute ne pourra-t-on jamais parvenir a quelque douce harmonie, mais il est nécessaire de tendre 4 une organisation rationelle de toute brutalité sonore.”  42. Jean Cocteau (1889-1963): Le cog et Harlequin: Notes autour de la musique 1918 (Paris: Editions de la Siréne, 1918): “Les machines et les batisses américaines ressemblent a Vart grec en ce sens, que l’utilité leur confére une sécheresse et une grandeur dépouillées du superflu. Mais ce n'est pas de Wart. Le role de Wart consiste a saisir le sens de l’époque et d puiser dans le spectacle de cette sécheresse pratique un antidote contre la beauté de Vinutile qui encourage le superflu.”  43. Fritz [Friedrich] Kaldenbach (1887-1918).  44, Hermann Finsterlin (1887-1973): “Innen-Architektur,” Frihlicht, no. 2 (winter 1921-1922): 36,  45. Henry van de Velde, Die drei Stinden wider die Schénheit (Zurich: Max Rascher, 1918), 4i.  46, Henry van de Velde, “Das Folkwang-Museum in Hagen,” [mnen-Dekoration 13 (Octo- ber-November 1902}: 249-72 (October); 273-77 (November).  47. Van de Velde {see note 46), page reference unknown,  48. Van de Velde (see note 46), page reference unknown.  49. Samuel Bing (1836-1905); Edmond de Goncourt (1822-1896); Jules de Goncourt (1830-1870); Karl Ernst Osthaus (1874~1921): Henry van de Velde (Hagen, Westphalia: Folk- wang, 1920),  50. Henry van de Velde, “Devant l’architecture,” in Europe (Paris: F, Rieder & Cie., 1924).  31. Michel de Klerk (1884-1923); Johan Melchior van der Meij; Alexander Jacobus Kropholler (b. 1881); Hendrikus Theodorus Wijdeveld (b. 1885}.  52. Richard Dicker (b. 1894); Luckhardt brothers: Hans (1890-1954) and Wassili (1889-1972).  53. Jan Frederik Staal (1879-1940): “Naar Aanleiding van Erich Mendelsohn’s Ontwer- pen,” Wendingen (October 1920): 3: “Het is het beste Duitsche, het behoort tot het beste persoon- lijke werk, maar het is nog Duitsch en nog persoonlijk.”  34. Erich Mendelsohn, “Problem einer neuen Baukunst,” Wasmuths Monatshefte (2924): 3-  55. Richard Neutra (1892-1970).  56. Nikolai Fedorovich Lapshin.  57. Richard Docker, “Uber Baukunst) Die Volkswohnung 5, no. 13 (10 July 1923): 161-Ga.  58. Hugo Haring (1882-1958).  59. Johannes Ludovicus Matheus Lauweriks (1864~1932).  Go. Hans Scharoun (1893-1972); Adolf Rading {1888-1957}.  234  Editor's Notes  61. Michel Rowx-Spitz.  62. Heinrich de Fries (1887-1938).  63. Lu Marten: Resultate historisch-materialistischer Untersuchungen {Frankfurt am Main; Taifun-Verlag, 1924).  64. Louis van der Swaelmen (d. 1929): “Stedenbouw,’ Het Overzicht (September 1923): “Het gaat dus om functies en om organen"; Georges-Eugéne Haussmann (1809-1891).  65. Vladimir Evgrafovich Tatlin (1885-1953).  66. Elias Ehrenburg, “Ein Entwurf Tatlins, Friihlicht, no. 3 (spring 1922): 93.  67. Wenzel August Hablik (1881-1934).  68. K. Selinski: “Stil und Stahl,” Neue Kultur-Korrespondenz 2, nos. 4-5 (1923).  69. Ernst Boerschmann (1873-1949). Féng shui (literally, “wind-water’) is the Chinese art of auspiciously siting buildings and placing elements within them according to natural forces.  79. Paul Tillich (t886-1965): Das System der Wissenschaften nach Gegenstdnden und Methoden (Gottingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1923).  71. Adolf Loos {1870-1933}: “Uber Architektur,” Der Sturm 1 (1911): 334.  72. Robert Mallet-Stevens (1886-1945); Gabriel Guévrékian; Francis Jourdain (1876-1958); Tony Garnier (1869~1948).  73. “Liarchitecture vivante est celle qui exprime fidélement son époque. On en cherchera des exemples dans tous les domains de la construction. On choisira les oeuvres qui strictement subor- données a leur usage, réalisées par l'emploi judicieux de la matiére, atteindront & la beauté par les dispositions, les proportions harmonieuses, inspirés des Aéments nécessaires qui les composent.”  74. Gustave Eiffel (1832-1923); Eugene Freyssinet (1879-1962).  75. Jacques Mesnil: Henry van de Velde et le théatre des Champs Elysées (Brussels: G. van Oest, 1914).  76. Tony Garnier, Les grands travaux de la ville de Lyon (Paris: Massin Press, 1919).  77. Tony Garnier, Une cité industrielle: Etude pour la construction des villes (Paris: C. Massin & Cie., 1939).  78. “Je n'ai pas eu Voccasion de voir de grandes compositions architecturales qui m’aient impression€, mais j’ai remarqué par contre trés souvent beaucoup Wingéniosité dans les installa- tons techniques que j’ai vues en Allemagne.”  79. Guyau: “L’art c'est de la tendresse.”  80. Victor Bourgeois (1897-1962): Sept arts: “Puisque la maison est inséparable de sa voi- sine et qu'une rue prolonge une autre rue, toute architecture puissante tend au style, c'est a dire a un équilibre supérieur et collectif.”  81. Bourgeois (see note 80): “Un architecte moderne obligé de construire actuellement dans une rue de Bruxelles commet presque une insolence & l’égard de son art, s‘il réalise un édifice  intéressant — quel progrés, si cette architecture hostile devenait une architecture indifférente."  235 
Editor’s Notes  82. R. Malespine: “I! nous faut des maisons & mesure d’homme”; Georges Linze: “L’origi- nalité est du reste forme d’insubordination.”  83. Richard Nicolatis Roland Holst (1868-1939).  84. Le Corbusier, Recherche des principes fondamentaux d’urbanisme moderne (Paris: G. Crés & Cie., 1924).  85. Robert van t’'Hoff, “Architektur,” De Stijl 2, no. 5: “Bij gewapend beton zijn alleen de toepassingen in horizontale en verticale richtingen consequent.”  86. Kurt Schwitters (1887-1948): “Watch Your Step!” Merz, no. 6 (1923).  87. Behne’s reference to an earlier quotation from “Baut Bewegung!” is incorrect. No such passage from the Selinski essay appears in the preceding pages of the present volume.  88. K. Selinski, “Baut Bewegung!” Neue Kultur-Korrespondenz 1, nos. 4-5 (1923).  89. Albert Gleizes (1881-1953) and Jean Metzinger: Du cubisme (Paris: E. Figuiére & Cie., 1912), 30.  go, Antonio Sant’ Elia (1888-1916); Virgilio Marchi (1895-1960).  gt. Nikolai Aleksandrovich Ladovsld (1881-1941).  92. Willy Hellpach (1877-1955): “Der jung-europiische Staat,” Vossische Zeitung (25 Sep- tember 1923).  93. Heinrich Mann (1871-1950).  94. Alfred Vierkandt (1867-1953): Der Dualismus im modernen Weltbild (Berlin: Pan- Verlag, 1923).  95. Christian Herrmann (b. 1865): Sozialistische Monatshefte (1923): 287.  96. Theo van Doesburg (1883-1931).  97. Piet Mondrian (1872-1944).  98. Docker (see note 57).  99. Theo van Doesburg, “Tot een beeldende architectuur,” De Stijl 6, nos. 6-7: 78.  236  117  I51, 152  153, 154 155a  155b  158, 159 162a  165, 166a, b  167a  167¢, 168, 169a, b r70a, b  172, 173  174  175 176a, b, 177a  r77b  180  Hlustration Credits  Every effort has been made to locate all copyright holders for the images reproduced in this book. The publishers invite any copyright holders they have not been able to reach to contact them so that full acknowledgment may be given in subsequent editions.  The following sources have granted permission to reproduce illustra- tions in this book (numbers refer to the pages where the illustrations appear; in the case where two or more images appear per page, letters are used to differentiate):  Stiftung Archiv der Akademie der Kiinste, Sammlung Baukunst, Berlin.  The Frank Lloyd Wright Archives, Scottsdale, Arizona.  Albert Kahn Associates, Inc., Detroit.  Knud Lénberg-Holm Archive, New York.  Chicago Architectural Photographing Company.  AEG, Frankfurt.  Elisabeth Weber-Belling, Munich.  Busch-Reisinger Museum (BR GA 3.4; BR GA 6.6; BRGA 6.3), Harvard Uni-  versity Art Museums, Cambridge. Gift of Walter Gropius.  Dr. T. Deffke, Germany, and B. Stilzen, Germany.  Stiftung Archiv der Akademie der Kiinste, Samm: lung Baukunst, Berlin.  The Art Institute of Chicago.  Mrs. Esther Mendelsohn Joseph, San Francisco.  Ludwig Mies van der Rohe. Concrete Office Building, 1922. Perspective.  Charcoal, crayon on tan paper, 541/2 x 1137/4", The Mies van der Rohe  Archive. The Museum of Modern Art, New York. Gift of the architect.  Photograph furnished by The Museum of Modern Art, New York.  Lichtbildverlag fiir Kunstgeschichte Dr. F. Stoedtner, Diisseldorf.  Stiftung Archiv der Akademie der Kiinste, Samm. lung Baukunst, Berlin.  The Getty Research Institute for the History of Art and the Humanities, Santa Monica, Archive no. 850129, vol. B, no. 2.16. Photographer: Ernst Scheel, Hamburg. Courtesy The Getty Research Institute Resource Collections and Martha Scheel.  Prof. Dr. phil. habil. Heinrich Taut, Lehnitz.  237 