BOOK RStephen Sennott II.pdf
GABR, ALI LABIB 1898-1966 Architect, Egypt  Ali Labib Gabr belongs to the second generation of Fgypran architects, which was provided with significant profeuional op- portunities by the Egypsianisarion policics adopted after [nde pendence an 1922. Beudes numerits readential buildings in Cairo and Alexandria (villas and bho of flas), Gabe desygned Lange scate housing schemes for mdustrial workers, together wath several factunes. hospitals, hotels and institutional buildings. In contrat with the catlice generation, Gabt was not cugcerned with the search for a disunctive “tutional syhe” for Egepe although some of his buildings may recall the massiveness of Ancient Egypt architecture. ¢-g. the Lawyers’ Syndicate in Cairo (1948). He rather worked at the dultusion of western concempo- rary forms in the country. Hts awn inclination was rawards a moderate modernism, or herter a modem classicism, much in kine with the bulk of inter-war architexture in Eusope, particu- lady Great Britain and France: he was rypically linked m mem- bers of the Reunions Internacionales d'Archicectes, the rival orga nization of the CIAM (Congres Incernutionaua d'Architcceuse moderne) thar was to gave birth w the [UA (Internatianal Union of Architects}. However Gabr was indeed much interested in Egyptian bentage. other pharsonic or Islamic, ax hus many sketches of details trom Cairo’s ok quarters ot monuments of Upper Egypt show. When preparing 4 proyect, he 1s also known to have paid acute artennion to its function and furure uses: his work is moreover characterized by remarkable execunon, an exceptional achievement in the Egyptian context.  Educated at the Khedsvial school, at the time une of the best public schools in Cairo, Gabr graduated in 1920 from the Architectural Depariment of the Cairo’s Polytechnical School The same year he was granted a governmental xholarship to complete his studies at the Liverpool University's School of Ar- chitecture, by then the leading one in Britain. Already a talented draughtsman, Gabe unpressed much the waching staif during his 4-years stay there: the working desyos for a large “Repertory Theatre for Cairo” that he submitced for his chesis in 1924 were considered as “the bess set ever submutted 0 the school.” by Sir Chartes-Herbert Reilly, with whom Gabr was ro stay in contact. After a tow months of practical training in che offices of the  Nicholas and Dixon-Spain’s firm in London, Gabe returned i Egypt, where he was appointed asistantloccurer uc the Architec- tural Deparment of the Polytechnical school in Cairo, then lecturer (1927), and professor (19.40). acring subsequently as ts Dean 11934-$5). A committed teacher, Gabr did much to amprove the architectural curriculum at the Polytechnical Schook through his acute knowledge off architectural develop- ments in Europe, where be regularly teaveled. combined with his phorographic kills (one of his hobbies. with music). be was moreover able to give his many students 4 solid culture on cur- rent international crends and ideas,  From 1928 onwards, Gabe was engaged in private practice. His fint villa in the eypical Italianate manner of the time, teveal an casly tnvolvernent with ornamental Art Decu—as in the Muhammad Reda Bey’s mansion un Zamalek, Cary t2.1930}— which did not lasted long as he soua moved towards sumplified forms, made of horizontal lines and audacious semi-circular overhanging. as best cxemptified by the restrained villa of the famous Egyprian anger “Umm Kulthum (1935) in Cairn of the Maksam Ebeid’s villa in Alexandria (1936). His larer works show more sensitivity to the cubism and plastiasm of the Durch School, and expecially uf Willem Dudok, of which hep known w have been a great admirer.  The opportunity ww develop his conceptions into a Large scale came an 1946, when he was comnussoned by the Mise Spinnung aod Weaving Company with the design and caccution of a work ces’ housing scheme in Mahalla af-Kubra, Lower Egypt, in col- laboranion with Ali al-Malig: Massa‘ud, a member of the Royal Town Planning Insneute in London, for the planning aspects of the project. The firse of its kind in Igypr. the scheme was pronded with the most up-to-date sonal, sporting and recrea- tional facilines (stadium. gymnasium, swimming-pool, club, open-air cinema, public laundnes equipped with washing ma- chines. . .}, besides row houses and blocks of flats for the 26,000 workers in the site; im Lyout was baved on ample perspectives, with an emphasis on asialiey and symmetry while horisuntality predominate in the compasition of che buildings, wme with softly curved facades.  Other industnal compleacs were subsequently entrusted to: Gabr, such as the Mpr Rayon Company Mills and workers housing (1980) ar Kafr al-Dawwar. near Alewandna, of the Mist  
Silk Weaving Campany Plants and workers housing at Hefwan, 2 Cairo suburb, Among hic larer mose important works ate the offices of the National Center for Scienntic Research (1950) and the Government Prew (19531 in Cairo, abang two five-stars hotels, the New Cataract Hotel in Assuan, and the New Winter Palace in Lowxor, both completed in the early 1960s,  Gabt was also much iaterested in painting and head for many years the Art Friends Suciety mi Caito, In 1962, he participated tn the technical Committee set by UNESCO with the Egyptian Minisury of Culture for preparing the "Abu Simbel Salvage Op- erauion” meant to texue the ancient monument of Nubia threatened by the building of a new dam at Assuan. Gabe war awarded the State Medal for Arts in 1964.  Mircrpes Voit  See abo Cairo, Egypt  Selected Publications  *Lirchitecture contemporaine on Fgypie,” (Are Vaewne, 16 (19301 "Madina ab wend br-Mahalla al-Kubra"| Workers’ city at Mabslla al-Kubeal, Mapedls af-echurediin (November 148)  Selected Works  Muhsmmad Rida bey Manson, Cairo, 1930  Sdugib bey Fathy Villa at Giza, «. (932  Abd db Rahnan Hamada Villa, Sysagus, «1940  Caso University Students Henpital, Gite  Workers Cary, Mahalla al-Kubra, 1946. 48, fndusrrul comple, Kaft ab Dewwar, 1947-4; National Center for Scieritic. Research, Caro, 1950; Gorge and Hilal Shama Apartment Duilding, Casro. 1952; Government Prew. Cairo, 1953  Further Reading  “Abad al-Muo'im Havkal. “Adi Labib Gabe sor fans al ‘vedra [Alt Labib Cabs and the An of Architecture, Cairo; General Egypaan Book Organizanon, 1973  Tahir al-Sdig, “Al-usede al-mi‘misi ‘Ali Labib Gabr,” AfMs mar (The Architect}, vol 19 (1988).  GARDEN CITY MOVEMENT  In 1919, the Garden City and Town Planning Association adopted the following to define a garden city: “A town deugned for healthy living and industry: af a size that makes possible a full measure of sucial life, but not larger; surrounded by a cural beg the whole of the land being in public ownership ar held in tnast for che community,”  ‘The idea of the garden city is attributed generally 10 Ebenezer Howard, who in 1898 published his visionary csuary, To-morreue A Peaceful Path to Real Refores {ecpublished is 1902 ax Garden Citie of To-morrow}, which projected a view of a new urban society. Howard was not an aschitect, surveyor, of town planner Some elements of his propossts find precedent in utopian litera- ture extending to the Renaissance and beyond; the ideas of utes Pian socialists. such ax Robert Owen and Charles Fourier; and the pragmatism of 19th-century philanthtope industrialists, n+ cluding Titus Salt, WEE Lever. and the Cadbury Brothers. These ideas combined to form, in Howard's own words. a “unique combinavon of proposals.”  Intended to be a self-sufficient community for fewer than 32,000 inhabicanes on a site of leas than G000 acres, the ideal garden city was designed to encourage all types and conditivns of people and to address the problems of squalor and woal alienation in rapidly growing industrial citics a well as the defi Gencies of rural life, characterized in Howard's “Three Magnets dugram. The plan showed a concentns arrangement. The resi- dential areas wete (0 he subdivided intn six wards of neighbor- hucds, surrounded by a greenbelt comprising cultivable land. Garden surrounded houses, a1 a deniity of 52 0 an acre, were laid out along well planted strcets, converging an the center, with uvic buildings and a park designed for communal and feuirabanal activities to be enclosed in “crystal palace.” Indus- tty was to be an the periphery.  Howard's practical utopunism was perhaps the first to link social, economic, and poliucal interes in what he termed a “woul cry.” The combination of public ownership. private en- terpeise, and communal management appealed to a wide political spectrum. An acnve campaigner, Howard was anstrumental in the formation of the Garden City Association in 1899. intended to promote his ideas. Tt comprised a unique combination of sponsors: social rctormers, industrial, philanthropises, politi- Gans, literary figures, architects, and tempetance campaigners, among other. The Garden City Pioneer Company Lid. was formed after the first auaciation conference at Port Sunlight. England, in £902, with the intcnuon of building Letchworth on a 3918-acte site in Hertfordshire, 35 miles nurth of London. Designed by Barry Parker and Raymond Unwin, the architecture drew its inspiration from English Domestic Revivaliss, includ- ing Norman Shaw, C.F.A. Vovsey, and EJ. May. Described by Nikolaus Pevsner as “rhe first garden caty ever built.” Leuchworth differed in some respects from Howard's ideal conception bur nevertheless reflected many of his ideas, The buile-up area occu- pied only 1300 actes af the eneal sire, the rest being reserved for an agricultural and recreadonal greenbelt. Houses were posi- tioned propitivusly to obtain the sunnicst and mow pleaant views and were ser hack ac a minimum distance of 20 feet from the footpaths to ensure privacy,  By 1918. Letchworth had established an international reputa- tion asa self-contained induverial town, but it had ac imitators. brederic Oxboen and the Garden Cities and Town Manning Associativn (later ube Towts and Country Planning Association) were renewing theit propaganda campaign for the garden city concept, but Howard believed that only a second practical dem- onsiration would uiflucnce government pabicy. In 1919, he pus- chased nearly 1500 actes of land in Hertfordshire just north of Harfield and formed the Welwyn Garden City Company in 1920, Similar in concept and general character to Letchworth, Webwyn is considered to be more compact and urban in lsyout and to cthibit a higher degree of overall architectural control, Louis de Sissons designed the plan and many of the nea- Georgian houses  Although the superficial architectural an) layout characteris: tics of Letchworth were to be copied in innumerable wiburbs and speculative developments described erroneously as “on gar- den city lines,” Howard's underlying principles and his promo- on of decentralization nevertheless influenced che whole of sub- urban England and undoubtedly contnbuted to the success of the pasrwar New Towns policy. Often represented as a homoge- neous, unchanging body of opinion. the Garden City movement  was in fact more flexible, embracing a number of different untes- ests and expreiions, Ite wader legacy was ugnificant throughout the 20th century, finding perwerlul cubes in the Ueuted States and across Europe, partiularly in Germany, brane, and Bel- gium.  Beuary f. Giscen See abo City Beautiful Movement; Parkways; Urban planning Further Readi A preat deal of Ineracure canis on the subject of she Garden City ovement. Although Creese suffers trom wime odd omiennn, it is generally aucepted a5 one of the must comprehentive views af the mone:  ment. [t benctits from the fact thacu was the fins independcal arses mont.in archaectural teims. of the movement's ams and abpecaves,  Abcrurombye, Patnck. "A Comparative Review of Mader fawn Planning and ‘Garden Cory’ Schemes in England.” The Leu Planning Review (9105  Bawhelor, Peier, “Tw Ongin ot the Garden City Comepe of Urban Fon.” Journal of the Sovsety of Antutccturad Hissorsans (19)  Creeee, Wakes b. he Nearci for Environment. Che Carden Cin Aefore amd After, New Hawes, Connectiat, Yale Casveraty Piew, (966, expanded edition, Baltimore, Marylead. Johns Hopkins University Press, 1992  Heward, Hheneret, Lamerren A Pracetul Path ce Real Reform, London: Swan Sonncnwchem, JR9R, 2nd elitiun, 29 Gandem Cotes af To-merrow, Lamdaiy Sonnenschein, 1902; reprinc, Cambndgs . Massachusetts. MIT Prot 105. evel inition, Fastbourne, Fast Suwes Arik Books, 1985  Osbom, F.p.. “The Garden Cin Mercier: A Revaluation,” Journs! of the Foun Planning Intute 94S;  Purdom. Charles B. The Gurdon City. New York: Dugan. aad Landon Dent, 1913: repaint, New Yark: Garland, 1985  Purdom. Charles B.. The Lahuont Achicement. London Deut, 1963,  GARNIER, TONY 1869-1948 Architect and urban planner. France  Tany Garniet’s Gamous publicauon, Une Cid Industrielle (198. 1932), secured his position as an important precunot of modern architecture and urban planning according w the evolutionary schema drawn up by the architecu, untics, and historians of the Modem movement Only recently. however, hax the real historical specificity of Garnier's particular amalgam of classi- sism and modernism been located in contemporary aspects of socialist utopsanism and moder Labor technalogics and mate- cials,  Garnier was bom in Lyon, the mayor industrial aty of France. during the 19th century. The son ofa silk designer and a weaver, he spent his childhood in the working-clays area of Crotc-Rousse As the age of 14, he enrolled in the Ecole Technique de ta Martinidre in Lyon (1883-86), where he received his inisial training as a draftspervas and painter. In (886, he entered the Ecole des Beaux-Arts is Lyon (1886-89) to atudy architecture under Elvin and Louvier, His success at the school, including the Prix Bellemain, enabled him rw further bis architectural stud- ies on Paris.  In 1890, Garnier was admitted to the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris (1890-99), where he studied with Paul Blondel. Scellect  de Gisors and the theorist Julien Gaudet, He won the pres. prow Prix de Rome sn 1899 for bis design of 4 nauunal bank headquarten. The entry demansteated his abthtics to formulate clear circulation routes. organize complex services. and allow for a hunlding’s futuse growth and expansion, Garmer's approach (© planning—rooted in his mastery of Beaux-Arts principles of somporitinn—would develop with the increasing industral and urban wale of his work. The Prix de Rame carned him the right co revide as a pertronnaire at the Villa Medici in Rome foe four years (1899-1904), During this persud. Ite asociated wath other penuenure, such as Henn Prost, Léon Jauscly, and Ernest Heébrard, all of whom shared his interests and Later became the fine genetauion of urban plansen in France.  Garnier contested the stact study of classical an hitecture re: quited by the aademy in the form uf the annual submussion of envais. of revonsttu tive drawings of anvent monument. His firse envoi (L901) was a rendering of the ‘Tabulasium, and aceoss the drawings he wroce a provocative statement of faith: “Since all architecture 1s based un false prnciples, ancene architecture was a mistake, Only cruth is beautiful.” Yet Gamier hardly desa- vowed the ulasical tradition; rather. he critiqued the academi- cians’ inabiliry 10 link this tradition to modern social and urban needs, Addressing this problem, he supplemented the 1901 envor with his fin plan for an ideal, industrial city, called Une Cité Industrielle,  For hie final envoi in 1904, Gaenice expticitly linked the classical Lradhtion with his anterest in urban planning by submit- ting a teconsuniciion of the catire antique town of Tuxulum. Again, he attached s supplementary project, a more claboratc version of his Cit Indusuielle, Although his 1904 Cite Indus tnelle drawings were cahibited. the project was nut published until 1918. Che publication was a much entarged and revised version of the unitial plans. Garnier incuied many additional references, drawings. ant photographs ot his tact work in Lyon. such as his industrial quarter for the silk-weaving industry, villas, a munkipal stadium, and a market hall.  ‘These plans describe an icteal ciry of 35,000 inhabitants bo- cated between a mountain and a riverhank to acest hydroctectric power for local industry. The qty was organized inte a series of zones according te function: induatrial, civic, residential, health tehated, and entenainment related. Garnier built Rexibility into the plan by allowing free circulation within and between these tones as well as anticipating their Ruture capansion and growth. Orher cumponeno of the plan include the use of preenbelts throughout the aty and dhe use of new matetials—primarily teintorced concrete—for the architecture. Thee new matenals enabled a standandized vanianan af building wpes and an aes- thetic of smple geometric shapes that relied on plasticity rather than ornament tor effect. The chief factor determining Gamier's design, however, was his emphasis on industrial labor, He was influenced by Emile Zola's great socialiet utopian nowel Trarwil (190), which fire appeared in serial form in 1900-01. Zola described a citv strikingly close to the Cité Industrielle. and several passages from the novel are literally inscribed on the assembly hall of Garnier’s Cité.  Bevause of favorable reviews in the Lyon press of his carly coaceptivas of the Cité, Garner reumed there in LOL. His first mayor commusions were for a hivestock market and slaugh- cethouse (1906-241 in the Mouche district and the Grange: Blsnche Hospual (1910-27). Both deugns allowed Garnicr to. 
elaborate on urban-planning issucs only intmated an his Cate Indusunelle, Uhe market~ slaughterhouse represented a comphetc study of the butchering process, from the transpartauon and classification of animals in the large-span market hall (built of sive] and reinforced concretel. to the hygienic division af services in the seintarced-concrete pavilions, to the circulation of prod- ucts via inretine roadways linking the pavilions. (Signdicanty. che 1914 International Urban Exhibition, directed by Garnier. wok place in the market hall of the slaughterhouse.) Likewise, in the Grange- Blanche ? luspical, Garnier dassified services, such as surgery and medicines, separated them inte distinct pavilions, and linked them with underground passageways. The bospital’s simple, reinforced-concrete pavilions with flat coofs are rhythm  cally aligned within 2 pastoral envitunmment, characteristics that also echo the green spaces included on the Cite. [hese propects also began Garnict's career-long relatiomhip with Lyun's new socialist mayor, Edouard Herriot, who was responsible tor mak- ing hien the city’s chief architect. In 1913, Garnier was appointed 2 professor at Lyon's Ecole dex Beaux-Arts.  Garnier's work on low-cost housing projects further demon- strated his skill in meeting the aesthetic and technical challenges of modern urban planning. For the Foundation Rothschild housing competition in Paris (1905), Garnier wihmitted an in- novarive design fir standardized apartment buildings angled at 45 degrees. This cigzag partern muaimized sunlight for cach aparmment, suppressed! long corridors and enclased courtyands, and creared open green spaces arvund the buildings. Two other low-cost housing projects designed by Garnier tor 1 yon, an in- dustnal quarter (1908. unbuilt) for the silk-weaving industry and the Quaruer des Etats Unis (1919 35), uncluded the full range of domestic. industrial, and entercainment services neces- sary to support lange working populations. ‘Through these projects, Garnier came closest to achieving the karge-scale ambi- tions of rhe Ciré Industrielle.  The dassicizing aspects of Garnier’s work are partivularly stoking in his villas, built in Tyon (1911, 1913, 1921), Saint- Didier (1921), and Cassiv (1930), All are reinfurced-concrete tructures, yet they evoke a Medscrrancan classicism through their simple geametric forms, lack of omamentation, retrace took, atriusnlike spaces, petgulas. and intimate fusion of archi. tecture and site, Many of these villas recall his first studies of pared-down damestic aruhitectute that were depicted in the 1904 envoi of Tusculuin and the Cite Indusuiedle. His Munni- pal Stadium in Lyon (1914~ 18)— the Stade de Gerland - is an ether study in abstract classiciam on a monumental scale.  Dunng the 1920s and 1950s, Garnier completed work on Major projects thar were concerved before the war, such as the Slaughterhouse. (irange-Blinche Hospical, Municipal Stadium, and the Quartier dev Exats-Unis, He also began new projects, such as a sanaronum (1923) at Saint-Holare de Touvet, the Lyon-Saint-Erienne Pavilion (1925) for the Decoranve Arts Ex hibition in Paris, and a city hall 11928~34) for the new town of Boulogne: Billancoutt, He produced little aficr 1937, In 1939, he left Lyon to live in Bédoule, where be died in 1948.  In 1920, Garner published ft grand: travaux de ba velle de Lyon, an album conuining his addnional works planned and built in Lyon. The second cditioa of Une Cite Indwerielle was published in 1932. With the exceprion of his bret preface to the Cite, Garter wrote litle. Drawing was his main vehicle of thinking and the principal means by which his work gained the  attention and admiration of modern architects and critics such as Le Corbusier and Sigftied Giedion. Amon VINEGAR  Biography  Ror in Lyon, France, 13 August 1869: son of architect Charles Gamier. Attended the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, Lyon 1886-85; studied in the audia of Paul Bliadel and Scellier de Gitar, Ecole dex Beaux-Arts, Satis 1889-99; Prix de Rome sholar 1899-1904. In pavare practice, Lyon from 1904. Died in La Béduule, 19 January 1948.  Selected Works  Lité Industnelle Lpeogect], 1904  Ruthsetukl Foundation Housing (compention etitzy), Pars, 1905  Housing Sector {unbuiltl, Induserial Quarter, Lyon, 1908  Villa ‘Tone Gatmcr, Suunt-Rambert. Lyon, 1911  Municipal Sudmum, Lyon. 1918  Vala Carus, Sauat-Didier, 1921  Sanatorium, Same Hidaur de louvet, 1923  Slaughterhouse and Seockyard. Lyon. 1924  Lyon and Saunt-Hicane Pavilions, Expounon Intenanonate des Aro Decuratth et Industnel Modernes. Maria, 1925  Gotange-Hlanhe Hospital (now {1 Edouard Hernot Hospital), Lyon. 1927  Horel de Ville, Boulogne-Brillancourt (wath J.H.E. Debat-Ponaan), tom  Housing Sector, Quartier des Etats-Unis, Lyon, 1935  Selected Publications Une Cué Industriciie. Erude pour ta constractson dex villes, 1918 Les grands travaun de Lt ville de Lyon, V2  Further Reading  A conptchomave caalog, and cheenology of Tony Garier’s work— and an excellent set of scholarty essays—appears in Guiheux and Cin- qualbre. ‘The March F9R4 issue nf the prumnal Regma, 2 munographic iwue on Gamicr, contamns essays that remain essential reading on the top.  Garnier, Tony, Tomy Garner. Leenere complete, Pare: Conte Georges Pampadou, 1989  Giestion, Sipftind, Space, Time, and Arvhuectars, Cambevdge, Manachuseres: |Larvard Univenaay Prow, and Londan: Oaford Univeesiny Pres, 1911; Sth alinon, revieed and enlasged. Cambridge. Massachusetts Harvanl Univenity Prem. 1967  Gaiheuy, Abin, anil Olivier Ginqualbre (editors), Tony Gareier Cease complete, Paris: Cinons du Centre Pompidou, 1989 {cnetaine oumetias essays by important scholars)  Te Corbuner, Slesiere de penser Farbanise, Pare Fdiewn de VArchaccrute d’Aujerdhui, 1943, as Looking at City Planneng. New York: Gromman, 1971; arw editeon, Pari: Donodl/ Gontheet. 1977  Migriani, Raccando {editor}, Teuy Gatrsier: Une Cité Industrirtle, New York: Rizznh, 1990  Pawlowski, Christophe. Tany Garraer ot ber débar de Turbanisme fonctionnel en France, Pane Contre de Recherche ' Urbanisme. 1966  Pavdoweha, Christophe, Foy Garnier pionnier de Farbamsnee de XXe sérle, Lyon: Creations das Pelican, 1993  Prewat. Lous. Tory Garay, 1469-1948, Lyon: Presses Uneversitaires de Lyon, 1988  Ramegna 17 (March 1484) Gpecal mane cnecled “Tony Garner, da Rema a Lione, Tony Games from Rome wo Lyon”)  Rae, M.. A. Lagier, andl P. Raver. Fomy Guirnier, Pans: Rovhershe CORDA, 1985  Siderahix, Kein, “Inteoduction,” in Tomy Garver, Lee Cae Treduservelie. étude pont La vomiruction des elles, clued by Siderakin, New Vark: Princeton Architectural Pres, 1989  “Utaman Aspects of Tony Garruct’s Cité Industtoetle,” Journal of rhe Society of Anvbitecrunal Hisariaw, V9 (March 10) 7  Viddler, Anthony, “The New Werld: The Revaviruction of Urhast ANopaa in Late t9ch-Centuty France.” Penprces, E18 (7D  Wichenwon, Dora, Tany Garnier The Cat ladustrietie, London. Studio Vista, 1960; New York: Braziller. 1970  GAS STATION  Gas sauons are a 20eh<entury invention, born of necessity in the automobile age, Uheis ubiquitous proence symbolizes the way the automobile has fundamentally restructured American bife and che built environment. ‘The functional neod that the BAS station was invented ta address: delivenng gasoline to the automobile —has now changed since the days of the Model I’ However, the manner of architecturally expressing and facilicat  ing chat function has evolved. In the process, the gay vation has become a permanence presence in the urban and suburban bundsape.  The Hint gas stations appeared ur the carly 1900s. they tended to be composed of gasoline pumps or above-ground unks and simple wv or tin sheds to sore tubricating products, Prive w the advent of these structures. automobile owners bought the gasuline from curbside pumps in Crone uf hardware of general scores. It appears thar the Amencan Gasoline Com- pany of Se. Louis built the first separate stacion away from the grounds of an od company swrage facility ia 1904. The stayon sonsnted of a small tin shed and two makeshift gas eanke with attached garden hoses, A year later, he Central Oi] Company built a prototypical sation in Flint, Michigan: a hand operated gas pump accesible frum bots sides and covered by a canopy By the 1910s, the ample shed had been eransfnemed into 4 recognizable building type. All the cements we associate with the gas stanan—driveways, canupies, gas pumps, and corporate signs—were communplace by die decade's end. Even un these early days, the oi) companies devised standasdized archatectural expressions for thew stations; ches was ube first step in the devel- opment of a unique corporace identity. In 1914, Standard Oil of Califorma created the first chain af 34 sdentical stations. Other companies soon developed their awn architectural nientty along the roadside.  Gas aation styles varied widely in site. location, and dengn aver the coune of the century despite cheir rather unchanging, function. In a nytematic review of gas station archiecuture, John Jake and Keith Sculle wentified 11 distinnt gas station types. including the “house,” “house with canapy.” “house with hays” “oblong box.” and “small bos.” Different typex have eruyed fluctuating levels of popularity over ime. For example, the early curbside pumps and rudimentary sheds disappeared by 1930, bur a standard gas station form remained relauvely constent. Most stations had 2 building to stove supplies and conduct trans- actions and one or mote nearby gasoline pumps under 2 roof or canopy. In the 1920s, stations began to include a covered  hay for car washing and lubricanng services, These bays typically lormed a prominent addition to the main building. Later, sa- tions expanded the number of bays available for sepair services. and by 1925 mechanical lifts were common in most service tacileties.  Varanons on the “gas station as house” ope were popular in the 1920s aml 1930), Often located at street commen, many of these house vations, with gable raft, mock chimneys, and Hower gardem, were placd in tesidential avighburhoods, where their domestic appearance would attract customers while blend: ing with the surroundings Durng this tune, the gas station truly hecame the “service station,” ulfering eepair and maintenance servicers, lubricating products, and restrooms along with gasoline. The most smportant impetus for the service station concept was the increasing competiaon between ol wampames. When uffer- ing gasoline alone was no longer enough co artact motorists, the oil companies extended their services in an attempt to win pubbe patronage, in much the same way chat distinctive uni- forms. dogns, and ns were developed to create a recngnizable corporate identity, This identity often defined the design of the as station in every detail. Because the average customer had no way of judging the quality of one gasoline aver snother, such eattancuus advertising devices were teyessary we instill brand loyalry in the cansumet,  Alongaide the incteascd standardizatiun of the 1920. and 1930s was a parallel eclecticism. For every identkal Standard Oil of Shell Oil houselike gas eanon, there was anorher vation buih w lovk Lhe « Greck temple, a caule, a windmill, or a lighthouse. Regional identities were also expressed, such as Span- ish Colonial in the Southwest and Ccorgian Revival in New Enyliml. These novelty staions tended to be dealer owned arher than company awned. The hirge ail companies found them expensive to replicate. which defeated the purpose of a Nationwide corporate image. Some companuss preferred pretab- ricared stations made with casy-to-maintain marerials, such as brick. stucce, of steed. Because of their simple construction, if the intended location proved unprotitable, the building could be divmantled and transported! tn a new site.  As the modern design aesthetic of the puse World War If eta spread to roadside building cypes, many oil companies pre- ferred the oblang bes form, Stations were built with flat roofs, glass walls. shiny clear surfaces, tnd streamlined curves, all ent phasizing modernizanon and cfliciency. Distinctive signage and color schemes were set ayaunse Lit surtices to serve a3 eve- catching advertsemeny. The gas mauon’s increased promunence retleceed the mercasing rok the automobile plaved in American life. Many oit companies hoped 10 augment their vsibiliry by horing famous industrial dengners co create Rew cuTpurate IM. ages For example, Natman Bel Geddes’ 1934 protorype for che Socany-Vacuum Oil Company praved too Fururistic and was never built, but Walter Dorwin Teague’s Texaco station of the tame year was camittucted in more chan 10,000 locanons across the country,  By the 19565, the modern aesthetic became dominant. Ectee- tic oF historic styles Largely deuappeared, being replaced by smiple Large of small boxes. Curpueate logos became mare important than parucular buihling forms in courting che public. la the 1970s, the gasoline delivery sytem began two change with the increasing popularity of sell-scrvice stations and yasoline pumps at convemence stores. Toward the end of the century. traditinnal  
“serve stations” with bays for repair and mainecnance services rapidly declined. Gas stanions have tended to merge with conve: Gience stores t create 3 hybnd form that combines the oblong how with the small grocery store. Despite these formal changes, gas stations conrinuc to be fixtures in ous urban and rural land- scapes, deained to remain a necesuty as long as out society remains dependent on the automobile.  Dare Aties Gert  See ula Roadside Architecture; Vernacular Aschitectare  Jable, Judin A. amd Korth A. Suulle. Thy Ges Sermon in Ameona, Raltimuer, Maryland: Jolin Hopbins t nivecury Press, UP Jennings, Jan tedxor), The Automabile io Design and Culture. Anes: fuwa Suse Universay Prov, (0  Vieyra, Daniel ‘Yur er Up" An dnbieeciral Himry of Americas Gar Sariow, New York: Macmillan, 19%)  Wore, Michaed Karl The denericae Gas Station, Oncrola, Waconan: Motorbooks International, 1902  GATEWAY ARCH, ST. LOUIS, MISSOURI Designed by Eero Saarinen, completed 1965  Gateway Arch, ot the Su. Louis Auch, is the main feature of the Jefferson National Fxzpanuon Memorial, 3 national park on the western bank of the Mississippi River un Se. Louis, Missouri. The pack commemorates the westward cxpansion following President Thomas |cffcrion’s Lousiana Purchase in 1803 from Napoleon. The arhi’s architewa, Ecru Saarinen, wen the two  stage competition of 1947~48 in ontlaborarion with |. Hlender- son Harz, Dan Kiley, Alexander Hayden Gurard. and Lily Swann Saarinen. The construction had to wait tor the end of Korean War, the appropriation of funding, and the removal of railroad tacks. [he arch was completed in 1965, four vears after Saarinen died of a brain tumor.  The arch ix an inverted catenary curve, 630 fect tall, and finished with stainless steel. los cross section os an equilateral triangle, wih its side measuring 54 feet at the ground level and 17 feet at the top. Uhe total of 142 triangular sections, made of double walls of sicel, are wehbed one on top of another. The space between the double walls « filled with reinforced concrete up to 300 fect high and held by stcel stiffener: abuve. A tram system of eight five-panenger capsules runs an the bollow core ‘of the triangle on bath sides, from che underground lobby to the observation room at the top. The Museum of Westward Expansion, which Saarinen envisioned as an independent stmic- ture an the site, is located benearh the arch  Mayor Bernard F. Dickman and Lather Ely Smith, a Sr Louis civic leader who had worked on the federal commision for the George Rogers Clark Memorial at che Wabash riverfront of Vincennes. Indiana. conceived the memorial on the riverfront in 1933. The sonpralit [efferan National Expansion Memorial Asociation was formed in the same yeas, and Smith became its chairman. On 21 December 1935, President Franklis D. Rousevelt ugned an executive order to allocate government funds that were w be matched by focal coninburons Roosevelt also directed the National Park Serve to acquire and develop the site. On 27 January 1958. the US. Court of Appeals legalized  the land cleanng. The demolition of existing buildings oa the sate was completed in 1941; World War IL, however, suspended turther progress until alter 1947.  George Howe, a fellow af che Amencan Institute of Architects LALA), was appointed by the association as the professional ad- ymer and wrote the program of 2 nwo-stage compeation. The AIA endoned the competition, and a detailed announcement of the competition appeared on 26 March 1947. The comperi- tun was open to all U.S, citizens who considered themuclves architects. The deadlines fur each mage were 1 Seprember 1947 and 3 February 1948, respectively.  The first-stage entrics totaled 172, many of which were o collaboration of an architect, a wulptor, a painter, and a hand- scape architect, as che competition program tecommended. The seven-member jury of S. Herbert Hare, Fiske Kisnball, Louis LaBeaume, Charles Nagel. Jr.. Richard j. Neutra, Roland Wank, and Willam W. Wurster met in S¢. Louis from 23 to 26 Septem- ber 1947 and schuted five teams for the second stage. Howe wrote the program addenda on the basis of the jury’s comments as well as on those of the AIA and the National Park Service. When the jury memben met one week after the sccond-srage deadline, the winner was decided unanimously.  This comperition marked Eero Saarinen’s professional com- ing of age. In 1936, after graduating from the School of Architec- ture at Vale University and rraveling co Europe, he jeined bis father, Fliel, in the firm and che faculty at the Cranbrook Acad- emy of Art in Bloomficki Hill, Michgan. This compedtion was onc of che first projects that Ecco undertook independent fom his father.  Dunng the postwar cra, monumentality was 4 frequent wp oft discussion and concen among architects and city planness. George Howe's article, “Memorials for Mankind,” had appeared in Archstectwral Perwm mn May 1945, and Louis L. Kahn's “Mon- umencality” of 1444 included a sketch of steel sculpture. similar tw the one that he inchided in his comperinian entry and to those: that Kahn showed to Saarinen before the comperitian. Saarinen had been contemplating entering a Lampetition fora great national monument, and for St. Louis he conceived of + dome, as found in John Russell Pope's Jefferson Memorial in Washington. D.C,  The dome conception did not ast long, however. Exarruning the site model with Charles Eames, an old friend and a previous St. Louis readent, Saannen found che dume too heavy in relation to the long stretch of the levee. The Saarincn eam then con- structed 4 more open dame, with three ribs that came together, out of pipe cancrs, and eventually experimenced with the forms to sete on an arch that was neither too semicitcular (chus ap- peanng rainbowhke) or tao pomted (aswwaated with the eccle- sasuical). The proportion of the arch was a penistent design ussuc. [twas initially a parabola, as indicated by the mathematical equarion an the firw-sage enery. While preparing for the sccomd-stage submission, Saarinen consulted Fred Severud, the Mructural engineer, to make it vertical, eventually arriving at a catenary curve, an upward-thnusting form.  After che winning design appeared in the national press, Gil- more 1D, Clarke, chairman of the National Commission on Fine Arts, ctiticieed the arch as resembling the design for Benito Mus- solini’s fasuast exhibition in Rome in 1942. Wurster, the chair- man of the jury, replied in a newspaper arucke thar so many arches exssted on architecuure that 11 was preposterous to associste  Careway Arch of $1. Lous, dengned by Eero Saannen © Jefferswn Nawanal Expansion Memorial and Nagonal Batk Service  such an impersnal, simple, and pure form with any political idevlogy and called Saurinen’s arch 4 witable wmbat asa gateway’ to the West,  One of the mont exciting momens in the construction of the arch was the placement of the keystone, which occurred in the moming of 28 Oxcober 1965. To avond compluations tom the expansion of the stecl by the sun's heat, fire engines sprayed cold water down the side af the south leg before the keystone was placed and welded. The arch was completed the following day.  : Rosine Hanna  See abo Saarinen, Eero (Finland); Saarinen, Elie! (Finland) Further Reading  Arveags, Robert, Gateway to che Wee, St Lone: Arteaga. VMs: 3rd edition, as Buaiding of the Arch a matianal monument on the Sr Louis riverfrane. Se. Louis: Jefferian Ratsonal Exparsion Memorial Association, 1967: 8th edinon, as The Haadding of the Arb, IPR  Brown. Shaton. “Jefferson National Expansion Meronal: The 1947-48 Competicion,” Ganewwy Herivage: Cuarterty jasernal of the Mussours Hitserical Society, 13 (1980)  Gatrinay so the West, St. Leonie: Jefferson National kxpansion Memonal Association, 198U  Handa, Rumike. “Dengn through Drawing: Eero Saarinen’: Design fot the Jefferwn National Pepansion Memorial Competition” (Ph.D, disseration). Univenvity of Perryleania. 1992  Mehshol, W, Arthur, The Guiewwy Arch: Fact and Symbol, Bowling Green, Obia: Bawling Green State Univenity Popadar Presa, 1992  GAUDI, ANTONI 1852-1926 Architect. Spain  Antoni Gaudi i Cornet created a style of architecture so unique that it is difficult wo imitate. In so doing, he broughe attention not only ta Spain bur also ro hes narve region of Caralonia. Most often described aa blending Art Nouveau with neo-Gothic, the ewo main architectural movements of hit day. his architec ture is more accurately described as living sculpeure. Using the parabola and motifs found in nature, Gaudi designed using scale models as well as architectural drawings and plans,  Gaudi incurpotated clemene of art — color, form, and tex- ture—intw ho anhicecture, His work is known for it use of orate ironwork, wide parabolic arches, and symmetncal designs emphasizing open intenor space, His greatest achievement was the development of the “slanted” column to replace the thring 
burtresses used in Gothic and Romanesque cathedrals His col urns lean on a slight angle and branch at che top to further suppor the veiling stresses of the tall and apen buildings that be created.  Gaudi was born in Rew. Spain on 25 June (852) He was plagued by rheumatix ailments trom an early age. Unable ro play with uther children. he spent time observing the world around him and drawing what he saw. Perhaps it was during dus time chat he devcloped his keen bservation of the elements in nature that woukl influence hix architectural designs.  Gaudi fire showed an interest in architecture and deaign while attending secondary school in 1867. With the help of two friends, he drew up plans and a proposal lor the restoration at the monastery of loblet. which at the time was abandoned and in mins, César Martinell, in Gaudi: His Life, His Theories, Hit Wark, describes the fascination that the ruins had on che youth and its lifelong influence on his vocation: “The crambling vaults and arches teveaked in skeletal form the mechanics of architec: tural strucnute which be had never seen we explicitly in well- prevrved buildings.”  Tn 1873, at che age of 17, Gaudl enrolled in the Provincial School of Architecture in Barcelona. ‘lo supplement the uncaget Granaal assistance that his family was able to offer, he worked aa draftsman [or a number of architects in Barcelona. Perhaps it was his practical, hands-on leaming that saved him. tor hes enthusiasm for his studies was erratic. [tis work for ar least one project. thar of a water depositary, led ta his passing his class in resistance materials, The prntessar. a friend of the architect, keamed af the unique solutian thar Gaudi had siqyented and alkrwed thane results. along with a cunory exam.,to provide Gaudi's geade for die class.  *He does not scetn to have been a particularly good student, but good enough fo acquire solid training in the Rindamental principals of architecture,” wrote Rainer Zerbat in Gaudi—A Life Devord to Archuecture. Lethe dextibes how Gaudi was given the murk of “ourstanding” ua a draft for a cemetery gate: “tn onder to give his design-drawing more ‘aumosphete,” he had wanted by drawing a heane and. apparendy, rendered a much more precise drawing ot this carriage than of the subject matter at hand.”  Alshough Gaudi camplered his enidies in the proper manner, acquiring the title of Architect in Madrid in March 1878, “he soon parted ways with the prevailing rules of architecture.” 34- cording w Zerlnt.  As 4 full-Medged architert, Gaudi was in lus element Fram his first commisson, us of a devoraive Lamppost for the city of Barcelona, he demonstrated a zeal and precoion chat be never came close to a a student. He presented dhe municipal board with sketches, 2 watercolor rendering, and a detailed study for the project. which included a budget, che placement of the fix- tures, and the details on their construction. Although never fully compemated for this project, “his profesional dignity ansisted chac the fine of his projects to be put on public view. sual a it was, should be executed with the greatext possitle perfestion without tegard for expenditure of effort of for personal peofit,” according to Marinell  Gaudi had erablished the fist of his “trademark” designs: ornate ronwork with morits trom nature. This design would be repeated and developed further throughout his career. He  Cass Bord, facade, Barcclana (197)  1 Howard Davia sora Buitdinags cate  blended arate ironwork with noplastered brick, parterned with brightly colored ceramic ule in two private homer that he de- signed during the 1880s. The result was scrunisccnt of Arabian archivecture,  This mature of materials wotinued with Cass Vicens (1883 85) for Dan Manuel Vicens in Barcclona, The exteriog included the trademark ornate itanwork. The interiot of the busking combined chicap stone, or rubble, with omamental ccramuc tiles. The result pornted to a Moorsh influence on the young archi- tect. “The casts nearly drove Gaudi’s sponsor wo the brink of banluuptey.” wrote Zerbst. “However, he was richly compen- sated an years @ come: Gaudi’s use of ceramic ritks initiated a veritable wave of fashion in Catalonia. and Vicens manufacnised lange quantities of these tiles.”  The ure of pwo wide parabolic arches dominate the facade of the Palacio Gucll 2885-89), a villa designed fos Count Eu- soba Girell. a cexcibe manufacturer and leader in the Catalonian few undustrial development. The rooftop formed a sculptural composition of dumncy poo and ventilitors, The main feature of the interior was the cencral domed hall, which rose to the top of the building. The hall was lit by the cupola, lined with heaugonal tiles and numerous small openings that punctuated the dome Like stam. he design for the stables at Palacio Gtell demonstrates Gaudi's structural independence. He used an elab- orate vaulting system sectioned off with arches formed by mush-  toom columns. The hones descended intw the stable using 4 rial ramp that allowed an open, flowing space at the ground  As Gaudi touk on now commissions, his style grew more exprenive, combining design with recent influences on the archi- tect —from art and the tatest architectural fad ro the books that he read in his leisure. He sought to create what he termed “Meds: terranean Gothic” from the classic ements of Grok archite: ture, the engineering of Gothic cathedrals, and the decorative hacure motifs of the Romantic movement. He worked to adapt architecture e the climate of the Mediterrancan, allowing light and ait a freer rcign in the finshed structure.  Each design also gave Gaudi an opportunity co find soluuons for stress support problems that had impeded architects for cen- turies and chat had intrigued him since his adalescence, He stud: ied the and curves of natural structures, such as trees. “Instead of the geometry of rectangles and circles, he took his structures from nature, studying what forms allow trees and humans ro grow and stay upright,” said Joan Rassegoda, 4 Cata lan professor, in the 28 January 1991 Time magazine article, “Heresy or Homage in, Barcetuna?” Using the helicoids, hypet- bolas, and parabolas that be noted in nature, he experimented on scale models, performing calculations co properly engincer cobumns, vaules, and arches that would allow a taller ceiling height with @ more open floor area.  In the Episcopal Palace (1887-94) ac Astorga. Gaudi devel- oped a symmetrical design emphasizing open interior space. The rooms of each floor surround a vertical central open space In the College of Sanu Teresa de Jesus (1889-94) in Banelona, the extecion walls feature patterned rubble. brick, and terra wuita. The interior demonstrates an exercise in structural precision high, narrow parabolic arbes of platet on brick peers.  The Casa Batllé (1905-07) and the Casa Mild Aparrmenr House (1905-07) exhibit free fur windows, curving balconics, and warped surfaces: further results of expeamenation in senic- rural design. Gaudi realized dhat warped surfaces were consides- ably more economical w build. The hyperbotoids and parsho- loids that he borrowed trum nature “are culed surfaces which can be easily reinforced by straight steel mds,” according tw Sweeney and Sert in Antont Gatdi.  In Casa Mild the elevation appears ta be in constant motion, Deep-cut, overlapping ledges bring to mind an influence of ocean waves and cliffs. The building ix locally known ax “La Pedresa” (the quarry), Willian J. R. Curtis describes the building in Modern Architecture sumce 1900: "The contrived textures of the ledges give the impressiun chat these forms have cume about over the years through a process of crosion.”  Pare Guecll, which (audi began in 1900. culminates his cx- perimentation with the slanted column, In this 38-acre crercise in Lumbcupe architccrure, he studied the copography and strug: gled o retain the original structure uf the landscape. The concept was hased on the English countzy ganten suburb, and his original design called for homes to he built surrounding the park. which never came to frustion.  “The nchness of Gaudi’s an liex un the revonciliatian of tbe fantastic and the peacucal, the subjective and the scrcatific. the spititual and the material. His forms were never arbitrary. but rooted in structural principals and in an claborate private world of social and emblematic meanings,” according to Curtis  To prevent destrucuon of the natural landscape, Gaudi care- tully selected materials to blend in with che natural cements. stone or warped surfaces built of brick were decorated with ule and broken-glass mosaics. Pare Guell creates a surtealts- tc atmosphere in an intricate system of mads. toosparhs, and curving tetaining wall, Road overpases are supported with mas- uve tilted cohimns, as are the covered areas and open-air theater vtage, which doubles as the roof of the marketplace.  Gaudi’: greatest architectural influence and most famour project is the Eapiatury Temple of the Holy Family, better known as the Church of the Sagrada Familis, Gaudi wok the qumminion in RAJ, taking over fiom the onginal architect, Francime de Paula del Villar. for whom he had worked while a student. This projet shows the phases of Gaudi’s continuing stytianc development. ‘The masaic decoration, claborate finials of the spires, and ernamental nature-motif decorations suggest Art Nouveau tntlucnces. but nea-Gathic, Moorish, and primi- five African influences are also evident in the design.  By 1908 Gaudi rebed more on three-dimenaonal models for designing elements in the Church of the Sagrada Familia and less Frequently on cesign drawings. Fle pertarmed exact calcala- tims to determine loads and aresses on the “tilted” columns thar be was developmg for the church and used models with weighted wires to verify his calculation, The columns danted tightly and branched at the top like tees Elaburating on the tilted columns used an Pare Goel, Gaudi achieved a height ia the nave of the Sagrada Familia of 325 yards (300 metess). “He treated the pien as ttee-trunks, tilting them inwards su as to counteract che thrust of uhe vault without recourse to any props or flying hustresees, which he dismissed as ‘onatches’,” describes David Watkin un A History of Western Architecture.  Sweeney and Sert explain Gaudi’s theary: "Rach branch of the ‘tree-cohumn’ is directed towards the center of gravity of the section of the vault thas it b supposed to catry. Each of these sections of the vaults is reintorced by steel rads, their shapes are hyperholoids and hyperbolic paraboloids,”  Gaudi worked of: chis peojece intermittensly for 31 years and exclusively foe the last 12 years of his fife. Fen after 43 years of devign and construction, the Sagrada Familia waa not yet completed when Gaudi died in 1926. On 7 June 1926, he was hit by a trolley car white censsing the ureet. He died on 10 June 1926. The funeral procession stretched half 4 mile as it wound from the hospital w che crypt of che Sagiada Familia, the final resting place for Spain's most renowned architect.  Lisa A Wrosit  See abo Art Nowvean (Jugendstil); Barcclone, Spain; Case Mila, Barcelona; Spains Expressionivan  Further Reading  Gaudi unugue atchurectural stvbe is referenced in many pubdicatwons dealing with Modern Ad and the himory of architecture covering the Ant Nouveau pertad. Biographies on the Catalun ar fivect offer insights into how hie naponatism and the nse af the Noo-Gorhic influenced has atyde  Curtis, Wilkam JR. Madre Archircnece ance 1900, 2d edition Englewood Cite Mew Jersey: Prentxe-t fall, 198?  Homblower. Margot. "Heresy or Humage in Barechorua?” Feme (28 fanwary 11+  Marinell. César, Gaudi Hee Lisle, Ply Eheneers, Hes Work, trandated by fudith Rohres, Cumbndge, Massachaserts: MIL Press, 197%  
Sola-Morales Ignasi de, Caude, Racal: New York, 1985  Swwency, Jamies Johnson, and Josep Lluis Sere, daswos Gaudi, New York. Frederinh A rseges, 1960  Warkin, David, A Hutery of Wesern Architecture. Zand aban, London. Laurence King Pabiahing. 1996  ‘Zesbse, Rainct, Gawd: 1852-19. Anvone Cota «Corner -A Life Derosed w Anhitecture, wansied by Doria Jones anu Jeremy Gaines, Cologne Benedikt Taschen Verlag, (988  GEHRY, FRANK OWEN 1929- Architect. United States  Frank O. Gehry, an monastic unhitet. has been alternately prased and mabgned tur exploring the boundarics berween ar- chitecture and sculprure. The shece joy in his exuberant forms was never contested, and even his critics credited che work for bringing popular attention to the profesuan. Archnecture critic Paul Goldberger wrote that (Gehry’s “buildings are powerful o- says in primal geometric form and... matetrals, and from an aesthetic standpoint they are among the mat profound and beilliane works of architecture of mur time” ((ooldberger, 1989),  Gebry's emall-nale work was matked by a skillful play of disparate volumes thar were as carchuDy composed as a will life arrangement. Among the wrungest of these include hin own house (1978) in Santa Moma, Calitornia, and the Winton Guest House (1983) in Wyzata, Minoesta, which comple mented an austere plas house dewyned by Phibp fubmon in 1952, almost JU years before. At thei most successful, Gchry's buildings create unusual spatial relationships. Gehry's abdlity to muegrate his urgank building forms inv difficult urban sites was shown in many projects. most notably the Loyola Law School (first phase completed in 1982} in Los Angeles, Califor- nia. Unalraid co use forms with metaphoric or tigural associa- tions, Gehry produced several whimsical buildings. In the head- quarters (1991) for che Chiat/Day advertising firm in Venice, California. designed in collaboration with artists Clacs Olden burg. snd Coogje van Braggen, a prominent paie of binoculars served as the entry below and conferetme tvoms sbuve. In the Nationale-Nederlanden Building (1996) in Praguc, Crech Re- public, nicknamed “Fred and Ginger,” a glass tower and 3 con- crete mass appear to be dark ing together. The Fishdanme Revoau- rant (1987) in Kohe, Japan, features a 60-foot-high fish scutpuure. Gehry's muscums have been appreciated fur their ma- nipulauon of light and highly developed intenu: space. Among these are the Actospace Museum (1984) in Los Angelus: the Vitra Furniture and Design Museum (1989) in Werl-am-Rhein, Germany; and the Frederick R. Weisman Art Museum (194) in Minneapolis, Minnesota. The Guggenheim Museum Bilbaa (1997) in Bilbao, Spain, ix considered masterful foe its magical, undulating forms.  Although known as a quintessentially Ametican atchitert, Canadian-bom Gehry had his most spectacular successes in Ear rope. [twas only later in hiv casece that he completed high-profile commissions in the United States. namely, the Walt Disney Cancert Hall (construction begun in 1992, halted, and restarted i 1999) in Los Angeles, Millennium Park (2000) in Chicago, and the Experience Music Projet (2000) in Seattle, Wash- ington.  in the 1970s Gehry pained the reputation of wing inexpen- sive matenals in an irreverent manner that established in part  E  what was called “Caldornia style.” Loosely grouped under chi heading were several younger architects, including Frank Thom Mayne, Michael Rotundi, and Eric Owen Mos. the dynamic collision of forms found in many Gehry buildings was samerimes mistakenly actribused co an affinity with the de- constructivist movement, although Getuy distanced himself from that school,  Gehry is more likely to cite visual arcists as influences (stach as Romanian sculptor Constantin Brancusi) than architects, He formed long-lasting collaborations with contemporaries Olden- burg. Coosje van Bruggen, and Richard Serra. Also important to him were friendships with artists, including Keany Price, Ed Mousa, and Ron Davis (the client for the Davis Hose and Studio, 1972, in Malibu, California).  The remodeling of Gchry's own house in Santa Monica brought him a great deal of attention and criticism for its formal and material originality. The house was a generic suburban bun- galow that Gehry engulfed with a series of platonic and amor- phous forms, Materials employed were a ing departure from “standard” residential banguage: chain-link fence became a scrinilike element to define valumes af space, wood framing was exposed. and galvanized metal and plywood were liberally used. Vhe work was criticized for looking unfinished and arbisrary, but propancnes pointed to the spatial sophistication and the ecinvention of cride materials that produced undeniably cegant resales.  Chain link was used as a screen clement in large-scale projects as well, The 300-foor-lang wall of a commercial project, Sansa Monica Mace (1980) in a Monica, California, was made from iwo layers of dense chain link with a supergraphic applied to the outer layer. ‘Mhe Cabrillo Marine Aquarium (1979) in San Pedro. California. utilized chain link as a means to lace vasious buildings together. Another lowly maternal, plywood, figured prominently in many of Gehry's interiors, Plywood was wed for interior partitions, furniture. and large curved panels. A bok approach 10 these simple materiah was shown in his design for the Temporary Cantemporary (1983; laser known as the Geffen Cantemporary) in Lax Angeles. Gehry renowared a vehicle warehowe building with a minimum of intervention and common materials to create a wiccesful wetting foe contemporary ar. Originally intended ta be temporary, the building was so well received that it became a permanent venue for the Los Angeles Muscum: of Contemporary Art, even after its permanent budding, designed hy Arata Isozaks, was completed in 1986.  Lessommen materia alse found theie way into Gehry's hands. tn a biter reidenual work. the Wintn Guest House, Gehry used precious matctials such as copper, bead-coated cop- pet. and stone. Fach fancnon was contained in separate volumes with theie own spatial identity, The Guggenbeim Maseum Bil- hao wax dad with limestane and sheets of titanium. This care metal was chosen for its muted retlectivicy and variable color. In all cases, the richness of the palette was generated by Gebry's interest its the sensual qualities of materials, regardless of their origin of price tag.  Gebry's reputation for creating skillfully integrated urban Pruyects was established by the Loyula Law School campus. Given an eclectic neighborhood context, Gehry managed to form a coberent campus while maimuuning the fabsic of the community. Occupying an entire city block, the Acropolis-like complex was organized around a central plaza. A campanile and  Hi  Cabrillo Museum Aquarium, Saa Pedro. California (1979) © Roger Ressmncver/Cotbus  grand stair contributed co 4 classical vocabulary that was auieed to the image of a aw achoal, and the colurful ssucco and itregular planning ftt well inte 2 Lonuemporary Califomia setting. Known 4 2 populist architect, Gehry was patticulatly concerned that people exise comfortably in the spaces that be created and that the buildings themselves contribure tw che context and cultutc of cheir sites.  The sculpeural and metaphoric nature of Gebry’s work reached its height in hss later buildings. The client for the Eaperi- ence Music Project requested that the undulating lorms he “swoopy.” an apr dewnpricn for the finished building, Four curvilinear volume:—blue, gold, red, and brushed stainless stect—were grouped around a simply curved purple building, Built as a high ich museum dedicated to populat music, Gebry auributed his inspiration for the building form to the twisted shape of rock and coll's proverbial smashed guitas.  As Gebry's commissiom became larger and more woinplex, it became clear that his forms could not be feasibly constructed without unreasonable costs, To solve this, Gehry became an unlikely pioneer in che high-tech realm of computer-aided de- sign and manufacture. His partner, James Glymph. worked with the French aerospace company Dassault to adapt the firm's com- puter modeling software, called CATIA, for applications in building design. Using this and other software, Gehry’s office  developed a methodology of working that wed the computer in extremely effective waye It iy important to nore that the introduction of the computer did nuthing to change the exential nature of Gebry's design process, which was heavily based on sketubes and models. Models were scanned, manipuladons were made, and subsequently new modeh were made from the com- pares data. When the tinal compucer model was established, it became the databuse for all dimensions and coordinates on the building, significantly ahering the typical construction docu- mentanon and shop drawing process. All subcontractors and manufacturers could use these data and add ta them. The process that Gehry developed used the computer as a tool to capture, check, and communicate his formal ideas. nat to gencrate them. This unique use of the computer garnered Frank O. Gehry and Axvociates credit for ecaxsertang the idea of the “master architect” after decades of ctouan in the profession's nope of responaibili- ties, Widely praised for harnessing technology withour being enslaved to it, Gebry's forms hecame ever mote daring as data from the computer models were mote commonly accepted by the building trades.  Gehry was one of the fire architects 10 explore rapid provo- typing in the constiction of custom buildings. Experiments were made in both the Nationale-Nederlanden Building (1999) in Prague and Der Neue Zolthof (1999), a trio of waterfront 
towers in Dusschlorl. Germany. Computer-driven cutters were used to make foam shapes that couk! be anserted untw formwork. Concrete pancls coukl be precase in the forms, later to be mounted onto the structural frame. Gehry recognized the poren- tial an using inexpensive automated processes to create highly individual forms.  Although theoreticians extendvely cate him, Gehry remains morc interested in the constmiction and inhabitation of his work than in its theoretical impact. Subnequent co the success of die Guggenhein Bilbao, attention by the popular pres signaled Gehry ana celebrity architect whose name would bring brand recognition co a project. A flurry of large-scale projects followed the Guggenheio commission, crsuring his satus as one of the moat influential and prolific architects of the era.  Ranie Chienc,  See ako Computers and Architecture; Deconstructivism; Gug- geaheim Muscam, Bilbao, Spain Museum; Postmoderaise:  Biography  Bam Ephraim Goldberg in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 28 Feb- ruary 1929; family moved to Los Angeles 1947. Studied architec- ture, University of Southern California, Los Angeles 149 51; bachelor’s degree in architecture 1954; studied city planning, Graduate Schwol of Design, Harvard Univerity, Cambridge, Massachuarrny 1956-57. Served, Special Services Division, United States Army 1955-56. Architectural deuigner, Victor Gruca Associates, Los Angeles 1953 - $4; planner and designer, Robert and Company Architects, Atlanta, Goorgas 1955 $6; designer and planner. Hideo Sasaki Associates, Boston, Masse chusetts 1957; architectural designer, Pereiga and Luckinan, Los Angdes 1957~58: planner, deugner, project director, Victor Gautn Associate, Los Angeles 1958-61; project designer and planner. André Remonder. Paris 196t. Principal, Frank O, Gehuy and Associates, Los Angeles from £962. Assistant profes- sor, University of Southern Califorma. Los Angeles 1972-73; visiting critic, University of California, Los Angeles 1977 and 1979; William Bishup Profersar, Yale University, New Elaven, Connecticut 1979; Chartotce Davenport Professor of Architec- ture, Yale University 1982; Eliot Noyes Profesor, Harvard Uni  versity, Cambridge, Massachusetts 1982, 1985, 1988, 1989. Fel- low, American Inuinutc of Architects 1974; fellow, American Academy of Arts and Letters 1987, crustce, American Avadensy, Rome 1989; fellow, American Academy of Arta and Scicnies 1991. Pritzker Prize 1989.  Selected Works  Davis House and Studio, Mahbu, Cahtomia, 1972  Gehry House, Santa Monica, Californua, 1974  Cabello Marine Aquanum, San Pedra, California, 1979  Sana Moma Place, Cahforma, 1980  Winton Guest House, Wyvaia, Minnesota, 198¢  Lovola Law School iphase 1), Los Angeles, 19B2  Temporary Contempoiary ‘Laer the Geflen Conterporany, Los Angeles. 1984  Actospace Museum, Los Angeles, 1984  Fishance Restaurant. Kobe, lapan, 1987  Vins Fuminure and Deugn Muncum, Weil-am-lthein, Germany, 190  Chav Day Headquarters, Venice, California (with Clars Oldenburg and Couse van Brugge), 1991  Walt Disney Concert Hall, Loe Angeles, construction begun in 1992, halted and restarted 1999  Amcruan Center, Par, 1994  Frederck R. Weeman Ant Musetim, Minoeapolis, 1994  Nationale Nedetanden Building PFred and Ginger"), Prague. 1996  Gugaenbeun Museurn, Balbsa, 1997  Des Newe Zallbot, Diweldor’, 19%)  Experience Music Project. Seattle, Washington, 2000  Further Reading  Amelt, Peiee and Ved Bickford todituns), rink Geloy: Buildings and Preects, New York: Rutzolt Internacional, 1985  Blewtes, Rosemane Haag, ct al.. The Architecture of Frank Gebry, New York: Rizzoli Intemational, 1986  “CATIA a0 brank O. Gehey and Auocistes, Lnc..” JBM News: Engineering Tecbuotegy Seluswns (October 1195)  Dal Co, Francesco and Kurt W. horses, Frank O. Gebry The Complete Works, New York: Monacelli Proa, 198  Fredman, Mildred S. tedstor), Gelrry Talks. Archatecture + Procen, New York: Ricvali Inecenational, 1999  Futagawa, Vukio (editor), Frank Q. Gebry, Tokyex A.D-A. Editor, 1993  Levene, Richard C. and Fernando Mizquer Cecikia, Frank Q Griey, Madrid: £3 Crnquie bditorial. 1990  Levene, Righanl C. and Fernando Mirguee Ceuiksa, Frank O. Gehry: 1991-1995, Madrid: EE Croquis Edrarial. 1995  Vomnbing Calvin, “The Maverick,” The New Yarker (7 July 1997)  GERMAN PAVILION, BARCELONA  Designed by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe; completed 1929  Barcelona's Universal Exposivion prompted one of modesnism’s most cdebrated, if evanescene, buildings: Ludwig Mies van des Rohe’s German Paviliun (1929). bollawing Mies’ directorate of the 1927 Sturtgart Weissenhofiedlung, the Weimar Republic commissioned him in mid-1928 to oversee exhibit installations of German inanufacturing products in preexisting, mulinmional halls foe the upcoming Barcelona fair. Mies asked his compen joa, Lilly Reich, an interior designer and exhibition specialist who hed abo cullsbucsted at Stuttgart, to assist. Germany's hesi- tant decision to expand Mics’ commission by erecting its own national pavilion followed later during 1928, after other nations had proceeded. Mere months remained for Mies w realize what would become a professiunal and aesthetic breakthrough. ‘The Pavilion held many seminal innovations, particularty for his sub- sequent Weimar-era works, such as the Tugendhae (1930) and Bertin Building Exposition (1931) houses.  Prior to designing, Mies effected a change of site from » ctamped position to a more prominent location terminating one arm of the exhibition's grand cross axis. The city of Barcelona's own boxy pavilion occupied the other, distantly opposite ex- tremity of this voncourse, A stecn of immense neodassical col- ums ttond before each terminus, flitering views. The cross-axial soute an Mics’ side looped upward past his site to an amusement area, requiring him to fuse the rales of visual termination and functional gateway.  ‘Mics provided no traditional facade behind the preexisting, trumphal columns. On a broad podium, he deployed an asym-  inetrically binuclear sheme composed of a larger reception sane and smaller office adjunct. ‘hese together parully eudosed a courtyard and reflecting pool. ‘Uhrough Literal, about-tace turns up eps and into the enuy, Mies defily diffused the voncourse's axis in preparation for the irtegular dimb up the hill beyond.  Mies’ bow podium, casually open courtyand, and ayymmetri cally congregaring forms recalled examples of German Neodassi- cis. expecially Karl briedrich Schunket’s Schloss Charltenhot (1826) and Holginineres (1829) near Potutam. Mics, however, having recoune to modern technology, achieved 4 apatial perme: ability beyond Schinkel’s dreams. Enhances by full-height lass Panitions and removable glaw door, the intenor and exterior experiences along the Pavition’s arcuitous route interpenctrated te an unprecedented degree. dissulying in a reflective and retias tive welter.  For the fist aime, Mees separated the functions of wall and support. Once disalled, he purpusctully interlocked these in a tetsivn of cxprosion versus convention. Mics juxtaposed 4 ru: mantically asymmetical and orthogonalh prnwhecling planar field (recalling his 1924 Brick Coantry House. De Styl paint. ings. and Wrghaan protowpes! against a crass-anal. classically composed belvederc of cight lreestanding cvluminy symimetri- tally wipporting 4 roof, Vhe calumns’ convennonally mettical order fragmented withits a Piranesian labyrinth  Mies’ radical tecconic crating of walls and columns further intertwined mudermty and tradivon. While his stone partivony’ sides were made from enormous machine-polished. book- manhed veneer only chee centimeten thick (sandwiched onto metal studs). their ends culminated in massively rraditionalwed blake Likewise, his rauey cruciform, chremnum-wrapped col- umn had reflective glimunery semanecent of classical Auting but ethihised no cradirional entasis, visible fixicy, or differentiation of cop and bottom, Miev lifelong, pensively indeterminate di- alectic of prospective/tetroxpective reached apogee at Barcelona,  The Pavilion’s wungtuous ruster of stones (blackish- green Alpine and Larissa marbles anel creamy travertine) culminated with 4 centrally lnuted, lreestunding, pinkih-gokl onyx dard veneered partion. The uacut block tor this alone consumed 20 perent of the Paviliun’s budget. Its guiden huc, togeter with the nearby red shantung sik draperies and black woolen area rug, tullilled the three colors of the German flag (Hying on mast ounside). A narrow, skyle, miky-glazed void stood to one side. Mics poanoned his much admired Barcelona furrutuse (cruss-legged. chrome-plated, and whete-lod cushioned chairs and ontamans and smoked-glass cables) in this central zone for the Spanith monarchy use.  Mics’ cxotic, almost kaleidascapic palerre—which distanurd him from other, more abstractly formal modernists doubrlessty  German Panlion, Barcelona (exterint). with Georg Knihe’s Daten, designed by Miey van der Robe © Photo cavarteny Randall Ort 
reflected Rerch’s luxurious taste. Reich also hikely inspieed the Pavilion’s incluwan at Georg Kolbe's bronze Dawn figurative sculpture. Thus gestural. female nude, ane of a senes Mies placed an burldings immediately alter mitiating a personal relanombup with Reh in 1926, stood untouchable in a second, emalter sourtvard pool as the final objective of the most remot pasage within Micv Pavilon.  Despite many authors’ Gains, Mice used na rigorously mod- tulas pysten at Barcelona. The pudiusn’s grid invorporated slight dimensional irregularities suing local conditions. Farther. che walls did nut centct on grid lines, and only tour of eght colunina tound grid nodes. Still, it is undeniable that Mies’ subsequent penchant for modular retiulation gathered strength here. Ihe gnd, the freestanding vencered plane. and the sculptural figure all underwent clanficanon a1 the Pavilion and later pupulated his more austere 1930s Courthouse projects.  Without alternate use once the exposition closed in January 1930, the Pavilion was dismantled after cight-months; however the Pavilion’: afterlife as a much eulogized modernist exemplar began with its inclusion in the acstherically onented interns tional Style ehibitian curated by Hitchcock and Johnson (1932) at the Museum of Modern Area befitting launching given the Pavilion’s aesthetic rather than pragmatic conception. The apparent dearth of dacumentation gradually lene Mics’ building wear myth status. For 0 years, it was published monototennly using oaly inaccurate pias and a singular set of Aerliner Bild Berichs black-and-white prints, Bunta (1979) dissected the Pavil- ion’s literature to cxemplify how scholars rigidly perperuare can- onic interpretations. [egethoff (1985) finally brought copious amuunts of documentation forward. Simultaneously, de Sota-Morales (1993) and orhers launched a successful recon- struction campaign, ending decades of discussion. Berween 1981 and 1986, a painstalingly eescarched facsimile (rendered com- plete with rechnical changes enhancing permanence) arose over the original foundation trenches,  Reconstruction has gencrared many frech interpretanons. Quetglas (1988) reorients critical attention to the Kolbe statue's tole; Constant (1990) interprets the Pavilion as a picturesquc landscape resembling the temporal flux of nature, and, must warthingly, Evans (1990) dixuvers a Lateral axis of horizontal syminctry. The visitor's optical plane precivcty halves the Pavil- jon's 3.10-meter dear height. ‘The composition’s nonisocropix. overwhelnungly horizontal bas and hovenng, anugravicational umpression result from Mies’ dedication to this unprecedented device.  Ranuau Ori See aha Loterantional Saye; Mics van der Rohe, Ludwig (Ger- many); Tugendhat House, Brno, Crech Republic; Weisen- bofsiediung, Deutscher Werkbund. Stuttgart (1927)  Further Reading  Having appeared in virrusBy every mayor work on 20th-century archi- tecture ance World War IH and having already inspired weveral mane. paphic sudies, the German Fauilion powesses a vast and frustranngly multilingual hserarure, The sources are dispersed, fragmentary, and un- sully nddled wih unresolved contradiction. mythic supposinon, and factual error. Published graphic documents arc notoriously faulty. The moat comprehenuve wntten sources ate Sala Morales (which contains an extenave bubliography? anit Tegethotf. What remains uf Mies’ orig)- nal drawings are tound in Drewder  Hunta Juan Pablo, Anbiivture and fer Interpretation: A Smudy of bxpresice Sptews in Ancbusecture, Now York: Rimob, and London. Lund Mumphaies, 1979  Canwann, Caroline, “The Barcefnaa Pavilion As Ladaape Garden: Modernwy and the Picturesque,” AA Feds, 20 (Autumn 1990)  Direnler, Arthur (editan). The Mies sata der Robe Archive, New York: Garland, 1986. , se expecially part 2, woh. 7-20, 1958-1967. The American Wark  Evan, Rebin, “Murs van det Rohe's Paradesival Symmetnes,” 44 Feder, 19 (Spring 1990)  Ford. Edwanl B.. the Devist of Medern Antusecoare, 3 vols. Cambradge, Manachunetts MET Prew, 1990-96  Plachcock, Henry Riusell, [rand Philip Johnwon Tie insermenenel Sate, New York: Norton, 1932, repaint, with new fureword. New York and Lundon Norton, 1995  MatQuaid, Manilda, 7 diy Reich, Dnigner and Architect texbib. cat). New York Museum of Modem Ar, 1996  Quetglas, Jose, “Fear of Gli: The Rarcelona Pavibon.” in An hise twrepreduction, edeed by Reatris Colomina and Joan Ockman. New York: Princeton Archaectural Pres. 1988  Schule, Franz. Mies ran der Robe Raccetena Parslion and Furncaee Design SMa 97D  Seli-Morales Robsd, Ignas, Crsian Cirka, and berande Ramos. Mie nan der Rabe: Ef pabelion de Bawelona. Barcelona: Cali, 1994. as Mier nem der Rohe: Barvelona Paradies, cransiared by Graham Vhomson, Barcelona: Gilt, 1995  Tegethott, Walt, Adis nen cher Rube: Dee Villew und Laadhaasprojette, Essen. Germany Bache, 1981: as Mies swe der Robe- The Villes and Cauntry Herces, cdaed bv Wilham Dyck. transdated by Rusch M- Srockman, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MUL Pros, 1985  Von Vegesack. Alerander and Matthias Kries (editors), Mies vate der Kobe. Architecture ata Deiign ie Stusgart. Barcelona, Brno (exhib, aan.), Milan: Mera, and Wuil, Germany: Vitea Design Museura, wa  GERMANY  German architecture in the 20th century was forged by the nuccession of political and social upheavals char swept through Europe during the century, so often with Germany at their epi- center, Conservative and ptogressive, as well as regional and international architectural tendencies battled for hegemony in trying to shape the German built environment, cach in their own image. The reault is a century of uremendously heterogencous architecture with sccmingly few continuities or unifying themes. Despite this diversity, a walk through many targe German cities today gsves the impressian that German architecture, pechaps more than chat of any other country in Europe. is an architecture of che 20th century, Indeed, many consder Germany tw be one of the birthplaces, if noe the home of modem architecture. Geeman architecture at the turn of the last century was chas- acterired by a continuation of many trends from the prosperous decades immediately following German unification ia 1871. In architectural desig, che tise of extravagant historical styles Mour- ished amidst increasing modernization, particularly for the rexi- dence and commercial properties of the inctcasingly weakhy upper and middle class. Alfred Mesel's Wertheim Department Store (1898-1908) in central Bertin, with it's mix of historcist exterior details and unprecedented use of steel and glass in a new building type celebrating the triumph of bourgeois, merro- Polican consumer cultuse, epitomized this trend, The more na-  tionalist and militarist tendencies of the German bourpevisie were embodied in Brunu Schmnier's gargamuuan Volkeruhlacht- dentmal ouvide of Leipng (1898-1913), celebrating the vente- nary of the Prussiun victury orct Napoleon,  The first sparks of a modem, noo-hisoricest architecture came from the Secesson and An Nouveau inspired: reforms against the conservative oorm in Germany. bhe antist’s colony on the Mathildenhéhe in Darmotade patronized by the Grand Duke Emst Ludwig of Hese (1900-1908) and the Fulkwang buildings and anist community in Hagen promoted by Karl Exnst Oxthaus (1898. 1912} both cxperimented with now lurtis Houses and complete intenor fittings in these cammutnitics by Peter Behrens, the Viennese Secession anchitca Joseph Mana Olbrich, and the Belgean designer Henri Van de Velde reverted tothe public 4 fresh, anti-historicast sense of form and otnument.  There was a deste tv ewape history amd diy academcism in favee of a more realistn unficauon of art. design, lite, and the evervday world,  Such beret forays into the Art Nouveau (Jugendstil) sryle at the curn af the century were soon subdued by 4 penchant for Tare reserved, monumental, and often neo-classically anspired forms that swept Germany in the year just before World War |. Olbrich's Tietz Deparment Store in Diweldarf (1906-1909), Paul Bonatz's main train eration in Sturegary (1911 1928). and Hermann Billing’s Act Museum in Mannheim (1906-1907) are typical of this often monumcatal trend in stone construction.  This general call for architectural order and regulary was  mnoted by several reform inarinutions founded in the fist decade of the century, Ainong the mest important were the Peeervanien oriented German Heimatschute Bured (Homeland Protecrion Association), founded in 1907. and the German Gar- den Citio Association. founded m 1902. to promote the estab- lishmenc of traditionally planned towns or suburbs with a re strained, arts-and-cratts style architecture wn conrrast woth the increasingly unlivable industrial metropotis. The most well- known reform arganization. however, was the Deutscher Werk bund, founded in 1U7, intent on promoting a grearce compera- tion of German artists and industrialists with the capticie intent of peducing more mexlern consumer gouds to inrease Germati exports, Hehrens’ AEG Turbine Factory (1908 1909} and Wal- ver Gropius’ factones for the Fagus shoc last manufacturer (1911 - 1914} and for the Cologne Werkbund exhibition (191-4) were typical Werkbund produce as icy expressed Germany's new induscnal image with a reserved, classically inspired set of architectural forms.  World War [ brought Germany's defeat in November 1918, and with it the end of empire, an unsuccessful communist cewo- lusion, the impoation of social democracy. as well as economi- cally crippling war reparations psyments imposed on Germany. Although there was litte work for architects, culture and archi- tecture took on increasing ideological power in the attempr ro reform society in the new social demuctacy. In the wake of defeat, groups of young arcias and architects such aa the Arbein- rat fur Kunst (Working Council for Art} and the Novem- bergruppe, led by Gropius, Bruno Taut, Mies van der Rohe, and others, dreamed up Expressionist. utopian architectural fantasies that spoke of a revolution in architecture and a longing for a new archerectures of glass and stecl, color and punry. In 1919 state officals asked Gropius to unify Weimar's old ar academy and applied arts schools and create a state-sponsored Bauhaus.  a schoo! that undied all che arts ander the fcadership of architer- ture on the model of a medbeval cathedral workshop. Although Wt produced very tew butklings, the Hauhaus proved to be one of the most important forces in reforming and modemiing design and architectural thinking in Germany and throughout hurope  In the years immediately alter the was, shostages of building materials and spiraling inflation made most consiniction impas- sible. The averuromled cites and poor housing conditions, a logacy of Germany's rapid indusriatizaion, only grew wone. Some nf the more suceeahul atempe to create housing focused on doat-yourelf building technology such as rammod-earth somination and the small-scale Volkwobnung (leuple’s House), simifas to those advucated by the Garden Cities Associa- tien. Many of the important commuwons that were built after the wat, such as the Grower Schusespiethans (Large heater) in Kerlin by Hans Poelzig (1918-1919), the Exnsten Tower in Poudam by Ench Mendelsohn (1920-1921), and the Chilehams by Fritz Héger in Hamburg (1922-1923), began ow realize an architecture thar was free of academic norms and focused on dynamic, expressive forms and 3 wide range of colarfal maceriake This Eaprexsoniam was a short-lived but very prevalent style chat touched ncarty all modern architects, bur was rarely continued in che Late 1920. However. the organic functionaliam of Hugo Haring and the elesiasna) architecture uf Domenihus Bohan are clearly related in spirit and form.  By the niid-1920s, through the help of American foreign aid. the German cconony and building auduaury began to revive and came into one of the mast vibrant and culrurally avanr-garde moments uf 20cr-century architecture, the so-called “Golden Twenrws,” when Berlin was che cultutal capital of Europe. Al- though most construction in Germany continued regianal era- diuons of the Hermantil (homeland sy} or the ornamental tradinions af earlier decades, an unomamented, Hat-soofed, toch- nologicalty oriented modern architecture, or Newer Banen (New Building) coalesced in urban centets such Berlin, Frankfurt (Fine May). and Dessau (Gropius, ELannes Meyer. and the Bau- haus), as well as Mapdleburg (Bruno Vaut). Celle (One Haeder). Hamburg (Karl Schneider), Munich (Robert Vorhoelzet), and Altona (Gustav Ochner), Progressive architecrs increasingly as- sociated with new left-leaning social democratic policies chat sought wehnologically orented ecnewal for the muses, while many conservative architects chase to associate with cight-wing, nativealist groups in favor of a pure German culture and arch toture.  The mast important endeavor which brought about the Newer Bauen were the vast public housing projects made posible by the Socal Democratic municipal governments all over Germany: aver 135,000 new housing units in Berlin, 65.000 units in Ham- burg. and 15,000 in Frankfurt alone. Under rhe guidance of Planner such ax Martin Wagner and architects wch ax Taut, cities like Berlin tarcd extant Lndowaen steeply. purchased huge tracts of land, formed cooperative house-huilding associations that modernized the production of building materials, standard- ized building elements, and streamlined the construction indus- tty. They produced government owned and subsdized housing of all wypes that allowed thousands of worker famibes tv escape the infamous rental barracks and slums for small bue clficiently planned apartment complexes with modern latchens and other facilmnes. These mmovative housing developments, most de- 
signed in a remarkably unitarm style char would soon be dubbed the “Uneemational Style,” drew almost universal international acclaim from architects such as Le Corbusier, J.[ P. Oud. and Philip Johnson. There was. hawever. increasingly harsh critique trom within Germany, as the local prew labeled the new architec: ture a “Bolshevik” of “Jewish” attsuk on German architectural traduions and inappropriate for the German climate and culture.  When Huler and his National Socislict regime cook over polinval wontrol of Germany in January 1933, the modern atydes awsociated with social democracy were halted in favor of a mia of conservative aryles. including rhe pitched-roof cottage tor do- mesic architecture, monumental classicism tor the urban civic cenrers, and a highly technical moder architecture for tramspor- tation and industrial facilities. Many of the most exteemed mod- em architects were forced to leave Germany because of their Jewich heritage. while others such as May, Meyer, Taut, Gropaus, Mies van det Rohe. Wagner, Ludwig Hilbcescimer. and Marcel Brewer voluntarily left in search of more favorable political and archiccctueal cfimaces, especially in the United State.  Hitler took an intense personal interest in che development of a Nazi archirecture; he chose Paul Ludwig roow and later the young Albert Spcer to oversee all mayor archutectural produc- tion in the Third Reich Speer amd his teams of anhiteus re planned and even started Consteucden in seven major repracita- tive tegsonal cites to serve as party headquaners. foremost amang them Berlin. The severe, hambasne classical erple, satid granite building ensembles they envisioned were tev evoke the power, glory and longevity of the German Reich World War AL pu a halt e most of these projects. although large ensembles remain in central Muriah. nutnely che party groungh ouuide of Nurembetg by Speer (1934 1939), uv the Gaufonom in Weimar by Hermann Giewer (1936 1942), and in Berlin.  fat the mary of Nazi architecture was more insidious and pervasive than a few monumental progects. German architects designed the concentranion and exterminanon camps of the Hol- oxaust for maximum efficency. Slave labor from the camps was wed in quarnes, brick lurnaces, and many poiny of the building industry, especialy for the most representative architectural Progects. Architects also designed factories and entire industnal towns for the machinery of war such as the citics of Salzgitter for coal mining (Werner Hchebrand, 1937), and Woltshurg for Volkswagen (Peter Koller. 1938), an well as transport facilites such as the Autabaha, and even vacation facilities for German worken and soldbers such as the great beach facifitics an the island of Rogen (Clemens Kloce, 1935-1939). Thousands of German architects of all persuasions posned the Nan parry in order to keep ther practices, and most continued their work after the war, despite theit Naz: affiiatons,  The victorious Western Allicd powers (under the leadership af the United Srarev) Marshall Plan) exercised strong concrot over the redevelopment of Germany's post war economy. gov- emment, society, culn d architecture. Throughout Ger many, the immediste post-war years were dedicated tu clearing and recycling literally mountains of building-rubble fot bombed out citia— most af the work being done by wornen. ‘This was followed by a rapid rebuntding of society's bane archi- tevtural needs, including hospitals, schools. temporary churches, and above all housing, with peak production reaching 600,000 units/year.  Under the eway of Communist Rusia, in East Germany. an carly “National Building Tradition” was officially dictated by Moscow in deliberate contrast to the “American” Intemational Style architecture in West, The references to Schinked's classi- cistn in che signarure project of che Stalimaller (1952-1958) by Hermann Henselmani in Berlin was an artempt to disulll refce- ences from history and region into the representational and mon- umentalizng goals of the regime intent on differentiating itself trom both the Nazi past and the capitalise West. Over time, im- peruant historical monuments and historic city centers were re stored with a cate and expertise carely seen in the West, as the best of architeccural heritage was made available to che working class.  tollowing Scalin’s death, Khrushchev ordered a complete about-face towards rationalization and standardization, both out of economic necessity as the cheapest way to build, but also to symbolize the moderniry of che East, After 1955 the entire build- ing industry was systemabcally reorganized to chum out factory prefabricated concrete aparement blocks both in and around every Fast German city. Housing developments tn Berlin's Mar- zahn, lena. and Hoyerswerda were technologically more primi- tive and less comfortable than similar develapmeney in the West bur represented a similar low of urban and architectural quality amd an eulusire orientation to functiun afd economics.  In Weat Germany, the “Economic Miracle” brought on by reconstruction and the development of a capitabst, modern state tadically reshaped the Lace of nearly every city and town by the 1950s, Meoimalist, abstract modern architecture became perva- sive. ly an the larger. representational projects that com- tmenced after the primary needs of soucty had been met. Egon Frermann’s German Pavilinn tor the Brassels World's Fair of 1957 set the dominant tone for architecture thar was to he crans- parent and sinple. modest and modern. Increasingly successful German businesses chose ro represent themsctves with the image of American corporate modernism, such as Fictmann’s dengns for Neckermann (Feanklurt. 1958-1962), Olivetti (Frankfure, 1968~1972), and [RM (Srumgart. 1967 1972) and the refined las slabs of the Uhymenhaus skyscrapers in Diisscldorf (Hen trich & Petschnigg, 1957 - 1960). Entire new suburban busines districts wach as blamburg’s City Nord and Frankfur's Noeder- tad were part of a general licnening of the traditionally dense core of German towns made pusuuble by che emphasis on trans. portanon and technology in planning and architecture.  A vast array of muscums, theaters, and entire new university campuses built after the 1950s were visible symbols of the at- rempe by West German social democracy so schuild German culture by heavily subsidizing asts and education. ‘he Ruhr Univesity in Bochum (Hentrich-Perschnigg, 1962-1967), and the Free Uiniversity ux Berlin by the English designers Candilia, oxic and Wands (1962-1974) were highly ordered megastruc- tutes built with purely functional and econumic considerations, Mics van der Rohe's new National Gallery in Weat Berlin (1961 - 1968) and Philip Johnsan’s museum in Biclefekd (1963- 1968) reinforced a tend towards 4 minimalist, highly techaacal and revtilinear, functionalist aesthetic.  As a counter-reaction to the strictures of this hughly ordered, rational architecture inspired by Mies and Amencan modemism, the Expressionist Hans Scharoun and others worked cowards a more organic, ant-monumental planning and architecture. The freedom of the open spaces of Berlin's Kudnrforum, as well ax Scharoun’s mos well known architectural designs. the Berlin  Phiharmonc and Chamber Music Halls (1956-1963. 1979~ 1984) and the State Library (1967-1976), each display a highly personal, expressive seydc based on curves and angled geometries. Located near the Berlin Wall at the heart of the Iron Curramn, they soon became symbols of Berlin's freedom, in opposition co che communist regime in the East. Some of the mast eracative buildings by German architects after the war were churches and memorials such as those by Rudalf Schwarz, Gortlricd Bohm, and Ono Barming thas provided simple but memorable spaces for worthip and remembrance, often with organic plans and a hope in the future represented by modern architecture. Uhe draped tenuile structures by Frei Orta and Gncher Bebnisch for the Otympse Stadium in Munich (1972) continued chis alter- native trend in German modernism, a precunar tv some of the fragmented shapes of more recent postmodermst aml decon- structivist archscecuute.  Housing continued to be one of the most presung issucs facing German architects after World Was Il, Although Ger- Mans moved increasingly mro single-family houses in the lait five decades of the century, karge-scale housing developments in the modern syle such as those developed by the News Heimat housing agency still formed the dominant housing type. The Interbau Building Exhibition, built with the participanon of 53 well-known architects from 13 nition in the Hansavierted dis- trict of West Rerlin in 1957, was prototypical, replacing a dense city section with a lome array af moder high-rise, low-rise, and single-family houses in a park-like setting. In its wake came a largely successful though often maligned and shust-lived wend of developing mega-scale housing complexes such as the Neue Vahr Siedtung for 30.000 readenes outside of Bremen (kenst May. Bemhard Reichow, Alvar Aalw ct al, 1957 1962). and the Markisches Veertel for 60,000 in Rerlin (Wemer Diitrmann, Georg Heinrichs. Oswald Marchias Ungers, et al.. 1962-1972),  Ry the carly 19706 chere beyan to be an increasing reaction against che acetic modernist planning ideas and architecture that had come to dominate the German landscape. Architects called for a more contextually sensitive and traditional approach to city building and architecture, and a wave of museum building theoughout West Germany, including Hans [ollein’s Abteiberg Municipal Muscum in Monchengladbach (1972-1978), James Srirking’s Suatsgaleric in Sturigart (1977 - 1982), and O.M. Un- gers Getman Architecture Muscum in Frankfurt (1970-84), demonstrared an overt connection to the past. tradusions, and postmodern variety. Rather than tearing down extant buildings, Preservation, restoration, additions. and even reconstruction be- came increasingly popular alongside a more contextual approach to architconure that coincided with post-modernism. Bedin's In- ternational Building Exposition (IBA, 1979 . 1987} sought to reclaim some of the more rundown distnets of West Berlin through 3 program of careful urban repair, while new infill hous- ing projects, often with architectural references to history. cradi- tion, and region, signaled a return co the traditional urban closed facade and block formauon.  The collapse of che Soviet Union led to German unifiation and the dismaniling of the Berlin Wall, The unified government invested heavily in the Fast and provided incenayes for private industry to rebuild the infrastructure, renowate housing and cul- tural buildings, and sec up branch offices and cosporate head- quarters chroughout che Eastem states, The capitol was returned to Berlin, which soon became ane of the biggest consiniction  sites in Europe and the world. Department stores an the Fned- richsstrasse by LM. Pei, Jean Nouvel, O.M. Ungers and others retutned the strece wn che East to its former status as the most elegant shopping sueet in Germany.  Although Rerlin continucs to be Germany's dominant me- tropolia, the coumtry’s federal political structure gives lange au- tonumy ta the States, and helps reinforce regional identity, pride, and wealth distribunon such that pockets of che newest, most innowateve architecture appeat all ever the newly unified Ger- many. The new bank rowers blowoming in Frankfurt, the ex- panding port and busmess centers in Hamburg, the mew State Parliament in Dresden (Peter Kutka, 1991-94) and the innova- tive Leipzig Convention Center (Vo Gerkan, Marg & Partners, 1995-98) all resulted from unification as well as the internadion- alzanon associated with Germany's powerful role in the new European Union and general globalization. Although German architects, with a few noteworthy exceptions. have received com- paratively few oppnetunirics to buikd abroad, che ubiquity of architectural compctitiom continues to make Germany mote open than perhaps any other country to foreign and young archi- recta, and new ideas, At the close of the 20th century bold experi- metits in theory and devunstructivism, in planning ideas, in envi tonmental sustainabiliry, as weil as in all manner of technology ara! building performance in Gemntany continued to stimulate and inspire new developmicaes all over the word that will help define the architecture of the succeeding century.  Ka K. Guisxnoe  Sve abo Behrens, Peter (Germany); Deutscher Werkbuad; Fagus Werk, Alfeld, Germany; Gropius, Walter (Germanyh Hilberscimer, Lacwig (Umited States, Germany); Mendel- sohn, Erich (Germany, United States); Mies van der Rohe, Ladwig (Germanyh Poelzig, Hans (Germany); Scharoan, Hans (Germany): Taut, Bruno (Germany)  Further Reading  Although che devclopments ot German 20th-century architecture are summancad in every mreey uf moatern archnecture. and the literarure on the subject is nich and growing samidly, an suthuntatnve Lompechen- sive aurvey of this complex and often difficul: cenenry has yet w be wneten. Monographs cxat on most of the aiayie and einoe afcbitects, sestituvons and pariculas cpochs especially of che inter-war period. Gurdebuuks, unduding Nenlinger’s, ax well ax studies on indevedual aves. especially Schecr's catalogue oa Bedin, often provide die be overniew of anc hinecnute actos the century. The three volume edued by Magneno Lempugnani (1992. 1994) and Sihnecides (1798) Accompattien major retrospective exhibits at che German Anbitecture Museum aod reproent some of the best cholarship on German arch tecture, expeuully from 1900-1959, The best untrodkutions in Engloh to pte- WT! anhitectare are Lane, Pummer and Zakewky. while the be airey: nf the developmenia after the wat in English are Marshall, De Bruyn, and Schwaer,  De Bruyn, Gerd. Cantrmporary Anbsiertace in Germany, 1970-1996: $0 Buildings, edited by Inter Nariones, Berlin and Boston: Burkhayser. 1997  Durth, Weenes, Droswche Atchuieten: Biographitche Viceflechexomgen, 7900-1970, Brunswick. Germann: Virweg. 1480, new edinon 2001  Darth, Werner, and Nick Gunchow, Arcbrtekear wd Stadvebau der Fantriger faker, Bowsn, West Germany’ Deutsches Nanonalkomutee far Denkmalschunte. 198? 
Dunk, Werner, Jaen Diuwel sind Nuch Gueschow, Satdiedern snl Anbucttur indo DDR, trankfuer and New York: Caznpus, 1998  Feldmeyer, Gerhard G , D¢e neue dentate Arhitebtar, Soustpatt Koblhamames, (095. as The New German Andue tare, uamatol bs Mark Wilh, New York, Rural, 1774  Hoffmann, Hubert, Gerd Hane, and Karl Kaspat, Vewe deni he Architektwr, Sungart: Haaje. 19%, as Neo German Architestare, teamlared by FIP. Montague, New York: Praeget, and Pandan Archetmtural Presa. 1956  Thuse, Norbert, Neon Mazen. 1918-1934. Mederse Acbitekiue in der Wermusrer Republik, Munech. Mus, 1975, Jed editsan, Bests. Enns. 1985  Jamer-Chakrsbuery, Kathleen, German Anhuesture for a Miss Audene, London and New York, Rourlodge, 2000  Jeskor, Pad B, Taw Architecture af Oppeenson The SS. Forced Lather, aad the Nagi Menwmrntal Building Fronomy, London snd New York Routledge. 2000  Lane. Barbars Maller, Arvhpernwy and Politics im Gromany, 1918- 1945, Cambenige, Mauschasetes: Harvard Unuverary Press, 1968; 2nd edition $985  Magnano Lampugnan, Virorio and Remana Schneider teiear). Moderne Archaisttur in Desaschhand 1900 bis 1950. Retorm and Fradsen, Stutigar: Hate, 192  Magnano Lamprognam, Vittorio and Remana Schneider lettin). Moderne Architetrur in Dewschland 1990 bis 1980: Exprosen and Newe Sachlichkeis, Scangar: Haye. 194  Marahall, Werner and Ulrich Cuntads, News dentwhe -trcheksur 2, Seurtgan: Hare. 1962; as Muders Anctasernere ix Germesey, translated by James Palmes, London: Archicectusal Press, and as Contemporary Architecture in Germany, Now Varhe Pracget, 192  Nendingee, Winfeicd and Comelius Latal, Cada all eectrsetuura adel Novercaty, Cormame, Milan: Elecra. 1996, as Architectural Guide, Germany, 20th Century, teanslated by Ingret Trytor and Ralph Seem, Basel, Swrzertand. aod Benton: Birkhauser, 16  Domine, Rechued sod Chennan Ona, Wesenbey 1927 ane she Maudern Movement in Architerrarr, Chicago. Univenity of Chicago Pres, 1991  Posence, Julius, Merlin aaof dew Wegy au einer eenen Anvhitehiws Das Zeitalter Wilkelow Hy Manish: Press, 1979  Schowider, Romana and Wiltried Wang (editors), Moderne Archactrur in Deutwchbend 1900 bi 2000, Make wad Monument, Osrfddern-Rusr- Harje, 1998  Saherihee, Marhian (editor), Dewewhe Archiiekrwr nach 1945 Viera Jabrre Moslerne em der Bundesrepuéhk. Scurgar:: Deurche Verlags-Anciak, 1986  Steckeweh. Carl and Sabine Galicher (editors), dere, Ore, Fanwtirfe: Arrhitektar and Ssidtebau mm der Bundesrepublik Deusrchlandtidess, Places. Projects: Anhuectare and Urban Planning tn the Federal Republic of Germany thilingual English and German tem, cranslaced br Larry Fisher. David Magee. and Renate Voges Berlin: Ernst, 1990  Wears, Klaus-Dicter. Yauag German Anchisects!Jenge deusuhe Architebien wad Archuseksanen ttlingual English ani German text), Basel, Switzerland, and Boston. Burkhjuscr, 198  Zakowsky, John (editor), fae Many tac of Madera Architecture. Huclding 10 Germany beteces the Warr, Munwh and New York Peesecl. 1994  GETTY CENTER Designed by Richard Meier: completed 1997 Los Angeles, California  tn 1982, dhe Getty Trust decided to build a tacility to bouse ats admunattative office: and the szatts of its six culeural programs.  It purchased a 110-acre site at the base of the Santa Monica Mounnains north of Los Angeles, California, and invited 80 architects to submit their responses to 4 progtam calling for soundly vonucructed buildings to setve and enhance the Getty's institutions in a scheme “appropriate to the site and responsive to its uniqueness.” In addition. the Getty Trust emphasized the need to meet these abjectives in a manner that would bring aesthetic pleasure wo the huikling’s occupants, visiton, neighboring community, After interviewing the finalizes, the se- lection canimistee chose che American architect Richard Meier (1934-) to formulate the design.  The rugged topography of the promontory and a strict conditsonal-use permit enacted by a powerful neighborhood coa- liaon placed unusual constraints on che architect, especially the restsrction limiting the heaght of the buildings to 65 feet above the 896-foor hilltop. To meet chis ccstriction and reduce the seale and monumentality of the projec. Meier located approxi- mately hall the built work below ground with ys COR- necong many of the faalities at a level of 876 feet, Above ground, he planned 4 campus of low buildings instead of one dominant structure and added a five-acre propylacum (vesrihule or en- trance} to furnish parking and provide access ta the acropolis via an clevisic tram, 7  Meier's design for the Getty Center exhibits significant depar- tures fram his previens work. One exaraple invalves his decision to create an assemblage of buildings insteal of a stand-alone structure. This decision forced him to consider urban -planning concern, sich 31 the relationship of buildings and the nature and sequcnung of their inversutial spaces. His response ts a 24- acre campus Cmphasting Ircedoin of movement between human-scaled adifices and thraugh generous courtyards and gar- dens. His chuice of materials represents another change. | ocat resident groups reyected boch Meier's sgnature white-nameled exteriors and his alternare choice of metal panels but approved has kater recommendation of mugh-deft Italian rravernne for rectilinear surfaces and complementary cobured enameled alumi- nur panels for the curvilinear accas. Cutting the fusilized stone imo 30 inch blocks to conform to the grid used as the basin of the Gerry design presented another challenge. requiring the inventinn of a guillotine-cype apparatus, lo addition, Meier de- veed 4 mnethud of supporting the cladding on metal plates, av. ing open scams beeween blocks and space between waterproofed interior surfaces and the traverune, diverung rainfall bchind the swine Wo protect the rough extenor from crusun. Meier's suspen- sion of the travertine panels demes che weight and massing of masonry, prompting some critics to describe the stone as having a fake appearance. The nontradiconal handling af che material does produce insubsantialicy and unforcunare results in some areat, particularly in the surface irregularity of the tall piers in the garden courtyard, but overall the effect of the travertine’s variations in color and texture complements the tiled surfaces and contributes to the unified acuthetic of the complex.  Although the individual stecl-frame and reinforced-concrete structures vary in form, they continue che uniform acsthetic by repeating Meicr’s characteristic 1920s vocabulary of ship railings, Hat roofs, and extensive glazing. References to the work of Le Corbusier, Rudolph Schindler, Frank Lloyd Wright, and others Provide the distingueshing features between the individual struc- tures and the institutions shcy house. The design of the Research lnsurute and che Muscum rorunda stand out as original and  Candliveral anopy over the main entrance tn che Getty Conurt, ebevignel by Richard Meier (1997) Photo © Mary Ann Sullivan  sentitive compasitions, whereas the ather buildings appear con  servative and understated, achieving their greatest uccets in des- muti. tertaces and pasages that carefully frame views of Los Angeles, the mounuins, and the wean,  Complexity is introduced in the magnitude of the scheme and the particularity of che plan. An assortment of buildings tailored to the identities and requirements of the Getty programs creates a diverse yet homogeneous campus. Further comploxaury is added with the division of the J. Paul Gerry Museum into an orientation building plus five exhibition pavilions. Meier's decision to conform oo the undulation of the topography tor the placement of the buildings instead of crearing a uniform base plarfurm also adds variety and reduces the apparent wale of che complex. He arranges the buildings slang two prominent natural ridges. Buildings located un the eastern ridge inchide the Museum cluster; a buildang for ate Arc History Information Program staff and the adininistrative offices of the Getty Trust; a building housing the employees of rhe Conservanun Institute, the Grane Program. and the Center for Educatiots, and a 450- seat Auditorium building. ‘Ihe Rescarch Instituce for the History of Ant and the Humanities and a support facility containing a public restaurant and cafeteria, plus privace dining rooms and meeting rooms for staff, occupy the western ridge. The ravine between the ridges accommodates the entrance plaza, a grand waircate leading to the Museum cluster, and outdoor terraces for dining, circulation, and relaxation.  The deflecting axes of the overall yout and the focus on central citcular toems in both che Museu Entrance Hall and the plan of the Revearch Inctinite cthibit chements evident in Meict’s Late work. Inconsistent clements in the cnmplered com- plex include the decoration of dye Muscum’s interion by the architect and intenor designer Thierry Despont and the central gatden denign by che artist Robert Irwin. Although the decision to create formal interiors consistent with the stems of the collec- tion offers some justification, the installation of Iewin's self- important scheme for the Central Garden is most unfornunace. Urwin's flagrane excess ignores and mass the tranquility and im- portance of the place expressed in Mevet’s cardicr plan fur the  len.  Duscounting Irwin's incompatible intrusion, Meier's wheme reaches its highest level in the equipoise atiained beuwoen the luminaus sesthetic of buildings bathed in golden California suns Light and the spectmulir spaces and landscape to which they eclate, Architectural historian and critic Chasles Jencks has praised Meier's abilicy to cteate a sense of intoxicating disonenta- tion through the combination of all-cncompassing space and conunuous surfaces that promote a seme uf suspended ume and transcendence. At the Getty, the aesthetic experience, which Jencks calls “liminal space.” pervades the Getty complex and provides an uplifring experience for the visitor and a ric work of an  Caron A. Hrvon Froarsy 
Incerior, fooking north toward main enerance af the Gey Comet  Phow © Mary Ann Sullivan .  See abe Los Angeles (CA), United States; Meier, Richard (United Seatcs)  Farther Reading  The fothneing lit nchades bork banks and artade prdaced daring the design and construction of the Gerty Contet and those written after its complaion. Most include derailed plans and photographs takeo durmg and afer consiraction. The articles in parncular present con- trasnng viewpoints about the success of the design.  Betaky, Aaron, “Fauley Towerk” Anvhisecture, BO (December 1997)  Beawne. Michadl, The Grity Center: Richued Merer and Partnen, London: Phadan, 199K  “The Getty Cemict in Loe Angeles,” Benmeistre, 9502 (February 1998)  Jodidiv, Philip, Richard Meier, Cologne: Taahen, 195  Meier, Richard. Richerd Meer, London Academy Editions, and New York Si, Mattin'n Pros, 1990  Meier, Richard, Rechar’ Ment, Arvhaert 1985-1991, New York Rizaoli. 1991  Meier, Richard, Auilding thw Get. New York Knopf. 1997  Meuce. Richard. Richard Merer. cckted by Vike Funagawa, Tokyo ADA Faica, 199"  *Merer's Magic Mouncam,” Amhisrawral Keroesc. 2081212 (February 198!  Newhouse. Victoria, Tommds a Nea Museam, New York: Monacelli Press. 1998  Reeve, Thomas F. and Carol McMichact Reese, “Richard Meict's New Getty Center im Los Angeles,” A + U. 328/1 Qanuary 1994)  Sorun, Michael, “Come and Geny: Archmodemist Meicr’s Work Takes an Unexpected Turn toward Kitsch,” Metepols, 1779 (June 1998)  Stece. James (editor), Msc Hailden, London: Academy Editions, 1944  Willuims, Harold, The Getty Genuer Deuga Process, Low Angrics: Getty Trust, 1991  Willaims, Harold, Making Archinceure [be Getty Conver, Los Angeles. Getty Crust, 197  GIEDION, SIGFRIED 1888-1968 Architectural historian and critic, Switzerland  A Swiss national bom in Prague and educated in Vienna, Sigfried Giedian runed from his early technical raining as an engineer to art history, swadying under Heinrich Walfflin in Zurich during World War 1. His formal education warcely reveals the founds- tional role that he would play a architectural critic, social an- thropologist, industrial archacologist, and official historian and propagandist for the madem movement. In the latter rale, Jo- seph Rykwert once called Gredion “the most important, indeed the only serivus, historian of munetcenth- and ewenneth-cennury architecture.”  Under Wolflin, he produced Spétharecher und Romantischer Klasizsoma (1922; (Late Basoque and Romantic Classicism!). a conventional study of architectural sryle. Giedion renrarively challenged rypical categories of style as sex down by his master, finding in neoclassicism nota style per se but a “colocing” that ne could rrace through baroque and ather periods of archirec- ture. Thus equipped, Giedion prcceded ca explode the entire idea of style, dismissing the 19th century ubsession with it as a colossal squandering of energy. He substituted the caperience of space fur style, reading the history of architecture in terme of containing, framing, spanning, and shaping space.  Swept up by the polincal rurbulence after World Wart, Gie- dion warned to modern architecture as a means of achieving the cultural renewal that the rising gencration sought. He met Wal- ter Gropius at the 1923 Bauhaus Exhibition and Le Corbusier at the 1925 Espnt Nouveau Exhibition in Paris, becoming a colleague and inumate of both men. Our of the larer meeting was born the Congrés Incemationaux d'Architecture Moderne (CIAM) in 1928, the organizational heart of modern architec- ture. for which Giedion werved as secretary-general until 1954, when it dissalved. His house served ax the group's headquarters and he as its chict apologist.  Also i 1928, Giedion published Benen in Frankreich, Bawen tw Eisen, Basern in Exenbeton (ax Building in France, Building m tron, Building in Ferrocencrete, 1995), in which he claimed 3 vast and forgotion patrimony for modern architecture in the ferruvutrevus market halls, train sheds, and exhibition buildings of che 19th century. On Giedion, Spiro Kostof wrote, “the mod- ern masters had gained an authoritative spokesman who would casc them into history.” He would also rurn that history into a weapon for rheis cause.  In the 1930s, Giedinn wrote regular articles on modern de- gn for two newspapers, built two model houses. organized an  exhibition on the bathroom, tried hin hand ae film, and founded a company tw foxes connections berween industry and inierior architecture. He was more activist than academic until 1938— 39, when with the help of Gropius he was invited to deliver the Charles Eliot Norton Lectures at Harvard.  ‘The exposure to the United States allowed him to expand on the ndeas first set down in Rawen im Frankresch, and in 1941 be Published Spece, Tine, and Architecture, Here Giedion observed whar he considered the disastrous rift between thought and feel: ing that arose in the 1%h century, roughly parallel to the scpara- tion of structure from facade in 19th-century architecuure dion found in the simultancous emergence af space time theusy, cubism, film, and a number of other phenomena at che begin- Ring of the century the stirrings of the cultural regeneration that he sought. These parallel cultural ideas. he belicved. would eventually reunite “the divided egu of man” through their apo- theosis in modem architecture.  He thus rewrote the history of architecture, using the great works of 19th-century engineering as the heroic precunon to modern architecture, in the process culling out rhe bulk of histo- ticise architecture as ireclevant. He isolated “constituen facts” {those tendenciet which, when they are suppressed, unevicably reappear") from “transitory” ones, which disappear after a time, a dubious method intended wo reconstruct a more vital history, Giedinn used history to press a set of contemporary cuacerns, and this widened his tame’s relevance. Fos cxample, the ultimate object of Giedion’s space-time theury was urban planning, the subject of the final three chapten of his buok amd arguably the most important issuc of the casly 1940s. Reprinted and ex- panded several times, Space. Jime, and Architecture became the standard history of modern architecture for several penerativas of architecture and archiceccural history scudeau who aftectionaccly called it “Giedion's Bible.”  However, the artifice of Giedion’s method and history led Kostof to cemark that in hindsight it was apparent “how often the advocate led the historian astray.” Nikolaus Pevsner. al- though full of admiration, called his method “a sin in a hisw tian.” Giedion, however, believed passsonatcly in a “presentist” history, He studied ube past in order to engage with the ixcues of his day, and he did so without apology. ‘This came with ume radical methodological consequences, Chroaulogy and periodic- ity meant less chan onrrelation and conncetions berween distant periods. He sacrificed exhaustive research of a topic to the bruad survey of linked phenomena and scrapped dispassionate, objec: tive inquiry for the passionare polemic. Great works yielded pride of place to fragments, anonymous objects. and a leveling of all artifacts 10 equal satus as evidence. Even 2 spoon, he Lauer wrote, refleces the sun. This fed co a highly selective, one-sided history but ane of immense therorical power, especiaily in an era in step with his polemic. ready tw forgive his abuse of 19th- century historicism. With Lewis Muinfoed, he must be cunsid- ered une of the pioncen of cultural history in itn madera interdis ciplinary form.  Giedion's next buok, the dassic Mevhunizanen Taker Com- mand (1948), left the field of architccusre propet to survey what he called the “anonymous history” of industrialization and mechanization. The apocalyptic title announced the prevailing theme of che book: to assess how the increasing rationalization of our means of living had ahtered human consciousness, alienating humanity from nature and from its own nature. Nothing escaped  Giedboo’s analysis, a nothing escaped mechanization, from birth. domestic work, and most famously the barh to the mecha- izanon of death in Chicago's meat-packing indussry. Of the last he wrote, with chilling implications (given that he wrote during the war year). “Has this neutrality 19 death had any tusther effect upon uc? ... It did nor base itself in barge scale until the War, when whole populations, as defenseless ax the animah hooked head downwards on the teaveling chain, were obliterated with trained neutrality.”  At about the same time that he wrote Mechanizarion, Giedion egaged in the important atchitectural debate on the “new mon- umentality.” first addressed in lus 1943 “Nine Points on Monu- mentality,” wniten with femand Leger. On one level, Giedion tecognized the limitations and senility of funceonalsm as a feprescntational idiom and sought to broaden modetn architec- ture to express ceremonial and communal life. his is especially important in light of pustwar recunstruction. As communities set out to rebutld che central instiniians of sociery, Giedion keenly felt the need for a symbolic architecture in che absence of traditional forms. Already a contentious debate, given the uses ro which fascism and communism had pur monumental architecture, Giedaon made & wone by proposing “great mpecta- cles capable of fascinating the pcopke” However, monumenrality meane samcthing even decper: the search fre enduring symbol. and permanence in a society that was in a constant sate of flu  Hercin lies both the continuity and the importance of Giedi- con's oeuvre. He was first and foremast a humanist. His srudy of society and iw artifact, whether architecuure of the machine, was driven by a longing for a nanural order, an arganic history to counter the contingencies, ruprures. and ephemeraliry chat characterizes @ much of inudernity and scholarship on moder- nity. In his work of the 195415 and 1960s, the search led him back vo ancient and prehistoric art and architecture. surveying Rome, Greece, Mesopotamia, Egypt. and the cave paintings of Tascaurx, where he squeezed our of rhe much earlier objects and images the same fundamental ideas about the husnan conlrunu- ion with its cnvironment.  ANDRIW M, SHANKTN,  See ale Coagris lateraationaux d’Aschitecture Moderne (CIAM, 1927-}; Glassy Gropius, Walter (Germany); Mum- ford, Lewis (United States); Pevsner, Nikolaus (England)  Biography  Born in Prague, 14 April 1888; s0n of a Swiss industrialist. Studied mechanical engineering in Vienna; studied art history in Zurich and in Munich under Heinrich Welfflin 1913-22, visited the Bauhaus, Weimar 1924. Leviurct, Harvard Univet- sity, Cambridge, Massachusetts 1958 ~ 39; professor, Technische Hochschule, Zunch from 146. founding member, CLAM 1928. Died in Zurich, 9 April 1968,  Selected Publications  Spitherscher und romantncher Klzwizimus. \A22  Bawen in Frankrrich, Bauen in Bisen. Bauen in Essenbeton, 1928; 35 Building in France, Building in Iron, Building in Ferreconcrete, edited by Georgudes Sokeatss, translated by Duncan Barry. 1995  Spue, Time, and Archstectun: The Growth of a New Tradsson. 4h. Sth edinon, revised and enlarged, 1967  
Mechanization Takes Conomand A Conmbetion 10 Anenyment Howry, AK  Architecture, Yon. tad Me. The Diary of 4 Developmens, \IS8  The Fscrnal Present. A Conterbustan om Conssancy and Change, V2  The Begramsingy of Architecneer, 1964  Arvhusecture and the Phenomenon of Trensinan The Tiere Space Conceptions of Anbeecture, IPI  Farther Reading Sokratis has wentee the bear recent wotk on Gredhon, but much of the better schalanhes wuimes front Giedian’s contcmporaties, ndadanig  Pevines, Rykwert, and, more reverntly. Keatol, Sre also Sakeate's excel lent inerodution to Ruilding ia Frame luce above),  Frampton. Kenneth. “Cocdbon in Amenca’ Reflectians in a Mirsoe.” Archiernsral Dengn, SA, 6 (L981)  Hofer, Paul (edimt}. Momunsge 3 Girdion, Profile seiner Perspatschbert, Basel, Swittetand, and Scucrgart, Germany: Birkhauser, 1971  Kestof, Spiro, “Architecture. You. and Him: The Mark of Sigfred Gredson.” Dareedatas (winter 1976;  Pevanes, Nekoluns, “Jadges V1, 34.° Aredimvpvral Reviow, 100 (194)  Rykwen, joseph, “Sicgfnel Ginodion and the Noun of Sxyle,” Burtingron Magazsne, H (1954)  Sokratin, Georgads, Slegftied Giedion: cane inaellekroctte Riographie. Zunch: Amman, t98%: a1 Siegfrind Geedion: An Intellccrmal Biography, transkited by Colin Hall, Edanbusgh: Eaboburgh  Univenity Press, 1993  GILBERT, CASS 1859-1934 Architect, United States .  Cass Gilbert belnaged to a group of archtens whe advanced a distincuvey Ametican intcrpretauon of the French Beaux-Arts academic tradition. Together with McKim, Mead and White. with whom he apprenticed as 4 young architect, Gilbert sap- ported the American Academy in Rome and with Daniel Burn- eontributed to the City Beauciful movement.  The two decades preceding World War f cosncided with the emergence of the United States as a world power, the search for a national cultural identity. and che increasing dominance of corporare structuse in American life. In this volatile context, Gilbert conceived his buildings. beginning with the Minnesota State Capivol (1895 1903) and culminating with the Wool. worth Budding (1910-13), as total works af act that carried rich  * meanings and enhanced their urban wureoundings with  beauty. As such, they served as penuasive communicators of emerging institutional identities and corporate power. Gilbert believed that architecture should affiens the cxisting socal ardet. masse the general level of culture, and foster the mythology of America as heir to the great civilizations of the past.  Gilbert indined wward che picturesque, resisting the cffons of fis Beaua-Arts insteuctor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Kagene Vetang, to discipline his designs with a French-inspired compositional ngor. Gilbert oured England. France, and Italy during (880 to sketch significant histoncal buildings, an activiry that inspired his design imaginauon throughout his career. His apprenticeship with Stanford White of McKim, Mead and Whue from 1880 tw 1882 motivated his interests in classicism and encouraged his tendency to see buildings in 4 painterly way. a1 memorable composinuns that  had wenogsaphic potential within « broader urban of landscape settany  Giber returned to St. Paul in 1882 snd two years later formed a partnership with James Knox Tayloe thas was disolved in 1892, when Gilbert began exploring the possibility of forming a partnership with Dance! Burnham in Chicago. Although Burn- ham chose Charles Arwood instead as the sucoemor to John Wellborn Root. in 1895 Gilbert won the competition for the Minnesota State Capitol in Sc. Paul, which catapulted his name anto the national archisectural scene. He cast, and while working on his first steel-framed office building, the Brazer Building (1894) in Bowon. he met Edward R. Andrews and in 1898 secured the commission for che Broadway Chambers Building in New York. Gilbert opened an office in the city the following year. in time 1 enter the United States Custom House competition of 1899, He tied wich Carrére and Hastings for fest place, and after a storm of contravetny, he secured the com: missHon.  Gilbert's emphass on a Beaux-Arts commponition’s sceno- graphu potential reached 2 climax following the Wudld's Co- lumbian Exposition of 1893 in Chicago with his designs for the Minnesota Saate Capitol and the United Spares Custom House (1899-1907) in New York. The Minnesota Seace Capitol had a classical compmition inspired by McKim, Mead and White's Rhode island State Capitol (1891 - 1903) and a dome modeled on St. Peter's in Rome. It had fine dons, solid constmuc- tian in white Genrgia marble, and a profusion of sculpcures and mural paintings, among them Daniel Chener French's gilded sculpuse, The Progress of the State, and Edward Simmons’ mural, The Civilication of the Nerthwert, ‘Vhese gave powerful visual identity tu the cullectively held image of an ideal capitol. Sumi- larly, Gilbert's United States Custom Tlouse had an opulent facade, graced with a giant Corinehian order and French Second Empire vrnamental motifs.  Gilbert's involvement with the Cary Beautiful movement began with his plan for Washington, 19.C. (1900), which pres- aged the later Senate Park Commission plan. For his Minnesota State Capitol, Gilbert designed three monumentally scaled ap- proaches (1903-06. unexccuted), and for the center of New Haven. Connecticut, he designed two broad avenues connecting the historic green with a new, secondary civic center and railroad station (1907-10, unexecuted). Gilbert's campus plans, among them the Univenity of Minnesota (1908) in Se. Paul, the Uni- versity of Texas (1909-14) in Austin, and Oberlin College (1912) ia Ohio, had the composiponal hierarchics, axial rela- tionships. and terminal vistas typically featured in City Beautiful designs.  Like his Beaux-Arts contemporaries, Gilbert thought that de- signs for public buildings, inherently timeless, should respect the classical ideal of beauty. Skyscrapers, however, a modem building type, along with railroad xcarions and bridges, suggested more up-to-date solutions. Gilbert's West Sercet Building (1905-07) and Woolwarth Building (1910-13), both in lower Manhattan, celebrated the skyscraper's lofty heights with verti- cals inspired by Lauis Sullivan's dkyscrapers. Seeking the proper composition for an office headquarcers in the cicy, Gilbert sud. ied the towered secular buildings—horeés des villes, hoch halls, and belfties—of medicval Flemish centers of trade, among them Bruges. These he anwciated with the intensely commercial, cor- porate. and competitive urban civilization then burgroaing in  United Seater Supreme Cours Building (19351, Washington (0.C Phot © Mary Ann Sullivan  New York. The Woolworth Building, commissioned by Frank Woolworth as the headquarters for his five-and-icn-cent mer- chandising empire. had a tower that rose straight upward from che sidewalk to command the skyline like 2 cathedral spire. Gil- bert’s design reverberated with hiaencal memones but also Projected an advenruresame spirit of modernity by celehearing the energy and optimism of uummercial New York.  Gilbert remained faithful to the disrincnion between the mod- ern and the timeless according to building type. but by the late 1920s bis finest works suggested « poluizing tension in his architectural designs that he never fully resolved. He designed the U.S. Army Supply Base (1918-19) foe a 100-acre waterfront site in Brooklyn. New York, finding inspirauon in the factories of Devoit architect Albeit Kahn. ‘The Supply Basc’s bold, ab- saract masses in concrete scemed to chart an increasingly modern direction for his practice. Gilbert's contemporary Detrott Public Library (1918-21), however. a finely propordoned, dehcately dewailed. and erudite Renaissame palezzo, showed that he con- tinued to honor the classical past. The most convincing work of Gilbert's late carcer, the United States Supreme Court {1928 — 35) in Washington, D.C... had a composition that vividly pro- aimed the majesty of the law, eeplete with allegorical wulpture and inscriptions symbolizing liberty and justice, fe was among  the List of such cissical monuments erected near Washingron’s Mall. Gan Fensat  See aio Burnham, Daniel H. (United States); Carrére, John Mervia, and Thomas Hastings (United Sentes); City Brauti- fal Movement; Court House; Library, McKim, Mead and White (Unived States), Neoclessicisny Sallivan, Louis (United States); Woolworth Building, New York City  Biography  Born 29 Nevembes 1859 in Zanesville, Ohiox attended Massa- chusetts Institute of Technology. Boston 1878-79. Moved to New York Caty co appeennce for McKim, Mead and White 1880-82; returned to Sc. Paul, Minnesota 1882. Formed part- nership with James Knox Taylor in St. Paul 1884-91; won com- petition for the Minnesota Stare Capitol in St. Paul 1895: offers to design state capitol in West Virginia and Arkansas followed. President of American Institure of Architects (AIA) 1908, 1909; founder of the Architecture League of New York, served as presi- dent 1913-14. Chevalier of the Legion of Honor of France. 
teceived the order of King Albert of Belgium. Member of Ameri- can Academy of Arts and Letters 1908; President of National Asadeiny of Design, New York 1926-33; awarded Gold Medal. Society of Ans and Suicnces 1931, Died 17 May 1934.  Selected Works  Beazer Building. Boston, Massachusetts. 1694  Minnesota Stare Caprol, St. Paul, Minnesota. 1905  Unived States Custom House, New York City, 1907  Wese Sureet Building, New York City, 1907  University of Minnesota Campus Plan, St. Paul. Manacsora. 1908 Woobworth Building, New Yark City, 1913  Univenuty of Texas Campus Pls. Ausan, Texas, 1914  U.S. Amy Supply Base, Brooklyn, New York, 1919  Detron Public Library, Michigan. 1921  United Seates Supreme Cour, Waslungeon. D.C, L985  Further Reading  Blodget, Geailrey, “Cass Gilbert. Architect: Conservative at Hay.” Journal of America Hinery, 72 (December 1985)  Chrinen, Barbara, “Casa Gilbert and the lieal of the City Beaetital: Cory and Campars Plans, 1900-1916" (Ph.D. drasercatican), Graduate Center, City Univenity of New York, 1997  Fenske, Gail, "The ‘Skyscraper Problem’ and the City Beauufuk The Woolworch Suikling” (Ph.1). dissercavon}. M.1T.. 1988  trich, Sharon. Cass Goibert, Architerr: Modern I nediionaier, New York: Monacelli Preas, 1999  Urish. Sharon. “Cass Gilbert's Cancer in New York. 1899-1905" (Ph.1). dassertanon), Northwestern Unaversity, 1285  Jone. Rubert Allen, “Cass Gilbert, Midwessern Architect 1 New York” (PhD. dissertation}, Care Weucrn Reserve University. 1976, New York: Arno Press, 1982 .  Morgan, Witham ‘Tawna, * Lhe Pobocs of Busses in the Careet of Cass Galbert” (Ph.D. disenuation). Cniversery of Mannesona, 1972  Thomypaon, Neal. Aftancseta’s State Capstol The Art ane Poltic of a Public Burlding, $4. aul: Minnesota Historical Soaery, 1974  GILL, IRVING JOHN 1870-1936 Architect, United States  Shortly after the cur of the 20th century in southern California. Irving Gill emerged from under the influence of various histon- cal revivals and began to create a simple. straightforward archi- tecture that looked ra the furtire and noe the past. Instead of highlighting craditional building methods (i.c.. heavy frame con- struction) and materials (i.c.. wood or stone) ax mou of his Californian Arts and Crafts contemporanes, such as the Greene Brochen, Ernest Cothead, and Bernard Maybeck, were duing, Gill began to experiment with inoder sceuctural medhods and tmaterials as well av undecarated surfaces. The result waa an archi- tecture of seathetiv severity, technulogical breakthrough, and s0- cial unventiveness. As exemplified by hus moot famous building, the Walter Dodge House (1916). Gull created a sprawting reinforcod-concrete frame of irregularly massed cubes organized around 2 raised patio and clad in noching other chan whie stucco.  For the first 15 years of his career, which included a stint working ¢n Loun Sullivan's Chicago office, Gill's buildings tanged over the terrain of 19th-cenrury historicism. After 1906,  however, most of Gill's buildings began to be orchestrated by his own design method of straighs tines and smooth plaster walls. Aside from arches. placed at entrance vestibules or covered pas- sageways, or rustic columns, used around courtyards, Gill's buildings arc soliloquies of the unornamented, crisp right angle. In che Russell Alien House (1907), Gill worked from a central bux modulated by selected projections and pons and re- lenilexs in its use of bean moldings around windows and the far roof, The unly ornament was a pait of columns ac the entrance. In 1908, the rectangular Wilson Acton Hotel and Scripps Build- ing. both in La Jolla, exchewed omament 7 relying oaly on a regular pattern of fenestration within quadratic white surfaces for their compositional effect.  Gill was among the fint Amcrican architects to design prind- pully from che fundamentals of geometry and modern cnnstruc- ton, He envisioned 3 new aesthetic based on the virual revelation of structure and the hanishment of cluctering ornament. As he wrore in his essay, “The Home of the Future” (1916), “There is wornething very restful and satisfying to my mind in the simple cube house with creamy walls, sheer and plain, rising boldly into the sky, unrelieved by comices of overhang of roof, tenors mented save for che vines that saften 4 line.”  This stance on omament is often compared to that of Adolf Taos. Yer, although the wo architects shared an incerest in blank surfaces as well as the savings of labor and muterials about by chminaring ornament, Gill went further than Loos in his concepuvn of ineapensive houses mass-produced for a ogy of reinforced-concrete construction was the. basis for Gill's new aesthenc of line and plane. Using cither a concrete frame with hollow terra-corta tile in-fill or poured-in-plice concrete walls, Gill began ro experiment with very thin walls, beinging down a building's cuus tw us utilitarian essentials and beinging duwit its cost to middle-chiss affordability. Far the La folla Woman's Club (1913), Gill was one of the fine architews to experiment with the new adca of tilt-up construction, which sumbines che permanence of concrete with the low cnaty of shortened construction schedules that came with che elimination of formwork.  Conctete appealed to Gill because of its strengch, long-term cost savings, and permanence. Ie was opposed to the cheap, semporary wood-frame consruction common to California home design, a method that encouraged ‘senseless ornamental buildup. A concrete house cxpresced its interiog arrangement on the extenior and derived its expressive from concrete in both reaims. It abu provided the possibility for energy-efficient insulanian and casy maintenance. In 1915, Gill published an article, “New Ideas about Concrete Floors.” that promoted the idea of mixing coloe with the cement to produce polychrome tones ina flour, what he described as “an effect of old Spanish leather.”  Given his interest in designing for the California landscape, Gill created a number of site plans chat maximized the connectiv- ity of andoor and outdoor spaces. ‘The Bishop's School (1908) in La Jolla teatured Jong arcades (influenced by California's Mission architecture) that created an expansive intermediate space be- tween intenors and the central lawn as gathering space. Ar che Henry Timken House (1911), thece loggias open onto a screened court that in turn faces onto a large garden and pool. The Paul Milrimare House (1911) is tied to its Lindscape by grear project:  Weket Dodge Hou, Los Angelos, Calif © Hitonc American Burldings Survey/Library of Congress  ing pergolas supported by rustic columns, However. pethaps Gill's most innavarive planning took place in barger apartment complexes for warkers, such as the Belly Vista Verrace (1910), aser of 12 corrages grouped amund a central pergola, In contrast w typical workers’ apartments, cach cortage had a great deal of light and possessed private ax well au shared community garden spaces. In 1912 Gill took these ideas further and designed several commercial and revidential etructures far the model city of Tor- tance, a Y-shaped plan oriented to give a view of Mount San Antonio in the San Gabriel Mountains  In all, over the vousse of Lhe first decades of the 2Ush century, Gill's architecture was one of the rare casa in which American scientific and practical approaches were embedded not only in building systems analysis or program efficiency but also tn a looking art of architectural composition and massing. By marrying aims of structural expression and geometric clemen- talism, Gill let architecture speak from the cubes and fines that from the complexities of consrmuctional actions and those  that lead back to the most basic simplicines. MITCHELL SOHWARZER  Biography  Born in Tully, New York (near Syracuse). 26 April 1870, won of a farmer, carpenter, and buikling contractor. No academic  architectural training. Employed in architectural office of Elks G. Hall, Syracuse 188%; employed in architecaural office of Jo- ceph Silchee. Chicago 1890, who helped introduce the Shingle style intu the Midwest; worked in architectural office of Dan- kmar Adler and Y ouis Sullivan, Chicago 1891 -93, where Frank oyd Wright was chief deaftaman. Artived in San Diego (893. Went inty partnerthip with Josepli Falkenham, designer of Queen Anne homes, 1894-95; went into parmership with Wi- ham Sterling Hebbasd. former drafeeman for firm of Burnham and Rout, 1896-1907; sublshed new partnership with Frank Mead 1907; independent architectural peactice from 1907; took pn Louis Gill, his nephew, as a partner, 1914, Elected secretary of San Diego Architectural Association 1910. Matried Marion Waugh Brashears 1928, Died in Carlsbad, Cabfomia. 7 October 193%,  Selected Works All budtings are in Calstornia unless otherwise noted.  Birckhead Howe, Porumouth, Rhode Island, 1902 Rurnbany House, San Diego. 1906  Laughlin House, Los Angeles, 1807  Rowell Allen Howe, Bonin, 1907  Newell Webster House, San Dig. 1908  Scripps Building and Water Tuwer, La fella 1908 
Wikan Acton Hard, La Jolls, 1908  Brshop’s Day School, San Diego, 1908  G.AW Simmons Hous, San Diego. 1909  Christian Sience Church, San Diego, 1909  Lewis Cours, Sserra Mader. [410  Paul Matimore House. South Pasailena. 1911  Henty Timken Hone. San Diego. 191  Bannong House. Los Angeles, 1912  Commercal and Residennal Busldings, Yorramce, 1912 Woman's Club, La Jolla, 1943  Walter Douge House, Los Angeles, 1916  Eien Soipps House, La Jolla, LY16  Garman Hall, Bishop's Day Schoul, San Diego, 1916 Horatio Wess Count, Santa Monn, 1919  First Church of Christ Sacntist, Caronada, 1927 Master Pan, Oceanside Civig Center, 1929  Selected Publications  “New Ideas shout Concrete Floors." Susur Magazine (December 1945)  "The Home of the Funure: The New Archecture of the West. Sauall Homes for a Great County.” The Craftsman (May 19161  Further Reading  Gebhard, David, “Irving Gil.” in Califerman Dinan, 1910, odived by Timothy Andenen, Fidureh M. Moore, and Robert Winter, Pasadena, Califorma: Design Publications, 1974  Gebhard, David, “Irving Cal,” in Touwdl « Simpler Way of Lift: The Asts and Crafts Architecn of California, edited bry Robert Winter, Berkeley: University of Calibornsis Pee, 1997  Hines, Thomas §,. drving Gill and the Arctizecrare of Reform: A Study im Madernist Avchstectural Cuteure, New York: Monacelli Press, $999 ;  Jordy. Wiliam H.. “Crafismanship as Reductive Simplificatiane Irving Cill's Dodge House.” in Progrricur amd Academic Ideats a the Tron of the Lmennes Conniry, be Jordy, Garden New York: Doubleday. 1972  Kamerling, Bruce, Jrvone A. Gib: Archteret, San Diego. California: San Drego Historical Socsety, 1995  McCoy, Esther, Fae California Aeviniects, New York: Remnbold, 1900  Schaffer, Sarah, “A Segruficant Sentence upon the Earth: Irving J, Gill, Progresuve Architect.” parts 1 and 2. feurmal of Sam Diego Hosery, 43 and 44 {Fall 1997 and Wincer 1998)  GINZBURG, MOISEI 1892-1946 Architect, USSR  Moisci Iakovievich Ginzburg was the leading theoretician of Constructivism in architecture, a prolific deagner, and a pronees in the research and consinictian of collective housing. Ginzburg, was born in Minsk. the capital of Relarusda, where his father was practicing architecture. On high whout graduation, young Mouser departed for Frame to study. After a bref pesod ia Pars at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts and in Taulsuse at the Art Academy, he enrolled in the architecture program of the Academia di Belle Arti in Milan, Italy, graduating in 1914, The oucbecak of World War | forced him to recurn via the Balkans co Moscow, where he continued his education at the Riga Potytechnic (evacuated to Moscow during the war), earning a degree in architectural engeneenng in 1917.  A man of cnormous energy and with a desire for continuous learning, Ginzburg departed for the Crimean peninsula to head the office for the preservation of cultural monuments and to investigate Tatar folk architecture. He resumed to Moscow in 1921 and published a series of articles on Tatar art, He devoted the following years to pedagogical and scholarly work, teaching at the Moscow Insitute for Civil Engincering (MIGI. later MVTIi and the Higher Artistic- Technical Sradins (Vihueernas). A member of the State Academy of Artistic Sciences, he headed an expedition t Bukhara, Usbehistan in 1924 and during the following year traveled to Turkey. He published two theoretical works on architecture before becoming a founding member of the Society of Contemporary Architects (OSA) and editor (with Alexander Vesnin) of the socicty's journal, Seoremennaia arkin- sebture (Contemporary Architecture) from 1926 to 1930.  During his student years, Ginzburg cacountered French Art Nouveau, lralian fururism, and the work of Frank Lloyd Weight. Moncow in the carly 1920s was the center of contending avam- garde Factions, where European avant-garde periodicals were available, For crample, the trilingual magssine VesciGegenstand! Object, initiated in. 1922 in Belin bry E} Limitzhy (1890-1941) and Hya Ehrenburg (1891-1967), related Soviet trends to their ‘Western counterparts. Ginzburg's first buitding in Mowow, the Crimean Pavilion at the Fine Agriculrutal and Handicraft Exhi- bution (1923), was inspired by the picturesque asymmetry of traditional Tarar houses, He also aimed at abseracting che under- fying principles that shaped folk architecture and defining che “distinct creative order” concealed behind its “picturesque spon- taneity.” He clarified chis cteative order in his cheorrrical wodk Ritm v arkbiteteure (Rhythm in Architecture), published in 1924, and Scil i epokha (Style and Epoch), published the follow- ing yeas.  Vichutemas was a resting ground for new sesthetic ideas. Ginzburg wrore his Rite » arkhitehture as a pedagugical tool for his course on the theury of architectural composition. He ane- lyzed the rhythin of architeceural styles and the harmonious tele Gonships berween architectural forms He defined harmony as “the mathematical essence uf rhyuhen,” supporting his daim with wonccpe from the physiology of visual perception. Ginzburg abso compared proportianal relationships in archicecture to har- monious “chords consisung of melodsous notes” in muni. He began working on Style und Epoch while Rion » arkhitekrure was near publication, thus responding tm the former to “express the thythmical pulse of our ime.” Presene dynamic erends are best  manifested in new technologies, Gi believed, and there- fore he took the machine as a paradigm for modem functional design. He devised a system of vector diagrams wo demonstrate  “che dynamic content” of previous archivectural styles compared with “a contemporary architectural concept” embedded in the 1923 Palace of Labor competition entry by the Vesnin brothers. Accordingly, the foem and sense of dynamic movement is best «aptured in asymmetrical architectural compositions symboliz- ing “a previously unknown eusian.” Although Ginzburg did not elaborate hu concept of rhythm and dynamism in ssbsequent publications, his concrete designs relied heavily on these con- NTU.  Ginzburg continued to clarify and develop the theoretical foundations of Constructiviam through the pages of Sorremen- nate arkbitekrare. For him, the functional method intgrated all possible aspects of architectural considerations imo design  solutions, induding “the national uniqueness” of architecture His 1926 projece for the Housc af the Soviets in Makhach Kala, the capital of the Dagestan Autonoma Republic, accounted for the inferences af persistent climatic and biological condition: that sustain lide and have defined the specific national aspect of each republic. Although Ginzburg did not win this competition, his design for the cetuct af Alma-Ata, the new capital of Kazakh sean, placed firs the following year. Tho urban publi space war surrounded by the House of Government, the Turkesun- Siberian Railroad Admunistration (1899-1974, both designed by Ginzburg and hia student Ignatii Milinis), and the Hause af Communkations (1897~1972. designed by Georg: Gerzamovi. Each building, a dynamic asymmetncal composition of several volumes, contained a semiprivate interior courtyard. Roof ter races provided magnificent views of the surraunding mountains. After huilding an aparrment and communal housing block (1927) in Moscune, Ginzburg was appointed in 1928 (a organize and bead the Standardization Section of the Canstraction Com: mite (Strokkom RSFSR). His group produwed five types of housing units in several variations for prelabricanion and speedy assembly all over Rusia, The moat economical rype. ret novel in its spatial qualities. was unmediately built in Momow (1928- 31), for dhe Commissariat of Finances (Narkomfin). This hows  ing type was used by several OSA members in their subsequent projects and by Ginzburg in the worker housing (1939) in Rostakino, near Moscow. Je became fashionable among Euro- pean intellectuals because of Le Carbunice’s housing blocks based on similar apartment unsts.  Ginzburg also headed the Section tor Soctalie Resetdement and participated in the 1929 Green City Resort competition. Elis project. 4 model for cransfoermng Muwew tu 4 groen city, sensiated of ribbons of prefabreatad howing units and transponanes-commerca-cultural nodes forming community centers, Although several experimental univ were built (1931). this proyect never materialized. None of his major competition peoqects—the Palace of Soviets in Moscow (1932), the Synthe- sizing Theater in Sverdiovak (19321. and the Commussanar of Heavy lodustry in Moscow (19334] —was realized. Yer they influ- enced modern architectural thaught in Russia and Western Eu- nupe.  Alter all architcccural organizations were disbanded and the official Unicin of Soviet Architects was formed in 1932, Girne: burg was elected to the board, From 1933 an, he headed a deaign sudie to the Comenissariar of Heavy Industry (Natkomtiach- prom), and when the Suvict Academy of Architecture was estab- lished in 193%, be was among its firse academicians. Ginzburg  Apariment House (1931) foe the People's Comminanat of Finance (Narkomfin}, Moxcow. by Moise’ Ginsburg, © Walum C. Brum 
became editor and contributor to the academy's multivelume Vieobahehuna isterins arktitekiwry (940-45; History of World Ar- chitecture). In 1945, he headed the academy's team changed with the planning and restataton of Crimea. He died on 7 January 1946 as the work began,  Mauka Buiznianow  Biogrephy Born in Minsk, Russia, 23 May 1892. Attended Exole des Beaux-Arts, Paris: aricnded Fook d'Architecture, Toulouse: studied under Gaetanu Moretti, Academia di Belle Aro, Milan: uated 1914; received an engineering degree from Rithsky Polytechnic, Moscow 1914. Private practice, the Crimea 195B- 21; editor, Arkhitrktura 1923; founder and editor, with Alek sandr Vesnin, Soreermennasia srkhiiekruns 1926-30, bead, Sector for Standardization and [ndunteialization uf Construction 1941 - 45; founder, editor, contrihutne, Veeobshichapa isterina arbhiteh tury. Professor, Vihutcmas, Mawow front 1923; inwructnr, Moxow Institute of Higher Technology from 1923. Member, Moscow Architectural Society, mentber, Russian Academy of Artistic Sciences; founding member, Awociatinn of Contempo- rary Architects (OSA} 1925; member, design studio, Heavy In- dustry Commissariat from 1933; member, First Congress of So- view Architerts 1997, academician, Sevier Academy of Architecture 1939. Died in Masaow, 7 January 1946.  Sclected Works  Crmeasn Cavilion at the Fint Agncubenral and ! Lisdicrals Exhibinion. Moscow, 1924  Aparmment and communal housing block for the State Lasurance Bureau (Goatrakh), Moscow, 1927  House af Government. Alms-Ata, Kazakh Republic (with Ignatii Miliny), 1935  c housing complex for the People's Comminariat of  Finance (Narkomfin!, Moscow (with Ignstii Maines}, 19.4%  ‘Workers’ housing in Rosolano, near Moscow (with Solomon Lasagori, 1931  Pretabocated indridual housing unrs for the Green City competinon, experimental models built near Moscow (with  appre ton ‘omy Ural regional  bi « for e economac counsel  {Urobbownarkhoc 1 econ {with Alexander Pasternak and S. Prokhorov), 1952  Turkesun-Sibenan Rulroad Admunvirxinn, Alma-Ata, Kazakh Republic (wich fgnatii Mili), 19.54  Onljonikidze Sanovorium for the Ministry of Heavy Industry, Kalovodsk. 19.37  Selected Publications  Rote o arkhverktwer, 1923 Sople and Epoch, sranslatced by As Judes substantial introductson by  Thilabche, 1934  Arkhtetture sanatonia NETP + Kidowadke, 940  Genzburg alio published qumerous astictes in the journal Nerrrmranait arthitehture between 1926 and 1940  Farther Reading  Although Moni Ginzburg is mentioned amdfor quered in every book  on Canaructiniam, no hook abwut heer os English exises  Bhetukew, Milka. “Rhychon asa Fundamental Concept of Ashivectune,” Experiment: A four of Ruscein Cattery, 219%)  Blomaker, Milka, “Soviet Houung duriag the Experimental Years. TATK- 1984," in Kucees Howsny in she Mordern Age Deugn and  Social Hutery. edited by Willkam Brumficld and Blasz Ruble. Cambridge and New York: Cambeidge University Press, 1993 Buchl. Victor, “Morse: Ginzburg’s Narkomfin Communal House in Mowuw: Cantesung the Soctal and Material Woeld.” Journal of the Socsery of Architectural Hosorutas, 9712 (UFIB5  Cooke. Catherine, Rasstian Avant-Garde: Theortes of Art, Architecture, and the City. London: Academy kdinons, (995 inchades sransLations of several articks by Guurburg published in the ournal Sevvemenaaia arkheirkrane)  Khan-Magomedov. Selim ., “MLY. Gineburg.” Architectural Desagn, 2a)  Khan-Maguaodov, Selin O., Meise Ginebarg, Milan: Angel, 1977; 2nd edivon, 1983  Khan-Magueiedon, Slim O., frencen of Sone Architecture: The Search for New Suberrom in the 1920s aie 19,301, traralated by Alaander Leven, edited by Cathenine Couke. New York Rizoh, and Landun ‘thames snd Hudson, 1987  Kopp. Anatole, Lan hitewture de li périnde sulimicane, Grenadble, France. MMreses Univernearcs de Grenoble, 1978; as Conurwetensse Architectere in the USSR. Vaondan: Acadcony tliiom, and New Vouk: St. Martan’s Press, 1985  GLACIER MUSEUM, FJERLAND, NORWAY Designed by Sverre Fehn, completed 1991  The Glacier Museum (1989-91) in Fperand, Narway, is the produce of the Norwegian architect Sverre fehn. A private enoe- preneur commissioned Febn to create a building that could serve as an educational center for schools, as a restaurant, and as an information center for tourists ta explore Fixrland’s wo branches of the Jostcdal Glacier. This glacier ix the largest ia Europe and attracts eientists and courists alike to westero Noeway.  Febo, born in 1924, is a key figure to emerge among the “progressive” Scandinavian architects organized by Ame Konmo in 1950, The Progresives sought to create architecture that was void of any links with ube nostalgic architecture of postwar na- uonalism in Scandinavia. Architects such as Fehn, along with Korsme, Jorn Uson, and Christian Norberg-Schule, embraced the ideas of che Modern movement. especially Alvar Aalto’s or- Ranic functionalisr ideas. Febn kater was wo exert the influence that Louis Kahn's architecture and phenomenological writings had on hit work  Fehn creates a regionaliss architecture, using elements of tra- Jidanal Nordic construction in innovative ways. His modernist marcrials include concreve, Weel, glass, wood, and alace quarried in Norway, In his buildings, date is used as it has been for more than a century in Norway: in large square shapes on floors end in various shapes as roofing, Fehn’s architecture is usually devoid. of additive color, although occasionally one color is used as an accent to the structure.  The Glacier Museum thus incorporates huilding traditions trom Fehn's Nordic henrage that he cranslaces into a modernist architectural language. giving the museum as well as his other works. by choice of materials as well as form, a distinct identity. Located in western Norway close to the end of the Fjxtlandfjord is the long valley plain carved by the glacier, where the Glacier Museum, also known as the Norsk Bremuscum, resides. The muscum lics on a delta formed by sediments dating back to a time when the glacict ran into the Fjarland Fjord. The site is  created by deposits of sand and gravel that are loosened by: the glacier’ 's ovement and melting. Vhe doping exterine walls can- sist of grayish-white concrete that repeats the farms of the steep mountain walls. The dark coloring of the slaic and the weighti- ness of the concrete give che building ins mass while the glass and wood evoke reflections af light in this dack but sometimes sunny repon of the world.  The Glicier Museum, co Febn, becomes 4 puctic temple for Norwegians and others to wonhip nature, cxpeuially the Joxtedal Glacier. Norwegians, as Hecho notes, worship God in nature, and the building resembles a giant alias from which to worship na- ture. The walls become the mounsiins, the carth, while the tout. the platform, becomes the sky. 1a difficult to exhibit the glacier, so the structure, the muscum, bevomtes the obrect that is exhib. ited: char tells the marratrve of the glacier. In che interior. the museum contains ilhustranons and models that help to make the invisible qualities of the glacier visible to the visitor  The spatial quality and structure af the museum corresponds ta its place. Fehn seldom uses explicit symbulism, yer in his writings he emphasizes the glacier and the wirrounding moun. tains that it drapes as a metaphor for the farm, materials, and spaual quality of the museum. The museum an elongated, horiennral volume that has 4 smaller cylindrical volume compris ing che audisotium, which lies to the left of the entrance pottal. On the uppusite side of the atutionum, faung the south, 1 the restaurant, which consists of a volume Lomprecdl of two wide-angled walls ut glass that yut away from the maen volume. lo Fehn, this glass vohime resembles the geometry of ice thar comprises the glacier. Ac one approaches the muscum. thy en tryway is flanked on cach side by stairs leading 1a an abservanon deck on the roof. On the deck, which Fehn likens to a ship's deck, the visitor can view the Jostedal Glacws and view the landscape that has been created hy the movement af the glacier The long entryway. 4 slae-covered double-pinhed cool with + nattow skylight, gives the illusion of narrowing as it meets the doors,  ‘This journey of climbing the stair and then descending them into the crevicelike poral, Fela sugges, is similar to penctrat: ing into the glacier to discover ita myuenes. The ineersar, onm- prised of wood, slatc, and concrete, is lic by a lung, narrow skylight chat cuns down the center spine of Use sructure and 15 divided into space for visitor facilities and for educanonat ex- hibits with information on the geologic formation of the site. The interior roof of the main gallery gradually inclines upward wath owin clerestory windows t0 its sides.  As in his easlier buildings, such as the Hedmark Cathedral Museum (1968-88) in Hamar, Norway, and the Vila Busk (1989) in Bamble, Norway, Fehn concentrates on the joint in the Glacier Muscum The joint is evident in this structure, ope. cially in che traditional wooden cantilever entryway. where the meeting of wonden members with stect bolts and braces are Ieft exposed. These later works all have movement in plan. making use of diagonals, and the use of natural lighung starts to become more arriculared and the structures more defined.  In the Late 1990s, Fehn's Glacier Muscuin was seen by the architectural cheorix Francesca Dal Co, in the intreducton w Christian Norberg-Schult's bonk beerre Febn, Works, Propecn. Wrining, 1999-1996 (1997), as disintegrating in ies parts but having a clarity of plan and rigor of structure (12-13), Chriaian Norberg-Schule, the architectural higoeian and architect, claims that the Glacier Muscum ix a “rural construction” that is com-  pored of “figurative tunes” thae aid in a dialogue with the Lind (28-29). During the carly 1980s, the architectural historian and shoutist Kenneth Feampeon’s remarks in hey arncle "Prospects fora Conical Regionalism” (1983) helped to define Fein’ Laver works, Frampton cmphasizes that ehn's works are aligned phe- tuunenologically co the ste. Fehn's work, and his Glacier Mu- scum eapectilly, realizes a complicated understanding of place and tectonics,  Resicca Davesco  Ser alw Aalto, Alvar (Finland): Febo, Sverre (Norway); Fram- pton, Kenacth (United States), Norberg-Schats, Christian (Norway); Urzoa, Jorn (Demmark)  Further Reading  Bay. Helle, “Bracen som Muveum—Bracen pd Mascum,” Arkisebtar DK, 3B A994)  beho, Swetts, “Noesk Bremuseum,” Byggntunet, 74/2 (Pebruary] 921  Feha, Sverre. “Spintr ddl Nord.” Spario ¢ Soviend, 60 11992)  Techn, Sverre, “The Nonwepan Glacier Center,” Lereng Arohatectare, 11194)  Fehn, Sverre. The Skin. she Cnt, atl she Bandage, Cambridge. Massachuset: MI Unrversiey Prev. 1997  Hietd, Per (iat, “The Workings of Sverre Fehn.” Progressive Archuectare, 75 (ecbeuasy 19941  Ficld, Per al, Suerte Aha The Thought of Canstruction, New York: Ruzols, 1988  Greaveld, Ul fin on los.” Anctasecreral Revers. 187 une 1990)  Gronvold. LIL “Gtemermuscam door Sverre Fetun: Verleden als ded van het Heden,* Architect doucer ‘July 1K  Lavalow, AL, “Masce Gbataee a Ferland.” (arduan tare dazwjonrd bus, 287 (1995)  Miler. Henry, “Cool Appiasal: Gloer Matcum, bjrland, Narway.” An butevsurad Revere. 193 (April (993)  Norberg Schulz, Chnotian, and Gennaro Posghoae, Sterne peda: Works, Propects. Writeng 1949-1996, Now York; Monacli, tar  Norti, Marja-Ruets, “Registo Helado: Museo de Jos Glaciates, bjatland,” Arguiiectira vine, 32 September Octebes 1993}  GLASGOW SCHOOL  Although the term Glasgow School origgnally was applied wo a group of painters (subsequently referred ro as ‘I he Glasgow Boys) involved with the Glasgow School of Art (GSA), the term more definitively came to be used for a group of Gtaswegians active in design and crafts berween 1890 and 1920: recently the term Glasgow Style has replaced in, Bus Glasguw School remains the appropiate designation for “The Four,” rea couples wha collab  orated on interior design at the turn of the century: the sisters Margarce (1864. 1933) and Frames (1873-1925) Ma Dunald and their future husbands, respecuvely, Charles Rennic Mackin- tosh (1868-~ 1928) and James Herbert McNair (1868-1955). All had been sutdents at die GSA: the MacDonakds in watercolor painting and decorative arts, the oxo men ih atchitecture and design. Although their work and that of like-minded Glaswegian colleagues such as Valwin Morris (1465-1911), George Logan (1866-1939), George Walton (1867-1933), and ELA. Taylor (1874-1951) has alfinites with Art Nouveau, it was indelibly and uniquely scamped by Glasgow, the bustling river poet that was preeminent in industrialization and maderization in Scot- land and that became in 1900 the “second city” of the Bestish 
Empire, with a population of 750,000. Clients of the Glisgow School, wich as the tearoom proprietor Kare Cranston (1849 - 1934), the publisher Walter Blackae (1860-1953), and the mer. chane William Davidson (1861-1945), typified the new breed of progressive enureprencurs wha Huurbed in the blooming conurbation on the Chide River.  Criucal to the development af the Glasgow School was Fran- cis “Hra” Newbery (1853+ F940), who healed the GSA from 1885 1 1917, and hus wife, Jessie (1864-1948; she married Newbery in 1889), who elevated the hitherto disdained ant of embroidery and taught classes in needlework that influenced all the deugn arts at the GSA. The couple worked ro dissolve the separation between fine and usctul arts. and they introduced design and technical arts studios into the cumeculum. In keeping with parallel trends of the time in Fagiand and Furape, the credo of the GSA was thas art should be a part of daily life and that through the applied ars, acetic choice should shape Private in addition to public settings. Metalwork, mosaics, peso, stencils, posters, apphguid tectiles, and ceramics joined waterco- lor drawing, book illusersnun, embroidery, and furniture as media emphauzed at the GSA and practiced by che Glaguw School. An admirable charactersen is the preponderance of women in the design revulution that the Glasgow School sig- paled: Annie French (1872-1965), Jessie King (1875-1949), Ann MacBeth (1875-1948). and De Courcy Lewthwante Dewar (1878~ 1959}, in additson to fessie Newhery and the Mac! onal sisters, are among the mast prominent.  Uhe naturalistically based visual language of the Glasgow School és a rectilinear version of the more dominant curvilinear Arr Nouveau of France, Belgium, and Spain. In the emphasis on gromeny. symmetry. and abstraction, there is a“resemblance to Dutch nina dst and che Ausrian Secesion, two move ments with which the group had ues, Characteristic: mosify of the Glasgow School are che square snd ach markedly conven- tionalized organic forms as the ruse, tie thistle, and the rose uve. Stylized allegorical ligures are frequently presene; the atten: uated and aften androgynous females found in early work by The Four brieily earned them ute epithet the "Spook School.” Color schemes evoked the pale palette of the Actthetic Mave- tment, but the pervasive pastel greens, pinks, and lavenders also echoed the countrysde around Glasgow. Contrasts provided by wood—stained dark brown or occagorally black—and metal— usually pewter, svet, or vopper—brought an urban reference into che harmonioudy designed interiors.  ‘The chief sources, assimilated and then integrated into an identifiable visual ensemble. of the Glasgow Schoul were the English Arve and Crafts movement, as inspiced by the writings of John Ruskin and manifested in the work of Wiliam Moreis and Walter Crane; pre-Raphaclite imagery and syle: acuthen- ism (notably the work of J.A.M. Whistler and Aubscy Beas dsbev}; faponiime, the Celti Revival, promulgated by, among others, Patrick Geddes (1854-1932); and symbolism, especially as interpreted in the Netherlands and Belgium (Dutch artist Jan Tuoeop influenced the MacDonalds’ drawings, and boch the literary and visual representatives of Belgians symbolism —Maur- ice Macterlinck, Jean Delville, and Carlos Schwobe— were well known in Glagow).  ‘The Glasgow School came to attention through the papular exposinons thar publicized new trends in the applied art in 1896 their work was shown at Arcs and Crafts exhibitions in  London and Liege, Belgium. Penodicals also introduced the Glasgow style to a wider public. The Yellew Boek published reproductions in 1896, and in 1897 a four-part series rithed “Same Glasgow Designers” appeared in Stadio magazine. Gleeson White, the perspicacious editor of Studie, preceded other British journalists in reougnizing that interior design had become a major ait form, penetrating the communal conscious- ness und altering patteres of consumption, and that in the British tales, ar feast, decorative ats surpassed in innovation all other visual media. In Glasgow, the ideal of the Geramskwaswert (toral work of art) teceived popular definiuen in the vanous interiors fashioned berween 1897 amd LOE for Miss Cranston’s tea- roams, designed initially by Walton and then by Mackintosh, with accessories such as posters, menu cards, gesio pancls, and stenciled wallpapers by the MacDonald sisters.  By the beginning of the 2th ceacury. the Glasgow School had achieved intemational status. In 1900. The Four, together with Walton, Talwin Morris, and several other Glasgow design- ers. were invited tn create # room and some furnizure at the eighth Vienna Secession exhibition: the display caused a sensa- tiva, and affinities herwoen the Glasgow School and thar of the Wiener Wetkstatte became discernible. In 1902, a special aumbet of Deboraine Kunit dedicated to the’ MacDonald/Mack- intoah entry for the Haus canes Kunst-Feeundes (An-Lover's Howe) was isucd by Alexander Koch, the Darmstadt publisher who had spomorod the campettion; the same magazine in March af chat year had printed a sympathetic account of the work of che Mackinwshe by Hermann Muthesius. Also in 1902, ube Scottish section, installed by Mackintosh, at the Inter- natonat Exhibinon of Modern Deourative Ast at Turin received critical acclaim. The McNairs furnished one of the rooms, the “Rose Boudowr” was by the Mackintosh/MacDonald partner. ship, and the Glasgow School dominated the other two Scorish moms. Although the Turin exhibition marked the end of the An Nouveau inoveinent generally, the Glasgow School as a whate would remain viable wnsil c. 1920. The Frances MacDan- ald and Herbert McNair cullaboravion, however, subscquently produced very little, and the Margaree MacDonald and Charles Mackintosh team sulfered declining comminsdons after 1910, Recently, there has been a revrval of interest in the Glasgow School, signaled by a notable impuct of theis formal strategics on contemporary interior design.  HELEN StAKING  Ser abu Arts and Crafts Movement: Glasgew School of Art Further Reading  Uhe majne dims con the bibliography are very recent. fueled by the teseatch of ferruniu scholar into a moeement that had an cxtrecrdinas dy high number of women amang its adherents and by renewed apprecs- ation for the social and aesthetic importance of the decorstive eet. Previoudy, the literarase cancentratod almomt exhnively on Mackin- tosh and virtually ignored the concribuoons of his wife and partner, Margaret MacDonald Mackintosh. as well as those by ocher designens associated with the Glasgow School,  Amcombe, Habelle, A Wes’ Teuct: Wemen on Deuign from 1860 tw the Present Day, Lorston: Virago, and New York. Viking Penguin, 1984  Bleach, Brian, et al.. The Glagow Style, 1890-1920, Glasgow: Glaxgow Museums and Art Gallevien, 1984  Burkhauset, Jude (editor). “Gages: Girb”) Women ins Act sud Deuge TRO. 1920, Glasgow: Glasgow School of An, 1988; revied  edinon. Edsnburgh: Canongate, and Cape May, New Jer Ochve, 1993 pens Tener Red  Callen, Anthea, Ampe! in the Sudo: Wasnen 1m the Aro: and Crafs Movement 1870-1974, London: Astragal. 1979; as Women Armin of the Arts and Crafts Movement, 1870-1914, New York: Pantheon, 1979  Babee, Willam, Mavements of Modernity: The Care of Clagen: and Ant Neuveas, Loodon and New York: Routledge, 1990  Groundwater, John, The Glargou Schued uf Art through a Connery, Glasgow: Glasgow School of Art. 1940  Helland, Janice, Fhe Stadio of Prances and Aargurt Marl onald, Manchener and New York: Manchester Univenity Press, 1996  Kaplan, Wendy (eduor), Charkes Kensie Mackiamsh, New York Abbeville Press, and Glasguw: Glasgow Muscums, 1996  Kinchin, Penta, foe and Taste. The Glasgow {ea Room, 1875-1975, Wendlebury. White Cackade, 19H  Kinchin, Renilla, and Julet Kinchan, CLugew's Gress Exiybition: 1888 1901, 1911, 1938 1988, Wendlebury. Whie Cackade. 1988  Lamer, Gerald, and Cella Larnet, The Glagow Side, Eaboburgh: Paul Harns, ond New York: Taplingsr. 1979  Muthesan, Hermann, “The Gligow An Movement,” Dekwrusive Kane, 9 (March 1902)  Mutheamua, Hermann, Thy taglise Howe, cdnted by Denais Sharp. warnluted by Janet Schgman, London: Crosby Pochwoud Maples, and New York: Rizal, 1979 (transdatiun of Der Enghiche Hast, 1904 05)  Neat. Tunothy, Part Seen Hart beutgined: Mesum and Symboliiee in the Wark of Charles Rennie Mackratesh and Manperct MacDenald, Edunbusgh: Canongate Pecos, 1994  Nutegers, Patrick (editor), Mackintosh and Hes Comtemperancs i Ewrepe and America, Landon: fohn Murray. R38  Rechic, Pamela, The Martintosts House, (864.1933 (exhib. cat.) Glasgow: Huncerian Art Gallery. Univeruty of Glargow, 1483  Reckie, Pamets, Margarrt MacTDunald Mactintuh, Glaygow Hunteran Art Gallery, 1987  Taylor, James Russell, The Art Nowress Hook in fritain, Landoe Merhuen, and Cambridge, Massachuserts: MIT Pres 1966  Whire, Gleeson, “Sane Glayguw Designers and Vheit Work.” The Seudio. 11-19 (18971  GLASGOW SCHOOL OF ART  Designed by Charles Rennie Mackintosh, completed 1908  The Glasgow School of Art (ease wing, 1897-99; west wing and upper tory, 1907 -08), designed fry Charles Rennic Mackintosh (1868-928), is significant beak aa che culminatian of the Ans and Crafts style and as a teuly original interpretation uf the Art Nouveau, the contemporary design Movement m continental  Europe.  The governors of the school, in sewing the parameters fur the 1896 limited competition for a new building, emphasized that their budget was small and char a plan building was all that was required. Funds were so limited. as it was determined somewhat later. that the building would have to be constructed in two phases, The school’s hoard of governors selected the de- sign put forth by Mackintosh, then an apprentice at Honeyman and Keppec. This project was the fire significant building cred- ited to Mackintosh, 28 yean od at the time.  ‘What cicarly distinguished the design of the building was its innovative response to the constrain of a difficult site—long,  narrow, and steeply sloping woth a drop of 30 feet from north to smuth Mackintosh set back che northern entry wall from the propery line at Renfrow Street ta minimize the amount nf ceo secon eapused to dhe severe angle of the slope, creating 4 Light well that extends the cntite 244-foo1 length of the site. Tho light well's glared roofs illuminate the technical studios located in the building's lawer level, banging abundant nacural light decp into the spaces.  The building's plan is iclatively simple. The small vaulted entry leads to a stairway cloaked in a dark foresr of simple wood tracery. suffused witch light from the muscum space above. A central corridor serves as an cast-west spine with studios to the borth and service spaces to the south, The school still functions well today, as the rooms are both well cumsdered [oe their pur- pow and flexible.  Thase studios, the primary expression oa the north facade. teach 2 height of 26 fect with simple, gridded windows. Three huge studio windows on one side and four on the other side flank a carefully composed masonry form at the entry. The most striking feature of the front clevacion is its asymmetty. The su- dio windows vary dightly in size, according ta the spaces they light. Alubough Mackintosh placed the entrauce at the physical center of rhe building, its trcarment subverts this position, as jusufied again by the Buiktings internal arrangement. Dynamic tension is created by the juxtaposition of ure symmetrical from tailings that flank the entrance stairway and declare its cencral position. The salloped stone ruining walls, in-filled with sculpriral wrought-iron railings. are a brilliantly creative solu- tion ta the problems presented by the ure. Vhe pedimented arched window, echoed by the wrought-iron archway at the sttcet wall, and rhe balenny at the second Roar are balanced by the bay windows and turret uf the entry. The simple, relatively srask architrave contains the only sculpture on the face of the building: the stylized carcd-stone keystone at the arched tran- som above the dourway sy nbolizes the funciivs of the building. A simple unadarned cornice, like the brim of a cap over the austere studho windows, fumes the fade and brings the proi- hence of the studio spaces into focus.  he cascading staitcase that carries one from the street across the light well serves as a drawbridge across a moat. The building ica synthesis of comparable symbolism: the disparate influences inctade Scottish baronial castles, continental Art Noswean, and the Arts and Crafts movement. Traditional Japanese decorative theme is evident noe only in the wrought iron on the extenor bur abo in the wand framing and ormament in the interior. Contrasts and opposition can be found everywhere: the wlidity of the masansy and the transparency of che glass, the delicacy of the iron ornament and the industrial scale of the windows. One of the must striking (cauires on the front facade vonsiss of the projecting iron stalks that serve to both brace the tall windows and provide mounting brackers for window washer’ platforms. hose stalls terminate in delxate uacery finial clus- ter adjacent to the window. Within the studio spaces, che iron- work appears to be abstract iron flowers set in window boxes.  ‘The sourh facade, srrikingly plain and purposely functional, has heen likened to a fortress: faved in a roughcast-concrete wash, the looming mass of the building is broken into three peayecting wings with very sparse. deeply insct fenestrapon. The western half of the building, buite several years after the initial portinn was completed, wan deigned during a frenetic period in Mackin: 
The Mackintosh Room, designed hy Chasks Renee Mackuntosh. Glasgow School of Ant  Photograph by Enc Thorburn © The Glasgow Pictuce Uibrary  cosh’s professional growth, Still, che wextern wing complements and completes the fire phase well while managing to catablish an identity of its own.  The western facade, where the dope of the site along Svoct Surcet » revealed, presented a particularly large challenge of com- postion. Thes wing contains the famous library space. a function unlike any ocher in the budding, [he narrow projecting oricl windows on the west facade are balanced in counterpoint with the recessed windows on the plain and completely unadomed south facade. The side entrance on the west facade abo features a highly articulated mannenst doorway wath layered motifs. The six bay windows thac mark the first flooe of this facade are set with deliberate care as delicate foal ww the vouned and powerful stonework, The three southernmost bays grow to over 63 feet in height, encompassing the library's nwc-wory windaw. This modern composition emphases the sertiuality of che building, at the low point of the site, further accentuatng the efect,  No room in the budding exhibits the full range of Mackin- tosh’s maatery of space and detail more chan the library. the most acclaimed interior space in the Glasgow School of Art. Like touch of the tension thar Mackincosh created on the buidding’s exterior, the space is severe, yer serene and warm. much as con- temptative spaces are in abbeys. The room's rugged dark-wood structure. complemented by the perimeter balconv’s stylized and  colorfully ornamented sculptural balustrade, is contrasted by the double-heaght hay windows and the cascading, madern metal chandclicr.  Although the building was favored and appreciated by its users. it drew little adulation ounside Glasgow other than the devoted followers of the Art Nouveau in Vienna. In the United Kingdom, chis project was met wih a decp critical apathy that lasted for many years, and Mackintosh quuckdy disay into eelarive obscurity. Unforrunately, is was not unril after Mackin- tosh's death that a new generation of architects and critics came (co appreciate his masterwork that @ che Glaxgow School of An.  Scart J. Katwea  ‘er dio Art Nouveau (Jugendstil); Arcs and Crafts Movement; Glasgow, Scotland; Mackintosh, Charles Reanie (Scotland); Omsment  Further Reading  Blu, Douglas Peevy, Cheri Rennie Macknsesh and the Glages: School of Art, Glasgow: Glasgow School of Art, 1961; 3ed ednicn, as Charley Rennie Mackintest and Glasgow Scheel off Art, edited and annonated by H. Jefferson Barnes, Glasgow: Glingow School of Art, 1988.  Ceawtond, Alan, Cherie: Rennie Macterctesh, London: Thames snd Hudson, 1995  a cal  cA  Uhe Glaggw School af Art North bnirancc Photograph by Eric Thorburn © The Glasgow Picture Library  Fiell. Chatlorve, and Peter Fiell, Cherlin Reunie Mackinsmsh, Cologne. Landon, and New York: Taschen, 199%  Harris, Nathaniel, The Life and Works of Renaie Mackinvech, New York: Smithmark, 1996  Jones. Anthony. Charis Reanie Markinseck, London: Studio Editions, and Secaucus, New Jersey: Wellfleet, 1990  Kaplan, Wendy (editor), Chsrks Resnie Mackintosh, Glasgow: Gage Museums, and New York and Londur: Abbeville Press. 1996  Kimura. Hiroaki (editor), Charles Rennie Mackintmb, Tokyo: Process Atchaecrure, 1984  Lowrey. lohn (editor), Fhe Age of Mackmnresh, Edinburgh: tdinburgh Universay Press. 1992  McKean, John. Cheri Rennie Mackintosh, Povket (ude, Grantown-on-Spey. Morayshire: Baxter, 1998  Macleod, Robert. Chuirler Rennie Mackintosh: Arhisevt and Arts, New York: Dutton, 1983; revised edition, London: Collins. 1983  Pevinct, Nacholas, Charl R Mchinsash, Milan: I! Raluone, 1950. as Charles R, Mackieiah, uranslited by Heather Robens, Vere: Canal, 1998  Steele, James, Charks Rennie Mackinsos Syntheus an Form, Loodon, Academy Editions, 1994  Walker, Frank Amed, Glayow. London: Phaxtun Press, 1992  Wilde, Hlizabech, The Mackintosh Siple: Dever anud Design. Load: Pavilion Books, 1995: as The Mlackasoah Seple! Deugn and Dever, San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 1995  GLASGOW, SCOTLAND  Glasgow, the largest city in Scotland, and the adminisrative enter of the Strathclyde region, is situated on both banks of the River Clyde, 20 miles (32 kin) from the river's estuary on the Aduntic coast. [he Glasgow district, an admunistrative arca slghely larger than the city proper, covers 76 sy. miles (198 sq. kim) and had a popukaion in 1995 of nearly 675,000. This fepresents 2 considerable dectine from the 1961] figure of apprax- imately 1,055,000. The dramatic nse of the city’s populanan and industnal base during the 19th century and its equally pre- tipitous decline during the 20th century form the underlying natrauve uf Glisgrw’s urban development and redevelapment.  Varying twanskuons of the city's Celtic name, “Glas ghu” indicate an carly history as a “green glen,” at “dear green place.” Nevertheless, cemturics of development transformed it into 6 setting that was wholly urban. The [8th century grid. and its 19th century additions—tunusually dramatic and extensive in the wuntent of Brish otis -—extended the crossroads of che me dieval city 10 the west and south, actoss the River Clyde, provid- ing the defining urban infrastructure for the Gty's growth. Into this grid have been titted more chan wo centres of housing, offices. shops and instiautions, their architectural expeessions in- duding Georggan good manners, Victorian eclectic exuberance. and mostly mediocte modernism. Not until the last ewo decades of the 20th century has a new sense of robust contextualism and a ce-appreviation of the city's urban heritage facilitated a revived “Gilasgew atyle.” evident in the work at several younger architec: tural firena in the city.  The gridded plan makes Glasgow's urban preseme cunspel- ling. The rectilinear partcm of space stamps the city more decphy imo the mind than any collection of individual buildings inchiding even Charles Rennic Mackintosh’s maserwork of the Glaygow School of Art (1897-99; 1907--09). The urhan quality of central Glasgow owes « great deal w the regulated street pat- term, where heights of buildings in tclation to street widths were more closely controlled chan in other British cirkes during the [9th century, Overall, the ardiitecture of neoclassical and Victu- nan buildings intenclates with the urban phn in a vibrant dia- logue of figure and ground that have survived neglect and swathes of poor modern developmen. In substantial areas, Glas- gow's character is maintained by the implacable integration of the grid and topography, a rwo dimensional arrangement full of potential drama brought ince three dimensiunal life by the ubiquitous four story tenements,  The tenement as a building type. generally four statics off apiruncnts, sometime: invotporating sisect level commercial uses, always accessed off communal stain of “closes,” and consis: tently arranged along serect Froncages, is a particularly Scottish typology, relating thar country’s pattern of city living more to continental Europe than tw its English neighbor. Since the 1980s the tenement has enjoyed someching of a revival, boch in terms of preservation and new building. This is in stark contrast to most of the 20th century, when che building type bore the brunt of social and polincal distaste. Perceived as the symbol and cause of high-densiry uchan squalor, the tenement had to be eradicated at all cast.  The tenement survived because it is inherently flexible; it responds to working-cLiss and middle-class houring needs, and hustorically has been capable of various architectural expressions, 
frum sevete unornamented surfices tw eclectic and highly mod- cled facades. Postmodern versions generally substitute coboeed brick fur the original red und yellow sandstone that created such pkeasing cohevion in the Victonan city before pollunon turned everything hick Recent manifesavons of this building type tespond in pant to a new desire for urban bving by younger professionals, rembabrring the center cicv in sporadic new private developments very much in contrast to decades of government spomored decentralizanon.  The fint exodus fram the cry center was promulgated by Incl government action alter the First World War. The working classes were decanted fram overcrowded tenements in the city ceater—where densities climbed as high as 700 penons pet awre—ta English style suburbs on the outskirts, built on cheap green field land. Spurted by a genuine fear af 3 sacialfiat) revali- tion bred from poor warking aml living condinons, the city government banbed icnemicnt-style devclopmient. and instead initiated low density devdopmenre based on garden city plin- ning ideal. However well untentioned, thae new suburbs Guled (0 live up to choir model. as planning and conuruction were Progressively simplified and cheapencd in 2 desire to rchouse the greatest aumber of people for the minimum cost,  Cost was especially significant, as most new housing was pro- vided by public funds. ‘fhis period of expansion occurred during the first years of Glasgow's industrial declinc, when employment in heavy manufacturing, chipbuitding, and shipping fell dramani- cally. In 1932, an astonishing 75 percent of the city's working populasion was unemployed. In this contest of private sector dectine. the publi, authority took the lead in housing develop. ment, and by 1939, the city council was the main provider of fnew housiny, mostly ounide the old city boundaries. Rerween (916 and 1944, the city built over $4,000 homes in this fashion, including, during che 3930s, a return to some modified tone ment type buildings tu meee che demand for rehousing within the available budget.  Public fursding and rudimentary planning was also provided fo attract new indusirics wo offer che Crunk uncmployment. While heavy industries cotted on their sites within the old uty. few employers located in rudimentary industnal parks amund the periphery. This explasion of sprawl around the edges of the city during the 1920s and 30s was completed by prvate sector developments of small bungalows. sited, for marketing reasons, as far away from public housing as possible,  The 19% and 60s extended the activise role of cary govern ment in urban development. The tenement was again mistakenly idenufied as the root of all urban evils, but this time the prescrip: tion for a new, modetn city was based an more than decentralua- tion. A three-pronged attack was launched an the city’s urban environment, a program that was well intenuoned. but with hindsight appears nuive and occdlewly destructive. First, whole- sale shun clearance and city center redevelopment were compre: hensively redeveluped. akin to American urban renewal projects. and all buildings within a defined area were demolished and a fnew urban pattern created, based, as elsewhere. on a modernist maodct of towers and stahs in open space. Allied to this wholewle demolition was the second strategy —a massive new urban high- way program that tore the heart out of many cencral neighbor- hoods in the name of improved transportation The third strar- egy for a modern Glasgow invalved mitigating the city's peripheral expansion by the creation af four New Towns, Eant  Kilbyide (1947), Cumbernauld (1956), Livingston and Irvine (both 1962), separated from the city itself by a preserved green beh.  Glasgow City Council ued the sweeping new powers of Camprehenive Development to purmic a vision of almost total rebuilding of the inner city in the 1950s and 1960s. While the cetter city was spared, vast areas of tenements to the cast and south were ed by a mix of low-rise terraces, medium-rise slabs, and high-nse towers, Tragically, chis massive demolition and redevelopment of urban housing coincided with the final death thmes of Glasgow's heavy industry, and this combination created huge areas of urban dereliction, many of which still ex- isted at the end of the 20th cennury.  Tronically, the main catalyst of this urban renameance at the end of che 20th century was the rediscovery of the city's architec- tural heritage: the same building stock and urban pattern that had been under severe attack for the previous 60 years. A conser- varion boom beginning in the 1970s reeducated the public and peofessivnab about their own city, switching emphasss from in- dividual buildings to wholc neighborhoods. Simply cleaning sev- eral decades of soot from the grimy facades of tencmens and vider wommetcial and civic buildings revealed an attractive and robust urhan environmenr, fashioned by architecture of surpris- ing sophisticauon.  Several civic initiatives during the 1980s and 90s enhanced this proces of rediscovery and reinvention. An exquisitely de- tailed new building by Barry Gaston, tm house the world-famous Barrell Arc Collection, opened in 1983. Two yean later, English urban designer Gordan Callen produced a city contet concept plan for the Scouah Development Agency thar brilliandy re- vealed che huge porential in che urban wore and adjacenc river- aile. ‘This concepe plan simulated further proposals, for che uity centet atid beyvad, amunyt which ate exemplary new develop: ments like Ingram Square (1989) by Ekder and Cannon. and ‘The Italian Center (1991) by Page and Park. In 1989 the city was awarded the Europa Nostra Medal of Honour for its conser- vanion work in the city center, and the following year Glasgow was appointed as che European City of Culture.  At the same ure, the aty set ahour remedying 11s mistakes of the Comprehensive Development program. In the tare 1980s and continuing into the 1990s, the city embarked on an exten- sive program of demolition of the medium and high-rise blocks of flats thar had proved such a failure during their shor, 30 year life. In the infamous Gorbals area, a new urban fabric was created Cased on a 1990 master plan by the London firm of C7WG) thar brought back to life the traditional Glugow typulogies of the tenement, the perimeter black, the street and che grid. This initiative was lallowed in Page and Park's Garhals East Renewal Propet, and new buddings by Page and Park, Elder and Cannon, the Holmes Partnceshup and Cooper Cromar have created a high sandard of new urban architecture.  Despite these successes, the crty’s declining population and an excessive supply of brown-field sites of litle inwerest to private developers. have conspired co spread redevelopment too thinly io many areas, beading to the suburbanization of once urban districts, Additional problems alsa remain along the tiverside. The major weaknew of the 1985 Cullen plan was its failute co Fecognize the potential for the whole length of the River Clyde. an it dissects the city, to be the major form-giving spine for long term urban regeneration. A major garden festival in the derebct  docklands in 1988 tried with limited success co redirect invewt- ment to those dilapedated arcas, but the recession of the carly 1990s allowed only piecemeal devckipment along chiv riparian sorridor—such as Sir Norman Foster's Clyde Auditorium (1997),  Glasgow's proves of civic reinvention is a work in progrens. But despite the significant physical and social problems that femain, the reformat spirit and urban energy that characterize the past three centuries uf Glasgow's histury provide the city with a powerfid source of energy asm prepares to mect the next round of urban challenges,  Das War ters  See aly Glasgow School Glagow School of Art, Scadand;  Mackiatosh, Charles Rennic (Scodand)  Further Reading  Gibb, Andicw, Glagen, she Making af’ Ciry, London. Cron Helm, 1983  Gameme, Andut Harvey, and Davul Walker. An hitecruce of Glagew, London: Lund Humphries. 1968; revised edition, Luni Humphries in association with the Glare Booksellers, J. Seith, 1987  Pacione, Michael, Glagoe: Thy Socie-sperteal Development of the Ciny Chichester and New York: Wiley, 1995  Reed, Peter (editor. Glasgow The Forming af the City, oul edition, Edinburgh: {dinburgh Universice Press, 1993; Ind edinan. 1999  Walker, Frank A. Glagou: ‘Phsidon Archstectural Gride!, Voridin: Phaidon, 1992  Walker, Frank A, “The Glasgow Gnd.” in Onder sud Spare ise Seciety. ocsted by Dhomas A Markus, bulinbargh: Mainrram, 1982  GLASS  With concrete and stecl. phass is one of a triumvirate of materials that modern architcers have unvested with auratie properties and utopian possibdines. Consequenily, the history of glass in 20ch- century architecture is a history of exceprions, some of which by dint of aesthetic, technical, or practxal men found ther way into common use. The reult is that the canon does nor always line up easily with what Sigfricd Giedion might have called the “anuonynvous history” of glass.  The glazed vaults of the pamenger concourie in McKim, Mead and White's Penis Staten (1905-10) is the fat of the feerovitrcous arcades of 19th-contury train vations, market hails, and exhibition buldings. Attached to 4 proper Beaux-Arts build- ing inspired by Roman baths, this was perhaps mote an extension of the peouliarly [9th-century convention of separating the for mal section of a train stabun ftom its functional secuons, which were handled un entitely different manners. A mate rembed contemporary use of glass can he found in Oute Wagner's lost Office Savings Bank (1905) in Vienna, with its glazed root and floor, which borrowed from the Parisian arcades in anucipavon of the modern atrium naw sen 40 offen in office buildings and hotels,  A more common launching point af the modemist canon. however, is Bruno Taut's Glan Pavihon at the 1914 Werkbund Exhibinon in Cologne. Wieh che bohemian novelist and prosety- titer of glass architecture Paul Scheerbart as his collzborator.  Taut dengned a faceted. multicolored bishop's hat of 4 glass dome raised on a drum of glass bricks. The novel exterior gave way on the inade to a cincular staircase Composed of glass treads and ener that fed into 4 ghzed prom, affording just a glimpse into che wt of all-glass architecture that Scheerbart anticipated, most prominently in his Gdsarchitedter (1924). Despite the fact thar the market ball, train sheds, and exhibition buildings of the 1th century were cerainly the immediate models, Taut and Acheerbart reached back co the Gothic cathedral as a source, which Scheerbart called the "prelude to the glass architecture.” Ax well as reveling in the pure delight of glass, Scheerbari ran through various practical considerations, bur he is best known for mysticizing the material. He envisioned a warkd transformed by glass architecture, which he imbued with cenain values and propettics, from honexty and cleanliness to a new spirituality,  Scheerban’s writings and che Glas Pavilion inspired a short. lived cortewpondence in the Lite 1910s berween a numbet of Betkn arises and architects, induding Walter Gropius and ‘Taur, called the Glass Charn Letices (Dre glisere Kette). These leuets extended Scheerhart’s glaw mysticism rhrough a scrics of com: plea costal metaphors. Lyonel feinunger picked up on the Gothic connection in his well-known cubo- futurist woodcut for the {ronuspiece of the Bauhaus Manufesta of 1919, a soaring evystal cathedral chat came to symbolize the new architecture. ‘Taut went on ro sketch a number of glass fantasies. In his Alpine Architektur (1919), he connected peaks af the Alps with dramaric and unbuildable glass citecs that prefigured the megasructures of hater decades,  Taut’s pavilion is usually paired with Adolf Meyer and Cimpi- usc model factory, also crectod at the 1914 exhibition. Hese the tse of lass is much clier to later developments in the glass curtain wall. The architects subverted the conventional expecta. tions of plas asa limited perforacion in a solid masonry stcucuute. Glass and maonuy literally switched roles instead of solid ude pavilions thar would anchor che building visually —-and bold the glass in plue—CGropim and Meyer wrapped che cegant circular starrwells in a continuous, Uear-glass wall, Lhus was mare than a game af solids and voids changing places. Glass, often a means of framing an extemal ew or a way of permitting 2 limited exposure of the interior. here becomes a statement of honesty in architecture: the stairwelb, a utilitarian architectural feature that is usually hidden behind masonry, are given pride of place. Glass provides the revelation of a new aesthetic. namely, chat structure and construction possess beauty. Listh thought was given wo the fact chat o glass stairwell was a liability in a fire.  To be fais, on the model Eanory, Gropius and Meyer worked within the generous ctncturcs of exhibition architecture. La 191-12. they had designed bagus Werk in Alfeld-an-det-Lcine, a tastory in which they already had begun w play with the conventional roles of glass and masonry. The architects pushed the baxy gnds of glass jut beyond the masonry container of Picts, proyccting glass as the defining element of che wall. Not only did this have che advantage of lecang in more light. an important consideration an a factory, bat it als reinvented the idea of the wall, treeing i¢ fram the structure behind. It was chis sort of maneuver that inquired Anhur Korn, a modern architect who was abo one af the carly apologias for the mew glass archi- tecture, to claim “che disappearance of the outside wall.” The “wall tv itself the window,” he weoce in Gla: im Raw wid ab GebrawcIngryrnstand (1926, Glan in Modern Architecture, Y968)  
“Tris the great membrane, full af myatery,” Beyond the arillaian of a glass wurface, Kors found 4 new depth in the glass curtain wall. [ts clarity yielded the workings of the huilding: he even hoped to dasolve the intcrins wath gles purutions, matching the changeable realities of modem ble and commerce with an equally protean material  Although plas was dowly being unproved m quality during the first two decades of che century, the dream ot a glass architec tute was decades beyund the state of manufactured glass. Must architects were not cught up in the ulopan musings of the avant-garde, yet the penn witnencd a wonderful vanety of new ses of glass in everyday architecture and the stirrings of a protes- sional dialogue on the modem uses of glass. Ourside the modern movement, the needs of induary for ample light and of com- merce for an arresting image inspired bold experiments with glass. The Hallidic Building (1917-18) in San Francis by Wil lis Polk is an often cited example. Here a plus curtain wall eatends more than thiee feet beynnd the structural system of eonerctc columns and girders. At every duind horizontal mullion, Potk canulevered a structural member trom the Hoor slabs in ordee to support the glass. An even carher example that bean mention is Lous S. Custis’s Boley Building (1908 09) un Kansas City. featuring probably the first continuous, stecl-mullinned stnp windows, pre-dating Kagus by a few years.  ‘The Boley and Hallictie Buildings are cxemplars in a wave of commercial buitdings rhar sprang up in cities across che United States, Yer they. wo. are still cacepdons, The fies third of the 20ch century was an age of eclectic design, of Beaux-Arts classi- cism in the United Stares. a “free classicism” in England, and a confident. if decadent, historicism chioughour the Wess. Glass followed this historiciem. Archisects sought glass that would au- thenticate their designs, and casnufacturers cid well to wpply architecrs with a range of glasses ro suit their catholic range of projects. Fur example, warbled leaded lin flourished ax the appropriate choice for the Collegiate Gothic. Some manufacou em wenr an far as to re-create historical glasses painstakingly. induding atcient Roman glass that ws [ouad in sites. Revival architecture had long inspired che revival of obder methods of manufacture. So 1 was with glass, giving tise m fames such as “Colonial” and “Florenune” {two types of ibbal passes} and “Erruscan™ (a nppled glass). These were a world away from Taut's Glass Pavilion.  At the same time, the demands ol new and changing budding types stimulated the use of new forms of glass. Wired glass, first developed in the 1870x in Tacony, Pennsylvania, came into wider use in carly 20th-century museums and other institutions that cequired a strong. sharterpmof ghiss to thwart theft and bring in natural light, especially from abave. ‘Toughened {or “security”) glaa, made by rapidly couling glass we that it com. presses as tt cungeals, came into use in the lace 1920s. It was up to 400 percent stronger thu annealed glass and had the advan- tage of breaking into small puces with rounded edges. It formed the bases for structural glazing and commencial glass doors and windows, in which strength was necessary.  (Mare glass, a French inveation of the [7th century, remained expensire and difficult to manutacnire quickly. Before World War |, Fnghsh piate glass was gencrally deemed the best, fol- lowed by French. German. and finally American, which was hampered more by the incredihte rise in demand than by techni- cal problems The dream of 4 glass architecnure, dependent aa  lange expanes af clear glass, was still far ahead of ies practical fulfillment. Drawn glass, a mechanical method of creanng clear plate, was still in its infancy and undergoing almost constant improvement. In the years around the turn of the century, » tumber of gliss manufacturers experimented with drawing sheets of molten ja evenly through a iit, of débizewe, and lowly cochng it in an annealing chamber. In the first quarter of the century. vatious competing patents in Europe and the Unuted States by Colburn, Fouscault, Libbey-Owens, Pisburgh Plate Glass, and Pilkington slowly periccted this process. How- ever, imperfect drawing and cooling methods— primarily involv- ing glass couching rollers or a surface, a the corruption of the slit with devirritied glass—ted to imperfections in the final product.  By 1911, about half of all American window glass was pro- duced by machines, whether hy drawing of by oldee methods. Yet at che same cime it was widely believed that mechanically drawn gla would aut dixplie hand-blown methods of creating plate, especially the cylinder method, tn this method, a highly skilled glass blower would create a glass bull ana, while it was aul] hot, elongate it by swinging it in carcies. all the while keeping wt but enough tv prevent devittification, a feat chat required great strength and knowledge of glass. The ends would chen be cut away to form a cyhader, and the glass would be cut lengthwise with a diamond ot hot iton and flartcned in the oven. Naturally, a mechanical method of malang plac was highly deiirable.  In the 1920s. following Henry Ford's lead. the automobile industry dominated advances in the mechanization of plate glass. ‘Ta meet the rising demand for clear plate glass for a ies, Ford created a conunvous mechanued process of drawing plate. Brinding. and polishing. Manutaccurets were slow co adopt the new methods, however. Only in the 1930: was the cylinder tocthal diploed by sheet-drawing machines, making plite more affordable. As bate as 1950, mast of the sheet glass in the United Statex was still drawn through the older Tourcault and Colburn wethudb, but the proves had been mechanized, reduc- ing the cost of plate considerably, The consequences uf afford- able, high-quality plate glass for modern architecture were ob- vous. as gencrous spans of plate became less of a luxury. However, the influcnce might go much dceper. Standardization. especially of the metal-trame window, made the continuous hor- wontal band caser to achieve: just as important, i¢ made such nibbon windows casiet to amagine, the architectural effect in some sense deriving from the very means of image of the asxem- bly line usetl.  As carly as the 1920s. architects began on explore the various posibilities of plate glass. Ava supercooled liquid, whase viscous otigins ase manifested in the visual ambiguitics of ies salid form. glass Cantalies, pressing che metaphor of architecture as Buren tausic. Ludwig Mies van det Robe is often considered the fit snodeen architeut to give this metaphor full sculprural expression. Furs en his project far an office building in Eriedrichserasse in Berlin (1919-21) and chen in his glass-tower project of 1920. ‘Mics emphasned the glass curtain wall. In the latter, he used an undulating, Expressionistic wall of glass—although he later dhsowned Expressionism—that capuvated his contemporaries and inspired glass-clad skyscrapers half a century after he pur his initial vision onto paper. Mies completely separated the glass \urtain wall from the skeleton of the building, an independence thar enabled a new level of abstraction and reinvigorated the facade with aesthetic possibilities. Erich Mendelsohn would ex-  ploie similar qualities in his designs for the Schocken department ores in the late 1920s.  In his later German Pavilion at the Barcelona Wedd Exhibs- tion (1929), Miea relicd more on the play uf witfaces, Here he combined highty polished glass, travertine, green marble and anys, chromium-plated mullions, and a reflecting pou! Lined with black glass ittto a complex play of lyht reflecuen and trans mussion. Stone ard water represent the polanties of this ambigu- ity, the one obdurate and impenetrable. the other malicatle and uanslucent, Glass could be both, and by creating an abstract compasition of all three in planar tension. Mice was able to execure one of the first essays in the clegant ambiguity of the ass wall as a wirface. At ho Pugenithar House (1930). Mies developed many of the ideas first executed in Barcelona, but here the continuous bands of plare came on vertical tracks, making it powsible to Wide the sections downwand, openung the room io the autdoor,  Mie’ experiments with elas tended to be abstract and acs: thetic im convem. Aa projeccs of exhibition buildings. they could ignote many of the ecalines of glass. Architects un the 1430s began to sinly the advantages and drawbacks particular to che glass curtain wall, such as the disadvantage of excessive heat and light transmission. | uming this to his advantage, Le Corbusier eealized that he could use the entire ronm as a light haftle of sorts. moditying light intemally a> required. In his fas in Geneva {c. 1932) with Pierre Jeanneret. he divided the space hwrizonially while still bringing the light and warmth nf the large window to the entire rvem, At the same time. the horizontal division acted as a screen, blocking some portion of the beat and light. The basic idea subverted the conventional window, Where cat- lier architects punctured the wall 1 bring light of heat w « specific part of a spac, Le Corbusier nuade ube coure window a wall and organized the intenor structure to suit the lighting and warming nceds of the space. Interior space became laght baffle.  Turning the exterior wall into window. as Kom had envi- sioned, brought with wa new flexibility—a term uhat would became key in modem architecture. Noc only did it free rhe wall from following che dictates of the interior space, allowing for free experiment with the ariculatinn of the glass, but it also engendered an archirecture of immense malleabilny. In theory. the glass wall provided a neutral space that could be subdivided into infinite variations and changed as needed. In practive. this was never as neat as envisioned. and the “greenhouse cifect” of the ylass wall bas only recently met senvus solutions.  With flexibility came ceonomy as well. As the thinnest aschi- tectural member nevessary to shelter people, piss is a space sarct. By decreasing the thickness of the wall even by mere inches, one {5 able to inctease njuate footage significantly in a Large budding or skyscraper. Given chat office space is rented by the square foot, the glass curtain wall increases potential earning tor devel- opers. This idea, developed fint in the 1930s. came into play heavily in the posewar pesiod. especially in the United Scares. where hundreds of glast-clad buiklings appeared on American akylines.  Many architects took up the application of the glass curtain wall to the hause, most prumunently at Mier’ Farnsworth House (1951) and Philip Johnson's Glass flouse (149), both of which are encased in glass curtains. In both houses, the glis wall is an accomplice to the open plan, reinforcing it Visually and function-  ally. With the bares af incernal walls, these houses left the flexi- bility of the neutral space umtact in a tour de force of mutmualist living. Much carlicr, Harwell Hamilton Harris had created simi- bar effects at his own Fclkwwship House (1935-57). From the inside, the house reads like a gliss house, with the same sense of being able co throw open the walls to the outside that one finds ar Tugendhar. However, the use of traditanal materials such as wood and the grass marting (practically the only interior decoration) tempered che coldness often amociated with glass houses. Despite the fact that iq is essentially a glass pavilion flaating on wooden piers, its genthy doping shingle mof and techive dance on a wonded hillside give it 2 far different coun- tenance than the Mics and Johnson houses, which arc extro:  verted objects of art floating in open space. However, alll three are oddities, snpiring archite.tural historians more than itnitations, The Mics and Johmon houses were also expensive, precluding adoption for the mauex, who connnued to choose Cape Cad and Colonial dengtn in which the main daplay of glass came in a pecture window, usually traming the yard trom the living room or breakfast room. Although the picture window is an carly modem invenuon, with the availability uf cheap plate glass it became a staple, a requisite campanent of suburban housing, the view itself adding value ro the house by piving a sense of spaciousness (0 otherwise modest accommodations.  Problems with excessive heat cransmission fed Le Corbusier to attempt to double-glaze the walls, what he called the “sew neurratisant” in his Cné de Refuge (1929-33). The architect envisioned heated on cooled ais flowing through the space be- teoen the glis, in uheory neutralizing tbe au umperatice out side. In reality, only anc layer af glass wat ever built, and the refngetaon plint was omitted, taming che building ints a peeenhouse. Cité revealed the disadvantages of a glass curtain wall, but the double-pisss wall—a 19¢h-century idea elaborated by Scheerbart— puinted w what rs day 4 standard suluiien in large glass-clad buildings Placing cwo plancs of glass together acts as sound insulation, reduces condensation. and is especially guod Jor northern climes as a means off reducing heat oss.  Alvar Aalrn's Parmio Sanatorium (1933) is a good example of double-plazing used for the purported health benefits of light. With fears of mberculosis haunting much of urban Wesrern society deep into the 20th cenmiry, a light and airy architecture held mare than aesthetic value, It was deemed healthy, largely in opposition to Victorian archicecture. which was thought 10 he dark and closed tn nature. This healthful association with plas touk on symbolic value us well: the eperiness of plas cont: nected society to nature, teversiig the process of alienation that many critics pinned on the industrial revalution and its concom- itant urbanization. Along these lines, manufacturers developed heat-abaurbing glasses tv fifter out ete infrared rays and other glasses that allowed che penctranon of ultranolet says. which were thought to be salubrious.  Also in the 1930s and 1940s, the developmenc of air condi- tioning prompted many architects to forecast an architecrure that could ignore climaric candinans. The thermal liabilincs of ghas, it was thought, would be made moot. This dream, which peaked in the 1940s and 1950s— especially in the United States, whore energy was cheap— has never came to pass, although sub- sequent decades have winesed the proliferation af buildings dependent on expensive and inadeqpute ait cooling and heating systems. 
The fing in chis line was the Lever Howe (1950-52) by Gordon Bunshatt of Skidmore, Owings and Mereill. Ie criggered avcemingly endless array of purintic, eeveilinear, plass-dad buikd- ing in the postwar decades. The pattern of green heat-absorbing, glass (pale green windows and darker bluc-gsren spandrels} cre- ated a complex, colorful grid. Lewis Mumtord Lauded the formal relationships of the cladding for its “suber cloganoe” but dis- trusted the building's rehance on art conditioning and the seub- born tormalistic intstence on using the same glass on the south: em exposure. However, Mamford abo found a political symbolism in the Lever House chat shew: how glast could eran- tend mere function. He wrote, “hragile, exquisite, undaunted by che chreat of being melied into a puddle by an atomic bomb, this building ts a laughing ccfuration of ‘imperialist warmangsr- ing and so it becomes an implicit symbal af hope for a peaceful world.” Vhe same building wuld thus symbolize two of the defining chemenes of postwar American snciety: ait conditioning, and the threat of nuckear war.  Lever House, greeted as an exception, became the notin, It was joined a few years later hy Mics’ Scagram Burling (1954- $58), ms de facto pendent and che archetype for the glass shywcta- pet in posewat America. Its iridescent selenium pink-gray-bronze fiass varies in hue with che time of day and the posinon of the sun, Mies affixed shim f-beatm to che facade as a means of creat- ing scansion, hut, depencing on the light. the sheer dark glass and its bronze framing and pancting emphasize the mass rather than the skin of the building. The Lever House and the Scagram Building helped generate che fad in rinted glasses that continued through the 1970s. These glasses had che practical advantage of screening solar energy but proved impractical in coker climates and highee latitudes, where retaining the light and warmth of the sun is important. In northern Europe and the northeastern United States, tinted glan was little mote chan what Michael ‘Wigginton has called “glamow weap.” In this uaditiun, one might include Pietro Beiluschi’s earlier Cquitable Savings and Loan Bulding (M748) in Purtland, Oregon; Eero Saarinen's elegant Bell Telephone Corporate Headquarters (1957-62) in Holmdel, New Jersey; and Reche and Dinkeloo's Federal Re- serve Bank (1969) in New York City. The Bell | clephone Build- ing is excepcional for extending the Hexibility of the glass curtaun wall, which Saarinen used as a container for what is essentially a series of discrete buildings within,  A technical advance in plate is partty ta blame fot ending the tineed-glass fashion. In the late 1950y, the English glass manufac. turer Pilkington wlved the last major probletn with drawn plate plas, namely, thar it had oo he rolled on a surface of dtawn through a wit, both of which caused inconsistencies in the glass. Pilkington used molten metal as a Sout for the molten glass, creating a fiem, clean, ever: surface without grinding and polish- ing, Pilkingtan’s method was cheaper and fauer and yielded a higher-quality glave: and, although the gles it prodoced was nat as brilliant as fired glass, ut slowly displaced earher methods of drawn plate glass, The unc drawback to the method, which now plagues the plate-glass indusery, 1s that #1 ss cumbersome to create colored plate. The company produced a limited range of tinted glasses using «ts new techaique, bur nor as many as had been the lashion before Pitkingron’s provess was widely adopted im the 1960s and 1970s  The reflectivity of glass has alin beets seen asa means af creating an architecture sensitive to contest. LM. Pei and Assoui-  ates’ Hancock Tower (1968, 1973) is often taken as an example of “mirror glau,” which has a thin film applied to the finished plate glass. Situated in downtown Boston, the Hancock Tower joined a number of important [9ch-cenuury buildings. including HLH. Richardson's Trinity Church. On the ambiguicy of its teflective glass, Keith Bell (1987-88) has written, “The buikding only appears to ‘ext’ up tv about the seventh story, after which at becowwes ‘sky.’ Hy this means, max and volume are denicd.” However, this is a highly dubious claim, a case of the faith in glass outsrripping its reality, The Hancock Tower, 2 massive plas high-rise, is not really invisible, and by reflecting Trinity Church 1 is no more sensitive to its context than a giant,  micror, It dacs not help matters that some of the glass panels were improperly sealed and without warning popped out of their housing and crashed on the streets helew.  Although most major cities can bass of their postmodernist reflective glaw skysrapem, Kohn Pederson Fox's green-glass tower in Chicago, at 333 East Wacker Drive (1979-83). exploits ite riverbank site and uninterrupted vinta with the use of a smooth mirrored plas facade that berids with the Chicago River. In Puesburgh, Philip Johnson and John Burgee’s PPG Place (1979-84) incorporates 3 40-story tower and four other lower burkdings around a public. plaza that shimmers from the surface’s mirror plass---silver PPG Solar Ran—produced by Pirtsburgh Plate Cilass, che Largest producer of glass in the world when this complex was constructed,  Beginning in the 1970s, che modern ghss atrium. a not-so- disranr ancestor of the arcades, orangeries, train sheds, and great exhibition buildings of the 19th century. became an increauingly important typology for malls, hocels. and office buildings. In same cases, the arcade is used metaphorically, as in the “Court” at dhe King of Prussia Mall outide Philadelphis, where an cn- trance pavilion refers direcely to Joseph Paxton’'s Great Exhibi- tiva Building (1851) in London. John Portman has made his livelihood exploiting dic sethetic, spatial. and symbolic potcn- tial af the giass atrium. In a long lst of boteb beginning in the late 1960s, Poreman employed the atrium’s assouation wich festive publa: spaces and places of commerce, most nouably at the Hiyart Hotel (1967) in Adanta, The idea has proliferared. and often co ill effect, in the more generic hotel atria of, say. Embassy Suites and the suburban malls (and increasingly urban malls) that spread throughout the United States in the 1980s and 1990s. Finally, Pei Cobb Freed and Partner’ Louvre Pyramid 11983. 89) in Paris, one of the mow powerful architectural ym- bok in glass to be built near the end of the 20th century, exploits natural light in a way achievable anly with vast glass surfaces.  The Last quarter of the 20th cenuury witnessed many improve: ments in glass manufacture. The desire to decrease the support- ing structure such as mullions in ordes to make an even smoother surtace has led to new systems of sealing and bolung glass. The strength-to-weight ratio of glass has been ty improved as well, allowing architects to bol glass much chaser wm its edge without structural compromise. Toughened glass and experi- ments with clips, brackets, knuckles, “patch” fittings, ceramic frits, glass fins, neoprene spacens, and other methods of holding glass in place have inched architects closer to a glated architecture ia which nonvitreous members have been ceduced nearly to the magnitude of a supte un « page. For example, the glass curtain of the Willis Faber and Dumas Building (1973-75) in tpewich, England, by Foster Associates uscs toughened glass connected  wath glass fins and sliding patch fittings, with each pane hangin from the one above. The entire ‘els thus in vemen, bolted and hung from s mooring at the roofline, The glass curtain is reflective by day and lie up at aight, translorming the building into a lantem for the srcet. The glass fin, 4 small puce of glass wedged perpendicularly between the plites as a connector, also becomes part of the facade’s proportion and scanmon, a staccato of metal and bolts puncturing and puncinating the surface.  Wich the patch, four panes of glass can be bolted together at their comers. The system has heen developed and used with. out fins at “Les Serres,” Cité des Sciences et de I Industrie at the Pare de ta Villerte (1980-86) in Paris by Francis Ritchie with Adrian Fainsilber, the former being one of che premier plas engineering firma. The bolt bevames the sole connectur of the lass, the wall being supported by a complex cable truss system within the building. These are so incumpicueus that the lines between the panels of plus disappear frum a distance. For all of this, che gins pavilions at Les Seis give the sense of heing tacked on. a high-tech stunt having beetle to do with die muscum behind. Structural salicon glazing, usually scaled im the factory and delivered in frame to the site. is 4 relarivety recent method for sealing glass. Although the method has not been perfected, such units promise ro reduce mechanical attachmencs even fur- ther and to case the handling of the glass and the erection of the building.  Whatever the advarmes in hardware, the glass curtain wall sill suffers from excessive heat transmission, limiting ie peacticalizy. This hurdle has led architccts and glass manufacuren w im- prove on the thermal qualitics of glass with surface coatings and tints applied after the loaning of the plate. These specaalized coarings, applied through “spurrering” nanametcr-thin layers of substrate onto the glass, have fed to the idea of che “smart win- dow.” which variously blocks or absurbs light and heat. Low- emission glasses. which first appeared in 1983, block radsacion emission and also allow internally heated spaces to hold their heat better. Increasingly thin coatings can produce glass that adonss daylight while reducing solar heat gain. As coatings cont, bine with double-glazing, which is rapidly beang incorporated into the heating and cooling system of buildings as Le Corbusier had anticipated, the skin of the building is becoming more ac- tive, The primary problem wich double-glazing, thar din and moisture can buikl up on the inside, hax been sobeed with factory-sealed units in which gasses such as argun and krypton have been trapped in onder to block radiation. Tu this unprove- ment one has to add glass laminates. in which vanous materials such as polyvinyl butyral have boen sealed beewcen layers of glass to create optical effects, to block radiation cransmusion, and for insulation. As the “imast window” takes shape, the architectural profession ix again preacoupied with the utopian possibilities of glus, only this time eechnulogy has kept apace of the emagina- tion.  Aspriw M. SHANKEN  Ser alo Asko, Alvar (Finland); Bansheft, Gordon (United States); Corbusier, Le (Jeanmerct, Charice!  (France); Fagus Werk, Alfeld, Germany: Faresworth House, Plane, Illinois: Giedion, Sigfried (Switzerland); Glass Howse, New Cansan, Connecticun Glass Skyscraper (1920-21) Ger- man Pavilion, Barcelona (1929); Lever House, New York  City: McKim, Mead and Whise (United States); Mendehohn, Erich (Germany, United Seates); Mics van der Rohe, Ludwig (Germany); Pei, LM. (Unived States}; Seagram Building, New York City; Skidmore, Owings and Merrill (United Seates): Tent, Bruno (Germany); Tugendhat Heue, Broo, Crech Republic; Wagner, Oreo (Austria); Werkbund Exhibi- tian, Colognr (1914)  Further Reading  Wigginton’s excellent book ix hoth a history and a technical guide. McGrath and Irost’s much eadicr work grees an architect's viewpoint from wuthim the Modern movement. Bletirr's conthbution is the stan- abird source toe the Caysal Chain Letters,  Banhum, Reynet, “The Glass Paradise,” Archutectural Reviews, 125 (989)  Rell, Keith, "Glass in Architecture,” Semuceanadst, 27/28 (1987-88) Bienes, Roscmane Haag. The lnterpictauon of the Glass Dresen.” Journal of the Society of Arctutectoral Hotorians, 4013 (1981)  Bostock, Edgar H., "Glan: Its Adaptability in Building,” Arebverctural Reverd, 27 W910)  Fiscostalt, Sandy, “The Rise and Fall of the Picture Window.” Harvard Deugn Magazine (Octobe: 1998)  Hliwt, Cait D.. Teobmaicn wad Acchivenare The Developrernd of Marnal: and System for Building. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Pew, 1992  Kur, Arthur, Glar fom Raw and a Grbranchegeprnisand. Berlin-Charlorrenburg: Pollak. 1926: as Ges in Madern Architecture of the Banluews Perind, New York: Rearillee, and London; Barrie and Ruckliff, 1968  McGrath, Raymond, and AC. Fross, Glas (a Aroticecture and Deveration, London: Architectural Pros. 1937; new edition, 1961  Mumford, Lewns, “House ot Glass.” in Frvor the Grown Up: Observations an Cantemperary Anbiucture, Howwing, Highway, Buskding, and Cine Derign, New York: Harcourt Brace, 1956  Schecrbar, Paul, Glasrciurokeur, Bera: Verlag der Sturm, 1914: reprint. as Glaarvhiiekine und (choheabrefe, Munich: Renee, 1986; as Ges Archieerture, New York: Pracger, and Londoe: November Books. 1972  Laut, Hruno, Alpene Architedtor, Vienna; Hagen, 1919  “The Uses of Glass.” dive Architecture, 701$ 11989)  Whyte. fain Bug. Ibe Crpasad Chaite Letters: Arvtriscenrad baraasse by Bruno Tavr and His Ciede, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Pres, 14985  Wigginton, Michael, Glar i Archieecturr, London: Mbaidoa, 1996  GLASS HOUSE  Designed by Philip Johnson; completed 1949 New Canaan, Connecticut  Designed by the architect Philip Johnson as a country retreat for himself, che Glass House was arguably the apotheosis of post-Wodd War I modemism in American architecture. Its uncompromising expression of simplicity, prismatic form, and transparency elevated the building to the Konic seatus chat it holds in the history of domentic designs. Through the bald jurca- position of the technological image of che building with irs bush, bucolic setting, the howe is aid ta represent the archetypal landacape idea of the machine in the garden. [1s innovative can- expe indude the virtual dissolution of the exrenur wall: an open, 
scemingly unpartitioned interior Moor plan, and the we of steel structure with expansive gli panels.  Around 1945 or 1946, Johnan developed his catlicet sketches for the house, and they snticated moer discrete coanss, Learning in 1946 of che Ealieh Farnworth House, commissioned from Ludwig Mies van der Rohe (1886-1969) by the physwuan for a ate in the Fox River valley in Plano, Hino, Johnson was indehbly impressed and intluctned by che open floor plan for that house, which would be completed, ironwally. approximately two years later than Johnson's house, Mies’ idea for a glass and steel house had emerged in the previous decade ta an unbuilt project tor a house in the mountains of Wyoming. In the Farn- eworth House. Mies sandwiched che space between twn floating, abs that canulever dramatically out beyond the glass enclosures to farm a terrace; he also raised the houte off the ground, thereby protecting it frum periodic flood waters, with eight H-columns forming an cxorkeletun. In cunceass, the Glass House ats firmly an the ground, and its eight wide-tlange H columns telate with more ambiguity to the sheers of glass. Ite black-puinted steel presents a more suber and revessve treatment of the frame than the highly burnished white frame of the Farnsworth House. Construction began in March 1948, and Johnson was able to owupy the house at the beginning af 1949.  Employing peinciples of ancient classical site planning, the house relates actively to its site—a meticuloudy manicured lawn arnid mature deciduous and coniferous trees and beside 4 ravine that separates the house from 2 pors|—and to the buildings that Johnson subsequently added 1 the compuand. Walking toward the Ghus House is nue unlike the processional experience of the Panhenon (448-432 B4..) on the Athenian Acropolis, which depemls heavily aa the angle of approach and the scemingly arregular spatial relationship of the temple tu the other buikdings on the hilltop. Ax ane approachey the Glass House along an obliquely angled path. perceptions of the votume vary according te the proximity to the entrance, the parncular angle from which the glass is viewed (generating either reflections of the foliage ota view through the house co the distant treetops), and the awareness of the other buildings an the compound: a guest house, a floating pavilion in the pand, a painting gallery, a sculp- ture gallery, and most recently a visttor center. The masney accretion of che guest huuse serves, in additiun to providing more privaic quarten, as an opaque complement to the open and diaphanous main house. With its almost uninterrupted Hemish-bond beck walls, 11 becomes a rural companion to the ground stury of the emphaucally urban Museum of Modem Art guest house (1950) in New York. devigned abo by Johnson.  Glan House finterion: New Caanan, Conecncat, desagned by Philips Juhnsan © Fuo  Johnson, who later saad that the architect “cannoe not know history.” incorporated other antecedents inte the deugn, among them Andrea Palladio’s Villa Capra (1566-70), popularly te ferred to as La Roconda. Like La Rotonda, the Glass House is a suburban villa, with a symmetrical enclosure: a highly tational disposition of spaces. ahhough physically abstract: and 4 promi went circular chement, the brok cylinder containing the bath- toom and fireplace, at its cote. Husing been impresed alo by the vestigial quality of the brick foundation and chimney that were the sole remains of a burned wooden village he once saw, Johnson thus incorporated an accident of history into the plan wich his emphatic representation of the brick podium and vervice core.  Resting on a brick plinth four courses high in Flemish bend, the enclosure of the $6- by 32-fnot unitary space ethibits axial symmetry, with floor-to-ceiling glass beeween flooe amd roof slabs. Running uninterrupicd between the ground and the un- denside of the of slab, the foar corncs wide-flange H columns are expuse! on both extenor and intenut, separating the plinth at its cuenen and revealing the comptcr intenection af the long, sides with the short sides uf the cnclosuic. Four additional col- ums divide the long wall into approximately thirds and sit within the glass. An clongaced door bisects cach uf the four walls and runs from Boor to roof, and ree stanc steps, triple the width of the door, mark the main entrance ar the conclusiun of the obliquely angled walkway. Four pomencck lamps oa cach long side bathe the walls in light after sundown,  Perhaps the ultimate capressiun of the dematevialized build- ing clement, the glass window in [ahnsan's house becomes the wall, and the wall has cvolved imu a screen or the hehws of building membrancs, separating indoor space from outdoot space. By means of steel aullions, there w a subdivision of the glass wall: 2 horizontal dado or chair rail runs continuously, except within the four doors, which provide crass ventilarin. Berween coturnns, vertical muntins further subdivide lower wx-  All service components of the house sit well within the inte- for, away From the enclosure. Extending the brick of the podium inward, the floor of the interior is herringbone-patterned brick. Positioned asymmetrically to the right of the main enuance, a brick cylinder conuining a fireplace and the bathroom prenes the roof. On the side away Lom the entry, the cylinder coatains the bathroom, and on the side facing the center of the space, it encloses a shallow concave hearth. Opposite the entey there is a white carpet, on which a grouping of Mics-designed furniture sits: two chrome-plated and leather Barcelona chairs (designed originally foe the inauguration of the German Pavilion of the Barceluna International Exposition of 1929), 3 chrome-plated and icather chaive longue und matching stool, and a chrome- plated and glass X table. A four-legged lamp with a shallow conical shade, designed by the architect himself, completes the ensemble along with the freestanding Funeral of Phocion, attzib- uted to Nicolas Poussin (1593/94— 1665), and a bronze sculpture of ewo female figures by Elie Nadelman (1882-1946). A row of wood closets divides this area from the sleeping area. In the left rear corner there is a marble-opped dining table and four Mies-designed Brno chairs of 1930, and in the teft near cornet waist-high cabinets contain the kitchen apphances, Silk panels. insealled on the main entry side, can be slid to filter strong light  Johnson's reductive experiment for himeelf demonstrated hes unique talent for appropriating and interpreting, che idcas of other, The Glas House epitumize the idea of uninterrupted, universal space adapted tu a speuific place and translated into a modeen symbul of an acthete’s discriminaning county life.  Pac Grassian  Ser sho Farasworth Howse, Plano, [ilinois: German Pavilios,  Barcelona (1929): Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig (Germany)  Further Reading  Drealer, Anhut, “Archiceuiic Opaque and Tranaparent: Jabnssa's Glass and Beigk Huuses,” fateriors, 109 (Oxsober 1949)  Feampron, Kenneth (estat, Uitip fobnon, Procenes. The les Home, 1749. ud the ATG! Corporate Headguarter, 1978 fexhibh. wat.) New York Insutute fot Architecture and Urban Seunhaes. £978  “Gils Howe Permits Ja Owner ia Live on a Room in Nanate.” Anhitctural berum, 11 (November 1447;  “House at New Canaio, Caonrcicut.” Andiecninal Review (Seqtembset 1950)  Johnson, Plulip. johwon House New Camsta, Comantint, 1949-, edited by Yuluo Futagawa, Tokyo: ADA. Edita, 1972  Johnaue, Philip, Abitp fobaas, New York: Simon and Schuster, and. London; Thuis snd Hudbon. 1971  “Le Pavillon de Verre. Manan de Week End.” £ architecture Laxjourd bi, 0 Guly 1990)  Schulac, Fraas, Philip fabown. Lift and Work, New York Kaupy, 1994,  Scully, Vincent, “Phiip Jobmon: The Glaw Hise Revitited,” Archisectural Eigen (Newember 1986)  “sora, Robert AM, “The Evolution of Phitip Johnsan’s Glas Hous. 1947 1948," Oppositsens, 9 (Fall 1997)  Whitney, David, and Jotlivy Kipmia (editors). Philip febnion: The Glen Howe, New York: Pantheon Books, 1993  GLASS SKYSCRAPER Designed by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe  Wartime, by denying architects actual opportunities to build. offers them instcad the time w indulge in theoretical activity. Vaking advantage of Berlin's dowed economy following World War |. Ladwig Mrs van der Rohe complered a number of propess thar, in cheis cechnological content and acethetic expres- sion, contrast dramatically with the more hismrically-nnentod projects he builr in the carly 1920s wach as the Eacharade House (Berlin, 1921~-23) and the German Pavilion at Barcetona (1928), Early plans and unbuitt projects wich as the Concrete Country House Propect (1923) and the Brick Country Howe Project (1924) forecast the hovering volumes of the Farnsworth Howe (1946-51, Plano. IHinois} for example. The prismatic towen he would build in Chicago and New York in the years around 1950 are firs suggested in hes shysceaper projects of the early 1920s. Deparcing from his generally conservative design, Mies’ cntsy to the Fredeichstrasse Skyscraper Competition of 1921 wholly ignored the technical limits of 1920s tall building conseruction with imponibly thin fooe slab dimendons and unfeasible clad- ding details, Likewie, the maning of the huikling broke dramat 
ically from German tradinons of office building design. Its yag- ged dover of a plan consumed a triangular site with theee sharply aruculated and notched Icaves gathered around 4 central cove. Each of the sectians provided retail and office space while sharing 2 communal service element: clevacar, stairs, and Lyatories.  A majority of the 145 subminions te the compeution adupied prismatic characteristics for the triangular ute. How- ever, Mics’ skyscraper was cipecially evocative, as seen in his perspective sketches and photomontages uf the propext that em- phasue vs sharp edges and facted massing. In an cxapgeratcd perspective view, the building's blade-like sithouctte booms as 3 shimmering pensm over a rough cobblestone street and the grim, load-bearing mawonry buildings that lay in its shadow. Distinctty unlike thee vernacular buildings, glass falls from the top of Mics” building as a continuous curtain wall, this sheer scrim obscuring the wafer-like Boor slhe only where fight dazzles in long vertical slashes from the building's surface.  Such images iHustrate the theoretical cuntens of the projet, emphasizing the means by which different buddung mutcrials modulate light. In ewence, mavonry bearing walls absorb light and cast shadows, while glass allows hghe «ts free play through reflective activity, These perceptive qualities pice the project en che context of German Expressionism, one of the many revol- Cionary mavemnence circularing in self-consciously progressive ar- tistic circles in postwar Berlin. Expressionist: manifesus ex- pounded upon promatic socialist usopia bowed in a shimmering architecture of glass. Paul Scheerbar’s prophetic book Glts Archiseksur (1914) cocoutaged the construction of whole crystalline cities ta rejuvenate Ruropean civilization; in Alpine Architektur (1919) Bruna ‘Taue similarly suggested that social listlessness and apathy was a product of masanry aschirec- ture: man would be spiritually and physically awakened by Irving int glasa architecture open tu the sun and stars.  Although Mies’ crystalline tower fulfills the Expressionists’ call for tully-glared and mulu-faceted archeccwure, the architect seemed never ta have wholly embraced the cemononal content of the movement. His inrent was m snidy the manner in which different materials respond to light, rarher than ro consider the emotive appeal of such Wluminasnn, Intentionally ar ane, in the lively inteeplay of light and uansparent surfaces, matched with che building's spiky plun, Mics amplified the skyscrapet's expres- sionistic nature. At the same time, the log so clearly expressed in his later grid-ordered planning is alrcady present in ube com- petition entry which otherwise makes clear formal overwures tv Expreswonism. Winting on the project. Mics failed 10 achieve the emotional tenor of Scheerbart or Vaur in his measured lan- guage. In a ravonal explanation of the seemingly willful and emotive forms he explained “Uhe building site was triangular: L ried to make full use of it. The depth of the site onmpelled me m split the fronts, so that the inner core received light” (Rifey, 180). Thus it was ne desire for a new expresion of architecture or celebration of dhe regenerative patential of mad- ceo materials but the simple desire for ceonamical use of the site and wash for well-ilkuminated interiors that gunded Mies,  In the following year. for another theoretical skyscraper Project Maes explained in umuilarly rational terms the genesis of this second glass-enclosed shut. The cuning edge of its plan filled a highly irregular, five-sided site with three unevenly bal-  anced lobed elements meeting at two common circular elevator  cores. This scalloped plan provided a supple. layered frame over which glass hung like a gendy undulating curtain, suggesting 2 means to harness the plastic potential of the matenal unlike che rigid, shard-like character of his fint skycsaper design. Mics insisted that this building's design wax similarly rational; its curves were not “arbitrary.” but rather they “were determined by three factors: sufficient illumination of the interior, the mass- ing of the building viewed from the street, and lastly the play of reflection” (Riley, 186). Thus Mies revealed neither revolu- tionary affectations in the building's shirumesing tans] nor romance for its thin, cantilevered floor stabs. Although this skyscraper tov would never be constructed, the coul logic and rauonality behind st traveled with Mies as he eeugrated to Amer- ka. The photographed presentation of the model expresses hari- zontal layers within a dass scrim in a manner which is doser wo the Wear eapressions of structure in such later skyscrapers of bis as the Lake Shore Drive Apartments (148. 51) and Scagram Building (1954-58); in its slenderncss it also anticipated their proporucns and was a dear, cogent forecast of those later curtain-walled tower.  Jiexniern A. AMUNUSON  See aby Glass, Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig, (Germany): Sky- scraper  Further Reading  Cohen, Jean-Louis, Miet nen der Rabe, Paris Hazan, 1994: as Alo wen der Rohe, translated by Maggie Rosengarten, London and New York: E and FN Spon, 1996  Riley, Terence. and Barry Berydall (editors), Mie in Aerie, New York: Muscum of Modern Art 2001  Scheorbart, Paul, Cluarchisekiwr. Bertin: Sturm, 1914; and Taut. Bruno, Alpene Anbxsrher, Veena: . 1919; borh as Glasr Arcbwectare, by Paul Scheerbars, and Archisecnase, by Bruno Haut, edined by Dennis Sharp, Glass Architrerarr wanstared by James Palmes and Alpine Architecture transtated by Shirley Palmer, echeod by Dennus Sharp, New York: Pracger, 1972  Schulte, Franz, Mies ven der Rabe: A Crsical Biography. Chicago: Universiry af Chicago Pres, 1985  GOFF, BRUCE ALONZO 1904-82 Architect, United States  The idiasyncratic deugns of Bruce Goff. one of America’s most important but also most misunderstood architects, ake a unique potition in Western architecture. Although Goff was undeniably influenced by Louis Sullivan, Frank Ulayd Wright, and Antoni Gandi, be worked well beyond contemporary architectural tradi- tien. His exotic taste, paired with an enormous variety of design and a preference far unusual materials, divided critics over bis work, leading wo such memorable judgments as the “Michelan- gelo of Kitsch” of a “puet of the unredcemable,” as  by Charles Jencks | 1978), However, behind the uni if nox fantastic shapes of his buildings lie qualities that are important coaributions to modern architecture. These include the spatial organizarions of his houses and his use of recycled marcrials. From 1916 uncil 1982, Goff designed around 500 buildings, of which at least 147 were built in 14 staves of the United Staces.  Although most of the commissions were residential. he also de- signed some commercial and civic buildings, such as the River. side Studio (1928) in Tulse, Oklahorna; the Redeenes Lutheran Building (1959) in Banlewille, Oklahoma; and the Meiedes Renz Agency (1967) ins Atlanta, Georgia. GulPs early projats tesemble buildings by Frank Lloyd Wright: Golf cenainly wat shiped similas geometric: peinuples in his anhuecturc. yet he was even more tempred to Itce hunself fram the right angle. Considering himself both an architect aml a composer until the age of $0. Goff cook considerable unspiration from music, sspecially the compositions of Claude Debussy. in several experi- ments. he sought parallels between music amd architectuce, a1 obsession that alto played an important part in his teachings.  Although Goll’s designe might appear to be thrating, he asu- ally adhered tw proportional systems co lend coherence to his buildings. He abo followed certain (usually symmetrical) plan typologies, onc, for instance, being 4 centeal, vertically empha- 2ised volume encirtod by compartmeated spaces, anather being 4 continuous band of intctlocking space surrvunding 4 ceneral service care, Despite his link co the organk of Expresionot tradinon, Goff's buildings are usually detached from the sur rounding Landscape, a quafity that separates him from \’nght's preference to usegrate a building with nature.  At the age of 12, Goff became an apprentice in the architec tural office of Rush, Endacocr, and Rash in ‘Vula, By the age of 22, he had already buile a major design, the Boston Avenue Church in Tulas. After a shor correspondence with Winget and Sullivan, he decided not to pursac formal architectural training, In 1929, he passed the Oklahoma licence examination asa regis: tered architect without a degice in architecture, In 1934, he muved w Chicago, where be opened his own office. For seven years, Goff taught architecture at the Chicago Academy of Fine Arts. From 194? to his resugnanon in 1956, he served as chair of the Schoot of Architecture at the University of Oklahoma, Norman, During this productive time as a teacher, Goff built 1? af 41 commissions. including the Ford Howe (1947) in Auroea, Ulinoix the Hopewell Rapist Church (1948) in Fd- mond, Oklshama: and perhaps his most famous design. the Bavingee House (1950) in Norman, Typically, hin single-family hotnes feature a large central room designed to serve different functions. The interivr of the Bavinger House is divided by plans, carpets, and fishnet as opposed to regular doors. ‘The steel cable supporting the soo! srucnure are biplane braces hung, fiom a central mast used by the oil-dnlling industey. Walls in Goff’s houses sometimes induded wante used as rustication or discarded glass reused as devorative crystal-like forms. Siemiar  Los Angdes County Maseum of Art, Pavilion fot Japanese Art (Shanon Kan Museum, 198K Photo © Mary Ann Sullivan 
clemenes appear in the circular-plan Ford House. another signiti- cant example of Gott: adaption of war marcrials, Here, for dustance, Quanset hut dements are put ea residential use. Seytis- tically, GolTs designs defy any rraditional «lassification, varying between the Prairic tyke of hus early buildings to organic forms showing Japanese influence (c.g., the Al Dewlen House Project Amarillo, eum, 1956)  Dunng the vears an Oklahoma, Golf was discovered by Joe Price, who was to become Goff’s most important chent. In 1956, Goff started designing and building 2 bouse foc Prue and a sttalso, Shun’enKan, in Bartlesville. ‘The designs followed onc of Goff's typologies. the crystalline buikting consisting of a central volume that is partly surrounded by smaller sreened spaces. The composition of irregular pentagons, however, does not sem co eefer eo any prooxdens. Whereas the plan might be reminiscent of Wright's experiments with hexagonal modules, the spacial tolucion and the unusual materials identify it as a unique Goff design,  Brom 1956 to 1964. Goff stayed in Bartlesville and main tained his own office in Frank Lioyd Wright's Price Tower Supported by Joe Price, in the following yean he was able to travel to Japan, where he gave several lectures. Later on, a Japa- nese influence became very evident in the Hasder House (1970) in Mountain Lake, Minneses, and in the Slun‘enKan Museum (1988) at the Los Angeles Coumy Muscuin of Art, comm- sioned by Pace to house his collection of Japanese art.  Despite the fact that Goff spent several years teaching at the Univesity of Oklahoma, lew students followed his foosseps. The most famous of them are Flerb Greene, who built his own house (1959) in Norman, Oklahoma in the shape of a butfalo. dove w the Bavinger House, and Rar Prince, wtia completed the Shin’enKan Museum in Los Angeles after Gulls death.  Dowty Kini mann  See ale Los Angeles (California), United Sates; Prairic Schook Wright, Frank Lloyd (United States)  Biography  Born in Alton, Kansas, 8 June 1904. Apprenticed as the age of twelve to Rush. Endacott and Rush of Tulsa, Oldazhoma. Goff became a partner with the firm in 1928 and a registered architect without a university education, In 1934 he moved wa Chicago to work for Alfonso fannelli and tarted teaching at the Academy of Fine Arcs. Joining the armed forces as a Seabee in World War I allowed him traveling wo California, Alaska, and the Aleutian Istands. Professor of auchitccuute at the University of Oblabuma 1947-1955, profesuonal office in Price Tower at Bartlesville. Oklahoma uneil 1964 when he moved ws Kansas City where he stayed to 1969. Goff died in Tyler. Texas on 4 August 1982. In 1987 che Bavinger House was awarded the prestigious 24 Year Award trom the American Instinate of Architects.  Selected Works  Bunton Avrnue Methadia Church, Tula, OMahomas, 1926-1927 Riverside Studio, Tulsa, Okbboma, 1928  Coloworgan Hesne, Glenview, Mlinon, 1947  Ford House, Aurora. Illinois, 1944  Hopewell Baptit Church, Falmond, Oklahoma, 148  House for Eugene and Nancy Rannger, Norman, Oklahoma, 1953  Al Dewlen House, Project, Amarillo, Vexas, 1956  Jue Price House, Bardeswlle, Okluhama, 1976  Redestner Lutheran Building, Bartlewille, Okbhoma, 1959  Mercedes Benz Agency, Arlania, Georg, 1967  Gin and Lactta Harder House, Moutitain Lake, Minnesota, 1971  Hatter II Residence, Tucson, Arona, 1976  Al Struckus Hien, Woodland Hills, California, 1987  Shuen Kan Museum. Pavillion foe Japanese Ar at Los Angeles County Muncum of Art, Los Angeles, 1988  Further Reading  Conk, Jeffvey, The Architecture of Breve Gaff, New York and London: Harper and Row, 1978  De bang, David G , The Architecture of Hence Goff—Busltings and Projects, New Yotk: Gatland Publishing, 1977  De Lang, David G Bruce Goff Foard Acaluce Archrercture, Boson: MIT Press, LORB  Jencks, Charles, “race Goff: The Michelangelo of Kiech.” Archisectural Design. 43110 (1978)  Saliga. Pauline and Mary Wackever tednom), The Architecture of Rewer Goff (exhib. cat}. Chicago: Art lnstituie of Chicago, 1995,  Sergeant. John and Stephen Moonng tedxon). “Brice Gull.” A.D. Profiles 48. (1978) .  Welsh, Philip B. and Archur Dyson teditors). Gaff on Goff: Conrensatens and Lecrures, Noenan: Univerary ot Okdaboma Pree 19  GOLDBERG, BERTRAND 1913-97 Architect, United States  Rerrrand Goldberg was an Americn architect and designer whore wark reflected his wommitment to rationalism, economy. cavironmental psychasociology, and industrial producran. Bor and raised in Chicago, he «cudied architecture at the Cam- beidge Schuol of Lands ape Architecuure (now Harvard Univer- sity’s Graduate School of Design) while an undergraduate at Maevard College from £929 en 1931. He left Harvard tm attend the Bauhaus in Berlin under Mic van der Rohe from 1932 w 1933 and, upon his retum to Chicago, atecaded sume classes ar the Armour Insticure of Vechnalogy (now the Iinois Instituce of Technology {IIT ]). He opened his own office, Bertrand Gold- berg Associates, in Chicago in 1937.  From the beginning of his career, Goldberg embraced indus- trial design as much as archirecrure. In 1939 he founded the Standard Houses Corporation as a venue for rescarching and producing prefabricated architecture. These dexigns included a bathroom unit that was distributed nationally in 1946 as well as a plastic refrigerate and freight car for the Pressed Stee] Car Company, which was produced between 1949 and 1952, when steel was in short supply. His work on the railroad car Sed to his design for a prefabricated housing unit called che Unishelter. Although Goldberg had designed and built prefabricated hous- ing as early as 1937 (fine in Lafayette, Indiana, and then in Suitland, Maryland), the prefabricated origins of these carty panel-system schemes were not made manifest; they were simple homes with pitched roofs. The Unishelter, in contrast. adopted a streamlined. industrial look. Initially manufactured for the U.S. Army, the Unishelter, which was constructed of stress-skin  plywood, could be used as a shipping cuntainer while it was being transported. Unisheher units could be waanbined in the fiekd to form Large, flexible, economical houses. The Pressed Steel Cas Company manufactured about 2,000 Unishehters between 1948 and 1950 for use hy the army, but. despite Goldberg's efforts we capand the unit's maker. the design newer went into cividian produceon.  Two other designs that reveal Goklberg’s desire to blur che line between industrial production and architectural design in- dude the North Pole Mobile Ice Cream Store and the Clark! Maple Gasoline Service Station, both consteucted in Chicago in 1938. These two propects wed tension-callc stmctural systems, Presaging the high-tech design movements af the 1960s and 1970s. The ice cream store in particular illustrates Goldberg's interest in flevible pragmatiom. [1 was deugned in such a way that theee units could fit unin a flathed truck. The intention was that the vores would be dropped off in urban parking low: as the weather cooled. the truck woukl move the units e cites farther and farther south.  Goldberg studied umber Mics van der Robe at uve Bauhaus and abso at the Armour lastitute UIT), where he often acted ay a ramlatus tor Mies. Alehough the technological and scuctural innovations of his industrial designs suggest Mies's influence, Mics’s impact is more direatly cident in Goldberg's carly howe projects of the 1930s. These employed such Miesian strarepies as slipped axes and freestanding screens to maximize the flaw of space through the interiors, According to an unpublished tecture that Goldberg gave at HIT in 1997 (the Ghoxe Walks"), he practiced under his menror’s influence until the nid 19505, when he grew skeptical of the ratianalicy and geometry of the grid. Turning 10 Eaprenioniats, suuh 2s the Viennene artivt Eric- densecich Hundertwasser, whe assetted chat “we live woday ints chaos of straight lines,” Goldberg ahandaned rectilincarity. At thi point, he broke off definitively with Micsian design.  Goldberg's first Large-scale departure frum: the grids his most famaus building: his innovative— and decidedly noneculin- car—Marina Cary complex, nicknamed “Chicago's Comcobs” 41964}, his mixed-use project, sited un a three-and-a-hall-acte site along the Chicago River. combines housing, aitice space, parking. and commercial and recrearional programs, Marina City was the first central city multiuse project to inchide housing, as well as the fire FHA (Federal Housing Authocty) project co be located in an urban downsown rather than in che suburbs, In onder to qualify for FHA funding within the central citv, Gokdberg went to Washington, D.C. and successfully lobbied to change the wording of HHA ‘Title 207 from “an intent to build for families with children” to building “for family living,” thereby broadening the legal definition of “family.” Ac 635 dwellings per acre, Marina City remains today one of the densest modem residential projects in the world. Recreational compo- nents included @ marina in the diver, a bowling alley Incated on the fourth floor of the office block, an ice-skanng mink ar the ground level, and a theater complex containing one television theater and three mone theaters.  Although the combination of so many programs is cerrainly innovative, particularty foe a building dating from the carly 196s, the project is most notable fos its formal and structural navelty. Ar the time of its construction, Marina City's wo 65- soty tower were the tallest concrete buildings in the world. Buike for only cen dollars per square foot, che cylindrical towers  Mating City, Chivagn (19640 © Corba  prowde a suiking cuncrase wo the orthogonal buildings chat form their context. Central, tubular, conceece cotes containing de- vatons, stairs, cold warer. tchephone, and electrical servwee—brace the pos-and-beam structure of the aparuments, which branch out from the core like flower perals or corn kernels. The nonpar allel wails fanning ourward from the core created whar Goldberg rormed a “hinenc, goocentm space” in the apaniment. To con- vince his dienr—Incernational Union of Janitors of the viabil ity as well as the kinetic effect of this atypical fnemal scrategy, Goldberg leased space in 4 Chicago luli building where he con- sieucted a full-site mockup of two adjacent apasuncats, complete with an 80-foor-long photngraphic cyclorama backdrop. ‘The mockup convincingly revealed that the combination uf the form and the gencrous bakonics— cach habitable tug in ue towers had us own halcony—made che burding'’s FHA-saed apart- ments appeas to be more generous chan their standard, rectilinear counterpart.  Goldberg's other prominent Chicago projects--- Astor Tower {a fuxury horel and aparrment tower, complered in 1963), the Raymond Hilliard Center (public housing for the ekierly and for families, completed in 1966), and River City (another mixed- uve project, with middle- and upper-income houviog, completed in 1985) continued his research inte nonorthogonal form and concecte contruction, His interest in the peychobogical effects of form on a building's inhabitants as well as hus doiee to promote 
communnty life in these siructures, cither through shared spaces ut shared uses, lod Goldberg in the direction of healdh care de- si  y Goldberg's beat-known hospital project was his fins, bis lang- ext running, and his biggest: the Health Sciences Center (1968- 81) for the State University of New York at Stony Brook. The 250-acre medical campus comple was designed as a megastnuc- fure: a seven-story. one-mullion-square-foot environmental errve- lope containing academic. research, and clinical facilities, which served as a hase for more specialized buikdings. such as the clinical science tower, the hospital bed tower, and a banc science rower. Other medical facilities detigned by Goldberg anclude St. Joseph Honpiral (1974) in Taguma, Washington; Northwestern Univenity’s Prentice Women’s Hospital (1975) in Chicago: and the Good Samaritan Hospital (1982) in Phoenix, Anzona, all of which ceplayed concrete structural shell constructiaa with undulating exterior walls enclosing centripetally oriented rovers. Additional hospital projects included the Dana Cancer Center (1974) in Boston; St. Mary's Hospital (1976) 1 Milwaukee, Wisconsin; and Providence Hospital (1982) in Mobile. Ala-  bama. Sasa WHITING  See ale Apartnent Building: Hospital; IMinois Instivate of Technology, Chicago: Mies van der Rohe. Ludwig (Ger- tany)  Biography  Born in Chicagu, 17 June 1913, Attended. Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 1930 32; studied at the Bauhaus, Berlin 1932-33; worked in the office of Mies van der Rohe. Berliss 1932; attended, Armour Institute of Technulogy (now tH, Chicago 1933-34. Principal, Bertrand Goldberg Associ- aes, architects and cnygncers, Chicago from 1937; branch office. Boston 1964: director, subsidiary companies in Chicago: Com puter Service Incorporated from 1969. Environmental Engincer- ing Corporation from 1974. Copy Corporation from 1975. tel- low, American Insite of Aschirects 1966. Died 9 October 1997, Chicago, Illinois.  Selected Works  Clark’ Maple Gasoline Service Stanon, Chicago, 1958  Narth Pole Mobile Ice Cream Store, Chicago, 19.3%  Unicel (stress-alan plywood freght cas, 1950-5)  Unehedter (peefabriaid housing unit, 1992  Astot Tower ihotel and spartinent tiwer). Chicagu, 1963  Manns City housing complert, Chaage, 1964  Raymond Hilliand Center {public housing?. Chicage, 10d  Tlealth Suscnces Concer, Mate Uruversiny of New York a1 Statiy Beek. 1968 81  Dans Cancer Center hospital, Boston, 1974  $t. Joseph Hunpes), Tasuma, Washington, 1974  Nonhwesern Univeruity ¢ Prentice Ware's Flospeeal, Chinagn, 1975  St. Mav's Hospetal, Milwaukee, Winansa, 1976  Good Samarsan Hospaal, Phovor, Arvuna, 1982  Prodence Hingirat, Mobile, Alabama, 1982  Raver Ciry (housing compler), Chivagu, 188  Selected Publications  “Rach Is Raghe” inland Archianc, 2611 (1982)  "The Crincal Mass of Urbanism,” /udamd Archuece, 28/2 (1984)  “Kindergarten Plaudetei (Kindergarten Char,” fndand Architect, 30/2 11986)  Further Reading  A+ £45197) (pecs aaue on Golefherg)  Cook, foha Wand Hench Kloc. Conrenazrem ssch Anchewren, New York: Pracget. and London: Land Humphrie, 1973  Now, Hemnah, “Bersand Goldberg.” Penpecta, 13-14 (1971)  Cogner. Linds, “The New Architecture af Bertrand Goldberg.” daland Aochitecs 18 (VITA)  *Manna City, Chicago.” Arvhiarnmned Record, 134 (1963)  Miller, Row, “Chicago Archicecture after Mica,” Critical Inquiry. 6 (1979)  *A Panfobo of Work.” The Arvhvtrctune! Forum, 84 (1946)  Ragan, Machel, (enldherg. danv le Ville; Goldberg, on the City (bilmgual French-English edinont, Pars: Pans Art Comer, 1985  GOLOSOV, ILYA 1883-1945"  Architect, Russia  Among the leading carly Sovct architects, ya Golasov was per- haps the most successtul in adapting the ngorous, unadorned geometric volumes of Construcuviem eo the socia] goals of the fnew regime through a sencs of workers’ cubs that have beoome landmarks af Ruuian architecture. in Golosov's bes work. the apparent austerity of 1920s modernism acquired a dramatic— indced. romantic ~ cast. in this regard, it os telling chat during the early 192th, Golosay led a theoretical movement known as “smboli. romanucism.”  Bor in Moscow, Golosov entered Moscow's Stroganov Schoul of che Aro in 1898, where he completed che full cight- yeat coune. He continued his professional training at the Mos- cow School of Pasnting. Sculpture, and Architecture in 1907~ 12 and then moved to St. Petersburg. where be studied ar the Academy of Arts unl 1915. This extended academic education grounded Golasov in the principles of Neoclasacism, and at the beginning of his carcer he came under the influence of the lead- ing neoclassical revivalia, Ivan Zholowkii. Even as Goloww accepred modernat archisectural concepo, the order system te tained its underlying importance in his understanding of form.  Tn che catty 1920s, Golosow taught with Melnikev at VRKBUTEMAS-VRKAUTEIN, and, like Melmkov, he buile or projected a number of wouden cxhibitivn pavilions, At the same time, he produced rather eclectic, “romantic” sketches for com- Petitions on a grand scale, such as the Moscow Palace of Labor project (1922-23), with the arched roof of its central auditorium suggesting the shape of a dynamo. By 1925 Golosav's acceptance of Constructivist principles became markedly evident in a num- her of lange office building designs. streamlined and reduced to a carefully considered balance of rectilinear elements, Golosov's aniculstion of form centered an che concept of “lines of gravity” that created a logical, organic frame on which structure took shape. Like other modernist theoreticians, Golasoy also explared the innate properties of basic geometric forms, woch as the square aod circle.  Zuev Worker’ Club 1927-29), Moscow, designed by lya Golosov © Wilkam C. Brumficld  The juxtaposition of square and circle is developed in depth by Goloww in bis Zuev Worken’ Club (1927-29). Many such clubs were built in the late 1920s and 1930s, and in the moc praginatic sense they were intended to provide a meeting and recreational space for both workers and professionals (whose hernative might have been the tavern), On the level of idenlogy, the wurkers’ dubs provided an oppormunity for the integration of architeciure and social politics in the creasun uf Gommunal sroctures, and they firmly annuunced the leading role of the Communist Party in the creation of a new society. It is not surprising, therefore, that the dub concepe tor “palace of Labor”) simulated some of the most interesting, Loigns of the penod.  The Zuev Club has detenorated over ume. like most Con- stcuctivist buildings. bur rhe vigor of Golosov’s concept has not diminished, The large corner cylinder, conaining a stairwell enclosed in glass, is clenched with a rectangular extension of one of the upper floors, The resulting contrast of shapes epitomizes Constructivist architecture both in its display of unadorned stecl, glass, and concrete and in its musing of sharply defined volumes. A new industeial aesthetic created 4 building that resembles 4 machine, symbolizing the machine age. Yeu the bok] modeling of its forms recalls che work of architects such as Bashenov, whose neoclassical designs display a similar volumetric. approach. (The closest cxample is Bazhenov's lushkov mansion, which also  tums on a cotner cylinder and, by fling wocidence, served as the main boauen uf VKhUTEMAS.)  ‘The ospanization of interior space at che Zuev Club abo devulves on the staircase cylinder, whose wall of glass not only laminates wath a beilliance unusual in Moscow architecture but alr highlights the radial construction at the reintorced-concrete beams beneath the upper Landing. ‘The dynamism of this machine-like space, which served to concentrate monan within the building, is both Functional and byrical in its relation to the urban Landscape beyond the walla Like Shekhtel, Konsanan Melnikov, and Le Corbusier, Gulosow was particularly attuned to the properties of the glass membrane in defining the relation berwren interior and exterior space, but he went beyand chem tt his woe of glazed components to endow the structure with the sense of a living organism whose interior workings. people moving from one level to another within the building — were exposed te view. Unfortunately, in the few of Golmov's pragocts that were svalized (primanly apartene buiklings). the diver- geme between the crsp lines uf his drawings and the realiues of Sevier consreucnion methods is all too evident.  By 1953 Gulosov, like many of has contemporanes, had aban- doned the idealistic view of wansparent structure in favor of a massive. opaque neoclasicism, Cine al the most obvious and best preserved cxainples of his Later phase is the large apartment house (1934-36) on Yauza Boulevard. In this and other adminis- trarive buildings of the late 1934s, Golosov melded the neoctassi- cal pomiples of his carly career with the formal restraint of his modermist period.  Throughout the prewar decader Golosov’s architectural work was complemented by that of his older brother, Pantele+ mon Golosoy (1882-1945), Although the ten did not collaho- rate as diwely as the Vesnin brothers (Aleaander, Leoned, and Viktor). their careers followed similar paths, from early study at the Stroganow School and the Moscow School of Painting, Sculprure, and Aschitecture to teaching positions at VEAUTEMAS.VKhUTEIN and the Moscow Architectural In- aricute. Pantcleimon Golasay's mast successful modernist struc - ture was aho one of the last: the Prana Building, designed for the publishing empire of the sume name and will very much in use The building combined a nine-story alfive block, fronted by the lower printing plant, wah 1s streamlined, borwzantal window lines,  The parallel paths of the wu Golosov brothers continued with che curn of Pantedcimon Gulosoy to the design of classically arnculated apartment buildings ac the end of the 1930. Al though ther careers can be seen as a successful cxample of the (ransition from modernast, functional architecture to the more comscrvative political and cultural environment of the 1930s, it seems evident thar the pressures of che prewar and war years led both to a premature death in the same year, 1945  Wiias C. Barwin  See abo Constructivism; Melnikov, Konstantin (Russie); Moscow, Russia; Neoclassicism; Russia and Sovict Union; Shekhtel, Fedor (Russia); St. Petersburg. Russia: Vesnin, Al exander, Leonid, and Viktor (Russia)  Biography Born in Mumow, 31 July 1863. Brother of architect Pantelei- mon Golooy. Studied at Suroganos School, Mancow 1898 
1907; artended School of Painting, Sculpture, and Architecture, Moscow 1907-12. inguncer, Russian Army 1914-17, Worked with Ivan Zholtuvskid 1918-24. Professor. archateceure faculty, Moscow Polytechnical Institute from 1921; professor and head of a workshop, with Konsuntin Melnikov, VRAUTEMAS, Moscow frum 1921, Meinher, Union of Contemporary Anchi- texts (OSA). Died in Moscow, 29 January 1945.  Selected Works  Design for Palace of Labor (campetines entry: unerccuted), Moscow. 1923  bar tase Pavilion. All Russtan Agricultural kxhibinun, Mewenw 1923  Palace of Culture. Stalmgrad. 1928  Zoey Workers ub, Moscow, $929  House of Sovets. Khabarovsk, Riso death BAY. Clanich), 1920  Government Building of Kalmytuya, Elsta, Russis (with BLY Mineman}, 1932  Zhalkombinat (Residential and Serrax Complen), Ivanavo-Vaencsensk, Russia, 1952  Howse of Seven. Rostov -on- Dun, Rusa, 194  Houung Comple,, Yaurs Boulevard. Moscow. 1936  trade Union School, Moscow. (9 2  Selected Publications  “My Creaave Path.” Arkén, SSSR E1933  “On Lange Anhitectural Farms.” drbhiz, SSSR 51955)  “New Trends in Anchiecture.” papet given at the Maxow Aschuectural Somety, 1$ December 1922  Further Reading  The sandard monograph, cictly Uhrarated on Gukeae Tl and work ts Khan-Magomedor 198%. A good sclection of comemporary docu- mente on workers dube et contained an A! .,  Alanner, (editor), fe eters senvtiden arkbraektery, 19% 1952 . Dokumenty 1 matensh: Robochee tube 1 dverty kudrury (From the Hi Soviet Archita tare, 1926-32: Devumonc and Matetials: Workers’ Clubs and Palace: of Culture), Moxcow Nauka, 194  Ratkhin, MAG. tal. (elizar), Meurre wrvtikes arkhischtury ob arkhiteknure (Manton of Soviet Architecture on Archicecture), 2 vola,, Moscow: bkwurne, 1975  Brumfield, Waltiam € . A Antwry of Ruourn Acchitecrrr, Cambridge and New York: Cambexige Uneveruty Tress, 199%  Canke, Catherine, Rutan Ansmetotnde: Theories of Art. An hiseoruer, aad the Cay. Larulon; Academy Edinons, 195  Khan-Magomedan, Selim O.. Prencen of Sevier Anvhitecture: The Search for New Solutio in the 1920) ard 1930s, cranslated by Alexander Lieven, edited by Catherine Cooke, New York. Rerredi, and Landon: Tharies ant Hudsin. 1987  Khan-Magomedor, $.0., Mit Goleser, Mowow: Steoitzdat. 1988  Khazanowa, VE. Sevetubara arbhtteliara pervyth ee Obnabria, 1917-1925 gy (Somer Architecture of the Firse Years of October, 1917-1925), Moscow: Nauka, 19711  GONZALEZ DE LEON, TEODORO 1926- AND ABRAHAM ZABLUDOVSKY 1924— Architects, Mexica  The collaboration of Teadors Gonziler de Loon (1926-1 and Abeaham Zabludoviky (1924.4 has heen a highly significant  development in the evolution of contemporary Mexican archi- tecture, Aa clansemates in the Escuela Nacional de Arquitectura in Mexico City, both men abnorbed the functionalist ches of professors such a José Villagein Garcia. Through distinct paths, both rejected certain premises of the doctrine after begin- ning thes own private practices, Aftes Further study in France in the studio of Le Corbuser from 1947 co 1948, Gonsdles de Leon attempted to construct prefabricated housing in the capital city to mect pressing demand for such; eventually realizing Uhac his designs should harmonize with the existing urbaa fabric, he was determined co find solutions in native matcnals, techniques, and design. Zabhidorsky, too, had cause to reconsider the central tenets of Mexican functionalism, Functionalism had appealed to idealisuc Mexican architcets of the late 19205 and 1930s as they were daced with the imperative of designing new facilities foe the sacial services promised by revolutionary governments. Simply stated, they perceived the anewer tv complex social and economic problems to be strusctutal—that chrough better design, centuries-old inequalities might disappcat. Vet, as Zabludovsky witnessed, in practice this approsch could noe serve the nation. As he eecalled ber, “We now know that architecture cannot abter a society's econumis vundiiuns .. . we, as architects, cannot direct society with the tools of our trade: Gur work has only a specific area of influence. Alchough we may be able w play a part in che proces of sucial transformauon from within chis field. it is now the result of aay inherent quatiry of architecture” (Zabhuderedey, 1993),  As Gonzalez de Leon and Zabludovsky realized che failure af tunctonalism to construct a new, more just nation, they de- veloped a more flexible architectural vocabulary that would per- mit che yuvernment and private sector to pursue guals of social justice and economic develapment. Their collaboration began in 1968, after each architect had experienced almost a decade of suxconful private pracuce. Ther fitse works were a series of maarce plans commissioned by PEMEX (Petrékcas Mexicanos} for Poza Rica and Minautlan, in the state of Veracruz, where growth was rapid and uncontrolled because of dramatic growth in ehe oil industry. Zabludevsky and Gonzdlez de Leon studied the existing natural environment to determine which areas were unsumable tor urbantauon, surveyed land usage. and developed planting forecasts. determining demand for housing. health and social services, and commercial encerprises. Their subsequent work, spanning two decades, would be in the areas nf low- income housing, apartment buildings and private residences, and public-secens works.  In 1968 and 1970, ther proped ambitious solutions to ube chronic shortage of low-invume housing in Mexico City, In the Lorre de Méxcoac (1971) and La Patera (1973) housing developments, the architects sted approximately 4000 brick- faced units around tranquil, open public space, allowing for a varicty of informal, recteational uses and integrating sculpture by Mathias Goeritz with their overall design. Later warks. among, them Gonudhez de Ledn's develapment of the Ex-Hacienda de Enmedio (1978), further refined these principles. In projects for lpper-income resdents, such as che Tome Manhattan (1975) and La Herradura (1982) apartment buildings, Zabludovsky and Gantales de Leon demonstrated simular vare concerning the site and the Mexican climate, In treating the wall as a mass, drawing on the Mexican vernacular, they rejected Large expanses of plite glass in favnr of procected. seuiles windows,  These elements ate also present in their designs for government-sponsored projects. among them the Declegaciin Cuauhtemoc (1972-73), a building to house the administrative units overseeing the central arca af the city. offices for the work: ers’ housing fund INFONAVIT (1973.75), the Mexican Ern- bassy in Brasilia (1973-75), educational facilities such as the Colegis de México (1974-75) and the Universidad Pedagrigiva Nacional (1979-82), and the Rufine Tamayo [nternatiunal Mu- seum of Contemporary Ant (1981), Constructed avet a penod of 12 years, these structures manifest the evolution and refine ment of Zabludoveky’s and Gonzalez de 1 edn's unique approach to architecture. Common to these works is 2 singular attention to Meucan culrure and national identity. The architects have drawn from the preconques: and colanial eras in emphasizing horizonality, centering there massive structures around patios and courtyards, and protecting entrances through gracefully exe- cuted porticos, Both interior open spaces and entrances have Grequently achicved unanticipated utility as meeting places and Landmurhs, as in the case of the INFONAVTT and Colegio de Meénico structures. Further, che architects frequent we of berms and sloping terraces, derived from preconguest design, serves to join these strocnures ro che urban Landscapes. Notable also is ther innovative use of concrete. Zabludovsky and Gonzdlez de Leda chose to mix concrete with murble aggregate. Che concrete was then chisclod, resulting in a rough surface that reflects light, creating a warm cast to buikding cxtcrings. In recent works. such as the Capuchinas-Banamex Building (1988-89), adjacent to the Palacio de San Mateo de Valparaiso in the oldest secuon of the city, che architects employed rose-hued sezonele sand in the concrete. creating a medium thar complemenre rather chan in- trades en viceregal structures.  Together, these elements have come to constitute a promi nent trend in contemporary Mexican architecture, “integrated functionalism.” ‘The architects’ use of massive. «ulptural vol: umes, whether in the Cultural and Tourist Services Uirut (1984) at Chichén ud or in the award-winning Banamer Financial Centers (1986-88), cmptoy logical aspects of funcuenalsn, combined with a sensitivity tw current suciveconome and cul- rural needs, co yield an authenucally Mexican architecture.  Both architecs have also pursued dynamic private practices Gonaalez de Ledn’s farcr works include the Fondu de Cultura Econémica Building (1992) and Federal Palace of justice (1993), Recenr publications. among them Anmhitecture as Arr, reveal his cnmmitment to excellence in deugn. Zabludovsky's recent work includes libraries. cheater, civic centers. apartment buildings, and office buildings. most nobly his restoration of La Ciudadela (1988} and the Celaya Multipurpowe Auditorium (1990), which received the Gold Medal ar the Sotia, Bulgaria, Bienal. In sum, their work consistently provikes numerous cx- amples of the complexity and dynamism of postrevolununary Mexican architecture.  Parnict E. Oboes  Biography  Teodoro Gonzilez de Leda oe Born in Mexico City, 29 May 1926. Attended the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de México. School of Architecture 1942-  7; degree in architecture 1947. Worked in che architectural studio af Le Corbusier, Paris 1948-49, In private practice, Mex- to City from 1949; director of Rural Housing, National Hous. ing Institute 1956-58; technical director, Council of Economic and Social Planning, Mesicu City 1958; advisor. operating and banking discoune fund for housing, Mexico 1966-70, ad- visor, PW. Deparment, Mexico City 1970-76; advisor, Mimis- try of Publi. Education, Mexao City 1976-76. Visiting prules- sor, Pratt Institute, New York 1982 and 1984. Member, Colegio de Arquitcctos de Mexico 1966; emenrus member, Sociedad de Arquitectos Mexicanos 1978; honorary fellow, American Insti- ture of Architects 1984; member, Academia de Artes 1984.  Abraham Zabludovsky  Born in Bialystok, Poland, 14 June 1924; emigrated cu Mexico 1927; nanuralized 1941, Attended the Univeradad Nacional Au- tonoma de Mexico. School of Architecture 1943-49; degree in architecture 1949. In prrvate pracine. Mexico City from 1949; director, INURBASA. Mexico City trom 1973; advasor to the director, CODEUR, Mexicr City from 1978 Teacher of com- postion 1965 .67, lecturer and advisor, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de México; leceurcr and advisor, Muscum of Modern Art. Mexico City. Fellow, Academy of Architecture, Mexica; bonorary fellow, Aovetican Institute of Acchitents 1982; honer- ary Icilow, International Academy of Archecerure 1994.  Teodoro Gonzalez de Leén and Abraham  Zabl  Parmership established in Mexico City 1968; have received awards for their work in Menco and South Amenca.  Sclected Works  Cuevas Hout, San Angel. Mention City, (968  Miuxcoac-Lomas de Maccros Housing Complex. Mexco Cry (with dculprurc hy Mathias Gocatrd, 1968  Other buildmg, Nuevo Leon and Campeche streets, Mexico City, 1970  Office hurkhng, Campm blisens 165, Merion Ciry, 1970.  OWice building. Presidenre Mazarvk 191, Mexico City. £970.  Vallejo-La Pateta Housing Complex. Mesicu City, 1970  Spores Comples. Tlatnepantla, Seate of Meraco. 1972  Delegacifia Cuauhtéeroc building, Mexico Ciry (with Jaime Ortiz Monaene and Luis Antunio Zapian), 1973  Mexxan Lebasty, Weasdia fonth J. Francesco Serrano), 1975  Headquanen, Insutuce del Fonde: Nacional de la Vevienda para ke Trabassdores, INFONAVTT, Barranca del Mucrio 280, Meuco Cay, 197  EI Colegio de Méaco, Camino al Ayuxo. Meaco Cay. 1975  Tore Manhattan aparements, Vevamachaluo, Mate of Meco (with sculpture by Mathias Goettr2), 1975  Rufine Lamayo Intemunimal Museum af Contemporary Art, Pasco de ba Reforma y Gandhs, Bosque de Chapuheper. Meaico Cory, 19RI  Torte Palmas office building, Paseo de las Palmas, Meno Cry, 19RI  Cawensdad Pedugopea Nacional, Camino al Ajuao. Meano Cay, 1982  La Heeragura apartment bulding, Merivo City, 1982  Barumex Caadra Complies, enlargement and remodeting, Menice Cir, 1984  Catraral and Tourist Services Ueut. Chichen leza. Yucarin. 1984  Bunamex tnuurgeates Encanto Francia Center, Av Tisurgentes y Enuante La Flotids, Metin City, 1988  
Banamer Revoluciin Financial Centet, Av, Revolucicin y Altamirano, Meaice Cay, 1988  Banames Jamas Financial Cencer, Lomas de Chapultepec. Mexico City. 1988  Capuchinas Buikding—Ranames, Av Venustano Carranea y Palma, Mexico Cary, 1989  Nanonal Audronum, enlargement and remodeling, Paseo de la Reforma ¥ Parque Lira, Mexico (ity. 1K)  Selected Publications  Teodoro Genzilex de Leon  Harra de Navudad, Estudes de we Area, 958  Invermgactoncs de Viriends ea Once Cindades det Paty. \ vals. 1b  Candloge de Cartagrames, \W09  “Diseno y prasis en la enseAanaa del concrete,” Argwssecenea y Seviedad $ (1980)  “La Picara ded Siglo XN." LMCYC. 142 betruary 19831  La Voluntad del Creader, V4  Retrate de Arguitects con Cinslad, 19%  Archetrsture as Act, 18  Abraham Zabludovsky  *E Centso Civico Cinco de Mayu,” Arquiantura’Mexice, 79 (Seprembice 1962}  “Unidad de Habitachin Terraras Suiclite.” ArguesectaraMécice, 91 (Seprember 19651  Arquitecture Contemponines Mevicana: Obrat dt Teadere Goncdler de Lein y Abraham Zatiudocrite, |S  “Des Ldificios de Departamentos.” Anguctreruna/ Maxine, 68 {December 1969)  “Coneral de Abasto de la Ciudad de Minna," Obra {Moucot (Manh 19831  La Cindadele, Robles Mexuanaz. 1995 *  "Arquidiilogo det Arg, Zabludovsky; EF Musew Rufino Vamayo.” Exctbeor (8 August 19921  Abraham Labludinky, anhrisect, \PD3  Abrabam Zabladoviky: Cingnemut Ake: de Arguitrruns, (99S  Abraham Labludoriky, Argusicis, WIS  Bernal de arqeiecnes merricans. Mevco Cay: Feberacian de Colegios de Arquitectos de 11 Repiblica Mexicana, 1'790~  Bullnch, France, New! Derectoins on Lasie Ameviots Arducrtare, New York: Braaller, and London: Saude Vista, [909  Dreaber, Arthur, Trrngiormarion: en Modere Ancbutecturt, New Youk: Misecum of Modern An. 1979: Londua: Secher and Warburg, 1980  “Edifuso Municipal de Delegaceias Catauhtern* El INFONAVIT,” and "Museo Tamayo,” in Modern Macan Architecture, edited by Makow Suzuki, Lokye. Prevess Aghitecture, 1983  Garav Arellano, Graciela de (cuitot). HHfptoria onal de bt ciucdad dy Mexsce tetimanar de sts seguasecter (NO 1990), Abeba Zsthudevsky, Mexico City: Lateria Nacsonal para Ls Amstencus Pubbca. Insetuto Mota, 199%  Ghaberg, Jutge, Sen arquitectin mesianer, Buenos Aite: Edicioncs de Arte Gaghanone, 1984  Heyer, Paul, Mesican Arctetevenre The Wark of Abraham Cabbedersky and Teodere Goasdirs de Lad. New Yock Walket, 197%  Heyer, Paul, Aéniharn Zabindowsks, Architest, 1979-1993, New York: Prieveron Anhcctutsl Prew, 1993  “Mineo Rufinu Tamaya.” Argeitevtars y Sociedad, 1 ORL)  Neuvillate Ortiz. Alfnnse de. Dire angina mestcane, Mervin City. Fdicames Galeria de Arte Misrachi, t977,  Noelle, Louise, “Mexican Contemporary Architecture: Aa. ten,” in Modere Meccan Archeecture, edned by  Makoco Sauki, Tokyo: Process Architecture. 1985  Noclle, Louise, “Arquitecrura mencana: 1952-1989." in México, 75 ae: de reveleciéa, edited by Otto Granados Rokdén, Mexico Garp: Fonda de Cultura Economica, 1983  Noelle, Louise, Arguisectas contempordness de Mexico, Merion City. bdivorial Trillas, 1989; ed edinon, 1993  Noctle, Louise, Créazcas de arquitectare, Mouco Cay: Academie Nacional de Arquitecturs, Unrenidad Ausinoma Metropolitana, 1993  Uche conpuntes de Habteacita: arguisectara co snextodtia: Mexnica Contemporary Archirecture (bilingual Spansh-English edinons, Meaico Cay. Arquitectuca y Sucrdad. 1976  Sandetrguet, Padro Conrado, Memoria y wiopis en la arguitecrara mexicana, Mecit Cliy: Universidad Autonoma Metropolitana, 1990  Toca. Antonw, and Aathal Figueroa Castrejin, Affzica: mucow arquitectura, Mexico City: Gil, L991; Sh edition, 1995,  Yanes, knrgque, Del funconalisme al post revionatinao, Mexico Ciy: Universidad Ausinoins Metopolitana-Limusa, 1990  GOODHUE, BERTRAM GROSVENOR 1869-1924 Architect, United States  Burn in the small New England rown of Pomfret, Connecticut, on 28 April (R69, Rerram Grosvenor Goodhue lacked the fi- nancial support from his family to follow che route pursued by many aspiring American architeces to the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris. Accordingly, he follawed che other conventional path to the architectural profession. going to work at ube age of 15 as an office boy - apprentice in the New York City office of Ren- wick, Aspinwall and Ruvil, headed by James Renwick, ehe ar- chitect of buth the elegant Grace Church on lower Beuslway and the geandiloquent St. Patrick's Cathedral on Fifth Avenue.  Having wun 3 compericion on his own in 1891 for a church iy Dallas, and ecoding hep an carrying it out, Goodhue formed an association with the Boston architects Ralph Adams Cram. and Chartes Francs Wentworth and became a partner in Cram, Wentwurth and Goodhue in 1892. The name of the firm was changed in 1898 ta Cram, Goodhue and Ferguson when Frank William Ferguson was brought on tollowing the death of Went- worth,  In addition w> his architectural work, Goodhue was involved from the beginning of his carcer in ather aspects af design. ape: cally publicaniansy he was, for cxample, the originator of the Cheftenhain typeface, designed in 1904 and, with Cram. pub- lished an avant-garde arty quirterly, The Knight Freant.  Although the fim of Cram, Goodhue and berguson pro- duced an impressive range of buildings in cheir carly years, the sommusion that caabluhed theis reputation was for the rebabibi- tation and expansion of the U.S. Military Academy (1903-10) at West Paint, One of the finest chements of the extensive project was the austere Cadet Chapel (1910), in which Goodhue had an especially strong hand.  Whereas the design collaboration between Cram and Goodhue seemed co exploit cheir individual strengths —Cram’'s in the development of the overall plan, Goodhue’'s in the refine- ment and ornamentation of it—the penonal relationship be-  ween the ewo men became increasingly competitive. Cram con- tinued to wnrk our of the Baston headquarters, bar Gondhuc in 1903 established a separate New York office. When the cum. musion for St. Thomas Episcopal Church on New York was announced, cach man submitted his own design. Cram's was selected, but Gondhue insisted thar major credit for the finished building go to him for his rule i the caccution of it. In any ase. St. Tharnas remains a high point in American Gothic archi- tecture, the quality of in ctterior mawing matched by thar of the elegant nave and the cnormaus altar screen, done by the German-bom sculptor Lee Lawrie under Goadhue's directive.  Noe surprisingly. Se. Thomas proved ta he the last vullabora- tion berween Cram and Goodhue, and in 1914 the junior past- fer set out on hes own.  The vigor of Gondhue's xcarch for his own aesthersc—one tree of Cram’t personal and religiously doctrinal commitment wo the Gothic—is evident in the combination of Romanesque and Byzantine that Goodhue applied to the design of St, Bartho: lomew's Episcopal Church on New York's Park Avenue (begun in 1914 and finished four years later, Ar the same time. Goodhue embarked on an experiment in town planning, with the design of a new community (19¢4) for a copper-mining concer in Tyrune, New Mexico.  Goodhue’s stylistic investigation continued with his "Chursi-  uc” buildings for the Panama~California Exposition (1911-15) an San Diego, an invocation of traditional Spanoh motifs that helped Fuel the local enthussasm for a Spanish revival.  New Nebraska State Capital, Lincoln, Nebraska Phote € Mary Ann Sullivao  The rathet bluodkes Rockefeller Chapel at the University of Chicago (hegun in 1918 but na finished unl 1927) shows a lingering willingness oa Goodhue's part to work in che Gothic, bur bis heart had clearly gone out of it.  ‘The building char resolved much of Goodhue's apparent in- devision over styles was one that abandoned all of them while embracing some vintage Beaux-Arts planning principals. It was the Nebraska State Capital (1920-32), the commission for which Goudhue wun over 4 how of competitor wedded to cem- ventional Roman domes and colonnades.  An essentially classical cross-axial composition centered on 4 400-foot cower, the Capnol beoke new ground in in. stripped geometry while cctaining a xnsiuvity to the tradition of figura- tive ornamenratian. What makes the complex so effective is the combinauon of abstract form with enough pictonal narrative to create a personal connection with the busding’s program of public service. Much of the credit must go to Ice Lawne, whore heros sculprures embodying assneted virtues and historical fig- ures emerge from che plane surfaces of the building to give chi austere stnkture a welcome plasticity. Alchough some critics have austociated the burding with che chilling classicism of the contemporancous wark in Healy and Germany. glance at the celebranion of the cole uf law and ce importance of the individ: ual citizen capressed in the Capital's ornament makes its differ- ent motivation abundandy clear.  Goodhue did not live to enjoy all of the accolades chat greeted the Capitol, among them the Amctican Institute of Architects 
Balboa Park, Calforna Tower, San Diego County, Caltorna {5 Library of Coagress  (ALA) Gold Medal in 1925, a year after his death at age 55. A poll af $00 architects taken by the AIA in 1948 ranked the Capiol fourdh the 25 greatest wurla of architecture in the world (and ahead of the Parthenon and Chartees Cathedral). By the time of its completion in $932. however, the Capitol had already been condemned hy the advocates of the modei nist avant-garde as a retrograde work. But in light of the sensiewe innovations evident in this building—and the doscly related design tor the Los Angeles Public Lebrary (begun in 1922 and complered in 1926)—une can only speculate about where Goodhue’s independent pursuit of an architecture of evolubon  eather than cevolution might have bed. Canta Wiseman  Biography  Born in Pomfret, Connecticut, 28 Apat (869. Ancnded Rus- sell's College, New Haven, Connecucut. Offke boy to James Renwick, Renwick, Aspinwall and Ruswil, New York 1884; chief draftsman, Cram and Wenrwarth, Boston 1891; partner, Cram, Wentworth and Coodhac. Boston 1892: partner, Cram. Goodhue and Ferguson, Boston 1898 Private practice. New York from 1914, Gold Medal, American Inwirute of Architects 1925. Died in New York, 23 April 1924  Selected Works  Gillespie Howse. Monweosia, Califorma, 1902  United cases Maitacy Academy, West Pont, New York (with Ralph Adams Cram and Frank W. Ferguson), 1910  St Thenas Church, Fifth Aveaue, New York (with Cram and Ferguson}. 1913  Pasama—Califorma Expoution Buldings San Diego, 1915  All Saints’ Charch. Asheaont, Boston (with Ceam and Ferguson), 1913, compleved 1941  Tyrone, New Meaico, 1914  Se. Hartholomew’s Church, Park Avenue, New York, 1918  Rocketeer Chapel, University of Chuago, 1927  Natuinal Academy of Sciences Building, Washington, D.C., 1924  State Capital (Fust pre. competion}, Lincoln, Nebraska, 1932  Central Public Libary. Los Angeles, 1926  Selected Publications  A Book of Architectural und Decorazive Drawing, 1914 Haok Decaraniens by Bertram Grosvenor Guedbue, (931  Further Reading  Brown, Elinor 1. Architectural Wonder of the World: Nebeuska’s State Capieel Hustding. Cereaco, Nebratha: Midwest, 1965  Kidney, Walter ©. Phe Archisecture ef Cheice: Felecticam in America, 1830-1930, New York: Braviller, 1974  Oliver. Richatd, Bertrame Groscener Goadirme. Now York: Archnectural Hrtory Foundanon, 1985  Roth, Leland. A Concue History of American Architecture, New York: Harper and Row, 1979  Shand-Tucci, Douglass, Relph Adios Crane: Life smd Archriecrare. Ambera: Unreenity of Massachusete. Presa, 1995  Whitten, Marcus. and Fredisick Kacper. American Archaccnere, 1607-1976, Cambeidge. Massachusetts: MIT Press, and London: Rourledge and Kogan Paul, 198)  Wiseman. Caster. Shaping a Nation: Taventeth-Century Americat Anatecture and tts Makeri, New York: Norton, 1996  GOODY, JOAN EDELMAN 1935- Architect, United States  In a cenrury when architecture has been overwhelmingly dami- nated by male practitioners, Joan Goody, a Fellow of the Amen- can Institute of Architects and since 1969 4 principal in Goody. Clancy and Associates, provides the welcome exception nat onty for the quality of her work but for ite range as well, Ie is exceed- ingly rare for an American woman of Goody's generation to have realized buildings of ruch programmatic variety and conse- quential scale,  Goody's path w prominence as partner in what would be- some one of Boston's premier architectural firms was steady, sure, and swift. In 1960, she entered the office of Marvin E. Goody and John M. Clancy. {Goody had established the practice in 1955 with Richard Hamilton, who died before foan’s arrival; one notable achievement was the Monsanto Plastics “House of the Furure,” 1956, a¢ Disneyland.) By the 1970s the firm had grown from five to 50 persons and was receiving major commis- ons for housing, offices, and research and ceaching facilities and began co focus more on actual construction. The partnership of Goody, Clancy and Associates was continued after Marvin's death in 1980 and today employs mote than 100 people.  One key wo Goody's success is her willingness to collaburate not only with her partners and employees bur also with her chents. ‘This process inchides the users no less than those who provide the finances, which typically are public ur institutional bodies. In particular, the firm ha welcamed the challenge of fered by housing, one of the most urgent and difficult tasks set by 20th-century e.onarnic attd political conditions. Whether fot famitics, the elderly, a temporary student pupulation, ar the affluent, the lower-income occupant, of the discmpowered, Goody has peovided highly regarded dwellings and plac of communsty for people af diverse resoutce and needs. Another distinguishing trait of the partnership is the deferral wo the von- text no bess than the pracucal requirements,  The technical sophistication of Goody's bulldings, con- structed with the most current materials and methods, never belittle the neighborhoods with which they mingle. Rather. ber designs update, enliven, and repair the surroundings without diminishing viable existing structures. Such seniitive awareness has been expedited by che firm's decision 10 concentrite the Peatice in New England, capecially the Boston area. the incee: mental charset uf which delights Goodly, who secs her work a contibuting tw the histwrival progreswn of che city’s built environment, Her experience with the climate has inspired ber to apply energy-saving strarcgies. stich as solar panels and recy- ding bea pumps (State Trunsportativa Budding, Boston}. wluch are especially popular with the government agencics thas frequently favor her firm. Nor surprisingly, Goody. Clancy and Associates has eagerly embraced ihe thee encompass histori. preservabon, such as the 17th-centucy Faneuil Hall/Old State House. Charles Bulfinch's late t8ch-cennury Massachuseres State House. and Henry Hobton Richardson's ISth-century Trinity Church, all in Boason, In che Lat devade of the 201h century, Gandy has extended the geographic reach of the practice by ‘cepting commissions in Pinsburgh (a mized-income wummu. uty, Allequippa Terrace), Chicago (master plan for $000 units of housing on the near north side, cited by the Wail Serert journal as onc of the 2x most important projects of the year 2000), and West Virginia (Federal Courthouse).  One of Goody's most buded proyeces, which dlusteates the originality and mastery with which she appmaches complies urban problems, is the redevelopment of Harbor Pont, Boston (constructed 1987-90; Goody was involved in vanous capacitics from 1978). whach won the Rudy Bruner Award for Excellence in Urban Design in 1993, Forged from the remains of the ill- wanted 1504-unie Columbia Point housing project, dilapidared and only 20 percent ovcupied in 1979 and a sad crample of the failure af 1950s public housing policies, Goody's then-radical vision of a mixed-income. multiracial enclave at first was met with skepticism, However, her tenacity prevailed, and today the 1300 dwellings, some subsidized and others rented at market rates, designed to accommodate a range of households and dis. tnbuted among 46 new townhouses and five- tw seven-story aparrment buildings. have heen transformed into a beguiling  There are views of the harbor, a waterfront park. a  mall based on Boston’s late 1Sth-<entury Common- wealth Avenue, public greens as well as private patios, communal facilities (meeting hall, centers for day care and for the elderly, tlubhouse with pool, and so on). and shops. The alicnaring abstraction and monotony of the Le Corbusian tower-in-the- park idea that had shaped the former Columbia Point has been  replaced by ceferences to traditional neighborhoods in terms of stevet patterns, roofbnes, marerials (including clapboard and red brick}, and details (darmer and bay windows and gables),  The highly praised Tent City (1988, named for an carlicr protest against further commmercislization of the site), with 271 tmxed-rental units, war a tchcanal on a amailer sale. Sicuated in the heart of Boston in the shadow of the sleek. looming John Hancock Tower, Tent City provides contrast not only in its tesidential program of (2-mary aparument blocks and law-rise tow houses but abo in its polychromuatic brick facades and do- mesae detaiting, which humanize the mainly commercial area.  Gantty also excels in the very different assignments offered by colleges and univenitics, for which she has designed an assort- ment of new and renovated structurcs and extensions chat are incegrated into existing campuses and urban settings. Here, t00, the disparace requirement: of the ocaupants— faculty. staff, stu- denw, and visiian - are harmonized through aesthetic and prac- Fical choices, The many laboratories huilt by che firm offer both the flexibility necewury in the rapidly changing world of scicn- clic and techincal research and the sense af specific place indis- pensable for eomfnetahle engagement with the institution. At the Whitehead Insicuw for Biomedical Research (1994} in Cambridge, the sleck brick, stance, and glais facade enchases buh gicaming, well-cqupped, busineulike Laboratori and warm and unurmate Curved spaces that encourage more persanal inter- action.  Herzen Staring  Biography  Born in New York, | December 1935. Actended, University of Pass 1954 55; studied architecture, Comell Universy, Ithaca, New York: bachelor’s degree in architecture 1956; audied archi- tecture, Harvard Graduate School of Design, Cambridge, Mas- seehusctts 1960, Marricd 1) architect Marvin E. Goody 1960 {died 1980); 2) Peter Davison 1984, Principal, wich husband, Gedy, Clancy and Associates, Boston from L961. Instructor, 196L- 64, board member 1975-80, Boston Architectural Cen- ter; assistant professor 1973-76, design critic 1976-80, Eliot Noyes Visiung Crk 1985, Harvard Graduate School of De- sign. Membet, Baston Landmarks Commission 1976-87; hon- orary member, Boston Architectural Center 1982; chair, Boston Civic Design Commission from 1992.  Selected Works  Jewuh Fumily and Children's Service Building, Boston, 1370  Facaly Gub, Mamachusctn Inavtute of Trohhology. Cambnadge, 1974  Heritage Gardens Hounng tus the Elderly, Winthrop, Maseahuncus, 1977  Lana Way and Hillade Housing, Taf Unevenity, Medford. Manachinets, 1981  Village at Fawcert's Pond, Hyannis. Masuchusetes, 19R3  Manachusein Department al Transporation Budding, Beaton, 19R4  Paine Webber Ofc Burlding, Reson 19R4  Austin Hall (retorations, Harvard University, Cambridge, 198f  Sports Concer, Simi Callege. Bagon, 1987  Tent Cry Houung, Botan, 18S 
Salomon Cemer for Teaching. Brown Univeruty. Promdence. Rhode Idand, 1989  Harbor Cary, Columbsa Poine, Boston, 1992  Faneuil HalltOld State Howse tpreservarion and rchabditation). Boston. 1992  Whitehead lostuute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge. 1994  ‘Obn Hall. Babson College. Babson Park, Massachusetts, 1996  Barker Center for che Humanines. Harvard Univeniry, Cambndge, 1997  Lansty-Chatenden Hall (renovation). Yale University, New Haven, 1998  Selected Publications  New: Architecture in Bestan, 16S  “A Rare and Rach Responte ta Contenr: Kein Unsversry Library, Tokyo, Japan, Maki and Awociates,” Archisectinal Revord. 71/5 (May 1983)  “Essays on Social Housing,” Progresiere Archisecrure, 65/7 (july 1984)  “Do You See New Direcosons?” Avchuecsure, 7475 (May 1985)  “Echacs in Design and Practwe.” GSD News {Fall 1995)  Further Reading  Anderson, Grace, “trom Vents to ‘Town Humes: Mixed Inovrme Housing, Tent City, Botan,” Arrbriectaral Record, 176113 (November 1988)  Anderson, Grace. “A Peuper Dignity.” Anrtisecraral Record, 17809 (Angin 19901  “Austin Hall Regaine Its Character.” Devign Solutions, 6/1 (Spring 1986)  Berkeley, Ellen Deny, and Mankds McQuaid toditaes), Architernen= A Place for Women, Washington, 19.C.: Smithsonian Lnsticunoa Press, 1989 :  “Celebrating Moealism.” Archicecture. 42 (May 19931  Daves, Sam. The Arcinecrare if Affordable Honsing, Betkeley: Unreensizy of California Press, 1995  Uiamonstetn, Barbaralee, Amerncaa Arvhasecture Now If, New York Rezzoli. 1985  *Hanuasng far the Future,” Progreune Archuecture. 69110 (Oxtober 1988} Phares & (Summer 1993) {qpraaal issue on Harbor City, Columbia Poant)  "Wane Noe, Want Not: The Transporation Bunkling, Boston,” Progeesuve Arshettcsure, (#4 (Ayuil 1985)  GRAHAM, ANDERSON, PROBST AND WHITE Architectural firm, United States  Befure forming the largest architectural firm of the great Ameri- can bushding perind of the carly 20th venvury. the primipals uf Graham, Andeeson, Probst and White all worked for Daniel Burnham (1846-1912). Their asbroquene work coveted the full spectrum of urban buikling — public and cultural instutwtuns, railroad stavons, skyscrapers. banks, department stotes, warc- houses. power stations. lofts. and some private commissions. With few exceptions. thew well-designed buildings are sill in use today, continuing to nourish public pride and civic spine. ‘The firm was neither avant-garde nor conservative bur solidly in the mainstream of the architecture ot its day. Solving new problems for such new building types as the railtoad stauon, che architects creauwely adapted the time-honored principles af che  Beaux-Arts tradition to meet changing needs and to rake advan- rage of new technology. Over che ycars, the firm used many different styles—classical, Art Deon, ant moderne, modernist and postmodern — but until the death of Graham, the planning prin- ciples were always Beaux-Arts.  Esncat R. Graham (1866-1936) founded a new firm shortly after Bumham’s death. As ewo of Burnham's sons were still in the office, the new firm was called Graham, Burnham and Company, In 1917, by mutual agreement, this firm was dis- solved, and Wilham Pierce Andemon (1870-1924), Edward Probst (1870-1942), and Howard Judson White (1870-1936) formed with Graham the firm that is till in existence today.  The United States Post Office in Washingvon, D.C. (1914) completed part of che urban scheme for the city, which also included Union Station (designed by Anderson in the Burnham cra) and the semicircular plaza in frons, An arriving visitor passed through the triumphal arches of the station to sce the sparkling white of the Capital beyond the green foreground of the park pla. The building group then takes its place among the great architectural glorics of the nation’s capital. As in many of their ucher urban ensembles, the firm's exemplified the clamical principle of cach part being an end in itself yet subordinate to the larger whole. :  The Cleveland Terminal Group (1930). an ensemble of office buildings grouped around 4 railroad station, also exemplifies the guiding principles of che firm's work. The soaring ower above the station marked a new emphasis on height for this building type. However. the planning fullowed the time-tested principles of the Beaux-Arts symmetrical massing, spaces organized along axes for che most efficient use with the exterior composition reflecting the intcrior disposition of the moms, and traditional omament adapted tm express the function of the building. tn addition, buildings had en be carefully sited to uke advantage of the tnpngrephy of to selate to surtounding structures, The broad expanses af windows and the airy colonnades of Chicago's Union Station (1925). tagether with its efficien. uraffic layour and the grandeur of its waiting room, are other cxamples of the renowned railroad design of the firm, 2s is che Mhirtieth Street Sarton (1934) us Philadelphia.  Cultural institutions were abo designed according to Beaux- Arts prinaples, bur despite the shared characterisrics, each build- ing was unique. [he distinctive qualities emanated from the specific problems involved in the design. No two buildings were alike because cach had a different site, context, client, and peo: gram. The Field Museum of Natural History (1919) and the Shedd Aquarium (1930), both in Chicago. illustrate the point. Both are sited to take advantage of the sublune union of Lake Michigan and the Chicago skyline and to relate to each other with theit classical eemple frones, yet in the interior the plan and the omament teflect different purposes. Vhe visitors walk ina gud pare through the light-filled comdors of the Field Museum, whereas they seem ww floar round through che darker passages of the Shedd. ‘Together, the two buildings are subordi- hated to the larger whole—the city itself, In this role. they work joindy as a cohesive link in the urban scheme. Recently, chix telavonship has heen underscored and improved hy relocating Sourh Lake Shore Drive co the west, allowing the two institu tions ro share a campus.  Of the firm's many office buildings, three ate outstandin ra but for different reasons. The Weighy Building (1924) in Chi-  Wrighey Building, Chicago. Mlinoix (1924) by Graham, Andenon, Prober and White © Grestbuildings.com  cago applies Spanish renabasnce oftiament to a sasting skyscza- pet. making the most of ats prominent site where Michigan Avenue bends at 16 juncuon with the Chicago River. Seruceur- ally. the budding is like ober Chicago models, and its exteriot is ariculated in the same errpartite manner, but the cladding is in dazaling white terracotta. A special, painterly attention to che glazing called for six different shades of white, varying from Bray 10 pale cream and gerting progressively lighter toward the top to chat the Wrighy scems to “soar from miss and fog to clear skies,” Add tn this the effects of dramaric nighttime illumi- nation, and the continued dominance of the Wrigley Building in the hearts of Chicagoans seers assured  The Koppets Building (1929) in Pitesburgh is a brilliant ad- apution of Beaux-Ares planning with the new Art Deco siyling. The unincerrupted vercicab of the facade suggest the soaring speed of the new machine age, buc the spaces within are tradi- tionally di  tn the 1920s, office buildings were often combined with ocher building types. Banks, colleges, and even churches were hybri- dized with skyscrapers, and the Crvic Opera Building (1929) remains a stellar example of this tendency. ‘The majestic office tower gives monumental grandeur to the broad auditorium of the opera house below and exprewes the original intention (no longer viable) that the income from rentals would subsidize the  productian of operas. Uhe musical motifs of the ornament in the lobby and the interior of the cheater are original and were designed by Jules Cuesin.  nett stures wete another specialty of the hrm. Wm, Filene’s Sons (1912) in Boston, Ginbd Brothers (1927) in Phil- adeiphsa, and Marshall Field's (1914) in Chicago were all like multileveled marketplaces full of specialty shops. Inspired by the prear workd's fairs of the period, all were microcities, bur chey were microcities for women where cussomers could lunch with frends. linen two music, buy steamship oe theater tickers, send a telegsam, and shop tue hawschodd goods, furniture. of clothing for the whole family. Filencs’ was cuentially a loft building, wath ane Roor stacked atap another. but for Marshall Field's, Anderson had a new conception of the disposition of the interior spaces. Instead of simply using horizontal loft spaces, he inserted three large vertical spaces in the stecl-cage support systeri: 3 six-story urban square, a | 2-story arcade, and a four-story restau- ant. the Walnut Roum. Gumbeb’ invorporatcd a new version of the 1%th-century galleria on its ground floor, luring in cus- tomers by combining the advantages of a street with the advan- tages of a covered roof. Each store was endowed wath a cenrral space so that the subsidiary spaces could be organized in a mean- ingful relationship. As in an ideal city, destmations could be  reached in a logical manner: once there were waiting roams and 
first-aid stations, and co this day the ensembles still seem to lend themselves to courtesy, salety, art, enrerainment, divenity. and an inexhaustible supply of gonds from all aver the world  The high architectural standards of the firm were also used for the design of light manufactorics. fof. and other industsial buildings, such as Western Union ‘Telegraph Campany (1919) ot the Butler Beothers Warehouses (1913, 1922), both in Chi- cagu. Len-eapenuive buikding materials were med, and omament was simplified or orderad fealy-made fram a catalog, Well- Proparioncd, well-made, and workountike in their strong sim- plicny, these burdings stiff have the digsuficd aur of a carpenter in well-pressed coveralls. Exceptions to the rule for uufitanan structures were the firm's power stations. The Crawlord Avenuc Generaung Station 11925) in Chicago is a palace of industry, distinguished by rhythmic massing, textured brick cladding, art terra-cotta architectural detail, Machinery dictates che dimen- sions. proportions. and arrangements of a power station, but the architects used every device at their command to endow the building envelopes with imposing character, The State Linc Generating Station (1929) in Hammond, Indiana. for example, has a trumphal arch entryway, implying, ax their Qient Samuel Lnsull sv doubt believed, that victory and clectricity were syn- onymous and using imagery befitting an emperor of industry.  “Throughour his Greer. founder Ernest R. Graham and his partners tried to preserve what wat valuable in the architeceutal traditions that they had inheriued while embracing che bes chat new discoveries (c.g, high-specd clevatars and berter firc- proofing) had to offer. Constantly, they had to respond to pres- sures from clients and to an ever-changing economy. They were successful partly because Graham (like Bumham before him) had grasped the imporance of operating an architéctural office as a big business. Pow firms were able to handle the binge, com- plex. multifunctional structures that required a specialized staff of more than 200. [1 1970, Edward Probst’s awo suns, Marvin and Fdward. Jr., sold che firm co William Surman. Srill using the traditiunal name, today the firm operates on a amaller «ale under the direction of his son, Robert E. Surman (1967 ).  Savy A, Kit Coiarrris  Biography  Espest Grabam  Bom in Lowell. Michigan, 22 August 1866; son of a general carpenter. Learned carpentry and masonry from father. Worked, Holabied and Roche. Chicago 1886; assisvant chief of convneuc  tion, with DH. Burnham, World's Columbian Fxpesition 1893, Chicago. Partner. D.11. Burnham and Company, Chicego 1894-1912; partnes, with Burnham's sons Flubcrt and Daniel Je.. Graham, Burnham and Company, Chicago 1912-175 past  ner, Graham, Andenon, Probst and White, Chaago from 1917. Died in Chicago, 22 November 1936,  William Pierce Anderson  Born in Oswego, New York 1870, Bachelor of asts trom Harvard University 1892; studied electrical engineering, Johns Hopkins Univenity, Balumore, Maryland; master’s degtce in engincering: degree trom the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, Paris 1899: Grand Tour 1899. Chief designer. D.H. Burnham and Company, Chicago  1900; pastner, (.H. Burnham and Company, Chicago 1908~ 12; partner. Graham, Burnham and Company, Chicago 1912~ 17; partner, Graham, Anderson, Probst White, Chicago from 1917, Died in Chicago, 1924,  Edward Probst  Bor in Chicago 1670. Son was archicect Marvin G. Probst. Worked for Peter 8. Wright. Supervisor, working drawings, D.H. Burham and Company. Chicago 1893-1912: partnet. Graham, Burnham and Company, Chicagn 1912-17; partner, Graham, Andcnon, Probert and White, Chicagy from 1917; be- came head of fiem after Graham's death in 1936, Died in Chi- cage 1942,  Howard Judson White  Bora in Chicago, 2! February 1870, Deafuman, D.H1. Burnham aml Company, Chicago 1898-1905; Graham's axsneant, in chasge of letting contracts and supervising construmtion, D.H. Burnham and Company, Chicago 1905-1912; partner, Gra- ham, Burnham and Company, Chicago 1912-17: partner, ham, Anderson, Probst and White, Chicago from 1917. Died in Chicago, 18 December 1936.  Graham, Anderson, Probst and White  Starred a8 10.11. Burnham and Company, Chicago: became Gra- ham, Bumbham and Company, Chicayp after the death of D.H. Burnham 192; became Graham. Anderson, Probst and White, Chicago after Hubert Burmham and Danict Burnham, Je. left to found Burnham Brother 1917; lasted until Graham's death in 1936, when Anderson became bead of firm.  Selected Works  Unson Stanon (Anderson), Washington, D.C, 1907 Willum Fuene’s Sons Drpustinen More, Boson, 1912 Butler Brothers Warchowes, Chicago, 191.4  United States Post Office, Washington, 00.0. 1914 Mandal Field's Department Store, Chicagu, 1914 ‘Wester Union Telegraph Company, Chicaga, 1919 Fecld Muscurn, Chauge. 1919  Butler Brothers Warehouses. Chicago, 122  Wrighcy Building, Chicagss, 1924  Cramtonl Avenue Generating Season, Chicago, 1925 Union Stanon, Chaage, 1925  Gimbel Brother: Department Store, Philadelphia, 1927 Koppen Bailing, Prrsburgh, 1929 .  State Linc Generating Sution, Hammond, Indiana, 1929 Civic Opera Building. Chicago, 1929  Shedd Aquarnum, Chicago, 1930  Cleveland Ternunal Groop, 1930  40th Surcet Station. Philadelphia, 1934  Selected Publication  The Anbusectural Work of Grahura, Anderan, Prelst, and White, Chacago, 2 vole, 1933  Further Reading  Chappell, Sally A,, “Beaux Aro Architecture an Chicago.” Indene Architect, 24 (October 1980)  Chappell. Sally A. "As If the Lights Were Always Shining: The Wrigley Buihting ar the Boulevard Link,” in Chicago Archisectary: 1872-1922, edited by John Zukowsky, Chicager Art Insciture of Chicago, 1987; London: Pressel, 2000  Chappell, Sally A., “Urban fdcals and the Dengn of Ruilrusd Stations,” Tibwolegy and Cudsare, M) cApeil 1989)  Chappell, Sully A., “The tquitable Buikling in New York Reconsidered,” forrnal of the Society of Archircraral Hinoran, 4 (March 1990)  Chappall, Sally A. Archeievture and! Planning of Graham, Andenon, Probst, and Whee, 1912-193 Pransferming Tradition, Chicago, Univerwty of Chicago Press, 1992  GRAIN ELEVATOR  A grain clevator is a granary set on end of clevated in wih 4 way that requires a lifting apparatus of keg to fill it, Granaries date to anriquiry. but the grain devator a: a modern invention, it appeared first in Buffalo, New York. in 1843, and shorty alter throughout the upper Midwest of North America, Phe earliest were built on the edges of rivers, canals, and the Great Lakes, and with the advent of the railroad they hecame ubiqui- tous, The cylindrical, reintorced-canctete grain devator was an innawation that appeared ac the end of the 19th century, and its type is will being constricted. Grain elevators can now be found throughout the grain producing regions of the world, bur until the carly decades of the 20th conuury, the larger of diese  |  were exclusive to the United States and Canada. Images of tall cylindrical bins, usually seen in randem with dozens more equally unhuarian, captured the imagination of eady modernists, such as Le Corbusier and Walter Gropaus, who marveled ac their size, function, and geometry, all rendered in concrete. To them, those ananymous geotnettic farms anggeseed a lasting sense of beauty and monumentality.  A distincdon should be made between tceminal clevator: and sountey clevators, The earliest and Largest were terminal cleva- tom, so named hecauve they were located az the receiving end ol waterway of railroad lines from which they gathered grain sent direcely from farms or country elevators. Buffalo was the easternmost terminal of the Great Lakes and connected to the industrial Northeast by means of the Erie Canal. As such, it became a point of eransshipment for freighters and canal boats. The volume of grain passing thraugh Butfalo in che carly 18005 imeeased each decade, and the grain elevator was invented as a structure to alleviate the borteneck af supply and demand confronting grain dealers. By dhe middle of the 1th century. Cleveland, Chicago, and Milwaukee, among others, became grain terminals as well,  Fram the outset, grain chevators were lange because of the economies and profit af bulk purchase and storage. Terminal elevators of 100,000- bushel capacity would grow to 1,000,000  J. Hartingion and Co., Grain Elevator and Office, La Salle Counry, Menois, «1892  Photo © Histone Amerikan Logineering Recotd/Uheary of Congres 
bushels or more betore 19H). The earliest were constructed of heavy timber set on masonry piers. The tremendous weight ex- ented on the piers was spread to a foundation mipported by timbes pelings driven below grade into the spongy wut of water- front locations. ‘The heavy amber above the pier supported wooden bins of square cross: ection, the botiome of which were like inverted pyramids There bins were Lid up in crib constr: tion: dimensioned lumber laid fat, one piece on tap of another, and sptked through. Above the bins were shed roofs and usually a clerestury with gable roof containing a headhouse of distabution floor. In profile, these carly elevators were carher hike attenuated Christian baslicas. where grain bins filled the nave and nde aisles.  The leg used to lift the grain trom the holds of freighters was an external structure, che upper portion of which was enclosed. The fower part of the leg. which could be 50 feet in length. sould be raised and lowered. The log was simply a Large conveyer bch with buckers artached and operated at first by a steam en- gine. The buckeo would lift the grain from the boat and carry it to the headhouse, where it was diuributed by chutes to one of the many bins. Chutes attached tw the bottoms of the bine and projecting frum the extemal wall above the slip ne shoreline conveyed the grain to smaller canal boats of railroad cars, Coun- ery elevators differed! from verminal elevators in size and organiza- tion but otherwise were similar in appearance. The principal difference resulted from operatiun. Whe ley of hese smaller leva tors was intemal, rising [rom 3 bascment of boor where grain was dumped from farm wagons and then lifted to ube headbuuse and dismibuced to bins as earlier deseribed. None of the carly timber terminal clevatars survive, bur the rimber-constructed enuntry elevators, which are usually dad in galvanited sheet iron, continue wo be seen in small towns and railroad crossings as symbols of agsiculraral dominance,  Cylindrical bins assoviated with 20th-century clevatons and captured in the induscrial landscapes of artists such as Charles Temath and Charles Sheeler are conmnacted largely of ecin- forved cuncrete. Cylinders betece accommodated the fluid behav. vor of bulk grain and created fewer structural eccentricities. Moreover, a cylinder requires Jews material pet volume chan a parallclogram. However, before concrete waa employed, iron plate was rolled ince curved sections and riveted together. ‘The eatlicst instances appear w borrow frum the design of standpipes, which predate the construction of steel water towers. Among the more famous of these iron-bin clevacors were the Great Northern, Railway's elevators in Duluth, Minnesota: West Superior, Wis- consin; and Buffalo, the batter of which was built in 1897-98 and continued in use until the 1980s. Ube problem with iron bins was manifold. Condensation easily formed affecting grain on the inside and causing corrosion an the outside; metal oon- ducts clectricity, and grain dust is highly exploive: and the ex- pense of fabricated components of such large scale andl number discouraged its use. To mitigate these drawbacks, the Great Northern's bins were enclosed in a masonry shell, Masonry, and particularly tile, became an alternative tv iron in the construction of cylindrical bins, and the carliest tile-constructed elevators apy peas us the 1890s as well.  An cxperiment if Minneapolis, Minnesota. un 1899 would transform the appearance of grain clevatots. Frank H. Peavey, a grain dealer. and archiect Charles F. Haghn designed a cyin- drxal concrete elevator using a slip form to pour the concrete.  “The cylinder was reinforced with wrought-iron houps, bedded into the material during the pour. Similar hoops had been used as an external reinforcement in stave-oonstructed wooden supply tanks used to replenish stcam locomotives. After 1900 the ex- posed reinforced -conctete clevator dominated. Despite difficulty in supplying sufficient quantities of concrete ta job sites depen- dent on rail and then elevating the mix by crane as slip forms reached 10 feet ot higher. the new system of constuction tquickly became dominant. Concrete provided greater thermal inaulation co protect the grain and was less expensive when em- ployed tn large-male construction. Jou S. Garner Further Reading Banham, Reynet, A Concrete Andante: US. industrial Building and Enrepren Modern Architecture, 1900-1925, Cambridge, Massachusetn: MIT Pres, 1986 Dan, Joreph, “The Geran Elevators of Buffalo,” Pruveediegs af the Buffale Hurerical Society. | -2 (1879-80) Mahur-Keplingcr, Lisa, Gram Elrsuten, New Yurk: Mrinucioe Arctuteccural Press, 1993 Wiley, D.A., "Operauon of a Modern Gran blevaus.” Aagineening Magazine, 23 (May 1902)  GRAND CENTRAL TERMINAL, NEW YORK  New York, New York  Engineered by William J. Wilgus; designed by Charles A. Reed, Allen H. Stem. Whitncy Warren, and William Wetmore; completed 1913  Built at che beginning of the 20th century, Grand Central Ter- minal (1909-13) at 42nd Street berween Madison and Lezing- ton Avenues in New York City sraddles ewo epochs. fr is one of the greatest examples of Beaux-Arts architectural planning in North America. At the same time, it is technologically one of the mont advanced works of carly 20th-century architecture and a powerful influence on carly modernism in Exrope. Antonio SanwFlia, for example, used Grand Central Terminal as the model fur his raitway station desipn (1914); the design of the transportation node at Shosen (1931-35) in Siockhole, Swe- den, might also have been influenced by it. As late as 1935, the architect Le Corbusier could still call it "a marvel”  ‘The present station is the third on the ste. In 1867. the calway magnate Cornelius Vanderbil: consolidsued the Harlem Line (covering southern New York State) with the New York Cenzral Railroad (with tracks to Chicago) under the nase New York Central and Hudson River Railroad and built a unified terminal, Grand Central Terminal. Its architect was John B. Snook (1815-1901), As rail craffic increased, the building ceased wo be adequate, and in 1897-98 4 new train shed was built by Samucl J. Hucked, fr. (1858-1917), with artificial stone mucco work designed by Bradford Gilbert (1853-1911). Yee the reno- vations did not sddress urgent functional problems. The Park Avenue train yards were unsightly and dirty: crostown traffic was hindered by sprays of smake and ash that crupted onto the street from just below the street level. Following a railway acci- dent early in 1902 in which 17 people were killed. the State of New York passed legislation banning stcam engines on the entire  idand of Manhattan: electrification became the driving force foe a bold new Grand Central Terminal.  The key figure in this transformation was the engineer Wil- {iam J. Welgus (1865-1949), Already a 1899, he had proposed parual electrification and in 1901 had argued that the whole line should be electrified. After the acntent, he prepared a “port- folio of suggested preliminary plans.” ‘The most important inno- vation was clevtrification, which would allow trams to make an underground approach and discharge and receive pauengen in an underground train shed. To save lateral space, crains would artive and depart on two vertical levels: a suburban gation below and a national ttation above: through trains would be accommo. dated an a double-fevel consimecs lnop of track that encitded the sation. Wilgus foresaw a multiomples of station and tain yard, hotel, offices, restaurants, aod stores standing aver the old train yards and underground tracks that would give “a distinctive and monumental appearance to the entite project that will prob ably make st the most attractive lovaliy in New York.” Other parts of his plan included an clevated tuadway to surruund the station, connected on the north to Park Avenue over the de pressed yard and on the south by a bridge across 42nd Street. Inside. he planned ramps “on casy gradients ... down co the train plattorms ... Elevators and... casy stairways... up ww the carriage concourse where vehicles are in plain view af the  Grand Central Teemmnal,  passengers and under cover.” Wilgus s visunary plans formed the basis tue the new Grand Centeal Tertninal.  A henited competivon was hekl in 1903 based on the Wilgus plans. Entrees were invited from Stantand White (1853-1906) for McKim, Mead and White: Daniel H. Burnham (1846- VOL2i Huckel; and Charles A. Reed (1857-1981) and Allen H. Steny (1856-19311, who were declared the winners, Like so many compentions of its era. however, this one was tainted by favontism: Huckel was Wilgus's associate on the earlier Grand Cenueal projeet, and Charles Reed was his brother-in-law. but to confound the results completely, William K, Vanderbilt, grandwa_ of Cornelius and the chairman of the board of the New York Central, detided that his coun Whitney Wasren (1864. 1943), in parmenship with William Wetmore (1866- 1941). who had not even entered the cumpetition, ahould reurive the commusion. In the end, Reed and Stem and Warren and Weemore were appointed associated architect and. with sme difficulty. collahorated on the project. Construcuon began io 1909. There were rwo major aboveground elements to the plan a built,  The central ticketing hall is known as the main oncourse. Its design was based on the forms of an ancient Roman barh, Although the Hoor was marble, che wails were sheathed with Caen stone. an artificial some. Ar the west end of the concourse,  spective drawing by H. M. Pettit of onginal pln, New York City © Muscum of the Cary of Now York Pant Archies 
Jeading up to Vanderbul Avenue and the tat stand, was a grand Mailvase; a sturcase tv the cust was not built (although 1 has been added in the restonuun by Beyer Blinder Belle of 1999), hae clearly marked carts led to south, west, and cast. Tu the south side were the ticket windows, and along 42nd Street was a kage waiting rouin. Between ticket windows and waiting suom were ramps that led to the suburban level below. The ceating was decorated with the constellations of the aursmn night shy (October ta March): by accadent. the constcllanons were painted backward. The main concourse remains the greatest indoor secu- lar space in New York Ci  For early modernise, however, the mast exciting part of early Gand Central Terminal was the integration of the various levely of transportation into one huilding. Not only were there uibway service and nwo vertical lines of cain traffic, but a fying upper level roadway encircled the uation.  Fos all its modernity, Grand Cental Terminal has many of the virtues of a inlid piece of late Victorian induarial design: tuggedly practical, as in the cranking system that opens and choses the windows in the cast and wee double placed walls. It is characteristic of Grand Central that its architects made exten- sive use of fireproof ules by che Gaastavino Company with thet tough-edged textured surfaces karly plans for Grand Central ‘Terminal show an art gallery and an ant school in the upper-level towers on tbe south side,  Garand Cenwal ‘Terminal was abo an advertisement fur che New York Central Railroad. Contemporary newspaper reports make «clear that the untenor ramps were one aagn of modern efficiency as well as a way to make the building friendly to women and their bong skirts, The Eeening Suet February 1913) noted, “In dhe buikling of the new Grand Ceattal Terminal woman played a highly important part—nort in the actual work, however, bur in the intlnence she exerted over the archuccets and engineers, They had her coastantly in mind a they planned every imporanr and minor item whose purpose was the conve- nience of the New York Central's passengers. It was she who was responsible for the elimination of wepe: man made seps, and ever since woman has had to climh rhem excepr ar the Grand Cenrrat, where she has caused chem to be abolished.”  Ti was the peculiar gift of the early 20h century to combine, at times, modernity and tradition so deliberatcly and so fcar- lessty, Working in a universal style like Beaux-Arts classicism provided a certain confidence; ie principles really can he adapted to the mast advanced problems of the times (mus transpurt) and incorporate che most advanced aleas (electrified rail service).  Today, Grand Central Lerminal can be sen in a form dose to the original pkins, As rail tallic lessened following World ‘War I, the main concourse became lirtered with advertising, and the great east window was blocked, Following the demolition of Pennsytvania Scation un 1962. unly heros efforts saved Grand Cemural from the wrecker's hall, All ches changed in 1995, when. the Metropolitan Transportauon Authuary and Metro-North, the suburban rail company chat operates the building, undertook abrilliam restoration (completed sn 1949) directed by the archi- rectural firm uf Beyer Blinder Bette.  NIGHOLAS Arvanes hee ahe Railroad Station Further Reading  Adams, Nuala Ritania del Grand Conrad termanal, New York MN reveaute detla unodkerna dears,” Capabedlt, 661 CNusember 1298]  Belle. John and Maxine Leighton, Gnemd Central: Gasriony sa Midhen Liver, New York: Norton, 2000  Comulie, Cael, Tar Port of New York: A Hastory af the Rect ama Terminal Sprocin foom the Geand Central Elecwrificassen to the Preveas, Chicge Univerncy of Chivagn Pre, 1981  Powell, Kenneth, Geand Central Terminal Warrea and Wetmore, London Phandna Pres, 1996  Schlichting. Kart © Grand Gowinel Terminal: Railroads, Engineering, and Anhitecrure in New York City, Baltimore, Maryland: John Hopkine University Presa, 2000,  GRANDE ARCHE DE LA DEFENSE  Designed by Johann Ono von Spreckeben; completed 1989 Paris, France  Uhe Grande Arche de La Défetne, designed by Johana Otto von Spreckelsen (1929-87), was completed just in time for the second centennual of the French Revotuuon. It forms the western termination (known as “Tete Défense") and the third errumphal arch of Paris’ so-called Rawal Axis. which stretches eight kilom- erers from the Grande Louvre co the businew district of La De- ferse. Von Spreckelsen chase to incorporate this complex histor- ical and urban program intn a design that is at once evocative of ahistorical past and reepectful of the arubetic. and technological ambitions of then: Preskdent Frangois Mittctrand’s program of the grands praject, of impoctant peajects meant to embody the civ, and economic achievements of contemporary France.  Johann Otto von Sprockdsen was virtually unknown ouuide his native Denmark at che time he won the competition for La Defense in 1983. His selection was even more surpeising given his relatively modest architectural produvuve: his own house tust outside Copenhagen (1958) and a handful of modemist churches. A well-respected academic, von sen directed the architecture department of the Royal Academy of Fine Arcs in Copenhagen. However, it was van Sprockelsen's demeanor rather than his résumé chat won him the respect of Mitterrand and the popular press. It was hoped that the archivect’s sincerity and modesty would translare into a sense of Nordic hummaniam in the contest of the concrete plazas and glass towers of La Défense. Midway through construction, however, in July 1986, von Spreckelien tendered his resignation because uf constant and contruversaal budget and pengram moditications that effectively transfornved the Grande Asche from 4 major public work into a speculative office building, Aldsough he visited the site several times after this date, the architect's death in 1987 prevented him from seeing the completion of his Paris monument.  In accordance with the guidelines of the commission. van Spreckelsen selected a French associate, Paul Andreu, a graduate of the Polytechnique known for his designs of airports. This arrangement ptoved convenient for von Spreckelsen. who there- after acted as the auteur of the project, working from Denmark and forwarding his conceptual drawings to the technically adept Andreu. After von Spreckelsen’s resignation from the project, Andreu saw the design to completion.  The Grande Arche is a massive 110-meter-high steel and teinforced-concrete cube. Because of practical considerations, the cube is offset six degrees relative to the historic axis. The “posts” of the structure contain offices, and che “lintel.” or & sais, houses the main public spaces for exhibitions and shops.  ‘The raised ground level of the cube 1 a pubbe plaza—the monu- mental centerpiece af the project. From thes plaza, a glcamung, frecuanding clevator shaft ascends wwant the top plarform, and a synthetic canvas “oud,” suspended by steel cables and inland with glass disks, covets the plaza and semes to humanue the scale of the looming cube. ‘This suspension structure was amodi- fication to von Spreckcisen’s original plan. which called for a structure made purely of glass and steel.  Von Spreckeken met the historical and acsibetn challenges of ‘Vere Detonse with a void, or what he preferred tu call “window to the world.” At the time his visionary design was taking shape, this optimistic symbolism seemed entitely appro- priate, for the building was intended 10 house not only the Min- istry of Town Planning and Housing as well as che Mimstry of the Environment but also 4 new International Carrelour of Communivation—a kind of moder agora for the eachange of Progressive teas un industry and technology. ‘The latter organiza- Wan was never formed, and thus the crvic aspect of rhe space was greatly compromised. The hollow frame was abso meanc to open, both literally and metaphorically. the possibility of further urban development beyond La Défense to the wee,  The Grande Arche forms the third and by far the largest of the criumphal, of commemorative, atches along the Ruyal Axis, the others being Charles Percicr and Pierre Francois Tcénard Fontaine's Arc dt Carousel (1807) and Chalgrin's Jean-hrangois tmagistetial Ary de Triomphe (1806). Perceived as a cube, the  structure is symbolic, turning ast dues the fast link in an urban chain of simple geomette: volumes along the Rival Aus, begin- ning with LM, Pei's Louvre Pyramid Canather grand proer being constructed sintultancuusly wath the Grande Arches and includ- ing the obelick in the Place de la Concorde. Mare aflusively, perhaps. the evocation of the Philehan solids connects the Grande Arche with a French rationalist tradition suetching trom the 7thaentury philosapher René Descartes to Le Corbusier. Symbolism of a cocmological significance is included in the de- sign in the form of asrrological eymboh inlaid into the marble on the top platform of the cube, co the design of Jean-Picire Raynaud.  Stylisically, the arch manages to transcend the pulemics of postinodent hustoncisms venus Lae modern fuoctionalism (pre- sumably unc key to i success in the comperitian). The design fulfills its symbolic dury as described previoudy and samulunse: ously forms a harmeunivus vuinporent of the postwar functonal- tst buildings consututing La Défense via its frank exposure of concrete and clean goomernes free of applicd ornamentation. OL equal importance is the privileging of che monumental aspects of the ste: the arch borh creaces a public space at its hase and frames erriking urban vistas,  The district of La Défense has long been in the political and urban consciousness of French officials. “The historical impor- tance of the site. well as the puliticdl aspects of devclopment within Para more genetally, ensured thar campleting a project  View looking upward from the plaza, Grande Arche de Ta Defense Paris (19d), by fohane Orta von Spreckehen  © bow 
on the Royal Aus would not be easy. Another conaideratzon ance the 1960s, was the graceful recontextualizanon of La De- tense itself—a business district bunk during che 1990s and 1960s, to the designs of Hemant Zchrfuss that indudes Per Langs Nen1s Exhibition Hall (1995). Since the ume of an invitational compention held in 1970, the weological debate regarding the Tite Defense site revolved around opening the aus to the west for further possible development of terminaung the axis with 2 more dosed campaupon. For better or worse. it was Mitter- rand’s determination to open the axis and the resources that he devoted to the grands projets that resulted in von Sprecketscn's visionary, albeit compromised, design.  Laney D. Bsns  Ser abv Nervi, Pier Luigi (Italy): Pei, LM. (United States)  Camino de Broadbent. Glora, “Johan Orta san Sprecketen: La Grande Arche, La Défense,” Architectural Dengan, 621 21992)  “Canopy Scructure: Tere Deteroe Cube,” Arvhriects Jomenal, [W012 {19891  Chushn. Franguis and Virginie Picon-Lefebvre, La Grande Ante de La Defer, Paris: Electa Moniivur, 1989  Courviau, fear-Picite, La Grande Arcbe. One von Spreckehen, Paul Aadbrn, Paris: Edivom de Demi crack, 194  Mangin. Daved and Gerard Monnet. “ta Grande Arche dle La Deferise.” itn deteature dAnzourdebut, 252 11987)  The Déjeme 1983, Concours international An bisecture, Pann. Theces Monicour, 1984  GRAVES, MICHAEL 1934- Architect. United States  Michael Graves is a leading twenneth cenmury archirect and de- signer whose deawings, huildings and produce are notable for cheir manipulation of archetypal form into highly abscract, figus- ative compositions, He is especially interested in responding the scenes and practice of everyuay life with designs that can be univenally undentood while rapaunding so ste, program and convert with a degece of sensitivicy that has often cluded his  nm,  Ome of dhe su-ualled “New York Five” (along with Peter Esscnman, Charks Gwathmey, John Hejduk, and Richard Meict) Graves gained recogninon in his carcet at a relauvely eatly age throug) 4 meeting of the Conference of Architects loc the Study of the Environmenc (CASE) held at the Museum of Mader An. New York, n 1969, The work cahibred by these five archnects at this meeting led to the publication of a seminal book, Fire Archuects (1972). Iramorialized as the progeny of “The White Gods” (Le Corbusier, Walter Gropius, Ludwig Mics van der Rohe) in Tom Wolfe's Hrom Bawhaus to Or Howe (1981). these five were inked by a common interest in both reviving and resmterprering the forms. cypically painted white, of the moderniat architects, Le Corbusier and Guiseppe Ter- tagns. This debbeeae focus on tore constituted a radical break from the contemporasy preoccupation with technology as the guiding force behind modern anhitecture, Graves, however, is the one member of the group whose work introduced figural  © Pashall/Tayior Phoso. Courtery of Mi haet Graves anid Awwrciaecs  form and color to this mannchramy: a wavy shape painted bluc made reference to the sky while 2 terra-cuita rail suggested a downess co the earth,  Along woth his penchant for using color to refer to the nacural environment, an interest in Cubist painting led Graves to con- cencrace on the detign of surfaces and elevations, an approach thar had all bur disappeared with the Modemis, movement. Intenducing dassical mosife in an abstract, collage-like manner, with a variable palette, Graves established a new identity for himself that was much more painterly, based on the history of architecture and strongly concerned with the relationship be- ween building and nature.  While in Italy in 1978, Graves became increasingly preoccu- pied with the rustic simplicity of the Mediterranean landscape— its topography and colors, vernacular barns and farmhouses. It was during this second stay in Italy thar Graves developed an even keener appreciation of Classical and Renaissance architec- ture that be would apply to his own work in highly original ways.  Tr 1980 Graves achieved instant international fame with his winning entry for the competition to design a new civic building for the city of Poritand, Oregon (Portland Public Services Build: ing). Fornaking the neutral glass curtain wall of late moderniam in fava of 3 colorful cloak of cladding that reintroduced che hierarchical composition of classical buildings, he brought a new  and unexpected image tv the etherwise ubiquitous glass box of the American city.  Following this tow-de-force, an avalanche of highty visible commissions poured into the Graves atclicr including the Hu- mana Corporate Headquarters in Lousville, Kentucky (1982), the highly controversial unbuit schemes foe an extenuon to the Whitney Museum of American Am in New York (1985-87), the Dolphin and Swan Hotels ac Disney World in Orlando. Florida (1987), and the Disney Corporate Headquarters in Bur- hank, California (1986), All of these peojects employed a similar colossal scale in thew design while addressing the wlient features of their locations. The Humana Building defines the Louisville skyline with an enorinous buw-front sky porch overlooking the city and the Mississippi River while its base responds to its mid- tise neighbor. ‘The Whitney proposals made Marcel Becuer’s 1966 building just one clement of a much bigger three-part composition. The Denver Central Library in Colorado (1990) has enjoyed a grear deal of visibiliry and asccess as well, mathing the jhrtine of the ciry with a giant ceown of copper-clad truss work,  More recently, Graves’ design for the scaffolding of the Wash- ington Manumene Restoration in Washington, 1.C. (1999) af- forded him the oppornuniry to distill his ideas into a ringle iconic gesture: revealing the cucnce of the building through a magnifi cation of scale and representasion in that it can be read from a great distance for what it is—.imple and powerful wone coursing.  Graves continues ta test hit own knowledge of architecture and design chrough teaching and working closely with his as00- ates, many of whom are former students. By adtoidy synthesizing the programmaric logic and figurarion of histoncally-hased ar- chirecture with the compositional devices of abstraction and wale variation associated with modernism, Graves has etab- lished himself 2s a major figure in ewenrieth century architcerure.  CHRISTIAN ZapaTkKa  See ako Diswey Theme Parks; Eiscaman, Peter (United States); Gwathmey, Charles, and Robert Siegel (United States}; Museum of Modern Art, New York City; Pordaad Public Services Building, Pordaad, Oregon: Poumodera- ise; Stern, Robert AM. (United States)  Biography  Bom 9 July 1934, Indianapolis; educated at the University of Cincinnati and Harvard University before winning the Rome Peize in architecture 1960; subsequently studied ar the American Academy in Rome 1960 62; began teaching at Princeton University 1962, New Jersey (currendy Schirmer Professor af Architecture). Established practice 1964, in Princeton, New Jersey with satellite office in New York City. Anhicect-In- Residence, American Academy in Rome 1978. Recipient of nu- merous awards and honorary degrees including the Gold Medal from the American Institute of Architects, the Brunnee Prize in Architecture from the American Academy of Arts and Letters, the National Medal of the Arts from the Nagonal Endowment for the Arts as well 25 numerous state and nanonal awards from the American Instinute of Architects. Fellow. American Inststute  of Architects, a member uf the Amencan Academy of Aru and Letters and serves on the Board of the American Academy in Rome, of which he is a Fetlow.  Selected Works  Hamelmana House, Fors Wayne, Indiana, 196?  The Portland Hudding, Portland, Oregue, 1980  The Humans Buiding, Lourville, Kentucky, 198)  (Cha Pegase Winery and Rewdence, Napa Valley, Califurnas, [984  Sotheby's Apurinent Tower, New Voth Ciry, 1985  The Disney Company Corporate Headquarters, Burbank, Cabiforma, ORG  Walt Disney Wark! Dolphin Hotel & Walt Daney Woeld Swan Hotel, Orland, Florida, 1987  Federal Triangle Development Suc Campentian, Washinpoa. D.C, 1989  Peover Central Labeary, Denvet, Colorada, 1990  Selected Publications  “The Necessity of Drawing: Tangible Speculaoon.” Arrhisectural Deuge (June 1977)  *A Case fot Kigusative Atchitectuce." i Michael Graves Buldings and Proyce 1966-1981, edited by Karen Vogel Wheeler, Peter Atselt and Ged Bickford, New York: Rizzol, 1981  Bleteer, Rosemarie U Laag, “Abour Graves,” Stytine (Summer 1979)  Cal, Petst, “Towards a Phstadiat Archicostute,” Progrerase Archuecture (Pebeuary 197 5)  Colquhoun, Alan, “Feum Brivalage to Myth: Or How ww Pur Humpry Dumpey Together Aga.” Oppesitions 12 (Spring 1974)  Finan, Peter, “The Graves of Modersustn,” Opperitions 1? (Speing 17H)  Fine Architert: Firman, Graven, Guathery, Hejdck, Meser, New York Wittenborn, 1972; acw edition, New York. Ouford University Pres, 1975  Frompeon. Kenneth, “Free Anchiteces.” Latics fatermational (Echruary 1975)  Gandcleanas, Mana. “On Reading Atchitecsure.” Pregerssive Archraccnere (March 1972)  Goldberger. Paul, “And Now, an Architricoral Kingdom,” the New York Temes Magazine (10 Ocrober 1982)  Goldberger, Paul, “Architecture of a Different Calas,” The Nar York Tomer Magazine (10 October 19821  Graven, Michael, “The Necessity of Drawing: Tangible Specolanan.” Architectural Design (June V9771  Graves. Michael, Mechae! Graves, edited by David Dunster. London: Academy Editions, and New York: Riezali, 1979  Graven, Michacl, Michael Graver Bueldings and Projects 1966-1981, echted hy Karen Vogel Wheeler. Prrer Arnel], and Ted Backford, New York: Ragzoli, and Londan: Architectural. 1982  Graves, Michacl, Michael Graves Butldings and Propecss 1982-1989, evhted by Karen Vogel Nechols. Patrick J. Burke. and Carohac Hancock. New York: Princetan Architectural Press, and London: Archnecture Desagn and Technology Press. 1990  Graves, Michael, Mechee! Graner Raridings and Project: 19°90 .94, edited by Karen Nahobs, Fisa Burke, and Partrck Burke. New York: Ruzzoli, 1995,  Huxtable, Ada Louise, “A Unified New Language of Design.” The New York Timer yl? May 197%)  Jencks, Charles, Thy Language of Pont-Modern Archetecture. London: Academy Edinons, and New York: Kurzoti, 1977, Gch edinon, 1991  
Jencks, Charles, “Abatrau Repteseniation.” Arcitretural Dogs, 58 Be ea  emis, Charles, Aimp of Infinase Space, Michael Greve and Frasck Lepd Wright, Londen Avadeiny Falcons, atl New Yoth: S¢ Marine Pres, 1984, revecd and enbarged edition, 18S  Joedy. Wilkam H., “Aedsulis Moxtern 6: Uhe Architecture of Michad Graves,” The New Crrareaan (October 1983)  Papademettion, Perce, “Haue Not So-Eary-Picoes,” Pragresire Archeectwre (March 1950)  Stern, Robert AM, New Drrvetions in American Anchetertire, Landon: Studi Vita, and New York: Brasillee, 1969; revued cdivon. New York Branller, 1977  Stevens. Susanne, “Semantic Disunctinas.” Progrewine Architecture tApnl 1975)  Valusi, Manfredo. ‘Five X Five-Twenty-Five.” Opporitiens 5 (surumer 197%}  Vidadas, Pilar, “Full Carcle,” Progresiee Archetertare (September 1984)  Zapatks, Chetan, “Michacl Geaves. the Media and the Making of Meconvmas Architecture.” in Michadl Grave, Selereed and Current Wart, by Michael Graves, Mulgrave. Vacsoria: Images, 1999  GRAY, EILEEN 1878-1976 Architect and furniture designer, England and Ireland  Tilern Gray directed her remarkable integeation of architccrure, furnishings, and textiles to address the modern individual's need toe physical and psychological comfort, qualities that were fre quently neglected in the carly 20th-century quest for innawative form. Through a relauvely stall nuenber uf buildings and won jectural penjects, Gray oftered 4 significant challenge to heron. ideals of dhe modern movement. Because her archizecnure drew ‘on the ideas of her avant-garde contemporaries, tt was both admired by her peers and forgocten in histoncal accounts af rhe modem movement.  Born ito 3 wealthy family in Enniscorthy, treland. Gray studied drawing ar the Slade School in London and the Ecole Colacossi and Académie Julian in Paris. She sewed definitively in Paris in 1906 after raining in Asian lacquer techniques with a London firm specializing in antique revioration, After estab- lishing her reputation as rhe first European designer co adapt traditional Lacquer techniques to modern Wester taste. Gray apened her own decorating shop. Jean Dever (1922), where she displayed her furniture and carpet designs. The simpticaty of her foems and her interest in cxphoiting the sensiaal impact of materi- ah brought Gray's textiles and lacquer fusnishinyy w the atten- Guo of the Parnian avant-garde. Het approach was both unprec- edented among decurauve arusts and influcntial for her subsequent pursuit of architecture.  In 1926, Gray began a six-vear collaboration with Romanian architect Jean Badovici (1893-1956) that led to her independent involvement in architecture. As editor of the influential perindt- cal L architecture vinance (1923 - 33), Badovici was an enthusias- tic agent fot the modern movement. He encouraged Gray wo cake up architeccure, introduced her to the works of the major European designers, and collaborated with ber on several build: ings in Vézelay that have heen ateributed inaccurately to hie alone. The carly issues of 2 architecture visante were Gray's text- books. providing fertile territory for hes intial architectural spew ulation, Whereas her Liequer inserion were motivated by the  sensual luxury associated with the French decorative arts, Gray derived her subsequent architecture from a critical engagement with contemporary approaches to the modern dwelling in which she distilled ideas from Le Corbusier, Adolf Loos, and the advo- cates of De Stijl. among others. Rather than begin her designs from a uct of theoretical precepts declared in a manifesto—an approach adopted by her more polemical counterpars—Gray challenged the all-encompassing claims of such examples of con- temporary theatizing by adapting » selective combination of modern movement tenets to address the occupants’ physical, psychological, and spiritual needs. This refiance on certain lead- ets of the architectural avant-garde was a necessary corollary to hes creative work, however. By working within che framework of certain modem: movement spatial devices, such as Le Corbusier's “Five Points of a New Architecture,” in her early buildings and prokcts, Gray sought 10 overcome the dehumanizing qualities frequenuy associated with abstraction by engaging the subjective qualities of experience. After initiating this approach in her inde- pendent House for an Engincer (1926), she exploited it more fully in the small vacation hou that she built both for and with Badovici an 2 remote tite directly on the Mediterranean in Roquebrune-Cap Martin (1929). She named the villa *E.1027°—a cipher fur the authors’ intertwined initials (E).B.G.)—reflevting the collaborative niature of the undertak- ing. Geay eabibited the models of the house and iss furnishings at buth the 1929 Salon d’Automne and the Union des Aristes Moderns, the latier a dissident group of designers of which she was a founding member. She articulated her intentions in a dialogue with Badovici thar he published in a special issuc of F architecture vinanse devored to the F..1027 villa.  Giray’s focus on che kinesthetic. ractile, and sensual porential of architecture and furniture in both F.1027 and che Paris apart- ment that dhe renovated for Radewvici (1931) wae unprecedented in modern-movenent discourse. It derived fram her interest in merging ats aspiruive for luxury emanating from the French decorative aris wadition wath the liberal social ams of the archi- tectural avant-garde. Wich her own vaanon house near Casreflar (1934). Gray abandoned overt references to the wark of her contemporaries while absorbing certain modcenist design princi- ples into her own valucs and expression. She named the house  Vempe 3 Pailla. cinng a local proverb to allude to the marurarion  of her ideas over rime, In companson with E.1027, Tempe a Palla is less of a showpiece: it is more compact and introverted, tailored both to Gray's tendency coward intimate and minimalist forms and to her solitary way of life, The Castellar houre also had a more explicit sncial agenda: tts minimal dimensions and spatian ataterial qualities impart a degree of reality that is not evident in ber peeviaus work,  During the 1930s, Gray began to address the broader social implications of this approach in a series of hypathencal proposals for publx beaure facilities, including her Vacation and Leisure Center (1937) and Culrural and Social Center (1947). Whereas her private vacation houses provided bodily cumfort and served as temporary respnex from the complexities of urban life, in her conyectural civic projects Gray transformed this interest in the moder individual's physical and paychological well-being into 4 more general concern for public welfare. Rather than staring from broad sucial or political assumptions, she proposed opnions that would encourage the occupants op make choices about en-  taving Room, Compe a Pala, Castelllar, France (194.1) © Photograph by Eileen Gray reproduced with permisuon by Peter Ader  Raping her forms. This quality accoune for ideological consist encies between Gray's built work and her hypothetical dengns.  Le Corbusier was a fervent admirer of Gray's architecture: he displayed her Vacation and Leisure Center alungaide the work of his fellow Congria Inicrnationaux d’Architecture Moderne (CLAN) delegates un his Pavillon des Temps Nouveanr at che Pansian Inemauional Exposition “Ast ct Technique” of 1937, After chus brief furry of attention, Gray's work was Lirgely sg- nored uncil Joseph Rykwert initiated a reappraisal in a series of articles dating from 1968, Laie in her life, Gray received a num- ber of honors she was named a Royal Designer for Industry by the British Royal Society of Arts (19725 and an Honorary Fellow of che Royal Instirure of the Architects of Ireland (1973). When she died in Paris in 1976, Gray was 98 years old and still praduc- ing furniture.  Caron Constant  Biography  Born in Enniscorthy, County Wexdord, Ireland, 9 August 1878. Attended Slade School of Art, London 1898-1902; studied lac- querwork at D, Charles furniture workshops, Soho, London  1900-02; studied drawing at Foole Colarassi and Académie Ju- lian, Paris 1902 05: swudied furniture making and lacquerwork with Sugawara, Paris 1907 14. Antbulance driver. Freemh Army 1914-15. Proprietor, with Sugawara, lacquerwork and furnivure studio and workshop, London 3915-17; proprietor, Galerie Jean Desert, Paris 1922-30. Fira architccmral proyous, with Jean Badovici, Roquebnune, France 1926; worked in Castellaz, France 1939-45; warked in Faris from 1945. tonorary Royal Designer for Indusuy, Royal Suciety of Ans, London 1972; fellow. Royal Insarute of Ish Architects, Dublin 1973; mem- ber, Union des Artistes Modernes. Uhed in Paris, 28 November 1976,  Selected Works  Mont of Gray's extane architectural drawings and photagraphs ate in the Archive af Ary aral Deugn, Victoria and Albert Museum, Landon, additonal drawings and model ate in the Royal Insnute of Brinsh Anhrecn, Loodon; numecrous campdes of hee furroture from E1027 are inv the Censre Gearges Pompidou, Fara  Aparoment for Mme Mathicu-Leve, Pans ine longer extant), 1924  Jean Désest, Pare (nn longer extane!, 1922  Boudoir de Monte Lado, Salon des Artusses Ligcorateurs, Pans tne longer extant), 1923 
E.1027, Roguebrune Cap Martin (with Jean Hadovna), 1929  Badower House, Verelay (with Jean Baduvier, crtenircty maxtificd), 1931  Bademci Apartment, Pans (no longer extant). 1931  Tempe a Puilla, Camellar, 1934  Vauation and Leoure Center (projet), 1937  Cultural and Saxial Center (project), 1947  Lou Peron. Chaprile-Ste- Anne (Saini-Troper: extensively modified), 1961  Selected Publications  “Manon en Bord de Mer,” £ aertizecture vrrance (Winter 1929) fissue on £1027, with Jean Badorii: includes dialogue "De Peckectaiene au doute™)  “La maison minunum,” £ srchiteture daajoerd bes, 1/1 (November 1980). inset following page 64, with Jean Badurrci  “Projet pour un Centre Culturel,” 2 ervbetectune daxjourd brs 82 tFebeuary/March 1999)  Further Reading  Aalam, Pever. Eulern Gray. ArctitectiDeagerr, New York: Abrams. and London: Thames and Hudson. 1987; revised edition, New York: ‘Thames and Hudsun, 2000 (inchides lier of exhibitions. catalogue raisonné of furnicure dessgra, and extensive beblography)  Consani, Caroline, A Non: Herowe Modernism: The Archuecrure of Exleen Gray, New York and London: Phaidon Prew, 2000 findudes catalogue rascnne of archirecture and tanatanon of dhalogue “From Eclextiasm to Doubt by Gray and Badowica)  Consant. Catone, and Wilftied Wang (editors), Fires Grae Aw Architecture fer All Senses, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard Univenicy Graduase School of Design. and Frankfurt: Deutsches Archisekrur-Muscum, 1906 -  Johason, J. Stewan. Eudeon Gray: Designer, 1479-1976, New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1970; Loadon: Debret’s Mecrage, 1979  Rylkowert, Joseph. "Exken Gray: Proneet of Design,” Architectural Review. 1$2/910 (Deucmbet 1972)  Rykwer, Joseph, “Eileen Gray: ‘Twn Howey and an Intenor, 1926— 1985,” Perpecta, 13/14 (1972)  GREAT MOSQUE OF NIONO, MALI Designed by Lassiné Minta and others; completed 1983  ‘The Great Mosque of Nicno (1948-83) in Mali in western Africa was built without drawings and without an architect. It thus prondes a wonderful opportunity to question some of ar- chitecrural history's baste tenets, such as the primacy of the arche- tect and the drawn plan. A work firmly entrenched in a local building tradivun, chis huge mud-brick structure also calls into question the description of vernacular architecture as average and typical: the Cirear Mosque of Niono is cearly a stunning monument.  Work starred sn 1948 when an existing morque was deemed too small. Largely designed by master mason Lassiné Minta, his son and other members of the community assisted in building this new mosque. The most nocable feature is the dynamic facade that frone the marketplace, with its piers, crenellated parapet, and towers from which palm-wood beatnx poke into the air.  Several terms ane used to identify the style of the Niono Mosque: Djenné. Sudanese, of Dyula. “Dyciind” refers to the  most famous cxample of this type of architecture: the Great Mosque at Djenné. “Sudanese” refers more broadly to the cradi- tional mud-brick architecture of the western Sudan. (Sudan, in this case, means the lands at the southern of the Sahara. This stsip stretches across Africa. from the Atkuntic to the Red Sea. The modern nation of Sudan occupies bur che easternmost partion of the geographic arca alto called Sudan.) Labelle Prussin prefers the term “Dyula,” which emphasizes chat Islamized Mande speaker: initially created this kind of architecture.  Regarding both form and style, the Great Mosque of Niono tches heavily on the Great Mosque of Djenné. In fact, the Nicno Moaquc is at once homage 10 Djcnné and ies modern architec- tural rival. The famous Djenné Mosque itself could be consid- cred a 20th-cenrury masterpiece if there were nor such confusion fegarding 1ts date of construction, The Hjenné Mosque dates primarily to 1909, and although it is certain thar it was built using an existing architectural vocabulary, i is uncertain how much of the design existed prior en its reconstruction in 1909, That is. it ix unckear che extent to which the Djenné followed trends of created them. According to Reoul a the technique of mud-dried bricks dates to approximately aD. 400, although the original Djenné Mosyue was probably con- structed during the period 1180-1330. Eijenné, an the Niger River. was a mayor ancient Saharan trading cent. Wrieten sources by cravclers and traders cundiem that the hismeic Djenné Mosque had many of che features tat Minta incorporated into the Niono Mosque: galleries, coloanades, buttresses, and pillars.  Different scholars have derected different cultural origins for this West African archirecrural sryte. Some see an Egyptian influ ence, and at the most hasic level, the forese of columns, the hypostyle ball, does dare hack tn the ancient Egyptian pylon temples. Prussin argues, however, thar North African Maghreb influence, chucfly Mueuccan, wan more influcntial. However, she alo emphasizes the importance of the local architecuural and artisne rraditions trom which this Dyula style arose.  Uf the exact stylistic origins of the earlier Djenné Mosque are uncertain, there is no doubt that in the 20ch century the Denne building is considered the peutwrypical mosque for the region. Mosques, ancient and modern, with which Niono shares simnilar characteristics, are found in Agades, Bamako, Gao, Kong. Mopu, Segui. and Timbukru.  Although a small focal rural scitlement preceded Niono, the present city of 5000 is largely a French colonial construction. buile in 1937. The desire to build a venceal religious monument in a cencuries-ald local architectural style affirms the people's tics to the region's more distant past. The Great Mosque is a monument that stylistically dates ¢0 2 period when the present village did not exist.  A doctor trom Timbukru and the local imam initiated the Project (0 replace a small wooden mosque. A site was acquired. bordered by open streets on three sides and houses on ane side. ‘The Niono Mosque was built primarily in three stages: the initial structure dating to 1948, the first enlargements in 1955, and the completion of the project, the last phase of construction, fram 1969 to 1983. The initial mosque was a small rectangular prayer hail built as + hypostyle hall. Fourteen columns created 2 structure of chree hays by caght bays. In 1955 side wings were added, greatly increasing the width of the mosque and more than doubling che size of the prayer hall. In this type of mosque  Facade of the lang gible wall, Great Mosque of Niono Povo by Kamran Adle © Aga Khan Award for Archurecrure  architecture, the buildings cxrend in cheir width and not their length, so that che rows of worshipers facing Mecca extend as far 2s possible. In the last wave of construction at Nino, beoween 1969 and 1973, the prayer hall grew 10 7800 square fret, and an area was buik for women worshipers. A storcroom and a guardian's house were added, and 4 separate ablutions building was built. The ablutions building is for the ceremonial washing that precedes prayer. In 1983 the guardian's house was cured into a tomb foe the firss imam of the mosque. Tombs are one of the elements that can be a part of 2 mosque complex. During the last phase of construction, the entire site was surrounded by awall, in effect placing che minque within a courtyard of a larger layout. The open space between the mosque and the outer wall acts as an overflow area fur prayers, Although the mosque essen tially was finished by 1983, its outer mud Les is petiodically renewed, “The moss notable Feature is the highly dynamic gible facade (gible denotes the direction toward Mecca). A worshiper inside mosque faces the interior side of this wall and thus prays in the direction of the Islamic holy city. The three towers that dominate the gibla facade received thei final form dunng the final expansion. The center tower has four tiers. and ewn shorter thrce-tiered towers flank it. Projecting palm-wood beams give  this cype of mosque its distioctive profile. These at as scaffolding during the building's construction, and they remain for workers to ase fur the buikling’s annual rewurfacing. The mp of the facade features low pyramid shaped pinnacles that add to che building's dynamic profile. The highly articulated and lively external form contrasy with the forest af columns of the prayer hall,  This facade makes an urban gesture, for it defines the space in front of the mosque. Frequendy with mosques such az Niono, the gibla facade is che main. not the entry. facade. At Niono the central tower s the tallest, and this gives an external expression the mihrab, the prayer niche in which the imam leads prayers. Ie is focared roward the center of the gible wall. An entrance tower. a fourth tower, ix Minta's bold innavation, for it strength ens the east-west 2a, which runs perpendicular to the all. important gibéa axis. A prominent entrance tower is not a typical clement of mosque architecture, and in this case it may detive from Minta’s familiarity with colonial Chrisuan churches.  The towers and pinnacles relate to several pre-Islamic anche cectural forms, such ax grananes and ancestral pillars, and sym- bols, such as phalluses and animal horns. Uhus Dicnné styte ss che result af a web of cultural influences, a complicated process whose exact origins are unclear bur that includes indigenous practices, Idamic practices, and. most recently, trench colonul 
architecture. Reflecting these diverse influences, the building materials unclude sun-dried clay bewcks. precast concrete, metal door frames, and steel tubing.  An example of how Niono inhabits a liminal space between tradition and modemity is its incorporatian of amplified speak- en ac the cop of its central mud-brick tower (something that has in common with many mosques today), Although this might acem a discordant move by architectural purists, to community members i¢ was 4 logical response to the issue a¢ hand: the oced to call worshipers to prayer  Although there is no deubt that dhe Great Mosque of Nione was built in the 2Uch century, it demonstrates the continued usefulness of centuncs-old budding tahniques. Mediaung the demands of tradition and modemity, a local congregation and a global Islam. Nivoo is doubtless a striking addition cw the West African architccnisal landscape. Ir was hunored with an Aga Khan Award in 1983,  Mark HincHMaNn  Sve also Africa: Western Africa; Egyptian Revival: Mosque  Elleh, Nnamndi, Afran Anhite ture: Hralution and Transformation, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997  The Great Mosque af Ninna, Mali.” Architectural Review, 174 (October (983)  Holed, Renata, and flasan-Uddin Khan, Toe Contemporary Mosque Archie, Clirny, and Deagus siace the 19505, New York: Rirwoli, 1997: as Thy Morgue and the Afadern World, | seudon. ‘Thames and Hudeon, 1997  7A Majot Sourve of Cominuing [nypiration: The Greas Meaque of Niono. Niona. Mali” Archicernurad Revord, 171 (Sefeurmber 1983)  Prustin. Labelle. Hatemere- hlemic Deagn in Wot Afnca, Berkeley: Caurventity of California Press. 1986  Snrdder. Raoul, “Yhe Great Mosque at Dyenné: Its Impact Todav as a Model,” Afimar, 12 [Apre june 1984)  GREECE  In che 20th century, Greek architecture bas vacillated herween 4 desire to follow dosely the internauunal avant-garde and an effort 10 spring up autonomously from its own carth and its own traditions. This divided! quest, which crosses the interna- tonal with the Greek—as if they were two scparaic syseems— is, of course, a fearure shared with other countries and other penods. Nevertheless, the very constitunan of the new Greek state in the early 1%ch century wene hand in hand with a revival of antiquity, which had precisely this double sagniticance: it en- sured. chrough the architecrural forms themselves, the cancinua- gon of the autochthonous classical tradition and a place in the vanguard of international Neoclasicism. This was, in any erent, the chief reason why Greck Nooclasicion, transmuted by the historical influences of che late 19th century, went on into the 20th as an offical and axa vernacular architecture until the interwar year, Evidence of this is supplied by the works of Ernst Ziller (1837-1923). Anastasios Metaxas (1862~ 1937}, and other architects that sull adorn Athens and the great vanety of orna- mental and typological Features of Neoclassmim that have been  imprinted on ammynious buildings throughout Greece, Under the weight of this long duration, there was very littke room left for quests [or renewal. which in other placea developed Art Nouveau buildings.  For Cece, World War | effectively began in 1912 with the great Balkan conflict and ended in 1922 with the Asia Minor disaster. The wide-ranging restructuring of the country at the etd of a decade of war was a ompanied by social and ideological changes, all of which had a direct effect on architecture, Modem- uation was in the sir, and this did not confine itself te morpho- logical caplorations with niudels borrowed for the European avant-garde or so the mechanical equivalent of innuvation in cunstruction. Beyond or alungside these, an almost program: matic wish was cultivated fue a public architecture thee would faithfully reflect the organization of a social stare orientated to- ward education, health, and welfare. There was a parallel quest in the middle and upper strata of society for a metropolitan and, therefore, modern way of life, This pursuit found expression in the mechanization of everyday routines and the vocabulary of modern architecture. However, ar che very time that cis cum towanl the more glittering centers of Wextern culture was taking, plac. another “domestic” avane-garde identified the absolutely moderns with an undetiled Greekness that had existed before the slassical and had continued without interruption until the chird and fourth decades of the 20th cencury in che work of anony- mous builders and painters and unlewtered writers and com-  In the carly years of the 1930s, some 3000 schools were buik all over Greece. For the design aod execution of this large project, the Ministry of Education recruited the younger gencrarion, living within the vibrancy of the Modern movement. By che end of the decade, a large number of hospital and social welfare buildings were constructed: there generally followed a strict ca- tionalism chat was both funcrianal, constructional, and aesthetic. The syrtematic spread of these buildings throughout Greek terri tory did not metely implement che intentions of a modern social statc; it also disseminated its image—condemed into simple ree- «angular prisms with a simple geometric layout. large apertures, and more rarely curves and free-standing columns—inm the tradition-bound environment of small towns or the peripheral quarters of Achens, Piraeus, and Thessaloniki,  The primary school (1932) on the pine-covered slope of rca dertus, in the center of Athens, was designed by Dimicris Pikionis (1887-1968). Tes clean-cut pramaix mames, with their rectangular plate- glass windows, follow che incline af the terrain and draw attenuon to the natural Landscape through the paved pathways and the fact that the classroums extend to the flat toofs. This diffused ratiunalism nevertheless has grafted on vo tc rypologscal features from ancient Greek tradition, such as the colonnade on the southeastern side, and doquent references 0. the art of building of anonymous Greek archisecrure, Two pri- mary schools (1953) in Athens by Kyriakoulis Panayorakot (1902-82), both buile with imposing geomerry and austere masses with selected fratures on cantilever or prletis with large plate-glass windows and a rational organization of the spaces, were a striking intervention in simple working-class neighbor- hoods of limited development that gave the measure of the mod- ernization aimed at with che strictest character of Greek interwar architecture. A large numbes of important schools were also built  by iets Karantinos (1903-76) and Nikos Mitsahis (1899- 1941).  The sanatorium: and hupiuals of loans Despotopoulas (1903-92), who spent some of hi ume as a student at the Bauhaus, are developed with Mouble arciculations and an clabo- tation of the syntax thas is reminiscent of Alvar Aalto. In the case of the “Sorina” Sanatorium (1932) in Athens, he gave parucular emphasis to the simultaneously aesthetic and functional layout of the vanious needs and demands in a compowoon thar had all the basic characteristics of the Modern movement. The cencral kitchen and laundry building of the same “Sotiria” hospital om: plex (1939) in Athens by the architews Periklis (scorgakopoulos (1903-58) manifests the richest elaboration of daign up io then in Greece, on the basis of the principles of the Mudern move: ment, in a state of tual liberauon from any morphological and typological memories of the past. Also of importance were the social welfare buddings of Panes Teckepas (1894-1978).  Similar featites are recognizable in a» number of resalences and, above all, in apartment blacks in the center and suburbs of Athens, most built by Seamos Papadakas (1906~1}, Parroklos Karanunos, Panos Tzelepis. Phoukidicts Valentis (1908-82), and other lesset-known architects. Many of these architects acted as channels of communication with the Eurupean avant-garde. and some of them had sudied in Paris. Ir is no accident that the fourth congress of CIAM (Congres Internationaux d'Archi- tecture Modeme} in 1934 vbuse Athens as in symbolic point  Byzantine Muscum (1978-1993). Thessalomki by Kyriakos Krokos Photo by B. Louizalis © K Krokos archnve  of reference. Many of che modern buildings ut Athens attracted the attention of the delegates and were publuhad in the berter- inown Gemun. French, Briash, and Italian archwectural peri- odkab, and Le Corbaser signed bis compliments on the walls of at keast two of these, (be reverse is abo important: that the attraction and influence that the radial ideas and the physical presence of the disringusshed delegates exerted on students and the youngest architects—for cxample. Geanges Candilis 191 3- 95) and Consmantinos Doaadis (1913-75) —was considerable. The parallel interest an Greckness and she unsultied anony- mous architecture af the land of the mounciia regiom of Greece and in the effectively modern revival of the ancient found fertile ground at precisely dhe sane period and often through the work of the same people, including Dimiuis Pikionis and Panos Teelepis. They saw nu vontradiction in the double dimen sion of theit quest. Nut was this, of course, cxclusively a question. of architecture, as umilar cros-ferilizations can be sen in che dance of badora Duman and the crivcal work of Christian Zervos and in contemporary painters, writers, and musicians. World War Il was a determining event for the Greeks: chey had fought from the very list momenc and had endured a harsh occupanon. The end of the war proved the starting point for a covil war thar lasted until 1949 and gave an altered meaning to the 1950s and 1960s. Greek identity, as a field tor architectural explorations and constructs, Inst a great part of the aesthetic dimension of the prewar period and yave capreniun lo a will  
for scli-determination im compurative isalanun from the ideas of international modernism. Pikionis emerged as the ideological leadet of the young atchitects who recognited in the Landscaping of the hills of the Acropolis and of Philopappus un Athens (1957) the best version of the moderti Greck vision, Genuine fragment: from the passage through time of Greek archieecture are poets. cally composed into a network of pathways that culminate in a lire chapel and a pavilion with a view of the Panthenon. At the same period, but on a different wavelength, Aris Konstantinidis (1913-93) cultivated a structucal and. above all, rational inter pretation of the Greek carth and the simple buildings that had sprung upon it, which he transcribed into an architectural idsam with extensive influence down en the end of the century. Under the nution of genuine modern architecture, he gave a new inter: pretauion to the aestheue and moral rnth of materials and archi- tectural forms, combining in 4 creative mannct international ranfored woncrete and hewn stune frum the site of the building iuelt. The holuay homes and the sctics of Xenta stare horels that he designed in the period 1958-67, the Icading examples being the Xena of Mykonos (1960) and the houses at Anavyssas (1962) and Sperses (1967), are madel constructions of an arch tecture of the summer sun and the sea.  However, the Greck artentian co a regional eradition repre- sented only one ditection. The pare ot many architects was turned to the West ot sought a forward vista liberated fromm the burden of tradition. Tn the 1990s and carly 1900s, optimism returned with « new prosperity. The houses of California met up with utopian quests of Ceneral Europe and broughe forch daring villas and similar experimentarians. Tos example, the de- signs of Nikos Valsamakis (1924—) and Takis Zenctos (1926— 77) show their intesest in new maccrials and forms, Valsamakis designed wo cypical weekend villas (1963), both in Anavyssos, that virtually take off froen dhe rocks at the sea’s edge; three apartment blocks (1953. 1954, 1955) char gave new meaning to the commonest type of howsng in Athens: and a hotel (1963) in Delphi chat created in a rational manner a very sensitive rela- onship with history and site. Zenetos designed villas (1967) that were technologically, functionally, and aesthetically weight- Jess in the best suburbs of Athens, Kavouni, and Glyfada; a strik- ing citcular school of raw reinforced conctete thar incorporates the bogs of the ancient uheater (1976) in Athens; fatories in which their industrial aesthetic was emphasized; and a sctics of unexccuted of utopian proposals, the most outstanding of which ‘was the canttantly evolving project “Town Planning and Eke- tonics: City of the Future” (1952-74).  Tn the 1960s, another generation collectively looked on mod- ern architecture with admiration and doubt; showed anterest in rugged architectural forms, vital functions, and simple clabora- ons of materials; and cultivated a relationship with the coun- uy's cukural and building values. In Greek history. these were difficult years, as the seven-year dictaroeship (1967 - 74) changed the direction of society. At the same rime. however, these prob- lems served as the catalyst that turned the eyes of many from the international avant-garde to the social aims of architecture. Greece of the 1970s and 19806 did not experience the essence of postmodemust architecture, but it did incorporate a Large part of the postmodernist critique into simple and almost underviated but solid revisions. The mast important prescice af Greek archi- tecture in the cxampley uf the 20th century, alter the interwar year, were built in there wo decades under the heading of  “critical eegionalism,” as formulaued by Alexander Tronis and Kenneth Frampton.  The mast important expression of this critical spiric is bound up woth che work of Dimitris (1933-) and Suzana Antonakakis (1938-) within the context of Atelier 66. What is effectively a reinterpretation of Greek tradivonal architecture in their work passed through the filters of Le Corbusier of the 1950s and of Durch revisionist architects of the 1960s. Simple materials and the art of the anonymous craftsman served to hold together the visible concrete The chree-dimensional and clearly expressed function and georneiry defied by light retain the feeling of the modern on 4 wale and with an atmosphere that is entirely Grech in identity. The residence (1981) near the Acropolis, the apart- ment block (1975) in the center of Athens, and the painter's studio (1993) on Acgina ate among their moat characteristic works.  Another person in this era is Kyriakos Krokos (1941-98), an architect and a painter who tovk delight in the Greek Neaclassi- cis of the 19h century, especially in its simplest, almase apony- mous forms of expression. Nevertheless, his cultural poetics bear the marks of modern logn. Uhe structure of his buildings is a skeleton of enurely visible reinforced concrete, bur the most imporant feature is the plasric elaboration. of their surface. ‘The compasition is enhanced with typological or stylistic memories frum centuries of architectural tradition in Greece. The result is an architecture of place, more ax a form and a meseage than asa structure and an essence. The Museum of Byzantine Civilsa- non (1793) in Thessalomki and a scres of residences in the suthurhs of Athens (1991, Philorheian, and 1996, Fkali) bring uut the logic and the eruth of the cuntempotary construction, on the adge of a mannerises, while they forge: sothing of the diachronic presence of the past.  In the late 20th century, the conscous participation of Cireck archiceaas in the global community represents just a sinall reflec- Gon of broader quests thar emphasize localism as a point of antersectiua between Greece and the rest of the world. These two poles define che contemporary identity of a counsry defined proudly by ins difference from and its identification with the most characteristic meanings of Wesem civilization.  Panavorts Tocenmaons  Further Reading  ‘The greater part af the bibbogsaphy dealing with the Greck archinncnare of the 20th century #2 written in Greek; boweves, the most important architevts and exhibition catalogues have been published in English, The mow important of thee exhibitions was held in 1999 by the Hellen Instinute of Architecture and the Deutsches Archicekrur- Muscun. In the intetrational and Greek bébliographics. muny articles have appeared, but che mou important warcer are the two bdbngual anmwal reviews — Archysrhteentiet themata; Archriecture in Greece ata) The- mata chemw § schon Design > Art in Greece —and the older bi- monthly Arrdirdtoniay  Acsopos. Yannas, and Yorgus Simcoforidis (editors), Lamdicaper of Medernuarcen. Greck Architecture, 19601 and 1990s, Achens: Metapoles Press, 1999  Archrrtsmecha themate; Architecture in Greece (1967 ~-)  Arcbvieksonck? Archecnire (1957-67) (with summaries. in English)  Aacher 66 The Archuteceure of Dinetres and Sweana Antonskakis, New York: Ruezoli, 1985  Gondaratos, Savas, and Willried Wang (editoes), Gereer, Manich and New York: Mrenel. 1999  Commantopoutos, Flindf (editor), Niew Vshamatu 1990-81. London: 9H, 1984  Fertengs, Alberto, Pigwnst, 1887-1968, Milan: blete, [09  Kentantinidis, Aris, Mrdrtn + ketaheers, Praca + Rucldengs Abilvagaea! Greck-Fagksh edition), Achent Agea Fdivuns, 198  Dhilippsdes, Demetres, Neorilenthe antutettonitt An briektowke sheoria bet praxe, 1830-1986, san anianatiee ton idealingthon epilegan ter neoelirakes bontuneras [Modern Grock Athitecnuce: Theory and Practice. 1830. 1980, as a Reflesion ut Keolagh al Carrems in Greek culrute!. Athena: Mediasa, 1984  Philippades, Demettes (editor), Spina tow 30 Mumiernt acvhitehtontke Athens, Urhan Hauiing of the “ith bilingual Greek-Englah olinon), Athens: Neteas, 1998  Pikionis, Dimiens. Desire Prironis, Architect, 1RA7- 1968 A Semumental Topegraphy, Landon Architevcsral Awocuanien, 1989  Fake: Ch, Zewetes, 1926-1977, Mtheoy Archwectuse im Greece Pres wa  Themata chorow + techmon: Deugn + Ani Geen IO? 1  GREENBELTS AND GREENBELT TOWNS  The Greenbelt movement was an American depression-cra out  growth of the alder Garden City movement. Like their predeces- sons. the greenbelt planners sought co decentralize cungested ci- tues all acrom the United States and to create new communities with a higher quality uf life. The Greenbelt movement wat insti- tutionalized within President Franklin Ruvsevelt's New Deal as the Greenbelt Town Program, spearheaded by Rexford Guy Tugwell (1891-1979). and administered by the Rescttlement Administration (RA).  The Garden City ideas chat inspired Tugwell were Lagely developed by Lhencrer | foward (1850-1928), 2 social reformer in Britain who had abo lived in the United States, Howard's garden cities were new settlements located some distance away from the central city, separated from it by 3 5000-acre “green- belt” containing farmlands and linked to it by train. Howard's idea was tn re-create all of the residenual, sovial, commercial and industrial facilites of the cental city in the new commani- ties while avoiding urban cqualor and related ill, Vhis would be accomplished partly by timiting them to « manageable size (32,000 people an 1000 sizes) and partly by the inclusion of many gardens, parkways and public greens. Howard's garden cities were funded as cooperative ventures, with the residents receiving a share of the returns from increased property values, Among the more successful and famous cxamptes are Letchworth and Welwyn, both outside London.  At the same time, the United Sates already had a number of “garden suburbs” — planned communiacs such as Riverside, Mlinois chat were built near existing industry, where worker: could five in a community with ample open space. The more self-contained approach advocated by Howard was fine tned in America by the Regional Planning Awociation of America (RPAA), headed by Lewis Mumford, with their plan for Rad- burn, New Jeney. Architects Stein and Weight laid out three villages in 1928, dividing cach into superblocks, with houses facing away from the street and into a park. The pedestrian and vehicular traffic were completely separated and peripheral roads terminated in cul-de-sacs. Unlike the original English garden cites, propery in Radburn was privately held. As a result, the village remained mostly beyond the reach of che urban working  dans even though ut ws ongeuily planned for a mixed income group.  Rextoed Tugwell. a Columbia Univenity eonomust and ad- visor t¢ Roosevelt, was impressed by these uleas and convinced the presatent that the Federal Government should be involved in this process of making livable communines ourside the urban core. The communities Tugwell imagined were similat in philos- phy wi the earlier ganien cities. with one major exception: vis- tually every step of the process, from building design and con- sructun to tenant selevtion, was to he conducted by the federal government, who would own all of the property. Tugwell saw hunactf as organizing an inevitable migration out of the urban wore; o11ce this ptucess had proceeded [ar euugh. the abandoned dums could be torn down and redeveloped.  Tugwell ukimately cavisioned 5000 of so greenbelt towns across the counury: for the intial project he sdenufied 25 cides and recerved approval teom Congress for only tive, Three of these were ulrimarcty developed: Greenbelt, Maryland (outside Washington, DC}, Greenhills, Obie Courside Cancinnasi), and Greendale, Wisconsin (outssde Milwaukee). The RA was unable m purchase any suitable land for a project outside Se. Lou, Minoun. and another in New ferscy was blocked by legal action brought hy che township in which ic was to be locared, who feared the loss nf property tax revenues (che federal government is exempt from property axes). In physical layout, che three greenbelt towns gencrally followed the Radburn model, with superblocks separation of pedestrians and automobiles, open spar, and small, bocal corumercial centers; 10 this approach they added space for local industry. The thice communitics were completed and openod w residents in 1937 and 1938. Federal policies allowed the twas to remain imdusive of a wider income Spectrum than previous actempts, although the RA openly cr- cluded blacks from the 1owns.  The Greenbelt towns faced difficulties from the ouset, Their construction ran far over budgee. Industry was more difficule to aturact than expeceed, Disagreements about community manage- ment began carly, as residents began to resent the top-down control over so many aspects of their lives, Rising national senti- ment against the “socialism” of the New Deal caused the end of the Resettlement Administration in 1938, within a year of the communitics opening, Ownership and management of the towns was transferred 10 the Federal Republic Housing Agency (FRHA), then transferred again four years later we the Federal Triblic Housing Authority (FPEIA). The rapid economic growth of the post-war years rapsd and the resulting rise of suburhaniza- uon and automobile ownenhup scaled che fate of the commun- ues: by the med-1950's they were lice different from the sur- rounding sca of commuter suburbs,  The federal government in the 19505 sold off the towns. Greenbelt, the largest of the communities, «as sold to a coopera: tive housing association chat is srill in existence and chat has kepe much of the original plan intact. The ociganal stement wat placed on the National Regiter of Historic Places in 1980 and rehabilitated with federal funds, in 1997 it was named a National Histor Landmark. Greenhills was abo wld to a co- operative housing association and Liter te private ewnen: they hive managed to maincain some of the gecen space atuund the prignul village, and ulus village was also placed on the Nauonal Register in 1989. Greendale. huwerer. was wid te private inves- wr immediately and has loa mow of its orginal green space. 
Few of the original families remain in any of the three. and the villages pow have no mote in-town jobs or community faciliues than ather suburbs of comparable size,  ‘The rmporiance of the greenbele movement comes not from the success of the three towns, bur from the inspiracion che movement provided to future projects. Among thew are the postwar British New Towns, which took their physical plans toore directly from Howard, but adapted the centralized federal approach that anty the Greenbelt towns had taken thus far, New generations of new town planning in the United States. from Columbia, Maryland to the present New Urhaniem movement, rely on the Greenbelt cuperiome to understand what aspects of design ut policy may ut may net be successful. These new mavements gencrally turn to the private sectar for development. unlike the greenbelt towns. but do adopt other clements such as pedestrian orientation, commumty facilities and spaces. and socioeconomic integration as their comerstanes.  MaNoH CHALANA  See the Garden City Movement; New Usbanisn  Further Reading  Amwold. fowph L.. fae New Dual en tie Suberbe A Hissory of the Greenbels Town Program 1935-1954, Columbus: Ohio Stare Unaversity Prew. 1971  Rader, Stanley, Vesomsrrs and Planner: The Crandon Cary Movement aad the Modern Communizy, New York: Oxtord University Press, 1990  Chestensen, Cand Ann. Phe Aimersctn Garden City and the Now Towns Movement, Ann Arbor. Micugan: UM] Research Press, T9R6 .  Hall. Peer Geotlrey, Cine: of Tomorrow: Aa Insellecenal Hostory of Urban Planning and Deugn in the Twenuseth Century, Oxford and Cambridge, Maxauhuseris: Bochwell, 1996  Osborn, Fredenc James, Green-Belt Citic, New York: Schocken, ine  GREENE AND GREENE  Architectural firrn, United States  Charles Sumner Greene (1868-1957) and Henry Mather Greene (1870. 1954) are appreciated today as wminal architeces of the American Arts and Crafis movement in the early 20th century, Fur a furtunate few, they combined the Iraternal syen- beosis with foimal training w create houses and complementary furnishings of artivic beauty and meticulous craftamanship. Their secondary education at the Manual Training Schout of Washington Uamversity (1884-88) taught them the fundamen- tals of sruachine-tool making am! woodworking. They audied architecture at the Massachusetts Insticute of Technology from 1888 ro 1891 and lates apprenticed in some of the finest Boston firms in practice ar the ome. Beginning their practice in 1894, their first houe designs were uninspired. but within a few years Greene and Greene were known for dwellings that harmonized with the topography and imate of wuthern California. The Greenes believed that success as classically trained architects in a remote comer of the countey meant rejecting «Lasivism, ‘The warm climate, relaxed lifestyle. and rugged Landscape ol the te-  sort town of Pasadena demanded it, as did their own creative umpubss, As studens and apprentices, they had witnesed a ois of academe and progressive architecture that had posed mean- ingful theoretical quesiuns but that did not necessarily offer appropriate answers for building in California. They realized. too, from their younger days ac the Manual Training School of Washington University in Sr. Louis, thar their work should be done with care and precision. Adhering to these simple tenets — looking beyond the dictates of history, profiting from the best examples of contemporary architecture, and executing work to the highest wandards—succenfully sustained the Greene and Greene fiers for more than 20 yean. Ulimazely, however, it was the brothers’ strong fasmifial bond that sustained their collabara- tive genus and made possible the creation of excepiunal works of anand craft.  Charles and Henry Greene were well mauhed yet utterly different. Charles tended toward a critical, artistic, and searching intellect. whereas Henry's approach to life was methodical. pre- cise, and more dependable in a traditiunal sense. These tenden- cies were their strengths, and so it is not surprising that during their profesional years sogerier, Heary was on to run the office while his elder brother petmarily caercised his prodigious design creativity on the jobs at hand. Charles pro- cessed daily stimuli into a parucular artistic vision — rocks ma streambed. recs on the landscape. and images in books of far- away temples and cliffside castles— chat contributed to the firm's unique aesthetic. Hlency organized and transformed his brother's visions inte practicas form. allowing Charles to respond to his muse undistracted. As their success in architecture grew. they became more free ta choose cients who were willing to take tishs and spend large sums of money to create houses of spectacu- far beauty and perfect craft. Actistic exprenion of structure was the basis of the Greenes’ design philosophy, and beautifully grained wood was their Favored mevtium. Numerous species, including Honduras mahogany, Burma teak, California red- wood, and Oregon pine, were shaped and smoothed to create houses with a sensuous. sculptural quality. Ther designs boldly drew attention ro structure by prominenuy articulating nmbers and joinery. They did nox abandon applicd ornament, but ci ther did they allow wt to avertake the expression of rationality and structure. ‘The contractors and craftsmen who worked with the Greenes. mast notably Peter and John Hall. were held m the same high sandank ro which the architects held chersclves. Nothing was spared in che quest co make whole their vision of beauty.  Best known amuag the Geeencs’ houses [all uf which, save one, were built in California) are the Robert R. Blacker house (1907) in Pasadena, the David B. Gamble howe (1908) in Pasa- dena, the Charles M. Pratt house (1909) in Oni. and the Wil- tiam R. Thorsen house (1909) in Berkeley. Each is formally distinct. yet fully charactenstic of the classic Greene and Greene style, The Blacker house is the langest of these, its vast interior spaces meant co reflect and complement the more than five acres of grounds (now cubdivided). The Gamble house was given somewhat more modest proportions, but its extensive use of exotic hankwoods amt leaded art glass put it in che same carified class as the Blacker house, The clegant rusticity of the Praut house speaks more of a Japanese country inn of an elegant version of  Drawing for Gamble House, Pusadona, Califoinia, by Hety amd Charles Greene © Historic Americans Buildings Sorveytl ibrary of Congress  the Adirandack “camp.” transported ta the idyllic Ojar valley. The ‘Mhonen howe followed a different cypology. being one of the Greenes’ few dwellings that reflected pedestnan-onented patterns of fe int an urban setting. Sometimes misleadingly re- ferred to as “ultimase bungalows,” rhese four houses stand as the most eloquent expressions of the Greenes’ careen together and mark excellence in the American Arts and Cratts movement. They were known also for beautiful and finely crafted furniture thar was designed 10 complement their hous. Vhe Greeney’ furniture was praised hy the English Arte and Ceatta architect and designer (R. Ashhee as being “quite up to “the| beat English crafernanshap.”  After moving wah hus family ta the bohemian encbive of Carme-by-the-Sea in 1916, Charles Greene began a radically different phasc of his life thar ulumatedy served to teprove him spectacularly as an arciuéarchitect in a clitttop dwelling in stone (1918-22) for D.L. James in Carmel Highlands. bts romantic site, massing, and use of materials make it more of a sculpture than a work of progressive domestic architecture. After Charles’ departure from Pasadena, Henry was more able co explore bis own design talent. even as he upheld the expected legacy of the firm's earlier work. The adobe ranch house (1929) in Porerville that he designed for Walter L. Richardson remains Henry's great  fate career expression of his essenrially self-ctlaceng character and hus personal, antimodernist interpretauon of “less is more.” Yer, however compelling their separace works are, the brothers were at their best working together, and it was their collective creativ- tey that brought che greatest architecrural and artistic value to the cients.  Although the Greenes’ influence on other architects was not Partivulasly widespread, their influence on developers and build- ers was. The ubiquitous California bungalaw af the 1910s and 1920s was often modeled aher images of the Greenes’ work published in Chaftomen magazine, Ludicr Home Jowmal, and other national journah, Frfessional recognition of their work came from the Amenxan Insutute af Architects in 1952, long aficr dhey had set aside their drafting saols. Today, the Gamble howe. operated by the University of Southern Califoema Schuul of Architecuuse, as the only house designed by the Geeenes that is open to the public and the only one to contain nearly all its onginal, aschite-designed furnishings. In an era of masse marketing, machine-drven production, and instantaneous global comaunication, the Gamble house offers cchoes of a alower-paced soacty wheres craft and art held equal status.  Eowarp R. Bostiy  See uo Arts and Crafts Movement 
Biography  Charles Sumner Greene  Born in Cincinaaa, Ohio, 12 October 1868, Attended the Man- ual Traming School, Washington University. St, Eauis, Missourh 1883-88; studied at the Depsriment of Architecture. Masachu- sens Invitute of Technology. Bowon 1888-91, Woeked for Hi Langtord Waren and Window and Wetherell, among other firma, Boston 1891-93. Pannership with brother, Henry Mather Greenc. Pasadena. Calitusnia 1894 03: practice moved Los Angeles 1903-06; practice maved to Pasidens 1906-22. Independent practice, Carmel, California from 1922. Died in Carmel, 11 June 1957,  Henry Mather Greene  Born in Cinanaau, Oluo. 25 January 1870, Attended the Man- ual Training School, Washingron University, St. Louis, Missoun, 1884-88; studied at the Deparment of Architcuure, Massachu. seur Institute of Technology. Boston 1888-91. Worked tor Chamberlin and Austin, Boston 1891-93 then for Shepley. Rutan and Cootidge. Boston 1893. Partnership with brother, Charles Sumner Greene, Pasadena, Calitornis 1894—03: practice moved to Los Angeles 1903-06; practice moved to Pasadena 1906 22. Independent practice, Pasadena from 1922. Dred in Pasadena, Califarnia, 2 Ocrober 1954,  Greene and Grecne  Feunded in Pasadens, California, by brothers Charles Sumner Greene and Henry Mather Greene 1894; muved tw Los Angeles 1903-04; renamed wm Pasadena 1906-22; dissalved in 1922, when the brothers punued independent practices  Selected Works  Robert R. Blacker House, Hasadcna, 1907  Anure Rardin House (#1 Hogats descteyed). Pasadena, 1903 Adclade M. Tichenot Howse, Long Beach, 1904  Charles W. Hollsice House (destnnyed), Hully word, 1904 David B Gamble Howse, Pasadena, 1908  Charles M. Past House, Oj, Califarma, 1909  William Ko Thorne Hiuse, Berkeley. 1909  DAL James Howe, Carmel Highlands, California, 1918-22 Waker L Richards Hinise, Menerothe. Catifienia, 1229  Further Reading  Bosley, Edward R., Crenble Hower: Greene and Greene, London. Phaidon Hress, 1992  Bosley, Edward R., Coreen wad Creene, London; Phaidon Press. 2900  Corrent, Wilkam R. and Karen Caren, Greene md Greene Archetevt: ue the Rewdential Seve, For Worth, Texas, Amon Caster Museum af Western Ast, 1974  Maksnson, Randell |... Cermeme anid Greene, 2 vols, Salt Lake Cay. Uesh Petegrine Smith. 1977~79; volume 1, 2nd edivon, 1982  Makinson, Randell L., fieneae aid Greene, The Pasuon and the Legacy, Sah Lake City, Utah Gila Smith 1998  Smith, Bruce, Grreme and Greens: Marterworb, San Frans, Chronkbe Booka. 1998  Strand, Janann, A Greene and Gerene Gaide Paudena, Californias Dahherom, 5974  Winter, Robert (editor! Fund « Simpler Way of Lifts The Arts and Crafts Arvhitevts of California, Bethcley Univeray of Califownas Prove, 1997  GREGOTTI, VITTORIO 1927-  Architect, Italy  Born in Nowara, Italy in 1927. Vittorio Gregotti graduated from the architecture faculty af Milan Polytechnic in 1952 and worked on the editorial board of Carabella magazine from 1953 ta 1955. He was chief editor fram 1955 to 1960, with Aldo Runsi and Gac Aulenti among the editors, and was managing editor from 1982 th 1995. Gregatti abo worked for Emeno Rogen at BBPR (Belyioioso, Banfi, Percwsutti, Regen). Like Gae Aulenn, Gregotd began his carcer in 4 professional environment in Milan that combined architecture with indusnal design and other design arts. Gregot's carty work included designs for exhi- bition posters, bouk covers, showrooms, offices, aqques. but he is best known for hundreds of significant architeccural projects, including housing complexes, supermarkets, depast- ment stores, and college campuses.  The 1950s and 1960» were a penod of economic boom in Milan, with the large influx of workers providing a need for new residential housing projects. Gregosti met this demand for housing. During the 1970, his work expanded to projects fot factories and research centers. Later, in the 1980s, he also de- ugned Linge stadium compleses. During the 1990s, his office designed everything from cruise slups to city plans. During the 1970s and 1980s, Gregori became one of Italy's heading archi- tects and most influential cheonsts, paracaparing with in- fluence in two important insututions, the Venice Biennale and the Milan Tennale. He has written several books on architec- ture throughout his career. including / terrtorio dell architertara (1966; The Territory af Architecture), J srchisetture dell espressi- exisme (1967; Vhe Archicecture of Fxpeessionism), New Direc- som in Italian Architecture (1968), (Quessioni di architerrura (1986), Cinque dialoghi necesari (90; Five Necewary Dia- logues), Dentro FAnvbstenure (1991; Inside Archicevture, trans- lated into English in 1996), and Ls cutsa reribile (1993, The Visible City). Kenneth Frampton called Insede Architecture "the tem amportant book by the mow important architect, critic and intellecuual wring today.”  As an important educator. Gregorn has been professor of aschitectural composition at the University Instinute of Architec- ture in Venice, professor at the University of Palermo, and visit- ing professor in the United Stares at Harvant University, Prince- ton Univernty, the Massachusetts Instinute of Technology, and the University of Pennsylvania. He influenced architectural edu- cation and theory in Italy during the 1970s and 1980s. His work has heen the subject of important exays by Joseph Rykwen, Keaneth Frampton, and Manfredy Tafuri. It was also the subject ata monagzaph published in tualy by Manfredo Tafuri in 1982 and of one publuhed in the United States by Joseph Ryfowert ia 1995,  ‘Gregotti's carliest projects included the Room of the Kaleido- scope (1963) at the XII Trennale in Milan and onoperative housing proyecus on Vis Monregani and Via Palmanova. The exhibinon and showroom designs, such as those of Gac Aulenti, reflected rhe mimes in complex and experimental compositions “Decorative and Industrial Arex” with underlying geometric bases. For Gregotti, as he describes in his evsay in Joseph Rykw- en's Vittorne Gregotti and Ausciate, gcomety “plays a role in restoring meaning to the original and fundamental gesture of  placing, arranging ...", His large-scale housing projects com- bined an inventive usc of materials in formal. grometne compa- sitional exercises. The marenals included glass, iron, brick. siane, teera-coeta, and ceramic tiles. The same combination wax applicd to projects for office buildings in Novara and Milan from the 1960s through the 1980.  Throughout northern [raly and other Kuropean counties in the 1970s and 1980s, Gregotti designed office and factory com: plexes and rescarch centen. ‘The constructiun uf the buildings follows the nature of the auateriaks, che interior uf the buildings creates a dialogue with the exteriar, and the design takes into account the hustory of the site, As Gregomti writes, “Matcrials come froin a context.” However, the torm of the buildings always marks a clear distinction with its surroundings: there is a pro- fessed distinction berween the narural and artificsal en the archi- secture. Such a distinction is maintained throughout Gregonti’s career, beginning with the showroom and industrial designs,  Grogotti abo makes a clear distinction between what he calls “instrumentality” and “meaning,” which constitutes his defini- Gon of “post-mncial hyper-modemity.” The form and function of the building as they ate realized in 20th-ceruury wos! and seonomic conditions are divorced from “any narrative concept of the human experience.” Gregutu professes to practice a kind of pure avant-garde formalism that is removed from “suciepoliti- cal and scientific progress.”  Inside Architecture, Gregotui's first buok to be transdared into English. cxamines theores of modemism in the wake of ue deteriorarnion of the narural and buils environment caused by mass culture and public insticurions. Luring the (9805, Gre- gosti's office designed spurs complexes such as the Olympic Stadium in Barcelona, the Luigi Ferrans Stadium in Genes, and the Sports Complex in Nimex, and developed rewn-planning penjects for Florence, Arermo, Brewia. Turin. Milan. Novara, and Vicenza Gregoui sail of the stadium that it is “a cult pace foe mass society and at the same time the space where imitations of its personal and collective conflicts are played vue,” (Rykwert 1995). In the end. his buildings are stiucturcs of profound com- munication, servicing the needs of the 20th century and after.  Jorn Hinviax  Biography Born in Novara, Italy. 10 August 1927, Attended Milan Poly- technic, Schoul of Architecture 1948-52; degrec in architecture 1952. Partnes, with Lodovico Meneghetti and Giorte Stoppine, Archisctti Associati, Milan 1952. 67; associate editar, Ceatbella, Milan 1952-60; editoe, Edilizia Modema munographs, Milan 1962-64; architectural editor, / Vern, Mitan 1963-05. In pri- vate practice, Milan 1968-74: architectural consulcant, La Ri- nascente Stores Group. Milan 1968-71; partner, with Prerluigi Cerri and Augusto Cagnardi, Gregortt Associati. Milan 1974— tz director, visual arts section, Biennale dt Venezia, Venice 1974-76; coediror, Lorus, Venice 1974—presenc: director, Ras- segna, Milan 1979-presenr: director, Cawbella, Milan 1982-95; professor of architectural compotition, University Instinute of Architecture. Venice 1978 - present.  Selected Works  Case d'affieto, Novara, 1957 Raom of the Kaleidowope, XII Trennale, Milan, 1963  Cooperanve Howang in Mian, 1964  L'Unuveraté degli Studi di Palermo, Diparrimenti di Soenze, 1969— “  Resdential Buikdings, Palermo, 1969-73 with Amoruso, Reogni and Mau.  Offices and Factory, Bossi Texte, Norara, 1980  Offices and Factory, Gabel ‘Tou, Como, 1980  Readential Housng in Laowstrasse, Berlin. 1981  Sports Complex, Nimes, 1986  Ling Ferrans Stadium, Genus, 186  Olympic Stadium, Barcelona, 1988  Heating Puwes Station, Genoa, 1988  Couta Line Cruise Ships, 1996-94  Fila State ue Madison Avenuc, New York City, 1997  Lisbon Cultural Center. 1994  Readential Development in Cannaregw, Venue, 144  Beerg Pratute Gallery. Milan, 1994  Selected Publications  Uf serrapree dell architetrara, \Kb  Lierchutenura dell'apremonune, 1967  New Drrectoms in halian Architecture. translated by Gluseppitss Sabradon. 1968  Ml desegno del prodasie indussriale, fuslia 1860-1980, \982  Questions i archurettura, 1986  Cingne necenan, Five Necensry Dialogees tbilingual faban-Englsh edvien), anabacal by C. Evan 1990  Densre Uarchizestura, 1991, as inside Architccrure, uranstated by Pecer Wang and Francesca Zacchoo, 19%  ta cinna vurbile, 1993  Further Reading  Calan, Paolo, and Giovanni Vraggiaz teiliturs), Ceregetrt Anoraati, 1973~1988, Milan: Elects, 1990  Crotn, Sergio, Vitono Gregaizi, Bologna: /anichell, 1986  Frampron. Kennech, “Carta senza baudiere.” in Demar, no. 609, 148U.  Mars, Hiroenecha feditar), Coreguct: Aueciete, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1984  Rota. lula (ednoe), De Project for Calabria Untverty and Ocher Archinctaral Works by Virwrse Greguert; If Progerte per LUnwersua deile Calabrie aleve Archivetrure (bilingual Eniglich leah cdstian). Milan: Ehocta. 1979  Rykwerr, Joseph. Vistone Gregorti and Asonaie, New York: Rasol, Loss  Tafurt, Mantrodu, Visrorto Gregurts, “Archetectural Narranees,” progeres ¢ archietrare. Milan: Eloces. 19K2; a1 Visor Gregetti, “Adventures of she object” Busldings and Propet, New York. Rinoh, 1982  GRIFFIN, WALTER BURLEY 1876-1937 AND MARION (LUCY) MAHONY GRIFFIN 1871-1961  Architects. United States  Young follower of Loup Sullsvan, Marion Lucy Mahony, aod Waker Burley Griffin were major parcipans in the Princ School, who in the main practiced from the antic of the Steinway Hall office block in Chicago. Steinway Hall's designer, Dwight  Heald Perkins, Mahony’s cousin, was theie first employer, she in 1894 and he in 1899. By January L901, hoch were working 
Predenck HB, Carter Jr, House Evanston, thane OTT © Histone American Buildings Survey, Library of Congress. Washingron, IC.  with Frank Lloyd Wright in his Oak Park Seudio until March 1906, when Griffin extablished his own practice. Waker and Marion Gaffin then entered the 1911 12 international compe- ution for the city of Canberra, the new federal capieal of Awura- Ba. Inspieed by the City Beauuful movement. the winning, design consisted of a cenural triangle of avcnucs spanning a man- made lake nestled vathin a majestic hilly landsxape amd river valley, with dispersed subcenters radiating boulevards like snow- flake structures, They established Melbourne and Sydney affices in 1914 and continued to create an idiosyncratic organic archi- tecture in the United Staves, Australia, and Linknaw, India. Mahony designed Frank Lioyd Wright's fancifully abstract et pragmatic interiors, according so Arcs and Crafty taste. Com. bining characteristics of Vienna Secession drawings ana Japanese prints, she ptonceted the tendering sre made famous by Wright's two Wasmuth volumes (Berlin, 1910-11), Mahony designed the Unitarian Church of All Souls (19031 in Evanston, Ttlinow, a sparse hall with strongly textured stone walls beneath astecply pitched gable roal. “The strect clevanion featured a huge Gotha window. Smooth plaster interior walls contrasted with radiant ceiling hghts in colored glass and a delcately joined wooden ventilatwon pnile. The ordinary rimber house (1906) for her mother was plainly Craftsman. Berween L909 and 1911,  Mabuny was commissioned as architect (Griffin as landscape architect) 10 finish penjects abandoned by Wright when he went to Eatope with Mamah Cheney. Mahony designed and built Praine Schou! houses for the brothen Adolph and Robert Mucl- ler (1910, Decatur. Mlineis) and for David Amberg (1910, Geand Rapids, Michigan} as well as a long, low manson de- signed an woceetc and rusticated stune for Henry Ford but never built.  While ac the University of Ulinais, Ushana, Griffin studied che writings of Berlin-trained Professor Nathan Clifford Ricker, who had cranslated French and German texts on building con- smuction and architectonic acsthetics. During Griffin's time at the Champaign campus (1895-99), Ricker also ranstaced Orco Wagner's Mederne Archisekrur (1895), which expected thar vital modern sechitecrure would engage with new construction tech- Riques, Louis Sullivan's observation that “form follows func- Gian,” as i duey in nature, also appealed to Griffin.  fn Winght’s Oak Mark Studio, Griffin occasionally designed Wright's buildings but typically provaded reaidenual Landscape designs, He supervised site construction, controlled costs and the sclection of matenals, and directed the peactice during Wright's absences. Only then were cervain new architectural ements and architectonn. themes co appear in Wright's projects, which re-  curred in Griffin's independent pracuce. Gnifin repeated the flat roof and timber trelliswork for the Lamp House (113) in Madison, Wisconsin, in “Solid Rock” [E911 in Winnetka, Minais, a theme shared with the Vienna Secession, Griffin's house (1903) for s neighbor and fellow Congregationalist, WH. Emery, in Elmhurst, Illinain, showed massive, capped comer pire between which were white plaster walls purterned with vertical frame members, A square plan type from Late 19th century architect-designed American houses was used fur the Peters house (1906) in West Chicago, featuring a centsal fire- pice surrounded by opets living and dining ruoms in an |. shape, with a closed kitchen in the fourth quater.  In the Rock Crest—Rock Glen estate in Mason City. lowa, during 1912-13, the Griffins cecated diverse forms tor lange  in concrete, terra-corta block and stucco, of rough stone-  work finish. A similar variety in marerisks appeared at Beverly (1910-14) near Chicago for modest houses in stained timber and stucco, The sained-timber window joinery fre each Grittin house in America oc Australia war given its own distinet signa: ture pattern of vertical, horizontal, and samctimnes diagonal lines; cach fireplace opening had a distinct signature lintel, corbel, or arch. Griffin interiors were characterized by ocher-tinited plaster surfaces and caposed staincd-timbes beams and serapwork, by aplit-floos levels and intriguing pecturesque staircase routes, and by concealed electnc-lighting uougls. The architectonic cle- imenas of battcred base. random-nubble coursed senework, and chunky concrete frame uccurred variously in the Minson Memo- rial Library (1912-14) in Anna, Illinvis: in Newman College, University of Methoume (1915~18); and in houws on the Ca ecrag Estate (1921-35) in Sydney. At Castlectag, the Griflins demonstrated theis desire for urganik: integration: contour- hugging roadways and rugged Hat-roated slab buildings blended with the natural herizansal rack ewarpments and plateaus on which the Griffins restared the denuded native bush. Same of these houses were not cough textured bat consteuted of flat surfaced “Knitlock,” a vertically ribbed concrete tile syrcm with a double skin and cavity, patented by Griffin in Melbourne in 1917, This system predated Wright's Caldornia blockwork by sux years. Knideck uke-making machines wore deugned tor eas- ing s that landholders could build their own houses.  Standing cight storics. Capitol House (1922-24) in Md- bourne was constructed of smooth-shuttered reinfotced con- crete. The adjoining Capitol Theatre cinema was spanned in concrete ruce giders. The ceiling was hung with multifaceted Alhambra ited plastcework projections, with concealed col ored clecrric light globes behind; che hues of the specrnim were oycled through w that varivus crystal formations appeared to emenge and recede from view. A glared curcain-wall sytem was used for che Leonard Flouse offices (1922-24) in Melbourne.  Demolition has also revently betillen the Griffins’ brick-and- stucco Pioncce Press buildings (1936) in Lucknow. Ornamental geometries were invented lor cach of the hamboo, burlap, and plaster pavilions for the temporary United Provinces Industral and Agricultural Exhibinon (1936). Only a back-and-stucco pumping station block beside the Guru River survives. Repers- tive overlapping cubes were used in the breathtaking perspective drawing of the Raja Mahmudabad Library Project (1937), Al- though the foundation stone of the Grilling Lucknow Univer. sity Library was Lid during January (937, chix building wis completed posthumoualy.  Aber bis return trom Furope in WOT, Veright successfully belitiled the contributions to Prairie Schoof architecture by his colleagues, inchaling Perkins. Robert €. Spencer. fr. William Drummond, Heney Wetoter Lomtinwn. and the Griffins, Wal- ter Burley Griffin and Marion Lucy Mahony had been directly volved in scrunal Praic School works, such as the Darwin PD. Marin and Ward Willetts houses. the Larkin Building, aod the Unity Temple. ‘The Griffins’ competition design for Can- berta was widely published and cahibited but was never fully implemented.  Jere Tusnsuat  See abo Prairie School Sullivan, Louis (Vinked States); Wright, Frank Lloyd (United States)  Biography  Walter Burley Griffin  Born in Maywood, [inus, 24 November [876. Artended Uni- venity of UWinois, Urbana 1895 99; bachelor's degree in archi- tecture 1899, Marned architect Marien Mahony 1911. Worked for several Chicago architec 1899-1901: worked for Frank Uoyd Wright, Chicago 1901-06. Private pratuc, Chicago 1906-11; partnership with wife from 1911. associated with Barry Byrne 1913 14. Moved tw Australia: director of design and construction for new federal capital, Canberra 1913-20; parutetship with |. Surcham Clamp, Sydney, Australia 1914— 15. Private pracuce, Australia 1915-35; designed and parenced the Knitlock erstem af construction 1917: Eric Nicholls became a partner 1925 - 39: worked in Lucknow India. fmm 1935. Died in Tucknow, 11 February 1937.  Marion Mahony Griffin  orn un Chicago, 11 February 3871. Graduated with a depere in architecture, Macachusetrs Institute of Techoulogy. Cambridge 1894, Mamed architect Walter Burley Grifiin 1911. Worked with cousin, architest Dwight Heald Perkins, Chicage, worked for Frank floyd Wright, Chicago 1895. 1909; worked for Her- mann ven Holst, Chicago 1909-1), Partnership with husband from 1911 37) associated with Barry Byme 1913-14, Moved to Australia: partnership with J. Butcham Clamp, Sydney. Australia 1914-15. Private practice, Australia 1915-35; Exic Nicholls be- caine a partner 1925-39: worked in Lucknow, India, from 1955. Worked in Chicago trom 1948. Died in Chicago. 10 August 196l,  Walter Burley Griffia and Marion Mahony Griffin Partnership tuunded in Chicago P11, moved to Austraha 1915-35; moved to Lucknow, India 1955-37; diswlved upon Walter Burkey Grifin’s death 1937,  Selected Works  Freey Howe, Habunst, irae, 1903  Lamp Hose, Madiwin, 103  Nesthera Ihave Mare Necnal Shool Landheaps Plan, DeKalb, 1908  Peters threw, Chicapi, TON  Croley Haue, Monrac. Lenzuana, 108 thuilt 19260  Ralph Grillin Howe and Gri, Fabvarderille, Hlinan, 1908 
Caner House, Evanston. IHhinoes. 1411  Tempel House (Solid Rack”), Winnetka. Uhnois, 1911  Rack Crest- Rock Glen Community and Landscape Plan, Mason Ciry, bowa, 1913  Model Brick Cottage. Chicago Coliseum Exhibition, (rebuitt at 5652 §, Maplewuod. Chicago. 1913  Stim Messonal Library and Grounds, Anna, Ilinoe, 114  Blount Houses, Beverly, Chicago, 1914  Summit Estaxe, Mount Eagle Estate. Eaglenont. Melbourne, 1914  Campus Plan, Uaiveruty of New Mena, Albuquerque, 1915  Lippincotr House, Glenard Estate, Melbourne, 1917  Newman College, Universay of Mdbourne, 118  City Pan. Canberra, Austratian Capetal Verewory, 1926  Castectag Esune, Middic Harbor, Srdaey. 1921  Croydon Hills Exutc, Melbourne. 1921  Liberty Hall, Melbourne, $921  Palaw de Danse and the Valais Pause Theat Cinema, Se Kilda, Melbourne, 1922  Fuhwick House and Wibon House, Castiecrag, Siney, 1929  Haw, Benases Univeraty Worker (now Varanay Hindu Univeruty), Untar Pradesh, 1935  Lucknew Unrveeuty Extenwon Phan, 1945  Lucknow Usaversaty Library, 1935  Zenans Palace, nest Lucknow, 1936  Capmol Theatre Cinema, Lucknow, 1956  Pioneer Press Offices and Works, Lacknins, 1936  Unaed Provinces ladustrial and Agrcubural Exhibition Pavilions and Victosie Path, 1936  Lucknow University Student Union (peujet), 1937  Raja of Mahmudabad Library (project), 1937  Sclected Publications  the Federal (Capital. VS . The UP, indwerial and Agnievitueal Exdubsrien, Lacknew, 1936  Further Reading  Burrell. James. Water Burley Griffin. St. Luca Unuveruty of Queensland Press, 19-4  Brooks. H. Allen, The Prarrce School Frank Lloyd Wrogh ama bss Midwest Comsemperanici, atonte, Otani: University of Taranasy Pras, 1972  Harrison, Peter, Washer Buriey Griffin: Landscape Archstect, edited by Robert Freestone, Canberta: Nanonal Liteary of Australia, 1995  fohinon, Donald teslie, fe dectntecture of’ Watser Baries Griffin, Seuch Melbourne. Victoria. Macmillan. 1977  Maldre, Mats, and Kruty, Paul, Water Arley Griffin ov Ameria, Urbana: Univenity of IHinois Press, 1996  Peunh, Mark L, The Chesagu Schaal of Archuectare: Early Fellewer of Sudian sud Wright, New York: Random House, 1904  Sprague, Paul E. “Grilin's Beverly Buldanys, » Catalog.” Prarie School Review, VEL (LP3)  ‘Turmbatl, Jeff, and Peter ¥. Navarctn (edton|, fhe Gryfias in Australia and ladsa. The Complete Works of Walser Burkey Griffin and Marwan Mahany Griffin, Melbourne: Melbourne University Prew, 1998  Vas Zanten. David tedisart, Waker Rurig Griffin, Selecied Deugw, Palos Park, Minar: Prasti¢ School Pres, 1970  Vernon, Christopher, “Walter Burley Griffin, Landscape Archnect.” in The Midwest in American Architecture. edited by John S Games, Urbana University of my Press, 1991  Walker, Metedmth, Adrienne Kahos. and James Weinrich. Riildemy for Narerr Walter Rucley Griffin and Cavtlecrag. Caubecrag, New South Wales: Walter Burley Grittin Society, 1994  Wirlere Rurley Griffin: A Re-Virw teshib vat, Chinn, Vierona: Monash L nevertity Gallery. 196%  ‘Wasson, Anse iednoe), Beyond Architecture: Marion Mahony and Watter Harley Griffin: America, Australia. india, Sydney. Powerhouss, 1998  GRIMSHAW, NICHOLAS, AND PARTNERS Architects. England  Together with Richard Rogers and Norman Foster, Nicholas Grimshaw is credited with pioneering High-Tech modernism in Beitain in the early 1970s. Grimshaw’s buildings demonutrate the fusion of well-cempered. functional engineering and the fun- damental principles of architecture. Always understandable spa- quality materials. and detailing and show his interest in cnginecring,  Born in Londan in 1939, che son of an aircraft engineer and great grandson of Victorian civil engineer Sar George Alderson, Grimshaw claims Victorian subject painter Atkinson Grimshaw as an ancestor. After studying architecture a1 Edinburgh Unives- sity, be teansterted to the third year at the Archieecnural Associa bon in 1962. Tutored by Cedric Price, he was subsequendy influenced by Peter Couk and Archigram. He admired engineer- ing structures such as the Dome of Discovery and the Skyton at the Festival of Briain in 1951 as well as che Crystal Palace of 1851. Grimshaw’s work shares Paxton’s uarity of concept, supported by detailed and thorough development. Concept sketches invariably embody the compleve essence of the final design.  His first project, the Sussex Gardens Service Tower (1967) in London, provided anitary facilities far seudent aconmmods- Gon, Its belical form, iMlustrating Geinshaw's interest in try, wav innovative, predating computer assisted design {CAD} and involving the coordinarian of 35 specialist subcontractors. Apartments on Park Road (1968) in London, built of light- weight materials the same vear as Ronan Point was constructed tn heavy precast concrete, reveal Grimshaw's developing interest in “technology uansler.”  Vhe expanding towns of the 1970s and the advent of the business park ed co the canstructian of aczes of humdrum «or- age buildings. Grimshaw soon proved thar the simple industrial building could assume the form of a shell, capable of being altered to cuit the changing needs of users and che processes inside. The Citrutn Warchouse (1972), commissiuned to be unobtrusive, with maximum dzc at minimum cos, was the first to show a setuiniviry to landscape, occupying a riverside site at Runnymesde. The Furniture Factory for Vitra (L981) at Weil am Rhein, Germany, and the Headquanters for Edlitiona Van det Vickie (1979) continue us theme. The green fiberglass panels of the low-lying building for Van des Velde. in the Loire valley, were designed tw imitate the green plas of Vouvray bottles.  Gromshaw's belief that people should be able ro manipulate their surroundings was developed in the Herman Miller Distri- buson Centre (1982) at Chippenham. Wiltshire. which he de- scribed as “the ultimate long-life loose-fit building,” At the Ad- vanced Factory Units (1978) at Winwick Quay, Warringson, carefully detailed cladding rymems were emplayed. The potency of the clear expression that structure can give to a building i  Grand Union Walk Housing, London (1988) 2 Don BsekerA Great Buiklings.com,  Gest scen at the Sports Hall for IBM Winchester, 1980 that echoes che branches of che surrounding trces. This cttect reaches a climax at the Oxdord Ice Rink. where the structure, with its spine beam running the length of the building. hung dramati- cally between two masts, signals the chrill and eacitement at the activity inside. The Financial Tames Printing Works (london, 1988) is a building with a mare formal and disciplined approach. where the support for the roof and for the cleaning gantries is combined in one clear eystem, This apparently simple move allows the all-glam facade and reveals the printing activity within. In the Sainsbury Supermarket Devetopmene (1989) in Camden ‘Town, Grimshaw's designs come to terms with the urban con- texe Here, scale, grain, and colar point the way to his more recent, high-profile projects. The Briish Pavilion ac Expo °92 in Seville, consructed from plas, with canvas sides and a water cascade down one side. secured internarional fame.  The International ‘Terminal addition to Waterloo Station (1990-93) has hecome an architectural landmark. This comptex structure, conceived to evoke the feats of the great Victorian engineers, heralds the “Gateway to Furope.” The building com- prises four main components —a car park, which forms the foun- dation for the terminal; a two-story viaduct, which supporce the platforms; the brick arches of the original «anion thar house  services; and 4 fluenced, sweeping roof, 400 fret in length. The stnuctuee moves away from surface ariculanon woward a more prmfound interest in light and space. The 1990s have brought 2 new dimension of meaning—the technically supertative Stock Fachange in Berlin (1996), the RAC Headquarters in Bristol (1995}, and che Wester Morning News Building (1998), all demonstrating evolution and refinement. The Fden Project in Cornwall (2000), the Ludwig Erhard Haus in Berlin (1998), the Mabeg Office in Geemany (2999), Zusich Airport, and the restoration of Brunel's Paddington Statinn in Landan represent Grimshave's most recent, ambitious, and diverse work. Huan J. Ghana  See alse London, England; Rogers, Richard (England); Super- modernion Selected Publications  Product & Proven, Lotto: 1988  “The Future of Enduurial Building.” fournsi of she Repal Sovtery of Ara (December 1984:  Further Reading  Amen, Colin, Anintatiure. Indusy and nnavation The Early Work of Nuhela Cetmuhen and Parmten, Loedton: Phaidon, 1995 
Daries, Calin. High Lech Archucctun, New York Ritroh. 1988  Glancey, Jonathan. Nea Reais Archetectare, Now York, Thames and Hindson, 199  Ural, Sutherland, Fe State of Artie Acrietectare, London: Architectural Press. 1980.  Moore. Rowan feditue!, Sinactate, Spree and Shing: The Wark of Nicholas Grimihan and Parmers. London: Hhaidon, 1998  GROPIUS HOUSE  Designed by Walter Gropius: completed 1938 Lincoln, Massachusetts  The home that Walter Gropius designed for himself un 1937- 38 even today seems strikingly modern. With its flat rool: clean. boalike silhouetic: ribbon windows: and «nteracting, seemingly weightless planes, the design has an affinity with licasso's faceted analytic Cubist paintings. Gropius intended for his house ro cxcmplify humankind’s spirit, creativity, and industry. Perfectly situated within the context of the Massachuseus landscape and imate. it ts alo detcrential to local building twaditions. Ir has been hailed as the first widely accepted modern house in conserv-  ative New England.  Gropius House. ncoln, Maxarhuvetca, by Waltes Gropanis © Roger Sera E un  The history of the Gropius House begins when the German pronecer architect and creator of che Bauhaus arrived in 1937 in the United States to teach at Harvard University. where he was to redesign and mademize architectural education. in search of a house in the rural surroundings of Boston, Gropius and his wife, Ise, ended up renting 4 colonial house in the small rown of Lincola, half an hour's drive from the university. On tripe in the area, Gropius became impressed with the local domestic atchitecture in adaptng to the New England climate and re- sources. He began to sec 4 basic kinship between their practical appeoach and clean unpretentious design snd his own modern arditecture. He tater stated. "t made it a point to absorb thase feacures of the New England architectural rradicion that f found sill alive and adequate.”  Gropius's fint vommisson in the United States was to be the modest house for his awn family. Because Gropius tacked the funds to build the project, Henry Shepley, an architect on the Harvard Board of Overseer, persuaded a wealthy Linenin landowner, Mix. James Searrow, 20 commission what Gropéus’s TAC (he Architects Collaborative) partner, Norman Fletcher, lates dubbed che first unequivocally modern house in New Eng- land. She aBowed Gropius to select a aire on her extensive erty and provided the $18,000 fur the construction of the house with the understanding chat Gropius could first rene and later  Gropius Toure. Lincale, Maseachustercs, by Walter Cropass © Wayne Andrewv'E sn  buy che dwelling wich its four acres of land from her over the ye Gropius was eminently prepared to accept the ofler. For a long time, certainly since 1925, when he designed the Bauhaus facuky houses and began planning the housing development Dessau-Torten in Germany, Gropius had thought much abour domestic architecture. as evidenced in his essay. "The Small House of To-Day,” published in Architeceural Forum in March 1931, In this text he advanced his conception of a modern single dwelling, that it be of “light construction, full of bright daylight and sunlight, altcrable. time-saving, economical” and char it be Of the utmost use co it vecupants. Fle alt pointed to che avail- ability of new materials and construction methods that would allow Large expanses of glass. At great length, he enumerated the advantages of a flat roof.  His two-story house (2300 square fect) in the shape of a  .. with its broad sides north and south, sits on the crest of a small hill with a view to Mount Wachusett. Screened trom the main road by a Large apple orchard. it is caretully posnoned vo catch maximum sunlight in winter.  In 1938, the flat roof of the Gropius House caused one neigh- bos to desogatorily liken it to a chicken coop. Actually, it slants slightly coward the center (one-quarter inch per foot) for runoff of tain and melted snow into a drain that, running through  the house ro prevent freezing, leads into a dry well, The most unconventional side of the howe is its nonh facade. Coming from the driveway, the diagonal of a long marquee feads co rhe front entrance. which is protected from weather and strect view by a targe ghass-block wall, The animated juxtaposition of con- trasting materials is countered on the facade's other side with the sculprural ewinting of a large spiral staircase. This leads 10 the tecand-Alone maf terrace, where one finds a private enttate to a secund-story bedruum area.  bor the bayour uf the interior, Gropius had advocated in his $931 arricle “no artificial symmetry, but free functional succes- sion of room . . . dear separation living, skeping and housckecp- ing parts of the house.” ‘The plan af the first floor generally contorms ta this ideal. A large area (21 by 28 tet) is divided into a living room and dining room separated by a jplus-block wall fram the study.  On che south side, twu Large plate-glass windows (each 6 by US feet) and 3 all, glas door provide glonous hyht for the dining and Inving rooms. The latter even has an additional plate- plas window on the west side; these Lange expanses of glass gener- ate a constant awareness of the beautiful outside with its indige- fous birds and other wildlife. From May to September, the sauth side is shaded with a large wooden screen that projects from the 
roof and is placed three feet away from the house to allow che Fiting hat air ta esape.  The large west-side window deflects the aun by means of a heavy exterior shuminum blind that w operated from inside, The entrance hall leads straight through a pantry to the screened patio (11.5 by 23 feet and 9 feet high), which unvonventionally juts oue at right atigles from the tear of the house.  Although the design of uhe boase stands in sharp contrass to that of its colonial neighbors. its ficldstonc foundacion, netaning walls. moss of its building materials, and basic structure are che same: light wood frame, sheathed wath white-painted redwood siding. and a west-side fireplace wall of gray-painted bricks. Gropius used dapboards, the ubiquitous exterior siding in New England, vertically as inside wall cover in the hallways.  All the extuctural isems and indoor fearares, such as doors, lighting fixtures, shelves, glass beicks, and even the exterior spiral staircase, were ordered from stock catalogs. According to his wife, Gropius “wanted to prove that the mass-produced output of Anserican industry was quite capable uf producing 4 sophisti cated house of contemporary design” (sce Gropius, 1989),  ‘The use of these materials proved a ueful object leson for students of architecture. The buikler cecalled that almust every afrermoon students from Harvard came out to look at the progress of che huuse, watching and listening 1 the archivect discuss his reasons for using the marcrials that were enexpensive  In 1974, che Society for the Preservation of New England Antiquities took aver the governance the Gropius House and its Fumiture. a large portion of which was constructed in the Rawhaus, as its fire madem historic artifact. In 1982, the build- ing wae depicted on a 20-cent U.S, postage samp ax part of the American Architecture scrics, which uvduded Frank Loyd Wright's Eallingwater.  Axneursr HaRninc Further Reading Buck, Suean, "A Material tvaluaeon of the Gropius House:  Planning ty Preserve a Modern Masterpiece,” Auorutnon for  Preservatven Te Bullen, 2814 (1Y97)  Gictleman, Peres, “The Gropius House: Concepaun, Construcuom,  aad Commentary” (Master's thes), Botton Uneverury, 1996 Gropius, lie, “Hlstory of the Gropius Hose in Lanala,  Manachusetts." 1977; reprine, aa “Trip tw Making Waltes  Gropius House, Lincoln, Masachunetts” GA Houses, 25 (Match  1989)  Gropin, Wahet, “The Small House af To-Day,” Anchiseceunal  Forum, 54 (March 1931)  “Geopius House.” in SUNEA Anmual Report 1987, Boston: Savery  for the Preservation of New England Aniquities, 1988 Surnmers, Nevin, "Analyzing the Gropius House a  Energy-Camscions Design,” ALA Journal, (612 (Fleuary 1977)  GROPIUS, WALTER 1883-1969 Architect. Germany and United States  Wahter Gropius. emigré architect, whose International Style and social insight helped co define che aesthetics of the 20th century. would certamly grasp and give vital form to the 21st cenrury were he alive to see it today. The strength of Gropnus's vision  was his humanisnc ability to comprehend the essentials of the world in which he lived and to design the basic forms and meta- phon that would give meaning to thote essentials,  tn the prewar Germany that Groptus inhabited for the firs half of his life. Sigmund Freud, fellow incellectual érnigré, had defined the essentials of human life as “work” and “love.” In the contemporary milieu of Gropius's Bauhaus, one might make the anafogy of Freud's theories of “work” ta Gropius’s theories of the machine and of Freud's “love” to Gropius’ concepss of the house and housing. ‘These essential chements of life were given architectural expression by Gropius in the factory and in the housing projects for workers, respectively. Gropius modeled the total environment tor the common man, from the public place in which he toiled t the private place that he came home to. Thus, in the utopian new world of the decent factory environ- ment and the humane housing for ins worker, Coopius, t00, expressed modern man’s search for work and love.  Geropius has develuped an almost mythic, monolithic repute- tion as Founder of the German Bauhaus and functionalist archi- tect of American high modernism, bua in many ways he was a complex, contradictory man. For whereas he worked passon- ately for the causes of the proletariat, he conversely represented the dispassionate ideal of die Newe Sachlichkeit (The New Objec- tivity). Although he developed conceptual repetitive type forms for architecture, the quality of his own work was highly variable. Even Gropius had to have been cognizant thar his earty creativity was unmatched in his later life. He was a true believer moving through nurbulent times, forced from his homeland and relem- lexly driven hy politics and war, and yer Gropius prevailed where others would have fallen to dexpundency, When the Bauhaus was closed by the Nazis, Gropius moved as a refugee from Germany, through Britain, and on to the United Staces, leaving buildings and cheary behind as his legacy.  Although Gropius had been born in Betlin to a prominent intelletual and artistic family, he chose carky to identify not with the privileged but with the common man, believing that he could build a better world through archisecoure. He was 3 visionary but alse a clear thinker. Unlike many German archi- teces of the easly 20th century, Groprus was not seduced for long by impractical theories such as postwar Expressionism; he sought a cuacrete way to insegrate his humanism and his are. tf disittigonment with the ald world of arr, architecture, and socie- tal inequity brought Gropius pain. he used this discontent as a9 impetus toward a new pragmatic idealism,  Gropius fourmt hic salvation in the machine. As he moved theoretically from the carly utapianism of the 1910s into the realms af the practicable and buildabte by the 1920s, his interests in factories and maw housing were already dominating his work. Gropius joined the Deutscher Werkbund and began his architec: tural career in the office of Germany's leading proponent of toral industnal design, architect Pecer Behrens, in whose office design objects ranged from typography to factory buildings. Gropius, too, would soon arnculace the gospel of total design within the Bauhaus, the "burding house,” that was at once a school, a style, and a way of life.  ‘The Bauhaus, originally established at the confluence of fine arc and craft. under Gropius was refocused toward che synthesis of artistic design with machine production. For Gropius was a synthetic thinker, a multidisplinary agent, who felt that all the arta must be united under archicecture. The world was changing  vith indusitialization, and as Gropius understood that man might be cither degraded or uplifted by mechanization, he chose So see man as master of the machine, Machine production, not Handwwerk, was the way of the fucure tw ensure that good design would reach the proletariat, The role of the architect. as the avant-garde of 4 new civilization, was to desegn the prototypes foe the machine, and thus models of metal furniture, of light fixtures and tea sets, and of industrialized hounng were drawn at che Bauhaus workshops. Ax director of the Bauhaus, Geopius’s incention was to assemble artists and craftsmen under one tool, to ond the class struggle of artist over craftsman. Together. this unified design school, expressing Gropius’s tener of “unity in diversity.” worked toward the common goal of the creation of type foes, ar models, for the modem world, for the machine was manufacturing the future.  Many of the master whom Gropas appointed to direct the Bauhaus workshops themselves achieved major teputations in their fields, and quite of few of them followed Gropiut's path to the United States: Manel Breuer and Mies van der Rohe continue co be famous for turntture and architecmre, Herbert Bayer for rypography, Laszlu Moholy-Nagy for photography. and Wassily Kandinsky and Pauf Klee for painting. As much a dynamic group leader as an architect. Gropias always sur- rounded himsclf by an arustic onle through which he simul. tancausly helped to advance and then died on the creativiey of a wide varicty of colleagues. This cicative group effort be walled “work and teamwork.” Later in his warcer, Gropius sought so continue this pacctn of Looperative work in his anditectural partnerships, in Britain with Maxwell Fry (1930s) and in the United States with Brcucr (hate 1930s to 19405), later with TAC (The Architects Collaborative; late 1940s to 1960s), and at the Harvard University Schoo! of Design, where he was named di- sector and professor of architeccure after his immigration to America in 1937,  Had Gropius’s Bauhaus career nor heen interruperd by the Nazi interference thar forced his resignarinn in 1928, had he heen able to catty on the work of the Bauhaus, one can only speculate on the beightened state thar modern design would have reached. Had Gropius done no other wurk than the yeass he spent at the Bauhaus, had his oeuvre conuined ne other works than his designs for factones and the Dessau Bauhaus, he would he a famous architect even today. He did, however, push on, dedicating the latter half of his carcer to the design of housing and schools, warking at the scales of architecture and urban planning, The eatly years of Gropius's carece were spent coming to grips with the architecture of work. chrough factory and pro totype design, and were highly charged symbolically and aessher ically. In later years. Grupius's 4im was toward finding solutions to social problems and standardized housing, and thus acstheucs were deemphasized.  Certainly, Gropius's greatest period of architectural creativity and symbolism was his catty factory aesthetic. He had foreseen man and machine in synergy, through a utopian vision of a mechanired word. Our contemporary interpretation of the ma- chine has changed since Gropius's time, for the machine has since becn pur to devastating use in two warld wars: however. there are those who today apply metaphors ta the computer char were earlier reserved for the mechanical machine. Gropius went further chan simple rhetoric in his time, inventing symbolic form  for the machine warld through design procarypes and a series of factory designs  The fir and one of the most significant of these factories was Gropaun’s Fagus Werk (1911) at Alfckl-an-der-Leine. Here, Gropius designed the glass curtain wall that was to become 5 intluencial a theme throughout his career. fn this building, glass is used in opposition to masonry, the glass wall at once dissolving and ever present, confirmed and recontirmed via its gridded iron structure ina taut design, ‘hus, very carly on Gropius was exploiung and refining the crude cements of the Gxtory into an aesthenc comment on itself. The beauty of the factory and the machine wax understond to be inherent within cheir own elemental forms.  The Model Factory for the Weskbund Exhibition (Cologne, 1914) chows Grapius explaring his vision of the factory, here ina theuretical setting. In this context. the factory is allowed w be expansive, to be divided into its functional pare, cach func- tion in a separate form, the array of interconnected parts influ- coved by Construstivian, Sume uf these buildings are glass, setae ate masonry. and some combine clements of both. The Model Lactory is memorable for the variation in elegant form in a cumples functional plan in which cach part is a complete architectural compasition in sell. Mose outstanding are the powerful shapes of the triangular roof line of the machine hall and the cytidrnad eatruded-glass staircase.  Following the expansive design for the Werkbund Model Factory. Gropius designed an even looser Cubist, Constructivist compundon for the defining work of his fe, the Bauhaus (1925-26) in Dessau. Here. Gropias’s glass curtain wall arrains ite grearent mastery in the workshop building, a gpant crystalline waive of archiceciuce, a worthy Lot link of che German theoreti cal glaswrne Kerte.the glass chain of architecture. In the Bauhaus, Gropius played the ststhetics of plas—its transparency, cefler- tivity, and distolution against architectural oppositions, no longer against masonty hur now against the white wtcon cube of lugh modernism. [he Bauhian in plin is dynam, an asytn- metrkally counterbalanced conmipostion, What makes the Bau- haus complex so endlewly fasconaring is nor anty char it ts one of the progenitors of the International Style but also that it isa many: layeted symbol form in itself. Formally, ics a machined building, functionally, a factory for design of machine proto- types: thus, the facade is a self-referential metaphor for the work that gocs on within the structure.  ‘With che Desau Ranhaus complex. Gropius at fast had the opportunity to devign soe only the working buildings but alu the housing in a unified enemble, He constructed living quar: ters for students, Bauhaus masters, and for himself, and thew dwellings can be read as carly models of his theatics of mass housing in microcosm. In the Bauhaus complea, he was able to test the architectural theory ubat he was developing. Gropius was committed to designing the Typinerung, or eype forms for a modern socicey: the Wobnungitype, ar sandardized aparrment type. for the Siedfang. or mas housing project, based on his research into Exicencomimum, of minimum tiving standards,  Throughout his tong career, Gropius applied his theoretical type forms, ranging from factories ro housing ro schools. in Germany. Britain, and the United States, In buildings for educa- tion, Gropiov’s influence continues tu be felt in his type farms for modern echonl design in England and the United States: at Impington Village School (8946) in Cambridgeshire, in the 
Harvard Graduate Center (1949) in Cambridge, Massachuserts; and in the numerous TAC [The Architects Collaborative) xchools of the 1950s te 1960s throughout suburban New Eng: land. In housing, he is remembered internationally for mayor works, including the German Sicmensstadt Siedlung (1929) in Berlin and Werssenbotvedlung (19.27) in Stustgart, for hes Brit- ish projet for Windsor Hull Flats (1955, unbuilt plans} in Wind sor, and much beer, while fiving in the United States, for Gropi- usstadt (1955) ar the Inrerbau Exhibicon in Berlin. for which he was able to retum to his homeland to see his early housing oRKepts again constructed and justitiad by ame.  In Furope and in the United States, Grips designed nat only public housing but personal residences as well. and there works may be read as highly indrvidual xatements and memoncs of his emigrarion. The Director's Hauer (1925) at the Dewan Bauhaus and the Gropius House (1937) in the Woods End Colony in Lincoin, Massachusetts, are important works for un- dertanding Gropius. ‘The houses that Gropiux huilt for hirmelf an! his family show buch a continuity of deign and a wonuast of meaning. In design, bath are white, asymmetrical, volumetric boxes in which the omament ts inerent in the design. glass vonds against fla. white, geometne facades arxulated with latory elements. he German house, however. is 3 cool Cubist, abstract stuco, very polemical design. whereas the American house is a much quieter synthesis of the Inccrnational Style white boa with the America white wooden vernacular house, The houses, in- censely personal staccmenis, beckon us co interpret the man as well as the architecrure. The first isa confrantarion with modern- ism. the sevoad more a retlective refuge. ‘hese ewo houses stand, with his Rauhaus and his tactorics, as Gropius’s testament to a lifelong search for work and teve.  Les Howar Consare  Scr at» Bushoun Beuhaus, Dessau; Behrens, Peter (Ger- qany); Breuer, Marcel (United States); Constructiviem Caubise; Deutscher Werkbuad; Fagus Werk, Alfeld, Ger- many; Glass; Gropius Howse; laternational Style: Incerna- onal Style Exhibition, New York (1932): Mies vam der Robe, Ludwig (Germany); Werkbund Exhibition, Cologne qgot4)  Biography  Born in Kerlin, 18 May 1883: immigrated wo England 1934: immigrated tu the United Staces 1937; father Walter anal great ack Martin were atchitects. Atiended the Fiamanistsches Gyennasium, Berlin; seudied at Technische Hochschule, Munich 1903-04: appsentice, Sulf and Wichards, Belin 1903-04, stud- ied at Techniwhe Hochschule, Charlottenburg, Berlin 1905 07; traveled Eutope 1906-07. Married 1) Alma Schindler Mahler {widow of composer} 1916 idivorced): | child; married 2) tse Frank 1923: 1 chiki. Served in German Army 14-05, 1914— 18, Chief assistant to Poser Behiens. Berlin 1907-10. Private pracuce, Bertin 1910-14: private practice, Berlin 1928-43; part nership with E Maxwell Fry, London 1934-36; partnership with Marcel Breuer, Cambridge. Massachuserts 1937-41; foun der and panner, TAC (Uhe Architects’ Collaborative, Cam- bridge from 1945, Director. Grand Ducal Academy of Art and  Grand Ducal Saxon School of Applied Arts, Weimar. Germany 1915-19 (schools merged in 1919 10 become Das Staatliche Bauhaus); direceor, Bauhaus, Weimar 1919-25; director, with Ludwig Mics van der Rohe, Marcel Breus et ab., Dessau 1925~ 28; professor of archutecture 1937-52, chairman of Department of Atchitecture 1938-52, profesor emeritus from 1952, Geado- ate Schoul of Desagh, Harvand University, Cambridge. Founder, member, president 1928, vice president 1929-57, CLAM; vice resdent, Institute of Socwlogy, London 1937, honorary metn- . Royal Iasucute of British Aschitecs, London 1937; honor ary member, Ruyal Suvsety uf Arts, London 1946; fellow, Society of Industral Artists and Designers, London 1950; feltow, Ameri- can Institute of Architects 1954: honoeary senasor, Hochschule fur Bildenden Kinste, Berlin 162; Honorary Royal Academi- cian, Londen 1967: associate, National Academy of Design 1967; members. National Institute of Ars and Letters. Royal Gold Medal. Royal Insirute of Brirish Architects. Landon 1956: Grand Cross of Merit with Star. West Germany 1958; Gold Medal, American Insrinire of Architects 1959. Died in Boston, § July 1969.  Selected Warks  Fagus Werk. Alfeld-an-des-Leine, Germany (vith Adolf Merer), yn  Model kacsory, Werkbund bxhibaion, Cologne lwith Meyer), 1914  D¥irex tees Howe, Bauhaus, Dewan, 1925  Rauhaus, Dessau. 1926  Weimenhotsexdhung (two), Srumgart. 1927  Dammerstock Hounng, near Karlsruhe. Germany, 1928  Sicmenstadt Siedlung. Berlin, 1924  Ssernenstadt Distinct. Berhn (supecvsing arctutect with Barinung. Fabat, Hanng, Henmng. Scharoun), 194)  Aparments {unbuilt), St. Leonard’s Hall, Winds, Berkshire (with E. Macwell Pry), 19.59  Impington Village School, Cambrnigesbire (with Fry). 1936  Gropass toe, Lincoln, Masachunctie (with Marcel Breuer), 1997  Houang Development, Now Kingston, Peomyhanu (with Breuer), 141  Hareand Univesuty Gadase Con, Cambnuge, Masachaserss (with TAC), 1949.  Inserhau Apartmens, Retin twah TAC), 1959  Selected Publications  Programm des tsastleben Rawhancer, \OV9  Idee anid Anfistw te uaasticbon Bawhauset, 1925  Neue Arbriten in Rawbesswetstarten tedicor), 1925  imcernatiomde Architebrur, 1925  Rawhaw-hawirn, 1928  the New Architecture and the Bawhaot, 1935  Henheees, 1919-1928 vwadh Herbert Buyer and Ise Gropras), 1938  Retnudding Our Commuricees, 1945  Archerevnury and Design in the Age of Sconce, 1942  the Siope of the Tous! Archiseceure, 1956  Architektur Wege rar optcchen Kultur, LYS  Katinea Tradition and Creation in Japanese Archusecrure (erith Kento Tange and ¥. Inhimoww), 1960  The Archuece Callaboeative, 1945-1965 teduon), 1966  Vertwad City, 1908  Apolia tn the Demasracy: Uhe Culineal Oblogasion of the Archtect. 1968  Farther Reading  Cormier, Ledie Huumun, Walter Gropius, Emigeé Architect: The Tersistence of Typefiens,” Arras: Journal af the Southeast Saciety of Archatectueal Husorans, 41993)  Nesdinger, Wintricl teduorl, Jw Walter Cnoprus Archive: An Hinsteased Cottalogue of the Drawings, Prints, anad Phocugraphs in the Walter Giropuns Archene at she Basch-Retunger Museum, Harwnd Uraverithy. 4 vols, New York: Gatbind, 19911  Winglet, Hans Maria. [he Bashais. 1919-293: Weamar, Heweru, Aerkn, Bramsche: Geb1. Rasch, 1962; Ind eevised editmon, as fas Banbans, 1119-1933 Wermar, Dewan. Bertin. und die Nachtbolge ie Ubxage seu 1987, Cologne: DuMont Schauberg. 1968: Jd odivon tramlated as TA Beuhaw: Weomar, esau, Berlin. Coacage. uatalatcd by Woltgang Jabs and Masi Gilbert. edited by Jowph stein, Cambridge, Massachuserts: MIT Presa. and Landon: Cambridge Pres, 104, rd revised edition, Cambridge, Mamachuseto: MIT Plow, 1976  GRUEN, VICTOR DAVID 1903-80 Architect, United States  Victor Gruen és best kauwn for his Large-scale encased shopping, centen built in the 1990s, such as Narthland Center (1954) in Devuit, Michigan, Although 4 number of other architects participated in the development of the modern shopping mull, natably John Graham, 1M. Pa. Welton Becker. and William Wurster. Grucn espoused a particularly compelling visian af the shopping center.  Instead of serving merely as 3 place to shop, Grucn proposed that the shopping center serve a new communiry center for sub- ushan Amenca, with places for receeation, commerce. and civic activity. Architecturally, his designs favored a slick commercial moudermiam. with axyminetical plans, oulciuse spaces, screen walls, and cilasged activ stories for signage. More significant than his career as. a shopping center designer and developer was his lifelong interest in envirunmencal planning and urban ee- newal, Gruen war deeply interested in creaung new strategies for economic and social renewal for Amenca’s decaying chan centers. His strategy involved knocking down much uf the exist- ing urban fabric and building new, nuall-Lhe womnecraal and cavic centers, such as Midtown Plaza (1962) in Rochester, New York. Extremely popula: in the 1960s and 1970s, thts approach to urban renewal, as practiced by Gruen and a number of other architects and planners, resulted in the destruction af countless historic cory blocks. the displacement of innumerable residents. and in all tou many cases a failure ew produce the promised Finacial windfall for the hose city. Regardless of the ultimate negative connotations of che rampant commercialism of the modern shopping mall or the Guted social experiment uf urban renewal, Gruen had a lasting ctlect on American architecture 19 the 20ch century.  Bornan Vienna, Austna, in 1903, Grucn attended the Archi- tecuural School and Academy of Fine Ans in Vienna, Following hus formal education, he worked in the offices of architect and industrial deugner Peter Behrens, whose office fumvoned through the 1920s as a training ground for architects and design- ens interested in modernism, Behrens was an carly proponent of modemise design, and his work ranged trom architecture to industrial designs for mass production. lr is likely chat Gruen’s interest in total, environmental design (along with hes long- standing commitment te modernist forms) was develaped dur- ing this period, By 1933 Gruen had opened his own office in Vienna, whete he worked as an architect and urban planner.  This phase of his career was brought to a halt by the advance of Adolf Hitler in 1938, an eycat that prompced Grucn to irnmi- grate to the United States. Gruen worked in the office of indus. thal designer Norman Bel Geddes, who was reaponsible for the very popular Futuramu pavilion at the 1939 World's bate en New York City. In 1939 Gruen ecceived his fint architcceural vommesion in the United States with the moderrust stotetrone and intermos af Use Lederer Shop (1939) un New York City. in 1940, Gruen formed a partnership with Ebie Keummock that lasted unl 1948. By 1951, Gruen tad settled in Los Angeles and opened his own practice as Victor Gruen Associates. From 1951 to 1980, Victor Gracn Associates was responsible tor many commissions, ranging from shopping malls to Large-scale urban- renewal projets. During this time, a number of aschicects worked in Gruen‘: office, mast notably Cor Pelli, who Courthowe and Commonx (1976) in Columbus, Indiana repre- sents the logxal extension of Gruen’s carlict leas of blending cormmetual space and civic activities. By the ame of his death in 1980, Gruct’s idea had uransformed the commercial and social landsape of Amerwa’s utes and suburbs.  In the 1950s, Gruen recognized that poopic were unhappy with the increased craftic and decentralization thar accompanied commercial strip development in the United States. In ficeing to the suburbs, Americans had feft behind far more than conges- tinn anc crime—they had lose a sere of civic and social facus. Aware of the historic importance of public space, Gruen pro- posed char the mudern shopping center could fulfill all the fusns- duis of the city centers of dhe past by creating a place for the inbabiuants of suburbia to work, learn, souialize, and shop. Along with the econonust Larry Smuth. Grucu: outlined us adca off the shopping center as town in his 1960 book Shopping Towns UNA: The Planning of Shoppeng Centers. \n it, Gracn recaps the work of shopping cencer designers in the 19508 by focusing on how he desi several of his own projects to funcrion as 4 new suburban town center. He also offers advice ro the chopping center developer, from financial issues en site planning and ad- minstration. All the eamplo rly on modemint forms with open airy plazas, atiumns, and wourt surrounded by ample spaces for parking and shopping. These projects underscore the impor- tance of providing dhe visitor with an interesting environment that mighe include pedestrian sucess, fountains, and public art. Although architeccure figures prominently, che buok ako pro- vides a backdrop for signs ot a containet for public spaces, The authors pay far more artencion to the financial and practical concerns of building and operating a shopping center, echoing Ginsen’s interest in architecture and planning ac an interdisciph- fiary and collaborative process among economists, investors, de- signers, and developers.  Amang Grucn’s enany cnelosed shopping centers, Detroit's Eastland Mall (1957) illustrates many af these concepte Sur rounded by a huge parking lot. the ntall tums inward, isolating, the pedestrian from the oursde wodd. ‘The visitor is met with 3 sprawling collection of horizontal blocks masked by enlarged atncs and prominent signage. On entering the complex, screen walls protect the visieor from the outside world, and fountains and public sculpuire (he convinced che developers of Eastland Mall to spend over $200,000 on public artt provide points of focus tor the indoor urcets and squares. In all, his shopping center designs took on the trappings of peveurian cities, a theme 
Vie Commons shopping center, Cilurnbus, Indiana, designed by Victor Gruen © Parrak Bonne CORBIS  that he would cake up in urban-planning projects of the 1960s and 19705,  In ooking back at his work from the end of the 20th century. it is ab to easy 10 find fault wich the large shopping center: thae contributed to the paving of suburbia and the windswept remmants of vast urbat-renewal subcmtes that failed to rejuvenate their urban sites. AH too often, these grand renewal projects cesulted in the demolition of cntire ciey bhabs and the creatun of cold, stenic urban cores. However, it 5 umportant to reabize chat Grucn sincerely believed in the potential of pedewrian mulls and modern architeceure to rejuvenate America’s ctics and towns. He also practiced at a ume when many architeces, plan- ners, cconamises. and designers actively sought a new vison of the city chat swept aside he problems of the past. fe has pow become the challenge of architects and planners co explore other ways of reinvigorating the civic, socal, and cammercial tality of cities and towns acmss the United States.  Marui S. Ronson  See ado Pelli, Cesar (Argentina); Shopping Center; Wurster, William (United States)  Selected Works  Tederet Shap, New York, New Yask, 1939 Northland Shopping Cencer, Decroit, Michigan. 1944  Southdale Shopping Center. Minneapols. Minnesna, 1960 Midtown Plaza, Rochester, New York, 1962 The Commons, Columbus, tnduana, 1976 (Cesar Pell with Geuen Associages) The biography on Gruen is surprisingly thin, considering his relative importance to American architecture and urbanism in the later 20th centacy. He published thrre books, the fire, on shopping centers. the Larter two on urban planning, His ideas held considerable currency in the 1960s and 1970s, and Geen was an active commentator on major cents «i cides throughout the United States, writing a oumber of Acrters en the New York Fimes, amoning others  “Architecture, aulpeure; the Northland regional centet [Dectout, Machigan],” Acts and Amiitectwre, 72 (May 1955)  “Nonthland: a new yardstick for shopping center planning.” Anhitectasal Forum, 100 (June 1954)  “Piazza. American Style: Courthouse Center and The Commons, Columbus, Indians,” Progerniae Archinrtare, 57 (June 1976)  Gauen, Victor, The Heatt of Our Caies. The Urban Crass: Diagnose and Care, Now York, Simon and Schuster, 1964  Gruen, Victor, Ceaten for the Uroan Environment, New Yotk: Simon and Schuner, 1964  Geuen, Victor, and Larry Smith, Shaping Toms USA: The Planning of Shopping Conte, New York: Reinhold Publishing Company (Progresiive Aschinecrure Library), 1960  GRUNDTVIG CHURCH, COPENHAGEN Designed by Peder Vilhelm Jensen-Kline: completed  The Grundtvig Church, one of Denmark's most impressive and monumental buildings, may be said to fulfill 4 number of eoles asa wacted apace, a memorial monument. and a national yymbol. ‘The church is one of the three largest in Denmark: it lies on a hillock in a email suburb of Copenhagen called Bispebjerg, surrounded by low tenement buildings planned to conlnen Bs the church and built largely in conjuncaion with it, Some uf the architects designing the tenement houses had also been uvolved with the building of the church.  When designing Grundtvig Church, architect Peder Vilhelm Jensen-Klint (1853-1930) was inspired mainly by medieval Danish churches, such as Marie Kirke in Hefsingor and Sankt Peder in Naestved. However, the inspiration resulted in same- thing torally unique: a building that unites Danish formal tradi- Gon with an expressionistically dramatic flair, Whe church, built of light-yellow bricks, ix broadly rectangular with three naves, side chapels, 2 chancel with a crypt, and a huge tower. The middle nave is slighily higher than the side oner, but not enough tm provide 3 proper windowed clerestury. Frum the autside, only a bow wall interrupes the mofing of the naves. Luterive cross- tabbed vaults made external hurtrewes necessary, but they atc ol aslender and austere type without omamentation. Narrow and cectangular windows cnd in sbghuy puiated arches.  Gables with veracal recesses provide the church wich ts matt decorative marifs both on the side facades and on the tower. ‘The fatter is considered to be the most dramatic fearure of the church, expecially when viewed from the west. Striving enetgeti- cally upward, the tawer offers a severe nepped silhouette divided inta three parts corresponding to the interior naves and with pable surfaces striated by recesses. The narrow, vertical recessing and he stepped gable are repeated in the low, shallow porch below. The slim recesses, partially whitewashed, emphasize the upward movement, a1 docs the broad and relatively low portals, Scen from a distance, the western aspect af the tower brings a gigantic organ facade w mind. Widhin, the yellow brick appears again, used nix only in the walls but also for some of the fixrures {e.g in the pulpit designed by Jensen-Klint’s son). he entenor is otherwise ascecically bare. with no paintings. sculpture or orna- meneation, Thus. aesthetically it makes an impression auinly through the effect of its building material and 141 proportions, The color was initially disliked by the public. bur today this decision has not been regretted. as the mature of the material enhances the detuched, severe character of the buikling,  The Grundrvig Church was built in 1921-40 hy pubtic sub- scriptiva as a memorial to Nikolas Frederik Severin Grundrag (1783-1872), a clergyman and polidcian whe influence on modern Danish mentality and society has been uverwhelming, Grundig wrote songs and psalms thar ace still popular, and he was a champion for democracy. An important tool for this was the Danish folk high school movement initiated by Grundig to ensure thar the general population would be given a chance to acquire the learning nevessary for public rule. His patrioriom influenced many of these establishmencs,  Jensen-Klint, the architect of the Grundivig Church, shared Grundtvig’s patriotic ideals and was an eager advocate for the  study of traditional, national architecture, Jensen-Klint gracu- ated as a building engincer in 1877, but he alo attended the Royal Academy of Arts in Copenhagen where he studied paint: ing. He was employed full ume with the city engineering office in Copenhagen from 1890. At age 43, he received his first archy- tcctural comaussion for a town villain Helleeup. From then on he intermanientty worked a> an archricet, drawing mainly villas bur eventually alse five churches, following the ideal of the Natwaal Romanuc movement. He was much doubled by the nism in architecture, which he ascribed to the rift herween con- temporary and oki tradiuunal Danish archutecture, where the former was inspired by foreign models. Hos patriotic take on aschwevoure became an important inspirauon to younger Danish architects in the heganning of the 20th century.  The issuc of a monument over Grundtvig was introduced to the public when the sculptor Rasmus Biigehierg cuhibited a plas- ter statue of the bishop in Copenhagen in 1905, It was suggested char it should be cast in bronze and placed in a public location, A majority of Copenhagen’s intellectuals rejected his work. Al- though the staruc project was discarded, the sdea of a monument had becume rugied. ‘hus. an upen competition was announced én 1912 and it revetved 32 projeces, ranging from sculpture to architevture. Jensen-Kline. together with a friend, Ivar Benen. suggested a small memory hall with a square plan and a vaule ‘open to the shies.  The commiuce could not decide o0 a winner, 90 it ran the contest a second time in 1913. Jensen-Klint and Bentsen re- worked and enlarged their original proyect, but Jensen-Klint also submined 3 suggestion of his own: a huge rower. The saulpror Hamen-Jacobsen was awarded inst prize and Jensen-Klint and Niel Bentsen second prize For the memorial hall. The staruc was never walzed, and a number of influential people had become chamored with Jensen-Klint’s unrewarded majestic tower, and a committee was elected 10 promote and organize the building of the Grundig Memorial Church. It was decided that the tower would be erected list and that che ecw of the church would be built as the economy allowed. A large fund-raising, campaign was Lunched noi valy in Deamark buc abo in the United States, where there was much interest in the project. Eventually enough money was secured, but it teuk more than 20 years to complete the project because af a temporary lack of funding and bevause the building materia were handcrafted.  Brirt-lncsi Joransaon:  Further Reading  Hansen, Hanue. Grenderegstirteos byomeser |The Buskding Master ot the Grundtvig Chutchl, Copenhagen: 1991  Ielshak, Jens (edaor), Grandin Kirke “The Grundeng Church], Copenhagen. §  Mantrand, Jacub, Grundivels Mindekirke pas Hispebjerg {Vee Geundrng Metonal Church at Bepebyerg!, Copenhagen: 1937  Steen Petersen, Anine-Maie. Som 1 or of’ en forsaclleng om Grnnderipskinken og dens byywnesiee [An af Made of One Fabric: A Story about the Grundtvig Church and ats tabling Master], Copenhagen Gridendal. 1997  GUADET, JULIEN 1834-1908 Architect, France  Jution Guadet was admitied wi 1853 to the Paris Ecole des Beaux-Arts as a student in the atelier of Henri Labrouse and 
then in 1856 in char ot Jukes Andre, Ar the same time as be followed his studies. he entered in UR61 the Agence de srariex of the Paris Opera tthe alfive supervising the construction of the Paris Opera) under the supervision of Charles Garnier He was oe of the principal leaders of the student eevalt agaime the reform of the teaching at che Reaus-Arty provuked by EE. Vrollet-de-Duc i 1863. The following sear, after winning the Furst Grand Prix, he left for Rome. On his return. he devoted almort all the rest of his life to his waching and to the defeme of the architectural profesiun, building very litte: bs wo mem: orable achievernents were the construction ol the Central Post Office (1880-86) of Paris and the reconstruc ton of the Theatre Frangais (19001, He was named in 1471 head of the official atelier of Simon-Claude Consant-Dutowx, a posinon thac he gave up in 1894, when the Cancer! ewperienr [managing council} of the Ecole appointed him profes of theory of architecture, 4 position he held until his death. In this post, he was in charge of drawing up the programs far the school’s competitive exanu- nations, peugrams for which he endesvured ta vary the dhetic, and to carefully draft diem while at dhe same une remaining up to date. In addition, he was un charge of greing a weekly coune,  Te was the contenc ot rhis course thar Guader wrote up in four volumes and published from 1901 ro 190M, riled Memensr at Theorie de U'Architectare. Stemming, from the academic cradi- von fan insitution shat he defended all his lite), Guadet was the firx teacher holding the chair of anhacccural cheuty to have ined to give a theoretical presentation on the workings of the Project and to have fixed in writing and theorized the system of eclecticism. We can chia look ar the Elemis ag the eclectic reply of the writings of Viollet-le-Duc. Guadet's premise in the inrreduction w his course would: not in fact have been denict by lus renowned predevessor of 40 years earlier: ~The object of this wuune is che study of the structure of edifices, their lancms and as a whole, from the double point of view of art and ot the adaprarion co detined programs, ca material necessities.” He removed himself radically from this premise when. instead of a docirine of principle, he begins from the hypothesis char there exis an open corpus of asic edifwes that constirure the parn- mony to be aught, He invited each person tu draw freely, with common sense und enteligence, the mudeh that would permet him to put together his proper program.  Guadet reyected the historical approach, chese “arcbeulogical atyles” char he considcred a servile copy, ceincizing with the sane comempt che Roman imitations of the tint half of the 1th century 2s well as the Gothic imitanans of Viollet-le-Duc and has followers, On the contrary, he rejoiced at the necessary adap- cation of archisecture to his programs atways mare varied and complex, leading co realizations char. in this upward and cantin- uous movement constituting the exence of history, would be came the classics of tomuruw. “Clawic™ eo Guadet was that which is cansectated by custom. tecaptucing quite serioudy 3 joke of his former patron Charles Garnier: “she classic ts. to the anhitect, everything which is built.”  ‘Tha intuitive and experimental method of wompoxtion was acquired un the ateber, “the perlou mnserument of artistic ceach- ing,” where the patron lavished course! an his pupal. For Guadet, the atelier was the backbone of Beaux-Arts teaching, the school iuelf being content te teach “indwsputable” subjects. such as  construction, history. or begislation, teaching thar the student could in the end do without.  Unfortunately, the demonstration is 2 litte spoiled by the ambiguity of the appraah, which oscillated endkeasly berween tradinon and rapture, functicnatiom and classiciem, symmetry and pecturesque, and contruction and decatation. Furthermore, the cxamples chasen convey a heavy classical culture, a lack of interest far the medieval, and finally, for the cantempurary ea- ample, muinly ethouccntric chowces—Guadet was intimately convinced, like his contemporaries. that the only good architec: use was French—und a telative lack of vuriosity vis-d-vis new matenalc zon was a utilitanan clement, to be used imide 10 pert wast supporting structures, and concrete was simply noc vet on the agenda.  Thus, che writings of Guadet ate far fram being revolution- asy. as had been those in their time of Viollet-le-Duc. However. is os to his credit chac he ried co instill the functionalist thought in the academic stronghold, He had conuderable influence in his cime. av mush on French students as on forcignens. Thiv influence may be trandated in cwo fashions: either directly through the students whe came an Paris (Atnetican students, ptinuipally frum the East Coast, constituted at the cum of the 20th century a tenth of the contingent of the architectural sec- tion of the school) of indirectly through teaching put in place tn the Unied States late in the 19th and carly 20th centuries using the model of the Cooke des Beaux-Arts. ‘Hhus, Louis |. Kahn learned these teaching methods chrough his professor, the Frenchman Paul Philippe Cret. who went to Philadelphia to teach architecture.  However, after Workd War 1. the school resumed its courses, without the generation of students killed in the war, and no peu- fessnr wax capable of reaaming the corpus of Guader to bring it upto daw. The Americans sumed their hack tirtle hy litle on the French scaching system. increasingly formal and disgunnected from architectural production. and the Beaux-Arts influence would be supplanted in the United States by that of the Bauhaus. One proof is thar the transtation of Element that had been pre- pated by the architect Nathan Clifford Ricker (1845-1924), a teaches at the Univeruty of Hinoix who was in fact formed by the German school of architectute, was never published. Ar the same time, Guadet's compilatian, tepubluhed tor the sath time in 1929-30, was sal read in France by snidenis in the 1950s, by which ume it had become a purely theoretical book,  Matue-Lavart Crosser LECONTE  Sev ulio Classicism Selected Publications  Elements 01 theore de Farvintecturs. coun prefest a {Ecole nationale ot speciale des Resux-ars, 1901-04  “Socieré centrale des architectes frangais, devours profestionnels dex anhuevtes. rapport de la Commission des devine penfesuonnels,” Liarctutectwre 27 Apel 18951  “Hinde sit ba dispostion er ly comuraction du Calisce”, Menteur architects, 7-971 R79}  “A V'Feode des beaux-art, souvenirs de 1863." Recweil die wuillidme de be socséee dex archuseces por le goevernemens (LOL)  Further Reading  Drexler, Arthur (editor), The Anhneecture of the Bowls dey Beaws-Arts, London: Secker and Warburg, (977  Epron, Jean-Picste, Cemprendiy férlectione, Par: Norma. 17  Lacan, Jacques, “Da Guader a Kahn: § cera delfa stanza,” Casella. $0/520-521 Uanuary/ February 1986)  Lacan, Jacques, “Katy et Guadet: La question de La pitce.” Montour architecture. AMC, Mb Apcil 1992)  Moddicton, Rabin {editor), Zhe Beawr-Arts and Nineseerh Contery French Archuecture. London. Uhanes and Hudson, and Cambwndgc, Massachutex: MIT Press, 1982  O'Donnell. Thoma Extward, “Ihe Ricker Manuscript Translations. LIV; Guadet's ‘Berscres and Theory of Architecture,’ vols. 1 4.” Pencil Front, ~ (November 1926) and 8 (March 1927. May 192°, August 1927}  Vigo, Joan Claude, Hitove des archnertonugues maderaes, France, 1900— 10, Notes inservorpues pour 6 yurnze premicres anaco, (Decembre 1985), Vilets-lis-Nancy. France: Ecole d'Archuewnuire de Nancy. 19%6  GUEDES, JOAQUIM 1932- Architect, Brazil  Joaquim Guedes's work 9s tundamenul for understanding Bra- ailian architecture in the second hall of ube 20th century. Depart ing tron: the rationalism, or Bruralism, of the so-valled Eavls Paulises (S30 Paulo's schoul in the 1950s, Guedes developed a unique se: to the challenges of Brazilian modern architec- ture, one that t much closer to the local demands and tectonic tesporses. Guedes understands “architectural design as the art of building” (Camargo, 2000)  Barn in 1932, che firs: of 14 siblings. Guedes graduated in 1954 from the univeniry of Sao Paulo, where he was influenced by Le Corbusier's method (hat nar its formal solutions) and Aaho's matctialicy, Aalto would conunuc tw be a strong reference in Guedes's works, a1 were his professors — pioneers of the Fivodr Faulista—Vilanovs Artigas, Oswaldo Bratke, and Eduardo Kasse de Mello. With them, Guedes shares the belief in tection igs as a base for a coberent architeceure,  Having the oppercunity to work on all scales, from objects 1 renovations to hospitals ta entire cities, Guedes is striking an his objectivity and rationality, Opposed to anything superftuous, Guedes has always criticized Brazilian modern architecture of the 1950s and 1960s for ine exaggerared formalism. For him, the submission to sncial programa. technology, economy, and human activities is muse important and comes before expressian- inm and penonal creation.  Guedes's work is also outstanding for the tigorous detading {not a stronghold of Brarilian Modern, which pushes his work toa higher level, Rigor and detailing have been tradenmurks of Ciuedes as a professor also. Teaching at the School of Architec- ture of the University of Sdo Paulo since 1958, Guedes has been a strong influence throughout the last 30 year. He also taught in Scrasbourg (France} between (970 and 1975. His incisive tational process can be summanized in his own words: “the mare { doubt, inquire and criticize, che more I feel closer to knowledge and truth” (Camargo, 2000).  Woking with his wife. Liliana, from 1954 to 1978, Guedes's architectural calent manifested itself very early on. He was only 24 years old when, in 1956, his entry far che Brasilia Plan compe- tition broke up with che Chaner of Athens. Still debared and studied today, his proposal for Brasilia presented a city based on quotidian experiences, able 10 grow and expand with the pace of Brazilian modernuation and consequent urbanizapon.  In 1957 he designed the J Guedes house (for his father) in a diffiaule site (30 by 150 ft) for a large family. In this houwe, the principles of his later work— rationality and rectonicn— ate already Laid out. Shortly after the J. Guedes house (1958), he deugned the Cunha Lima hoesc, which made bins famous and won the prize at the VII Sao Paulo Brenal, At the Cunha Lina house, the exposed tcinforeed womecte arustuee that was the trademark of the Paulista School is ranterpected with emphaus von economy of means and maximization of spaces for social life. toe Guedes, architeciure has always been a rational and cou nomic way to matenalire spaces for the neads of society. In the Cunha Lama house, as is common in all his buildings, the structural solurian is very important and the economy of cal- umins increases the Hesibility of intenor spaces.  The ame structural emphasis would occur in his own house {Liliana and Joaquim Guedes house. 1968}, where the fantasnic daby continue outside the plan and work ax a shading device. In this house, the ourstanding detailing is fully harmonized with the overall plan. and the exposed reinforced concrete slabs are humanized by the wooden fenestration subordinared ta the seructure.  tn the 1970s Cueukes had che opportunity to dexign and build entire citics in the Brazilian backlands and the Amayon jungle. The unties of Carazis (1973), Marabd 1973), and Batcarens (£980) in the Amazonian state of Pars were designed ax past of a major mining project for which Guedes worked from the beginning. ufluencing even the path of the railway that connec che project to the port. 400 miles away. Many hundreds of miles from the major ciues of Belém amd Brasila, the designs of che new ary plans included complex logistics af rransportation and labor— a task tor Guedes’s rationality,  fh the design and construction of the city of Caraiba (1976) in Bahia's backland, CGusedes faced a completely diftcrent task. Caraiba ts located in a very dry cegion of the Brazilian sersde idry savana), where the challenge was m shade and protect it from the bor winds. Guedes solved this problem with litle shaded spaces instead of lange plazas. and a igh respect for the traditional local way of building guided him toward very simple facades whose elegance adds a delicate touch to the hard life of the certaanegar,  Gusedes’s focus on economy instead of aesthetic eapressionism guides him to think of the Brazilian dums, for instance, not as aproblem but axa solution, becauac i¢ reveals the amazing capac- ity that people have 19 build and overcome daily problems.  Suuciure, economy, rationality, and emphasis on quotidian life might be the major forces behind Cuedes’s atchieecrurc, hut they are not cough to explain the strength of his mayor works. Tu those quabties we need w add the extremely develuped senss- bility of « humanist.  Frananpo Lane Selected Works  Guede House, Sao Paulo, 1957 Cunha Lima house, Sto Paulo, 183 Architect's own howe, Sio Paulo, 1968 lan of Carapds, Para Phan of Car » Raha, Plan of Rarcarens. Dard 1080  Further Reading  Bauand, Yvo, Arquitrtirs Comteinpaninds he Reaei, Siv Vaute Perspectusa, 181  
Camargo, Ménica |. fasquine Guedes, Siw Paulo: Cana, ¢ Naty, 2000  Lemos, Carlos AC. Argeitetura Hreuietra, Sav Paula Mefhoramentas. 1974  Segawa. Hugo, “The Essentials of Reahan Muderniam,” Deagn Bout Review. 320548 (1994)  GUGGENHEIM MUSEUM, BILBAO, SPAIN Designed by Frank Gehry: completed 1997  Dengned by Frank ©. Gehry and Assouates and completed in 1997, the G heim Museum Bilbso in Bilkio, Spain was the fourth un the comtellauon of spaces that constituted the instieucion known as the Guggenheim Muscum. The cxuber- andy curved ctanium and limestone building is considered w be the finest of Geluy’s career. an achievement tw which all his subsequent work was compared, .  ‘The success of the Guggenheim Muscum Bilbao cstablished the reputation of the Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation’s director Thomas Krens as a visionary whe redefined the relatian- ship between a museum's collection and its public. By the late 1990s, Krens had curended the museum well beyond the spiral ing ramp of itt other signature building by Frank Uoyd Wright  Guggenham Museum Bilbao, by Frank Gehry, 2¢ Bilbao, Spain (1997) © fohwon Architectural Images!tirea Budding com  {Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 1959, New York, expanded in 1992 by Gwatheney Siegel and Associares). At the time it was built, che Bilbao Guggenheim was rhe mos: ambitious of the museum's new spaces, Ocher Guggeaheim satellites included the Peggy Guggenheim Collection (built in the 18th century, renovated and expanded in 1995 by Leila and Massimo Vignelli) in Venice, the Deutsche Guggenheim Bertin (1997, Rachard Ghackman) in Germany and the G heim Hermitage in Las Vegas (Rem Koolhaas and the office bre Metropalitan Architec- ture).  The Banque administration had originated the partnenhip with the Guggenheim as part of a commitment two revitalizing che industrial center of Bilbao, the fourth-largest city in Spain. The autonomous northern region af Spain was secking to re make its public identity and the Guggenheim was intended to funcuon as onc of the means bry which to redefine the physical space and remake the cultural economy of Bilbao. After consid- eing and cexecting an idea to renovate a historic warchouse burtding, the Basque group held an invited competition for a waterfront site, Gehry, Coop Himmelb(1)au (Wolf Prix and Hel- mut Swiczinsky}. and Isoraki were selected by Krens and arked to submit designs. Gchry's scheme was chosen for ins strong, iconic identity and semaitivity toward the site,  The muscum joined a series of targe-scale devign projects that were intended to wansforn the city inte an isvemational cultural and financial bub. Okher projects under conerruction in 2000  Skeycoutr of the Guggenheim, Wilbon © Dan Delgado d? Arch  included as ainpost terminal and contol cower by Santiago Cala- uava, 2 subway syste by Norman Faster, and a master plan foe a waterfront by Cesar Pelli. ‘Ihe museum was financed and owned by the Basque administration and managed by a founda- tion comprised of members of the Guggenheim Ioundartion and  The Guggenheim Muscum Bilbso became a symbol of what could be architecturally accomplished with the untelligent appli- cation of computer modeling. The curved forms were made sconomically feasible through optimization of the forms and che wee of computer daca for calculating, manufacturing, and amembling all building clements, from snuctural stecl to clad- ding, The use of titanium for exterior cladding material was onc of the first such applications un a large building. ‘Vhe material was chosen for the mercurial livelissess of the finish, which would alternately take on the color of the river or the sky. Its durability and strength allowed the panels to be just 0.38 millimeters thick, thin enough for a slight pillowing effect to soften the appearance of the building.  The design of che building was acclaimed for us sensitive response co an urhanistically vieal dite. The 24,000-square-meter building sits 16 meters below the level of the city streets, a design move that served several purposes, The lowered carry level provided a powerful sequence, beginning with a public  plara at street fevel on the south side of the building and descend- img a funnct-like stair ta the entry. ‘The sectional shift also re- duced the overall mauing af the building without sacrificing the high vertical space of the atrium. The Pucnee de La Salve, a major artery into the city, cats theough the site and is integrated into the massing of the building, The bunks af the Nervion River define the northern limit of the site. devchiped as a warer- front plaza.  ‘There was 2 powerfully moving qualicy af the museum's extc- tror presence and interios spaces. Gchry organized the building around an extremely vertkal atrium nsing 50 meters above the level of the river, It ie crowned with a sculpeural ckylight whose whirling forms are variously compared to the image of Marilyn Monroc’s billowing skirt (from the film The Seoen Your fech), an artichoke, of an opening lower (the architevt’s own description). Three fevels of gallerics connect to the atrium with catwalks and vertical circulation, A total of 11,000 square meters of exhibition space is distributed among 19 galleries. Limestone volumes con- tain traditional orthogonal exhibition rooms, and ttanium-clad volumes define highly organic spaces that offer unusual propor- dons and dynamic lighting effects. The mast spectacular oie talleries is “the buat,” a temporary exhibition area with 2 clear span W meters wide and 130 meters long. Its volume stretches under the La Salve Bridge. connecting to the tower element on the other side of the bridge. Since its opening che Guggenheim has commissioned many pieces customized lor the site, including Snake (1994 -96, Richard Serra), fastadlasion for Bilbae (1997, Jenny Holzer), and Wall Drawing #831 (1997, Sol 1eWitr).  Che intense media attention focused on Bilhan has been unu- sualty united in ity praise of the building. Elerbert Muschamp, chicf architecture cnt. of the New Fork Fimes, called it “a mira- dle.” and Ada Louise Huxtable, critic and architecture writer for the Wad! Serect Journal, called it “one of dhe most significant, as well as the mow beautiful, museums in the world.”  The highly sculptural forms of the Bilbao Guggenheim are hat unique in Gehry's work. The ckillful resolution of mulriple forms can he found in small-scale work, sich as Gehry's private heune (1978) in Santa Manica, Califomia, and the Winton Guest House (1987) in Wyzata Minnesota. Bilbao’s sinuous curves were telated to the office building Nationale-Nederlanden Buikling (1996) in Prague, Cecch Repuldic, and the many fish- inspired forms tha Gehry has executed, such ax the Walker Art Center installauon (1986). The museum also contained the experrmental seeds for several large-scale Gehry buildings com- pleted in the years after it: the Eaperience Music Project (2000) in Seat, Washingron; the Walt Disney Concert Hall (con- struction began in 192, halted and restarted in 2000) in Low Angeles. California; and Millennium Patk (2000) in Chicago.  Rents Cane.  See she Gehry, Frank (United States): Guggenheim Museum, New York  Further Reading  Beuggen. Coonje van, Fount 0 Gehry: Guggrnberin Museum Bilbo, New York: Guggenheim Museum, 1998  Fonwer, Kurt Walter and Ralph Richter, Frank QO. Gehry: Guggenberm Bilkan Mucrod, Stungatt and London: Edition Axel Menge, 1998 
GUGGENHEIM MUSEUM, NEW YORK  Designed by Frank Lloyd Wright, complered 1959 New York. New York  The only museum deugned by Frank Loyd Wight, the Gug- genheim was abo his most fame consuming commission, Formed in 1937, the Solomon R, Guggenheim Foundation was the source of the Muxcum of Non-Objpective Painting, the original name of the instisution, Located at 1070 Fifth Avenue, between Fast 88th and 89th Steeces, Wright's muscum is alternately viewed as his most kinetic structure, his most egregious expres sea of hubris, of as his magnum opus.  In 1927 Salamon Guggenheim met Barences Hilla Rebsy von Ehrenwicsen, a tireless advocate of abstraction in the visual arts. and in 1943. as his curator. she wrote the architect, asking whether he might be interested in creating “the dame of spirit.” thus conceiving. at leat in words, of the central idea of the building. Disagreemenr about location delayed the project from the starr: Wright, unsympathetic as abways to dense. urban sites, advocated a location in Riverdale, the Bronx, near the Spuyien Dnuyvil and overlooking the Hudson River. Guggenheim, how- ever. penisted in his preference for a more central location, mak- ing the primary purchase of land on Fifth Avenue in 1944,  noe until 195} were the requisite parcels of land on Fifth Avenue asscinbled.  In response to the constrained sitc, Wright designed a vertical rather than horizontal furm and by building upward created almost the antithesis to the Praine stybe of his early career. lhe mow plasric of his designs, the muscuns is a spiral, ballouning ourward as mt ascends and enclases a unitary <paceEchoing this rotunda ts 2 smaller volume, which he called che “monutor.” Poured into curvilinear forms, the steel-reinforced concrete made posible the plasticity of the form and marked Wright's ultimate abandonment of pag-and-liarel seructure.  Not the we instance of Wright's use of the spiral. the Gug- genbcim owes its form co numectuus antevedents: its central ro- tunda is her tr the grear domed central spaces in the anucnt and early medieval worlds, such ac rhe Pantheon (4.6, 128) in Rome, to which Wright hitmelf compared the museum, and Santa Contanya (c. 4.0, 350), abo in Roene, Le Corbunier had developed an unburk scheme tot a spiraled vertical museum. In 1924, Wright designed a domed planctantum for Gordon Strong in Sugarloaf Mounuin, Maryland, in which a double helix of famps, one for automobiles and a second. narrower, inner ring for pedestrians, wraps around the exterior of the form, Com- pleted before the museum, rhe V.C, Morris Gift Shop (1950) in San Francisco exhibits a central cniled ramp. Similarly intro- verted schemes preceded the museum as well: the Larkin Build- ing (1903, demolished) in Buffalo, New York; Unity Church (1908) in Oak Park, Illinois; and the $.C. Johnson and Son Administration Building (1936) in Racine, Wiscunsin,  Eartier in hus career, Wright had relicd on the vertival core as an anchoring device, as in the fireplace and chumncy wore of the Frederick C. Robic House (1909) in Chinago and the vertical fieldstone core of the gar 5, Kaufmann $r., House (Fall- ingwater. 19.46) in Bear Run, Pennsylvama, Wighe’s cencral and radical concept relied on the conunuity of the spiral in combination with the service of an clevator, By daiming that the muscum visitor would no longer need to retrace steps,  Wright further justified the form. which evolved through four versions. The first approximately eight-svory volume, developed in 1943, comprised hexagonal tiers with level floors and a subor- dinate spiral for moving between levels. Clerestory windows with glass cubing as in the S.C. Johmon Admininration Building would provide natural light. The next version derived, in Wright's own words, from the ancient Near Eascern ziggurat, with perpendicular oucer walls clad in red marble. By the end of 1943 and carly 1944, he inverted the siggueat, thus creating the expanding spiral, and in he final phase of che development he inflated the volume somewhat and tilted the walls outward. Perhaps the most controversial aspect of the design, the tiled walls—deemed an appropriate form for the display of art by the architect, who felt that they would approximate salon cascls— vexed museum curatots and directors who adapted the eccentric conditions with a system of metal rods to bold the canvases vertically,  The position of the larger rorunda in relation to the smaller monitor varied, and in 1948 Wright reversed them. placing the rorunda at the south end of the block By 1952 he developed 4 ptuposal for an annea, in which the patterned facade facing Fifth Avenue, in contrast to the smaoth ex of concrete of the gallery spaces, consisted af small squares further divided into  4 squares. Surrounding the monitor, a concrete balustrade, originally ciecular but executed a3 2 contrasting de- rived from those seen cartier in Fallingwater, and ci pat- teens. xen in the windows of the Avery Coonley Playhouse (19421 in Riverside, Illinois, define the mullion arcs of the moni- tor windows and the brass arips of che terrazzo flooring, As 3 secondary geometric element, the lozenge form of che fountain at the hase of the spiral repeats most notably in the comice of the monitor. grouped in paire within semicircular arcs. Modified herween 1954 and 1956, the skylight was originally pictured at a meries of tangent concrete of stainicss steel rings with an inner shel] of woffcring. Cras constraints, hawever, tenulted in che sub- traction of the inner shell and che addition of more prominent hairpin-sthaped ribs supporting the glass. Although Wright wanted a flual, continuous structure, structural vertival fin-like Piers support the ramps.  In 1952 the building was renamed the Sulomon R. Guggen- hem Museum, and in the summer of 1956 consuruction began, supervised by Willan Short in collaboration with David Wheatley and Morton Delson. Jaroslav Joseph Polivka served as engineering consulranr for che structural design, and Wright hoped in vain that he would be able to make the vertical fine that support the ramps unnecessary, John Ortenheimer designed the distinctive embossed exterior lettering, and the builder was George N. Coben af the Euclid Construction Company.  Opened in 1959, Wright's last and posthumous work ce- ceived several alterations, inJuding che enclosure un 1974 of the driveway berween the rotunda and munitor to contain the bookstore and cafe and the addition un 1978 by Richard Meier of the Aye Simon reading room off che rouunda. Envisioned as a second atrium with balconies and a skylight, the monitor had been closed tw accommodate administrative offices, In 1992 the firm of Gwathmey Siegel and Associates began a comprehensive testacanon of the building and the realization of an annex cant of the monitor. Relating approximasely in wale and patucmn to the annex vinible in a pencil-and-ink perspective by Weight from 1951, Gwathmey Siegel's ten-sory tower, clad in gridded lime-  Guggenham Muscum, New York © The Frank Lloyd Wrght Foundimen  stone, inchides, in addition tn offices, onc single-height and three double-height gallerica Reopened aa gallery, the moniter won tautis asccond spiraled ramp. Alse accomplished were the instal lation of ultraviolet-filtering glass in the dome, the return of the café to Ease R&th Screct. and resturatian of the below-yrade-level auditorium to contain its original scating configuration. bakony, and tote.  Whether viewed as among the noblest or as the most impos- onal of Winght’s public spaces, the Solomon R. Guggenheim remains, like an uninviced bur determined guest at a sad and exclusive dinner, Fifth Avenuc's most defiant denizen.  Pact GLassMtan:  Sev ato Corbusier, Le Jeanaeret, Charies-Edouard) (France); Fallingwater, Bear Run, Penasylvania: Gwathmecy, Charles, and Robert Siegel (United States); Meier, Richard (United States); Museums Rebic House, Chicago; Uniy Temple, Ouk Park, Mlinois; Wright, Framk Lloyd (Uniced States} Further Reading  Abhough there is a vast nuntber of sources on the building, Ned Levine's  analynis os pethapa the mort choeugh in addrewmg 1 fiemal, spatial and seructural axpects,  Gill, Brendan, Many Marky A Lift of Fea Lapel Weight, New York: Purnam. 1987: Londen: Heinemann, 1988  Jordy, Wiliam H , The Impact of Ewrepren Modernism in ihe Mid. Twentieth Connury, Garden Cay, New York: Dovbleday, 1972  levine. Neil, The Archisecrure of Frunk Lloyd Wright, Preceroa, New Jeteey- Princeton Universicy Prose, 1996  McCareer. Rober, Frant Lond Waght, London: Phaidon, 1997  Scully. Vincent, Frank tdond Wiraght. New York: Braviller, and Landon; Maytlowes, 1960  Stem, Rober: AM. Thomas Mellin, and David Fishman, New York 1960; Architecture and Urbain beneeen the Second World War and she Huemennial. Now Vouk: Monacelh Pree, 1995; 2nd edition, 1997  Weight, Frank Llavd. Hnenk Lord Woaghn, she Gaggenhem Corregpondence. compiled by Bruce Brooks Metter, Fresno Press at Caltomia Seate Univerary, 1986  GULLICHSEN, KRISTIAN 1932- Architect, Finland  Practicing for over 40 years. Kristian Gullichsen is one of a few surviving second-gencration modemiss in Finland today. As a waadent in the 1950s, he worked as an intern in the alfices of 
Alvar Aalto and Heikki and Kaya Siren. These two firms were the most significane players on the tinnish architecture scence at thas aime, winning berween them most of the architectural competitions,  Gullichsen’s designs demonstrate his interevt in the wark of Te Corbusier and range from a mass-produced vacation house peounype of minimalist elegance and simplicity (Module 225, designed with Pallasmas, 1969) to 2 singular, primitive sonc howe at Guame, France foe his mother (1972). In che case of the Module 225, the debt is to Le Corbusier's modular vtec! system, and in the lattes, to the French architect's filtering of Moditerranean building themes such as masonry walls, vauks, and cylindneal towers, The Module 225 system 1s a bealliant prefabricated wood column-and-heam structure, approximately eight-foot square, with infilling panels. designed for assembly on any site. [t 1s also evidence of structural discipline. an imporiant ethical theme in Finnish architecture of rhe 19605. The house at Grave, on the other hand. ix site specific, built into a hill of stone verraces with olive trees. Camposed of repetitive bayr bike the Module 225, the stone house opens and loses itself to the sun with aiding barn dours,  ‘Other housing designed by the firm - Gullichsen Kairamo Vormals—explores remarkably different themes of lightness, traraparemy, and wall as light membrane. This appean tu be the influence of Erkki Kairamo, whose semidrtached houses and apanment blocks in tbe suburb of Espoo, buile fram 1971-90, reveal De Stil-inspited planar compositions, Sliding screens, Graular seairs, glass skins, and nied surfaces enliven and give swale w the Parades.  Linking rhe swo types of housing production is an interest an proporcon and number, likely passed on to’ chem by the tevered Helsinki University of Technology teacher Aalis Blom- sredt. These and other design themes emerge in the buildings done for industry. One finds in sich works as the Varkaus Paper Mill (1985) and Marimekka Textile Factory (Helsinki. 1978) a oclebration of structure, function (smoke sacks, ducts, and fire capes). and durable industrial materials.  The firm's exquisitely propartioned and detailed industrial vomplenes find parallel in an urbane project for Helsinki’s shop- ping district: an addition to the Stodkmann Deparunent Sture (1989), Together Gullichsen, Kairamo, and Vormala reintce proved «wo signdiant features of Aulto's nearby downtown work: the internal atrium of Aaito’s Academic Bookstore and the repetitive squarc-bay facade of his kaso-Cusreit Office Building (1962). The focal point of the Stockmann addivon is an irregu- larly shaped arrium topped with a domed skylight. Externally, taut glass block screens supported by stainless srcel frames stretch berween stone volismns. creating a rich, layered facade for the lower floars.  When approaching religious or civic architecture, Gullichsen returns to the theme of the wall, It is a hallmark of three fine works, characterizing his back Malmi Church (Hebinki. 1980), femininent of Scandinavian medicval chunhes with walled courtyards, and of the Late churches of Sigurd Lewerentz), the Kaunisinen Parish Center (Kauniainen, Finland, 1983), and Picksamalu Civic Center (Picksamals. Funland, 1989). Gullich- scn’s skill as a site designer emerges in hus response to an urban condiuon, a hilbide, and a lakefrone park respectively. In cach case, an cnury court establishes the procession into the building, adjusting the scale of the experience Irom the outnde to the  inside. The moves are those of a skilled , welll versed in boch Aalro and Le Corbusier, in the free plan and the enclosed room, References to ancient and modern way’ of inhabiting the landscape comfortably coexist in these buildings. The grounded hearth and the light-srudded ceiling are boch present. It is also the fusion of the vernacular and intemacional in Gullichsen's work chat gives it, and the bet of Scandinavian architecture, tesonance beyond the Nordic countries.  Karr Neserct  Ser ako Aaleo, Alvar (Finland): Blomsveds, Actis (Finland); Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Chasles-Edouard) (France); Lewer- entz, Sigurd (Sweden); Pallasmas, Juhani (Finland); Siren, Heikki and Kaija (Fialaad)  Biography  Born 29 September 1932 in Helsinki: scudied architecture at Helsinki University of Technology (1951-60). Upon graduation worked briefly with Alvar Aalto, then opened his own practice in Helsinki, 1961. Mentors included, in agdition to Aalto, such major mid-century Finnish architects and theorists a Aulss Blomstedr and Reims Pietila. Head of the Exhibitions Office of the Museurn of Finsush Architecture, Helsinki, (1965-67); later became State Arust Professor of Fintand (1988-93). Taughe ar Helsinki University of Technology. 1961-69; founded a part nership with wwe younger architects from HUT, Erkki Kairarno (1936-1994) and Timo Vormala (b.1942} in 1973, Recipient of the Stare Award for Archirecture (1978), honorary doctorate (1986), the State Chair in the Ars (1988-93), the Urban Enwi- foment Award (1989), and the Concrete Constsuction Award (1990), Gullichsen continues tn practice with Varmala in Hel- sinks.  Selected Works  Module 225, dengned wath Pallasmaa, 196!)  Stone house, Grace Franc, 1972  Manmckko Texule Factory, Helunls. 1978  Varhaus Paper Mill, béelanki, 1985.  Mockmann Department Score addition, Helanla, 189 Malem Church, bietsenka, 1980  Kauniatoen Partch Center, Kaunianen, Funland, 1983 Preksarnaba Cavic Center. Packsarmaks, Finland, 1999  Selected Publicatioas  "Villa Masrex: penvate revidenie for the Gullschsen family, Fieland,” daveng Architecture. 1S. 199?  Grllctoen/KasramaV ermal (Carmen Architecture Catalogues)  Barcckina: Fdicorial Guaavo Gil, SA. 1990. (Spanish and Enghsh. translanon: Samiago Castan)  Farther Reading  Thete ate cwo monographs on Gullicien end his partnen, one of which recency appeaied. The Gili monograph on Gullichsen ated hia partner it comprehensive and well ithiursted, fully ranuaced, and includes descptive ters by Gallicheen and an introduction by Colin St John Wilman The other books on Finnih architecture ale include some af his work. lwurs of the Finnish journal Arbbiieéei too numerous fo mention feature his work and/or the work of the firm, somerimes sath texts by Gullichien, Gullichsen hax written several articles on Alvar  Aalto, of which one is mentioned below. All works are in Lnglih excepe aa noted,  Brandolini, Schastiano, Kristian Gullichten, Freér Kunrumo, Timo Vormala: Architecture, 1%69- 2000, Milan Shira, 2000  Brandolins, Sebastiano, Kristian Gullichven. and Silvas Miles, “Opere recenti in Finlandia di Guluinen Kairamo Vormala,’ Carabella, 53/562 (November 1989)  Gallahsen, Kristan, Guilichsea/Rumume/Vormals Chilengual Englinh-Spanish edinont, Barcelona: Gil, 1290  ‘Gallichsen. Krorian, “Villa Mairea: Private Resadence foe the Gulltchscn Family, Finland.” faving Archueceuer, 15 197)  Korvenmas, Pelika (atitor), Archuchdin fyi Suomen arkburberliste. 4892-1992 Finlands Arkiekifirbund Artiirtion Arte, Helunks Suomane Arkkichsiliito, and Rakenmaticto Oy, 1992, as Thy Work of Archstects The Finnish Asociarian af Antutecs, 1892 1992, wasslaed by Jun Kokkonen, Hebinké: Finnish Acsviation of Architects, and the Finish Building Center 1992  Norn, Marya-Roites, and Peter Davey, Arteiehimurin Nrbrherki: 7 Nithekulraaa: Aw Architectural Present. ~ Approaches tenhity. cat.): (bilagual Enghsh-Finnish edionn}. Hetunkse: Museum ot Finnish Architecture. 10 (enc hudes an imermew with the anhitecs)  Poole, scott, Phe New Frvanch Anchutecture, New York: Ruzzoh, 1992  “Profile: Works of Kacsan Gullichsen.” An Aneceuze and ( rhenium, 420) (hebruary 1988)  Quaneill, Malcolm, Aixaish Anvtitecturr and the Modernist Traduion, London and New York E and FN Span, 1994  GOREL FAMILY SUMMER RESIDENCE, CANAKKALE, TURKEY Designed by Sedat Giirel; completed 1971  The (anakkale region on the southwestern Acgean coast of Tur key has a mild climate with abundant suraltine. making it attrac tive tw tourists. Its traditional architecture és akin to other Modi- terrancan atyies and consica of cubic, whitewashed stone buildings with flac moh, uuzally clustered soyether in the land: scape. Moat houses retain the sane design characteristics but today are usually constructed of brick with a wooden roof xeruc- ture covered with cerra-corta tiles. ‘The room size and structural spaces are usually modest, wath several rooms jouied around more public spaces. Turkish houses have many built-in elernencs, such as alcoves (eprua), shelves, and niches, anu sofas, oF raised seating platfonns. are often placed in the living rooms. Screened windows help modulate the bright sunlight. at da vine-covered trellises in shaded courtyards. The fincnonal vernacular arche- tecture reflects both the climatic and the social environment.  The summer residence of the Giirel family was completed in 1971, The late Sedat Gilrel and his wife, Gain, had spent many vacations in the region and wanted a house of ches own w which they could invite Gamily and friends. ‘They appeccimted the climate, the area (which hoses several historn and archacological places), and the site, which averlouks the sca, Sedat Gurel, a professor of architecture at the University of Istanbul, susdied the climare. ecology, and construction techniques of the arca before embarking on the design in (968 and commencing the construction a year later. The house had to acommodare the extended family, providing spaces for interaction yer privacy for individuals.  The site covers an atea of about 1000 square meters, sloping down to the beuch, and fics along a toad parallel to the warer.  Vhe house, more accurately described as a complex of seven single-story units consisting of living and sleeping spaces, is strung along different counyards resembting a small village. The units relate spatially to the boundary stone wall cunning roughly fourth to south with the water's edge to the weet,  A cleanmy to the nurth marks the entrance and car parking area, Along the edge of the parking arca, perpendicular to the wall, is a narrow building that houses storage areas and 4 small bedroum and bathroom used by staff. Adjacent to it on the other side is the fanuly courtyard. flanked by two units bude for Guzim Gurel’s sister and family, The one to the west has four bedrooms, and the ane to the south contains die common hving areas. The courtyard, which does not have a view to the sea, becomes a secluded and shaded family living and cooking area—an outdoor oom, A fourth unit w the south of this grouping consist of a double bedroom and bathroom intended for Sedat Giirel's par. ents, Plaing the parents in this central position was seen as the spiritual and physical bund of the complex as well as a sign of respect for the elder generation. (Since the death of the parents, it has become the guest room.) A grouping of anodher three burdings for the Gurel family itself surrounds anocher east- facing courtyard adjacent to the boundary wall. Two of che units cantain sleeping quarters, and the third has the living, dining, and Ietchen functions. A south-facing deck of rhe Irving area overlooks the water, which can be reached by a meandering paved pathway.  The eleyant placement of the buildings i the landscape, leaving free the seashore and using the stane boundary wall as a datum. gives the almost randoin arrangement a structural order thar is evident in both plan and clevation. The high wall with its row af planted ttecs alwo insulates the compound from noise and street rraffic, The juxesposician of units successfully gives the inhabitants privacy yet provides several communal areas, courtyards, and patios that enable the famnily members and guests tw gather, The arrangement allows peuple co come and go as they lhe without disturbing the others and works remarkably well,  The sea, sky. trecs, and encky carth have been incorporated into the design, and the archicect left che natural rocky Landscape with it pine, olive, and oak erces in its undisturbed state. The relationship berwren built farm and the earth's texture in cxem- plary. The artangement of the buildings with their balconies, courtyards, and pation help funnel breezes through che site, and stone stairways built into the rocks lead down to the sea through dhe wees,  The buildings are constructed on strip foundations and Aoors of bocal brick with load-bearing in-fill plasered brick walls, Roughly applicd whitewash covers the exterion. The wood beams and gently sloping roofs are covered with handmade tiles, as are the flours, A local curpencer made the umber ceilings and shuttered winduws as well as the simple furnisure. A number of niches, sturage arcas, ated seats of concrete and brick form an integral part of che rouins and courtyard spaces.  The cost of the 126-square-meter resudence, excluding land. was around TL 103,000 (U.S. $7.250), or TL 816 (U.S. $57) per square meter on completion in 15971, a figure that was lower than for other traditional buildings in the area. Maintenance costs are vety low as well. and because the residence is used only in the summer, there are nv heating costs, although there are 
Exterior of Gtirel Family Summer Revlon, by Sodas Carel Phot by Reha Gunay © Aga Khan Trust for Culture  fireplaces if needed. The lime whitewash has to be reapphed every two to three years.  All the family members and guests seem to be very satisfied with his retreat. In 1989, che residence was brought 1 national and international attention when it won an Aga Khan Award for Architecture. In awacding the prize, the maxter jury noted that the project was “sensitive, competent, intelligent, and un- pretentious, .. where landscape and building are of equal impor- tame. It has dexegregated the functions of living ... with hu mane and caim decision,”  The building cumplea hus a spirnual dimension that has litle to do with cither religion of tegionalism but rather with the fundamental relationship of human beings to the earth and to the deep structures of human consciousness. The essence af such building, also seen in the work of Hassan Kathy and Geoffrey Bawa. bes in theis poetic quality and ther ability to alluw the usets to commune between the physical expenence of nature and Jeaps of imagination. The Giirel sammer residence remains in harmony with narure around st. Its timeless simpliciry cantin- wes to demonstrate its importance as an exemplary work of con- temporary vernacular architecture.  Hasas-Unors Kirtan  “The Aga Khan Award fr Architecture 1989 Winners” Mimar, 4 (Peverber {4804  al-Radi, Selma. “Garel Summer Resdence.” in Archnterenre fear Ldamic Socieries Today. edited by James Stecle, Loadon and New York, Acackemy Fulitinn, 1994  GWATHMEY, CHARLES 1938- AND ROBERT SIEGEL 1939-  Architects, United States  Many crincs soe the architecture of Charles Gwachmey and Rob- ort Siege! as a continuation of the modernist aesthetic developed in the 1920s and 1930. Gwathmey’s archirecnre belics the influence of Louis Kahn, who taught Gwathmey at the Univer: nity of Pennsylvania, Sicgel’s work was influcrced by William Beeget, Scbyl Moholy-Nagy, and Aldo van Eyck. Their work compares favorably to the early ideas of Le Corbusier, especially that of the free plan and the free facade.  One of Gwathmey's carly works represents a model of his mature architecture, the Robert Gwathmey Residence and Sra- dio (1965). Sited in Amagansett on Long Island, New York, the house and associated studio are dad in tongue-and-groove cedar plank, The choice of matenals reflects the context of the howe on the beach and recalls the shingle-sryle architecture of the 18905, The house as designed an a modular grid. Gwathmey munipulated the system co create curved spaces and volumes  that are contrary to the cube's rigid geometry. Maircases are indicated on the exterior by curved walls. A portion of the mof is sloped ws give added complexity to the building's form, The house reveals Gwarhmey's ability to sculps apace, cither adding or subtracting volume from the cube.  Gwachmey Siegel used the grid in their carly residential work ax a design tool for the sniculation of form. The building's ute (acces, oricntation, and topography) determines aspect uf form ao well. Gwachmey Siegel selected a range of materials both mad- em and vernacular. For example, the cedar siding on the Gwath- mey Residence has moder planar qualities, bur is is also a tradi tional building material on Long Island.  In 1970 the archicects designed Whig Hall at Princeton Uni- versity. which had been gutted by fire. The university wanted to preserve the remaining walls of the building and also desired 10,000 square Set of programmed space in a building thar origi- nally held 7.000 square fect. Gwathmey Siegel develuped free- form interior volumes masked by the original Classical Revival facade. Major program clements induded a cunference room, a debating area, a 250-scat multipurpose space, and work areas. Blank interior walls were used to create dixecte and private spaces. The curved eucrior wall gave the building its sense of space.  Gwathiney Siegel's new thoughts about space and walls were evident after the completion of the Dunaway Aparement (1970;  Wick Alumm Center, Ueiersity of Nebraska (1985) Photo © Mary Ann Sullivan  New York City), Here the architevts ued curved walls and color to cteate their signature volumes af space within 3 renovated apace. A heavy column was used in the center of the apartment to make the modular sarem evident to the casual observer.  According to Philip Jobsnon, the Elis Bash House (1973) in Clifton, New Jeney, is the prototypical Gwathmey Sicgel house. The building differ from the Le Corbusian modern idhbom in that it is dab-on-ground construction; there are no prlutss, and the form is based on an exact cube rather than a horzontal onentation. The decorative elements are cuts and flourishes to the cube. and the cube itself is gouged. [he composition focuses on the grid anchored by a singular, detined column.  In the Cogan Residence (1972; Fasthampton, New York), wale is used as an ordering device primarily to relate the interior and exterior masses. Cabinctwork and color are used to articubare the interior space. The grid structures and defines their devign theough the repetition af elements, must notably columns. Rely- ing un 4 stylist, reference to the work of Te Corbusier, the architects employed a ramp as the majer vertical cranapuetatioa clement.  Guathmcy's house on Amagansett was impartant in gaining ceitical recognition fur bis architecture and the work he would Laser complete with Siegel. In 196%, the Conference of Architects for the Study of the Favironment (CAST) held a meenng at the Museum of Modern An in New York Cay. The woference  
ubimately Jed tv the selection of five architects to exhibit at the Museum as a New York school. Charles Gwathmecy was one of the group know as the New York Five.  Gwathmey Siegel has also completed many major public works. including the addition to the Sulomon R. Guggenheim Museum in Manhatan; the Museum of Contemporary Ar in North Miami, Florida; the Science. Industry and Business Li- brary of the New York Public Library in New York City, and university commissions (ram Princeton, Comell, and Calumbes Univenity,  The work of Gwathmey and Siegel has nue seen a school of followers, However, sensitivity to site and material is consistent with other practitioners uf late 20th-century design. An attempt to work within the modernist aesthetic divorced from its socialint agenda is important in the legavy of thes two architect.  Jt Maze. Corp  Biographies  Charles  Born June 1938. Charlouc, North Carolina. Attended Univer- siry of Pennsylvania School of Architccture, 1956-1959. B. Arch; Yale University, 1962, MAnh. Received The Wilban Wim Winchester Fellowship as the outstanding graduate from Yale University and a Fulbright Grant Awarded Brunner Prize from the American Academy of Arts and Letters 1970; Yale Alumai Arc: Award from the Yale School of Architecture 1985: Lifetime Achievement Medal in Visual Ans trom Guild Hall Academy af Arts in 1988. Flecred ro the American Academy of Ar and Letters 1976, Served as President of the Board of Trust ces tor The tnsrinure of Architecture and Urban Scudies 1981. Elected as a Fellow nf the American Instinure of Architects in T981, Taught at Pra Listitute, Cooper Union for uve Advance. ment of Science and Art, Princeton University, Columbia Uni veraty. the University of Texas, and the University of California at Lon Angeles 1965-1991. He was Davenport profesor and Bishup Prufessor (1991) at Yale, and the Flioe Nayes Visiting Professor at Harvard University (1985).  Robert Si  Bom New York City 1939. Awarded B. Arch from Peart Ineti- tute, 1962; M.Arch from Harvard University 1963. Organized the Pratt Institute Seudene Intern Program with the Gwathmey Siegel office 1963. Awarded Pratt Institute Centennial Alumni  Award in Architecture 1988. Elected Follow of the American Institute of Architects 1991, In 1983 The New York Chapter of the American Institute of Architects awarded the firm, Gwath- mey Siegel Associates, che Medal of Honor. In 1990 Charles Gwathmey and Robert Siegel won a Lifetime Achicvernent Award from the New York Society of Architects.  Selected Works  Gwathmey Residence and Studio, Long island, New York, 1965  Whig Hall (renoranan), Princeton University. New Jersey, 1970  Dunaway Apartinent (anterior), New York, 1970  Hu Bash House. Chifton, New Jericy, 1974  Cogin Howe, Fast Hampton, New York, 1972  State University ot New York, College at Purchase, Dormitory, Danang. and Scudent Union, Purchase, New York, 1972  State University ot New York. College at Purchase, Service Suidding amd Heating Plant, Purchase. New York. 1972  Comell University, College af Agynuutural and Life Sciences, Ithaca, Now York, 1981  De Mend Resdence, Lasthampioa, New York, 1985  Wack Alumar Concer. Uouvetsity of Nebraska, Lincoln, 1984  Amernan Museum of the Moving linage, Astana, New York. (988  Solomon R. Gugeenbar Muscum (addbeion). New York Cay, 1992  New York Public Lulvrary (Scicnce, Industry and Busines: Library), New York Cry, 1996  The Ciry University of New York, Graduate Center, New York Cay, 199  David Geffen Foundinon Building, Beverty Hilb, Caltornis, 2000  International Center of Mhatogsaphy, New York City, 2001  Selected Publications  *Gweath ney and Asorrares, Archirects 1987-1991," twith Charles K Gandcel. special sue. Archiaretsere » Urbano (Apri 19841  Abercrombse, Stanley, Gusishoney Siegel, Now York: Whitney Library of Design, and London: Granada. 1981  Arnel, Peter, and Ted Bickford (editors), Curis Gusthmey and Rebers Sucgel: Basldoigs snd Prayects, 1964-1984, New York: Harper and Row. 1984  Bresdow, Kav, and Paul Beesdow, Charles Guuchmey and Robert Sénget Keudentral Corks, 1966-1977, New York: Architectural Book. 1907  Collins, Brad, and Diane Kasprowicz (editoes}. Gusuhasey Seeged: Husldings and Preyects, 19912-1992, New York: Rizzols, 1995  Five Architect. Eusenman, Grevn, Guettonty, Heduk, Maw, Now Youk: Witeenbor, 1972  Mulgsave. Viatoria, Gasathniey Stegel and Auaciates Avchitects, Selected dad Current Work, mages, The Master Architec Scnes HL 1998  HABITAT 1967, MONTREAL Designed by Moshe Safdie: completed 1967  Constructed of an assemblage of prefabricated modular units. Habirar °67 was an experimental, single-family housing proto- type built in conjunction with the 1967 World Eahibirion in Montreal. One of the most publicized and convoversial build- ings of Expo ‘67, Habitat immediately attracted the ateention af both the local and international public and the archiceciural professicn.  Intaeli-born architect Moshe Safdie Fire developed the enn- cope in his fifth-year graduate thesis. “A Three-Dimensional Modular Building System.” ac McGill University’s School of Architecture in (900-61. ‘The prnject was intended as a model of inexpensive, high-density housing in urban centers to ac- conumodate escalating postwar populations. To counter urban sprawl and provide an alrernarive to aparrment blocks, Safdie pro three procorype building systems that utilized cellular. prefabricated components produced by mechanizarion eo re duce materials and labor costs. nepired by Le Corbusier's skeiches for “Immeubles Villav” (1922), in which dwellings were vertically stacked in a checkerboard pactern with gardens in the voids, Safdie’s “howes in the sky” combined variow terraced permutauons w xically create a complete conununity eovironment. The vertical structure was designed w incorpo- rate commercial, culiural, and atucatiunal facilities for up to 5.000 resents.  Aker graduation. Safdie apprenticed with Van Ginkel and Associates in Montreal (1961-62) and then worked with archi- tect Louis Kahn in Philadelphia (1962-63). In 1963, Sandy Van Ginkel, then directs of planning for the World Exhibition slated for Canada’s 1967 centennial, asked Safdie co return to Montreal to assist on Expo's master plan. Safdic agreed with a condition that he be given the chance to ecalize his housing project. Named "Habiut '67,” the visionary concept for univer: sal housing aptly suited che exhibstion’s theme, “Man and His World.” In 1964, Safdie resigned from the planning of Expo to work exclusively on Habitat for the Canadian Corporation for the 1967 World Exhibition as client. To design the project. he gathered a team of mostly young McGull architecture graduates, with ewo of the most imponant contnburors coming from  Kahn's office: architect Dave Rineliart ard sructaral consubant Auguat Komendant. Peter Barott repeeseated the associated firm of David, Barots, Boulva, Archivccts.  Funding the construction of Habitat '67 proved difficult until the federal government's Central Martgage and Housing Carpo- ration (CMEIC) agroed in provide $11.5 million for a dramari- cally scaled-down version af the complex. Ihe esamated $42 milbon original Phase | scheme called for 2 22-stocy complex housing up co 1,200 units, sepported on giant inclined A-frames conuining sairs and elevators. The as-built project consined of a structurally revised 12-story building of 158 unin, without 4 planned communicy school or the commercial and office facili- ties,  Overlooking the Saint Lawrence River and the Expo idands, Habitat “67 was built on Mackay Piet in Mantreal’s pore asca, about a mile from the duwntuwn area. The 354 reinforned- concrete Compooens for dic recuangular apariment “boxes” and pimary suuctural cements were manufactured at the site and then finished on an assembly-line basis. Although clemens such as fiberglass bathrooms and assembled kitchens were separately prefabricared as well, ocher decorative Functional and scructural elements had to be executed in the rraditional manner. Weighing 70 t 90 tons, the completed units were hoisted into place by crane and stacked into three irregular ziggurats. ‘The resulting chutered design generated by che construction process resembled ancient European and Middle Eastetn hillside tower.  On the recomarendation of Komendant, the concecte modu- far boxes became load bearing as well as space enclosing and formed an integrated three-dimensional structural grid with bor- azontal pedestrian corridor units and vertical service cores con- taining elevator and stair shafts, By assembling the modules in various combinanons, 19 dwelling types were created. producing one to fourcbedroom apartments of one to two levels that ranged in size From 600 eo 1.700 square feet. The varied and Projecting arrangement of the completed complex offered apart- ments with privacy, vistas of the river and city. ample sunlight. and a garden balcony formed by che roof of the unit below. The interioe pedesusian streets held common spaces, including children's play areas on the fifth and ainth Boon. Outsde the building, pedestnan crculation was kept separate from vehicle access roads and underground parking. 
Habitat 1967, Moncrcal Lxpo, designed by Moshe Sahlie € GreaBuildngcown  Yet Habitat (G7 mened out to be an expensive propmition asan alternative model to factory-produced huusing and fell shor in several uf its primary objectives, The openness of i staggered box forms seduced the building's rerident-te-land-area rauo from high to medium densuy. Even if Habeas had been built as a 22-story comphex as intended. 1 os still debatable whether it would have been economically feasible as low-cost. affordable housing. After Expo ‘67, the rents charged by the CMHC to recoup costs par Habitae into the tuxury houang range, and no private developers came forward as was hoped ro construct additional phases of the complex.  After the completion of Hahiar 67, Satdic connnued to experiment into the 1970s wich similar housing systems wang grometric forme for the modules other than rectangular, These Uincompleted projects include a student union housing comples in San Francine (1968) and multiple housing in Washington, D.C. (1968), New York Caty (1969), Jerusalem (1970), Roches ter, New York (1971), San Juan, Puerto Rico (1972), and Teh- ran, Iran (1978). One of the majar problems hindering the pen- eral acceptance of these housing prototypes, according to Safdic. was the inability of the buikding srlustry tu develup the extensive mass-production capabilines needed to refine the sywem and make it affordable.  Despite im inherent shortcomings, Habieat ‘67 is std] interna- Gunally hoown and greatly admired as a landmark bowing com: pix. By creatively combining prefabricated factory -produced components with a husteric vernacular housing rype of hillside villages, Habitat embodied 2 utopian visiun of designing a hu- manisoc, unwersal housing alternauve to standardized slab apartment towen. Since the 1976s, the ocaupancy rate of Habi- tat has remained very high, and the relatively intact building underwent a $1.6 million upgrade in 1988~91 paid by its cur- Tent renant cooperative owners.  Micuiie Picane  Ser aise Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Chartes-Edouard) (France): Expo 1967, Montreal; Kaha, Louis (United States); Safdic, Moshe (Canada, Israci)  Further Reading  Komendanr, Augusr B.. "Post-Mortem an Habieat,” Pregerisive Arcbitersere 49 (1968)  Murray, Irena Zantovska (editait, Mehr Saftie: finddong and Prowern. 1967-1992, Moatreal and Buffalo. New York: McGill-Queen's Universi Presa. 16  Newman, Oar, “Habiat A Critique? The Comadian Architect 4, 90. 10 (1964)  Imenor of Habeat 1967, Montreal Expo © GeeatHanldings cam  Safdse, Moshe. Bepend Habitat. Cambmile. Mansachuseres: MII Press. 1970,  Safdic. Moshe. “Habitat at 25," Archrerctwral Keord 180. po, > 41992)  HADID, ZAHA M. 1950- Architect, Iraq  Zaha M. Hadid was wansformed trom an unknown architece into an international presence when she won the prestigious competition for the Hong Kang Peak Club in 1983. In addition. this victory helped to establish deconstruction as 2 viable style of architecture. Although the project was canceled for financial reasons, Hadid used the mamentum generated by her unexpected wiumph to build a strong reputation and temain in the intematiunal arena, This was quite a feat for the fragi architect, as her fine building, Vira Fire Starion (Weil-am-Rheim, Germany), was aot completed until 1993. ‘The power and quality of the deconstructive designs produced throughout her career are impressive, and they have broughe her international renown.  Hladid’s success wan demonstrated carly when she was awarded the Archucctural Association (AA) in Lundon Diploma Prue in 1977. Her devonstructivist designs, campused of dy- namic forms and ptescnted m elaburate renderings. are critically acclaimed and influential. For example, her painungs of the Peak Club project have become scons for architectural students, However. by 1999, after more than 20 yean of profesional practice, Hadid had entered numerous competitions, completed inany projects, designed same furniture and 3 few decorative objects, and realaed fewer than ten buildings.  Quality, not quantity, is the foundanon of Hadid’s reputa- ton. Her fourth-year sudemt project. Malevich's Tecktonik (1976-77), and hee lifth-year student design diem, “Muscums of the Nanctcenth Century” (1977-78). are composed of the tegular geometric forms of modernism that are arranged like Supremarict and Constnactivis: compositions. Although Hadid has maintained chia method of onmposition, in her deconsrructi- viet designs she combines orthogenal forms with curves, rhom- boids. and parallclograms. This was a slow change chat was evi denced first in her Dutch Padiament Estension (1978 79) for Rem Koolliaas’s Office of Meaupobtan Archinecure and firmly etublshel in her project for $9 bacon Mace (1981-82); it has since become her signature style.  Hadid produces innowarrve, aesthetic. and functional build- ings, whether they remain on paper (Al Wahda Sports Center, {9RR, Abu Dhabi) or are constructed (IBA Housing, 1986-93, Rerfint, She has won imporians international competitions, such as those for the Cardi! Bay Opera House (1994 96) in Cardiff” and che Contemporary Arts Center (1998) os Cin inna.  The Contemporary Aru Center is Hadidl’s first building in the United Sunes, and it serves as an excellent example of archi- tectural design ar the end of the 20th century. On the other hand, Hadid's design for the Cardiff Bay Opera House will noe he realized, and it stands for much thar is wrong with the state of the profession. Despite having won fwo separate competitions for the Opera House commission, one open and one invite wnal, dhe project has been taken away from Hadid, Although pethaps disputed, the offxial cxplinauon is chat hes design waa unfavorably received. Hadid belicves that the general public and the Opera House ust officials, wha were laypersons and noe architects, reacted negatively to her design because they could not sead her drawings. In her presentation drawings, Hadid de- picw a structure at different angles and in different stages instead of the tradnional method of giving a single view. such as an clevation It is crue that they can be difficult ew read. bur chal- Jenging drawings do not automatically represent bad buildings, as Uadid's designs for the Opera House and the Contemporary Asp Center iftuscrac.  Vhroughout her career, Hidid has produced high-caliber, innovative work. At the beginning of her career, she helped to evtablish deconstruction as a credible style of architecture. Unlike many other deconsteuctivist architects. such as Daniel Libeskind and Peter Fiscnman, Hadid is interested in an architecture that is pamanily formal rather than theoretical. Av the dawn of the 21a century, Hadid embadies what facets af the profession should be left in the put and what facets offer potential in the future.  Loner ta Lawanc 
Vitea Fite Scanon, Weil-am- Rheim, Germany 1993} © Dan Delgada €2? Aah  Vitra Fite Stawon, Wort-am-Rheim, Germany (1993), detail © Dan Delgado 42 Ant  Ser aha Decowatructivinas; Eseaman, Peser (Unied States); Koolhaas, Rem (Netherlands)  Biography  Born in Baghdad, Iraq. 31 October 1950, Attended the Ameri- can University. Beirut. Studied under Rem Koolhaas, Architec- tural Association, London 1972-77, Unit master, Architectural Association, Landon 1977-87; worked in the Office of Metro- poliran Architecture, founded by Rem Koulhaas, London: pri- vate practice, London from 1979. Professor. Architectural Asso- cation, London 190-87; visiting professor, Harvard University, Cambridge, Manachusein, and Columbis Univer- nity. New York 1986, 1987, Kenso Tange Chair, Graduate School of Design, Harvard University; Sullivan Chair, School af Architecture, Univenity of Illinois, Chicago 1997; gucst pro- fesor, Hochwhule far Bildenden Kanste. Hamburg 1997. Member, School Council, Architectural Association, London: member. Master Jury, Aga Khan Awards for Architecuure 1998.  Selected Works  Dutch Pahament Buildings laddisions), The Hague, 1979  Irish Ambumador's Roademe, Eaton Pave, Landon, 1981  Peak Club (fin prize. comperinon. unhult). Kowleon, Hong Kong, Rd  Office Burkbng (firs prise. competition). Kurfarscadamm. Bein, 194  Al Wahds Sports Center (unbuilt}, Abu Dhabi. OBS  Vices Fite Station, WCeil-am-Rhein, Germany (with Pasrik Schumactee!, 1994  IBA Social Hoaning. Berlin, 1993,  Cardiff Bay Opera Howse (first prize, competition), Cardiff, 19% Conemporaty Aste Center (fire prize, competition), Citcinasn, 998 —  Selected Publications “The Dead Zone.” Archumcrural Deg (July/August 1991)  HAJ TERMINAL, JEDDAH AIRPORT, SAUDI ARABIA  Designed by Skidmore, Owings and Merrill; completed 1982  Uhe Haj Terminal, opened in 1981 at King Abdul Aziy Airport.  2 miles north of Jeddah, Smid Arabia,» among the mow speciacular airport terminals in the wodd. The name of the terminal refers to its use by Muslin pilgrims whe come to Mecca, 45 miles distant. Architects and engineers working for Skidmore. Owings and Merrill's offices in New York and Chi- cago conccived itn 1976 after calang into accounts technical and material considerations, wedded to those of dimare. suitability to an unusual variety of users. and excephonal traffic pateerns. It adapss modern architectural principles of monochromatic sm-  plicny. telationship ty engineering, and temperature control to the specific: site and culture without adding details evocative off ancent umes,  Mecca, Mohammed's birthplace, is the focus of a vast annual Muslim pilgrimage, the Haj, during 2 coughly six-week penod including the month of Dul-i-hija. Pilgrsns arrive trom all over the world to worship at the masque surrounding the Ka‘aba shrine. Each pious Musk hopes to make thes joumney at beast once, and more than 2 milbon individuals come by air for this purpose cach year. The cime limits of the designated season cause a rapid influx of passengers at the airport and rapid deparcure. The normally used terminal spaces designed in the 1960s by the fiew of Edward Durell Stone could not accommodate this traffic, making a eeparare terminal neceuary, Wonhipen of every cli- mate and cultural origin must be able to use the same terminal apace, whether they be cobed, lightly clad. of dressed in business satin, Many have never experienced ais conditioning. The build- ing had tw be flexible enough eo accommodate the pilgrims’ chfferent vultural and personal habits.  Consequently. the arrangements at the Haj Verminal are un- like chose at Western airports, which are designed to hold passen- pers foe brief perinds and are ourfirted with shops, fis-food restaurants, Club and conference rooms, and bass. The usual international traveler volerares artificial climare control and never  Each tent unit consis of a double-curvature tensibe surface that ses conscally toa tension rig Photo by Reha Gunay © Aga Khan Award for Archuecmure 
? Haj verminsl, dengned by Gordon Bunuaf: of Skidmore. Owings and Morn (19°71)  € Photo waney Skidmore, Owings and Merit  ser meruhandise displayed on the floor ar bung from an infor- oul apparatus, as in done at the Haj Terminal.  The designer at Skidmore, Owings and Meruill avoided air conditioning, Jest people unaccustomed to it become uncom: forrable o¢ ill, Nevertheless, use budding had to be habruble alespite the how dry chmate in which the temperature reaches 130 degrees Fahrenheie. ‘they proposed a set of ten modular spaces, expandable by ten more identical modules. Raul de Armas, a design partncr, suggested concrete umbrellas to cover the modules. but an anocipaced shortage af concrete and poten- tial interference with ground-level facihties prompted a change of matenal to fabric structure. an idea proposed by design parmer Ray ©. Allen. Noncombustible glass fiber coared with fluorocar- bon resin (Teflon) had become commenially available by 1974 The engineering firm of Geiger-Berger, which had built the United States Pavilion at the Osaka World's Pair of 1970, rude computer analyres of the seructural design of the Hay Terminal Farlur Khan- Shodinore, Owings and Mereill’s chicf seructural engincer and partner in the Chicago office— directed the engi nocrung of the Hay Terinuial, white Gordon Bunshaht. design partner in the New York office. supervised the design.  Famuliar with cable-hung cent construction, Khan undet- stood that the innovative coated fabri reflects sanhghe back into the air instead af allowing it te heat the area below the tent.  Using dtis material kept the temperature in the pilgrims’ waiting area ar a tolerable level in the mid-A0k, Warm air under the tenn rives to the exterior through a vent at the wp center of each tent. whete che tent pole pencteates the fabric. The movement of hoc ais upward from the reflective roof also creates air currents around the construcbon.  The tenes are constructed om modules of 150 by 150 feet. Each of the ten units is 450 by 1,050 feet, dunensions relaed to the length of the Immigration Procedures building. Only chat two-story building (thar Fuses customs and passport control. bers) is artfivtally cooled: its length is a multiple of the length of bays needed to accommodate Bacing 747 airplanes and che buses parked heside the aircraft that transport pilgrims to Mecca. Under cach tent. kiowdks and toilet modules provide for the pas- senges’ needs. The tent-covered terminal ia flexible and the sructure unobrrudve because fabtic-covered tents require lew mastive support than do many ather roofing materials, Herc, the supporn are slender cylinder of cpoxy-painted scel columns sing abour 150 feet from concree footngs underneath the terminal's flows. The columns taper from over eight feet in diam- eter at the buse te just over three feet at the top and contain roof drains and lighung equipment. Uhe tents’ reflective underside bounces illumination from up-tights used ar aight: they are mounted an four pylons in each bay, Each tent 1s stretched and  formed in a semiconical form by 32 radial eel cables attached to a steel tension ring abour 13 foet in diameter. Corrosion: Preventive material covers the cables, makung the large roof units Possible. ‘The raised tension ring rises about 48) feet higher than the hase of the tene cloth, creating 4 semiconical shape. The fabric is nat straight sided as a cone would be but has a double curvature that ensures stability under vaned wind boads Double-pyion portal frames separate the cents and guard against collec of the whole if une fails. Satisfactory ait quabey uv cn- by mechanical fan towen in the pylons and elsewhere ‘The building is not overtly Islamic or Saudi in ats aesthetic references, It is an example of the molernist marriage of aevthet- tes with function chat, although ostenubly superseded by Post modern reminiscent design at the cime, nevertheless responds sensitively 10 local citnatiy and religious needs. Univerully ad. mired, it has won the Aga Khan Award for innovative modern Islamic architecture, Cakor Blegstiir Karson  See abe Airport snd Aviation Building, Bunshah, Gordon  {United States}; Jeddah, Saudi Arabia; Skidmore, Owings  and Merrill (United States)  Further Reading  Chadlirp, Rata, Concepes and influences: Tawards a Reponatized durernational Archivecture, Vondon: KPI 19K  Eiperssions of Ielem 10 finaldings- Bxploseeng Archrteceure in tskamec Caleures, Geneva: Aga Khan Trust for Culture, 1991  Krmshy, Carol Henselle, Gordon Bunuhatt of Strdmorc, Owings and Memll, New York: Archuectural Hatery Foundanan, and Cambnie. Massachuseto: MIU Press, 1988  Nang. Atim A (ednod), Bualdeng fir Tomortnw. The Aga Khan Award fer Archuerture, London: Academy Faiivns, 1994  Steele, James, Archuccture for a Changing World. The Aga Kabn Ansard for Architecture, London: Academy Fabeions, 132  HAMLIN, TALBOT FAULKNER 1889-1956 Architect and architectural historian, United States  Trained as an architect. Tahot Hamlin became an important critic and architectural histusian during the first half of the 20ch century. Hamlin thought of architecture as an “art for all men and wrote numerous books ahour che history and practice of American architecture from this point of vicw, He alse left 4 legacy for architectural schulars through his creation of the Avery Index to Architectural Periodicals.  Hamlin wanted boch the American publu and architectural professionals to appreciate and develop an understanding of American architecture. In thes vein, he wrote several books chat are accessible to hoth the seasoned professional and the novice. For example. The American Spit of Archstecture (1926) 15 a heavily ilhestrared text that is organized chronologically with the United States divided inte regians and periods, The chapters cach have a brief introduction, usually consisting of a page oF two of text, followed by a series of illustrations with lengthy. descriptive captions placing the architecture in ite appropriate historical conteat. The concern in this text is to allow the reader to see the visual hustary of American architecture.  In Forms and Function of Tuenneth Century Architecture (1952), Hamlin attempted in write a “theory book” that incor. porated the knowledge of structural methods and new problem and their suluuuns chat had developed during the 19308, 1940s, and 1950s. The four-volume series is divided into three Lategoe- ies: elements of antitecture, pamiples of architecture, and building types. The book was intended to promde architects with examples of modem architecture hut did not prescribe of advocate a particular style,  Crock Revival Architecture in America (1944) and Benjamin Henry Latrobe (1956) are Hamlin’s most scholarly books. They ate thoroughly researched and include footnotes and biblio- graphic references. Greek Reviral Architecnire in America argues that the Greek and associated chiuical revivals are not meecly srylintic cevivuls bat rather a distinct representation of the newly formed United States, His biography of Benjamin Henry La- ttube, conaidered by many co be the first professional architect practicing in the Umted States, is his mose umportant book and temains the only major work on this seminal figure. ‘Whe biug- raphy unctudes selected Ietecrs watren by Latrobe and is a well tesearched 16x. Hamlin won the Pulitzer Prize foe biography in 1956 for Benjamin Henry Latrobe.  During his lifeume, Hatnlin’s works were well received: today. however. most of his books arc out of print. His accessible approach to archirecture has heen rendered our of dare by the successive developments in architectural scholarship during the second half ot the 20th century,  In addition to his mary books, Hamlin developed the Avery Tndex to Architectural Petiodicals. During his tenure as libearian of the Avery Architectural Vihtary ar Columbia University. Harlin began tu indes the architevtural periodicals reveived by the library, Fie began the systenutic indexing thac became the Avery Index to Architecrural Periodicals. Maintained originally a acard file, this standard bebhugraphic woul has been published in two editians (1963 and 1973) with 13 annual supplemenrs published chrough 1993. 1n 1979, the Avery Index became the first spevial database in the Research Librasies Information Net. work (RLIN) and chrough ches nerwork has been available 10 scholars internationally. ‘The Avery Index ss consulered the bea resource for architectural articles and 1s used by historians and researchers all aver the world.  Harnlin graduated from Horace Mann School and received a bachelor of arcs degree trom Amherst College in 1910. He received a bachelor of architecture from Columbia University in 1914 and was hired as an instructor and leceurer on the history and theory of archivecture at Cotumbia University’s School of Archivecture fram 1916 to 1947, He became a professor in (947 and professor emeritus in 1954. While an instructor ac Column bes, Hanlin served as librarian ol the Avery Architectural Library from 1935 co 1945. He also served as the librarian of the Fine Ants |abrary during the same time period. He was the first librar- ian at Columbia to solicit drawings trom acuve architectural firms.  Juc Mani Loan  Biography Born in New York, £6 June 1889: son of A.0.F, Hamlin, archi tectural historian. Ancnded Columbia University School of Ar 
chitecture, New York 1910-14; traveled Europe 1914. Worked for Murphy and McGill, New York 1915-24; partner, Murphy and McGill 1921~34. Avery Architecture Libranan, Columba University from 1934: began the Avrry Index te Architecenral Perriedicals: full professor of architecture, Columbia University 1946-56. Fellow of the American Institute of Architects and an honorary associate of the New York Historical Society. Served con the architecuural committee of the Muacurn of Modern Art, New York. Died in Beaufort, South Carolina, 16 August 1956.  Selected Publications  The Fryeymens of Architerture, WG: rece edition, as Architecture. au Art for All Men. 1947  The American Sperit in Avchssecture, \9%6  Howse Plan Beoks Priee 12 1890 in the Avery Library, 1938  Newe European Architectural Lebreria, 939  Archeecctuee ihreagh the Ages, 1940. revised edition, 1953  Greek Revensl Archuecnure in Aotevica, VI4A  Forms and Hanctians of Twentieth: Coanury Archueceare (oditor). 4 wols, 1952  Bergamun Henry Latrobe, \95S  HARING, HUGO 1882-1958 Architect, Germany  A significant coneribuwr w the discourse surrounding modern architecuure, Hugo Haring built relatively few of bis designs over the course of his architectural career. This was duc tw several factors, chief among them the context in which he found him- self —Germany dunng the rears prior to, during, and following Word War |. Akhough the buiklings chat Haring realized are  examples of a significant, if somewhar marginalized. strain of Modern architecrure, it is hin writings and theuretical pro- nouncements that vunsttute his greatest legacy.  Becoming a key member of Germany's art and architectural avant-garde immediately following World War |, Hicing and his contemporaries. -a generation of architects thar included. among others, the Taut brother, Erich Mendcbohn, Hans Scharoun, Hans Pocisig, Ludwig Mics van dcr Rohe, Hermann Finstertin, Walter Gropius, and Le Corbusier —articulated the esanifold aspirations of modern architecture. Hanng’s visiun, what Peter Blundeli-Joncs refers to as “constructed organism,” sought a spiritual dimension in architecnure, asserting the dual  igmuficance of Gestalt aml Geist. Grstad, a corm that denots “torm imbued with meaning or signiticance” (Blundell-fones), and Geist (Spirit in the sense of “the onganining force of mind”) are concepts he emphasized repeatedly in his writings. Haring’s ideas and focus on program as the generator of architectural for were distinct from the Typserung (standardization, narma- tive form} advocated by many of his peen (Hannes Meyer, Wal- ter Gropius, and Ludwig Hi(l}bercimer among them). Two euays in particular, “Strukturprohiljeme des Rauens” (Serucnural Problems of Buikdings) of 193] (rev, 1946), a tract that looks at the underlying orders of building, and "Uber des Geheimnis der Geitalt” (Concerning the Secret ot Mystery of Gestale), his last complete essay, frame hey essential thoughs on architecture. However. these essays are supplemented by bis building desi and collected writings, all of which are critical in comprebending  the nuances of his ideas, Shared by many of the architects col- lected around the Arbrisnst. Nosembengruppe, amd Der Ring, Haring’s ideas trace their origins to the early writings of Goethe, writings that stand as che seminal works of German Romanti- cism. Alto embedded in Hiring's conceprual apparatus are ideas dlosely associated with German nature mysticism, 3 theological perypective that undergirds German Romanticiom. The embrace of these ideas—formulaced through repeated arrcmper to clarify and distinguish his pasidons from his contemporarics— became more apparent as Hiring’s architectural career progressed.  Haring was born in Biberach, a town south of Seuregart, on 22 May 1882. Like most of his colleagues. who would come of age immediately after World War !, Hiring was bom into a world that was becoming more open and more standardizcd. Germany, 3 country chat had lagged econamically behind much of Western Europe, experienced an infusion of new ideas and new influences immediately following Bistnarck’s succesful uni- fication of the northern and southern halves of che German sare, Haring’s father was a highly respected cabinetmaker who maintained a workshop on the premises of his family bume. Not accidenually, Haring exhibited a decided preference for the use of wood and handcraft detail throughour the course of his cascer.  After completing high school. Haring enrolled in a formal course of study, entering the architecnural program at the Tech- nieche Hochechule in Stusigan ia 1899. Ar the rime, design scudies were very comervative, with various historical style: (Gothic. Classical, and carly Renaissance) representing the range of architectural styles permitted within the academy. For many of Germany's architects at the time, Baukuns (the an of build- ing) reigned as the ideal, and students were subsequently raughe the mechanics of building in vonsurucuion courses, statics and structures, and geometry. Freehand drawing was abo wught. although the use of individual artistic expression was restricecd. Haring cvidendy reacted io the insistent pedanrry and limes tions imposed by his faculty. disdaining from usng the word Architektur Unroughout his career. Yet the impact of the terms aswciated with Bawdwest, as distitet from the academically bur- dened Architekewr, cannot be underestimated, cither: Rankunss, with its emphasis on structural systems. new technologies and materials, and vernacular building, provided the foundation tor departure trom academic rules and principles. Open-minded architects, Haring among them, used the term co signal cheir departure from academic tradition.  After a brief foray to Dresden just after the rurn of che cen: tury, Haring returned to Scurgart and began to study under one of Getmany’s carliest advocates uf Modern architecture, the Gertnan architert Theodor Fischer, Alehough Fischer's progres- sive curriculum encouraged students to study the accepted classi- cal idiom, u¢ was from a critical perspective. Embracing the con- cept of Bawkwms, he also suggested that his students endeavor to look at vernacular precedene. such as farms and industrial buildings. Along with his snudents, Fischet’s research into ver- nacular architecture enabled him to formulate a concern for the circummances of context, otganization, and function, an ap- proach that would have a profound impact on the development of “the organic Modernist tradition” (Blundell-Jones). Fischer's promouan of alternatives to the academic tradition in num sug- gested char architeces probe technological development and so-  sial change in their search for the meaning and significance of archicectuse.  During the early years of hus architectural practice, from roughly 1904 to 1914, FLaring, like many peogressevely minded architects of his generation, struggled to obtain work. Neockass- cism remained the accepted mode in both the academy and professional practice, and the perstent resort w tradition by most of Europe's established architevts and their clients, hawever derwative and tired, was broken only by the catastrophe of World War 1. For most young architects, the war served to sideline the activities of practice, which up to that time had been taken up hy failed competition wubmisnons and limited professional capenure. Although already in his 30s, Hanng was aalled to dury, serving as a soldier for a year before finally being tapped foe serace as an architect in East Prussia, Situated within 3 contested and heavily damaged area of Germany caught he- tween Russian, Polish, and German ctiims, large parts of East Prussia (new in northern Poland) were in need of rebuilding, if onty co further Germany's anertion of ownership.  Completing his tour of duty in 1918, tiring remained in the Balkans until 1921. executing significant private commissions in Gross Plaucn and New-Ulm. With his mastiage to the German actress Emilia Unda, Haring moved to Berlin, where he devel- oped an interest in cheater and film—buth significant aspects of Weimar culture. while abu beuming agquanted with che cnengics and ideas of Berlin's cultural elite chroigghuut the 1920s, Hanng’s association with members of Germany's architectural avant-garde, many of chem relocated w Berlin alter the war, developed quickly. Of particular noce is Haring’s friendship with Mics van der Rohe. who by then had established his own office that be offered to share with Haring. The arrangement, which lasted from 1923 to 1926, was bencticial to both archircers, who traded ideas and worked on projects together. During these years, Mics and Haring’s atclice became the “nerve center” of Der Ring, an association of artists and architects who shared a progressive, utopsst vision of architecture. Members were drawn from both the Arbrusret flir Kunst and the more radical Novem bergruppe (an wternational organizarian thar included Russians, Hungarians, and members of the Dutch De Stitt): an abbreviated list of participants included Bruno and Max T'aut, W’alter Geop- jus, Wassily Luckhardr, Hans Poelzig. Hans Sharoun, Hanng, Paul Scheerbart, and Mics van der Rohe.  Although both Mies and Hiring continued to share a vital and mutually beneficial friendship during these crucial years of development, it was at this time that Macs began to clarify hia ideas about architecture, ideas that progressively distinguished themselves from Haring and other member of the architectural avant-garde who sought to develop an "organs functionalism.” This splirring of Modern architecture into two strains, one "goo- metric” and the other “organic.” reinforced Hanng’s earlier thoughts on the foundational premises of architecture's tw workdviews. In later yean, Haring commented on the situation with carefully chosen words: "(When working together] we [Mies and Haring] saw... . chat cach mune go his awn way, Mies that of architecture, and J chat of building.” As Bhundell-Jonex remarks, whereas Mies came w assume the “normative Clasi- cism of Behrens,” Haring strove to further the “responsive Re- gionalism” of his mentor. Theodor Fischer. Despite the fact that both lines of argument emphasized funcionalism as the primary  aim, chis distinction, reflected in the arguments of other groups at the cime (both the Deutscher Werkbund and the carly years of the Bauhaus are prime examples), suggests that there are in fact ewo principal theoretical venues for the practice of modem architecture. On the one hand, there is the universal and typical. a point of view thar consciously cxrends Neodassicism’s high regard for rules, principles, and order, On the ather hand, there a the equally compelling argument for specificity and individual differcrme, where itregubarity arx| the specific rexpome to 4 set of programmatic and site comideranany govern each project. For various reasons, the former vinon for modern architecture, represcited by, among others, Wiaher Gropius, the French-Swiss Le Corbusier, Mies, and modern architecture's preemanent his- torian and propagandist. Sigiticd Giedbon, eventually became the standard for Modern architecture, culminating in Hitchcock and Johnson's limiting and exclusionary [ntemanional Styte Ex- hibinion of 1936,  Vhe repression of Haring’s voice—along with chat of his fel- low “organic functionalists,” such as Hans Scharoun and Erich Mendebohn — furthered the misinterpretatiun uf Modem archi- secure ana distilled style, producing anumptivns that continue to resonate to this day. It did not belp chat Hiting, with Hans Scharoun, his fellow German architect with whom he had his most important association, chose internal exile over immigra- fan during the years of fascise nile. Haring's choice om remain in Germany led to severe [imications and choices; although he did not cooperate with the Nazis, he all but lost his bartle for the woul of Modern architecture. After the war, it became obvious that seandasdizaiion and suentilic positivism would drive archi- teceural discourse, with the weablich architects Gropius. Mics, and Meyer tepresenting the horizon of Modem architccrure against the traditionalists. Despite his best attempes ay reframe the debare on Modern architecture according to in original terms, Hiring’s words were lost to the paur and demands of Europe's redevelopment and che entrenchment of scientific ub- yecuivity 4 the touchstune of Modern architecuste. His resistance to facuons that dominated architectural debate are best chroni- dled by the proceedings of CLAM (Congres Internationaux d’Ar- chitecture Moderne), events chat ked his evencual withdrawal from membership due to the excessive control evened by Le Corbusier and Giedion, rhe preeminent modem historian and Le Corbusier's principal champion. Hiring was not alone in his tesistance ta Giedion’s exclusive versian of Modern architecture, Berlin's Ring. the group he cofounded and for which he served as wecretary. had come to effectively represent Germany's bur- geoning architectural avant-garde. Yet the pusitions sct for by the Ring went unrecognized by CLAM (Hiring accused Gropius of faciltanng chis turn of events) so that a more unsficd, positivist approach wo Modern archivecuure might be realized. ‘This approach, based on standardization and “formalist func- donalism,” was eventually ratified. a circumstance that corre- lated with the dispersal and eventual demise of the Modem movement in Germany in 1933. What began as a general and open debae on the direction of Modem architecture degenerated inw « one-sided monument to historical progress and “rabonal building methods.” The most significant alterna: tive 10 Giedion’s viswon, espowed by members of the Ring, was effecuvely suppressed. and hustory’s cum of events only  moteased its marginalization. 
For contemporary debates a6 architecture, Haring’s ideas have begun ta receive there duc, with organicism and functional: ism resurfacing at viable mades af thought, This is duc en several factors, including an hicecture’s current concera far nature (sus: tainability, organ. form, and green architecture). technological thinking, space, and materials. Haring’s preecupation with na- ture (Mazur), ongank form, Gestaés (utufiod form). and Rasa weed Gent (space and spint) support a view that architecture, the “art of building,” is anything but a standardized. efficent, and abstract pracnce beholden ro a set of objective, quanufiable re- quirements. Rather. the embrace of bath qualitative substance and circumstance. -parucularly the scnstrvity tw context and spevificity—sapports Haring’s view that archisecture ix organ- teed in similar manne to all forms vf life (Lrbéemformen).  Haring's buildings. alhough few and Gr between, remain important as well, providing necessary masertal for revisionist histones of Modern architecture. Phis is particularly true af his masterpiece, Gut Garkan, 2 highly detailed yet simple building, fepresenutive of the “new lunctionalism” thar Hanng repre- sented, The structure. a compound al buildings devoted to agni- cultural work, was built between 1922 and 1928. Its progeam. pieces of which inchade a barn and cowsbed (both built in 1925) aad various ocher unbuilt camponents (pipty. sable loft, and farmhouse). reflected the architect's preoccupation with the ver- nacular, Fischer's “responsive regionalism.” This project was fol- lowed by a emisage factory in Neusradr, a brulchng that, although reflecting similar concems with Gut Gaskau, was consinicted hurriadly and of poor materials,  Hang also built several private homes over the course of his career. but his most imporant contributions to housing were part of the general program for social housing during the 1920s. the yean of the Weimar Republik and. in retrospect. Modem aschitecture's “golden year” in Germany. “Vhese included a hausing project in Berlin- Wedding and hix contributions to the Large housing project Siemensstade for the German company Siemens, a 1920s planning and housing development in Beilin thar provided many architects the latitude to develup their ideas. ‘Only a very few of Haring’s projects were consuucted during the 19305, 19405, and 1950p the succumbed on 17 May 1998 after along diness), although these, alongside hes unbuih designs, betray a continuation of his earlier ideas and their developing sophisiation  Although never ceasing to draw projects with the intendion uf realizing them, Haring himself understood that hie major impact was as a thearetician of architecture. Tu thir ond. be elaborated his ideas at longeh, peuducing esays and notes and giving lectures unul it became impossible far him w do so. Even then, he gave interviews, many of which further refine his writings and starements. Although Gut Garkau remams 3 sem inal event in che development nf modern architecture, Hiring’: most significant contnbations to anhiteture reside in his im- pact on others who managed te realize their work — particularly the German archicut Haru Schacoun— and in his imporume toa weal stun of Modern archutccrure that resonates today.  Euizast ri Burs Gasp  Ser aie Deutscher Werkbund; Germany; Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig (Germany); Scharoun, Hans (Germany): Taus, Brano (Germany)  Further Reading  Bluodell-Janes, Pret, /fam Scherawa, London: Hhaidon Pres, 1995  Blundell Jones, Peet, Huge Haceag. The Organic vervis the Geometra, Seutgan, Germany: Edition Aucl Menges, 1999  Kar, Anton, Marts Jay. snd Edward Dimendberg (editan), The Werear Repuldir Sewrcebook, Betkdry. University of California Prom, 1994  Lawerhach, Hemrch, and Jurgen Jocdicke (editon), Hege Harreg: Schryfien. Etwsirfe, Baraten, Muntgart, Germany: Keener Verlag. 1965  Mumford, Erin. CIAM Dinowrse on Urbentim, 1920-1960, Cambridge, Mauachaverte: MIT Pees, 2000  HARRISON, WALLACE K. 1885-1981 AND MAX ABRAMOVITZ 1908-  Architects, United States  Wallace Kitkman Harrison (b. 1895 in Worcester, Massachu- setts, d. 1981 in New Yark City) and Max Abramovia (b. 1908 in Chicago. Illinois} belong to the generazion of architects mark- ing the tranaition beeween Bears-Arts and modernism in Ameri can practice. From large-scale callaburative design and planning plvieca for government agencies and universitics to corporate office buildings and private residences, much of theie work melds forms introduced by feading modernixts, woch as Mies van der Rohe, Alvar Aalto. Pier Luigi Nervi, and Le Corbusier. Yet, when free of the restraint of collaburation and client demands, both produced original and imaginative work. often inspired by enginecring in their innovarive cochniques and uses of material.  Harrison recerved his eraining as 2 draftsman for architoccural and construction firms, supplemensed by part-time study at Worcester Potytechinx, Institute, the Boston Archisecrural Cen- ter, and the Ecole des Beau Arts (1920-21). A Rotch Uraveling Scholarship (1922) supported mwo years in Europe aruf the Mid- dic East. After 1916, Harrison worked for several New York archivevts: McKim, Mead and Whitc; Rerteam Goodhue; Ray- mond Hood; and Hatver Wiley Carbert. with whom he sudied and later caught at Cohambia Unisersity (1925-26). Ia 1927, he became a partner in Helmie and Cocbent. heir Roerich Muscur and Master Apartments (1929) in New York and cot- laborative work on Rockefeller Center teatured: masonry-clad slab towers that had setbacks characteristic of New York office buildings between the wars and chat prefigured Harrison's ma- nire work,  Abramowirz received degyees in architecture from che Univer: sty of Hinod (B.S., 1929) and Columbia University (MS. 1931), where he ako taught design. He became a student of Harrison's in a housing study group at the New School for Social Rewarch, New York City, in 1931. A jaduate scholarship from Columba afforded wo years ac the Ecole des Beaux-Arts (1932-34). In 1934, Abramowitz joined Corbett, Harrison and MacMurray (1929 - 35; Later Harrison and Fouilhoux). Abramo- vitz became a full partner in 1941, Following Fouilhoux's 1945 death. the firm became Harrison and Abramovitz.  Harrison and Abramovitz ran a progreuive office resembling the atelicrs and deagn enidios of their youth. Despite conven- Sonal educations, both became committed modemists by the late 1930s. At Yale University (1939-42), they helped rejuvenate  Empite Seate Comples— Mall, Albany, Now York (1964-79) Phow © Mary Ann Sullivans  the design and planning curricula. ‘Ther desyn studios hosted such visiting artists. planners, and atchitevts as L ¢ Corbarsier. Jase Luis Sest, Lewis Mumford, Robert Mones, Amedée Ozenfant. Ferdinand Léger. Alexander Calder. Oxcar Nitachke, and R- Rackminster Fuller. Their firm sun became a magnet for tal- ented young designen.  A consummate diplomat, Hartiton’s cae in handling the complcs demands of multiple clients foe business, institutions, of government secured a broad chent base, resulting in many high-profile commussons. His gcnius for forung key baisony with powerful, well-placed individuals extesded the scope of the firm’s business both locally and imernationally, Harnson's friendships with Robert Moses and members af the Rocketeller family helped him execute important buildings at the United Nanons (1946-52), Lincoln Center (1956-66), and the Fanpire State Maza (1961-77) in Albany. Chese jobs led en other com- missions, expecially politically sensitive ones, such as the U.S Embassy buildings, designed by Abramovira, in Havana (19511 and Reo de Janeiro (1952), and the CIA Headquarters (1961) in Langley, Virginia. Abramovitz attained multiple commissions for educational institutions: the Law School at Columbia Uni versity, 16 buildings (195$~70) at Brandeis Univenity, 4 bbtary and student residence (1966-70) for Radcliffe College, and the Krannert Performing Arts Center 11969) and tbe Assembly 14all (1963) at che Universicy of Illinois.  For Harrnon, wollaburation was a typical and successful work- ing method, bur in his work for Nelson Rockefeller at Albany, it proved a fiahiliry, From 1961 ro 1977, he was involved almost sively in che design of the Empire State Plaza. Dubbed “Talicarnassas on the Hudson” by onc critic. its angled slab affice tawen. egg-shaped performing arty center, and monumen- tal cultural education contet betrayed ia buss of artistic control rypical of bureaucratic design. Inspited by Le Corbusier's Mun- astery of La Tourette and Oscat Nicmeyor's work in Brasilia, the cnscmble Laks subthety of detail and the originals’ sureness of form.  Under more favorable circumstances. the firm produced such highly onginal structures as the ‘I ryfon and Perisphere at the New York World's Fair (1959-401 and Harrison's tish-lorm First Preshyterian Church (1958) in Stamford. Connecticut. Harrison felt freest to explore new ideas in domestic architecture. His fasinaton with circular forms emerged in designs such as his Milran House (1936) tn Thermuda. where rooms radiate out from a circular care For Nelson Rockefeller’s latcrnational Basic Econamy Corporation, Harrisan designed 1,500 experimental low-cost renforced-conceete hous (1995) for Las Lomas, Puerto Rive.  Both architects consributed novel solurions te the design and planning of tall office budding, often adapang industrial mate-  ris in remarkable ways tu tclieve the munocony of the slab form.  
‘Two mich postwar office towers in Piteshurgh also displayed ro advantage the products of their cients. Ae Alwoa (1952), Hari- son designed luxurious modular aluminum cladding for the exte- tior, AC U.S, Steel (1971), Abramovitz supported the triangular tower with hallow external members providing uninterrupted office space on all Soon, These Cor-cen acel member, filled with antifreeze and water, created structutally able fireproofing, at significantly reduced wots, Ac dhe United Nations Secretariat (1950), Abramovice transfuemed the Le Corbusian slab into an Americanized curtain wall heat-reducing ghss by Libbey- Owens-Ford. The firm’s work foe Corning Glass over two de- cades, beginning in 1949, included a Visitors’ Center and several office buildings with lavish expanses of glass. | inks with peodic- en of key building material contnbuted to their role a one of the leading corpurate design firms of the postwar period.  From the mid-1960s, with Harrison ocupted neatly exclu- sively by his work in Albany, Abramovitz produced the majority of the firm’s other designs. This long separation eventuated in the dissolurion of the partnership in 1976. Abramovitz tctained the firm as Abramovitz. Kingsland. Schiff whike Harrison prac-  Lint S. Priprs  See abo Corbusics, Lc (Jcannerct, Charks-Edousrd) (France): Lincoln Center, New Vork City; Unived Nations Headquas- tans, New York City  Selected Works  (LS) Embusey, Havuea, Cabs, 1951 ‘  United Nations Plaza, New York Cry, 1952  U.S Embassy, Rio de Janciro, 1952  Alcoa Headquarter, Piersbungh. Penniaylyaniia, 1962  CIA Headausnsers, Langley. Virginia, 1961  Assembly Elall. University of Minor, Chicago, 1963  Linculn Cemer, New York Ciry. 1966  Krannert Peferming Any Center, Univenity of Sllinois, Chriuagn. 1969  Library and student readence, Radcliffe College Cambndge, Mamachuners, 19°C  US Sevd Headquaren, Pittuburgh, Pennsytania, 1971  Empire State Plaza, Albany. New York, 1979  Selected Publications  “Drafang Room Pracuce,” Arduectaral Forwn, 56 January 1932), 81-84  New Livung Space far New: York: “Hactery Park Citys A Proposal for Creating a Sute for Kevudentenit and Busrnes Facies im Lawer Manhattan, New Yuwie: piwvatcly published.  “Ottice Buildings,” in Forna and Funcnors of Iwentseth-Centuery Archttevtere. vol. A tal 4), Bucking Types. edited te Talbot Hamlin, New York: Cohimbia Unnesity Prag 1982  Harmon, Wallace K.. and Cub. Dobbin, Sheol Buildings of Lackey aud Tomorrow. New York: Archnectutal Book Publishing Comspaav, 1931  Harrison. Wallace K.. Harvey Wiley Corbert. Robert Manes, Flief Saarinen, and Hugh Ferrin, "New York in (99 — hive Predictions. Architects and Cary Planners Look unto the Crvstal Ball and Yell What They See.” New York Limes Magazine (kebruan 6, 1949), 1H 19, 33, 44  Further Reading  The Archiseciure of Max Abramovets (exhib. cat), Urbana: on, 1963  “An. Cheops’ Architect.” Timer Mapszne (22 September 1952)  Biceaker, Samuct E., The Potisic: of Archuccence: A Peripevtive on Netun A. Rockefeller, New York: Rutledge Prem, 1981  Doumata, Lanua, Wallace K. Harrian: A Rebliegraphy, Monticello. Mlinais: Vance Bibliographies, 1989  Dudley. George A.A Workilup fir Peace: Designing the United Nations Headguaners. New York: Architectural History Foundsnon, and Cambridge, Masuchusett: MIT Pres, 1994  Max Abramavice and Univertury Architecture Aw latreductery Ribliogreply, Moenicello, Mlinvix Vance Ribliographuer. 1983  Newhoune, Visions, Wadlae Ao Harrian, Arciutect, New York: Rirsol, 1989  Pippin. Paul WT, A Dosen Avigument; Preliminary Drip Study Models for the Facade of ihe Unesedt Natsans Secrviarias Building. ALEC, Bethel, Connecticut: Rutledge Hooks, 1996  “US. Steel Headquuriety Building,” Cost Eaginerring ASCE (Apeil 1970)  Wind, Herbert. “Prafiles: Architect.” The New Yorker (20 November 1954, 27 November 1954. 4 December 1954) (on Wallace K. Hasrison)  HASEGAWA, ITSUKO 1941- Architect, Japan  Trsuko Ufasegawa stands virtually alune among Japanese archs- tects in het attempts to develop a criucal practice. From her earlien work, Hasegawa addressed uve manner in which public buildings are designed and programmed, eschewing butcaucratic directives in favor of a public process. As she masured. other themes also emerged, especially a concem for the environment and for the dncntranchised: women, children. the elderly, the disabled, and the homeless. Although some of these issues remain incompletely realized in her work, their introduction inw profes- Sonal discourse in Japan is significane.  Ironically, Hasegawa was echicared by one of the nation’s feading formalise, Kazuo Shinohara, In 1969, she entered his graduate studio at the Tokyu Institute of Technolagy, and she temained with hum a his assistant until 1978. Many of Japan's crines note today chat their undenianding of dhe muster pre- vented them from initially understanding Hasegawa’s approach.  Funhermore, Hasegawa often used buslding materials as a tool to acheve her agenda. drawing artennon to the materials rather than their purpose, Chis is most apparent im her debut progecr, the widely acclamed Shonandai Cubrure Center, won by competition in 1986 and built just ounide Tokya. Hasega- wa's carlier projects were almost exclusively residential, and she brought to Shanandai the same concern far dient input and attention to detail. The 14,.315-square-meter complex (which tnchudes a children's museum) remaina hughly accessible through the use of tikes embedded with animals’ foorprints, constellations of mirrored fragments implanted in walls, and marbles scattered across punched-metal ceilings.  Punched metal was also significant in framing her inivial repu- tanon. She first used ic in the House ar Kuwahara (1980), de- signed for a metals suppher. and the commodity quickly became ubiquitous in che arsenal of Tokyo's trendiest designers. She  followed this with explorations of various wansparent and trans- bucent surfaces in the late 1980s, anticipating trends that would emerge internationally ten years later by stretching fabric into bulbous shapes, projecting light once frosted glass, Layering poly- carboaate skins, and chorcugraphing reflected light.  Hascgawa's position as an iconoclast may be rooted in ditter- ence. She was onc of only a handful of women architects in Japan and stood virrually alone in her international acclaim and her alliance with che small cadre of architects shaping the profce- sion, Alshough she exphaited this earus, using her position as a bully pulpit. a heavy schedule of lecturing and teaching abroad has also prevented het from engaging fully with the opportunitics of Japan's commruction proves. Asa result, her budding, Lick the refinement and attention co detail found m much uf the work from Japan. Although it may be char Hasegawa felt liberated by the deliberately rough detailing found in Shinohara’s architec- ture from the late 1980s, her own approach is les clearly com- mitted to one position or the other, having areas of cefinement and delicacy juxtaposed with roughty executed components.  Hasegawa calls the materials and form of architecture “hard- ware” and feels thar this side has been overemphasized 10 the deteiment of atchiteytural “sofware.” in particular, ber efor fie in developing s nchly rendered set of sensory expericnces, apprehended by moving along multiple pathways. In publica- Guns, ber dexnptions uften attempe to deliver something that photography cannot, calling attention to ring ndes and flicker- ang light of to the sound of the wind, the cool couch of water. arkl the emergence of a ew alung a ming path.  For Hasegawa. architecture essentially acts as a constructed form of landscape or, in her words, “a new nature.” With Tuyo leo, a close friend. Hasegawa reinterpreted the dense Japanese cityscape as a form of nature. to be celebrated. She often icters vo her buildings as hills, and in her nvose recent barge-scale work, the Niigata City Performing Ars Cencer (1998), she established the roof as a city pack. At a sinaller scale, Hasegawa introduces the texture af landscape in ber work by mixing soil into marras finishes or setting stones and shells in the surfaces of walkways and  Vhis is noc done arbitrarily. Hasegawa strives to awaken what she sees as che lasent memories of nature possessed by each ste. embracing accidental oc dormant qualities ever rational expus- tion, Botond Bognar quotes Hasegawa as saying that she wanu to “accept thoxe things that had been rejected by the spirit of rationaliam—the translucent world of emotions and ube supple and comfortable space woven by nanire— snd to create a land: scape filled with a new form of nature where devices crable one to bear the strange music of the universe” (Bognar, 157). This gives hee work an instincual charactor that is partnularly un- common in public works, the bulk of her ourput  Since completing the Shonandas Culeure Ceacer in 1990, Hasegawa's office alsa produced the Sumida Culuure Factory (1994), the Othima Machi Picture Book Museum in [min (1994), the Muscum of Fruit (1995) m Yamanashi. the Him: Seaside Botanical Garden (1996), and the previously mentioned Niigata City Performing Ares Center — extraordinary output for her tiny office. Hasegawa hus also taken on several underfunded  bogies, designing public housing—the Takuma Housing Project (1992), the Namekawa Housing Proyect (1998), and Imai Newtown Housing (1998) —and two small. rural elemen-  tary schools — Busshouji Elementary (194) and Kaiho Elemen- tary (1996).  In het muse tecent discussions, it » dear chat Hasegawa feels frustrated in hee attempes to coshape the character of Japan's public architecture. In paruculas, she has begun tu question the scale and underutilization of muscums, performing ars centers, and other Large-scale facilities intended by government authari- nes as chic urban cutposts, attempts to staunch population losses from emall cammuninies co the mare dynamic Tokyo, Hasegawa has come to believe thar these scructures ace rarely embraced by the boval community despite her best efforts to rethape the bukiings’ programmung. Instead, she has begutt to call for inte. grated cflores drawn from local traditions and the ebythm of the community. If she is able to cajole local governments int considering this approach, sbe will have considerable effeut on the life and texture of Japan's smalict cities,  Dana BustRock  Biography  Born Shieuoks Prefecture, Japan, 1941, Graduated from Kanto Gakuin architecture program with a bachelor’s in 1964 and stud- ied in the Shinohara Lh at Tokyo Instinute af ‘technology from 1969 w 1971. afterward becomung Shinvhara’s assistant in the lab. Hasegawa worked tor the Mctabolis: Kiyenori Kikutake from 1964 to 1969, berween her praduare and undergraduate studies, Established Inubo Hasegawa Atclicr in 1979. She teaches regularly at Waseda University and Tokyo Insnrute of Technology and has been a visiting professor at Harvard's Grad- uate Schoul of Design. Selected awards include the Buikding, Constructors Society Award for Shonandai Culrure Center in 1992. a design award fron the Architectural Institute of Japan for Bizan Hall in 1986, the Japan Cultural Design Awaed in F986, and the Japan Art Academy Prize in 2000,  Selected Works  Stanoncry Shop, Yauu. Shirwoka Predecuure, 1971  Tokumara Chikdren’s (timc, Matsuyama, Ehime eefeuure, 1979  Howe in Kuwabara, Matsuyama, Ehime Pretecnire, 1980 (destrayed)  NC Hume, Nakato-hu, Tolyu, 1983  Howse is Ikebukuro, Tokyo, 1984  Bizan Hall, Shevoka Cay, 1984 (destroyed)  louse in Netima. Tokyo, 1986.  Sith Road Fapnincn Pavidaons, Nata, 198K  Shonanda Culture Centct, Fujnawa, Kanagawa, 1990  STM House. Shibuya Ward, Lokye, 1997  Takuma Houung Projece, Kumamoto City, 1992  Fnoework Compurer Center, Kanan, Hyogo Prefeceure, 192  Sumuls Culture Factory, Sumida Ward, Tukyo, 1994  Oshima Movhs Parure Bonk Mascum. Imau, Toyama Prefecture, 4  Mauwum of beat, Yaranathi Gry, 1895  Gymnusiumn for the University of Shiga Pretcunite, Hinne, 199%  Hiri Scande Batameal Garden, Hin Cay, 1996  Niigata Performing Aro Center, Niigata Cy, 1998  Further Reading  Hasegawa's unaque pusiuun a a woman prea icing architecture Japan has alrawn sigraticant attentuts te her work, and tbete are several good  
menogtaphs avadahle on her in baghsh. Most anchude euays that draw antencion to the theveetic positions she has ken, Like many of Japan's practitioners, however, Hasegawa writes lice beyond urnple dexcriprive statements. reening diawonons ob the reawes behiad the work for lectures. Retond Hognar and Kip Paks ate two of Hasegawa’s iow sempathetic crite  Architestural Monographs No 31: texte Harepusss, Lomon: Academy Group. 1995 (somecumes Hawgawa wv liaed as author.)  Hogous, Botond. The New fapevese Acvtitecture, New York: Rirzol, 1990  the Complete Werk of ftncke Hasrgama, Vobyo: Space Dogg, Kama Ansacute of Publishing. 1485  Dubacy, Seephen tedstor), Thr Master Asehetect ene IL: lowke Hasegaw, Sclevsed ard Carrent Work, Mulgrave, Vasaria: Une Images Publishing Company, 1997  Hasegawa. fyuho. “A Search fut Now Concepta through Filtenag My Lafe an Tokyo” and “Sumida Meraphorical Townscape. Tokyo.” Arncdurcsirad Deyn No. 99 Japanese Antitecrure 2, London: Acalemy Group, 1992  Inuko Hagawa, 1985 1995, Space Deoign, 11874), Tokyo Kajena tawuruic of Publuhing, 1995  Ineo Haxgaus Hevrat Buildiogs and Proyects, Basel Birkhiuser! tnemtus Peagais d’Archivecture, 1997  “Opening up a New Aubiteceure Scene through Communication.” Keuchitw Buaks. specs! inne on Hawgawa [Jatunty 1993), inchales an cosy by Koj Tako  HASSAN II MOSQUE  Designed by Michel Pinseaus completed 1993 Casablanca, Morocco  King Hasan 11, who claimed that he was inspired by dhe Kuranic vere “The throne ol God » on the waters,” raised this vast monument in his awn honor, The verse inspired the sice of rhe mocque, a reclaimed parcel from che Arlanuc shore, giving the edifice the moniker “The floating Mosque." Standing a the tallest religious building in the world. the Hassan I Mosque was designed to celebrate the 60th birthday of King Hassan IT of Morocco. Buile berween 1980 and 1993, this mosque i also the largest of its type in the world, with space for 25,000 people, inchading space wt aff fnt 5,000 women in keeping with cue toma. Sinuted boldly along the Atlantic coat and pointing to- wanl Mecca, the mosque was dewyned by Irench architcor Mi- hel Pinscau. Beyond is enusmous scale and monumental urban presence, the mosque ts astounding for its abundance of luxuri- ous decoration, crafted from a wide range of exquisite decorative materials. The mosque, visible from great distances, rests at the endpoine of many important roadways,  As ir stands taday, the approach to the Hassan UI Mosque accklentally recapruret the mysteries and auras of the labytin- thine medieval city. Even though Casiblinca is carefully laid out in the baroque style by the French. this city docs not reveal the locations of objects easily, Unless one is in one of the newly built high-nse suructures in the town, the locaton of the mosque does not allow any waming that the individual is about to arrive at the tallest religous budding of the 20th century. Asa pedes trian. the only way one can have a view of the minaret of the structure trom a distance ss it the person approaches the complex  on the roads that border the Atlantic Ovean. From the west, it would be the beautiful meandering Boulevard Corniche, which hevomes Boulevard Sidi Mohammed Ben Abdellab and vermi- nates at the Round About, which aburs the southem terminus of che complex. From the northeast, it would be along Boulevard Des Almohads, which begins at the junction of the Port of Cass- blanca and Boulevard Félix Houphoutt-Boigny and ends at the Round About at the northern terminus of the complex. The coastal road between Boulevard Sidi Mohammed Ben Abddllah and Boulevard Des Almohads is subterranean in order to direct the traffic 10 and from the parking structures below the complex and alw to enable che continuaus flow of traffic along che coast, However, neither of these rwo pleasant approaches gets one into the complex through the main entrance. ‘The main entrance is on Rue de Temnit, and it is Ranked on the west by the Bibliochaque (Library) and on the cast by the Musée (Museum)  As one proceeds to the main entrance from Rue ‘Trenit, the L-shaped structures of the Library and Muscur lotm a gace and frame the person's view of the expansive esplanade. focusing it directly on the mosque. Besides. neither the finish of the Library nor that of the Museum can bold the individual's artention for long, and they suggest very little about the bevel of finish of rhe edifice, 10 that ane it naturally curious to explore what lies be- yond the expansive csplanade, which covers an arcs of 30.000 quate meters and can hold up ro 80,000 peaple during prayers, ‘The first pan of the entrance at Ruc Tiznit is in the farm of a (C-shaped colonnade, whose back at as the sarting point for an immense U-shaped arcade chat is divided ante mullipte coust- yard screens in Front of rhe Library and the Museum structures, The U-shaped arcade also helps to frame one’s views along the eapansave esplanade and gives the sense of multiple transitions Grom une space to another as one moves from the Rue Tinir into the esplanade, The configuration of the arcades into double dodters of columns gives one a setne of cuntained valumes of spice as one proceeds farther into the esplanade. However, rhe coplanade expands into a void once the individual goes beyond the arcades in front of the Library and the Museum and proceeds farther toward che mosque.  It is at a much doser proximity that one begins co interact with the monumental scale of the mosque. The scale of the human figure becomes very small compared to che scale of the columas of the arcade, and it is about the last moments thet ‘onc can look up and have a glimpse at the tup of the minaret. Moreover, looking up at the minaret abo shows how its ewo faales w the suuth elevation are tilted almost at 45-degroe angles from Rue ‘Tuznit, theteby determining the orientations of the wings of the peristyle. However, more impressive is the glow of the marbles and che granices on the cy paving, the marbles and seiliy ornaments on the walls, the col- umas, and the ornare square bastions of the peristyle of the courtyard, On a bright sunny day, che giant green roof and the marbles are showered by the sunlight, forming sculpuired interlocking volumes and surfaces of a massive goiden and green gem. The moment of transition from the vast esplanade into the courtyard of the mosque also reveals the fact that the peristybe that encloses the courtyard of the mosque is maneuvering several angles to maintain the exsentially symmetrical design of the sMruchiare.  The minaret tives to a total height of 200 meters (650 leet) from its base, including jrmour,on which the 1S-meter (49-fou0) copper finial is mounted. The finial is equipped with a Laser beam with a range of 30 kilometers (20 mites). and it points 10 the direction of the gibla, which always indicates the direction of Mecca, bur the 30-kilometer-range laser beam also serves as a lighthouse for vevsels coming into the Casablanca harbor. The copper finial at che top of the minaret reads very brightly on a winny day. so that one sees three major color as ane looks at the minaret: the white marble, the green zefly, and the shiny yellow finial. Alchough the white mathle and its intricately carved diamond-shaped laces make up the primary cladding over the heavily reinforced canceete minaret, the Uwe friezes on the tower are also quite visible,  The ultima space of the mosque is the prayer hall with a capacity of 25,000 worshipers ina 200-by-100-square-meter {650-by-325-square-foot) space. The plan is esentally basinal: a rectangle with three arched naves that are delincated by $0 giant pains of pien. The cwo ade raves are further subdinded by 10 smaller pacts that are near to the sowhern and northern walls. The picrs that flank the central nave and the ones thas are near the walls of the southern and northern facades are con- nected by a series of huge, serrated. high-arched walls. Each pier. the ones on the sides and che ones that define the centil nave,  Hassan U1 Mosque: Casablanca, Morocca (19932 © Naaindi Fllch  is Lvishty decorated with puleshed granite, marbles, plasters, and succes that drop into sulactes (aoxgarnus) that are made up of ptumetous Jobes and arches. The asourgarnar are well defined by the additions of tiny coluning along cheit edges and by the intensity of the caloted sanes in the multiple lobes. The serrated arches that Hank the central nave and connect the piers are also lavishly decorated with mownpirsas. The two side naves contain the gallerics, mevzanine for wamen, who van access them from the ablution seams in the havement. The fine woodwork that slads the mezzanunes on cithes side of the naves is further embet- hshed with stuccos that radiate green. yellow, and white colors. The flaue glows with the shine of a mixtuce of polished granite and marble. The giant reteactable rouf thar covers the prayer hall is 65 meters (210 feed above the foot, but the height of the ceding then drops to 38 meter (125 feet) and finally w 27 meters (0 feet) above the floor at is lowest pont “The mobile ceiling is lavishly decorated with ciders that are embossed wah gold, bur its function 1s primarily ta bring nacural light into the huge space when it ix open. Even then. the depeb of the building from the sides and from the length still docs aot allow narucal hight inte all parts of che building. Rather, it alters the whole acmoxphere in a dramanc way that is quite different from the light provided by the stained glasses, By che time one leaves the prayer hall and descends tn the ablution rooms and the Agama  ns en  
(large heated pool ut Turkish baths) in the basement. all the tesiatance one has for repecting of celebrating an arrwork ix goac. Neasior Bieri  Further Reading  Hasty, Drisn Hausen 1 Mougne: A Sperisue! and An datesturad Wark, Ratur, Morce. Minsiry of Intoemation. U4  Comba-Schilling. Mul. Savted Performances iam, Sexwality, wed Manifice, New Vath. Columbia Univeraty Prew, 1989  Holod, Renta, and Hasan-Udddin Khun, Tr Menger and the Modern World: Archimats, Darron, stad Linagneri dince the £950: Tondan. ‘Uhamer and Hudbon, 1997  Ploquin. Philippe, Frais Peunas, and Mohammed-Alll Senacou:, La Maguée Hanen 11, Diemil Uafags, France: Editions Daniel Briand, 1993  HEATING, VENTILATION, AND AIR CONDITIONING (HVAC)  ‘The 20th-<cenmury proliferation of HVAC systems for condiuion- ing the intenor envirvament played a smunal sole in the devel- opment of modemism. “Manufactured weather,” which Willis Carrier described in 1919 as cleaner and purer than what nature vould provide, freed the building envelope from its role as the environmental mediator between inside and outside. Interior spaces nv longer needed cu be adjacent to the pecumeter to recewe ventilarion or narural lighting, and materials and consraction detailx were no longer subject co regionally specific conditions. cesuking in a design universality hac divorced building from site. Planar surfaces, onnetructed of unprecedented cladding marerials arad weewhed as thin shins auruss che building extérior, retained only one nonacrtheric function: the preventinn of water penctra- tion. The 9th-century permeable moonry building, with in high perimeter-to-core-arca ratio, was steadily supplanted by the 20ch century's impermeable curtain-wall building with its deep door pla. The deterministic relusiunship berween the building and irs exterior environment abruptly shitted to one beoween the buikding and is HVAC systems.  During the 20ch century, the rapid dissemination of HVAC syxtems, partculasly in the Linised States, established the Ameri- can systems as the standard to which all other systems and tech- nologies were co he compared, The Arab oil of 1973- 74 provoked the first swrutiny of the relationship beeween the building and irs cystems since before World War |. but many of the subsequent investigations ended en reinforce the hege: many of the technology rather than dismantle it. Many of these iervestigations, ranging from vernacular revivals anal passive solar designs to systerns integration theory and high-tech buildings, found a nacural home in the architecture academy, as most were based on a formal determinism, The resulting strategies were unable to replicare che conditions produced by the standard HVAC system, which emerged preeminently from this nexus of activity; furthermare, its implementation is beginning to surge again, particularly in Europe, where acw HVAC insuallations are incteasing by 40 percent annually. Paradoxically, che HVAC technology itself was lirtle investigated during this perind, undergoing only minor revisions in its control seratcpy, with the resule char the HVAC systern of the late 20ch century was conceptually and operationally the same as the system in place at the beginning of the century.  The rants of che relationship between 20th-century architec- ture and HVAC systems can be found in 19th-century experi- tents in heating and ventilation. Indeed, the formal determin- ium was in plice even before ait conditioning was well established. This determinism was nos, however, a product of the technalugy: rather, boeh the technology and the architecture were driven by the socal. cultural, and scientific milieus of the 19th century that. alehough no longer relevant, have maintained their influence on architectural form and HVAC systems.  ‘The development of madern chemistry during the 17th and 18th centuries led to widespread concern in the !9rb century abour the human contamination of air through respiration and bodily processes, Ranging from carbonic acid gas to “crowd poi- son.” human biecfHucnts were considered to be the source of deadly diseates. Ventilation with autside air of any quality. even from a highly polluted urban cavironment, was wen as the only solunon to preventing dullnew, dementia, and perhaps death frum human-contaminated interior ait. Although stearn-deiven fara had long been used for ventilating mines, they could sot be practically deployed in small and sonindustrial buildings that did nor manufacture their own steam. Instead, other schemes for moving air were used, particularly convecuon shafts that contained heat sources to “induce” air movement. hese shafts were inserted inro the interstices of buildings and were meant to carry away the “revpired” air before it could contamunate the occupied spaces. This approach, although having little success. was ail considered more desirable than cross ventilanon, as there was alo a persistent fear that drafts caused many epsdenuc dis cases. Foul-air shafts were a common design element during the 19th century and extablished the formal precedent of building infrastruciure ceded to air distribution.  When district stcam service brought low-pressure steam to ushan areas during the 1880s, many buildings weed the steam primarily in heating sysums and sewondarily in convection shafts, but few took advantage of the widely available steam- driven fans. ‘The germ theary of contagion had begun co overtake the theory that disease was spread by air, and the belief thar human respiration produced 2 potsonous gas was on the wane. ‘The added expense of ventilation, particularly in the winter. convinced many building owners tv shut down their ventilation systems. Many of the manufacturers of sscam-heating systems aly produced fans, and in the 1890s, combination fan/heating systems began to be marketed. ‘These “blowers” were advertised as providing “free” ventilaion: une steam supply drove che fan, an the xpene steam, or condensate, was thea circulated through the heating coils. These small systems combining heating and ventilation rapidly gained in popularity and became so well es- tablished chat when the steam supplying the fan was replaced with an dectrical drive, the components stayed packaged to- gcther. The mechanical integration of heating and ventilation, although originally a marketing scheme, became an unques- tioned precedent during the 20th century.  The carly decades of the 20th cencury witnessed enormous opposition w mechanical systems. Many opponents believed thar the use of mechanical syscems encouraged employers ro relocate ro spaces that normally would have been unsuitable, such as basements, turning workers into “cave dwellers” in mo- netonously heated, artificially lit environments. Other oppo- hents were again raising the issue of cost, as the electrically driven fan was no longer a free byproduct of the ecam-hearing coil,  The moe: vociferous uppasition, which waa ncatly succemful in dismantling the integrated wystem, came from the public healeh arena. Fresh, mountain ait had Jong been the desired environ- ment foe taberculoay panents, but the demographic shift af the disease during the 19th century from the general populace wo the urban poor and immigrants precluded their treatment in an alpine-tike sanitarium, U an tuberculosis parients were encour aged to sleep on their roofs and halconies. and schools for mbes. sular children were established in which the windews were kept open year-round. Eventually, open windows were recommended asa prophylactic measure tor the bealthy as well, snd mechanical sytems were shut down in many ushus shoals, In 19t3, a enajor study was funded in New York evaluating the peeformance of 5,500 children over a four-year period with the conclusion thet upen windows were as effective a mechanical ventlanon in providing the necessary antenor environment. Mechanical sy» tems may well have been climinated trom many publ buildings had nor the conclusion uf the report coincided with dhe 1918 influenza epidemic, during which more people died than had in World War 1. The popular belief that the flu was spread through air encouraged many poopte to close chew wirklows, and mechanical systems suddenly hecame a very desirable means of isolating occupants from the gem of others Hygione re- placed ruberculosis as the public's focus, particularly as increas ing dass consimuanens in the United Seases was propelling the rich Lo separate themselves further fram the poor and the Ameri- can born to diffecenusie themselves frum the foreign burn, Man- ufacturers of mechanical systems were quick t capitalize on thus emerging, concern with bypiene and cleanliness, and air washers were invorporated intu mechanical hearing and ventilation sys- tems, giving rise 19 the ait handler. The air handicr became so well established az the standard system thar the incluson of cooling coils, forming the last component of the HVAC system. was almost incidental. The ais-handler. based system, having originated from the 19th-cencury desire to bring ourside air into a building, had been subverred into a syxrem for isolating the inside from the outside.  These chive precedents — the concepe thar fresh air and foul ait must be separately maintained in an infrsseracrure-intensive dinzibution system, the integration of different functions into the same system, and the development of the hermetically waled “manufactured” environment— formed the basic of the peevail- ing architectural incurperation of HVAC tyaems. Unquestiona bly. the advent of HVAC technolagy facilitated the sptcad of new functions, such as movie cheaters; the development of new forms, such as high-rise office towers; and the prohferauon of new materials, such as glazed currain walls, Nevertheless, the incorporation of the technology int dhe architecture remains rooced in the 19th-century precedents, and this determinism was accepted as a given for much af the 20th century.  The necworks of duces chat typify most kinge-building HVAC systems are litte different (rum the diseriburion systems intended to purge “crowd puisun” in the 19th century, Although there were examples of direct ventilation thraugh the exterior envelope as well a1 the use of corridors and occupred spaces for ait disunbus- tion, they were overshadowed by dhe use of duets o infrastruc: tural elements, such as plenums, as only “contuned” systems could isolate the “foul” air from the “fresh.” In 1929, the Phila- delphia Savings Fund Society building became the second office tower ro te filly air-conditioned, with a service Aloor inserted  at the 20th floor for the take of uncontaminated fresh air. and part of the clevatur shaft space was dedicated to vertical duces fing multiple stores, Louis Kahn's design of the Rachatds Med- ical Laboratanes (1957-64) carried the faul/fresh shatts beyond the interstices of che building and replaced them with service towers flanking the laboratory spaces. Although Kahn claimed to have hated ducts, hes assignation of air disenbution to separate towen simply eeinfarced the 19th-century desire to isolate foul air an vertical shafts, By the time of the Pampidou Center (1972- 76), designed by Ruchard Rogers and Renzus Piano, the language of che ait-distribution system overshadowed its purpose, and Statuituus ducts and intakes found an aesthetic expression that sagnified tbem as the hallmark of “high technulugy.”  Phe integration of different functions within 4 single system may have originated from the clever marketing strategics of 19th-cemury manutaceusers and engineer. but un the 20th cen- fury. sntegravon was given an immaculate concepuon as the fundamental arrrihuce of an organic structure analogous to the human body. HVAC distibunon sptems were likened to the body's catculatory syweom, and Le Corbusier once described the air handler as the hings af the building. Uhis organicist undenurrent may have prevented the decoupling of functions as other technologics changed, particularly during the switch from steam power to electricity, and 2O0th-century architects have louked instead tu capand the inteyrauun, The use of infrastruc ture as air-distributian space scemed ¢o logically extend tn inte- grating the sir-distribution systern with the structural system, even though these systems are uperationally iovompatible. In the Yale Are Gallery (1950-53). Louis Kahn's space frame was designed with tetrahedral dements so thar multitudes of small ducts could be ducaded chrough the ciangular voids. In Marco Zanuso’s Oliver: factory (1964), integration went 2 step further, a the guden supporting thr roof plane were hollow tubular clements that also served as the air supply ducts. During the 1970s and 1980s, after integration of HVAC. and seructural systems had become fairly standard. archnexts and engineers nurned their arrention toward extending the functionality of the HVAC system, although it already incegrated several very differ- ent types of furtions: couling, heating, ventilation. humidity control, odor control. and filtration, Distribution loops were added to circulate through luminaiees for directly relieving theie heat generation, and in buildings exemplified by Lloyd's of Lon don (1979-84), circulanon loops were insected berween the lay- ers of double glazing wo cantrol ehe mean radiant remperature. This atemion of HVAC funcuonality into che building enve- lope led to the current tend of vented double-skin buildings. tn which air crrculares through the entire facade of the building, adding mostly operational complexity and additional consruc- ‘upon and maintenance cost in exchange for a more organic inte- gration of building systenns.  The isolation of the building interior from the exterior envi- ronment was common when pre- Enlightenment theories of con- tugon presumed that air was the carticr of pestilence and thar only the conscientious scaling of buildings could protect one from contracting cpidemic diseases such as cholera, onsump- tion, and the plague. Although devdupments in [9th-cenury chematury and mediune dismantled the theory of “miamic” contaminauon, equipment manufacturess and engincers capital ted on the general public's fear of invisible germs and resur- rected the Larenc belief that aur was dangerous The ait-handler- 
fhased system came to fruition when urban air polluon was peaking tn the 20th century and when tenement dwelling snmi- grants were perceived to be the source of tubers uloss. The 1906 Laslun Building in Buffalo. New York, incorporating one of the fint air Washers, war desctibed later by Brank Lloyd Wright as being hermetically sealed co keep aut the podsanous gaser pro- duced by nearby trains. Willis Carrier boasted in 1909 chat his HVAC system was able to mantulacture an intenor environment that was “completely free” trom bacteria. As air conditionsng proliferated, high-rise buildings in particular began 16 chuminare operable windows. and the Lever Hause (19514, by Skidmore, Onrings and Mernil, sated the entre facade, including the floor vlabs, behind a curtain wall that tead as a single hermetic skin. Even in buildings designed ax “sustuinable” rexponees to the enctgy crisis, the belief remains thar the hermetic seal peotegts the interior. The Audubon House, renovated in 1991 by Croxton Collaborative, has operable windows that the archireus have suggested be kept losed so that the HVAC oy stem can properly dean and filter the air.  ‘The technology for conditioning the interiue environments of buildings has changed liale during the course of the 20th century, and the nacure of the determsnistic relanonship berween buildings and conditioning systems is even older. daring back to the 19th-century precedents of che HVAC system, Uhere i a peed reason why the technology has nor been substantially challenged. Unfike mos neher problems in fluid mechanics and hear trandecs, building aie behavior is a true cuising pot at phe- nomena: wide-ranging velocities: temperature/densicy samnfica- thons: conductive, convective, and radiance transfer; laminar and turbulent flows; and randomly moving (and ta generaung) objects, The ais-handier—hased HVA maintaned its hegemony for nearly a century because ull its ability ra provide reasonably homugencuus condnions among this cacophony of behaviors. Since the energy crisis, however, the disadvantages of the single integrated sysccm have begun to ounreigh its advantages, Control systems have become much pore expensive and compkex while air quality and thermal com- fort have degraded. In additian. cfforrs ta improve energy effi- ciency in TEVAC systems are producing diminishing retums, and sustainability initiatives have just begun to renew the focus toward reducing energy comaumptivn further. Many atclute ts have looked to return tu passive and natural conecuon sratepes bout bave not been muuch more succeailul than chet 1 th-contury: predecessors, parucularly in regard to application of chet meth- ods to urban buildings in vatiable climates. Ocher atchirects are arempting to cirarmyent the sustainability concerns by scarch- ing for alternanves im fosel fucl conversion for building systems. ‘These alrernarives, including solar power and geothermal energy. may provide long-term benelin with regard to greenhouw pas emisions but do noe addres the more immediate weakncwcs of the HVAC sytem or the dircet archineetural contribution to energy cumumpuon,  BD. Mirco Aptinc ron  Further Reading  The new field of technology and culeure has recenehy begua tw address the implications of eneiranmental wunttal, and books such as Caaper's ant Toanes's clarify the cultuial and social conics surrounding the emergence at HVAC svicems. A compreheniive wvervion and discussion  of the development of 19th- and early 20ch-century HVAC techaology occur in Donaldson,  Banham, Reyner, The Architecture of the Well: Tempered Envéroument. Chicago Untvenity nf Chicago Pree, and London: Architectiral Press, 1969; 2nd edinon, Chicage: University of Chicago Prew. and Locos: Architectural Prew, 1984  Billings. John Shaw. Je Pruvnipie of Ventilanon and Hosting and These Practival Appivation, New York: Sanitary Engineer, and Tandon. Tribnier, 1884; 2nd edition, New York: Sanieary Enginers, THRs  Carnet Faginecting Corporation, The Story of Manafactirnd Wosbee. bn the Mechanical Weather Man, New Voth: Casrier Faginerring, 1919  Couper, Gail, Arr-Candinaneiny America Engmece: and the ConcroBed Farvineement, £900) 1960, Balomare, Maryland: Johns Hopkins Universicy Pree. 1998  Cartan, Alain. Le mesasme cr lt yongielte: Lodorat et Uromaiginaare social. AVIle-XIX¢ siete, Pari: Aubree Monuaigne, 1982: as The Fond sand the trugrant- Oder wad the French Socuil Imagination, Cambridge. Mavachusits: Harvard University Pren, and Leamington Spa. Warwickshire: Beng. 1986  Donaldson. Barn, and Bernard Nagengast. Heat and Cold: Mastering the Great Indeoes A Selective Hiuery of testing, Ventilanes,  Asr Conderunung anet Refrigerarion from the Ancoenats te the 1950s, Adanta, Georgia. American Scxicry of Heating, Refrigerating, an! Ait-Conditioning Engineers. 19%  Efbort, Coot Do. Faves aad Antntecture: The Develapment of Afatertals and Serena for Braiding, Cambrdge, Massachusetts: MUD Press 1992  New York (State) Commuswa ut Ventidanon, Report of tbe New Perk Sete Cemmusion an Vennitnon, New York, Qunua, 1923  Rad, David Rowell, Uhotratats of the fheary and Practice af Ventubetiow, sith Remark oo Warming, Ealusive Logheing, and the Cermmunuatien of Seund. London, Langman, Brown, Green, and Longmans, 1844  Forma, Nancy. The Gaypel of Geemt: Men. Wamen, and the Microbe in American Life, Carntirlge, Mana hunena: Harvard Univertaty Pies, 148  HEGEMANN, WERNER 1881-1936 Architect. Germany  Werner Hegemann achieved early renown and international prominene. Alter his death in eke, he became shrouded in obscurity. Only recencly has his invotvement with the emergence of ory planning and modern architecture regained artenrion, yet he remains bes known than other “invisible planner” whoo impact on the petception of modern architecture and urbanism derived from their ideas rather than visible. built cxamples. Heg- emann’s intellectual inquiry focused on the evolving torality of the city, asguring to a grasp of the city as a cultural phenomenon touting from collective action over Gime. This quest for a com prehenuve overview energized his academic and theoretical ura- jetury. The mnelusicn of political and culeural history as agai cant Beton for present and future city planning distanced Hegemana fram the salient architects of the 1920s. It also con- tnbuted to the repudiation and eventual rediscovery of his pasi- tion, which asngned pride off place to city planning and consid- cred architecture 2s but ane element within the dynamics of the evolving metropolis.  Although Hegemann never acquired architectural training, he studied philosophy, history. and economics at the Univeniry  af Berlin, eventually carned his doctorate on politcal science from the Univensiry af Munich.  His return to Philadelphia in 1908 to work as a muniapal housing inspector led to 2 sequence of events crucial lor Hege- mann’s career and to ory planning, [1 brought him to Boston, where he panicipated in the civic improvement movement “Bos- ton 1915" and its promotional activities and exhibinon of 1909. One March, a man proponent of the Greater Bertin Comper tion for a maser plan and conremplating 2 future echibitwn, urged his nephew to atudy and report on the “Baton 19157 exhibition (1909) and the se-called Congestion Shaw in Now York (1909). ‘These American exhibitions ant city planning and selated subjects are nocewurthy precedents of the major Unever- sal Cory Planning fchibition in Berlin and its sequel. the laterna- tional Caty Plinnung Exhabidon in Dusseldorf (borh 1910), Be- yond the expectanone of the organizers in Berlin that he woud contribute experience and material from aceow the Arlantic, Hegemann structured the major com eptual content of the echi- bitinns in Bertin and Dusseldorf. They are considered landmarks within a cluster of city-planning high poine in the year fiom 1909 to 1913,  American Progressivism hid shaped Hegemunn’s interpret- tion of exhibitions as ychicks for sumulasing publa: awareness of urban issues. deeming dhs esscrtual Jor advaming urbanism for the bencfit of society. City planning required socal action to be camed forward. [n Berlin, che winning compeution entries were shown together with a wide sckction of European and American plans and models. The historic past, the present, and schemes fae the furure merropelis were displayed together with explanatory texts and sratistical charts. This orchestration Facili- tated comparison and cohanced the concepe of city planning 25 aconcern that bridged national haundaries.  In the wake of the city planning exhibitions, Hegemnn be- came engrossed in the action group “bur Gross- Berlin.” which crusaded agains the dismal housing comlimuns in the ecntad barracks (Mirrskasernen}, agicaung for beer bowing and open space. especially playgrounds  An invitation to becture and consult in the United States brought Hegemann’s activities in Bertin to a halt. Following an invitation by The People’s Institute (Wedicated to progressive adult cducation}, he arrived in New Yurk in March 1913 to visas more than 40 towns and cities scruss the country, Tn bis leaures, amply reported in the local newspapers, Hegemann fave as much attcnuon to the valuc of the “experience,” not “example.” of Europe to American pluining as he did to the reverse. His journey ended in California, where he temained until March 1914 and composed Report on ot City Plan for the Municipalities of Oakland and Berkeley \V9V5). Rather than a summary of recommendanons, this work 1s an exposition ot the author's ideal of reconciling a rational. scientific spproach with responsiveness taward the historical and cultural uniqueness of a given city.  Hegemann departed [oe Japan, China. and Australis, anticé pating that he would be back in Lurupe by the end of LOLA. He did not reach this destintton until 1921. At the ourbreak of World War I. his German ship was detained off the coast of Fast Africa. Evencually. ecgrettully abandoning his copious notes and photographs, Hegemann jumped ship and made hus way back so rhe United Seaces.  brom 1916 until 1921, Hegemann pursued a careet as a consultant, setting up an office m Milwaukee. Wisconsin, When the United Sxates dediared war in 1917, he was considered an enemy alicn but was allowed to work. Forming a parmership with the landscape architect Elbctt Peety (1886-1968) proved auspicions. Their projects, mastly residential developments, are preserved in promotional brochures illustrated by Peets's draw- ing. The layouts refhect the influcme of the kngtith garden sites, adapted wo an Ametican Lindscape and melded inte the adjacent street grid. Signilicant among them are Washington Highlands, Wauwatora, Wisconsin, and Wyomising Park. Reading, Pennsytvannia. Working on the Latter, they opened an offwe with Joseph Hudnut in Now York, Described as a “resi dential park,” the dengn preserves the xenic beauty of the large tract. An architecture ustng che local red brick and gray limestone was iccommended.  Few af the projects by the parinesship Hegemann and Peers were realized, although their {he American Vitrwetus: An Archi- sects’ Handbook of Curse Art (19221, a compendium of over 1.000 lustrarions of histone and contemporary ensembles of build- ings, emphasized a sense of place and the primacy of the urban fabac. The text abdicaics chronological time and architectural seylen in Favor aff space and the relationship of buildings that frame it. achieving a synthesis of volume and void. The text ha since become an important contribution yo the literature of urban planing,  Hegemann's upton (ar editor of the Wamuths Monanbefic (fir Basckame, 1924 33) eogarding the architecuure by the hetoic figures of the Modem movement tended to be critical, but to somider lun an-Modern is simplau.. He wrote perceptively 00 Ench Mendelsohn. J.-P. Quad, and Adolf Loos, Ths archutec- tural criticism was conditioned by his belief in the primacy of ty planning over architecture, his profound socealist leanings, and enduring cammirment to housing. Historians af rhe Inser- national Style have otien dismissed Hegemann as reactionary, questeoning hus defense of traditional architecture and individu- alc laree tainted by Narism, ach as Paul Banatz, Paul Schnutchenner, and Paul Schultce -Naumburg, whom he event ally repudiated. Adverse reactions tn Elegemann’s position were froned by hiv attack on the Weinenhohiedlung, Deutscher Werkbund, Srutegart (1927), a project that becuine recognized as exemplary for Modcen building, Hegemann saw a degencta- ton of functionaliam into superticial seylistic Formalism in most of the Wenscnbulsteliung progects: his outhouk was probably tinged by the affront ta his self-estecm as a city-planning and housing expert when he was shunned by those involved with Weissenhof.  Professional and increasing potitwal tensions made the year 1928 a watershed foe Hegemann. His attention shifted from architectural matters and his dedication to the edatorsal work at Wasmuth to political activism and urban history. ble published Dias steinerne Berlin: Geschichte der grinsten Mietshasernenstads dev Wels (Berlin, 1930) in which he atsributed the uagedy of this metropolis tea sequenie of inissed opportunities and etrancous deusions by thos in power, primarily the Prussian state, which sawed the city’s falure te adhteve the status of a mayor capical.  He book Eardirnte Geschichte (Hatory Debunked), beanng the woniuilly maokeading dediauen “Den Fuhrern der Deuschen. Paul Hindenburg und Adolf Elitler in erwartungs- voller Verehrung gewidmet.” was published in February 1935-by 
Jakob Hegnet, Leiprig He urged the author to leave Germany immediately, fearing for hiv arrest or worse, Initially, the dedica- tion deluded the Nazis, but soon all wopres of chia first edition were confiscated, Ac the notarious bouk burning of 10 May 1933, Hegemann’s historical publications, Entlervee Grshichte among them, were condemned to the flames.  A proposal to lecture at the New School of Socual Research in New York and assistance from the Emergency Commmattec in Aid of Displaced German Scholars enabled the family to leave Furope in lace October 1933. Abin Johnson, president of the New School of Social Research, offered Hegemann a teaching position, but not in the prestigious “University in Exile,” which woul! have ented him vo a higher ulary. This self-governing tewcarch institute had been established only recently by socialise and Jewish scholars. Its faculty voted againet accepting Hege-  mann, claiming that cry planning and housing —the topics of  his courses—were architecture and not social scence.  In 1935, Hegemann embarked on writing 4 major work on housing as an integral component of city planning that may be considered a possible seyucl to The American Vitrurtas: Canc Art. City Planning: Honsing comprises three volumes: volume 1, Hinerical and Sociotogical (1936); volume 2, Political Eoonamy and Civic Art (1937); and volume 3. A Graphic Revinw of Conic Art, 1922-1937 (V938), Hegemann did the groundwork for all valismes and completed the text for volumes | and 2, which demonstrate his impreuive knowtedge of American hisuey and contemporary concepts and conditivm. Volume 3 entailed the sclection and obtuining more dian 1,000 illusuations from all over the world and was carried co completion by ewo dedicated frends: Wilham W. Foester and Robert C_ Weinhorg. Consider- ing thar ix was brought forth under che adversines of exile, Hege- mann’s last published work is noteworthy, being imbued with his pragmatic idealism and faith in the city as the highest cultural attainment.  Cristiane Caasemann Couns  See abso Urban Planning  Biography  Born in Mannheun. Germany, 15 June LH8!. Graduated fram Gymussum Plocn $901; enrolled at Konighiche friednch- Wibelr Universitat, Berlin 1901 and 1905; seudsed ar the Fa- culté de Droit de L'Universiré de Paris 1903-04: studied at University of Pennsylvania 1904-05: cared doctorate in pols. cal science from University of Munich (908, Organized plan hing exhibitions in Boston 1909 and Rerin 1910; publidhed Report on a Ciy Plan for Qubtand and Rerkeley VV: traveled tw Japan, China, Australia 1914-15, formed partnership Hege- mann and Poets (Fbert Pecta), City Planning and Landsape Architects, Milwaukec, Wisconsin 1916. 21; returned to Europe 1921, edited Wasmathy Monatshefic itr Baukunst 1924-33. Ac- tively opposed Navsm; published Ensdante Geschichte 1933, burned by Nazis; departed trom Germany 1933 to New York: taught at The New Schoof tor Social Research, Columbia Uns- versity {professor nf urhan planning) 1933-36. Died in New York 12 April 1936  Selected Publications Ameritunoche Parbanlagen: /éerparks, Nuteparks, Ausen- und ts, Park Zaweckverbtnde, 1911  Imernssionale Sadtebau Ansstelbung a Ditseldorf, 2 vols, 1911- 3  The American Viruruus, An Architect's Handbook of Crsic Art (wits Elbert Peen), 1922  Inuernastonal Citscr and Town Planmag Exisbinon, Jubilee Exhebinen (edhtve}, 1923  Ameribanssche Arbisknur und Stedthenkurst: Ein Uberblick aber den bemsigen Stand der amevikanuchen Bankunst im iheer Kesichung zum Stadichen. N25; revied edition, 1927  Facade of Buildings: Foonn of Old and Modern Busines and Dwelling Houses, 1929  City Planning, Hewung, 3 vob, val. 3 edited by Wiliam W. Forster and Robert ©. Weinherg, 1936-38  Further Reading  Kobe, Onto, Afte eeacr Emtetuag con Werner Hegemana, Berlin: JE Hobah. 1930  HEIKKINEN, MIKKU 1949- AND MARKKU KOMONEN 1945- Architects, Finland  THeikkinen-Komanen Architects, a Uielanki, Finland, office founded by principal) Mikku Heikkinen (1949-) and Markku Komonen (1945 } in 1974. Boch were trained at the Helsinki University af Technology's Oraniemi campus (designed by Alvar Aakw, 1949-69) and influenced by the [960s interest in stand. adization of building components: and harmonic modular de- sign sywems, particularly thase devised by Aulis Blomsted. Heikkinen and Komonen’s work draws an influences ranging from midcentury Califumia modemism and Jean Prouvé to Amerwan minimalist sculpeure of Donald Judd and James Tur- rel. ‘Their busit work is mostly insncutional, set in a wide variety of rural ot sennurban sctungs. Gencrally simplified, abseracecd masing schemes give many of theis buildings a sculprural quality.  The firm first atwacted attention outside Finland with its competition-winning entry, “Heureka,” for the Finnish Science Concer (L988), constructed in Vantaa outside Hebinki. Heikki- fen and Kornanen’s design houses a collection of disparate pro~ grams in discrete platonic forms, appearing both in plan and elevation as a collage of minimaliss clement. Sited at the junc- ban of a commuter railway and a river, it free-form plan is integrated inty both che natucal and man-made landscape—a monolithic tunnel under che railway connects the Center w a parking lot, whercas a suspension bridge ovcr the river provides pedestrian access, Building materials vary widely. with the archi- tects ying steel frames, concrete, and timber in structural schemes suitable for shaping each separate portion. Contrasting volumes and surfaces—in the building and out ineo the site— demonstrate the architects’ preoccupation for specific form to be matched to appropriate materials. Other, scientific demon- strarions are integrated ineo che building fabric. as with a facade of mirrored glass and stee! armature set against the railway tine,  where it doubles as both + demunseration of the color specirum and an acoustical shield.  Heureka’s varied materials and colliding masses avoided the pttfalls of Postmodern pastiche by being experiments with arche- types—sphere, cylinder. bar, grid—rather than literal historical elements. Similarly, che firm's construction palette has not been limited to contemporary High-Tech or pure modernist, madi- fied indigenous construction techniques and materials appear in variety, expecially in the projects for West Afrwan whool build- ings (Guinea, 1994} of a pair of Karchan interpretation centers (Kuhme, Finland, and Kostamus, Russia, 1993), Noncthelew, a formal emphasis on ample gecmettics and Proportions remains the stylistic locus.  Komonen, editut of the Icading Finnish architectural review, Arbkuche, between 1978-80, noted thac “Postmodern eclectt- asm” never pained much ground in Finland because historical quotation was seen as bart left metaphorwal, and moderis ex- penimentanon, especially in maserals, stardards of axembtics, was a strategy net vet exhausted.  The emphasis on sweeping facades and archetypal forms reap- pears with the Rovanietai Airport Terminal (192). The terrni- nal functions are housed in a steel bow with a cable-staved rvof. Tn cum, the box us fronted by a long arc of a canopy, also cable- stayed, and other site improvements that inscribe Larger ans out into the landscape, Vhis specific reference co Rovanseun's location on che Arctic Circle is continged on the intenor, where a skylight documents the Arctic’s sabele yeas-ro-year shifts and an art installation races enidence of the Earth’s orbit once the terminal's floor,  ‘The Emergency Services Callege in Kuopio, Finland (1995) creates a precisely ordered landscape around separate buildings. A long bur with a double-loaded corridur houses the teaching college. Surmounting the worridur a doped placing and aposel stecd frame for cable stays, vpial io Hcikkinen and Komonen's work, creating a rhythmic roficape. Students are housed in a dormitory shaped as a gentle arc set back trom the college, an arrangement thar articulates the college's entrance. This parti of a curved dormirory shape, in contrast to a reculincar instruction space was reworked for the European Film College ar Ebeltofr in Denmark (1993). But instead of the courryard-style grouping of elements at the Emergency Services College, the film college's bar and are are deplayal in conteast to ie sloping site. The dormitory’s access stairs have been dramatically pulled out of the arc and grouped to make five pavilions crowning the higher portion of the school’s site. Opposite, the instructional buikding cuts the site in half, ralushly perpendicular to a depression in front, which facilitates 3 dramatx suspended main cntrame wo the sccond Hoor of the embedded bar.  Heikkinen and Komonen’s imernational work continued with the commission for the Finnish Embassy in Washington, D.C. (1994), The embasry isa bux fronted by a mesh facade, juxtaposed by green granite facades, and sited againue a steep ravine to the narth. The south mevh facade ts fitted with a brunze trellis to allow creepers to shade the interior, whereas the moth facade’s extensive guzing visually brings the great trees of the ravine into the building. Inside the bax a light well through the center of the building provides illumination Jor the lower level. Elements of the building entwine the site figuratively: at the front, lights sct into the drive mark the embassy’s construction  module, whereas at the back, lights set on the ips of poles continue the main flooe darum out among the trees.  The recently completed Lume Media Center (2000) in Hel- sinki’s Arabia neighborhood is a part of the expanson of the Hetsinka University of Arr and Deugn and continues the expen- mentation with the vocabulary of mevat facades fronting baxes, exposed steel frames, cables, and glazed walleways, but now works within 3 context of old factory buildings. Also recently com- pleted is a molecular biological rescarch center for the Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetica in Dees- den, Germany (2000),  Tine Lanustan  See abo Aalto, Alvar (Finland); Blomstedt, Aulia (Finland); Hedsinki, Finland  Selected Publications  Hoklanen. Mikko, “Anchsecture Beyond Philosophical Ideas.” OZ 18 (1990)  Kamonen, Markhu, “Herok ‘Takes and Everyday Budding.” Process sAtchsmcrure 32 (1983)  Further Reading  Davey. Peter (aliton), Aeikbinen aired Kamonen. by Heikkinen and Komonen, Barcelona: Gil, 1998  Moggan, William ieditor), HMeibtinen and Komenes, Now York: Monacrh Press, 1998  Quantil, Makotm, Fran Architecrors and the Modernist Tradision, London and Sew York: & aad FR Span, 195  HEJDUK, JOHN 1929-2000  Architect, United States  Throughout his caret John Hejduk's speculative dengns exam- ined the fimits and porentiale of architectural represcatation. Trandorming the daminane 20th-<enrury tenets of fanctional- ism, Hepduk’s work incerrogates the origins of aschivectural mak- ing and mmcaning located within personal desire and memory (informed by literature, painting, and other parallel forms of tepresentation). Generanve pragmacic and programmatic wsves were infused with this pactic intention, resulting in works of extreme spatial plisucity. Hejduk’s research inirially explored architecture in speculative axonomsctnc design, then moved to- ward built works, and finally toward pure poetic impulse.  Asa link berween whar has been buile and what could be built. aif of Hepduk’s proposals were inherently constructable, although tew were realized. As the dean of the architecture pro- gram at the Cooper Union for the Advancement af Science and An (1965-2000), Hejduk decisively influenced many genesa- tians of designers with this unique vison of the vocation of architecture.  ‘The beginning of this erscarch began in che mid- 1950. while he was teaching atthe University of Texas at Austin (along with Amenxan architect Colin Rawe), Later named the "The Toras Rangers.” their ecvisionint investigations af madern architevtute strongly shaped the theury and praatice of architecture after modernism. Heptuk’s carbest design work intcteogated and ex- tended a strict Le Corbustan vocabulary of forms, frames, and gridded spaces with 4 degree of precision and control drawn 
more from De Stijl painter Piet Mondrian’s paintings than from the Cubut precunory. This first series, the Texas Houses (1957 63). camined the mutability of space Lomposed within idealized structural frames whete the prevision af modern grace anal sts drscrete syste are fused she tn amtonumous apparacus. Thee formalin works, precisely inscnbed un axonumnetae sketches and drawings. extended the vox! of moder space inte a hermetn negation vf site and Wwotcat.  bir the honsses ot the Diamond Series (1965-67), che intluence of Mondrian's pantings is more explicit. Uaing both orthogonal grids and a fundamental 45-degree tration of plan, the resultant structure, encinsure, space, and objects are compresied into a dialogue that strains atthe hmuts of axonamemec reptesentanan,  The exploration of the clemental relations of form. function. and planes was transformed anal liberated trom determiniat grids in the next phase af tescarch, the Wall Houses (1908-74) The Wall Houses tepresented a wurch for a symbolic order guverning the Forms of fiunctonul prugeam whele individual spaces are enuoded as extremedy primary volumes (citcle, square, reiangle, and oval). In the Wall Lfouses. Hepluk also questioned the lis wool status of che wall un architecture as a space defining cle- ment. In these projects. the wally often separated from and extending beyond functional voluznes, became sigruficane meta- phorical represcatations of passage. boundary, and mass, The "14 House C.* used Miesian planes of the brick villa to extend inte brpotheucal landscape. In che 71/4 Hous: D,” thesc planes disappeared, and in the “3:4 House,” the differenriated spaces were disributed by elongated circulation paths. In the “Wall Hause 2/Bye House.” (designed in 1973 bur onty built in 2001, in Groningen. the Netherlands) the diagrammuaric distillation of function is distibuted across buth sides of a méuphorx wall. The “Wall Iouse 3° sated rhe wall ax a plan or plane tor compeni- Gonally arranging purise vulures uf space, appearing tw be turned inside out, and achicving the futdiry of space that the earlier series tesisted.  Among che sguificant examples of hin buile work ate the Berlin Tower and Garden Apartments (1998) and a crvic center (2000, with Antonio San Martin G. de Ascon} in Santiage de Compowcla. Spain,  Hepduk was later recognized in the publication Frue Archetects asa significant figure in the emergence of a new Amcnican mod- ernist seyte. along with Charles Gwathmey. Peter Exsenman. Ru- chand Meier, and Michael Graves {known as the “New York Fave"). These archicects drew on the legacy of Le Corbusian modernism at the scale in the design of the domesin house to develop a thoory of architectural construction that remained relevant tm madernism,  Throughout the 1970s ant early 19806, Hcpluk worked chrough a new series of propusals that led to che radical fagmen- Ution af space into freewaading abject-buildinga, Vhese “mas- ques" (1979-84) manifest as structures that dety categorization, blending architecture, scenography, sculpture, and poetry, The term “masque” (naiedrat reflects the masking of function by form and tevalls fetes, festival, and even death masks, rejecung, the funcoonilism of arvhitecture tor metaphor. ‘The Berlin dfas- cars, built in 198) at the IBA in Berlin, Germany, reveals He} duk’s terest on the pastische of rhetone with architectural form. Situated ena site ravaged during “orld War EI, the Beehn Afar cara contradicted the dominant urban logic of reconstructing the shattered perimetcr-hock urbanism wath in fill buildings.  In 1998 Hejduk staged the a Mascara de le Medusa (the Maak of Medusa) in Buenos Aires. Constructed of wood and metal and painted black, a Mascara de la Medusa is ited within an historical neighborhood called “La Boca” whose houses are made of primary color—painted metal and wood heees. Exccted at the daomtep of Fundacién Pros, alungside a tiverbank, the Medusa project is vinble fim several entrances to Bucaas Aures. It was designed to be a collaborative space where urban-artistic projets including perturmances. poctry readings. plays, and even a dixe would flourish. Orher Afaicana projects were done int Vladivostok, Russia, Riga. Latvia, and elsewhere.  Thostas MicaL  dee sho Le Corbusier (Jcanncret, Chackes-Edouard) (France)  Biography  Borns} July 1929 in New York. Studied at the Couper Union for the Advancement of Scienue and Art (New York City) and the University of Cunuonat, Ohio, carned master's degree in atchitecture, Harvard Univerary, 1953. Itaveled to Rome, Italy, on a Fulbright grant the following year, taught at University off Texas, Austin (1754-56). Worked for 1M, Por and Partners (New York.) and A. M. Kinney and Associates (New York,). Assistant professor, Comell Univenity. Ithaca, New York (1958-60): Yale University (1961) protessor. Cooper Umon. New York (1964-2000); dean of architecture program, Cooper Union (1975-2000), Fellow, American Insitute of Architects (1974). Died 3 July 2000 in New York.  Selected Works  Atcherturm Chaloucnstras:. Weilin, Germany, 1988  Mar of tlic Medusa, Buctius Aino, 1998  Bye House (or Wall House}, Groningen, Netherlands, designed an 1973; huile poattisnwusly in 2001  Selected Publications  Anhaseing Foundations, New York: Monacelli Pres, 1995  Education of an Anitet, Now Vouk: Rarroh, (988  Powter Wenge, Golden Hams, Stone Vetk, New York: Monacdli Pres, ys  Samsding, New York: Ruzzoh, 1994  Vladtostok, New York: Rizzwh, 1989  Mask uf Medust: Works 191." 15983, New York. Rizzoli, 1985  HELSINKI, FINLAND  Architecture in Helsinki is above all young, the vast majority having been built in the 20th century. hrough such an abrupt transtormation of urban environment, Finnish architecture has lormed a wordwide heritage. A certain unmistakably Finnish quality en architecture ts created out of the blending of Finnish traditions, chmate, and narure with cosmopolitan modemiry. Vhe architecture of Alvar Aalto, for example. who dominated Finnish architecture From 1927 until his death in 1976 at the age of 78. 1s regarded ax distinctively Finnish in character. ‘The National Romantic movement was the first style to be inpured by Finnish building heritage. The firm of Elie Saarinen,  Hetman Gevdlius, and Armas Lindgren took the lead in the creation of new urchutecture. Intermational influences ranged from the architecture of American H.-H. Richardson tu German and Viennese Ant Nouveau (Jugendstil), lmaginative and puctur- exquc, this movement sought ro fuse architecture with decorative motifs. Authents: Finmsh building materals such as wood, natu- ral stone. and granite were favored. Lars Sonck’s Telephone Building (1905) in Hetsinti recalls the Finnith medieval trade tion. Sonck's Stack Exchange (1911), a neuslauical monuniental building, features 4 yramdlime interior of alemaring, white and red colors.  To the decade preceding World War L. binnih architecture achieved greater simplicity, as scent in Selim A. Lindysist’s work, Eliel Saarince’s monumental Helanks Railwa ron (1919) features 4 high tower and regulated cubic pavdions. Another nutable building is Sigurd Frosterus’ residential and office build: ing “Uaas" (1912). Naannen’s tantly unrealized Munklineny Hiaaga plan (1915) and the Greater Helsinks plans (1918) e preed the ideal of the city as a work af art, Although chis tradinion was broken by the next generation af architects, archi- tects such as Bik Bryggman and Aaltes were able eo integrate new buildings into old susrounding..  After the declaration of Finland's independence in 1917 from Russia, Nordic classicism became the leading styfe, enriched by Finnish classical architectural beriage and new interninonal models, The Parhament House (1941). designed by J.S. Siren. was the greatest classical proect Oiva Kallio produced a plan for the reorganization of central Helsinki based on Siren’s Parlia- ment Building. However. the greatest achievements were in ces dential buildings and social housing. The garden suburb Kapyla (1925), designed by Birger Brinila and Ore-T Meurman, em- bodied the social ideals of the period. The architect Mani Vali- hangas frecly interpreted wooden clasacal style to create intimate domenic architecture with standardizal elements An important model was Finnish wooden farmhouses in the wamworks wom munitics,  During the pened of ansnon to funcnonalsm. a new gen- eration of classically crained archirects, such as Hilding Eketund, Bryggman. and Aalto, created archirecture that is natural, light. humane, and deticate, as een in Ekelund’s Hetxinki Art Hall (1929). Bryggman’s works range from functionalise dengns to those of the 1940s and 1950) that emphanise the assimilation of tradiuive as well as the ene of the Landscape. Marta Rlam- atede’s Union Bank (1926) in Helsinks, in Romantic Classicism, also pointed toward functionalism,  White functionalism was en full force by the 1930s, During the functionalist phase, rom 1927 unul 1939, Fanowh architeces gradually assimilated internananal influenses. such as the work of Le Corbusier. modern Durch industrial buildings, Soviet ar- chitecrure, and the work of the Swedish arulutece Gunnar As- plund. Functionaliem led to a radical reform of architecture and auned at resolving real problems and creating interconnected. well-lit spaces. One of the first functionalist building was Glas Palace (1935) by Viljo Revell, Niilo Kokko, and Heimo Rithi- mili. The Olympre Village (1940) by Ekelund and Marna Valkangas was the first significant proyeut built by a Finnuh public utility housing company. Lino Ullberg's Bensow Office Building (1940) exhibits a marure command of the modernist vocabulary.  [i the 1930s, 4 Lirger varvety of material, such as wood, nafuieal stune. chnker. and bik, was used in functionalist arche- tecture, which was hecommg mere practical and mure regenal- ot. Combinations of budding parts and oom forms that opencd onto outdoor spaces achieved Hesible spatial arrangements. The wooden structures and yom forms developed by Aalro would became a source of inspitation tor decades to come, Aalto made 4 gniticant coneribution in the creation of a living and wotking envirunment that is dose to nature. Aalto’s house and wadio {19361 in Hebinks sefleet this ideal Je ample L-shaped plan integrates a much more compley form The punty of Aulw's eatlict functionalises «replaced by 4 unique blend of the reman- i Urdaion, dassciam. and funcianalism that would be e- proved in his mature work, Through his design fut standardized wood furniturc. Aalto achieved a cohesion between antenot spaces and the furnishing disc refer 10 Saurinen's work and to Frank Loyd Waght's concept of organic architecture.  The central aim at postwar reconstraction was the creation of cow-cficient an well-functioning housing Standardization, unstiated by the Finnish Association of Anchiteces. became im- pormant. Cubelike houses in. wood—rhe anty available mare- tial—came to efritomize Finnish housing, Aalto initiated the “AA system” of industrially produced eapandable wooden house types. His aim in the 19405 was the development of “flexible sundardization,” which pointed far into che furure. An impor. tant source of inspiration for Aaho wa the Karclian house, a flexibly evolving group of buildings with a variety of form.  The 1950s ate often seen a the golden age of modern Finnish architecture, The penod saw a fundamental change im building because of widespread urhanzarion. In 20 years over a million new dwellings —two-uturds uf dhe entire number un Finland — wonld be bute, Same of the finest achievements are the carly pans of Lapiola Garden City, in the suburhs of Helsinki. which showcase the integration of the landscape and che applicadon of industrial constricting techniques. Aarne Frsi, who designed the master plan, alu designed ute apartrnent complex at Myllyde $ (1961) on Helsinki. Ervi’s tinest building is Tasdo Library (1970) in Helsinks. The Palace Horet and Industrial Cencer (1952) at the harbor, designed by Revell (a former anitant of Aalta) and Keijo Potaja, marked the trend toward rational, clear-cut form, Che plan of Revell’: Karjensivy Verrace tlounes 41955) near Hedsinks has varations that are well adapted w the topography. This project resonates with Yrjo Lindegren’s celebrated Snake House flats (1951). which gave diverse forms and sheltered yards ty 190 munscipal aparumtent blocks. The annex to the Helsinks Workers’ Institute (1950) by Aulis Blom- stedr remams one of the finest cxamples of an extenvon to an old building. A landmark competition. held in 1954 for the Qramem Chapel (1957) on the campus of Hebinks Technical Universiry. led to the creation af one of the most celebrated modern Finnish buildings, The groundbreaking design by Heikki and Kaija Siren combined the clasucism of Mies van det Rohe and Aako's organic lorevt imagery. The intensive, spiritual anterior space features a glass wall through which nature can be seen heytond the altarpiece.  fe che 1960s, architects shifted atccarian io the issues of fast growth. technological development, and global problems. One rend. marked by steucturalism. Canstructssism, munumalism, and purism, was tuwand the design of universal and theaible systems and structures, apecially those thar were dixposable and 
Helsinki Pariiamenc Howse. by J 8. Siren (19314 © Ohne Lick (CORBIS  variable, The Exso-Guuzcit Headquarters (1962) by Aalto and the Marimekka Factory (1974) by Erkki Kairaino and Rejo Labtinen are notable industrial and business projects. Aalto also focused on cultural buildings The copper-clad Academic Bookshop (1969) conauns an aurium parti inspured by Sunck’s Stock Eachange. The attrum, decorated with verncally suriped halustrades of white marble, is lie by sculpeural roof lights and prism-shaped skylights. Aalto'’s dream cultural proce was the creation of a new center of Helsinki that was Co give a new image to Hetsinks based on compterely new symbols. Of his designs, only one, the massive Finlandia Concert Hall (1971). was built on the western shoreline of Téalé Bay, Clad in white marble, the building daminates the cownscape. Aaltn's perennial uensitiv- ity eo light can be sec in the light-filled hall with wooden Jouvering in indigo.  The most influcntial Finnish architect aftct Aalto is a disciple of Blonutedt, Reima Pictila, whuse work spans from the 1960s to his death in 1993. His ewlognally balamed designs are pow- erfully individual. Finnish local expression is blended with refer- ences tv the experimenul European architecture of the 1920s. Pietila’s winnung design for the President's Residence (1993). with a form of a mermaid washed up on 4 shore. is based on natural metaphors, such as the crystalline strucnure of ice, Tree manifs decorate the doors, Another influential figure, Aarno Ru-  wsavuuti, a caster of pure, mudem, minimalist architecture, created buildings chat are cool, stripped, and sctf-contained, Ség- nificant peojects include the rextotation and extension of rhe Helunki City Hall (1988). One of Tine Penuila’s oustanding designs for powcr stations is the Hanasaari Power Plane (1976) for Ifelsinki. In the Helsinki Municipal Thearer (1967), Peneita achieved 3 lively digdogue between the sumural terrain outside and its constructed counterpart inside, An important representa- tive of classical modernism in Finland is Juha Leiviska. Myyt- maki Church (1985) ifhustrares Leviska'« highly recognizable aes- thetic and cxemplifies his sculptural use of light.  ‘The 1980 and 1990s saw the manifestation of a diversity of style, often inspired by old buildings with varied surface treat- ment, Gullichuen, Kairamo, and Vormala’s Stockmann Depart- ment Store cxtemion (1989) is one of the rare recent urban interventions in the center of Helsinki. The refined and simple glass-and-stee! facade successfully defer to the neoclassical land- mark. The works of Juhani Pallasmaa, thc firm of Hakkinen and Komonen. and MONARK, which represent chtee generations of contemporary practice. are uncompromisingly modemist with an emphasis on precision, purity, and meditation. The Irikeskus Vower (1987) of Exkla Kairamo used repetinon, rhythm, and emphasis on the vertical, One af the new landmarks by Mikko Heikkinen and Markku Komoncn, whose work emphasizes pre-  cae, clean, and taut lines, is che perforated metal lighting col- umas (1998) lining the road to Vuosaari. The Center for Chang- ing Exhibitions (mid-1990s) by Pekka Helin and Tuomo Stitonen has a luminous gies entry hall chat takes advantage of the darkness of Finnish winter and fall.  The unique quality of Finnish architecture ts often repre- sented by the oept of the “architecture of silence.” which poine to 2 philosophical, internalized process that generates a wide range of architectural expressions, ‘The urban tradition ix young, and the achievements in Finnish architecture tend to be che buildings that are placed in untamed nanirc of a landscaped park. The archetypal simplicity chat is inspired by the landscape has been the source of the astonishing tradition of asceticism, restraint, measure, rationality, and above all w- hence, The tendency toward “natural architecture” has mani: fesed itelf in the ways in which Aalm sought repeatedly to Bberace architecture; Pictila integrated warm, organic forms into modernism; and modernist architects sought to carve away cx- com and create singular organic forms and volumes, 4 universe of solitude.  Haze Hares  See abo Aalto, Alvar (Finland); Heikkiaca and Komoncn (Finland); Helsinki Raitway Station, Finland; Pietiti, Reima and Radi (Finland); Searinen, Eero (Finland); Sesrinen, Elie! (Finlead); Siren. Hethhi and Kaija (Finland)  Further Reading  The majority of bnglish-Languasee works on Muneush architecture tocuses: oa the work of Alvar Aalto. In the lase decade scvetal comprchcnave  works on modem Finnish architecture have appeared. and significant works on the romantic national movement also cami out.  Conaah, Roges, Writing Architecture: Famdmas Fragmenss Fictions: ‘An Archivectunal Journey through the Twentieth Centers, Cambridge, Masuachusetes; MIT Prem, 1989  Connah, Roger, Thr End of Finnish Accitecrure, or, Cine, Povwrmbin' Hchinki: Finnish Building Centre, 1994  Hausen, Marika, ct al, Elied Seerinen: Projevn, 1896-7923, Cambridge, Maneachansctes: MIT Prem, 1996  Tlelander. Vilhelm, snd Simo Riera, Suamalsinen rakeneuctaide, Hehinki: Kicjarhtyma, 1987; a5 Modern Archizecture in Finland. Helsinki: Kinjarheyma, 1987  Koho, Tima, Adve Aude: Urban Finland, Helisnki: Finnish Building Centre, 1995  Korveamaa, Pekka (edi The Work of Architects The Finnah Auociation of Architects, 1892. 2, Helsinki: Finnish Association of Archiwess. Finnish Budding Centre, 1992  Mikkots. Kirmo, “Alvar Aalto and Town Planning,” in Gere Lose Orte-1. Mewrmanrn 90-vuctixjahlakirja: fe Commerenttan of the 90h Birthday af One-1 Mermaa, 46/1980. \Yelsinki: Ragenmutkina, 1980  Moorhead. Gerald, “Finland after Aalto,” Archatecrwral Record 178, ner. 10 (1990)  Moorhouse, Jonathan. Michad Carapetian. and Lecaa Ahvola-Moorhouse, Hebinki fugeadsiel Anhisccmre, 1H95— 1915, Helsinki: Ouava, 1987  Nerdinger. Wintried (editor). Alvar Aatts: Toseurd a Haman Me inet, Munich and New York: Prestet, 1909  Niluls. Raima, Archinciure and Landscape: The Buslding of Frelend, Helsinki: Orava, 1994  Norri, Marja-Reta, Elina Seandernskiokd, and Wilfned Wang (editons), Fredend, Munxh and New York: Prestel 2000  Poole, Scere. “Foreign Bret: Finkand (The Linergence of Comemporary Funtush Arctotcctute).” Progrrasie Antuneare 73, no 9 (1942)  Poole, Scott. The New Fianoh Anvbisectunr, New York: Rassali, 1992  Quansnll, Mukcolm, Alias Anta, at Crnical Study, New York Schocken Rooks, 1983  Quancnll, Makan, Ketone Pretelit: Arrtutecture, Context, and Mederma, New York. Rizzoli, 1985  Quancrill, Malcabn, Finrsh Arhinctwre and the Maderaist Tasdition, Loadon and New York: Spon, 1985  Quanuill, Makolm, and Bruce Webb (editors, The Culture of” Silencer: Architerture’s Fifth Dimeanen, College Station: Venas A and M Uneversiry Press. 1998  Ron. Peres (editor), Alvar Aalto: Rerwerm Harmurnur and Materiation, New York: Muscum of Madern Art, 1998  Richands. fames Maude, A (aide 29 Finmesh Arctuseceure, New York: Praeger, 1967  Rihank, [ame Maude, 800 Years af Finnesh Arcbinernoe, London: David and Charies, 1974  Salohor, Acko, Modere Archisetise i Hnland, New York: Praeger. 1970  Schildt. Gotan, Afuer Ante: The Complew Catalogue of Architecture, Design, and Art, New York: Rizzol, and London: Academy Edinons 194  Suhildh, Ciivan, Atuer Aas: fhe Decor Years, New York: Ructuli, 1986  Schild. Goran. Alvar Aube: the Mauer Yoan. New York: Rizzuli, vel  Tempel, Egon, Nene finnoche Andutekine, Teufen, Switcttand: Naggl, 3968; as New FineA Andaiecire, wranalated by Jame C. Palmes, New York: Praeger, 168  Trenchet, Micha, fhe Alves Aalte Guide, New York: Frinton Anhnecrusal Prew, 1996  Tuom, Timo, Knstuna Paneeto, and Eyjs Rauske (editors), Aber Aalio in Seven Wnildings Interpreratune of we Arhints Work: Aleur Aaise in Sieben Bawwerken: lorerpretatonen der Lobeatwerts eines Archickion (bulangual Lagheh-German edition), Helsaake: Masur of Finnish As bitecrare, 1998  HELSINKI RAILWAY STATION, FINLAND  Designed by Etiel Saarinen; completed 1914-  The Helsinki Cenirat Railway Station is one of che carlient orke- brated landmarks of pose-Art Nouveau architecture. It was built in response to Finland's increasing wen-nf-the-century demand for railway services that coukl link domestic and international cites. Designed in 1904 by Finnish architect Goutlich Eliel Saari- nen (1873-1950), the winning corrant in the competition held by the Suate Railway Administrauon. its phased construction commenced in 1905. The first phase was completed in 1909, the sconnd phase, however, compnsing the station proper itself, was only substantially completed in 1914.  The work on the interiors continued for several years. The inauguration was delayed unl March 5, 1909, because of irs canveron to a military medical facility in 1914 and its use as such by the Russians until the end of World War 1. After the war, when Finland reclaimed its national independence, addivional modifications were necessary. The claborate waiting area for ex- ample, that was previously designated fur the czar af Rusia had to be redesigned and reconstructed for the president of the new 
Velanks Raibray Searion, designed by Flicl Nauciun (1914~) © kato  republic. Although these unforeseen citcurmlances compro mined the design develupment of che building’s interior and delayed itt intended civic use at a gateway te the capital, they never detracted from dhe Station's fasighted cole in Hebinki beconung a modern Mih-century metropolis,  “The Central Station's design that was intended tw ceweute the spirit of the emserging Romantic Nationalistic movement in Finland anstead sparked extensive public debates in the volinle dimure of public opinion abou Romantic Navona versus Romantic Classicism. Whereas the former was driven by a search for a Finnish national style, the latter was associated with nestal- 2 and the imperialist Russian mannerism apparent in buikling designs in Helsinks. Protracted criticisms and an equally smpor- tant fusion of progressive design influences led to several major revisions, which wete informed by American architecture and new developmental trends in German and Brinch railway station devign. The statian’s arch, for example, with inpur from Herman Gesellius, was characterized as 4 simplified interpretation of the ‘Transportation Building designed by the American architect Louis Sullivan for the 1893 Warkd’s Columbian Exposition in Chicago, [Uinois, Sumilarly, the side clevanons were linked eo Sullivan's other well-known huilding, the Navonal Farmess Bank (1908) in Owatonna. Minnesota. [he station tower's af finuty to that of the Palan Stocker (MOLL) by Austrian architect Josef Haffmann has aby been extensively noced. The most lre- quent association, however, was made with a peominent crample of Jugendsul, the Secession Exhibinon Building m Vienna, Aus- tia (1899). designed by Austnan architect fase Olbsich.  Although a tectonic correspondence herween the station and ite saurces of inspiration ix evident. it hax been filtered by an unprecentiaus and logual Nordic design strategy thar has ab- stracted the classical and the Tinnish vernacular influences to achieve architectural clarity. Saarinen’s final design emerges as tauonal and without referencing any romanticism typically evi- dene on architecture of the post-Art Nouveau cra.  The station complex creates an averall impression of a metic- uloudy detaled Expressionist: Modern form, even though it was spatially configured as an angular U-shaped tctminus in compliance with a predetermined plan prepared by Board of Railways staff an hitect, Bruno Granholm. ‘She boldly scaled and geometrically defined heraldic single-arched granite elevason of the main entrance is damunaced by a barrel-vaulted and copper- trimmed roof. The arched window with recded frames is hon tontally divided by a massive flac copper-ccimmed canopy to emphasize the enssance. The geometry force of the Hanking pices is relieved by a pair of seylized sculprures of masculine Nordic figures by Emil Wilsram on hoch sides of the entrance. cach extending a spherical Lanter as they emenge from the wails, Asymmetrically planned, che mass of the terminus is punctuated by 4 49-meter high clock cower with a copper-cladded dome that mediates che vertical upwand thrust of its shaf from an octagonal plan. The synergy of these forms with their clean-lined Feometry ss a potent introduction to 2 building, within which forma! design issues dealing with modern functions have been successfully addressed as evidenced by the relationship berween intemal functions and external form.  The station, a remarkably alvanced buikling foe the period, also represents a celebration of new construction rechnolugies and redefined collaborative rdationships between architect ant engineer, in this case Jalmani Castren. Although conventional maverials, such as brick. concrete. smooth hewn granite. and plaster for wall asrtaces were used routinely, the arches in the waiting area were constructed with dimensional concrete. which at the time was a relatively new procedure in Europe and unfa- snidiar co the Finnish construction trades.  The Central Station drew international ceitical suctain ot only to ies design and the architecture of Finland in general, but also to ita architect, who until 1907 was only regionally known, as a founding member of the Gesellius, Lindgren, Sasnnen Part- acohip. The timely convergence of the winning entrce’s design approach tempered by an empincal understanding of Helsinka's inne city and eovirons and how planned transportation systems would affect these as a coherent metropolis established Saarinen’s international stature.  The Censral Station not only provided Helsinki with a monu- mental focal poine and a picturesque landmark. but alin made material contribution to the definition of the histurical dimen- ons af Modern architecture, This is significant when comider- ing that Finnish architecture was previously hindered by the culture's geographic olacion trom mainsucam Were vultuzes and a language unfamiliay 10 outsiders, Acclaimed by the passage of time, the Central Station continues to represent the virtues of architectural clarity and the courage to creatively contront them.  ATOLA LAWHENCE  See ake National Farmers’ Bank, Owatonna, Mianesots; Pa- lais Stoctet, Beussets; Saarinen, Eliel (Finland); Vieana Seces- sion  Further Reading  Chia Janet. Alben, Fel Seerinen, Chicago’ Unaveruty of Chicago Prees, 1948: cevised edinon, as Saarinen: Franch. American Arvhrtect and Exucaver, 1979  iausen, Manka, “The Hebinks Rasheay Station in Flicd Saannen’s First Versions, 1904." in Latedehistorisittsea nushermsbsa Aomthoteritkhe andier, vol}, Helvinks: Taidehotorian Seura. §974  Hauten, Marka, Elie! Sarrtnen: Sowmen-sike, Kouruu. Finland: Kustannososalcyhtio, 190; as Elael Saarinen: Prayerts, 1896— 1923, wanstaind by Desmond O'Rourke and Michael Wrnne Filia, Cambodge, Massachusettes MUL Press, and Hebinki- Ova, 1990.  Higuchi. Kiyoshi. “Railway Scarinn, Helagip, Funland, 1910-1414" A+ €153, no, 6 Gime 1985)  Meeks, Carroll Louis Vanderdice. The Rasiroad Sears Aa Archieeneral Histor, New Haven, Connecticut: Yale Univernty Pras. 1556  Muro, Alura, aod Kebun Sano, “Builway Sanon, Helsmio. Fintand, 1914-1919." Space Dengan, 218 (November 19821  Norri, Marja-Roieta, “Ideas above Theit Seation." Archerevtwrad Restew, VIRMIRS (September 1995)  Parissien, Steven, Ssartow te Station. | ondon: Phasdoa Drew. 1997  Saarinen, Elacl, Search for Fore: A Fundactental Appreach to Ant New York: Remhold, 1948  Wodehouse, Lawrence. fhe Reati of Intemanonal Sete Arctisecnere, West Comwall, Connecticut: Locus: Hill Press, 1941  HERTZBERGER, HERMAN 1932- Architect. the Netherlands  The enduring Duwh legacy of a socially commited architecture rempered by strung functionalist belch found in Herman Hertzherger onc of its most cluquent practitioners. Admired as much far his pedagogy @ for his built work and theoretical writings. Hertrberger has mamnuined active participation in all three disciplines. He has taken the term rodefrrmingtion as a vort of creed. one that speaks of the duality of structure and in-Fill as well as of the nced for inhabitants tu participate in wme meaningful way in the construction of their individual habitats. As for the batect, Herrbenger has writen, “The architect's task ts above all to apply more than cut-to-fit, readymade solutions and as much as possible to fice in the users themselves whatever they think they need, by cvolang images in them which can lead ww their own personally valid solunens.”  Herteherger began hus carect asa follower of Aldo van Eyck during the larter’s early days with the Team X 1101 group. The owo architects, along with faap Bakema. shared editorship of the prominent Durch architectural journal Ferwam from 1959 co 1963, fon Fertile years in which a new apprach te architecture, one promulgated moet publicly by the ‘Team X group, was de- tailed and comprehentively theneized. Characterized by a nonhi- erarchical design fayout and fiercely polemical writings (many hy the editon themselves). the Foran af these years emerged as ane of the most tmporanr and singular voices in opposition to the instrumcaralized funcrionalism of prewar architecture as characterized by Walrer Gropius, Lndwig Mics van der Rohe, and be Corbusier.  Uermaberger's experience at Forum played a pevneal role in the creation ot the Durch School of eructuralism, of which he was to become the principal proponent, Following Team X's aticmpe to triumph over the functionalist divisions of CIAM (Congrés Internauonaun d’Architecture Modeme), structural- ism proposed an integrative approach to a building's functions, empbascing a muluplicity of ctemencs in a loose, complex pat- tem, with the whole subordinated to a single. homogencous structural principle. The legibility thac results would exist within che discrete units as well as throughout the entirety of the build- ing. Patterns of relations berween the user and the buitr cnviran- mene, allowing for an interweaving of functions, also chacactenire the srructuralise paradigm. Deapite voncerns that structuralism’s infinite flexibility served w blur the programmatic distinctions between buildings of differen furmtions architects such as Herteberges were able to subvert the deterministic ideals of func: Gvaalism by positing napons of an archetypal human and his or her communury while sall acknowledging the inexorable press of history on the effects af buman interaction with built form.  Heruberges’s Centraal Beheer {nsurance offices (1972) in Appeldoom offer a textbook example for che democratic organi- zatiun of building components, A regularized grid af floors. sup- porting columns, and venice ducts provides a framework for the irregular clustering of offices and conference rooms, The modularity of che usenor allows for infinite reconfigurations through the deployment of furniture and Cabinets; the internat atrium revalls Frank Llovd Weright’s Laskan Bustding (1904) in its interwoven fabnc of tectonc elements, yor opens up the  
Sarter's more regulared symmetry through Hertzberper’s detiher- ate attempt to infuse the space with the aceds of the inhabitanes to individually modify their own work spaces, Workers are thus provided with personal areas whose participation in a collective environment avers any tenoe of psychological alienation; inter- Penetrating tap: fit voids from both natural and electric sources enhance the drama of the interior and tie together the ceBular workstauons,  The Central Beheer offices alse represent the ways in which Hertzberger's practice maintained the humanustic investigations of van Evck with more structurally rational forms handed down from the Dutch architects Hendrik Berlage and Johannes Dui- ker. This insistence on corporealiry and human scale while main- taining structural integrity is at the heart of this enterprise: Hertzberger has written, “Scructure is che minimal onder neces- saty to make posible the maximum bherts and even stimulate this effect.”  The Diagnon Houses (197!) in Delft, a ser of eight protocype houses originally designed in a Larger formation fne the city of Vaassen, aptly embody the aspect of self-determination that Herveberger considered oo crucial to the development of mean: ingful living conditions. Referred to as "half-works.” the details of each dwelling unit ate tte deliberately ambiguous: witmlow openings that can eeveive glazing or in-fill, depending on the needs of the inhabitant; carposts un Une lowes level tu be cicher used. as garages or convened inte additional work space; and roof terraces that can bevorne greenhouses, children’s play areas, or additional penthouse space.  Hosberger’s Chasse Uhearre (1995) an Brecla showcases the more Expressionisne side of Hertzberger’s neobumanicm. Re- versing the orthogonal ordering. of his carticr work, che undulat- ing mofline of the theater annuunces itself over the rooftops of surtuunding houses, a gesrure echoing the parabulic atch from which is suspended the rof of hix project tor the Bibliocheque de France (1989), and the curved ramps and balustrades of the foyes carve out interior space mach like in the conusal hall of his Ministry of Social Welfare and Employment (1979 90) int The Hague. Uhis lace work, spanning almust a decade of effort, embodies both the modular and the Expressionistis, where curvi- linear staircases and clevator shafts meet the strict orthogonals of the Centraal Bebecr’s offices,  ‘The exterior pays homage both to Le Corbusier's Plan Vooin with its duster of crucifarm towen and to Gropins's Fagus Werk with its glazed comer stair towers. but the interpenetration of masses and vohlimes, the oblique posirioning at the site, and the hinged capitals char seem ra allow each black to pivor against its adjoining member recall such forms as are often affiliated with Hans Scharmun, especially his Philharmonic Concert Hall (1963) in Berlin. Such varied clement: of influence, integrated with the urmose integrity and conjoined with the ability to bal- ance the necessary realms of seucture and freedom, ate the hall- marks of Heruzberger’s aryle,  Noat Ceasin  Sve ado Vam Eyck, Aldo (Netherlands)  Biography Bom in Amsterdam, 6 July 1942. Auended the Technische Hogeschule. Delft, Netherlands: graduated 1958. Private prac-  tice, Amsterdam from 1958; editor, Ferwm, Amsterdam 1959- 63: town planning consultant, Deventer, Netherlands 1969. In- structor, Academy of Architecture. Amsterdam 1965-70; profes- wor, University of Delft from 1976; visiring » Mamachu- setts Institute of Technology, Cambridge 196-67, 1970, 1977, 1980, visiting professor, Cahumbia University, New York 1968; visiting profewor, University of Toronto 1969-71, 1974; visit- ang profesor, Tulane University, New Orleans, Lousiana 3978; visiting professor, Harvard University, Cambri Massachu- sexts 197%, visiting professas, University of Pennsylvania 1981; visiting professor, University of Geneva 1982-86; professor, University of Geneva from 1986. Honorary member, Académie Royale de Belgique 1975; chairman, Berlage Institute, Amstes- dam from 1990, honorary fellow, Royal Insticute of British Ar- chitects 1991,  Selected Works  Eight Experimental !louses (Dugoos), Daf, 1971  Centraal Beheet Office Building. Apeldourn, Netherlands (with Lucas and Nierueijce). 1972  De Drie tavern Home for the Elderly, Amaterdsin-Slotervaan. 1974  Veedeniburg Music Centes, Ucseche, 1978  Biblioehdque Nationale {fest prize. competition), Paris, 1989  Miniary af Social Welfare and Employment Office Bullding. The Hague. 19)  Chand Theater, Breda. 1995  Selected Publications  Herman Hericherger Buildings and Projece 1959-1986 (wath Arnulf Lihanger). 1987 Herman Horisberger Leseny for Students in Architecture V9  Further Reading  Bergesik, Herman Van. and Deborah Haupemann, Neatross off Herman Hertebergee, Romeidain and New York: NAi Publishers, we  Linhenger, Arnulf, Herman Hertcherger: Hawsen and Proyebie L959 86, The Hague: Anh-Faitien, 1987  Lachinger, Amtilf, et al., “Dutch Structuralism —Consribunon to 4 Present-Day Architccture.” Archincture + Urbanism. 75 (1977) (specaal asst)  Nakamura, Toshwo (editor), “Herman Hetmberger. 1954-1990," Architecture ¢ Urbane, A124) 991)  Remiah, Adtisan Wessel, Herman Herezberger, Arohitect, Rotterdam: Untigevey 010, 1990  Van Dijk, Hats, “Hetman Herrberper Archucctural Poaciples an the Age of Humanism,” Dasch Art and Archwecenre Tadey, 6 1979)  Viduto, Andrea, “The Chane Theatre un Btu.” Domus, 776 1195)  HERZOG AND DE MEURON Architecture firm, Swittertand  Jacques Herzog (1990~) and Pierre de Meuron (1950—) were born in Base. Swirerland. They attended university «  ar the Fadgenissische Technische Hochschule Zurich (ETH, or Swiss Federal Institute of Technobogy) in Zurich and were awarded their architecture degrees in 1975, Both served as asais- tants to Professor Wolf Schnebli ac ETH in 1977. They formed  theie partnership, Herrog and de Meuron, in Bascl in 1978. The firm has ewo additional partners, Harry Gugger (1956-) and Christine Binswanger (1964-), both of whom teceived theit a- chitecture degrees from ETH tn 1990. Friends since kindergar- ten, Herzog and de Meuron developed a very natural collahors- tion in their early careers that they extended in the creation af! their firm.  ‘The firm first gained aotice chrough a series of exhibitinns that chey mounted and treated as architectural projects at STAMPA Galerie in Basel in 1979, 1981, 1983, and 1988. By 1905 dheie work was the subject of larger exhibitions at both the Center Pompidou in Pastis and the Museum of Modem An in New York. A strong connection with the art world has beens constant through the histury uf the firm, a natural phenomenon given their location in an art center such as Basel, Herzog has said. “We prefer art co architecture, and for that matter, artists to architects.” They have been influcnced by the formalism and minimalism of arcists such as Danald Judd. Sol LeWiu, James Turrell, and Richard Serea and share with chote innovators an interest in perception and in the relationship beewcen object and the social, geographic, and physical contest, Herzog and de Meuron collaborated early on with artise Helmut Federle on color studies for a facade design and have had several froitul collaborations with French anist Rémy Zaugg. whom Herog has referred tv as fifth partner. The studio thar they designed in 1996 for and with Rémy Zaugg in Mulhouse-Mfastatr, France. is one of several buildings chat the firm has creaced for the pro- duction or display of art.  The project that attracted the greatest carly international in- terest in Herzog and de Meuron was the Goets Gallery (1992) in Munich, designed to house private contemporary art collec dun vo the grounds of the owners’ hoo. Building restrictions limiting the height and foutprint of che structure in a residential neighborhood required cunsttucuon of a basement fevel to pro- vide the stipulated amount of exhibition space. This restriction provoked an ingenious sccuun fot the building wherein both basement and upper-level galleries have equivalent spatial quali- ties and fighting from a high horizontal band of matre-glazed windows. The exterior af the simple ecctangular pavilion appears tm be a wooden volume hovering berwern owe milky glass strips. The project is inextricably tied to act, from itv eanly detailed galleries where contnulled, glare frce light falls frat technically sophisticated clerestorws vo its clegantly vkinned volume thar rests like a huge piece uf cunimalist sculpture in the garden.  ‘The largest art-related work of Herzog and de Meuron is the Tate Gallery of Modern Ari (2000) ar Bankade in London. The project renovares and extends a historic power station on the Thames River directly across from St. Paul's Cathedral. This ambitious architecture and urban design undertaking creates not just a building bue a whole urban district for viewing ant, Grand public spaces dedicated to display of sculprure are linked to existing walkways along the river. The neighbothood to the south is enlivened by a new public square wich shopn and kiosks joerung the museum to its environs. The Tate Bankside, accord- ing to Hertog and de Meuron, is about looking, perception, and communication. fis six suites of galleries, along wah the spectacular renovated Turbine Hall, offer a wide variety of spaces and contests in which tw expenence modern and contemporary art and interact with other visitors.  Herzog and de Meuron have dealt with a wide range of build- ing types, induding offices. housing, university buildings, and industrial propects. he firm approached each of these with the same refined sensibilities that they have brought co their art- related work. En a serics of raitway projects in the Auf dem Wolf industrial area of Basel, flerzag and de Meuron have demon- strated their ability to transform ordinary building programs and hondescripe sites into significant works of architecture, The lange Railway Engine Depot (1999) gives clarity and oder to a waste- Lind of railway tracks, warchouses, sheds, and weeds. Nearby, Signal Box 4 (1995) as 4 six-story district Landmark that. in ity treatment as a single monolithic block, beumes a powerful sculptural object. ‘The Ceniceal Signal Box (2000) creates a visual dialogue with its earlier counterpart but also functions as a part of the rest of the city in ita chose relativaship tw the street and existing solizary buildings around ic. Both signal boxes are clad in eight-inch-wide copper strips that are cwisted in the midsec- on of some walls wo admit daylight. The copper cladding not only provides durability in a corrosive indusmal environment but alia becomes a Faraday cage. protecting clectronic equip- tmnt inside from clectromagnctic fickds on the site.  The Dominus Winery (1998) in Napa Valley, Califewnia, similarly elevates a building uf made purposes to high ar. lo long, thin volume parallels the rows of vines thar surround it as well as a ridge of hills in the distance, cresting an impressive  ‘Vare Maxbern extension (20000 at Bankade, Lenden. by Herzog and de Meuron © Ohrnan Richter Fao 
symbiowis of structure and site. The building's skin és constructed of gabions (wite cages filled with rocks) employing a local basal that further links the agsicultute structure to the land. Fleganely and poctically detwiled, the winery combines, like wine making itself, technical proficiency and sensory detight.  This combination charac tetizes much of Herzog and de Meu- ron’s work in which experiments with woud, copper, stone, Con etete, and glass have produced dazzling and innovative visual effects. Pacrems created by varied vancrete textures or by sitk- screened printing on glass, tor cxample, have gone chrough sev- eral generations of refincment. from the Pafaftenhols Spocts Center 11993) in France co the Technical School Library (1999) in Eberswalde, Germany.  Lawreser W. SprcK  Ser ako Ricola Storage Building, Laufer, Switzertand; Switz ertand  Biography  Jacques Herzog ;  Born in Basel. Switzerland 19 Apnil 1950. Studied archice ture under Aldo Rosti and Dalf Schnebhi, E1H-Zumch: degree in archicecure 1975. Assotant to Doli Schnebli, ETH-Zunch 1977, Parmer. with Pierre de Meuron, Herzog and de Meuron Architecture Studbo, Basel from 1978, Arthur Rowh Dengn Critic in Architecture, Graduate Schoo! of Design, Harvard Uni versity, Cambridge. Massachuverts.  Pierre de Meuron  Born in Basel, Swarzerland $ May 1950, Snidied architecture under Aklo Rossi and Dolf Schncbhi, B11 H-Zurich; degree in architecture 1975. Assistant to Dolf Schnebli, ETH - Zurich 1977. Partner, with Pierre de Meuron, Herzog and de Meuron Architecture Studio, Basel from 1978,  Hi and de Meuron Architecture Seudio Formed in 1978 in Basel, Switrerland by facqnes Ierrog and Pierre de Meuron.  Selected Works  Goew Gallery, Munich, 1992  Pafaffenbols Sporn Center, France, 1993  Signal Bon Four, Aut dem Wolt, Basel. Swazerlanl, 1995  Rémy Zaugg Studio, Mulhiwse Plastart, France, 1996  Domiean Winery, Napa Valley, Calitornas, 1798  Radway Engine Depot, Auf dem Wolf, Buel, Swstverland, 1999  Technical School | diary, Eberiwalle. Germany, 1909  Tate Gallery of Modern An at Banksale (tcrwaunn und extennun), London, 2000  Central Signal Bus, Auf dem Walf, Basct, Switsetlanet. 2000  Ricota Storage Bulding, Laufer. Switverind. 1986-87  Selected Publication Herzog and de Meuron Samminng (oer, 199% Further Reading  Gilber, Mark, and Kevin Alter editor, Covtruction, inteanon, Denast: Eve Propects from Fare Suse Architects. Fal provkte von  fant Schovizer archicrkira (bilingual English-German edition). Zunch: Anemia 194  Mersey and de Meuron, 1983-1993, Madeid: Croquis, 1993  Levene, Richard C. (odivon), Herzog and de Meuron, 1993-1997, Madvid: £1 Croquis, 1997  Lacan, Jacques (editos), Herzog and de Mewor: Sex Works, 1967— 1995, Tokyo: A + U, 1995  Mack, Gerhard, Herang and de Mewon: das Goamnwrt: The Complese Works (balingual German-English caution), 2 vob., Basel aad Bouton: Borkhauser. 196-97  Raff, Thownas, and Steven Holl (edstors), Arhutecrina of Hevaog and de Meuron, Now York: Blum, 1994; 2nd edition. 1995  Wang, Walined. Hercag end de Meuron: Prayeces and Butldings 192-1990, New York Rersoli, 1990.  Wang, Wittned. Hersey and de Meuron (bilingual coliuon), Zunch: Artenus, 1992; 3rd enlarged edition, Bowne: Birkhauser. 1998  HIGH MUSEUM OF ART  Designed by Richard Meicr, completed 1983  Adana, Georgia  The High Muscum of An in Adanta has been cited as one of the ten heat warks af American architecture of the 1980s by the American Inotiuuite of Architects. Situated in miltown, this whine porcelan clad muscum sits on a comer site facing Peachtree  High Museum of Art. intenor, designed by Richard Meier (1983) T Bead Wrdey Phot courtesy che High Museum of An  High Museum of Art, exrenor. designet by Richaid Mur © Brad Weistey. Photo counesy the High Museum of An  Street, the main north south artery of the city. It houses a signili cant collection of 19th. and 20th-ceneury American art and American folk art.  The plan has four quadrants with one square displacd and pivoted at an angle of 60 degrees, cecating a separate auditorium. ‘The space created by this displacement becermes the focal atrium space. Externally, this is reflected in the pianu-shaped cnizance and the curved facade of the atriuin. The remaining three squares are the galleries that wrap around the atrium in an I. shape. A diagonal ramp wakes visitors From the street, through a gateway. past a cwo-story 250-seat auditonum, and into a low entrance foyer, culruinaring in the 67-foot skylit auium flooded with light. This procession is further continued up the cuperimposed series of ramps situated on the curving external side of the atrium connecting the galleries at various levels, Ramps and the galleries are designed tw create multiple penpeciives. The windows of the curved facade along the ramp open the muscum toward the city, enlivening the weial area of the museum.  Processional movement from the entrance to its interior cre- ates a variety of spatial experiences. Critks suggest that the mu- seum has a theatrical quality thar places visitors ina multiplicity of frames, wuroing them inte spectators and performers. The ramp becomes a central compositional device that organizes and manipulates horizontal and vertical surfaces. Its regular  pendishim-like movement induces visimrs to appreciate the building's geometry and tu celebrate che cir.umfererue by not passing through the galleries but receiving glimpses into them. The three Large spusare galleries thar anchor the corners have walls with inset display cases that allow views through rearing few intersclationships trom a vanety of vantage pomes. Yee ar chit Richard Meier creates the domestic feeling of the early museums (situated in grand residences and palaces) from which he detives inspiration. The interplay of display cases. walls with windows, and ceiling grids all create a sense of nested scales throughout the galleries. In addinian. the column grid interacts with the paitern of subdivision so chat the columns chorengraph movement, Along the ramp, they mark the direction of bound movement, and ar the center of the galleries, they slow down movement in addition to defining and breaking up space. Light is also used to further enhance mavement, drawing visitor into gallerice through the use of floor-to ceiling windows and glass block slits at the cross axes, Within the galleries are spotlights for the exhibits whike daylight foods the atrium delineating the geometry of the quarter citcle.  The program was originally developed by Gudmund Vigtel, the first director of che High Muscum. He felt chat architecture of the highest quality was important to the success of the mu- seum in order ta place icon the cultural map and thereby draw 
support from key instininons and individuals. ‘he program also contributed to making this museum unique in that. unlike oth- crs, it originally allocated two-thirds of the plan space for service functions Initially, the granite-pancled rwo lower flooss of the building had an education department with its own gallery, re- soutce center, xcreening room, and major service arcas, including storage. Today, they howe a cafe, offices of curators and assis- tants, and mecting roomy, The lower flove bias carpenter shops and other utilities. The main entrame level has a gallery with an interactive inuoduction to the fundamental elements of ant for visitors of all ages, 2 gift shop. and the main atrium, occupy: ing $000 square feet, which is the souial and public space of the buikding and is available tor special events, Onginally, the galler- i¢s were arranged chronalngically on three Aloors above this bevel with the display of devurative arts designed by Meier. In 1996, when a special exhibition was organized to cclebrare the Olym- pics in the city, the internal layout of gallery spaces was changed. walk were removed, and the organization since then has been thematic rather than chronological, Asa result, rhe neiginal expe- rience of the galleries has not been retained. In 1993, for the tendh-annivenary celebration, a 64-foot high wall drawing was commissioned by the museum from the minimalist artist Sol LeWiet for the atrium.  Comparisons have often been made berween this building, and Meier's carlicr works. Alchough very different in its design approach, the basic parti of four quadlranes is much like a reinicr- presasson of his Frankfurt Museum (1979-85), the design of which was completed just befure recerving the commussion for the High Muscum. The ramp és a key clement in the carlicr Athenaeum (New Harmong, Indiana. 1979) which incidentally also extends out ww the street and the city and iv'samilarty used to intensify the archirecrural experience bur internally is organ- ed in a very different manner. Ihe external appearance of the building features porcelain enameled square pancls, pipe railings, and mallina windows— Meier's signature marks,  Although organized in a different manner, the we uf the ramp within an atrium ix compared by critics, and by Meir hinwelf, w Frank Word Wright's Guggenheim. Uhe spatial e- quences and che play of masses in light win be compared w some of Le Corbusier's works. Clusical eeferences from the four-quadrant plin and the adea of ccorer and symmetry seen. in both the Frankfurt Muscum and the High are unporant features in Karl F. Schinkel s wark, who also uses central skylit atrium spaces that are surrounded by exhibinion galleries. he High has also been seen 3s reflecting more of the rational sensibil- ties of the 18th century and deriving in essence much more from the first European museums of the Enlightenment. Compared to the work of Charles Nicholas Ledoux, Meiet's building is seen as allowing the conteraplating af forms a5 abstract entities that ean be appreciated for theie poetic qualities alone. In this mu- scum and in much of Meier's other work, one can observe a concern for visual order that desires reason over function.  AARATI KANEKAR  Fusther Reading  A pubkcatinn was prepared by the High Museum of Art on 6 Ocbet 1983 on the occasion of the dedication of the new huilding Ie ie a chronicle of the buikding’s planning, design. and construction and in- cludes a statement by che anbsect together with the Ames essay listed followsng.  Ames. Anthony, "A Modern Synthens,” in High Museum of Art,  Attunta, Georgia: High Museum of Art, 1985 Blaser, Werner (editor), Muaddiag for Are, Basel and Boston:  Burkhauses Verlag, 1990 Balfour, Alan. “Atlanta High: High Muscum, Adanta, Georgia,”  Archutectura! Review, 1751 1044 198) High Campbell, Rober, ° ‘Forms Explaliag’ from a Dreen:  Museum, Atlanta,” yarneeie The ALA Jourmad, 7515 (1964) Fos, Catherine, "A New High fot Adanta,” Ary News, 82/3 (1983) Freeman, Allen. “Dei Showcase.” Archtecture: The AIA  Jenrnal, THA2 (IIS Maxwell, Robert. “The High Museum, Adlanta, Georgia,” AA File,  7 ($984)  Mares, Richard, Richard Meer, Acchetrce, 3 vols New York: Rizaoli,  1984, 1991, 1999 Mat, Rechard, Richard Afeser, London: Avadevey Ediian, 1990  HIGHPOINT I APARTMENT BLOCK, LONDON Designed by Lubetkin and Tecton, completed 1935  Situated on a hill in the Highgare area of north London and offering expansive views of the city, Highpoint |—an apartment block designed by tbe Russian architeca Berthold Lubetkin and his tiem, Tecton — was completed in $935. The building is Lubee- kin’s personal synthesis of the social aspects of housing and usban planning that were the concer of so many modern architects daring the 1920s and 1930s, a know! of the conceptual ideals and visual forms of modern art and archinecrure, and an understanding of his client’s (and London's) needs. Highpome I reflects the sophisticated, often unacknowledged state of modera Beitish architecture in the 19305.  The projest wa bunched when a wealthy industrialist, Sig- mund Gestemer, commissioned Lubetkin 19 design varmunal worker housing, When the only appropriate site that Gestetner could find was lovated in affluent Highgate, he altered che origi fal program and asked Lubcukin to design flats ew rene to middie- and upper-class tenants on the open housing marker. Although Lubethiss agreed to the change as well as co Gestetner's precisely calculated profit margin for developing the site, the actual build- ing reveals thar the architect never quite renounced a commit- ment to collective ideals.  ‘The garden site chosen was accompanied by 2 set of zoning regulations, inchiding a height limit on the street facade and a fextriction on developing the land to the building's rear, and Labetkin's design also had to maximize the privacy, sunlighe, views, and cross ventilation accorded each flat. Highpoane { con- sisas af a symmetrical double-cruciform plan, rising seven stories on the street frone and cight sxoties on the rear, garden-view side. The building is raised on ceinforoed-concrete pilotis (stiles), and each residential floor contains four ewo-bedroom flan and fous thuce-bedroom flats. The rooftop is a communal sundeck. and the ground floor abo contains a series of public spaces en- countered sequentially. in essence offering a passageway from the front entrance to the garden. One enters the building from the coburnned porte-cochére (carriage entrance) that faces che street and is ted on a promenade architectural: into an off-axis encrance ball, a semicircular winter garden and lounge. a large windowed hallway, a tearoom, and a camp thar cures down  Highpoint 1 Apariments, Highgate. Loadon. designed by Lubetkin and lecuen (1935) © Angelo HarnaksCORBIS  into the garden. Along the way, one passes the elevators that provide upper-floor access.  Highpoinr I's ribbon windows. roof terrace, and prions dearly reflect an awareness of Le Corbusier’s “five poines,” and, as ar Le Corbusier's Villa Savoye (1929), Luberkin's piletis enable cars to pull directly up co the entranceway. The plsn iibre (free plan). however, exists only on the ground Boor, and there is jicthe Next bility within each flac. Strucuurally, the building diverges from Le Corbusicr’s notion of 3 free facade: the walls, made of solid concrete. are weight bearing, although thcy are part of an innova: tive structural system engineered by Ove Arup. Despite the over all simplicity of the relatively unadorned white exterior and the rigid ordering of the residential flooes, Ludcthin inserted many sculpeural elements inw his design, similar to Le Corbusier's interpenctration of curves and disgonals into Use modernist cube of Villa Savoye. At Highpoint |, for example, curved, intemal towers house stairs and elevators. In plan, the distincdy round forms of the stairwells amidst che overall grid of the upper floors not only add visual complesity bur also reveal a Beaux-Arts— inspired sensibility by clearly separating the so-called served and servant spaces. Sculprural forms also appear on the exterior: the balconies are curvilinear, and the now altered radio antennae on the roof (at the rime. the roof of the building was che highest point in Londen) were modeled after the Vesnin brothers’ 1923 design for the Palace of Labor. The curved ramp thar descends  to thegarden trom the ground tloor calls to mind Constructivist sculpture and theater design and also appears in Lubetkan’s 1934 design for the Penguin Poot ar Regent's Park Z.00 in London.  Although Highpoint I can be linked by its formal, visual language to larger understandings of modem art and architec- sure. [ubeskin's interest in the social role of architecture cannot be ignored. Lubctkin had been in Russa during the revolution, and he always remained connected to art and politics in his native country. Highpoint I. with i privace fla and many communal spaces. invites comparisans to the Soviet social con- deniers and collective housing bloks of the 1920s thas were 90 important 10 Le Corbusier ax well, such as Moivei Gintburg’s Narkomfin aparrments (1928) in Moscow, Even though High- point I hail been intended far fairly well off tenants — che grournd Alone inchided small flau for maids and porters —Lubetkin’s pared-down. modernist forms and cullectivia ideals suggest a Progressive, social vision for mass housing that was unusual for England at the time and offer an cxample of the way in which his plea to architects t0 “build socialistically” was modified for England's class hierarchies,  In 1936 Le Corbusier visited Highpoint I and praised its modernity, declaring it the “vertical garden city” thar he had imagined but not yer built, He saw Luberken’s apartment block as the periect prototype for modem urban housing, one char exemplitied his own ideal of a wower-in-a-park by optimizing 
standardization, offering deas pedestrian routes away from auco- mobile teaffc (often via pilots), and providing ample communal space. By budding vertically instead of hariznntally, the urban structure of the futuee would relewe the surrounding Lind for cecrvational purposes. Lubethin’s Highpoint with ats gardens, its pedos, its pedestrian walkway through the ground floor, its to light and aur, its use of modern materials, plan akin ty the towers in Le Corbusier's own Contemporary City for Uhree Million Inhabirants (1922) —was precisely the type of building that Le Corbusier envisioned as the solution co global urban ills,  Luberkin designed a second apartment block adjacent to Highpoint | three year later, Highpoint I] (1938), as it has come to be known, failed to generate the enthusasuc rexponse thar had met Highpoint 1 Lubetkin war criticized for having abandoned hic rationalise principles in favor of a more mannered facade, replete with classical caryatids, and che architectural com munity looked aewagically to Highpoint I for having more fully embodied the ideals of modern anhitecture.  Dimonan Lewirtts  See alo Apartment Buildings Arup, Ove (England); Contem- porary City for Theee Million Inhabitaney, Corbusier, Le Qeanneret, Chastes-Edouard) (France); Ginzburg, Moisci (Russia) Loadon, Fagland; Lubetkin and Tecton (England)  The arcicle “Flass at Highgate” in Anihsectueal Review imubules two  smaller anticies that ate conmemporary responses to Highpoint | “Vhe Verrxal Garden City" by Le Corhusser and “The Building” hy J.M. Richards. ‘  Allan. John, Mertheld Ladeekzn Acchasecrwre and she Tradition of Progr, London: RUBA Pubbcations, 1992  Cortia, Walhiam JR, Lagtish An baserzure, 19400 The Modern Mevemens ine Friglind, 1930 193% Thoughss an the Pedinal Content of the Imtersenene! Spe, Milton Keyes, Bucksnphamahire: Open University Prion, 1975  Diehl, Thomas, “theory and Princaple: Berthold Lubeskin’s Highpoint One and Highpoint Two,” fowmal of Archian nerad Educatten 52,00. 4 May 19}  “Plats at Highgate,” Arsieecnurad Review 79 (January 1936)  Hicchoock, Henry Reusell, and Catherine Bauer Wurster, Maddern Archiavenere in Lapland, New Yor: Museum of Modern An. 1937  Realing, Malcolm, “Tall Cider.” fhe Arvhitert fownel 21, 00 181 © June 1985)  Reading. Malcolm, and Peter Cac, Lubethin and Taton: An Archrectural Seudy, London: Unangle Archmectutal, 1992  HILBERSEIMER, LUDWIG KARL 1885-1967  Theorist and urban planner, Germany and United States  Betrer known asa prolific dievretician than practicing planner, Ludwig Karl Hulbersermer lett his legacy in several volumes of writing rather than in built projects or even a substanrial ap- poinement as city planner. A graduate of the ‘Technische Hockschule’s {Karlsruhe} architecture program in 1911, within  a decade Hilberscimer had turned to writing, first as art critic for many Furopean journals and larer as the author of a dozen books and more than $0 articles on city planning, architecture. and related issucs,  Hilberscirmer published his first theoretical work, Horhhaass- tads {High Rise City}, in 1924. This vertically toned, centralized onanizauon of resident - worken housed in tall, unomamenied skyscrapers placed in a tectilinear grid defined by automobile traffic was well within general comtemporary European city- planning tendencia (the project in many ways resembles Le Corbusier's Contemporary City for Three Million Inhabiranes of wo years earlier) and drew the artention of many leading European architects. Hilberseimer was invited to show these plans in the Novembergruppe Exposition of 1925; in 1927 he ethibited a contratized “Welfare City” and also collabarased with Mics van der Rohe in the Weinenhot Exposition in Seurgart. The following yeat. Hannes Meycr appointed him wo develop the urban-planning curriculum at the Bauhaus, where he taught until its chose in 1933. Since 1931, he had been rhe director of the Gertnan Werkbund, another group that emphasized the machine as a tool for everyday tite. In these short years, in lieu of pursuing an architectural practice, Hilberscitner produced four bouks that explained his uwpian, modernist planning ideas. In 1938 he left Farrope, accepting Mses" invitation co teach urban planning at the Armour (later IIbnois) Instirure of Technology.  tn 1944 Hilbeneimer published his first work in English, the New Coy: Principles of Planning, which codified his cartier work and revealed some new values: the posential of such natural factors as prevailing winds and solar onentation ax design gencra- tors, the idea of choice among a variety of housing types, and decentralization. Vhese ideas formed the core of his teaching at the Illinois Instiaute of Technology from 1938 to his death in 1967,  The “New City” attempted to accommodate muntern indus- trial life in a more appropeiace and effective mannet thin che “Hintoric Cary.” Spanning from anuent Miletus to Penn's Phila- delphia, Hilberveamer studied a variety of cultures’ technol as generators of dillerent buile environment. Modern man failod by trying ro fit his tedunology into extant. outmoded de velopment pattems.  Nanural forces, industrial smoke and fumes. and the burden- some reality of automobile traffic were givens and Hilberseimer's starting point. Automatics and telephones allowed people co move mto the Ueaner countryside, with administrative focal poines thar would link cuunery and city as one “organism.” Resi- dents wuld choose to tive in freestanding, single-family houses at well as apartment blocks, all of which would be mixed to- gether. Like othen before him. Hilberseimer practiced exclusion- ary soning, separating industrial. commercial, residential, and revreatsonal arcas. Hawever, his was not a graphic exerase (like Le Corbusier, who endeavored to avoid “all special cases” in his “City of Tomoruw’); Hilberscimer's New City responded wo specilic characteristics of site: prevailing winds, solar orientation, Natural resources, and topography, which would determine the shape of the settlement. allowing wind co naturally sweep indus- tnal pollurion aveay from residential, academic, and commer- cially zoned areas. To reduce pollution within these zones, Hilb- erseimer called for “Superblocks.” which combined several reguar blocks without through uteects to increase green space and reduce paving and conflicts between automobile and pedes-  trian trafic, Limited growth wouhd allow residents to walk 10 work and school. His conservative approach to the hiszotical city included its incremental transdormativa, lustrated by such examples as London and Chicago. Their decrepit city centers would be vacated in waves to the cleaner, becter-planned out- skirts, allowing eventual replanning of old city centers.  As wind patterns organized the settlement unit, salar onenta- tion extahlished housing design, The placement of every room in a house was to be determined by the tire of day that cach was occupied, Solar rays alu dictated the density of housing structures, none of which would cat shadows an another. Hith enseimer believed that this natural approach would alo alleviate social problcins that were thought to be caused in part by denatty.  Thus, nature dictated a kind of template for Hilberscimer. from the wale of the city so the antividual dwelling. Once these primary considerations were made. Hilbencimer granted the ar- chitect “absoluce creative freedom” (The New City} to articulate the indsvidual buddings, Beyond this tbetoric — unusually ac- commodating to such a modernist—Hilberseimer still proposed Bauhaus ideals of mass production: hke an automobile, a house should be mass-produced from industrial materials and thus made cheaply available to all, Certainly, [ilberseimer's own ar- chitectural designs show little of the crestiviry thar hit occasional statements about artistic liuense seem tu imply.  Like other isodern architects, Hilberscimer thought that che profession had a moral obligation and power t correct weial ills chrough architecture and city planning. He emphuszed the potential of new industrial materials and methods to allow free- dom of housing choice lot poople, Placing his own work in + historical continuum, he judged hes plans agannst such invesuiga tors whose ideas he inoneporated inty lus own work, such as Wright (decentralization and che single family home}, Le Corbu- sier (towers in a garden), Howard (garden space), Soria y Mata (ribbon systems), and orhers.  Neglected in Hilberseimer’s theory were virtually any other building type bur che residential unit—a marked contrast to others who designed all buildings m house modern life (e.g. Sant’Elia's power stations and Wright's office rowers), Further tuare, Hilberscimes's confidence in the enviranment’s ability to abtorb limites pollution, his indifferene wwatd any down- wind regions, and his willingnew ta vondemn hietrical city centets that once provided models for his study left his cheones, on the whole, impossible to implcment. Still, hus Superblock and his insistence ao the importance of sular ofientatiun saw application through the second half uf che 20ch century. Further- more, he predicted the traffic and health problems that the sub- urbs would come ta suffer in their tack of planning, His calls for variety of housing type to suit different human needs and sunsent to allow choice in archivectural style were innovauve. No manifewo on style, The New City was unucual in allowing personal intervention and individuality within the planners overall scheme, a welcome alternative to his own inhumane and unexpressive designs.  Jiennnre A AMUSDSON  Biography Born in Karlsruhe, Germany. 14 September 1885; immigrated to the United Stares 1938; naturalized 1944. Studied under  Fredridh Ostendort and Hermann Billing. Technische Hochschule, Karbseuhe 1906-11. Architevt and planner sn var- tous European cine, ppecally Bern (918-38; during WWI designed aircraft hangars and workshops; European architectural correspondent. Chicsge Tribune 1925. Private practice, town. Planner. Chicagy from 1938. Rounder and director. Cary Plan- ning Deparrment. Bauhaus, Dewan. Germany 1929-32; profes: sor, director of Department of City and Regional Planeang 1938-57, profesor emeritus, from 1957, Hines Institute of Technology. Chicago. Member. Novembergrippe, Berlin 1919: member, Arhcitsrat ff Kunst. Berlin 1919; member, Der Ring, Hetlin 1924; member, Det Sturm artais’ group, Berlin 1925; tmetaber, CIAM ftom 1928; disecior, Deuce Werkbund from 1934; member. Advisury Board, Burnham Library, Art Institute of Chicago 1938-60; fellow, Amencan Instituce of Architects, member, Acaderme des K nate, Berlin. Died in Chicago, 6 May 1967.  Selected Works  Opera Hoge, Bertin, 19H  Mouung Estares: Adlergestestrasse, Adbershatsrrayse. Diiepfeldstrasse, Rerlin, 1927  Rhemlandhaus, Bertin. 1926  Werkhund Lahsbiuon ELil, Weissenhof Escate, Stungart, 1927  Cary Development Plan, Dowau, 1932  Rupendom Housing Estare, Berlin, (935  Lafayene Park Development Plan, Detroit, 1965  Livde Park Development Matt. Chisago. 1956  Selected Publications  Horbhaussad: (24  Grastadshawten, AFIS  Grecutadt Arctueksur, 1927  Ansernationale neue Raskwui 1927  Ketan ah Genaler vents Julius Viner, 1928  Haslien baxten, VI31  The New City. Principe of Plaurang, (944  The New Regional Panern. Indestnos and Garlem, Workshapy und Farms, 1949  the Nature of Cattes, 1955  Ales nan der Robe 1986  Conternporary Avchstertare te Rams wid Trends, WNG4  Enstalnang ewer Plananpudee, \903  Berliner Arihstebtue der Mer pabre, WIG?  Further Reading  Banham and Carin peowide sound background fur Hillicrwimer's pe- trod and peers as well as canmmentary vn the planner himselt. Pomater remaite the most complete single source on Hilberscumes’s life and ourk, wheres Spacth pronides a beicf overview of his life aswell aa fine susnatary of the duzeas of books and articles worsen by Hulhereimet.  Banham. Reyarr, (Avery and Denga in the burst Machine Age, Now York: Praeger, and London: Architecsural Press, 1960  Curas, William J.R.. Modem Architectere since 1900, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Premier Hall, and Oxford: Phandon Press, 1982; 3nd edition, Upper Saddle River, New fersey: Prentice Hall, and London: Phaidon, 1096  Deasseyne. Howard, feude the Baha, Now York Razah. 1986  Former, Richard, David Spacth. and Kern Harrington. de rhe Dradow of Atte: Ludwig Helbcremer, Architect, Educator, and Urban Planarr, New York: Ruzob, 1985  Spacth. David. Laducg Karl Huberscirar: An Annotated Hibliography and Chronology. New York. Garand, OKT  
HILVERSUM TOWN HALL, NETHERLANDS  Designed by Willem Marinus Dudok, completed 1931 Hilversum, the Netherlands  Hilversum Town Hall, in Hihersum, the Netherlands, was con- structed between 1924 and 1931 by Willem Marinus Dudak (1884-1974). Known internationally as one of the most influen- tial buildings of its date, the design is reminiment of casly Frank Loyd Wrighet 1867-1959) design, specatically the Larkin Budd- ing (1903) in Buflalo, New York, and Unity Vemple (1904) in Oak Park. Ibnois,  Located approaimately [5 miles southeast of Amsterdam, Hilversum is a small modem town with uee-shaded, brick-paved roads and well-kept properties and is well known to have had one of the Netherlands’ premicr 20th-century architects. Willem Marinus Dudok, an Amsterdam-horn Durch military enguncer, became one of the most influential architects working in the Netherlands between the ewo world wars and was credited with mare than 240 buildings, In 1915, he became the director of public works for Hilversum, where he produced 4 town develop- ment plan based on the Englich Garden City movement pro- moted by Briton Ebcneser Howard (1850-1928). Fur neusly 40 years, Dudok was in the service of the municipality.  Hibversum Town Hatl, the Netherlands 19400  Heavily influenced by the work of Wright, as depicted in the Amsterdam Schoo! publicarion Wendingen (Trends), Dudok is also thought to have garnered some minor influence from Am- sterdam School expreuionism, De Stijf functionaliom, Delft School traditionaliam, Cubism, and simply the Dutch vernacu- lat. This enigmatic way of nonconformity hac caused some critics to ertoncoualy refer to his “eyke” as a lrybrid of some or all of these rather than as a creation of an independent character of apparent individualum. One elf-proclaimed influence was che mmuac of his childhood. Born 10 musicians, he fele chas che grest compen initucnced him more than all the great architects, He believed that the rhythm, mood. and character of music were easily transferred to architecture through the use of thes com- manalicy: proparions.  Dudok's ocuvre. known colloquially as “going Dudokey,” formed the model for many later architects. International cxam- ples emerged throughout Europe and the United States. The 1935 Brussels Exhibition and che 1937 Paris Exhibition con- tained many buildings that reflected Dudok's ing work. spe- cifically Hilvenum Town Hall, which also inspired clones im Cachan, France, and Lausanne, Switzerland. ‘She irony was that as his ance perusal style was mimicked ad neuscan and as the fluidiry af his design style developed, taking further cues from the modernist, its earber individuality was eroded into anonymity. As a result, Hilvenum Town Hall has been hailed  Hidversum Town Hall dock rower © Hoabeth A. Bakket-fohnann  a seminal building that set an architectural toe and marked 4 pinoade in Dudok’s carevt.  Surrounded by a neighborhood of semidense, medium to dark-colored brick and stucco residences, the imposing baff- colored Hilversum Town Hall rises up from che water in the midst of a wide-open space, bounded hy large trea, Dudok’s use of camilevered caves, an unusual feature for the Netherlands. and a simple asyrometrical three-dimensional geometry arranged around a square inner courryard provides a modern structure while still reflecting the historicism of the medieval town halls by use of a large hall and a tower. Ihe verticaliry of the looming tower breaks up the Wright-inspired horzontality. producing + sense of balance and harmany between rhe two axes. Also, a hicrarchical use of light through varied Fenestration adds yer anather dimension of equilibrium. Dudok’s cuphonic design seems to reconcile the apparent discordant usc of solids and voids, the hoeizantal and vertical, and light and dark.  Slightly askew of the ewer, the main entrance is defined hy a hovering canopy that extends coward the lake. Initead of an axial approach, one enters atong a low wing ot covered calonnade  jcular to the main entrance into a low vestibule with a contrasting large marble staircase that leads up to a space more than 20 meters high. The overall cubic volumetric massing of advancing solids and retreating voids held together by the unify ing glazed yellow-bnck skin enfolds the components to a whole  body. Bane of glass, subdivated into small panes, running paral- lel between the dean, flat rvefline and the horizontal ground Plane, are juxtaposed to similar panes thas rise as a group from the entry colonnade parallel ww the clock tower mass and its clongated windows.  The sequence of spaces within produces a series of interlack- ing sobds and voids chac che functional hierarchy of fenestration augments. For example, natural light enters from clerestory win- dows; reflects on the ceiling: is tiltered by way of eranshicenr, decorated glam panels; and then glows thrugh the glaw canopy high above the public main stairs, The private council chamber, however, is naturally [it by only three high, narrow, vertical slits of windiws. Hatizontal windows above the galleries and bright light accented with chromatic variations in the teception hall round out the divetse styles of illumination.  When finished in 1931. the public embraced this cxampie of mader architecuure because of ies balance of form and fum- tron and because it still seemed uaditional through its composi- ton, fine craftsmanship, and high-quality materials. Mast of all, it was praisod for its monumentality. As Dudok once sated, “Monumentality is the most pure expression of the human sense of harmony and order” (Holzhauer 1981}. Some crinics. how- ever, felt that the building was 2 nonstructural, proportionally irresponsible arrangement of its shapes and accused Dudok of diluting modernist forma ar of being a middle-of-the-road mad- ernist whe produced yei another contenipuraty syle rather chan creating a formal language of his wwn, By inasting thar his archi- tecture be of a specific stylistic mode, critica miggested that hia deseens lacked Quidity. thereby contining it to 6 suice formula that must he applied to all architecture. Neverthelem, the final prodixt becomes a sculpiaral cxpresion ef 4 compositional theme. [1 is a testimony of the harmonious consonance of torm, function, art, and human necessiry. Hilversum Town Hall is nut voly the magnum opus in the work of Dudek but abu one af the most successful buildings m che history of the Modem mwement.  EutsaprrH A. BAKKER-JOHNSON  See alo Amsterdam School; City Halk Cubism; De Seiji Dudok, Willem Marinus (the Nethestanda}; Garden City Movemcat; Larkin Building, Buffalo, New Yorks Unity Tem- ple, Oak Park, Illinois; Weight, Frank Lleyd (United Sextes)  Further Reading  An exhaustive list of available material can be found in Langmead 1996.  Groenendijk. Paul, and Pict Vollital, Gidt Vear Maderne Archstectuur in Nederland (Guede to Modem Archisectare in the Netherlunds? Rotterdam, the Netherands: Uingevery 010 Publohen. 1987; 4th edition. 1992  Holebaucr, Wilbelm, “Willem Mannus Dudok. Town Hall Hilvenum, the Netherland), 1928-31." (label Archusernere: An Encylopedia of Madern Archsecture. 98 (Y9811  Lingncad. Donald, Willem Marine Dudok, A Dash Madernsit: A Bio-Hibberaphy, Wenpor, Cannectiiat: Grecnwood Pres, 199%  Whittck, Atnobd, Exrupetn Archusccrure an the Twennesh Centary. ! vols, New York: Philosophical Livan, and Landen: Crusby Lockwood, 19911  Wit, Wim de todwot), Phe Amuserdam Schoot Duich Exprestonist Architecture, 1915~ 1940, New York: Cooper-Hewite Muscura, and Cambridge. Mavachusectas MIT Breas, (783  
HISTORIC PRESERVATION  Hisoric preservation is one of the most significant popular and profesional movements of the 20th century w influence atchi- tecture aad urhan sedevelapment in the United States By its impact on policy and the design, finance, and review af programs and proyects in thousand of communities, the preservation movement continues to make a Liging umpact on the develop ment of the built envzonment, including ass iated landscapes. The eaampics abound.  Beginning 4s 4 pictistic: ameiative and nutivin reaction, con: cern for archaculugnal sites in une Suuchwest fed to the Antgui- ues Act of 1906 and the establishment of the Nanonal Park Service in 1916. Regvonal etforty by the American Scenic and Histuriy Preservation Society. based in New York City, and the Soacty for the Preservanan of New England Antiquities, based in Boston, provided the earliest sustained preservation activities. The first forward-looking documentation program dedicated tn aboveground buildings hegan during the Great Depresion. The Histone Amencan Building Survey, begun in 19:53, was a joint effort of the National Park Service in coaperatinn with the Amer- acan Inaritate of Architects and the Library of Congress. Al: dhough Colunial Williamsburg remained an important popular influence and critical training ground for carly profesional, tbe nabunwide soning am! plansing models promoted dung the 1920s inspired the shilt away trom oaly the restoration and feconstrucbon of ate: and toward the deagnation and protec- Gun of casutg bustotic ncighburhouds. The carly clloits in ‘Charleston New Orleans set the tone, with San Antonio pining them belure World War U, and Alexandria, Wil- amsburg. Winston-Salem. Geatgcrown, Narcher, and Annapo- is all passing, local landmarks district tegislation by 1951.  From these and other local efforts, the vord of national leader ship became apparent. ‘The need for advocacy in caving sires led to the establishment of the National Trust for Historic Preserva- Gon in 1949, The organization's purposes were to further the pulicies of the Historic Sites Act of 1935, shar is, the preservation of sites, buildings, and objects of national significance, and w enccusage public participarion in preservation efforts, The Na Gonal Trust daimed 235 members the firat year, bur member- ship had swelled to about 8,000 by the mid. 1960s.  ‘The growing interest in preservation was largely in response to the expansion of the federal housing and transportation pro- grams during the 1950s, which caused considerable demolition of inner-city arcas in the name of avec improvement. Congress passed several housing acts, the most notable in 1954 calling for widespread urban renewal, and supplied millwns of dollars for learance. It also approved the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1956, which authorized the largest joint federal-scate domestic public works venture ever: $31 bilhon co be spent over 13 years to provide a 41,000-mile “National Sysiem of Interstate and De- fense Highways.” The rise of environmental conservation, un- dencored by Rachel Carson's Sdent Spring (1962) and Stewart L. Udall’s The Quies Crins (1963), was microred by Jane Jacobs's Death and Life of Great American Cines (1962). Jacobs's attack on then-current rebssibding claimed that the bousing complexes being built were worse than the slums they replaced. Although the country generally enyoyed consxlerable prospenty. the accel- erated “white flight” to the suburbs left many people who re- tained behind trustrated by lack of economic opporninity and  the polsncal isolavon. The riots that plagued several communi- ties during the late 1960s undencored the problems.  During the Johnson administration. the federal government took the fire: positive sepa w stop the wholesale devtruction of urhan ncighbarhoods. In 1965, the Task Foro on the Preserva- tion of Natural Beauty called for a joint federal-state program in historic pecservation and cited the work of the Nacional Trust for Historic Preservation. Additional efforts to accelerate historic preservation came from the U.S. Conference of Mayon, which sponsored a repurt later that year, It recommended (1} 2 compre heme statement of nagwnal pulicy regarding the activities of all federal agencies; (2) an advisory council on histatic peeserva- tion to provide leadership and guidance in interagency actions and 4 lraison to state and local governments; (3) a turmat Na- tional Register of Historic Places based on a systematic inventory of the districts, structures, and objects significant at the national, state, and local kevels; (4) added authority and fursling for federal acquisition of threarened buildings; and (5) provision of federal loans and mcher finarkial an for historic preservation. These revomimendations guided the framing of the National Historic Preservatian Act af 1966 (PL 89-665), signed by President Lyndon Johason un 15 October 1966 (Glass, 1987).  Two other Laws in 1966 seflected 2 growing consciousness of historic preservation. The ‘Transporation Act alipulated, in Secuon 4f, that any program or project chat required land from a publx park, rcercation areca. wildlife or waterfowl refuge, or historic site would nor be approved “unless there is no prudent amd feasible alternative,” arguably che strongest resunction to demolition to date. The provision was almost immediately tested in New Orleans, where a six-lane. 108-fnor-wide, 40-foor-high elevated interstate expressway along the waterfront was chal- lenged. and the project halted (Borah, 1981). The Demonsira- tien Cites and Metropolican Development Act marked a shift from urban renewal to providing money for “madel cites.” tr declared “a need for timely acuon to preserve and resore aren, sites and structures of historic ar architectural valuc . .. in our Nauon’s urban areas” (Friedan and Kaplan, 1975). The Demon- uration Act amended the Housing Act of 1954 to make urhan- fenewal demenraoon grants available to municipalities and towns of fewer thait 50,000 people. required the recognition of hutowic and architectural preservation in urban-renewal plans, allowed the planning for these projects co be included as eligible costs, peosided grants covering up to 50 percent of the prescrva- tion projext’s costs to the state and focal governments, and al- lowed for che acquisition of an interest in historic properties and rexoring them for public use, Listing an the National Register of Histor Places was a prerequisite. The passage of the National Enviranmental Policy Act of 1969, with it: required enviton- tental impact analysis and public hearing process, alto under- sored the comern for historic properties.  These broad federal mandates accelerated the shift away fram the recognition of single historic sites and reward the designation and protection of historic district. In addicion, neighborhood conservation became local pubtic policy with the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, signed by President Gerald Ford. Categorical grams of a number of different lands were replaced by “lump sum” revenue payments. termed “com- munity development block grants.” and the local planning community determined the priorities through a series of pubbc hearings. Projeces included a wide range of infrastructure im-  provements, public facilities, assisted housing, morgage credit assiance, and urban homesteading and rehabiliesuon loans. Re- volving loan funds for housing rebabiltavon played an esential tole in communities such as Savannah and Charleston.  By che carly 1970s, mayot projects, such as Ghutadelli Square in San Francisco, the Fanucd Hall/Quiney Market renuvations ta Boston, and Pike Place Marker in Seatile, became models for dozens of subsequent waterfront revitalization «hemes (Friedan and Sagalyn, 1989), Bringing the mall to the inner city has met with marked success in some locations and with abject failure in other places, However, largely by virtue of the ininatives of James Rouse, a suburban developer named inner-city vewonary. the festival marketplace became a permanent fixture in several duwntawns, including South Street Seaport in New York and Harbor Pe in Baltimore. [n uke 199s, many uty councils increasingly looked tw heritage tounsm a at beast one poruon of the public enterainment venue that should be offered by former downtown central business districts.  Meanwhile, in academia, schools of architecnure were the first ty take an interest in teaching preservation. with seminars and classes at the Univenity of Virginia (1957), Cornell University (1962), and Columbia Uaiversity (1964). the latter becoming the first to insticure a graduate degree program in 1973. Roth graduate and undergraduate programs blosumed in the advent of the U.S. Bicentennial, embracing a broad cange of din iplines Focused at first on the need to staff the 50 care histone proweva- tion offices across the country. the graduates suon found the private wectoe offering considerably mote opportuniuics. In part. this was due co historical celcbeationy associated with the U.S. Bicentennial ivelf. The history of the wountry was being rede- fined trom a story of cultural unity to an alternauive narrative of cutrural pluralism. Alchough the principal restoratian campaign centered on the Statue of Liberty, an carly all-metal skeleron with sheet-metl skin, die semitivity of the counury to its soial evolution was accelerated by the enormous popularity of Alcs Haley's Rear (1976)  New challenges alin came with the introduction of the Tax Reform Act of 1976, which spurred billions of dollar in pri- vauly financed “certified cchabilitation™ af historic properties during the carly 1980s, Projects wich che cevi ten of the mammoth Union Station in St. Louis gave enormous hope to inner-city enthusiaats, Unfortunately, a gencral tax reform in 1986 redived the incentis and cooled this kind of invextmcnt activity. A gradual resurgence wath «maller projects occurred dus ing the 1990s (Vharcher, 1999). Espeaally when coupled with the low-income housing tax credit program. sederal incentives femain reasonably lucrative tor insereseed investors (Sullivan. 1998). As with the tederal historic preservation and environmen- tal legidation during the 1960s thar spurred amular stare-levet initiatives during the 1970s, the mure important long-term im- pact of the federal tax credie peogrants is chat they have continued to serve an models for more recendy adapted state and local sax credit programa.  ‘Vhe significant effect that this private-sector activity has bad on the historic preservanon movement cannot be utuleresti mated. Corollary commercial enterprises specializing in tinance and providing skills and hiscorical reproductions grew markedly. tn part by tapping the do-it-yourself approach un home reneva- ion. A number of prevate, nonpratit advocacy onganizarions were estahlished—such as the Assaciation for Preservarian T'ech-  tology (1968), providing technical informatiun, and Preserva- ton Action (1974), a natianwide lobbying organization—and contributed 1 strengthening gencral understanding through their publications and educational programs. The number and tole of regional and citywade groups also increased substantially. with “Enends” groups. such as thar involved in the restoration of Central Patk, taking the lead in fund-raising, In the case af ar keast one statewide nonprofit advocacy organization, the Hismutic Landmarks Foundation of Indiana, regional offices were established an hiseosic sites throughout the state, Widespread tecognition of che legitimate eule af local hisuric district desig- nation and review power came in 1978 with the U.S. Supreme Coun upimon in che landmark case Penn Censnad Transportation Cov, New York City, Subsequent challenges in state courts have tcpeatedly sched on the decision.  During the last two decades of the 20th century, however. the uend in government sponsorship of hustoric preservanon projects followed the ovcsall shilt from federal and state-funded Programs to a near-comptere reliance on local resources. From she late 1970s, dunng the Carter administeation, federal and state housing programs, ance a staple for neighborhood revitali ation, have seen relatively little growth, Housing rehabiliration has fallen to community develupment corporations some of which arc faith-based groups that have often acquired formerly publicly owned properties in poor repair.  With the end of the Cold War. “defederalization” was moat apparent in the sale of defense facilities. Pethaps the best example is the Presidiu, one of the mast valuable pieces of real estate in the Bay Area, which occupied much of San Francino’s atienvon. ‘The opportunity te reuse ckements of 3 number of Largely selt- contained former nulitary bases was the most obvious deliberate preservation planning ctlort of the last decade of the 20th cen mury.  State-sporsored environmental bund initiatives have offered some direct funding in cases such as Vermant, New Jersey, and New York, but they are comparatively rare. Uhe only significant federal domestic public improvement program iv that devoced to rranspartarion, beginning wich the Intermodal Surtace Trans portation Act of 1986 and che ‘Transporation Equity Act for the 21s¢ Century Both pump billions of doltass inw highway building, public transit. and bridge building and offer millions for various enhancements, including udnportation-related his- fork preservauion profes. Saving histori: roads themselves ha hecome a concern. Perhaps the most obvious side cffect of this work w that it has brought conuact archacologists. under the rubric of cultural resource managenient, intu closer working rela- vonship with che preservationists on ace planning, interpreta- ton, and treatment.  Uhe role of the National Park Service (NPS1, the steward of the nation’s cultural resources. was reframed during the Clinton administration to focus on accammodanng more public access to and impmvement in the parks. The NPS has promoted the belief that guidance, coupled with economic imentives, is better than outright grants-in ad and that partnerships are preterable to outnght acquistnon and long-cerm management responubil- ry. In architecture projects. foe cumple, the need for guidance in housing rehabilitation led to the creauen of the Secretary of the lorenur’s Standards for Rehabilitation in 1977 (Mora, 1994), These were used by the NES and state histone preserva- tion allices as performance standards for the evaluation of  
projects whose sponsors sought federal preservation tax credits and have been inc reasingh used in praject review at all levels af government. The most obvious examples of the partnerships with state and local agencies include the various Heritage Corri- dor initiatives chat followed the establishment of the Lowell Urban Cultural Park. such as the Gateway National Recreation Area, the Cuyahoga Valley National Recreation Area, the Hlinois-Mochigan Canal Hevitage Corridor, and the Blackstone River Navona) Heritage Corridor (honson, 1998). fn terms of direct funding for NWS programs, ounide the national parks and the federal support fur all the 50 state histotic preservation offices and the 1,200 local certified governments serving histonc disericts, it has not increased in more than 20 vears. It remains at a lietle over $30 million so that, in real terms. given even relatively modest inflation. funding has actually declined.  ‘The National Trust tar Historic Preservation, having pradu- ally lose its federal funding during the 1990s, became more self- supporting by arrempting to expand its memberthip and cur- tailed in benader public advocacy and education programs, A nouble exception of a local preservation controversy that rose ta the attention af the National Trust during the 1990s was the plan fue the Disney Corporation ta build a theme park ticar Manasias, Virginia, Congressonal hearings on this problem led many leading presetvationists in the mid-Aclancic states to focus tbeir attention on sprawl, characterisuc of cbei expauding re gional economy. The National Trust's most successful program, the National Main Street inaiarive, Launched with three small midwestern towns in 1977, spread through a neework of state: wide programs twp embrace 1,500 communities. Experimenrarion with urban demonstration projects, beginning in 1985, prepared the way for the citywide program launched in Boston in 1995, a modd that uther atie are attempung to follow.  Posrmadern design, introduced in architecture in the hae 1970s, his generally beeome widely embraced by the historic Preservation community, for it is generally underswwod to allow foe more sensitivity m the context. Designers also conuinuc tw link che popular acceptance of historic materia and nentradi- tianal schemes to the incicasing recognition given ubem in the histori, preservation process. During the 1980s, for example, urban and suburban designers interested in traditional Layout and design used the histone preservation movement t usher in “New Urbamsm.” New Urbanists have recently gained recogni: tion by the Department of Housing and Urban Development.  Meanwhile, many icons nf the Modern movement are threat- ened. The Los Angeles Conservancy's ininarive to promote the “case study houses” thar introduced the Modern movement to the Southwest was one of the earliest efforts to gain public sup- port for endangered properties of the recent past. Meanwhile. federal housing projects of the postwar era, wich as Pruit-Igoc in St. Louis, have suffered demolition. largely because of the memories associated with the Failure of the social service pro- grams. Other houses, such as Frank Loyd Wright's Fallingwater near Pittsburgh and the Darwin Martin House in Buffalo, have become the subject of major restoration campaigns. The notable effort to recognize the importame of the McDonakd's in Dow- ney, California, saved it from che wreckang ball as welll.  Hence, the character of whats felt worthy of saving continues to cas our society changes and as 20ch-century culture enters history. The concerns for wood, brick, and stone are sup: plemented and sometimes supplanted by the need to conserve  fiberboard, glue-laminated timber, plywood, ceramic veneer, concrete, glass curtain wall, and a variety of specialized metals, The investigative technixques have also broadened. Supplement- ing measured drawing and microscopic analysis are several non- deuructive techniques. including X-ray analysis, ground: penetrating ada, impact echo modeling, various forms of three-dimensional visualization, and computer-aided design. Re- gional preservation issues are alo more obvious. For example, California preservation enganizations and agencies became much more conscious of disaster preparedness, particularly after the Northndge carthquake. Seismic retrofit projects on the West Coast and some mountain states generally centered on the im- portance of providing base isolation, influencing design in other parts of the country and the world. Hurricanes in Charleston and flooding in the upper Mississippi River Valley have also focused attention on the special problems of reerofitting historic properties and aheie contents to natural disasters, During the 1990s, an era of relative worldwide peace. this expanded to in- clude the problem of protecting cultural sites fram teerarist at tacks.  The United States entered rhe 20th cennury thoorcrically and pracucally behind mast European countries un historic preserva- tion, and Amencans were forrunate enough never co have suf- fered the ravages of a world war on their own soil thar would have necestirated rebuilding irs urban coses an the same scale. During the second half of the century, however, the country han gained cormiderable experience in rchabilitation owing to tremendous private-secuue initiative and the ability wo marchal considerable financial resources. At the dawn of the new century, it frequently serves 10 provide models for other countries to follow,  Micrakt A Tomian  Further Reading  Korah, Wilbaum E., The Serend Bartle of New Orissa, A Hisory of the Views Carve Riverfront Expremoay Controverm. Tuscaloosa, Alabama: University of Alshama Prous, 1981  Boers, John (ediwor), Rerendong Hatevie Barlding,, Washingwn. DC: The Amesigan Inwicute of Architects Pres, 1989  Frieden Bernard J. and Marshall Kaplan, Thr Palins of Nagle. Urhan Aid from Model Cities to Rewune Sharieg, Cambridge, Massachusetts, MIT Press, 1975  Frieden, Bernard J. and Lynne 6. Sagalyn, Dewnsoson, Inc. How America Rebuslds Corin, Cambenipe, Massachesetrs: MIT Pree, 1989  Glass, James Arthut, “The National Histone Prevervation Act,” Ph.D. das, Corel University, 1987  “Hisar American Engineenng Recon: Thirty Years of Documenting Ametica's Techaolagical History. CRAM 25, 6 (2000)  Howmet, Jt.. Charles B., Perwetocr of the Paar: A History of the Preservation Movement im the United States before Willemsbury, New York: Putnam, 1966  Hosmer, Jr. Charles B. Presernetion Coots af Age: From Widharnctrury te the National Trius, 1926-1949, Charotvewille, Vieginia: University Press of Virginia, 1981  Howard, J Myrick. “Where the Action ls,” in Thy Amvrican Mosaic, edited by Robert Ii, Stipe and Anroinenie J. Lee, Washingron, DC, USACOMOS, 1987  Judd. Dennis R. and Susan S, Fainstein (editors), The Toormt Gin, New Haven, Connecticut: Vale Univeracy Press, 1999  Lindgren, James M,, Prrsereting the Old Dominion Histor: and Virgie Tradirionalim, Charonewille, Virgerna University Prest of Virginia, 1993  Manion, Paul Daniel, Srreng Hevoris Reads, New York: Wiley, 97  Moron, W. Brown HL, “The Secreury of the Inverior's Starulards for Historic Preservation Prowects: Frhics in Action,” Fobay i Histerse Presernatvon, Ithaca, New York and Washington, DC Naoonal Couteil far Preservation Education, 194  Mulloy, Elizabeth D.. The Hotovy of the National Trust for Huser Preervatren, 1963-1973, Washingian, D.C: The Preereanen Pree, 1976  Scarpino, Philip V., “Planning for Preservauon: A Lank at the Federal-Sate Hissar Preservanon Program. 1 96h 1986," Pudbtir Hisenan. 14, no. 2 tspsing 1992)  Sullivan, Aleca. Affordsble Heaseng. Combining the fax Credits: A Symposium, Washingtoa, 1).C.: National Park Service and Histone Presenation Educanon Foundaawa, 198  ‘Thacher, fames, “Histone Rehabiliation Tax Credas: An Hifcctive Policy un Prespectve.” Masters of Public Aduunneration, Corel! University, 1995  Thorson, Juba Vavloe “Evaluating the Implementation of the Blackstone Raver Vailey National Heneage Corridor: ‘The Muscurt: of Work and Culture and Visitor Ccruce, Wounsoxker. Rhode Inland.” Ithaca, New Yoek: M.A. chests in historic procration planning, January, 1998  ‘Tomlan, Michael A., “Preservation Prate Comes of Age,” When Pas Meen Purare: Historn: Preservation m ibe News 25 Year, Washington. D.C: Navona Just for Hine Proervapon. 1992  US. Conference of Mayon. Wh Herisage So Risé, Wahungws, O.C: National Trust for Histone Preservation, 196%  HISTORICISM  Generally defined, historiasm is a system of chought in which the past is understwod a a series vf penods or epochs, cach disrinct from cach other and the present. These various penods are characterired hy a number of prevailing philosophies, social structures, and technologies—the Zeitgent —wiach are the inev- itable results of the conditivas present wishin the subjece time and place. These characteristics are considered independent of those that came before or those that might follow, so thas the values and scial mores undentoud und rexpeted in one period muy hold ne currency in 2 ancecding time or place Histanciam is buch redatsvise, un chat the actions of an individual ins specific temporal of locative context shauld not be judged by the stan  dards of another and progressive, in thas Uhe present canditian is held to be superior cw the past, while being at the same time the result af all that has come before.  A hallmark of the post-Fanhightenment West. hiscoricism has been the prevailing artinide reward the past since its formulation in the mid-28th century. Under the historicist paradigm, the act of recording history became the placement of events within the prevailing context. As professional historians began to parti- cufarize the Western experience into discrete penods, further subdivided by ethnic of national cultural componcars (for exam- ple. the English Lace Middle Ayes, the French High Renais- sance), this same preudo-scicntific mania for classification was extended to the history of architecture, with the result that pe tory became regarded by many as the ability to describe cah o ovens of historic styles, identified by time and place, and ro  categorize correctly 4 given budding ito ane ar more of thes styles, Within the design community, the application of chis hatory in pracece meant the abdsty to detail correctly a building in any appropriate style as the cbent, program, ur princapal de- signer demanded. Yet this application of hntoricist history vio- lated the very snteflecraal framework from which wt was derived, toe if the art of every time and place is an expression of irs unique context-—its Zeitgerst —then the modern industrial age must have its own set of national styles and chauld be loathe to embel- lish ata buildings with the vexsments of another time os place. Tt was thus ttoumbent on the artists af the day to develop che “wryle of the age”: indeed, many self-conscious attempe were made in the late 19th century to develop an abistorical aschiter- ture that expressed the ambitians of the emerging industiial cul- cure  Mos practicing architects of the carly 20us century did not sense a conflict between bustoricist architecture and thert prescat Luntexd, pur were they overly concerned with producing wholly unprecedented archuectural form, Writers of the next tion, such as Nikolaus Pevsner and Heary-Russell Hitchcock, would view this insouciance as a neat betrayal to the penfession, and they often sought to etude traditional designers from the historical record of the firse half of the century. In the formative yean of the Modern movement, they contempruourly branded as histaricise any designee whi chose ty emulate too cueely forms or clement from the pase. Yer, these architects did not view themselves as sutnehow apart from theie time, and they certainty were not involved in a cabal ww destroy architecture from within. Ruther. they simpty adhered closely to 4 second tence of histor cist: char historical Cuange nue only is the result of a change in the Zeitgeist bat also is evolutionary. From this veewpoins, a was entirely reasonable ro continue che use of past architecsural toons where dhe program, client. and public expectation required it, Ut also was reasonable to assume char a “style of the age” would emerge out of the innumerable variarions the architecrural community generated whule recunaling thee forms to modem requirements, marerials, and rechniques of constriction.  Several justifications for the continuarinn af histaricist archi- fecture inte the 20th century were advanced within the profes sion and the schools. The first and most populady understood. was dhat on an age of rapid technological and social change, aditional architectural foros etnphiasized continuity and stabil- ity. Those with a stake in society as it was naturally wished to reinforce the connection between the past and the present and pethaps to assuine some of the authoriy cxpressed by ulder forms, Governmental busidings, such as the latge administrative complexes comtnucted around the Capitol and along the Na- tional Mal! in Washington, D.C., or at Whitehall in London, appropnated neoclassical and neolaroque forms to emphasize the fongeviey and ausharity of rhe governmental institutions they housed. A second justification for hisoricist design, the doctrine of associationalism, held that cach historical building form trig. gered within the mind of the viewer a set of qualities, characteris: tics, and cmarions that could he transferred tn new constmaction and hy extension to the occupant, By the lare 1%h century, this principle was melded wath the watemauc study of building typology to bevome the academix theory uf caractere, in which the designer carefully chow an architectural vocabulary that communicated the purpise and quhties of the insutution. keep- ing within design parameters accepted for the building pe. Fhe  
theary of caractire wax most clearly promulgated at the French Ecole dev Beaux-Arts in Paris, where, under the tutelage of Pro- fessor of Thevry Julien Guadet, students were challenged to apply thew developing undcruanding of history to a wide variety of contemporary arhiteciural problems, Irom worker housing to hydivelecten dams. The strength of the study of caractére was in its emphasis on the pubbe understanding of the suructure’s purpose, staltts. and organization, hased as was ott buddings and patterns knowable to the laity as well as che profession.  The use of analogy alus extended fo new structural syvtetns. Fugene-Fmanuel Viellet-le-Dise's demand in the mid- 1th cen- tury for an architecture of iron was predicated on parallels be- tween the skeletal nature of Gothic structure and isan constnic- fon. At the end uf the century. Louis Sullivan put forward the analogy of the tall building as a clinical cahumn. Twenty years later, the consteution of Cass Gilbert's Woolworth Building (19131 30 New York City initiated 4 series of Gothic skyscrapers, all of which proposcd that the stacked piers within the steel frame be oquated to the great compound piers of the Gothic cathedrals of Furope, feading vo the inevitable references to “ca- thedrals of cnmmmerce.” In conceete construction as well, che analogy to past forms proved cxscartal to understanding the na rure of the matetial Anatole de Baudoe's Church of Saint-Jean de Moatmastte (1902) in Paris exploited the tensile and com- pressive capabilities of reinforced concrete cunstsuction within a stylized Gothic Revival format. The frank cxpression of the concrete frame usually is crediced co Auguste Perret, a snident of Guader's at the Ecole des Beaus Ara; in Perret’s institutional work, however. aut us the Thédtee des Champr-Elysées (1913) or Néoue Dame de Rainey (1923), Perret makes allusions w histori. forms while demanstrating the putenual of cunciete as a suttace material capable of ceceiving an omamntal finish. Haltway acrow the world, in California, the plastic nature of concrete and ixs arnamental potential were being explored by procéges af Lime Ransome, including Arhar Brown fr, whase city hall for Pasadena (1927) presents a 205-fone high domed wwer accenicd with sinuous nco-barque ornament executed in cast and poured high-res concrere. In the best Beaux-Arts tradition, Pauadena City Hall recalls many buildings in Mediter ranean Europe, but these references are fused wyether una une fed compusinun immediacy sdenufied with sudhern Cali forma.  The development of modernst architectural culture en the 1920s challenged established jusuticadons for historicist design, Advocates for the Modern movement demanded a complete repudiation of the historical past, Largely in order to weaken the hold of raditionalist doctrine in the schools, professional sweieries, and the pres, Even those who scught a compromise porition. such as thou who designed in the stytized modem dlissicam now known as Art Devo. were deemed not to go far enough in the Modern movement's ampaign to eradicate all vesnges of historic practice. This rejccuun of the past was penuasive to many in the profession, but in the 1930s, work in histuncist, modernist, and hybrid modes coexisted. cach form finding an audience and a set of typulogics appropnute to it Yet the adepuon of Neoclassicism as the offivially sanctioned style of both Nazi Germany and the Saalinist Soviet Union asso ciated modern classicism with chese toralitarian regimes in Eu- rope and precluded the use of all historical forms in the rebuild- ing of Europe's uties at the conclusen of World War IL excepe  Humana Building, designed by Michacl Graves Jouaville, Kennucky (1985). imerer Phow © Paschall/Tarlur Phote  in the reconstruction of prominent Luxlmarks destroyed during the war.  Although hardly a force in high-syle archirecrural practice from World War Il on. historicism remained the dfee noi of architectural theory chrvughout the middle devades of the 20th century. In $960 che Canadian theorist Perer Collins was moved to wnire an essay for the Londnn-hased Architectural Review, in which he termed the practice “the curse of the 19th century,” the one construct thac could prevent architecture from developing to ire full potential. The following year, Nikolaus Pevsner sounded the alarm that some architect: were again looking at the past tuo closdy but now wete caiding the history of the Modern movement itself for design ideas (that this was a complement to his own Pioneers of the Modern Movement Pevsner was teluc- tant to acknowledge). Io Peviner the work of designers such as Edward Durell Stance was indicative of willful rebellion among, thov on active practice against the strict functionalism of the Internanonal Sryte: by example. Pevsner identified Scone's use af concrete screens, such as ar the American Embassy at New Ohi (1954), as derivative of Perret’s use of the same device at Raincy. Other late-Modern architects infused their work with traditional clements and composition, New York's Lincoln Cen- ter (1966). a collaborative effort’ headed by Harrison and Abcamovite with cansiderable design input fram Philip Johnson, recalled Michelangelo's Piazza del Campidoglio in its urban form  and che abstracted neoctassicism of iu principle buildings, Al- though this complex was extraordinarily well recived by the general public, many architeveure critics decreul sta overt histoei- sist character ax a retreat irom truly principled modern design.  The debate aver historicisin, once limited to a select segment of the architectural profession, gained a wider audience un the 1970s and [980s as 2 number of prominent practitioners and theorists publicly advocated a reexamination of the use of past forms in contemporary architecture. Robert Venturi and Denise Scont-Brown's call for a renaissance of meaning in architecture eet a receptive audience in a public that found both tunctonal ism and late- Moder expressionism austere and incamprehensi ble. By the end of the 1970h. architects were aware that ignorance of che past was no longer a sign of creative verength but of oultural impoverishment. Architects previously identified with the Modern movement, such as Robert A.M. Stern and Charles Moore, produce! work that acknowledged both the modern and traditional heritage. No building signaled the ncw atutude toward the past more than Juhnavo and Burgee’s AL &T Build- ing (1984) in midtewn Manhattan. Johosen’s modestly scaled, tower revived the Sullivanian formula for the shysraper and presented a well proportioned if somewhat flatly modcied base and body. The building's crown, an enurmaus broken pediment. was controversial for borh ics form and its intent. Johnson's Aamboyant design starement. located just blocks from borh rhe Seagram Building and Lincoln: Center, demonstrated co many not only his uncanny ability co identify and explon trends in American archisecture but alse thac the pmfesion had indeed arrived at what Stern denoted “the edge of Modernism.”  The carelid reevaluation of history pronused by the begin tings of the Posumodcrn movement failed to materialize as many theorists had wished. Ue license to examine and interpret his- torical sources was quickly abused in the name of sen). While Posunodern architects were tree to utilize histancal monk ro communicare a build:ng's structure or program to the masses, they were expected to do so tongue-in-cheek, lest their ntenuions be misinterpreted as a genuine interest in revivalism. At times this ironic posture was perhaps appropriare. such as with Michuel Graves's uarters buikling for the Disney Corporanon at Burbank, Calitomia (1990), in which a heavy Tuscan pediment is carried by atlantes modeled on six of Snow White's seven dwarves (Dopey hulds up the raking comices with good -nacured resignation). Here Graves not enly remarked on the tradition of the figural column and made a wry substitution of Disney's dwarves for Herculean Atlases, but he also referenced the origans of the Disney entertanment empire.  Usually, however, posimodern hustunicam lacked speufic meaning, a deeply felt connecnon to the past, or the caretully crafted detail of pre-Modern uaditional buulding. Quotanons from the past frequently were slapped onto otherwise unremark- able buildings, often at a ridiculously inflated scale. Graves’s Portland Building (1982) was hailed by sume ar ins compkeoon as @ monument that would reinvigorate architectural rhetoric and often is cited a the firss poamodern building: his Humana building (Lousville, Kentucky) fullawed in 1985, Must Port. landers today, however, think of Raymond Kaskey's statuc Porr- landia as the building's truc representational device —-noc the technicolor awatd ribbons or the four-story-high keystones, In Europe postmodem historicurn was both disdained and cm- braced. While many still associated classicism with the fascist appropriation of the classical language in the 19M), other.  younger architec reveled in die appurtunnty to be working in the mannetst vein uf Mabelangelo o Gruliano Romano, The large public-houstg comple Ricardo Bolill and his Taller de Arquiteciura cumtructed oucude of Pans and Barcelona became known as near-parodies of the Postmoderm movement, as the outszed columns, arches, and pediments aflixed co their Faades took on a cattoan-like quality that looked mote ephemeral than eternal  Most architects of the 190) who were interested in the hs tortual heritage approached the pase with a more circumspect attitude than Bofill, Three approahes to the past seem to be parucularly relevant co the question vf Justorcism. The coeical tegionalises, represented bat by Mana Boua or Antoine Pre- dock, examined che building Waditions of the site and inter pected these teadigons while employing an abstracted modern vocabulary. A second proup, the revivalists, employed historical styles an their most literal form, believing chat these enduring forms continue ro retain their validvey. Ablied at times with the New Urbanism movement, the revivalists have received much public artention in the United Kingdom. where devignen wich at Demetri Porphyrioe and Quinlan Verry challenged beading figures within the nation’s planning establishment and the Royal Instrtute of British Architects (RIBA) with regard to urban form and the design of several prominent public projects.  ‘The thitd stream of hiuaey-conwoous architects might be termed the contextualse. hese designers use historical forms where rhe status of the project and the strong urban form of the surraundings demand ic. hur they integrate these contextual gestures into whar are essentially modernist buildings. This de- sign scrategy is proving cpiire aaccessful in the reconumuction af Bern and alse has hecome an important means of resnbving the numerous aesthetic forces at work within the monumental core of Washington, D.C. A leading practitioner of thin apprmach is James Ingo Freed, whose United States Holocaust Memarial Museum (1994) wuth of the National Mall insegrated 3 umber of existing structures into a complex that at once deferred co the nearby Jefferson Memonal and thar recalled the architectural appasarus of the Nazi regime. Actos the mall, Freed agam inec- grated rraditional and modern in his deugn for the Ronald Re- agan Building 11998), which completed the massive Federal Tri- angle complex and gave Washington one of its few large modem spaces in the building's light-floaded ronunda. As architects atound the world reinvigorace the 21st-conrury city with struc- tures that advance the art and science of building while maintain- ing a continuity of meaning and lorm with the past, they may well tind that it is this contextual approach thar will finally revenue the histormat tadivon with the Modern movement.  Jerrkey Trostas Titan.  See she Ast Deco; AT&T Building, New York City; Bofill, Ricardo (Spain): Bora, Mario (Switzerland); Disney Theme Parks; Graves, Michsel (United States); Harrison, Wallace K. and Mas Abramovits (United States); Hitchcock, Hensy- Ruseell (United States); Holocaust Memorial Mascum, Washington, D.C.; Johason, Philip (Unised States}; Lincoln, Canter, New York City; Moore, Charles (United States): New Urbanism; Notre Dame, Le Raincy; Pevsser, Nikolaus (Eng- land), Postmoderniam, Scote Beown, Denise (United States); Stern, Robert A.M. (United States): Stone, Edward Durell 
(United Seaves); Ventmri, Robert (United Stateshs Woolworth Building, New York City  Further Reading  A monograph-lengih study of the problem of histornism has ver to be writen. although many promument theonsts and hidonans have considered the use of the past an architectural practne Che definition of hitericntn used here 1 based an Van Pelt and Wesetall's Archrercrerad Prinaples in the Age of Hesorscism. Vhs bibbography lists the must important works of theory that cxplained hsoncist practice and several seminal husrories of the Modem movement that conricred them Fs- nally, a nunsber of books and articles from the neat past dlusteate che man points of new practitioners now have with regard to hntoncern.  Bankam, Reyncs. Sheery ind Design in the Firat Machine Age, London. Architectural Press, and New York Pracpee, 1960; 2nd ediuon, New York. Pracgct. 1967  Chowy. Auguste. Hismwere de Carchitecture, 2 woh. Parr: Gaurkuce-Villun, 1899, report, Pans. Bibbothoaue de Mmage. 1996,  Colkews, Peter, “Hiseuancian ” The Anfesmuval Reva VT 1s 762 47900)  Cann, Wiliam, “Modern Trambormauons of Clusiiom” and “Pornciples and Paniche.” fhe Anhitertmral Kerurwe 176, 0 1080 (1984) .  Dever. Arthur. editor, The Arobutecrurr of the Ecole dev Betas Arts. Now York: Muncum of Mosler Art. am) Ponda Sokce aed Warburg, 1977  Cieuhon, Sipfind, Spare, tase, and Anhites ter, Canibeidge, Mamachinerns: Harvard University Prow, and Jandon, Oxford Univenity Pron, $941; Seh edition, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard Caivenity Pron, 1967  Guadet. Julien, Elément er Theorses de CArchaecture, 4 vols, Pacis Titwarie de La Cormtirtion Mudeme, (902 04: Gch edinon, T929; eepaint, 17: an Kemenss and Theory of An bit ture, Sed edition, Urbana Univeraty of Illinois Pres, 1916; reprint, 1980  Harlin. Vallant, Ferme wud Fencteum of Twratierh Contery Arcbrtectere, 4 volt, New York: Columbia Caiveriay Pees, 1982  Hihsack. Henry Russell Jr, and Philip Johmion, Tae International Seyler Archivecture Siewe 1922, Now York: Norton, 1932; ceprint, London: Norvaa, 1494; New York: Nera, 194%  Jencks, Clarks, The Language of Pos Madera Acchetecture, London: Academy Ednions. 1972. New York. Rizeoli, 1977; fh cdnion, 1991  Jencks, Charles, “Post Moderninite and Diwontinuiey,” AD Profile 65 41987),  Peover, Nikolaus, Piamerrs of the Modern Movement from Willan Morris «9 Walter Crupin, Vondon: Faber and Faber, 1936; New York: Stokes 19.47, revited edition, 45 Pinnerr of Modern Drage From William Afar to Walter Gropiw. Landen amd New York: Penguin, 1991  Peviner. Nikolaus, “Modern Architecture and the Historian, of The Return of Hisroricum,” RRA fowrnal 68, na G (1961)  Peviner. Nikolaus. tv Searcy: of Modern Archiecture and Pega. Neve York: Oxtord Univerury Brews and Liamdon: Thames and Hudern, 1968  Porphyrin, Demet, Charcical Arbeermure. London Academy Fdinons, 1991, New York: Mcdieaw -Hell, 1992  Van Belt, Robert Jan, and Carll Willam Westiall, Arrheeevtural Principles ut the Age of Hteriren, Now Haven, Conneutwue Vale Univeraty Press, 191  Ventun, Robert, Compleaty and Conrvedictian in Aerbatecture, New York: Museum of Menfers Ar, 166; 2nd edition. New York: Muscum of Modem Art. and London: Archrecairal Pres. 177  HISTORIOGRAPHY  The New (Oxford Dictronary of English defines historiography as both the wnting of history and the srudy of the writing of his- tory. There is a fundamental ambivalence present in she word's meaning when it refers w both the writing of history—as the activity of the historian — and the self-conscious srudy of histori- cal method and reseanh, A twofold meaning is already present in the Latin and Greek roots of the word: bisterre-graphia, history and the writing of history. As Panayotis Tournikiotis points out, in dhe (9th cenury, an important third meaning was  the histuriographer was now the historian employed to write the fustory of a group or public institution, and subsequently, the study of history assumed the character of the study af a com- pleted corpus of wnieren history, An example of such a “com- pleted” set of histaries about a chronological period can be found in the historiography of moder architecture, although its corpus is far from homogeneous.  The Dutch historian Franklin Rudelf Ankersmit gives an indication af the place of hismringraphy within the broader bori- tons of theory and hisyury. On the one hand, there is the activity of the hisorian as the producer of history: on the ather hand, there is the field of the philnsnphy of histary, of which hiswriog- raphy might ve might nut be 2 part, Historiography occupies a position on the border between history and the philosophy of history because its task is mainty factual and descriptive, describ- ing the work of hisonsos un the past of the evolution of the tepresentation of the past through the ages. As such, hissonogra- phy may be seen as a part of history itself, especially of che specific branch called untctlectual history, However, when histonography assumes a critical cask as an inquiry after the methods used by historians and the justificarion of their represenrarion of the past, historiography may be wen axa part of the philosophy of hisory (see Ankersmit, 1984)  Vhe Italian theariss Giergio Pigafetta concentrates on the specific discourse uf the himuriogzaphy af modem architecture and emphasizes, in contrast tu Ankcoumit, the unbreakable unity between history and historiography. Both dixcounes share. a- cording to Pryafetea, the fact thae chrough theie historstc charac- ter they hineon mainly az the developmental instruments for Reason and Nevesury: both discourses are therefore centered around questions of meaning: 4 aoey that has a seme intended asa direction and a destiny toward which the story develops and chrough which wr becomes (see Pigafetta, 1993).  Within the tradition of the historiography of moder archi- tecture, two moments can be discerned. First. we can speak of the historiography of the Modern movement as the construction of a corpay of writen histonict about modem architecture, Tha tradition had a starung point in 1927 when Gustav Adolf Marz published the book Dse Bawhunit der Nenesten Zeit (1927; The Art af Building of the Newest Fime) and could be sasd wa have an end point in the year 1965, when Peter Collins published hus Changing Ideals on Modern Arcinsecture 1750~1950. This last book already marked the emergence of 4 second tradition in which che word historiography denotes a critical reflection on what was by cow a substantial corpus of histones about modern architecture. Within this secand tradition of historiography, an umporant subdivssion can he identified. First. there are those histories in which the idea of the Modern movement is funda- mentally problematired but that still use the formula of a hissory  of modern architecture; Kenneth Frampton's Modern Arcdates- ture: A Critical History (1980) ot Manfredo Vaturi and Francesco Dal Co's Arvhitertura consemporanea (197, Modem Atchites- ture) are examples of this category. Second, there 1s an even foe recent category of study thas departs from the wea thar the narrative structures of the historical genre have been “con- sumed” and thar a profound sudy of those artatives is necessary to define tresh interpretative instruments for analvring conten  porary architecture and inv history. For example, Taurmikiotis’s research is motivated not 4s much from an interest in the ma- shinery of history as trom a cemmuument with contemporary architeccure,  The engagement of Taurnikiotis abo vaguely calls wo mond the strategies of the s0-called piancen: the tint historians to uke up contemporary anhutecture as an objet of hatory writing These pioncer historians ase chatacterized by their commurment to dhe disipline and a direct atl penonal concern with the Protagonists of its histories. Uhe relationship between the antu- tecture historian and critic Signed Giedion and che architect Walter Gropius may be called exemplary for this cammirment. Another example is constituted in the relationship betercen the histonan Henry Russell Hitcheock and the architect Frank Lloyd Waghe. bers impurtant to realize that many of the pioncer histo- Fiant of modern architectute were art historians and received theie formative training from the German tradition of Kieut geubichae (act history) that dominated aniversities in Furope and Agverica The inethous of hiatoricam are fully clabesrated in che German uadition of art history, in which bistericam van be said 00 constitute the very eco of art history. Wilhelm Worringsr (1881-1965), Hemmch Wfflin, and Alois Rieg! (1858-1905) among ober critical German historians recognized that know! edge about art objects: in the past could be achicwed by placing them in the narrarive concext of history wrinng. Also, as an important second component, it was now agreed on that such historical knuwledge about az could bear on the final interpreta tian and judgment of the art object. Histoncism alo provided the possibiliry of conceiving the representational values of art in a historical coment: if art was regarded as a visual and material embodiment of ethical and ideological instances, then history could Ivcate those instances within the braader historical narra- tve. Ast and history were now mutually enhancing and covensti tutive: whereas art clarified the etlucal dimensions of history, history acknuwledged ube nurmuative idenary of art, The classecad model of hustoricism in art history was provaded by fulunn fos chim Winckelmann (1717-1768) in the publicanon Geabichie der Kuost dev Altertums (1764; The History of Ancient Are. Winckelmann idealized the Greek world and its art by organiz- ing parsicular (now canunical) art objggts into a systematic ac- count of stylization with terms retained today, including classi cal, Romanesque, Gothic, Renaisance, and baroque. Central in Winckelmann’s account was a development ar progression going feom simple and insecure beginnings to « full bloom of beauty or the high point of artistic achievement, Importantly, Winckel mann alo conssdered historical knowledge about the past to be applicable to a present appreciation of anuieat art; furthermore, his history was tehcological and marked by 4 predutability of past events (Soussloff, 1998).  Although Pla. was not an art historran—he worked as an architece for the city of Mannheim and as an assistance for the technical university of Berlin-Charlorcenburg—in his publica-  hon Die Maher der newesten Zot 1927) 1 bovomes dear how the hustoristic: method of the ar-hestorical dincucse also shapes the fint outlines of a new discipline. [n has attempt to provide ahistorical framework for “the art of building” of modem times, Wats adopts a historical proceeding that is dialectical of nature: epoch B wy configured as the contrast and as a reaction to epoch A. The histonal dynamic prceeds through absolute rupeures; these revolutions find their legiimization in the idea of Zeltgein: that is. the ides char all artistic results should be 4 faithful ceansla- ton of the spent of the age. Adopting this motive meant that the historical procecding would, 4s 2 consequence, only be theo: lugsid. as cach epoch had ¢o lise up to its own spirit, history could only culate in the keading role af medern architecture. The history of moder architec ture assumed buth a consrituring and 4 regularing vahic: it constituted knowledge about the archi. textural past and confirmed the moral authority of contemporary architecture,  In the work of the Getman-Lnglish ant histonan Nikolaus Pevsner, the art-historical method strangly coneributed to the crystallizarion of a canonkal image of the history of modern architecture, With che publicarian of Pevsner's Pioneers of the Moder Movement from Morris te Gropius in 1936, an imporrant instrument was provided for the formation uf an ideology of moder architecture. Importance is the treatment of the architec: ture of his time as morpholigy, 4 complex system of forma—as a succession of horizontal or vertical planes, geometric shapes, surfaces, Rar mals, bay windows, and sn on. This methad gocs fuk w Johann Wolfgang ven Goethe, who. as a reaction tu the curent mutcrialistic philosophy ol his time, developed the morphological method. For Cinethe, rhe world could nar be reduced to a materualtic system uf parts. a complex unteracuon of atoms or physical particles as was elaborated, for crample, in the theary of fseac Newton. Contrary ra 3 vision of the world as a cohesive pattern uf part, what was needed, awunding to Goethe, was an encompassing framework to “wrap” the parts, a whole that was necessary sn Hirer understand rhe parts, Goethe saw thin whole presenc in the agent of the form and envisioned the world accordingly asa complex interplay of forms. In the writing of Pevaner, we see how the form ix discerned as the privileged agent. Jt in dhe forts that modern archisecuure mati fore because it is bere that the crucial combinavon of aesthetics and value judgments becomes apparent. Lines, shapes, and forms are judged by Pevsner a “hanew.” “sound.” uf “sober.” Both haroruns and aichitests hare the possibility to almost intuitively percerve of thes crucial combination of form and value: therefore. they are important partners in cormribuang—trom the pout of view of form—co the broader process of socal evolution.  After Workd War If, the criss: of moder architecture neces- arity resulted in an associated awareness of the problematic con- rent o€ iss history, An important contribution to this debare is now given by Italian historans, pecifically in che work of histo- tians and architects Bruno /evi (1918-2000) and Leonard Be- newilo 11923-], The ethical queuions accompanying madera architecture now farge navel tclevance. In the book Storss della rbvtertine moderna (1990. History of Modern Architecture), Zevr advocated ant opetative we of histaty. lnflucned ny the plulusophy of Henedero Cre (1860-1952), he wees actuality not oaly as determined by hutun bac abo as present oniy in hastory: therefore. his goal b not to provede a hatotical narrate for the most recent expfessnens of architecture but to deull eur 
of historical knowledge a guide for the actions of peesent and turure architeces In Storia dell arebutettura moderns (W960; His tacy of Modern Architecture), Benevale conttonted the ques- tions and hesitations about the ideals al che Modetn mavement  Berrevudo believed in the ned tu revise Modernism’s history to ermute ite continuing relevance To this end, he integrated the historical nareanve inta a broader waiabogical contest, demon  steating hew modern architecture is narruwly interewined with the lives of modetn peuptes and cultures, Frum this detwves the potificativn of mademn aschicceure a the only protagonist of comtemputary architectural histery.  Finally. in the 1970s and 1480s, the histasiogeaphy of mod- em atchivccture developed in’ myriad vontadktury ways. Whereas on the one hand we sev an objecuvanton of the method cot a modem architectural hotory in what by now has become a “manual.” on the other hand we sec a deepening of the criss, leading ta radical quesons about the kgitimization of the hus- torical genre of a history of modern architecture per s-  Rix Hotks tea  See sho Beacvole, Leonardo (Italy); Frampton, Kenneth (United States); Gropius, Walter (Germany); Pevaner, Niko- las (England); Tafuri, Manfredo (Italy) Zevi, Brune (lealy)  ws tbe hisennagsaphy of modern architec- ture 1s written by Panayuris Toantikiates (1999). Ihe hook ss dlearty Posmeder an character: inspired by French draminutee phuloso- pher Jacques Dernda, Tournikions trean hitariography ava number of writen certs, diverse m character. whore narrate and discursive struczuses require analysis. On the other end of the spectrum. teats by Maria Luisa Scaliai and Mian Grazia Sandn (49841 focus on the carly phase of hatorugraphie producuon becween 1927 and 1940. im contra in Vournduets's approach, an bistatal method is falleed, emphasising the proces by which the authors derived their view of hiwury. A particulely wrung ceadinien en himormsptaphi- cal wudy im present in fudy: because of this, matty bobs aie risen in Italian.  Ankersenit. Franklin Rudolf. Lendin ener gochtedemis cen oserente tan modcrar sexhicdfieafinks opnetinges. Groningen Walter Nuordhufl, 1984  Benerulo, Leunando, Ssuras deft srchitetrera miedema, 2 vuls,, Bari: Vateera, 1960, new edition, Rane. Laterea, 1999; as Hivery of Modern An heterture, (eainlivedd by HJ, Landry, 2 vols, London: Rowaledge and Paul, and Cambridge, Mawachumetts MIT Press, tod  Fratnprom, Kenneth, Madera Arckatersume: A Critical Hutery, Londen: Thames anid Huthen, and New York: Oxford University Press, 1986; 3nf edition, Landon: Thames and Hadi, 1992: New York: Thames and Hudwon, 1997  Pevener. Niklawn, Praweers of the Madern Movement from Willuam Horn’ w Walter Coroupies, London: Faber and Faber. 19%  Prgateita, Giongso, Architettera asedemas ¢ ragiene storica: bt sworvegrafia ttaksana sll ancbisertura moderna; 1928-147, Milan: Guerin: Seudio, 1993  Mute, Gustav Adolf, Dre Bamkunst der nenciten Zeit. Berlin: Proprlacn Verlag, 3927; 2nd echoon, 1940  Vorphyris, Demctn ieditor). Cir the Metboadelogy of Arcdatectural Hustery, New Vouk: Sc Martin's Pre, and London Architectural Deugn, 1981  Salar Maru Law, and Mans Geasa Sande, 2 immagine worregrafiia dellandirctrur vencempocanea da Mate 4 Gindioa, Rome: OFFivina Redizioni, 1984  Soudoli. Catherine. “Histericien an Art History.” in Erendepedit of Arsthetnt, ealived be Mithael Kelly, New York: University Peew 1998  Tatun, Mantiedo, and bramesno Dal Co, Archirreere camtemporanea. Milan: Lbecta, 1976; a3 Modern Archinectare, teamlatal by Robert Erich Wolf, 2 vole, New York: Abrams, 1979, Londun: Acaicmy Editions, (980  Lournucns, Fanayutis, Che Hutariography of Madern Arcbisecture, Cambridge. Massachusens: MIT Press. 15  Watkin, Duval Phe Rise of Anvhisecreral Hastery, London: Architectural Pres, ami Westfield, New Jersey: Eastview Edumns, 1980  Winckelmann. Johana Juschim. The Husory of Ancoent Art, trandaeed by G. Eleney Lodge. 4 rob., Benton: Orguod, 1649- 75. ecprit. New York, Ungar. 1969 (twansinen of Gescdichee de Kurut de Alvertuon, 1764)  ‘Zev, Brune, Hf knguaggre mederne dell arshisetrura, Tonto: Einaudi, 1978, an The Mosier Language af Antutecure, Seattle. Univeruty of Washingtan Pres, 1978  HITCHCOCK, HENRY-RUSSELL, JR. 1903-87  Architecture critic and historian, United States  Henry-Russell Hitchcock Jr. was onc of-the emall number of nonatchitece (which inchade historian and cultural oritk: Lewis Mumford and, somewhat later, the architecuutal historian Vin- cent Scully) who exercised a crucial influence on modem archi- tectutal practice in the United States, As a chronicler of then- fecent currents in kuropean architecture, Hitchcock defined the historkal aud formal feameworks through which Americans in the 1930s and 1940s undersned the new phenomenon of rhe Madem movement. Beginning 2s an unabashed partnan sup porter of what he and his ciscle dubbed the International Style. Hitchcock went on as an influential architecraral historian ro offer an exhaustive, magpxterial overview of more than two centu- vies of European and U.S. architecture.  As astudent of architectural history in the 1920s at Harvard. he was shaped equally by che hulistic visian of architecrure and cultural history of his mentor, medievalist Kingsley Porter, and by the enthusiasm for avant-garde art and literauare of a cadre of undergraduates with whom Hitchcock founded the arts journal Hound and Hern iv 1927. From Portes. Hitchcock wok an all-inclusive stance coward architecture that eluded construc- on as well as che history of widely differing forms. Hitchcock shared with his young pro-Modernist friends 3 preaccupaton with the role of creative artists as living parts of their culture. The latter concern drove him ro explore the roots and potentialities of contemporary architecture in a wide variety of essays and monographs, dimaxing with Modere Architecture (1929),  Modern Architecture recouncs the majoc treads and talents of the 19th and 20th cennines. from the collapse uf rococo to the emergence of Le Curbusier, to prove the thesis Hitchcock laid out ant his fire Hownd and Horn essay. “The Wecline of Architec- ture.” in 1927, Mainatream, revivalist peactive, Hitchcock seated, was metcly scenographic, without integral relationship to build- ing technology and thus was dead. Hitchcock viewed with sym pathy and respect the work of those architects around 1900, chicf among them Frank Uovd Wright, who worked to arip traditional torms of cheir most dishonest and absolete features. A new, | approach vo architectural style, however, would have to fimin itself to engincering’s new forms and methods of consruction—but with primarily seahetic, not functionalist.  motivations, Accordingly, Hitchwock argued that despite the achievements of Wright and the "New Tradition.” the direcion of the "New Pioneers” —J.).P. Oud, Le Corbusier, and Ludwig Mies van der Rohe —had formal creativivy, ssructurst hoe. and the force of history on ite side, Hitchcovk thus staked aut a potition in favor of the mod extreme moderniem bur without the antiaestheric stance that dominated detenses af it in Furope at thar rime,  Hitchcock's ideas achieved nationwide influeme through his connections with the Museum of Mader Art in New York. Hitchcock's Harvard friend Allred Barr, che museum's founding director, persusded Hitchcock to wn a planned revision ot Modem Archiecture aimed at a European readership intw an exhibition and short book tor a U.S, audience. Barr, Phechcack, and Barr's young acolyte Philip Johnson, the millionaire volun- leer director af the architecture show. replaced Hitchcock's term New Pioneers with the label fstemazional Style. In 1932, the year of Johnson's exhibiion at the maseum, Hitchcock and fahoson published a pithy, well llustrated eynoptis of Hitchcock's eatliee book under the tithe The Internasional Strde, Hitchcock teduced the formal devices of the radical Europea mudernuts and some of their polemics, ecpeciatly Le Corbusict’s, intu a ihuet list of stylistic features: non-losd-hearing walls, thin walled spauul vul- umes, regular propurtions and finish, asymmetry, acknowledge ment of industrial building methods, and lick of ornament. Thes list both described the style as it had evolved historically and prescribed its application in various building cypes. Althoagh the book and exhibition were criticized widely for being both dogmatic and apathetic e~ward modernism's social message, they did much to focun the confused undesttanding and eclectic adop- tion of nonacademic architecture in the Uniced Stater at the beginning of the Depression. The Intermuesivnal Seyle, retusaining in print throughout the next two decades. came tw by accepted tm the 1940s as the primary text on inudeinist's genesis and, as a generation of young refuernist archer catered the profes- sion, a rulebook for us styles and terns.  In 1936 Hirchoock published The Archtsectere of Ht Re vhardson and His Times, the [irst full-length snidy of Richard- son's carcer since 1888 and «till an invaluable, spmpatheric guide. (Hitchcock's appreciation of U.S. Victorian architecture. unex- pected in the author of The Insernational Style, was lifelong: in the 1930s he and photographer Berenice Abbott launched a project co document Victurisn design in New England.) His later publications vary widely, from Victorian Gothic wo Dutch modernism to the German Renaisaunce, hue his must lasing achievement is likely 10 be his classic survey lor de Pelican History of Art series, Armhisecrure: Nineteenth and Twentieth Con awries (1958, with larer revised editions). This work evinces Hitchcock's sheer crthusiasm for looking at buildings of all kinds. in combination with his encyclopedic range and goft for the convincing overview thar confirmed him a major contributer to the acceptance of modemism as well as to the writing of  architectural hiuory in the Uniced States. Mires Davin Samwuis  Ser abo Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charies-Edeuard) (France): Gaudi, Anteni (Spain): International Style: International Styte Exhibision, New York (1932): Johnson, Philip (United States) Mies van der Rohe. Ludwig (Germany); Mussford, Lewis (United Seates)) Museum of Modern Art, New York  City, Oud, J.).P. (Netherlands): Scelly, Vincent (United States)  Biography  Born a Boston. 3 June 1903; raived in Mymouth, Massachu- setts, the sont of a ductar. Studied architecture at Harvard Uni- verury. Cambridge, Massachusetts 1923-24; eeccived a master's degree in art history from Efasvard Univeracy 1927: toured Eu- tope 1930. Helped organize Modern Architecture: International Exhibrion ac the Muscum of Modern An, New York 1932 Profesor, Vassar College, Paughkecpsic, New York: 1927-28: profes, Wevteyan University. Middletown, Connecticut 1929 43; protessne, Smith College, Northampton, Massachu- set. 1941-68. Died in New York. 19 February 1987, Selected Publications  Modern Architecture, 1919  Lhe tracrmttwonal Soyle twa Philip Johann), 1932  The Anchiseceure of HHL Richardson aed His Toma, 1996  tn the Nature of Atasersah, (940 Anhiserrare Nineteenth and Twrnnech Cravens, 158  Further Reading  Recens artennos 10 Hitchcock has tacused on his motranons for the velective account of modemisn he uffered Amerikan realery m the 1940s: the mosx echaustve account on the topic is Riley, However, he has alse rocrmed anvntion ay a inember of New Yuk's arts avant-garde an the same penud: Watson discusses Hitchcock's acovines in the mu- sical and ast worlds of New York, Cambridge, and Harford berween 1929 srl 1935. A Dreef but suthoricstive acaamint of Hidiuocd's caret as a whole 1s Searing,  Riley, Terence, Thhe tnsernational Szyle Exbibition 15 and the Maven of Maderw Art. Now York: Rivsali, 1992  Searing, Helen. “Henry-Russal Hischcock: The Architectural Hisorian As Crive and Cannoicceas,” in The Archuecturel Hinwnan im America, edited by Elisabeth Bluir MacDougall, Washington, D.C; Nananal Gallery of Act, 1990  Waren, Seceen, Prepare fer Soesmst: Coerrmnade Serum, Ving Thawesan. and the Mamsiveammg ef American Moderum, New York: Ramlom House, 198  HODGETTS AND FUNG Architects and designers, United States  Hodgetts and Fung Design Associates in Santa Monica, Califor- nia, is divtincrly unlike the rypical American architecture office, for their produccivn inchides not utily buildings and their wat. roundings, but alo cabibivion design. performance ast, installa. tions, film set design, interactive game environments, and visinn- ary urban design propmah at all wales. Ihicy are perhaps the only firm tw cary furward the legacy of the office of Charles and Ray Eames, who also sucucsdully combined architecture with other dengn modia, notably that of film.  Hodgetts: and Fung buildings ate known as progressively modemist: clarity of torm and spatial organizations inherited from the Modem movement often serve as an ocgannational basi, Within these armatures. clements are added and manipu- Lred ata smaller scale, overlaying both artistic and engancering 
logic to achieve flesibiliry, choice, dynamism, « humanist axsimi- lation of technology, and a concer for context. Fach buibding tends to have an individual charuster arising out of its unique sulupon, giving the work an ionoclasue and antimonumental stance that appears alniont like an anonymous modern vernacu- lar, lacking as it does the recognizable hullinaths of persona style favored by the wadiivnal design firm.  This approach was first cvidenced in the Southside Settle- ment Community Center in Columbus, Obio (1980), where the young architects successfully integrated such diverse antlacnices as James Stiding’s Flats ar Ham Common (1955), Alvar Aalto’s Sanyarsalo ‘Lown Hall (1959), Herman Hertzberger's Student Union in Amsterdam (1966), providing the villagclike buskling, with an eclectic and exuberant vocabulary of archerypal Modern forms interwoven with idiosyncratic popular adioms denved from the surrounding urban conteat. Later buildings that cm- body this appenach inchsde the Click and Flick Agency in Wewt Hollywood, Califrma (1992), the Towell Library at University of California, Los Angeles (1992), and the Sinclair Pavilion at the Art Center Schoul of Design in Passdena (2001)  Hodgetts and Fung have peoduced 4 great umber of exhibi- tion dougns, including the weil-known “Blueprints lor Modern Living: History and Legacy of the Case Study Houses” in the  Southwale Sectlement Community Center, Cofambus, Chie (1980) Photn © Mary Aan Sullivan  Vernpocary Contemporary. Los Angeles. which inchaded full- size eeplicas of ewo of the Fames Case Study Houses (1989) Other exhibition design penjects have included the Experience Music Projece in Seattle. Washungion (1995), a series of cyber- envisenmens for Microsoft ar the Electronic Entertainment Ex- positon itt Los Angeles (1996) and Adanta (1997), an urban theme pack an Beijing for Universal Scudios (1997), and an interactive game environment for Disney in Orlando, Ronda (1997),  Hodgeus and Fung’s work is distinguished by an integraoon of rechnologees into their projects that is, unlike most architec- ture Labeled as High-Tech. neither glorified nor romanticized. Instead, advanced materials and products throughour their buildings ergonomically and aesthetically enhance the environ- ment. Their work seeke tn avoid the overwhelming sense that peuple have of being dominated by technology: it is, instead. somfonable and accessible as it enters the scalm of the vernac- ulae.  Because of the nature of these projects, Hodgetts and Fung operate na cullaborative manacr that b quite different from a typical architecture office, where the architect is piven the lead role io the design process wich other tcam members as merely supportive. They capand and blur the boundanes of the archi-  tect's role by a scamlos and sometimes even anonymous integra- tion inc a substantial range of cieative envianments. Joun ML Cava  Biography Craig Hodgetts  Born in Cinemnati, Ohia, 9 September 1937. Attended General Motors Loainute, Flint, Michigan 1955-97, earned bachelor’s degree, Obertin College, Oberlin, Obia 1960. Attended San Francisco Stare Univerary, California 1961-62, and Univenity of California at Berkeley 1962-64, carned inuster's degree 1966 in architectute at Yale Univenity, New Haven, Connecticut. Princzpal and cofounder, New York and Venuc, California uf- fies of Studio Works 1968-83; principal and cofounder. Hodgeus + Fung Design Assocrates, Santa Monica, California 1984— present; principal and cofounder, Harmomea Inc. Santa Monica, Calitormia 1989. present. Member, California Counul on Design Education 1975: member, NEA Design Advance- ment Panel 1984, 1986, 1987: member, NEA Panel un Archi- wet/Arnst Collaburauiuny 1984; member, NEA USA Fellowship Policy Panci 1986; speaker, Intemational Design Conference, Aspen, Colorado 1995, Associate Dean, California Instinte of the Ans 1969-72; visiting professor, Rice University, Houston, Texas 1984; adjunct profesor, University of Pennsylvania 1982-90; protessor, University uf Californm at San Diego EFO- 93; Eero Saarinen visiting professor, Yale Universuy., New Haven, Connecticut 1995: professor, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angelo, Califorma 1993—presen; Architecture Award, Amorian Academy of Arts and Lett 1994; Chiyoler Award for Innovanon in Design (996, Architecnural Foundavon of Los Angeles 1997.  Hsin-Ming Fung Born in Hanoi, China 29 May 1953. Atcended Oxford College, Oxford, Ohio 1971-72, Miami University, Oxford, Ohio 1973-74, eamed bachelue’s degree 1977, California Sure Uni- versity, Dominguez Hills, California; mastes’s in architecture at the Univesity of California ac Los Angeles 1980. Principal and cofounder. Hodgetts + Fung Design Associates, Santa Monica. California 1984—presens; principal and cofounder, Harmonica Inc. Santa Monica, California 1989-present. Board member. Mascum of Contemporary Art, Fos Angeles 1992-present: pres- ident, Los Angeles Forum for Architecture and Urban Deagn 1994-95; Associstion of Collegiate Schools of Architecture 1994-present; fellow, International Devign Conference, Aspen. Colorado 1995. Visiting professor, Southern California lnstituie of Architecture 1993-present; associate professor, California State Polytechnic Universiry, Pomona, California 1985~present, Eero Saarinen yisiting profesor, Yale Unuversity, New Haven, Connecticut 1995; iteceure Award, American Academy of Ares and Lercer 1994: Chrysler Award for innovation in Design 1996, Architectural Foundation of Los Angeles 1997. Selected Works cs , Venice, California, 1979  Sry Sonicare Community Center, Cohsmbus, luo, 1980 Venice tnterarm Center, Venace. California, 1983 “Blueprines for Modern Living: History and Legacy of the Cate  Study Houses.” fexhibicion design). The Temporary  Comemporan, ‘The Mascum af Ganemporary Ait, Lox Angeles, Cabloema, 1989, Viswnury San Flanunie, San blaine Muscum of Modern An. 91 Clide and Mich Ageny, We Hallywuod, Califiania, 1992 Tokvo Disneyland Gate I Main Sucet, Tokye, Japan, 1992 Tive Shrines Installation, World Pinancaal Center, New York, 1992 Torwell Lattary, Criseruty of Califorma ar Los Angdes, 1992 Ocadental Catlege Sculpture Studia, Cow Angeles California, 177 Score Zone, Daney Quen, Orlando, Horida, 1997 American Canemathejuc, Hallywoud, California, 199%  Further Reading  Architecture + Urbanist, Toyo: A> U Publishing, Match 1991  Carstanunopeules, Vivwn (editor. 10% 10 10 Cris, 100 Arvhitecn, Lorton. Phardon Press, 24900  furter, hunt, New Wor Cat Architecture 1982, New Yodk Inautute for Archstecture and Urban Studhes, 1982  Forster, Kus, Hodgers + Fivay. Scenario and Span, New York Rinok, 187  International Archuienture Yearbook, Mulgrave, Austsalia. (nage Uiblishing, 2000  Joduho, Philip, Contemporary Californus Archisert, Cologne, Gemuany: He pediht Taschen Verlag, 1995  loddiy, Philip, AevActecturr co rhe $2905, Cologne, Germany, Benedikt Farchen Verlag, i997  Volledd, Pande, Msemtre Sen Proccicy, Munich: Preved Verlag, 10  HOFFMANN, JOSEF (FRANZ MARIA) 1870-1956 Acchiwct, Austria  Today, Josef Hollmann’s historic significance & firmly estab fished: together with Orta Wagner and Adolf Loos, he is one of the three internasionally best-known Viennese architects from the petiod around 1900. His international renown had been equally steang during the First chree decades of the 20th century, but by the middle af the century much of Hnffmann's oeuvre was practically forgotten of at least deemed lrrchevain. The res- sons for this were partly intrinsic to the subculture of architecture with its built-in alterations of attitude and partly consequences of the dramatic changes of external conditions that accompanied his practice.  When Hoffmann was bom in the small Moravian town of Brinice (then Pirnitz), Moravia was an integral part of the Austro-Hungarian monarchy. and when he arrived in. Vienna to study ar the Academy of Fine Arts under Carl von Hasenauer, he entered the thering capital of an empire inhabited by some 24 million people. Az the time of his death, the same city was the capital of a very small, impovershed central Fuenpean sare, and the economic and social framework of architectural practice in it had changed in many ways.  Hoffmann’s strength lay ins a nevee-flagging wealth of creative imagination paired with a strong talent as form giver and graphic artist. He trusted his intuition and, with a decam walker's assur- ance, on sheets of squared paper made freehand designs for any- thing that came his way. from suetace patterns and small objets ew furniture, exhibitions. houses, and pakices. Today, his draw- ings and the objets carried our after them are highly priced 
collector's items, bus tar decades they were the butt of attacks hy those of hit contemporaries who, like Adolf Loos, were tring to rid the world of ornament,  Whar Hotfmann brought co his profeuion as natural endaw- ment was upplemented by the effects of veveral strong educa: tional expenemea He war fortunate to complece hin studics wader Otto Wagner, Hasenauct’s successor at the Academy, and to win the Rome prac for a stay in lly. The Mediterranean impressions received where beuame as furmatiee for hun as in Vienna Wagner's buildings and clearly formulated teachings abour an architecture appropriate for “modern man.” In addi- tiva. he became imbued with the teachings of fohn Ruskin, William Morris. and Alfred Cchrwark, Ar the same time, he assocanon with artists of che Vienna Secession, such as (Gustav Klimt and Kuloman Moser, and ho appoincmenc as protewor at the Vienna School of Applied Ants, where he taught from 1899 to 1936, became imporsant factors in his career.  A crucial development occurred in 1903, when, cogether with Koloman Most and the wealthy an-leving buxineuman itz Wamdoricr, Hotfmana founded the Wiener Werksuitte. fn- puted by the English Arts and Crafts mavement and ettcuuraged by Charla, Rennie Mackintosh, the Viennese firm employed hoghty shulled arusans tu exewute deagns by Hoffmann and  Moser House, Vienna (19033, designed by fowt Hoflmann © GreaBualdings com  Moner, For several years, it provided che inceriors for buildings by Hoffmann, who also directed its architecture department.  Hoffmann's ber-known wrviving buiklings from the carly 20th century are the Sanatorium Purker: (1904) near Vi- enns and the Stout House (1911) in Brussels, Betore he re- ceived these commuwons, howrves, he had sccurely extabliched his reputation in Vienna by s number of successful works, in- duding a shop, interior, stunning calubitions, and a group of four huuses in the suburb of Hohe Warte.  Aficr ube extetios uf che Purkersdorf building had been thos- oughly restored un the recent past. it became possible to experi- ence again what a powertul puncenng statement it made by the superb interplay of simply proportioned white cubic and slablike torms thar, like all window openings. were clearly delimited at the edges by hosders of small blue-white ceramic clements. The building. which invites comparisons with contemporancous works by Mackintosh and Wright. was canvtructed in brick and wucco with reinforced-concrete ceilings and stair. Recent re- seatch has related the architeceural treatment of the building to the advances in prychiatic medicine made in Vienna at the time Gee Topp. 1997).  At the Stodce howe, the device of formally framing all sur- faces af the facades also became a man dengan feature, valy bere  it was a matter of enclosing cladding slabs af white marble with chased-metal moldings. [1s highly likely that Hoffmann, in- spired by Quo Wagner, here gave his version of interpreting Goatfried Semper's theury about che rate of cladding in architec- ture. The Socket commission, by a tare chance, brought Holf- mann together with a congenial art-loving client of almout un- lienited meat, The result was anc of perfect harmony of pro- gram, design, and cxecutiun for the building, its garden. and its interiors. Several artist friends of Hoffmann helped in carrying our his intentians at Brusch, aune of them more brilliantly than Gustay Klimt with his by now world-famous, but at prescnt generally inaccessible, mosaics tor the Stodket dining room. When after six years the buikling was finished, architeus and arusts trom all over Europe care to marvel ac the owner's pre- Gous art collections and their architectural frame. A performance un the theater/concert hall of the Srocket house must have come as close to being a Goamtbunsturck (toral work of ard as was possible at the ame.  Ak at Purkersdorf, the carctully ptopertioned plan was laid out along two main axes, and an the upper Aoor it reveals a perfcut symmetry, On the ground floar, however. the anlucion is more complex because of the asymunctrical ements of entrance, staitcase tower, and service wing. Seen from the street, the build ing looks vaguely cculesiastical hecause of the apsidal termination of the ground floor at one end and the suircasc tower at the other. The tower's decorative and sculpcural treatment scoms intended 0 symbolire a fusion of power and beaury.  ‘The Stocker house is but the largest and must monumental teprescatative of its type —the well-appointed private garden res- idence that was considered one af Hoffmann’s specialties. in Vienna, he created a number af these, not all of which survived. Among the best preserved and most impressive are the Villa Ast (1911) at Steinfeldgassc 2; the large. simpnicas Villa Primavesi (1915) at Glocicttegatse 18; and the Villa Sonja Knips (1925) at Nusswaldgasse 22.  Ever since his beginnings at the Vienna Secession, with the (4th exhibition of Klingcr’s Reethuwen (1902) as the artistic climax, exhibicions were considered Hoflminn’s tric bailiwick. His Vienna Aamsnchay (1908), the Austrian pavilion foe the international art exhibiuiun in Rome (1911), and above all the Austrian pavilion foe the Werkbund exhibioon in Cologne (1914) were considered genuine masterworks by contempora- neous critics. However, only his Ausisian pavilion for the Venice Biennale (1934) has survived as testimony co his skill. Ar the Austrian pavibon for the 1925 [nrernational Exhibition of Dewo- racive Arts in Paris, a single molding, taken out of context and given new meaning at a different scale hecame the generaring element of the building's entire facade treatment. With such bi; inal and cflective inventions and a sophisticated way of giving the formal language of dassicism new, often atectonic and ambiguous ineerpretations, Hotfmann became one of the unacknowledged progenitom of Art Deco.  Hoffmann had come a long way from the world of late 19th. century historic eclecticism co that of the Modern movement, when, in opposition w Victor Horta, he voted tor Le Corbusier's entry at the international competition for the League of Nations palace. His ccuvre is rich in changes of direction, bur a every care he ended up with something unmistakably his awn, some- thing that had undergone a subtle transformation in keeping  with his ideal co “advance from the correct to the noble cancep- rion” (Sekder, 1985), His influence was widespread and explicitly acknowledged by such 20th-century masters as Alvar Aalto, Gio Ponti, and Carle Scarpa, and some of his faverite motits, such as the multiple eecesung of edges, are still parts of curren archi- tectural Language.  fovann EF, Spxuer  Sre abo Ast Deco; Arts and Crafts Movemeng, International Eshibition of Decorative Arcs, Pacis (1925) Loos, Adolf (Austria); Palais Stoclet, Brussels) Vienna, Austria; Vienes Sccemions Wagner, Orto (Austria); Werkbusd Exhibision, Cologne (1914)  Biography  Born in Pirnitz, Moravia (now Brtnice, Cacch Republic). 15 Devember 1870. Studied in the Department of Building, Staacs- gewerbeschule, Brinn, Moravia (now Broo, Crech Republic); studied architecture under Car] von Hasenauer snd Ouo Wag- net, Akadenue der Bildenden Kiinste, Vienna 1892-95, Rome Prize, traveled Italy 1895. Private practne, Warburg, Germany 1891-92; worked in the studiv of Gao Wagner, Viena 1896- 97. Private practice, Vienna from 1898; founding member of Vienna Secession 1897. Professor, Kunigewer-beshule, Vienna 1899-1936. Founder, with Kolomon Moses and Fritz Warnd- otter. Wiener Werksraere 1903; director, with Gustav Klimt, Kansschau, Vienna 1908-09; colounder and director, Austrian Werkbund, Vienna 1910; director, Kunsrler-werkscime. Vienna From 1943. Died in Vienna, 15 May 1956.  Selected Works  Moet Huuse, Vienna, 1903  Sanatorium. Purkersdort, Austria, 1°01  Auvwiian Pavilion, Rome, 1911 tdescmyed)  Palais Stocket. Brusarhs, 1911  Villa Aa, Vieans, 1911  Austrian Pavibon, Werkhand kchddinen, Cologne, 1914 (destroyed)  Villa Prmaven, Vienna, 1915  Villa Yemja Krups, Vienna, 1925  Ausman Pavilion, Fxpmitina des Aro Devorstifs, Paris, 1925 (destroyed)  Austnan Pavilion. Biennale, Venice, 1934  Selected Publications  “Panfache Mobel.” Due: Interewr TI 1901 “Wiens Zukunlt,” Gee Mecker, December 1919  Further Reading  The most compreheruive treatment including « atlog of works ix Seblet; #6 full babhiogsaphy: is updated un the ftalan edition of the book (1991). Muntoni un the Stuer Hous contains plans that were inarcesuble before, how many dlusteunane of devigas by Hatlmann, 104 Nocres  Gresberi. Gaulane iediton, fer Hoffrernn, Bologna: Zanu hell, TORI: as faref Heffmana, New Ytk: Ruzoli, 1985  Manton, Alessandra, Hf palaces Stocks ob feof Hoffeiaan, 1905— 1912, Rome: Mulugratia, 1989  Noever, Peter leditor). fof Hogfinany, THO. 1986: Ornament sactichen Hoffnung und Verbrecben, Vicana. Onterterchischey  
Mureuin far Angewanstte Kant, 1987; revised! and expanded, 2s Josef Hoffmann Deore, Munich: Preset, 1942  Seklct. kaluar 1, Josep Heffomeran: aban anvhrichuoneche Werk Menograpiar und Werkerrzewtms, Salzburg Resudens Vetta, LAK 2 Ind edrion, 1986; ax feud Hoffmann: Ube Architectural Wark Prwcion, New feesev: Princesa University Pree, 1985  Vopp. Leslee. “An Architrsturs fur Modern Nerves: foset Hollimann’s Purkersdort Sanatorium.” feuruel af the Socuety of Archcectural Hecoersare Ses December (404  Vergo, Pere. "Enez Wamdorter and fuse! Hatlnann,” Burtengsan Magazine 125 (1983)  HOLABIRD, WILLIAM 1854-1923 AND JOHN WELLBORN ROOT 1887-1963  Architecture firm, United States  One of Chicago's wat venerable atchitectural firms, Holabird and Root is also onc of the oldest in onntinunus practice in the Uniced Staten Founded in 1880 by Willum Holabird and Mar tin Roche, Holabial and Roche became Holabird and Root in (928 on the succemion of John Holabind (1886-1945) and Joho Wellbura Rout, Jr. With the change of name came a sheft in design method. Although borh men had crained in Paris an the Beaux-Arts tradition, they condiuded that histurinsin was nap. Propriate for modern buildings. While numunng the Chicago ition of the skeletal frame, the firm achieved nauonal acclam by supplaming clasicisin and devising 2 distincave architectural expression wirh their powerful, vertical. streamlined skyscrapers of the Lare 1920s. Some critics. such as Carl Condin. contend that Holabird and Roor might have pioncered a acw Amesican archireenre had the Great Depresion not intervened. Holabisd and Root’s anertive new syle was fire proclaimed in two Michigan Avenuc affice trwere in Chicagn, 333 Michigan Avenue (1928) and the Malimotive Building (1929). These sis: plified skyxctapers, which comply with the 1916 zoning liw that increased the cubic volume of buildings and required setbacks, replace the bulk and mass characteristic uf earlier lange buildings As its shoes vertical walls soar aver the city and the Chicago River, 3433's pared-down silhouctce and complex massing adhere to the skeletal principle of the Chicago Schuol whule simuliane- ously anticiparing modernism’s preferences tor slab design. Root. the firm's chet designer (Holabird's expertise was engineenng and management), acknowledged the lasung influence of Hicl Saarinen’s second-place entry for the Chicago Tnbune Tower competition (19223, which inspired 333’s tower and long, nar- row design The 37-srory machine-age Palmolive Building con- tains an unprecedented number of setback volumes (six) that create a pattern of receding masses andl define the building's sculptural dispositinn. Deep window channels set in the wall plane scentuste its pronourmed vertwality. The Chi.ago Daily News Building (1929; aow Riverside Plaza), for which the firm was awarded the coveted gold modal fium the Architectural League of New York in 1930, paved the way for development along the Chicago River. Ic was che first building constructed on ait nghts over saddtoad facilines; its foundation is cantilevered over Union Scaion’s cracks, and ventilation shafts are incorpo- rated inte the design, As commuter shuifle through the 26-story  building and gather in the ciry’s first public plaza, che vertical surge and horizontal span are in equilibrium.  Arguably, che most successful commission for Holabird and Root was the Chicago foard of Trade (1930). The country's foretunt agricultural trading center required offices, an cuchange flour, trading pits, and retail space. The building's nine-story base fils an catire city block while the bean, symmetrically ar- ranged setbacks bound toward « pyramidal hipped roof capped by a cast aluminum sculpture of Ceres, Roman goddess of the harvest, by John Stoen. Ac 45 stories, ic was once the city’s tallest structure. lo streamlined massing and refined detail epitomue the modernatc, Ant Deca skyscraper. Prior to the Depression. these modern. rational office towers, enlivened by complicated massing, striking verticality, and dramacic lighting. generated much enthusiasm, causing sume to regard Holabird and Root as successon to Louis Sullivan and Frank Lloyd Wright. Crisic Farl Reed, Jr., maintained “nothing so significant has happened here since the pre-Columbian Exposition days which witnessed the coming to uur streets of the epochmaking works of thar mighty band which surrounded Sullivan” (Reed, 1930, 1).  Omament was nut antithetical to Holabird and Root’s carly tuwen. Low selicts and stylized carving, ar times rectilinear, as in the Board of Trade, and ar rimes narrative, as in che frieze at 333 Michigan Avenuc commemorating Chicago's pioneer days, trequently appear above windows, along cnmice lines, and at entryways. While decnrative elements nod at tradition, they do nine ineerrupet the broad expanse af the curtain wall. The fully unadomed structural frame did not gain prominence unl the Lae 1930s, with the arrival of Mies van der Robe, whom Hula- bird was unfluental in bringing ws Chicago's Annus Insitute (now the Hlinois Institute of Toinalogy). Modern detail was peuuinent in Holabird and Root's intction as well. Materials such as walnut, marble, glass, and nicked, as well 2s ovurals, sculpture. exotic motifs. and polychromatc patieming, signify the firm’s response to the ectecticism of Art Deco. Diana Court, in the Michigan Square Building (1930; demolished 1973), was onc of the most resplendent interiors of the period with its kilei- doscopic semicircular rorunda af polished metalwork and mas- be. Design was undertaken by the firm's in-house sculpture and interior design departments and by several fine artists, stich as Car! Milles aid John Noetoa, As 4 collaborative practice, Hula- bund and Root created complete environments in their signature  The firm reached its pennacle in 1930 with its lofty, modern office towers that plonified American commercialism. yet Hola- bisd and Root has mastered many building types. including the- aters, capital buildings (North Dakora), courthouses (Birming- ham, Alabama: Racine, Wisconsin; and Se, Paul, Minnesosa), railroad cars, hoteb, public and private housing, exhibition buildings for Chicago's 1933-34 Century of Progress Exposi- Gon, and research-and-develapment huildings, such as the inne- vative A.O. Smuh Laboratory (1929) with its aluminum and plass facade and free-span incerice spaces, [Uinois Bell and Mon- santo have relied on Holabird and Root's utiliarianism and adaptability for more than 75 and 40 years, respectively. The hegemony of international modernism and an emphasis on engi- neenng rather than design typified the firm's post—World War IT production; however, from the carly 1970s to the present.  Riverside Plaza, Chicago, Hilinois } 19.19}, William Hotabird and John Welborn Rooc  © Grea Huddingsxom  inventive design practices have once again soliditied its repara- Won. In educational, institutional, and coeporare wheres, mod- ernist principles regarding detail and steuctutal refinement are Holabird and Rove can be characterized as 4 ranonal and pragmatic team whose focus is on collaboratiug and innuvauon. Wich actention to dient needs and the ability w carry a project through trom design to production, the firm has made substan- fal contributions, from its authoricarive role in the development of the skyscraper to the shaping of the urban and suburban environment. Despite its pursuit of a modernist typology. it has never been an avant-garde practice. Instead, progressivism, adaptability, and sound design and construction characterize Holabird and Root’s mase celebrated buiklings of the Late 1920s as well as many of their ather buildings. The centenarian firm reflects the nature of atchiteccural practice un the United Sates throughout much of che 20th century and, quite posubly, in  the present century. ANDREA FoGolt PLOTKIN  See ahe Chicago (IL), United States; Chicago School; Hola- bird, Wiliam, and Martin Roche (United Staves); Ulinois Institute of Technology, Chicago: Mics van der Rohe, Lud-  wig (Germany) Tribunc Tower [nterastional Competition (1922), Chicage  Biography  William Holabird  Bor in Union. New York, II September 1854. Studied engi- neering as a cadet ac the United States Milicary Academy, West Pout. Virgima 1871 73. Masted: son was John Holabird, ar- chitect. Draftsman, affice of William Le Baron fenney, Chicago 1873-80, Partner, with Onian Simonds. Chicago 1880; partner, with Simonds and Martin Roche, Chicago 1881-83; partner, Holabird and Roche, Chicago from 1883. Member, Wester Asaciatian of Architect: fellow, Ameran Insitute of Archi- tects (889. Died in Evanston, Minos, 19 July 1923.  Martin Roche  Born in Cleveland. 1 August 1853. Studicd at the Are Institute of Chicago: apprenticed to a cabincunaker, Chicago 1867-7, drafuman, office of William Le Baron Jenney, Chicago 1872~- 81. Partner, with Ossian Simonds and Martin Roche, Chicagu  
1881-83: partner. Holabird and Roche, Chivage from E883 Member, Western Awaciatian of Anhiccets, fellow, American Institute of Architens 18B9. Died in Chicagu, 6 June 1927,  Selected Works  443 Michigan Avenue, Chicage, 1928  AA), Simth Laboratory, 19.29  Palmoloe Bulding (now Plasboy?, Chicago. 1927  Chicago Daily News Buikding (now Riverunle Plat, Chicago, 1929  Chicago Board of Trade, 19.00  Duna Court, Michigan Square Burling (destroved), Chicages, 1950  Lxtubmon Busklings, Chacago’s Century of Prugiem Eapasinon, 1954  Farther Reading  Pror so Brocgmann’s tandmark. three-rolurne caalogue (1991). 09  book an Holabird and Root had been written since the 1920s, when  the fern published 1 own collection of photographs. Boch Blaser and  Condit contend that the firm claborated on the fundamental pruaciples  af the Chicago School, Bevegmann (1980), Stamper, and Zukowshy  analyte the firm's princapal buildings and proncering role in the 1920s, and Wilbon examines Holabid and Root's apnificance from sis uncep- tort ap to the present day.  Blaser, Wormer (edison), Chicege Archtretnrr: Halabird and Rost, 1880-1992, Pane! sod Uoston. Birldhtuser Verlag, 1992  Brucgmann, Raber, “Holabird und Roche and Holabird and Root: The Fira twa Generations.” Cheage Hisery. 93 (Fall 1950)  Brucgmans, Rubert, Hulabind and Rocke, Holadnrd and Ram Aw Musrensed Catalog of Warts, 3 vole. New York: Garland, 1991  Condit, Cal W., Chicage Buriding, Planning, ant Urban Techmolegy. Chicaygr: Universiry af Chicago Press, (973  Reed. badd HL. Je, “Some Reverie Werk af Holahird arid Root. Archatoxen” Architecture, G1 (January 194M)  Stamper. John W. Charaga’s Nerth Michigan Avenue: Planning and Development, 1900-1930, Chicagn: University of Chicago Press, i  Wilson, Ruchard Guy. “Hotabinl and Roos: Century ot {Intcrmuttent) Progress,” ALA Journal. "2/2 (rebruary 1985+  Zakowssy, lobn (editor), Chicege Anbrsectare and Deage, 1923 1993: Reconfiguration of an American Aterrapels. Munch: Prestel, and Chacago: Art Insocute of Chicagu, 1993  HOLABIRD, WILLIAM 1854-1923 AND MARTIN ROCHE 1853-1927 Architecture firm, United Stites  William Holabied and Martin Renhe, together with Wilham Le Baran Jenney, Burnham and Root, ind Adicr and Sullivan, belonged (0 the Chicago School style off archicsecture. Founded in the 1830, Chicago gradually emerged as the cunmmen ial center of the United States, and it was here chat the first skyscra- per appeased, After the great fire of £871, architects from all over the country were attracted by the unpuralleled opportunities offered by reconstruction, They dowly evalved solutions to the aesthenc problem at rhe high office building by allowing the ew structural techniqnes not only to admit the building struc- ture but alse to express 1  Holabird arrived in 1875, after owo years at West Point, and tonk an engineering joh in the office of fenney. where he met Roche, with who he formed a partnership in 1880. Regard  for economy and utility, demanded by Chicago investors, is reflected consistently in their work. They never resorted wo histo- ficism, and the ubjective clarity of their designs witneseed a dras- (ic reduction of piers and spandecls, allowing vast expanses of plas. They pioneered the “Chicagn window,” involving a large centet pane flanked by a narrower operating sah.  Their 12-mory Tacoma Building (1889), with its generous employment of gaa, followed Jenney's Home Insurance Build- ing (1884) in establishing stecl-skeleton frames and curtain wall- ing lor skyscrapers. The well-proportioned Marquette Building (1894) shows an ahemnative tu dhe Tacoma design, which had involved cancilevering tiered bay windows aver che property line to obrain more space. The Marquette Building is similar to Jen- ney's Sears, Roebuck and Company (second Leiter) Building (1890) io its threefold division, bur its shorecaming results from enlarged and rusticated comer pier, which invoke masonry tather than weel-frame construction. Horizontal windows and crisp, uncnriched moldings herald the 20th century.  The McClurg Building (1900) shows a darification of this design. The piers and mullions, reduced to mere lines, nmbine with the wider spandreh to make a cellular patern that both balances and expresses the horizontal and vertical nature of the sted frame. The vast expanse of glass also testifies to the internal sted frame. Holabird and Koche designed two structures adjoin. ing Sullivan's intimasely scaled Gage Building (1899). Also a part of the Gage group, their economic lines contrast with Suili- van's and exemplify che more objective and Programmatic dee sagns that characterized the Chicago School. ‘Three commissions for State Sureet stores, in the strategic Loop location, were all under way hy 1911, Holabird and Roche designed a 15-story structure for Mandel Brothers, for whom they already de- signed an annex, with characteristic wide bays and large glass windows, at the comer of Wabash Avenue and Madison Street Feaunng huge granite pilastcrs slong the have and an arcade of Connthian columns at che top. it replaced a smaller budding and created ane of the Largest Chicagn deparument stores, incor: purating 6,500 square feet of plate glass for display, essential for commercial success. Che ren-atary Rothschild Sure (1912), faced with enameled terra-coma, boasted 38 clevators, seven niles of aisles, a speually designed ventilation system. and an. advanced fireproof construction. “‘Vhe pmjecting cornice, ar- caded lower floors, and delicate detailing distinguish it from its neighbors.  The first of a senes of buildings for the Boston Store was described on completion in (912 as “the architectural embodi- ment of the ‘Chicago Idea’ in commercial architecture.” Phin in design, the building was tlooded with light. The Netcher Building, which followed in 1917, at 17 stones, became the sevond-tllest building in the city, This flat, cellular structure nuurporated three basements, housing small workshops for making candy, cigars, and ice cream; 4 full-size tennis court on the roof: and a beanch of the Chicago Puble Library. A magnifi- cent mukistory colonnade ran across the upper stories, echoing the neighboring Manhall Fickd’s complex (1892) by Burnham. The architecture of the boom years after World War Land before the Great Depression of the 1930s included new hotels notable for their sire and efficiency. Palmer House (1927) covered more shan half a city block, with its three basements and 25 stories accommodating 2.268 guew rooms With facades of brick above 4 limestone bate, its gracious second. Alour reception lobby and  Auditorium Annex, Michigan Avenue. Chicago, designed by Holaburd and Roche  © Hiswsn, Ateran Buildings Sue abtasy of Congress Mhoco hy Coen Robaon  connecting banquet room and ballroom were among the city's most cleganr interiors. | his was tuliowed by the Stevens Horel (1927), where 25 aunes sretched along an entire block, enjoy- ing 4 magnilicent view of Lake Michigan Holabird and Roche continued te produce sraightforward, imposing dexigns, very inuch in accord with the Chicagn School, uaril Roche's death in 1927. Hirany J, Gasincee  Ser the Burnkans, Danicl (United States Chicago, Mlinoiss Chicago School; Holabird, William asul John Wellbora Root (United Seates)  Further Reading The fullest account of the work of Holabird and Raabe isin Beuegmann «1g9T7)  Rach, Ina J. deditoe). Chacago) Kanes Building. ted edition, Chicago. 1980  Beuegmann, R.. Holobind and Roche and Rows, Garland, 191  Bruegmann, R.. The Archreerts and the Cry: Holabord anud Roche of Chacago 1880-1918, Chicago, 1197  Condit, Carl W., The Rese of the Skyicraper, Chicagn, 1942  Condi, Carl Wo, the Cdacag Sehoul of Architecture: A Husory of Commerc and Fublic Butlding: in the Chucago Area 1875-1925. Uhicago. [Mot  Jordy, Wilham H, american Buildings and Pheir Archaecn, Volume t: Progresrne and Agadema: ideats at the Varn of the Contry, New York and Oxford, 1972  Rane. brits, Lher Haselbaa veo beaten te und Awlsnd, Ssuntyart, 1950  Wight. Meter, B., “Additiuns to Chicago's Skyine, A Few Recent Skyscrapers” Anvhusecewnat Revord, 28 (July 1910:  fadowshy. fobn jeditot}, Chrcage Architectare IN). 1922. Berth of Morepets, Murch. Condor and New York, 188  HOLL, STEVEN 1947- Architect. United States  Steven Holl, archirect. theorist, and teacher, has been considered aleader in Lae 20th. and carly 21 century architectute, his work distinguished by a subtle abstrace thythen thas defies bots modcrt dnd postmodernist seambiiucs, Kaven for develop- 
ing diagrams thar define the design of cach project, the exsertce of Holl’s work lies in the quality of space, light, materiality, and ultimately, the overall guiding concept. As founder and principal of Steven Holl Architects, he hss maintained an offve in New York City since 1976, and his projects have been built world- wide.  Holl's significant projects imbude the Muscuin of Coniem- porary Ant Kiasma (1998) in Hebinks, hinland, Knut Hamsun Museum (19) in Hamarey. Norway: and the Bellevue Art Museum (179) in Bellevue, Washungion. Same of his residen- tial work includes the Pool House and Sculpruze Ciarden (1981) in Scarsdale, New York: Seretto Honse (1992) in Dallas. Peas: the "VW House (1998) in Camkiil Mountains, New York, and the Berkowtr-Odgit House (1988) on Martha's Vineyard, Mas: sochusetts, He hat gained recognition chrough large residential projects, including the Seaside Hybrid Housing project (1987) in Seasnle, Honda; Makahari Housing (1996) in Chiba, Japan: and Void Spuce/Hinged Space Housing (1991) in Fukuoka, Japan. Other works unclude the Sarphatisteaat Offices (2000) in Amserdam, the Netherlands; the Chapel of St. Ignatius (1999) in Seattle, Washington, and the addition ro Cranbrook Instinte of Science (1998) in Bloomfield Hills. Michigan, as well as a callaborative project for a Storefront for Art and Architecture (1993) with conceptual artist Vito Awonci in New York City.  Envouraged by an influential profewor at the University of Washington, Hermann Pundt. Holl left Scartle and sudied abroad his junior year in Rome, Jealy, br was here thar Voll made Frequent visits en the Pantheon to study structure and light and was exposed to the ueban layers af the city, hoth of which had a great influence on his later perceptions in arvhitecture and theory. ln 1976 he did posigraduate work at che Architectural Association in Luodon, where be came in contact with architects such as Rem Koolhaas. Loon Kier, Charis Jenks, Elia Zengh chs, Zaha Hachd. and Remard Tschumn. Alver traveling through Easrope for ceveral months, Holl returned co San Francisco and soon after moved ro New York, where he established his office in 1976,  Nearly bypassing architecture for 4 career in painting in the 1970s, Holl sill relies on two-dimensional media as a means to develop sudict and diagsams chat fauilitate his search for the “ctuive exsence of architecture.” Holl’s buildings are dexnibed 4 aural ax well as visusl, and he has cared 2 reputation for crcaung deagns chat cvolve from conceptual meaning rather than from a specific srylisne form. Alrhough it ss hard wo distin- guish one architect of styte as a guiding influence, much of his work shows reflections of Louis Kahn, for wham Holl had been planning on working anul the architect's sudden death, and Le Corburies, both for their attention to structure and sense of materiality.  Although projects such as the DLE. Shaw and Co. offices (New York City, 1992), the Cohen Apartment (New York City. 1983), and the Void Space/Flinged Space Hounng (1994), re Alect early modernist qualitics of clean lines and reductive maten- als such as concrete, glass, and metal, Hall experiments with a new ihree-dimensional language of planes aod volumes that moves beyond the pure modernist intluence. In the Srretw House, inspired by the overlapping stretty between heavy per- cussion and lighr strings in a musical prece by Béla Bartok, light metal root: floac berween four heavy face-ground concrete pavil-  Museum of Contemporary An Kizwia (1998), Helin, Fintand, by Seven Holl © Fregenck Busam Esto  jwns, echuing die munical wore and illustrating a shift between Holl’s carly and later work.  fn the mid-1990s Holl’s work shifted Irom the rectilinear to abstract, curvilinear forms with strong expressions of light and color, In the St. Ignatius Chapel, Holl consmicted a precast- concrete box of colored tilt-up slabs thar. framed six skylights. cach reflecting the incoming light off colored inteniot Acthe Museum for Contemporary Arr Kiasma in Helsinki, the Pannared zinc, hand -polished aluminum, and sand-blasted glass exterior interewines the building's mass with the geamerry of the city and Landscape.  Kavu Rous Maino  See ako Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charter-Edouard) (France); Kahn, Louis (United Scares); Museum  Biography  Born in Bremerton, Washington. 9 January 1947. Eamed bachelor's degree 1971 at Untversiry of Washington; moved eo San Francisco for internships with Howard Bracken and Lawe- ence Halprin: graduate work at the Architectural Association in  Landon 1976-77, Moved to New York City and established office in 1976. Associate professor, Columbia University, New York City, since 1989, Scleceed for the Palazro del Cinema Com- petition (Venice. 1990) and the Museum of Modern Art Expan- sion Competition (New York City, 1989). Mared Janet Olmsied Cross 1992, divorced 1997. (Also an architect. Cross worked in the office from 1990-1997 and worked closely with Holl on projects.) Married Solange Sabiao, 1999. Awards in- chade the 1990 Amold W. Brunner Prize for Achievement in Architecture a an An—Ametican Academy and Inwitute of Ares and Letters: 1997 New York AIA Medal of Honor, 1998 National AIA Design Award, Chapel of Se. Ignauus: 1998 Alvar Aalto Medal; 1998 Chrysler Award for Innovation in Design: 1999 National AIA Design Award, Kiasma.  Selected Works  Pool House and Sculpture Gardens. Scarsdale. New York, 1981  Seasde Hybnd Housing project, Scasule, Horida, (987  Berkowre-Odgs House, Martha's Vineyard. Massachasetn, 1988  ‘Tower Apartment, New York City, 1988  Void Space/Hingal Space Housing. Fukuoka. Japan. 1991  Serecto House, Dallas, Texas, 1492  Makshari Housing, Chiba, Japan, 1996  "Y" House, Carskill Mounsains, New York, 1998  Museum of Contemporary An Kiasms. Helanti, Finland, 1998  Cranbrook Jasticuse of Science, Moonfickl Hits, Mwhigan, 1998  Kout Hamsun Muscum. Hamarcy, Norway, 1999  Bellevue Art Museum, Bellevue, Washington, 199  Chapel of Se. Ignatius, Seale. Washington, 1999  Serphatistrax Offices, Amutendam, the Netherlands, 20001  Selected Publications  Anchoring Seleceed Prepera: 1975-1991. New Jerser Princevon Architecanral Press, 1996,  Parallax, New Jersey Prnceton Architectural Pres. 2000,  Pamphlet Archueceare (I-10), New hensey. Princeton Architectural Press, 1998.  the Chapel of Se ignaine, Now ferscy: Princeton Architectural Press. 1999,  the Sivetto Howe. Now Jersey: Panceton Architectural Press, 1996.  Further Reading  Retky, Anton, ‘Steven Holl,” Mesrepoliran Home, 3016 (1998)  Futagawa, Yukio (editor), Seren fell tbitingual Eng)ich- Japanese elition), Tokye ATA Edita, 1994  Pamphiet Architecnere £10, New Youth, Princston Arcturectural Press, 1998  Sein, Karen. “Proyect Diary: Stewn Holl’ Makahun Houang  plex,” Arrisecrwrat Record, IRS (1997)  The Stevtee Hesse: Steven Holl Arctneen, New York: Monacell: Prem. 1996  HOLLEIN, HANS 1934- Architect, Austria  Hans Holle is an architect. arust, teacher, exhibition designer, curatoe, and a designer of furniuite and silverware. After praduat- ing from the Vienna Art Academy in 1956, he traveled in the United States on a scholarship and continued bis studies at the IHinois Insticute of Technology (IIT) in Chucago, receiving a  master of aruhuectuse depsee from Berkeley in 1960, During these yean he was able to study with Ludwig Mics van der Rohe, Frank Lloyd Wnght, Richard Neutra, and other famous architects, After working in Australia. South America, Sweden, and Germany, be returned to Vienna and established a practice in 1964.  Together with Walter Vichler, Hollen sued a manifesw of “abwoluce archisecture™ in 1963. declaring thar “architecture is net the sansfacton of the nceds of the medinere ar the environ- ment foe the petry happiness of the masses. ... Architecture is an affsic of the elite.” (Burkhsndt and Manker, 2002, 35). De- space such grand aspirations, Hallein’s fest commiaion in 1965 wan rather modest. the design of che Retti Candleshop in the ceacer of Vienna. Though the project was small, he reurived the $25,000 Reynolds Memonal Award and achicved international fame.  In the 1960s Hollcin was a prominent figure in the lively Viennese scene, which also included Friedrich Se. Florian, Rai- mund Abraham. Coop Himmmetl)btau, and the theorist Ginter Feuerstein. In his two-dimensional collages, Hotlein developed 3 paper architecture in line with pop art. transforming banal objects, such as spark plugs or aisplane carriers, invo architecture through scale changes and incongrucat combinations. Declaring that everything ix architecture, he wggested in 1967 thae a perception altering drug would also be architecture: in the same year, Ron Perron of the Archigram announced the same idea as the “Enviro-Pill”  in 1970 Hollen won prabe for his fies commission in New York, the Richard Feigen Gallery. Other commissions for elite ahops followed. induding nwo jewdry stores for Schullin (1974 and 1982) in Vieuga. These deapns represent a mannerist ver- sion of bre modern architecture. With the intention of crcatiny a facade with 2 wrong image, Hollen used marble and chrot sect in scasuous shapes chat canied anthropomorphic, often semial, connatanions and occasionally contained veited allusions to death,  By the mid- 1970s Hollein cmerged as a leading Postmodern architect in Furope. The interior he designed for the Audtian Tourist Office in Vienna (1978, demolished) features all the crucial aspects of Postmodern architecture, as defined by Charles Jencks in his seminal book in 1975, in particular the principles of metaphor and tuultiple coding. Bus a Layman, the birds hang- ing from the ceiling would function as a metaphor for airplane travel, the Rolls-Royce radiator grills of the ticker counters a6 a clear agn for money and the peculiar metal palm crecs in the anterior as 4 promos ol exotic beaches. A vonnuisseur. however, wauld recognize the palm trees as a reference «o John Nash's Royal Pavilion in Brighton (1815-22), just as he would crace she origins of a small metal pavition in the Tourist Office back 10 the Mughal pavilions in Fathpur Sikri and the glass ceiling, af the Office to the Postal Savings Bank (1912) in Vienna by Ono Wagner  Evet more significant an achievement was Hollein’s design for the Abteiberg Municipal Muscum Méachengladbach, Ger- many (competision in 1976, completed in 1982). Like the inte- tiot of the Tourst Office, the exterios of the museum is a collage of clasical and Modern styles and building qpes: a nuniatuse skyscraper. undustoul sheds, a steel bridge. ewo symmetrical clas- sical pavilions. Like in James Stiding’s Maatsgaletic in Stuttgart, the different codes of archuecture are not resolved to any syn- 
Haas House (1985 90), view of the interior. designed by Hans | fallen Pham € Mary Ann Sullivan  thetic totality but they coctist in tension, underonring the heter- ogeneity of Lontemporary suciety. La the imerive of the muscu, however, the pop atutude to collage and assemblage is 80 longer in evidence. Rather. the interiors are designed with modest re- straint and a sensitive uae of light to provide die best possible exhibinon spaces for the works of art,  In Hollan’s Museum of Modern An in Frankfurt (1983- 91}, the gallery spaces are even more precisely determined ac- cording to the needs nf each individual work in the permanenr collecuon. with the consequence that che muxum may be less ideal to present other works. Because of the tight urban setang, alwo the facades are more restrained and lew heterogencous than in Monchengladbach,  (In 1985, Hollein received the Pritzke: Prize, establishing tis Feputasion as one of the foremost architects ins the world, The same year, he started designing the Huss Hass, 4 small shopping. center in the most preciour location in Vienna, oppoate St. Stephen's Cathedral. ‘The deugn is a surimary of Hlallan’s mos successful designs ovet the years, a curuupia of chromed f- cade, curved mitsus glass, fountains, bridges, staircases, all tied. together by an architectueal promenade that recreates the moun: tain hikes loved by Austrians. In the nincues. Hollen had achieved the goals of his tirst mamtfesto, becoming the architect of the ctite.  Like his fellow Priteker I'tize winner, Frank Gehry, Hollein har also mide designs fot spectacular new Guggenheim rou- seums one in Vienna and another in Salrhurg. Expeciilly the Salbury project (1990) could well function in the same way as Gehry’s Bifpao, as a spectacular mass attraction by a star archi- tect. The design realizes some of the promues of Hollemn’s first manifesto: though not soanng in the heights. the muscum pone trates deep into the mountain neat to che Salzburg castle, creat- ing an intriguing multilevel cave. Seylistically, Hollein has nos changed dramanically More recently, Hollein has reduced the omament and began to experiment with complex curved sur- faces, as in his design for the Austrian embassy in Berlin,  Diane KUniatans  Ser abo Abteiberg Municipal Muscum, Miacheagladbech, Germany; Gehry, Frank (United States); Muscum ef Modern  Art, Frankfurt; Musetim Newe Stantagalerie, Stuttgart: Post- modernism  Biography Born in Vienna, Austria, 30 March 1934. Studied at the Acad- emy of Fine Ans (Akademie der bildenden Kanse) in Vicuns  under Clemens Holameixer where he graduated in 1956. Toured and studied in the United States on a Harkness Fellow: ship. Graduate studies ac the Illinois Institute of ‘Technology in Chicago, Master of Architecture degree at the University of California, Berkeley in 1960. 1978-90 Austrian stare commis- stoner, Architecture Biennale Venice, Italy 1993. 1996 and 2000; director of architecture wection, Architccture Biennale Venice, Italy 1994-1996; curator exhibition “Contemporary Ar, Architecture and Design” Shanghai Art Muscuni, 2001. Visiting professor, Washington University 1963/64 and (966; profesas, Acadamy of Fine Arts, Diuseldor!. Germany 1967 76; 1976-2002 professor at the University of Applied Art. Vi- enna, Austria. Awarded Reynolds Memorial Award (966, Grand Austrian State Prize 1983, Priccker Prize 1985.  Farther Reading  Burkhardt. Frangnis, and Paulss Manker (cdators), Ham Holirn Schrificn and Mencfeae, Victwncs: Universitit tar Angewandte Kune, 2002  Cable, Carol, How Halbin: A Biblugraphy of Books and Anices, Monticello, Ilinoss: Vance Bibbographies. 1985  Feucracin, Gitinther, Vadose Architehtur: Virwna 1958/1908, Bertin: Ernse, 1988  Feitech, Herbert (editor). Architebien: Hae Hollen, Ath edition, Scurgart: (RH Verlug, 1995  Han Hollcin Muzeum in Monchengladbach: Architektur Ab Collage, Monchengladbach, Germany: Stadusches Museum Abtaberg.  Muachengladbach, 1986  HOLOCAUST MEMORIAL MUSEUM, WASHINGTON, D.C. Designed by James Ingo Freed: completed 1994  Initiated by President Carter and confirmed by a unanimous act of Congress in 1980, the prmgram for the Holocaust Memorial Museum was to contruct “a permanent hrving metmoral mu seum 10 the victims of the Holocaust” on the National Malt After a scrics of controversies involving the building's design. the Holocaust Memorial Council asked James lngu Freed (b. 1930 in Essen, Germany}, a partner of the New York architec- tural firm Pei, Cobb, Freed and Partttens, to amend a previous scheme thought to be too “fascistic” by the committee, and following a number of interviews, Freed agreed to rework the museum's design. Built on a 1.?-acre site berween the Victorian-era Auditor's Building and the neockassical Bureau of Engraving and Printing, the Holocaust Memorial Museum has 258,000 square feet of space dedicated to exhibits, program spaces, offices, and archives. It ix conceived. as ity name and Program suggests, ax both « public memorial and a private mu scum,  With cerain exceptions, the events that the Holocana Me morial Muscum commemorates are unlike most of the public monuments and celebeations of culture along che Mall. Even outside this particular contest, there are few buikling programs dedicated to such a complex sct of issues: A hustorical fact, a collecteve memosy, and a failed humanity are only a few of the difficult and complex issues that undertie the building program. In accepting the project. reed acknowledged these and other considerasions: the polirical nature of rhe commission, the repre-  scatational limitations of architecture. and the inability of any art or culrural enterprise to give form ot words to the inarticula- ble. ‘To this end, Froed’s research began nox in archives or books but with the arrempt to ascertain che material dimensions — the experiences and places that spoke to the need for such a memorial muscum. Thus, the architect, returning to the region where he was ham, traveled to the sites of the Holocaust—campe, ghettos, factutics, andl urban arcas-— hoping ¢v find a way to conceptual: ize and shape the marerial and expericace of unimaginable human tragedy inv architectural form and space.  The architect's ablique siting of the muscum relauve to the relatively straight line of buildings located on the National Mall—ns front lacade ib positioned slighty off the projected line of its peer buildings—gives the first indication of Fred's tntention to subvert the contormance of the whole. The buildi incorporates the materials-— brick and limescone—of the build- ings immediarely adjacent, and the museum's scale, also at vari- ance from either structure, suggests both discontinuity and snmpression; the building literally appears to be slighty out of place, its language at once commensurate and at odds with is surroundings  The building contains numerous formal references to the matenal, technology, and structures that aided and abetted the Holocaust. Freed’s we of the traditional form of the synagogue for the Hall of Remembrance—here windowless, solid, and re- tovte despite its prominent position on the Mall—is coupled with a linc of looming and asonytmous brick wwers, pusitioned as sentinels. ‘Ihe mawers suggest, among other things, the camp guard cowers, ebe righ] and anonymous subscription to collective order, the vernacular tactorylike buddings of the death and work camps, and the chimneys from which the ashes of victims spewed into the sky, In detineauing such dissonance (the building is full of references to the rechnological rigidity, instramental chaos, and disyrder of the Holocaust), the architect's pointed use of symbolic form creares a condition where any number of refer- ences. like memories expoved by dreams (Trasmen), became both prosimate and disjurntive figures in space and time.  Another ceample of this is found when approaching of heav- ing either of the building's ewo faces. The entrance sequences, from cither Lath Surcet of 15th Sircet, alubough distinct, are both expressive of a sense of pervasive lack ot perhaps undermined expectations, Entering from 14th Street, one is struck by the aggressively synumetrical. neoclassical entrance—a formal mech- anism reminiscent of the reductivist monuments of modern im- peralist states, From the 1th Street side, the entry, inverse in magnitude and references, stands in direct contrast: It is inappro- priarcty modest. Like the scaleless and mute beick facade stand- tng prominently and anonymously within the Hall of Wimess, the entry from 15th Sereet expresses the underlying, anonymous horror codified in the vernacular architecture of the Fascist sate.  Approaching che muscum’s main space, the Hall of Witness, from either entrance, the sequence of spacey ake appears to lack ditecdon. Visors bewome confined, disonented by the almost casual, even arbitrary lack of dircctronal cues. This moment marks the beginning of the architect's conceptual program, where the viutor ns no longer directed to view objects in the museun, but instead becomes a parucipant in 2 set of events.  The form, space. maternal, and temporal orchestration of ar- chitecture are arrayed on. a manner thar will maintain heightened awareness. Materials are used diachronicatly; black granite reflec- 
U.S, Holocaust Memorial Museum, Washingson. D.C, rear favade overlooking the Tilal Basin (1994)  Plate © Mary Aon Sullivan  dive surfaces, murroting the vutluies uf che undisunct figures pass ing by, sand in response, albeit obliquely, to dense. white marble surfaces suppestive of purity, impenctrable veils, the harsh winter snow, of simply nothingness. Freed’s details expose the mecha  nistic, precise thinking af the (serman bureaucracy as weell as the compulsive recording of quanuties, names, and dates. Railway schedules are jucctapated to a daily death tally, both recorded in the strict anonymity of an unknown hand: all evidence is equal, whether it be disposal procedures. personnd needs. creplascs. deaths, sransport arrival and deparcurcs. shocs, brushes. o¢ hair The qualicative— that which granes a face to humanity —is hid- den behind a highly efficient artay of quantitie, location, and request. In this sense, the educational component vf the pro-  gtam is not solely didactic but immersive. The spaces and their confused, disocienung choreography: formal manipulations; scale; and mairtial work to undermine a visitor's looking ac by inducing a sense af being there. For Freed. wholesale immersiun dispenses with the screening, objectifying effects of language and pictures: only expenence compel empathy.  Freed’s promiscuous use of technatogy and detail suggests a deliberate muning of metaphor. Bridges. gates, mesh tences, brick. ght. steel. and cable— all practical effects of the Holo- caust terror— become condensed metaphors as well, just beyond the reach of definitive aniiculation In hit use of the various forms  of vechnological enterprise, Freed came w undentand what Elie Werel calls “the hanality of evil,” one located not in higher idcals buc in che baseness of an anonymous, self-cvident vernacular tradinon. In the awkward asserablage of the various parts, Freed alsy understood that it was imporant co maintain the friction, the difficulty in arrwing at aconctusiva, and the profound inade- quacies of any symbolism afforded the memorial’s historic con- text  Vhe architect's concentranan on the interrelationships pro- duces an incosive, albeit unsettled. edifice where the whole ex- cveds the sum of individual experiences. Nonetheless, the reality that the Holocaust Memorial Muscum attempts to expose, the meaning of its patkular hisueis Fact, continucs to resist, as Freed and athers have acknowledged, attempts io articulate it wholly of fully: The staging of artifacts, the collections that reside within (ecmingly banal refuse), transcends che mechanisms peo- vidked by linguistic and symbolic metaphor, huwever capably tendered.  Euzaae rit GAMARD  See alo Jewish Museum, Berlin; Memoriah Musesm Further Reading  Dannart, Adrian, United Sewn Holecautt Memenal Mesum: Jamey Juge Freed, Londen: Phadan, 199%  US. Holocauss Memorial Mascum, Washington, D.C. Hall af Wines: Photo © Mary Ann Sullivan  Hiss, Martha, * Pobrcal Memoey’: Sudien: eve Platting, und Realnicning shes Holocaust Memorials in Washingran.” Ph.D. dasa... Freie Universitat Berlin, (1795  Linenthal, Fabwand Vabor, Pracreing Memory. The Straggle te Create America Hedecaus: Mascum, New York Viking, 1995  Miller, fudith, Cher, by One, hy Oue. Favimg the Hedovaut, New York. Simon and Schuster, 1990  Weinberg, Jethajahu, and Rissa (els, The Holocaust Museum i Waskengroe, New York: Rizzoli International, 195  HONG KONG, CHINA  As the starr of the 20th century, Hong Kang was a colony of the British Fmpire, an impoverished port al minot importance, one of several outposts on the coast of the China from which the British conducted and proeccted theis trading activisies in the region. By the end of the century, Hong Kong rose to surpass most countries of the world in terms of wealth, rrading volume, and financial stature. Limited by and and sca borders, with largely hilly terrain, Hong Kong has from the start relied on redamation to create buildable land: chrough the century. recla- mation created more than 10.000 acres (4.000 hectares) tor buildings and infrasteucture, most of it around the harbor. Be-  aune reclamation is an expensive procas, high denaty soluuons have been the assumed strategies for accommodating the expand- ing populauen and economy. Ets in the realm of high-density designs that Hong Kang has contributed aorabty in che 20th century,  Noreworthy architectural structures in the colony in 1900 were the Hong Kong Club (1897, demolished 1981) and the preiner’s aammer residence, Mountain Lodge (1902, demo- ished 1946). both designed by a local architectural and engineer- ing praceace. Palmer Tamer. The other significant local practice of the rime was Leigh and Orange. designers of Prince's Building (1901), Queen's Building (1902). and the Univenity of Heng Kong (1912). These architeceurally hybrid buildings were cre- ated in the colonial image using architectural vocabulary curtent in London, although perhaps more tiberally combined than Home County tote may have permitted. Ocher important buildings of that time indlude the granite Supreme Court (1912, Aston Webb and E. Ingress Bell us consultants to the Colonial Oifice), demonstrating in atchitecural form the British legal dominion, and the General Post Office (1911, Denison, Ram and Gibbs) in polychremaue Amoy red brick and local granite.  High densities existed in the urban situation from carly on, keading to trpival problems in sameation and puble heath. After a plague tn 1894, authanties lnoked to urban improvements to 
prevent a recurrence and enscted the Public Health and Build- ingt Ordinance of 1903 (net amended unul 1932), From this arose 3 typical budding form of a thice to feve-stary apartment building, ornamcnied on the street facales in engaged columns, perhaps with deep-shading vcrandas of street-level arcades 10 provide relict’ frum the sutamer sun; 4 fine cxtane example is Lui Seng Chun (1934, architect unknown). ‘These aight urban blocks surrounded by narrow suects. captured in mavies such as Love la Many-Splendored Thing (1955) and The World of Suze Wong (161), typified the screen.cape of urban Hong Kong, uncil che 1960s. Although largely demolished in the third quarter of the century, one example of a commercial building that sur- vived to the end of the century is Pedder Buikling (1932, Palmer ‘Tarner),  The first headquarters for the Hang Kong and Shanghai Rank (1886, Palmet Turnes) was replaced in 1935, again designed by Palmer Turnet. Sausfying instructions from the chief manager of the bank co “build the best posible building regardless of cont,” it was the tallest buikling between Cairo and San Fran- cio. An Art Deco wower (220 feet cll) flanked by two lower wings, the huilding was leading example of technological appl- cations in building. The stone-clad bukling was the fint outside North America ro use high-tensile (Chromador) steel through- out, achieving a comparatively lightweight structure. ‘The tower was serviced by high-speed clectric elevators, and che buildi was fully air-condisioned using 4 scawarer cooling system a heating delivered intemally in conocabed- panel systems. Several buildings from the same practice follownd in this vein (Bank of China, 1950; Chartered Bark, 1959), The building was replaced in 1985 by Norman Fostcr’s dengn. likewise a technologically significant building af ire rime By the rime this latest headquar- ters was completed, i reproemed Uke must eapenive building in the wodd and became an icon for Flong Kong. In distinction tw the mussive concrete construction thar typifies Hong Kong, Foster employed a highly articulated stud cxoskelcwn. The structure conssts uf five suspended-foor scetions, cach cansist- ing of a cenwal atrium doutmated by ecalaiurs serving the floves in that section. A thin raised floor system serves all spaces with air condiuoning, cabling, and power, providing for extreme flct- ibility sn configueanon, Reaswmbled restrooms and stair ele- mens plugged in to che buikling. and 2 computer-conuolled sun scoop was designed to reflect hght into the depths of rhe banking atrium.  In addition to the bank construction, rhe 19:s contributed other notable architecture, including the Raya! Hong Kong Jockey Club Grandstand with clock tower and nearby mechani- cally ventilated stables (1932, both Palmer Tunes, demolished), municipal market buildings in Wanchai (1936, Public Worka Deparment) and Central (1937, Public Works Deparment) in the modemnut style. and the circular Rayal Hong Kong Yacht Club (1939, Leigh and Orange) with uty Art Deco interior. Al: though little of note was erected in Hong Kong between 1940 and 1960, 2 number of Imemational Style cxplorauons were erected in the (9608. A new City Hall (1962, Ron Philips and Alan ich of the Public Works Deparument) was erected on the reckimed waterfront consisting of a walled garden flanked by a ull rower of offices and library and a lower hinck co the north containing concer halls, exhibition spacey, and restau- rants. The Hilton Hoeed (1962, Palmer Turner), located on a basy corner of Garden Road and Queens Road Central, placed  an L-shaped cower an a curved podium with cabanas around a swimming pool, This form spoke much abour che start of the shift from a colonial outpost to a minor city in the international ciscuie, St. Goorge’s Building (1969, F, Wang and W. Chu and Associates) is ant elegant aluminum-clad building owing mach to the Chicago School, and the HK Elecuric Company bea (1974, Palmet Turner, demolished 1998) presented aa a bridge in reinforced concrete spanning a ttrcam in a deep valley above Ceneral Diserct. icctund rated in Hor s on the archi map was 1983 oe ne tien br Zaha Hadid for the Peak Club. Al- though never realized, the building initiaced a remarkable carcer for Hadid and demonstrated thac there was interest in Hong Kong for architecture of international repute. This change was emphasized by the construction of the Hong Kong Club replace- ment (1984, Harry Seidics) with ics prestressed T beams to create clear-span spaces within and cspremed externally to present 6 structurally articulated facade to tbe central business district. Although municipal and institutional buildings heve set the standards for much of architecrure in Hong Kong, it is in the realm of housing that remarkable achievements were also made. Subjected tu successive waves of refuy became one of the defining issues in Hong Kong, tnirially, che govcenment's only iotervcnton in housing was ordinances to attempt to keep disease and safety in hand, defining a standard of 3.25 sjuare merers of floor space and 9.34 cubic meters of volume pet person. Private enterprise responded by erecting very dense tenements. The influx of refugees as a result of the civil wan in China following World War IT ted ro large squatter setdlements, ft was a fire through one of these in December 1953 that led the govremment to initiate a massive building programs for subssdized houning, resulting in the government itself becoming the largest tesntential developer in the world with annual production reach- ing 4 peak of 32,000 units in 1967. Must of these units were designed by the Hong Kang Housing Authority ivelf, although some were designed by private practitioners, as was Choi Hung Escare (1965, Palmer Turner). Starting with the Mark i H blocks an Shek Kip Mei in 1994, units were designed to 2.23 square meters per person. ‘The Mark VI type in 1969 increased this allowance increased back to 3.25 square meters. Although ec- markable in its achievements for housing so many in sn short a ume frame. the program was pressed hy the urgency to maximize output and lapsed into brutal forms and simplisnec site plans. In addition ro housing estates providing subsidized housing, populinen grawth was absorbed by the establishment of new towns to divert pressure sway from che urban concentration around the harbor. Influcoced by the British Garden City move- ment, development started with three towns—Tsuen Wan (1990s) for 720,000 residents, Sha Tin (1970s) for 600,000 tesulents, and Tucn Mun (1970s) for $40,000 residents—and contioued with six more in the Last ewo decades, each coming to maturity in bess than ten years. The typical rypology is a substanttal podium-focused design topped by tall point blocks, keaving urban spaces poorly resolved herween the tall structures, Where they have succeeded is duc ta good high-capacity public Transportation cannections to existing urban centers. In bater developments, we find the ixues of high-density development being addrensed more carefully. For example, Verbena Heights (1997, Anthony Ng) in the new town of Taeung Kwan O and Tung Chung Crewent (1999, Anthoay Ng) on Lanta near  Hong Kong Club 11984), designed by tarry Sealles C Thame Kean  the new airport offer examples of environmentally conscious high-density designs for mediurn- sm lower-cost sinirs Varied building heights capture prevailing winds and control wlar an- gles wo permit beer natural venulativn and lighung, reducing energy consumption and improving microclimates in the tower blocks while also resolving very tall rexilential structures to che buman sale at the ground level.  The harbor dominates Hong Kong both economically and physscally. Throughout most of its history in the century. Hong Kong had no petmcable land border—all contact was by ait or sea. It is appropnate, thercforc, that cransportauon-telated architecture has found manifestation in ewo successful structiues, hoth designed by partners of Spence Robinson. an expatniate firm founded in Shanghai that moved ro Hong Kong im the 1930s, The first is Ocean Terminal (1966, Spence, Robinson. Prescout and Thornburrow, facally marred by a renovation in the Late 1980s}, a three-level cruise ship pier and shopping center of clegant simplicity aml detailing. The second interchange is the Shun Tak Centre and Macau Ferry Terminal (1986, Spence Robinson), 4 twin-tawer transportation ineerchange that beings together high-spead ferries, buses, helicopeers, and a connection to the underground train with hocel, residential. and office spaces standing on 2. commercial podium with ewo piers beyond, realec- ing proposals from the beginning of the century for the integra:  Peak Tram Seanon (1946), deagned by Ferry Farrell © Thoma Kvan  Gon of transportation systems and building form (for example. fa Citta Nuova, 1914, Sanv'Elia,  With the center of Hong Keng crowded around che harbor, the shortage of land hia dictated ever-taller structures, an “archi- tecture af density,” in which all manner of activities are acoom- mmoduted. Legislative has caabled mixed-use zoning such chat commerual, caidcmial, and asstiufscturing can be found within single seructures. Examples inchide sume umuual combinations of uses: multiunse markets and community centers, ain the Tsing Yt Complea (1999, Anthony Ne) with a wet market, hibrary, and games hall organized arvund an internal street under 2 ten- sile rook cemerenes and memorial halls, as in the Tsuen Wan Columbarium (1987, Dennis fau and Ng Chun Man); and warehouses. a in the Hong Kong International Distribunoa Centre (1992, LPT Architects and Planners), which offers stor- age space on seven levels and where vehicles can enter the build- ing at mezzanine level and drive up a 3.5-kilomerer internal ramp wo 4 roukop waiting arca for 400 trucks. Common throughout Hong Kong are podium structutes with the lower thece Hoors given over to commercial uses, often connected by sky bridges to 4 nehboring podium, ucating tayered urban space and highly segregated trallic flows. Steep slopes often de- mand ingenous solutions. Educational buildings that have suc- cecded ate the University of Scence and Technology (1992. 
Simon Kwan and AsweiatewPercy Thomas Associates}. which resolves a complex program for a tertiary invitation on a deep hillside, and the French tneernational School (1984, Design Conauleants Lid) and che Hong Kong International School (1989, Dengn Conultanes Ld), which raalve peiraary and sec- ondary school programa elegantly on tight. sloping sites  By the end of the century, the skyline of the harbor of Hong Kong was Qanked on che south (island) side by cver-taller office buildings against a backdrop of tall residential buildings working their way up to the Peak Club, Structures in Kowloon remamed constrained im heght by the aceds of Kai lak Airport. In 1970, the watertrant was again reclaimed from the harbor in Central, opening land for new construction, including Jardine House, fortnerty Connaught Contre (1973, Palmer Turner), with its distinctive circular portholes; at 52 stories, in was the tallest building in Asa for many years, More land was made available foe construction to the cast of Central District when the British armed forces withdrew as part of the agreement in the run-up to the handover of Hong Kong to China in 1997. This land soon became a new financial and commercial center known as Admiralty with several notable buildings. Fhe ewin octagonal towen of Lippe Centre, formerly Bond Centre (1988, Paul Ru- dolph), with alternating cantilevered hays, form a distinctive centerpiece. Nearby. che Bank of Ching crected its loud bead quarters (1989, LM. Pei), employing the geometry of a diago- aully bisected cube tm achieve a lightweight building of consider- able height and a column Iree interior. Also on this released Land is Pacific Place (1988-91, Wong and Ouyang). a majnr shopping  with three hotds and one office tower standing on a podium of four levels of shopping with parking below. To the south of the Bank of China is Citibank Plaza (1992, Rocco Yim), an intelligent building with centralized buikling manage- ment and raised floors throughout. With its stepped twin towers, it Sem an urban furewourt to the Bank of China building, The major past of the barracks land was converted ino Hong Kung Park, in which can he found the Aviary (1991, Ove Arup and Partners with Wong Tung and Partner). Ube Brith Consulate and British Council (1996. Terry Farrell) were given a significant location adjacent tu buds he park and Pacific Mace tos consular and cultural representation afect the handover.  As the Central District expanded castward across the rekcased maluary land, t connected to Wanchai and Causeway Bay dis- tricts beyond. Coupled with the construction of the under ground rail system (the Mass J ransit Raitway), commercial facil: ities began to be erected along more of che waterfront. Central Plaza (1992. Dennis Lau and Ng Chun Man), a Posrmoderniss interpretation of a 1930s Manhatean skyscraper. prevents its 374-meter-call hinghtly lit facade. the talleat reinfurced-concrete structure in the word. mpped by a nean-light timepiece that marks che quarter hours throughout the night by presenting various combinations of colors. Aa the airport was moved from its harbor laation at Kai Tak to the remote northwestern boca- Gon on Lantau [sland in 1997. building regulations were relaxed in Kowloon to permit buildings uf greater height (e.g. the en- insula Hote! extension. 1995, Rocco Yum) as well as an increased appbvation of architectural lighting. Although beghdy fes- tooned with neon prevacusly, dhis rdaxation rapidly changed the look for Hong Kong at night te.g.. The Centre, 1999, Denms Lau and Ng Chun Man) with ie use of computer-controlled lights across 11s 73-story facade.  By the last decade, changing economics led to a greater de- mand for office space. The Hilton Hotel was replaced by the Cheung Kong Centre (1999, Cesar Pelli with Leo A. Daly) when Property prices rendered office space more profitable chan horel we. A desire to establish an iconic image of the harbor led w the canstruction af the Hlong Kang Convention and Exhibition Center (1997, Wung and Ouyang in association with Skidmore, Owings and Merrill), a multilevel rectilinear assemblage of exhi- binun spaces topped by massive aweeping ruafs, The move of the atrport led to wbxtantial associated infrastructure canstruc- tian and also set a new standard for architecture. ‘Whe clarity of design and structural clegance of the Hong Kong International Awport Terminal (1997, Foster) could not be ignored. Hong Kong Station (1998, Rocco Yim in association wich Arup Assoa- ates), the terminus of the airport railway, reflects the clarity of organization found at the airport terminal, woth large voids connecting the upper-level shopping levels with che ticker hall. in-town check-in facilities, and the subterranean rrain placforms, coveted by a sweeping roof coated in titanium. This terminus is flanked by One Intcrnatianal tinance Centre (1998, Rocco Yim in association with Cesar Pelli), in which a circular podium revolves a complex pedestrian connection, topped by a faceted tower abowe. Acrow the harbor, a complex'brief for commercial, residential, and uansportation functions was resolved in ube Kowloon Station (1998, Terry Farrell), The increased interest tn technological solurions to architectural problems is also dem- onsuated in the Kadoorie Biological SGences Building, Unicer- sity of Hong Kong (1999, Leigh and Orange). in which a double skin ix employed wm accammodare servicing needs and reduce energy consumption.  The century also saw the city move from a volunial British ourpost ta a world city within China. In order to make this change. the people of Hung Kong faced difficult questions of political and social identity. The architecture of Hong Kong teflected this struggle tor identity and recognition. At the begia- hing of the century, colonial puwes was reflected in the classical fangwage of all public and most major private buildings, Yer Hong Kong sa city in China, and its architecuure has striven to eaptess dus reality. Although indigenous construction has continued (c.g., the walled village of Hakka Wai, 1904), Chinese architectural vocabulary was also used w place official and pri- vately developed buildings inm the local context (Tai Po Marker Raitway Stavon, 1913}. Sometimes Chinese plan forms were adapted to Western clevations (St. Stephen's Girls College. 1929). The Chinese Methodist Church (1936, Mehler) was a successiul melding of vocabularice (replaced with a bese succeaful church and office tower, 1997, Kwan and Associates Architects Led), Government House (1855, Charles St George Cleverly) moephed, starting the century ws a Victorian residence and later being hybridized with Japanese forms to become the Japanese military gowernoe’s resklence (1944, Seichi Fujimura). Some architects tned to engage Chinese architectural more direvtly: Tao Fung Shan (1934, Prip-Meller), a rebgious study centcr, was designed after an extensive study of Buddhist monasteries throughour China but implemented a sive layour owing much to the architect's Danish hericage. Alchough the architectural language was largely international by the end of the century. architects continued to interpret Chinese vocabu- lary into internstional form: for example, the Hong Kong Aro Centre (1977, Teo Ho) integrates Chinese philosophies with  modern functions using Metabolist principles, ‘The leak 1 rain station, with its promincnt location on the saddle on the ridge overbooking Central District, has been hose co two incerpreta- tions of a Chinese gate. In 1972, Chung Wah Nan devgned a heavy oval plan block on ewin pillars, said to be a watchtower, This was replaced in 196 by the upswepe-dith form by Terry Farrell, in which the vocabulary of a temple (podium. calumns, and sweeping roof) ix used. Abandoning interpretation, 4 techni- cally accurate replica of Vang-dynasey woolen construction was erected at the Chi Lin Nunnery (1998, Don Pan and Ansoniates}  Thostas Kuan  See aio Bank of China Tewer, Hoag Kongy Citta Nuove  (1914); Hong Kong International Airport, Hong Kong:  Hoaghoag are Shanghai Bank, Shanghai: Shanghai  Further Reading  Brmtow, MR. Hong Kong New Town, New York and Hong Kong: Oxford University Press, 1989  Chung, Wah Nan fcampuler), Canemperary Architesnere in Hong Keng, Hong Keng: Joint {HK), 1989  Hong Kong Housing Authority, Thr Hint fae Million, Hong Kang Hong Kong Housing Authority, 1980  “Hong Kong,” in Prrsente 9 fiarwroe: Arpuisecrara en les crnelader {ethih, car}, edited by Ignasi de Solr Monee and Xavier Casta, Barcelona: Contre de Cultura Contemporania de Barurlona, YN: as Preent and batwrer Architectare es Cities ‘extub. car). tanstated by Mark Waudby, Barcelona: Contec de Catiura Contcenparama de Baroeana, 19%  Lampugnani. Viteono Magnago leditor), Hong Aone Arctitersure: the Aethenin of Deasiry, New York ant Murat: Prestel. (993  Hong Kong International Aisport (Chek Lap Kok), intense (1997) Photo © Dennis GiberuVIEW  Pryor, Edwand G., Housng in Hang Kong. New York and Hong Kong: Orford Unovensiey Pree, 1974: Zod ediuon, New York: Unluid Caneraty Meese, 1983  HONG KONG INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT  Designed by Foster and Partners, completed 1997 Chek Lap Kok, Hong Kong  Lovated on the perth shore of Lantau, the Largest uf the islands in Hong Kong, Hoag Kong Internavonal Airport is built on the radically enlarged $,248-becaare island of Chek Lap Kok. The passenger terminal building is set at the east end of the island berween pwo runways lying cast to west, When opened in 1997, the rerminal consisted of 39 wide-body aircrsft sands (tor 35 mulbon passengers annually! faid around the penmeter of a ¥ with the arms opening west and crossed on the cast by a processing terminal in which are sited the check-in and ground Cailities. By 2000 there were 47 aircraft stands in operation: the airport master plan includes cxpansion to more than 70 stands with the addition of an X-shaped satellice to the west to cymmmet- really complement che westwatd arms of the fina terminal build- ing and a second terminal building to the cast to handle 87 milbon passengers anoually.  The aupurt was designed by a joint-venture consortia of Foster and Parmers, Mort Connell [ td, and BAA PIC, alth the Litter subsequently withdrew as a parmer in the venture tor tisk management reasons. The phase 1 verminal is 1.2 kilometers  
Aerial view, Hong Kong Iicenational Airpart Phono © Denna CilbertVIEW  from front door to the farthest gare and covers an area of $50,000 square meters, with up wo cight levels in the building enclosed, capped by distinctive undulating barrel vaulre spanning east to. west along the long central axis. he architectural clarity of the building is exemplified by this singular roof. creating as it does the soaring and uninterrupted views internally and the billowing lateral forma externally, Tall ylass walls enclose the building below these barrel vaults, revealing the grec hills of Lantau and the wacen af the Peart River delta eo the passengers within. The immense building is tendered camprehensible by the lung sight Hines from almost any vantage point. The visual experience of thene waiting for their Rights ix une uf freedom, lightness, and expanse, a far cry from the segmented boxes that typify terminal buildings in other major airports of the workd. Prequalification of project teams for the competition for the airport terminal was completed in September 1991; the competi- tion started in October 1991. and submissions were duc on 24 December 1991. ‘The design contract was awarded in March 1992, with only 26 monte allowed for detailed design and construction documents, a very short period for such a complex building. Foster and Parrners were ahle to accommodate this compressed schedule by drawing on the many operational anil technical lewons learned at the revenily cumpleted Stansted Air port proyect in Fates, England. That project was initiated in  1981, entailing five years of technical scudy and functional analy- sis before construction started, finally opening in March [991_ In this decade, hester's team examined every aspect of airport terminal design, {rom groundbreaking ideas lor building services to speafic operational requirements for all users. An extensive database was evolved of design and spatial methods tn coondinare the many complexities. Key members of the Stansted tesm led the Hong Kong peoct from competition to completion; with this knowledge and background, the ceam was well placed to contbine the advanced technical understanding and the required design signature and to develop stratcgics for coordinating the design and construction information to allow the project w be completed in a compressed wchedule.  The concept of an upen and expansive terminal ex; oe was fira explored by Foster in Stansted. There, the flat roof hovers aver che 35,000 square meters of departure-and-arrival hall on a single level, held aloft by branched columns within which services and lighting are integrated. The supershed form continued ideas explored by Saarinen at Dulles Airport, Chan- silly. Virginia (1962). reestablishing the romance ind excivement of ait travel by exposing wanting passengers to views of the sky and the aircraft, framed by soaring roofs and columns, marking the airport terminal as the quintessential building type for the 20th century. These examples demonstrate a typology for an  airport terminsl—the large ched roof umber which passengers and activities ase organized in a clear diagram of peacess thaw to handle pamengers, aircrah. and baggage, uncluticred by ser- ees and structure,  In order w achieve the desired openness of the interior, the design team solved several difficult technical problems without saceificing the clarity of the design concept. This was achieved only through a tight integration of the maltkliciplinary dewign team, including the quantity surveyors WT Pannenship. who controlled cons as design alternatives were explored. Among the critical technical issues resolved in temarkable ways ate the integration of structure, fire safety. ventilation, and lighting. Fat example, the roof is a thin (650 millimeters thick) composite roof of PVC sheeting over insulation and plywood on aluminum structural decking, lying on an undulating 36- meter steel-lartice barrel vault. supported by columns at 36-meter centers. The one-to-six barrel vault seructure was created in units in Singapore and the United Kingdom and assembled on site in 12 modules. Drainage of che large roof area is achieved through small-bore downpipes within the concrete columns, made possible by er- ploying a siphonic drainage system chat removes the necd for large and unsighdly downpipes and deep gutters. Similarly, the cool air thar keeps the passenger at a comfortable temperature ix delivered from venrs just above bead height buik in te binna- cles that double as flight or passenger information syams, Air Lamination maintain. warm air above the lowest 4.5 meters within the depseture hall like a blanket over the wool ait, achiev ing high energy efficiency despite the terminal's Lirge volume. All these idess were fit explored in the Stansted progecr (for which Ove Arup and Partners were alo consulung enginects) bur were refined in Hong Kong ww achieve an even mure dra matic interior in a very much larger building, ‘These results were achieved only within a tightly monitored budger and the de- manding 26-month design schedule thuough very dose working relationships in the design team and extensive coordination of all ements from the initial design stages, a discipline Icarnod and reheaned by both roster and Arup at Stansicdl The building has won awards from the Hong Kong Insotute of Architects, Snieish Consimaction Industries, and the Internanonal Associa- tion of Lighting Designers and was identified as one of the ten mon important consiruccion achievemenrs of the 20th century.  Tuowas Kvan  See abe Airport and Aviation Buildings Arap, Ove (England)s Dulles International Airpert, Chanailly, Virginia: Foster, Normans (Eagiand); Hong Kong; Saarises, Eero (Finland)  Further Reading  Davey, Peter, “Plane Sailing,” Fie Anchrtccnuned Reverts, 2041219 (Sepeember 1998)  Graham, Mark, Chek Lap Kak: Fouchdown in Hong Kong Hong Kong, Asia Magazines Lul., 1998.  Green, Glynis, Vision a Reality in Tera! Harmony, Hong Kong Airport Authority, 1998  Pawley, Marun, Newman Foster A Global Architecture, New York: Universe, 1999  Robbins, Jack. “Haw did they do tha? The team behind Chek Lap Kok.” World Architecture, (8 (July-August (798)  HONGKONG AND SHANGHAI BANK Designed by George Leopold Wilson and others: completed 1923  Shanghai, China  Since its complepon in 1925, the former Shanghai headquarters of the Hongkong and Shungha Banking Carporanon (HSBC) has been the keystone of the Shanghai Bund. a roughly 1.5- kilometer-ong stretch of land along the Huangpu River where approomarcly 35 commercial structures, most dating fram be- tween LOL] and 1937, mark an earlier perind of intense capitalis- tic activity in Shanghai. The Bund (xwitan). as well as Zhongs- han Numbers One Road East. is naw shadowed by a forest of high-rise tower, especially in Pudung, a former warehoune and indusitial arca that hus become the paragun of Shanghai's 21st- cenmury expansion. The hank’s significant role stems partially from iv umpoung stance: iv dome tiecs 180 feet above ground and its facade spana 300 Iect wide. When completed, it was reputedly the second bank building in the world (vee Johnsiwn, 1993). The structsre has also carned enurmous sym- bolic weight, in Shanghas and beyond. as the anchor of lorign Gpitalists’ investments in pre-1949 China ‘The building now uacupring the site, on che corner of buzhou Road, is the third chat the bank occupied on the Bund. Beginning in 1865, the bank’s Shanghai branch was in a modest huilding by compar- son, but in 1875 the bank ereceed a larger structure, which it outgrow by World War 1. bur then waited until 1919 to decide to erect “a building which would dominate the Bund and make @ positive statement about the Bank's imspurance and cual dence” (ee Eambor, 1986), After 1949 the Communist Pasty’s municipal government located its headquarters in the hank and pled a prominent md sear on tbe dumie’s finial. ft was only in 1993 thar the municipal government vacated the building. In the contert of aruracting pew investon tv a booming Shanghai. city officials urged HSBC to renovate, lease, and rebocate to its former premises. However, the corporation decided against thar option, and instead. after an extemuive rehabilitation program, the Pudong Development Bank leased the building beginning in December 1996,  The main architect of the former bank was George Lcopold “Tug” Wilvon (1886-2), 3 Londoner who immignred mo Hong Kong in 1907 and became a partner in the firm of Palmer and Tumer, the nwst influential of all foreign architeciural offices operating in Shanghai during the Republican period (1931-49). The firm was based in Hong Kong, where it still prospers under the name P and T Aschitects, Lid. The British architect William Sabway established che firm in (868, 26 yeass after Hong Kong became a British colony. In 1870 Sahway took on a partncr, Wilberforce Wilson (no relation). and eight years Later the firm was known as Wilson and Bird. In 18B4 the HSBC selected the firm as one of three to submit designs for the expanding com- pany’s new Hong Kong office at One Queen's Road Central. To assist them, Wilson and Bird hired a young British architect, Clement Palmer (1857-1952), whose skill helped them win the competition. Refore the domed neachusical-uyle bank was compkted in 1888, Palmer replaced Wilson ax a partner, and theee years Later Arthur Turner, a structural engineer, replaced Bind. Palmer and Turner was established, and the company pros- peed in wommerually vibrant Hong Kong. fn 1908 the Union 
Insurance Company of Canton hired Palmer and Turner to design the Union Building, Shanghai's tint steel-frame office buikding, on the comer af Guangdong Road and the Shanghai Bund. “Tug” Wikan was dispatched to Shanghai te work with LH. Logan, bead of the fiem’s operations there. Completad in 1912, the Union Building was where Palmer and Turner bocated ity branch office. from which an the succeeding quarter century the company designed a dozen other hallnack structures abony, the Bund for thriving companies, among them the Hongkong, and Shanghai Bank.  Wikon characterized his design fur the bank as neo-Grecian and “to achieve the dignity with simplicity which that name implies the architects have eschewed the use of carving or sculp- ture almost courely and seled upon proportien and line” (HSBC, £923). Wilson also relied on several neoclassical prece- denes for Betish hanks. such ay John Soanc’s Bank of Fngland (1788-1823). He was doubtlealy aware af projects in contem- porary London, such as Sit Reginakd Bloanfick!’s ecfacing of the Carlton Club in Pall Mall (1921), which reflected a predilection for arcaded, rusticated bases and prominent attic stares (soc Zheng, 1999), Wibon abo euboed cerain stylistic morifs from the Hong Kong headquarters, such as paired granite columns fe anus on the main elevation and a colossal dome.  Hongkong and Shanghas Rank, Shanghai, Ching 11924) Pham © Jeffrey Codv  However, Wilson and the larger construction team with wham he coltahorated surpassed mere imitation in three notable ways. One of those concerned the structural nature of the build- ing, Rather than relying on local engincers and contractors wo erect this massive edifice, Palmer and Fusnes joined forces with the eminent Londan and Liverpool engineering fiem of Trollope and Colls. Mr. Fabes of this company designed an innovative, concrete raft foundation (insicad of employing Shanghai's con- ventional bur fess-secure deeply driven wooden piles) and uti- lized steel from the reliable British company Dorman and Long ww fabricate a frame wo which cladding materials such as Hong Kong granite were attached, The success of both the foundation and the frame set a significant peecedent in Shanghai, where Palmer and Vurner (and other firms) subsequently felt more sccute in convincing clients to utilize the more innovative mace- tials of concrete and sicel that were becoming so popular clse~ where hy the 1920s,  A sccond innorstion concerned what might be termed the advenisement of pre-Depression financial globalization, espe sially reflected in the bank's large ovtagunal entrance hall sus- mounted by 2 dome whose conception was selated to aspiration (see HISBC, 1923), he London artist George Murray created cartoons for eaght richly colored mosaic pans above che comice  that depicted cight of the bank's most prominent locations: Hong Kong, Shanghai, London, New York, Paris, Tokyo, Bang- kok. and Calcutta, Customers would have passed under the pancts and dome on their way to 4 vast barrel-vaulted skylit space accented with soft-toned gray Italian marble.  ‘The third innovation was 10 set a higher architectural san- dard for commercial property in Shanghai. Because of the bank's success, Palmer and Turner was hired by at least four other banks to design offices an the Bund (for example. the Bank of Taiwan, the Chartered Bank. the Rank of China, and the Yokohama Specie Bank). Other companies followed suit (for inuance, Sav soon House, Cathay [Peace] Hotel, Palace Hotel, Jasdine Mathe- ton Building, Glen Line Building. Yangtare Insurance Building, and Broadway Mansions (Purvis, 1985]}, The foundation and steel sulutions employed for the Hangkung and Shanghai Bank building were then refined in later designs. Furthermore, the dramatic visual appeal created by the bank's presence within centsal Shanghai uspited dienv and theit architects to try to meet that higher standard,  Therefore, the Hongkong and Shangha: Bank 1s of tunda- mental significance to 20th-cencury commercial architecture, More than just a palpable link to Hong Kong, the hank connects Shanghai with contemporary Faropcan building technology, places Shanghai within a global commercial contest, and epitn- tnizes Shanghai's capitalitic activitien in the early 20th century  Torres W. Cony  See aie Hoag Kong, China; Shanghai, China  A dezailed of the bank is townd in the extensive maagural hookler printed for the bank's apening on 23 june 1923, The most comprehensive journalisn, ureatmenc of the bank's vonseucion rs in the Far bassern Revew. The most untormed bustory of Palmer snd Turner 1s by Purves. Fur congructiies wath the bunk’s Hang Kong bramh, we Wong.  Cody, Jeffrey W., “Remnants of Poset lichind thy Hund: Shanghai's IBC and Robert Dollar Buildings, 1920-1922," Arrhitestueral Rewearch Quarterly 3, nv, 4.1999!  Hongkong atl Shanghas Banking Corporation, The Oficial Openemg of the New Buslding at Shanghai, 24 June 1924, Shanghai: Kelly and Walsh. 1923  Hurhoer, Jon, “Architecture un the Shanighar Bund,” Papers om Far Eastern Hetory 39, 65 989}  Johewon, Tess, and Exh, Tung chiang. A Lau Look; Wectern Architecture in Old Shanghai, Hong Kong: Old China Hand Pres. 1993  Lambos, Ian, and Gillian Chambers, One Quer’ Rad Central: The Headguaren of Hangkong Bart cuce VBea. Hong Kong: Lambot. 1986,  Lu, Xiao-mo teditor), Sangha jrsnahy shinan: A Guede to Shanghar Accbiseceure (bilingoal Chinese-English edition), Shanghar Shanghai Reamin Meuhu Chubanshe, 1996  Purvis, Makolm, Tail Sterep: Palmer and Turner, Architects anal Engoncers— The Fine 100 Years, Hong Kong: Palmet and Tumer, 1985  Wilon, G.L.. “Architecture, Interior Decoration, and Building in Shanghai Twenty Years Ago and To-day.” (Chiee Journal 12, m0. 5 (May 1930)  Wong. Shirley S.'W.. “The Hongkong and Shanghai Bank Headquarters Buildings (1886, 1935, 1986): A Hntorical Analysis of Colonulism and Architecture.” Ph.D. dis, Batet  School of Graduate Studies, University College Loadan. Unvenity of London, (97  Wu. Chiang, Sheng Nai pai med chen hiv hth, 1840-1949: The Hutery of Shunghas An bites twee, LAQ- 5549 (balinggual Chince Fnglish oditioni, Shanghai: Tung Chi Hitich Ch’a Pan She, 1497  Zheng, Shilin (alitue), Saenghas pindcs jranchy fengiim [The Fvolunnn of Shanghai Arhitecsure at Modern Times], Shanghai Shanghai Jisoyu Chubaruhe, 1999  HOOD, RAYMOND 1881-1934 Architect, United States  Raymand Mathewson Hood is remembered as a major figure in American architecture who was known nut oaly for his irrever- ence but also for his commiiment to the development of a partic- ularly American moderns Linguage of forms.  Hood was burn tn Pawiucker, Rhode Island. on 21) March 1881. He began his education at Brown University but trans- ferred to the Massachuserts Instirure of ‘Technology. He then went to work for che firm of Cram, Goodhue and Ferguson. which was ccnowned for both its nco-Gothic designs and in skill ar formal mascing.  Hood left the United Staves in 1904 for the Ecole des Beaux. Arts in Paris but failed the examinations in draftemanship and came hack ea Cram, Goodhue and Ferguson in 1906. He then spent a brief petiod with dhe architect Henry Hormbosel in Piusburgh but scturned to Paris in 1908 and completed his Feole seudies in 1961. After rejoining Hombostel’s office for another brief penod, Hood set out on his own in 1914. Fortune aniked on him wn 1922 wheo John Mead Howells, who had decided ta enter the competinan for an office building for the Chwago tribune. called on Hud w assist him.  The 1922 Tnbdune Competition attracted 263 architects from the United States and abroad, among them some of the most avant-garde. Hood an! Howells tock no nshs with their enuy, which was a sturdy Gothic rower crowned with flying bunrresses, Despite his training with Cram and Gandhue, Hond was nor a Gothic Revivatiot at heart, but he evidently know what would please the jurors, and the design he and his collaborator submitted was just craditional enough to evercame the bolder Fumpeans, including Eliel Saarinen, who finished second. Adoll’ Low, and Walter Gropius.  The success of the Tribune Building tay fess wich itv arytistac treatment than with rs fiemdamentally sound formal organiza- finn. Hood followed this with che Amencan Radiator Building (1924) in New York City, a slender tower with a gilded top that retained Gothic touches but telied more heavily on sculprural simphcity and a sense of vertical thrust. ‘This eflect was amnphitied by Hood's decision to clad the building im black brick. He argued thar window glass tends to appear dark against a light cladding and that by using a dark one instead he could create 3 more unified visual impression  Hood carried this concern for simplicity yee further in his building (19301 for the New York Daily News. The stepped-back form, this ume clad in white hack that was distributed along Meader piers of equal walth, was dictated largely by the cay’ 1916 zoning ordinance, but the architect amplified ut by going up enough of the site on une side te ptovide tor a corridor  
American Rachator Budding at night, New York Cay © Gorsche-Schkeimer Collecoon'Libeary ot Congress  through the block, The rewlt was a freestanding tower that otherwise would have been crowded at tome furure date by an- other building an che adjacent lat,  Hood's steady refinement of the tower form proveeded with New York's Rockefeller Center (1933), a complex of several buildings centered an a 70-stary lab. Hood, working with the French engineer J. Andre Fouithoux, was part of a team calling inelf the Associated Architects and made up of wo other firms: Reinhard and Hofmeister and Carbert, Harrson, and McMur- tay. However, Hood became the ty inthuence on the overall design. The result was arguably the fines: moder urban complex in the world. The central tower seems ro gather the lower build- ings co itself whike opening up to the city chrough an intemal street and 4 generous pedestrian corrdor: the Channel Gardens,  Moving back to the single-shaft form, Hood completed the McGraw-Hill Building in 19310 In contrat to his earlier, strongly verical towers. this onc was distinguished by the use of arong horizontals and was clad in an innovative akin of yreen-hlue terra-conta bricks. The industrial look of the design won Hood inclusion as the only American architect in the influ- ential show and subsequent book by Henry-Ruwell Hitchcock and Philip Johnsen, International Style Exhibition, New York (1932).  That sclewtion depended heavily on the superficial similarity between Hood's work and that of the avani-garde Europeans, bur whatever the influence, Hood always insisted that he was foremost a practical architect in the service of his clients and that he fully supported cheir goal of making money. Indeed. Hood was quite capable of putting an avctsize replica of a refrig- crator on the rané of a building for a chent who owned a chain of General Electric showraoms.,  In an article written: for the 7 December 1929 issue of Liberty magazine sitked “What Is Beauty in Architeuture?” Hood an- swered the queation himself by saying that it “is utility, devel- oped in a mannct to which the eye i accustomed by habit, tpofar as this development docs nut detract from its quality of usefulness.”  Caen Wiseman  See abo taternational Seyle Exhibision, New York (1932); Rockefeller Center, New York City; Tribune Tower interaa- tional Competition (1922), Chicago  Biography  Roen in Pawtucket, Rhode IsLind, 21 March 1881. Degree fram Brown Univerwty, Providence, Rhode [sland 1899; studied ar- chitecture, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Camberndge 1899-1903; trained in the offices of Cram, Goodhue, and Fer- pusun, Boston 101 04 and the offices of Palmes and Hornbos- (ct, Piesburgh 1906-08; attended rhe cole des Beaux-Arts, Paris 190406, 1908-11. Set up office with Henry Hornbostel, Pittsburgh 1971 14. Private practice, New York from 1914: partner with J. André Fouilhoux 1920; member, Board of De- sign. Century of Progress Exposition, Chicago 1933. President, Architectural League of New York 1929-31; fellow. American Instinte of Architects 1934. Died in Stamford, Connecticut,  15 Ansgust 1934, Selected Works  Amenian Radiator Balding, New York, 1924  Chicago Tribune Tower (first prine, competininn: with Joha Mead Harwell), Chicago, 1928  Nauonal Broadcasung Company Scudios, New York. 1927  Idewd House, Lambon, 5929  Mayoic Temphe and Scottish Rite Cathedral. Scranton, Pennsyivanua (with Frederich Godley, ). André Fouilbous, and H.V.K. Henwenon), 1929  Duily News Building, New York (with Howell). 1930  M.Grew Hill Building, New York (with Godley and Foullhous), 1941  Rex Cole Showroom, Bay Ridge, New Yor, 1951  Rex Cale Showroom, Flushing, New York, 1931  Roxhefctler Center, New York (with athen}, 1933  Selected Publications  “The Chwage Tribune Competition,” Arcbinrtinal Reseed (February $923)  “Exterior Architecture of Office Buildings.” Architectural Farum, 41 (Sepeember 19.24)  "The American Radiaear Company Building. New York.” Anverican Architect, (26 (V9 November 1924)  “The National Broadcasting Seudion, New York." Archectaral Record (uly 1928)  “The Spirit of Modern Art.” Architecrutal Forum (November 129)  “Beauty in Architecture,” Architrstund Forwee (November 1930)  The News Buikling.” Arctsecrwna! Forum (November 1940)  “The Design of the Rockefeller Cerner.” Architectural Forum (anuary-June 1932)  Further Reading Kilham, Walter Harrington, Reymond Heed, Anhue: Form through Pancsian sa she Ameroan Shycraper, New York: Archuiccturs)  Book, 1973  Seetn, Robert AM., and Thomas P. Catalano, Reywnand Hand. New York lnwitue for Architecture and Urban Studie, 1982  Thomiike, Joacph J. editor}. frre Courmnie of Notable Ameren Architect, New Vork: American Heruage. and London. Orbu, 19at  Wireman, Carer, Shaping 2 Naren Twentieth Ceatery American Architecture and In Makes, Now York: Ni  HOPKINS, MICHAEL 1935- AND PATTY HOPKINS 1942- Sit Michael and Lady Hopkins. principals and founding partners of the London-based architeviural practice Hopkins Architects Tad,, established in 1976, ase responsible for sume of the must spectacular and influential buildings frem the British High-Tech movement of the Late 20th century. ‘Their work is characterized by its materiality and attenuon to detail, from the early buildings in steel and glass to the later contextual projects using tradicional materials, such as brick, stone, and lead. Coupled with a holdness, and simplicity of form, this flexilnlity allows a consurucuonal eusnomy of repetilive systems.- enriched in tecent years as che scale and complexity af the [lopkins’ work hac sreadily increased. The practice built irs early reputarion on a series of industrial commissions, mainly for stand-alone buildings on green-ficld sites. such ax the Greene King Beer Warehouse (Manchester, England, 1980) and the Schlumberger Cambeidge Research Contre (Cambridge, Fagland, 1985), both of which clearly cx press function through che drantatic display of technology. The Patera Building System (1982), a factory-peoduced kit of parts for light-idustrial buildings, also shares with Schlumberger the use of an external, or cxoskeletat. structure. One of the peoto- types of thus system was eventually recycled for use ax the Hap- kins’ offices in north Landon. The Schlumberger building in- cluded a Teflon-coated fabric roof structure. the fins of what has sance become a urademark element in Hopkins’ architecture, appearing in a series of more recent public projects, such as the Mound Stand (1991) at Lord's Cricket Ground in London. the temporary ticket offive (1994) for Buckingham Palace. and the Dynamic Earth exhibition building (1999) in Edinburgh. The shift toward 4 contextual and site-responsive approach, marked by the Mound Scand, reuilted in a series of projects in sensitive surroundings, including Bracken House (1992) near St. Paul's Cathedral in London; Glyndebourne Opeea House (1994), built on the grounds of a Susex counuy hoiwe; and, more recently, Port House (2000), providing new govern- ment offices adjacent to the Westminster Houses of Parlument. The latter building also manifests a concern with energy ctfi-  ciency and cavitonmental isucs; these were fint caplored in two: caries progeers, both for instinational clients: the [nfand Revenuc Headquarter (1994) in Nottingham, which again included a fabric roof serucrure, and the Jubilee Campus (1999) for the Uawersity of Nouingham. Other major projects under way at the rime of writing include several cultural buildings funded by the Millennium Lortery Commission, such as the Norfolk and Noewich Library (1996-2001) and che Manchester City Art Gallery (1994-2001),  Michael Hopkins is che son of a builder from Dorset, and his early architectural experience ix marked bry a fascination with construction. Beginning with amall-sale building projeuts un- dettaken as a child to the restoration with Patty Hopkins of a 400-year-ald house in Suffolk, this interest alvo led co his drop- ping out of art schoul at an early stage in favor of practical expencnce in an architect's atlice. After working as an assistant to brederick Giibbetd and hen Sir Basil Spence, he returned to study at che Architcaural Awocaoun (AA) in Londen and there encountered an intluendial group of young designers and archi- tectural rhenrists. Chiet among these were Cedric Price and Peter Smithson. both new seen as exerting a significant early influence on the development of high-tech architecture in Britain. Four years after Michael, in 1967, Party alr completed her studies  Canopy roof of the Glideboutne Opera House. Sussex, England 11994) © Grant SenitheCORBS 
at the AA, with a thesis praiect inspired by the Charles and Rav Fames House (1949) in California and ies use of factory- produced companents. In 1968, they were offered a commission by Hopkins’ father, chen a director of a national construction company, and for this shey teamed up with the young Norman Foues (whe they had alvo met at the AA) and his practice Team 4, which also inckuded Rachard Rogen. Although this first propect fell through, they worked on another of Fuster’s groundbreaking buildings, the Willis Faber Dumas offices (197), a cantilevered concrete structure with a frameless full- height glass curtain wall. The minimalism of the Foster buildings and the domestic scale of the Eames House came together in the Hopkins’ own family house (1976) built in necth London— the firm's inaugural project, This ewo-sory steel-and-glass pavil- ion alee became an icon for the burgeoning High-Tech move- ment; with its lightweight lattice roof trusses, corrugated-metal wide walk, full-height sliding windows. and meuaflic venctian blinds, it contained most of the basic ingredients of the practice's early Lager projecus, parucularly the Groen King Warchouse as well as che offices at Schlumberger and the later Solid State Logse (1988).  In the Hopkins’ later woek, these mazerials were augmented acenrding 0 context. particularly where existing buiklings are involved, as a contrast is created with materials that heighten the distinction between old and new. For instance, at the Mound Stand an existing beick arcade is dramatically offset by the new white fabric canopies cantilevered our abawe che street, At the Bracken Hous office building, the monumental brick wings of the old printing, works frame a delicate anembly of bronze-and- gdasa bay windows ehat ateen the newly imertey! suture.  ‘Thus rediscovery of tradiciuaal mucerials thrvugh che adapta- non iv hstonk contests has also found anodher funcuon in ube practice's later experiments in ecologically oncated, or “green architecture.” The property of thermal mass that is missing in many lightweight high-tech buildings has heen exploited for environmental comforr and to help improve energy efficiency. At the Inland Revenue headquarters, this was used to help vena- late the buildings aaturally. wgether with glass wair Greens to generate aie movernci and expused-concrete ceilings tw absorb heat. More successful from: an environmental pout of view Ia heen the Norringham University Jubilee Campus. whete a com ination of namical and mechanical ventilation provides substan tal energy savings. The expressive rotating wind towers and Photovoltax solar pane! arrays. together with the codar-clad cle- vations and grass-covered roof, have also proved influential in dramatizing ecological factors in architecture. ‘This new direcnion in the practice’s work is also viuble ar Poricullis House bur 1s less successful from a compositiunal viewpoine, pethaps because of the constraints of fiting in with some rather undistinguished ecighboring buildings.  The Hopkins practice has reveived numerous awards, includ- ing the Reval Gold Medal trom the Roval Instirute of Brith Architects (1994). In 1995, Michael reccived 3 krughthoud in recognition af his contribution to architecture. A modest and peactical couple with a clear focus on creating enduring buzldangs rather than the uransiens resin of theorctical debate. chey have inspired many of their collaborators to embatk on similar ven- ture of thar own.  Jonaran A. Hare  See ako Cotncxtuslisan Foster, Norman (England): Post- stracturalisem Schlussberger Cambridge Research Centre, Cambridge; Smithson, Peter and Alison (England)  Selected Works  Hopkins House, London, 1976 Greene King Draught Beet Cellan, Manchester, 1980  Patera Buskbng Sperm, 1982  Schlumberger Research Centre, Cambridge, 1985  Solid State Loge, Oxford, 1588  Mound Stand, Lond’s Cricket Ground, Landon, 1991 Bracken House, Landaa, 1992  Temporary Ticket Office, Buckingham Palace, London, 194 Opera House, Glyndebourne, Sunves, 1994  Taland Revenue Headquaners, Natungham, 1994  City Art Gallery, Manchester, 1994-2001  Library, Nurfolh, 1996-2001  Library, Norwich, 194-2001  Dynamic Fanih Kahibition Building, Edinburgh, 1999 Jobdee Campus, Univensicy of Nottingham, 1999  Porturdlis House, Wesemineer, 2000  Further Reading  Davies, Colin, Hopton. The Work of Micheal Hopton and Hartne, Lomdoe: Phaidon, 1993  Davies, Colin, Hoptrm 2: The Wark of Michael Hopkin and Purtnert, London. Phadan, 2001  HORTA, VICTOR 1861-1947 Architect, Belgium  Views Horta was the leading European architect of the rove ment eo create a madem acchitecture in the 1890s, His work blended a structural rationaliam influenced by the writings of FE. Viollct-le-Duc with a personal, qurvilinear decoration de- tived from abstracted hotanic form as proposed by V.-M.-C. Ruprich- Robert tw produce works of axtotinding internal spatial complexity and organic coumpleieness. Hurta’s buildings were complete works of art for which, when given the opponunity, he deaigned every object, from furnurure and table finens co doorknobs and ardirons. Often remembered as one of the practi- toners of the Am Nouveau stybe, Horta was in fact the chief anventor of that style. More than that. his ability to use iron, and glass in place of load-bearing masonry remained unsurpassed among turn-of-che-century architects.  Bom in Ghene in 1861. Horta briefly studied music at the local conservatory before enredling in the architecture course at the Academy of Fine Arts in Ghent. In 1878, he traveled wo Paris co work for an intetior decarauor, returning ta Ghent on his tathes’s death in 1880. The following year. he married, moved to Brussels, undertook che study of architecture at the Brussels academy, and began drafting for Alphonse Balat, the royal archi- tect to King Leopold ff, whose work reflected a rational, if cissi- ual, approach to architecture. Horta work unterminenty for Balat unul 1891.  in Paris in the fate 1870s, Horta discovered the power of Beaux-Arts dewgn, as exemplified by both the urban planning of Baron Haussmann’s boubevards and the architecture of Charkes Garniec’s opera house. Returning in 1889 for the world’s fair, he was dmilarly draven ta the Galerie des Machines, an iron.  Tassel House (1892-93), Brussch, Bedgium © Grea Balldings.com  and-glass building whose truses spanned almost 400 fee He was amazed not only by the possibilitics of Victor Contamin’s engineering bur also by the curvilinear decotatiut urcated by the architewt Charles Dutert.  Hoera’s pavilion for Jef Lambeaus's "Passions Humaine,” begun in 1889, reveals a search for a new expression within the vocabulary of classicium. In che Autnche house (1893}, Hora first explored a atore original decorative vocabulary based on absuracted botanic farms and simple geometry. Yet neither pre- pares us for the extraordinary accomplishment of bis next buld- ing, the Tassel house (1893). Within the parameters of the stan- dard Brussels cownhouse— party walls with its neighbors to the sides, built ta che street, and with an open yard behind —Horta began an architectural revolution, He splic the building into po parts and connected them with a metal-and-glass circulation zone that brughe natural light into the whole building. He ser the whale composition in motion by melding his new curvilinear decoration co the structural systems. Horta developed this solu- tion into its mos elaborate form in the Solvay house (18%) and into its most perfect form in the Van Bervelde house (1895)  Horta brought this approach to nondomenic architecture in 1898 at La Maison du Peuplc. che Brussels headquarters of che Belgian Workers Party, which contained large and small lecture halis, meeting rooms. a coffee house, and commercial shops. He combioed structural iron freely exposed in a “rational” manner  with sinuvow cuives of iron. wuod, and masonry to produce a work of great cxpressive power that is clearly organized.  Florta’s mature style was perfectly tuned co the valucs of the Aaute bourgeoisie of the 1890s throughout Europe. His architec- ture strongly influenced emerging architects. such as Hector Guimard. whereas the superfiaal aspects of bis decoratrve forms were casily copied by lesser designers. Hora’s very populanty contributed to a rapid change of taste in the middle of the first decade thar left him without sufficient clients to continue inves- tigating the problems posed in the 1890s, Hix work gradually hecame simpler in form and reflected 4 return to dasicm.  Horta was decply affected by the German acupation of Bel- sium. In February 1915 he traveled to London to meet with British architects and Belgians in exile to plan the rebuilding of Belgium after the war. In December he continued to New York tw enliss the support of American architects. The proposed lec- ture tour became a three-year exile. Recurning bome in 1919, Horta was overwhelmed by the devastanon,  Respected in Beigium as both maser architect and teacher, Horta in the 1920s was involved in a number of civic projects, including a new gallery and concert hall, the central erain station, 4 major public hospital, and the Belgian Pavilion at the 1925 Paris Woeld’s Fair. All these were capresed in an abstracted classical manner. The rebuke of this work by carly histonans of 
the Modem movement has been reversed by a recent generation of historians, who find a continuity in approach despite a change of styte. The concen hall ke Palais dex Beaux-Arts (1920), built of reinforced concrete, hae come to be regarded as Horta's most accomplished work. Although the masting of rectilinear solids that characterizes this buikding has more in common with Art Dec than with the emerging Intemasiunal Style, the devign exhibits che same capresive caboualism of Florta’s carlier work. Horta’s work stands as an carly expression of the possibility of incorporating the cataclysmic changes brought about by the industrial revolution into a systens of design chas, like the picat hinons styles of past. reflects contemporary values and possibil- ties, Paut Keury  See ubo Art Dec, Art Nouveau (Jugendstil); Brussels, Bel- gums Farther Reading  Aubry, Franguise and Jos Vandenbeenden (edimes), Horta: Nawsanir at dipanemon de FArt Nexreau, Ghem, Belgium Lodion. and Pari, Hammarion, (996; an Herta Art Nowwraw tr: Maderanm, Ghem, Belgium: Lodion Prev, 1996  Bari, Franco and Paolo Paroghess. Viewer Hera Rome: Edom del Tritone, 196%; as Verse Howse, irancdsted by Mare Heline Agucros. London: Academy Edsnons. and New York: Rizzoli, 191  Dethaye, Jean and Francunse Aubry, La Mateo ain Prupte de Virtor Hora, Brussels: Archer Vokser. 1947  Deane, David and Alan Canew-Cka, Vier Herta, Landon: Academy Editions, 1995  Manser, Darn, “Victor Horta, Art Nouveau, and Freemasonry” an Hebggum, the (vudden Decades, 18801914, edited by fane Pllack. New York: Peter Lang. 199°  Mustache, Anne, Sicven Jacobs, aid Fria Hocndcrs, Vater Horus. de Palen de Regex Aro de Hrseaelies, Bouse: Snoedk-Ducap, and Crédit Communal, 1996  Loves, Francome and ean Delays, Vwsor Moras: Hotel Level 1895 1895 (bilingual English and French edition), Brusseds; Archives Architecture Moderne, 1486  omens Watanwe, Yolinde, Vator Horta f Hote Satvsy; The Solesy Houw (bilingual English-French edition), + vol. Louvainla-Neuve, Bcigium: Inuit Supérieur d'Archeolagic ev WC Hinaire de Art, Calloge Ereume, 1980  HOSPITAL  The hospital is amang the most complea and reinvented build- ings of che 20th century. Whereas hospitals in 1900) weee charita: ble insnrutions for the sick poor, resembling other benevolent establishments such as schools. prison, convents, and work- houses, by 2000 che hespital had become a complicated atchitee- tural projece that housed areas dedicated to bealth care, research, teaching, and new medical technologies.  Four datnce types af hospitals evulved during this period; in many ways, cach of Uses hoapital types developed as a reaction te the (oem that preceded it whide adapung i program to raped new developments in the delivery of health care. At the bepan- ning af the century. new hospitals were rprcally constructed accanding to the highly develuped pavilion-plan mode. After World War I. new hospitals were more compact lalthough some-  times larger). multistory buildings with conservatively styled ex- teriors, accommodating patiencs in smaller rooms alang double- laaded corridors, The post-Woeld War II hospital was often an isolared tower. with minimal decoration and neutral colors. Since the 1970s hospitals have become “healch care facilities.” with a renewed emphasis on flexibility. patient-focused care, accers, and an architectural form and language that reflects con- cemns for inviting and comfortable spaces.  These four types were also the result of complex and compet- ing social, economic, medical, and profesional concerns. The main issucs that influenced hospital architecaare in the 20ch century were the evolving nature of medical theory and practice. expanding patient populations, the drive toward bospital stand- ardization, changing notions of privacy. and increasing specaali- zation among hospital archirects.  Cominuing from accepted hospital plans developed during the 19th century, the basic form of the pavilion-plan hasptial was well established by 1900 and continued to be constructed uno the 1930s. The type had hecame an international seandard in the 19h century, with major examples in India, Persia, Rumia, Australia, the United Starx, and Europe. Based originally on the ideas of Florence Nightingale and other midcentury reform- ets, the concepe of separate or minimally connected pavilions and the open plan of the wards was believed to discourage the spread of infecun by maximizing ventilation. ‘The hallmark of the pavilion-plan type was the upen ward, in which 30 w 40 beds were arranged against a regular chythin of large windows, The presumption was uit the copious amounts of fresh air circulating beeween patients would mitigate che chances of von- tagion, cven following the development of the perm theory in the 1870s.  The premict cxample of an American pavilion plan hospital is the fohns Hopkins Hospital (1885, John Billings and fohn Nternsee) in Baltimore. An illustration of the persistence of this type at the turn of the century is University College Hospital (1897-1905, Alfred Waterhouse) in London. An innovation on the pavilion plan was made at the Rigshospiral (191 L} in Copen hagen, where the beds were turned parallel to the window. Here the ward of 26 beds was divided by screens into sections of three or four patients. This afforded the patients more privacy without uctificing accessibiligy ur ventilation and foreshadowed the eventual cclipse of the open want by the semiprivate and private foom.  Hospitals in the mnterwas period were much more compact than chose constructed around 1900. Alchough rhese buildings were planned according w Tayloristic principles of efficiency amd employed modern materials. such as cenforced concrete. hospitals constructed between the wars were likely to resemble Georgian mandons of Scottish castles, employing a series of revival wtyles. Typical of this period in che work of Bowan- and Taronto-hased architecas Edward Fletcher Stevens and Frederick Lee, wha desgned hundecds of hospitals in North Amsctica, such as the Ottawa Civic Hospital (1924),  A constellation of other hospital design experts appeared in the interwat period, contributing ro the architectural develop- ment of the hospital. Sigismund Schulz Goldwater, a physician and commisstoner af New Yark City’s hospitals from 1934 to 1940, acted as “advisory construction expert” for 156 hospital. Goldwater was an outspoken advocate of the “vertical” hospital.  Poorcard of Orrawa Civic Hospeeal. Cirtawa, Ontario: designed by Stevens and Lee (1922-1924) Photo courtesy Annmarie Adams  ideas thar were published posthumously in his Gn Hopital (1947).  A number of socal and medical factor also influenced the design of the interwar hospital. such as the increasing signill cance of surgery, the arrreal of middle-class and paying paricats, and the establishment of hiwpitah for special patients, such as wornen and children. Whereas the pre-World War I surgeons had likely performed in an amphithcatcr with tered sating, surgery in the 1920s commonly took place in a suite af smaller Specialized rooms. Surgery was onc of the means by which middle-class panents were convimed that che hospital was 2 better place for baling than home, To this end, hospital con- structed luxunous pavilions tor paying panencs in the 1920s that were frequently compared ta hotcls. Like other building types. new hospicals in the 1920s accommodated large numbers of automobiles for the first sime. offering both parking and patient drop-off by car.  Interwar hospitals were also often much largee than those constructed before World War I. especially in the United Stares. The Cohimbian Presbyterian Medical Center (1928. James Gamble Rogen) in New Yurk and the Cornell Medical Center of New York Hospital (1933, Coolidge, Shepley, Bulfinch and Abbor) ase illustrations of this jump in scale.  In the name ot economy, the past-Workl War If hospital was most likely a multistory cower, resembling an offke building  imore than any dumestk: model, often surrounded by huge park- ing facilities. [allmarks of che post: World War II hospital were wandardized floor plans. undecorared facades, flar roots, vertical citculation, and pontrolled ventilation. ‘Ihe image of these haspi- tals, with their deck, hard-surfaced interiors, was detached and neusral, whereas the interwar inatimirien had been romantic and highly decorative.  Postwar hospital architcces also caperumented with the huspi- tal’s acction. In Europe, a number of huge urbas replacement buspruls were buile in the 1960; following a “matchbox on a muffin plan,” wheicby paucnt tuwen were constructed atop 4 podium of high-tech senuces. Exampks of dus type include the Free Unwersicy Hospital Center (1969, Arthar QQ. Davis and Franz Mocken} in Berlin, A systems of interstitial space. where Rlexible service floors were located benween patient levels, was First used in a health-relared building in the Salk Insneute of Biological Studies (1960~62, Louis Kahn) in La Jolla, California Te subsequently (unit about 1980} became a popular model for acute-care hospitals in Fnglaod, Canada, and the Unived States. Among the firse hospitals ta cmploy the sytem was the Health Sciences Centre (166-72, Craig, Zeidker, and Strung) at MeMaster University ay Hanulton, Ontario, Canada.  Since the 1970s, huspitals conscrusted after Workd War [1 have been sharply antigized for their impenonal sale. urban. isolation, visual sterdity, and confining arculation. Uke hoipre 
movement, the rive of patsene-driven (as opposed to peovider- driven) cate, and increased consumer awareness about health care matters have encouraged altematives to these machinelike form. A new focus on pacient-centered faudities, whkh cm- braced homelike spaces and furniture, regwonal eymbalivm, an- creased access, and humanly scaled buildings, chiracterized hos- pitals of the final three decades of the 20th century,  Un terms of buspital planning, architects abo looked te chree significant models in the design of hospitals since the 1970s: the shopping mall, the village, and the hume. ‘The Dartmouth: Hitchcock Medical Center (1991, Shepley Bulfinch Richardsan and Abbort) in Hanever, New Hampshire, resembles a mall in its skylit rotunda and three-story galleria. “Health villages.” comprised of low-rise intercannected buildings, are a conscious critique of the megshospital of the immediate postwar period in theie use of brick (and other materials chat cxprew human scale). doping roofs, and encased walkways. The inclution of dasmestic imagery, as an attempt to inkne intimacy and meaning inw che imutuGon, has sometimes meant a confusion of con. tents, For example, the Hijirigaoka Hosparat (1990, ARS Design Associates) in Tokyo bouse red-brick dadding, colonial detail- ing, and classical portivocs, as ound on the castern seaboard ol the United Srates.  The end of the 20th century was marked by unprecedented hospital mergers and the closure of many hestoric hospital build- ings. Whereas some of thae have been preserved as admunistra- tive adjuncts to new health care faciliues or transfonned wcom- pletely new uses, many historic hospitals have been simply abandoned and/or demolished— costly ceminden of the swift pace of medical progress.  ANNNURIT ADAMS  See ato Salk lnstinne, Le Jolls, California Further Reading  Adams, Anamorie, “Modetouum and Mediane Ihe Heapaale of Stevens and Lex. 1916 1932," fomrnal of rhe Society of Anduecreral Historian: 58, no. 1 {Match 1494)  Forty, Adrian, “The Modern Hospoal in kaghand and trance: The Social sod Modical Uses of Architecture.” in Butddings and Seusety: Exsays on the Soxia! Develapmient of the Haslt Enviewament, edied by Anthooy 1. King. London and Bostun, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1990  Galdis, Grace, Work of Mercy: A Picture Heaory of Hovpitels, Toeonto, Ontares Bown Mills Peean 194  Gedlwatrt, Signmund Schulz, On Hays, clad and compiled by Clara Aub Gobdwatet, Now York, Macmillan, 147  Oxhanes, Albert John and Meyer J Seurm, fie Ongenicanan, Construction, and Managentent of Hospital, with Numeren Pam and Desath, Chicago Cleveland Pres, 1907. 2nd edition. 1907  Rime, Gucntce B.. Mending Borns, Saving Souk: A Hisury of Herpral, New York: Oxford Univervty Press, 1999  Moane, David Chistes, “Scientific Paragon to Hionpiaal Mall: The Frolotion of che Henpital, 1885. 1994," fowrnal of An hisectural Edwvatten 48, 10 2 (Navernber 1994)  Stevens, Edward Fletcher, The Amicrican Horpreal of the Tuennieth Center, New York: Archaeciial Recon, 1918; Ind eevee edition, New Yuk, Dodge. 1928  Stevenwon, Chrisnne, “Medicine and Architecture” in Companion Emytopediia of the Hirsery of Mesdicine. edited by William F. Bynum and Roy Porter, Candin and New York Routhedge, 1993  Taylor, feremy and Reginald Buckley. The Archssect ated the Pavilion Heperad Daalegwe and Design Creativity in England. 1850-1914, Lowcenter: Leicester University Press, 1997  Thompson, John and Grace Goldin. The Hospital: A Social and Archuecturel Hutory. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1975  Verderber. Stephen and Dad J. Fine, Mesttheare Architectioe on an Ene of Radscal Transformation, New Haven, Connecticut: Yale Univeramy Press, 2000  HOTEL  Ar the most basic level. a hotel provides temporary shelser for travelers, a Function that the 20th-century horel shares with it predecessors extending hack to the ancient inn. As a modern building type, the horel integrates a complex variety of uses, including lodging. food service, and retail, into a specialized building program, After the affice building, the hotel is che most important building type to embrace the skyxraper form, chus addressing the archites tural challenge of efficiently arranging co- dependent yet distinct public, private. and setvice spaces. 1 fotcts generally have major public spaces on the lower- and uppermost loon, largely identical foun of guest roumm between, aml re- lated service arcas carefully woven throughout the plan. This basic program appeared in the 19th cenrury and was associated with barge railway hotels bocated in cities around che world. How- ever, the scale and complexity of the 20sh-century hotel make it a distinctive building type and an important pome in the urban landscape. By virtue of its location, the resort hoe caters to tourists and merits is own analysis.  The henel is a building rype intimately linked to the sociocco- nomic changes of the 20th century. The rise of a consumer culture, especially in the United Sutes, spurs urban growth and ditevdy benefits service-sector businesses such as the botel indus- ty. Toctcased tourism, widely accessible commercial travel, and annual conventions provide an expanded clicntele for the cam- merutal hotel. Since the carly decades of the 20th century, cum- Petition to attract conventions has especially shaped the planning of new hotels, Mayor exhibit halls, meeting moms. and audito- Thums requite a Large percentage of space on the public floors of the hotel to be devoted ta conventinn-rclated facilities.  These trends first peaked in the 1920s, making that decade the heyday of the development of the hotel as a 20ch-ceneury building type. New horeds, sch as the Roosevelt (1924, George B. Pear and Sons) in New York, Hotel Statler (1927, Genrge B. Post and Sons) in Boston, and the Lox Angeles Bilunore (1924, Schulere and Weaver), ure just 2 few of the mauve hotels from that petiod with around 1,000 guest rooms. ‘The Stevens Hotel (Holabird and Roche), the largest hotd in the world, opened on South Michigan Avenue in Chicago in (927. With 3,000 guest rvems. 3,000 baths, and a huge array of public spaces, dining rooms, and convention facilities, the Stevens epit- omizes the carly 20th-century architectural development of the hotel  The balance between the commercial purpose of the hotel and the need to create a domestic atmosphere often led hotels to embrace historically inspired architectural styles and interior design. Multitowered, Beaua-Arty-influcnced skyscraper forms with eclectic decorative program: were common during the carly  20th century, Afier World War Il, hotels followed the shift to modernum in commercial archeevture. The resuking sathetic change to ahistoric ruunumalism was dramatic, but hotels Largely setained the same basic functional arrangement and preference for mainstream architectural styles.  Horels often feature a combination of conservative architec- tural design and innovative systems and technology. Among the most significant hotels in the 19th century, Adler and Sullivan's Auditorium Building (1889) in Chicago combined a theater. modern hotel, and office space. Using the latest in moder con. veniences hs been vital to a hotel's success since the 191th ven- tury, and 20ch-entury hotel quickly incorporated any impor tant new technology. The most significant improvements were plumbing and air conditioning and their subseyuent influcace on the form and use of the hotel. Although indoor plumbing was available in t9th-ccntury hotchs, private baths were relatively tase. The basic standard for hevels changed rapidly an the carly 20th century, and by the 1920s nearly all new hotels provided a private bathroom for cach guest room. Arranging and servicing the bachrooms is a problem specitic to the Mth-century hated. The architectural firm of Genrge B. Post and Sons developed an efficient layout to provide private bathmome in an affordable commercial hotel with its designs for the important eady chain Hotets Statler. Bathmoms arranged in pairs along the intenor wall create mirror-image room plans that allow two bathruotn to share one plumbing shaft. Standardized hotel archirecture did not emerge unl che postwat periud, but diis plan was ap important Fing wep.  Ventilation creates another challenge for the 2Oeh-century hotel. The muluple towers of the large pre-World War H hore provide exterior light and air to all the guest roonis, Mechanxal air conditioning was first intraduced in the public rooms of some major urban borels in the 1920s. Scarting in the 1950s. new hoth provided aix-condidoned guest ruoms, eliminaung dependence on exterior ventilation. The new possibilities thar air conditioning brings tw the hocel form are perhaps heve unilized by che Hyatt Regency Hotel of Juha Portman and Associates Portman's Hyatt Regency Aclinta (1967), Uyace Regency O'Hare (1971), and Hyatt Regency San Vrancisca (1973) feature a dramatic new form fncined inward on the suium lobby. Port man atid his imitators use 4 aiodctiuse vouabulary to create the grand public space of the atrium, bu the functional program of the hotet remains essentially the sme.  Eatemal forces, such as urban development and transports tion pattems, alsa help reconfigure the fundamental relationship berween hotel and location. The shift in the United States from railroad to autormebide travel rranstorms the shape. scale, and location of hotels, The downtown skyscraper hord usually lacks parking facilities, and march cmerge along highways to serve the interstate traveler. In the past World Was It period, hotel development moves beyund downtown, especially wih con- struction around vullying airports, However, the form and pro- gram of the botel building type remain essentially urban  The Amencan hotel defines the building type throughout tbe 20th century. especially in the pustwar period with the growing international dominana: of a few large hotel chains. The sian- dardized Hilton. Sheraton, or Marriott hotel, more than any other building, symbolizes American commercial culture throughout the world. Standardized commercial botels sell a self-contained vision of urban arder and prosperity closely ued  w the emergence of a deindustrialied global economy. Vhroughout the 20th century, horels reflect che impact of eco- fomic change in the urban landscape and the social demands that shape a complex commercial building type.  Laisa Protine Davinson  See tise Holabird, William and Martin Roche (United States); Imperial Hotel, Tokyo: Park Hotel, Shanghai: Pertmsn, John C. (United States); Resort Hotel  Fusther Reading  A comprchenseve atcbitewtural history of dhe hotel has yet tu he written, and Hany of the avalable sewondary sources ate genctal of  in mature. Hertel trade pournals such as Hotel Atanchly ated Hoel Warld are wcll fur feauing thie building types development.  Brucgmann, Robert, “Palaces of Democracy The Business Hate,” in The Architect: and the City: Holabird and Reche of Chicage. FAK 1918, Chicage University af Chicago Prea, 1997  Denby, Flame, Grand Horrle: Reatiey and Mtesion Aq Architectural and Secial History, London: Reakteon Rooks, 199%  Donel. Catherine, Alexis Gregury. and Marc Walter, Palaces et pronds bors dAmergice de Nord, Pans: Flammancn, 1989: 2s (rand American Hoseh, New Yorks Vendume Prox, and London: Thames and Hudson, 1989: as Grand Hotels of North America, Torona: McClelland and Stewart. 1989  lakle, kohn A., Keith A. Sculle. and lefferion $, Rogers. The Meee! mm America, Bakimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins Universiry Pres, 1996  Lapadux, Morn, and Alun Lapidus, “Commercial Hocets,” in Fime-Saver Ssanclardi for Busldeng Lypes, cdivod by Joseph De Chua and Joh Hancock Callender, New York: MecGraw-Hull 1S; 3rd edipon, 190  Kevines, Nikolaus A Hoty of Buakdoeg Lyper, Princeion, New Jeney. Pnaceton Unversity Pres, and London: Thames and. Tudson, 1976  Rais, Kael B., and folk Paul Jones, HT * The Cay Hotel as Landscape Artfact and Community Symbol,” foxraal of Cudnurad Geography (1988)  Roxx, Juha Welborn, “Horcl and Apartment Hore,” in Ferma and Fumctoon of Taenticth- Century Architecture, vk Buildeng Type: Buildsogy for Reudense. for Popular Gatherings. foe Edacation, and for Government, edited by Talbot Hamlin. New York: Columba: Caveesity Prea, 1952,  Wilhamaun, Jetienon, The Amerson Hotel: An Anecdotal Hissary. New York and Lando. Kutepf, 1930, repin, as The -Uneericam Howl, New York Arno Pres, 1975  HOUSE  Given its special place in the life and development of human beings, the house is an imponant architeccural cype, It proroces us from external influences. hoch from nature and, by crearing places for privacy, from the full and immediate abserpion inte social and public life. Thus, because of its soul and paychobogi- cal significance, the house is the most univenally desired form of habiration, For these same reason, the house is aly coamd- eted by some to be the mest useful archuteccural type for explora- dons into questions of culnue and life.  Similarly, the house un the 20th century attracted the atten- gon of architects, cheno. developers, and historians and theorists because the house as a type and expressive architectural form 
often. syntheared the aspirations of endivadual architects and leading architectural movements or schools as well as home awa cr who wanted to choose the most up-to-date architectural seyle for theit house, Whether large or uinall, houses were built in vanous farms and materials around the world, thu attesting. tw the cnurmuus vaticty of meanings for dwelling and shelter, Dwellings in developing countries, for example, are often made trom locally avalable natural maternal: that adhere to long- stamding vetnacular lorms and ornament, sometiines centuries old.  In house souctics of South America, Southeast Asta, and elsewhere. for cxampk, the house serves co express social hieras- ches and kinship of to provide a ricual site, thus functioning fess as a prastwal dwelling for dasly activities, as 2s casomary in Western indusrrial societies, Wherever the house serves to ex- press social and institutional values of a culiure, the analyte methods of Claude Levi-Surauss and other beading anthropolo- gists and ethnographer: provide significant ways af bearning abet the house in angle: and multihowe socictics as representa: tions of culture. Yeu this article addecsses the house as the promi- tent and architect-designed type waociated with the arbiter tural profewion and wealthy, devcloped sucictics.  Qne of the most important aspects of the house in the 20ch century 6 its emergence as a prmary mcdnun for architec tural expermentation. The house, including shase but by architects far cheit own use. has proven to be a remarkable laburatery for pew ideas. Lo che architectural avant garde, the house became an important instrument for che eransformation of socery in urban. suburban. and rural enviruameos. Suh cunge were possible, according to architects and heonsrs, through the in- vention of new forms of domestic settings that were more re- sponsive to and appropnate for the new. modern era.  Accerding rm mest modernists, proper attention te rhe new way of life in the howe would lead 1y new furm and spaces and a new acathetic, all af which were facilitated by the introduc thus of new materials and technologies as well as radically new ideas abour the arrangement of interior domesis spaces. [nthe Robie Hose (1908), far example, Frank Llnyd Weight used long-span construction muteriah uw cresic open and fluwing spaces for the democratic individual whom he cavisioned as the proper subject of his work. He achieved this by chmunating walls beween rooms and introducing cuntinuous bands of glass windows and doors to create a new freedom of movement and vision. Winght's development of an organic architecture and rhe Prainie-styte house during the first 5 to 20 years of hus practice left a broad and lasting effect on 20th-cennury house forms far beyond Chicago and the Midwest. His many writings abour the house provide a detaited philosophy fo1 giving foem and mean- ing to family life in the 20th-century home. In his “Five Points Towards a New Anhiveciure” (1926) —baved on his catlicr in- vention of the Dom-ino House (1914-15; — Le Cortwier pees sented a sytem af columns and dabs that fornicd the bass for his interpretation of the free plan. ‘his framework made it posse ble foe him to use the house asa means of preening, aconting to the cnta Cahn Rowe, the disparities as well as che concucr- emes beeen the past (as manitestod in the classwal arrange- ment of structural columns) and the present (che practical and thus asymmetrical arrangement of rooins and furncrions) in his 1920s villas and maisons (Villa Stein, 1926-27; Villa Savoye, 1929-31).  Through the influences of new materials, inventive concep- uaons of intenor space, and economic and practical concerns, 4 widespread interest in an aesthetic of abstraction emerged that wan considered consistent with modern, analytical thought and thus appropriate w the modem house, Joef Hoffmann reduced walls to thin planes as surfaces enclosing interior volumes in the Palas Stoclet (1905). fn ane of his mast important cssays, “Orainent and Came,” Adoiph Loos argued that the truc atyle of the times would be found only when ornainent was climi- nated: this meant a reduction to the esential underlying qualities of form and proportion, a concept that he applied in his house designs (Stemer Honse, 1910; Tristan Trara House, 1926-27}. Gerrit Rictveld's Scheider-Schrader House (1923-24) exempli- fied a dynamic architecture liberated from the constraints of gravity with its receangular, smooth shapes and open. pinwheel, “transformable plan.” ‘This was another version of the “free plan.” cach of which casried 4 symbolic mewage of liberation that promoted 4 new way of life.  tr the second half of the century, Lite modernism continued the interest in abstraction. [1 its extreme cases, in which archi- tects sought greater refincinest, this preference led to an interest am the experience of the sublime. Ludwig Mies van des Rohe, for example, pushed the abstract to its afchitecraral limits in his minimal presentanion of space. as in the Farnsworth House (194650); in chis new cananic building, a series of glass planes is held in space by thin, drafted vertical and horizontal steel member. Philip Johnson's Glass Hone (1949-51) is one of the finest cxamples of this propensity to suggest an otherwise invini- ble volume uf space.  The dedication tw absuactian was one of the reasons that mnany began to quotion modernistn in architecture in the second halt of che century. Song publ: criucim began in the 1950s and was wodespread a devadk Later. The relevancy of abstraction was questionod by architeceural and cultural crtics alike, panticu- Lily as it applied ra domestic envieanments. Several buildings in Minori Yamasaka’s Pruitt-fgoe Housing Projece (1958) in St. Louis, Missouri, were razed in 1972 in an effort to reduce the vandalism and crime thar had plagued the project for 14 years: it was ant event that some referred to as the end of modetnisa. Studies such a those of Philip Boudon's cxamination of Le Corbusict’s Pea. Housing (1926) in Bordeaux, in which modcrnust aeothetic was replaced by its residents with conven- tional images of local domestic architecnure. alerted everyone to the face that modernism had not becn successful un its grander asperations to transiurm fife.  While these intereus did nor disappear, other interpretations of the howe filled the void left behind in che retreat of modern- ism. Aldo Rossi and Venturi, Scot Brown and Associates (VSBA), for example, turned to vernacular buildings as 4 com- mon housing stock that guaranteed cultural relevance. While Ronsi climinated all eviderme of arnament and historical change in his analysiv of types (Pavilion, 1973), however, VSBA em- braced ornament and signs, claiming that these were the source fas eugene relevance (Vanna Venturi House, 1965). VSBA twok «tas a responsibiliuy to represent the signs applied to “sheds” — simple, scghtbrened, voneo es While the architectural critic and theorist Alan Colquhoun found the separation berween the sign and the “substance” dis- quieting, VSBA’s Poumodernist ideas were highly influential in  the work of Michael Graves (Plouck House, 1980) and Robert Stern (Huuse for an Academical Couple, 1974-76).  In che Last quartes of the century. ahers used the house asa means for deconstructing architectural assumpeions concerning domestic life. Ln his own howe (1976) in Santa Monna, for qample, Frank Gehry took a California bungakow apart. Incrally and figurauvely, and wrapped it with a volume of roams enclosed by chain-link tence and corrugated metal siding: he used chs as a@ means to explore relationships between inside and outvide. surface and structure. and forms and materials, Other architects used the howe to quceion the way architerture is vancenved: Peter Eisenman (Hause VI) and Bernard Techuini (Project foe a Villa, 1992) eaplored the rdationships beewron tora and huna- tion and between space and events, respeitively, One of the mest influential houses in the lattice pare of the 20th century was Coop Himme(blau “Open House” (981), 4 proposed house that reversed tbe relationship berwern form and tuncuon, ‘one of the central tencts of modernism.  The configuration of the house and the domestic hfe it shel tered were throughout the century by changes cunide architevtural circles as well. Among the mast important of these influences came from manulacturing. legidation, and financing. The manufacturing industry generated new produces through- our the century thar would have far-reaching cffccts on the house. The single most important of these consumer products in che West was the austomubile; its intruducion and widespread acceptance contributed powerfully to the development of the wiburhs and the distribution of single-family houses actoas vast expanses of land (Levittown). Commuter rail fines and vast high- way octworks permitted bome owners ty locate cheat houses int communitics far from the city. With increased wealth and an expanding middle class. houses were deugned in a wide range of styles and scales to suit the tastes of new owners. Large man sions and country houses, for example, were designed dunng the early 20th century in the United States by Howard Van Doren Shaw, David Ader; McKim, Mead and White; and oth ers in a wide variety of revival, historicast, and modernist styles, induding the Chatcaucsque, Tudor, Romanesque, and lalian Renaissance as welll as the Craftsman, Prairie, and Laternational styles,  However, house life changed also because of new appliances and household equipment. The transformarios of the hichen, for example, can be followed from its origins in the open scone hearth as the sok source of heat fur covlung and warmth. The hearth was central co the Cape Cod type and became the cuncep- tual and symbolic focus of Wright's houses throughout his eaute career. Running water was introduced in most major cities in the Wess by the late 19th ceneury and hot warer mn the early 2Oth. The typical compact resilentia} bachmom was standard- ized around 1930. Heating and cooling, in concert with the automobile, made it passible to live in regions of che world thar were formerly questionable environments for domestic life. Over the cours of the century, typical suburban houses were equipped with dishwashers, clothes washen and dryers, vacuum cleaners and other appliances radios, televisions, telephones, and com- puter. Some of these required that new toon be added to the program for the typical house: all had significant impaco ve daily domestic hfe.  Manufacturing also affected the construction and supply in- dustries. eventually leading to the standatdration of matenab  (dimenwoned Lumber, plywood, and drywall) and the invenvon of new chenents and matenals (compressed wood elements, box beams, plastica, and polycarbonates), most of which found their way ante readential construction. Sandandized parts coukl be assembled with a minimum level of expertise. making 1 possible for many to build thet own homes, often trom kits of mail-order plans. Some architects explored the use of standardized, “ready- madc™ parts in their houses as well {Eames House, 1949). The appetite for self-help home canstruction was fed by magazines in the beginning of the century (Ladier Flame Journal and Howse und Garden) and by tlevaian programs at the end (This Old Howse) that pave hame ownets endleas advice abuut bow to im- prove their reudential cnvisanrnents, The local lumberyard and hanlware store grew intu large whuleale supply companies, such as Home Depot.  bor ochets intcrested in houses of theie awn, manutactured and prefabricated houses were available through catalog stores such as Sears, Rucbuck and Company; Montguinery Ward; and others during the carly 20th century. By 1934, 110.000 of these houses had heen sold. In 1927. Buckminster Fuller designed a mass-produced hesagunal house ‘Dyniaxion House) that was suspended from a central mast and thar could be transported to almod any site and rapidly ve in place. Continued interest in cvonomic, mdustsial housing eventually led cw the mobile home, a housing type that became relatively popular in post-World War Ul society, Vhe demand for manufactured homes created a ccw Jurm of sesidenual landscape, the uailce park. Although important primarily in the Cited States, popular house forms, including dhe ranch house and splievel, wwnhouses, apart ment compleacs, aud anuther generation of revivalin styles (un duding the nen-Tudor, noo-Cotonial, Midwesr vernacular, and Posumodem of Decunstructivist). were designed w acommo- date thy lifestyles and changing tastes of suburban familics and bankers.  Changes to the financing of home construction and govern- ment legislation made it possible for more peapte to own their en homes and thus rranstormed rhe housing marker in may part of the word, The Housing and Town Manning Act (1919) iv England and the Federal Housing Act (1934) in the United States. for example, cammitted both nations to housing inves. Phe United States crcated the Federal Hounng Authucity and 2 murtgage guaranty program tv increase home ownership. Aftet World War IL. che Department of Veterans’ Affairs operated 4 sumilar program for those who served in the military. The federal cotmmiunent to bousng also fed to greater commiunent in the banking community, Mortgage credit played a vital rake an the growth of home ownership in the L nited States, fram 33 percent tn L891 co 65 percent in 1998, England had a ssmular inctcase,  After Work! War II, other counties undertook simibrr plans for Iegidanton and changes tq financial practices with modest success in increased home ownership. While in the firs half of the century aflluent howebolds lived in mansions that generally tepeated the local traditions or the architecture that was im- ported from colonial Western authorities, with the apread of modernivm in the 1950, houses sn thee countnes began to teflovt the aesthetic pravtices of abstiac ton and the emmitment fw ccenoms that wete associated with the style. In the lat part of the century, modernisin way coupled with contextuatist can- victions about integrating architeccuse with loual quntests. This perspective was practiced in most of che counines in the word 
The works of | uis Barragin (Las Arboled. 1958-61), Hassan Fathy [house near Lusor. nid, Tadao Ando iKidewali Houre, 1982-86), and Herzog and De Meuron (Villa EM. 1988-93) represent skillful cuusples of this integration.  Although the detached house continues to be an inporrant and pervasive budding ype, by che end of the 20th century it received caticein [rom vatious perspectives, For phenomenolo- git, the Cramiuemation of the house in the 20ch century has serious consequences tor the human sense of well-being and the development of public lite. Many crines raned concerms about the influences of technolagy—from the celevisinn to the In- terect—on typical. everyday life in houses, Eeminise, argued that individual home ownership in kyw-density suburtw helped oppres women: it constrained theie mability and defined the wxial spaces granted te them. Other have argued chat how: density suburban develupment hay a sigtificandy negative effet on the covirvnment. Marcars have criticized dhe growth of lieme ownenhip because it has eclied on raped and cacessive extension of cansumer credit. Studies have also raised questions about the cultural appropriateness of modemist intentions and the vernac- ular akernative. which can perperaste social inequities. staras differentials, and economic disparities.  Iran La Marctit  Ser ake Ando, Tadao Japan): Barragan. Luis (Mexicoh; De- constructivism; Dom-ino Homses (1914-15); Farnsworth House, Plano, Minois Fathy, Haman (Egypt); Feminist The- ory; Glass House, New Canaan, Comnecticut; Hoffmann, Josef (Anmria); Postmodcraism; Praitt Igoc Housing, St. Louis, Missouri: Robic Heuse, Chicago; Resi, Aldo (Italyh Schrider-Schesder Howse, Utrecht, Netherlands: Steiner Howe, Vienna; Vanna Venturi House, Philadelphia: Villa Savoye, Poissy, France  Further Reading  Coleman. Debra, Huabeth Danze, anc Carol Henderson (editor, Architecture and Feminism, Now York: Prince Architeceural Presa, 19%)  Gardiner, Stephen, Erolasion of she Home, New York Macmillan. 1974; London: Constable, 1975  Marcus, Clare Cooper, Howe as Mirvar of Self. Exploring the Deeper Meaning of Home, Berkeley. California: Canati Prew, 1995  Moore, Charles Willard. Gerald Allen, and Dunhn Lyndon. Thr Place of Howes, New York: Holt Rinchatt and Winston, 197%  Olrees, Paul (editur), Erryclepedia of Vernacular Archisectuer of the World, Cambridge and New York: Cambridge Universiey Prev, 9?  Rapoport. Amos, Home Form and Cadturr, Frigewood Cliff, New Jereey: Prentoce-Hall. 1969  Raley. Terence. Fhe ('9-Prrnate House, New York: Muscum of Modern Art. 1999  Rybcrynsla, Wrald. fie: A Shere Hestory ofan Idee, New York: Viking, 1986  Rykwerr, joseph, On Adem: Hoie on Paradie. The tdes af che Promitioe Hut in Archirectecal Hirory, Now York: Muncum of Modem Art. 1972, 2nd edition, Cambridge, Masachueerty MIT Press, 1981  Van View. Willer tediton). he Pricyriepedia of Howsimg. Thousand Oaks, Cabforma: Sage, 1998  HOUSTON, TEXAS  In the mid-1970s, an article in The New: York Trmes cxulted, “Houston is rhe city of the second half of the rwenticth century.” Author Ads Louise Huxtable proclaimed it “the place that schol- ary flock to for the purpose of secing what modern civilization has wrought” and “the city that has supplanted Los Angeles in current mythology as the city of the future.” Currently the fourth-largest city in the United States. Houston has been arsong, the fastest growing urban ns in the country fur most of the postwar penod. In the act ‘or anafocrmng iudif from backwater to boomtuwn, its development has coveted che featureless Gulf coat Lindxape, replacing, pastures with skyscrapers at a mind- boggling pace. Sometimes calla Insane City, Freeway City, Space City, of even a noncity. Huuston has redelined urbaniry in a way that s both tantalving and deeply disturbing.  Thice factors help explain the raw vitality of Houston's archi- tectural and urban form, Fint, che blank-slate neutrality of both its populace and its site bas provoked 2 kind of “anything goes” permissivencss for much of its history. The largest demographic group on the city seems always te be newcomer, and the flux of pupulation is constant. Houston is a melting put un the trucst sense, neutralizing the history and character of the diverse people thet come and go in favor of a new congkomeranion. The imi- larly undiflerenuated coastal prairie where the city resides is flat and featureless with no majos trvers of other natural bodies off water. Even the port of Houston was made. nor found. The effext of this blank-slate quality on architeccure was well de- scribed by Ralph Adams Cram, who. when he began his work for the Rice Universiry campus in 1909, found “a level and stupid site — no histucic or stylistic precedent.” He concluded, *“Manifestly, the only thing to do was to invent something ap- proaching a new style.” Archirects throughout the century fk asimilar, unfettered sebeuse from the constraints of culture, grog: taphy. hissory. and precedent. In the right hands, the result hus been buildings that are fresh, adventuresome, and full of derring-do. In de wrong hands, the resules have ranged from banal to self-indulgent.  A second factor that has figured strongly in Houston's charac- ter is its tong standing commitment to individualism, personal freadom, and a resistance to conurols, Houston is the only Ameri- «an city with no zaning laws. The city's transportarion system ts primary urban form determinany) is based on optimizing indi- vidual choice, which means heavy reliance on the personal suto- mobile. This factor, combined with almost compicie depen- dence on the individual single-family home far housing stock, has created vast sprawl with endless freeway systems, strip devel- opments, and big-box retail dusten. As Joc] Garreau noted in hus influential 1991 book Edge City, “Yes, Houston is nuss. Bot it's «© much fun. There is so much individualism, You have so much freedom.”  A third factor crucul in the shaping of Houston's architec- tural and urban form ia moncy, specifically real estave profies, Founded by the Allen brothers as an entreprencurial vencure in 1836, the aty has been called “an act of reat estate, rather than an act of God or man.” The doctrine of “hi and best use” is gospel. In Houston, the correct shape af the city hax been deemed to be whatever someone thinks the marketplace will make most profitable on a lot-by-lor basis, Because the market- place & notoriously unstable and unpredictable, che result is  urban chaos—a cacophony of bonanza and bankruptcies played out in che form of strip shopping centers, cul-de-sac subdivisions, office parks, fast-food joints, var lou, and mulls.  The urban fabric thar money, individualism, and the city’s blank-slate neutrality have produced is hoth frightening and sur- prisingly livable. The jarring contrasts. visual blight, cultural emptiness, and sheer ugliness of much of the city are daunting to vitor, Yet Houstonians often find the city's freedom of expression and divenity of opportunity more chan compenta- sory. Aside from the inevitable craffic problem, Houston works surprisingly well both sociully and physically, belying auch of what planners and urban designers have preached over the last half of the 20th century. People find places te live, work, and raise their families in amuable if somewhat strethed-out and circuitous patterns. A strong sense of communty often occurs, although not in the traditional sense of a physical neighbarhood.  ‘The architecture of Houston evokes similarly conflicting re- actions. Whe city’s permissiveness has generated a generally low quality of architecture. More significant, however, che city’s  ness and freedom of expresion has produced some isolated ohices and enclaves of very great architectural distinction. Three Houston buildings of the lateer part of the century have garnered, significant internativaal renown, Pennzoil Place (1976) by John-  Pennaail Place Building, by Philip Johnnie and John Burgre at Houston, Texan (1976) © Mary Aan Sullivan  san/Burgec Architects and 8.1, Muitis Associates is the mast striking pedigseed architectural object in the city, Composed of two 36-stoty towen, each with a trapezmdal plan and an angled top, the downtuwn office complex offers radically different per- spectives when viewed from vasious parts of the city. A kind of minimalist freeway sculpcurc, Pennzoil's dark color, shifting grometrios, and dramatic 10-foot dot herween the tower con- firmed again Philip Johnwn a a prominent high-rise designer and brought developer Gerald Hines intemational recognition aa savyy client who knew how to combine high design and profitahilicy.  Wf Pennzoil is the favored architectural emblem of Houston among the subculture of arcbitectute, the Astrodome by Herman Uoyd and W.B. Morgan and Wilson, Morns. Crain and Ander- son (1965) 1s its counterpart in popular culture. The first perma- nent air-conditioned sports facility bustt for foorball and baseball games, the Hlarns County Demed Stadium was the brainchild of larger-than-life politician and promoter, Judge Roy Hotheinz. Tt broke new ground tor a generation of lavish sporss palaces all over the United Stares that followed in the last decades of the 2Oth century, Vhe 53 skyboaes, otentatious club facilities, and lighted woreboard (almost 500 fece long and four stories high) predicted the hallmarks of furure stadium and arena design.  A third signature buikling of the uty, The Menil Collection by Renzo Piano and Richard Fitrgcrald and Partners (1987), contraws sharply with Pennzoil Plice and the Aserodume. The Menil draws its strength frum subuery and understatement. ft 1s hidden away in an unprepossessing neighborhood to which « demurs graciously. Whe collaboration of chent Dominique de Menil, architect Renzo Pianu, and engineers Ove Anup and Partners has produced a quiet rectifinear structure with a white steel frame and an in-fill of gray cypress siding. The gracetul S-shaped concrete “leaves” that top exterior porches and soften interior light qualiry are the tour de force of The Menil—refined, elegant, and particulary effective in creating a luminuus environ ment ideal fur viewing art  Many significans architectural abjects by well-known design- ets peace the city's skyline and bolaed urban aites, including Republic Bank Center (1983) by Jahnson/Burgee and Kendall Heaton Associates, Texas Commerce Tower (1981) by LAL Pei and 3D /nternational, and the Museum of Fine Aru: Houston with contribudiuns by Ralph Adam Cram (1924, 1926), Ludwig Mies van der Robe (1958, 1974). and most recently, Rafsel Moneco (2000), Several enclaves of great design distincuion have also been influenced by renowned designers. The Rice University campus was onginally planned by Cram, Goodhue and Ferguson in the easly part of the cenniry and now has buildings designed by Cesar Pelli, James Sritling, Antoine Predack. Ricardo Bofill, Tom Beeby, and other notable architects. The ncarby Se. Thoma campus boauts buildings designed by Philip Johmon from the £9905 co the 1990s. The Galleria/Poat Oak district is a virtual beauty pageant of glittery architectural objects with works by LM. Pei; Cesat Pelli; Philip Johnson; Skidmore, Ow- ing and Menill, and Hellmuth, Obata and Kawahaum,  Houston has produced many notable architects as well. Wil- ham Ward Watkins, Alfred C. Finn, Kenneth Franzheim, Joseph Finger, John Staub. and Birdsall Briscoe, among others, made great contnbusions early in the century, Karl Kamrath, Howard Bamstone, Eugene Aubrey. Anderson Todd, William Cannady. Charles Tapley, and Joba’ Chase were amang the leading practi-  
tioners in the ponwar petiod Firms such ax Caudill Rowler Scott, Neuhaus and Taylor: Golemon and Rolle, Loyd Jones Brewer and Associates: Pierse Goodwin Alexander: and Wilson, Morris, Cran and Andenon made arc hetecture atto big business. More recently, design-ancnied practinuners, such ax TAFT Ac- chiteso and Carlos Jumcnez, have made a significant mark as well,  Lawrence W. Srton  Further Reading  Tn addition ww the falling hooks, a contmmng Houston an hare nice and design teview pournal pulsed by the Rave Design Allunce, Cite (Myear), fv an emeBent touice af information on the wty's development  Barna, Joe! Warten. The Ser Through Yeun: Crearsen and Derrructon tm Texas Architecture and Reat Erase. (981 1991, Houston. Rice Univeraty Prew, 1992  Bamstone. Howard, The Arvdvtevtune af fnbnt & Stamb: Houston snd the South, Austin: Universuy of Texas Press, 19°9  Feagm. Joe R.. Free Exeerprae Cty: Hexstent «nt Polssical-Economical Penpectire, New Brunswick. New Jenicy: Rutgers Unversity Pres, 1988  Fox, Secphea. and Leradd Mourbrad, Howes Archiecteral Gade, Houston: Amencan Insutute of Architeco. Howston Chapter, and Herning Press, 1990; 2nd edition, L9Y9  Garteau, Joo, Edge City. Late on the New Pronner, Now Voth: Doutdeday, 1991  Juméner, Carlox, Carl fimdnre (butuigual Englah-Spanih edivon), Banctona: Gusto Gilt, 1991  MeCamh, David G., Heumen the Anyew City, Austin, Unrvetuty of Teas Press, 1969: resiwil actin, a Houston, ot History, 981  Rome, Perce G.. Mating « Middle Landiaps. Cambrnigs,  Maven trues: MEL Prean, 11  HOWE, GEORGE 1886-1955 AND WILLIAM LESCAZE 1896-1969 Architects. United Srates  Although ther parmership was short-lived. Gcorge Howe anal William Lewace were among the leaders of moderisist architec fure in the Unired Scares in the 1930s. Nanwithstanding counter- claims by admirers of the work of Richard Neutra, Rudolf M. Schindler, and Frank Loyd Wight, the signuticance af Howe and Vescaze’s East Coast work in the International Style is at times overlooked, perhaps beauc of the limited duration of the partnership (1929-34). the anal scale of most of the com minions, o¢ the unbuilt statin of same of the projects,  Early its his cucer, Howe designed a romania villa (High Hollew") for his family ia Chestnut Hill, Philadelphia. Ir imor porated the spatial principles af his Beaux-Arts training, observa- tivas from travels in Tualy. and the regional characteriwivs of Pennsylvania. In 1916. he entered the firm of Mclloe and Meigs in Philadelphur and became a partner in the firm of Mellor. Mags and Howe, where he temamed through 1928, Dunng the years 1921-24, Howe's maior design acavity centered on the Arthur E. Newbold, fr. Estate in Laverock. Pennoytvania. a romantic country house based en the vernacular forms of French architecture in Normandy Perhaps his tint true exposure to  European modemism oocurred in 1925, when he visited the Exposition Internationale des Arts Décoratifs in Paris.  Tn £923, Lencaze opened a practice in New York, acquiring mostly small commiaions and demonstrating througheut « nat- ural inchnation coward the International Style, which would become the dorninant architectural force in the second quarter of the 20th century. Ie treats architectural form as volume rather than mass and seeks to liberate those farms from references to architectural history. Favoring asymmetry in plan as well as in clevation, the sryfe features smooth, planar surfaces; che efimina- tion of applied ornament; steel or concrete framing; and large expanes of plan, Lescare's umal-scale designs from this period include the Cagutal Bus Terminal (1927, now demolished) in New York, his first atrempt tn introduce the International Seyle to the caster scaboard of the United States. In addition to some innovative interior design projects, he produced prototypical res- idcmtial designs in the style, having been commiuioned by both Architectural Forum and Architectural Record, Lescase’s 1928 un- built projeces. an apartment house and garage at Broadway be- rween 50th and Sist Sueets and another apartment house at Park Avenue and 72nd Suet. represenc his experiments with a modernist vocabulary on a larger scale.  Lescaze was introduced to Howe in 1929, by which time Howe had already acquired the commission for what would be thew most important work together. an office tower for the Philadelphia Saving Fund Society (USES). an a site at Market and 12th Streets near the Reading ‘Terminal and Wanamaker's Department Stare. ‘Their partnership began in the sume year and was characterized by a division of work not unlike that of Surnbam and Root in Chicago 50 years earlier. Howe cultivated and developed busness contact, aionitored agreements, and pur forth concepts, whereas Lescaze was the chief designer, work- ing on the development ot architectural content and details.  In 1926. Howe had already developed a scheme, his fiese acvempt at skyscraper design, for the president of the bank, James M. Willcox. It was a hybrid of Reaux-Ars cmphass on che masonry enclosure and Secessionist or Art Nouvean forms. The hank reconsidered its plans for an office rower, consmicting in ie place 4 wmall and temporary branch bank to Howe's design wn 1927. By 1929, however, the society was teady to realize the mote ambitious plan, and with their recent partnership, Howe and Lescize were poised to introduce the International Seyke w the United States in a Large-scale building, resulting in the pioncering lors uf the wuly modern skyscraper.  Amecedents tw the design are Hawe's awn scheme from 1926, in which he included spaces for recall shops at the screet level, raising the banking flour up onc level. and Krud [ énberg- Halen's entry w the 1922 Chicago Tribune Tower competition. Lewaze's sketches frum December 1929 introduce the sweeping pulished green granite and glass curtain wall hase, with its tounded comer prefigured perlagn by the unitary broad curve of Frich Mendelsolin’s Schocken store (1928-30) in Chemnitz, Germany, in addition to ummiernipted horizancal bands of glass, alternating with opaque spandrets, in the office tower above. The bank teserved three stones above in main public space for offices, and above those, the 32 speculative office floors are subtly cantilevered. The top was rexcrved for a penthouse suite and observatory, and the T-shaped plan allowed for the separation  of services (stairwells. clevarars. and restrooms) from the offices. Distinct marerials indicare different functions on the extenor. polished granite for the banking tloor. sand-colomd hmestone for exterive columns on the cast and west des, gray brick for office-foar spandrel. and glazed and unglazed brick for the service tower, Set originally at a slight angle, 4 27. foot-high sign with neon letters idencifying the PSFS initials tor the hank i visible for 20 iniles. Aluhough PSFS's cxpresion af verticality, with ita continuous ¢xternalized cahimas at the uilive Moun, desives from the principles of the Sullivancaque tall offie build ing, with its articulated wall. 11 also anticipates icons of skyscraper design of the 195s: Lever House (1952, Madmore, Owings and Merrill) us New York. with its cannlevered cower floaung over an elevated horontal pavibon, and Inland Steel (1954-58, Skidmore, Owings and Merrill) in Chicago, with is exoskeleton and fully discrete service tower In 2000, PSES became Loews Philadelphia Hocel, adapted by Rower Lewis Thrower Architects and Daroff Design.  Ouhet notable works by the firm include Oak Lane County Day School (1929. demolished) in Oak Lane, Penmylvania: high-rise projects far the Museum of Mader Art (19300 41), to conform to a typial Manhattan ciey lot. 60 feet wide and 100 feet deep: Hessian Hills School (1931-32) in Croton-on- Hudson. New York; and the Charles Edwin Wilbour Memorial Library (1933-34) at the Brooklya Museum of Art.  PYES Building, designed by Howe and Lenare (EDAD © Greattiviiings coen  Atter che dissoluden of the parmenhip in 135. Howe com- bined modernist forms with Incal marcrials. He worked with Louis J. Kahn (1901-74) and Oxcar Seoronavy (1905-70), form- ing the firm of Howe. Storonev and Kahn, and later with Robert Monrgomery (8. 1946-58). Fram 1950 co 1954, Howe was dhais of dhe Deparment of Architecture at Yake University, bes care’s work independent of Howe indluded thice painted stuaco and glawblack houses on Manhattan's caat side, one for himself (1932-33) at 201 Last 48th Street, the first fully modern cown- house in the United States; 4 second fue Rayinond Kramer (1934) at 32 Fase 74th Street; and a third for Edward Norman (1941) at 1.24 bast Och Sereer. Companng |escaze’s own house on Ext 48th Street with Howe's remodeled townhouse for Maunce J. Spewer in Philadelphia (1955) reveals the essenual natures of two architectural personalities: the Lescaze House re- places an earlier row house. employing white-painted stucco and expanses of glass block and royal bluc treesanding columns, and the Speier House is fully contextual, employing conionming window heights, blending masancy, and retaining a manvard wot and dormer windows. Dunng World War 1, Lescase worked with experinicotal materials and pretabrication. and by the end of his carect he faveted a Miesian idiom for office build: ings in Manhattan.  Despate unportant careers independently and as the firm of Howe and Lacaze. the wwe architects will occupy 4 plac in 
architectural history as the creative torces behind one building. the PSFS Building, a landmark in che cyolurian of che skyscra- per. paradigmatic for ts machinetike clarity  Paur Grassman  Sve tho lateraational Seyiey Lever House, New York Cin Skidmore, Owings, and Merrill (United Seases) Skyscraper Tribune Tower International Competition (1922), Chicago  Biography  George Howe  Rom an 17 fune 1886 in Worcewct, Massachusetn, George Howe studied architecture at Harvard University, graduating in 1907, and teceived 2 diploma from the Exule des Deaux-Arts in Paris in 1912, having joined dhe atelier of Victor Lsloux. Return- ing w the United State, he joined the firm of | urness and Evans in 1913, shondy after the death of Frank Furness. He died in Philadelphia on 16 April 1955.  ‘William Lescaze  Born in Onex (near Geneva), Switzerland, on 27 March 1896, William Lemaze atuended the Eidgenossixche Technische Hochschule in Zurich (1915-1919), studying with Karl Muser. Before arriving in the United States in 1920, he worked in the Paris ollie ot Henci Sauvage. After a position in the firm of Walter R. MacCormack in Cleveland, Ohio be opened a prac: tice in New York in 1923. He died in New York on 9 February 1969, ,  Selected Publication Temare, William, On Being aw Archtcect, New York: Putnam, 1942  Selected Works  i by George Howe High Hollow, Phdadelphia, 1917 Arthur FE. Newbodd, fr.. Fate, Lacctock, Pentaylvanns, 1924 Phuladelphia Saving Fund Society branch (demolished). Philadelphia wr Maurice |. Spener House (remoueling?. Hhiladelptia, 1935.  ‘Capital Bas Torrunal (demolished), New York, 1927  Apartment house and gatage junbuile). Broadway beowoen West $Oth and $10 Sceoet, New York, 1928  Apartment house (unbule}. Park Avenuc and Est 72md Street, New York, 1928  ‘William Lescare Howe and Office, New York, 1953  Raymand Kramer [bouse, New York, 194  Edward Norman House, New York, 1041  Designed by Howe and Leacate  Ok Lane Country Day School idemolshed), Mhibdelphia. $929  High-tiec projects ine the Muscum of Modetn An. New York. 1931  Hewian Hills School (now Temple [sracl of Northern Weuchester), Cronon-on-Hudson, New Vouk, 1932  Philadelphia Saving Fund Sooery (nove Loews Philadelphia Horel). Philadelphia. 1932  Chale Fdwan “itbour Memoral Library. Braakhn Museum of Art, Brooklyn, New York. 1934  Further Reading  Huchwock, Heney-Russdl, Jr. and Philip Johnson. The Jaarrnstional Saye, New York: Nurvos, (932; eeprine, with a new foreword, New York and Loadon: Norton, 1995  Huber, Chnstian and Lindsay Stamm Sbapwo, Witham Lescaze, New York: Rissol, 1982  Jordy, William Pf, and Robert A.M. Steen, “The Philadelphia Saving fund Suciety,” fowrrual ef the Sostety of Archetrcticral Hesmerians 21 (May 1962)  Lanmion, Lorraine Welling, Witham Lewase, Archuect. Philadelphia, Peansytvania: Ant Alkame Pres. and London; Awocuted Univenity Prewes, 1987  “A New Sherer for Savings Googe Howe and William | excaze, Archuects,” Ancbuecturad Forum $7 (December 1932)  “The Phiknlelphia Saving Fund Society Building.” Arbisecnunal Reveew 73 (Match 1933)  The PSES Building, Twelve Seuth Twelfth Sereet, Philadetphea, Pennsylvania: Philadelphia Saving Fund Society. 1976  Stephens, Susanne, “Project Diary: The Landimash PSES Building by Bower Lewis Thrower Architects and Daroft Design Is Reincarnuted as a Loews Harel,” Arrintesneral Record 188 tOcruber 2000)  Atom, Robert AM. Geongr Howe Toward a Modern Amencan Architecrare. New Haven, Conneccncur: Yale University Press, 1975  HUNGARY  The history of Hungarian architecture in the 20th century devel- oped herween the opposite pols of traditionalism and modet- nity. of the search for national idenuty and international validity. Rerween 1876 and 1919, Hungary consrirured ane af the wo states of the multinational Habsburg Empire, the Austr Hungatiats monarchy. The first wo decades of the century were a period of the phicalism of styles, Beside the nenstyles, nich as Gothic Revival, neo-Renaimance. and their wlioayneratic varia. dons, the most important tendencies were Art Nouveau, early moderniem, and National Ramancicism. The key monument of monumental historic is the Parliament Building (1885— 1904) on the Danube riverfront ia Budapest by Imre Steindl. in tlungary, Are Nouveau architects developed forms chat are still rooted an histoncism bur used floral ornaments and allegori- cal wulptural detail. The major representative of this widespread and popular style was the Budapest olfice of Aladar Karman and Gyula Ullmana (aparrment house, 1899-1901, on Percrel Mor Street in Budapest). ‘The biomorphiam of French Art Nouveau was very rate in Hungary; its main example is the Redk Palace {1906-07, Fde Magyar) in Sroged. Oddn Lechner, the most dincuased and mart influential figure of che Hungarian “national style” at the turn of the century, was known for his highly inds- vidual ormamental language using the lesons of Oriental, pei- tmarily Indian, architecture. His moat important works in Buda- pest are the Museum of Applied Art (1892~96), the Geological Institute (1899), and the Postal Savings Bank (1899-1901). Lechner’s colorful facades, clad with ghyed terra-conta (known ax Pyrogranite), attracted many followers who crected large public burdings in other Hungarian towns, such as the City Hall (1907) ia Szabadka (present-day Suborica. Yugoslavia) and che Palace of Cutrure (1910) in Marosvasithely (presenc-day Tirgu Mure. Romania), both by Marcell Komor and Dezsd Jakab,  and the County Hall (1913) in Debrecen by Zoluin Balint and Lajas Jambor, Jarsef Viges worked for Lechner carly in his career, but he sean became influenced by the efforts of early modernesin in Vienna by the architecture of Orto Wagner and Josef Hoft- mann (toy store “Arkid Hazir,” 1909, in Budape.  Around 1908. a group of young architects pursuing the issuc of 2 national style rejected Lechner’s ornamentalism and urped atchitects wo study the vernacular ast and architecture of the Hungarian village. Known as the “Young Ones.” they mnitiated National Romanticism in Hungary in cle connection with wimilar tendencies in Scandinavia, lint of all in Finland They were also intlucaced by the goals of the Faglish Ary and Crafts movement, the writings of fahn Ruskin, and the deagns of Wil ham Moers. An interes fot picturesque massing and for ticher conttevtions with the surrounding Landsape of urban cviton ment as well as the use of natural materuls such as nurural stone and wood characterize their buildings (Church, (08-09, in Zebogény, Karoly Kos and Bela Jinszky: Wekerte Colony, 1912- 13. in Budapest, Karoly Kos, Bela Eberling. and other; apast- ment building of the Reformed Church, 1911, in Kecskemer. Valér Mende: Lkementary School. 1912. in Kiskunhalas, Denes Gyorgy: Protestant Church. 1913, in Kologsear (today Chiy. Romania) Karoly Kes,  Istvan Medgyagay arempred iw synthesize cflorts of the na fhonal sivte with the aewhetica of Vienna modernism. He studied in the school of Orro Wagnet but alas participated in the feld- work documenting the an of Transyivanian \illages in the regions of Kalotaszeg. Hia intention war in develop a modem aesthetic fot ceutforced-comerete structures based on the instinctive bngic of vernacular wooden: wonsuuctions. The main resales of thus search are the theaters en Veszprém (1908) and Sopron (1909) and the Cachobe Church (1911) in Rirdsmulyad (present-day Mul'a. Slovakia).  The buikdings of Ba Lajra and Baa Malnai that were exe- cuted around 1910 represent a mayor achievement of early mod- ernism in Hungary. Prefercing durable materials such as brick and stone and using ornament sparingly, their buildings were esteemed by representatives of the avant-garde after the war (Commercial School, 1912, and Rezszvalgyi Store, 1991-13, both in Budapest, Béla Lajta: apartment house, 191], oa Fatvis Street in Budapest, Bela Malnai). Around 1910, classical refer ences start to appear in che work of bath offices (apartment block. 1910, on Visegrsdi Serect. Béla Milna: and Gyula Haase)  Building activity radically decreased during World War 1 (1914-18). Uhe Austro-Hungarian monarchy low the war and broke up into smaller natsonal stares, With che peace treaty ut Trianon (1920), Hungary lost two-thirds of its historic ecrritory to the surrounding counrnes, In a very difficult situation, Eun gaty’s conservative government managed to estate the economy by the 1930s. After a failed attempt to introduce a Soviet-style “Republic of Councils" in 1919. the political restoration forced left-wing intellectuals wach as Lisi Moboly-Nagy, Marcel Breuer, and Farkas Molnar our of the country: they hecame important figures of the international avant-garde. In Hungary during the 1920s, a conservative neobaroque style dominated (Déry Museum, 1926, in Debrecen, Dénes Gyorgy) amd Aladir Miannich; Franciscan Monastery, 1927, in Zalacgerszey, vio Kotsis). In the interwar period, new universiues were built using an ectectic language of form in Szeged, Debrecen, and Pécs to replace lost centers of higher education. Some of the most attrac  tive ensembles were created by architects who studied dhe Nordic Romantaism of Scanlinavian counties, such as the Cathedral Square (£930) in Szeged by Bela Rerrich. la 1928, the cites ol Pes and Gyor organeed urban competitions tor their master plans of tuture development. he arusnc reconstniction of the  rogue city center (1948) af Seckesichervar hy Ivan Kos was 2 very successhil urban antervennion Katsis strengthened the historic umage of the city by transforming buildings and public squares by careful interventions. ‘The cultural and political con- pecans with Italy were entenuve. Novevento architecture influ enced not only ecclewastical architecture but also office build ings, such a the Hungarian Credit Bank (1938) in Debrecen bw Jend Padinyi Gulydis  After 1925, as the political climate became more liberal, ome lepreenuiuves of the avant-garde, such a Farkas Molads and Fred Forbit, rweurned to Hungary, Joining lurces with other followers of modemism. such as Pal Ligeti and Jozsef Fischer, they erected a number of villas ant smaller aparement buildings lor open-minded intellectuals (Schwatce House, 1932. in Szeged and villa, 1932, on Lejrd Street in Budapest, Farkas Molnar: villa on Csatarka Strect in Budapest, [Gzsef Fischer). I'he social utopia of modernism was represented by che Hungarian CIAM (Congrés Internarianaux d’Archirecrure Moderne) group with tarkas Molnar as its leader. Ube group organized exhibitions to demonstrate the connections bewween architecture, housing conditions, and social inequality. Av by the mid-1930s modem: jam had abandoned its political yuals, the uyle became increas ingly popular in Lirger Hungarian cities. The office of Béla Hols tatter and Lerenc Domany realized Linge apariment blocks using innovative cedhnulugy and stew mutetiah tu provide Iuusiows dwellings (Dunapask apaitment building, 1937, in Budapess). ‘The aurport (1936) in Budséirs by Virgil Bierbauer and Liszld Krdlik abo shows a freer application of modemist aesthetic prin- aples than before. Many summerhouses and hotels in natural enuiroament were built using regional marerials, especialty naru- ral stone (Mecsek Hotel, 1936, in Pevs. Lasdé Lauber and lavan Nyiri: Summerhouse, 1936. in Mecsek ar Pécs, Fred Forkdt).  During World War II. many Hungarian cities wuffered seri- ous damagy. Alter the war. great efforts were made to restore infrastructure, buildings, and factories. In the first years after the war, the influence of Le Cashusier was obvious in many new structures (Trade Union Headquarters, 1949, in Budapest, Lajos Gidoros, Gabor Preisech, and others), Howeves, Hungary was atuated within the zune af Soviet interest. and this helped the Communist Pany aun poliacal power ur 1948. The pany: made radical changes in political and cconomic structure and abandoned a market economy (1948-89). The centralized plan economy forced the development of industry. During the 1950s, large-scale centers of heavy industry were built next w small, traditional settlements, such as Kazincharoka, Ajka, Varpalota, Komlé, Tacahinya, Ord, and Pécs in coal-mining, metallurgical. and steel production areas. Sztalinvarns (present-day Dunadyy- iron), a “tocialist city” (master plan, 1950, Tibor Weiner), and the Univenity of Heavy Industry in Miskele (1952, Istvan Ja- naky, Gyorgy Jinassy. and athers) were newly founded. Design and conmruction, like the while euonumy, were nationalized and organized in large offices In 1951. the Communist Party dedared funcuunalist modern at hitecture cosmopolitan and de- cadene, Hungarian architectute now had the task to express the values of sociahsm, Architects studied the radition of Hangarun 
dawicism and ased the lessons of the Scandinavian neoxlassicismn of Gunnar Axplind and Sigurd Lewerentz to avoid the imitation of more manumental Rusian models, The most convincing examples of this tendency are the Culuaral Center (19527 in Tala by Rela Pinter, the County Hall (9520 in Debrown by Péter Molnir, the Mining Sehoul (1953) in Varpaluea by Gyula Rimandcay. the Institute building "R” (1985) af the Technnat University on Budapest by Gyula Rimanocey, and the County Hall (19531 in Salgotasyan by Pal Nemeth.  Modern architecture had Jowly rerurnad, already betore the failed eevaturion against Communism in 1956. A process of libevalzation started. and a productivist approach to modernism dominated Hunganan architecture trom the [960s on. Indus trial architecture achieved internanonal sevogninon: engineers and architects of the planning office IPARTFRV designed indur trial plants fue the whole country, ach av the beating plant (3999) in Pécwijhely by Gyuls Matra che cold storage ware- howe (1960) in Mukok by Laszlo Csaba. and the Debrecen Cannery (1969) by Lajon Faldes. Phe womtnuction of publ health and higher elucapun, culvgtal centers, trade union holi- day hotel, and kindergartens and schools stunted on 2 Larger wale, mostly using standardized plans and prelabreauon. The spread of the [ntemativnal Suyle is represented by the Parks Resaucant (1961) in Radacsony by Ferenc Callmeyer, the Hote! (1962) in Keeskemet by btvan Jandky, che University of Ageicul- ture (1963) in Debrecen by Tibor Mikolas, rhe Hospital (1964) in Dunadiviros by Zofian Farkasdy. hotels (1964) in Sidfok by tndre Caighes. and the City Center 1965) i Salgétanin by Géra Magyar and Gydrgy Szrogh. Regionalism was present in projects auch as the Observacury (1964) on Pasckésterd mountain by Gyorgy Serogh and che Culeural Center 11969) in Orgavany by Kamfy Jurcsik, In 1968, 4 reform prugtam was introduced to liberalize the vaumy. The monotony of prefabricated concrete housing estates all ever the country triggered increasing criticivm. Gyangy Caete emphauzed the role of ornament in humanizing Large-scale housing construction in Pécs. The nrganic movement of Imre Makowecr, which soun gained imernational recgnition. was abo the result of the dissatulacoon with burcauctatic design methods. Makovecz and his young followers. Dersd tiler. Sandor Devenyi, Tamas Nagy, and others, studied the anthro- posophy of Rudolf Stcinee and created a beomoephic architec cure. Phe dominance of spectacular, shingle-covered rats over aatculas or fre shaped plans is a significant chacactenssue of thar aschirecture (Town-Center. 1984, in Zalaszenttiolé and Catho- be Church, 1987, in Paks, both by Imre Makoveca). ‘The Bull's Head House (1988) in Pécs by Sindor Dévényi shows how Makovec's growing micces and the rise af Postmodernism in the West could result in an cacewine use of ornamental forme The regionalises were seeking at the same time mute muddest mean of exprenion using stone, brick, or wond (Greek-Catholy, Church, 1983, in Edekny, Ferem Torok: Schaar Museum, 1986, in Pevs. Istvan faniky. Jrc Forest School, 1796, in Vise- grid, Gabor Puranyy). The MIDROTON Calcural Center (1884) in Szekesteben ar by Péter Reimbolz ss a signtficane work of structuraliom.  After the political change in 19H), the introduction af a tree: market economy and a democratic government changed the of- ganization of archiectural design and building construction. “Phe large state-owned planning offices disappeared, and private ones emerged. Multinational firms started co buikd headquarters  or remodeled existing structures. Although the organic architec- ture of Imre Makowecs and his followers is still alive, the latest examples of American and Western European architecture are carefully studied: decanstructivism and High-Tech have their fatlowers (WIDEOTON Compact Discs Workshop. 1989. in Setkerichérvse, Janos Dobai; Glaxo Wellcome Building. 1997, in Fordkbalint, Lislo Sear). Eaclesiasnc architecture has also produced remarkable results (Catholic Church and School Cea- tet, 1995, in Maskoh., bsevan Ferenc7; Lutheran Church. 1996, in Dunadijviros, Famis Nagy: Catholic High School and Dor- mitory. 1998, in Szeged, Janos Golda and Attila Madzin). Mod- em aethencs and traditional craftsmanship characterize the small-scale buildings of the Farm for Disabled Children and Adolescents (1994) in Perhal by Péter [anesch and Tamas Karac- wony,  Ka rari Monavans7xy-Gadncr ann Akos MORSVaNe7ky  Further Reading  Yorks, Andras, “Hungaran Aniotccture Between the Wan" and “Hanganen Anhecenie in the Postwar Years,” wn The Architectare of Hino Huagary, cliced by Dots Wicbensan and Kzsef Sieg, Cambridgs, Maxachusetts MIT Fre, 1998  Lesnikownka. Wojach fediuar, Aa barepean Madernem, Archuevtare in Concherlovakia. Hurgary, and Poland betwren the Wan, (919 £939, New Yark: Rizzoli, 1996  Moravanicky, Alun, Competing Visions Acthais tnermnon and Sacsal Imaginstion int Catral European Architecture, 1867-1918, Cambridge, Marna haserts KEPT Pass, 1998  HUXTABLE, ADA LOUISE  Architecture critic, United Sunes  Ada Louise Hustable is considered une of the leading architec ture crities of the modem cra. Over a period af 25 ycan, trom 1963 ta 1982. she wrote more than 800 articles commenting vn cuatemputary buildings for the New York Times. Fouusing exchusvely on archrtecture, Huatable’s weekly, and someumes biweekly. missives on focal architectural projects became a fixture within the New York ames. Her concern wath the qualiry of design and ts umpact on the urban labtic of New York raised awareness of the amportance at architecture among New Yorkers,  Born and raised in New York, Huxtable studied srt history at Hunter College and embarked on a carver in interior design after praduarion While working at Bloomingdale's on a modern furniture design competition, she was introduced to Philip John. son, whe was then a curator at the Muscum of Modern Art. Tehnson hired Huntable as asuistant curator at the muscum, where she wreked with Johnson to produce several shows on modern architecture, nduding the work of Mics van der Rube. After completing her graduate work at the New York University Insutute of Fine Arts in 1990, she received a Fulbngbr grant to Tualy, which she used to study modern Italian anhitecure of the 1920s and 1930s. On her recurn, she began to write on a freelance hasis tor Are News and Progressive Architecture. Her arnicles tocused on focal projects that demonstrated innovation in structure or dengn, and they were published regularty in a column titked "Progressive Architecture in America.” By the late (950k, Huxtable had applied foe and received a Guggenheim grant to fuccher her investigations inte the contemporaty archi-  tecture of New York. During this ume, the published a guide to New York's classical architecture and. tut the Munxipal Art Society of New York. created several walking tours ot New York architecture.  In 1963, Huxtable began working as an architecture critic tor the New York Eimer, Ultimately, ber position at dhe New York Limes allowed het newt only to raise public interest in atchi tecture bur also to extend the influence of the crite aver the Procetees of architectural and urban dengan. Her writing focused on projects thar the everyday reader found acccuible radier than on high style ot foreign dewgnets, Slee believed that architecture should acount for and tespond te tts urban contest and thas archisecture must be noe only functional but creative and plea ingas well. Her arneles made architecture relevant ta New Yark- ers through 2 palpable emphasis on their own home, and in doing so she created popular demand tor gond devign  Asan ardent conservationint. many of Hvvtable’s arucles em: phasized the importance af preserving the urban Jahr of the Aity, While her humorous critaiams of new architecture tee nated with her audicace. het concern over and protection ul the spaces that contributed to the character of New York cread enthusiasm for mamntauing ud New York buildings, Huxtable Promoted stronger cong laws iy presetve local «paces and to prevent modermst projects Irom ubhteraning viable ocighbor- hoods with insensitive designs She speke our against projects thar were disrespectful to the urban scale and «ene. such as the demolition of Pennsytvania Station and the construction of the Olympic Tower, promoting the idea that axial factors of design were equally important to artistic concerns.  A champion of modcenism, Hustable believed un die creative power and innovation of Modern architecture. For Huatable, Modern architecture's social content, where the problems ut sonicry would be solved through goud design, appropriately con sdeted the funcuonal and personal needs ot the user. a tact chat she argued superseded the arnstic concerns For f laxtable, ir was more imporant that a building work for the human being, and she believed thas Modern architecnure contained the suitable creative propernes co address rhis concern, In her tact articles. she recognized that modemitm had failed to measure up to in promise and had yielded co a now syle, that af Posimederian. the lantee of which she defined as the rrintegeation of context into architecture, embodying it with a human meaning and wale  Huauabie’s work ultimarely shaped the role of the critic. to the extent that she was awarded a Puliwer prize io 1970, the first awarded tor disunguished critiasm. Her leas were com mon sense rather than theorctical and appealed to 4 broad audi- ence through a matter-of-tact, humorous rone. Ac their heart was a greater concem for the social cantert af a structure and how architecture would affect the general reader to whom Huxt- able wroce. She carefully rescarched the economic. political, snd legal issues involved in a project anal injected a concern for pre- serving the urban fubne and generating 4 hunuan «alc for a design. Ver ability to daly che prescne archicectural situation  tur her audience helped te bridge the gap berween academy and Practice. Clarapaine Wo Zane  Ser ubv Johnson, Philip (United States); New York, New Yorks Postmadernism  Selected Publications  the Archaiecaure of Naw Vork A Hetory and Guide, Garden Cin, New Dark: Anchor Books. 1964  An bite, Anyone’ New York: Random Hause, 86  Goodbye Hruon, Helle Hamburger: An Anthology of Ankitecrural Debghe and Drogen, Washingsan, DC. Preservanon Press, juke  ~The hleal Cin.” Presernanon, 42 (ManhiApeil DAE)  Aicked & Building Liaely’ New York: Quadrangie/Now York Limes Book Co, 197  “ty Modern Anhitecture Dead!” Archrtectvrat Record, 16% 4 HOcvaber 1811  fer bauge Nera, New Yorks G. Braziller, 10  “A Quesoon of Quabe. A fowtaad. 7A) \Jaraary 1982)  “The Lall Budding Artetically Reconsidered: Ube Search tor a Skyscraper Seytes” Anchrtectural Reverd, 19251 Yanuary 1984), oi  the Fall Burlding Amistcaily Reconcadered. The Search par a Skyscraper Style, New York: Panthona, 1984  “Phe Crahbd State of Matern Anhitecure,” Arvbiteitucad Reverd, fo"! January 1981)  The Conceal America. Andres tare rend Uber. New York: New Prew, har  Well They Ever Finish the Hrackiee Soudrsard! New York: Mavinillan, 194  Farther Reading  Mung ot che best bivgraphacal and <rittcal intormanon on Hustable is wruten by the crite: herselt iituxtable (192) shove). An annotated Inblasgraptiy af Huarable’s werk, Inning her artes in an casy-to-read format. can be tuund in Wodehouse. Wodchouse also includes astictes writen above Haacabl, daang to 1979, Fora sumnury of Huctalde’s impact un the atchitectural pruemots, sre Seephens (1982). Stephens (L977) inchades ao anatase of Huatuhle’s uatuhyeon ro women st the Fed of an bite ture  “Archies cual Critk sm: Four Wamen,” Progriare Arcbreernore, 58 (March 19.7)  Campbell, Robert, 7A Comenanon wth Adis Linwe Horcable.” Antutecrural Kevord, 18144 [Apr 1944)  Pevsner, Nikolaus. “Books The Modi Movement: Ubeary and Criucann.” fowrnel of the Socrery of Architecrunal Hiswwratns, $8 (March 19%)  Richanhon. Margaret, "Wornet Uheonists,” Andustcraral Dosen, 45 (August 1974)  Mephems, Suzanne. “Ada Louoc Hutte,” in Women i American Anburcince. A Hatory and Cantemporan Pespecuve, edstod bv Susanna Torre, New York Whimey Liban of Design. 1977  Stephens. Suzanne. “Temes without Muxtabie: Ada Louse Ehaxtable an Pesspeative.” Skyive iMarcd (982!  Wodehouse, Lawreme, Ada Louve Hustible An Aanosated Bibboguphy, New York, Gatland, LORE  
ILLINOIS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY  Designed by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe,  completed 1956  Chicago, Minois  The first work executed by Luctwig Mics van der Rohe (1886- 1969) in che United States, the campus of rhe Hlinoss Instirute of Technology (IIT) in Chicago represents the fuller embodi- tment of modernist planning principles applied to the renovation of the city at midcentury, The campus is abo notable ax a site for Mies’ development of industrial building techniques in the service of mudernine spatial principles. Ulimanely, IfI"s mast enduring ngnificance is as a site foe the direct architectural capecuion of ucel-frame comutruction applied across scales From the individual sructural inember to che overall urban plan. The resulting campus and the 22 original structures completed by Mics berwoen 1939 and 1956 remain among the seminal works of 20uh-century archite tute and planning in the Westcen Hemi-  rc.  After the rise of Fascism in his native Germany, Mees resigned as director of the Rauhaus on its dosure by the Nazis. Already an architect and educator of international stature, Mics accepted the directorship of the School of Architecture at the Armour tnsrirure of ‘Technology and irnaugrated to Chicago in 1938. Wich this appointment, Mies abo accepted the commission (0 prepare plans for the institute's rapidly expanding campus.  Developed as a regional technical institute with funding trom the eponymous meatpacking fortune, the Armour Insitute of ‘Technology was housed on Chicago's near south side, On its merger with the Lewis Inseinute in 1940, che institution was renamed the Minas Institute of Technology, and its mission  wo indude the creation of a world-class technical inatitate for the American Midwest comparable with those on dhe Fast and West Coasts.  Mies’ preliminary scheme for the smaller campus (1959) ex- hsbits a set of principles thar would continue to inform all work done on the site. First was the erature af the existing Chicago grid and its huikding fabric. beaving a blank slate for develop- tiene. Second was the organization of a series of prismatic rectan- gular volumes sliding past one another in a series of local cross- axial compositions, resulting in a continuous flow of extenor space. Third was the use of industrialized building components,  including stccl framing and Large glass panels ott 4 monumental ncale. Fourth was the introduction of a thin carpet of landscape dotted with occamunal plantings as a compensatory residue from, the process of uiban erasure,  Mics’ Rnal plans for the larger campus as partially imple- memed (1940) employ a 24-by-24-fuot planning module a3 an organizing clement for the entire ste. The 24-foot dimension was selected for its econamy and utility as a semuctural spanning dimension in sieel-frame construction as well as its flexibiliry as an intcrior-planning dimension for classrooms, offices, and Labs. This modular dimension system related interne and exteriog spaces and erured the integration of individual building com- Ponenss, such as colimns and beams, with che overall planning stracezy of the campus,  The first building completed on the campus, the Minerals and Metals Research Ruilding (1942 43}, revealed Mics’ interest in the arncubstion of a language of building construction hased on the expression of the structural steel [same, The precise rele. tion of steel Cohumn, fireproofing, representational steel mullinn, brick panels, and glass custaiet wall posed a series of architecuna and techoical questions that Mics and architects of the Second Chicago School would work 10 anivulate and sulve for three decades. Subsequent work for the unecalized Library and Admin- istration Buulding Project (1944) extended this research to Mies’ ongoing interest in long-span spaces. These first owo projects developed the palette of regularty dimensioned steel-frame build- ings thac would inform the Institute Buildings (1945) as well as the exceptionally dimensoned long-span srracnires that would be conasmmated with che completion of Mics’ master- piece. Crown Hall (1950-56), designated a National Historic Landmark in 2001.  Crown Hall was conceived as a single interior volume com- pletely enchwed by glax and devoid of any interior structural tmembers. As an expecssion of direct construcuon, the clarity of its spatial volume and subdery of ite structural system reinforce each other to produce the site's single most powerful architec- tonic statersent and one of Mics’ most important works. In a series of significant deviations trom the majacity of buildings oo the campus, Crown Hall was developed as 2 hierarchically important exception to, as well as an ultimate reinforcement of, Mies’ overall strategy for the campus and has been considered hes most valued commisson ar IE] 
Crown Hall (1956), [inots Institute of Technutogy © Gora Builings com  Intended as both an architectural and a pedagogical ct, the clear-span space of Crown Hall served as both a site fur and a subject of Mics’ educational program at TT, Uitimacely. the IT curriculum itself became canonical as a reductive and systemic, appicauon of Muesian pnaciples of the building art appbed within a rigorous system of architectural educanon. This educa- tional monde would become world renowned as generations of architects were waned under Miesian primiples and dissemi nated those heliefs rhrough their buildings, wrinngs, and teach- ings.  One of ewo Bauhaus faculty members co enugrate with Mies to form the iniriat faculty ar (IT. Ludwig Hilbersimer (1885- 1967) was an influential modemis planer and theoretican in his own right before coming to the United States. Hilbersciener’s eatlice urban projects and writings teveal bis commitment to modernist principles of urban planning that can alo be found an Mics’ work at the I) Campus. The influence of Mies’ aasuci- ate can be seen in a number ul planning deuswns taken on the campus, including the reliance on decreasing the density of building fabru: and the use of landscape elements asa continuous horizontal carpet of urban ground, Although Hilberscimer had no formal role in the planning of IIT, his proximicy to the Process is best evidenced by the resonance of the IF] campus  plin with the rewlts uf his subsequent collaboration with Mies for Lafayette Park (1956) in Dotrow and other later works, An umponant contributor to the IT campus, Alfred Caldwell (1903-98) was responsible for the design and planting of the campus Landscape. Caldwell’s thin carpet of horizontal vegeta non, although only partially implemented, constructed the site’s ground plane as an clement af sparial and material continuity. Caldwell, also an carly member of the ITT faculty. employed a regional palerte af Landscape plantings as a counterpaint to the essentially placeless abstraction of Micsian space and industrial teed building cantraction ac the ITT campus. Cuartes Warpuris  Ser sho Chicago (IL), United States: Hilberseimer, Ludwig (Uaited States, Germany); Mics van der Roe, Ludwig (Ger- many)  Further Reading  Dioner. Denit, Alfred Caldrortl: The Lif and Work ofa Preinie Schon! Landscape Archoest, Ralimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins Univenivy Pres, 1997  Frampton. Kenacth, Masern Architecture A Critical Hovwry,  London: Thames and Hudsan, and New York: Oxford  University Prew, 1980; 3rd aviaon, Loder. Thasnes and Hudson, 1992  Hays, Ko Michael, Maderroo ana the Post Humanut Subject: The Archisecture of Hanne Meyer and Ladwig Halberseimer, Cambriclgr, Massachaseers: MIT Prea, 1992  Lamben, Phyllis (edime}, Mus in Averrica, Momtecal: ( anadian Contec for Architecture, 2001  Menins, Dethef (editoe). Thy Prrencr af’ Mia, New Yak Princemo Architeccural Mrea, 1994  Neumeyes. Frits, Mis nan der Rohe Das bunstlor Warr, Berm: Saedler, 1986; at The Arthas Word: Mss inte der Rube om the Building Are, Carnbtnlge, Massachusere: MU Brew, 1991;  Pomeet, Richard, David Spacth. and Kevin Harnngeon. fv thy Shadow af Miow Ludarig Hilberrmey, Archtevt, Exhacater, and Urban Planner, Chicago: An Institute af Chicago, 1984  Schule, Frans, Mees ou dee Robe: A Criewal Bregraphy. Chicago University of Chicago Press, 1985  Schulze. Franz (editor), Mier nen der Rohe: Critival Fup, New York: Museum of Modern Ar, 1989  Spacth, David, Mus sax der Robe, Now York: Rrzols, and Landon: Architectural Press. 1985  IMPERIAL HOTEL  Designed by Frank Lloyd Wright. completed 1922 Tokyo, Japan  The Imperial Hotel, located in Vokyn, Japan, was designed by Frank Lloyd Wright between 1916 and 1922. Wright's interest in Asian arts is genetally traced ww the 1890s, when he sae ant authentic Japancse pavilion on display at the World's Colum- bian Exposition of 1893 in Chicago. In 1905 Wright made the Girs¢ of several trips vo Japan w collect Japanese wouduut prints and study Japanese architecture. On his return to the United Seares, he displayed his collection and used his experience with Japanese architecture to obtain conimissions in the Far East. Although the events surrounding Wright's seceipr of rhe Impe- nal Hotel commission are unctear, his background and his inter- ext in Japanese art made him a highly suitable candidate for the job. The Imperial Hurel ecadily displays Japancse principles of architecture. and it serves as one of the more prominent cramples of Wright's work abroad.  On recewing the commision [rent 2 goverming board of db rectors, Worght was instructed to replace the old, dilapatared. uaduional, wood-[ramed Imperial Horel with a new, larger structure made of brick and stone. In plan. Waght's suceure formed an H with two crossbars in which he placed the public facilities. Vhese facilities included the hobby. dining room, the- ater, banquet ruoms, garden, tea balcony, bounge, shops, post office, and the Peacock Room. which was the centerpiece of the design. Along the sides of the H. Wright designed three levels of individual rooms, cach containing built-in furninure and a balcony, On the exterior. the balconies created a dynamic yet rhythmic facade tw hide the building's full seven-story beight. Wright intended the facade to be low in profile but grand in decoration, which he believed fit with traditional principle of Japanese architecture. In terms uf decoration, Wright contrasted beick, bis primary building matenl, yoth a biva stone called ope. a highly porous and casily carved material. (pe was native to Japan, and Weight’s use of the matermal tied the design of the hotel to ots nacural context. The stone's color, canging from gray-green to a light umber. also created a polychromanc eftect  on both the caterioe and the interior of the structure and helped to energize the design.  Because Wright was acutely aware of the frequency of carth- quakes in Japan, he accounted tir this possibilicy en his scructural scheme. Traditionally, Japanese architecture was timber framed and therefore easily reparable after a narural disaster. Wright, however. intended to work in stone, and he supported the addi- tional weight of the stone by placing his building on a series of preformed-concrete dabs. Underneath, the abs rewed on thin conciete piles that were driven to a depeh of cight feet through a layer of mud and placed at two-out intcevals throughout the foundation arcu. Wright reaoned that the piles would permit the slabs to float on the mud, allowing the mud to cushion the building during an earthquake. The freyucticy of che pins and the flexibility of the slahs would help the building absorb carth- quake wemors in a temile manner instead of breaking against competing forces.  Although this unique structural syzem accounted for the difference in weight between stone and timber, it alo necessi- tated that Weight desgn a lighter-chan-average masonry build- ing re rest on the piles. To this end, he carved away at the solidity of his stone walls. cresting an interior of interpenetrating voids where different ceiling heights and wall placements defined cach ranm. This idea appeared best in the public moma where space Meawed frum rooms ta rovm in all three dimensions, Al- though cach coon was a separate arca, it was easy to walk from the lounge ea the dining coam to the tea bakany. In total, Woybe's design embudied what be eermed ‘organic architec- cure,” which meant not only that space coatimued froas part to part but chat the deugn embodied narural principles and was sve ngid or forced in any manner. This fluidity in the spatial organization eccalled the writings of Chinese philosopher Lao- {'73, who argued thar the realiry of the building was the space within. Ulumately, the experience of the design made the build- Ing seem even more Asian in its conception,  Kallowing his well-established principle of a entally designed environment, Wright included pattems for the decorations, fur- niture, sculpture, and landscape space in his architectural scheme. I lis decorative motifs were linear and recalled carlicr Japanese designs thruuyh theit common emphasis an simplicity. Wright wrote vatensively on uhe Asian principles of balance in design, and he praised the Japanese for knowing how to use simple forms to canvey a basic theme without too much detail. As Wright argued, Japancse design encouraged cach linc to work coward the whole but did not include any line that was cxtra- acous. His decoranve matifs for the Imperial Hotel were there- tore simple, without overwrought detail, and were gencrally based on pure geomeine torms. The dining room chairs. for example, used hexagons for rhe primary morif, whereas the ceil- ings and walls were decorated with inset squares, Wright used Rrametric cucours for his hight fixtures to create a play of shadows over tepetitive bun moving farms. In the Peacock Room, his ceiling had multiple planes thar intersected according to an eauly visible grometric pattern. He even designed railings, frames, and floor anording to these themes such that the entire enviroa- arent was subjected tu his overall design scheme.  [n 1923, shortly after the complenan af the Imperial HHorel. Vokyo experienced an carthquake of epic proportions. Although the Kanto quake feveled most of Tokyo's buildings, the Impenal Hotel sustained only minos damage, 2 substantial feat that pro- 
he Boon  amok  Unpenial Rated, ‘Tokyo (1922; © The Frank Ueyd Wrpht Founskarain  Pelled ic to legendary status. Wright cook immense pride in the success of his design, and his accomplishment broughe him back to the forefrone af the archwectural penfession. In subsequent years, the brvperial Hored received several additions, all of which ignored the character of the building, and new plumbing and electrical mechanics diced through Wright's original scheme. By she 1960s, the Imperial Hotel had been further damaged by the induserial armosphere of Tokyo and by a siruceural imbalance cawed by the installation of Vokyo's subway syeem. In 1967, when skyrocketing fand values and a deureasing dientele made the area occupied by the Imperial Hotel extremely valuable, the hotel was demolished. despite nuassive protest. Perhaps parely because of Wright's fame, the Imperial Hotel sull occupies an important place in the architectural history of Japan, and its survival of the Kanto carthquake will not soon be forgotten. Carmine W. Zire  See aie Hotel; Toyko, Japan: Wright, Frank Lloyd (United States) Farther Reading  For a good hicory af Wight's emrk in Japan, see Kourks, Winghe's version of the history af the Imperial Hetel can be found an Wright and Futagawa Two concise and informarive bingraphies of Waghe  are Gill, a more acesible version, and Twombly, which presents an  academic approach to Wright's Ide. An analvus of the desiga can be  found in Alofsen.  Ablolin, Anthuny. Frank floyd Weraghr The font Years, 1910-1922, Chicago: Uarvernty of Chicago Press, 1994  Burk. Melanse tedior), Friuk Ldeyd Wright 1 bafty Views of Japan: The 1905 Photo Albom, San Fraocico: Pomegranate Artbooks. 1966  Bars, Ken, and Lynn Nowck. Frank Lloyd Wright: A Film by Kew Buras and Lyna Novek ividcorcceding), Washington, D.C. PRA 1908  Futagawa, Yukua tedstor), The taperial Hotel Tokyo. japan. 1915-  Tokyo: A.D.A. Edita, 1980  ths: A Life of Frank Lleyd Weighs, New  s 1987, London: Itancmann, 1988  Jaines, Cary, The tmpenal Hesel: bran £ loved Wraghe and the Archisectwre af Uraey, Rostland, Vermont: Turde, 1968; as Prent Loyd Winghe's Impenal Hetet, New York and Loodan: Dever, 1988  Kowha, Robert. Friend Lod Wraghe on Japan, Path Forest. Illinois: Praane School Press, 186  Levine, Neil, The Archisecturr of Frank Llayd Wright, Princeton, New Jeney: Primeton University Pree, 1996  Vind, Cala, The Jost Buckdings of Frank Lleyd Wright: Vanished Masterpiece, Landon: Thames and Hadson, 1996  Nucc, Kevin. Frank Llend Waghe and japan, The Rale of Tradivonsl Tapenne Art and Architecture in the Wark of Feank Loyd Wrghe,  London: Chapman and Hall, and New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1993  Twombly, Robert C., Frank tdayd Weighs: Hu Life und Hu Architecture, New Voth: Wiley, we  Wright. Frank Lloyd, Aw Ansebiograply, New York and London Langman’s Green, 1952  INDIA  Twentieth-ventury architecture in India is a product of diverse repeal practices and historical precedents. the country’s colo- pial legacy. and the policies adopted by the independent state aspirations as well as visions of the collective — nation, i and religious affiliation —have also left chert imprints on this macrix. The proliferation of stylistic labels in ercent discus sions of 2Och-cenrury architecture in India- Indo-Dece, Anglo-Indian modem, neovernacular, and Banis- Garhic- some invoked more humorously than athen, indicate not only the multiple agencies at work hut also a problem of description More specifically, this ix a cunceptual problem of situating La- dian architecture in the matrix of uw global culture and the century-long effort to tease out what is “Indian,” Far from being a monolithic construct, the mulafarious n0- fom of Indian identity ahiftcd numerous times during the cen- wry. Certain sssumptions, however, underlay all disussions of archinccture that modernity had no onginary mors in India and was of European import. implying, that Modem architecture in Undia was derivative; that any nution af Indian architecture must retain connection to the tradinional archirecnire of the country, in contrass to Euro-American modernism. which claimed a break with che past; and finally thar che task of Indian archieccts was to develop a regional vocabulary. The lirst assumption was based ona British colonial discourse thar viewed Indian cubrure as static and maintained that any change must be duc to loreiy influence. Although Indian narionaliwts argued thac change could be home wrought. most viewed groundedness in a pec-British tradition a necessary condition for 4 modern (ndian iden Those, such as Jawaharlal Nehru, India’s first prime mini who deviated from this norm, ensured that Le Corbusict’s tod emit design of Chandigarh would be treated as a watershed in Indian architecture. he changing weulugy of aate patronage in independent lodia trom a modern international outlouk after independence to a modem valorizaven of Indian uadition since the f980s has invited a nagrative of Indian architecuure that constructs the larter as a sign of independence and onginary acts. A small coterie of Indian architects who are central to chis lace-20th-century development have ensured through wrinngs and interviews that their work is understood within frames of reference set by themselves, most imporant, that these acts of tradition arc read back as universal gomures (and not simply as application of universal principles to a local vocabulary creating variation on a modernist theme). In a Isrger perspective, this ability wo determine the narrative af contemporary architecture is a significant change from the beginning of the century, when Indian architects operated with limited power under colonial rule,  Preindependence Architecture  Ars che beginning of the century, the major cities showcased the work of the reigning Anglo-Indian firms. such as Martin and  Co. in Caluutta, Wiliam A. Chamber and Co., Hall and Batley in Mumbai (then Bombay). and Jackson and Barker in Chennai {then Madras). The estabtshment of architectural education Programs (the J.J. School of Arcs in Mumbai augmented its five-year diploma in 1913) as well as che formation of the Indian lnscinute of Architects in 1929 increasingly formalized profes- sonal practice, By the 1920s, more and more Indian architects wete securing commintons, and architectural Firms, such as Mas. ter, Sathe, Bhuta, and Maherwanjce Bana and Co. in Murnbai, enjoyed the pattonage of wealthy Indian industealist,  In ceems of architectural design, some important changes were taking plice. Designer in urlun areas were responding to pew technology, such us edevtrical lighting, elevators, and the widespread use of indoat plumbing and to changing conceppont of privacy and gender structure an both European and Indian tesidemes. The threc-bay bungaluw plans with a hall in che center and two rows of reoms on cither ude and sts counterpan. the urban courtyard house, were heing replaced by a Larger vari- cty of howe plans that used bay windows, oblong sours. and rounded verandas. Designers clearly intended ro distinguish be- tween the use of rooms and wed cordon for separating func- tons and people. The practice of aggregating spaces in terms of use and incarpnearing an clabnrate network of paruages had al- teady transformed the plans of instiqutions and office buiklings, Now a classical tecacment of the eatcrior, the hallmark of respect: abiliey in the early [9th century, and the official nen-Gathic and lude-Suracen, were supplemented with 4 number uf stylist, varutions inspired by Art Devo and inquiry into Indian architcc- tural vocabulary. “Ihe New India Asnurance Building (1935) in Mumbai, a reinlorced-woucrete sructure by Master, Sathe, Ahura. was a symbol of modem ourtook in business adopted by the fata Company. a feading Indian industrial house. Lr was meant (0 be distinguished trom its contemporaries. such as the Statesman House (£931) in Calourva by Sudlew, Ballardie, and ‘Thomas and the late 1920s project: for the Indian ‘Tobacco Company on Chowringhec Road by Martin and Co. The batter had conventional partis and arrempted tm fir inte the onlonial nevclassival surtuundings. In contrat, the Assurance Building had an open plan, chen synonymous with business cificiency, and a forced-air cooling system that was complemented by ade- quate natural ventilation as a contingency plan.  The bold vertical demenu ol clus six-story facade compeual with a new building type, the movie theater, which also used this Art Deva trearment to emphasize a novel idencity. Buildings such as the Eros Canema in Mumbai, designed by Solrabji K Bhedwar in the 1930s, also cropped up in Calcutta, Cheonas, Parna. and other cities. Located at prominent strcer locations with highly illuminated facades, theaters were designed ww con- vey the fantasy world of movies. The entrance foyer. bar and lounge, and cweeping staircases were dressed in marble and adorned with murals, etched glass, and chandelien, These public spaces were anc of the few places the middle class could celebrate dlegant life. For a section of the growing middle class, at Jeass, there was a domestic counterpart ta die Modern approach to denign exemplified by the Awurance Buikling and the cineman. The architects af numerous residential projects between the 1930s and 1950s resorted to Huid lines in designing the building cavelope. This acsthetw agreed with the aced to pravide contin- vous shade over windews and with the building codes thar stapu- led uniform setbacks 10 render coherence to the street view 
aod yet allowed individual cesidences te projeut modern aspira- tions of the nuckeat Families for which they were designed. Apart ment in the Back Bay in Mumbai and detached residences in Ballygunge in Cakutta are dawis examples af the era. Although chs kind af domestic an hutectuze has become inse:  parable from tndian middle-class respectabality, tv cuntempotary atchitects. such as Sns Chandra Chatterjee (1873-1966), their looks dad noe denote Indanness. He advocated “an internal ar fangenicnt sutable for mudern lite” but a decorative program directly derived from ancient Indian architecture. Partern books. such as AV. Iyer’s fhe dndian Architecture (1926), recom- mended “a proper national siyie" by adapting colonel bunlding. types to reflect classical Indian nocinns at beaury, This was con- trary to 19th-century residential designs for the Indian middle class in which a traditional aare: was augmented by a “modern” neacasical facade, Hf in the 19th ceaniry the inner space of domestic life was wonsidered the repuvitury of Indian values, that identity was now to be translated in a clearly recognizable vocabulary on the public face. OF course, Chatterjee’s ideas were nut restricted w readenudl design alone; his suggestions fur banks and educational invicurions demonstrated the atempt to define a “Greater Indian Order” by asimilating elements from different regions and ctas uf India’s ancient architeyture. Chat-  Undira Gandhi Tnveinste fot Desrtopmenc, designed be Unam Jains nat Photo courtes: Uttam fain © Aga Khun Award tor Architecture  ter}ec's vision documented in the “Draft Manifesto for the Pro- posed All-India League of Indian Architecture” found a number of prominent suppurters but was not persuasive enough to deter- mine the nastative of Indian architecture.  The desire 10 define a national language of architecture appeo- priate for the 20th century came out of the swwadeahi movement. Sustdeds (national), a cesponse to British cconomic and culeural domination, meant the reyecuon of foreign goods and support for native industries. This sosdesht quest in the arts was grounded in a “new Orientalism” chat found enduring aesthetic menit in India’s ancient (mainly “Hindu”) tradition and believed in a revival of chat tradition ar the necessary basis for a modern Indian ar as oppased to its 19tb-century Britssh Orientalist view that belistled this tradition. The msadedy' spirit in architecture. however, took various forms. from a championing of the local vernacular to pan-Asianism. The Japanese victory ins the Russian-Japanese War (1905) injected a confidence in Asian power and a dease for a pan-Asian solidarity in the ans, A re- markable cdebration of such a pan-Asian aesthetic. was the eesi- dent of Nobel laureate poct and novelist Rabindranath Tagore in Santiniketan, Bengal.  Tagore established a school (tater to become Viswa Bharati Unaversity) at Santiniketan with the objective of providing an education thar would be nurtured in an idyllic narural surround- ing reminiscent of the ancient forests (tapasun) where the sages of the Vedas were wid tn have resided. [Te rejected the unimagi- native regimen of the British school eyvrem and ita urhan moor: ingy in Calcustes, OF the many residences thar were designed for Tagore by Surendranath Kar with che aid of Nandalal Bose and the poet's son Rathindranath Vagore, the largest was named “Udayan” (lacing the rising sun). The multilevel design af the huilding (1919-28) was developed in several phases. and its unusnal qualirics resided sn the attempt to break our of the confines of the ram ava anit of habitation. {ts staggered rerraces teached our ro “connect with nature” from various vantage points, and in eclectic decorative program was intended to create different mounds in different spacca and owed auch w Japanese woud interion. ‘The richnew of the decoration was also hierarchi- cally layered, with devorative features disappearing at the top- most level, where the empty form alone would provide repose. The ideas cabeukled un the hause plan appear w have stepped out of the gender hierarchies of the 19rh-century Calcunia man- son that he grew up in (with ins separation beoween the inner aparrments tor women and vuter apartments for men). but the necessity of a laboring pupulanon m seme the master house had nor disappeared. A sulntantial single-story building, huusing kitchen, storage, and servants’ quarters, was constrain as 4 separate attached structure. Although aot conventionally “reviv- alist.” Udayan was ax much a symbal of the poct’s penunality a it was af the emergent nations,  Vhe use of Indian referents in such well-koown buildings was invariably perceived as a political statement in light of the planning peocess of New Delhi (1911-31). The neoharoquc pln of New Delhi and the deuign of the capital buildings by Edwin [uryens and Herbert Baker were meant to impress Beitish resolution to cule India despite Indian nationalist agication. The new capital. with its insiwent differentiation along lines of race. clas, and occupation, was m enshrine in stone the relation be- tween the rulers and the culed,  Postindependence Practices  The independent state inherited the impressive monuments of New Delbi as well ax an inadequate physical infrastructure, 4 weak cuonomic and industrial base, and a massive houssng shott- age. The latter was exanerbated by the influx of refugees from Pakistan following the bloody partnion of the country as the cost of independence. Primary industeses, power generatwn, acif-sufficiency in food grains, and housing were national privsi- ties, As a socialist democracy. the state shouldered the respon bility of much of the building activity thac took pluie in the formal sector. The state's intervention had a profound influence over architectural expresion throughout the rest of the century  Instead of making Indian maeils svondary to the building program, as in the case of Luryens’s deugn, aries after inde pendence, at the behest of politnians, made them central to thet scheme. If the overscaled enwrance to the Vigyan Bhavan (1955) tn New Delhi by RI. Geblote demonstrated the posubibry of manipulating ancient formal cements while keeping die cord of historical assocranon intact, the abundant decorations in the Vidhana Soudha (1952-57) in Bangalore wrove to assert the vaabiliy of the tradinonal building crate in India. The architects of Mysore’s Public Works Deparment sought our erperts in the decorative arcs of the South and constructed a building shin- ning new material, such as ghus and steed. The later stood opposite the neucluaical High Court (1865) and teplicated its plan and section in spirit, A deverative program paying tribute to Kannada culture aforned the building's profit: and sunuctural members. ‘Ihe proud originator of this idea, Kengal Hanu smuanthiah, the chief minister of Mysore (present-day Karnataka}, is memotialued in front of the burlding, sanding wal « mudd of the building in che palm of bis hand. The building program. the sting. and rhe sculprure were telling of identicy and power at stake in the newly formed nation-state. Viewed Lrom one angle, Hanumanthiah's conception of the building offered less renstance to the British colonial legacy chan it did to the modern- ist archiecrural vision thar wax unfolding contempurancuusly in Chandigarh, From another peapecave. it demonstrated that the formal cunception was often not the most important plat- form for capressing independence. rather, it wan the question of who had the power to make decisions regarding mayor financial and cultural investments,  ‘The niast celebrated example of state-sponsored conuructon was the planning of Chandigarh (1951-57), the capital of the new states of Punjab and Haryana. At che invitanon of Jawaharlal Nehru, the Department of Public Works appointed Le Corbu- sict and a team of consultants—Pierre Jeannerct, Jane Drew, and Maxwell Fry-- to design the city and several imporant buildings. The kargest commission af Le Corbusicr’s lite hecame an opportunity to explore his notions of a modem city and modern monuments. The spacious 1200 -by-800-meter city grid with its low-density built form was designed with an affluent car-owning citizen in mind and ignored lessons from contempo- rasy lodian urbanism. Taken tuyether. the Assembly Building, the Secretariat, and the High Court presented an array of formal possibilities of reinforced concrete in a contest that offered bril- Jiant sunshine and manual labor. Considered individually, cheit objecelike presence, the pragmatic concerns of users, and the weatherworn concrete expose the lapses in design consideration. Nehru had supposedly intended Chandigarh as shock therapy  for the nation—an expensive way fur exarcising the ghost of colomalism that continued te haunt the poles and politics in the region for years in came. Formal experiments in modernism, however, were not new in India. The Dining Hall (1947) of the Enecitute of SGence in Bangalore by Orso Koenigsherger. the New Sccretarian 1144 47) in Cakuna by Habib Rahman, the Shexthan House (1939, now demolished) in Ahmedabad by Atmaram Gajjar. and the Golconda (1946-48) in the Aurobindo Ashtam in Pondicherty by Antoni Raymond predated Chandi- garth, av did many others, Chandigash differed from these exam: ples in the objectives and the scale of undertaking and in the chansma of the archiect himuelf but most of all in che explicit idcolugy chat acwompaned e. Nebru had supported other ap: Prasches to archacctute as well, many of which were conspicu- ous in their “uradtuonal” referents. However, it was oot tradi- vanal forms but the social premise and cultural baggage chat accompanied the forms that he faund problematic. He was con- temporancoudy fighting logislacive battles eo keep in place his vision of a secular democracy that did nec discriminate on the hasis af caste, class, gender, or religion with rhe cucuse of tradi- tion. Although he did not determine (nor did any ane individ- tual) all the aspects of city plan os building design, Nehru envi toned Chandigarh av his political legacy—the danng m eaperiment with new idea and hix belief that a new democracy deserved a novel archstevuural form.  ‘The architectural imaging of Nehra’s vision of a modern, industsal nagon fuund several subscribers and continued well into the 1970s. Achyut P. Kanvinde’s design fur the Milk Pro- cesung Mant (1974) ar Mehuna relied an a heroic gesnute of turning the ordinary and mechanical functions of a factory into a thearnical onterplay of form and light. Few examples, however, were more telling of national architectural aspirations and limita- tons than the vommissiva for the Permanent Exhibition Com- plex foe the 1972 Trades Fair in New Delhi, The buidding de signs by Mahendra Raj, an archirect rammed structural engineer, and Raj Rewal were contemplated as sted space (ramen we span FR. and 44-meter modules unencumbered by supports, but ulti mately it was cunstnacted of reinforced concrete when the enat of sec} consmucuon proved prohibuive.  The more mundane cult af the concecte—a_ brick-tilled reintorced-concrete frame with a concrete flar-slab roof and can- crete ledges and shades used en masse in government housing propees and insticurions became the most common language of architevture across the country. Invariably disranguished into inconw groups —- higher, middic, and lower income—hundreds of housing projects for government employees and for sale at subsidized rates were laid down on gndded plans. Some of the privately sponsored residential projects. such as the Vara Group Housing (1978) in New Delhi, deviated from the previously mentioned mechanistic schemes. Designed by Charles Correa, Jashir Sawhney, and Ravindra Bhan. the project consisted off 160 double-story cow hause units (varying from 84 to 130 square meters) built on 3-by-15- meter modules The residential unics were Maggered in both plan and setion along sn internal land- scaped “sreet.” “The street acced as a “hurnidilying zone” canviv- ial for social interacnon, High-density low-ese housing and the vocabulary of courtyards. chowks istecets), and mohallas (pedes- trian alleys) became the mainstays of housing design in the 1980s. Ray Rewal's design tor the Asiad Village (1982) in New Delhi took this vocabulary 10. us extreme. ‘Whe Village, buile for 
the 1982 Asian Garues, comted of 700 unies that later became apartments fur high-income tenant. The unio were clustered in groupa of 12 tv AG units around a common space, with terraces toc outdoor living and sleeping, and gateways were formed by overhanging residential units that atiempied to render vanety tu the repetitive pattern.  At the other end of the suciocconomme scale, housing solu- tions met with glanng lmutanons. ‘Io meet the demand tor housing the poor. government development agencies promoted User-imitiative programs in “stes-and-services” projects, The cost of infrastructure — roads, water supply, wastewater drainage, and a small coilct—werc bore by the agency, and the construction of the individual dwelling waa left to the individual owner. The lategrated Urban Development project (1975) in Ahmedabad by Kirtee Shah, designed for flnad rcfugers, aceempred to provide dwelling units as well as opportunities far education and supple. mentary employment. The design, developed on the basis of atchitest-owner participanan, consisted of rwn-reiem units made of exposed brick and ruofed with asbestos cement sheets. The veranda and a shared courtyard worked 43 outdoor living/work space. The viability of these projects was circumvenced by their focanon away from ciues and employment opportututics, and ewo-thirds of the targeted oconamically disadvantaged popula- sion could noc even afford these subsidized projects, Conse quendy, migrants co the cities continued to swell the population of squarter serdemencs and slums.  Mos architece recognized chat the housing shortage was not a design problem bur required a drascic reconsidcrarion of basic issues of resource. employment, and social equity, Noneehetess, the problem of low-con housing continucd to be addressed by mont architects at a design: challenge—discovering lew-coet forms and low-cost vechnolugy that necemitated an inquiry inte vernacular building practices. In the ashrams at Sabarmau (1918) in Ahmedabad and at Sevagram (1930s) in Maharashtra, Mahatma Gandhi had wed tradiuona consruction tu demun- strate its viahiliry, and rhese became rouchstones for a gencration of posundependence architects. Uhe simple rectangular build- Ings at Sevagram were mud-on-umbet-traine constructions on stone foundation. Pitched timber roofs with niles. a few bamboo columns, spacious verandah, anc smal] fenestration covered with skated bamboo screens completed the ensemble.  Lausie Baker, an English emigrant tn India, inspired by Gan- dhi’s vision, built a large repertoire of buildings that eschewed contemporary design fads and were rooted in an appreciation of the resourceful vernacular architecture of Kerala. His deugn for the Center for Development Studies (1975) in Thiruvanatha- param, Kerals, was developed tn demonstrate responsible build- ing practices. A vorabulary of exposed local bricks for walls and scrcens, wood and concrete for suructural memben, and ceramic tiles for roufs was rendered in simple but clegant deuuls, Con- crete was used econgtnucally. substituted with reject clay tiles in she bower tension portion of slabs, The most lavishly detailed building was the guesthouse, where the brick jais (Lattice) screens were accompanied by carefully crafted woodwork.  Considerations of dimate and local building practices led Unam fain to explore a completely different vocabulary in Rajas- than chat was shaped in large measure by an allegiance to mod- emist principles. In the buildings of the Jodhpur University campus (1971), Jain used dressed yellow sandstone in lime mar- tas co give che buildings a rugged fect. {a the Faculty of Aro  and Sciences, stait-towers and vaids for cross lighting punctuated the double-loaded corridors of a conventional U-thaped plan. The load-bearing, glated inner wall was chaded by an outer wall to reduce heat foad and eender the building a sculprural quality. Jain’s Indira Gandhi Institute for Development in Mumbai (1987) asserts a similar relationship berwcen building and sce: this research complex with residences for staff and scholars coa- fesces around open courryards and green space.  Tt was the space-structure relatianship of vernacular traditions that most architects found useful Jor ther modern buildings Charles Cortea's design for the Gandhi Smarak Sangrahalaya (1957) in Ahmedabad exploited the versatility of the courtyard typology and included a concer for climate. human scale, and history. By the 1980s the critical acclaim of Correa‘s designs. the design of che Indian Institute of Management (1972) at Ahmedabad by Louis Kahn, and the campus designs thar fol- lowed (mich as the Indian Seatisusal Institute, 1985, in New Dethi by Anant Raje and the Indian Institute of Management, 1985, at Bangalore by Balkrishna Doshi) ensured not only a significant change in the design of the instituconal campus (compared tw the instiuute of Technology campuses in Kharag- pau, Kanpur, and New Delhi and scores of thar ilk) bur also the establishment of an Indian modera . Academic faciliues around 2 spacious courtyard or amphitheater. shaded networks of “streets,” daagonal axes af movement, broken sym- merries, and the hold geometry of locally quarned sunes of bricks vo a reinforced-concrete struceural system were the beit- manifs of these institutional designs, The austere aesthetics and the monumentaliry of these projects were snfrened in the experi- menu with typulugy in anuller academic compleres. The peefer- ence for 4 more intimate scale in designing institutional projects was related to the establishment in the 1980« of a number of agencats to study and votetee physical and cultural resources, These were small semiauconomous academic and research insti- tutes thar desired an architectural image in harmony with chang- ing concems about sustainability. ‘Whe Center for Dev Seudies (1987) in Pune by Christopher Beninger: che Inter- University Center of Astronomy and Astrophysics Center (1998) by Charles Correa; he Entrepreneurship Development Institute (19871 by Bimal Parcel and the Center for Environmental Fduca- gon (1990) by Neelkanth Chhaya and Kallol Joshi. both projects located in Ahmedabad; and the Visirnes Hostel (1990) at the Nehru Science Center in Bangalore by Chandravarkar and Thacker adapted a domestic scale that wus integrated with the landscape.  Repositioning Indian Identity  Une of the must innovative precedents chat integrated landsca and architecture was Balkrishna Doshi's studio and architectural foundauon Sangath (1980). The building consisted of rwo sets of parallel barrel-vaulted structures. partly subterranean and the totality integrated with a carcfully designed landscape. The vaults were made of cylindrical terra-cotca cites sandwiched berween thin ferro-cement shells. The external surface of the vauler was animated by a beat-reflecring waterproof covering of china mo- saic. Water channets between vaults carried rainwater to reflect- ing poo and the garden. Although the cooling effect of the form and materials was limited in the Ahmedabad summens, the  design and ideas presented through lyrical drawings and thumb sketches signaled a departure from the modernist vocabulary of {indian architects: here a concer tor typology, matenal, climate, and form was squarely kocated in the realm of India’s architec- tural wadition.  The centrality of “tradition” in a newly emerging aarrative was evident in two architectural exhibitions in 1986 ‘The fine, tiled “Vistara” (vita openings). was exhibited in Mumbai and was designed for the Festival of India tour abroad: the second. titked “Kham” (space/patne}, was organized by the Indira Gan dhi National Center for the Ans (IGNCA) in New Delhi Whereas the fine atiempied to locate contemporary architecture in the continuum vf India's architectural hixory, the second suggested multiscnsorial “acts” of space and commonalucs be- tween India's preindustrial architecture with those around the workt, Both emphasized the role of myths in atchitcuune and everyday Life (including myths of modernity and industriatea tion) and claimed an aesthetic universality that wax simultanc- ousty grounded in regional practices and tradition. These were professional designers’ attempts to designate acceptable sources and practices and to craft an Indian Modern style that claimed to have come to cerms with the past  The politi.al imate that supported these ideas wrestled with the recmergence of tradition as a political problem. Although tradition in the revival of Indian crafts and advertising tourist destinations was profitable and found an cager audicace among international courses and the Indian bourgenssic. the logic of tradition in the religious nativoalisms chat were artempung to tear apart the secular democracy nacded to be cuntronted. In demonstrating tinks between the great architecture of different eras and emphasiang their metaphysical dimensions. one could pass over the political ditliculties facing che architect when deal ing with rrowbled hiscorical legacies te-g. the recent ones of Brit- ish colonialism) aril overlook sociopolitical fractures in the con- temporary fabric of the country. Nut surprisingly. in the brief of the international design competition for the IGNCA complex (1986) in New Delhi, the overwhelming theme was ime of assim: dation. The Center, a cultural coruples of muscuns, perfor mance, and education faulitica, was intcnded to be a memorial to Indira Gandhi, who was assassinated in 1984 by Sikh milisanes demanding a separate homeland. The Center was to artwulate 2 unique all-encompassing “Indian worldview” (which in the brief passed as 2 "Hindu" worldview) to hunch Gandhi as one of the canonical figures of Indian nationalism equated with some of the mainstays of the nationalist movement in British India. Situated in the beast of Lutyens's New Delhy, this complex was to harmonize with the colonial surroundings. Ralph Lemer's winning entry, a Lutyenesque responte to the brief, was com mended for maintaining “a necessary connection with history.” Here historical connections necemarily resided on the surface,  Similarly. an investigation of folk architecture central to the fnew interest in tradition could only include queuions of form and beauty. In such 2 view, the “typical” Indian village and che historical architecture of the country were seen as the repository of 2 universal good, notwithstanding the caste, class, and gener dynamics that inhabit(ed) and influencted) these forms. Revaths and Vasanch Kamath’s design for the Tourist Village at Man- dawa (1986) in Rajasthan was conceived as sun-dried mud- brick-and-thatch structures replicating the anthropomorphic vil- lige forms of the Shekhawati region. The client. the raph of  Mandawa, was hard to convince —he wanted a pucet (masonry) construction for his invesoment, preferably ane that looked like a Canadian reson, The architects convinced him to adopt a regional mcabulary of mud architecture— "not only cheap bur aho the mou appropraic way, both dimatically and acsthen- cally.” le was a place for the international tourist looking for the Indian village expenence without the squaloe and inconvenience and one in which folk artaans and performers could market theer traditional skills. The architect here 1s nucanly the arbiter uf aste, but abo is taporible fur decoding and interpreting cultural memotics and rewwing traditional building practices tor- gotten by the Dubar-retucned focal masons. Uhe client's and the architeut’s aspirations were nut that different—both borrowing, distant images tu produce an object. an expenence for consump- sion. cach an their own way crafling a contemporary Indian identity with thei imaginings of a good life.  Cresuing an architecture romed in tradition when images from actona the workd are easily acvensibde through television and the Internet is a difficult proposition at best. In a country ins which most buildings are not designed by design professionals, many Indian architects have resorted to myths t0 distinguish their work frum that of dhe concraceor-builder and the truant muddle class comumer who apply anhuccural forms w resi- deaces and commercial compkercs as objects of desire culled from a global economy. For example, in narrating, the meaning literally underlying the design concept for the Bharat Diamond Baurse (1998) in Mumbai, Balkrishna Doshi spoke of spiritual tather than corporate revdlacons. The thiee-mullion-square- foot megacompler consists of nine rowers clad in mirrored glass lo- cated on a kindscaped hase of granite outcmp. The tightly se- cured walled-in comple was constracted with the aspiration to compete in the luctative global diamond muarker. Doshi. how: ever, imagined the racky sire as having mythical origins and claimed thar the complex is new the “moat ucted site in India” and a “true sanctuary.” Phis sort af ty ing romanticizes what was otherwise a blaandy commercial project amd might well forcbode 2 very different landwape in che 21st century.  Swart CHATTOPADHYAY  Charles Mark (India): Doshi, Balkrishaa (India): Enerepre- neurthip Development Institute, Ahmedabad, India; Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad; New Delhi, india Rewal, Raj (India)  Further Reading  Ashraf, Kari Khaled, and James Belhiarde intiteon), Ane Arriusevsere af Independence: The Making of Modern South Asia, New York Architectural League of New York. 1998  Bhatia, Gautam, Pangaby Haragur anal Other Memories of Archirecture, New Delhi and New York Pengum, 14  Bhan, Vikram, and Peter Scriver. Afier the Martens. Ahmedabad, tdaa: Mapin, 1990  COhanerive. Maly, “The Evolutioa of Contemporary Indian Architecture.” in Anvhitertures en Inde, edited bre Iean-Leuis Veret, Pans: Electa Mowiceur. 185  Frenam, Norma, Chandigarh, Berkeley: University of € alitornia Press, 1966  Fvenson, Norma, he indian Metropole A View towwends the West New Haven, Connecncut: Vale University Pres, 108% 
Grover, Sanuh, Biuddong beyond Borders Story of Camsemnpersry Indian Antitestuer, Now Delhi, National Book Trt Indes, 1995  Gatha-Thakurta. Tapan, The Miiaeng af os New “Indian” Are Arius, Aashena, and Nanomslom on Heagal, 6 (890-1920, Cambridge and New York: Cambridge Univeruty Pre. 1992  King Anthony, “Indu‘s Past in India’s Present Calsural Policy arnt Cultural Pracrice in Architecture atul Urban Design. 1960— 1900," in Perceptions of South Aca 's Veued Pase. odnied by Cathenne Filly Blanshard Asher andl bamas Ro Metcalf. New Delhi: Amencan Insecure of fadaan Sradees, 194  Lang. Jon 1. Madhavi Desai, and Miki Desai dnvérsecrane and Independence Uhe Search for ldrotity— india. 180 te PRO, Decthe atid New York: Oatord Universiey Press, 1497  Tillogsom. Giles Henry Rupert, The Tradsioe of faduin Archit ture. Connery. Controversy, and Change time 180, New Haven, Connasinan: Vale University Pres, 1989  INDIAN INSTITUTE OF MANAGEMENT  Designed by Louis Kahn, completed 1974 Ahmedabad, India  The lodian Institute of Management (1M) (1962-74) at Ahmedabad. Indra, remains among the major buikiing com- plexes designed by Louis Kahn in the latter part of his career. This insure took a number of sears w complete, and Kahn's drawings shaw a considerable change in design during construc: don. Ie i a significant project primaniy because it brings into focus many issucs that were of concern ta the architecs through ous bie career, such as che wse of light and shadow, solids and voids, geometry and composiuon, formal juatapusitions. integ- rity of building materials, monumencality, and a Fascination with rains. At the time it was designed, chis 65 acte campus was situated at the outskirts of the city. The insziture compensated for this Lack of an urban setting and conteat through its own monumen- tality. The main «hoot building forms the focus of the compos Livn and was inspired by medieval munusteries. As one enters the tree-lined parking arca, there 13 aut one entry but a number of entnes. Yet the visitor is unmediatcly drawn to the dugonal staircase of the main shoul building that leads ince the cenrral courtyard. which is now called the Louis Kahn Plaza and which forms che main quadrangle of the huilding. The institute com- prises this U-shaped main building, which houses the lasernoms and lecture halts in one wing, the administrative uffices in the other, and the library cannecring the nwo sides, The sin class: rooms or lecture rooms on one aide of the court are perfect cubes, but in contrat to the excetion, the intenor is an amphicheater-bke diagunal areangement. Fach classtoom and administrative block is a distiont entity and connected on onc sade deruugh a corridor thar has openings onto the central coun- yard. In between the Classrucms are spaces that pen tu the oursade. thus conunuously shilting the view between outside and inside. Both wings of the U-shaped main burding are unufied through the use of arcades with thick beick walls and arched openings. The wings are linked by the ltbrary building. which domunates the structural composition. The play of light ara shadow in the arcades, the use of thick beck walls, and the perfect geometry of forms all contribute to a sense of serenity ‘The second part ot the LIM campus comprises a cluster of tnangular buildings. which are the student dormitories chat  stand in cose proximity 10 the main building. Each block is four storics high with 20 individual rooms and triangular com- mon rooms that apen to the outside through huge circular oper ings. Kitchens and coilets are in the square tower attached to the long fave of the right-angled triingle. ‘This block, chen, com- pletes the equate. The voids berween the dormituties are exactly the same size as the dormitories themselves, and one sees an exploranon of reversibility of solids and yoids an this project along with that of light and macer. ‘The lower Aoors serve as mecting places in keeping with Kahn's idea of unchoreographed yet interactive spaces chat are present throughout the campus and thar ia his opmion shape where education occurs. The dor- mitones are in fact interspersed with a series of courtyards, par- tially enclosed ground floors, and walkways. which ate read on the plan as ewentially a grid. Is is the diagonal movement thar changes conunuuusly from closed to semiclosed to open and the rapid transigons from light m shade that make this place espe- cially compelling as a hving and learning environment.  The main schoal budding and the dormitories were com- pleted first; A.D, Raje, an architect who worked in Kahn's Phila deiphia office initially and who was lefi in charge of the project, designed the faculty housing on the basis of Kahn's drawings The faculty housing possesses a simplicity thar 1s arriculared by Kahn's “composite onder,” a system of shallow bck arches and  tt  Indian Inatstute of Management, Ahmedabad. India, (1974) © GreatBarklingscom  concrete tie beams that he had specially designed for this project. Raje, wha had gone on to complete the propct, independents designed several other buildings on the campus: the dining halls. the Management Develupmens Center, the Mathai Center tor Innovanve Educanon, and the married studenis’ housing: some of these were later additions to the program. These all inlaw the vocabulary set forward by Kahn.  Mach has been written ahour the compustional aspect of the HM, which was laid out wah respect tw the wit direction, in particular the southwesterly breezes, Apparcudy, the architect, BW. Doshi, played an imponane cole in vonvincing Kahn to utdize such an arrangement, and this choice is reflected as the changes in Kahn's design seen in the carly and Lascs drawings. In addition, an artificial lake, regarded as important by Kahn. was not implemented. The dormitories were supposed tv be surrounded on both sides by a shallow Lake with bridgelike walks that would connect them. [his lake was abo meant ta separate the faculty housing [rom the student housing, but malarial mos- quitocs prompied worry. Nonetheless, the viewer can unagine the successful effect of the forms, especially the curved. satl-lke walls with huge circular openings. Although gcomeirically cach parr of the complex is quite distinct. the ie of brick creates 4 sense of unity and integration, Similasis. the repetitian of certain foemal elements, mich as arcadcs, unitics the parts, The repetitive character of the spatial framework enhances the diverury of func tions and geometry further. Arcades form the transient spaces and create the play of light and shadow. The connections be- tween various buildings define much of Kahn's architecture, At the saine ume, the individual expression of various busldings is muintained in strong formal terns,  Although Kahn drew setorences here to the classical European mecheval tradition af the monastery. onc can alse sce reflections of formal ideas. especially the seme of sale. composition, and geometry from the 12th-century royal tombs and palaces of Mandu and some Idamic monuments of Ahmedabad such as the Sarkhe} complex and mosques.  Aspaty Kanricam  See ako Abnecdabad, India; Doshi, Balkrishna (India); India;  Kaha, Louis (United States)  Andenon, Stanford, Public latin Tows | Kahn's Readings of Volume Zetu.” foursuel af Arcintectunal Edwasion, 4011 (Sepeember 1995)  Bathia, Gastam, “Anant Raje, dopo Kahn; After Kahr: the Indian Inwvitute of Management.” Spacio ¢ serie. 17466 tApal-June 190)  Brownlee, David B., and David G. De Long. fewit J Kahne in the Realm of Archiectere, New York: Rizzok, 1991  Devillers, Christian, “EL Tadian Institute of Management ad Abmnedabad, 1962-1974, di Loun |. Kaha,” Caurbelle, 540571 {Sepeember 1990)  Fusagawa, Yukio (editor). Indien fnstituse af Mamagemens Abrmcdabad. India, 1963-. Exerer Lubrary, Phillips Exeter Acaderny Exeter, New Hampshire, USA, 1972, Vakya: ADA. Fira, 1975; revised edition, 19°8  Giurgola, Romaldo, and Jaimini Mehra, Leucs f. Kadn, Boulder. Calorada: Wesrview Prem. 1975  James, Kathleen. “Lous Kahn's Indian Insitute of Management's Courtyard: Form versus Funcunn,” fearnal of Archscerrwral  Exbecarion, 4941 (September 1995)  Kaha, Lows 1, fhe Lowe 1 Kun Archer, Perenal Drawings, ~ walk, New York: Garland. 1987  Ranegna, 721 (Match 19KS¢ Gpeial hue uticd “Lous L kaha, WyOrs THT a's  Ronner, Uetng, Shatad flhaven, and Alessandin Vasclla, Lome 2 Auda: Complete Work, 1945. 74, Boulder, Colorado: Weview Prem, 1077  Sckder, Eduard b, ‘Formabon and the Palemicad Use of Haory: Thougho on the Recene Redlimovery of Revoluacnan Claas.” fhe Hartel An dite tnee Revie 1 (xpring 1980+  INSTITUTE FOR ARCHITECTURE AND URBAN STUDIES New York, New York  Peter Fasenman founded and diroured the Institute tor Aechitec- ture and Urban Srudics (AUS) as an intellecrtal and culroral bub in 1967, at atime of sucial unrest and an increase in monies for urban projects from governmencal and private sources, As stated in its charter, the instinute sought to bridge the univenity, the muscu, and architectural practice. Tt combined highly learned revearch with exhibitions and intensely felt design. The urban ditection of the institute predominated from the begin- fing unl 1975, when financial sponsorship considerably slowed.  Eisenman established an office in New York City that was to Last tor two yeats with very lew participants, The first endeavor was a study of the Kingsbridge Heights section of the Bronx. Colin Rowe, the renowned cheorist and pracutioner of desiyn who had been Fisenman’s mentor at Cambridge University, broughe three of bis graduate stadents from Cornell University: Stephen Potters, Michael Sclowarting, and Jonathan Swouman. Rowe also recnuired William Files, another one of his students Gor the University of ‘Vexas, to work with him ar the JAUS. The students conducted many studies from un-site surveys of the rapography, infrastructure, and building candinons in the Kingsbridge vicinity before marrying these observations with Row.'s figure and ground ideas. Rowe gave lecture and supervi- ston every fortnight, traveling ltom Cornell. Nothing was imple- mented by the city planning authorities, hue the study was part of the New York City Master Ilan, and the exercise was woethy for its site investigations and design variations.  The major urban project to come out of the institute was a bouk, On Stren (1978), edited by Stanford Anderson. a profes- sor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and a fellow ar the insrirute. Anderson and Flhs coduected the initial tesearch and assembled macerials trom the analytic phase of the study. which was supported by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). The srect had become the micro- cosmic element of public space. Much of the public life in prein- dustrial days had become interiorized, and Andenon, Ellis, and the rest uf the insutute explained this uaruaetion and the processes of communication befure and at the ame of publication of On Streets, Anderson and Filis's cuneribution war as beaden and Panicipants in many of the wudies in On Sercers; Anderson abo assumed editorial responsibility fer authors’ producaun of their committed essays. Thice uf the essays to come out of thes propect included Andetson’s explorations af use types and their locations in cities such as Paris. Savannah, Geonga, and north Boston; 
Anthony Vidles's account of uopian communitics and the de- fonsive urbanism of revoluuonary Pans in the 19th century: and Kenneth Frampton’s study of generic streets that defined, desonbed, and critically analyzed building complercs (mainly residential and their communivauve potenuals for public and Private activities.  Another notable essay was a demonuzation projet —a study of Binghamton, New York, by a team of architects: Eisenman. Victor Calliandro, Thomas Schumacher, Judith Magel, Peter Wolf, and Vincent Moore. They closed off a residential street of townhouses with slightly taller buildings and made it 2 park street, with trees lining the way co a preceisting park. This was similar to the surrogate strect that the institute had planned with HUD in 1970, but by 1971 che federal agency withdrew its support. and the projected street design remained on paper in the On Streets, The book reflects the broad, multidisuplinary scope of the study: it was trambated into five languages and has been used as 2 primer for architecture and planning schools  Architectural education was 4 majot endeavue for the inati- ture. A program for undergraduates began in 1974, There were institute lecture series with many burgeoning and established architects from Earope and the United States speaking, whach was very inspirational to the student body. Before the inception of the education program. the institute found 3 new home on 40ch Street with ample cvom for leciures and exhibitions in a grand space in addition to offices and tmudins. Ar any given rime there could have been 12 #0 more chan 100 people in chis office  Nccording to Kenneth Framptnn, the mast important educa- tion program was called “Open Plan.” This was a nighttime extension school attended by aduls as well as uridergeaduares. Awarded with s $350,000 Nationul Endowment for the Hu- mmasutics grant obtamed by Fredcriche Tayloc. this scrics ad deessed a mixed audience who would tirclewsty come te the inati- ture after the workuay. Joan Copjec, whe cotered the instituse in 1977, took ower from Andrew MacNaus and Anthony Vidler, organizing the program and selecnng speakers. Another part of the education program was the high school program mun by Deborah Berke and Lawrence Kutnicki, in which youths were encouraged to enjoy the art of architecture.  The instiruce also made a valuable contnibution with its publi- carions, Opperman: and Skyline (the Laver was a design newspa- per edited by Mac Nair and then by Suzanne Stephens), and the caraloguc scrics. Fach of these publications retained a critical integrity and independence, more or lew free of political or per- wnal alignmens, Although the more auune at the institute car- tied forth —with criucal hindsight .- the lineage of theit modern- it forctunners. there were histaricists. mich as Robert A.M. Stern.  Oppositions attracted the best talents around, and as us name declares, it featured divergent views and divergent tps. The conuadictory nature of the material was managed by leading figures ac the institute. including Eisenman, Frampton, Mario Gandehonas. Vieler. Kurt Forster, Julia Bloomiield as managing editor, Joan Ockman as executive editor, and Diana Agrest ax a silent partner. Agrest was one of the few women who, from the instirure’s inception, was recognized in the male-caminated organization She was active in the education program and de- sign tuconals and alse joined her partner, Gandelsonas, in Iead- ing semiotics research. Frampton and Silvia Kolbowski, a con-  ceptual artist, cocdited the catalog series, which nos only accompanied exhibitions but, asin the catalog on che AT&T building by Philip Johnson, wmte biting critiques.  ‘The Last serious project to emanate from the instieute was ReVisions, Funded by Walter Chatham and orgenized by Joan Ockman, the group at fine hosted public events. In its second phare, an intense reading group met regularly and studied many of the great thinkers of their day. They severed Manfredo Tafuri, the Itahan Communist who had come to prominence with his Architecture and Utopia, in which he exposed the true underpin- nings of modern architecture a a capitalist pursuic. He opposed the operative criticism of Kenneth Frampton as Frampton op- posed his hardline Marxism.  ‘The disintegration of the insciture began around 1983, a) though it managed 10 cke cur an existence for a few more years under the leadership of Steven Peterion. a follower of Rowe, and Ed Sac, « former corporate CEQ), The demise of the instiute followed in the wake of Eiseaman’s depanure in order m build. Although he had designed buildings while at the institute. he wanted te open an office, It must be said chat most of the institute leaders and some students have stuck to the serious sociocultural values that emerged frum the institute in ube 1970s.  SUZANNE FRANK  Sev ala Agrem, Diana, and Mario Gandeisonas (Uniced States); AT&T Bailding, New York City; Eisenman, Peter (Unierd Senses); Frampton, Kenneth (United Santen); Tafuri, Manfredo (Italy)  Farther Reading  Andcrsan, Stanford (odivoc), Om Sireess, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Presa 1978  Evenman, Peer, ct al. “The City as an Arvitact.” Gesabetle, 35 (S9Thy  Feampion, Kenewth, Madera Arclatertusr: A Criswel Hisrery, London: Thane and Hudson, and New York: Oxford Univeruey Press, 19210; Sed edition, London: Thames and Viuduon, 1992; New York: Dhaines ond Hudson, 1997  Peampron, Kenseth {echtor), Mili Joburon. Procener: The Glas Heww, (949, and the ATAT Corporate Headquarters, 197R. New York: Inatstute for Archiregunte ard Urban Seadies, 1978  Hays. Michadl {editus), Opporitions Reader Selected Reastrags from a Journal for Ideas and Crancem in Architecture, 1973-1984, New York: Princeran Anchitevtutal Peowa, 1998  Amntitute For Architevture and Urban Seudies. New Unhen Sertlemenns, New York: Instirure for Archisecruse and Urban Studies. 197)  Inerarure for Architecture and Urban Studies and New York Stare Urhan Development Corporation, Another Chance for Hawang: Low- Rise Alternatives, Brewnsrille. Brooklyn, Fox Hells, Staten didamd. Now York: Muscum of Modern Art, 1974  Museum of Modern Ar. The New City: Archisecture and Urban Renewal, New York: Muscum of Modem An, 1967  Oxckman, Joan, *Revurrecting the Avant-Garde: The History and Program of Oppoutions.” in Amhitecrurepeoduction, cdived by Bearriz Colomina, New York: Princeton Architectural Press, ayaa  Resctada. Max, and Kenncth Frampton, Art and Architecrure, USSR. 19132, New York: Wittenbom, 1971  INSTITUTES AND ASSOCIATIONS  Architectural institutes and ausaciations played a fundamental tale throughout the 20th century in legitimizing archizecrare as  4 specialized practice and dcfining it as a profession. Formed a Rational and. secondarily, ax regional or urban onganizativns, architectural instituees and associations provided an arcoa for dialogue and informanon exchange by cheit members through the venues of meetings. conferences, competitions, exhibitions, and journals. Although the priorities diftered somewhat among counmries. the general goa: were to establich regularians for the Protection of architects and their clients, particularly through 2 uniform fee sructure: to gain public recognitsan and comolidate 3 market for their services: and 10 improve and standardize archi- vectural training, Professional associations validated the creden- tials of their members and provided them with collepal wupport.  ‘The profemioniizanon of many occupations initially o¢- curred during the 19th century in Western Europe as a fcature of che division of labor in industrial capitatiam. By the beguimung of che 20th century, distincuons between the activities of archi- texts, cnpincen, quanety surveyors. and contracwn had been established, and each proup had tormed separate professional or ude organizations. The divisions became more firmly adhered to over the course of the century as univensitees and technical schools developed distinct programs. further differentiating the practices and identitics of the various groups, With che increased separation of professional ticks chara teristic of democratic gov- ermanee, insticutcs hecame insrumental in negouaung legiala- ion and contracts with the guverning hodict of che political fegion in which they operacd. fn defining specific practices and values that consututed a proteysunal entity, insduutes and associations supported the process by which architects were tec- ugnized as the producers of specialized services, and the marker for chis aperuse was buth formulated and controlled.  Aschitectural organizations such as the Royal Lastirute of Brit ish Architects (RIBAI and the American Instimte of Architects (ALA) have been influential worldwide and have greatly conn uted ¢o the standardization and eespectahility of archirecrural practice. In countries rhar were under current or former colonial cule, the architectural profession was. nut surpraingly. domi nated by practitionen and ideas from the culing stare. For exam- ple, buth che Royal Architectural Institute of Canada (RAIC) and the Indian [astiture of Architects (ILA) were modeled on the practices and policies of the RIBA. In both instances, there were subsequent attempts within the profession tn consteuct a definitive national archavetural identity, and the instituics were instrumental in negotiating these issues. to Late 19ch-century Japan, British architects were favored over traditional Japanese builders for major public commissions because of their expertise in modern building practives, As a result, the British architec- tural profession had a significant impact on the formation and ideas of the Architectural Lostitute of Japan (AlJ). Here again. efforts to create a distinctly national Japanese} modem archivec- ture in the firse half of the 20th century produced + prufestiveal culture that attempted to adapt new building techniques and some British uylistic auribuces into Japanese institutions and culture,  Architectural institutes and sssociations concerned: then selves with the education of prospective members of theie profes- sion throughout the 20th century. The Architects’ Registranon Act of 1931 granted the RIBA control over architectural training, and entry into the profession in Britain, where the system of articled pupilage was the conventional means of obtaining archt- tectural education uncil che focus on office training in the 1950s.  "The Strstegs Study of the Profession, commissioned by the RIBA in 1995, determined that the most important task foe the fucure was in the realm of education—specifically, in developing the knowledge and skills of architects by linking education and prac- tice and encouraging inctrated specralzzation.  Prizes awarded by architectural mstitutcs. such as the gold medals of the RIBA. the AIA, and the Paris-based Union Inter- nationale des Architectes (UIA), cxemplify the ideal of the profession. Providing public recngnisina for bah the individual winner and the profession as 4 whole, the awards establish na- tonal and international standards. The institutes offering these presignous awards have 2 sigmficant effect un which architects heuome warld renowned and highly influential.  The casly architectueal institutes and assciauons were similar in form te gentlemen's dubs. Women, ethnic minontics, and the lower clases were umphuuly excluded from che training nec- essary lo pain acceptance into the profession, and the professional organizations were formed by and for cultured gentlemen archi- tects. Public universitics weee influential in opening the profes- sion to women and ethnic minonties, parncularly in North America, as the formal ccaining and accreditation helped individ- uals overcome the initial discrimination and obstacles ta working in mainstrcam offices and become accepted into the profession. Organizations such as the Finnish Architectura Astnciation and the Union Internauonale des Femasce Architectes (UIFA) have increased the visibility of women in particular connrica while protecting theie interests within the profession. Since the 1970s, same women’s archirectural erganizatinns have been involved in compiling revwionist histories, seclung tv inmlude gender issuc in the history of architecture.  As the respottubiiues of architects have changed, s0 tuo have the mandates of professional asweiations In theis early years, atchitectural instauics reprecited a unall number of pravution- ers working in the field. With the growth of large-scale corporate architectural Girns and ao increase in the authurity of peofes- sional organizations, instinures enjoyed a broad-based member- ship. However, substantial differences remain among vanous countries in terms of the role of architects and in their profes- monal associations. Although the CLA currently represents 98 counties that have some form of professional organization for architects, the issues that chese asaciarions are dealing wich are often vastly dissimilar. At the 1986 International Seminas of the Aga Khan Award for Architecture, which focused on architec. Vural education in the Idfamix world, the strengthening of profes sional asociations, along with the separation of architects and planters frum engineers, was suggested ats one part of a suduticn to the problems of the architectural profrssion in Muslim socic- pe. In contrast, the adminsteatkin of the AJA has recently at- tetnpted to restructure the wuaservative, well-established insti- tute into a flevible, democratic one that is responsive co the interests of the young and minority ashuteco for whom it has previously had lithe relevance. ‘The challenge for architecrural institutes in modernizing countries is to adapt the goals of profes- sional pracuce to crditional cultural values. whereas in postin: dustrial economies the difficulty for associations will be to main- tain their significance im an increasingly specialued profession with a divene range of practioner  SaRALL BASSET  Nee athe Aga Khan Award (1977-); Education amd Schools; Royal Insticure of British Architects 
Further Reading  The source mister! dealing wich archueceural insntutes anal sannct tions on che 20th century i for the muse part found in histones of pinicalar institute of asoation and in uamnution cepa. Mote of the publaanons ate oriented towards the formation and beginnings of prodeninal urganisatives, and Beitich and American enatitutes ate the mow widely discused in secondary sources, Brief mention of the satus of the atchieecrizal profeawin aid che Foemation of erganieatonn can afien be found in histones of architecture tur individual counties, andl thete are sewveal Carthy recent publiations shar addeces the presence of women in the profeuion.  Adams, Annmane, and Peta Vancred, Dniguing Women Gender and the Antatecural Profexen, Vorante: Unernity of Leroato Press, 2000  Aga Khao Awatd tit Aichucetute, Arctriectare Eddssation sa the Idamsc World, Simppore: Concept Modu, 1986  Goth, J. Alfred (edo, The Growth snd Wort af the Roped lasnruic of Bruish Archarce, 1814-1934, London: Sanwonr, 1934  Hawthome, Christupher, “Meet the New ALA (Same As the Old AIAD).” Architecture, 814 (20001  Kare, Barnngion, Te Deselepenens of che Arciasrceural Prefers ive Bnsare: A Seciologioal Sendy, London: Allen and Unwin, 1960  Kemal, Spero tediant), fhe Archune: Chapter: in she Hesory of the Prefimion, New York: Oxtord Unrvenity Pres, 197"  Swmmns, Geofftcy, Ontane Asociarion of Architect. A Contexniatl History, 1889 1989, Lorunte; Ontare Aven tation of Anhites ta, 1989  Summenon. John Newrnbam, The Arduievturel Auoviatian [H4~- 1947, Londen: Plrimles Books, 1947  Swominen-Kokkones. Renga. Thy Fringe of’ Profesiven: Women As Archive in Finland foam the IRN te the 1950, Holsinki- Muinsisnuncoyhidiaykeen Aikakaunkija, 199?  ‘Woods, Mary N.. Fram Craft to Profession: The Practice of Arthisecnare in Noseternth-Cousury America, Hothibey: University of Caktornia Press, 1999  (EXPOSITION INTERNATIONALE DES ARTS DECORATIEFS) INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION OF DECORATIVE ARTS, PARIS (1925)  Le Corbusier, whose Pavillon de Esprit Nouveau was a succes de wandale at the International Exhibition at Decorative Arts, an important exhibiuion hdd frum April chrough October 1925, dubbed it “the international ‘Marathon’ of che ars of the home fares des maisons].” here the madernistic was ptted against the modera, luxury goods against mass-produced commodities, hand-craftsmanship against the machine. the angular against the typical. The expasition gave its name to the Ant Devo style, a popular blend of motifs from Fauvism, Cubism, Fururism, the Ballets Russes, and African, Melanesian, and pre-Columbia art rendered decorative through the lens of a shematized dansicism, Although thar style characeerized the Pavilions des Prestige, gates, and gardens by such Beaus Arts archicevts as Lous Ronnie! (1856-1946), Charles Plumet (1861-1928), anal Pierre Parout (1879-1965). the exhibition also played hast te sume buildings that were truly new departures,  The organizers had ditected that all displays be “contined ww arucles of modern inspitauon and eal orrginality” and threat- ened to ban any work of a tradinonal nature. Here they trankly  acknowledged the cxample of the 1902 Exposition held in ‘Turin, which had been the showcase for the style thar preveded An Deco—An Nouveau. Another prnaple that guided che sponsors was the need to encourage artists and craltspersons to collaborate with manufacnirers as a means to make French dreurative art commercially competitive: here. they were raking up the challenge of che Deutscher Werkbund. However. the sotullary of tha principle—thar the “arts of the home” would thereby be made accesuble to peuple ocher than the wealthy — was pul scty much in evidence. (hua the Ambassade Francaise, the wontribuuon of members of the Societe des Arties Dévo- fateur. ane of the onginal sponsors of the exhibition. bad inte- ciors of sumptuous elegance furnished with unique pieces. Three of the rooms epitomized the Art Deco style, and even the others, by the more orthodox modern Pierre Chareau (1883-1950) and Frantz Jourdain (1847-1935), demonstrate the French disdain for che mechanistic visions of the Wetkbund and the Bauhaus, neither of which panicipated in the exhibition  Only a cew of French architects resinued the prevailing Ant Deces extravagance. Robert Mallce Stevens (1885 1945} used unadorned reinforced cuncrete tor his engagingly cubsstic Pavil- son of Tourism; canulevered horizontal planes and a strip win- dow emphasized its modctnity. The two-cler masters of the technical possibilities of concrete also employed it for their con- tnibutons. August Pertet (1874-1954) reworked the successful formula of Notre Dame du Raincy for bis brilliantly conceived theater, and Tony Garnier (1869-1948) provided for his native city of Lynne a pavilion that. except for an emblematic plaque aver the entrance, is reminiwent of the austere buildings he designed for the Cité Industrielle.  The most innovative structures, however, were to he found aspong the 21 foreign paviliuns haated along the banks of the Seine. If che majority were conservative and historicizing despite the putative requirement of mudetnity — thus Armando Beasin: (1879-1965) and Victor Horta (1861 - 1947) used Ulassical mo- in an unusual, quasi-Mannetise way for the Italian and Bel- gian kinsks—there nevertheless were a lew striking examples by members of a younger gencranion of the diverse currents swirling through progressive circles in 1925. The Austrian pavilion war multivalent, nex surprisingly. ac its chic designer, Josef Hoff mano (1470-1956), enksted wevrral architects prominent in Vi- enna, ineluding che German Peter Behrens (1868. 1940), at that time professor at the Viennese Accademy, who provided  faeted glared winter garden that reflected his post-World War | flina- Gon with cryvulline Expressionism. Hofmann, in conerast. erected a low wooden building clad with bulbous stucco mold- ings thar made chus section of the Austrian Pavilion resemble «ts French Ant Deco neighbors. Similarly divene in its formal vocabulary, though representing very different: contemporary stylistic currents, was the Dutch Pavilion by J. F. Staal (1879- 1940}, a member of the Amaterdam School. Conmructed of brick. favored in the Netherlands though an anomaly at this exposition, one facade displayed the inegular curves, nautical sonography, and Indonesian references characteristic of Amster- dam School practice, and the other showed the willingness of that group to assimilatr some of the formal inventions of its tival, De Sujl. The Danish Pavihon, by Kay Fisker (1893-1965), was also of brick. but its prismatic simplicity looked ahead to Scandinavia'’s pragmatic interpretation of modernism,  The most avant-garde af the foreign pavilions was by Kon: stantin Mefnikew (1890-1974), who specifically emphanited the ephemeral and didactic nature of such a building type. Erected in timber by bacal carpentcn, hiy pavilion’s ced and white frame supported large glass walls and created a lattnework tower of ‘Consrructivist origin that bore lange Russian character that spelled “USSR.” An extemal stair, open tu the sky under sloping intersecting beams that cartied the hammer and sickle, sined diagonally through che enclosed spaces: the parallelogram of the plan with its dynamic lines and planes approximated a Suprema. tit painting by Kaamir Malevich (1878-1935). Inside was a replica af a workerv club, with s folding display unit and speak- crs rostrur of metal and a reading table and semicin ular wooden chaits by Aleksandr Rodchenko (1491 - 1956).  Comparable in its daring contempourancity was the Pavillon de Esprit Nouveau, which w offended the suthuritics that orig anally it was hidden behind a tall fence. Named after Le Corbu- sict's polenucal journal. ic was 2 full-scale mockup of onc unit of the wnmendle villas that formed part of the City tor Three Milbon Inhabitants (1922) and represented the ideal maisonette thar continued to be che basis fur most of his housing projects. Attached was a curved enclosure where such Utopian projects as the Voism Plan for Paris were displaved. In the context of the exhibition, |e Corhasies’s most provocative challenge came in the area wf the fittings, the abject stiles ar the equipement of the dwelling. For instead of specially designed, costly furnishings, he included fatury-produced and readily affordable items like Thonet chairs and « series uf interchangeable seurage unie thar he called cassers randards.  Dunnog its brief existence, the cdhibruod tuncuoned as a bou tique of rival artistic and technical manifestations. Its ettecr on the decorarive arts was far-reaching. and although mast of the items on display were available only tw those with Lange incomes. the Art Deco style did eventually influence the design of mass produced objec. Ab for architecture. the many metiulous pho cugraphs uaken at che time document the divergent and often brilliant possibilines on offer in 1925 before these movements were consolidated into an [nternational Scyte.  HIDES SPRING.  See abo Amsterdam Schook Bonhaus, Schrens, Peter (Ger-  many); Charean, Pierre (France); Unc Cité Industrielle; Con-  temporary City for Three Million Iababitants; Corbusier, Le  Qeaancret, Charles-Edouard) (France); De Stijl; Deutscher  ‘Weskbund; Fisker, Key (Denmark); Garnier, Tany (France);  Hoffmans, Josef (Austris); Horta, Victor (Belgium); Mattet-  Stevens, Robert (France); Melnikov, Konstantin (Russia):  Netre Dame, Le Raincy; Perret, Auguste (France); Russia  and Soviet Union; Voisin Plan for Paris  Further Reading  Beunhammet, Yeonne, 1925, Pans: Les Press de ls Connaissance. 1976  Brunkammes. Yeonne. and Susanne Une, The Decorative Arts in France. 1900-1942: La Socete des Annies Decoritenss, New York. Rizzoli, 1990  Encyedopécie des arn dxoratifi et industries moderne ata XX¢ ssdcle, 12 vols, Pans: Office Centrale d’Editions ot de Labeairie, 19.25, New York: Garland 1977  Greenhalgh, Paul, Ephemeral Virus The Expeution: Univenelia, Great Expontions and World’ Fart, Mamhewter: Manchestet University Perens L988  Jannesu, Guillaume. J Art décoratif madrene. formes moucelier er prugrammes mvs, Paris: 0 p.. 1925  Magne. 1M... Eavcignemene de Lespetition imerrmanonate dev ars décoranhs et indusiniek madernns, Pauw: 1 Eyrules, 1926  Magne. [-M., Ragpert genenad. Fxpoution: dev art déveratifi et industriel, nadernet, 12 yaks, Pans, 1925-31  ‘Veo, Nancy, Madera and the Decorative Arn in France: Are Nouvean to Le Corbwiirr, New Haven, Connecticus, and London: Yale Univeruty Pres, 1991  INTERNATIONAL STYLE  The International Soyte is defined aesthetically by a seties of desgn rules cmphasizing volume rather than mass, regularity sather than symmetry. surface continuity, and the absence of applied ornaments. Often buildings of this group shared the addi tional characteristics of the articulation of structure, the com. monality of the white cube of the gridded glass hax, and the we of the modem materiah of the 20th century: glass and steel.  The acsthetic characteristics and the name were codified and popularized by the catalog af'a museum exhibition, The Interna sronal Style, Architecture save 1922, beld in New York City io 1932 at the Museum of Modcen Ant, cusated by Henry-Russctl Hitchcock and Philip Johnson; Aiwhausbuch, Internanonale Ar- chitekewr, by Walter Gropius, had previously commerud on the developing pan-European phenomeaca. During the decade that separated the books. the Internanional Style w vent transfor- mations in its theoretical basis as well as ics locus. The movement that had begun so opumisucally. however, as a social/poliucal’ aesthetic synthesis evolved ewer time mward pure aesthetics. Al- though the proletariat. for wham the carly modernise soiled, had never fully accepeed the Intemational Style, itonscally, capitalise corporate America embraced it. Internationale archisektur be- came the International Style, Vhough the theoretical meaning of the International Style changed over time, it inainuined throughout 1s history an aesthetic consistency rately ween in artistic movements of the 20th century. ‘Thus, the International Style as readily idencifiable today as one of the primary architer- tural movements and motifs of the 20th century.  Early International Style, 1920s  ‘The early ddacticism and peoselynizing of the International Seyte meant that many af the finest cxumple of the style wete often fuund wn design expositions and schools. These demonstration twildings were intended to drive home the message of the new architecture from the avant-garde to the proletanar throughout Europe. Many of these European exhibitions uf the new architec: ture had prefigured the International Sryte ethibinon in New York. Among the most successtul demonstrations of the new architectute were the Weissenhotriediung (1927; Stuttgart), the Bauhaus (1925-26; Dessau), the German Pavilion at the Barce- Jona Exposition (1929), and the Pasallen de l'Fapat Nouveau at the Intemational Exhibinon of Decorative Arts, Pans (1925),  The Wetssenhofricdlung was the Hint great demonuration of the theme thar would define the existence of a developing International Style. Under the spensortup of the Deutscher 
Werkbund, Ludwig Mics van der Rohe ceeated the overall design of 4 uedlang, of housing projcet. and many architecss fram buro- pean nations centribured houses, almost all white, flat-roofed funcuonakst boxes. Iris astounding today, but must have boen even more so then, that so many architeuts were thinking and creating simultaneously within che same genre: simpliaty. white- ness, and geometry. This aesthetic seemed to asiee spontancously on drawing boards as architects sought the “Holy Grail” of 3 new architecture, for the white cube has the universal appeal of a tabula rasa, just the metaphor on which to build a new work.  By inviting European neighbon not onty to view theit exhibi tion bur abo to participate actively init, the Werkbund extended inelf beyond political barriers, even to countries that technically had heen enenucs, for 2 common sovial use: hounng for the proletanat. Architects paruupated Jrom Germany, Fratwe. and Holland. By the time of the International Style Exhibition in New York, multiple countnes were represented by architevts whose names are still familiar: Mics, Gropius. Breucs, and Men- delsoha from Germany: Le Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret from France; Oud from Holland; Emberton from England: Alto from Finland: and George Howe and William Lescare from the United States, mm name bur a few. Even one non-Westem archi- sect from Japan was presented. The [ntermativaal Styte, there- fore, may be thoughr nf as a farsighted movemenc. a watershed in the progres toward European unity of. in canternporary tet: minology, as globalization or as the creation of an architectural piohal village.  Many European architeus whe had made the pilgrimage to Germany ta view the Weissenhohicdlung travckd to Dessau to see the mast signifitane modem design schoul of irs time, the Bauhaus, whch cven from it incepuon was a tecogmized Land mark. The Intemational Style architecture af the building com- plex was a metaphor for the creation of the modern prowtypes, ot type forms, that were designed within. In this complex of studios and school buildings, Gropius not anly explored the white, cubic aesthet of the most prevalent International Style, ut made another daring teap as well in his juxtaposition of the glass curtain wall of the atelier building with the cubic buildings. The glass curtain wall firse cebebrated at the Bauhaus would eventually become the major memphor of the high International Style.  (a the German Pavition, Barcelona (1929), Mies contributed another major sep ww the aeyhetics of the developing Interna- cional Seyle. Hes volumetic spatial cumpositiun was contained by a seties of flat planes of polished travertine, chrome, glass, and water—the sparcly degant planes intenecting planes and planes intersecting space, Using a tcductvist aesthetic previously restricted to Modern art, Mies created International Styk archi- tecture that was as close as possible to his drcam of a rero-degree architecture.  An carly composiaon by Le Corbusier, che Pavillon de I'Es- pet Nouveau (1925) became significant not only stylistically for the International Syte but also for the dearly stated utopian faith of in name, “the new spirit,” about which Le Corbunier expounded in his seminal commentary, Ver nae architectare Clowards a New Architecture) (1923). The pavilion, a double. height, cubic hax with gridded windows, in a study of life lived wathin geometry, showing that all the necessities of the modern home can be contanted in a tight Le Corbusian universe, stripped of historical associations, and furmahed in objer-npes. Within  the geometnc Le Corbusian univenc, nawure two is juxtaposed in che form of'a tree growing bravely through a circle cut chrough the roof of the pavilion.  International Style and Emigré Architects, 1930s  Despite the expositions and pavilions, despite the artistic visions and humanc intentions of the carly International Seyle, architec- ture vould not deny reality. which intervened in the form of Nazi interference and World War HH. Utopian European archi- tects were silenced. and the thrust of modern design was abruptly truncated. ‘The tloudlights of the expositions went out all over Europe. Under such great duress, many refugee architects fied 10 England o¢ to the United States, where the Intemational Seyie enh later cecmenge triumphantly in the Ameticsn postwar building boom.  In the devastating wake of World War I. Le Corbusier, un- like many other architects, remained in Europe. Even he, how- ever, was not untouched, for be had to reinvent his style, building in cast concrete in a weighty, sculpnsral style thae, chough highly influential te late modernism, could no longer be called main- stream Internauonal Stylc. As émigeés, Mics and Gropius, with their comparriots such as Marcel Beeurt, carried the tenets of the original Intemational Style w American soil in Chicago, Boston, and New York. Here they reinvigorated the syle and their carecrs with 1¢, Mics as prime moves of corporate modern ism, Groptus as professor of architecture.  In America. Gropius functioned primarily as cheoreuician and teaches of architecture, but he created one significant monument ta his European Incernatianal Seyfe rocics: the heuse he designed for hirnsclf in a country setting (1937; Linwoin, Massachusetea) ourside Cambridge, where he directed Harvard Univenity’s Graduate School of Design. ‘his house i¢ a landmark in the anager of modemiun and the subsequent integration of Euro- pean aesthetics with American vemacular architectuse. Its nuved syntheti. approach made this work a kind of visual textbook of the transfer of European aestheixs, pointing woward the assimila- thon of the International Seylc into mudcentury American domes- tic architecture. Other German émigré architects, Marvel Breuct and Richard Neutra in partiuular. spread the Intemational Style along the East Coast and Califomia, bringing it inco the contem- porary home. in the guise of their simplified, informal composi- Gons in wood and glass, as modem American domestic design.  High International Style, 1940s to 1950s  Mics concentrated on large-scale American ontporate modem asm. Hes high-rise commercial headquarters spake symbolically of a new, upwardly mobile world where economy and sesthetics were fused. Mies’ restrained reductivism, his use of the new materials of sel and glass, and his intistence on the articulation of structure made his International Style buildings the defining Monuments of postwar America, The greatest of Micy’ works of the high International Style were 960 Lake Shore Drive (1950) in Chicago, the Scagram Building (1957) ia New York, and che Farnsworth House (1946) in Mano, Illinois. The first two structures are studies in simplicity, yet they are metaphori- ually complex. They are high-rise towers of gridded steel and glass, arranged in perfect prisms, reaching ever upward, full of  self-referential comments on architecture. speaking not only of their own structure bur abo of the very ewence of architecture. Mics" insistence on the articulation of the simplest possible form, the post and lineel of trabeated architecture, reminds us of his tors in classical architecture,  Aa Mies bridged the antique to the modem, he created an Taternational Style with intimations of the eternal. To compre- hend Mics’ obsession with the classical values of architecture within the moder. note in particular the Farnsworth House. which is a Greek temple reformulated in white enameled cel and ghas. As International Style architecture, i is entirely volu- mmcuic atid denics mass; it is subtly axymmetmal, white, suruc- tural, and wholly unomamented. If the Gropius House can be read as a study in the assimifauon of European International Syke into the American environment, Mies Farnsworth House can be understood as the purest example of unadukerated, classi- cab International Sryle in Ameria.  The International Scybe was broad and sufficiently flexible to encompass variations on its themes created by Mies, Groprus, Le Corbusier, and many other architects. The myriad creative responses of architects, all within the Internarional Style, sem to point ts the angoing relationship of modern architecture wich modern art, In Mies, we Cind the suave passages of planes inter- secting planes, planes parallel tu and perpendicular to une an:  et, forming an apen structure that seems to be coming together and pulling apart simultancously, Thus, Mics’ Interna- tional Style, particularly seen in plan, recalls Dutch De Sujl  John Hancock buidding (1970) Chicago, fhincis, designed by Shadinase, Cheingy and Merrill © Esto Photographics  design and the lare paintings af Piet Mondrian. tn Gropius and the Bauhaus, we find the Internanonal Srvle to be composed of an opaque bax and its opposition in the transparency and reflectivity of glass, the elements asymmetrically arranged within a tightly spinning plan. The Bauhaus composition, therefore, may be thought of as analogous to beth Cubism and Russian Canstructivien, In Le Corbusier, we Find the configuration of the white bus in all its surknes, the cube being understood metaphorically as the essence of architectural object within space, reduced tr itx simplent possible form. Le Corbusier certainly was inspired in his International Style aesthetics by French Cubism,  Late International Style, 1960s to 1990s  From the Seagram and the Farnsworth. Philip Johnson absorhed the Micsian style, producing his own International Style high- rises and bis own bouse (1951) in New Canaan, Connecticut, which comments on and extrapalares from Mies’ Farnworth House. Other Philip Johnson works continued in the classical International Seyic. until Johnson's work began to raixe visual and theoretical challenges to the credo of “almost nothing.” His carly work for Lincoln Center in New York City (New York State Theater. 1964) played with Neuclasicism, while in his Later ornamental and mass-implying AT&T Building (1978) in Now York, within blocks of ube miaster’s Scagran, Jahmon di- rectly Challenged and even tepudiated the very style for which be 
had helped write the credo. Through these challenges, Johnson created the tirst cracks in the International Style. operunsg the field to vanants of Postmodeminm and deconstrucaivism. Rebel- lion againwt the Inteenasional Siyte found theoretical support in the seminal texe of archivect Robert Vencun, Compleaty and Consradictian in Architectare (1966), which, in an inversion of Mics’ much-quoted “Low is more.” answered “Lov ita bore.”  Other architects who. unlike Johnson, had not been vo closely assocated with 2 master were feeer to follow the course of the Intemational Style to its nandsal conclusions rather chan rebct against st. These were the second-genetation tmolernats, archi- tweets free of the constriction of the carly orthodox tenets and postwar boom mentality who could study the expressive qualities of the International Sey. Among the most astute and creative of those currently working is LM. Pei, who rook all that was elegant about che International Style and within its cunsiraines created prismatic forms. Pei's Hancock Tower (1969) in Boston is ane of the mos pawertul expressions of the International Style and a wholly new interpretation of Mies’ reductivism. The building is 4 bluc, reflective prism that literally chooses to disap- pear and reappear with rhe changing sky. The uninterrupted surface w perfectly reflects the Moating clouds that, Zenlike, it becomes one with the sky and therefore, metapharically at ease, achieves a sense of “nothingness.”  Okher Later exemplar International Sule buildings indude Lever House hy Gordon Bunshatt (1951; New York Cary), an unprecedented blue-green glass Constructivist statement that has remained for half a century anc ol the central images af the International Style. Contrasemg with the Seagram's aghtly uni- fied stab form. Lever House is a composite composition, annecal- Ing two slabs perpendicular to cach other, ane plane finating above the other. Lever House. after half a century, was justifiably named onc of the first Intemational Sivke historic Landmarks, inkiating the start of a public apprectanan after the fact of the beauty of mid: 20th. cemtury design.  Later interpectations of the Intemational Styk have been variatiom on the gridded glaxs box or the dab. In midtown Manhawan, the Citicorp Cencer (1978, Hugh Stubbins and As- saciates), in which che amplified glass bo is sliced diagonally at the tvafline, creates a wophisticated silhouctte against the skyline. Chicago balds claim co che tallest Intemational Style bubling. va the American skyline. the Scars ‘Tower (1974. Skidmore, Owings and Mernil), a combination of the International Style with the sethack skyscraper, though this is not 2 building wo be celebrated for anything bur saze and surely docs nar compare to the firm's classic Lever Howse. One of the latest and most advenrurous variations on she International Suyke dab is the At- fantis (1982, Arquitectonica) in Miami, where the basic gridded glass box is punched through with a giant void. aowing views of the clouds and sunrise aver Biscayne Bay through w the city,  Curtent propuncan of the International Styde, architects who truly undersiand its aesthetics include Gwathmer Siegel Avoci- atex and Richard Meier, Gwathmey Siegel's Whig Hall (renovs- tions, 1972) at Princeton Univerary und the Busch-Reisinger Muscum (1989) at Harvasl University speak to a comrempurary continuity of design with dassical carly International Styte. Meier's very late tnternanonal Seyle J. Paul Getty Museum 41998) in Malibu. with its modem. anaque, and Le Corbusian imagery. can be read as a kind of milenmal summation of the form and meaning af the style.  Critiques of the International Style The wos powerful ensemble of International Seyle buildings  in America remains the great trumyirate of Park Avenue in Manhatran. Standing on ane comer of the avenue, one may loak east to the Scagram Building. west ta Lever House, and south to the Pan Am Building. Although ewo of the buildings give the viewer the periect new world vision of the International Styte, one. the Pan Am (1957, Gropius and Belluschi), offers a cautionary lale of moderniam, Where good architects make bad buildings, we find all the mistakes chat have given the Interna- tional Seyle its Latter-day bad reputation: the aggressiveness of the building's stance. the overall repetition and boredom of the taade, and most of all the intrusive, callous placement of the budding in in urban space. Bizarrely sited above and across Park Avenue tather than along the street, the Pan Am blocks the clungated processional of the Manhattan street plan, nearly de- vouring its landmark predecessor, Grand Central Seation (thank- fully now fully restored though sill supporting the Pan Am).  International Style ough to be studied and understand theo- tencally and visually, and judged chronologically. [i 1s blatantdy unfais to the pioneer architects of the International Style to be judged by che worss architects and developers who copied them. For each of che excellent examples here presented, thete are hundreds of hideow glen buses purporting tu be Intemational Style that tine United States’ strip streces, fill our malls and induvrial parks, mar our universiry campuses, and woot of al scar our city skylines. Jt is Use bad fortune of the International Style that the meaning af architectural simplicity has been cor: rupted repearedly and ignorancly to mean cheapness. A clear example of this cumurast may be ubserved along the Boston sky- line, where Pei’s Hancock Tower ss ulten paired with iv artistic eppesitin. the Prudential Center, an l-proportioned glass box nearby.  Influence of the International Style  Certainly, Intemational Style was a Gicamsng acsthetn, purging the architectural work! of ornamencal decadence and sentiment. fe substiwuted an aesthetic of truthfulness and structure, clanty- ing architecture rhrough its ngorow redutvism. Draped only m1 curtains of glass. ir spoke hanestly of skebetal structure. Recall- ing the vigniticance of seructurc. proportion, simplicity. and ge- ometry to architecture. it insasted on che elemental forms of architecture, reminding us of the continuity of the modern with the antique, Mont significant, che International Style created the models, protocypes, of type forms for a modern world, Fint for a tew Europe and chen for a new Ametica, both of which were becoming mas societies, the International Style invented the forms for the housing, the schools, and the institutsons of the few proletariat, the tising middle class. The International Style thus remaire 4 monumental aesthetic and social euperiment in architecture.  Lisi Hui Coamier  See ube Bauhaus, Dessen; Breuer, Marocl (United States); Cacbusier, Le Ueaaneret, Charles- ) (France); Farn- sworth House, Plano, Illinois; German Pavilion, Barcelona (1929); Ginss: Glass Skyscraper; Gropios, Walter (Germany):  Gropius House, Lincoln, Massachusetts; Gwathmecy, Charles, and Robert Siege! (United States): locemational Style Exhibition, New York (1932); Johnson, Philip (United Stases); Lever Homsc, New York City: Lincolm Center, New York Citys Meier, Richard (United States); Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig (Germany) Pei, I.M. (United States): Seagram Building, New York City; Skidmore, Owings and Merrill (United States); Skyscraper: Weissenhohiiediuag, Deutscher Werkbund, Seungart (1927)  Further Reading  Frampton, Kenneth, Madore Architectenr: At riical History New York: Ostord Univeriity Pree, and Landon, Thames and Hudson, 1980  Geropius, Walter (editor) fatrrnanionale Archebtur, Munich: Langen, 1925; repeint. Bertin: Hloran Kupferberg. 1981; English translanon included in fmager, edited by Charlocte and Sim Benton and Milton Kernes. Buckinghamshire: Open Univeraty Pros, 1975  Hurchcovk, Henry-Russell, Jr. and Philip Johnen, fhe fnirmanenal Sivle: Archttecture same 1922, New York: Norton, 942: rd cdinon, as The bntcmunonal Seyi, New York and Lamon: Nortoa. 1995  Prcrain, Wilham Hardy, American Buekbrags and iter Anvbiteen. 5 vols, Garden Cuy, New York: Doubleday. 1970-1 see especially vol $, fhe Impact of Maderniem in the Med-fwenticth Ceniuery, by William H. Jordy. 197  Khan, Hasan Cildin, /reremanonal Stole. Madernat Architecture frome 1925 w 1965, London, New York, and Cilogne, Germany. tanten, 1998  INTERNATIONAL STYLE EXHIBITION New York. New York. 1932  “Modern Anchitectute: International Exhibition,” shown ar the Muscum af Modern Artin New York (MoMA) in the Late winter and carly spring of 1932. has become part of the mythulugy of modem architecture in the United States. be was mounted ata time when Art Deco, the nascene streamlined Moderne style (a more horizonual, lex nemamented version of Devo), the stripped Clasicivm of Jowf Frank in Austria, the vernacular Classiceam of Ragnar Ontberg and E.G. Asplund in Scandinavia, and more tadinal design tendencies seemed equally posible and equally confusing to Americans. MoMA‘: display af advanced European architecture offered a decasive alternative to the prevashng eclec ici. It is because of this show and its acompanying book, the Insernational Style: Architecture since 1922, that a penetration of architects adopeed the formal languagé of Le Corbuster, Wal- ter Gropius. and Mies van der Robe and thought of themselves as working in a technically, artistically, and socially mandated Incernarional Seyte. Uhe exhibition's unpact on che American architectural profession is all che more remarkable because it atrraceed a limited audience and a generally critical press recep. tion, Moreover, the worening Grose Depression made the show's chicfly formalist concerns sacem irrelevant and abo cn- surcd that next to no building was done in the “International” or any other style, However, the striking and bognal manner in which book and exhibiuon presented the Gropius- Mics-Le Corbusier direction in architecture made MoMA an authorita-  tive guide toi, as faith un cevivalise and Ast Deus deamgn modes faded during the Deptewion and a practinoners in the manner advocated by MoMA (chief among tiem Gropius and Mics) emigrated io the United States.  Uhe impens tot the show came frum Alfred H. Barr. |r., the Muscum of Modern Art's young founding director. Barr's intention on assuming the directorship of the new muscum in 1929 was to edunate the Amencan public—especially its parrons of arr—on the evolution and forms of radical are ance post- impressionism, Bare generally presented modem panting nd wulpture in pluralistic and inclusive rerms. However, he was sharply critival of ends inn Amesican architecture, expecially the Gorhic and Clawical Revival architecture thar dominated such college campuses as Princeton, Harvard, and Wellesley, where Barr was educated and began hiv schelarly career. He contrasted the shallow celecticism of Amencan design wail the purity and unity of direction he sre ar the Dessau Bauhaus in 1927, It was Barr's ambation to make his museum present modera forms in alll the visual arts, just as the Bauhaus gave all lorms of an and design cqual umporance. Accordingly, archicecrure and applied design were mmportant parts of Bart's exhibition plans for MoMA. However. he intended MoMA shows on such wopics wo be explicitly didactic. Unlike his generally catholic displays of post- 1890 panting. Barr intended tw feature in archisecrure only the style of Water Gropius and like minded designers to counter what he saw as the inauthencicity af Deco and revivalist architecture. Bast especially wanted w counter the pernicious influence of such skyscraper architects as Raymond Hood, whont Barr saw offering a fale, cynical, profie-driven comuptian of such concepu as “modernity” and “functionalixen.”  Barr's intcanion to mount an architecture show at MoMA was made pouible by the help of two associates. Heney-Russell Utchcock, Jr. was 4 young Haward-cducated arnduvacuural his- tonan who had broken out af a training in eevivalist design and joined forces with undergraduste enthusases for avant-garde arr, His wrinngs made a steong case lor Grogius’s and Le Corbusier's mademusm at the only constructive direction tor architectural biswry. Hitchcock and Barr became friends when they were graduate students wo the Fine Ans Department at Harvard. Fither there or ar Wellesley College, where Barr taught before joining MoMA, Barr and Hitchcock met and betriended a wealthy Harvacd undergraduate named Philip Johnson, whe had just discovered architecture as 4 life's calling. Under Hicchcock’s and Barr's cutetage, Jahnian became not 2 student of architecture but a writer, mvestigator, historian, and financial patran in che cause of modem architcccare. With Bast’s encouragement, Hitchock’s plans to write a book on modemist aesthetics be- vame a plan ty mount ao exhibition ar MoMA of key modernsst works, stressing formul elements of the new “style” over socal and technical concerns. Johnson assumed chicf responsibility for collecting matenal and moanting the show.  From the beginning, the rwo historians and their exhibition director had several circumstances limiting them. They wanted to make as strong a cate as powuble for the work represented by the Dessau Bauhaus and the villas af Le Corbusier. They wished to present this approach as an artistic direction — a peogram for the cteation pot merely of functional spaces buc af menumene, wo a genuinely modem style. To bolster thetr case, they needed tu show executed work, not hypothetiedl projects; tou many Auncricans knew of European medernivan saldy in terms of ute- 
pian projeces. To show executed work, however, meant showing eoumvipal housing estates and other projects whose purpow was practical, nor artistic. From the ether direction, Barr, Hitchcock, and Johnvon wanted to make chear that radical European work was nevesuary to cleanse architecture of the extreme individual- iam of pre-World War I radical designen. Only pure. sample work, executed in 4 uniform way with uniform assumptions, vould prove the wathlwide existence of a singke new direction foe architecture, yet this work had to be demonstrably aesthetic in conception, not (as che MoMA hatorians thought of it} unre atrvely technical and practical. Finally, the show's planners wanted to convince Amencan patrons of architecture that the new approach would suit their specific needs.  The manner in which Johnson. Hitchcock, and Barr curned varied radical experiments into a single aesthetic entity is demon- strated by their creauun vf a label for che work they exhibited: “Invernarional Scyte.~ As Hitchcock and Barr knew, many lead- ef of the new European architecture, expecially Gropius, had labeled cheir approach “international”; che teem coanoted an antinationalise, egalitarian view af meernity and detign in which a global architecture culture and, eventually, a new global society woukd be created on the basis of the machine, The MoMA hastarians were uncaxy abnat the political and antimanu- mental unplicaions of the tern, les beuiuse of any political qualms (although Johnuan despised the political left) than be- cae of their raining as art histonans. I'v Barr and Hitchcock in particular. the idea ot a universal formal Language whose pro ponents rejected formal concems and who rehised to believe aschitectural decinom could be formal at all was an oxymoron in the visual arts. While discussing the need for an art-historical style babel for the work they were to show, Barr and his colleagues adopeed the term International Sryte. “Inuermational” meant for them simply chat the new approach ro archirecrural form, whether arrived at through aesthetic ve functionalist choices, was pretty much identical in ies results wherever it appeared. The Label “International Style"—left in lowercase by [nhnsan and Hitchcock but capitaleced by Barr had inure ia common with habies of art-historical terminalogy— for crample, the label given the so-called Internutasal Guth otyic of 1400—than with politics and technology.  Hinchoock and Barr decided that the mast genuinely “inter fational” architecuuse was that which resembled the reductivist formal Language of Le Corbusier, These tormal elements— aun, non-load-bearing walls: aserive use of new building technolo- gies: expansive interior spaces; dynamic asymmetry: gromenric and Cubist-derived composinon: and cschewal of applied ormna- mene —were presented in show and book as the art histosian's matter-of-fact catalog of features. The “uyle” wax for them, in fact, the dimay of architectural history It had the geomersic purity of clasiism and the stnactural expreniveness of the Gerhic. without che ornament that had reduced bath seyles to mete wenography in the hands of later revivals.  The foemat of the show that [haven mounted in 1932 was in same teapects a severe compromising af hix anginal vison. Johoson planned at various times to have leading modernists design models of reproentanve “modem” building cypes (ur example. factones and prisuns) and to bring Mics van det Rohe over from Germany to design a more artistically ambinous instal- fanon. Museum rrustees qualms and the wonening Deprewion scaled back these schemes. Asm opened in February 1932,  “Modern Architecture: International Exhibition” had chree sec- tions. One section displayed phocographs of “international style” work fromm all ewer the woeld. Designed to underline che seyie's ubiquity and inevitability, the section featured much German and French work. a body of ly mediocre American de- signs, and an entry From as far off ax Japan. Modern architecture from socialist countries was shown yery sparingly, with the most ambitious Soviet projects not shawn at all. The emphasis on executed work, although wie as far as attracting American sup- porters was concerned. wax malcading in its omission of the bypethecical projects chrough which the modern movement had largely defined iuseli. lt was also ironic. as MoMA, like many (cading modermsts of the preceding decade, had decided to pto- pagandize for modernism through a temporasy show and nat a Permanent project  A section called “Housing” was an admission by MoMA of the social agenda of many leading modernists. It was curated by the architectural and wal critic Lewis Mumford and docu- mented the conditions that made mass-hausing penjects neces- sary in the United State, paying little attention to isues acvtheticn (im cunteast, Hitchuock and Johneun argued in The International Style that bousing projects should follow che formal vocabulary of the Intemational Seyle). ‘Iie centerpiece of the show was the section called “Modern Architects.” Jc featured the work (photographs of burkdings, models af built and unbuilt designs, and a few uncxecuted drawings) of che masters of the new siyke. These were Le Corbusier, Mics, Gropius, J.J’. Oud from Holland, Frank Lloyd Wright. and four other American architects or partnerships. This secrian. demonstrating the simi- lantics and differences between. for example, the Dessau Bau- hans and Mics’ Tugendhat House (both displaved in claburate models), was offered ax proof thar individual artistry was still possible within the narrow range of the “style.” However, a glance at the section called “The Extent of the International Style” reconfirma the nurtowness of thar range as defined by MoMA, with Expresioaist currenes in Holland and Germany omitted altogether. Only a very few entnes in the show deviated Gum che cinenial Le Corhusiin forms, Ironically, these were mostly works by Le Corbusser himself. such as the rubble wall of the just-designed Pavillon Suisse un Paris, Huchonck seems to have decided char Le Corbusiet’s great stature as an artis ennited him to libernes that no oher desgner shoukd dare.  The criteria tor including Amencan designers in the “Modern Archatects” secnan seem in retrospect to have heen the most compromised and shortsighted aspects of the show. [he MoMA hetorians felt that Wright had to be inchided as the grearest living master, indeed the founder, af madern architecture, even though he had heen vocally contempruaus of new European work. The show and the hook, especially the Letter, cautioned thar Wiight’s individualian was no langer a construcave attitude tn architectural reform. Weight designed a striking “House on the Mesa” for the shew, but later demanded thae his work be omitted from the traveling version of the exhibition created by MoMA’'s education deparunent.  Afecr Wright, che best-known modernists in Johnson's show were the revivalist-turned-modemist George Howe and his Swiss-born partner. William Lescaze. Howe and [excaze's public houang proposal for the Chrystie-Forsyth site in lower Manhat- tan gamered much press attention, Both Howe and Lescare’s work and that of the Vienna-bom Califomian Richard Neutra  were programmurically “international” ia form. Johmon te- garded Neutra as the best modern architect in the United States, and the muscum’s decision to feature Neutra and exclude an- other Viennese modemist in California, the more Expressionist- oriented Rudolph Schindler, has become notorious as ant examn- pk of Johnson's narrow vision. Surprisingly, among the other Americans featured in this section was Barr's béte noire, Ray- mond Hood, who conmbured a mode! of a complex of ribbon- windowed towen in an open field, the fruit of his interes: in Le Corbusier's work. Hitchcock's essay on Hood in the show’ ata- log came clase ¢o calling Hond an opportunist but claimed that the skyycraper srytist’s use of “international” mannensm proved how inevitable the style must be. A final American firm, Bow- man Brothers of Chicago, was included because of Jolnuon’s enthusiasm for its striking drawings. Embartauingly. it curned out chat the firm had built nothing.  “Modern Architecture: Internaponal Lxhibiton” ran for a woath and a balf, until late March 1932. Crtical reacnon was generally posiuve toward the work shown, especially the New York media's response to the Chrystie-Foesyth project, However, the museum—and Hitchcock and Johnsan as authors of The Internanonal Style—were vaken to task fur cheir Formalism and the obvious narrowness of their criteria. The book, however, remained in print, and a smaller version af the show circulated to Cleveland, Tos Angeles, and other cities The show aroused heated and generally hostile debate within the New York archi- sectural vottununity. As the Great Depression deepened, reapout grew for the point of view set furth in the show's designs, if not for the viewpoint of the MoMA historians. The museum itself extublished a permanent Department of Architecture apd Design in the wake of the show, with Johnson as directo: even after Johason lett in 1934 tor an abortive career in fringe poliua, the deparrmenr kepr alive the crucading spuri¢ and didactk pro- gram thar Johnson had established in his first show.  The term “Enternauonal Strte” inelf went almost unused ex- cept in a tow decorating magazines thar were under Johnion’s influence. Ir was nor until che architecture profession revived aker World War IL, with Gropius, Mies, and other emigre mud. etnints remaking design educston and practice, thar Hicchcouk’s and Johnson's assertion of an Internarianal Sryle became useful. By the time MoMA held a emporium on directions in modern- iam in 1948, ins participants were wang Laccrnational Style frecly ws aname for modern architecture at ity purest. Por the net two decades aftet that. debate on modernism centered in Large part on whether any design innovanen could be fit into tbe guidelines of the “Arye.”  The Internacional Style show of 1932 was both a fallure and a success. Critics noted immediately rhat the show, cacilog, and book prownbed the technical and aesthetic prssibilities of mod- erniam in unacceptably arbitrary ways. At the same time, the MoMA historians’ hopes that the show would regroup American architects around a unified syle went unanewered during the Depression. As responses to the changing nature of architevuure, bath the show and The Inernatronal Style wom shallow in their anvithooretical biases and thees old-fashioned definition of archi- tecture as monument, However, it was just these qualities— Hitchcock's, Barr's, and Johnsun’s evasion of intclleceual and idevbogical pitfallk—thar made MoMA’s vision af modernism indispensable to the corporate and university parrons of modern- ism after 1945. While the show and honk’s protagonists, espe-  cially Johmon, crnphaswed the avant-garde nature of the forms they showed, they managed to give them a European and art- hiseoncal pedigree (and a short, simple set of formal rules) that was comforting to partons and designers weaned on a Beaux-Arts approach, Finally, whatever distortion of che Furopean modern mevement the Fnternational Style exhibition perperratcd, its eventual success linked architects, patrons, and academic art his- furans in ways that had profound ¢Hects on future architectural change.  Murs Davin Sasson  see ato Bauhaus, Dessau: Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charler- Edouard) (France): Gropius, Walter (Gerraany)s Hitchcock, Henry-Russell (United States); International Style; Johason, Philip (United States); Mies vam dee Robe, Ludwig (Ger- many); Mumford, Lewis (United States); Muscum of Modem Ant, New Yoris Newtra, Richard (Austria): Oud, J.J.P. (the Netherlands); Tugesdhat House, Broe, Czech Republic  Further Reading  Scholartheys ue the Intertisrional Seyle shor and book has benefited grratly in recene years from acces to previeudy unieen documentation, especially ar MoMA Hover, the aimeum’s own scholars have been the main beneficiaries. In other scholarnhip m the ficld. the long- running argument that Hoichcock, Harr, and Jolson had a privace agenila or agendas for misrepresentimg European modernism has beers redefined—bur not dixmised—as these proiagnnisis receive great scholarty stud.  Hitchcock, Henry-Rumell, Jr. and Philip Johnuan, fhe Insereeemnal Stele: Anbitevoure vince 7922, New York: Norton, 1932; reprint. with new foreword, New York and London. Nanton, 1994  Riley, Terence, The fusernasianuel Spylr tadisbitean 15 amel the Mocrare of Mrders Art, New York: Rizzoli, 1992  Schulze, Franz. Phrip fobman Life and Work, New York: Koapt, 19g  IRAN  The contentputary anchiteure of bran is predicated an the im- pact af Europe in che fate 19th centuty and of mudernisen in the 20th. Sime 1980, the expreuion of istam in building has played a major tle.  The Qajar dynasty (194-1925) muintained cohesion by emn- phasizing the Persian valucs af Shiite Islam. The dominant pub- he busidings were religious—mausoleums, shrines, and maw im- portant, mosques. They formed dic foci of the muthedis. or teadcnnal neighborhoods, determined the city tabric, and con- tinued long-standing building traditions, Around 1850, the Pee- sian dite who traveled to the West intraduced European-style Palladian villas into the urban tandscape. They began co make spatial changes by climinaring traditional elements, such as the dxuhti (the octagonal rransitional space! and by installing indoor bathrooms and mechanical heating (using kerosctie). New mate- rials, such as ucel and comretc. changed the archrteveure, and new housing forms, such as row hours, appeared. Persia alo became a focus of study in the West, knrwn through publica- nons such as the American Arthur Upham Pope's eyght-volume Survey of Penian Art (1938).  Discontent with Iran's culers erupted in the carly vean of che 20th century, leading ww the “constirutional revolution” of 
1905-11, supported by the British andl che Russians. After a bloodless coup d’étac in 1921, Reza Nhah formed a republic and Launched the cauntry’s reconsiniction and modemization, He established a trong centralized government and, like Agartirk of Turkey, mowed toward weularzation, regarding religion as a force that hindered progress, The craditional Islamic and meta- physical thought of the late [9thventury Qujar dynamy gave way tw the introducuvn of Wotern wientific and rationalise fleas coupled with new economic and political considerations. However, unlike Atartirk, Reza Shah noc only maintained 4 monarchy (he was crowned ur die Citadel in 1925) bur abo used history for his own ends. In architecture. he revived a con- sciousness of ancient Achaemenid glory in an interpreation of the newly rediscovered sites of Susa and Persepolis. tle also initi- ated grand urban progects while demolishing in the 1930s sym- bols of the Islamic past. such as the wall and 12 gateways to Tehran. Many of the buildings of the Citadel (Arq) were re- placed with new public structures, such ax ministry buikdings  The capital city of Tehran well ithutrates nationalist and secu- larise aspirations. The plan impored a grid of srreers on the dense existing city pattems and provided separation of vehicles (eam pedestrians. It changed the sale, accommoduting new modes of tranyport and multistory apartment buildings. The planners unwed the sew maidens, or squates, as focal points of axial Layouts and as symbols of modernity instead of as ceneces of activity for the ncighburbued’s inhabitants.  From 1921, the state was the most active pauron of archite, ture, which changed with the influx of foreign srchinects, Among. che fist were che Frenchinen André Godard (1881-1965) and Maxime Siroux (1907-75), wha arrived as archacologses bur suon started to design buikdings. Siroux restored histori: build- ings and designed a number of schools that displayed sensitivity te climate, materials, and local customs, Godard became the  first director of the Iran ¢-Bastan (Archaeological ) Muscum (1929-36) and its architect. He als planned Tehran University in 1934—the first in the country based on a Western model -— and Siroux designed its Medical School. Other works in the rationalist modern mode followed. including the School of Fine Ans by Roland Dubrelle and Mohsen Foroughi. Another pi- onecting architect was Nikolai Marcoff (1882-1957) from Sv. Poenburg, who introduced the use of plate-glan-and-seel- frame construction. He designed, among other buildings, several churches and the Bank Melli (c. 1928) in Tehran. The buildin usex the crenellated roof derived [rom traditional ry  as Zoroastrian symbols, such as the Eagle of Marcolf tclerted to Achaemenid budding again in his monumental Trumphal Arch {c. 1930).  Uhe mid-1930 marked the beginning of modernism in trap with its cubic forms. new marenals. and buildings raised on pilorss (sits). The Viennese architecr Gabriel Guevrekian (1900-70) came to work in Iran in the mid-19305, having been the sccretary-general ac the fire congress of CIAM (Congrin Intemationaux d’Architecture Moderne) in 1928. Guevtechian’s buildings for the minssteies of foreign affairs, justice, and indus- try and new building types, such as the Tehran Theatre, were built beeween 1934 and 1937, Among the local architects trained either abruad ur in the recently established School of Architec- ture, Vartan Avanessian (1896-1982), an Armenian from Ta- bniz, was perhaps the most prolific. His designs indude Reza Shah's palace at Sadabad and aparument buildings and cinemas in Tehran. On his return from France in 1936, Mohsen For- oughi (1907-82) worked on a series of buildings for Tehran University. Ober significant architects were Keyghobad Zafar (1910-), whe studied ar che Architectural Association in Lon- don, and Hoshang Seyhaun, who graduated from the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris in 1948, The Laster designed modern  ALCihade Morgue, 1988, Tehran, designed hy Djahanguar © Aga Khan Awarch for Architecture  SPH eeeceans  Weidework Games a pedeseian strect im Shustas New Town, deupgned by Kamran Diba (DAZ  Archit. Manners and Enpneers) Photo by Kaman Adle & Ags Khan Awand for Architecture  buildings char also referred m Persian vernacular architecture, as in the Mausoleum of Nader Shah in Mashad.  Alter Reza Shah's abdicauion in 1941, his ton Mohammed Reza, the sclf-styted shah of Iran. furthered the cause of secular modemism during his reign, which lasted uncil 1979, Architec- ture as a profession finally came fully intw being. ‘The journal Architect, founded by the architeut Iradj Mushiri, appeared around 1937; a decade kater. the Suciety of Eranuan Architects was chartered.  Under the Pahlavi reign (1925~79), lran experienced a grow- ing commercialization of agriculture and crafts, especially car- pets. The most imporant economic sector, ail, wat nationalized daring the 1951-53 prime-ministership of Mosaddeq, making available a tremendous source of income for state projects. The shah’s “White Revolution” of 1962 inaugurated a program for the establishment of new towns and buiklings in 1973, the Borj-e Azadh, the inverted Y-shaped Freedom Monument close to Tehran Airpon, was built, commemoeating the 2,500ch anni- versary of the Persian Empire along with Lavish celebrations at Persepolis. Other religions besides Islam also constructed reli- gious edifices, the most impressive of which is the modernist Armenian Cathedral (1964-70) in Tehran by Mirza Koutchek.  The modemizing nanion-sate, boosted by oil money, em- braced modern architecture with its cubic forms, large winduws, lightweight-seel stnsctures, flat rong, and thin walls. Small build- rs, the bentz-o-befirroush (build-and sell), flourished, asdid major architectural practices, such as thar of Abdolaciz Farman-Farmian and Associates. The number of architects who built architertueally Significant buildings remained xmall, and many of them were trained abroad. Among these, che mast disinguished are Kamran Dibs (1937 -) and Nader Ardalan (£939-).  Diba’s work in tran, under the name DAZ Architects, con- sists entirely of institucional works in concrete and beick. Jondis- hapour University (1968-76) in Ahwaz, the Garden of Niaaran (1970-78), and the Muscum af Contemporary Art (1967-76) in Tehran lustrate well his concerns. Arguably. Diba’s finest work was that of Shudhtar New Town (1974-80) in Kuzestan. a remarkably designed verikernent that in spatially and architec: turally elegant and fuses on intensifying human interaction.  From 1972 tv 1979, Ardalan’s Mandala Collaburative pro- duced a numbet of important works. These include the Lran Cemer for Management Sualies (1970-73), now Imam Sadegh Univetsicy in Ichran. designed when Ardalin was working for Farman-Farmaan, and the Master Plan tot Bu Ali Sina Unversity  
(1975) in Hamadan with Geurges Candilis. Ardalan also wrow abour Iranian architeceure, geometric order, and Islam in an influential publication, The Sense of Unity, coauthored in 1973 with Lakh Bakheiar. Both Diba and Ardalan have worked our- side the wountry sime 1979,  Other promineng architects working in the shah’s Tran were Djhanguir Darvich, whu designed the Farahubad Sports Center in Tehran; the Arata Collaborative of Farroukh Fasalat, the University of Mashad: Cyrus Hessamian, an clementary subvol in Shiraz: Ali Amanat. the Cultural Heritage Office (1980) in Tehran; and Mehds Kowsar, several Brutalist buildings. Ar the same time, many foreign architects, such as Roche and Dinkeloo, Maxwell Fry, and Jane Drew, realized works all over the country.  In the 1970s. building was spurred even further by the success of OPEC (che Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries}. which was able to reconstruct the vital vil market in its favor. This caused a worldwide oil crisis, and as building production dowed in the West, it boomed in the Middle Fast, attracting architects from all over the world ime the region. Many influcn tial architects from the Wesr cannibaltzed preconceived images of Idamic architecture, sometimes an caxier way to satisfy clients. An increase of cural-w-urban migration and the decrease is od income in Iran due to pressure placed on OPEC by the West aggravated the economic smustion, and a majoe cutback in wun- struction around 1977 brought massive uncmployment, ad- venely affecting the population and architectural production.  The notion of expressing an Islami identity through archi- recrure for states with majority Muslim popufanions spread in popularity around che same period. becuming a pobtical and cultural raltying cry to distinguish Islam. This usually meant the secular West. Idamic and regional modernist styles vied with cach other fos recognition as the “authenuc” expression for anlu- ecrure in several counrrics, including Iran and Saudi Arabia. Equating the countey wich the religian reinforced the notian of Islam as a cultural force as well, interewining the realms of the religinas with the secular.  Opposition w dhe shah’s regime by Avawllah Khomeni’s followers, beginning in 1977 wath che slogan “Independence, Freedom, Islamic Republic,” Sed to the Idamic Revolution of 1978-79. The grievances behind the revoluuun were as much socioeconomic as cultural. ‘he social historian Nikki Keddie wrote in the American Historical Rasew (no. 88), 1983, “Far more than the (ajar, the Pahlavis were perceived as touls of Western or Westemized powers. chiefly rhe United States and Israel... there developed amongst the alsenated a search for foots and a return tn ‘authentic’ Iranian of Islamic values.” The Iran-Iraq war that lasted several years, beginning in 1980, reia- forced parriaric/Islamic ideas bur advenscly affected the building industry.  Tran questioned the symbols of modernism, denigrating everything from the shah’s time and peauting “Islamic” archi- tecture. In the mid-1980s, chix unfortunately led to 4 pastiche of badly interpreted clements, such as the dume, the arch, the enclosed courtyard, and even stained-plus windews The school of architecnare in ‘Tehran thay had promoted modetn architec- ture succumbed to the stylistic mades of Pastmodernism, high- tech design. and traditionalism and became the purveyor of an eclectic deagn approach, Architecture for new buildings paid lip service tw historical Islamic building in formalistic terms and use of materials bat without any real interpreration of its intrinsc  princyples. Architects and teachers alike discussed at length issues  of sdencity and culture but built very little of note despite the  explosive growth of the cities.  Tehran's population reached 10 million by the mid-1990s. New major infrastructure works were undertaken: expressways, a subway, and a wstem. The old maidens were rede- signed, and mynad small urban ploo turned inta gardens with curious fountaine and murals depicting revolutionary themes. In the tate 1980s and 1990s, the architecture seemed to convey a sense of celcbration and populam. The mausoleurn dedicated ro Imam Khomeini and built on his death in 1989, with its iron. structures and onion shaped domes covered with glazed tiles, is the mos obvious expression of this Postmodern atmosphere. A design competition for Farhangjstan. the Academies of the Ls- tamic Republic (science. medicine, and language). drew on ate- teorypical Idamic architectural elements, especially the chahr- dagh (the quadeipartite garden) in the winning project by the Nagah-i Jeban/Pars Consulting Group, headed by Seyyed Hadi Mirmeian. Another competition project for the Great Historical Maneum of Khorasan, Mashad, by Dariush Mirfenderski, refers to Kalu-j Nadisi, 4 palace-fortress built by Nadir Shah at the end of the 18th century,  Reflecting a different aspect of contemporary architecture in fran, Ali Saremi, a modernist of Tajeee Architects, abstracts past clements and archetypes to produce modern bailing ‘The Af shar Residence (1976) and che Jolfa Resides (1985), using both conceete and brick, illustrate his approach. The Ravand Consulring Group, beaded by tradj Kalancari and Hossein Sheikh Zeyneddin, one of che largest archivectural prac- tices an the country, designed in the same vein the Faculty of Engineering (1984-90) ar Imam Khomeini University in Qaz- vin, Faryar Javaherian used a similar approach in an apartment ‘buibding at Farmaniyya. The Al-Ghadir Musque (1988) in Teh- tan by Djahanguir Mayleum is among the most successful ayn- theres of tradition and madernity.  The architectural profeasion hus very litde influence on deci- stoma in building and operates in an attsosphere of uncertainty. The struggle cununues between a symbolic “Istamic architec- ture” referring 10 some notive of the past and the desire t0 be “modern.” Uhe social and religious aspects of architecture and urbanism dominate the rhevoric of the politicians and the profe- sionals. The production of high-quality architecture is impeded by the complexity of procedures, by speculation, and by out- dated technology applied ro new building types. In general. che architecnure in tran remains in a state of great flux, although a few struggle to do interesting work, and a sense of idealism exisas.  Hasan-Unois Kian  Ser ao Ardsian, Nades (Iran); Mosque  Further Reading  Adle, Chahryas. and Bemuard Hourcade {edaor), Tthéran Capitele Atcenenaite. Patis: lnsntua Frangan de Recherche ea lean, 1992  Diba, Darah, “Iran and Conternporary Architecture.” Mimer, 38 (March 1991)  Frampton, Keaneth dactics editor), World Architecturr, 1900-2000: A Critical Mosaic, 10 vol, Vienna and New York: Springer. 199- 2002 (sce cepecially volume 5, Hasan-Uddin Khan, The Middle Fees, 2000)  Keddie, Nikki R.. “Iranian Revolurions in Canny Pre ive,” Aruceicun Historical Review, 08 (V983) —_  Khas, Hasan-Uddn, Contemporary Astin Aevhiterts, Cologne and New York: Taschen, 1995  Marefat, Mina, “Building t0 Pawer Architeciute of Tehran, 5921 19417 (PRD, dimertation), Manachusetts fnaunute of ‘Technology, 1988  “Recent Buildings in Iran,” The Anditwnural Reese. 162/695 (July 1977)  Saree, Ab, Peeenaial Vatees tx traman Archiiestare, Vehuan, 1007  Saremi. A, “The Status of franun Architecture in Today's World.” Abadi (V9)  Seyhoun, Houchang, Repends ner fran, Parts: La Déewe, 1974  Tiloran dar yike nigeh. Tobran at a Glance (sbingual Persian -Laglish edmont, Tehran: Publa. Relations Office anu Internatamal Affairs Department of the Tehian Manin ipulity, 1992  ISLAM, MUZHARUL 1923- Architect, Bangladesh  Murharul islam has been active unce the carly 1950s an defining the scope and lorm of a modem architectural culmure, Fest in Pakistan and after [97] in Bangladesh. Beginning in the early 1950s as the only formally trained archuecs working in Dhaka, Bangladesh, Islam started with the enormous task of creating  Jahangomagar Universicy Student Dormienries (1974) © Aga Khan Trust for Culrure  a modern yet Bengali paradigm fur architecture. His steadfast commutment to a madernist aleology stems from an opamisuc vision for transforming socity. bor Islam, modernism ss mote than an architevtural vocabulary: it ix above all an alternative ethical and rational approach tor addressing whar he perceives ws social inequities and deprivation of the region. Consequently, hes commitment for establishing a strong design culrure in Bang- ladeth is paralleled by an equally deep engagement with the political and cthical dimension af xxiety.  Inam’s contsibution to creating a vibrant architectural culture depended on establishing the architectural profenion of a new hation in the face of strong opposition trom burcaucratic and chgincering citcks. To this end he introduced an internatsunal and national dialogue io Bangladesh by inviung Louis Kahn, Stanicy Tigerman, and Paul Rudolph co work there. As teachet, mento, and organzer, Islan influesed the development of vigorous architectural activities: the mose nutable was the fuund- ing of Chetana Architectural Research Group in 1983.  Islam was the Senior Architect of the Guvemment of East Pakistan (1958-64) belore opening his own practice in Dhaka. His architectural repereviee is wade: he has desi and bud universitics. large-scale housing. government buildings and insti- tutions, and numerous residences. His archiectural production, from his catlier skeletal approach expressing the pavilion pars-  
digm af the hor, humid Bengal delta. as in the N.LP.A. Building ar Dhaka University (1964) and his own house (1969), to hin Liter aercotumic, catth-husgging idiom, best shown in the Na- tional Library (1980), has sought to denve a place-oriented archi- tecture fram modem tectanic and constructional methods, from environmentally sensitive responses, and from abstract cultural typologies overlaid with geomet: order. The budding: respond to the nature of dwelling in dhe hoe. humid delta as receptactes of “light. green, and ar.”  An Dobam’s large-scale projece, expecially Jahangumagar Uns- versity (1967-70) and Joypurhas Housing (1978), che order of the plan is determined by a geomernic web of tilted squares, triangles. and diagonals, The projects are situated in nonurban arcas where the nacural landscape is trandormed into a «ene of deep-green foliage and chustered masses of red brick. Thee Projects address alternative ideas of urbanity by moving away freen the conventional morphology of cither city or try. Tn the Polytechnijuc tntitutes, designed with Stanley Vigerman for five sites (1966 78). the project becante an uccasion tu ptu- duce rational and methadological principles af design for Bang- Ladesh where none really caisted in 4 contemporary sense. Vhe énirtal study by che architects resulted in an exuraordunary netic lous research on form determinates in relation to tectonics, ecology, Gimatolugy, and materials and wadiuunal building techniques,  During che ime when Islam was establishing his pracias— the 19505 and 1960s— Pakistan was in political turmal, The dominant political consciousness in then Fast Pakistan, roused by the issue of economic disparities between the two provinces of Pakistan, and the manipularive use of ecligion by che central pevernment. polarized most Bengali intelleeruale sch as Islam coward secular, socialist thinking. Islam has always insisted on architecture's link em larger social and political issues, especially within the South Asian vontest, His continued commitment m a rationativt and matcrialist philosophy hus ted to his vehement anupachy to the manipulation of architecture and culture within highly potiticired religious siumacions. [1 this context, his work, remaining distanced from exclusivist symbolization and whut be sees as archicectural fastuon. has approximated a kind of ascetic architecture. Since his direct partxipation in the Bangladesh ‘War of Liberation in 1971, he has received fewer corumissions from various governments,  islam holds che view thar architecture is not only a reflection of society bur also a medium for social cnrique and transforma- tion, In his increasing political engagement he has argued for a broadening of rhe rile of architects in South Asia iw oler to condront and transform existing social conditions, including the vast rural arcas that mostly lie outside the pule of formal architec- tural activities.  Kast Keeaterp Asiuar  See abo Dhaka, Bangledesh; Kahn, Louis (Unised Seates): Rudolph, Pua! (Uaited States)  Biography  Bom 25 December 1924, Bangladesh: carned hachelos's degree in cival enponcering, 1946 ac Calcutta University; bachelor's of Architecture, 1952, at Oregon University, and master’s degree,  1961 at Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut (trained under Paul Rudolph). Received Rockefeller Fellowship 1961 and toured Europe. Junior Architect 10 the Government of East Paki- stan 1953-58, and Senior Architect 1958-64; began private Practice 1964: consultant to the Government af Pakistan for the Pakistan Embassy in Poking, 1965. President, Institute of Architcuts, Pakistan 1968-69, President, Institute of Architects, Bangladesh 1972-75, and 1978-80. Member, International Jury, for selection of Best Design for the competition for the Grand Mosque in Iamabad 1968; Chairman, Commicice for feview and tinalvation of the Fourth Five Year Plan containing the sector “Physical Planning, Housing and Archicecture,” Isla- mabad 1970: Member, Masser Jury, of the first Aga Khan Award in Architecture 1980; Member, International fury. for the com- petition for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Building in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia 1982. Initiated with group of architects Chetana Study Group (later 10 hecome Chetana Architecture Research Center) 1983, Special Award, Institute of Indian Architects (West Bengal Chapier) 1991; Great Master's Award for lifetime contribution co the architecture profession from AYA (Architects of the Year Awards} India 1997; and bellow of the American Institute of Architeces 1999,  Selected Works  Ar and Crate. Dhaka, 1993  Dhaka Uneversary Libeary. hake, 1953  Tuwn Plan for Rangaruti, 1958  Goverment Housing, Aumpat. 14)  Siete faboraery, Dhaka. 1964  Keishi Bhaban, Dhaka, 196$  Nauwoal trstinae of Public Adininiseration Building, Dhaka Univensiey, 1964  Polytechnique Inscitwies. 1970 iwith Sankey ‘Thgerman)  Chataguog University, 1971  Atumic Energy Commision Housing, Roopur. 1971  [shangueuges Gniversity, 1971  Roads and Highways Laboratory Housing, Mippur; Rangladeah Pavilion, New Delhis, 1973  Limeatane Factory Housing, Joypurhat, 1979  Nanoeal Library and Archives, Dhabas, 1980.  Further Reading  Ashraf, Kaz Khaleod, “Musharul [olum, Kaho and Aschiteciuse int Hangladrsh.” ALZMAR, $8 (1989)  Ashral, Kass Khalend. amd James Belluatdo, Am Architecture of Independence The Mating of Modern South Ana, New York: The Architectural League of New Yurk. 1997  Rance, Anupam. “Carversation wth Murharal Islam,” Enerronnecnts: Jeumal of tasendisciplinary Studer, Uruverrity of Waterlos, Omario, Vol. 2. 1988  Hunsin, Rabiul, “Bangladesher Schaparya O Sthaperi Murharul Welam” (on Bangla), Architect Mucharnd islam: 7O0b Birthday Sonrenir. Dhaka, 1993  Lifches. Raymond, "Marier Man Study Gives East Pakistan New Approaches for Trapical Architecture,” Arvbitwrnarel Record (Seprember 1968)  ISOZAKI, ARATA 1931- Architect and theorist, Japan  Arata Isozaki is one of the most influential architocts and theo- fists of the Postmodern eta in Japan, He studied architecture at  the University of Tokyo under Profesor Kenzo Vange. Attet graduating in 1954, Isuzaki worked on several important projects at Kenzo Tange and Urte. up until 1963, including the ‘lokyo plan (1960) and the main paviliun for Expo "70 in Osaka, Later. he was regarded as Fange's successor in the internanonal archi- tectural scene, Although he started his practice in Cokyo, most of his early works were commissioned and built in Oita, his native town in the southert: part af Japan. He went inte architec: tural practice with a eenie of abserice. His patcors had died, and his hometown was burned down during the war These expericnces made him 4 cypical lust-generation anhutat in Japan. In 1962 he made a deswing tithe Cay of Rat, whol depected a futute uty on the columns of ancient suins, This became his manifesto as an architec. [he juatapositions of past and future, of destruction and coasteucuon. are key mouts of his architecture.  The Oita Medical Hall (1960, demolished in 1999) was Io gaki’s firse built work, His work from the bate 19605 shows the influence of the Merahatism School, In Oita he designed such early works ax bwata High School and the Nakayama Residence (1964), Oita Prefectural Library (1960), and the Oita branch of Fukuoka Ciry Bank (1967). Years later un the same area, he designed Yuluin Station (1990), the new Oita Prefectural Li beary (1995), and B-con Pls (1995). In 1968 he experienced  Palew Sant Jord) Sports Hall, Barcelona (1990) Photo © Mary Aon Sullivan  the worldwide student revolucion. He vonsidered that revolution symptomats of the cnd of the early anedern cra, Since then, his attitude toward architecture has changed. Through his writing, he revealed his preference for Western architectural history, The Voukuba Center huitding (O83! was the embodiment of his writings and conasted of accumulated fragments of the products of Weuem architectural hiaary trom the Renaissance to Neo- lanicism. In the center of the building, he placed a copy of the plan of the capeal city, Rome, as i¢ was land out by Michelangelo. The ongunal piacea was lowered, and the cenral statue of Marcus Aurelius was removed. He msembled the historical ements, but without a recognizable ewsince. Ax a result, luzalu’s treatment produced a sense uf absence. In 1986 he designed the Contem- porary Muscum of Art in Los Angeles, his first work abroad. With its dominaing pyramidal shape set abuve an Asan satid- stone building. Rachard Maer dexctibed this muscum as ‘a bea- con in the Land of the fost.”  Atter the ‘Tsukuba Center building (1983). bozaki tried 10 draw his entity from a Japanese sense af place. The Mito Arr Tower (1990) shows the resulrs nf his quest foe identity, He pura double helix-shaped rower among Western mous in this building vomples. At the center of the court, he designed a compelling cascade. In the center of this caxcade, a huge wtwne was upended with chains and showered with wate. an allegori-  
cal reference to the battles between students and nor police in the lace 1960s. In 1990, he was nominated to design the Sant Jordi Sports Hall in Spain for the Olympics, 3 project that brought him international ercognitiun, The neat year, in Or- Lindo. Horida. he completed the Team Disney Building, in which be inserted a replica of the sacsed site of Lee shrine as a eeotral sundial court for the building.  Although lsozaki began his career aa 4 modernist architect, he gradually assumed a critical position toward modernism. He docs not believe in a reductive functonalism. and bis forms have been described as stylized, ciecti, and mannerist in keeping with a Postmodernist visual paradigm. Throughout his career, fsoraki hax constancy changed has method of design from one standpoint co another. Most of hus [ricnds are aot archutects bur, rather, artists, composers, and novels As early as 196%, he wok curves from the body lines af Marilyn Munroe wo deugn furniture and architecture. This technique of anthropomorphic Projection was drawn from the works af Marcel Duchamp and pop an. His monument (1977) of Otamo Sorin, 4 Christian feudal ford in che 17th cencury; his monument (1993) to architect-poct Michizo Tachihara; and the gravestone (1993) of Ivan composer Luigi Nonu in Venice are products of lus friendship with artists and schakas. In this respect. he is quite q@xorptional among Japanese architectural professionals. He has wtitten many articles and edited several series of bucks on art and architecrure.  In uhe 1700s Isucaki’s style became more free aml dynamic. Oval, hyperbolic, and parabolic shapes dominated his architec - ture. Historical references gradually faded away from his design, coinciding with rise and fall of Posumodern archiuxcture, The Nara Convention Hall (1998) and the Shiruakd Prefecnural Convention and Art Center (1998) show his interest in abstract composition, Isoraki inberited enthusiasm for mechanical de- vices frors Kenzo ‘Tange and the Metabolier,. He was alsa influ- enced by the legacies of Western architecture and contemporary art. Nevertheless, he preferred to treat them with irony, {0 dhs respect, Luzaki’s architecture can be seen as an opposition to the “will to construct” evident in modem  Piieorunt Seizuind  Ser tho Metaboliste; Tange, Kenzo (Japan): Tokyo, Japen  Biography  Born in Oita City, Japan. 23 July 1931. Studied at rhe University of Tokyo, Faculty of Architecture. under Kenan Tange: degree in architecture 1954. Marned sculpror Aiko Miyawaki 1971. Worked for Kenro Tange and Unter, Tokyo 1954-63, Director, Arata lhozaki and Associates, Tokyo from 1963. Visiting profes sot, University of California, Lis Angeles 1969; visuing peufes- tor, University of Hawai, Honolulu 1974; visiting professoe, Rhode iiland School of Design, Providence 1976; visiting peo- feswer, Columbia Univeniity, New York 1976, 1979; visiting professor, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mascachusetts 1981; visiting profesor, Yale University. New Haven, Connecticut 1982, Member. Accademia Vcherina. Italy 1978; honorary fel- low, American Institute of Architects 1983; honorary member. Bund Dewrscher Architekten, West Germany 1983. Gald Medal, Royal Instinate of Brinsh Architects 1986,  Selected Works  Ona Modaat Hall, Oita (demolished 1999), 1960  Tokyo Plan tproject wath the Kenan Tange Team), 1960 Canes un the Aur (peoject), 1960  Ones Mednal Hall, Oira, 1960  ‘Ohta Prefectaral Library, Oita, 1960  Cary of Runs (project). 1962  Nokayama Reasdence. Ona, 1964  Ona Brinch, fukuoka City Rank, Oita, 1967  Hct Labyrinth (phots collage), 1968  Main pavilion fur Eapu '70, Osaka (demotisherd}, 1970 Kirakyuabu City Museum, Kitakyushu City. 1974 Guam Prefecnutal Museum of Fine Ant, 1974  Kamioka Town Hall. Gifu, 1978  Trukuta Center Building, tharap, 1983  The Museum of Contemporary Art, Loe Angeles. 1986 Sans Jords Spars Hall, Rarectona, 1990  Yufuin Station, Oita, 1990  Mito Act Tower, Iharags. 1990  Team Dancy Building, Odando. 199)  Lasigi Nono’s Gravessane, Venice, 1994  Kyoto Concett Hall, 1995  Oita Prefectural Library. 1995  Bron Plaza. Okra, 1995  Nara Convention Hall, Nara, 1998  Shitucka Prefecturit Convenuon and An Center, Shunks, 1998 Gasama Prefecraral Otnervatory. Gunma. 1999 Selected Publications  Keachibs ae keite [Devontnuctivn of Architecture], 1975 Shube gr {Om Maniera). 1979  Kuban o [ee Spave], 1984  Anywhere, V Anyway, 1995  higen me Merlot: Jepanerukizerben [Reproduction of Origsn], 1996 Anyplace, \997  Anyene, 1998  Anpwne, 1999  Further Reading  Avase bsocaks, frax Report 140. Tokyn. Inan, 1999  Drew, Philip, Tie Andutecrure of Arata heceti, Now York and London: Granada, 1982  Frampeon, Kenacth (edacr), A New Wate of Japenese Arctatertire, Now York: fitstitute far Architccrare and Urban Scudies, 1978  Furagawa. Yukin (esletnr), ease broth, volume 1 1959 19H, Toby ADA Edita, 1991  Futagaea. Yulao (ednor), Aras ftseahs, Tokyo: ADA. Eda, 1996  GA Document 57 (19  Seewart. David (editoc), Arata feeaki: Architecture, 1960-1990, Lin Angeles: Museum of Contemporary Art, and New York: Rizzoli, 1991  Srewart, David, and Richard Meser (editors), Avene /meabs: 1 960/ 1990 Architecture, Tokyo: Ine, 1991  ISRAEL  Although the state of Israel was officially founded on 15 May 1948, its architecture dates from the cur of the 20th cencury, when waves of Jewsh immigrants arrived in Palestine. Over che century, architecture was fashioned under a number of successive political and geographic changes. wars, tits, economic fluctus-  Gans, waves of immugration, and de! aphic changes chat forced it ¢o adapt and respond to constantly shifung teesures and conditions,  The architecture of the Jewsh seulers, who arved in the 18805, was limited ctseritually to residencial structures and tended to follow the style thar was in fashion at the time in Palestine. the Southern Mediterranean, mixed to various degrees with local Arab idioms. Buildings had sane ar stucco exteriors, red tile roofs, and shuttered windows.  The need for public buildings that woukd comatitute and ex- press the new identity and aspirations of the scttien and wymbol- ize the vew. yet old, Hebrew culture emerged at the beginning of the 20th century. Unlike other colonisu in ther parts of the wad who were able to draw on the architevuural bersage of the mother country when buikding cher new sctilements, the Jewah pioneers had no architectural tradiaon to call thet own. Not even the architecture of synagogues, which served as centres of Jewish religious, cultural, and communal Ide in che diaspora. could be used as inspiration, as they reflected the stytcs and fashions prevalent in their surcounding societies.  The “Oriental” movement thar formed during this period influenced painting, literature, theatre, dance, and music. The new sertders saw their return wo Zion as the establishment of a discct link with their Biblical ancestors, and the eclectic aspect of the Otiental movement enabled architects to incorporate Bib fical and local Arabic cements within the contours of monumen- tal European buildings. This is cvident in the Gimnasia Herzel- iah, Tel Aviv (1910), designed by Yoscf Barski, and the Technion, Haifa (1914), by Alexander Berwald. However, the movement was not restricted to public buildings, as exemplified by the Biahk Residence (1920) by Yosef Minot and the Palm House (1920s) by Y. Vabachnick, both in Vel Aviv.  By the end of the 1920s, as rethected dsewhere in Western Europe, eclectic architecture that borrowed motits from the pre- vious cenrury dawly gave way (0 a modem architecture; that is, one based on a unique formal language. This is bot demon. strated by the xhoul on Kibbucs Degania (1928) by Richard Kaullmana and the dining hall at Kibburs Tel Youef (1931) by Leopold Krakauer, Boek unuctires were designed to fit the new conditions, and their forms explore solutions to the existing climatic problerns.  In che 1930s, the rise to power of the Nazis in Europe led to new waves of immigranes who brought with diem architects schooled in the new theories of Le Corbusier, Walter Gropius, and the Bauhaus. At che sane time, a number of young architects returned 10 Palestine alter a period of studies in places such as Pars, Berlin, and Ghent (the Netherlands). The common opposition of these two groups to the prevailing eclecticism and theis acceptance of the contemporary concept of building within the local context inv turn led 10 the demise of historical architex- ture and marked the beginning of the pursuit of purcly abseract functionalism.  However, although the Eurupean newwomers unequivocally peodaimed the superiority of the Lorernational Style, the ecturn- ing architects, having knowledge of the local milieu and fanuluar- ity with the way of life of the ewablished community, were in favoe of 2 more gradual adaptation of European concepts to [sracli conditions. Among this were Zeev Rachtet, Anch Sharon. Dov Karmi, and Joseph Neufeld, who were to become leaders of Isracli archirecture.  The restricuons on Lind use imposed by the British Mandate resulted in a decline nm the conserucaon of private resdenves and an increase in cooperatively owned apartment buildings. Structures such as the Kiryat House. Tel Aviv (1941), by Shmucl Mestiechkin, the Cooperative Warkers Residences, D, F. and F, Tel Aviv (1935), by Arich Sharon, and others of the period reflect the Sparian Bauhaus philosophy. Flat-roofed, marochromatic monoliths af stuccocd concrete, with surfaces broken only by cubi protrusions ar slotted recesses of balconies, these Bauhaus-inspired suru tures eschewed any articulation of ature. ornamentation, of relict work.  Erich Mendelsohn, renowned for his idiosyncratic sryle, came to Pakeune from England wo design the residence foe Chaim Weaman near Tel Aviv in 1934. Iniluenced by the Palestinian environment, he abandoned his usual plasiaty in favor of a cestrained and somber style and designed buildings such as the Hadassah University Medical Centre on Mount Scopus, Jerusa- lem (1938), World War II and the decline in construction ended Mendlesvhn's activides in Palestine.  In his search for novel, enlightened, hygienic. and efficient architectural forms, Le Corbusier discovered the “white cities” on the Mediterranean, with their flat roufs and white walls bro- ken into emall units. Whereas Le Corbusier brought the Medi- tetranean utyle to Paris, those influenced by him brought back his “modern” Mediterranean style w the streets of Td Aviv. Ruildings such as the Idelson Street Apartment House, Tel Aviv (1930s), by Dow Karmi: Engle House, Vel Aviv (1933), by Zeev Rechier; and Villa, Tel Benjamin, Ramat Gan (1936), by Nahum Satkind reflect a typical Moditerrancan expression in- fused with the local climare and atmosphere,  During wartime in dhe 140s, constraGon was limited, and architectural development was confined to refinement of previ- ous tends. The declaration of Israel as a sovereign scare in 1948 broughe the promise of a renassance in ail phases of activity in the counrry, including archirecture, The depamure of the British and their building codes and land restrictions provided the op- portunity to develop new building ordinances that were seen as more fitting to the condition of the new state of Inracl, New energie: that lad heretufore been directed toward political and armed struggles were frced for architecture and consruction.  However, a sudden influx of thousands of immigrants created an urgent need for mas housing. Bouse of time and budget constraints, quality of dengn and construction gave way tw haste, uniformity, and low cost. By the mid 1950s Isracl had a great number of poorly planned and constructed housing projects thar were designed with lide i any regard wo regional concerns such as clemare and landscape.  In response, a new wave of Israeli architecrure hegan, and the lack architects rumed tw the Western workd for inspiration. Furope’s resources were devastated by World War [3. and Euro. pean architects, engineers, and designers, thercfore, had litte to offer in terms of architectural development, Within Brazil, however —a county unaifected by the war—a group of young architects whe were stimulated by Le Corbuuer and led by Owar Niemeyer emerged. Their work demonsteated, among other things, how solar control vould be achieved by brise-sodet!, a device both funcuonal and decorative, and how concrete could be trandated into both clegant and playful furrns, Israel] archivecas borrowed elements of the Brazilan modemism. incorporating these stcuctures and techniques into bukdings such as the Ad- 
—_—-  The Kncwer (Parliament Building), ferwalrin, designed by Yosef Klarwcin.  © Michacl Nihokoa/CORBIS  ministration Building (194s) by 0. Karmi and Z. Meter aint the Hebrew Nativnal and University Library (1960), designed by a lasge group of keading architeces bath at the Hebrew Liniver- ary in J  The gradual recovery of European and American architecture im the posewar years created a number of significant buildings thar generated additional influence on Israeli architecu. The Royal Festival Hall, London (1951). by Robert H. Marchew and the Lever House. New York (1952), by Gordon Bunshaft of Skidmore, Owings and Merrill found rheit echoes i buildings tach as the Rederic R. Mann Audicoraum, Tel Aviv (19508), by Zeev Rechter and Kasmi and the Superval high rise, Vel Aviv (1959), by Nachum Zolotov.  However, the greatew impact was made by Le Corbusier's Unité f' Habitation (apanimem building! ncat Mancilles 11952), as accmplifed by tbe Beit Altchul Immigganes’ Hostel, Beersheva (1957) by Avraham Yaski and Amnon Alexandion. The Unive d' Habitation provided an answer to the problem of mass housing as well a new way of using concrete—the primary construction maternal in Isracl. The discovery that concrete need not be plas- tered proved to be a windtall to Israeli architects, as the detenora- don of plaster under the hot sun and high humadity was a perper- ual problem,  Expcrimentarions with new materials and technology emerged in the 1960s. Onc of the must interesting sttemupes was the “space packing” theory, introduced at the Technion, which was the only recognized architectute school en Israel. AHtred Neu- mann, together with Zvi Hecker and Ehdan Sharon, created a series of buildings composed of repetiuve geometrical forms and dominated by strong three-dimensional qualities, such as the Mechanical Engineering Buildings, Technion, Haifa (1960s, Neumann, Hecker. and Sharon) and the desert synagogue at an army base in the Negev (1968) by Neumann and Hecker  One af che most interesting buildings to come out of the Technion sexthetic is the Town Hail, Bar Yam (1963, Neumann, Hecker, and Sharon]. A three-story inverted zigpurat, this build- ing is madern in concept, yet at the sane time is evucative of regional architecture. Although Neumann, Hecker, and Shar- on’s designs did not beoorne mainstream, they formal influence can be found in che work of follower Moshe Satdie.  More typical of che ume were projects such as the Knesset (Parhament Biukding), Jerusalem (19605), by Yosef Klarwein. consulting architect Dov Karmi: Yad Vasher Memorial Shrine. Jerusalem (1960), by Acich Elhanami: the El Al Building. Tel Aviv (19605), by Dov Karmi and Ram Karimi; and the Shalom Mayer Tower, Tel Aviv (1960s), by Y. Perlstein. It is interesting  to mete that these Jerusalem buildings are ave stone-faced. as are moat others in Jerusitem, following the ordinance umpused by the British Mandate of 1918 and conanuing unl the present time,  The architecture of the buildings constructed in the £970s arempted to establish a link with the country’s past. The Town Hall in Beersheva (1972) by Nadler, Nadler, and Biron and the Beit Arieila Library in ‘Tel Aviv (1977) by Lofenteld and Gamerman, like many other buildings from the same period. were influcnoed by Crusuder structures and by European and American Brucalom. They are characterized by an aggresive, fortress-like appearance, wath narrew windows and Large arcas of expoand cough concrete.  The search for a regional architecture and a dialogue with the past continued in the 1980s and the 199s. Moshe Saldic invorporated Arab-Moslerm clements in Heit Shmuel. Hebrew Union College, Jerusalem (1986). However. the most serious attempt at dialogue was made by Ram Karmi and Ada Karmi in che Supreme Court Building in Jerusalem (1992), This edifice tmakes reference two a wide range of structures built in farael over the conruries, starting with the Herodian period, through the Hellenistic, Crusader, and Greck Orthodox monastery periods and up to che British Mandate period.  Aschitecrs in Isracl had the rare oppoeiunity we particapate in the formation of a new society, and it would scem that un the course of their century-long search for a national identity. they have come full circle. Israeli architecture started with and re- turned tv historical eclocticasm. ft as clear chat what did cmerge as a national Israeh style is very much indebted to changang fashions and styles in the world. Although Isracti architeces did not merely copy intemational examples bur. instead, adapred them #0 local canditions and eraditiens, the styles of the build- ings that were created remain conscious of their foreign qualities and tiex to European and American architecture.  Hau Hava  Ser abo Bauhauy Concrete: Corbusier, Le (canneret, Charles-Ldouard) (France: Niemeyer, Oscar (Brazit); Saf- die, Moshe (Canada, Lurael); Unité d'Habiation, Marseilles  Further Reading  Harlap provides « compichomive history of architecture Fveact in the 20th centusy, and Levin taker an in-depth took a the architecture un Tel Aviv wn the early part of the ceunity and the sever and moverients that influenced it Hest and Shechori provide a more cance wiwens of leradli aichivectuse up (o the time the astictoe were writen The sdditional sources peomde furthes general informanon on mare specific aspects of Laeach architeciure and an the ideology that created the state  Architeeruea conmemporance in Israele, Rume: Officina Ldinoni Roma, 1969  Best, Davad, “Architecture in Isract.” RIRA Journal, 7 (November 1972)  Harlap. Amwam, Now iecté Anditectury, Rutherford. New Jeney: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, 1982  Herzl, Theodar, Der judenstast: Verwch ciner nodernen Liseng der Judeufrage, Leiprig ond Vieneat: Breitensscin, 1896; a A fouch Suate: Ars Atserapt at « Modern Solution of rhe Jewith Question, trandated by Sylvic d'Avigdor, Landon: Nutt. 18%; 6th edition, an The fewish Scare: An Astrmps at a Modern Selution of the fewuh Question, London: Pordes, 1972  Karaty, Joset (editor). Consemponery Liratels Arvbtrecsire, Lokyo: Trove Archacuuic, 14  Levin, Michacl 1), White City. insernarions! Siete Anvtrisectury in direc A Pertrast of an Prt, Vel Aviv: Fel Avy Museum, 19K  Shevhi, Ran. “The Suate of the Arvin rack, 1998, Architecture.” ARIEL, The tirael Review of Arts and Lever YB (spoual mvue an Jerusalem)  ISTANBUL, TURKEY  Twenneth-cennuy Istanbul rues on an atea thar was formerty occupied by the captuls of ube Byzantine atid Outuman Empires. Tha manifold past had culminated in che classical Ottoman ety af wooden hous and teliginus and civic monuments i masoney that were lining winding streets and cul-de-sacs, How- evet, the tradigional aty of Byzantine and Orroman tour de forces such as Hagia Sophia and che Sileymaniye Mosque, which had already been spreading beyund city walls. began w change in the 19th century. Then, the sporadic regularization artempes of the erreet partern were facilitated Largely by frequent fires that often left whole neighborhoods dewlate. Some other contem porancous developments were the construction of huge military barracks, bringing a much larger wale and a regular genrnetey to the tradigonal organic city, and the Jourshing of vew build ing types and materials, as ut the case of masonry palaces and aparment buildings where buropean anhitoceural style, such as Nooclassuum, were cinployed. All these were che conse- quences of the Orraman reform artempes ininated in the 18th cennury with the gradual weakening of the empire. By che 18th century, the Outomans had started to appropriate European models in military, legidarive, and social marrers. Those arrempes ratified the unique position of Lsanbul as a city between “East” and “West” by exposing it to powertul Wesccen influences. Ac- cordingly. an oscillating herween the universal (thar meant Faro- pean) and the local shaped the architecture of Ltanbul in the fiest half of the 20ch century.  Ar the turn of the century, Icanbul was a coamapolitan city of about une million people, with Greek, Arinenian, Jewish, Bulganan, and European inhabitants in addition co the Muslios population. Among the diverse_ eclectic, and historiciat examples in which foreign and oon-Mudim Ontoman architects combined pseudo: Istainsc and Otvoman facade features with Beaunr-Ast plans and new building types. one imported architectural style actually fit with local building traditions. Unal che 1960s, when they were beginmung to be demolished, Istanbul had che largest qumber of Art Nouveau buildings of any city in the world.  Italian architect Raimondo 1¥ Aronco had arrived in the city in 1893 to design che pavilions for che Ouoman Agricultural and Industral Fair, which was fater canceled because of the disastrous carthquake in 1894. D‘Aronco, instead, woeked as the architect in charge of the imperial palaces and directly in the service uf the sultan until 1909. During his wjourn, besides muny government buildings and annexes to the sultan’s resi- deme at Yildiz, he deugned numerous villas, fountains, apart- ment buildings, and even 4 small mosque. fn many of these projects, such as the Seyh Zafir Tamb (1903-04), he achieved a refined remterpretapon of Ottuman architecture that he com- bened with a modernuing Art Nouveau sensibilicy. Both the aparement buildings he designed for the Pera disenct, where 
inhabitants were mainly European and Levantine, and his psd (wooden, waterfront mansions) along the coasts af the Bosph orus were part of the finde-sitcle An Nouveau frenzy in Istanbul.  Many non-Mudio Ottoman architects contributed to the spreading of Art Nouveau with ther apartment at office build. inga and particulaely with villus and ywéis on Wayakada (one of the aine ["tinces’ Isles on che Marmara Sea) and the Bosphans until the 1920s. The later were singular syntheses of Ottoman wooden house qypes and techniques with Are Nouveau details thas, since then. became part of the image of Istanbal.  That period coincided with the emergence of 2 nationalist reaction to the European architects working in a histoncist, ec- lectic Language. as in the case of the pscuda-Onental Sirkeci Train Station (1890) by A. Jachmund and the Frenchified. neo- Renaisance Haydarpaa Train Station (1904) by Ono Rites and Helmuth Cuno, Probably under che influence of the ideas of the Young Turks movement. two Turkish architects, Vedat Tek and Kemaleddin, started ta employ Seliukid and classical Oxtaman features in their architecture to achieve a etytistic unity vis-d-vis the eclecticism of the foreign architects, who randomly combined different so-called Idamic srytes. Tek and Kemaleddin thus became the harbingers of 2 historicist architecture that has come to he known as the First National Suyte.  Gon Leather Produce Factory, designed by Neat Sayin 41995) Phere courtesy Nevrat Sayin © Aga Khon Award for Architecture  Particularly in the examples where they tried 00 bring together new building types and materials with historical features. the “Turkishness” of their architecture remained at che level of the surface treatment, Nonetheless, in the projects where the preoc- <upation with the past was relatively suspended, as in Tek's own residence (1914) and Kemaleddin’s Harikzedegin Aparument Complex (1922). built far the victims of the 1918 fire, they produced cxamples of a sophinticated architecture. The former is an daburaie synthesis of Ottoman residential architecnsre and an almost Wrightian modernism, whereas the laner is one of the firs reinforced-concrete aparment complexes in the historic perinsule with communal servace facilities, courtyards, open staircases, and stores introducing a new type vis-a-vis the inward-looking Turkish house.  The Harikzedegan Apartment Complex was built during the Allied occupation of Istanbul while the War of Independence was being fought after the defeat of the Orroman Empire, doug- tide Germany, in Warld War J. The victory in the War of Inde- pemleme led to the abolnion of the surviving insitutions of the empire and the proclamation of che Turkish Republic, That change in the regime brought the change of the capital as well: is 1923, after 1600 years, Istanbul lose its status as a capital eo the central Anatolian town of Ankara. The dim was to dissociate the new state founded on ‘Furkish nationalism from the cosmo-  politan, imperial heritage of Istanbul. Accordingly. during the first decades of the republic, a vast building program was under: taken in Ankara while the construction activity in Isanbul stayed meager. In accord with the republican clites’ preference of an international architectural language, however, same modernist Projects were realized also in Istanbul. ‘These include the purist Presidential Summer Residence (1935) by Sevfertin Nasih Atkan, a pupil of Vedar Tek, who has alo worked with Hans Poelig, and the Observatory of the Imanbul Univeniry (1936), which combines a horzuntal, modern exterior with the trah- tional Ortoman cruciform plan, by Hikmet Etoltay.  Je che fint decades of the republic. the demund for ercat numbers of architects was tried to be met by buch sending Furk- ish students to Europe for training, mostly to Germany because of the cultural pacts signed with ehis country, and inviting Euro- pean architects. again mosuly Germans, to teach ac che ewo archi- tecture schoals in Isanbul. From the 1940s to the end of the 1950s, Emst Egli, Bruno Taut. Clemens Holzmester, and Paul Bonatz. among others, taught cither at the Academy of Fine Arts. che first architecture school of the country founded in the 19th cenrury, o¢ at Istanbul Technical University. the Engineer- ing School, which in the 1920s staried co give the degree of archicevture as well, Although the reaching activities of thew architects deeply affevued Turkish archisecoural dixcoune and education, the majority of thei: architectural activities remained confined to Ankara. Tant’s Istanbul residence (1934) is one of the exceptions: it displays both | urkish and japanese influences in a butkding set on a Ulf overlooking Ue Bosphorus and 1 daringly cartied by four pillars, ewo of which are 10 meters high.  Both ‘Taurt and his predecessor, Eli. while teaching modern, ratiogal principles of design at the Academy of Fine Arts, also §a¥e support to a seminar on national architecture founded ro study the characteristics of Turkish architecture. In the 1940s thar course, ako in aconrd with the resurgence of nauunalism in Exrope. fucked che secund spate of National Sryle, che major proponents of which were Sedad Hakki Eldem and Emin Onat. This time, the main source of inspiratinn was Anatolian vernacu lar architeceure, particularly che Turkish house, on which cypo- logical studies were usderiaken under the supervition of Elders ar the Academy. Eldem, who conctribured cxremively w 20ch century Istanbul through his numerous projects, is one of the shapers of Turkish architecture of the century. Although his Taslik Coffee House (1948) is a typical example of the Sevond Narional Style. his callaborative project (1952-84) for the Hil ton hotel chain together with the Amencan firm Skidmore, Ow- ings and Mereill disclosed the shift in trends: International Style was becoming che dominant architecnural paradigm cogether with the rampant American influence ws the cultural sphere.  Tn the 1950s, with the change from an ascetic ctatism to a populist liberalism, political authorities’ interest in Isranbul war renewed, Extensive demolitians were undertaken tm make space for boulevards, which could only partially be justified by the pressing needs of a growing metropolis leading to [stanbul’s nascent (now uncontainable) internal migration problem, The immense fase at which the city, whose population as of 2002 was abour 10 millon, grew resulted in the squatters and rathice stale apartment blocks chat wrap the city today. That, on the other hand, does not mean thar attempts to salve the housing problem were not made, asin the case of the Levent settlement (begun in 1947} and the Atakoy satellite town (begun in 1957).  both architecturally fine examples that nevertheless would noe lye up to the ideal of providing housing for low-income familia. After the waning of the International Style and the plurahstic architecture of the 1460s and 1970s—exemplified in the organic aparrment building of the [960s by Nezih Eldem: the Brutalist Retail Shop Complex (1959) by ‘Teketi, Sisa, and Hepgiler; and the contextualint Social Security Complex (1970) by Sedad Hakig Eden -- Istanbul, since the 1980s, has been characterized by a new type of international architecture. that of the faceless shopping mall, high-rive office buildings. and intesnationst hotel chains On the other hand, the newly awakened intercon, in the Ottoman pass, whule helping to develop a consciousness for the pemtecion of the histocical heritage, reveals stself also an the rather superficial uappings of luxurious housing. Ac dhe end of che 20ch century, btanbul » a world city, displaying all the problems of megalopalscs: cnvironmenal pollution, heavy traffic, shortage of quality housing. and spreading squatters. Among all these. it sull retains remnants of its age-old beaury to which projects by both old and young generations of archi- teers, such as Turgut Cansever (with his ya/: restorations and Anadolu Club Building [1951] on Bayada) and Nevaat Sayin twith his Gon Leather Factory 11995), have been and are «ill  contributing, Berais Tunas  Further Reading  There ts po angie scholarly swurce devoted to the antutouse of 20th- cencury Istanbul. The archieectural guide by Beck and Forsting iy the first atrernpr to compale a lest of 20tb-cneur buildings an che cisv.  Burillari, Diana. and Frio Gudali, fesmbad £900; An hizetrens « stierm Ant Nonveaw, Florence Octavo, 1996, ax Istanbul 1900: Ant Nesrvan Anbisrnare and interian, New York: Rizati, 1906  Beck, Chnsta, and Christiane Forsting. fssembud: An Architevtuent Guide, Voodon: Hlipsis, and Cologne: Konemann, 1997  Bondogan, Sibel, Suha Orkan, anal Fingin Venu, Svalaad Felco Archisest in Turkey, Singapore Concept Media. and New York: Aperuure, 1987  Holod, Renata. and Ahmet Evin (editors), Afedern Tarkish Architerture, Phitudclphia: Uoiversity of Penasylvania Press, 1984  Kuban. Dogan, /tanbul, an Urivee History Rpcantinn, Comtantenapelss, lustnbeul, \canbul: Economic and Sooal History Foundavon of Turkey. 1996  Sey. Yildiz (editor). 75 rldds dagisen kent se msimertit, Iscanbul Turkise Ekonomik ve Toplumsal Tah Vakhi, 1998  ‘tekeli, than (editor), Landen beguee Lrantal exntlopedin. 8 Voks.. Istanbul: Kabir Rakanligi, Vacibh Vakfi, 1993-95,  Yder!, Aulla, "Contemporary Turkish Architecture.” Memer. 10 (Ocraber—December 1983)  ITO, TOYO 1941- Architect, Japan  At first glance. it is possible to mistake Toyo fta’s work ax high tech of pethaps Lie mademist. Early on, he was heavily influ- enced by Metabolism (especially as a was defined by his mentor, Kiyonori Kikutake) and ats English correspondent, Archigram, even going so tar as to initally name his firm “Urban Rabo.” However. Ito came wo see that to celebrate the machine in the lacter halt of the 20ch century represented a position thar was 
fallacious in its nowtalpua, Vhe shift in hes thinking is marked by White U. a building be designed in 197 for his recently wilowed sister: this project catalyzed It to embrace immatertal- ity over form.  Although White U is often treated as an anomaly becaune it as heavy concrete consteuctiun (most of fro's work strives to be paper thin), he established gaals for the project that remain die basis fue much of his designs over che subsequent 25 years, Ito axed the building to shape hght, both to evoke beauty and to create a constantly changing space, eather flusd and continuous or sev off by Light and shadow. ‘The lack of formal room divwons encouraged feee mavement, and the flow of both people and energy became the heart of Ito’s architecture. Ito also extended this teme of spatial continuity ante the central courtyard of White U, foreshadowing bater efforts to unify architecture and landscape, at seen at the Shimosuwa Municipal Museum (1992) and the Nagavka Lyric Hall (196}.  Tn latee work, Ita explorcs materials such as glase and corru- gated ahiminum as well as the effects of natural light. must evident in his 1990 T Building. ho abo studied the implications of changing teanshucency in glass materials, especially in che 1989 Guest House for Sappory Brewery and in a 1990 peopusal for La Maison de la Culture de Japon. Ito extended these investiga: Hons to artificial light with che competition cntry for the Lower of Winds (1986; Yokohama). where wind speed and direcuun, sound, and the rime af day activate clecrrical lighting in varying overlapping patterns. More important was the 1991 installagon Tro designed for “Visions of Japan.” In chis space. multiple scenes of everyday life in Vokyo flashed across every surface of 3 mom, creaung a filmic effect Itv is only beginning to approach in his built work. ’  In addition ww light. Ito has attempted to embody the flow of other forms of encrgy in his work. Wind shaped the appeat ance not aply of the Tower of Winds, but alo his 1984 house for his family, Silver Hut in Tokyu. The flow of economic demand duting the volatile “Bubble” period made to conscious of the telatively short life spans of many peotwar buildings, and his designs tor Nomad Restaurant (1986) and the temporary Nob Uheater (1987), intended fram the start to be used for only short periods, allowed him to explicitly explore the impermanence of aschitecture. Sto proved himsell’ a keen observer of actual conditions in a changing society, recagnizing char the rapid eco- nomic capansion of fapan's postwar period signaled an ephem- eral and superficial role for buildings and attempting to discover the relevance of architecture under these new circumstances. Te was ar this time that fro deliberately began to position his architecture as antiheroic or noamonumental, and his interior spaces became increasingly imporcant,  His prescient designs (ot the “Tokyo Nomad Woman,” Pao 1 41981) and Pac IT (1985), were immediately understood to recy ognize the new wxial freedoms young Japanese women cryoyed in the 1980s, but also stoud as a vrithism of the otherwise staid expeuiatons that held true for much of Japanese souety. Al- though « was not rocagnued unul tecently, these designs also anacipated the placeless portable neeworks that have become common at the end of the century, (Perhaps it is not coincidental that dic [-mode, a system for receiving and sending c-mail of downloading Web pages and other data chrough a cellular phone. was developed by the wite of another Japanese architect whose work is clearly influenced by Ito.) In response to the  emergence of rootless communines. in the 1990 T Building and the 1993 ITM Building, Io began to concentrate his efforts on creating “communication locations,” natural eddies in people's movement through a building that would enhance meeting and eachanging information —-thus refuting the dystopian inolation tmany percaved in the Pao designs.  lronically, as lho attempted tw create an architecture of the chectranic age, he was un.reasingly driven to ccaddress the themes of machine-age architecture. More importantly, itu has beca one of Japan's mast technologically sophisticated axchiteces, applying the collaborative opportununes in Japan's construction commu- nity to introduce new cunstruction matctials and develop ambi- tous structural approaches. His apphcanuns of technology. however, differ. In Nagaoka Lyric Hall (1997; Nigata). he erodes the organizing power of structure with an apparently random organization of columas, whereas in projects such as the Ota-ku Resors Complex (1998; Nagano), [tn’s structural planes achieve new levels of improbable thine. In 2000, Ito revived a long- stating interest in aluminum by using it in the delicate semac- ture foe a small Tokyo residence, and he has projects on the bmards that explore the implications of duminum as a structural shin.  heo's competition-winaing proposal for-Sendai Mediatheque (2001. Miyagi-Senadas) ts 4 summation of many of these themes and a landeuark an his carcer, The structure as composed of 14 lsruced mbes, intended to frame vertical movement through horzonal layers of the budding chat are barely divided by ex- tremely chin. beam- free itee! Hor pllatcs. The tubes encase eleva. Tors, stairs, pipes, ducts. and other building systems. Daylight is directed through several tubes by means of a motorized eet of vertical louvers and electrical lighting seeping between Moors is made apparene by the ine of different colors of high-intensity lighting. Tu ride the elevatars up ane tube, while ather elevators and clevaroc weight sip sournllessly up and down the adjacent tubes, is to understand the scnse of tHhuidity chat Teo has tang, entended in his work.  Dana Bustrock  See aio Metaboliats  Biography  Bor 2 June 1941 in Seoul, South Korea. under Japanese occupa. tion. Graduated from Tokyo University, bachelor's degree 1965; worked for Kiyanori Kikutake Architect and Associates 1965~— 69, Eqablished his own office. Urhan Raboc (URBOT), Tokyo 1971 (office was renamed Toyo Ito and Associates, Architects in V9T9), Selected awards inchide the Architectural [nstituec of Japan Award for Silver Hut 1986, Togo Murano Award for the Sappots Brewery Guest House £990, Mainichi Art Award for Yauushito Municipal Museum 1992, Building Constructors’ Society Award for Yatsushira Municipal Museum 1993, Japa- hese I-ducation Minister's Are Encouragement Award (For Odate Dome. 1998), and Building Consteuctors’ Society Award and the Japan Art Academy Prize 1999. Exhibitions dedicated to Ito's work include “Pao 1, Exhibition Project for Pao: A Dwelling for Tokyo Nomad Woman” (Seibu Department Store, 1985), “Architecture in the City of Windy” (Gallery Ma, Tokyo, 1986}, “Anemorphosis: Transformations by Wind" (Tokyo.  1986), “Pao IL, Exhibinon Project fat Pao: A Dwelling for Lokyo Nomad Woman” (Brusseb, Bogium, 1989), " Toye tte, Archi tevture Hucuante” (Insntut Francais d) Architecture, Pars, 1991), “Toro tro” (Vokyo, 19923, "Blurring Architecture” (Suermonde-Ladwig-Museum, Aachen. 1999), and “Al chitec- ture [sx} 2000" proposals for ahiminum scuctural svstems (GA Gallery, Tokye, 2000),  Selected Works  Alsmunum Howse, Dsujade, Kanagawa Pretecrute. lapan. 1471  Whue U, Naluno, Pokye, Japan, 19°  PMT Building, Nagoya, Auhi 178  Silver Hur. Nakano-ku. Tokyo, Japan, 1984  Nomad Restaurant. Roppongi, Tokyo, Japan. 1986  Fower of Winds Vokohamanshi, Kasuga prelesture, Japan. 1980  M Building on Kanda, bokya. Japan, 198"  Guer House tut Sapporo Brewer. Fniwa sh, Hobhaale 1989  ( Budding, Auhusalashi, Tokyo, Japan 1989  T Building, Nakumegaro. Tokyo. Japan, 1990  Yaoushirs Manaipal Muscum. Yatoushiro-shi, Kumamoto prefecture, Japan, 1991  Fag of Winds (Okawabats River Cin 21 Town Ga Bf, Chie hu, fohya, lapan, 1991  Shumosuwa Murucipal Muscum, Shimowiwa cha, Nagase prefs cas. Japan. 1992  Kundergarisn in Fudenherm, Frankliet, Germany, 1992  TM Building, Macsuvama-shi, Chime, japan, 1944  nd Pouple’s Home, Yauushito, Kumamute peetectute, Japan, 1994  Yasushuw fire Station, Yatunhitu, Kumamoto prefeue, Japan. 1995  Nagaoka Lyen Hall, Nagauka, Nugaca prefeuure, 97  Duane in Odate, Oulate, Aluta prefecture, Japan, 1997  Ona ha Resurt Complea in Nagano, Chi'napata gun, Nagatar preteciuie, Japan, 1008  Nowathars ‘Town Hall, Notsulasa mahi, Ota peefeuuse, Lapan, 1)  Vateha sta Buttha Paloce, Lana cho, Shutante pretvceure, Japan, A008  Sendat Madutheque, Sendai, Misags piecferture, Japan, 2001  Selected Publications  Tayo fie-— Kase we Hen jones [Transliguranun of Wine} hargleh tle fepe tte - Sevu-permeuble Andiatee. Tokyo, SD UfeasbubafKajme Pobloting 1966. Senond cation by Sealosha, 18) (Onginally SE? no KOU. special issue on Ito.)  Fajen Sure Remdde, Tokyu Aelu Sho. 2000  Further Reading  Gow, Notuke, Sachike Gat, amd Fumito Gow, Nakeno  foomacis ne fe (Howse in Nakanuhunmacta), Tokyo: Surai ne Fovhokan Shuppankyoka, 1998  “Ente the Cary uf Reply ants,” World Anherctury, ea)  Anant Space De Antica bapenment of Toyo leo,” World Arvbutecrare, $4 (195)  
JACOBS, JANE 1916- Archicecture critic, United States  Jane Jacobs has been an important and conrreversal observer and critic of the American city since the 1961 publication of her mou impurtant hook, The Death and Life of Great American Cities,  Jacobs's work at Architectural Forum trained her to become an articulate critic of the parterns of development and urban planning that she ubserved from mid- and downtown Manhat- tan and her own home wi Greenwich Village. In particular, she became at first suspicious of, and chen increasingly hustle wu, urban renewal, the growth of housing projeas, rhe highways that radiated from center cities to the ever-growing suburbs, the need for more and bigger parking Jou in the city, and the re- maval of small neighborhoods co accommodate all the new intra- structure. She decried the loss af the diverse elements char made for community: resxlences, commerce. culture, sarcet life, and recreation that the felt worked best when found in manageable proportions in a local neighborhood.  Jacohs's discarisfaction wich the kind of planning that was represented in her mind by the plans and projects of Robust Moses finally coalesced into her influential book that made her the champion of all who opposed what they saw as the cause of sterilicy of contemporasy lite. There is much debste as to whether Jacobs was anacking urban planners or only misguided bureau- crats in her 1961 volume, fhe Death and Life of Great American Cities, but there is no doubt that she suuck a sympathetic cord in reformers, community organizers. and uhox who saw plan- ning and urhan renewal as the cause of neighborhood disinvest- ment, suburban sprawl, and endlew commuter craffic jams Some alia extended the critique tw blaming the work of planner for racial separation, growing estrangement of pcople from their neighbor, and an increase int crime. In addition, although Jacobs might not have taken the argument as far as some who cited hee writings in suppor of theis own social agendas, there 1s no doube thar her book presented a strong critique of such pioncers of modern planning as Ebenezer Howard and Daniel Burnham. Pethaps a romantic Jacobs presented the neighborhood as the place where people would live, shop, educate their children, and keep a careful eye out for those threatening their communty:  In that ecgaed, she cmphasired the sume values as others saw in the ideal American small town, In contraw, the spake of the sterdity of planned Wammumies, n which carchilly tended parks temained empty because of thei lack of conveniences and their ability tu protect crmunals who might prey on those who ven- tured w these itmonvenicnt settings far from the watchful eyes of their neighbors.  Jacobs's later books covered a varicty of related subjects as she moved to both heturical analysis and an overview of how societies operate. The Fronemy of Citi (1969) attacked the no- Gon that cities aruse in response to patterns of agriculture and the condency for people to congregate tugeuhet. Inntead, she posited thar rhe needs of trade were whar created rhe earliest major concentrations of people. In Cities and the Wealth of Na- tom (1984), Jacobs carried that pome fusther. making the case that the growth of powerful commercial cenrers created the country’s wealth, rather than seeing che growth of cities as an outgrowth of wealth in the Jeflenonian scase. Het book, Systeme af Survseal (1992), cramined the impact af hath commerce and gevermment in coetemporary urban life and euplored the changes in the relauonship beeen the public and private 1c- tors that have cvolved with changes in urhan life.  Jacobs's detracturs have pointed out thas she generalized from too few examples of “cities that worked,” that the cities them- selves were only selected neighborhoods in the city, and that her arguments ignored economic and political reatines. She could also be accused of seeing only the positive side of the traditional community, whether urban or small town, and ignoring the demands for conformity, invasion of privacy, and hostility co outsiders that often accompany the intimacy of the community. Howeret, she wrote as a journalist and activist refuemer, not as a scientist, and has had an influence on both public figures and an entire gencration of advncates for the New Urbanum  Daviv M. Somat  Ser abo New Urbanism Urban Planning; Urban Renewal  Biography Bor Jane Butzner in Sceanton, Pennsylvama. on 4 May 1916: had an uninspired high school career and then, ro gain some 
expetience in the middle af che Great Depression, worked one year without a salary 4s a eeporcer for the wamen’s page editar fat the Sreanton Trrbune. Moved to New Yask, surviving in pant-umc pustiony as a stenographer and freckince writer fur Rewspapers, magazines, and tale pubtnariony As the navon moved from the Depression tv a wartime conony, obtained a pestuon with the Office of War Informauon and mareed a fellow employee. a young architect. Continued her peripatetic career while having theee children and finally cook a poxtion as an associate editor and writer for Architectural Form. Alter 30 years in New York Ciry, and with substantial visibility as the authos of her widely discussed first hook, moved to Toronto with het family where she still resides.  Selected Publications The Leash and Life of Groat Arverioan Cites, 1901 The Ezanenty of Cine, 1961  Cues amd the Wealth of Nanens, 1984 Systema of Surreal. VN  Further Reading  Waungs abour Jane lacobs are divulad bevacen seviews off ber books. yournaliaic accounts of ber ideas, and some scholarly appratsals of her contnbununs, The Liner atc oltca submerged ia broader dra unsunns of the issues she uckled and du not appear on a general bibbography  Athimon, Brooks, “Craic at Large Jane lavabs, Author of Book on Citi, Mahia the Mos of Liang in One,” New York Temes (10 Nevember 1961)  Camh, James, “Cities and the Wealth of Nation,” Armies 0 [uly 1984)  Duany, Andreas, and Hlivabeth Platur-/ylark. "The Scfoad Comme of the Amesican Smal Town.” Wiken Quartrrfy. 16/2 (1992)  Hoppenteld, Morton, “Review: Une Death and Life of Great Amencan Cines.” Jeurnal of the Anarrican Insitute of Planners, 28/2 (1902)  Montgomery. Roger, “Is There Still tife in the Death and Life?” Anterican Plroning Aseciarion fosernal (Summer \99Rt  Sewell, John. “Golden Report Misteads Urban Guru Jane Jacobs.” NOW (8 February 1901  Warren, David, "I've Ways 00 Live: Jane Jacobs Speaks with Dave Warren,” The laler, 38 [summer 1495)  Zon, bd, “Eyes on Jane Jacobs,” Planaing (Seqremhor 19861  JACOBSEN, ARNE EMIL 1902-71 Architect, Denmark  In bis contributians Danish mmadern architecture, industeial design, exhibition design, and urban design, Scandinavian archi- tet Ame Jacobsen demonsttated + broad undertanding of the rule of good design in life, from the scale of kitchen mplements to the sale of the housing estate. He had the oppurtunity to work on a tremendous range of building ¢ypes, fom the mun- dane to the honorific, and he endowed all with a sense of the sublime: factories, labocatories. oflices. schools, sports facilines, housing. and town hulls.  Jacobsen completed the rypial course of study for an archi- tect in Denmark, beginning with academic high shool. techni- cal college, and finally the Kuneakademicts Arkitehtskole (Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts School of Architecture) in Capen-  hagen. This path included an apprenticeship to a bricklayer and study tours o France. Italy, and Germany. Jacobsen received hiv profesional degree in 1927 and was awarded the 1928 Lille Guldimedalje (Small Gold Medal} for the deaga of # National Museum in Klimpenborg, surth of Copenhagen,  At ihe Kunstakademic, Jacobsen was taught by leading practi- Genes of the Scandinavian Doricist (Neockassical, 1910-30) movement, including (var Bentsen, Kay Fisker, and Edvard Thomsen. The intluence of these professor is cradent in Jacob- sen's dixciphned use of proportion and material. His characterw- fac austenty of means, which today might be labeled minunalist, is im fact an aspect of continuity in Danish architecture since the 1700s. Restraint and elegance mark Jacobsen’s development as che most tignificant madern architect in Denmark, 2 stature recognized in his selection ro design the Royal Danish Embassy in London. (This 1969 proposal was executed after his death wn 1971 by Dissing and Weitling, a firm founded by two of his anaciates.) facobsen's work had admirety sbroad, as evidenced by dhe many international awards, honon, and commissions bestowed on him.  Jacobsen wuthed only briefly for other archicects (Fisker, Niels Rusenkjacr. and Paul Hohee) before setting up his own  actice. Winning the Bellevue Beach competitsan (1932) was  is breakthrough, initiating a series of proyects along the shore in Kampenborg. He designed beach dub facilites (1932). a thearet and restaurant (1939). and three housing complexes: Hellavisa (1944), Seholm T and 11 (1951), Seholm IIT (1955), and Ved Bellevue Bagr (1961),  By no means the only modem: architect in Denmark. Jacob- sen was probably influenced in the lire 1930, aml 19405 by Vilhelm Uauritven’s Kastrup Airport (1936) and Radio House (1937-45). During these years. another influence can be de- tected in the Srettings House (1937), Aarhus Town Hall (1942), and Satlerad Town Hall (1942). Jacobsen liad a friendly rela- tiumbip with the Swedish architect Erik Gunnar Asplund from the 1920s 10 1940, during which time the latter was working con the Gothenberg Law Courts Additiva (1913-36). Jacobsen might have derived his contextual design approach from this model.  Jacobsen’s reputanon and many contacts in Sweden belped south the way for bim during his flight Irom the occupying Nansin 1943 Dunng a two-year ctile in Scockholm, he worked Primarily as a rexrile designer. using his extraordinary skills in drawing and watercolor painting to create patterns for fabric and wallpaper  In the postwar period, shortages of material and labor forced architects to employ alternative means of construction, new tech- nologies, and new material, Jacobien was an important figure introducing these in Denmark. He explored the posubilities that industrialization (such 4s curtain wall construction and prefabei- cated cements) offered in wich projects as the Jespenien Office Burkding (1954). In fact, the poetics of construction is a major theme in his work. Jacobsen’s structural solutions are innovative. pushing materials to their limits, for example, the concrete in the Gas Station (3937) and the Belvedere Restaurant project (1964), Furthermore, hus details are exquisine and refined, re- flecting, the admuration that he held for Ludwig Mics van des Rohe. ‘This influence is most apparent in the Redovee Town Hall 11955) and Library (1969). In general, structure and detail provide the ornament in Jacobsen’ buildings.  The second theme is beauty. which Jacobsen felt was misun demtood in modern architecture, He said thar simply resolving functional problems did not constitute a beauntul solution, In- stead, the architect needed to provide an aestheuc dimension. which in his case consisted of elemental massing, reductnn ot detail, and clegant proportions to organize the whole. Jacobsen tecognized that because the modern architect works with wan- dardized elements, proportion is the way to ruptess his individu- ality. Simplicity of form and derail contributes co a sence of the sublime. akin tu Mies “almost nothing.” In tume, Junbuen designed buildings, such ax St. Catherine's College at Oxtord University (1963), as total works of art, crmompassing landicape. interiot design, furniture, lighting, hardware. and fittings.  The third theme is site design. One uf Jacobsen’s strengths is che integration of a building woth its site. It is likely that his studies at the Kunstakademis inchided the new garden design courses. He also collaborated with the oclebrased landscape ar- chitect C.Th. Sorensen on two early projects.  Jacubsen’s macure works of the 1950s show mastery of build: ing type. proportion, marerial, and deuail. This petiod usw real- jel importante public commissions, including twwa hall, the MunkegArd’s Schoo! (1955), and commercial works, such as the  Haris Showroom (1953), the Cat! Christensen Factory (1956). and the SAS Royal Hotel (1959).  Jacobsen masnrained ongoing relationships with manulactur- ets and clienes through rhe four decades of his career. For exam ple, Nove Industries retained him for theee separate laboratory designs in 1935, 1959, and 1969. Similarly, Fric. Hansen has produced Jacnbxen furniture designs since 1952. Five chairs are still in production, including his most famous designs. the Ane chair (1952) and the 3107 (1955). which have sold five millian copies, and the Grand Prix (1957), the Egg (1958), and the Swan (1958).  Standardized canseructian and the single-family house evpe ‘were currens interests in the 1950s and 1960s. Jacubscn devel- oped a series of villas influenced by the American Case Study houses of Chars Hames, Pierre Koenig, and Richard Neutra as well as Mics’ houses. Although the availability of materials and cast requised thar Danish architects wansform these models. an other factor in the synthesis was traditional Japaneve architeuture with its panelizcd systems of construction and proportional order. Jacobsen's Sieshy House (1957) ix s dear example uf the getue, and the Jurgensen Howe (1956) with its courtyard plan and rooms enfiilade is a sunning, variation.  In 1961, Jacobsen won the limited compeuuon for onc of his most ampoctant Danish buildings. the Nawonal Bank (and mint), which was built in Copenhagen in three stages beginning in 1965. The 1960s brought him opportunities abroad, including competitions and commissions in England, ‘Germany, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Pakistan. and Kuwait.  Some of Jacobaen’s most experimental work was done in 1970, when he develaped three different system houses; Kube flex for summer cottages, Keadeatfles for a housing exhibition. and Mellehuser. Similarly, wo of hu most successful industeial designs are from late in life: the Cylinda linc of stainkess-sece! tableware for Stclton A/S (1967) and the Vola plumbing firunys for 1.P. Lands (1969). These timeless dengns, along with light fixrures for Louis Poulsen (1957) and cutlery for A. Michelsen's (1957; now made by Georg Jensen), are still in production.  Jaobsen's work ethic is legendary: he titelessty sketched, studied, and modeled a deugn prablem until a good solution was found. He imparted this and the need ta simplify form te his students at the Kuntakademi (1956-65) and to his employees. Gehrdt Bomebusch, Knud Holscher, and Henaing Larsen are three of Jacobsen's formes cmployces who became leading sevond-peneration modemins.  Javobsen’s influence on contemporary architecture and de- sign continues. Hix work remains fresh; the simple and organic shapes remain vital, colors soothing, and details inspiring, Jacob: sen spoke of the importance of beauty in distinguishing architec- ture trom building, (1 os his achievement eo have created bemty while working actuss 4 specuum of buikting types, scales, and Jouales. Hle has improved the tickls of modern architecture and indusunal design with the chinty of hus vision.  Kare Nesarri  Ser «ho Asplund, Erik Gunnar (Sweden); Denmark; Eames, Charles and Ray (United States); Fisker, Kay (Denmark); Lanes, Heaning (Denmark); Mies van der Robe, Ladwig (Germany)  Biography  Horn in Copenhagen, Denmark. (1 Ecbrusry 1902. Amended  the School of Arhiteceure, Academy of Ars, Copenhagen: de-  grce m architecture 1928, Married: 2 chuldten, Worked in dhe  office of architects Paul Hoboe, Copenhagen 1927-30, Private  practice. Copenhagen from 19340; daigned texules and furninure  from 1943, Professor of architceture. Academy of Arts. Copen-  hagen from 1956. Honorary corresponding member. Rogal In-  stitute of British Architects: honorary fellow. American Institute  of Architects. Died in Copenhagen, 24 March 1971.  Selected Buildings  Bellevur Seasale Devebnpasent (First pits, cumpetitien), Copenhagen, 1932  Bellavista Housing Faate, Klaaypeuborg, Denmark, 1933  Seelling House, Gammel Tor, Copenhagen. 1937  Bellevue Theater sod Ganiticl Itellevur Resausant, Copenhagen, 1947  ‘Town lal (hee prise, compentaon, wath Litik Maller), Aarhus, 1942  Town Tall (Fine pnze, compertnon, wath Flemming Lauca), Selterad, 1942  Sabolm Terraced Housing. Kismpcnbarg. 1980  Maney Harris Showroum and Spare Department, Roskilde landeve), Copenhagen, 1952  Jespensin and Son Office Building, Cupenhagen. 1955  Town Hall. Radovte, 1955  Ruthwen Jurgemen Home, Vedback, Denmark, 1956  Munkegaard School, Vangedere). Gentofre. Denmark, 1956  Cad Christensen Factory, Aalbutg. 1957  SAS Royal Horel and Air Terminal, Vewterbogade, Copenhagen. 1959  Feik Siealy House (peject), Prinsessesuen, Lyngby School, Radewre, 1980  Relieve Ray Housing Estave, Klampenborg. 1961  Se Cathenne’s College, Oxtord University. 1163  Library, Redovre, 1969  Dansh Embassy, London (with Diseng and Weithing!, ("1 
Danuh Nanonal Bank, Copenhagen bath Dieing and Weeling). wi  Further Reading  Most af the boul on Jacobsen have appeared in Danssh, Spanah, of  fulian, wich tnglish inanalanuns, caccpt a noted By Gar the aunt  comprehensive and Lavishly illuwated book ws Vhuu and Virdum’s  1998 work, which ws encisely in Danish. The Centre d'Fanudes de Bis:  seay monograph (Jacobsen 1991) 1 excellent, fully eranalated, and in dudes cous by the architect  26> Revista Ineernanwnal de Arquitecrara: International Architecture Revrem: 4 (1997) (specaal rsue entitled “Ame Jacobean Edificios Pabboos; Public Buildings”?  Faber, Tobias, Arne Jacobsen, Srumgart, Germany: Verlag Gerd Haye. London: Titan, and New York Pracger. 164  Jacobsen. Ame, Artuetien Arie facvinen, 1902-7! feubib. cats, Copenhagen: Dansk Arutcktur og Bypgeckspon Center, 1991  Jacobsen. Ame, Arne facadven, Baruclona: Centre d'Esnudis de Drseny and Santa and Cole Edicrones de Desitm, 1991  Meller, Erik, Aare Raddbes, Copenhagen: Arlutcktens Furag, 1991  Pedersen, Johan, Arkuekien Arne facabien (with English xurmmury). Copenhapen. Arhitehicrs Forlag, 1954  Rubino, Luciano, Arne Jacobsen: opera compilers, 1909-1971. Rome: Kage, S980  ren-Beaxua de Corral. belin. Are Labora, Barcelona Gih,  198%, 2nd edition, 1991  Thaw, Carwen, and Kjelid Vindum. Arne Jarnbsea, Copenhagen: Artcacksera Forlag, 1998  Vojnes, Poul Eck. and Kyeld Vindum, Are fscebon: Archiars tnd Dengert, Copenhagen: Dandk Design Concer, 19  JAHN, HELMUT 1940- Architect and designer, United States  The design work of Helmut Jahn has always engaged technology at the ceruer uf architectural activicy. His famboyant personality is duplicated in his ster architccrural design works, which have shifted from a laie-Miesian vovabulary to a Posunodern phase characterzed by high-tech stytizations. His rapid climb withia CLE. Murphy and Associates (founded 1937) put him in an influential position co redefine the established firm’s exclusive position in Chicago into a firm nf international significance. The most recent work incorporates the transparency of glaxs, fusuristic systems. and advanced ccolagival comers that can be waced to the technological imperative of his earliest works and education.  After Jahn studied in Munich and at the Ilenois Instaute of Technology (ITT), bis wuek privileged the expression of the mechanics of conserucuon within che formulist idiom, Working with Gene Sammics, bis first design work included the McCor- mick Place Convention Center in Chicago (1970), a propect influenced by the detailing and structured space of Ludwig Mies van der Rohe's Neve Nationalgalene (1965-68) io Berlin and his unburl projoce tor a convention hall (1953) on Chicago. Situated berween Lake Michigan and Lake Shore Drive, the Rridded interior space is defined by a large-scale space frame overhead. spanning the open plan of 150 feet with additional 75-foot cantilevers projecting overt the exterinr space. In 1973 - 74, Jahn designed the Kemper Arena in Kansas City, Missoun,  This project utilized three steel trusses to hang a roof over a large oval-shaped athletic arena space and seating for 18,000 spevtatnes, Suspended over a solid exterior cladding of insulared metal panels and rounded corners, the project expresses a faith in space-age technology. After chis, he directed the design of many large urban projects, including courthouses, libraries, con- vention centers, and corporate office towers actors the midweat- crn United Sun, experimenting with this emergent style. The works of the period 1974-78 exhibited a growing confidence in the expressive use of primary colors and exposed technological devices, in sympathy with the Archigram group in England.  Jahn was a member of the informal group of nascent voices who called thernselves the Chicago 7 since 1977. During this period he began ta pasticipate in a larger disccnurse on the direc- tion of architecture informed by che communicative and sym- bolic functions of architeuture. The work of Murphy/Jahn turned from a strict interpretation af the technologically driven design of the Micsian tradition and aligned itnelf with a rising tucod defined by critic Charla Jenks as Postmadernizm. Jahn acknowledged this percepuble shift in his work's meaning as « new attitude allowing the firm to “free our skills wo practice atchitecture beyond a mere problem solving, funcuonalist meth- odology, resulting in a pluralism, which is multi-directional, less restrictive and fos dogmatic, characterized by a loss af conviction as to exclusivist principles and more communicative and user- orienced.” This new emphasis on populism and pluralism in- formed his subsequent urban projects ax a directed search for a “variable, wide-ranging archirectural language.” The cowers propoved for che Xerax Center (Chicago, designed 1977, built 1980). the Chicago Board of Trade Addition (designed 1978, built 1982), che unbuilt Chicago Tribune Tower Lite Entry Competition (1979), the Northwestern Terminal (Chicago, de- agned 1979, completed 1986), and One South Wacker (Chi- cago, designed 1979, buile 1981-82), utilized exterior curtain walls of gl.is, reflective and selectively colored for ummamentaton disurctly different than the cahausied Micsian prototype of sam- ber discipline. ‘The labbies of these tall buildings express this wwncem with populism and ornamentation in their simplified echoes of Art Deco and art nodeme precedents. Physically and structurally dependent on cartier rechnalogy, these projects par- ticipated in a larger culraral shift coward forms thar recall the past and break overall volume into subordinase masses, The inPuence of the carly pioneering phase of tall-building design is recalled in 4 distinctly reductivisr execution, achieving the Poutnedern gual of reconciling modernim tn irs historical past. Te is during this time that che preliminary design sketches and representations of projects hecome self-conscious touls in the development af style, whete the explorations of “paper architec- ture” appear transferred to the skins of the buildings.  Thus process is evident in the project submitted for the com- petition for a tall building in Houston — the Bank of the South- west Tower (1982). Here, che sibmicted drawings and design- Process sketches for an 82-story building reveal a search for an appropreate stevie for the tall bunkding in a city with much fewer buih precedents as context. The multiple studies range across high-tech mechanical volumes co historically reminiscent stacked and ticted farms following the base-shaft-top typology of the catly 20th century. The resulting submission utilizes masonry cladding at the ground level, a clear prismatic solid shaft (with Jahn’s frequent use of multicolored lass-curtain walls as deevea-  Firsz Source Comer. Seath Bend, Indiana (1982) Photo © Mary Aon Sullivan  tion), und a whematic top thar mimice the Chrysler Building (1930) in New York.  The most prominent commission of this period was [or the State of Ulinais Center, later renamed the James R, Thompson Center. Designed in 1979, ic was finally constructed in May 1995. The program for the square site adjacent wo Cay Hall included over a million squate fect of uttke and adminsuative spaces for vanous branches of the State of Illinois government, stations for subway and elevated trains. amd retail at the plaza devel. The building's form has a large cylindrical rotunda 160 fect across rising all 17 floors to an inchned glass roof. It is an internalaed public space, animated by che flow of people and sounds than the mannered exterior space. “The vertical circula- tion of elevators, escalator, and vain move up through this fucurintic espace that performs a valuable encrgy-conserving func- tion, The overall building foem is a quarter ciecle in plan, with three faces built to the strect lines, but the curved face that faces the exterior plaza is inclined with three setbacks. The ground level contains exterior cladding of pink and gray granite forming a continuous arcade. The red, white, and bluc glazing and metal panels are a glib reference to its government function and employ details from Jaho's other tall buildings in Chicago, The ‘Thomp- son Center has received near-constant public criticism for its experue, execution, and appearance,  Contemporancous with these projects for tall buildings. a significant series of commissions for the growing O'Hase later: tational Airport allowed Jahn to explore his vocabulary in a radically different building type. Projects a O'Hare incuded the Rapid ‘Transit Station (designed 1979, buik 1983) and the award-winning United Airlines Terminal and Satelle Building (built 1985 -87) arising trom the successful proposal for the aver- all development of O'Hare in 1982. The airport's growth con- tinues, and Murphy/abn remains the primary architect of one of the world's largest airports. Accommodanng over 40 new pre and over a million square fect of circulation and supporting  cilities, chis project was deugned as cwo parallel finear systems. composed of a repetitive series of stect structural bays, The struc- tural aystems is exprened in curved-steel arches and cross bracing that incorporate mechanical modernist strategies fram Victorian influences. The successes of the project are its legibility, clarity. anil case of movement through the vaulted space, Folded erusses ard four-post strusnutal columns create humin-saled modules of space in 4 vast proyece. Subterrancan connecuons are desayned as moving walkways surrounded by kineus hight and sound sculptures. an overt populist treatment of a potentially gloomy space. In 1985 three projects were designed lor New York Ciry: the unbuilt cower tar the New York City Cotium at Columbus 
Circe, the anbuile Times Square tedevelopment progect, and the City Spire Project (derigned 1985, built 1985-89). The recewion of the late [980s put an etd co ment Laqge construction ta Chicago and other large American citics, and che office of Murphy/Jahn raponded by pursuing more unematonal work. Projects and competitions for Jahn’s native Germany and works in Asia formed dhe basis of the Lite phase of 20th-century design work for the flim. Two variations of the United Airhines Verms- nal were proposed for che Consolidaced ‘Terminal for Ameran Airlines and Northwest Airlines (1988) at JFK Internalonal Air- port in New York. A vast Scoom! Bangkok International Aurport (designed 1995} was stopped because of public critic over cust and the absence of “Thai elements” in the design  Jaho's Messecurm (1988-91) in Frankfure am Main, Ger- many, was ane of Exrope’s tallest buildings. towering over the sprawling city, [ts design follows the logic of the carlicr tall buildings, with a historically informed sithouctee. An adjoining market hall for the Frankfurt Girgrounds (uste of ten designed by multiple architevts) formully anticipates the Later unsuccessful Richard H. Drichaus Foundation Design Competition (1997) for a new student center at the campus of Minois Institute of Technology (IIT). Across State Strect from Mics’ $.R. Crown Hall, Jahin designed Scate Street Village (2003), 2 set of readence halls uxat face ofl with ube Miesian kegay. These torous span large blocks of programmaric space with 3 pracefully curved bur monoliths. metal ruof, a sftening of the orthodony uf the earli- est works.  ‘The most prominent and anticipated work af Murphy/Jaho in the 990s was the vast Sony Center (195 2000) in Pots. amet Plarz, Berlin. This project, like many achers, was iniriared va the vollape of the Berlin Wall and a deliberate areempe by the federal government of Germany to rebuild a rotalizing urban fabric: arom the barren areas created by the Cald War division of the city. Potsdamer Plau teucived special auemtion, as its prewar status as a vibrane ushan center gave way in the 19505 and 1960s to 4 vague territory of cruptiness in the middle af the city, desolate in comparison to the adjoining Tocegartcn. ‘The overall muster plan for the sites was won previously in a compcuvon by architect Renzo Panu, who was responsible for overseeing all the new construction. Conremporancous design progects near Poudamer Marz were done by established interna tional architects, including Ralacl Moneo, Richard Meier, anal Daniel Libeskind  Within the Sony comptes, the ruins of the Grand-Horel Fs. planade (1908-12, Orme Rehnig} weie incorporaed with some difficulty: the “Emperor's Hall.” weighing $300 tons, was ranted 2.5 meters and transported 75 meters on rails te its final location within the ensemble. The large office tower fur Sony, executed in 4 neomodern technique of technology. signifies the movement away from che flagrant populisin of catlict work and is remarka- bly restrained and serious, in contrast with Jaha's dendet office tower on Ku'damm. The conerctc-trame vanstruction of the diver program ns clad in smouth ghus skins w emphasze the transparency of the volumes and the public space between them,  Major clements of the project pursue the historical function of the sire and the technology of the client asa public overture — although now 2s usctul chemed functional space, nor as privat- ized scons. ‘The Sonv Cenrer entertainment taciities include an cight-screen multiplex cinema and an IMAX rhree-dimensional theater. In accordance with the cinemanc progrimming, the  Berlin Filmmaseum and the German Mediarhek are joined with an education facility, the Film and Television Academy Bertin. the Filmlibrary. the Film Distribution House. and the programs of the German Kinematheck. Restaurants and shops at ground fevel, below-grade parking facilities, and a significant amount of housing above ring the difficult triangular aite, The project fol- lows the Berlin model of perimeter block housing defining large anterior public spaces (here gardens and a formal paved plaza). The must visble component af this mixed-use urban block is the elliptical tensile cunstruction echoing the cent forms of a pre-cinematic form of popular entertainment: the circus.  The Horel Kempinski (1993-94) near the Munch Airport places hotel space aside a vast atrium with a thin overhead canopy and all-glass entry facade designed to deflect up to one meter with changing dimatic conditions. The increasing reliance on glass skins and exposed mechanical xysiems overtakes the cartier Mratcgics without vicpping entirely away from the carbest for- alam. Teanaparency is noe pursucd ax an allegory of a transpar- ent or democratic society hast as a citation of the carliex experi- ments in the potential of glass as 4 significr of modernism, as in the unbuilt ofle towers proposed by Mics in the 1920: oF the socialia exprewdicniom of Paul Scheerbart and Bruno Taut She incral tramparercy of glass in his last 20th-<entury work shows a fusion of hixory and technology. As Wener Blaser bas stated, “Eelmuc Jahn has given the use af steel and glass in architecture an exceptional iechnical and aetheuk articulation thar is inseparably associated with the concept of cransparency. Standing squarely in the rradinien of che 19th cencury and yer interested in the wontinued development of innovative facade technologies, Jahn places the supporting stcel structure of his buildings on the outside, Ar the came rime, he wraps his glass skins around a light and weightlew incetior that acquires a mpecial force through effects of light and color.” (eee Blaser, 1996) A rhume on wphisticated technology. “high-tech” signature Pieces, “passive/acuve systetns.” technical innovation, and an emphasit on the image of technology ate all manifest in use Later works, ahhough they are implied in the imagery of the cathicst.  THontas MIcaL  See sho Hintocicisany Mies van det Rohe, Ludwig (Germany); Postmodcsnizen  Biography  Boen an Nuremberg. Germany, 4 January 1940; maved to the United States in 1966, Attended the Technische Hachschule, Munich 1960 - 65; degrees in architecture and engineering 1965; wudied under Myron Goldsmith and Faslue Khan at the IHinois Insite af Technology. Chicago 1966-67. Married Deborah Ann Lampe 1970 1 child. Worked with P.C. von Seidlein, Munich 1965-66. Joined Cb. Muephy Associates, Chicago 1967; asistane to Gene Summers 1967-73; partner, director in charge of plantung and design, executive vice president 1973~ 81. Principal, trom 1981, president, from 1982, chief executive otlicer, from 1983, Murphy/Jahn Associates, Chicago. Lecturer, University of Illinois, Chicago 1981: Eliot Noyes Visiting De- sign Crt. Harvard University, Cambridge. Massachuserts $981; Davenport Visiting Professor of Architectural Design, Vale University, New Haven. Connecticut 1983; Thesis Profes-  sor, Illinois Institute af Technology 1989-92. Member, Chicago ? from 1977; corporate member, American Liutitute of Archi- tects 1975. Chevalier, Ordre des Arts ct Letres L988.  Selected Works  Kemper Arena, Kansas City. Maxoun, 1974  Tribune Tower Late Enery Campetinon (untuile, Chicago. 1479  Xerox Center, Chicago, 3980  Board of Veade (addition), Chicage, 1982  Fine Source Center, South Bend, Indiana, 1982  One South Wacker Office Building, Chicago. 1482  O'Hare Rapid Tramat Station, Chicago, 1483  New York Cry Coliseum (unbaile), Columbus Curcie. 1985  Times Square Redevelopment, New York, 1045  Nontrwesern Rail Termaal. Chicago. 1986  United Audtics Terminal, O'Hare Internanonal Airport. Checago, (987  City Spwc, New Yutk, 1989  Mase Frankfurt Convention Ceniet, 1989  Mowe Tower. Frankfur-am-Maun. 1991  Hoed K Munich, 1994  Sure af Uhaow Games R. Thompsont Center. Chivaga, 1995  Sony Ceneer, Posdamer Mai, Berlin, 2000  Selected Publications  “Architectural Form” (with James Gorrch), Hawen and Wohnen (December 1975)  “Romanuc Hi-Tech” (interview), Penning ane Bercddemy Develapmrnt (Man hi April 1983}  “The First 20 Years.” A + U (19803  Further Reading  A+ U Extra Edition (June $986) (apecaal usue edited by Toshio Nakamura and trled “Buililings in Progrest”}  A+ U Exton Edition Seprember 1992) (special issue ctled “Hema Jahn"  Blaer, Wermer, Heimat Jahn. Tramparray. Helmeus fabr. Tramparens (tolingual English-German ednion}, Tascl and Boston: Birkhauser. 1996  Jabn, Helenar, Asrperts. edited by Werner Blaser. Basel and Bowoa Birkhiuser, 1991  Jooliche, Joachim Andreas, Hebwrus jata: Dergn ciner newer Archirkrr, Scangan. Gremany: Kramer. 198%: as Hebert fad Devign of a New Architecture, translated by Peter Green, New York Nichols. 198”  Miller, Noy, Helorar lade. Now York: Rizzoli, 1986  JEDDAH, SAUDI ARABIA  ‘Whar began over 3000 years ago as a fishing seelement in a bay situated halfway an che east coast of the Red Sea is now feddah, a thriving metropolitan area and the second-largest city in the kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The name Jeddah. meaning “Grand mother” in Arabic, refers to Eve, who is reputed to have de- scended from heaven in Jeddah to luok foe her mace Adam. Today a tomb for Eve exists in a burial ground bearing her fame, Our Mother Eve's Cemetery, in the Al Baghdadiya disterct just to the north of the okl city. The significance of the gco- phic location of Jeddah at the aime was the eustence of nch shing waters with three major lines of coral reets off the shore of the Red Sea and the "Faaima™ valley that links a inland to  the holy city of Makiah. Throughout its existence, the city eape- rienced shifts in its promincat role because af regional and inter- tational power change and continued to cvulve into its current major unternational seaport starus.  The opening of che Sucz Canal in 1869 proved to be a huge opportunity for aty merchants to trade with international ports in india, Afnica, and even Liverpool and Marseilles. Thus, Jed- dah’s later significance in the 20th century was started by means at this access,  Tn 1925 the city sutrenderal 10 King Abdul Aziz Ibn Saud, and in modern history continued when, in 1933, the king's fimance minster, Al Sulaiman, signed in Jeddah a luctative oi vencesivn with the Seandard Oif Company of California. In 1938 oil began flowing in the eastern province of Saudi Arabia, and life [ue all cities in Arabia, including Jeddah, was never again the same.  The wall of okl Jeddah came down in 1947. and che city began sprawling to the north, Up until 1947. che population of Jeddah was about 25,000, Within the span of che last $3 years, this populanon has jumped ww a staggering ovo mullion inhabit. ants, requiring vast aumbers of architecture and infrastructure  projec.  Refore the 1960s Jeddah’s architectural designs were influ. enced by cultural/religions and environmental factors. The sciec- thon of cunatruction materials was controlled by local availability of raw building supplies. Lovaved at 21°33’ north Latitude and 39°10! ecact longitude, Jeddah’s anaual environmental facton include an average temperauare of 28.1°C (82.61). a relative humidity of about $0 percent, and a total of about ewu weeks of rainfall, Culeural and religious factors centered on the issue of privacy. Those influences ould be seen an the simplest yer most visible feature of a buiiding, the bay window. Known as Kaxseshin. hay windows are stnking tearures of the archisecrure of ukd Jeddah. Displaying lavish woodworkings and engravings on imported tcakwoods, which are highly resistant to msect at- tacks and relative high humidity; these Ratsaesho provided fresh cvoling air and preserved the privacy of the occupants. A similar arrangensent cxisted in small batconics with lattice screens (Sesh) and wood caxements (Afishnabiyah), fulfilling the combined re- quirement of natural yertilatiog and privacy in Jeddah’s eypical home. The main conscruction material of old houses was selected out of tclatively uiff matcriah of the available Red Sea recht. Limestune blake were cut frum those corals and monared to- gether using date pulp-based compounds. This combination al- lowed bunkers to construct one-, two-, thice-, oF even four-story buildings. Elaborate and origynal handcrafted designs oma- mented the extenur limestone stucco, which was acher white of colored mainty with pastel shades.  “The mast famous house in the city feanuring such traditional methods and materials is a 50-roam stone house called Beit Nassif (Nassif House) on Al Alawi Street, Designed by Egyptian aschitect Hassan Fathy and completed in 1973, it was home of the Nassif family for aver a century and is currently part of tremendous government cfforts to preverve 950 such structures sattered around old Joddsh’s quarters.  After the vil boom of the mad-1970s, almost all construction, wed concrete, stect, and glass as materials, and the traditional Jeddah style of buikting was abandoned.  The city is abo remarkable for its monuments created by prominent and international architece, including he Jeddah  
Abdul Raouf Hasan Khalid Muscom (1975-85) Pho wou Zouher A. Hashem  Spores Hall (by Frei Otto, 1981); Jeddah Royal Palace and Reyal State Palace (by Kenzo Tange, 1980); King Saud Mosque (1987) and Azizivyah Mosque (1988), both by Abdel-Wahed Fl-Wabil: and National Commercial Bank (Condon Bunshaft and Skid- more. Owings and Mernil, 1983). Award-winning busldings in leddah include the Haj Terminal at King Abdul Aziz Interna- tional Airport (designed by Sladmore. Owing, and Merrill, 1985). Vhe project is cantidered to be the word's largest roofed structure, covering 3.5 square kitomerers (370 acres) and de- signed t accommodate the one million pilgrims who make their way to Mesa cach year. The Haj Terminal comise of 210 conical Tellon-coated fiberglau ronf unin divided into ten rec: tangular sections, cach with 21 (3-by-7) af thine comecal roof units. ‘The project revcived the Aga Khan Award for Architecture in 1983, Gordon Bunshaft’s Nacional Cammercial Bank Head- quarter building reflects the importation of International Style modernism and features dramatic 100-lout-wide facade open- ings and recessed windows. Above che first-flooe level, a small tnangular core draws up warm air and venss u through the center of the mot,  At about every kilometer. a moayuc has been erected for the convenience af praving crowds of tourists and locals alike, The most famous of alt these mocques on this Red Sea strip is the Corniche Moxque. which received the Aga Khan Award for Ar-  cbitecture un 1989. Built in 1986, che mosque was designed by the Egyptian aschitece Abdel-Wahid Ei- Wakil. Recognized by ws simple dome and minaret cunstructiun, the musque's interior provides praying men and women with a serene atmosphere overlooking the blue warers of the Red Sea.  EL-Walal also designed the King Saud Mosque (1987) on El. Meda Road. The largest domed mosque in the city, it fea tures an open central courtyard with properly oriented shading devices thar allow warm air from the enrire structure to vent nacutally ubrough the rooftop. [he main feature of the King Saud Mosque in its segmental central dome, which has a height af 40 meter. This type of dome construction was never realized before this project's completion, Foe weight consideration, the dome was conmructed using hallow. yet load-bearing, bricks. Starting with che square, the construction allowed for going through the remaining multisided layers of the dome in a much slower rate thin was typically done and, as such, permiteed the dome to be signifxanty hugher than typical domes.  If history offers us any lessons, it would teach us that Jeddah will continue ro survive and prosper, Given government rt, the resourcefulness of its population, and the sourism prwpecs in Saudi Arabia (religious, internal, and external), the city will face 2 potentially tremendous growch dilemma, Infrastructure rejuvenation and expansion will be a munt for the city to take  on anticipated challenges. Architecturally, the viry still has the  potential to witness the creation of many more euient building  achievements in both the private and the public sector. Zocneik A. Hastie  See abo Fethy, Hassan (Egypt) Haj Terminal, Jeddah Air-  poet; Saudi Arable  Further Reading  Buchan, James (edits), Jeddak Old and New. London: Sarey Internannnal, 1980; revised edition, 1991  Schofield. Daruel (editor), with an essay by Sis Norman Anderion.  The Kingdom of Sandi Arabse. London: Stacey Internanonal, 1997; 9th aliuon, 1995  THE JEWISH MUSEUM, BERLIN Designed by Daniel Libeskind; completed 1999  The Jewish Muscum in Berlin is a building that is mored in the history of its sire, the city. and its Jewish readent in the 20th century. ies collections and exhibirions include cultueal and his  vorical objec: af art and artifacts af Jewish people trom the 4th cemury to the present. Begun by the American architect Daniet  fewath Museum, Bertin. designed by Daniel | dboskind (1999) © Bitter Bred:, erin  Libeskind in 1989 and completed in 1999. the mascuin was designed to physically and emotionally challenge its community and visitors alike chrough interpretation and perception.  Bom in Lodz, Poland. and raised in Israel before becoming an American citizen in 1965. Libesland has become recognized for his engagement with the critical theory thar surrounds much contemporary architecture. He has developed a distinct aesthetic with 2 specialization in museum design. The Jewish Muscum. Berlin (also tithed, as if a work of art inselt, Berween the Lines} represents the first of many similar projects including the |anish Jewith Museum, Copenhagen (Mizeneh, 2003), the San Fran- cinco Holocaus Museum, California (Z ‘Chat: To Life, 1998 - 2005), and catensions for the Deaver Muscum of Art (The Eye and the Wing, 2000-2005} and the Victatia and Albert Muscum. London ( The Spiral, 1996-2006).  In 3988 Libeshand was imsited by the Berlin Senare to submit 4 proposal to the architectural competition for the design of the Jewish Mascum (before the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1984). a project and institution that would come to represent one of the first steps toward establishing dialogue in a Gry shrouded by its history of Nazism and destruction.  The design concept tor the Jewish Muscum reflects and re- lates to its pierscal and historical place within the city of Berlin. Buiht on a prominent and visible site in the old seution of the  
“Memory Vou.” imtenyr of the fewoh Museum (1999) © Bircer Bred, Bertin  city, and adjacent m the Kollegienhaus, » Prussian Baroque courthouse, the Museust contrasts with ies surroundings. How ever, according to Libeskind there exist invisible counterparts to the site and the design of the building dat are in cumsant play, in che extentot and the interive. Metaphorwally. the contrasts and contradictions that are built into che structure represent relauons between Germans and Jews and underscore the primary aspects of che budding: to define the Jews of Berlus and to re- member the names af persons departed from Berlin during the Holocaust, specifically those listed in cwo massive official vol- umes known as the Grdenkbuch, or remembrance book,  The distorted Star of David, inscnhed upan the facade of the building and facmg the courtyard, represents the architect's efforts to use plastic form as a visible means of creating links berween Jewish traditions (the history inside the building) and German cilture (the exterior that is the city of Berlin). The scerning)y irrational arrangement of poses creates a compressed and distorted star chat furs tions as an emblem of religious faith. but ae of oppression: Berhn Jews were forued cx wear yellow stars on the very site where the buibding now stands.  Fanphasizing the sharp contrasts beoween old and new, viuble and inviable, visitors enter the Jewish Museum through the Baroque doors of the adjacent Kollepenhaus. ‘The movement  from onc tume and space into another is suggestive uf the kind of expected and unexpected experience to be encountered by the visitor inmde the 10,000 square metcrs of interior space. A descending stairway leads visitors into a dramatic void that runs below the foundations of the old building into che new. The new building arises from the void ax an independent structure, tied to the okt only hy time and space. Three underground “roads” lead vistors to ather acces of exploration from where they wan symbolically reach different condusions and peroep- tons. The longest “road” or hallway dircces one to the main staircase and to future exhibiuan spaces. Symbalically, this pach represents dhe continued history of Berlin. A second “road” heads oiftomard agarden. the E. 1. A. Hoffmann Garden. The unique design for this space. dexcrbed by Libeskind as “a kind of upside down garden.” places green foliage above the heads of the visi- ton. atop 17 concrete columns who stand on a sbupe. Also re- ferted to as the “Garden of Exile,” the space is intended to represene and ecflect the experiences of the exile and emigration of Jews from Geemany and their imprisonment in concentration camps. The third “road,” several hundred yards in length. leads to dead-end that starkly represents the void of the Holocaust.  Centtal co the organization and design of the interior pace is a large void. 90 feet in height, which nts through the form of the building, creating a spine around which cahibitions arc tw be organized. To cross from onc side of thit void ta the other. visitors pase across G0 connecting bridges chat further highlighe the intentional contrast of void and space and draw attentions to cdements that are both presence and absenr. Libeskind’s dynamic building has been subject to a common criticism of museum architecture: dha is. thar ube struccure upstages the ant and aru- facts that it was designed to house.  As expressed by Dibeskind, the Jewish Museum, Bertin, is meant io be understood as “an emblem of hope” that reflects the heritage of the pase. expresses the scatiments of the present. and projects a future of greater understanding,  Eur T. Jos1ow  See abo Decoasteuctivisnn Libeskind, Duniel (United States); Muscans  Further Reading  Binet. Helene. A Hanage Frough Ssirace and Light, London: Black Dog Stress, 1997  Libedund, Daniel. Couasernige, London Academy Editions, (991 and New York: Ruzoli, 1992  Libeskind, Daniel. and Helene Binet, fewish Museum Bertin, (Ammerdam:|. Gordon and Breach Publishing Group, 1999  Schaader, Bembard, frwah Museum: Berween the Lines, foreword by Daniel Libeskind, Munich and New York: Prestel, 1999  JIRICNA, EVA 1939- Architect, England  Eva jiricna is one of few women with an international reputation an architecture, design. and cngincering, Born in 1939, she traned in her homeland of Ceechoslovakia with a srrong empha- ss on science and engineering. [n 1968 she tnoved to Britain, where she remained. becoming a Beitish citizen in 1976. She  worked for ten years on the mammoth Brighton Marina project while with the firm Louis de Soissons Partnenhip, where she Seamed about high-tech materials such as tect, aluminum. noo prene, andl glass fiber. among others.  During the period 1982-84, Jaricna worked as team feader for the interior design packages for the Lloyds headquarters buikling at the Richard Rogers Parmnership, Having her own London office since 1984, she is often recognized as an architect of interiors. She has designed retail spaces fat Harrods in London and for Joan and David and Fsprit shops in Britain and the United States (1985-87), Her veraatile designs make maximum use of industrial materiah in limited spaces and often incorporate sculptural staircases as dramatic focal points.  Fach commission ia unique to Jiricna, and the Parameters and conditions are the starring point for the search for the sohi- ton. The actual design is preceded by duzens of analyses that Sook pot only at the functional requirements to be fulfilled bur also at possible mareniais and structural. and spatial sotunions, She employs a minimal number vf materials. thus allowing the nature and characteriwics of cach to be declared in a clear and often surprising way.  In [989 ane of Jiricna’s firs signature staircases was designed for the Joseph store on Sloane Street in Landon. The new stair- caxe wan located in the center of the store and used to organize the space while creating a visual focal point of acuvity. The risers are glass. and the entire suucture is suspended uning 2 system of steel rods, Fach decail 1s carelully calculated and peecisey crafted, and its transparency formally unites che ditlereat bevels of the shop. Although the initial impression of the staircase is one of fragility, che principles of engineering arc unwavering, and as the customer ascends ar descends the staitcase, sensations of security and surprise are experienced.  The design of a new ostcem for cthibitions was rhe task the architect faced at the Sir John Snane Muscum in Tondan in 1993. The house-muscum aceded freestanding clemency wo allow for the display of drawings, sketchbooks, models. and other architectural documents. However, the new supports could not interfere or modify the existing buddings, designed by Sir fuhn Soane in the late 18th and early 19th cennines. A series of freestanding glass cases were designed thar solve mulnple prob- Jems. The cases, made of clear taughened glass, mave on rails watrolled by pistons. The intecior af the case is a glass pancl with a mild sicel shect in a glass frame for the exhileion of two and three-dimensional objects. Drawings are held in place by magnetic strips. Three dimensional objects reat on gars alicives. Rasy access to the drawings is made pouible by opening an cad of the case and sliding out the innce glass panel. A mixture of florescent and tungsten halogen sources is incorporated within the case design and provides both direct and indirect lighting fo minimize possible reflections inside the case.  In 1993 President Havel of the new Czech Republic invited Jiriena to become a member of the Prague Presidential Council in an advisory capacity as an architectural consuleant, In 1998 Jiricna was asked to create a greenhouse for the Royal Garden. The first Orangery at the Prague Castle was established in the 15th century. The new commission called for a proposal chat would maintain the historical function of the site while using 2Och-century architectural language. The solution again looked fo a scainless steel stnxcture. which supports a supended glass  shell. A conwant in her work, structural efficiency has peoduced clear volumes and capanses of delicate shell while never rcln- quishing the funcional concerns of the building. It is sited in atoking way, and vison alung the new path from Klarov to Powder bridge yan appreciate 4 truly this modern building, which fits gracefully in a histone seating,  Recent projects alse include adapting the interior of the Frank (Gehry buildsng in Pi for the affices of Andersen Consulting, a pedestrian bridge for the Docklands, and a bus station in London. Jiricna’s office designed the Faith Paulion within the Millennium Dome, designed by the firm of Richard Rogers and Pannen.  Marea Troe  See abo Ragers, Richard (Ragland)  Biography  Boen 3 March 1939 in Czechoslovakia. Studied engineering and anchiteceure at the University of Prague: teccived a Master of Arte degree, Academy of Fine Arts in Prague, 1967. Travelled ty London in 1968, just weeks before the Soviet invasion of Crechoslovakia. She stayed in London permanenuy, ated worked for the Grearer London Council (1968-9); parmer with De Sossons (1969-80); and with David Hodge (1980-82). Estab- lished Eva Jimena Architects in Lomon, 1987. firicna is an Hon- orary Fellow of the Royal College of Art and of the Rayal Incar- poragon of Aschitecs of Scodand, She was elected to the British Roval Academy of Arts. She frequently leccures at universiues in Furope and the United States, including Harvard Uneversiry, the Univenity of Pennsylvania. and Ilinais Invitute of ‘Tech- nology.  Selected Works  Jomuph shop design. Landon, [989  Alex Bounque. Florenic, Haly, (989  Kolutc Footbridge, Broo, Caoch Repubisc, 1491  Gallery designs, Sit Joha Soane Museum. London, 1993  Extension and Convenuon, Ove Arup House, Highgate, London, 1994  Orangery, Peague Castle, Czech Republic, 1998  Fach Zone. Mallesaum Dome, Gecenvoch. England, 1999  Hotel Jusct, Prague, Crechowdovalua, 2002  Further Reading  Almaas, Ingetid Hetsing “Galleri § Sir lohr Snane Mayers.” Bogyekunst: The Nerwepian Reveew of Archivecure, %6 (1996) Davey, Peter, “Jarigra Bravura,” Architecturad Rerwew. 18S Qanuaary 1984)  Ereeggui. [oseph. Fra firs Devigas, Landan: Architectural Associanon, 1987  Hughes. Elmer, “In Person: Eva Jrricna” Gnterview). Mian Archuecture. Buslding, Interioe Deugn, 7 (July 19921  Manser, Jose, Jouph Shope: Bea frrena, London: Archieeaure Devgn and Technalagy Press: and New York: Van Nostrand Reunbald, 1991  McQuire, Penny. “Deawing Inspiranon.” Anchvievtural Review, 19" Qune 1997)  MeQuiston, Laz. Werner an Deugn: A Camtempursry View, New York: Rezzoli, 1988 
Rechardon, Sara, firscna Kerr and Anocuates « bebligraphy (00s, A2212), Monucedlo, Iknoe; Vance Bxbbogsaphics, 1989  Pauley, Marun, Ene firncna, Dengn in Exile, New York: Retsoli, 1990  Powell, Kenneth, “Back to the bucure.” Arduies’ Journal, 206 (July 3U~ August 7 1997)  Stungo, Naomi, “Sanun tw Sawn Canada Water laterchange.” RIBA feurnal, Vt (September 199)  JOHNSON, PHILIP 1906- Architect, United States  Philip Johnoon has been a crucial Figure in introducing conserva- tive American dients to avant-garde architectural forms and pub- Lctaing these forms in striking way, He began a» an carly and important advocate of the architeccure of the Furopean Modem mowcmenc in the United States chrough exhibitions, lectures. and juries, in addition to his own bails structures. He lived long enough to become onc of the best-known and most prolific Postmodern designen of the 1980s, Throughout his career. Johnson emphasized the formal valucs of architecture above all others, far more on than adherence tn any one etyle ar approach. More paradoxivally, he has maintained « poste of permanent avant -gardism, attacking the architectural ceniainties of the mo~ ment—admitting all che while that his aim has been to influence the wielden of power as they choose architectural expressions of thar power.  Under the influence of young Harvanl-trainad art historians Hensy-Russell Hutchcock, Jr.. and Alfred H. Bars, Jr. Johnson quickly became a formidable authority on Western architecture. However, Hitchcock and Barr, as well as Johnson's brilliant Harvard circle of funure Madern-art parrons, persuaded Jahnson to put his energies and considerable wealth ince education and  nda for modern architecture.  In 1936, shortly after che 1929 frunding of the Muscum of Modern Art (MoMA) in New York under Bart's direvtorhip, Johnson began acting as the muscum’s de facto, unpaid curator of architecture. His 1932 exhibition, “Madern Architecture: In- ternational Exhibition,” » generally known as the “International Seyle” shaw, after the tirle of the accompanying book by Johnson and Hichuock. The eahibiven followed Bast's lead in presenting the most extreme and accomplished modernise —Le Curbusier, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, Walter Gropius, and J.J.P, Oud— as masters of a undicd, wachable. inevitable style. for which the MoMA historians invented the label “International.” The ethibirinn and book were criticized for theis frankly formalist stance, but the thoroughness with which Johnson documented and publicized this branch of modernism made MoMA the au- thoney on it for the next 3) years.  ‘Through his MoMA contacts and prevence on the Berlin art scene, Johnson became a majot figure among the avant-garde’s elite patrons on two continents while still in bis 20s. Johnson's mas important Berlin acquaintance was Mies van der Rohe, whose presence in American deagn began under Johnson's pa- tronage. After the exhibition, Johnson was hered (paying his own salary) as MoMA’s curator of architecture and design, However, the mercurial and umpetuous Johnson became attracted to the Hitkr movement in Germany and in 1934 left archuecture to  serve as actinst and publicist for several Eascist and radical-nght Causes.  tn 1940 Johnson enrolled in Harvard's Graduate School of Design, thes ran by Gropius. His first executed building was a Cambridge house thar he built for himself using Mies’ “court house” concept: it was offered as his senior chesis in architecture in 1942. In 1947, Johnson curared 3 seminal eponymous recro- spective of Micv’ work, accompanied by » monograph that was the first catended discussion of Mier’ career in any language. The show and bonk made Mies a major figure in American architecture almost avetnight and returned Johnson to the place of influence in architcurure that he had occupied before 1934,  In 1949 Johnson erected his fire imporunt work: a single~ room, steel-framed, glass-walled house for himself on property in New Canaan, Connecticut. The concept derives from Mies’ Farnsworth House tn Plano, Illinois, that was in che planaing stages at the rime. However, Johnson's Glass House depares cru- cially, of subnly, from ies prototype. The Farnsworth project és asymmetrical and scems to Moat above a floodplain on its white- painted I beams. Johnson's Glact House is symmetrical. rests on a low brick platform, and is anchored to its hilltop by a chimney cylindet of brick. The black finish and heavy comen of the ster] frame imbuc the house with a weighty, dasical air chat works in striking dialogue with the building's radical transparency. The Glass House is regarded 21 amang the best, possibly the very bets, of Johmnn’s buildings and is an important monument af the Internativnal Style’s a.ceptance in the United States.  In the carly 1950s, Johnsoa achicved some eminence aaa designer of suburban houses in Mies’ manner as well ax of the beautiful MoMA Sculpture Garden (1953) in New York, in- spited by Mics’ 1929 German Pavilion at Barcelona. He was Mies’ parmer in the design of che Seagram Building (1959) in New York. a commission that be had obtained for Mies as a MoMA consahanr to Scagram heiress Phyllis Lambert. The building's elegant Kour Seasons Restaurant is Johnson's chief contribution. Huwever. beginning in 1953 with a domed bed- toom in his Guest House, Johnson began experimenting wich fon—lntemational Seyle elements such as curves, vaults, pilaster, and axes, His appromh was to adopt avant-garde forms in more accemible, elegant. of recognizably hanotific ways, Johnson often ackled cerebral, rather stagy ceferences to carliet architecture, ranging from the work of Claude-Nicolas Ledoux to chat of obscure German modemists, but he always paid careful attention ty muterials (frequently fuxutious) and details. Johnson's build- ings share 2 pronounced concern foe the plan in both making useful spaces and considering their aesthetic effect on the pedes- man.  In the bate 1940s Johnson began to assert that the werities of the International Style were dead and that change was now architecture's only constant. He soon became identified with the quasi-clasical manner with which architects such as Edward Durell Stone amd Minoru Yamasaki uied to vermper modernist austerity; his New York State Theater (1964) a¢ Lincoln Center is wich an example, However. Johnaon also played with composi- tiunal schemes based on circles and cylinders (for example, the exquisite domed pavilions of the Museum of Pre-Columbian Ac, Dumbarton Oaks, Washington, D.C., 1963). The Roofless Church (1960) in New Harmony, Indiana. and several urban parks in Texas show Johnson's gift for siting abstract forms in ‘open spaces, His most breathtaking exercise in abstract form is  Fagus Werk (1911-14), Alteld an der Leine, Germany Designed hy Adel Meyer and Waher Gropinas (Germany? © Peeer Aaron ? ESTO. Alb cights reserved. 
Geundevig Church (1940), Copeshagen, Denmark Dactigned by Peder Vilhelm Jeasea-Klime (Denumark) © MIT Calle tices CORBIS Sahat al-Kindi Pasa (19860), Riyadh, Sauai Au Designed br Beeah Group Consuleanta (Ali Shami snd Abdul-Rahman Hussaini, Seuds Arabea) © Saich Al-Hathload  Sunita Pulp Mull (1936-38, 1951~54), Kou, Finland igned by Alvar Aako (Finlend)  
Jewish Museum (1988-98), Berlin, Germany Designed by Danial Libeskind (Poland and United Sratcs Grande Arche de La Défense (1982-89), Patie, France © Bireer + Brede, Berlin ’ Designed by Johan Qi vats Sprecketen (Deniraarh) ‘Alex Bartel f ESTO. All rights reserved,  °  Fovell Health House Ineerior (1929). Los Angeles, Cabfornus Designed by Richard! Neutra (Austria and  Ret erase Carbecdpat (1S 3) &dascasessa Pw caraerua 
Bank of America Corporate Center (formerly Nations Bank Corpoeme Center) 1992, Charlome, North Carolina Designed by Cesar A. Pelli (United Seatet) Phows © Ceau Petit and Awuciates  Parliament Building (1952-62), Chancligarh, India Designed by Le Corbusier (Charies-fdouard Jeannerct, France) © Chis Heller / CORBIS 
Habib Gorgy Scolpeure Museum Inverior  Rares Wana Wawel Arie Cenens (1574), Murtania, aca Gisa, Egypt by Ramecs Wissa Wasset (Egypc)  Photer by Chant Avedisign © Aga Khan Trust for Calmare  Shetdon Memorial Art Callery, Univeruty of Nebreska, Liecoln, Nebraska (1962)  Phos © Mary Ano Sullivan  the all-glass Crystal Cathedral (1990) in Garden Grove, Cali- fornia.  During this perind, Johnsan’s career as an architect was al- most secondary ta his starus as 2 pundit. He took an interst in the reform of urban planning and became a hero to the nascent preservation movement by protesting the 1963 demolition of New York's Pennsylvania Station. At the same time, with the guidance of art consuhant David Whieney, his companion, Jobnaon became an imporant collector and patron of pop are. Jolson was swarded the American Institute of Architects Gakd Medal in 1978 and the Pritzker Prize in 1979.  In 1967 Johnson took Chicago architect John Burgee into his firm. meking him a parmer in 1969. Burgee's experience with skyscraper design made it possible fo? Johnson to enter the high-rise marker. The firm experimented with variations on the standard glast-slab skyscraper, such as the IDS Center (1973) in Minneapolis, with its faceted comers, and the slant-top ad- joining crapezoids of Pennzoil Place (1976) in Houston. The publication in 1978 of the firm's famous scheme for the AT&T  in New York marked a controversial new direction. Ementially a modernist sab in layout, AT&T (consteucted 1979-84, now the Sony Building) featured a 60-for-high neo- Renaisaxnce Loggia with a 116-foot central arch, a granite-clad shaft, and a roofline in the form of a classical broken pediment. The vast “Chippendale” top reflected Johnson's admiration fot  Robert Venturi, whose writings mized calls for readable symbol- ism with a pop sense of irony and contradiction. (ATE 1"s pedi- ment also recalls the splir-top “gable” front of Venturi's 1964 house for his mother.) The skyscraper's granite casing and classi- cal details showed the inluence of more earnestly historicisr Posrmoderists, auch as Robert Stern. AT&T's monumental ele- ments and io stripped-down classicicm are in keeping with John. son's easlict prodilectiona, but acver before hed he repudiated the Intemational Styke so completely, Nor had 2 Pustmodera design ue such a large wale been accepted in the United Seates by such a conservative client. ‘The commission made Johnson the leader of the best-publicized and mont lucrative architectural trend of the following decade.  Between 1980 and 1985. Johnson and Burger dominated the market for Postmodemist skyscrapen and other high-budget projects. In addition to works in coundess historical styles, from French classical to German Renaissance to Art Deco, Johnson designed several buildings, stach as PPC; Corporate Headquarters 11984) in Pittsburgh and Internarional Place (rwo stages. 1988 and 1992) in Boston, that collage and distort familiar form in Provocative ways. These were the fruit of his interest in pop art and were nn always respeceful of his clients’ desire for clear architectural representation. However, Johnants's reutless design sensibility often kept him from maseceing either straight revival- et forms of these pop appropriations ¢y cntic’ sausfacuon. De- 
spite the excellence of works such as the Transo Tower (1983) in Houston. less-scoomptished designs, such as che Tames Square redevelopment (1983; unbuiltl with its overpowering scale, seemed to be cynical insults  Postmademism’s representational and urbanisic concerns, fn 1988 Johmon dropped historicia Postmodernism and in- volved himself with MoMA’s exhibition, "Deconstructivist As- chitectuse.” This muve remforced Johnson's reputatian for cyni- cal power brokering, yet Johnson was catrect in noting that stylistic revivalism had begun to wane as a major force in atchi- secture. The uve of sugnature architectural sryles (histone or avant-gande) as high-class commodities #s a more Lasting legacy from the Postmodem penod, which Johnson's catecr as an arch tectural impresane did much to encourage. Murs Davin Samson,  Sve aise AT&T Building, New Yorks Church: Corbusier, Le Qeanseret, Charles-Edousrd) (France): Fameworth Howse, Plano, Hliaois; Glass House, New Canaan, Connecticut Gropius, Walecr (Germany); Historicism; Hischcoch, Heary-Russell (United States); International Sryte; lateraa- tional Style Exhibition, New York (1932) Mies van der Robe, Ledwig (Germanyh Museum of Modern Art. New Yarks Oud, J.).P. (the Netherlands); Stera, Robert A.M. (Uaited Seates); Postmodernism; Seagram Building, New Yorks Venturi, Robert (United States)  Biography  Bora in Cleveland, Olio, 8 July 1906. the sua of a lawyer. Entered Harvard College in 1923 with dass of 1927: graduated 1930 with a B.A. in classical Greek. Volunteer advisor and cura- tor at Museum of Modern An, New York 19-32; curator of architecture and design 1932 - 44. Co-ufounder and director of nght-wing National Pany 1434; offered servges tw Luuiuana Senator Huey Long's national political efforts 1934-35: affil- ated himself with Father Charla Coughlin’s National Union for Soxial Justice 1936; co-organized “Youth and the Nation” political movement (later Young Nationalists) 1936-37; lecturer for American Feflowship Forum 1939-40, Studied at Graduare Schoot of Design. Harvard University 1940— 43, carning B.Arch. degree. Served in U.S. Army 1943-44. Architectural practice with Landis Gores 1945-91; dinetor of department of architec: sure, Museum of Modern An 1946~54; trustee of muscum from 1958; visiting cat, Yale Schuul of Anctutcceure, from 1950 unul carly 1960s. Partnerslup with Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, New York 1954-59, on Seagram Building exclusively, partner: ship with Richard Foster from mid-195ts m9 1962 and 1964- 69: partnership with John Burgee 1969-86: consultant to John Burgee Architects 1986-91; participated in and contnbured fi- nancially co Instinnte for Architecture and Urban Studies from about 1970 uncil che caily 198M Awarded Guild Medal of the American Institute of Architects 1978; awarded Priteker Prise for Architecture 1979, awarded honorary degrees frum Yale Uni- versicy, Pratt Institute, Oluo State University, University of Houston, and University of Nebraska.  Selected Works  Phibp Inbrin Heme (Glass Hote), Now Canaan, CT, 1949, Other significant works on the New Caraan property include Guew House (1949; bedroom remodeling 1953), Pavilon at Pond 11962), Sculpture Gallery (1970) and Gate Houre (1995)  Abby Aldrich Rackeéeller Sculprure Garden, Museum of Modern An. New York Gty Jin collsboration with James Fanning, Landscape archmrect), 194%  Roimonna Hoaw, New Canaan, CT, 1956  Four Seatons Restaurant, Seagram Building. New York Cary, 1959  Rootlew Charch, New Harmony, IN, 1900  Sheklon Memonat Ant Gallery, University of Nebraska. Lincoln. 1962  Museum for Pre-Columbian Art at Dumbanua Oaks, Washington, D.C., 1963  New York State Theater at Lincoln Center, New York, 1964  Kline Biology Tower, Yale Usuversity, New Haven, CT. 1966  IDS Center. Minneapoles, MN, 1973  Pennant Plae. Houston, 1X, 1976.  Thanlogiving Square. Howtun, 1X, 1976  Transca fowes, Houston, TX, 1979-85  PPG Headquarter. Pitnturgh, PA, 1979-84  AT&T Building (now Sony Building), New York Cxy, 1979-64  Republic, Rank Center, Houston, 1X, 1981-84  Fitty- Third at Third, New York City, 1984 -"  St. Baad Chapel, University of Se Thomas, Houston, TX (project), 1987  Selected Publications  Hichusck, Henty-Ransell, fe atl Philip Jubnwn, The fnaractional Style: Architecters nce 1922, New York: Norv: 1942: Jad edrion, Ud  Machine Art. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 194  Miter pan der Robe, New York: Museum of Modem Art, 1947: 2nd, reveal iadition. 1953: 3rd. revised edition. 1978  Architecture 1949-1985, incroduction by Henry-Russell Hitchcouk, Ir. New York: Holt Rinchar: and Winston. 1966  @remg:, introducnon by Pever Eisenman. New York: Oxford Unrversity Press, 1979  fohnwon, Phuhp and Mark Wighy, Deconssrnctevist Arehutectre texhib, cat), New Yorks Modem Muweum of An. asd Boston: Linde Brown, 1968  Modera Architecture: lnternassenal bxbrbuion, New York: Museum of Modern Ant, 1932 (with Alfred H. Bart, Jr. Heney-Rumell Hitchoock, Je. and Lewis Mumfoid, exhib, cat.)  Further Reading  Blake, Peser, Philip forson, Baxct and Rouon: Bickhiuset Verlag, 1996,  Frampeon, Kenneth (rditcor), Pindip Jobasen. Precrun: The Glas Howse, 1949 wad the ATET Corporate Headquarter, 1978 (cahib. cat), New York: Insntore for Architeceure and Urban Studies, 1978  Jacobin, John M.. Pbiip Jofrwen. New York: Rearilicr, 1962  Johnson, Philip. Hilary Lewis, and john O'Connor, Philip jobever: The Arckirece in His Own Words, New York: Real, 194  Kipnis. Jetirey, Philip Johan: Revent Werk, London: Academy ditions, 1996  Riley, Terence. The international Scie Exbobisien 15 amd she Musewm of Modern Art, New Votk: Rizzoli, 1992  Sefualze, Franz, Philip Jobnet and Wark, New York: Knopf, 1994  Whitney. David and felfrey Kipnis. Philip Jolwsom: The Glan Hous, New York: Pantheon, 1993  JOHNSON WAX ADMINISTRATION BUILDING  Designed by Frank Loyd Wright: completed 1939 Racine, Wisconsin  By the 190s the brilliance of Frank Lloyd Wright's carly atect seemed eclipsed by the new aud sinovative srchitccture an Kae supe. In the yearn since the Robie Flouse. he had lett the cy of Chicagy for the explitanon of an archiiecture bused on att organic merger ol program and site 4s the vchale dur the dircet expenence of a ransendenial Nature. In he xheme tor Broadicre Cty, tint developed during the late 1920. Waghe had extended the scape of this investiganun to recommend the full-scale dispersal of urban and industrial elements chroughour the countryside, overcoming traditional dichotomies of city and nature, Following this, 1¢ wan with Fallingwater (Penneytvania, 1934-371 and the Johnson Wax Administration Building (1936-39) that Wright signaled bis return te international promincme.  Located in Racine, Wiscumain, the building is a ren-part nas compared of 3 large clencal work flove Wuuttevted to an adjoining parking parage by s bridge of services and cxccutive ultices. The buidinig's design mcomporared innavarive technical derail. in-  cluding Aone heat, stecl-mesh seintorcing tor the concrete, and Blass tubing for skylights. The larger problem that Weight faced in the design lay in tying the corporate work envinenmcal tu an expenence af the narueal work whe ¢emaming on the indusuial urban site, in this case an entire city block. Te accomplahed thes by relaung the extenor of the budding 10 the motiva of the automobile on che surrounding streets rather chan tu die casting buildings nf the ciry and by turning the design inward, envelop ing workers un an unexpectedly remute intenor environment. When first scen, the building appears as a low streamline brick mass with softly rounded edgew [he se af the budding tvobs ured by a lack of ornamental detail and the use of diagonal ‘ox nonhverarchical massing on its third floor. As is charactertic of ws many of Weaght’s buildings. the entry docs aot announce ieself but mas be sought our, Plancs of brick and muted glass mave inte one another, cteating a Mud attangement that suinds apart from the abrupt verticality and singular masaing of the more traditianat office building of the surrounding city. Rather than deny the automobile as an intrusion into the entry cxpericnce, Waphe incorporaicd it. pulling vehisko inte the compesiuon at the pout uf enuy. The covered enuy drive, nestled beneath the bridging executive offices, is alow, sheltered arca. As oe steps unide, hihi floods duwit fromy a thice-story lobby. peoviding an immediate canerasr to che darker, com-  Jobnion Wax Budding (mictioe), Racine, Wawwnun, by Frank Loyd Winghe © Historic Amencan Buukfings Surey/Library of Congress 
pressed entry area and acting as a screen berween chat and the sangular, unprecedented work space beyond.  ‘The “great workroom.” as Wright called it. was designed 2s a communal workspace where each of the many clerical workers and managers could draw inspiration from participation in the shared corporare endeavor, Its spatial strategy inverts much of what we are accustomed 10 in our expectations of enclosure. Four walls meeting a ceiling with doors and windows clearly marked by molding as interruptions in the enclosure is not the way the character of this space is derermuned. A sweeping brick wall envelope an otchard of ull, flowering columns. A contnu- ous band of glass rubes at che traditional juncture of wall and ceiling disengages expectations of an orthogonal spac bnuted by such definitions of enclosure. This is not so much a room built smply as a device to exclude the outside as it is the creation of a unique experience un its own terms. To work in this build- ing, Wright said. would be like “(being] among the pine trees breathing fresh air and sunlight.”  Noted for structural innovation, the concrete columns stand out as the dominant clement of the space. A careful reversal of dasical entasis in the columns creates a genthe spreading serie of space, made indistinct by an ilusive relation of column grid to ceiling plane and load. These rise intn large circular capa that do pot touch ane another us they spread vat to establish a ceiling plane. There circles do not reinforce the orthogonality of the overall frame of the building aa given by the enclosing brick wall, Rather, one's most determinate rcading of che room is given by che columns, each standing with a presence of its own yer sull as a member of che group, much like the effeut of wees in a forest. Their shape is carefully crafted to pull one’s attention above the clutter of the working Boor to the shared pool of light above. Their connection to the ground is obscured by the tounded furninure thar Wright designed for che buiiding.  ‘Weight had experimented with many of these dements hefore in the Larkin Building (1904). He is explicit about the connec: tion berween these ewo, Thic great workroom “[is] the daughter of the Larkin Building,” he wrote. “burn, . .on provincial Amet- ican sed.” The Johnson Wax Administration Building resembles the Larkan in plan, with an enery sequence diding between twa masses to engage the short axis of a Linge interior volume. How- ever, the differences between these two buildings are more im: portant than the similarities, Ax Larkin, Wrighe opened an atrium ina threc-dimensional scructural grid. The resultane space was appointed with decorative elements and finishes in line with pi matic objecuves, In the Johnson Wax Admin- istration Building, the order of design is more powerful, Not only are the decorative elements incosporared into the architec- tural forms, but these forms, and the concept of smucture that  they develop, are reshaped—one might say reconceived— in set-  vice of the design idea. No preconceived structural or typological form was allawed to intervene between the spatial conception and its execuvon. It is architectural invention at its very best.  Life magazine opened its 8 May 1939 issue with 2 tribure to the building, aying, “It is getsine American archisecture, owing, nothing to foreign inspiration, different from anything ever built in the world.” Comparing the building to the recently opened New York World's Fair, it added. “{The] Fair. sprawling its gigantic mass of Freak and futuristic buildings is undeniably o great show. But future historiam may well decide thar 4 wuer glimpse of the shape of things to come was given last week by a single structure, buile arrictly for business, which opened in a drab section of Racine, Wisconsin.”  in chis era of rapidly changing society, Wright sought wo emphasize the role of the industrial establishment, the corpora- non, in bringing peuple together in “peaceful and productive collaboration.” The values of loyalty. participarion, and mem- bership enshrined in the prairie house dining roams emerge in the quiet formality of the great workruom. Wright himself called it “simply and sincerely an interpretation of modern business conditions ... designed co be as inspiring a place en five and work as any cathedral ever was to worshjp in.”  In the Joloson Waa Adininistration Building, Wright has identified the significance of work as a social bond and the poren- tial of the workplace to act a3 a binding agent. ‘he adaptation and transformauion of die ancient form of top-lit hypostyle hall, invoking a sense of community based on the participation of the Architectural histonan Kenneth Frampton has called the John- son Wax Building “possibly the most profound work of art America has yet produced.” It ranks among America’s most am- bitious statements of the possibdities of corporace capitalism.  J. Mocnan Desmoonp  Ser ake Booadacre City (1934-35); Fallingwatcr, Bear Ran, Pennsylvania; Weight, Frank Lloyd (United Scases)  Architectural Forum, G1 Yonuay 1938)  Egbert, Donald Drew, “The klea of Organic Expressina and American Aschisecture,” in Freduttonary Thought ut America. edited by Stow Persona, New Haven, Connecticur: Yale Univenity Pree, 1950  Uporan, Jonathan, Arend f lond Wright aad the Johnson Wan Buskdeng,, New York: Rizzoli, and London: Architectural Pres, 1986  Wroght, Frank Lloyd. Am Ascobiegneply, New Yatk and London: Longman Green, 1932  KADA, KLAUS 1940-  Architect, Austria  Klaus Kada is one of the leading figures in contemporary Aus- trian architecture. His work and conrribution are w be under- stood in the contest of the repanal architecture culture that developed around the city of Graz. the second-largest city in Anstia, from the carly 1970s onward and that gained interna- tional ateenton in the mid-1980k. Orher members af the group, all of whom share a passion for furtnal and material experimenaa- tion, inchide Ganther Domenig. Volker Gienche, and utc hoshand-and-wife team of Michact Srystkewitz and Karla Ko- waliki. Newrithed by active government building programs. ex- Pansive competiuun systetns, and vivid public debate abuut ar- chitecture, these Graz architects have recently challenged the hegemony of Vienna as the cenees of Austrian architecture.  Kada was born in the small city of Leibninz, about 20 miles south of Graz near the Sloveruan border. where his parents owned 2 department store. As the eldea son, he was expected to take over the family business, bur instead he chose to study: building construction at a technical college. In 1961, Kada on- cered the Technical Univenity of Graz co study architecture and earned 3 diploma ata relatively macure age in 1971.  In 1976, Kada opened his own office after five-year training period in various architectural office: in Germany and Austria. Such training is required of Austrian andutects prior co taking the licensing examination. Since then, Kada has built a very successful practice designing private, public, and invitunonal buildings. mostly around the Graz region. The office has a broad scope of building rypes to its credis: private houses, mass-housing projects, a dormitory, a muscum, laboratory buildings. office buildings. hospitals. and auditoriums.  Kada's scrength lies in his commitment to the practice of building cather chan in theoretical pronouncements, His archi- tecture is known foe precision of detail and experimentation with new building technologies, mas recently with glass con- struction. He is also known for intelligent site strategies. his ability to combine old and new, and his ability to reapond to a variety of programmatic needs. Formerly known for exuberant forms, Kada's mature work has settled into restrained goomecc: formal language with clear structural and material articulation.  Ome of his firx commissions was to design a new facility for the family business. The Kada Department Store (1971-73), with its prefabtivated-conctete skeleton and paneling systems, manifests Kada's carly interest in new technologies and construc- tion methods as it pays tribute to his carly affinity to che megas- tructurab projects of the 1960s. Kada also cites Pier Luigh Nervi and Louis Kahn, both known for their highly articulated and syttematic approach to senicture, as early influences.  As common to Austnan archirectural practices, Kada has yained most of his larger commissions chrough design competi- tions. In recent years, he has completed majac public and institu- tional projects. induding a dormitory (1988-92) in Graz, a glass museum (1987-88) in Barnbach. the Institute fur Plant Physiol- ogy (1993 97) for the University of Gras a aursing home (19973 95) in Leibniv, and a coment hall (1993 95) ia Si, Potten.  The dormitory building in Grar and the glass muscum in Barnhach are perhaps the most celebrated Kada buildings to dare. In the srudent hausing project. Kada shaws his mastery of a difficult ushan site and his passion for communal housing. he darmicary is lacated along Wiener Srrasse in a slighely dilap- idared part of own. Uhe building is pushed into the interior of the block with a narrow axial entrance to the road. From the street, herween ald houses, one can catch s glimpse of the slightly curving south-facing facade of the main building mass, which is articulated with red balconies, longitudinal access galleries, aud vertical glared staitcasea reminicent of Ralph Enkine’s Byker Wall (1969-81) in Newaastle-upon-Tyne, England. On warn days, studenn occupy these spaces, nuhing the building appear as a Lage wall of life and movement. The communal seudent life as cemered around an auditorium (also red) and a cafe on the ground-floor bevel.  The glass museum is located in the existing glassworks in Barnbach, near Graz. Like the dormitory, the glass museum manifests Kada’s mastery of a difficult sste condition and his ability to mediate between old and new. Unlike other competi- tons, Kada chose to preverve the old generator house and to use it as the core of the new muscuin. The sew clement tap and fom spaces around what came to he reduced to a concrete skeleton. Appropriate to the function, the building beats witness to Kada's passion for experimenting with glass and its new struc: 
tural pesabilines, (he compowpon is dominated by owo high walls that use glass in an inventive and spectacular way: the 30-foor-high freestanding glase entrance wall, one of the fire of its kind in the world. and a slightly higher diagonal wall, made of shimmering glass tiles, that marks the edge of the site, Kada’s glass museum belongs ta the group of projects built in Austr and France during che late 1980s anal cary 1990s that celebrate pplss as the ulumute modera building material In addition to his building activities, Kada is a profersos in the Aahen Reinsch-Westfaliche Vechniahe Houhshule in Germany, where be has held the chair of building construction and design unce [Ni Kads was also a founding member of EUROPAN, a housng and urbanism competition progeam for young European architects. His work has been published wadely in che Austnan and the internatronal architectural press, and he has won numerous nativnal and internaponal pre tor design excellence. Erva-Disa Proxosrs,  See ako Austria  Biography  Born in Leibnitz, Austria, 1940. Graduated from the Technical University of Graz, Austria, with a degree in arhitesture 1971. Five-year mandatory training penod with firms in Germany and Austis 1971-75. Set up private practice in Graz, 1976, Profes- soe, chair of building constructive and design sxe 196, Aachen Reinisch-Wientfilische Technische Machschule. Tound- ing member, EUROPAN. :  Selected Works  Kada Department Store, Leibniz, Austria. 1974  (rlase Munem, Barihach, Austria, 1948  Dormitory, Unrersity of taraz, Austria, 1992  Nursing Home, Labnce. Ausria 1994  Canorre Hall, St. Pilren. Ausiria, 199%  Insonue tor Plant Physiohogy, Univerury of Graz, Austea. 1997  Selected Publication  Kans Kass, edited by Onto Kapfinger and the Austrian tstivute lor Architecture, Vienna: Springrt Verlag, 2000  Fasther Reading  Becker, Annette. Dacemas Steunct. amd Wilfried Wang (atin), Anchitekrer ime 20, fubrhonders Munich wad New York: Prestel, 1995  Blundell Jones. Peter, Dialogon ia Time: New Gras Arebitectare, Grav. Austria Haun der Anhitehrnt, 1998  Guelbrecht, Ernst (editor), Arciitetter-dnevsitionen Gracee “Schule,” 13 Stamdprurtee. 2ewl edition. Gras. Aintna: Akademache Drock- und Verlagsancals. and Forum Stadepark, 184  Hellenaye. Nakedaus, and Peter Zingated (editors), Anvdusctrur ade Engagement: Archiseknar aus dee Sterermarh, 198s— 1992 Archtetune a Cammmument: Styrtan Arhitecture, 1986-1992, Civaz. Awaria Haus der Architekrur 1993  Pelkonen, Eeva-Liia, Avhtung Architediar’ lemige ane Phantason in Contemporary Aussraae Architecture, Cambnidge Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1950,  Zinganel, Peter tenor, Srandpwaize 39, Graz, Austra: Forum Seadrpark. 1494  KAHN, ALBERT 1869-1942  Architect, Germany and United States  The son of Rabbi Joseph Kahn, Albert Kahn was bom in the town of Rhaunen, Germany (near Frankfur), on 21 March 1869. Difficult cconame condinons led tw che family's immigra- thon to the United States (by way of the grand duchy of Luxem- bourg), and in 188} the Kahn famuly sertled in Detroit. a major industrial center in the upper Midwest.  For various reasons—— his family’s economic difficulties being perhaps the most significant— Kahn was not able tn follow a normal coune of education leading to a university degree. In- wtead, his dengn abilities, developed through a series af free pri- vate lesons given to him by the sculptor Julius Mechers, enabled him to begin bas atchiuctural apprenticeship with the Detroit firm Mason and Rice at the age of 15. Quickly finding ances as a draftsman in the firm, Kahn focused on the pracucal aspecas of architecture and made excelent use of the firm's brary. The combination of Kahn's intellectual interests and practical experi- ence enabled him to wits a scholarship from the journal Aneerscan Archiiecs fora year’s study abroad. Kahn's year of travel through Italy, France, Belgium, and Cermany—roughly the same as the traditional European tour undertaken by more privileged stu- dents of anhitecuure— alluwed Kahit to develop new. significant Giendships (im luding with Heary Bacon, architect of the Lin- coln Memorial in Washington) while deepening his knowledge of acchivecruse through site visite and the sketching of buildings and their details, Returning to Mason and Rice, Kahn's akershes of nuuble works, while significant frum an educational perspec- tive, had a direct bearing on his architeccural work fot the office. In 1896 Kahn, along with nwo other architeas trom Mason and Rice, farmed a new firm, Nerletan, Kaha and Trowbridge. Alter Trowbnige left 10 become dean of the Cornell School of Architecture in 1897, the firm became Netdeton and Kaha unril finally, on the death of Neuleton in 1900, Kabn reassuciated with Gearge Mason, his original emptoycr, for a brief period before finally opening an office under his own name.  Tn the counc of his early career, Kahn worked with numerous historical styles, che Italian Renaissance being perhaps the most Prominent. Nonetheless, the architect's stylisux: predilectinns did aut preude an interest in the development of new material and methods—an interest that forcshadowed hus understanding of industaal and technological enterpeise. This tendency was further facilitated by his firm's development in the early part of the 20th century: having facilicared his brother Julius’s engineer- ing educanan, che ewo brothers were able to create a pratessional association in (903, with Julius working with Albere as the ar: chivect’s chief engincer. Julius Kaha, an expert in the use of teinforced concrete, was also something af an entreprencur, founding a company (Trused Concrete Steel Company in Youngstown, Ohio) in ordes to develop and manufacture what became known as the “Kalin har” ot “Kahn system” of reinforced soncrete. This turn of events was tu peowe essential to the devel- opment of Kahn's own architectural practice, culminanng in Albert Kahn Incorporated Architects and Engineers.  Kahn's commissions during the casly years of che 20th acn- tury uncluded prominent civic, institucional, and residential buildings in the Detroit metropolitan area. lower Michigan, up- stare New York. and Ohio. These works incuded Temple Beth  Tord Plank Offices (1909), Hoghland Park, Michagan, hy Albort Kalen © bate  El; the Belle [she Conservatory and Casino; the Belle Isle Aquat ium; several classroom, auditorium, and library buildings far the Universiey of Michigan in Ann Arhor, and numesous large pr- vate residence in the Grose Pointe, Blovinlield Hilh, and Windsor, Ontario, suburbs of Detroit. In addition, Kahn began to design industrial buildings —the type of structures for which he is bese knawn—as carly a. 1901. These industrial buakdinys, most of which were for various automobile manulaciuren head quartered in Deurvit. were not limited to automobile assembly plants bur included office buildings, showrooms. and materials processing plants (mills, stamping plants) as well. During the same penod. Kahn was also involved with the design of buildings for the mititary; many of chem affikared with rhe development of artpower.  Although usually averbooked given the significance of his in- dustrial buildings. Kahn's cwic, institutional. and corporate ar chitecture, along with the numeruus readences, were of very tugh qualicy, adhering tv architecture's traditional aesthetic and building principles. Scripps Library and Gallery in Detron (1898, Netdeton snd Rabo). uhe Belle isle recreational buddinigs (1903-08), the William L. Clements Library (1922) at the Um- versity of Michigan, the Deteoit Athletic Club (1915), and the Grosse Pointe residences, among other works, are elegantly pro- portioned, well-constructed works that bespeak Kahn's antention  so the Givic nature of architecture—in the case of the insimunonal building ---and the highly spevilic aspeves uf formal and informal privare life  Over the course of hiv career, there was little stylistic unity berween the different categories of building project, kor Kahn, every architectural program type required a different sea of criterua; dhus, be saw no inherent contradiction in designing a tesidence in Tudur style, a kibrary buikling in the manner of the Italian Renasssance, arnt an office building according ww the pnouples mberene in tall-busdding architecaure. In this sense, Kahn distanced himself trom the modernist promation of uni- versal, internationalist primiples, Working in a region outside the “epicenters” of modern American architectute (Chicago and New York! over the course nf his career enabled Kahn eo con- tinue to develop a made of architectural production chat many would judge tw be mconsistent,  Unlike many architcees of his day, who often delegated industrial-design projects co junior members of the firm, Kahn did not consider the design of industrial buiklings ww be beneath him. For Kahin, chee projects represented an unupped epporta- hity for architeaute, a view primed by the firm's embrace uf the engineering aspects of building deugn. Kahn's carly work with the antomabile industry ithe Mackurd Motor Car Company buuldings 1904-10), the Grabuweky Power Wagon Company 
Plant (1907). and the Chalmers Mator Car Company [1907]1 was noticed by Henry Ford, founder of Ford Motor Company, Ford, known for his persistent search for improvements in the efficiency af production téchniques, contacted Kahin for the de- sign of a new production facility in Hightand Dark, Michigan. jun ouside Detroit, With Ford, Kahn oot only devgned an Industral edifice but alto facilitated 2 new program for produc: tion. Kahn’s work with Ford established the view that the archi- tect was no longer simply the recipsent of an organized set of programmanic needs bur an agent in the development of the program itself—a critical member of a weam that engaged the functional aspects of industrial processes. In his work with Ford and in later projects for commercial and military assembly plane, airport uerminals and hangan, hospitals, office buildings, lahoes- sory buildings, and bibranes, Kabn cxcmplified the nation that archisecture i a matter of both form and function and that every building gype cxeris specific functional nceds thar can be facilitated through building form. and. vice versa. thar form is able not only to support but alin co enable functional require- ments,  Kahn's work was notable foc its embrace of modern techno- logical enterprise. induding new matenals. structural assemblies, and means of production. Accosdingly, the architect was not relegated to being 3 “form giver” bur rather could also parnicipace in the development of systems thar underpin modern technolng- ical enterprise and, hence, madem lite.  Enizanrm: BURNS Gastann  See ato Automobile Lincoln Messocial, Washington, D.C.  Biogrephy  Born in Rhaunen, Germany, 21 March 1869: immigrated co the United States 188U. Received no formal education in archi recture: apprentice, and later chief designer, ollice of Mason and Rice, Derroit. Michigan 1884-95. Privare practice. Detroit from 1902; architect, Packard Motor Car Company, Detroir 1903; architect, George N. Pierce Company, Buffalo, New York 1906: architect, General Mown, Choyler Corporation, and Glena Martin Airceali; practiced in Moscow 1929-32. Cold Medat, International Expo of Aris and Sciences, Paris 1927; Chevalice, Legion of Honor, France. Died in Detron, § December 1942.  Selected Works  Grand Hore, Mackinaw Inland, Michigan. 1888  Scrippa Libeary and Gallery. Detroit (with Neteleton), 1898  Conservatory and Aquarium. Belle Inc, Michigan, 1903  Packard Motor Car Company Plane, Detroit, 1903-10  Chalroces Moune Car Company Plant, Derroir, 1907  George C. Booth House {now Cranbrook House), Blownfield Hill, Michigan, 1907  Canina, Belle ble, 1908  Ford Motor Car Company Main Buikling and Machine Shop, Highland Park, Michigan, 1909  Derroit Athletic Club, 1915  William 1. Clements Library, Univeriey of Michigan, Ann Arbor 1922  Choyder Half-Ton Truck Phat, Detroit, 19.37  Selected Publication  Architecture (wah oihers), 1948.  Further Reading  Bucci, Federico. Aibert Kahn: Archveect of Ferd, New York: Princeton Anchieectural Press, 0423  Doumuto, Lama, Albert Aan, 1869-1942: A Bebleegraphy, Monocello, Ithinows: Vance Bibliographies, 1988  Hildebrand, Grant, Deuguang far badustry: The Archaseerure of Albers Kahn, Cambndge, Massachusetts, and London. MIT Prew, 1974  Kang. Sol, Creasrne-Reponsive-Pragmenc: 75 Youn of Prefeainual Pracene, Albert Kain wad Anocustes, Archatect-Engineer, Now Yosk: Newcomen Sociery in North Amenca, 1970  The Legacy of Albere Kab (eshib. <at.), Detrou, Micha: Detron Inuitute af Ars, 1970  KAHN, LOUIS 1. 1901-74 Architect, United States  The works of Louis 1. Kahn were among the greatest influences on world architecture during the second half of the 20th century. Trained in the Gussical tradition of the Besua-Arts by Paul Phi- pe Crct at the University of Pennsytvania, Kahn nevertheless embraced the Modern movement in his early practice experience with vanous houwing authorities and in parunenhip with Oscar Stonorov and George Howe. Kahn was stow in ing as an architect, and the works of the first $0 years of his life. mostly derived frum Internauvnal Style precedents. did not receive sig- nificant notice.  Yer by World War Il, Kahn had hegun 1m question rhe capac- ity of the Imenational Style to embody contemporary cultural meanings and social institutions, In 1944, Kahn published an way whercin he defined monumentality in architecture as a spuitual quality conveying a seme of eternity. of cimelemness, and of unchanging petlection. Te fle that modern society had failed tw give full architectural expecssion co che institutions of human community, and be pointed to the grear monuments of the past. which, alchough not possible to literally duplicate. embodicd the qualsties by which all new buildings should be measured. Finally, he indicated the critically important part played by structural perfection and material character in the creation of historical monumental form. calling for a reexamina- von of comtemporary norms of construction. Although he had yet to find theis appropriate expression in his architecrural de- signs, Kahn had established what would be the key themes of his career.  Kahn first gained notice net a an architect but as 4 profesor of derign at Yale Univeruty, starting in 1947, His inapered teach- ing lel tw his appointment in 1950 us the architect-in- residence ac the American Academy in Rome. Kahn spent much of this tume traveling in Italy, Greece, and Egypt, and this period of histancal rediscovery would prove w be pivotal in his ment as che most important modem architect of his time. eternal quality of heavy construction and the spaces shaped by massive masonry made a lasting impression on Kahn. the building he had complered just prior ro leaving for Rome was of steel construction, after this year abroad Kahn never again made use of lightweight steel structures, building only with rein- forced concrete and masanry.  On his ccturn from Rome, Kuhn was comminioned to deagn the Yale University Art Gallery (1951 - $3) in New Haven, Con- necticut. The first modern building on the Yale campus, its Peimary street facade was a massive brick wall murked anly by concrete stringvounes at the fuor hoes. The plan was divided into three primary spaces: two cotumn-ftee galleries flanking a central service rone where the main stairs, trangular in plan. were housed in a reinforced-concrete cytinder thar rose through the four floors to a clerestory light at its top. Kahn's floor seruc- ture was likely inspired hy the geodesic domes of Buckminster Fuller, yer che uriangular ged of poured-in-place concrete, ex- posed in the ceilings beluw, was a powerful and heavy preacnce quite unlike the lightness idealized by Fuller, Incorporating the techanical and lighting services within their dark pyramedal depehs, Kahn's flooe structure was abo the exact opposite of the structurally and spatially neutral slab heeewotore typical off International Scyke bunkdinys.  The Bath House for the Trenton Jewish Community Center (19$4—$8) was the progect where, as he saa, Kahn found himsetf as an architect. Kour pavilions formed a cruciform plan with a court in the center, open to the sky, each pavilion composed of four concrete-block U-shaped hollow pien at the comers, on which sat a pyramidal roof of wood thas thoated above the heavy earthbound masonry walls enclosing the open-air spaces, For contemporary atuhicects, the Bath Hows was a revelation—at once modem, built of che most typical uf materials, and ancient, a place where carth and sky meet, signified by the untinished stone citcle in its central coast.  Altbough the larger Community Center was never but, che gnd of individually roofed volumes was the first design in which Kahn made each space within the complex program into a sepa- tate building with its own structure and bybt. in direct uppost- non w the undifferentiated trce- plan space-in-extension typwal of International Seyke modernism, Kahn now concerved of each function a5 requiring its awn room-as-phoe, and the plan was new co be undersmad as “a wxciety of rooms,” their spatial rela tionship articulating their collective purpose.  In 1957, Kahn was appointed co teach at the Univenity of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, and he began a long and produc tive association with two remarkable engincers at the university. Robert Le Riuulais, 4 visionary poct of structure, and at the office, August Komendane, an expert on concrete wocutruction. As this ume, be also reveived the commissivn for the ALN, Richards Medical Research Building (1955.64) at the Univer- sity of Pennsylvania anil was able to fully develop his concepes of expressive construcuun and asticulare funcova. Each of che five taboratory towers, a square in plan, was consteucted with an clegant precast-concrete cantilevered garucture, the columns placed at third poines and the structurally independent. load- beating masonry service shafts located ar the midpoints of each side. Exemplifying Kahn’s distinction between the “served spaces” (primary function) and the “servant wpaces” (services), the floors of each twee were entirely free of structure oF seryqes. In what Kahn held to be an ethical unperative, the material of construcuon were left cxpored, showing how the buikling was made and becoming the only ornament appropriate to modern building.  The Tribune Review Publishing Company Building (1955— 61) in Greensburg, Pennsylvania, was Kahn's first design to der onstrate his emerging understanding of the relationship berween  structure and light. The main space was spanned by precast- concrete beams, beasing on brick pices, and on the east and west elevations Kahn revesled the concrete-block walls between these piers ty be non-load-beanng by placing glaring between the tops of the wally and the roof structure above, within the depth of the beams. Under these harizontal windows, the in-fill walls were plit at their centers by tall, narrow windows, and together these windows produced 3 T-shaped opening, large at the top to bring in maainum light and narrow at eye level to allow views but 10 minimize ghare.  The First Unitarian Church (1959-69) in Rochester, New York, is direutly related to Frank Moyd Wright's Unity Temple of 1908, indicative of the important influence of Wright's early work on Kahn. Like Wright's design, Kabn's sanctuary is a cen- tral. top-lit space enclosed by solid walls, offering 90 cyetevel views out and accessed by a surrounding ambulatory. Yet io the relation uf the xboul to the sanctuary, Kahn took a difference approach, nnging the sanctuary with the classrooms. ‘The walls of rhe sanctuary are made of nonbearing concrete block. the hollow spaces within allowing the return of venulavon ait. The tool of the sanctuary is a gently folded plane of casr comcrete, lifting to erestory lights at the corners to form a huge crows shape overhead, and is supported at its center points by columns that stand in cach of four doorways from the surrounding amb latary. The claccranms, abo entered from the ambulatory, form athich protective layer aruund the sanctuary, ubcie brick extcrior walls folded to produce a deeply shadowed edge into which large windows are recemed and amall window seats projected.  Tha comept uf surrounding ptimarn spaces with shadow: fiving wall, which Kaha desceibed as “wrapping ruins around buildings.” emerged fully developed in his design for the Salle Institute (1959-65) in La Jolla, Calforna. This is unquestiona- bly Kahn's greatest design, yee ss most emportant component, the Meeting House. remained unbuile. The Meenng House plan was also Kahn’s first fully developed “society of spaces” plan, a series of independent-room burtdings, cach with irs own geame- try and sructnre, surrounding » central cubic hall. the outer range of ruoms facing the ocean assumed the form of hollow cylindrical conctete shells wrapped around and shading cubic glazed ronme within (and vice vera). giving the whole an unpar- alicled munurmentality.  The Salk Institute Laboratories, which were malized, consise of column-free laboratory Goors alecrnating with service Aloars contining the reinfurcedoncrete tnus structure, the whole constructed of meticulously detailed cast-in-place concrete. Be- tween the pwo laboratory buildings. where the screntises’ wood- clad studies were placed in rowers, Kahn cnvisioned a garden ‘but was convinced by Luis Barragin w make instead a paved plaza. open to the sky and the ocean, Today this plaza, without any formal program of use, remains one af che most powerful and deeply maving spaces ever built.  The Indian Institue of Management (1962-74) in Alimedabad, India, and the capital of Banghadesh (1962--74) in Dhaka were Kahn's geeacest built examples of hie “plan as a tociety of rooms” concept. In both buildings, the sevondasy vpaces, such as corsklors, arcades, stair landings, and vestibules, became as umpurtant co the overall experience of the building as the prmary spaces of program. Kahn understood that fearing, and decision making happen not only in the classroom and assembly hall bur an the passageways, cates, and courtyards as 
Yale Concer for British Ar, New Haven. Cannes tivat (1969-7), deuagned by Lows Kahn  © elf Coklherg/tace  well. As Kahn said, he acted as the philosopher for hes clienrs, interpreting ther program of uses in ways both culturally resu- nant and socially suggestive.  The Exeter Academy Library (1965-72) in Lxerer, New Hampshire, was Kahn's most subde and yet revoluGunary work in chat he rumed the traditional program of bbrary (central teading room surrounded by hank stacks) inside out. Uhe design again involved a building-within-a-building, this ume a brick load-bearing vuter shell, containing the reading spaces. sur- founding the inner reinforced-cancrete honk stacks. In this way, ax Kaho raid. one could take the book from the protective dark: ness of the inner stacks to the natural fight of the outct reading rooms. At the center of the building, Kaho plicd the entey hall, a space that went from ground eo sky. with giant circular con- clete openings revealing the books, celebrating the purpuse of the buikling.  The Kimbell Art Museum (1966-72) in Fort Worth, Vexas, as righdy considered Kahn's greatest built work, The space was composed of a tenes of concrete vaulted roof forms, cach span- ning 100 feet, split ar their center ww allow hypht to flow in. bouncing off aluminum deflectors to spray the undcrside of the vaults with an ethereal silver light. Withour quesnon Kahn's most beautiful space. the Kimbell was ale the most rigocousty resolved example of Kahn's concepe of che relation herween light  and structure, the interior spaces revetving natural light in ways that precisely anticulaicd the suuctural clements. Finally, the Kimbell was Kahn's most clegane built cxample of landscape Planning, ws entry sequence taking us past sunken scubprure gardens, under a vaulted loggia, past sheets of cascading water, through a gravel-foared courtyard filled with a grid of trees. and then quietly into the very heart of the gallery itself.  Many of Kahn's greatest designs were never built. including che Salk Instinite Mecting House (1959), the U.S. Angolan Em- hassy (1959), the Mikveh Isracl Synagogue (1961), the Domini- can Matherhoure (19651, the Memorial to the Six Million Jow- ish Martyrs (1966). the Palaszo dei Cungressi (1968), and the wublime Hlurva Synagoguc (1967) in Jenualem—a group of works that, consideted alone, would constitute one of the mast ggnificant voatrburivas tu 20ch-cenuury architecture. Yet even without realizing these astonuhing designs, Kahn's importance to the development of modern architecture in the second half of the 20ch century cannot he overestimated.  Kahn's work redefined modern architecrure in two primary wavs. First, by reestablishing the relevance af historical architec- ture for the design of contenyporary buildings, Kahn's work was crucial to the emergence of both che American Postmodem and the Furopean neurational critiques of International Seyle mad- etnism, Second, by reestablishing the primacy of the art of con-  struction in the design of comemporary buildings. Kahn was stitical to the cmergence of a “tectonic” interpretation of archi- tectural history and practice. By mudcentusy, Kahn was one of many who fele char madem architecture had lost ts direction and sense of purpose. Yer Kahn stands virtually alone mn having opened a way out of this impasse. a way he achieved by rvon- hectng construction to its ethical imperatives and space making to its ancient origins,  Rost McCartra  See ake Barragha, Luis (Mexico); Fuller, Richard Backmin- ster (United States): Indian Institute of Management, Ahmodabad: laternational Style; Kimbell Art Muscum, Fort Worth, Texan Salk Institute, La Jolla, California; Weight, Freak Lloyd (United States)  Biography  Born on Osel Island. Russia {now Saaremaa Island, Extonia). 20 February 1901; imenigrated to the United Scares 190: natural ined 1915, Educated ar Central High School and the Pennsytva- nia Academy of Fine Arts, Philadelphia 1912. 20: member of the Graphic Sketch Club, Fleisher Memonal Art School, and student ac the Public Industrial Art Suboal, Philadephia 1916- 20; Studied at the Univenity of Pennaylvana. Philalelphia, under Pail Cret 1920-24; bachelor’s degroe in architecwue 1924; studied and uaveled in Europe 1928-29. Married Esther ‘Virginia Istach 1930: one child. Dratisman, die fie of Hultnan and Henan, Philadelphia 1925: draftsman, the affice of (fewitt anal Ash, Ibiladdphia 1922; senior draftsman, Cary Architects’ Deparumeti, Philadelphia 1924-27; chiet ul design. Sesquicen- tennaal Fxhibirian, Philadelphia 1925~26: designer, ottice of Paul Cret, Philadelphia 1929-30; designer, the firm of Zane- wager. Borie, and Madary. Philadelphia 1930 - 32: squad head on charge of housing studies, Ciry Planning Commission, WPA {Works Progress Administration}, Philadelphia 1933-35; axsnci- ate principal architect, office of Alfred Kavener and Partner. Phil adelphia 1935-37. Private practice, Philadelphia trom 1937; consultant archiwect, Philadciphia Howsing Aurhoriey 1937; consultant architect, United States [fouxing Authority 1998: associated wath George Howe 141-42; associated with Howe and Oscar Stononmy 1942-43; asouated with Swnote 1943- 48; consultant antsitect, Philadelphia Cary Planning Commis- sion 1946-52 and 1961-62; consultant archuect. Philadelphia Redevelopment Authority 1951-54. Teaching assistant, Unuver- sity of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 1924-24; critic in archirec- tural design and professor of architecture, Yale Univeraty. New Haven. Connecticut 1947-50, chief critic in desygn. 1950 $7: resident architect. American Academy, Rome 1950- $1: Albert Farnwell Bemis Professor. School of Architecture and Planning, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge 1956: pro- fessor of architecture, 1957-66, Paul Cret Prafewor, 166 71, ementus professar, 1971-74, University of Pennsylvama, Phila- delphia. wet and director, Architectural Research Group. Philadelphia 1932-33; fellow. American Instinite of Architeces 1953: member. National Institute of Ast. and Letters 1964; honorary member, Royal Swedish Academy of kine Anis 1966; member, American Academy of Ari and Sciences 1968; fellow, Royal Society of Ars. London 1970; member. American Acad-  emy of Arty and Letters 1973; honorary member, College of Architects of Peru, Centennial Gold Medal. American Insitute of Archiects, Philadelphia Chapcer 1969; Gold Medal of Honor, American Institute of Architects, New York Chapter 1970: Gold Medal, American Institute of Archicecss 1971; Royal Gold Medal, Roval Institute of Botish Atchitests 1972. Died in New Yowk, 17 March 1974.  Selected Works  Vale Ani Gallery. Yale Univeraty New Haven, Connecavur, 1953  Bath Howse and Master Plain, Jewith Community Center, Trenton. New ferey, 1954-58  Milk Tintitute Meeting Howse funbuilt), 1999  Unued States Angalan Embaxy (unbudt) 1959  Uiibiiee Review Buikling, Gerenburg, Penrayhania, 1959 61  Mikvch larael Synagogue {unbuikt), 19Gh—74  Richards Medical Rewearch Building. Gaivenity of Pomme ania, Philadelphia. 1957-64  Salk lostanite Laboratory Buildings. Uo Jatia. California, 1959-65  Daminican Motherhoue (anibuilt), 1965  Jeenh Marrers Memoral (unbuile!, 1906  Hing Unitanian Church, Rovbester, Now Votk, 1959. 69  Hurva Synagogue (unbuile, 19%  Palazzo det Cangressi (unbuile!, 1968-72  Diheary aod Dining Hall, Philkps Freter Aculemy. Exeter, New Hampshire. 1965.  Kimbal Art Maseuin, tute Worth, Teas, 1966 72  Insutute of Managemenc. Ahmedabad, India. 196  New Navonal Capital, Dhaka. Bangladesh, 1962-7  Why Cry Planing ty Your Ropoessbiline (aac Oscar Stonoren}, Wad  Yow and Your Neighberbood (with Seonorovs. 144  Lows 1 Kaba. Talks with Scudenn. 196  The Notebooks and Drawings of Lows § Kata, odired by Pochard Saul Wurman and Eugene Feldman, 1975  Further Reading  Turn books written with Kahn's approval and incoherent were 1 final preparation at the time of his deach: Roaner and {havets documents Kahn's complete wudks eth many design drawings and madels trom the Kahn Archives (ar the University of Pennsyivania), and Giurgola and Mehes, 2 menageaph covenng Kahn's complete career. hacidhy prevents Kahn's poetic ideas anad alluscrates how they srucruse his archi- fectusal designs. Scully is a precient carly stutly, written bette many of the buddings tor which Kaha 1s today mort famous were designed. set cooly fatesccing Kabn’s importance. Watman and Latour are catabop of Kalin’s wintings and taths— excellent sources for understand- ing one of the very tew great architos 10 atlempe wo artsculate the  ‘mymenes of the deagn process. Hochitumt documents Kahn's cravel  sketches, allowing magh« inte the unporiance of hrtorical archectusc for Kahn design process, Brownice and De Lung 0 the must compre  henave recent ascument and iicludes brict building “brographics” of all Kahn's major works. Butrtker and Gast analyze Kaha's larger neder  ing prnuples and how they shaped his buildings, McCastet 1s the fist comprehensive monvgraphy to be published ance Kaho + death  Brownlee. David Bruce, and Dawid Gitton De Long, fous f. Kaas In the Reatra of Arcbatecture, New York: Rizsoli. and Lan Angelev Museum of Contemporary Am, 1991; condensed edition, New York: Universe, 1997  Barker, Ure. Lowes £ Auda: Logie and Space: Licke und Raum (bitingual Engdish-Cserman eitiont, Basel and Boston: Birkhauser, 1994 
Gast, Klau-Pever. Lowi 1 Ket: The tdea of Order. Basel and Poston; Birkhauser. 1998  Gaurgola, Ramaldo and Jaimini Mehta, Lowi ¢ Kahn, Boulder, Colorado: Wearview Frew, 1975  Goldhagen. Sarah, Lonay 1 Kaho’ Sinuated Medemum, New Haven, Connecticut: Yale Universicy Presa, 2001  Hochstim, Jan. The Paincings and Sheiches of Lowes 1. Kahn, New York: Retzoli, 1991  Larour, Alessandra (editor), Lous 1. Kado: Writingy, Lectures Inserviews, New York: Ruzzoli, 1991  McUarter, Robert, Louis 1 Aahn, London: Phaidon Press, 2003  Ronee, Heinz and Sharad Jhavers, Loner 1 Aah: Gumplete Work. 1995-1974, Basel: Bkhiwer. and Boulder. Colorado: Wesvaew Pres. 1977; nd revined and enlarged edition, Basel and Boston: Burkhuser. 198°  Scully, Vincent Joveph, Lows J Asha, New York: Braller, 1962  Wurman, Richard (editor), Wase Wil Be Has Adware Been: The Word of Laws Aube, New York: Rizal 1986  KALACH, ALBERTO 1960~ Architect, Mexico  Alberto Kalach was bor in Mexico City in 1960, Tle snudied architecture at the Ibercamericana Univenity, graduaung in 1981. He later auended Cornell University (1983-85). From 1991 to 1997, he worked in partmership with Daniel Alvarez.  Kalach is interested primarily in weaving his architeuure inw the urban landscape and context of the city, He belongs ro a generation of contemporary architects whase works an invernatonal moderniat Language that subuly alludes to tradi tional form. His references inchide Te Corbusier, Tardwig Mice van der Robe, Lsis Barragan, Louis Kahn, and the work of the Spanish aiid Italian rationalists, Although small in scale, his buildings carefully relate mn the urban context and the landscape and spatially express seructure and materials.  The development of the patio and pandcn as gathering places in Mexican architconure is a principal recurring cheme in Ka- fach's residential design. Adapted well tv climate atu form, the  rio is tied in several of his carly works. His chree cubclike  (1990) in Fuente Mercurio, Lecamachalco. Memco City, are simular in scheme and are arranged tu aruculate the entrance and generate a common patin. ‘The geometric rclanonship be- tween che patios and gardens offers different perspective views while varying planes of light enrich the spatial relationships be- tween the interior and exterior.  The significance of Landscape, site, and memory is explored in several of Kalach’s hauses built in the 1990s. These works interpret the topographical elements af landform and existing vegetation and revognize cphemeral components, wich as natural light and regional landscape character. In the house (1994) in Palmira, Cuernavaca, all rooms are surrounded by gardens, and the wore uf the house is focused on the pane, Long wall cho Barragin’s aestheac while ewo conceete towers evoke Louis Kahn's sntetest on expressing bold architectural clements.  The House and Garden (194) in Valle del Bravo, Mexno. conspts of tour simple platforms thar are related topographically tothe sce. The plattorms offer the opportunity to view the forest from different perspectives, The house utilizes a small room as a connecting tink ta the outside woeld of the street. The site's onganirational structure creates a journey from the road, through  the gate, and into the house itself. The journey orchestrates leisure garden activities. such as dining or sitting on 3 swing. Exposed brick, concrete. and wood ate organized into precise geometric grids to interact with the existing organic forms of the landscape.  Kalach further explored these concepts in the Negro House (1997) is Cunuadero, Mexico Ciry. Thia project is designed as a series of five structures buih inta a steep dope. The structures ston platforms that seem to float in a ravine af mpezan tees. The structure is anchored into the ground to minimize tree F001 damage and wo avoid site disrurbance. Rainwater is channeled from the panos and the mof tu the foundations, where ie is collected and stored in ciseerns, Macerials such as concrete, glass, and sted are combined with an on-site wane called sepetate. This house emphasizes the transformative role that occurs when architecture interacts with a sive and exemplifies Kalach’s interest in creating a sustainable intervention between nature and every: day human activity.  Balch designed and buile several apartment projects thenughout Mezius City, including the Holbein Building (991) in Misoac, the Rodin Apartment Complex (1993) in Mexico City. and the Fresas Buikling (1993) and the Adolf Building (1996) in Colonsa del Vaile. All these projects unify permanent and ephemncral components of the urban fabric and refer toa modermst or | ¢ Corhussan use of materials and typolo-  oo Kakach's design for a hardware store (1991), built $0. kilo- meters fram Mexico Ciry in the industrial ciry of Toleca, repre- sens his we of simple everyday materials to create sophisticated clements and details, The scheme, which is a small warchouse intended to store and sell iron products, consists af one building inside another, A centralized office, designed in the form of a ship, is contained within an external envelope of concrete panels thar have heen covered with iron sheets. The roof structure is a light barrel vault conseructed of galvanized sheer iron, The roof is separated from the conctete-and-brnk walls, giving w the whole structure a sense an exquisite lightness and beauty.  Kaluch’s geometric ngor is exemplified in the Monte Sinas Kindergarien (1992) in Tecamachaloo Stare, Mexion. ‘The project's program called for increasing the number of classrooms. The project was conceived ax a series of austere pavilions con- nected to the exasung school by a bridge. The strict geometry is accentuated by terraced gardens and patios chat are enclosed by stone walls, ramps, and stairs,  The importance of topography eo Kalach is cocmplified in project for the Maguen David Jewish Community Center (1996) in Cuajimalpa Seate, Meaico, located at the edge of 8 dranutic caving on che outskirts of Mexico City. Its pure forma, constructed of reinforced concrete, create an introspective and cantemplative atmosphere. The scheme is unified by a distinc: physical and spiricual gathering center that conneas the syn- agogue, via a bull uf dender columns, to other areas in the com-  In the deugn of the Alexander Von umboldt German School (1996) in Cholula. Puebla State, Mexico. Kalach pro- posed a completely artificial landscape that is organized on a cicaular embankment. ‘The powerful scheme is surrounded by dense vegetation that separates the school from the immediate surrounding yet preserves the magnificent view of the distant mountains, Classrooms occupy the center of the ciscular scheme.  Earth chat has been removed from the foundation is used to form an undulating landscape of smooth hills.  Since 1997, Kalach bas been a member of the Faller Ciudad de Mésica (City of Meaico Studio}, This tcam proposed a feasi- bility study w determine huw to reverse the deuccaunn of Tex- coco Lake in Mexico City, The study, in collaboranion with Gonaalez de Leon. proposes the use of waste and rainwater to increase the size of the lakes in the metrnpolitan area of the Mexican capital, The plan will expand the surfaces of lakes in the city from 1000 hectares is 1998 to 13.800 by 2008, By Proposing a low-density plan for development within the arca, the plan is intended tn henefit the environment and atttset tour. iam. The peoposal reftects the political and suial nature of arch. tectural practive in Latin America. It suggests a strong relation: stup beeween urban renewal and environmental mutauuns and strongly reflects curtent architectural trends an Mouco.  Kalach’s work has received significant cetical attention as 4 result of his delicate detailing, subde relerencing ta older cul- cures, and interest in the rdanonship between bandswape and architecture.  fast Berxarpr  See abo Barragin, Luis (Mexico); Mexico City, Mexico  Biography  Born in Mexico 1960. Aucnded dhe Universidad Iberaameticane 1977-1981; degree in architecture; postgraduate studkes in ar- chitecture at Cornell University. Ithaca, New York, 1983~ 1985. In ptivate practice, Mexico City: parmership with Daniel Alvarez 1991-97, Ehoe Noyes Visiung Design Critk, Harvard Univer- sity Graduate School of Design. Cambridge, Massachaserts, 1998-99. Member, Jcam X (10) from 1991: member, ‘aller Ciudad de México from 1997,  Selected Works  Three Houses, Avenida de la Fuentes, Mesico City, $990 Holbein Building, Mivoac. Mexico City. 141  Hardware Store, Tolteca, 1991  Monte Sing Kindergarten, Tecamachalon Seat, 1492 Rodin Apartment Complex, Mexico City, 1993  Frevas Building, Cakonia del Valle. Mewco Cary, 1994 House. Palmira, Cucrnavace. 1994  House and Garden, Valle del Hrave, Mexico, 1994  Adolf Building, Colonia del Valle, Mexico Cay, 1996 Maguen David Jewish Cammunity Center, Caagmalps Stare. 1996 Alexander von Humboldr German School, Chobula, 1996 Negro Honse. Contadero, Mexico City, 1997  Further Reading ~  Alberto Kalach, Daniel Alvarez, Negrin House, Cantadero, Mexico City.” GA Hower 57 (August 1998) (contains photos, plan. vection, elevations: in English and |apanese)  “Albervo Kalach: Howe and Garden un Valle del Bravo, Mexico.” GA Howes 46 (1995) (contains plans, site plane, sections, dlerasons, detaih, phots)  “Alberro Kalach: Houses and Gardens, Palmira, Corenavaca, Mosctos, Mexica.” GA Hous: 46 (June 1995) (contains phovos, plans, sive plans, sections}  Leén, Adviana. Kalech and Alpares, Gloucester, Massachusers: Rockport, 1998 ithe only hook in Englith derored vo the producnon of the mudso}  “Meaiuo, Five Architectural carne aa a Country in Full Renewal.” L archuecture daupeurel hui 28 September 1495)  KANSAI INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT TERMINAL  Designed by Renzy Piano, completed 1994 Osaka, Japan  The Katiai Internatsonal Aiport Veceminal (1988~94) is a major achievement with cegard to bocatiun, concept, and architecture. Designed under the kadership of the Renzo Piano Bulding Workshop Japan (in collaborasicn with Ove Arup and Parteens (Teter Race] and Nikken Sekket}, it consists of a main rectangular block with wing-shaped lincar cxtensians and a votal span of 1.7 kilometers. Phe wing buildings contain the circulation spine for the 41 gates. The central building houses the check-in for domes tic and international flights. immigration control. customs, and baggage handling and is characterized by its verncal separanon of functions: access from and to the building occurs on three levels, The international departure arca is situated on the upper deck and the international arrival area on the gmund floor, The domestic arnvals and departures are located ia between and con- ect tn the regional erain station. All three functions are visually and physically integrated in the w-called canyon. This vertical cut through the building fun tions as ube avai entrance hall and demonstrates the concept of the building as a lowing landscape: under a single roul, a wide-open space is created. with trees and bamboo on the bottom and colortul bridges, devaten, escalaton, and transparent staircases openly connecting the different levels.  The Jong, curved rvuf feanures the acrodynamic form af a fanding jet and functions as the building's main facade, giving the rerminal its identiry. It refers ro carly consmmuctions by Piano, such as the Bercy shopping center (1987-90) at Charenton ke Pont in Paris, as welll as ro the Linge roots of rraditional Japanese buildings. ‘Whe form was designed im expanse to the needs of ait conditioning: cold air is drawn from the canyon and blown from air novzles thar are directed toward cloudlike smooth wirfaced Teflon sheets stretched out heeween the structural cle- ments. These ‘open-air ducts” oudine the shape in which ait diffuses when blown free of obstruction from the ait nuzeles. This form docs nut force che flow of air bur merely guides from landside tw aunside, The whole buikling functions as a mac- suchimate toe air control, and the spaces where people move are adjusted as microclimates. Ihese sheets simultancourly reBect indirect light, further reducing the number of objects hanging from the roof and allowing for the roof’s very light construcuon. The shape of the roaf determined the form of the structure, which consists in the center building of inverted eriangular sec- tion ruses that span 82.8 meters, have a tocal kength of 150 meter, and are supported by inclining columns. Painted gray. they call 10 mind a dinotaur ckeleton.  ‘The boarding wings are conceived 4» part of an imaginary ring 16.4 kilometer in diameter that extends into the earth at an angle of GH.2 degrees tu the ground surface. The ribs of the building become slanted toward the end as they correspond to this overall concept. "This program allows the use of enncal panels (1.800 to 600 millimeters} for the whole 90,000-square- meter roof. The highly weacher-resistane stamnlesssteel_ pancts 
have heen treated with a dull finish tm reduce light reflection On the arude, the wings fearure an clegant curve with Large glass pancds that allaw observapon of the planes trom the lobbics, ‘The design produces close links among farm, stmeture, and geometry. giving the busaling wiity despite the huge diniensions ata conualized airport.  ‘The concept of a single-unit terminal had been chosen by Aétoporn de Paris in negotiation with Japan Airport Consultants in the carker phases of planning. This design has won favor in recent years, following the threat of terrorism and the need tor reater secumty, alchough it often requires parrons to walk fairly long distances and makes terminals difficult to expand. In con- trast, decentralized terminals, with indsvidual airport buildings linked by a corridor, allow easy expansion and make connecting between different uaffic forma: more convenient lor traveler. ‘They ate, however, increasingly difficult to manage as the dis- tance between termunals grows over the years.  The Kansai Airport Terminal is an impotant architectural and tcchaical achievement and a milestone in the opening of Japan to the world. The development uf the Kuna eegaun, Ja- pans second largest urban concentration, which includes Ostha, Kobe, and Kyoto, has been promoted to counteract the aver- concentration of development ut Tukyo. The ousting fami Au port in Osaka is located in a densely populated urban arca and  Kanuat International Airspan Termanal. Onska (1994) C) Yoshun Hata  thus did nor allow for extemion or 24-hour usage. As a result. new Intemational gateway was required, and several sites were discussed, The lack of flat and buildable aress of Land, sogether with diffiiultics reluting to expropriation, environmental and nose reduction baucs, and the problem of future expansion, led to the construction of an airport (1987-91) of S11 heveares of Landfill, five kilometers un Osaka Bay. The airport could thus be dengned independent of the constrainus of an cxiaring urban environment, Special solutions had to be found, however, to prevent differential serlement of the building on the recent land- él  Selection ot a concept for the new auporr began in 1986 and invalved a consortium of Japanese companies. The decision was made ro invite overseas participation in the construction of the enormous Kansai Aisport, since the project's estimated soral cose would he 1.5 crilbion yen. This ked tn the inclusion af Aéropart de Paris and expecially its vice president, Paul Andreu, and the decinun ty held an ancertational design competition. Following an open registration, E5 groups: including warld-tenowned at- chiterts sch as Sie Norman Foster, Cesar Uelli, and Bernard Tahuru -were invited to participate in a two-stage competition held on 1988. Renzo Piano was the eventual winner. fn contrast to many of the competing designs, Piano's project was claborated independent ol Japanese vunsuruction firms. Not surprisingly.  ‘m' 7 NLA “oe UL  the plan was criticized for oot coruplying with UIA tLntema: tional Awecution of Archicects) regulations and for the clase relationship berwren the architects and constructian companies involved in the project, Nevertheless, the hulding of a campeti- tion and its realizacion may be scen as indicators of a new attitude an Japan, where competitions are sare. Vhe inclusion of forngn compamucs in the construction process further signaled an open- ing of the Japanese marker,  Vhe Kansai Airport Terminal is a1 autsanding example of airport design, At century's end, it is abo an important piece of the puzale of plobal architecture. repersented by a limited aum her of sar architects designing presiigious buildings for Large and small cities around the wodd.  Canoes EEL  Sev alo Aieport and Aviation Building; Japan Piano, Renzo (Italy)  Further Reading  Vhe architectural and technical dese af the Kansai Internananal Asr-  port Terminal has bees presented im architectural magarines such as  dapon Archstect and Proves Architecture. Movake tocuses hss comments  on the comperitun rucess that led to the winning detign laskiryg  whether iis a posiave precedent foe furure competitions in Japan)  Information ne deagn conepts can be tound in Piano's wrk catalog.  The history and fiuncuons of airports iy Futupe enif the United States  are analyzed in Zukowsky, which also provides much background infor  mavon.  Kansat tnsernatianal Airport Panenger Ferrminal Rurkding, Tokyo. Process Archixecture, 1994  Kanes laternatianal Airport Panenger {rreinal Hurkding, Tokyo: Shinkenchiku-chs, 1994  Miyake, Richi, Tad so brachibu Competition. ‘Vohpo V4 K Publishing Laren, 1991  Piano, Renan, Kruse Misme prugetei ¢ architestere, 1987-1994, Milan Electa, 1994; as Renee Prame, 1987-1994, trambated by David Kerr, Ranel. Swireciland, and Rowan, Buikhauscs Verlag. 1495  Zukowsky, Jobn (editor), Baskding for Asr Travel: Acchitecturr and Derign for Carmerecial Aviation, Munich and New York Frestel, and Chicago: The Arc Instisure of Chicago, 1996  KARL MARXHOF  Designed by Karl Ehn; completed 1930 Vienna, Austria  Of the various housing projects built by the cry of Vienna in the 1920s, che Kas! Marxhof is the most remarkable. Nox only the name but also the size and architecture of this project em phatically express the social-democratic aspirations of the city  government. The Karl Marchof vas built in the framework of a long-term residential building program chat was started in 1919 and even tually came to an end during the civil war of 1934, The building program was part of che sociocconomic policies of Austrian wcial democracy, also known as Austromarxism. The central focus of thei political outlook, in stark contrast wo the violent Russian Revolution of October 1918, was an evolutionary path to a socialist society, as a result of citizen participanon and a strong dicecting role of the state. From 1920 their political programs  were focused on the capual uty of Vienna, where the Social Democrats held 2 comtortahle majority.  Like other metropolitan cies in Europe, Vienna had strug- pad with problems of raped population growth since the second  if of the 19th cencury. The population of Vienna had almost tripled since 1870 ro a toral of 2.380.000 in 19LA, Lasing the war exacetbated the urban sinuation. Before the war, Vienna was the capital of an empire of $2 million, At the end of 1918, it was the center of a small country with six million citizens, The most impantant industries and natural resources now lay beyond its borden, the dewruction af capieal was overwhelming, and the sovial situation was unstable. There was a tremendgus housing shortage, and the quality of casting housing was very poor.  The Vienna city government tackled the housing shoriage. finan ing ube effort with a munsapal tax structure targeting pri- varely owned housing and businesses. New housing was buile ‘on land bought by the city. and rents were low. The motivanon foe this rent policy was not exclusively social in nature. Because renee were low, wages were keps down as well, making businesses more competitive. ‘the building program was centrally managed out of the Stedthauams {city building office). and a share of the commissions went to local construction companics. Marker pressures were entirely evaded in the program,  Avthe beginning of 1919, the residential building program was haved an twn concepes: that of the Seedlungra, a conninuation of the gatden city spprasch. and thar of residential blocks, 3 compact urban mulusiory building form bid oat around court- yards. Governing Social Demactats preferred the lactet because of political considerations. [n 1923 the municipal government Bunched a five-year plan for the consurucuon of 25,000 housing units, Most of the funding wene to the building of residential blocks.  The residential blocks were built on emp lots between exist ing buildings and on the outskirts of Vienna. The city aimed for comidcrable density, striving to build up 50 1 60 percent of the tars. Later, these percentages were lowered. The number and size of the housing unite in the blocks varied per lncation, but the majority of chem were one rage flats with an area of 38 square meters. From 1926 several “superblocks” were built with more than 1.000 units each. ‘The Karl Marthof is the se- ond Largest, with 1,382 units and an ates uf 15.6 hectares (about 38.5 acres).  The choice of location for the Kad Marxhof was a narrow garden stnp, only 12 kilometers wide, between the focal eram- way station and a soccer stadium in the Heiligenstad¢ quarter. ‘The first plans, designed by the architect Clemens Holzmeistet (1886-1983) in 1926, were rejected by the Szadrhamem?. Holz- meisser's design, nowhere rising higher than four stories and in long. partially freestanding blocks. was thought uninspyred, and the commission went eo city archivect Kart Ehn (1884-1957), who presented an early concept in Octnber 1926,  Eho’s plan was much more compact and conveyed iu poliucal stavus and importance more effectively. He grouped units in two long, dosed courtyard blocks of uneven size, with a higher block and a large square at the center, Vhis higher bhick has six large arches at che hase tu facilitate pedestrian traffic and cower with flugpules. Together with the square. rt forms che central focus of the comple and of its sociopoliucal statement, The central block, between the stadium and the stanan, lics on che route by which soccer fans reached the sadium for Sunday games and 
Kad Marhaf, Vienas (1930) © Howard DavivGreatBuikdings cont  serves to remind them af the city's building effoets. In contrast w earlier residential blocks built in Vienna, only 18.4 percent of the tocal arca was buile up. Most of the gardens that take up the remaining space lic within the courtyards of the blacks. Because of its scale and the closed form of the blocks, the Karl Marxhof formed an independent clement in its environment. It was sf-sufficient also in the sense that its 5,000 wo 6,000 tenants could rely on their own facilities: 25 stores, a post office, a pharmacy, a dental practice, a pediatric practice. rwo hathhouses with showers and tube. a preschool, and twn central lundry areas. The units rhernscives were relatively small: 54 percent of them conuisted of a kitchen, a living tom, and one additional roum, with a hallway and twilet. taking up 41 square meters. In comparson to the carer ecsidential blacks. which were derigned with building volumes of different sites and decorated with arcades, bay windows, and expressive detail, the Karl Mars: hof presents a severe design. To further che unity af this complex, such severity was almost inevicable. Moreover, Fhn’s earlier work also distinguished itself in its sober approach from the work of most of his coll (see Lindenhot, 1924; Bebel-Hof, 1925), The principal bu volumes of the Karl Marxhof are straight blocks, enlivened and there with bakcanics and setback cor- nen Mon remarkable is the plastic articulation of the gable of the central block, which, in combination with the ax lage  arches, giver the building a monumental allure, Both scale and degree of aberraction are reminiscent of the neoclassical work of Boullée and Ledoux. Ehn had studied, like several of his col- leagues, with Otto Wagner, and this might explain the combina- tion of a classical idiom and bis modern, functional approach.  The typological hackground of the Karl Marshof—the court- yard block form itelf—comes aut of a Cenceal European tradi- tion. The line originated in convents and the baroque palaces of the nobility and evolved in the 19th century into residencal complexes and tenemencs. The preference of the city's sucial- democtatic government for the residential block form was not innixent of conscious references m the palaces in which the form onginated. The city government's cancetn with volving the housing shortage was to be clearly vinible in the “social palace” of the residential block. ‘The Karl Marxhof furnishes a particularty clear example of this trend. An analogy with the USSR's “palaces of the people” of the 19.305 might also be present, except that the cultural and political doctrine of Soviet socialist realism found an exclusive inspiration in the neoclassical past.  ‘The similarities 10 palace architecture of the Karl Marshof and other residential blocks caste in for criticism alto, among, others by Josef Frank (1885~ 1967), who touk aie at uve disso- nance between older architectural types and the new social aspi- rations 4s carly as 1926. Even funcionalist architects faited to appreciate Vienna's social housing construction, as it diverged (00 far from the principles formulated by CIAM (Congzsés Ia- ternmionaux d'Architevure Moderne). For these reasons, archi- tectural history harely paid attention to the Viennese residential blocks after World War Il. Only during the past two decades has this carcptional phenomenon of s peopk’s housing program received more deuiled zttention. Although the Karl Marzhof became a battleground during the civil war of 1934, che complex cemained inhabited.  Orakan Mica  See ale Congrés Intersationsex d’Architecture Mederae (CAAM, 1927}; Frank, Josef (Amstriah Palace of the Soview Competition (1931); Vienna, Austriay Wagner, Ore (Auv- tria)  Further Reading  Gencral studies on politics and the housing program indude Graber, Gulick, and Hardy. Blu. Ohboget, ‘Tafuri, and Weihsmann discus architecoare in the contest nf housing policy,  Blu, Eee, The Archisecrare of Red Veenna, 1919-1934, Cambridge, Mavachuumetey: MIT Pres, 1999)  Gouber, Helmut, Red Vienna: Experiment in Working. Class Cabtwre, 1919-1934, New York: Oxford University Prew, 1991  Gulick, Charles A., Ausmia from Habsburg to Hitler, 2 vole, Rerkeley: University of California Prem, 1948  Hardy, Charles ©, and Robert R. Kuczynela, The Hesing Program of the City of Vienna, Washingeoa, D.C.; The Brookings Inatiawtion. 1934  Oblingce, Walter (edison), Das Rowe Wien, 1918-1934, Vienna: Mitieen det Stade Wien, 1993  ‘Vafuri, Manfredo, Vienna Rens: La peliticn recidenssale nella Vienna saciahute, 1919-1933, Milan; Elects, 1980; 2nd edlitinn, 1995  Weihwrunn, Hele, Du Kore Wier: socinidemokrann be Archickrr und Xemmaneipolink, Viena: Promedia, M85  KIMBELL ART MUSEUM, FORT WORTH, TEXAS Designed by Louis I. Kahn; completed 1972  Often cited as one of che finest muscum buildings in che world, the Kimbell Arc Muscum in Fort Worth, Texas, demonstrates the power of 4 fruitful collaburation berween a trang, know! edgeable client and one of the most probing and creative archi- tects of the 20th century, Dr. Richard F. Brown, who spoke for the Kimbell trustees on design issues, and architect Louis F. Kahn were joined by a talented group of consultants and experts, a cluding engineer August E. Komandanr and lighung devipnet Richard Kelly, in the conceptualization and development of this tour de force of sophisticanon and tcfineinent. Prexun M, Ger- on’s firm im Fort Warth as associate architects (in particular, Frank Sherwood) and [Thomas 5. Byrne. Contractors (in particu- har. A.T. Seymour). were essential in ensuring the quality execu- sion of the beautifully made structure. Marshall D. Meyers, one of Kahn's most capable assistancs, played 4 particularly important  role throughout what was.4 tumultuous design and construcuon  process, On his death, industnaliss Kay Kembell bequeathed a collec- thon of 350 art objects along with the capital funds for a building to establish a new museum neat downtown Fort Worth, In 1965 Richard F. Brown was hired as director. having previously served at the Tos Angeles County Museum during a period when it had built 4 new building. Disappointed in his previous role in the deugn process, Brown stipulaicd to the Kimbetl erusteea, before accepting the position, chat be should hare full conto! over architect selection and client input. He chen began 4 metic- lous process of researching the work of leading designen and preparing a lengthy pro-architectural program chat documented very specifically his vision for what kond of building the museurn uered,  Brown indally thought that Ludwig Mies van des Rohe, the architect whom be had supported unsuccessfully for the Los Anges County Museum project. should recave che commis- sion. However, further research inclined him eo favor the maver- ick Louis Kahn, whose Yale University Art Gallery (1953) had taken Mics’ work (and modernism in general) in a somewhat different direction. When Kahn began the Kimbell Muscum project in 1966, he was at a numing paine in his career. Having just completed the Salk Institute (1965) in Califoenia and a  Kienbell Muscurm of Art, Fort Worth, Texas, dengned by Louis Kahn (1972) © GreatBuildings com 
dormitory compler 11965) for Bryn Mawr College in Perinsytva- nia, the late-blooming architect was moving into a period during which he would produce a series of nmeless public buildings imbued with a powerful architectural order anu clarity,  Both Brown and Kahn were strong indhviduals with personal. but compatible, goals fur the new building, Brown wanted 4 beauniful. inviting museum with intimate spaces more like 4 graciow home of villa. He wrote in bus pre-architetural pro-  ram. “The overwhelming, percentage of people whom this Prilding is intended co serve will not be art historians, other architects or Progressive artists with a sophisticated background in architectural form. ‘heir cotal experience of a visie ro a mu seum should be one of warmth, mellawness, and even elegance. . A visitor wo an art museum ought to be charmed” Kahn sought the architectural forms that were fundamental eo the museum, its program, and its locale, He said that his mind was “filled with Roman greatness” and chat the vault was etched in his consciousnexs— "the vaule, rising not high, not in an august manner, but somehow appropriate to the size of the individual, and ws lecling of being at home arnt safe Lame to mind.”  From his fire skeuches, Kehn conceived the museum as a series of long, narrow pallcries topped by shells or vaults. As was his habie, however, the design took many diflerent configura- tions before the final xheme emerged. In earty stages. the mu- seum had a very large square footprint with a dozen of so court- yards of various sizes capeured within. In larer stages, an H-shaped configuration was developed with separate auditorium and gallery wings joined by a generous passageway. The final wheme emerged ax a C-shaped plan around an entry plaza with oaly three small light courts penetrating the vauleed purtion of the building. .  Approptiate natusal light was 2 priority for both the client and the architect, Beown desired “a paycholugical effect through which che museusn visitor feels that both he and the are are still a part of the ecal, rotating, changeable world.” Kahn abo believed thar a arructure “Joigned to house paring and sculpture ought, by nature, to echo uh art's stasitiviry ta different aspect: of mood, light, and colar. Working with Richard Kelly, Kahn and Meyer developed a system of Lyheing that ran the length of the vaults at their peak. The intense “Texas sun was softened, fhounced, and cnoled as it washed across perfurated stainless-steel xereens and the concrete underside of the vaults before finally reaching the roams helaw,  Brown admired the fact chat Kahn was “willing to let the specific situation poted by the creation of a building guide him and tell him what the structure, engineering and sesthetic ought to be.” “The buildieyg chat cnerged from their jam: efforts cet. tauly exemplifies that responsiveness. The Kimbell Museum embodies not only the dircctor's well-defined program but alu particular parametets of site, climate, and regional charactet. Its flatness, toughness, and cawny natural surfaces, along with the way in which et withstands the someumes brutal sun, make it part and parcel of the northem Tesas landxape.  Seyhsucally, the Kimbell Museum is distinct among Kahn's work. Ic shares an affinity for order. a constructional logic. and, an expressive use of materials with other mature works, but its forms and spatial quatiries are unique. The Kimbell Muscum has become a pilgrimage paint for visttors from all over the world who can witness Kahn's magnificent marciage of modernity and romance, logic, and sensuality. The buikling speaks the language  of human experience—pocked satin of travertine against the “liquid sone” of concrete, silvery stainless steel against honey- colored auk paneling, and everywhere the paw of light borrowed from the aun.  Lawkencr W. Seek  Ser sho Kabn, Louis (United States}; Museurs; Salk lascicate, Ls Jolla, California  Further Reading  In addition ta the ecadings below. almost any compilaeion of the works of Love L Kalo will inchade intarenation on the Kimbell Art Museum.  Rellinelli, Lace, Lowa 2 Kahne The Conrructian of the Kinabell Arr Miwewer, Milan: Skira, 1999  Benedikt, Michael, Devemsernctiag the Kimbell: An Frey oe Meaning and An hitature, New York: SITES Bewks, 1994  Gartamons, Croia, and Luca Rivales, Leos f. Kakor Keonbell Ad Vien, tlorence: Alinca, 1991  Giurgola. Romaldo. and Jaumun Mehta. Loans £ Kako, Boulder, Calnaada: Wesevrew Prose Artemia, 1975  Herz. Ronner, Aleoandio Vasella, and Sharad Jhaven. dos £ Kahn: Cs Works. 1935-1974, Baul: Bukhauser. and Baulder. Colorado: Westview Pres, 1977: 2nd edition, Basel and Basron: Birkhauser, 1987 .  fohnvan, Nella k, Light de ake Theme: Lowa t Kahn and the Kimbell Art Musewm: Cummein on Architecture, bore Worth, Texas: Kunbell Art Loundanoa, 1975  Komendant, August b.. 1a Yeurrs with Archatect Lows 1. Keio, Englewood, New feney: Aluray, 1975  Tobell: Jobn, Between Sulence and Legbt: Spear in she Archacceure of Lewis 1. Kabe, Boulder, CGatanido: Shambhala, 1979  Speck, Lawrence, Landmarks of Teas Ambreceure, Aamir: Univenity of Teras Iran, 1986  KOHN PEDERSEN FOX  Architecture firm, United States  In 1976 A. Eugene Kohn, William Pedersen, and Sheldon Foa formed one of the late 20th cencury’s most commercially and Gitically successful firms, Kohn Pederen Fox (KPF}. Although KPF is bess known for its high-profile commercial shyscrapens, each of its diverse projects reveals the fiem's commitment co structures not only of unique importance to the individual client but abo with an overriding contextual focus. Frequently respon- tive to the nearby environment, the firm's designs demonstrate an assimuation of modemist and Postmodern ideals, epitomized by a varied and adaptable architectural wicabulary and a healthy appreciation for luurious materials and clarity of form. Finding strength in this flexibility, the firm quickly gained a reputation for design excilence. In 1990 the American Institute of Archi- tects (ALA) awarded KI°F with ins Architectural Firm Award, the firm ever to receive such high recognition.  To no small degree, KPF's success is due to the speciali: tole thar each founding partner has played in the very much Itke the symbiosis that existed within another highly wac- cessful firm at the beginning of the century. McKim. Mead and White. A. Eugene Kohn (1930~} energetically marketed the firm and Sheklon Fox (1930—) functioned as the manager and Wil- liam Pedersen (1938~) as the chief designer. A fourth principal, Patricia Conway (1937-), specialized in planning and interiors  and in 1984 became president of KPE's splinter interioes firm. Koha Pedersen Fox Conway Arsociates, All four met while em- ployed by John Cart Warnecke and Associates directly prior to KPF's founding.  Both Eugene Kohn and Sheklon Fox recenwod their architec- sural degrees from the University of Pennsytvania. Kuhn worked as a designer for Vincent G. Kling Associates from 1960 to 1965 and as New York design director for Welton Becket Associates until 1967, when he became president and purtact at Joba Carl Warnecke and Annciates. By 1976 Hos had tisen to section tice president at Wamecke, following criployment with Kahn Jacebs (1995 72). Aftet receiving his bachelor's degree un architecture fiom the Universay of Minacwta, William Pedersen attended the Massachusetts Instrute of Pechoology (MIT), where after gtaduanon he worked for Picwo Belluschi. MIT's dean of anhi- tecture and planning, In 1965 hie won the Rome Ine, spent two years of study at the American Academy in Rome. and worked with Italian architect Fduardo Catalino In 1967 he joined LM. Pei and Associates unuil he was hired away in 1971 to beenme vice president of John Carl Warnecke and Acusciates. Columbia University graduare Pacricia Conway was asmxiate director of planning for Warnecke from 1972 w 1976.  After vevetal well-caxccuted but hanlly memorable designs, the firm's fire widely acclaimed building «as 334 Wacker Drive (1983) an Chicago, a Me-atory groen-ecflective-plass office tower  333 Wacker Drive (1989), view from clevated train cracks Designed by Kohn Pedenen and fox  Chicago, (linois  © Barhara Karant. Phot courtesy Kohn Petersen and Fou  whence fustrous sculptural curtain wall imitated che bendsng Chi- cago Rover along its tnangular site, The structure exploited the sheer retlective mass of she curtain wall by munimizng individual windows through tinting gray-green the verncal duminum win- dow mullions. Green marble and gray granite octagonal columns at the bine bevel made a subrle reference to the Merchandie Man's octagonal towers actos the fiver, Addicenal methods employed in reaction tn che building's environment incduded beginning the office flours above the track level of the nearly clevated train, thus permitting a large four-Hooe masonry-block hase that better integrated the structure with neighboring build- ings. The side of the building facing che city are set at ey  anghe, soponding there ww the urban god. Ube ALA rewarded this dewign with its National Honors Award in 1984, validating KPF’s coming of age as a major player in skyscraper design.  The Postmodernist maneer in which lush materials such as colored marbke and foams remuuscent of classical architecture were employed by KP} became 2 hallmark of the firm's buildings in the 1980s, many of which were corporate commissions. Some of the bea crampley include che Hetuules Incorporated Head- quarters (1983) in Wilmington, Delaware: the ‘Third Nationat Rank (1985) in Nashville: and CNG Tower (1987) in Patts- burgh. Ire second AIA Nanonal Honor Award came in 1987 for the Procicr and Gamble Gencral Offices Complex (1985) in Citminnat, an 836,000-square-foot expansion tu the company's evisting | -story headquarters, The maltivelume sakiien con- sisted of ewe 17-story occagonal towers with pyramidal roofs thar formed a vinual gareway to the city from Interstate 71 and a six-story L-shaped base that embraced new public space and that connected te the older steuceure. The prevailing cuncern for humanizing bath the scale and the siting of the complex typified KPF's best work during this pened.  Responding to new global eusnumic conditions, KI'F increas. ingly produced speculative structures abroad fat international chents un the 1990. It uperted oflkes in London (1989) and ‘Tokyo (1995) and added a number af new principals ta the firm. Tn all, KPF has built in more chan 30 countiics. The political unificarion and economic reviulizacion of Germany. as well as the establishment of the Furepcan Union, presented unique building vpportuniucs in Central Europe particularly. One of KPF’s first upnificant overseas commissions was the Westends- tase OG Bank Headquaners Building (1993) in Frankfurt. As a 915.000-<quare-foot mixed-use complex har includes a 52-nory office cower, resnlential aparuments, and a winter gar- den, the design sought ro link the commercial Mainrer Lands- trast couidor with the ncarby Watend residential area. In char acteristic KPF fashion, the camplex reveals a multicude of interlocking geometric forms, cach cesponding to yet another aspect of the surrounding micro: and macrocnviroament. In 1994 KPF reveived its chird ATA | lonors Award tor the Westen thtrawe t design.  A booming Asan cconomic market led KPF to a farge num- ber of commissions on the Pacific Rim, particularly in China's provincial uty of Shanghat, Begun in 1997 and xheduled for completion cary in the 21st century, the Shanghai World Finan- Gal Center will be one of the callest buildings in che world at 1.509 fee, As with mow KI'F designs, the Shanghai World Finanual Center not only physically reterences its surroundings through sts form and materials buc abo suggests cuttural integra- tion with ats emblematic: use at a “moon gate” cut through the top of the tower, Lightly mirrored glass and horizontally handed 
stainless stcel form a reflective membrane for the square prism shaft Uhat serves as bath oflice cower and hogel, with retail space at the base. Difficulty with soft wil resulted in piles being driven over 260 fect inte the soil to anchor the theee-sillion-square- foot building, yet the shecr size of the sxructurc is visually negated by the wind pressure—seheving 164-foot-diameter cylindrical void. Although a daring use of farm sametimes trivialize KPF's designs, the firm's adruitness at adapung to clients’ needs and to changing world econamic realities leaves KPF one of the top ten architectural firms at the end of the century and posed to continue making signdicant contributions well inco the 21st century.  Vaterik 3. Gast  Ser ade McKim, Mead and White (United States): Shanghai World Financial Center, Shanghai  Biographies  A. Eugene Kohn Born in Philadelphis, Pennsylvania. 1930, Educated ar the Uni- versity of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.  ‘Wiltiam Pedersen  Born in St. Paul, Minnoota, 1938. Studied at the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis. and at the Massachuscts Institute of ‘Technology, Cambridge.  Sheldon Fox ’ Rom in New York Cary, 1930, Educated at the Unsvessity of Pennsytvania, Philadelphia.  Kohn Pedersea Fox  Partners met while working un the ailice of John Cart Warnecke in the early 1970s: Kohn Pedersen fox established in New York 1976, Specialized in corporate offices and office towers. A branch office, headed by partner Patricia Conway. specialized in corpo- rate office interior.  Selected Works  ABC Television Suxlw Building, New York. 1474  393 Wacker Drive Office Buidling, Chicagu, 1983  Henvules Imorpotated Headquarten, Wilmington, Delaware, 1983  Third National Bank, Nushwille, Toaneuce, (985  Proceat and Gamble Goncral Offs Complex, Cinconnacs, Obie, 198s  CNG Towes, Pittsburgh, Pennsyhanis, 1987  Wesendtrene DG Rank Headquarters, Prankfur, 1513  Shanghas World Fanancial Contes, 1994 (Scill under cunsttuction)  TAM Workl Headquarters, Armoak. New York, 1997  Further Reading Ducumentaton in the furs of photographo, budding and sete Laynasts.  and details regarding che cules of the firm's prnupaly in each work are found un two caslogner troeene Chio and Abramson, and Jame,  Aadenon. Grace. “Five hy KDE.” The Architectural Revord 175, no. 2 19K)  Boles, Daralce Donkervoct, and Jim Murphy, “Canannaty Conterpicve.” Progrentie Arcteresture 66, no 10 (1985)  Chio, Sonia R., and Trevor D. Abramson. editors, Katw Padenien Frcz: Bunldongs and Proyects, 1976-1986, New York: Rizeoli, 1987  James, Warren A., editor, Kebu Pedenien Foc Archetecture and Urbantom, 1986-1992. New York: Rizzoli, 1993; revised edition, 194  “Kohn Pedersen For: Profile.” Progressine Architecture 64, no. 10 (1983)  MeCQuade. Walter, “The High Rise of Kohn Pedenca Fox,” Archeecture: The AIA feurnal 78, no. 5 (1989)  KOOLHAAS, REM 1944- Architect, designer, Netherlands  Rem Koolhaas is an intemationally known architect, urbanist, and writer, He gained initia! recognition in 1978 with the publi- cation of his firw book, Delirious: New York, in which be analyted the exuberant, complex, and popular modemism of New York City of the 1920s and 1930s. His interpretations of New York were presented a8 4 ctitique of canonical Earopess modernism and as a pluform for designing architecoure in the contemporary city. Koulhaas’s writing, building, and are alf insera- ments for research into the architectural possibilities for the con- vemporary city.  Ip 1975, Koolhaas founded OMA with Madelon Vriesend- orp and Flia and Zoe Zenghclis and produced theorctical projects, such ax the City of the Captive Globe (1978), published asa posscript to Defrrions New York. The young firm also began entering comperitions, After winning a preliminary competition for the addition to che Parkament Buildings in The Hague. OMA opened iu office in Rouerdam in 1981, where they cna- tired preparing compctition entries (Parc de ta Villcuc, Paris, 1982; Ville Nouvelle Melun-Senarr, (987) while carrying out awarded commissions induding the 1J-Plein Urban Housing Project in Amserdam (completed 1986) and the Netherlands Dancc Theater (completed 1987).  {n the carly 1990s Koolhaas and OMA's acriviries expanded to indude the publication of OS1A: 5.M,L.XL (1995). Koolhaas and OMA were awarded significant commissions, incuding Nexus Housing, Fukuoka, Japan (1991); Villa dall'Ava, Paris (1991); the Kunsthal, Rotterdam (1992); Enralille Masterplan (1994), and Grand Palais. | ille (1994); Netherlands Embassy, Berlin (1996); Educatnsium, University of Urrechs (1997); tli nois Institute of Technology (IIT) McCormick Tribune Cars pus Center, Chicago (1997); Maison a’ Bordeaux (1998); and Seattle Public Libeary (1999). OMA's projecus—buile and un- builr—have been published widely in international journals and have been the subject of numerous exhibitions, induding Rew Koothaas and the Place of Publi Architecture at the Museum of Modern Art ua New York (1994).  Like other architects who emerged as of che postwar generation, Koolhaas's work both breaks wah modernism and teformulates it as he reconfigures relationships among architec nural forms, contemparary building programs, and the Postmod- crn city. His essays, projects, and built work reject cerain aspects of first-generation Pastmodernim, including the contextualism, of Colin Rowe (United States), the typological itions of Aldo Rossi (Italy). and in the Nethetlands, the Struuraliom of Herman Hertzberger. Because Koothaas’s architecture is con- ducted as research, not as the outcome of any fixed theoretical  ill ater daiaat = poll Bed f-Biga:  Lille Grand Pabis, Lille, France (1999), desagned by Rem Koulhaas and OMA  © Dan Delgado 2 Anh  position, his architecture cannot be labeled stylistically or associ- ated wish specific movements. For Koolhaas, the mélange of projects and places fur his rescanih produces an alchemical envi- ronment: Atlanta, Tokyo, Lagos, Shanghai, Paris, Amaterdam. and New York; highways, airports, transpuetative tunnels, and shopping malls in addition to libraries, private villas. and mo- scums.  Koolhaas and OMA's projects operate with ewo major design strategic: the first emerged fram Delinow New York and em- beaced che city as an infinice grid of streets, blocks, and skyscra- pers and the penultimate sign of modermty. Here Koolhaas cites the Downtown Achlenc Club (1930) as architectural design that fulfills the promise of alternative modernism within a “culture of congestion” (vec Koolhaas, 1978). This design strategy organizes urban territury--- gridiron or otherwise. -into increments that wet tadically differcne programs side by side and chat are joined or separated with che boundary of the oor, the exterior skin of the building, of the city grid. Projects of Kouthaas’s that exploit this paradigm inchate the urban and Lindwape competinons entfies for the Parc de La Villette in Paris (1992), che new town of Mdun-Senart outside of Paris (1987), and later architeceural projects. especially the competition entries for the Jussieu Librar- tes (Paris, 1992) and che Bibliotheque de France (Paris. 1989). The second strategy emerged not from conventional rescarch  but from experimentation, eapeuially within the Kunsthal (Ros- terdam, 1992). Euratille master plan (Lille, 1995), and Educ- tarium (Urreche, 1996), and later clabntared in Koothaas’s essays “Bigoess: The problem of Large” and “The Generic City.” In these texts, be calls fur che aommodation of che global spaces of flows. instead of just the local spaces of place, as the has for design within the contemporary city. These projects wrap and fold spaces. programs, and the landscape in and around a neutral structural frame Although OMA's current work resists classifica- tion, several recent experimental projects continuc these explora. Hons of vongestion and flow, such as the Urban Design Forum master plan (Yokohama, Japan. 1991), Nexus World Housing (Fukwoka, Japan, 1991), and Almere Cay Center (expected camplenon 2005}.  In addition to being an influcnoal intemational figure in architecture and urbanism. Koolhaas has stumulated an emerging generation of young architects, expecially in the Netherlands. These architects are nut following stylistic canons but, rather. carrying forward an attieude that focuses on architecture's place in the contemporary city, on the programs of everyday life, and on the research and creative invention cit Koothaas bus kepe alive as a challenge to a new generation.  Ricard: DAGENHART 
See uho Hertaberger, Herman {Netherlands}: Netherlande: Ronterdara, Netherlands  Biography  Born in Rotcendam, Netherlands 1944, Lived in Indonesia 1952-56, Journalist with the Hacgue Pos in The Hague. sreen- writer in the Netherlands and in Hollywood. Graduated from Architecture Assouiation, London, 1968-72: wear to Cornell University on a Harkness Fellowship to study with O.M. Un- gen. 1973. Visiang fellow, Inatitute for Architecture and Urban Studies, New York, 1974; colounded the Office of Metropofiian Architecture, London 1975; opened OMA office in Rotterdam 1981. Laughr at the Institute for Architecture and Urban Scud.  ica, New York, 1975; Arclutcctural Assuciation. London, 1976; Technical University, Delft. 1988-89; Rice University, Hous- ton, 1991-92, Visting scholar, J. Paul Getty Center. Los Ange: kes, 1993, and Harvard University. Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1995—present. Numerous awards for archirecrure and urban projects. induding the 2000 Laureate of the Pritzhes Architec  tural Prize.  Sclocied Works  Pan de bs Villenne (rompetitio Paris, Frees, VOR2  World Exhibition 1989 (study). Paris, France. 1983  Ville Nouvelle Melun-Scrant (compentian). Melun-Senan, France, 1987  Nexus Housing. Fulsoka. Japan, 1991  Villa dal Ava. Paris, France, 1991  Kumgthal, Rotrercdarn, Netherlands. 1942  EuralDe Masterplan, Lille. Prance, 1994 .  Lille Grand Palais. Jille, France, 1994  Netherlands Embassy. Berlin. 1996  MCA Unuversal Studios, Los Angeles. 1490  Hilacaianum, Univesity of Vue, Cancht, Netherlamb. 1997  Dhinow Ensorute of Technology Srudent Center, Chxcago, 197  Mawan a Bordeaux. Bordeaus. France, 1995  Public Library, Seattle, Washingron, 1999  Selected Publications  Delinosa New York: A Remaactive Manifesto for Manhattan, New York, Ovtord. 19.8. Rotterdam: O10 Pubbshers, 1994: New York: Monucdh, 1995  OMA, SMULXL, Reaterdlam: 010 Publishers, and New York. Monsceth, 1995  Further Reading  Lucan, Jacques. OMA, Rem Kaothars. Munch and Zunch: Atteme Verlag far Architekius, 1959  Sinning, Hake. Mare & More OMARem Keothaas, Uheune and Archuckrar, Berlin: Wasnusth Verlag, 2000  Verwynen, Jan, “Rem Koolhaas a vlficc for Metropobun Anhiterure,”Arbeiebn, 5 1988)  NIHON KOSAKU BUNKA RENMEI QAPANESE WERKBUND)  The Japanese Werkbund. under che official name of Nihon Uapanese for Japan") Kerkw (making) Bwerks (culture) Reimer fassembly), was an organization of Japanese archutecss and indus- trial designers who came together with a common regard for  the European Modern mavements. The German Werkbund (1907) was the model from which the organization's name was drawn, The Japanese group was formed an 6 December 1936.  Bewoets the two world wan, Japan’s mow important insitu- tional building designs were chasacterired by a pluralian vaguely borrowed from the European tradition, A sumber of organiza- tans had already been formed by progressive Japanese architects who were inspired by European mudcrniss ideologies. For cxam- ple, the Niben Bonrihe Kyekai, or the Japan Secession (1920), modeled inelf an the Austrian (Vienna) Secession, and Nihon Kokusai Kenchrku-kat (dhe Japan International Architectural Ay sociation (1927)] echoed ideals of the CLAM (Congres Internasi- onaux d'Architecture Moderne) formed the same year. The mainstream debates tended to focus on establishing a proper stvle for Japanese architecture. The Japanese Werkbund a- tempred to find a way co capture the essence of Japanese culnure in modem and tationalistic expressions that were vornpatibie with international European predecessors.  The 19.36 conference held by che Japanese Academy of Archi- tecture prompted the formation of the Japanese Werkbund. The conference wax nrganized to discuss appropriate styles for mod- em Japancee architecture, Many of the furure members of the Werkhund srtended this cunfererse. Ken Ichiura published an artick: afterward that represented the group's prition regarding an appropriate style fur Japanene architecture. Ichiusa considered ir false tn replicate the details of the Buddhist temples and Shines sbrincs in modern construction and insicad urged archicects to look for the esence of the Japanese expresions frum Kasure Detached Palace, Ise Shinto Shrine, and folk houses. This state- ment was directed apainot a oumber of instisunenal buildi thar had been campleted onty several years cartier. The identifi- cation of Katsura, Le. and Japanese lolk buues a the suurces of the cultural identity was in accordance with Bruno Taue’s observations of Japanese traditional architesiure. Already an in- ternationally well-known architect, laut had fled Nazi Germany and arrived in fapan three years carher. After visting a sumber of traditional buikdings, Taut claimed co have rediscovered Japa- nese beauty in che simple forms of straight lines, sober colors of materials, and direct expressions of construction in Karsura, Ie, and folk houses. Predictably. Taue denounced ornate and colorful crearments, such as those seen in Buddhist halls, Taut's tecture, tided "Fundamentals of [apanese Architecture,” was held in Tokyo in October 1935. With its enthusiastic recepeion in Japan, Taur’s lecture had a wrong influence on future Japanese arclutecture in general His statement that the functionality and rationality of thee building were equivatent te the principles of European modern architecture was particularly well received by members of the Japanese Werkbund.  Like its model German organization, the Japano Werkbund shared the idea chat architecture would create a unity among other allied ars, Architects and artists were encouraged to collab- orate. The group proclaimed its objectives by setting up che three sets of opposites: architecture for living, nor of wre crafts. with purpose, not for leisure: and products with value. not lack- ing taste. The group saw its activines categorized into the follow- ing three arcas: collaborative research, the training of craftsmen and workers at the production sites, and the education of the general public. The group organized exhibitions, site trips, and workshops held in support of the Japanese Ministry of Com- menx and Industry. The group's journal, Gendei Kenchiku (Contemporary Architecture), was published between 1939 and  1940, Although shon-lived. this publication lax! the foundation fe Japan's architectural pournalisms chat developed after World  ‘ac UL,  The Japancse Werkhund shared some nationafistic and mili- tary ideas. In thew proclamanon, the group urged lapan to take the leading role in the construcuon of an Asian alhanve They foresaw an opportunity in che near hisure in which architecture and other allied disciplines would face many challenges and diffi- culties. The group's charge was to endow a great force tw culture thar would bring true success to the building af a great Asian alliance. In addition, the group had the intention of becoming the major contribuvor to the Japan Fxposinon, which had been planned tn celebrate che 2,600th year of the Japanese Imperial calendar (1940). This, then. was yet anuther aspect of the Japa- nese Werkbund, one that chowed the group's reflexive accop- tance of the nativealisuc movements in the country at chat ame, ‘The group terminated its journal publicauon and dnselved ats other activinies when the exposition was canceled. [t would, how- ever, be putting too much emphases on the group's interests in this exposition to consider the event's cancellation as the direct cause af the group's termination, Other newspapers and journals were rerminated under the military guvernment as well. The political and social climare of the time under the newly formed tuilnary alliance with Fascist Germany and Inaly did not alow che group's activities.  Although the Japan Tntcrnauunal Architectural Asuciativn inchided international members such as Bruno Taut, Frich Mon: deluwhn, Gerrit Riervell, fumef Hoffmann. J.J.P. Oud, Peter Beh- rons, Waker Gropius, ad Richard Neutra the Japanese Wetkbund were Japanese. These included intluce- sial modernist architects, such as Hideto Kishids, Sutemt Hor Ruchi. Junzo Sakakura, Yoshiro Tamguchs, and Kunio Mac- kawa. The works of the membership include Wakasa House (1937) by Sutems Horiguchi, the Japan Pavilion (1937) ar the Paris Exposition by Junzo Sakakura, and che Dormitories 1148) at Keio Preparatory College by Yoshico Taniguchi.  Riko Hanns  Further Reading  “The Horigan fu fegacy: Centennual of Sutemu Hunguciw’s bith.” Kewcheku-bunks, 50/582 {Apr 1995)  Taut. Brunv, Grundbnien det Antiicktur Japins, Tokyu, Kokassi Banka Shinkokai, 1936, a Pendaneenual: of Japanese Architecture. tramlated by Glenn Haker and It. L. Pringaheim, Tokyu Kokusai Bunka Shinkokai, 1936  10 People Who Moved Modvenivim Rethinking the Mudernive The Japenre Porpective, special ine uf Kewhibw-burtka, 556¥4 (January 2000)  KUROKAWA, KISHO 1934-  Architect, urban planner, and theorist  Japan  Kisho Kurokawa is one of Japan's keading designees known for his theory of symbiasis. According t Kurukawa, “symbionis” an alternative conceptual model for Japanese architecture that simultancously embodses seemingly conflicting ideas, such as universal principles and regional differences, Western and East- em sensibilities, history and fucure, small and large scales. oF  al the members of  cultural adenaty and modern cechnulogy. He large-scale archi teetural projects. both builc and unbuilt. parallel his ubcoretical writing regarding atchitectuce in the Paamodern cra and ceflect his attempt to define an essential character of Japanese architee- ture,  Kurokawa’s carly carcer was shaped largely by his experiences as one of the founders of the so-called Metaholie movemenc during the early 1960s, whose member induded other well- known Japanese architects, such as Fumihiko Mahi and Kiyonori Kikutake, Rejecting modernium’s functionalist approach, the Metabetists proposed Large-scale urban projects that used biolog- ical concepts and structures as models for ways in which archites- ture coukd address practical and souclognal isuct, such as popu- Lation increase and the need for sinictures that could adape to the changing demands of their inbabitames. Kurokawa Gnt gained eecognitwon outmde Japan in 1962 for his design of the Agnicul- tural City Plan, exhibited in the “Vissonary Architecture” show at the Museum of Modern Arc in New York. Dunng the sane penod, he was invited by Peter Smithson and Aldo van Fyck to Parricipare in Team X meetings. the largely Netherlandish group of young anhiteets who rejected stect functionalism in order to promote individual conceprs af architectural and social identity. However, although the urban agendas of | eam X and the Meta- bobsts were sienilae, che Metabolis: experiments with biological metaphors gave them 3 distiner identiry.  For example, Kurukawa’s urban proposals were forrnally based on structures that encorporated che possibility for constant growth and change. The Helix City Plan for Lokyn (1961) was luerally derived from the double-heliz structure of the DNA mobxule. This abstract model expressed the coneepe of both vertical and honzonual urban expansion, potentially infinite. Buulding projects such @ the Nagakin Capoule Tower (Tokyo, Japan. 1972) embodied Kurokiwa's urban concepts of mutable, modular forms and references to cellular structure. Built between 19°U and 1972, che tower consists af prefabricated living units thar were fnfted into place by a crane. The modules provided what Kurokawa referred to as “spacial equipment” that could be operated by its inhabiran. In addition, by providing hotel-like amenities in the most cfficiens way possible, he actempred tn encourage the development of residential buildings fur com- outers within the city center during a time when many city dwellers were moving tn the outlying subucht.  Kurukawa’s interests in modular form and posibilitio for thiee-dimensional expansion were explored at the scale of the struciural component in the Toshiba [HEI Pavition at Expo 1970 tn Oula. ‘The circular, domed, H0-seac theater provided Kuro- kawa with the opponunity to experiment with a metal space trame of tetrahedral units chat could be expanded in 14 ditferenc wars. “The first aim.” tated Kurokawa. “was to introduce chis fegcnerating process into architecture and city planning, che name being expressive of the Wanviction that a work of architec: ture should not be frozen once it ws completed, bur should be apprehended instead 3s a thing—or as 3 procea—thar evolves from past to present and from prevent tu future.”  Metabolism could be acen ax 4 reaction ta the practical con- cerns about the growing population crisis wn Japan's cities and as a challenge 10 the so-called machine age that operates without consideration of human history. Kurokawa and the Meubulists shared simiantics with, and may have been influenced by, uthet architectural styles, such us feam X and the British Archigcam 
group. bur Kurokawa was also motivated by his strong reaction agamst the rigid International Style, which had been an influen- tial force in Japanese architecture during the fire half’ of the century, The percewed Furocertrism and homogencity of Inter- autional Style buildings was heavily criticized by Kurokawa as @ form of colomulisen. In particular, he objected to the notion devised by European architects Brune Tauc and Waltet Gropous during thes visie to the Katsura Palice in Japan that the simple, spare forms of the building anticipated modemist principles and represented Japanese architecture a whole; rather, Kurukawa be- lheved thar the Katsura Palace represented only pare of the coun- try's architectural tradinon.  From hus carly work as a Metabolix, exploring the tension between technology and culture and berween global and local architecture, Kurokawa developed his culrural cheory of symbio- sis. He has written extensively on his theories of symbiosis, and his writings, including the 1992 publication From Metabolsm a Symbions, are virtually manifetios, Weiting in» manner that recalls the work af French literary critics such as Roland Barthes, Gilles Deleuze, and Felix Guattari among others, Kurokawa draws inspiration trom loval teadivion and culture co inform a hew patadigm for Japanese architecaute that continues the suduiuhural dynamic characteristic of Japanese cuttatc, for ex-  The Coline Buildings, designed by Kho Kurokawa. Nimes, France © Chow Bland: kye UbiquitoussCORBIS  ample. the invorparacion of Chinese clements into Japanese cul- ture.  Beginning in the 1970s and continuing with his comempo- tary work, Kurokawa has explored the ways in which contempo- rary architecture can draw on the past and present to express tegional identity. Moat, if not all, of his projects contain refer- ences to the centuries-old nvdaye style of Japanese archiveceure. Literally translated as an ocathetic. of “arthessness,” the sedipe style was employed in the design of teahouses, most notably during the Ede penud of the catty 17th through the mid- 19h centuries. ‘The Nagakin Capsule Tower employs curting-edge technology and materials. is constructed of mass-produced units, uses lugh-tension connections te a central core, and addresses contemporary urban population issues: a the same time, how- ever, the individual rnoms within the tower contain references to the traditional nekipe style: 8- by-13-faot dimensions are based on the plan of the tearoom: molded plastic interiors express the simpliciry. orderliness. and econamy evident in the spare design uf the tearoom; and pawage from the street up co individual quarters could be described us conveying the sense of isolation and exape expressed by traditional tcaroom design.  Many of Kurokawa’s buildings are muscunu, a building type well suited to che eaplorativa of culture, Aistory. and the notion of symbiosi. For crample, the Ehime Prefectural Museum of General Science (Ehime, Japan, 1995) is a complex of several buildings. each wath its own program and discrete form: the conxal entrance, rhe rectangular exhibition hall, the spherical planctasium, the crescent-shaped restaurant, and the triangular parking garage. The noncentralized arrangement of the baild- ings. which includes a shallow pool within which dhe planetar- ium is situated, recalls che asymmerry and nonhivtarchical lay- curs of traditional Japanese forms, fram the random placement of stepping-stemes in a garden tw ube rambling plan of rhe Kan- wea palace and gardens, anarher prime example of rtadips etyle, Through his use of pure geometry in many of these buildings, Kurokawa aime co evoke “past cosmolopies and symbals of sopes,” an approach char he refers to as abstract symbotion. For example, in wadiiuaal Chinese architecture, the cath was often tepresented as square and the heavens as round, references that were incorporated by Kurokawa in his spherical planceatium and rectangular exhibition hall. However, the crescent-shaped buildings and slightly tilted walls of the rectangle are examples of how pure geomerry. while referring tw the past, may be dis- torted to create new forms. The cone, frequently used in many of his projects. contains multiple references, including the Furo- pean tower and the roof the traditional Chinese palace. fa the Fhime Prefectural Museum of General Science, references traditional forms are justapoecd with contemporary construction materials of aluminum, glass, and concrete to create a synthesis of past and present,  Carnenixe Mov See ako Archigramm Maki, Fumibiko (Japsn)s Metabolist; Tange, Kenzo (Japan): Team X (Nethertunds); Tokyo, Japan  Born in Nagoya, Japan, 8 April 1934. Attended Kyoto Univer- sity, Department of Architecture; bachelor's degree in architec: ture 1957; studied under Kenzo Tange, Tokyo Univenity, De-  partment of Architecture: mastet’s degree in architecture (G+. Married Sumic Tsuchiya in 1959, had children: divorced: mar- nied Ayako Wakso in 1984. Founder, Kisho Kurokawa and Asso- ciates, Tokyo 1962-68; president, K-K. Architect and Assoui- ates, Tokyu from 1968: principal, Ineaute for Soctal Engancering, Tokyo from 1909: adviser to the Japanese National Railways from 1970; analyst for che Japan Broadcasting Compo- Fation from 1974; adviser to the International Deugn Conter- ence. Aspen, Colorado, fram 1974; general oversees, 198 World Architecture Exposition Triennale. Honarary fellow, Ametican Inatituce of Architects 1982; honurary member, Union of Architects of Bulgaria 1982, life fellow, Royal Soucty af Art. London.  Selected Works  Hela Cary Plaa. ‘Tokyu. lapan, 161 ‘Yoshube IH1 Pavibon, Eapo 170, Oxaka, Japan, 1970 Capauke Cowes, ‘Tokyo, Japan, 1972 Fulwoka Bank, Fukuoba japan, 1975. Sony Tower, Onaka, fapan. 1976 National E: al Muncum, Quake. Japan, 19°? Saitama Prefevtural Muscum of Modem Art. Lrawas, Japan, 182 National Banralas Thence, Ouiks, Jagan, 1983, Waual Kajimahs Building, Tokyo. Japan. Dds Nagoya City Muscum of Caotemporaty Art, Nagoya Japan, 198! Hirahiens City Museum of Modern Art. Elrutbuna. Japan, 1988 Japanee-German Centce if Kerlin, Betlin, Germany, 1988 Viatona Centeal, Australia, 1988 Japancse-Chincae Youth Centct, Beijing, China, 1990 Shirase Memorial Hall, 1990 Sporting Club at the Mlinaw Center, Chicagn, filinais, 1990 Paifa Tower, Panis, France, 1991 Ishibathi Junine Haghs Schanl, Lochigy, Japan, 194 Ehime Peefectisrat Muscurn of General Science. Ehirme, Japan, 1995  Selected Publications  Metabolisea in Archstectute, 19°?  Niche Kurokawa: the Arvhiteceuce uf Spwbiaw, invsoducuce by Franco Chaslin, 1988  Inserenboural An bitevsure the Phabvaphy af Syrabions, VIO  From Metabolism to Spenbionu, 1992  The Philomphy of Sprmbieris, V904  Further Reading  Blackwood, Michael, director and ptodurer, Aube Kucoksaw from Merabolism te Symbiosis (velcorccarding), New York: Michael Blackwood Productions. 1993  Dobney, Stephen (editut), Aube Kurmkeua: Selected and Current Works, Mulgrave, Victona: Images, 1995  Guiheux, Alain, Aishe Kureiuwa. Arhiece: Le Mésabelame, 1960 1975, Pana: Centre Gearges Pompidou, 1997  Kubo Kurekawa leahib. .ai.}, Par: Monacur, 1995  KYOTO, JAPAN  Kyoto, the former capital of Japan and its center of traditional culture, is situated in che countsy's heartland: its larger metropol- itan area is interwoven with two other major centers in the Kan- sai region: Osaka and Kobe. Onc ef the few Japanese cities not to have been bombed during the Second World War, Kyoto houses numerous ancient Buildings Major socioeconomic changes trasaformed mast Japanese cities since the mid: 19th  century and did not bypass Kyoto; nunctheless, these historic stnututes form the backdrop and reference for contemporary architecture.  Kyote was ewablshed in 794 as capil city on a site sur- tounded on thece sides by mountains and crossed by nwo main nivers, the Kamogawa and the Karsuragawa. It is one of the few Japanese cittes laid out on a grid fullowing the devign of imperial Chinese cittes. [nspited in particular by the Tang dynasty city of Ch’ang-an, its regular layout cantrase with the maze of Tokyo's urban lendwape and the organic design af mont other Japancse sitios  European and Amerkan architecture, introduced to Japan after the Mciji restoration of 1868, was considered a status sym- bol in effurts w moderne Japan. It was particularly well suited to the oulward-booking new nauunal center, Tokyo, but it abo entered the architectural world of Kyoto. when the ary was srugging tw redefine its role after the buss of che capital cry tuncnon. The Ryukoku University Main Building (1879), the Daiichi Kangyo Bank (1906) by King Tarsuna, or the Kyor Prefectural Library (1909) by Gaicht Takeda ase example of Western influences. All dil noe accepc the new forms. The French Second Fmpire styte, such ax Kyntn National Museum (1895), and paricularly ita predevewor, the Nara fmperial Mu- scum (1894), by Tokuma Katayama, provoked debare at the time of constructian.  In teacuun wo these Wotern-styte buildings. the new Nara pretotural office (1895) by Uheuji Nagano combined the size and Layour of 4 contemporary building with an overall Japanese Jook in the design of the rvols and the entrance space. Concerved as a modern “Japanese-style” architecture (kindai watu- kenchilan), and not an imitanon of traditional forms, che new Japanese sevle quickly spread to other building types and places an Japan. Framples in Kyoto are the Nijo stacion (1904) and the Minamiza Kabuki theater (1929), the banter fearuring reinforced concrete in combination with traditional forms, The traditional Kyoro landicape was particularly suited for the Kiramura house (1963) by Inova Yoshida, a Japaneve architect crnvinced thar Japanese could noi rival European buildings and whe focused fon rinterpecting and modernizing traditional Japanese Forms.  in che 1920s and 1930s, Kyoso abo saw the construction of several modeinist buildings, such as the Toba High School Main Hall (1931), the Kyoto Institute of Technology University Main Building (1931), and the Kansaidenryaku Kyoto Branch (1937), the fatter by Goichi Takeda. Their number, however, is si cantly smaller than in Tokyo. The few modern buildings in Kyoto thar received internanional atrention were conceived in the postwar period. Nonetheless, even these buildings responded to the historic environment, Kunio Maekawa's Kyoto Hall (1960) preceded the Tokya Metmopolican Festival Hall hy a year: while displaying many similar features, the forms and marerials wed in Kyoto are restrained compared to Tokyo 1 as not w compete with the earby Heian shrine. Contemporary architects Largely respected the horizontal Kyoro skyline. the only vertical landmark introduced was the Kyoto Tower by Mamoru Yamada (1964). The most surprising building in the subdued Kyoto enwronment 5 the Kyoto Intcenational Conference Hall (1966, addition 1973) by Sachio Ohtani. a member of the Metabolist group. Based on a hexagonal structural system peactically with- out vertical columns or walls, the building pays homage to the roots of craditional Japanese buildings and paniculatty the Ise  
shrine using modernist forma. The particular spirit of the city and ins narrow paths inspired even a foreigner, David Chipper- fied His Tynes Auto Kyoto building (1991) ertlects the ald city in ity interweaving of different functions and relates to the mountain surroumling Kyoto,  Wheres few loregnet built in Kyoto, Tokyo-based archi- sects who adapeed ther formal language to the parucular wuatext designed numerous major contemporary burddings. Furmhiko Maki's Kyoto Nanonal Museum of Modern Art (1986) is lim- ited in height in accordance with the historic/scenn one where it is buidt, and the gridiron partern of the facade reflects the gnd plan of the city, Arata bazaki’s Kyoto Symphony Hall (1995) 1s. aseciated with Kyoto’s commemoration in 1994 of the 1200nh anniversary of the city’s founding, The thice goomerric-form volumes -~a rectangular box. a cylinder, and a cubic lattice — are arranged on three urban axes hidden in ancient Kyoto.  The birgest and most important urban change 18 the comsteuc- tion of the new Kyoto Stanan building (1997). Conceived dur- ing the bubble period as part of a larger regional development Project focused on the Kansai airport. ic reflects Kyato’s attempts at attracting tourists. Following on the privatization of the Japa- nes nativnal railway JR, the new owner. JR Nishi Nihon. can- ceived a redevelopment plan in cooperauon with the city of Kyoro, Aimed at revitalizing the starien arca. it integrates numer- ous functions unually found in the virinity of a station such as hotels, deparrment tore, theaters, chops, and restaurants, The new building, designed by the Vokyo architect Hiroshi Hara, realted from 2 1990 campetitiun. Hata proposed a high density, low-rise structure to conor with che horizontal Lund. scape uf Kyoto but consciously opted against aysimilation with traditional archstecture. Instead, he conceived the 230,000-  ware-meter building in che spirit af rhe great railway stations nf the 19th century. Transportation funcnons take up only 15 percent of the ground floor, and the great glass roof covers pri- marily the commercial funcduns, Ihe entrance hal} takes the form of a valley becween tu moumiains, the Western “dope” being designed as a huge staircase. A “skywalh.” featured previ ously in Hara's Umeda Sky Buikding (1993) in Osaka, provides 3 promenade imide the roof semicture and links hoth wings of the building to allow a wide view ower the city. The commercul funcron toak precedence over an additional link acto the rails. For the time being, only one underpass and one overpass connect the 470-meter (1,540 feet) building with the south of the city.  The tradinonal urban landscape of Kyocu is the backdrop to AumMcrous contemporary small-scale buildings, many of which are designed by architwcts of the Kansa mgion. Tadao Ando's minimalist archirecture and the exotic, mechanical structures of Shin Takamatsu have become partiatlsrly famous. Ando has creared one of his bea urban projects in Kyoto: the Time's | (1984) and Time's H (1991) building compler, Lovated ino popular neighborhood clase to che Sanjo-Ohashi Bridge. the building faces a busy verect while extending alongside a river, the lakasegawa. Ando used this loinen to create a layered ayzem of interwaven enterinr and extenor spaces accessible through various staircases as well as a curing deck at the water level thar functions as an oasis of calmness in the buating city. ‘Dhis area ts also home to several buildings by Takamatsu, the Pontocho-no-Ochaya {Yoshida House) (1982). Cella (1991), and Maru Building 4 (1987),  ‘The fantastic architecture of Fakamatsu, reminiscent of 1920s Expressionist sketches, ix based on mechanical references and High-Tech forms, The Ark Building (Nishina Dental Clinic) (1983) is one af Takamatsu’s mos powerful images of machinery, a borirontal silvery cylinder laid over a rectangular sencrete volume crowned by Lanterns reminiscent of wmoke stacks, His buildings (eature strong contrasts in materials such as the combination of highly polished granite and copper tives, in Orga 1 (1981), The buikding has been extended as Origin 2 (1982) and Origin 3 (1986), che Latwr displaying an aggressive look more typical of { akamarsu's design. On Kitayama Surect in the north af Kyoto, [akamatsu designed the Week Bralding (1986) and the Kitayama Ining "23 (1987), as well as the noted Syntax Buiddong (1990). Phe lacrer, a four-story construction with two basement Jevels houses shops and restaurants. tts most astonishing charactersnc ts two cantilevering feanares on the euoftop stretching their arms aver ocighboring houses seemingly searching for fiture connectiom, ‘Tadao Ando's B- Lock Kiray- ama (1990) and his Ganlen of Fine Arts (1994), a peacefial oasis en the bustle uf the city, are alin located on this street.  Other notable examples of small-scale architecture in Kyoto are the Maruti Buildings 1 15 (2990) and 0 17 (1991) in Kyo- co's Gion district by Hiroyuki Wakabayashi, who wes a Language similar to that of Takamatsu. Waksbayashi, known for ho avant-garde building, has alu responded to the historic envi- conment by tanstorming a tradinonal building for his office: the Srudio Arch Wakabayashi (1990). Closer t Ando’s formal Language are Ware Kishi's hoawes in Kamugyo (1990), Nakagyu 41993), and Shimogamo (1995) thar demonstrate his capacity eo use imple elements to make complex forms and his dedre to tramdate Japanese elements inte modern design.  Many recent baddings have been crected on the outskirts of the city or even in the larger mermpoliran area, Jun Tamaki's Tofu (1997) house for an eblerly couple ix built on a housing exrate on the western side of Kyoto, This white building suggests a Wok or lump, filled with same bamogenaus material, floating above the ground surface. Its organized around a central arca that functions as reception, dining, living, and bedruom and gives acess to the ather service rooms. Large wintow undesline the lumplike character of the building, Another site for contemporary construction is the Kansai Science (i hills of the Kyoro-Osaka-Nara arca, where the Kyoto- Kagaku Research Insutute by Waro Kishi is located.  Traditional torms continue to influence contemporary con- struction in Kyoro. The importance given to the city’s history as tellected in the recent discussion ro build a replica uf the Paris Poot des Acts as a pedestrian bridge aver the Kamogawa to celebrate the Year of France in Japan. The proposal, seen as an opportunity ta show public art in Kyoto, was abandoned in 1906 after heavy critwium for borrawing from the West in the context of traditional Kyota.  Canora Hein  See abo Ando, Tadee (Japan): [sozaki, Arata (Japan Kuso- awa, Kisho (Japan); Maki, Fursihiko (Japan): Metabolises; Shinohara, Kazuo (Japan); Tange, Kenzo (Japan)  Further Reading  Few books discuu solely che architectural history of Kyotn. Mout publi: canons on Japanese architecrure, however, include issues of the city’s  urban and architectural develupment Finn discusace mine Kyoco buikl ings in the context of Meije-rime architecture, Hatwuda, Ookawa, and Fujua concentrate on modern lapanese-sryte archites ture, including buildings i Kyoto Booka on modern architecture, anh as Suruki- Banham, and Kohayashs. Kultermann; Tempel. ar Row meninon only afew constructions in Kyers The buildimp of Maki, fuwaks, Ando and Takamateu on Kyoto are dinumed in monographs on thie arch texte (soe other entries), A ricnograph on Ware Kishi, who i slightly lees known, is inchaled The fapen Anvkitecs OV wae an Kyoto and Oaks features archicecture primarily from the early 19%,  Bognie, Botond, Te fapan Guide, New Yutk: Panceton Architectural Prem 199%  Fann, Dallas, Mfripe Rewosted: The Sites uf Visorsn Japan, New York Weatherhill, 1995  Gallery Ma, The Andetevtneal Map uf Kysen, Totes Shuppan 198 (in Japaneie)  Hatsuda, Tohru, Misuo Qohawa, and Yortsi Fupiva Ainedect wufie benchidu, 2 woh 1A Modern Japanese-Sivle An hita cute? Kenchiks Chishila, Talus Kajima Shuppankasi Showa. [9KH a Japancee)  Kultermana. Ude New fapamere Architecture, New Vark- Prager, 1960  “Kyana naka.” The Japa Aerbiters, LE (E988)  “Kyoto Staci” Leena hour uf Deageers’ Warkshep, (OF 1997)  Monugnana, Francexe, Gude alsin ferestura def Norevente Cossppore, Milano, Flecta. 1904; a4 Reekhstuner Architectaral Gnade, bape 20th Center, Pash, Beth, atal Boston: Buekhiuece 147  Oolawa, Minus, Mute Kawarukai, Tokeu Hanada, and Koichi Voshuds, Annas: dearbite ao beifie (A Goocahiygy of Minkein Architecture). Shokokusha, [a  Rene, Maadied Feanklin, erwnd Metabolism The New: fapanee An Aatevture, Now Yorks Archie cital Rowotd Hooks, 1TH  Stewart, Davad BL Th Making of a Modern fapanne Architertare TAGE te the Preent Vabye and Now York Kodandis Encernacional, 1YK"  Susuki, Hiruyuhi, Reyer Banham, and Katwhira Kobsyanhi, Niko nw gendasi kent. Kew York Ristoli. JORS as Cansenepurany Architecture of Japan, 1958-1844, Now York: Rezroh, 18  Vempel. Egun Near Lipvente tr An bitekrur, Stutrgart. Getmary: Verlag Gand Harje, 1969; as New fapaane Architestuer. trandated by F Rockwell. Landon Thames and Hudson, 1969  Ware Aida: Ruridings and Poozecn. introlucvon by Hieushi Wuranabe, Mungar: Fdirion Axel Menges, 20000 
LAPIDUS, MORRIS 1902-2001 Architect, United States  Morris Lapidus is best known for 1950s resort hotels that com: bined International Style modernism with a decorative formal vocabulary. Born in Odessa, Russia, in 1902. Lapidus came to the United States in 1903 with his parents, who were theing the pogroms, Like mast Jewish immigrants in this period, rhey settled on the lower cast side of New York. An catty hove of the theater led Lapidus to study drama in college. In 1923 be gave up acting and entered the School of Architecture ar Columbia University w become a set designer. Though Lapidus abandoned this goal, his work retained an csscntial theatticalicy.  ‘Trained in the Reaux-Arec method, | apedus's schoolwork fo- caused on monumental are! idealized projects and classical revival styles. Contemporary arlhutectural developments were rarely dis- cussed at Columbia. though Lapidus did become familiar with some modem design, principally Art Deco. while sull a student. After school, Lapidus worked for Warten and Weunore, design- ing ornamental details for the New York Central Building on Park Avenue. In 1928 he joined Ross-Frankel, 2 frm specializing in store design and consruction  Despite the Great Depression. the 19301 were a professionally productive period for Lapidus. His stores for prominent chain eetailen appeared in New York City and accoss the Unired States. By the time he left Ross-Frankel in 1943, Lapidus was an estab- lished store designe: whose work was published in the architcc- tural press and was critically well received.  Lapides continued to absorb architoctural ideas from Europe. namely the work of Ludwig Mies van der Robe and Erich Men- delsohn. His stores were also influenced by modern German praphic journals such as Gebneuctegraphik, With asymmentry, transparency, flowing spaces, and bold graphics, I apidus’s stores brought modernism to American commercial architecture. But even as Lapidus came co terms with the [ncemational Style, he developed a highly personal vucabulary —his so-called “cheese holes.” “woggles,” and "bean poles” — which gave his architec- ture visual exuberance. ‘Though critics deemed this manner ap- propriate in a small-scale retail context, a Lapidus’s commissions increased in size after his move to independent practice in 1945, Lapidus came under fire for his architectural famboyance.  In his first years as an independent designer, retail remained Tapidus’s primary focus, and despite material restrictions during World War IT, his firm thrived, Nocwithstanding this success, Lapidus was unwatishied because he did nat consider sore design as real architecture because it an often involved the renewation of existing buildings eather than new construction. Ihe opporru- nity to broaden his practice arrived ia 1949 when hotel developer Ben Novach hired Lapidus ax asociute architect for a new resort he was building in Miami Beach, Flonda After designing the interiors and facade details for the San Souci, Lapidus received numerous commussions w ales and improve the design of other Miami Beach hotels already under construction. Tn these projects, far che Delano and the Algicrs among others, Lapidus employed many of the ame techniques and signanire forms thar he had uwd in his retail work, reaming that hotels, like stures, had something en sell—be it leinure, pleawire, or lusury.  In 1952 Lapidus received what would be the mos crlebrated amd nutonou: commision of his carcer when Ben Novak hured hum to design the Fountainbicau Howl, Miami Beach, providing the architect with his first opportunity to plan 2 building from start to finish, Dominated by a sweeping curve embracing the ocean, the Founrainblean was an essay in Intemational Style mannetism, which strongly recalled Erich Mendelsohn’s work of the bare 1920s, as well as che work of Brazilian modernist Oscar Niemeyer, whom the archicect met in 1949. Though the hotel's 440-foot curve had dramatic visual flair, it was also a Atrategy intended to minimize the monotony of rhe endless corti- dors needed to accommodate 565 rooms. The interiors, cxtrava- gantly decorated with marble, crystal, and mirrored plus, were influenced by Hollywood movie sets and designed in a style Lapidus dubbed * modern hisury.” Upon its comptenon in 1954, the Fountainbleau became synonymous with the swank and glamour of the star-studded Miami Beach social scene and estab- lished Lapidus as a beading hotel devigner.  In the mid-1950s Lapidus opened an office in Miami Beach to handle che lange horel commissions his firm was now recciv- ing. These included the Eden Roc (1955) in Miami Beach; the Americana (1956) in Bal Harbour, and the Sheraton (1960), Summit (1961), and Amencang (1962), all in New York City. Lapidus abo designed scveral resorts in the Canbbean including 
Fountanbteau Hotel. Miamé Beach 11954). cdesigied by Marris Lapidus 42 John Margolica/bsia  the Aruba Caribbean (1956) in the Dutch West Indies, the Asawak in Jamaica (1957), and the El Conquistador in Pure Rico (1965). In 1960 Lapidus completed an urban renewal scheme fur the Lincoln Road commercial urip in Miami Beach, uansfoeming five run-down blocks into an eatly caainple of a car-free pedescrian all with fuuntains, canopics, and pavilions. In addition, he designed numerous apanment buiktings and shopping centers in che extern United States.  Despite the enormous popular success of Lapidus's work, it was regarded as a critical future by member of the modernist architectural establishment at the 19% and 1960s, who viewed che horels in particular as 2 caprtutanion to kitsch, or mass taste By the late 1960s and carly 1970s, however, his work was being defended by 3 new generation of architects who, in revale from high modernism, were drawn to its populist content and formal excess. By the 19801 Lapidus had been critically: rchabilirated and was regarded hy his suppurters as a progenitor of Pastmod- etnism.  Lapidus dosed his New York office in the catly 1970s, hang moved permanently to Miami Beach in the previous decade. He continued to practice in blorida unul 1984. Following a Fesurgence of interest in his work, Lapidus came out of reure- ment in the late 1990s and began co consult on projects in the Miami Beach area, including the design of several restaurants  and bars and the restoration of his own Eden Roc Horel com. pleted in 2000.  Ganauritt Esreroy  Sve abe Meadelsoha. Erich (Germany); Resort Hotel  Biography  Born in Odessa. Russia. on 25 November 1902; immigrated to New York in 1903: in Brooklyn, New York. Arrended architecture school at Columbia University graduating in 1927. Worked as store designer during 1930s; established independent office in 1943, Achieved prominence and notoricty in 1950s a designer of remet hotels in a flamboyant modern acyic. Mature worked dismissed by modetniot architectural eatablishment but Tapedus was critically rchabilitated with rise of pup an and Pastmaderniam. Retired from practice in 1984; died on 19 fanu- ary 2001.  Selected Works  Fountamblean Hotd, Mia Beach, Florida, 1954 Eden Roc Hoect, Miami each. Florida. 1955 Amencana Hotel, Ral Harbour, Horida, 1956  Lincoln Road Oundoor Mall, Miami Reach, Florida. 1960 Summis Hotel, New York City, 1961 Americana of New York Hotel, New York City, 1462  Selected Publications  Toa Mush t: Never Enough, Now York. Ritswls. 1956  Farther Reading  Conk, John Wevley, ant Heintich Klotz, Genrenanom with Aovhutcets, New York: Vracget. 1979  Duumann, Martins, and Fricdenike Schneider (editor). Mora Lapidn: Architect of the American Dream, Bact: Bir\tauser Verlag, 1992  Friedman, Alice T.. “The Lunuty of Lapidus” Marvard Drage Magezsee (warnaner 2000)  LARKIN ADMINISTRATION BUILDING  Designed by Frank Lloyd Wright: completed 1906 Buffalo, New York  Frank Lloyd Waght’s Larkin Building was designed and can- ssmacted berween 1903 and 1906 for the Larkin Company, a soap and mail order concern based in Buftalo, New York, The firm had begun as a soap manufactory in the E870, but a scries  i Ne ma  Larkin Adminiaranon Building, Buffalo, New York (1906) Photo © Buffalo & Lne County Hutorical Sucsety  of clever marketing innovations invelving the inclusion of pre- frau iteins with the bulk purchate of wap increased sales dra- matically in the 1890s and transformed the business into 4 mail- order operauen. Uhese conditions gave rise to the need for a new office bulling wheran che ompany's ever-increasing customer cocopordence could be elliciently handicd. Frank Lloyd Wight was chosen as architect on the strength of his prowing narianal reputation and has five years’ experience with Adler and Sullivan, a leading wall office building firm in Chicago, The commission was especially impaniant co Wight because he was then known primarily asa domewic architect and his work was confined to Ilinoes and the adjnining midwestern states,  ‘The site for the Larkin Building was in a mixed induurial and reidential neighborhood ane mile case of downtown Buffalo, immeduately acrow the siteet from the Larkin factory and ware- house buiklings and nearby the main New York Central railroad crank lines. ‘Ihe program called for a building thar would house about 1.800 secretanes and their supervisors, as well as the Lar- kin Company executives, in an environment that would be clean, brightly illuminated, fireproof. and attractive. Weight’s design consisted of a stecl-framed, brick-clad struciure approximately 100 feet wide, 100 feet tall, and 200 feet long. Its principal feature was an mtcroal Tight court surrounded by five stories of balconies and topped with a skylight. Beneath the main Boor  
was an abi rade basement for receiving mail cracks. On the north side of the building, Wright designed an annex—a dimin- hed version of the main structure that contained an entrance Sabby—and three more floors for restrooms, lounges. and class- rooms, Wright would use versions of thit binuctear plan subse- quently in his Unity Temple (Oak Park, tHlinnis, 1906), the Johruon Wax Building (Racine, Wisconsin, 1937), and Guggen- heim Museum (New York City, 1959),  Un the original design, stairways were located as cither end of the light court as in Bumbham and Roats's Rookery Building (1888) in Chicago, but during the design prucess Wright was inspieed to relocate these features on the four outer comets of the building and the two comen of the anna, in brik towers, thereby more than doubling the number of fire ecape routes. This change fed hun alo w transform the intake and exhaust units into pscudotowers of the same proportions, thereby crans- forming the nwo principal lacades of the building into monu- mental pylons, evocative of ancient Egypt yet modern in the expression of the building's mechanical functions. However, this was only one of a number of innovations in the building.  “The building was denigned co accommodate the Larkin Com- pany’s system of organizing customer accounts in divisions bared on states (for example. Pennsylvania A and 8. Florida. and Can- ada). Each group of states had its asxigned position among the tiers of balconies. The mail was delivered by ckcvator trom the basement to sorters on the third floor and, once sorted, tu exh wate group by messengers on roller skates. The main floor was devoted to the leading executives and department heads and the Gifth floor to a restaurant open to all. including visitors, Wright designed metal chairs and desks throughout the building and built metal file cabiness into alll the exterior walls gs a fireproofing meaure. ‘The furniture was constructed with magnesite panels, and cach Ror war of magnesite, a resilient, lightweight concrete that dampened sound. Light poured in {rom the central skylight and from windows high in the outer walls that channeled light across the balconies, The quality of light was enhanced by Nernst glowers amd by a uniform use of 2 semivitreous cream-colored rack in the interior.  In an ettort to seal the incetior of the oflke building from the infiktrativn of soot from che passing trains, Wright was quick te capitalize on Willis Carrier's experiments with air condition- ing made only a tew years eadier. Two plenum air-conditioning units were installed below grade in the hase of nwo of the stair towers, Air drawn down by fans from above the buikling was washed in a sheedike spray of water and then cooled by a Krocachell refrigeration unit to lower its temperature and thus precipitate out moisure. The coaled air was arculated through- out the building through a sywem of ducts under the bascment Aloos that casried up to cach floor within the structural pics that formed the light court. Returns were Incated high on the outer walls, By doing this, Wright enabled the Larkin secretaries to cotrespoad with customers coinfurtably and nearly, as is ap- propriate to a soap company.  Many of Wright's innovations were intended to promote work efficiency and safety, but the building's hisrotiel promi- nence Lies as well in its beauty and inspirational nature, The light court was not in plan, buc its piers soared uf toward the skylit top, where they burst inte abstract exfohations, To enhance this effect, Wright shifted the fifth-floar balcony franrward, hack from the plane established by the four lower balconies so as to open the uppermoas: portion af the space fur-  ther to the light. All the fifth-floor balcony fronts were inscribed with gilded inspirational words and from Scripture. Just above the fifth Moor at the short ends of che building, Wright provided a partial sixth floor containing a conservatory  with palms and ivies chat spilled their tendrils just into view at the edges of the gridded skytight—a hint of something serene and wonderful high above the hum of the workplace.  Although the Larkin Building was criticized by Russell Srurgis for “ugliness” that he perceived in che rectilinear purity of its forms, the building doce exhibit traces of the Beaux-Arts clasai- cium that dominated in the United States at the cum of the 20th century, Its massing conforms to the symmetty, the three-part organization, and, along its flanks, a temple-like columniation reminiscent of the classical, all of which add 4 cercaun familiaricy and authority.  The Larkin Building was designed w specifically to suit the needs of the Larkin mail-order business as « functioned in 1903 that it reststed changes within the business and did noc lend ixself ro new uses in the late 1940s, after the Larkin Company abandoned it, Following an extended period of vacancy and attempu to make some use of it. the Larkin Administration Building was demolished in 1950.  The impact of the Larkin Administration Building on the modern movernent in Europe and in the United States is sub- stantial both in reems of indrvidual works chat are inspired by ats formns (such as Jan Wils, project for a pension, 1921; William Drummond, Firs Congregational Church, Austin, Tltinois, 1908) and as an agent of encouragii architects, such as Ludwig Mocs van der Rohe, Erich 4 Waher Gro- pius, and others to the possibilitics of a greater absuraciness of form and to the exprestive porential of mechanical functions.  Jack Quian  Ser ako Chicage School; Guggeabeim Musemm, New York  City; Johnson Waa Building, Racinc. Wisconsin; Mics van  der Robe, Ludwig (Germany); Sullliven, Lovie (United  Staces); Unity Temple, Oak Park, [inosy Wright, Frank  Loyd (United Seates)  ischcoch, Henry-Rusell, fe the Nance of Material, 1887-1941: The Buablonp of Frank Lloyd Wright, New York: Duell, Stoan, and Perce, 1942; with new foreword and bibliogriphy, Now York: Da Cape Prew, 1973  Quinan, Jack, Framk Ldepd Wright's Larkee Building: and Fast, New York: Architectural History Foundation, py sawhin Mamachyacere MIT Prem, 1987  Weight, Frank Lloyd, Frank Land Wraphe Collected Wrist, edined by Bruce Brooks Pieiffer. $ vols, New York: Riszoli, 1992-95  Weight, Frank Loyd, Fran Lleyd Wrighe, Archiver, edited by Terrance Riley. New York: Museum of Modern An, 1994  LARSEN, HENNING 1925- Architect, Denmark  During his almost five decades of practice, Henning Larsen has had che chance to design a wide range of buildings, ranging from tewspaper offices to churches, housing to embassics, colleges to museums, and factories 10 theaters. Although his work is occasionally marred by a misfit in scale, Larsen carries on the  excellent traditions of Danish aschitectuee: clegant detailing, beautiful use of materials, and massing of goomettic forms. Lar- sen’s work is inventive and deliberate. The body of wack has changed over time as themes and references shifted, and several mujot penods can be established within his ocuvre, roughly as represented by work between 1960-79, 1980-89, and 1990 co the present.  Larsen was bom in Brejning, in Judand, Denmark, in 1925, and studied a1 the Technical College in Copenhagen before cn tering the Kunstakademic in 149, He spent a year of his protes sional studies at the Architectural Association in London, A grad- uation scholarship allowed him to take counes at Manachusetes Instinate of Tock tour the Unierd States, and work for a Milwaukee firm. After retuming to Copenhagen, he opened his own drawing office, and worked briefly for che State Building Research Lnscitutc.  In the Lite 1950s Larsen collaborated with chice contempor- aries: Gebrut Bornelasch, Mas Beuel. and Jorgen Sechau. The foursome entered and placed in several umpetitions, and pro- duced the austere Crematonum Chapel (19661 in Glostrup. an essay in brick and light similar to Sigurd Lewerentz’s St. Mark's Church (1960). Henceforth. Larsen worked on his own; anc of his first works ro be built was another funeral chapel. this ume in Athus 11967),  In the 1960s Larsen was a guest professor at Yale and Prince ton universines. where he woukd have encountered American architects Louis Kahn, Robert Ventun, and Michael Graves. Quite likely, it was there he gained exposure to and developed an interest in literary theory. which he has since daimed as a preoceupation. Architecturally, this wok the form of structural- ist designs thar dealt with issues of flcxibility, growth, and legibil- ity of fosm. ‘The clearest examples of Larsen’s steucturalist think- ing are two school projects. Haje Tastmip Grammar School (Denmark, 1981) and Trondheim Universiry (1978). In 1970 Tarsen won the Nordic competition for the design of Trondheim University in Norway, but only a puction of cus mepascaled sampus plan was realized. One of his fincas works, it explores the use of indusuidized building chements (prefabricated concrete, steel, and glass}, and acommodates growth by extending its prudded modules and glazed street. Rescmblances to Vistorio Gregott’s Universty of Calabria design (1974) of the sume pe- fiod ate manifon.  In the 1980s a more whumical side of Larsen's work anciged, comparable ta the histoncist Postmodern work of Ventun, Graves, and British architect James Stirhng, His designs from this perwod. such as the Nation Center in Nairobi, Africa (1993), and Dalgas Have housing Frederiksburg, Denmark (1991), are characterized by figural and ornamental experimentation. They  Miniury of Foreygn Affairs, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; sloped tamp-start leadt to the minvsery's entrance (tend) © Age Khan Trust for Culrare 
are frequently charming and posws a storybook quality akin to Aldo Roas’s work, bur without the melancholic side. Laren realized one of fis mont important works in the immense Mitia- try af Foreign Affairs (1984) in Riyadh, Sandi Arabua, which twes a Danish senibility with a deferential ineerpretatiaa af blanuc culture.  to the 1990s Larsen returned to an emphaus on the tetony, capresivencss at marcrial and form. As a result, cecent work has been some of his most vical. and mdudes the addition to the Ny Carlsberg Glyptotck (1996) Copenhagen, the Enghoj Church, (Nordby, 1994), and the BT Building (Copenhagen. 1994).  Spatial themes unity Larsen's diene oeuvre, which includes the use of elemental lurms such as the cone and cylinder. as the rotunda and hinge. the monolithic trearment of the cucries, siting on a plinth, and organization along a glared interine serece. By urilizing daylight. Laren at times initiates 4 procesional sequence through the building: an ascent toward the light  The tone of Lanen’s buildings «usually monumental, har hening hack to ancient and Enlightenment sources (such as 1 8th- century afhiteces Charles Nicholas Ledous and Enenne-Lows Boullee). The capreaiun of weight is manifested through bar- teted walls and exaggerated cornices, and is a theme found in Scandinaviats Doricast architecture, which is an evident refetctiue for Larsen. Foe example, he reinrerpeces the spatial and decora- ove ideas (drum and block} of Erik Gunnar Asplund’s Stock- holm 1ibrary (1927) in his Matme Library (1997) in Sweden.  Ob a similar note. Laren’s Gentatte Library (1985) refers to Alvar Aalto's library ar Viipuri. In both cases, a mezzanine wraps around an atrium that containt bonk stacks. Larsen repeats this arrangement in smalicr scale to make an exhibuion space ‘The ubiquitous balf vaule and circular skylights’ ac well as the reading room cables and chaiey designed by Aaltu, reflect the Finnish architect's influence on Lanen, The Gencofte caterior makes une of traditional Danish canstrucuon techniques that Aalco appropriated 3s his own: brick walle rendered with « thin layer of white stucco,  Lanen’s buildings are usually whire, with uaional splashes of blue for interest, Much like the rendered walls, maternal ccx- ure and gcomcut. pattern arc part of his devorarive palette. The buildings manage 10 connect to the primitive eradinons inhabiting the Nordic kandscape. and suggest new possibilities.  Katt Nesare Se aie Aaho, Alvar (Finland); Asplund, Erik Gunnar (Swe- den); Graves, Michacl (United States); Jacobsen, Arne (Den-  mark); Stirting, James (Scotland and England): Stractural- samy Vencuri, Robert (United States)  Biography  Bom in Brejning, Denmark, 20 August 1925. Educated at che Technical College, Copenhagen; attertod the Schuol of Archi: tecture, Royal Academy of bine Arts, Copenhagen: studied under Eduardo Catalano, Archirecniral Assocation School, Lon- don 150-1; studied under Pieten Belluschs, Massachusetts In- suture of Technology, Cambridge 1952; private practice. Co- penhagen from 1952; director, Skala Gallery, Copmbagen: editor, Skaét magazine. Copenhagen. Awociate lecturer, 1959_ 48, professor of architecture, 1968-95, Royal Academy of Fine  Ans, Copenhagen. Honorary fellow, American Institute of Ar- chitects 1991; honorary fellow, Royal Institute of British Archi-  tects 1991. Aga Khan Award foe Architecture 1989.  Selected Works  Crematorium Chapet, Gheatrup. Denmark (with Gehrde Bornehurch, Max Briicl. and fargen Selchau), 1960  Functal Chapel, Arus, 1967  Unwensty of Trondbeim Campus dlinse prise, 19°C competinan; partially buslt}, 1978  Hoe Paarup Counce Grammar School, Denmark. 1981  Manisiry uf Forergs Allain, Riyadh, Sauds Arabia, 1984  Genmofte Library, Gentotte, Denmark. 1985  Dalgas Have Housing Camples, Frederiksburg, Denmark, [991  Nation Conusunaanon Center, Narabs, Aftus, 21993  Enghe; Chueh Randers Nundiy, Denmark, [9M  BT Buildeng, Copenhagen. 1994  Ny Carhberg Glyptoech (adaluion), Copenhagen, 1M  Kolonihavchus. haven Archuccctute Park, Dcrumark, 196  Malan Library taddiion). Malmit, Sweden, 1997  Selected Publications  “Lessons from the Onent” Daidiles 1S Devember 1983) “Hevuning Carsen on Aschncuture." J iving Archscectuee 4 (1984)  Further Reading  Arcle an Lanet hive appeated is muy than a dozen journals an diffviwat targuages The specsal imu uf Ackiteétar DK dewned oo Late ven'e work provides a good avernicw af TS tevent peopces and is fully tramlaud “The aracles in Lising Acvhiterture offer thoreuygh usvetage of projects in Tagleh Fund's comprehensive monograph ia well illus. trated but is wretten enorely in Daninh.  Abel. Chins, “Modernism in the Danish Manner,” Arrbaseensral Record 6 (490)  Arkuekinr DK 4Q. no. GA 996)  Davey, Peter, “Sculpustal Street.” The Anhuecraral Review: 200, no. 1198 {Deacmber 1996)  “Hlcamng Lanen/tlennung Larsens Tegnestuc: Malmo Ciry Library.” A+ USS (August 1998)  “Heneung Larsen: Uaiveruty of Troadhewm, High School a Haye Tawrup.” A+ £9148 Ganuary 1983)  “Henning tanen's Tegnestuc A/S. Uneversity of ‘Irondbeim,” GA Docement 4 (1981)  Khan, Ibauan- Uddin, “Nation Canter, Naobi,” Mimer 10 (December 19881  Vund, Nib-Oe, Arkurée Henaing Laren, Copeulagen: Gyldental, 1996  Mortoa, Dand, “WA Portfolin, Dewr Buildings,” Progressive Acchitevtere May 1987) °  Petenen, Stren Eaevad, “The Ministry of Foreign Aflairy, Riyadh.” Leesag Archisccture 4 (1984)  Prategaand, Ida. "The B.T Newspaper Buidding in nl ” Leving Architecture 14 (1995) men sn Copenhagen  LAS VEGAS, NEVADA, UNITED STATES  Vas Vegas. Nevada, began che 20th century asa speck on the map and ended the century ax the United States” fastest-growing, sity, From an Ohl West ourpost to a rort town to the most impeobuble of Sunbelt metrapotises, Las Vegas has become a celebration of unrestrained enteepenurism and unashamed indi-  vidualiam to some and a dyupia dedicated 10 the exploitation of human frailty to others. At in extremes, Las Vegas is both these chings, bur it is much more, and its history is far more complex and nicl: than is uwally expectad,  The city bas always been a road town. Las Vegas ithe name means “the meadows” in Spanish) sand as a supply sup along a wagon road berween Salt ake Ciry and Los Angeles. Onginally seuled by the Mormons in 1855, artempts to make che village an agricultural censer failed, but iss location at che division paint of 4 stage ruute and later the San Pedro, Lox Angeles, and Salt Lake Railroad ensured the town a commercial life long after the Mormons headed back north to Utah. The railroad, under the direcosship of William Chak. inaugurated the town's modem existeme, for, after locating its repair shops and yards in the valley, it subdivided its excess holdings at Las Vegas into a grnd of parcels sold at public auction. ‘The purchasers of chese lors  rated the town in 1905 and constructed the first city, a bnick and wood-frame western town similar to hundreds of oth- ers built all over the West beeween the end of the Civil War and World War }.  This sleepy town gradually improved its phyucal intrasirus- ture throughour the 1910s and 1920s and made a few avernures towaed capturing a share of the rourist trade chat was developing, in the Southwest fallowing the adoption of the automobile, The underlying cconomie structute af the town did nor change until the lare 1920s, when the site of Hoover Dain was fixed at 30 miles outside of the city limits. Although dam workers and their families were required tv live ar Boulder City, the Bureau of Reclamation’s straght-Lacd plained community near the work site, the project's many single, male workers sought entertaio ment in Las Vegas. Propherically, just as the dam's worktorce was assembled in 1931, che Nevada sate legislature legalized gambling Unzuughout the state; chat same year 4 hal-dezen bars and gentlemen's clubs obrained gambling licenses along Fremonr Sereet in Lax Vegas,  ‘Vhese firs gambling evablalimene were noc large aructures, and they repecseated themselves as an cerenaan of the city’s Southwestcm heritage rather than something new of apart; in fact, many of them were remodelings uf preeaisung saloons ot commercial buildings. The catenors were predominantly Mis sion Revival ur Weatern tanch in feeling, although the interior often attempted a sophisticated moderne, un imitation of the latest in elegant European gaming locales. These insuudens were strictly enrerainment venues, and although they might snnain a supper club or a restaurant on the premuses, patrons spent the night (or the following moming! chewhere downtown, After 1940, these patrons were more often then not defence workers of uniformed personnel as Las Vegas hecame hast to a number of defense industries and several important military bases north af town.  Not all of the early entertainment development was down- town. With a sencs of reform governments in the late 1930s, gaming establishments sprang up outside the city limits on the Los Angeles highway, beginning the transformation of the high- way into the Strip, of mare formully, Las Vegas Boulevard. The first significant venue, Los Angeles hotelier Thomas Hull's El Rancho Vegas, established as early as 1941 the type of the hotel- casine in its Las Vegas incamation. Hull's architect, Wayne McAlliscer, cast the spraveting motel and casino in the image of aovensized dude ranch. The buildings themselves were bow-dung,  arcaded stucco ranges situated around the Spansh Revival main burldung, which condined the dining room, showroom, and allimporant casino. The structure was further distinguished from the rooms by a windmill rower. which proclaimed the fname of the camplex high ahove the strect in brilliant neon. Inside, the El Rancho reinforced the Old West theme with heavy wooden furniture, wrought iron fixtures, open timber trusses, and murals: the impression was that of a 19th-century hacienda that had sumehaw sprouted craps tables and rouletee wheeh.  Aficr the war, the development uf the hotd-casino accelerated with the arrival af Eastern syndicate moncy, While Bugsy Sicget extended Capone-Luciano imereats into Las Vegas in 1941, his development of the Flamingo in 147 cemented organized erime's commitment to the Strip. Archuecturally, the Flamingo annoumed 4 new sensibibity—the Old West imagery of the E2 Rancho or Fremunt Sucet was traded in for a highly chromatic interpretation of Internanonal Style modemism, as practiced in Los Angeles, Architects George Vernon Russell and Richard Stadedman set mwo- to four-story room wings arcund a lush. Lindscaped courtyard thar gave pride of place to che swimming pool, At the bead of che compesition was the casinn and resau- rant. Sleek and contemporary, the main building st off stone masses agnine: a sca of crystalline glass and dramatic cantilevers. Above the luw oof wared a neon sign nearly three times the height of the building, which marked che site with 2 sophiati- cated aurhariy.  The Flamingo was the fine of five etablishments along the Soip thar established the hotcl-casino typology. The Thunder. bird, Desert Inn, Sahara. and Sands cach expanded on the Flam- ingo’s prototype. Guests load cach property from the highway by means of a sign-tower thal was often integrated into the main seructure; many of these were designed and executed hy the Young Elecuric Sigs Company ‘YESCO), They drove under a sweeping parte-cachere. left their car with an acendant. and entered a themed lobby. Jo one side. ene tually found rhe har and restaurant. to the other che casino proper. A new feature. the chowraom, was locared an the far side of the casino, ensuring that partons would linger at che tables after cheir intimare en- counter with Dean Martin ur Nat Kityy Cole. As competition along the Strip grow more fierce. geruing noticed along the high way became evet more importunt, as postcard views of the period suggest. The Thunderbird invorpurated 2 stylized wulpture on. its sign, strung 2 uend toward three dimensional signs that would cventually engulf che building. The design of these new hucel-casinos became sw startling that by 1953 the Flamingo was out of date; Perricra and Lucknian daigned a new cotonnade and agn tor rhe building. as well as the famous champagne tower, a cylinder of noon. Sadly. this new Flamingo would be superceded in ins tum by the mid. 1960s.  The architectural innovations found in the casino buildings were noc extended to the rooms in these carly properties. Und the mid: 1960s, the rooms were simply arrayed in low ewo- oF three-story motel tanges, often completely detached from the Lasino building Towers began to pop up on Fremont Street. where building sites were canypact and Lasine floor space at a premium, Few towers were built on the Strip. but ube nune-story Rivtera, designed by Roy France and Sou in 1955, was an excep- von. The master of the Las Vegas tuwer hotel was Martin Seem Ir., who created cnsp Internatenal Style compleaes for the Sa- hara (1959), the Sands (1967), the Intemational (1969), and 
Hoel Flamingo Patio, Las Vegan, Nevada, designed by George Vernon Russell (1946) © Besemsna/CORBIS  the ist MGM Grand, now Bally's Las Vegas (1973). The Inter- qanonal (tater the Hdton Las Vegas) heralded che corporate farure of the Las Vegas casino, in chat i was 1500 rooms big. featured an impressive porte-cochere, and had an extensive land- scape surrounding ic. The MGM Grand was even larger and greeted guests with an cight-lane porte-cochere and an Aztec pyramid (all of which was consumed in a disastrous fire in No- vember 1980). Although the International and the Grand were sucessful convention hotels, they were not the Las Vegas resorns Most tourists came te town to experience,  One property of the 196Ds led the way back to che themed future of the Suip—Cacsars Palace. Opened in 1966 and ox panded chroughout the fallowing decade, Caesars fined histori- cal and modern architectural and arustic amagery te Urcate an enure environment. The architecture was not stiricdy Roman, Baroque, Beaux-Arts, of Mussolins Modern, bur a fisian all of this and the classically minded modermsm of Edward Durrell Stoac. Minoru Yamasaki, and Philip Johnson as well, Developer Jay Sarno and architece Melvin Grossman areempted to exceed the expecrarions and fanrasies of the middle-class tourist, who might muse thar this was whar Rome might have been like if Hadran had precast concrete and air conditioning and af the Vestal Virgint had raken up employment as keno ninners. The Project announced its presence with an enormous temple-tront  sign desiyned by YESCO: visitors were hailed as honored citizens al Rome by overscaled centurions as the pulled unto the property. Arrival was monumentalired by the quatretail pools and soaring, fountains of the entry court. whoch was further punctuated by faux-Roman statuary. Visitors entered the hotel-casino on axis under a long. sweeping cllipical porte-cochere that provided counterposne to the circular 14-story harel block heyond. The saucer-dumed lobby was urimmed in electric fight and defined by stylized Jonic calumns. One ventured beyund te the gaming pits and Cleopacra’s Barge, an Egyptian-themed cocktail lounge calculated 10 make would-be Richard Burtons and Elizabeth Taylon swoon.  It was to the post-Cacsars Palace Las Vegas that Robert Ven- turi, Denise Sunt Brawn, and Stephen Izenour and their seu- dents traveled in 1968. Theie study of the structure of the Strip and uts implications for lave-20th-cencury American develop- ment became the landmark book Learning from Las Vegas. The Yale-based team of academics, practitioners, and students came to Las Vegas to analyze the Strips then-novel spatial distribu- tion. They found that the Strip represented a new automobile- based scale of building, in which architectural imagery had to deliver itv message at 40 miles an hour. Buildings were widely spaced to gain an identity in the highway blur. bur given the architectural standardization of the hotcl-casine type. it was the  claburation of the sign that provided cach property with ts tden- tity and introduced the traveler to the fantasy environment 10 be found beyond the porte-cuchere. Thus, the sign at Cacars Palace not only conveyed the rextital faces of the property's name and the lounge acts of the week, but its bonic columns (with a Doric entablarure) set the theme, and 1s centurions beckoned the driver to share che whalsome decadence af the empire as promised by the property's comumed staff and advertising cam paign.  ‘The book's eva lasting concepts are that of the “dusk” and the “decorated shed.” A “duck” is a builduig that embodies in form that which it eepresent. such as duck shaped ogg store of Lang Island that gave the type ita name. A “dewurated shed” is a budding thar announces its contents on its exterior surfaces, a melding of significr and structure. The casinos of las Vegas were seen to be mostly decorated sheds, some becoming more sign than building. such as the Golden Nuggct. the Mint. or the Stardust. Others became veritable “ducks.” sich as Harrah’s “riverboat” casino on the Strip ot the then-new Circus-Circus, which literally contained a creus under its steel big top, Bath types illustrated 4 then- nearly fargetten function of archisecture- shat architecture describes through fuer the peaple and activitics henwed within it and signitics the relative place of these contents within the political, snciat, and covmological structure of che socicty that creates it. Although the Moder movement dis- counted the continuing validity of this function, at Las Vegas this traditional function was democratized; with wedding chap- ds, gas stations, and hotel-casinad all chock-by-jowd on the Strip, it was che system of signage and aschitcctural imagery thar gave it order and that was to be celebrated,  ‘The Las Vegas the Yale explorers experienced in the late 19605 was undergning preat social stew, The developmens of Las Vega as the nation’s premier resurt city was threatened by its sogregarionist housing patterns and the resorss’ pase dis- ctiminarory patronage and cmploymene practices. A satrwde civil-tights law paved in 1965 mandated equal auen tw a sommadadons throughout Nevada. which cased the obvious discrimination on the public side af the Strip but did noe cxtend to fair bousing or to fair employment practices. 1 was not until after a series af riots in 1969 and 1970 that oper housing laws were achieved, that all of ube area's public. schools were inre~ grated, and that agreements were reached between the NAACP and the hotel operators and cmplovees' unsons to promote non- whites to nonmenial posinions in the bars, restaurants. and gam- ing moms.  This lifting of barriers in the 1970s came at a time when Las Vegas was beginning to see competirion from other resoct cities seeking gaming cevenuc. Once Atlantic Cty permitted kegatized gambling in 1978, it became dear that the city's hotel would need to cater to an expanded demographic to remain viable. The corporate awners of the hotel-casinos undetstoud thar Las Vegas would have w become a year-round family-friendly resort whose bread-and-burter would be the trade show and the con- vention. The Vegas of Sinatra and Liberace would give way te that of the Cirque du Soleil and Siegfried and Roy. The driving force behind these changes may very well have been Steve W’ynn. who launched a number of new hotel-casinos in che 1980s and 1990s. The first of these. the Mirage, located juse nerch of Cae- sars Palace. was completed in £988, the first major property tc be built on the Strip in 15 years, Ar the Mirage. Wynn carered  both ro high-rallers with milhen-dollar accounes and to families attracted 10 the lobby's 20,000-galion salwater marine tank and Siegfried and Roy's tigers. Although the Murage's architecture is not heavily themed, the grounds evoke a Polynesian paradive where guests can snupghe up to dolphins and watch a lava- spewing volcano erupt every 30 minutes. Neat door, Wynn builr Treauer Island, 4 Caribbean-themed property that is even more kid fricndly and whuse primary draw is a mock pirate barte right on the Strup. Kirk Kerhutian alo compeced for the family market in 1993 with the opening of his second MGM Grand Hotel, which takes ets amagery Irom the Emerald City of the Wisard of Ox and that boasts a small cheme park an its back but along Tropicana Boulevard.  By the mid-1990s, the casinos downtown were feckng squeezed by the new development and the decining quality of the urban fabric around them. In 1994 they roofed aver Fremont SMrcet with a glass-and-steel arcade designed by Jon Jerde. The “Prenvent Street Experience.” as it is termed, is best seen at night, when a light show plays across the coiling, muensifying the visual dentiry of the place. Jerde also lent his dcugn talents to Wynn's Bellagio, an upscale hotel-Gaino modeled on the town of the same name on Lake Como. Here Jerde and his team integrated 4 seties of cxchisive restaurants and shape along » fountain- studkded lakefrunt chat saught to create a distinctive aml exclusive ambtance to the property. The theming of hotel properties con. tinued throughout the larrer 1990s, with particular arrenrion to the recreation of utics. Nhe beat of these have carned che theme beyond the “decorated shed” and into the cealm of tbe three: dimensional “duck.” Ar the New York New York. the city's skyhne is compressed into an almost cartoontsh forest of rowers, scaled down and painted up like a Red Grooms sculptural en- semble. ‘the whimsical mood is punctuated by the property's tulle voaster, which dara among the tuwen and copies of the Staruc of J iberry and Ellis Island, Acthe Venetian, the juxtaposi- tion of thar city’s Landmarks is pethaps more troubling. because a seneer of ersatz “authenticity” pervades the work the monu- ments are nat scaled down, and they take on the form and material of che original, bur theie relationship to one another iy juntbled.  Whatever the cheme, the purpose of all of this architectural simulation is to (eomoee a mood of escapism. ‘This xensbiliry alw pervades much of the Las Vegas valley's reuent residential development. Enormous master-planned communities such as Summa Cosporarion’s Summerlin offer conrrolied-access neigh- borhoods that ase carefully edited to present a marketable life- style distinct frum older urban places, Summerlin. attempts to eseate a “cota community” in which residential, commercial, and recreational uses are balanced against each other and against open space reserves according to the developer's certified land wwe plan. Eventually the project will contain some two doren villages” of about 600-800 acres cach grouped arnund a town center. The architecture of the housing ts developer Mediterta- nean and not partivularly distinguished, although 4 variety of housing erpe: and target income groups is accommodated, The public community amenities, wich as Robert Fieklen’s Library and Performing Arts Center (1993), evoke an emerging South- west cegional modemion and yive the town center a greater sense of locality.  Tf Las Vegas is so have a civic adenney apart trom the Strip. it will likely come from the city’s aggresive campaign to hire  
name architects for its public buildings. The Las Vegas-Clark County Library District was certainly the moat progressive archi- tectutal putrun in the valley in the 1990s and secured excellent facilities from Anwoine Predock, Michacl Graves, and other lesect-known practitioncts, wach as HSA Aschitests and Welles- Pugsley Architects, The city, county, and state governments abo became desagn-minded in the 1990s and commuswoned several encereszing civic burddings. Perhaps che most signifiiant of thee is the Clark County Goverment Center (1995) by C. W. Fen- ues, J. H. Bradburn and Assouates, Fentress reinterpreted nearly the ennre history of desert architecture in this sprawling 38-acre campus, evoking furms as disparate as the pyramid, the amphitheatre, and the kiva in its red sanduoac elements. ‘The building ts both serious and theatrical. mediating between the visual artifice of the Strip and the genuine natural beauty of the valley and its encircling mountains.  Few cities better illustrate the state af late-20th-century city building in the United States than Las Vegas. The town serves as the chicf exemplar of che modern capicalint setrlemenc- ite urban structure is shaped by the circulation uf money. bunds chat fly into town at McCarron Airport atc dropped at the gam- ing tables nerehwatd along the Strip and spent by the hotels’ employees in the suburban desuncts ax the periphery. Yet most in the Las Vegas Valley feel a commitment 10 making the city work as a whole and well-integrated community apart from the gaming industry. To its people, Las Vegas is no Far West boom: town, no lifc-size Monapaly board. buc a teal community with a nghtlul place in the story of che development of the human city.  [ere Tran  See abo Resort Hotel Scott Brown, Denise (United States):  Venrari, Rabert (United States)  Further Reading  Bersky, Aaron, “Vegas, Senously: Mark Mack Brings Subsrance to Las Vogas' Shun Docp Suburhe,” Anchuesticre BR, nus. B August 1999)  Curtis, Wayne, “Belle Lpaxy: Lin Vegas, Nevada.” Prnenassian $2. ne. 3 (May June 2000)  Fitch, James Marston, “Highway to Las Vegas.” Art it America 00, fo. 1 Yanuaty-Fcbuiry 1972)  Hess, Alan, View Lats Vagus Afier- Howes Antutecture, San Francisca Chromcke Books, 195  Kaplan, Sam Hall *summerlen.” Crier Land $3, no. 9 (September 1994)  Kaololf, Reod, “The Other bas Vegas.” Aevhiterrure 85 nv. 4 (April 1996)  Land, Barbara, and Mynck Land, A Short Hiuory of Far Vegas, Reno: University of Nevada Prem, 1990  Machning, Eugene P., Resort City in she Sunbels La Vegan. 1930- 19°50, Reno. Unieisity af Nevada Pre, 1989:  Portes, Douglas R.. “Betting on Geowth,” Urban Land 57, 00. 6 June 1998)  Stern, Julie T).. “Fremone Street Eapericace Reviving Dxrwntven Las Vegas.” Urban Land 83, nv B (August 1996)  Veneun, Robert, Denise Soort Brawn, and Seeven Leenour. Learning from Lay Veg. Cambrulge. Mavachweto MIT Prew, 1972 Vilham. Johe, “On a Rall: In Las Vegas. the Casino Resort Concept  Te Reaching New Haght.” Uehan Land 59, no 3 (March 2000) Winghr. Lance. “Robert Venturi and Anu-Architectuce,” Arobetetansd Review 193, no 4 Apal 19741  LASDUN, (SIR) DENYS 1914-2001 Architect, England  Denys Lasdun, former president of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) and a recipient af its Gold Medal, occupies 4 unique place in the history of British Modern architecture. By virtue of his birth date. his career brackets the intraduction and subsequent (in the 1960s) transformation (but not repudiation) of Modem architecture in his country. Trained at the Architec- ture Awociation ftom 1931 to 1934, Lasdun immediately allied hinwelf with the umnall number of progressive deaigners in com- servative Britain who, in the 1930s, sought en plant oo English soil the principles of funcionalism, which Lasdun calls “a purify- ing agent in the architectural process ... demanding] chat de~ sign be underpuined by reason and resesrch to produce a sane and purposefil architccrure” (1984).  Already in the 1930s, Lascun was strongly influenced by Le Carbusier, who was, despite the arrival in that decade of German exiles such as Walter Gropius, the major conGinearal master for British architects. This admiration continued after World War TT, when Lasdun exchanged the purise geometries of che Interna- tional Seyle he had briefly embraced (regelence in Paddington, 1938, which resembled Le Corbusier's Maion Cook) for the wulptural massing and weathered concrete surfaces associated with Bruualism, also inspired to some extent by Le Corbusict’s late work. However, Easdun did reject che Swiss master’s ideas on urbanism, which he felt were flawed by the refusal to ac- knowledge a sense of place and w forge oecesuary kinks with uradition, a ctitaque Utat was complemented by his concept of the urban landscape, which held that a budding’s fluid and layered intenors should connect with the space of rhe city. often through platforms or “strata”  ‘On prestigious and less econumically stringent ineiturional and private commissions, such as the Royal Cullege of Physicians (1964) and the lusury duplexes on St. Jamies’ Place (1960), Las- dun inurporated duh granite, travertine, terrazzo, mwsaic, and richly tinted eaginecring brick along with the textured concrete to add color and sensuality to the palette of materials. What binds together all his postwar work is the forceful articulation uf program tn create asymmetiical compositions of great com- pkeaty in plan, section, and clevation that catend assertively into the surruutsdings, whether urban ar rural.  His tiest significant postwar work, the large primary school in Paddington, was completed in 1955. when it was named “Beiuin's most modern schovl.” The commission originally had some to the British archnectural firm Tecton and was done in collaboration with Lindsey Drake, another former partner of the firm. The varied spaces thar comprise dlasseauma, administrative offices, and che auditorium receive vigueuus differentiation in height, shape, matenals, and fenestration.  By 1957 Landun’s vocabuliry had shifted to the boldly massed. dynamic. and faceted shapes that visually and ooncep- tually link hus work not unly with general postwar developments in European architecture but also with the English baroque tradi- tion he explicidy cherished, embodied especially in the work of Nicholas Hawksmoor.  Lasdun continued his commitment to. socially oriented Projects, at that time energetically sponsored by the government co redress a dramatic housing crisis due to wartime dunuage. His  Roval Nanonal Thearre (1976), Londen. England © Michael NicholsonsCORBIS  T4-story “cluster” blocks (1955-59) in Bethnal Green, Landen. were considered very innovative and wer lincudly; regreeeably, poor maintename has threatened their continued exutence. On each double-herght level, four ecparate set of nwuestory apart- ments are connected by bridges to a cencral scrvme Luce. The vaned ofientation of each of the manoncttes affords unusual privacy co the tenants, ard che setbacks of individual facades from the concrete frame identify the spatial system while provid- ing balconies and sun selief. The cerm cluster denves trom Kevin Lynch's writings: Lasdun in tum popularized the concept in Britain, where it was used to combat the sigidety of CIAM (Con- gfts Ioternationaus d’Architecture Modeene) planning and Le Corbusier's Ville Radiewe and to emphaxiee the importance of context.  One of Lasdun’s most admired buildangs is the Royal College of Physicians in Regent's Park (1964). which wan hem the Teust- cs Medal of the RIBA (992) and has received Geade 1 lseng from English Heritage. a signal honor for a 20th-century work. The need for distincuve public and private rooms, same serving ceremonial and athers professional purposes, was the deal chal- Senge for this architect. who revels in clarifying while expressing intricate nvultipurpase institurional peograme Ar the same time, he took pains co respect the wale and color of John Nash's neighboring crraces and ev maintain the interplay of natusc  and anhiteviure that George IV's brilliant town planner had achieved. His faith chat the design could be expanded if necessary withour doing damage to che Jornal cobereme of che initial building was proved justified when he seamfessly added a chapter house and lecture cheater in 1995,  The Royal National Theatre (1963 76) is another tnumph of sophissicaved circulation through areas that serve varied func- tions. although all were intended to enhance the theatrical en- counter. IF its untemiteingly severe pray surfaces have been ctiti- cued, i bold concrete cantileven and lively silhouette eaquently communicate the National Thestre’s purpox and cultural prommence. Lasdun created aus impressive theatrical mecca thar keurs together without confusion three auditoriums of diverse sizes and characters, box affices, honkstores, restau- ran. cafes, and waiting arcas where musical perfurmances and readings take place, In addition, it 6 an important clement in the cityaape of the Suuth Bank: even chose whe do not entet make use of the multilevel walkways that offer enticing ervet views and connect pedestrians with Waterlaa Bridge. Casdun sought through the “strata inside and ouside . . . to capture the tundameatal sense of the theaere as a place of gathering and a framework for the experience af visiting the |Natanal Theatre| which takes the ciry itself as a backdrop” (1984) 
In a postwar Butain that was dramatically expanding teadi- onal universities and eatablishing new ones, Lasdun aby played 2 highly visible rule, For the tabuls rau that was East Anglia Unrversity (1962-72) oupade Norwich, he designed a cumplex that encompassed housing for students and stafl, che fibrary, Jecture theaters. and the University and Senate Hause, conceiv- ing the building as “hills and valleys." He developed his principle af inictloctung spaces and stratified terraces further in the resi- dences at Chnst’s College, Cambridge (19661. For the Univer- sity of London in Bloomsbury (1965-79), Lasdun prepared a mayor extension scheme that inchudes the Institute of Education and the School of Onental and African Seudies; its aggressive tmaning, bold play of light and shadow, and creation of an aca- demic square within the embrace of the new buildings make the work s quintewential expresion of Lasdun’s scsthetic,  Hrirs Srasine  der abe Beutalises, Corbusier, Le (Jeamnerct, Charles- Edouard) (France); Ville Radieuse (ca. 1930)  Biography  Born 8 September 1914, London; trained at the Architecriral Association in London (1931 34), and with Wells Coates, che leading English Modernist (1935-37). Joined the architectural group Tecton (1937) umeil its dissolution in 1939. Worked in conjuncoon with Lindsey Drake (1949-59); served as a major to the Royal Engineess, in charge of building the first aiefield used in the Allied invasion on D-Day; served as chairman of the MARS (Modern Architectural Research} Group. Wor the Trustees Medal of the RIBA (1992) for Royal College of Physi- Gans in Regent's Parle, died 11 January 2001  Selected Works  House. $2 Newton Road, Paddingson, Landin, 1938  Hallichl Schad (with Littdery Drake} Paddingtoa, Loadon, 1955 Chnret Tower blocks. Bethnal Geren, London, 1959  Duplesss, St Jamev’s Mace, Grevst Bark, Dondon, (960 Firwilliam Catlegr. Cambridge University, Cambridge, 1961 Royal College of Physicians, London, 1%4  University of Kant Anglia, Norwich, (972  Royal National Theatre. Landon. 1976  Extensions. University of Londiin, Bloomsbury, 1979  Extension, Royal College of Physicians, London, 1995  Selected Publications  "Mars Gonup, 1953-97." devditads Year Book 4 (19571  Architecnure in an Age of Skepncum, A Practiianen’ Aashelogy, New York: Oxford Univeniry Prew, 1984  A Language and 4 Theme: The Av Parton, Landon: RIBA. 1976  Further Reading  Banham, Reyne, Deagn by Chane, edited bey Penny Spathe, New Yenk: Ritsob, and London. Academy Eduions, 1981  Curtis, William J,R., Dewey Laude Archieestury, City. Landscape, Laralen: Phaidon, 1994  Curtis, Wilham J.R.. Modern Architecture my 1900, Ontord: Phadon, 1982, Englewoud Chih, New Jersey: Prenoce Hall, 1984; 41d edition, Englewood Clif, New Jersey. Prentice-Hall, 1996  re of Deny Lardun wed  Jakeon, Anthony, The Prtiticr of Ahitutarr: A Histery of Maden Arstotecrure ia Brisain, Toronio: University of Toramu Presa, and Londen: Architectural Prem, 1970  Peta, James and Donna lovedsy (editors). Modern Aritain, 1929- 7939. Landen: Dewgn Muscum, 1999  LE HAVRE, FRANCE  Le Havre was a great waport town until World War II, when it was besieged by the German forces on 2 Seprember 1944 and occupied uncil 13 Seprember, The old Le Havre was planned in 1541 on a gridiron principle by [ulin engineer Girolamo Bellarmarco, then in political exile in France. With the end of the bartle of Normandy and the liberation of Paris, Le Havee war left as one of Europe's worst-lamaged pore cities, Virtually wiped out, it wiflercd 146 raids and more than 4,000 deaths, and 9,935 dwellings were totally destroyed and 9,710 damaged. After ewo years of help from che Allies to clear the destruction, rewastruction began in 146.  In France. che plan of modetnuauon and revonsuruction after the war was conceived on a national scale, although rhe relation between political and architectural intentions remained vague. Rarionalist and neovernacular soluuions were largely discredited on account af their associations with Pérainist conscrvacism, and different towns were assigned to individual modem architects in the late 1940s: Maubeuge to André Lurcat. the heart of St-Die to Le Corbusier (evensually canceled), and Le Havre (1954) w Auguste Perret. aged 70 when the war ended. The pioncer of reinforced-concreve construction had designed buildings as di- verse as Netre Dame du Raincy (1923) and the Theatre deo Champs Elysécs (1913), both in Paria, He envisaged a sew town that, although keeping the primiple of Bellarmato's plan, would achieve 4 suitable balance between space and vulume and be- fween hotizonuls and verucals and incorporate: monuments worthy of a town with a noble histury. Perret’s anginal concept involved a vast pedestrian precinct, with all the traffic going underground. The postwar climate of austerty could accommo- date neither the cost nor the volume of concrete required. Pes- tes plan was modified accardingly and realired with the cooper- ation of hit many pupils and disciples.  Le Havre represents Perret’s most important postwar wark and has sceved as a model cramplhe of 20th-century neoclassical urban planning The buildings rely on his characteristic simpli. fied clawical rationahat vocabulary of frame and panel, which did at least permit a degeee of civ. rhetoric in the handling of inutituuons and urban «paces, bur the results were considered disappointing by matiy critics, who saw in the blocks of fats anil offices, a drab repetition of an outmoded design aesthetic. One French wnicer considered 1t to be “one of the most dismal urban landscapes to be found anywhere in France.” In favoring vehicular over pedestrian acorss, the human scale of Le Havre is somewhat unsympathetic. Furthermore, the concrete has weathered ungracefully.  The Place de "Harel de Ville is one of che large squares of Europe and does achieve a remarkable archiveceural unity. It offers wide perspectives made possible by the three-mory housing and commercial units whose horizoncal roofs are broken by six ten-wary towen blacks, The town hall includes a cheater and exhibition hall and forms the fourth side of the square, Designed  in raw concrete with curtain walls, it hus long, low, pleasing lines: 2 flit root; and a receangulas tower. A publ garden occupies the veatcr of the square, in which a monument to the Resistance has been erected in the center. The Rue de Paris, Le Havre's tines strect in the 18th century, leads off the square oppose the town hall and is lined by arcades of hixury shops. ‘The impressive Avenue Foch, be Havre's Champs-Elysées. opens op to the weet, offering a fine perspective sowand the Porte Oxéane. It isa heroic geture that symbolizes the important part the sea has alway Played in the life and development of the town,  The Bassin du Commerce. nw reserved for pleasure ctalt. hus been made the focal point of the new quartet accessible by the Pont de La Bourse, a toutbratge. ‘Overlooking the narth side of the dock ts the Chamber of Conmmerce. which houses the Stock Exchange, at the end stands the Intemational Centre of Commerce.  he Church of Saint-Joseph (1959), serving as a memonal to the victims of the 1944 bombing as well asa place of worshig. was Pestet’s bast work. Although less succesful in many ways than Notre Dame at Le Raincy in Paris, its 100-micter ovtagnnal tower, piercing the skyline of the Boulevand Francois [. was soaddered by Perret to be not ualy a hieratic eymbal bur abo a pivotal accent in the design of the town. Rising from the square church, the wwer, with it hard reticulated surfaces, has been compared with a rocket un a Launching pad. The interior struc ture is strikingly monumental, designed on 4 square plan, with four groups oFfous towers supporting the base uf dic bel wwer, which forms an 84-meter lantem tower, The brute concecte of the interior ts exposed, but the walls of the church and mwer alike area mona of light strcaming in through the stained-glass windows. their colors carefully graduated an all four sides of the suwer.  At the end of the Boulevard Framoi | is une of the unques- tionable successes of the new Le Havre, The culture of construc: tion, wedded ta technological ecploratian and to a mechanistic imagery that had emerged in French pouwar anhitecture. is  clearly un the Maison de la Culture (1952 61) by Lagneau and Weill. It sought a halance between formal rhetoric and the desire to treat a civic building as a flexible wial instru- ment in glass, stecl, and shuminum. The ightaess of matcrials provides a weloume contrat tu the inert mass of so many of the other buildings in the town. The roof, designed to provide the best possibic light to the galleries inside, is highly orginal, con- sisting of six sheers of glass covered by a horizontal slacted alumi- sum sun blind through which natural light passes, together with electric light, which is subsequently filtered through a series of clear and opaque panels above che glass of the ceiling. The galler- ies are linked on differene levels by gangways. similar to thos on the outside of the building and reminiscent of those an board a ship. The building faces the sea through a monumental con- crete sculpture, known locally as the “Rye.” When opened in 1961, it was the must modern museum in Europe. The insersor is planned on the principle of manipulating sather than encloxng, space, and Se cians can be adjusted co the neds of changing exhibitions. Somewhat appropriately. the museum's fame rests on the work of Eugene-Louts Boudin and Raou! Duty, 19dh-cencusy painters who were born in Honfleur and Le Havre. eespectively.  Ste-Adreser extends Le Havre to Cape Héve. The resort and old town has garden-surrounded mansions that form 2 succes-  won of Letraces up to Cape Héve. Le Havre now consists of three mantime terminals. one for cruising ships and the other wn for cross-channel temics, which allowed in 1981 lor the movement of more chan 4 million passengers. The opening of the Tancerville suspension bridge (1981) and more recently the Pone de Notmundie (1992). connecting the commercial and induscrial ferns of the Le Havre region with the left bank, has teought additional traffic to the city. Furthermore, the alluvial land abong the north bank, extending to Tancerville, affords excelent opputtuniues for extending the poet in the furure, Hitans J. Graiuen  Ser ake Nowe Dame, Le Raincy; Perret, Auguste (France) Further Reading  Ache. Jean-Bapnste (editor), Perres (euhih. cas.), Pars, 159  Champagnculle, Hemant, Herre. Harn: Arm et Menens Graphiques. 1959  Collins, Peter, Concrenes the Vision of'a New Archstecrure A Staaby of Augaste Perret and His Preewrers, London: abet and aber. and New York Honzan Press, 1959  Garis, Walliams [.R, Modern Architectunr ynce 1900, Oxtord: Phadon, and En CIR. New jersey: Prentace Hall, 1482, Jed cdine, Londen: Phaidon. ant Upper Sadille River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 196  Jamot, Paul, AG. Peres et FArhuenssere du betan arme, Pare and Weamels: Varner, 1927  Robert, Nesta, The Campmuan Caade 18 Normandy, Landon: Callus, 1980, Enghewsen) Clif, New Jeney: Prentice Hall, 1983  Royres, Emesto Nathan, Auguste Perret, Milan: 1 Baloane. 1985  LEGORRETA, RICARDO 1931- Architect, Mexico  Over the past 40 years, Ricardo Legorreta has created innovative solutions to contempurary building challenges. His work com- bines architecture, landscape architecture, and intenor desgn, with 4 respect for the regional climate and the diverse heritage of Mexiuan souety. In propects ranging froms private residences to factories, hbrancs, hotel and resoets, and museums, Leporreta’s work sands out far his use of colar. water, proportion, light. and planes.  For all us ecferences wa European-dertved modernism. Leg- orteta’s work profoundly reflects the images of indigenous Mex- ico. His designs remain ronted in an understanding of Mexico's pre-Columbran and colonial past. Leporreta studied at che Es- ucla Nacional de Arquitectura of the Universidad Nacional Au- tanoms de México, under architect Jost Villagran Garcia. Vil- lagran Garcia, part of the vanguard of the fint generation of posurevolutionary Meaxan architects, inatdled in his students a sense of social responsibility, as well as the maral dimension of architecture. Upon completion of his studhes in 1952. Leporetta worked in Villagran Garcia's studio, beuomning 2 partner in 1955; the results of this collaboration arc seen in the funcpomalist/ rationalist Hotel Maria Isabel (1961).  Legoratta was aware of the limitations of funchonalism as practiced in Mexico, parricularty what he perceived as its rigidity. universality, and lack af warmth, He sought a new architectural identity that cxpressed a Mexican sensibelity. and one that revog- 
nized the nation's diverse, regional camponenty—ammething that the ranenalise  In his private practice begun in 1959, Legoratta was able to develop his own vocabulary. Among the firs buiklings wom- pleted by his new firm were the Smith Kine and French Labura- tories (1964; Mexico City) and lactories fos Chrysler (1964; ‘Telucal and Nissan Motor (1960, Cuernavaca), Uhene struc ture drew un his academic traning gained in Vullagran Garcia's studio, as evidenced in cheir balance, cfficiency, and functional: iny. Further, these buildings contain the first indicanons of what would become a constant theme in Legorrcta’s industrial archi- tecture: a concern fos those who labar within the buiklings. To thar end. assembly lines are designed to human scale and work and office space ix blended seamlessly.  The Cheyster factory alo represents a watershed in Logor- tetas development of design solurinns that are relevant to Mexi- can social and physical climates. tt was ut this poinr that Legor- reta met Tois Raragin, who advised him te mvea more attention ints the landscape. This led to further refinement of what became known as an ctnutiunal er empachk architecture.  Subtequent works in collaboration with Barragin. such as the Caraine Real Hotel (1968) in Mexico City, represent a fusion of tradition and modernity. One sexs de architect's awareness of  Managua Cathedral, Nicaragua (199). designad by Ricardo  © Peter Aaton/Esto  the central nitions of Functionalism smbued with his adme- ration for ne vernacular, in the Hotel Camino Real, Legorreta departed fram convention, which dictated high-rise constnuc- tion. Lnvtead, with pre-Hispanic and colonial forms in mind, he emphasized horizoneality. The resulting form blends public spaces cfforticady: the honzontal emphasis allows for lavish gar- dens, patios, pools, and fountains, all accentuated by a brilliant we of volo, which commences with a starding magenta surcen at the hotel entrance. The incerior is an intimate refuge, grven his attention to intenor light. co details in the design of furnish- ings, and in the placement of artworks (including murals by Ruling Tamayo and Mathias Goeritz, and sculpture by Alexan- dee Calder.) ‘Together these elements infuse this work with a tense of mystery and of warmth, elements that characterse Le~ gorreta’s style.  These clemenrs are also prominent in later hotels executed by Legorreta’s firm, notably the Hotel Camino Real Canciin (1975) and the Hotel Camiou Real bape (1981), These haces are graceful adaptations to their sites, whether placed herween the sea and 2 Lagoon, as at Canuin, or following the slope of the face of a cliff, asin Iatapa. The resule harmonize with the environment, mediating intenor and exterior spaces. The hrrapa sive feanures expansive, welcoming, open public arcas. as well as terraces and walkways to uke beach, and pool that invite explorarion and contemplation of the dramatic setting,  A similar imteyranon of building and site is apparent in Legnr- sora’s industrial architecture of the 1970s and 1980s. Projects such as the IRM factory (1975) in Guadalajara, Kodak Laborato ties (1975) in Mexion City, and the Renaule facmry (1984) in Durango, manifest this tendemy in diverse environments. In the Renaulr factory, Legorreta drew inspiratiun frum the devert site; the final fuem is a striking cemponition of massive ied and ochre walls, whose mas cuinplements the limitless desert hori ton, providing prmitection ftom harsh cements as well as on affirmation of che desert itself. The cobblestone landscape con- tinues the descit hues and textures, joining building to site in a manner that would be impossible to achieve solely with vegeta- ton.  In 1985 | egorieta Arquitectos began one of their most exten- sive works the maser plan for Salana in Dallas, Texas. and the design of the Sokana Village Center and the 18M National Markering and Technical Support Center. Legorseta’s master Plan was intended to evoke traditions of the Hispanic southwest, avoiding the anonymity, sterility, and buredem, often evident in office and mixcd.ase complexes. The result. created on a site measuring some seven muilliots square feet, succeeds in Linking modetn construction techniques with 2 seme of timelasoess. The Solana Village Cenecr, reminiscent of Mexican colonial-era plazas, pecsents a buted with luster af office and retail buildings, where beown and white stinco exterion harmoake with the colors and textures of the praine landscape.  In Legorreta’s residential work a penonal. contemplative side emerges, ilfustrating the extensive talent of this architect. To this pount. the Molinas (1973), Montalhan (1985; Los Angeles), and Greenberg (1991; Las Angeles} residences demonstrate his Auid- ity in designing lor distinccive physical environments and cul- tures. Massive walls preserve privacy and offer scant lucs as to the function of a particular segment, in keeping with the Mexi- can vernacular traditions, Light and colot create warmeh; walls are often perfurated by lattices, balanced further by the genthe  flow of water into pools, As in bis large sale works, the result és an organic compasiuion, ably blending art and architecture, exterioe and interior, light and shadew:  Patna & Or sen:  See aise Basragin, Luis (Meticoh Mexico: Mexico City, Mexico  Biography  Born in Mexico City, 7 May 1931. Educated atthe Us Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Merivo City 1948-52: degree in architecture 1952. Married Maria Laisa Hemnandes 1956: 6 children. Draftsman, 1949 - $2. project manager, 1953 55. foe Jose Villagsin Garcia, Mexico City; partnenhip with Villagein 1955~60, Freelance architect, Mexico City 1961-65: principal, Lcgorrcta Arquitectos, Meaico City from 1963; prinupal, Legor- feta Arquitectos Disefios, Mexico Cary from 1977: office established 1985, Design profesor, 1959 experimental archnecture group. 1962 -64. Universidad Nacio- nal Auténoma de México, Mexico City: visiting professor at numerous universities in North America and Spain, Distin- guished honorary fellow, Mexican Sooety of Archieeces 1978; honorary fellow, American Inssiture of Architects 1979) jurur, Pritchet Prize feum 1983: member, conastant commitee, J. Paul Gerry Museum. Los Angeles 1986; member, Urban Devel- opment Council of the Miguel Hidalgo Dekgation, Mexico City 1989; member. International Jerusalem Committce 198%, ad- viset to the president of CNCA, Mexico Cay 1992; bunotary member, Academy ot Arts, Meuco. Awatded the ALA Gold Medal an 2000.  Selected Works  Hotd Mara lab, Mexico City (with Villagrin Garcia), 1961  Chrytlee Factory, Toluca. Mexico, 1964  Smith Kkioe and French Lahoracorics, Mexico City, 1964  Niaas Mexicana Office and Marutacturing Buikling. Cuctnavaca. Metin, 1966  Camino Real Hotel. Meco City (with [ais Barragan). 1968  Molinas Hoine, Merico City, 1973  IBM Factory. Guadalajara. 1975  Kodak Laborataries, Mexicn City, F975  Camiao Real Horel, Cancin. 1974  Camino Real Hotel, txtapa, 1981  Renault Factory, Gomez Palacio, Durango. Meno, (984  Montalban Howe, Los Angeles, 1985  Westlake Park Master Plan, Texas (vith vibers). 1985  IBM Offices, Solana, Wenlake-Southbake, 1988  Solana Village Center, Westlake-Southlake, (988  Contemporary Arc Muscum, Paloma, Mexico, 1991  Greenberg Hour. Los Angeles, 1491  FY Papalore Children's Muscum, Merce Ciry, 1402  Managua Cathedral, Nicaragua, 199.3  Max Palevsky Resident) Commons, University of Chicago. 2001  Selected Publications  “Legoreita Remembers Rarragin,” Progrenioe Architecture “O12 UPebrusry 1989)  “The Wall a Mesica,” Ancheecture and Urbawien 265 (October 1992)  Further Reading  Ammann, Glona, “Hacer una arquccutus wongruenie won el pais,” Razenn, 62 (May 1982)  Antuniales, Anthony, “Rucando Leporrcta: una arquitec cura tecamsna,” Soma, 23% (Mash 187)  tuyon, Danian, and Pando Gaspatin, Panorsonas de Ls arquieectura Latine-amervcang, Barcelona Mlume, 1977: a The Changang Shape af Latin Amornan Ariittectere, Conventions with Ten Letding Architect, uramdatcd by Galen 1). Greaser, New York ant Chahoter, West Sunex: Wiley, 1979  Rusun, Edward R. teditor), Madernisy and the Anteiteaimer of Mesa, Aun Coivereay of Texaa Prem, 1997  Daz de Ovando, Clemencing, “El Palacn de Irurbade,” Arie de Mean, 21 (1972)  “Frvrevieta al Arq. Legorreta yal Arg. Cauro,” Angwetectns de México, 28 tAugue 1967)  Gaspanni, Graziano, Murer de Méaco, Mexico City San Angel Fdiconet, 1978  “IBM Guadalajaea.” Obras, 35 (July 1977)  iichis, Ricardo, The Archisecture of Ricardo Legocrria. ndited by Wayne Anue and Spdiney H. Broker, Asin Uarveenty of Texas Press. and Berlia: Erna. 1990.  Murlow. lobo V. ledstor). Legerreta arguisecio, Naucalpan, Mexico: Gili, [997 as Ricardo Legarveta, Archizects, New York: Rezzoli, 1997. as The Architecture of Ricardo Legos, London: Thames ant] Hixhon, [997  Noelle. Louise, Ricardo Legorresa, tradicién y modernidad. Mexico Cay: Univeradad Nacional Autdinoama de México, 1989  Smith. C. Ray, “The Mexican Minimalism of Ricardo Legorresa,” The Architectural Record, \GO (October 1976)  Smith, Clive Bamfonl Beilden in the Sina: Hine Mecican Arcinzecn, New York Architectural Book 1967  Tema Rondndes. Anionic. “Ricardo Legutrcta La atngucieectara micxwcand del sigie, XX, odsted by Femando Gonsile Gortimar, Meuco Cry: Consejo Nacional pata la Caltun y Las Attics, 1996  LEONIDOV, IVAN ILICH 1902-59  Architect and urban designer, Russia  Wan Leonidoy began his formal art studics in the Soamay (free an studios) in Tver and conunucd his education from 1921 unui 1927, at the VEAUTEMAS (Russian acronym toe Higher Mate Arr and ‘Technical Srudios or workshops) in Moscow. Ie was there. in the studio of Aleksandr Vesnin, thar his interests shilced from painting 10 architecture,  leanidoy’s diploma propece far the Lenin Institute and Li- brary (1927) captured widespread arrention and hroughe him public promincnee, Featured at the 1927 Exhibition of Contem- porary Architecture in Moscow, the precocious scheme received Further recognition after ics publication in the Constructivives’ architectural journal, Sorremennaia arkhiteknora (Contemporary Architecture).  Leanidov's design for the Lenin Tnstinute, situated in the Lenin Hills ncar Moscow, cavisioned a centrifugal arrangement of buildings coanevted to the Mendet and centrally placed book- stack tower of the library. An elevated monorail connected the insurute to the Gty below and communicated with it by using the best telephone systems of the ame. His proposal also in- dluded a science theater wath 3 planetarium, various laboratories and offices for the research peronnel, and a sphencal glass audi- torium, audaciously supported by an inverted conical structure. 
From 1927 to 1930 Leonider taught at the VEAUTEMAS and was one of the editon of Sorremennaut arkhiseksurs, During this period he produced unesccuted designs for 4 variety of building types: the Sow-Kine Film Production Complex (1927), the Trentrosoyuis Headquasters (1928) in Moscow, and the Government Center in Alma-Ata (1928). projects for the Chris- topher Columbus Monument in Santo Domunge (1929), and the House of Industry in Moscow (1929). His desga fur Mos- cow's extensive Proletarshy district provided a full range of recee- ational facilities for workers ving in a comprehensively planned environment,  As an active member of the Coastructivist Objedinenie so- vremennykh arkhicektoray (OSA: Sociery of Contemporary Ar- chiteces}, Leonidov's designe were a species apart. While the other Constructivists tended to conceive of buildings as dynamic combinations of functionally and geometrically distinct spacey, teonidow isolated the programmatic elements into simplified, freestanding figures. The Constructivists generally articulated the structure, and differentiated the cladding of theie dynam- icbutildingy. Leonidov. however, preferred tu peueralize the sur- faves of bis buskdings, crcaung visual interest by vigorously con- Tasting the scale, geometric form, and anentation of the  Loonidor’s nocable urban designs include a project tos a Pal- ace of Cutnure in Moscow and plans for che city of Magnito- gunk: both were designed un 1930 but remand uncsccated. Located in the Urals. a new industrial center was conceived as a linear city, extending from an industrial core our into the counuyside. It featured a broad residential spine that was placed hetween nwo parallel zones reserved for parks, athletic facilitics, were placed perpendicular to chis highway, and divided the city inte secton, with each tuperhinck defined by its zoning. The scheme allowed for linear, inuremental growth by the addition of new sectors as the need arose,  In the carly 1930s, Leonidey's projects became embroiled in the debate between the “urbanisu,” represeniing uaditional planning ideas, and the “disurbanists,” who were supporters of new urban paradigms. When the Sovict government began with- drawing support for modernism, Leonidov's propusals drew in- Greasing criucism. In the offical press, “| conidovism” became a derogatory term usually apphed wo projects deemed idealistic, financrally naive, utopian, or formalistic.  Leonidov responded ro the critics by submicring a project of striking originality for a 1934 design competition. The campeti- tion was for the headquarters of the Ministry of Heavy Industry (Dom Narkomciazhprom), sited in Red Square, Moscow's mast imponant and sensitive site. Fue this project. Leanidov drew insperation from the vernacular buildings of medieval Runais, and sought to engage the Kremlin, Lenin's Mausofewn, and the Church of Sc Bast in 4 wompositional disloguc, The new ministry—a keystone of Salin’s plans for rebuilding central Mos- vow also was intended as a counterpoint tv the Palace of the Soviets (1931). sited 10 the Kremlin's southwest. Had these cw projects been built. they would have bracketed the medieval Kremlin between them. and created a symbolically charged jux- tapesinon celebrating Stalin's regime.  Leonider's proposal for the Ministry of Heavy Industry con- sisted of three akystrapens, each one asserting its particular iden- tiny chrough its distinctive form, steuctute, and material, Bridges  interconnected the three tawers, which rose above an elongated tribune of vtepped terraces, created co better view the parades in Red Square. ‘The foremost and tallest cower, built from an expored skeleton frame, crowned its topmost stones with crusnes and cadho antennas. Behind it stood an elegantly dongated rota- tional hyperboloid. its surface completely veneered with bricks of black glass and punctuated by boldly projecting balconies. The third tower, Y-shaped in plan, alternated concave curtaia walls of glass against flat end walls of concrere. North of this tower, Leondov placed an anditorium—a multicolored and modesdy scaled rotational hyperboloid—thar responded in modern terms to the neighboring Neoclassical Bolshoi Theatre.  From the mid-1930s to the sart of Wadd War U1, Leonidov worked for Moisei Ginuburg, producing various projects for coastal sites in the Crimea. OF these proyects, only the amphithe- ater and oramenual staircase were built in 1937, for the park of the Ondzhunikilee Sanatorium in Kislovodsk. During this perid Leoniduy abo designed the House for Young Pioneers (1935), built in Kalinin (Tver).  After World War I, Loondoy developed his usban and archi- textural ideas in a series of skerches cided “City of the Sun.” a utopian vision thar remained unfinished. at his death, As his wark became berter known in che 1970s, Leanidov’s significance in modern architecture became iatemationally r  K Pact. Arias  See alo Constroctiviem; Palace af the Sovicts Competition {1931}; Russia and Sovics Uniasm Vesaln, Alcrander, Leonid, and Viktor (Rassia)  Biography  Bom in Viasikh, Russia, ? February 1902. Apprenticed to an icon painter in Tver, Russia; sudied ast at the Sremas. Tver; studied under Alcksands Vesnin, VKALUTEMAS, Moncow 1921-27, Editor, Seremennuia arkbiteknura 1927-30. Instruc- tor, VKRUTEMAS 1927-30. Member. Unian of Contempo- rary Architects (OSA). Died in Moscow. 6 November 1959.  Selocted Works  Modal Peasane Cartage (competition enary, 1925  Apartment Budding (competition entry), Wanqve-Vomesnsk, USSR, 1926  Relatussian State Universcy Burldings (competinon entry), Munsh, 1926  Protogypes for Workers! Clubs, 1927  Lenin Inatinute andl Libeary (unbuile), (927  Sev-Kino Flin Pruductiun Comptes (uabule, 1927  Trensrumoymit Headquarters (unbuil), Moscow, 1928  Government Center (unbuik), Alma-Ata, USSR, 1928  Cheitapher Columbus Manument (unbuilt), Santo Domingo. Daminian Repubbe, 1929  House of Industry (unbuile), Moscow, 1929  Palae of Culture (unbuste), Meacow, 19.30  Mantce Man (snexecuted), Magnitogarth, 1930  Ministry of Heavy Industey (competition entry, unbuit), Mexow, 14  House fur Young Pioneer, Kalinin (new Tver), 1955  Selected Publications  “The Ministry of Heavy Indusey in Monow: The Projet of Ivan Wich Leonidov: Explanueory Notes abuut the Project.” Anthis SEHR 10 11934)  “The Archotect’s Palette,” Arhhit S86R 4 11944)  Further Reading  Gouak prowides the mast cumprehenave cuverape, including ant exten- sive bebliography of primary wurces and secondary hiterarure in Rasssuan  Coake, Catherine, “Ivan Leonor: Viawin and Histonasm,” Archurcrural Deugn $6 (June 1986)  Gaaah, Andes, and Andrej Leunsdiv, fein Lewnedar: Use Complete Werks, New York: Ruszali, and London. Academy Fabtions, 1988  Anan Lromidor, New York insutuse for Architecsure and Urban Studies, 1981  Koolhaas, Rem, “A Foundanon of Amnens,” Deige Quarterly 128 (1984)  Laour, Alesandia, “Ivan Leonalov: An Fabvbition in New York and Naples” Ao ¢ 07227 (August 1980;  Sik, Mirostay, “The Kaemlin's Construceinst Cathedral: Ivae Leonider’s Dengn fat the Sted Intusiy's Comminanat, 1934.7 Latus International 45, tw. 1 (1985)  LEVER HOUSE, NEW YORK CITY 1949-51  Designed by Skidmore, Owings and Merrill: completed 1951  New York, New York  Lever House, at Park Avenue between S3nd and $4th Serects in Manhattan, was built as the Amerwan beadquaners of Lever Beothers, a British fires of soap manufacturers that became, by the mid- 20th century. a company offering vanous cleaning prod- ucas, This building established the fashion for glas-walled office towers in the United States. Designed and erected between 1949 and 1951, i¢s contemporaneous with the United Nations Secce tariat, which has two broad glazed surfaces. but while the latter is an institutional and international monument, Lever House is a corporate headquarters constrained by zoning and budgetary cules, and thus the mote specific model for many ghan-and-secet commercial buildings that followed chese pioneer.  Lever House established the reputation of its architeuts — the firm of Skidmore, Owings and Memll, and expecially of is New York City office where Gordon Bunshafi was the partner in charge of design: William S. Brown was adminiscrative parmcr foe thin structure, They worked dosely with Lever's American president, Charles Lackman, who had been trained as an archi- tect thorly before the Depression. All three had been young when European modernism was of intense interest to progressive architects, and the client was therefore willing to rink cumunis- sioning an unconventional building.  Lever House garnered exceptional publicity for the owner in part because of the unusual surface materials. Greenish gLus and stainless steel cover the tower and a low extension, intended for the era's huge computers. that encompasses the perimeter of the site a¢ second story level. The owners publicized the use of their detergents for the cnatinuous program of window washing,  for which a worker's “gondola” apparatus anchared to the mof was invented,  Another reason for the unusual attention pax! to Lever House was thar the burding felt open space, primarily tw she south of the office tower. Inside the rectangle formed by the clevared computer corridor is a small garden bed open to the sky, While meager by standards of famous urban plaza, and while offering ho amenities such as seats of tables, the small plaza was ncverthe- leas vistually unheard-of in commercial premises, the open space at Rockefeller Center being the only other example.  Lever House becaine famous, tuo, because af its limited size. Lever Brothers did not want w build more than was requited for an exclusive corparate headquarten. Because the owners te quested no speculauve olfice Nour space for rental, the resulting hailding could be low compared to most postwar structures 1 midtown Manhattan, where high land costs usually dictate maxe mal exploitation of the lot. Nevertheless, the intenor was spa- Gous enough so that employees at interior desks were located five feet clner co rhe perimeter windows than was common at the time. A service core at the wert occupies the most cuafined end of the building.  At bath Rockefeller Center (Raymond Hoad, New York, 1940) and Lever House, the open space was partly a onsequence of raning segulations. Following rulcs cstablished in 1916, a  Lever House, New York City (1951) Phot © Skidmore. Changs sed Merril 
tower might be buile to any height if it crvered no more than a quarter of the site; that determined what Lever's tower and the suppoets for the computer extension de, Other rules required 4 setback from the budding line, hence the widened sidewalk along S4h Stecct. By contrast, carhier office buddings such as the Chrysler (Van Alen. 1930) and Empire Stace Buildings (Shreve and Lamb, 1431) fill the lot before setting back gradually to the one-quarter limit, Younger modernists the Lickman, Bunshatt. and Brown preferred the avant-garde geometric slabs inspired by Le Corbusier and Ludwig Mies van der Rohe to commercially conservative wthack designs.  Many architects of the period, indiuding some on the Skid- more, Owings and Mertill satl, produced designs combining, vertical slabs rising ahove horiznntal exsersians, all made of glass and metal. Like Bunshaft, they bued these on Le Corbusier's fazed warface at a Salvation Army hostel in Paris, his db on shits with a horizonsal extension at a Swiss students’ dormitory in Paris, and on the glass and mctal walls a1 Mies van der Rohe's Lake Shore Drive Apartments in Chicago.  ‘The proportions eventually chosen far Lever House, and the finesse of the surface — espeuully given the limated choice of materials at the rime—aroused the admiration of cnics and the pubbc. ‘The architects were proud of having produced a thin exterior wall. a much-adnured achievement of the ame, and of having made a sealed building comfortable, thanks to the combination of ait wuoditioning and relatively cool Huorescent lighting thar was then available. While a sealed building reduces the interior noise levd and penetration of dust. Lever Houx was sealed foe aesthetic reasons. Framed by thin aluminum mul- lions, the blue-green glass, the only color then available for hem- absorbing glass, made the weer seem ethereal as’ compared to buildings covered in stone oe brick. Some af the original effect ia now lene, aa much of the glass has has) w be teplaced because of cracking duc to expansion and contraction in sun and shade: some replacements are inharmoniqusly coboted. (ilazed span- drels below the windows made Use ourcr surface wasitent [n- side the building, the offect of sleck and efficient modernity was enhanced by a suund-absorptive suspended custom- designed by its manufactures, Metal Hashings to keep water from penetrating the surface, and a nickel-copper alley ro prevent water seepage from the cvof showed chat the planners were aware of sks to the stricture resulting from thee unfamiliar design and marerials,  While response to Lever Howse was overwhelmingly positive. dissenters criticized cealed huildings as the consequence of focus ing on an idea instead of on che natural nceds of human beings. Some lamented the absence of the mure abundant pline and sculpeute seen in eadty plans. Others have criticized the detailing as beitle and the color ax gaudy aa compared to the nearby Seagram Building by Muex van det Rohe, where there is also more gencrous plara space. Nevertheless, Lever House was desig- nated an official city landmark in (982, Repairs are to be made by Skidmore, Owings and Merrill for the present owners, RER Holding L.L.C, Lever Brother having vacated all but four floors of the building following a corporate merger with Unilever Home and Personal Care U.S.A.  Caror Hersritr Krinsky  See abo Bunshaft, Gordon (United States): Corbusier, Le Geanneret, Charice-Edouard) (France): Mies van der Rohe,  Ludwig (Germany): Rockefeller Center, New York City: Ses- gram Building, New York Citys Skidmore, Owings and Mer- dill (Unised States)  Further Reading  Ramsone. Howard, “Are Our Buildings Livable?” Budding 54 11954)  Danz. Erna, Architecture of Sedmsere. Owns, and Merrill, 1950- 1962, cranstated by Emst van Haagen, New York: Praeger. 1962: Condon Ardiecctural Press, 1963  “Class Walled Skysceaper,” Enpneering News-Record 147 UI May 1952)  Krinsky, Carol Herselle. Gordon Bunuseft of Skidmore, Owings, and Mort, New Youk: Archacaural History Foundaven, aad Cambridge. Massachinetes: MIP Prow, 1984  Mumford, Lewis. “The Sky Line.” fie New Yorker 26 (9 August 1952  Now York (NY) Landmarks Preservation Comumrenon, fever Heme, 390 Park Avenue, Borough of Munhatsin, New Yor. New Yurk Landmarks Mreservanon Commusion, 1982  LEVI, RINO 1901-65 Architect, Prazil  Rino Levi was ane of the pinncers of modern archiecrure in Brazil. His career spanned more than 40 years. amd has made a definative contribution to the diftusion of modemiss ideas within the country.  Avon of ltalian parents, Levi wax barn in 1901 in Séo Pasto, where he studied at the Colégio Dan Alighsen betore traveling ta Italy to continue bis snidies. While in Tealy, he studicd at the Polytechnic Schoul of Milan before moving to the superior School of Architecture in Rome. This was the first unified school of architecture in Italy. founded with the objective to unite the academi teaching uadition with a rigoroux rechnical-scientific framework. Levi studied under Marcello Piacentini and gradu- ated in 1926. Thar same year, he returned to Séo Panto, and he remained there for the rest of his fe, contributing so the archivecrural configurauon of that metropolis.  bn the years following 1926, he, along with Russian emigrant Gregori Warchavchik, was one of the defenders of the re- newal of formal and technical architecrure in Brazil. However, Levi differed from Warchavchik and did not devote himnaelf ro the diffusion of ideals chrough manifcatos but voncerned himself’ with building a solid professinnal carver. The influence of the Veahian architectural culture is nutable in Levi's works, and al- though his ideas refute the imitation of clasicium, he did not deny it as a source of inspiranon. Another important inheritance from che Itahan tradition was hix conception of architecrure as volume: it is identified as “weight,” which combines with the characteristic “lightness” of Brazilian architecture.  Breaking with the local rradition, Levi was the first architect in S30 Paulo to devote himself exclusively to the architectural project, separaring it from the consrruction process. Throughour his career, he encouraged the recognition of architecture as a profession. This goal is best represented in the technical elabora- tion of his projects, and the manner in which he always re searched new materials and different construction techniques. He did nos uttempe to dissociate himself however, from formal  questions, and snasted on constant caperimentaden with many forms, materials, and construction systems. He searched for the most appropriaic combinauany for cah project. and never lapsed into formulaic patterns.  In 1932, Levi designed one of the first skyscrapers in Sao Paulo—the 10-story Columbus Building (Fditicw Columbus) which nox only provided structural challenges bur alo bed to careful consideration regarding plinning. and comfortable 34- commodations for the residents. fn referencing Italian rational iam. the buikding can be viewed 0 formally rbed, with flae walls, curved counters, and discrete amamental details. In this Project, we see wime of the traits that would mack many of Levi's skyscrapers; these buildings break with the sale uf the city, but at the same time they value the urban strectscape. with careful treatment of cormen. ground floors, and entrance halls. Among Levi's numerous buildings, the office of the Institute of Brazilian Architects (1947), the Prudéncia ¢ Capnalzazao Building (1947), the Trussardi Building (1947), and the Plavinil-tctor Ruilding (1961) were all situated in Sao Paulo, In these projets. Levi emphasized concerns relating i the climate, whenever pos- sible, avoiding large expanses of glass. which he saw as inadequare foe a tropical imate. Instead, he frequently rerurmed to che use of bakconies and brises-suleil,  This attention to deuil abo marks his residential projects and his careful trearmens of natural lighting. The residemes were  Facade of Institute Sapicotise headquarters (19421, S40 Paulo, Brazil © GE. Kidder Smith CORBIS  wually organized around internal patios and were chatactenzed by there introspective nature: in a sense they denied the eustence of the cry, Uhe architcet untegrated intcriog enviranment, articu- lating living space with gardens. His interest in tropical vegeta- bon brought about his long cellaboration with Brazihan land- scape architect. Roberto Burle Mar. Among his residential Projects, the architect's own cesidence (1944), the Milton Gruper residence (1951). and the house of Clemente Gomes (1963 -64) copresent hiv best dameuis architecture.  Levi was commissional to design several movie theaters be: tween 1936 and 1941 and turned his attention to acoustics. Some of his most ootable cinema proyects include the An-Palaio (1936), the Canema Universe (1939), and the Cine Ipiranga (1941), which otfes perfect audio and visual environments.  Uhe same care and technical concern assisted Levi in beoom- ing a specialist on complex architeytural typulogics, such as hospi- tals and factones. In these proyects. he developed derailed flow and sectorization studies. This can clearly be seen in his project for the Maternity Budding (1945) of the University of Sao Paulo, which he developed following detaited calishoration with ateam of hospital dactors. ‘Vhis building marks a teries of similar cemmasions, indading the Cancer Hospatal (Hospital do Can- cer) (1947) and the Hospital Albert Einstein (1958). Flin hospital architecture culminated in reviews in several international publi- uations, and led ty an invitation by the Venezuclan government 10 organize the country’s system of hospital buildings (1959- G0). Among his industrial projects, it is fitting w mention the offices and ruasting bouses of Café Jardim (1943} and the Labor- aténn Paulitca de Biologia (pharmaceurical industry. 1956-59). in which he adopted 2 Pagineated solution with isulated build- ig tor each function.  In his response to Nralian deagn, Levi always considered archi- tecture withun the consext of che caty. For example. his project for Brasilta (2957) won third place in the competition, I fis design explored the theme af a city with many centers and propoved reridential econ as mega structures (300 in high, 400 m wide. and 18 m decp) chat incarporated a sophisticared system of vertical Groularion intended to provide for three wrect levels His final project was the Civic Center for che city of Samo André, and scsembied the Brasilia project in ins arrangement of the execurive, legislative, and judiciary buildings.  Lew: actively partiupated in the Institute of Beaalien Arcls tects and served as present for two consecutive admunistrations (1992-53, and 1953-54).  Levi ched in 1965 during an exploratory urip wo the interior of Bahu. His profesional lite induded nore than 230 completed prokets, Hes office conunucs today under the control of his parmers,  Leonarpo B. Cavin  See sho Brasilia, Brazil; Brazil; Séo Paulo, Brazil  Biography  Born in So Paulv. Brazil, 31 December 1901. Actended the Academy of tine Art, Milan 1921-22; studied at the School of Architecture, Rame: degree in architectute 1926, Laabhed attice in Sao Paulo 1927; parnership with Roberta Cerqueira Cesar 1941; partnership with Linz Roberto Caravalho France  
1951, Taught ac che University of Sao Paulo 1954-59; taught at the University of Caracas 1959, Founder and president, Ineti- tute of Architects of Brazil, member, Cangrés Internationaux d'Architecture Moderne (CIAM}. Died in Sao Paulo, 29 Sep- tember 1905.  Selected Works (All buildings in So Paulo  Cohumbus Building, 192  Art Pata, 1996  Cinema Universo, 1939  Cine Ipiranga, 1941  Invritute Sapientiae Headquarter, (142  Offices and Manufactunng Plana, Café Jardien, 1943 Rina Levi Hine. 1944  Maernity Hoepical (unexecuted), Univenity of Sie Paulo, 1945 Instivuee of Brasilun Archiece Office, 1M7 Prudéncis © Capitalizayao Buikling, 1947  Trussard: Building. 1947  Central Cancer Hoqytal. 1947  Mikon Gruper House, 1951  Alhscst Einstein General Hospiral, 1958  Laboratécio Paulista de Biokogia, 1954 Plavind-Eiclor Budding. 1961  Clemente Goines House, 1904  Selected Publications  “A anquiterura ¢ 2 evtitica das Gade” O rade de Sdo Pale 15 Nowember 1925): ales published in Arguetenere moderna Rrmileira: drpoimeniee de wma geraqae. compiled ty Albers Xavier. 1987  *O que hi na aequsterura.” in Revisss anual do ceveeird sale the maio. 1939  Obras 1928-1940, 1940  “Sinuagao da arte ¢ de ansista ao mundo,” Caligio 4 (1948)  ke borpran (with Jarbas Karmen and Amador Cunha do Prado), 1954  “fussiticagao arquitetnica,” Kevoiat prejete 11 (19R8}  Further Reading  Many of Levi's works elicited coverage un itnporant architectural jour-  nals auch as Architecture! Forws. The Architectural Record. Progreuree  Arcbitertusr, [architecture danjsurd teat, Dore, Zodiar, Architrmums,  Architectural Review, Architecraral Derign, sod Doe Kunst. Foo a detailed inventory af hiv projects. wee Levi.  Andlli, Renuwo, “Atqunenura ¢ unlade oa bea de Riny Lev.” Eipuco and Debate 0 (1997)  Mruand. Veos, Llanfuscrure contemporaine am Herwl, Vares: Universe de Ware 1, 1971  Corona, Eduardo, Carlos Lomas, and Alberta Xavier, Anysctenune owderne pastistana, Sto Waulo: talnues Pini, 1983  Debenedetti. Emma, and Ansts Salmoai, Arhusetiure faliana ot Sin Paolo, Siev Paula: Inaivwto Cultural tulo-Reasdena, 1954  Goodwin, Philip, Brazil Builds: Archisecrure New and Old. 1652 142, Now York: Muscurs of Mudein Att, 194%: 4th edition, 1946  Lev, Rina, Rine fern, Milan: Edizians di Comumed, 1974  Mindlin, Hearigue, Luarchenrvtune madeene aw Brinl, Rio de Janes Coben, 1956, as Modern Anshitecrure in Brutal, Rios de Janciee: Cobbs, New York: Reinhold, and London Architectural Press. 3950  Santon. Paulo, Quatre secudae de arquitrtwrs. Rio de Janae LAB, y9Rl  Segawa, Hugo, Arpaitrtunas ne Brasil, 1900-1990, Sio Paulo: tulitora da Universidade de Séo Paulo, 1998; 2nd edition, 1999  LEVITTOWN  New York (1947), Pennsylvania (1951). and New Jersey (1958)  The architecture and planning of the 2Oth-cencury American suburb invanably retums co the model communities known as Levittown. In 1947 the first Levinown began to emerge from the potato fields of Hicksville, Long Island. The Island Trees development provided same [7,000 for 60,000 residents and included nine swimming pools. numerous “village greens.” seven hopping centers, five public schools, # professional-sise haschall field, and a town hall. Levitt and Sons moved of tw build Levittown, Menewytvania (1951), and Levicrown (now Willingboro), New Jersey (1958), The firm was compared of father Abraham Levitt and soma William and AMfred. ADS told, the company built some 140,000 houses, mainly in the eastern United States.  Levittown, Long Island, began a trend toward muus-produced suburban developments. In his authoritative history of suburben develupment, Crabgnass Frontier. Kenneth Jackson (1985) argues thae “Levittown was the largest housing development ever put up by a single buikler, and it served the American dream-house market at chose tu the lowest prices the industry could attain.” The developments were buils rapidly: ar peak production, Levitt and Sens was able 10 complete 36 houses per day.  The Levittowns were made possible by 4 constellation of fac- tars, There incladed the post-World War Il housing crisis, cost reducing inpovations in maxs production and building material, dhe increasing impact of the automobile and ita attendant legials- tion, a hase of new federal legisktion designed to resuscitate the housing industry, and a pradual increase in postwar affluence as more Americans joined che middle class. The Levirtowns drew somewhat on the planing innovations of E9th-cenusry develop- ments, such as Gi , Obio (185t, designer Robert C. Phil- lips), Riversade, Ilinors (1868, designer FL. Olmsted), and Radburn, New Jersey (1928, designers Clarence Stein and Henry Wright). Radburn, New Jercey, for example. pioneered the con- cepe of the “superblock” and grouped homes in villages with internal parks. In addition. Ebenezer Howard's cuy movement and itt preference for open green spaces wan a likely influence on Alfred Levitt's later community plans. These carly tubusban developments, which Spiro Kostof classifies as “planned picturesque,” created the appearance of houses in a park (1991).  Unitke most other postwar developers, the Levitu planned their communities with many parks and recremional amenizics. Although Levict and Sons frequently used the term “planned” t0 hearken back to cartier. more lush and upper-class communities, characteristics of the late 19th-ceomury planned communities, such as curvilinear roadways, staggered house setbacks, land- scaped plors, and dubhouses, were only weakly imitated (or aliens) in Levisrown.  Levittown planning improved over time, Construction in Levintown, Long Island, far example, was initially so rapid that streets were often bald out “as needed.” In the Pennsylvania and  Levittown hone, Mrs, Dorothy Aiskelly residence at 44 Sparrow Lane, Levittown, NY © Gorscho-Schlesisaer Collection (Library af Congress, Unmed States)  New Jeney developmenn, community and street planning was much more cot ive and informed. Levitt and Sons had originally planned to build a mode} community called “Landis” in Jericho, ong tsland. With the building moratocsum that accompanied the Korean War, the propect was permanently pus- poned. However, the planning concepts that Alffed Levicr devel- oped for Landia came to inform the firm's furare developments in Pennsylvania and New Jersey. Vhe tandia plan divided the community into residential neighborhoods, separated the indus- arial area from the rest af che community with 2 “wooded shelter belt,” usilized one through street in che inserior of the commu- ity along with circumferential drives surrounding each neigh: borhood. provided parks as a separatian device between neigh: borhoods by locating them at the ends of mayor sercets, and inchided sites for public whools within walking distance of every home (Levitt, 1951).  Following the Landis planning concept, Levitown, Pennsyl- vania. provided (or four high schools and 21 peumary and muddie schools spaced throughout the community. Recreational areas in the community were placed in locagons roughly central to the “neighborhoods,” or subsections, of which they were a part. Levittown, Pennsylvania, incorporated parklike “buffer zones” berween neighborhoods in the development to enhance the rural  feel of the community and provide additional recreation space. The addinon of these natural elements heightened the perceived similarities between Levittown and more upacile housing devel- opments and country suburbs. Community landscaping, orches- trated by Abraham Levit, was a significant Gctor in the desi of the Levictowns. Furthermore, cach house was surrounded by an ample wn complete with four truit wees. Leviwown, New Jersey. alsu followed the planning concepss evident in the Penn- syWvania development: ute master block, residential neighbor- hoods, park buffer zones, and the provision of school sites, “The lor size available in the Levirrawn devclopments was 9 source of pride for Levitt and Sons. In Levittown, Long (sland, houses were buili in the center of 60 by 100-fout lors wich uniform setbacks from the street. In later developments, such as Pennsylvania and New Jersey, lot sizes varied hecawwe of the adoption of a curvilinear surcet pattern but were still roughly 70 by 100 fcet in size. Because peoperty-line fencing was prohibited in Leviccown, the generous lots served to provide a scnse of privacy for residents and made expansion of the house possible. Levittown, Long Island, was frequendy cnriazed for the mo- netony of its home designs and sireets. Over time, however, Levirt and Sons offered more exterior variety in its home designs and used circumferential drives to make navigating the develop- 
ment casier, Although Levittown, Long Iskind, initially provided nearly identical Cape Cod. cotsages, the 1949 and 1950 ranch houses were built with several exterior elevations involving small variations in the roofline. Different eaterion color combinations abo contributed to the pencption of varirty, even though the homes were idenucal inside. In Levittown, Pennsylvania, despite the fact thas houses within neighborhoods were uf the same type, the precise external color and shape of a home varied on that “2 hwuse of the same shape and color occurs only once in every rwenty-cight houses” (Papenoc, 1977).  Another Levittown planning innovation was the integsation of different house types on each street. Previous developments typically grouped home types by neighbarhood of survet, This combination of housing types was the primary innovation of Levittown, New Jerscy. Alchough pos—Werld War II suburbs have been ridiculed fre decades, recent scholarship by Barbara Kelly and others suggests char such suburbs provided 2 strong sense of community and civic awareness.  Centita Duguerie Saute  See aise Suburban Planning Further Reading  The most compecbemive discussion of Levittown is provided by Kelly:  this work alse itwludes a detailed bibliography af pramary and eccondary  nourcer Gans provides a sociologpcal account of Levittown. New Jerery.  A thorough discuming of the Landia planning concepe 2 provided in  Levier.  Gans, Herbert J. Tbe Levitsownens, New York: Pantheon, 196!  Jackson, Keaneth U.. Cradgran Frontece: the Suburbenscatson of she Unused States, New York: Oxtord University Dress, 1985  Kelly, Harbara M., Expanding she Amencan Dretm. Buslding and Rebasideng Leteown, Albany: Star Univernty af New York Press, 1995  Kusiof, Spite, The Cary Saapeds Cirkan Marterta and Meanrags sheosgh Hamer, Bowon Lith Beown, and Lundort, Thaines and Hudson, 1991  Leviet, Alfeed, "A Communigy Huikdve Laake at Caomunity Planning.” fowrnal of the Ameritan fustituar of Planners, 17 (apeang 1953)  Popenor, David. Tiw Suburban Friireament: Sweden and the Uaited Stasn, Chicago Univeruty of Chicago Press, 14977  LEWERENTZ, SIGURD 1885-1975 Architect, Sweden  The work of Sigued Lewerene encompasses two of the strongest architectural cucreno of the 2th cennury; the fies is classic in its Nordic version, and the second ia moderniam. It ix anly recendy that Lewerenez has been recognized intemationally, and it is only in the Final ewo decades of che 20th cearury that scholars i respons other than Germany and the Scandinavian countries have paid attention to Lewerentz’s prolific work, which is located solely en Sweden.  Lewereni's sensiuvity co materials is a feature that charactet- ized his lifcong work; & undoubtedly was first developed in Sanda, his nauve cown located in the Vaoternerriands region of central Sweden. Lewerenez learned the craft of forging at his father's glass factory during the summers of 1905 and 1906. He also, during this time, studied at the Chalmers Technical Insti-  tute in Goreboeg, from which he graduared in 1908. While at Chalmers, Lewerentz became very interested int the ideas of the emerging Deutscher Werkbund in Germany. Between 1908- 09, he was an apprentice in Munich under Richard Riemerich- mid and Theodor Fischer. who were members of the famous  Mp.  ie F910 Lewerente seturned to Sweden and entered the School of Architecture of the Royal Academy of Arta in Stock- holm. After one year of lassical ruining, Lewercntz's disagree- ment with the established classical precepts taught at that institu tion became evident. He and some of his classmates abandoned the academy and founded the Klara School. There, Lewerentz had che opportunity to explore some of the intereses that had been elicited by the Deutscher Werkbund, as well as co share tn the ideas from the Kiara School movement, which induded such figures as Ragnar Ostberg, Carl Bergsten, and Ivar J. Teng- bom. Among the princpal cuncerns of these architects was the search for tegionaliem and authenticity through the use of indig- chous marenals and forms, One of Lewerentz's dassmates and contemporancs was En Gunnar Asplund (1885-1940), who would beuume the best-known figure in the development of modern Swedish architecture and phyed an important role in Lewerentr's carees. .  In 19145 Lewerentz formed an architevtural partnerthip with Torsten Stubelins. This lasted only nwo years but produced a significant number of designs, ranging frum industrial objects — such as lighting fixeures and gla productx—en churches, hous- ing, and Landbcape interventions, Lewcreniz’s incerests and fasci- nation with industrial design resonated chroughour his entire professional cascet, In the 1920s he developed the IDESTA win- duw sytem with engncer Clies Keeuger, and directed its manu- facture during the following rwa decades, at his own factory in Edubtuna  During this snitial penod with Srubclius an imparrant aspect of Lewerentz’s practice took shape specifically, lus use uf draw- ings to invesugate and reveal the possibilities of site, archirecrure, and nbject. ‘Thus, drawings became the tool he used to igoroudy scruunize all of the scales of a project. ranging from the topagra- phy to the minuresr derails,  (mn 1915 Lewerents. in association with his contemporary Gunnar Asplund, won a campetitian for the Woodland Ceme- tery in Enskede. Stockholm. This joint venture produced one of the moat uignificant monumental sacted landscapes of the 20ch century and became a locus of intervention by both archi- teuts for the nest 20 yearn, Here, Lewerent built his fansous Nexxtawical Resurrection Chapel (1926), and he remained re- sponaible for the Lindscape design of rhe complex until 1935, when the Cemetery Authority excluded him from the design of the Chapel of the Holy Cross, and ewe additional minor chapels chat were executed by Asplund alone. This unfortunate incident affected Lewerents deeply. and he never ecconciled with either his former friend and partner Asplund, or with the Cemetery Authonty.  Dunng the decade of the 1910s a a result of overcrowded cemeteries, iraditional burtal practices in Sweden were often ig- nored in favor of cremation. Lewerencz and his parmer were responsible for the design of several new cemeteries, cremato- riums, and churches. Among these. the Eastern Cemetery 11920-69) in Malmé became his main focus uneil his death. ‘This cemetery includes neoclassical buildings executed priot to Lewerentz’s ewitch ta modernist vocabulary in the carly 1930s.  Despite the fact thas the furnishings, architecure, and landwape of Malmo's Eastern Cemetery were designed over a span of half acentury, they still speak in umsen,  During the 1930s. Lewerenrz explored rationalist and func: Gonalist ideas in a variety of projects. They included architec: tural, industnal, and graphic designs for the 19.4) Stockholm Exhibition, architectural projects such ax the Malma Theater (1933-44) with David Helldén and Frik Lallersteds, the Villa Edstrand (£938 -45) in Fabterbo: and large complexes and athan Projects, auch as the one for Lower Norrmalm, Stockhelm (1932). In the catty 1940s, Lewetentz's chapels of Si. Knut and St. Gertrude (1943) became, as crith Colin $1. Jobers Wilbon pointed out, the markings of a definite shift from the meen lassi cal form to the vigoruus and original work that characterized his later output.  Following ths commission, Lewctente withdrew from archi- couture, emerging again only during the Lare 1950s. This final energetic and more mature period corresponds with three of his most important works: the Church of St. Mark (1960) in Bjorkhagen, Stackholm: St. Petri’s Church (19661 in Klippan; and hes final project, the Flower Kiosk (196'N in Malma's Fast em Cemetery.  fr is undoubredty St. Petn’s Chunh thae ix che culmination Lewerersts’s career. and it became an cmblem of his lung yean of practice. The building can be considered 4 repository of ucted and secular memories thar the architect used to emphasize the Lutheran rite and liturgy, and wa achieved by exploring the experiential aspect of architecture. His prumary sturaicgy was the Mullful manipulation of details and forms: conventional matcri- als such as brick, mortar, aud glass ate treated in unorthodox ways, and light and water play an important role in creating an interior atmosphere for processiwn, intruspeition, and ta fon.  The Flower Kiosk in Malmo's Eastern Cemetery. which un formunarely has heen alrered now, is Lewerenr's final statement and deab with che possibility of creating maximum sensory im- pact with minimal repertory of architectural torms and devices. Je was executed with a linited vocabulary of materials: concrete. copper, glass, laminated wood, and ceramika. Neverdhiclen, the Flower Kiosk speaks loquently -as pointed eur by Alison and Peter Smithson —of the brad-mindedness of a man who was one of the silent architects of the 20ch century.  Raccasmas L. Casincr  See abo Aspland, Erik Ganaar (Sweden); Deutscher Werk- buad; Sweden  Biography  Born in Sandd, Bjarurd, Sweden, 29 July £885. Edunated at the School of Building, Chalmen Fechnical College, Gothenburg. Sweden 1905-08; attended the Academy of Arts, Scuckholn 1910; founded and attended the Free School of Architecture. Stockholm under Carl Westman, Ragnar Cscherg, Ivar Teng- bom. and Carl Bergsten 1910-11. Married Edit Engblad 1911: three children. Worked for Bruno Mohring. Bedhn 1%)7—08; employed by Theodor Fischer, Munich 1909: worked tor Ri- chard Riemerschmid. Munich 1910; partnership with Torsten Stubelius, Stockholm 1915-17, Private pracace, Stockholm 1917-43; moved practice to Eskibruna, Sweden 1943-58: moved practiceto Skanor, Sweden 1958-70, private practice,  (und, Sweden from 1970; founder, director, with Claés Kretiger (1928-35), Idesta Metal Window Company, Stockhalm 1928- 40 and Eskilsruna 1940-79, Dred in Land. 29 December 1975,  Selected Works  Wondland Cemetery (fine prac, competition: with Erik Gunnar Asplund), Seackhalen, 1915-38  Eaten Cemetery. Malmo, Sweden. 1920-69  Chapel of the Rewrresting, Wordlund Comescry, Stockholen, 1926  Lower Noeimatm, stockholm, 1932  Villa Edutrand, Fabacrho. Sweden, 1935  Chapeleof St Knut and St. Gectrude, Malma Cemetery, 1943  Murscipal Theater, Matmd (with PD), Helldén and F, Lallerseds), 14  St Mark's Church. Stockholm, 1960  Se Petn Church. Klippan, Sweden. 1966  Hhrwer Kienk, Eastern Cemetery, Male, 1969  Further Reading  For a compechemnive view of Lewerente. ee Dying, (his ten-votume  publi ation includes eways on che architect at well as photographs of  Lewerenra't works with corretponding repmductions of his drawings  Ablin, Janne, Sigurd Leuervasz, arkitehs, Stockholm: Bygefictapet, 1985; ax Sigurd Lewerents, Architect, 1885-1975, Cambndge, Mlawichusctos MET Pros, 1987  Codtington, James, “Sigurd Lewerentz, 1885-1975," The Architectural Reosee 199, no. 940  Dyrnling, Class (abun), Arbiert Sigurd Lewerente, 2 vb, Suickholm: Bypetiislager. 1997  Manilla, Luis Moateno, “Patrahasii’ Veil: Lowerenns Jovrtey oa Tuly.” 949 (1995)  St John Wilton. Colin, ‘Sigurd Lewerents and the Dilemma af che Chassicd." Propecte 24 (1958)  Sapurd Leswerents. 1885-19775: The Dilemma of Clastcam, Londen: Architectural Asenciation Presa. 1989  LIANG SICHENG 1901-72 Architect and architectural historian, China  Liang Sicheng has been considered the founder of the modern study of Chinese architecture, including architectural history. Trained in the United States in the pracace of architecture before such an opuon exbted in China, Liang was involved in dhe establishment of China's first architectural schools. He was the teacher of China's first generation of architects, and the only 20thcentury Chinese of his generation to achieve signifiant recognition outside of China, culminating in his involvement in the planning of che United Nations headquarters, Moreover, he was a central figure in the movement to find and identify premodem Chinese buildings and bring them inte the global study of architecture. Liang saw some of his goals for China's buildings —and for China as defined by her buildings—come ty pass. but others were thwarted by the political chaos that plagued every decade of his life.  Liang Sicheng was born into China's privileged, educated elite, His father, Liang Qichao, was a central figure in China's reform movement. Liang’s decision to become an architect was inspired by his furure wife. Lin Huiyin (Whei-vin: Phyllis {1904-55]}.  In 1927 Liang and Lin met at the University of Pennsytvania while pursuing the same course of studies. She became his chief 
sallaborator, wsually executing the architectural drawings for their projects. Liang, Lin, and at leau 16 other Chinese students, had chosen the Pennaylvania School of Architecture because of the reputation of Paul Cree (1876-1945), Prior ta thei return in 1928 to China, Liang and Lin worked in Cret’s Philadelphia office, and he spent a year at the Harvard School of Design.  Once home. Liang was charged with founding a departnicnt of architecture at Nurtheast University in Shenyang (Mukden), Manchuria. The curriculum wat based on Cret’s Beaux-Arts model.  Liang and three other architects who had also trained as the University of Pennsylvania established a firm that immediately received 2 commission to design a campus for another university in Manchurra. It was during dhis time. that Lang, first carefully looked at historic Chinese buildings, and he became a local advo- cate for the preservanion of premodern archstecture at a time when most of it was being demolished. All ¢his came tu an cad in 1931, when the Japanese rank Manchuria.  That same year, Liang accepted the charge of a Chinese scholar-official in Beijing to form a society for research in Chinese architecnure, ininiating his career as an archicectural his- torian. With war raging on scveral sikes of Beijing, Liang launched field trips inte China's most remate villages, question- ing locals about old structures and soeking buildings whose ames he had found in historical documents. The work war expecially gruciing for Liang, who had never fulty regained use of a fog he had injuted in a motorcycle accident in 1923, No voc has tallied how many buildings were eevovered during this period, hur at leas 10 of the pre-12th-century wooden buildings that he measured, drew, and photographed were lust before che end of the war in 1945. Much of the research of this group was published in seven of the volumes of the Budleton of che Sectety for Restarch in Chinese Architecture. The last volume was wenten by hand, during cheir years in Kunming or Chongqing when the major atics of North China were under occupation of wege. Those artiches are still utilized and form the basis for education in the history of Chinese architecture in China and abroad.  Lang's continuous research and writing under wartime con- ditions did not go unnoticed. During the war Liang was ap- poinred vice chairman of the Chinese Commission lor Preserva tion of Culsural Relics in War Areas. [a 1949 he revurned om Beijing. end was appointed by the Ministry of Fducation to head a new department of architecture at Qinghua University, where he developed a cutticulum in urban design. Shorey there- after, he was invited tn teach at Yale University. One uf his projects was the completion of a histury of Chinese architecture, in English. While he was there (academic year 1946-47), he served as the appointed Chinese member on the Board af Design Consultants for UN Heahguantens. In 1947 some of his drawings and photographs were exhibited at Princeton Univenity, where he received an honorary degree.  ‘The establishment of the People’s Republic uf China brought changes that proved more severe than any Liang had experienced during che war. Initially. he was named vice director uf the Beijing City Planning Commasion bus five-point plan was te- jected, with che exception of the plan to save the Foebadden City from destruction. Lang had to contend with Soviet advisers at every mage. and he continued to conflict with the party leaders and their antihistoncal retotm position, but because of his incer- national reputation he was often sent abrmad, co the USSR, cast. em Europe, Cuba, and South America.  Although Liang Sicheng produced no architecrural mastes- piece, his legacy x a vision thar China would take its rightful place in the contemporary world. The place he envisioned in- cluded buildings and urban designs thar utilized the mont sophis- ticated weehnology bus did not fase the attachment to China's architectural past. A movemene to restore Liang to 2 place of honor in Chinese hutory was begun in the 1980s and peaked in 1986, when, in commemoration of the 85th year following his birth, the fourth volume of his onllocted writings was published. Students and colleagues at Qinghua University issued a set of essays in his honor, and a postage stamp feacuring his picture was sued in 1982,  Naxcy STHNHARDT  Sev ako China  Biography Born in Tokyo, 20 April 1901, Anended the School of Architec- ture, University of Pennsylvania 1924-27; master's degree in architecture 1927. Married architect Lin Huiyin 1928 (died 1955). Collaborated with wife 1928 55. Profersor of archirec- ture, University of Mukden (Shenyang), Manchuria 1927-31; profesor of architecture, Qinghua Litivenity, Beijing, from 1949. Married architect Lin Zhu in 1962. Director, the Society for Research in Chinese Architecture, Beijing, Spent che Last six years of his bfe as target uf antiresctionary, anti attacks at Qinghua University during die Cultural Revolution. Liang’s library of writings subsequently dessroved. Died in 1972. Selected Publications Song Yiegzhue fashi sasha (Uhawings for due Yingshan fast of the Song) (Qumedn yngchee sunt perl: (Building Regulstioas of the Qung Dynastvi, 194  Vingzhve fda wechs, juan shame (Commentaries to the Yingzho tashil. 1980  Farther Reading  Chen, Mingda, “In Memory of Professor Liang Ssu-ch'eng.” Bailding in Chins 4 (1986)  Fauhank, Wilma, {sang and Lon: Parnes in Exploring China's Architecneral Pass, Philadelphia: University of Pennsyteania Press, 194  Lung, Cong fic, “Lung Sicheng: Atchuect wath a Dream,” Cheat Recomernces > (198)  tang, Suu-cheng, Liam Ssch emg wen chy {Collecred Essays af Liang Sicheng), 4 vob, Being: Wenwu Press, [942-86  ~ A Pictorndl Untory of Chinese Arvhatectare, cxbtcd by Wilena Farbank, uanalated by Lian Cong fic, Cambridge. Massa huseto. MIT Pres, 1904  ——. Luang Sau-ch ong hnen sheug san chien pa shih wae chow mien chee sien wen ch, 1901~ 1986 (Collected Exays om the Occannn of the Exghty-Fifth Rurddlay uf Lung Sacheng), Besjing: Quaghua Unavesury Prew. 1986  Lin, Zhu, “Wo yu Liang Sicheng (Liang Sucheng and 1). Reams Kibse (30-artice seein, Mb Ocraher 1990-98 December 1990)  Lun, Zhewen, “Huanian 1 iang Sicheng Xuantheng (In Memory of Liang Sheng)” part 1, Wentew ciendi 4 (1991); part 2, Wenwe ands 5 (1991)  Wang. Zhuo, “Liang Sheng nianpu dawang (Bs cad Profile of Liang Secheng),” in He Chenci fiasshow pata siara lenwen Ji (Pesachrifi for the 70¢ch Birthday of Profewor He Chenci), Tasshang: Tunghsi University, 1990  LIBERA, ADALBERTO 1903-63 Architect, Italy  Adalberw Libera is eprescatative of a whole generation of young lalian architec, arti. and urban designers whose pantisipa- Gon in the building culture of the 20ch century was signiticantly marked by the tumultuous sociopolitical events of the first hall of the century. tis buildings. painrings, exhibit designs, poaer designs, competition entries, and polemical writings arrest to the macerial and philosophical challenges posed by ewo wodd wart and numerous years of reconstruction. In addition, like many of his Italian colleagues, Libera’s actions as an architect were directly contingent on his actions as 4 political being.  During the interwar years (1927.42), Libera sought the sup port of the halian Fascist state. He parucipated in wate sponwored design competitions, built a number of xonic exhibi- tien pavilions, and promoted a language of architectural figuration highly effective in the dissemination of fascist rhetoric As cadesigner of the principal facade for rhe Tenth Anniversary Exhibition of the Fascist Revolution (Rome, 1932), the Italian Pavilions foe both Chicago's Warld Fair (Chicago, 1933), Brus sels’ International Exposition (Relgiuay, 1955), and the Recep: tian and Congress Hall foe the E42 Universal Exposition (Rome, 1942), Libera’s designs were insrumenul ui creating an exportable image of Italian military power.  Nevertheless. in the years tollowing the war. Libera paruci- pated in extensive rebuilding efforts aimed ar ameliorating the lives of those most devastated by the fighting. He administered the planning effons of INA Casa (1947-54), a postwar agency that oversaw the implementation of building standards for the construction of worker housing unin. In thiv capacity, Libera developed technical specifications foe alll aspects of a building's performance including key ergonomic meawees for kitchen, bathroom, and work desk layouts. Via Galikei (Trento, 1949) was built precisely in this manner, adopting the phytical mea- sures that Libera had metoculously studied and coditied an his manuscripr Lt tecnica funzsonale dell abstacione (1943-46).  However, Libera’s legacy in the annab of 20th-cencury archi- cocture is, most notably, the result of his unequivocal commit ment co the development of an Italian language of Mudern archi tecture. Throughout his catecr, Libera advocated the cadnal transformation of Italian building practices. In 1927, while still a studene at the Schoel uf Architecture in Rome, he joined the ranks of Gruppo 7 and helped champion the tenets of Sealian Rationalism. With Milanese collaborators Giuseppe ‘Terragni, Gino Pollini, and Luigi Figini, Libera promoted the emergence of an entirely new culture of architectural making. Aware of transformatians in the material, social, and programmatic condi- tions of daily life chroughout Western Europe, Libera called for the development of a coneemporary language of architectural figuration expressive of such tranwuemations. The appearance of new buikling technologics such as ranforced concrete, steel. and glass necessitated a parallel tnvention in the nature of archi. tectural forms. As such, the Ratiunalist credo was centered on the absolute rejection of ail forms of Neoclassicism, including those of the Novecente Movement: a post-World War | move- ment that promoted a renewal of Italian architecture via the stylized representation of select architectural motifs.  Within months of joining Gruppo ?, Libera traveled to Ger- many, where he was introduced co Europe's most innovative building practues. He visited the Wesssenhotscidlung Exhsbi- tion in Statrgary, seeing firsthand projects built by [adwig Mies van de Robe, Walter Gropius, and Le Corbusier. On his recurn to Rome, in 1928 Libera co-organized with Gaetano Minus the First Exhibition of Ravonalise Anhitecure, which show- cased propects hy burgconing modernists such as Alberto Sartoris and Mate Truce; the btecr having completed in 1925 the hughly popular Fist Factory in Turin. Libera’s own conuibuuon included two designs for low-income housung devised using the Rasionalist principtes of standardization and mas production.  By 1930, Libera had become a founding member of Mevi- mento haliano per (Anbitetrurs Razionale (MIAR), a national Organizanion secking to promote Iratian Rasionalism. It's first and most audacious event was the launching of the Seound Exhi- bition of Rationalist Architecture. Held in Rome in 1932, che exhibition's organizers openly sought, in their struggle far mod- emism on Italian wal, the aupport of the bascixt leader Benito Mussolins. To this end, chey mounted a senes of polemical cx- hibits chac challenged and ridiculed cxamples of architecture they decmed retrograde. Aluhough the exhibit’s argumentative seance evcotually rquited in the demise of MIAR, the course had beca sct for a scrics af collaborative ventuies between Rationalists and Fascists Libera designed and bust sume of che must emblematic buildings of dus collaboration.  Poa Office and Melecommunicarions Building (1934), Rome, dengned by Adalberte Libera © Andeea JemolofCORBES 
The Fira such peopect was the resurfacing of the |th-sentury neocdasscal Exhibition Building on Via Narionale destined to house the Tenth Anniversary Fahibidion of the Fascist Revolu- tion (Rome, 1932). Libera, along with Mariu De Renzs, em-  Joyed Large-scale cohimnar steel fasces to inaugurate a figural  nguage of mays rhetoral appeal. Framing the building's teumphal arch entry. these oversized and stylized emblems of imperial power convincingly portrayed the emerging influence of Tealtan Fascism. In a similar manner, the success of Libera’s design fac the Exhibition’s Sanctuary of the Maryn, the final tom in the ritual procession through the budding’s your, was once again asured by his use of over-scaked geometries and iconic figures.  Libera’s mastery in the design of exhibitions was repeated in 1937 with his project for the National Exhibition of Summer Campa and Youth Programs. Sponsored by the Fascist Party and built un the grounds of the ancient Circus Maaimus. Libera, Rena. and the painter Giovanm Guernini ushered in a Language of horizontal extension and expansive parterres. Albeit a tempu- rary suructure. the simplicity of its construction and the singular power of its porticoed pavilions made of this project an easily imitated symbol of balan Modernism.  ta 1933, Libera built the first of bis winning competition enmics: the Aventine Past Office and ‘Vetecormunications Building (Rome), The charity of its commitment to Raponalism was clearly evident in che building's C-shaped plan and in its cubic volumetric proportions, A year Later, in 1934, such alle, giance to elemental and primary forms was again in evidence with Lihera's cumpletion of che Elementary School in Piazza Raffaello Sancis, Tren, and the four aparunieyt buildings fur the Tirrena Corporation in Ostia, Rome, Libera’s reputation ewetinued te grow as 4 result of his wumpetition entries for the Palazzo del Litwosia of L934 and tot its second sage enry of 1937. Also, lke many architects of che period, Libera partici-  in dhe design of oew urban centers; the most notable of which being his 1936 Master Plan tor Aprilia,  However, on the eve of World War II, his career was facused on the completion of hus most publicized commission w date: the design and constuction of the Reception and Congress Hall for the Universal Exposition, £'42. Uhix movt grandiose of build- ing projects initiated by the Fascist reginw aspured to advertise tw the world Italy's moet acclaimed new works of architecture and urban design. Planoed for a site of 400 hectares and seven i i, ched the vonscruction of industrial successes, cultural history, and artistic raches, Libera’s Reception and Cangrem Hall was one such building and, contrary to most, whose fate was never to be builr, Libera’s Congress Plall was constructed,  The project of the interwar years chat continues to gamer the most animated discussion is chat of Casa Malaparte (Capri. 1940). Sired on the exceptional cliffs of Punta Massullo. che house designed for the writer Curzo Malaparte sald clicits admi- ratson for its highly articulated Modernism. The manner in which its principal volume forcefully delineates its profile against the existing landscape maker Casa Malaparte the most lyrical and transcendental af Libera's projects  During the final years of the war and the German occupation of Traly, Libera retumed to Trento to work on his ctgonamis studies for che optimization of residential Irving. It was only with bis involvement in posewar teconstrucnon that Libera returned  to Rome tw design numerous housing projects, including the highly innovative complex at Tuscolano (Rome, 1954), As well, following the war, Libera oversaw the construction of his win- ning entry for the Trentino-Alto Adige Regional Governmental Headquarters for well over a decade (1953-1963), Finally, Li- bera’s most successful and acchaimed postwar project was the construction of the residential village for the Olympic Games held in Rome in 1960. This highly publicized project returned once again both Libera and tralian building to international prominence.  Teaching subwequeal generations of Iralian architec: was of importance tv Libera. and in his final years, from 1954 until his death. he taught both in Florence and in Rome. In March of 1963, at the age of G0, Libera passed away, leaving a much- contested begacy.  Franca Tausino  See she Casa Malaparte, Capel; Feocist Architectures Ter- ragai, Giuseppe (Italy)  Biography  Born 1983 in Trento, Italy; studied at the School of Archicecrure in Rome (1925 - 27); carned his diploma in 1928. Jomed Gruppo Tin 1927 whereby he championed Italian Racionaliem. fmunding member, MIAR group (Mavimento lealiane per UArchittetura Razionaleh, 1930. Varucipated in designs for the Tenth Anniver. sary Eahibiuon of the Faxisx Revelation (Rome, 1932); admin- istered sebuilding projects for INA Casa post-World War If (1947-$4). Vaught in Horence and Rome, 1954-63. Died in Rome, 1963.  Selected Works  Italian Pavilion. Chicago World's Fane, 1953  takin Position, Brooch Intemational Exposition. (9455  Receprson and Congress Hall. Universal kapeition, Rome, 1942  Arcntina Fist Ofice and Telecomimunications Building, Rome, wit  Casa Malaparte. Capri, 1940  Further Reading  Cauas. Garp, “Lo Sole Libera; The Styte of Libera," Caxabella 53. no. 455 (1489)  Woordan. Dennis F., Budding Modera italy: lalian Archisecture, 1914-1956, Now York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1988  tain, Rechand, “lulian Nanonalam,” Pmgesiee Archiscrare 64. 00, (1983)  Garofalo, Hancesin, seul Luca Veresana lednom), Adalberte Libere, Bolugne: Zanichellt, 1989; an Adatberte Libera, New York: Princeron Anhutecrural Press, 1992  Ghitardo, Dane Yvonne, “Tahun Architects and Fascist Politics: An Fvalusoun of the Ranonalac’s Rale i Regame Building.” fanrnal of the Socsety of Arcinsectural Histonans 39, m0. 2 (1980)  Maruni, Riccardo, “The Plinsung of the £42: The First Phase.” Lotus Tasernational 67 (1990)  Quibes, View, “Adalhero Liber: Roman Rationahaen between Wan,” Latte International (6 (1977)  Talamona, Manda, Casa Maleparte, Milan: CLUP. 1990; a3 Cae AMalaparte, New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1992  LIBESKIND, DANIEL 1946- Architect, United States  Daniel Libeskind gained recognition as one of the world's fore- most deconstrucnivist architevts through his participanion in the New York Muscum of Modern Art's “Deconstructivist Architec- ture” exhibition (1988), which included like-minded archects Peter Fixcnman. Rem Koolhaas, Frank O, Gehry, and Coop Himmetb(au. In 1989 Libeskind won an international compe: tation for the Jewish Museum extension to the Berlin History Museum (1999), This project was his fire major comnusian and proved to be pivotal for his subsequent architectural career,  Libeskind first antracted attention with his architectural draw ings titled Mocromegus that were devoid of perspective, context, and narrative. They were produced in 1979 and exhibued in Hedbinki (1980). London (1980), aml Zurich (1981), One of his most prestigious carly awards was the list prize in the Leone di Pietra at the Venice Biennale (1985) for lus “Uhre Lewons in Architecture” of the “three machines” tor reading, writing, and memory.  Libeskind’s proposal for the Jewish Museum ectension in Berlin (1989) achieved international acclaim and criticism for igs unique and unconventional forms and intention, The build- ing is designed in the form of rwo bats of spaces, one called the void (the space of boss and disentranchiscment), which is built in a wtraight line, and the other the space of the observer (the space of the collections and the test uf the museum’s functions), which is a braken, folded bar that crosses and recruases the voxd. The angles and lines chat generate the form of dhe muscun inBec and refer to places in the city af Berlin in which the history of ideas emerged. The void suggests the loss of this history, a well as. of the individuals who conrnbuted co it, in che Holocaust. These externat references are coupled with the stark and chiustro phobic character of the buikling that cvokes the anxiery and angst awociated with the Joss uf human tife and intellecrual his- tory in the Holocaust. The project, therefore, is a profoundly exogetical work that csokcs both emotional and imaginary inter: su in a complex mapping of the natuce of human caistenee today generally and of Berlin and Jewih history specifically.  Libeskind's wrinngs on archiecture and architectural theary have been rransiated into most major languages. He has criticized what he sces as a problem in modern human culture and the architecture that it produces. constantly challenging the architex- tural community to create a different Sand of architecture. one thar is not determined of valued from a purely uolitarian, eco- somic, and visual puinr ot view. Instead. his work, as he describes it, is meant to evoke experiences and engage che gpirit, His archi- tecture Ges at che nexus of painting, mathematics, and music, This aggregate of incereste tentifics to his avid exploration of these subjects, to a broad educitton in literature, muse, art and plulusophy. Morcoves. Libeskind’s extensive weaching career tes. tifies 10 his interest in alternative architecoure.  His other projects include, among many, 4 master plin and elements of a “City Boundaries” urhan design scheme for Gron- ingen (with Fokko van der Veen, 1988) in the Netherlands: a winning competition entry for the UNY Corporation Pavilion (1990) in Nagoya; an urban design competition tor the Pots. damerplacr area (1991) in Berlin; the dramatic spiral-shaped exteruion to the Victoria and Albert Museum in Landon (begun  in 1996, expected en he completed in 2006); the Bremen Phil- harmonk Hail (1995-98) in Bremen, Germany; and a garden for the Pokderlands (1995) in the Netherlands.  In Seyrember of 2002 the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation. in computation with the city and stare of New York, established an internauonal design competition foe a me- morial for the World ‘Trade Center site that was devastated by terrorist attacks on 11 September 2001. In February 2003, a proyert tuled Memory Foundation: by Labeskind was honored as the winner. Libeskind designed a museum with an enitance at the Ground Zero Memonal Sie that leads viewers down into a quict, meditative space of reflection. “To commemorate those lose fiver, U created two large public places. the Park of Heroes and the Wedge of Light,” Liheskind stated. "Rach year on Sep- tember 1th henween the hours of 8:46 a.m.. when the firse airplane hit and 10:28 a.m., when the wound ewer collapsed, the sun will shine without shadow, in perpetual tribute uw aleru- jam and courage.” A dremutic. gas encased 1,776 foot ull spire wil] ureate 4 powerful new skyline fur Lower Manhatean, while 2 new rail station with a concoune Inking the uains and sub- ways, vall coalesce in a bustling urban space including a perform- ing arts center, office sowers, hotels, streex level shops, and restau- rants that reaffirm life tn the aftermath of tragedy.  Jran La Marcuse  See abo Deconstructivism; Eisenman, Peter (United States): Jewish Muscum, Berliny Gebry, Frank (United States): Kool- has, Rem (Netherlands); Memorial  Biography  Bom in Ladz. Poland, 12 May 1946; immugraced to the United States 1960; naturalized 1965. Studied music in Lodz, Poland, and Israel betuce 1960: attended The Cooper Union foe the Advancement of Science and Art in New York (B.S. atchites- ture, 19701: received a master of arts in history and theory of architecture ac the School of Comparative Studies, University of Essex, Frngland (1972), Married to architect Nina I ibeskind: Ichildecn. Partnership with wife, Reelin, First prize in che Berlin International Rauauutellung (IBA) urban design competition (1987); fist prize in several open and invited competitions since 1993. including the Felix Nussbaum Haus (euscum, 1998) in Osnabruck. Germany. Lecturer. Architectural Association, Loa- don 1975-77; head, department of architecture, Cranbrook Academy of Art, Bloomfield Hills. Michigan 1978-85: various professorships (1985-194) at Harvard University, Cambridge, Masachuscte, University of Naples, Italy, University of Illinois, Chicago, Ohio State Univenity, University of California, Los Angeles, Univenity of London, Danish Acsdemy of Att, Copen- hagen, Yale Universty, New Haven, Connecticut, and Weisensee Academy, Berlin, Founder, director, Architecture Ine termundium. Milan 1986-89: Senor Scholar, J. Paul Getty Foundation 1986-89. Elevted to the German Akaderme de Kunste and the Gierman Society ol Atchetects, 1994: received the American Academy of Ans and Letters Award for Architecture, 1996. His practice, Studio Daniel Libedand. operates in Bertin and California.  
berlin Nuwdbaurs [Laue (1998). Osnabriick, Germany © Bauer Beret, Berlin  Selected Works  Mauer Phan, Gromungen. Netherlanch (with Fukko van der Veen). 19RR  UNY Corporation Pavition (finvt prize, competition), Nagoya. 1950  Garden, Pubdedlands, Netherlands, 109%  Bremen Philharmonic, Germany, 1998  Felix Nusahaurn Haus (Gert prize. 199% compcetion), Osnabruck, Germany, 1908  lewidh Museurn (fit prize. 1989 compertion), Berlin Historical Muscum. 1999  Imperal War Museum, Manchrater, Fngland. 2002  Danish Jewish Muneum, Copenhagen, Denmark, 1996-2003  Jewsh Museurn of San Francisco. California, 1998 - 2008 (proyected completion date)  Vicon and Albert Museum (spiral addition), London, 1996-2006 (proqected unenpictinn date)  Selecsed Publications  Betwern Zero and Infinity: Selected Projects in Architecture, 1981  Chamber Works An hrectucal Medecations on Thema from Heractewn. 1984  Theasrusn Mundi: Uheusegh the Green Menchrenes of Space, VOBS Dame! Libeikind  Counterngn, 1992  Further Reading  For an avemew of Labeskind’s philosophy, se Libewand and also Jar. rombel, An abbreviated carticuhimn vitae is published in Papadakis addinonal biographical skevche can be found im Hoxige and sev and Langmead  Beuky. Aaron, Vielesed Prrfivtion: Archutecture and the }ragmentasion of the Modern, New York: Rirzuh, 1990  Hodge, Dansel HL. Dame? Lidesbrad An fatroductoon and Hibbography, Momicelto, Wingis: Vance Bibbographues, 1990  Jartombeh, Mack, “Ready-Made Traces im the Sam,” Ascablage, 19 iDeceenher 1992)  Johnava, Donald Leslie, and Donald Langmead, Makyr of 20eh Crmsnry Modern Arvhitecrere: A Bis Cinntal Sourcebook (biblogtaphy), Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press, 1997  Iuhason, Philip, aml Mask Wigley (ednun), Derosseructtonr cArchitecture, New York: Muscum of Modern Ast, and Bosoa: Vette Brown, 1985  Libeskand. Danse), Exiznaion 0 the Bertin Musnse with few Moaesm Deparrment, ecdued by Keintin Feiteias, Berlin; Erne and Soha, 1992  Papadakis, Andreas (editor), Threry and Expertmerntanon: An Intellectual Fxmraveganes, London: Academy Edition, 1995  Papadakh, Andrcas, Catherine Cooke, and Andrew Benjamin, (editon), Decweurrmcnoe: Omstius Valame, New Yack: Rizo, and London: Academy Editiona, 1989  LIBRARY  The 20th century saw a remarkable transformanon in tibrary ilosophy, away from the traditional understanding of the 1i- WY 23 a treasure house that protected books from untruswor-  thy readers toward a new conception of che library as 4 building  type that encouraged the encounter between readers and books.  Pianeered in the Unined States, chis new philosophy pur particu-  ler is on allowing seader free access to books stored on  ‘open shelves, providing children's reading rooms, and establish.  ing branch and traveling librarics. So radical was the idea of  giving readers ready acess to book collections that many public libraries did so only in conjunction with archirectural mecha- nisms aimed at controlling readers, These included rumnstiles  {which forced readers to file one at a time past the charging desk)  and the radial arrangement of bookshelves (which enhanced the  ability of a single staff member to survey several aisles of book: shelves), Becmixe radial bookshelves were often housed in scmi- circular rooms that wete difficult to expand, theiz use was discon:  Gnued in the United States by about 1910. Britah librarians,  however, continued to support the practice ar beast until 1920,  when several versions of the ar t were published in che  thind edition of James Duff Brown's Manual of Library Economy  (1920),  ‘This new philowophy of service played a rule in cocouraging bibrary philanthropy on an unprecedented scale, as industrialixt Andrew Carnegie (1835-1919), newspaper editor John Pass: ore Edwards (1823-1911), and others financed public library buildings ax a means of encouraging sclf-improvement among the working poor. Carnegic's library building program was par: sicularly notewnrrhy for the aumber of buildings Carnegic fi- nanced directty (1.469 in the United States alone, 2.507 world- wide). for its gengraphic exrene {incliding [ngland, Ireland, Scorland. Canada, New Zealand, Australia, Viji. Mauritius, and dsewhere), for the innovations ir introduced into the planning of small-town and branch libraries. and for the library building boom that it helped fuel even in communities that did nor re- ccive Camegie funds. The number of American pubtic libsraties more than quadrupled between 1896 and 1925, growing from 900 to 3,873.  Foemulated in consultation with progressive bbranans, the Camegic ideal was a one-story building withous full. berghe wate not parutions, an arrangemenc thar enhanced administrative ct ficieacy by giving the libranan seated at a centrally located charg: ing desk an unencumbered view of the bookshelves lining the perimeter walls, Readers were allowed free access tu the shelves. and half the space of the building was deyored tw a children’s reading room. Although Carnegic eecammended a simple eate- Hor expression, many local decision makers adopted <Lassicism in order to incorporate the library imo the coordinated civic landscape advocated by the City Beautifisl movement, The tear ple front and the criumphal arch were favorite wompositional motifs, often used with a dome whose lantern lighted the cincula- tion area and transformed it into a bocus of calightenment. both literally and figuratively. Alchough many of these small public libraries reccived additions in the 1930s (wath the help of W.P.A. funds} and during the postwar period. they continued to shape the public library experience for most Americans throughout the 20th century: according to Amsrican Libraries, at beast 744  Camegic-tinanced buildings in the United States were still used as bbrancs in 1990.  Standardized library equipment marketed nasionally helped pve carly 20th-cenuury library interiors eheir distinctive charac: ter. Established in 1888 by Melvil Dewey (1851-1931), a lead: ing librarian and invention of the Dewey decimal sytem. the Library Bureae offered a full range of library furniture and fit tings that by the eurn of the century tended toward golden oak Windsor chairs and cabineury uf a simplified dassical form, Sacad and Company specialized in the manufacture of self supporting tron book stacks and by 1915 had completed more than 200 book-stack installations, induding those at public li- hearies in Washington, D.C. (1901-03, Ackerman and Ross), Denver, Colorado (1904-10, Albert Randalph Ross}, and Louis- ville, Kentucky (1904-08. Pilcher and Tachau), as well as at Harvard's Widener Library (1912-15, Horace Trumbauer). The company also helped establish indusery standards for shelf width G3 feet) and range spacing (4 feet, 6 inches on centes).  Tn contrast co che innovative forms of smalier libearies is chis Period, central libraries inv larger cities (and several academic libraries) tended to follow patterns set by the great public librar- ies of the 19th century, pariculidy the Bibtioustque See Genemeve (1844-50, Henri Labrouste) in Paris and the Boston Publi, Library (1888-95, McKim. Meal and White}, each of which made reference to the Renaissance padazzo and featured dosed book stacks and a monumental reading mom on an upper Boor, Twentieth-contury examples inchule the public Hbrariex in New York (1897-1911, Carrére and Hastings), St. Louis (1907-12, Cass Gilhert), Philadelphia (1912-27, Horace Trum- bauer), Detroit (1913-21, Cass Gilbere), San Francisco (1914— 17, George W. Ketham). and Indianapolis (1914 17, Paul P. Cree and Zanzinger. Borie and Medary), all of which locared the bouk stacks at che back of the buikling. whee bong, narrow windows brought daylight into the aisles.  In the interwar years, monumental classical exteriors were suill che putm for cenural libraries in Lityer American cities. but these now often cloaked internal arrangemens aimed at bringing reader and books closet together, One approach was to locate the buok stack in che center of the building, surrounding it with teading rooms. Another was to disperse the cullection, placing hooks in closer proximity to reading moms, as was done in Los Angeles (1922-26. Bertram Grosvenor Goodhue}. A third approach was to put the brunt of tbe book collection on a bower level. This approach is associated particularly with New York architect Edward 1. ‘Tilton (1861-1933), who firse introduced it at the Springfield (Masachusetts) Public Library (1907-12) and later used it co provide an open plan for the main Hoot of large urhan libraries; the Somerville (Massachusetts) Public Library (opened 1913) and the Enoch Pratt Free Libeary (I928- 33, Titwn and Githens, consulting anluteats) in Baltimore, Maryland, are noteworthy cxamples. The Enoch Pract building was built during the tenure of libranan Joseph | Wheeler (1864-1970). who embraced an aggressive approach to attract- tng readers co the library and encouraged Tilton to emulate some of the characteristics ot the department store in his library design: a facade set directly an the bot line, a sidewalk-level entrance. and lacge display windews. By midcentury, Wheeler was a prominent library building consultant and coauthor of Tae American Public Library Building (OAV) with Tilton’s former partner, architect Alfred Marton Githens.  
Boston Publsc Library. (888 95, ley Mi Keim, Moab and Wha Phiten conurteay he Bastonsan Society. Old Stare House  In other contexts, architects took advantage of bascment-level book worage to develop varied and dramanc building sections, as Alvar Aalto did at the Vispuri City Library (1927-35) ifn Finland. There. adult readers entered the building one level above the bonk storage anez and dimbed up another level cu the main bending coom. which ut tum acted as a gallery that allowed the librarian’s desk ta ovedook the main reading mom and a smaller reading mezzanine: skylights brought daylighting into all theae reading ateas.  During the 1930s, nclf-supporting multiticred book stacks were reaching their greatest heights; Yale's Sterling Libeasy (de- signed by James Gamble Rogers) rose 10:16 tien when it opened in 1931. At the same time, however, academic ibrarians began to question whether such stacks were the bese mode of buok stocage. Prompted by pedagogical innovauons, such as the ser fas system that involved students on intensive hbrary tse, aca- demic librarians were unhappy with the infleuble character of the book stacks, whose standard ter height (established by Spead and Company at seven feet, six inches) and dim lighting made them unpakatable places for reading. Angus Snead Macdonald (1883-1961), president of Snead and Company. formulated a more flexible syscem of library planaing that employed a nine. by-nine-foot planning module Iwhich allowed librarians to lo- cate standardized hooksheling anywhere in the library) and an  eight-foot ceiling height (which affere a compromise between shebving ctfigency and reader comfort).  Alchough the particular dimensions of the module continued to evalve (by 1955, Macdonald advocated modules as targe as 27 by 27 feet). the modular bibrary became the norm for public and academic librarics in the decades after World War 11. unclud- ing among the first the Fireserne Memorial | ibrary at Princeton University (1944-48. R.B, O'Connor and Walter 11, Kilham Je). As teading space and book storage spare became incegrated on cach floor, the rectangular footprint of these buildings tended tw grow, as did the library's dependence on ait conditioning, fluorescent lighung, and (at ceilings, Although the doctrine of Gexible planning offered caciting possibitiaes in library service, the architectural spaces that it cteated often were monotonous,  Particularly important to these developments was the Co- operative Committee on Library Building Plans, a Joosely de- fined group of architects, academic libranans, and university administrators wha met benecen 1944 and 1952 eo discuss li- brary daign, In addition m Macdonald. the group induded Keyes D. Metcalf (1889-1983) of Harvard University, who be- came an important library consultant in the 1950s and 1960. and whe wrote the bible of modular library planning, Plasning Academic and Research Library Buildings (1965), Discumions of modutar library planning also took place at Library Building  Institutes, spoesored by the Amencan Library Agocuation. from the eid-1940s until 1967.  Un the face of predictions that the computer would make the library obsolete. the fast 20 years of the 20th century caw a renewed inecrest in library architecture, with a parnicular empha- 35 on farge central public libraries that can serve a suable audi- ence by reaching further afield for lihtary user: while aiding in the econamic redevelopment of urban cenicts. Several af these libraries have boen the subject of national of international design competitions, including the Jacnsuy Library (1982-83, Helin and Siitonen Architects) in Finland, The Hague City Library (1986-95, Richard Meier and Partners), the Harold Washington Library Center (1988-9), Hammond Beeby and Babka) in Chi- cago, and the Vancouver Central Publix Library (1992-95, Moshe Safdie and Associates with Downs Archambault and Part- ners). In Denver, Colorado, Michael Graves transformed and expanded the existing 1956 Cencral Library (Fisher and Fisher? Burnham Hoyt) with his 1995 structure located adjacent ta the historic Civic Center Pack.  In the fast decades of the 20th century. there was also a concerted effort to make librarics delightful places to tead. Archi tscts became concerned with the provision of narural light and with che manipulation of the ceiling plane so create evading spaces that were either monumental, as at the fifth-floos reading room of the Phoenix Central Library (1989-95, beuderDWL, Archisects), o¢ intimate, as in the galicrics of the Vancouver Cencral Public Library or in the reading alcoves of the Humbulde Library (1984-88, Moore Ruble Yudell) in Berlin. Typically, these spaces are che product of functional soning within the building, a venion of the fixed-fumtivn planning tht charscter- wed prewar library design. Sometimes chis zoning has been ac- complished within a modular gril and square footprint, as at the Tensherg (Norway) Public Library (1988-92, Lunde and Lawseth). More often, however, libraries of the late 20th cennury used irregular plans ro give the various fincrians their own spa- Gal arisulation: notable cxamples of this approach inchide the Monster Cary Library (1987 - 93, Acchitekturbaro Bolles-Wikton and Partner) and the Almelu Public Library (1991-94, Meva- 00) 1n the Netherlands.  Equaily important, there has also been a renewed appreciation for older library buildings. Late 19th-century buildings mn the gsand manner have been lovingly restored; readers are once again wekomed through the main doors of che Boston Public Lebrary on Copley Square and encouraged to expericnce the original entry sequence: up the main stain, past newly cleaned mural paintings, to the main reading room. More modest libraries from the early 20th Lenusty are also enjoying & tenaisance, as cities such as Seattle work co revitalize the historic character of their numerous Casnegic-financed branches. At the dawn of the 2(s1 century, library architecture is again as vital and exciuing as 1 was at the beginning of the 20th.  Aas A. VAN StYeK  Ser abe Aalto, Alver (Finland); British Library, Londons Car- rére, John Mervia, and Thomas Hastings (United States): Gilbert, Cass (United States); Phoenix Public Library, Ari- zoma; Stockholm Public Library; University Library, UNAM, Mexico City  Furthes Reading  Te addition to the ypeufin sources listed below, Library Jawrnal has amc 145 devured anc of ite December iaucs to artides on bibrary an htexture.  Baumann. Charks H.. The feflucnice of Angus Suned Macdonald and the Sneud Beoksuack on Libsury Anbiterture. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarcacow Presi. PTE  Bolunshi, George $.. Carnegie Libranies: their Hustory and dmpact on American Public Library Developoncas, cago: Ametican Libeary Assocation, 1969  Brawnic, Michael, Library Burldrer, London and Lanham, Maryland: Academy Edivons. 1997  Beuwn, Jamia Duff, Massel of Libsary Hovnoney, Leduc: Scott Greemmood, 1903; 7th edition, rewrinen by RL Northwood Lock, London: Graton, 19%)  “nvieing Maven” American Lebrario, 21/4 (Apel 1990)  Kascr, David, The Erolution of the Amertian Academs Library Busldrag, Lanham, Maryland: Sate ree Breas, 1997  Metcall, Keyes De Wier, Planing Academe and Research Library Boaldiegs, New York: McGeraw-HLall, 1965; 2nd odinan, by Philp 1, Leighton and David © Weber, Chicago: Ametivan Library Association, 1986  Dehlers, Dontahl b,. Hoods and Rlmeprins: Muibding Americas Publ Librane, New York: Greenwood Prew, 1991  Spons, Michacl, Veipurs Library, 1927 1935, Alvar Aatas, Lonulon and New York. Academy Editiuns, 1994  Thompnn, Anthony. Library Building af Britain and Lurope An Internesional Sends, with Feamplsr Maindy from Rrisain and Some from Europe and Queries, London: Bueterwortht, 196%  Van Shyck, Abigail A. Fore sa AR: Camegie Libraries amd American Calrere, 18901920. Chicage: University of Chicago Prem, 1995  Wheeler, Jowph Lew, and Alfied Moran Githent, Thy Amwrican Puchlic Library Boating, Now York: Seritmer, and Chicago: Amencan Library Amocation, 1941  LIGHTING  Aschitects and lighting designers have exploited the spectule of light chrough visual perception co capture emotion, recall our primal past. cumfuet, protect. heal, increme productivity. and expand moder culture by pushing back the nght. Architectural hghting design is rapidly morphing as architecture, theater, art, nema, and pop culture perforare a domain dominated for de- tades by electrical engineers. ‘Transparent, wranslucent. and spex- ually selective smart materials: eflicient and provocative light sources modulared by sophisicared computer concrol; color- changing and imape-producing LED systems, fiber-apmec light distribution networks; and luminous thin-film surfaces are al- lowing architecture to be reconsidered as a luminous environ- ment. Embracing the monds of daylight and uniquely respond- ing to the specific physiological and aesthetic needs of building oxcupann, architectutal illununation ov becoming an utegrated building ecology rather than merely technical problem sofving systems,  Light and Human Response  Beyond the fact that some modicum of hght is required to see— an amount quite small tor general spatial movement (3 to 5 foon-candles. (tcli—quite sophisticated lighting cnviconments 
are tequired ta perform the tasks common in moder society. Subsequently, the expectation for higher-quality energy-cfficicot systems o constantly incecasnig a1 new technologies appear and become integrated into aschitecture, Copious studies dating from the turn of the 20th century are well documented by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North Aimenca (IESNA} and referenced in the IESNA Handbook, demonstrating that productivity and visual acuiry increase with increased dlumuna- ton levels. This research provides the basis for mom current building and lighting codes. The general recommended levels have varied over time in response to changing cultural condi- tons. In the 19505, with advanced industnalaation and cheap energy. recommended lighting level rese to 100 fe from the 10-fe recommendarions in the first decade of the century. After the oil embargu of 1975, recommendation levels were reduced to 50 tc. and daylight reemerged as a viable lighting source.  Ts was not until 2000 thar che “Quality of the Vieual Environ- ment” chapeer was offaially udopecd by the IESNA and inchaled in its design handbook, significantly shifting the fous trom purely practical to qualirarive issues in design. Although mosr hiserical recommendations call for even ilumnation for youal tasks, this nced has been questioned. especially fos particular environmencs. In 1975. researcher John Utynn began groundbreaking capenimens that inextricably linked light distri- butina with spartal qualities and judgments that he described as visual clarity, complexity, color cone, plate, private, relaxing, and pleasanmess. Spattal perception relics not only on the architec- tonic surfaces af rooms but on the deployment of light within and on those surfaces, whether ever. direct, walluped. or grazing, A human subject's primal relationship ¢o circadian rhythms (day -cight cycles) pes well beyund the visual, affecting paycho- logical and emotional well-being and states of mind. Revent feacarch, for exampic, has demonstrated that expowire tn con- trolled light regimes can auprove easunial affective disorder sy- drome (SADS}, Atzheumer's paticnes’ quality of life, amd the  fates of premature infants. Key issues in these audies indude the quality of light an terms af coloc spectnum (specific frequencies included in daylight! and che fact that cxposure is cyded to replicate che day-night sequence. Relared snudies have demonstrated that nonexposure to the nght frequencies of light for specified periods of rime can cause degradanon of phywologi- cal funcuon, neurobchavioral pertormance, and skeop quality. In this case, the body docs not receive specific “daytime” frequen- cies of light tw calibrate che biological dock, raising questions about long-term daily expusure to artificial light. In a shore 100 years, we have transitioned trom an agsarian socicty linked to the diurnal cycle scanning the fields and pastures to a Postmodern, information-based global culture operating around the clock in highly specaalized lunmnous environinents.  Daylight and Architecture  Many precminent architects of the early 20th century refied of daylight as the primary light source in theie buildings, Louns Kahn's Kimbeil Ant Museum (For Worth, ‘Texas, 1972) pro- vides an excellence example of the integsanon of daytight and atchitecture, Kahn, along with lighting designer Richard Kelly, devised a syitem of vaubted ceilings and pecioraced wsinles sel actrens that softened, bounced. covled, and filtered natural sun-  light co illuminate spaces for fine art. As the daylight changes in intensity, calor, and quality throughour the day and from wasn to season, the moods of the Kimbell’s spaces are sensi- tively and subtlety revealed, softening the uructure's modernist tectininearity and imbuing che archicectuse with life.  At the ture of the century, most buildings relied on daylight, as other artificial light sources wete cumbersome, expensive, and tclatively ineftiveent. The reliance on natural light led to signifi- cant innovations in plan organization, glazing technology, le teacment, and window systema that could control daylight en- tering the building, These techniques kept spaces close to the edge of buldings, resulting in lecter-shape plans (E, L, S, etc.) or courtyard schemes with epen central circulation spaces, High ceilings and windows allowed dayhght to pencrrace deeply into the spaces, providing adequate lighting in almost all daytime conditions,  In the United States, engineered clecurical lighting was incoc- porated inte architeceure when the office typology protifcrated in the postwar cra. Lighting design strategic: favored constant illumination levels and allowed large open areas. Quantifying dengns w mect these new recommended levels proved to be quite difficult given the mutability and variable maruse of day- light. As clectrical ight sources and energy became more prolific and econutnical. the reliance on daylight as che primary light source diminished. The dramaric increase in energy costs from the 1975 oil embargo spurred a reconmderanan of low-energy lighting systems. Buildings used approsimately 30 percent of the nation's roral energy, and 50 percent af the nergy used in office buildings went to lighting during the daytime houn—a grea porcotial for nationally significant energy reductions, As a result, design srraregics have been developed 10 reestablish his- torn. precedent lighting strategies while extending the range and control of dayfight and unegrating electrical systems, Windows, light shelves, clerestorics, and skylights have been studied as aper- lure systems tw admit large quantities of light, modulate heat transter, and control ghare. Builusng with bilareral lighting (light from two sidex) is replacing the large. square floor plan of the typical speculative office building. Sophisticated monitor amt control systems arc being incorperared to constantly adjust elec- tric fight in response to changer in daybghe.  In many Eurpean countnes. rhe anced for daylight in archi- tecture 1s acknowledged by building and municipal code legiala- Gan thas requires ail occupied spaces a» have access to daylight. Buildings in other countries, including the United States, are still being constructed with few if any winduws—typically 9 short-view value engincering decision. This strategy relies en- turely on electric tight. limiteng daylight scorss eo a small percent- age of perinieter spaces if at all, Eflocuive strategies are available to integrate daybght, design, and enginecring but they rely on courdinated techniques for qualifying long-term value to balance trade-offs berween energy cost, glazing cows. electrical lighting costs, and the occupants’ well-being.  Electric Light  Modern architecture embraced the electrical light as a technol- ogy to literally bring souiety out of che darkness of the industrial city, The luminous ceiling ultimately replaced the sky in office buildings around che world, providing almast antiseptic levels of  illumination. Easty attempts to integrate with Thomas Edison's marvelous contnibution to architecture involved refitung gas and od lamps with sources hundreds of times brighter. creating a substantial glare problem. According to architecture cntic Re- yner Banham. even as light sources began 10 be manipulated and sestheticized by designers such as Le Corbusier, “the naked and exposed bulb was always an alternative in his [Le Corbu- set's] eyes,” as the stark plare of che single, exposed, clear bulb ilfuminating the living coom in the architect's Villy Cook {Boulogne-sur-Seine, France, 1926) demonsratcs. As electric lamp types expanded, luminaire design became more sophini- cated, and indirect light wax integeated in buildings, the diffi culty of glare was preatly reduced.  Blecurical light sources include the dowing tungsten filaments of incandescent Lamps with halogen ur xenon gasses added in the bulb to improve brightness and color rendering. Significantly inefficient, producing much morc hear than fight, they are not economical on a large scale anid are cypically reserved tor residen- tial and accent lighting situations. The most common Lamp is the fluorescent tube, providing madcratc to good color rendering depending on the specific phosphor content. Its widespread cf ciency explains the prolific use of fluorescent lighting in build ings ranging from offices to schools to huspicals. With great advances in compactnos, compatibility with iovandescent fia- tures, and voloe-rendering improvements, flunrescent lights arc finding new design flexibility and emenging ax viable domestic alternatives for energy saving, Other gas discharge sources in. dude metal halide, mercury vapor, and sodium vapor. Typically, theve lamps are used in exterior situacions with metal halide, finding applications in large spaces such as uansportation termi- aals, sports arenas, and other medium-to-large public spaces. Mercury and sodium vapor are most commonly employed as security lighting.  Successful electric lighting design reveals the intentian of the architecture by sensitively illuminating the sparial and eectonic ape with appropriate luminma techoablugics. Ie involves co ordinated efforts between the atchitest, lighting designer, inte- riwt designer, and electrical cngincer, Myriad lamp and fixture combinations proliferate on the market, and many precedent examples of building inuegrated lighung design cxist. Without a clear understanding of how light should support and enhance the design, choosing a system can be quite difficult Direct bght at a grazing angle will reveal che texcure of surtaces and provide shadows that suggest an intimate o¢ relaxing space. Indirect light—light thar is reflected into the space from a surface rather than the lamp directly—provides more evenly lit spaces with luminous surfaces that convey a sense of spaciousness. Down lighting might define spatial nodes or gathering areas within a larger open space, creating privacy in the dimmer space and speciack: in the illuminated area. These stratcpies represent modes of connectian that link light divtribution to spatial activ- ity. Au these strategies emerge, selecting appropriate technologies becomes a logical process. Meeting the criteria of local codes of JESNA guidelines provides the critical baseline level of illumina. tion ina given space. Well lighted spaces appeal cv us by visually defining or accentuating the intentions and possibilities of che archicecture.  ‘Commercially available compater programs that use radiosity and ray-tracing algorihms provide sophisticated. photorealistic light rendering as well as quantitative calculations, Computer  Programs allow speculative experimentanon with light sources and building surfaces that combine direct. reflected, and daylight luminance tor specific geographical locatrons and times of day, thereby advancing the integranon of daylight as a primary light source. As soon as the dovign is fixed, the calculations are already complete. allowing fur additional experimentatian within a de- sign budget.  Emergent Technologies  Light-crniting cande (LED) fights are transitioning from the citcuit board to the building as viable tight source alternatives. LED lamps have hte spans up to 10 years, are very small, produce very litle heat, and can produce a variety of dynamic colors with a coatrol device. Fiber-opuc distribution networks allow light ra be filrered and focused on a task ar object while keeping the actual source in 3 remote lncanon—excetlent if heat or mon- ture is a concern or if very small size is needed. Daylight collex- Fors have been developed in Asia to dircedly eransmit sunlight throughout buildings via fiber-aptic cables. Luminous thin film technologies can replace teadivional building finishes w provide  light-emirting surfaces.  IMuminated Architecture  World's tairs and imcrmacional cxhibivions of the carly 20th con- tury established lighting as ene of many themes reared co the cultural coles of architecture. Advancing frum the whiteness and glare of the World Columbian Exposition in Chicago of 1893, controlled flood lighting and colored light dominated che farer years. “Light Architecture” appearing in 1956 formalized mod- tm architecnite’s integration of light, power, and maternal te- tonics as part of 2 process that continues today. Unhindered daylight stecamed into buildings during the day, internal spaces bmadcast light nightly, and light radiated From ilfuminated edif- furs tw redefine maturnal urban apsce and the skyline of the modern city. Luminous “Jumbotron” video wreens morph tw shape the buildings of Times Square while commanding adver- cismng artenuen apd Huminate through folly and spectacle. More substantive urban gestures usually integrate muluple territories of lighting professions, including architecture. theatcr, interior design. an. planning, landscape. and engincering. Howard Brandston, originally a theatrical lighting designer, designed over 2500 architectural lighting projects, including she award- winning Petronas Towers in Kuala Lumpur (1996). Working with architect Cesar Pelli, the laghting design cmphasizes the space between the towers a3 a framed gateway to Malaysia and recalls mozifs of 1920s and 1930s rowers in the United States such ax the Empire State Buitding (Shreve, Harmon. and Lamb, New York City, 19311  Sculpiot and environmental artist James Turrell, known for manipulating hghe as an expressive substance, wulpts the Plinet M Building (Hanover, Germany 2000}. He combines dynamic moods of light through cranduccot color, antemaity, and anucips- tion to create a stunning seme of mood and space. Turtell’s project employs almost imperceptible rates of change such chat one does not notice intervals of color but rather the fact that colar has changed and will again—or will it? Using the batest 
theatncal equipment in concert with material selections and sur- face detailing. the scheme unifies texture. reflection, and trany parency to give the Hoanng orb whstance through symphonic light.  To cite another example, New York City’s famous Metropali- tan Life Building, designed by Pierre LeBrun and erevted in 1909, with its unginal pold leaf illuminated cupola, radiated day and night as an “eternal light” in the empire skyline. Replaced with aluminum in the 1960s, and finally restored in 2000, the Met Life Building's gold Jeaf, along with new computer. controlled solot-shanging diachronic filters and powerful Ights suggests how contemporary applications of theatcr-laghting tech-  scan enhamve the city’s tradition of expressing cultural events through mods of light and color.  Environmental hghting, first with gadights, advanced public space in time. getminating modem culture. More recently, Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED) identified night lighting at a leading deterrence ro crime. Hlumi- nated infrainawures of Western civilization are casily visible from space as earth's energy (transformed into photons) is beamed into the comme. “Dark aky.” “light treipan,” “light polluvon,” and “light nuisance” language and regulauon are tapidly emerging in town mectings and municipal codes, suyg- gening much betecr wantrul of environmental lahe in the future.  In his 1933 essay fn Prattee of Shadows, novelist Junichiro Vanizaki laments the advancement of electric light, exiting dark- ness from the places we dwell. By extolling the virtues of the shadow. he challenges the “more is better” paradigm of modem lighting design. ‘Adbmituedly, he would noe live an the echpuc world constructed in his narrative, which is to say that che shadow should be culrivaced and enjoyed as a part of the electro- humenescent world we live in. Inspiring lighting dengan responds to these currents, incorporates sustainable modes of action, and integrates with tevtonic symems a advance architectural spatial occupation.  Maatin Gorn Further Reading Banham, Reyner, the Ariintecture of the Well Fempercel Environment,  Chicago: Universany of Chicago Presa, 1969 Brandssoa, Howard, “How Thearncal Lightng tnflucrces  Architectural Lighting Design,” £0 1 A (1974)  Brown, G.Z., and Mark Dekay, Sun Weed, tnd Legh: Arvbisecturad  Deaga Smategin, 2nd cditain, New York Wiley, 1985, 2001  . M. David, and Vicor Olgyay, Arcbizectural Ligering. Boston  McGraw-[hll, 2002 Evans, Benjamin, Dewight ia Anhiscture, Boston: McGraw-Hill  1981 Fitch, James Masuon, and William Bobentuasen, American  Basking: The Farces that Shape Tt, Bentimn. Henaghnoa-MilTin and  Cambridge, Mastachucra Riverside Prew, 1949; revived edition  an American Beilding: The Environmental Forces that Shape tt,  New York: Oxford Univeriity Press, 1999 Nuckoll, James I, futerior Laghting for Fresronmental Designen,  New York: Wiley. 1983; revised as Gordon, Gary, and James I.  Nuckalls, Zncenior Fighting far Desipun, New York, Wiley. 1995 Millet, Marnietna § fight Revealing Architevtar. New York: Vary  Nourand Reinhold, 1996 Neumann. Dietrich tedinor’, Anchisecrure of the Night: The  Hbeermased Buddmg, Munich and London: Prestel. 2002 Seetfy. Gary, Arhitectural Lighting Deugn. New York: Van Nostrand  Rembold, 1990  Tanizaki. Junichiro, fnzi Rane, New Haven, Connecticutr, Lee's Lshaad Books, (977, and London: Cape, 1991; a dn Preise of Shadows, vranstated by Uhomas J. Harper and Edward G. Seideniucker, New Haven. Connecticut: Lecte's Island Books, 1997. and London: Cape. 1991  Tombins, Calvin. “Hying mnvo the Light,” The New Verkrr (January 2003)  LIN, MAYA 1959- Architect. United States  Maya Lin is renowned as the architect of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, D.C. for which she won the design competition while an undergraduate at Yale University. Het ocu- wre spans a wide range of media and venues and includes build- ings, sculpoures, landscape projects. and gallery installadons; as a resuh, discussions of her work often address the mmntion be- tween her adentities as both architect and artist.  The Vietnam Vererana Memorial (1982) drew nacional enten- ton because of che controversial nature of the design. Promi- neatly bocated on the Mall in Washington, D.C. the memorial cnnsists of two black granite retaining walls in the con- figuradun of a “V," once which are inscribed the sames of Amer- kan soldicts killed during the Victnam war, listed in chronolog}- cal order of cheir deaths. A path leads visitors along the bac of the wall xo chat dhe viewer descends from grade fevel to the apex and then asocnds back to grade level. One of the polished stone walls reflects the image othe Washingron Monument (Robert Mills, 1884), the other the Lincoln Memonal (Henry Bacon. 4922).  Phe memorial’s unique deaign drew bach praise and criricism, Unlike other national monuments, the memorial was sunken inen the ground instead of rising above it. Whereas critits main- tained that the design dishonored the war dead and the nation itself, Lin and hee supporters argued that the deaign’s simplicity and austerity were intended to provide oppurtunities fur private cuntemplation of the perional sacrifices made by American sul- dicts. The subject of special congressional hearings, Lan’s design was ultimarely built, but with tbe addition of an American flag and a statue uf Amencan soldiers in the neat vicinity.  Today, the Vietnam Veterans Memorial receives the highest umber of visitors in Washungton, D.C, and has influenced the designs of other monuments, including the nearby Korean War Veterans Memorial. Since the construction of the Vietnam Ver- etans Memorial, Lan has designed and buit several other well- known commemorative works that reflect her strong interests in minimalac geometry, narural materials, and the chronological retelling of history. In 1989 she completed the Civil Rights Memorial (Montgomery, Alabuma), commemorating the Amer- ivan black civd rights movernent. Comminioned by the South- ern Poverty Law Center and located ouuide its offices in Mont- gemery, Alabama, the memonal coasets of a arcular black granite table 11 (ect in diameter and a black granite wall 40 fect bong thar divides the arca outside the building's entry into upper and lower plazas, Water Hows up through middle of the table and out across the surface, onto which ts inscribed a time line juxtaposing legislation and important events in the history of the cwvil rights movement, The wall is inscribed with a biblical quotation spoken by Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.: “until justice  The Wave Field. Unrveruty of Michigan. Nath Campus. Aan Atbor (1994) Phote ¢ John Wene  tolls down like waters and rightcousness like a mighty sream.” Similarly, The Women's Table (1999), Yale Univenity, New Uaven, Goonecticur is an elliptical black granite table onto which is inscribed a spiral shaped time line depicting the history of cooducation at Yale.  Lin's work is distinguished by her use of madern technology as tools for newing the natural landscape, such as acrial photog: raphy, satellite images, microscopic pictures. and views taken from studies of flut dynamics, Her interest wn contrasong the so-called man-made and the narural is evident in fr Ware Field, a wribute to an acrospace engincering student at the Universsty of Michigan named Frangais-Xavier Bagnoud who died in a helicopter accident, Located adjacent to the University of Michi- gan's acronpsce enginecting building, che piece conius of 3 10,000-square-fuet grassy area in the form of rows of small waves.  Her other landscape works include TOPO (1991), a project located in the median along che approach to the Chadatte Cati- seum in Chartorte, North Carulina. Ta activate the somewhat conventional open space, Lin collaborated with landscape archi- tect Henry Arnold to design a configuration of ! 2-fooc-dameter holly bushes pruned almost perfectly spherical to appear as balls ralling down a gentle slope white willow oaks eventually will form arches over the median. Likewise, in her peace chapel de-  signed for Jumata College in Huntingdon, Peontylvania, Lin imerts a few built clements into che natural landscape: 4 40- fout-diameter citde delineated hy rough-hewn stones that are tecessed into the ground and cunnected to # small four-foot- diameter circle by a path,  Lin's commemorative Lindscape projects reinforce compari sons to those of ube American sculptors and Earth or Land arises of the 1960s. 1970s. and early 1980s. Indeed, aspects of Lin's works recall elements of Earchworks by such artists as Mary Miss, Robert Smithson, and Michael Heizer in her use of ab- stract forms and concepts, natural context and matetials, and publ venues. The Native Amencan burial mounds and Japa- new Zen gardens thar Lin hat cited among her sources of inspera- tion are ahared by some carth arias as well, In addition, whereas Lin ases abstract forms commonly sen in works of environmen. tal art, the narrative concent of the Victnam Vercrans Memorial, the Civil Righty Memorial, and The Womens Table creates 4 resonance between the textual ane the physical.  Like Richard Serra, a sculptor who gained prominence in the late 1960s, Lin established a dialogue between sculpture and architecture in Groundswell 11993;, created while she was visual- artist-in-residence ai the Wexner Concer for the Arts in Cotem- hus, Ohio. Built by architect Peter Eisenman, the Werner Cen- ter’s “leftover spaces” on the building’« roots are occupied by 
dreamlike landwapes of blue-green safery glass that wem to drift into the spaces like newly fallen now. Like Serea’s Tilted Arc (1981). 9 12-foot-high, 120-foot-long curved steel shere that subverted the intentions of the architect by interrupting pedes- trian flow though Federal Placa in lower Manhuecan, Groundswell impact results from its relationship to the more rigid architectural contest, Inspired by Japanese gardens, the proce is infused with Landscape sensibilitics and associations that act in juxtaposition with the industnal materials and as a foil to the surrounding architecture.  Although relasively few in number, Lin's buildings demon- strate her ability to design spaces char meet practical criteria of the clients’ program, building code, and environmental and aructural considerations. Among these is the Weber House (1993) in Wikiamntown, M. users, and the Muscum for Aftican Art (1993) in New Vork. Hee firs: design for a private residence. the Weber House features gently curred, sloping root. made of lead-cavered copper and a flaor plan that is arranged around a courtyard Japanese garden, recalling Lin's fascination with natural landscape forms. The Muscum of African Art is a Jong, narruw converted loft inty which Lin retntroduces some aspovu: of ber Landscape works, such as the curving, irreguias mraircases and colors evocative of nanural fearures, as well as her interests in history, narrative, and passage or circulation through  ice. Of her roles as both architect and artist, Lin has described  differences in the activities as analogous to the differences between “writing a novel.” for which the archisect-writer must make decisions abour the more detailed aspects of rhe design, aad “writing 2 poem.” for which careful consideration must be given to cach individual clement because the sonpe of the work  is smaller. ° Cartiuun: Moy  See ake Memorial: Muscum: Victnam Veterans Memorial, Washiegwn, D.C.  Biography  Born in Athens, Oluo, § Ortuber 1959, the daughter of Ohio University professon in literature and fine arts. Reveived bahe- Jor of arts (1981) and masser of architecture (1986) from Yale University. Active in independent practice in New York City since 1987, Received Honor Award of the Amerikan Institute of Architeces, 1984; Henry Bacon Memorial Award, 1984: Hon- orary Doctorate of Fine Arts, Yale University. 1987: Presidential Deagn Award, 1988; inducted into International Women’s Hall of Fame. 1990,  Selected Works  Vietnam Veterans Memutial, Washington, D.C. 1982  Cavil Raghes Memorial, Southern Poverty Law Center, Munegumery, Alabama, 1989  Junisca Peace Chapel, Husunpdon, Penneytvania, 1989  FOPO, Charlotte Colneum, Chashite, North Carolina, 1991  Growndswell, Wexner Conter for the Ans, The Ohw Sue University. Columbus, 1993  Museum for Afncan Ant, New York Cary, 1904  Weber House, Wilkumsown. Mawachuretes, 1993  Women’: Table, Yale University, New Haven, Connecinut, $993  Felimed Tome. Pennsylvania Station, Now York City, 1994  The Weve Field, Univecuty of Michigan, Ana Arbor, Michigan, 1994  Asian(Pacific/Amenican Scadies Insure, New York University, New York Ciry, 1997  A Shifi in the Seream, Pancipal Financial Group Headquareets, Des Mawes, fowa, 1997  Tew Degrees North, Rockefeller Foundatioe, New York City, 1997  Bronx Community Paper Company, Broa, New York, 1997  Further Reading  Abramwn, Daniel. “Maya Lin and the 19605 Monumena, Teme Lines, and Mirumalism,” Critical Ingssiry, 22/4 (1996)  Bremner, Ano (edaor), Mapa Lin: PubliciPrivce, Columbus: Wexner Conner for che Arcs, Ohio State Univessicy, 1994  Maya Lin: Topologie, Wimson-Salem, North Carolina: Southesaera ‘Cerner for Coneeraporary Art. 1998  Mock, Freida Lee, and Terry Sanders, “Maya Lin: A Strong Clear Vision” (videorecording). Santa Monica, Cakfomix: Sanders and Mock Productions/Occan Releasing, aod s.|: Ametican Filer Foundation, 1995  LINCOLN CENTER, NEW YORK Designed by Harrison and Abramévitz and others: completed 1970  New York, New York  The integration of the arts. a much sought-after of the randern ovement fraind fruition ar Lincoln phn far the Performing Aru in New York City and permancot expremion in its modern interpretation of classical architecture. In chis major mid-Manhattan ste of remple-like theaters and concert halls arranged about a monumental Beauz-Arte plan, opera, sym- Phonic music, dance, and drama come together in white marble, the very theatricality of the enmposition reflecting the dramatic Function of the buildings.  Modern architecuure within neuclasical monumenuality de- fines the ambiguous bur ultimately acceptable design program. of Lincoln Center. Like the amalgam of the arts housed within the comples, the architecture democratically wanes tn be all things to all peopte. and it fulfills this desire surprisingly well. To assess the success of this complet fairly, one must view it at night, theacncally lit, when is shines hike a jewel box of ilhisionary beauty. as patrons stream into the floodlighted. founrained plaza after opera ot theater, yellow cabs line up, and dancer exit hack- stage doors. This is Lincoln Center live, ax it wes meant to be.  Principal architects of the center were Harrison and Abramo- vitz, with associated architec: Philip Johnson, Eero Saarinca, Gordon Bunshak, Pictro Helluschi, and Marcel Breuer as carly consultants, all modern architects and firms with dose New York City ties, often to che prime movers of the project, philant ist John D. Rockefdller (11, urban planner Rober Moses, rye astintic director of the arts organizations. Harrison and Abramo- wie, foe example, a very straightforward, pragmatic firm, had made cher names in New York in the 1930s as one of many architects of Rockefeller Center and in the 19508 as archivects in charge of the United Nations. They were insiders from the very incepnon of the site plan foc Lincoln Center and were fusthes commissioned for the primary anchors of the complex, ‘Wallace Harrison for the Metropolitan Opern (1966) and Max Abramovitz for the Phitharmonic Hall (1962).  View of the Lincaln Canter plaza, desygned by Wallace Harnson and others, New York Cir, (1970! © Bill RosCORBIS  Philip Johnson, exponent af Mies van der Robe and friend of dance master Geurge Balanchine, was comtnissioned fue che New York State Theatcr (1964), home of the New York City Ballet. He was then experimenting with a made of modern classi- cium, ween in the tiny temple pavilion at fohnaun’s Connecticut home, corresponding to his cheater design. Eero Saarinen was suited to che drama hull, the Vivian Beaumont Theater (1965). This cheater and its accompanying treed courtyard represent one of the hidden creanve strengths of the project. The mote prosaic and functional programs for the Juilliard School (1969) and Library of Performing Arts (1965) were assigned to corporate architects Pietro Belluschi and Gorden Banshalt of Skidmore. Owings and Merrill, respectively, architects experienced in large commissions wich multiple-use functional parameters.  The complex history af Lincoln Center as an urban project is overshadowed by the apparent simplicity of the plan as it mands today and by the fact chat most New Yorkers have little mematy of a cime o¢ place before Lincoln Center moved in and lit up the neighborhood. In fact, it was once just another seceion of West Side high-density housing that conuoversial planner Robert Moses had declared a slum to make it eligible for federal urban renewal funding. Even today, the greatest failure of Lin- col Center is that its plan cends to wall the ares off from their urban environment. The project was funded via three sources:  the federal government, acting nat at benefactor of the arts but as urban renewal peoponent; by the arts organizatians them- selves; and by private patrons.  Formunately. the time of Lincoln Center's planning and con struc toot (1955~70) was a time of arhan renaisunce in the hes- tory of the city en which many Uuings came together for the benefit uf the arts: patronage, urban optimism, strong economy, excdilence in American art forms, and continuity with the mod- emnist bebe that ube ans feally were refuted not only to one another bur also co che basic humanity of the populace. When Lincoln Center finally opened. Mayor John Lindsay's and Presi- dent John F. Kennedy's administrations were committed sup- porters of the ars. [0 is remarkable to note tha at one time macstrm Leonard Bernstein and George Ralanchine were per- forming simulancously within buildings designed by such American masters ax Philip Johnson, erith mural by Mare Cha- gall, and sculpture by Henry Moure,  Such a grand collection of artists and art forms, by nature, seemed to demand a monumental setting, and therein lies the one majut sexthetic conundrum of Lincoln Center: appropriate- ness of form, How docs one monumentalize the modern? One might see in the plan rather unsubtle contemporary references to Michelangelo's plan for the Campidugtio in Rome. Like the Renaissance plan. [Lincoln Center is a theee-suded, axial design 
arranged about a caned central ornamental plaza. open w the urect via an expanse of stain.  As in the Campidogtic, the theee major anchor of the Lin- coln Center plaza are basically giant boxes with only one de- signed facade pes building, cach facing inward and reflecting Michelangelo's solution of employing wreens of giant orders to unify che opposing ude clevauons. [he Metropolitan Opera. ube veual fucus of the plan, is umamented with five arched bays juataposed with glass and intensely colorful modera murah. The colonnade of Philharmonic Hall and the piers of the New York Stare Theater stand perpendicular w the opera. The arches. piers, and colonnade are alt the same grant scale, faced in travertine, teaching upward from the ground ta che hull height of the build- ings in bong vertical lines. Thus. che majo halls are dressed up. Tike stage sets in which the spectators became the actors.  Te wenild be easy tc be cynical abour the design of Lincoln Center, for itm neither pure chasicism nue pure modcmism, bur it succeeds, It is simultancously pompous and popular, deco- tous and democratic, pragmatic and idcaliwic. reflecting the pet- sonas of iu vriginators, une tine of its inception, and certainly the character of New York City itself,  Lean Hust Corsair  See abe Banshafi, Gorden (United States); Concert Halk Harrison, Wallace K., and Max Abramovitz (United Saates); Johnson, Philip (United States}; Saarinen, Eero (Pintand)  Further Reading  Mayer, Mastin, Britt, Morter, and she Performing Ar, New York. The Twentieth Century Fund, 1970 ,  Young, Ldgas B.. Lincaln Center: The Building of an fauntuvon, New York: New York Coiveniny Pron, 1980  LINCOLN MEMORIAL, WASHINGTON, D.C.  Designed by Henry Bacon with sculpeure by Daniel Chester French and Jules Guerin: completed 1922  Like all monuments, the Lincaln Memorial (1914-22) vom memorates a past: unlike most. however, it memoriatized a fu- ture. The memorial, in the form of a classic Greek remple, com- bined Doric columns with an Ionic friere to ecterence a past of Athenian democracy, rural American landscapes, and most significantly, American national reconciliation, Although in construction demonstrated the consalidation of the power uf profeuional city plannen and architects, its existence symbolized American wruggles for racial equality. “This Memorial is leas for Abraham Lincoln,” proclsimed President Warren Harding at the Memorial Day (30 May 1922) dedication of the memonal. “than those of us 1-day, and for those who follow after.” Architect Henry Bacon designed a Beaua-Arts Greek imple in which symbalic details of design, layout, decoration (paintings and writings}, and sculpture created and reintorced a reflective and somber mood in the wewer. Within the context of the Amenican appropriatian of Greek archirecrure, the temple assaci- ated Athenian democracy with Lincoln, a suggestion made more explicit with the carving of the Deckaration of Independence’s  dain chat “all men are created equal” on the southern wall The southern and northern walls. possibly in reference to che northern and southern pediments of che Parthenon, display the allegorical paintings Emancipation and Unificatson by Jules Guerin (who had illustrated Bacon's design proposal) above the Gettysburg Address and the Second Inaugural Address.  ‘The Lincoln Memorial curned the standard Greek temple to iss ude and removed the triangular pediment; unlike the Pas thenon, the memorial is approached on its long facade. The number of extenor Duric columns symbolizes the 36 states at the end of the Civil War. As in Grock temples, the gigantic seated sculpture of Lincoln rests on three steps, supposedly so that an attendant arrives at the sculpture an the left and more appropriate foot. Danie! Chester French's sculprare of a seated Lincola in the rear of che middle chamber faces the Washington Monument. Originally designed to be 15 feet tall, the white Georgian marble suructure was doubled in site when it became apparent that it would be dwarfed by che building. The ewo side chambers focus attention an the paintings and writings on the north and south walls, The artic frieze ounide the memorial portrays the reunification of the nation by listing the states a1 the end of the Cavil War in the order of their admittance to the Union. .  From the westem end of the National Mall in Washington, D.C, the building faces the Washington Monument and, two miles away, the Capitol at che custern end, chus highlighting the relationship beewren the founder and saviat of the nation and Lincoln's distame from the partisan squabbles of Congress. The Lincola sculpture looks across the entire length of the mall w- ward the sculpture of General Grant seated on his horse at the foot of the. Capitol.  The memorial’s western location was the inust contested ele- ment of its creation. Ir is located in what had previously been a marsh bur is now a supremely well-designed landscape of box- wood and holly trees thar are simply and directly spaced so as to direct attention toward the building. In the tradition of Fred etich Law Olmated, Sr., the landscape. designed in part by Fred- ctich Law Olmmated, Je., waa intended to being to the urban dwellce a taste uf the Armetican rural past to case the psychologi- cal stress of livang and working in an industrial city. The western Jovation, furthermore, placed the memorial in relavonship with Robert E. Lee's house un the Virgnnia side of the Potomac to symbolize the reconcihatwn of North and South and the advance westward of a unified country.  Even as the memonal referenced a past, its creation demon- sirared architectural methods of the future. particularly the pro- fessionalization of architecture and city planning. The World's Columbian Exposition of 1893 (specifically the urban planning exemplified in the “White City”) and the American Lunitute of Architects (AIA) meeting in Washington, 1.C., encouraged the Senate Commitee on D.C. to appaint in 1901 a commission, headed by Senator McMillan of Michigan, to plan and direct the development of the National Mall area in Washington, D.C. ‘The Lincoln Memorial was their top priority. Despite years of argument over the location and dengn of the memorial, the initial plan of che McMillan Commission would eventually be realized in most of its major points. One consequence of the Plan wax a national reconsideration of urban-planning goals and theis meaning in the practice of architecture.  Uneoln Moamnarial, Washingian, 10. 11922) © Hissonc Amencan Buildings Surver! Library ot Congress  The 1902 MiMillan Plan stemulated rhe public and profes- sional imagination concerning the poxihilities of planning and designing a city on a very large wale. Instead of architects ran domly planning and placing buddings, this ptan reminded the professionals uf the possibilities of creating an cocire urban envi- ronment, stimulating dozens of amilat plans chroughour the United States in cities such as Kansas Cary, Harrisburg, and Denver, Colorado. Furthermore, city planning on rhis sale meshed with the reforms of the Progressive Fra and the popular~ ity of the City Beautiful movement from the 1890s to the 1920s vo fift the spirit and productiviry of che populace, The plan contributed to the growth and cansolidation of che power of planning commissions in general in its influence on the commis- sions that later made the final decisions concerning the memo rial: the Council of Fine Arts, created hy Thendote Roowvelr's executive order, and the congressionally crested Commission of Fine Arts.  The Commission of Fine Arts. created on 17 May 1910, consisted of Burnham and Olmsted, who served on both the McMillan Commision and the Council of Fine Arts. Added to the cammission were architect ‘Thomas Hastings: sculptor Dan- iel Chester French (who would later resign when he was chosen to create the statue for the memorial); the director of decoration  at the Word's Columbian Exposition, Francis D. Millet: archu sect and preddent af the AIA (ater architect of the Supreme Court Building) Cass Gilbert; and former McMillan secretary Charles Monee, The commision had very little disagreement over the style of the monument, although there were sume fan- tastic monuments proposed, including proposals from John Rus- sell Pope for s pyramid and a nygurat.  The Lincoln Memorial is ube one moaument vo the tull thar bas developed im own historical significance, For example. Marian Andenon's performance there in 1939, after she was rejected from the D.A.R. Corutellanon Hall because she was black. still echoes in the Ametican memory. In addition, the fact that the memorsal hosted one of the most intellectually powerful moments for the definition of American democracy maintains its beloved position among Amencan memodials: in 1964, Martin Luther King, Je., explained his dream of a dema- cratic America while standing on the seeps of the memanal  Crag Mien  See also Memorial; Washingtoa, D.C., United States Further Reading  Kohler, Sue. The Cenrmecssan af Hine Arte 4 Hirt Husary, 19 T0- 1990. Neashington, DLC: The Commission of Fine Acts. 11 
Lincoln Memorial A Guide ro the Lincoln Mevearisl, Washington, DC. US. Deparimens of the Interior, 1986  Longureth. Richard (editoe). The Afi! ow Washingues, 1791-1991. Washingian D.C: Nauonal Gallery of Art, 1991  ‘Wahoo, William, The City Reautifal Morement. Ralumore. Maryland: Jahas Hopkins University Press. 1989  Tialkowski, John, Clasaral influence an she Public Architecture af Washington and Par: A Comparison of Tuw Capttal Citirr, Now York: Tang. 1988  L'INNOVATION DEPARTMENT STORE, BRUSSELS Designed by Victor Horta; completed 1903  U'lanevation Department Store (1903), designed at che dawn of the new century by Belgian architect Baron Victor Homa (1861-1947), was one of Brussels’s pioneering achievements in commercial arvhitevture. ‘The sture, located un ruc Neuve in the heart of the city’s shopping district, expanded a prospering resail business operated by Bembeim Freres. a firm specializing in haberdashery and hosiery since 1897. L’Innovation’s open plan and gland exterior wall enticed consumers by making visible a plethora of merchandise, all under une roof. By commissioning Horta, the nation’s leading architect. for the project. Julien Bern- heim realized the commercial value of che expressive, progressive mode of Art Nouveau.  Ast Nouveau (Jugendstil), the archirecture and decorative are atyle thar dominated Europe until World Was 1. was a wide- spread popular revols against the academicism of established his tanical iryles, principally Beaux Arts Claviciam. Horta, cnnsid- ered the utiginatur of dlassix Art Nouveau architecture. first tnuroduced in his Hotel Tassel (1893), had a profound respect for tradition and borrowed from such divene sources as classi- cis, Rococo, and /apoaume. He strove, however, fot a unuyuc, contemporary expression in his designs, liberating architecture Grom the comuaing of hiswecism wah flowing, oaturalistic details and modern-day materials, creating an overall plastic unity. Using metal and glass as narural components of his de- signs, Horta sought a synthesis of the structural, architectural. and ornamental,  L'innovarion, rhe first of several department stores designed by Horta, was an exposed iron frame structure with a double- paned glass facade, cenrral core, and averhead skylight. Modclod after Louis-Charley Boileau’s Ban Marche Deparrment Store in Pasis (1874), its open, symmetrical compoaition allowed far a variety of goods to be visible from many different angles buth inside and out. A wide, top-lic atrium and two narrow four-story bays disposed as bulcomes distinguished the interior space. “The store's success was linked to the amount of natural light that entered anto the heart of the building. allowing views across and beeween flours dat best presented the wares. Bold, decorative advertising signs within each depannment enhanced merchandiz- ing and made shopping an exhilarating, social experience. The facade, iodf a display piece, reflected the general profile of the budding wath iv wide, sweeping arcs: high, recessed central sec- tion; and side bays thar bowed outward roward the street. Fantas- tic organic ironwork omament thar conveyed the malleshility of the material, hanging lamps teminiwent of Oxto Wagner's Neumann Stote (1895) in Vienna, and chythmic. sinuous lines  throughout the structure produced a harmonious, coherent unity characteristic of the evocative xpirit of Arc Nouveau.  Large-scale department sores proliferated in Furope and the United States in the carly years of the 20th century, Meant to be grand, modern-day inonuments at the core of downtown, they emerged in France in the second half of the 19th cennury, replacing the small, single-itcm sbop with a bazaar-like, marker- place format. As a building type with litte precedent, che utilitar- ian purpase of department stores made them ripe foe new discov- cfies in mass construction. Iron’s inherent ability to permit fleuble planning, large glazed spans, and well-lit was in- creasingly recognized, Horta's determination to exploit che struc- tural potential of the latest materials in his design for L'Innova- tion was inspired by the writings of Exugene-Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc (1814-1879), which he read as a young appren- tice in Feance. In Frrvetions cur larchisecture (0872), the nco- Gothic architect and theoretician defended manufactured mate- tials, particularly ison, claiming they could be artikulaed to create organic forms suitable tu present times. The most dra- matic applicasiua of those principles, which deeply influenced Horta’s vigorous ure of iron and glass, appeared in 1889 with the Eiffel lower.  L Innovation was conudered the finest’of Horta's department stores and was well received by his contenporasics. The fusion of pan, matenal, and detai) within che language of Arr Nouveau animated architects and deugners in Belgium and throughout Europe, chief among them Parisian Hector Guimand, L'Innova- tion Department Store was also Hocta's last significant Art Nou- veau achsevement. Shortly after its completion, the architect abandoned his daring controntation with the cult of hismricicm and reverted co what many considered a tired scademicium. His reputation for inventiveness was revoked hy modernist histori- ans, only to be resurrected by Heney- Russell Hitchouck Jr. whe praised bis work, citing E'Innoyation Department Store in par- Goular, ass landmark of the beginning of modern architecture, comparing Horta's Art Nouveau buildings with Louis Sullivan’s skyscrapers. Others, like critic Sigfried Giedion, viewed Horta's Progressive designs aa ape uunsiions w modern architecture. especially apparent in buildings that exploited vast, unsupported, illuminated spans, like L'lanovation. He nated thar Horta’s work foreshadowed modetnism’s curtain wall and ss openness of structure and space. As 2 bridge berween | 9th-century eclectic dassicism and 20th-century modernism. Art Nouveau's new vi- sion of architectural space and organic detailing was admiced by some of the 20ch century's leading architects, amang them Mies van det Rohe, Le Cochusier, Walter Gropius, and Paul Rudolph.  Regrettably, the facade and Alor plan of I Innovation De- partment Store were radically restructured in 1922 in an acrempr (o create a rationalist, contemporary department store with » solid extcrior wall and partitioned interior, The original facade, yath its curvilinear iton tracery and capanuve windows, was comidered ta be one of Horta’s finest; however, the xtore was demolished in late 1967. months alter 1 devastating fire caused by an exploding gas cylindes claimed the Lives of 322 hunchtime niin As a” exceptional caample of the integration of mer-  ing and design, goods and mass-produced building mace-  tals, the demolic L’Lanovation open so con- sudered among the greatest bosses of 20ch-century archicecture. ANDREA Foucie PLOTKIN  See ake Art Nowveau (Jugendatil}; Horta, Victor (Beigiam)  Further Reading  Because of the dramanc decline of hit reputation. s dagruniled Hora  destroyed much of hie archive befure his death, Few drawings and  project notes remain; Horta’s 199 memas, compded by Dulicee  (1985) in a critical, carefully revean eed and annotated edition. provide  peimary, albeit retrospective, informatun. te was not unul the late  1960s, wich the founding of the Horta Mincum and restoration uf’ several of his houses. that interest 10. the archirect waa revived. Roni and Portoghesi wrace the fiet monograph on him. published is hal anal French (1970). The finn English language study of Hlurta’s com. plete works it their updated amd revised cdition (1991) Several mono graphs and exhibinion catalogues followed, notable among them Aubry and Vandenbrceden (19961, speculicts in Belgian archucectural hruory who ames: Horza’s place in the history of rationslixm, Ant Nouveau, and modernism. Although no tource existe ant Llnpovanon Depac. tmem Sore, books on Homa and Art Nouvesu inchide dix unions af)  Art Newwan, Belgam, France \cabib, cat. Houston: Insurute tor Fine Ara, 1976  Aubry, Francone, and Jos Vandenheeedsn (alitor), Morte. Art Neueeas 10 Madertum, Ghent: Ludson Press, and New York: Harry N. Abrams, 19%  Boni, Franio, and Paulo Porroghest. Vier Harta, ansltod by Marie-Hebene Aguetos, New York: Rizal, and Heussels Man, Vokar Faneur, 1991  Detnic, David, and Alawait Carew-Coa. Vira berta, Lardon: Academy Group, 1995  Dulhere, Cecile (editor), Victor Horta Mrawirn, Brunch: Minister de la Communaute Francaite de Bepque. 1985  Greeabalgh, Paul (edi), Art Nexewsa, 1980-1914, London. V sind A Publishep, and New York: Harry No Abrams, 2600  Rohert-Jones, Philippe. Arnal: Fin de Suvie, Kola: Bencdskt Tanhen Verlag, 1999  LISBON, PORTUGAL  Lisbon is situated in a paricutar geographic setting shaped by the hills of che Estremadura tableland and the Lage estuary of che Tagus River, the main symbol of Lisbon’s architectural, eco nomic. and political renewal, The ancient city is located just at the point where the Tagus joins the Atlanta Oceans in tact, afier a long journey of some 1000 kilometers, the river ends in adelea surrounded by sandbanks chat link the ocean to the Mar de Pabla (Sea of Straw), a kind of ciny Mediterranean ut: the Atlantic coat. The river and the occan are the main geographic elements that explain the cconansic and urban development of this city.  Lisbon can be considered a meeting point af various culturcs. Iisa place where many different architecuises have always coca isted: the Baixa (downtown), the commercial space of the city, desi by right-angkd boulevards in the 18th century. is per- Fam ian aoe che irregular design af the Alfama. the medieval quarter. The [talian architect Virtorio Gregotti clearly points out that  we can speak of structural characters na country which, because it has strongly defended its national identity tor almost one thousand years. has also been more capable than others of accepting, interpreting and elaborating both the input from distant lands gathered by great navigators, and the Arabian. Spanish, Italian influences which fol-  lowed ,.. cach serect has two backdrops, ts own narrow perspective and a distant reterence point, full of sunfight: the rivet, the tacing hill, the dome of a church. the old palaces,  For these reawons, Lishon is a singular place, one of hills, valleys, and slopes: of buildings made of plasterwork and tiles of blue colors (the w-called azudyos, which decorate ancient buildings): of streets paved with gladike aone and basalt: and with 4 riverfrunt hike a frontice, a symboli, apace of arrival. Probably founded by Phoenicians, the urban development of Lisbuo began in 205 8.1... when the Romans structured the first town along chece fun ictal pomes: the Gate (the hill). the civic center (the slope), and the port {the rivertroat), After the Ro- mans, the Arab occupation, the Christian reconquest, and the age of the great discovenes all contnbuted to the city’s evolution into the 20th century. when multiple Wultures and urban models coexisted.  It is evident thar since the 18ch century, the architectural history of Lisbon has been charactenzed by great urban plans that rorally reoriented the city and underlined its strong relation- ship with the river and the sea. Even in recent years, since the etd of the Salazar dictatorship (1932. 74), Lisbon has undertaken a decp transformation with many new architecnices, from the senullest of designs tu the Laryest infrastructural projects. This is a clear ctfort co bring the city into the new millennium: the traditional architectural models have been left behind foe show- ang a pew approach wo contemporary architecture. Propeets such as the Comperinan for Ideas for the Riverside Arcas (1988), the project and construcuon of Belém Cultural Cenere (1988-92), the Suraiege Plan and Lisbon Master Plan (1990 94), and the World Exposition “98 in the eastern atca prove this rurmarouind in that people consider Lisbon a riverfront city, as it was in the  iC. rete fing significant project was the World Expasinon ‘98 Gitadel (Parque Expo). placed in the northeastern aca of the city oa a five-kilometer riverside stretch on the Tagus that was an abandoned industrial area, The arhan canversion of his large tone was one of the main aim of Expo ‘98: the great new infrascuctures, such as the Vance da Ganta Bridge aiul the new tailway aapun, allowed its perfect antegration with che heart of the city. The World Exposiven focused on the theme of the oceans and celebrated che Portuguese navigator Vasco da Gama, who fiest discovered the sca route to India: another way to define Lisbon as a waterfront city oo the Adantic coast.  Expo ‘98 displayed different and brilliant ways of making symbolic architecture. A tacinaung example ss well represented by the high-tech railway station Gare Do Onenre, planned by Santiago Calatrava: glase and stcel becomes a contemporary homage to Gothic structures. Other buildings, wich as the Oceanic Paviion {planned by P Cheemayeff of the Cambridge Seven Associates) and the Utapian Pavilion (planned by R. Cruz with Skidmore, Owings, snd Merrill), are metaphorical symbols of the sea; the accurate design evukes waves, shells, and caravels.  ‘The Oceanis Pavilion, bosting the Largest aquarium in the world, 1s che most spectacular building of the citadel. At is situ- ated at che quay at Duca dos Olivas, in the heart af the Expo. Four stone towers surround the huge central tank housng the marine habitat. This building displays a particular architecture made of textured stone walle and glass ront: the whole mass, 
Gare Do Onente, by Santiagy Caliitava for ube Laboa Wodld Expo ‘98 € Dan Delgado 22 And  rising Lrom quiet waters, recalls a Large ship, The Utopian lavil- ton, too, with its particular deagn of an overturned caravel, evokes the veasels used an the past ages for che ercar discevenes, Icis a multifuncnonal covered stadium, suited for cultural and sporting events.  However. the architequral ocon at Expa “98 as represented by the austere Pornuguese Pavibon. planned by Alvaro Siza with Eduardo Souto de Moura. Built in front of the dock of the Tagus. che Portuguese Pavilion shows an extraordinary and unu- sual space configuranon: the large outside place for ceremonial functions (the pavilion is to be the future home of the country’s Council of Ministers) is designed by a curved concrete veil thar is aspended at either ends by steel cables. As opposed to many of the uuruunding buildings, Sia chow a horzontal deugn, which better relates with the shute of the tives.  In the western asea uf the city is the Belem (Quarter, the amient fortified port and a pout of departure of cargo vessels, The magnificent Belém Casttural Centre (1988-93) is ust situ: ated in this significance area avertuolung the agus, with seme of Portugal's most important monuments, such as the Loth-century Monastery Dus Jeronimos. Planned by Gregoct. 1 na large mutntunctional citadel with an opera howe, a concert hall, 2 museum, and a congress hall. ‘The whole building is faced with rough limestone offer by white frames around entrances and windaws. The internal spaces are a rigncous scheme thar ov presses a telarionship with the external surrounding landmark: the river. the Large Plaga de Imperia, and the ancient monastery.  An eather and agaificant sntervention in the urban context of Lisbon is the Reconstruction Plan for rhe Chiade (1991-94) by Siza, considered une of the most remarkable urban develop- ments currently cabung place ins Europe. The old Chiado is a transition rone between the Baixa, rhe urban arca rebuilt after the carthquake of 1755, and the Bairro Alto. the most important commercial place in the city, Ln August 1988, a fire desuroyed most part of the ancient Pombaling buildings facing the three iain roads of the quarter: Rua Do Carmo, Rua Garter, and Rua Nowa da Almada, The main purpote of the Restoration Plan was to preserve the historical and architectural value of thi. ancient district, respecting the original features of the buildings, Siza ecinvents the architectural Pombaline language in a contem- porary key: the facades reflect the simplicity of that age, austere and «vere, with modular proportions and narrow balconies. New public walkways. once clased by gates, have now reappeared and shuwed anual, unexpected courtyards. Furthermore, Siza's actual work on the very Baixa-Chiado Subway Scation might be considered symbolic of ute renaissance of this fascinat- Ing aca. Besides, even the enlargement of the National Muscum of Contemporary An, now renamed Chisdo National Gallery (1994), +5 a clear sign of the cultural and economic renewal of this old quarer. Founded in 1911 within che walls of an 18th-century convent and 3 bakery, the muscum now hosts a collection of contemporary art. The project was commissioned to J. Mf, Wilmorte. His inservention respeces both existing struc- tures but introduces a modern architectural language to enhance  the exhibition spaces. New materials, such as sted, stone, and glass, perfectly cocxist with the brick of the ancient walls. Today Lisbon is a capital where contemporary architecture is increasing, The strong economic expansion is supporting dif: ferent projeces even for educational areas, public green spaces, and housing. Furthermore, shis great waterfront city always shows its beautiful old suggestions, and “near the river, where the land is flat, it sometimes reminds af Venixe with itr golden sunsets shading off into the fog” (Siza). Stetana Arti  Ser ale Lisbon World Exposition (1998) Malagucirs  Quarter, Evora, Portugah Siza Viciea, Alvaro J. M. (Portu-  ged: Soute de Moura, Eduardo (Portugal); Tavora, Femando  (Portagal)  Further Reading  AANY.. Lashes Expe 98. teansdased by M. Cain. Ubon: Editorial Blau. 1996  Anggillo, Antonio, The Recomireuctson Phat of the Chiado; Conversation with Alzare Sita, in Casabella, N_ 628 (1995)  Collowa, Roberta, A Covered Plana, in Lon. N, 9 (1998)  Grego. Veecorio, The Great reasre of she Belém Cultural Centre, in Casabella, N. 610 (1999) di ip. Alvare Size, Kiln; Taxhen, 1999  Nicolin, Merluigi, Osservasion on Alvaro Siza's Inierrension in the Cheade, er Locus. N. 92 (1997)  Portas, Nuno, and Manud Mendes. Pormgaile. Asvinsetnera. pli wltons vent ann:, Milan. theists, 1995  ‘Santos, Paulo, Lisbon « Guide x Recent Arobiectere. London Elipsss, 1998  Sua, Alvaro, Opere ¢ progem, Milan, Electa, 1994  Sua. Alvaro. Demure 4 site, Mibn. Mona Archers. 1997  LISBON WORLD EXPOSITION  ‘Over five ventuzies ago, Portugal led che world in advancing the skills of shipbuilding, mapmaking, and wailing thar opened the oceans and continents to Europe. In 1498, Vaacu da Gains pi- oneered a coveted route wa Africa to the Indies, crossed the Indian Ovean, and weighed anchor an Asia. Two years liter, Portuguese navigators landed on the shores of the vast expanse of Brazil.  Pe , wishing to commemorate these events, sponsored the World Exposition of 1998, an intemational exposition in Lisbon, ats capital and histone principal port. However, in the context of the modern world, the planners desired to emphasize more than just Portugal's past accamplishmencs: the exhibition, therefore, also called anention to the viral modem theme of Preserving the oceans and future life. Commemorating old ac- complishmenis within a modern context and myle was key to the exhibition. Architecture became the velicle for expressing and celebrating this modernity and the future.  Expo '98 underscored the modernization of Mortugal. The exposition buildings were sited on more than $00 acres of land seeetching over two miles along the west bank of the estuary of the Tagus River ax ic enters the Adantic Ocean. The theme of the exposition was “The Oceans. a Heritage of the Future.” Rising in the eastern part of Lisbon. the exposition area rehabili- tated a decrepit dock region, The new infrastructure and build-  ings foc it comprised the first phase in a Langer plan for the rehabihtatian at the city, Expo ‘98 lasted from 22 May tw 30 September, with many of che structures built to Last indefinitely.  ‘The long, rectangular grounds of the exposition created a north-south axie with entrances at cach end. A wide, iree-shaded pedewtnan mall travened the wevtern edge of the area. Breween it and the riverbank by must of the exposition buildings Extensive riverside gardens and the pavilions uf foreign nations occupsed the northern half of the area. In the southern hall stretched the Olwvais dock, a large, rectangulir marine inlet: below it, near che south cntrance, were aduinonal nativnal pavilions. Bordenng the water of the inlet were an arena, the Pavilion of Portugal. ceremonial plaza. and water fountains. Rising from the south- etn edge of dhe inket was a ewo-story “oveanarium,” or ocean- warer aquarium,  A short east-west axis transected the center of the exposition. Te extended from the western entrance to the area at the railway and subway wana sop, to the iiverside. The walkway conncct- ing these sites wax dominated along the north edge by 3 mulri- Purpose arena, the largest building un the site, and on the south by the upper part of the marine inlet.  Mont of the buildings represented stylized nautical ae marine themes. Many were white of light-colored, brilliandy contrasting with the blue af the summer sky. Among the most distinguished was the tail and subway station (Gare do Oriente), designed by Zautich-based Spanish architext Santiago Calatrava, by which the mujority of visitors arrived. | he plattorm of che Oriente terminal shehtered uravelers under 2 high glass roof. Incertwined arched white stecl trusses supported the root, which appeared to suar with spread wings. ‘Ihe strucrure suggested both the hull of a ship and a Gothic chapel, possessing an ¢kegance thar conveyed the feeling of a providence voyage. Calacrava’s tetminal. a rippling complex of curves, recalled the hillowing sails of a Alorilla of ships.  ‘The inremarional pavilions — designed by Portugucse aschi- tects Albertu Franga Doria and Antonio Barreiens Perreira— in the north section were modular sructure chat connected the individual displays of the over 100 participating countries via patios, courtyards, and pathways,  At the northern up of the expositiva arca ruse the 40-story Vasco da Gama ‘Tower, designed by Skidmore, Owings, and Mernll (Uniced States). From the cower, which dominated the Lisbon skyline, a metal support whose profile resembled the sail of a ship curved ourward. This building was the Pavilion of the European Union. A terrace at the hase of the rower extended out onto the river over concrete piles. Stretching away from the tower lay extenave gardent that occupied almost a fourth of the exhibition area and displayed the plants and ccosyaems cncom- passed in the former Portuguese empire.  The Brazilian-trained Ponugucse archivent Regine Cruz, to- gether with Skidmore, Owings, and Merrill, built the cenual multipurposs arena, known as the Utopia Pavilien, Able to seat more than 15,000 peuple and occupying over 300,000 square feet, the circular building bud a concrete floor from which pine- wood trusses curved up, spanning almost 400 fect. The mam- moth wooden arches were particularly effective. conveying a sense of encompassing warmth. and afterward it became the Major arena in Lisboa.  Alvaro Siza designed the Paviliun of Portugal, the offical reception area of Fupo ‘98. Siza's elegant budding, constructed 
Gare Do Onente abouil of radread cracks © Dan Delgado 2? Arch  around an interine courtyard with an open plaza for public cere- monies, demonstrated his grasp of minimalice design principles. Located along the marine inka, the Porcugal Pavilion juxtaposed the accanarinm, one of the most ingenious buildings of Expo ‘98.  Named the Pavilion of the Furure and designed by Peter Chermayeft, the oceanarium rose from the inlet like a docked ship. Consisting of two buiklings connected by pedestrian bridges, it hatsed 4 complex af tanks displaying over 20,000 types of fish, occan flora, and fauna, The largest tank held a volume of water equal to several Olympic-aize swimming pools,  ‘Over 10 million people attended Expo ‘98, the only interna. dona! cxposiion ever hdd in Portugal. Expo “98 was thus a singular opportunity for Portugal, a country with a lung histori- cal hentage. to reassess and express its role in the modem work! and in . Arvculauing dhis role curough archutecture, the exposition’s historical chemes resonated with a fucunsex ambi- ence that was framed in a landscape of dynam, interacuon be- tween structures and environment.  Rowanty AL RIEDINGEK  Ser abo Calatrave, Santiago (Spain): Exhibition Building; Lis- bon, Portugal; Siza Vieira, Alvaro J. M, (Portugal)  Farther Reading  Bartney, Marcus, Arvhutreture of Ratt The Way Abmsd. London. Academy bditions 199%  Lisbon Expo 3: World Exhibinon Guide, Oporo: Livrana Crvibeagaa Editora, 1998  Moltenbrey, Karen. “A Tale of Two Cines—How CAD Stnultancouly Pranstormed an Old, Run-down Senne of Jasbon into a Werkd’s Fair Site and New Ulaa-modern ‘Cary wathun a City,” Computer Graphus World (1999), p. 34-43  Pasilan of dre Future, 1998 Laben Wortd Expontion: Officast Catalogue. Lisbon: Parque Expo ‘94, 1998  Tigucitas, Luis, Ledaa World Expy 98 Proece, Barcelona: Edieorial Gustave Gil, 1998  Usepae Pavikon .... 1998 Lusbon World Exposition, Lisbon: Parque Expo “98, 1998  Viagew ao stewlo XN = A Walk through she Cenmery, Lisboa: Parque Expo “98, 1998  LONDON  London, “rhe unique city” (as Steen Eiler Rasmusen atled it in bis popular book firs published in 1937), can never be cap- Cured in a tingle image but tantalizes with a succession of contra- dictory takes. A collection of villages. parishes, boroughs, and former suburbs, specialized as to origin and devination—the Cay wieh its financial and legal institutions, Westminster with its political bodies, Mayfair and Kensington with their residences and cultural insticutiom—iv architectural character is as varied 43 if component parts, which comprise an incoberent if dynamic  metropolis that developed piccemeal, largely through private ini- tative. London experienced no grand governmental scheme w connect the separate enclaves in a disciplined manner. and indi- vidualism has reigned architecturally and ushanistically.  fe was not until 1889 that the London County Council {LCC) was established to exercise some measure of control over the 12 metropolitan boroughs: for yean, the City remained reso lately oumside ics jurisdiction, tnitially, the anhitrcrural impact of the LCC, which had its own designers, was visible chiefly in the housing estates i erected throughout London, but after Wodld War Ul, it dominated construction in a number of cate- gpories. In 1965 the Greater London Counal (GLC) was tormed 00 regulate the expansion into surrounding counnes; London grew from 117 10 60% square miles. and the population reached some 8 million. The GLC was dissolved in 1946 under the Tharcher government, forcing the individual boroughs to take the initiarive and grring impctus to gigantic private schemes for commercial and residential develapment.  Queen Victoria's son, Edward VIE, came ro throne wher Great Britain wai at the height of its power and glory. A grand veale was necensary for the Largest world capital of an imperial gation, and accordingly. the favored style in an era chat still considered revivals indisperuable was the English Baroque of the $7 th and carty 18th cenusics. Edwardian architecture brieled with the heavy rustication, broken pedimenus, bokl comices, and dustered columns heloved of Christophe: Wren and Nicholas Hawksmour. Whereas Victorin buildings had achieved thew size by the addition and multiplication of relatively fine-grained derail, Edwardian architecture was massive and sculpcural. In many cases. Vicrorian polychromy via red brick dressed with pale stone was retained, though many buildings were entirety of Pondand or Bath stone. Regrettably. a great deal of new construc: tion occurred at the expense of cxisting buildings, especially those of the !9th century, considered stylistically outdated and spatially inadequate for perceived new urbanistic and program- matic: requirements. Thus, che mudesily scaled and sconogeaphs cally consistent structures of the late Georgian Regent Strect development fell victim to discrete huge buildings like the Picea- dilly Howe! {190$—08) by R. Norman Shaw (1831-1912), the lave Victorian colossus who defy adapted wv Edwardian asic,  Public and private buildings. especially government struc- tures (Central Criminal Cours, Old Bailey, 1900-06, by Ed- ward Mounrford [1855-1908]; Lambeth Town Hall. Brixton, 1905-08, by S. Warwick and E. A. Hall; London County Coun- cil County Hall, Westminster, 1908. 31, by Ralph Knorr [1878~ 1929), theaters (Coliseum, 1903-04, and Victona Palace Munic Hall, 1911, all by Frank Matcham [1854-1920)), and urban interventions {Admiraly Arch, 1906861, by Aston Webb (5849-1930). The French Classica) Beaux-Arts manner alo made its appearance (Ritz Hotel, Piccadilly, 1903-06, by Charles Mewes [1860-1914] and Arthur Davis [1878-1551]; Selfridge's Department Store, 1907-1928, comumenced by the American Francis Swales (1878-1962) and completed by Sir John Burnet [1857 1938]). Neo-Georgian formed a less entrav- agant, more vernacular nationalist counterpoint (0 necharoque. Sir Edwin Lutyens (1869-1944), set generts, lacked ww both traditions, manifesting his originalicy in his very first London building, the premises for Counsy Life magazine (1904), The heritage of the Arts and Crafts movement was ill alive. particu- larly in domestic architecture: C. F, A. Voysey (1857-1941)  erected characterisically simple but endearing reudences in Ken- sington, and C. R. Ashbee ¢1863~ 1942) constructed nwo highly orginal houws at 38-39 Cheyne Walk in Chelsea (1899-1904) A few busddings, like the Bishopsgate Inssirure (1895) and Whitechapel Ant Gallery (1897-1901) by C. Harrison ‘Town. send (1851-1928) and the Blok Friar Public House, remodcted in 1903 by H. Fuller Clark, reflected the cflcct of che Art Nou- yea  Edwardian style untinued into the reign of George V—the Gitst member of the House of Windsor, and king fren 1910 to 1936—although surtaces were smoothed, the armament was cut back into the wall plane rather than boldly extruding, and the attitude toward hsstorical styles became more . Such stripped, mannerist classicism can be observed in Lutyens’s first large London building, Britannic House, 1924-27. In some cases there is a fusion with Art Deco. the “other” modern style, which was gleefully welcomed in London, whereas functional met resistance. Thus, Broadcasting House (1932) by Val Meyer and Warwn-Hart with sculpture by Eric Gill, (1882~1940) 1932, and the headquarters of the Roval Institute of British Architects (RIDA) 934, by (Goorge) Grey Wornum, 1888 1957, could be amigned with equal justice m the clasical ar Devo wap. The capital is well enduwed with unequivocal Deco, both in tems of interiors (Cambridge Theatre, 1930, by Wimp- eris, Simpson, and Guthrie with auditornim by Serge Chermay- eff (1901-1996) as well as mayor buildings, such as the Daily Tekegsaph (1928), by Elcock and Sutcliffe with Thomas Tait (1882-1954), and she Daily Express (1932). by Sir Owen Wil- fam (1890-1969) with Elhs, Clarke, and Arkinson, bath of which employ vast swathes of gheaming glass and chrome.  (In its modemistic Deco classicism, Broadway House for the London Underground, a stepped high-rise clad in Portland stone with sculprures by Gill, Jacub Epseits, and Henry Moore, reser. bles hath Broadcasting House and the RIBA. It was designed ins 1927 bry Charles Holden (1875-1960), who had the good forse -and the alent tv be chosen by Frank Pick (1B78- 1941), an executive at London Transport and onc of the more adventurous patrons of contemporary design (he commissioned avanc garde posters and the logo sull in use}. Hukden’s Uniler- ground stations are among London's finest architectural works of she 1930s. Uhowe for the Piccadilly Line ar Arnos Grove and Aawn Town (1930-33) blend functionalism with Scandinavian and Dutch influences. a combination seen throughout London. Connnental architects like Gunnar Asplund of Sweden and Wil- fem Dudok (1884-1974) of the Netherlands, who enlivened the geometrical purity and severe surfaces of the International Style through the ingenuity of their compositions and continued 10 employ traditional materials like brick, were moee congenial w English rave than the émigrés who began tw arrive from Central and Eastern Eusupe in the wake of totalitasian tepresion.  Nevertheless, their presctice would eventually act as a solvent of conservatism, Although some. such as Walter Genpius, Erich Mendelsohn and Marcel Breuer. remained only briefly, others such as che Hungasian-born Ernd Goldlinges (1902-1987, houses in Willow Road, 1937-39) and Berthold Lubetun (1901-1990) from Georgra in the Soveet Union, feft a lascing legacy. The larter, in 1932, formed the Tecton Partnership with students from che Architectural Association (AA). the rduca- tional stronghold of che avant-garde. leceon's buildings foe the Regent's Park Zou, capecially the Penguin Poot (1933. 34) wth  
its canulevered platforms, and the privately financed High Point im Highgate exuded a confident elegance that reconaled many Londoners to modernism. The nine-story crucilorm Highpoint 111935), woth 60 Hats, and the seven-story Highpoane If (1938), with 12 maisonettes. offered rare amenites like 4 basernent ga- tage, a common winter-garden. and maids’ and porters lodgsngs.  Lubetkin belonged to the Modem Architecture Research (MARS) Group, founded in 1933 as the Botish branch of CIAM. Most of che members were homegrown modernists like E. Maxwell Fry (1899-1987; Sua House, 9 Frognal Way. 19.35, one of the first Corbusian villas in England) and Ove Arup (1895-1988; he owabliched Arup and Arup in 1938 and ic be- came the major engitecring firm in the British lales, still active as Arup Associates), The Canadian Well Coates (1895-1958), another MARS founder. who had designed some interwn for Broadcasting House, participated in anc of the most micresting experiments in London in this interwar period: the creation of *bsokon” (acronym for fsometric Unit Construction) in 931. This firm. directed by J. Craven (Jack 7) Pricchasd (1899-1992), was intended to produce for busy urbanites existenzenimam flats and houses chac would be fitted out with standardized units. All were to be designed by Coates. whose most radial achieve- ment was the concrete-surtaced, pallery-accessed Lawn Road Ser- vice Flaws (1932 - 33; Gropius, Breuer, and Laslo Moholy- Nagy. all formerly connected with the Rauhans, stayed rhere for various periods). Installed with built-in Isokon furniture, Lawn Road ‘was inspired programatically by the Narkofin collective facility in Moscow and formally by the Pavilion Sisisse (ax was Coater's mate bourgrep 10 Palace Gate apatumenes uf 1939). Another interwar architect who deserves citation is William Crabtree (1905-1991). Although he oever attained che professional re- nown of che MARS founders. Crabuce incroduwed the curtain wall in his Perer fones Deparment Store on Sloane Square (1930). Remunncent of Mendelsohin's Schucken Department Stores in Germany. Peter Jones nevertheless is an unusually well-rsolved indigenous example of 1930s modernism at ats most compelling.  During World War Il, nor only did building cease but Lon- don suffered irreparable lowes of its architectural aock. “Whe mandate after 1945 was ivconstruction. especially of hausing, To meer che target ef 100,000 new dwellings amid postwar shoctages of material and manpower, new techniques of prefa- brication were adoperd, and new typologies such as the slab and the tower block joined mare traditianal layouts. In boch mavenal and aestheuc regards, quality at first was poor: w counter this, the LCC broadened the responsibility of the Architect's Depart- ment, Many figures that became distinguished private practi- tonen, such as Colin Si. John Wibon (1422—) and Peter (1923- 2002) and Alison (1928-1993) Smithson. gained their first prac- cal experience there.  During the 1950s and 1960s the LCC. along with hocal coun- als, erected vast housing estates in Innee and Ohter Landon. Many were unsmaginative and shoddy, stigmatized as “Welfare Stare” archirecture, but several. such as Alton West ar Rochamp- ton near Richmond (1955 -59), were internationally hailed. A sort of Ville Radicuse made pakuable through i pictureuque testing and unusually careful execution. Alton West comprises five Unités d'Habituation, cunningly set against a sloping hill, and filtcen }2-story towers arranged in twu groups, as well as low-rise tertaces and housing for the elderly, The cartier Alton  Fast (1952-55) taker its clues from Scandinavian public hous- ing—the hw blocks have pitched roof and concrete wall are clad in Kiinker brick—and while doubdess ingratiating, is less powerful.  Private architects also worked for local councils. Denys Las- dun (1914-2001) invented a new type of public housing — the cluster block —for the Bethnal Green Counal, and die West- munstet City Council sponsored 2 competition for Churchill Gardens, Pimlico (1950-62). won by A. J. P. Powell and J. H. Moya when they were ill students at the AA. fr is an inner-city version of the CLAM Siadiung. 7- co 11-story blocks run perpen- dicular to the nearby river, and slabs ranging from three to five floors parallel the Thames. The estate includes a covered shop- ping atcade, pubs, and restaurants, Its vocabulary is reminiscence of pre-World War TH moderniam. Whe taut glazed and brick surfaces and aniculation of the (rane make the dwellings more open and Jes monolichy, chan one finds with customary council housing.  In a burst of postwar opumum, the Festival of Britain had been held un 1951 1u showcase modern architecture as suitable tor other projects besides housing and to iniriate development on the South Bank of the Chames. A number of the temporary pavilions anticipated the High-Tech movement of the 1980s in cheir light-weight marerials and novel structures, The only permanent building, the Royal Festival Hall (LCC Architects Department with Robert Matthew. J. Leslie Martin (1908- 2000), and Peter Moro) is a successful fusion of Fnglish/Scandi- avian empiriasm with continental élan (thenggh somewhat curred in recent years by additions and interior renovation). The ineenors were beautifully crafted, and che complex interlocking spaces functioned in ways thar still command admiranon. The uulucme ol Le Corbusier, cuosiavendy the favorite European Piancer among the Satish (Mics van des Rohe did not attain the popularity he enpoyed in the United Sates until much later), is discernible in the use of pidons {suilts) and in the articulstion of the glazed skin as scparate Irom the structure.  Bue this is the Le Corbusier of rhe 1920s and 1930s, whereas at would be the Late Le Corbusier, che man who made béton braz (rough concrete) 4 byword, who would dominate che London architectural scene. exercising a not accessarily benign influence for mote than two decades. The grim concrete bunkers of Queen Flizabeth Hall and the Hayward Gallery that in 1964 joined the bestival Hall on the South Bank, designed by dhe UCC/GLC team, sull evoke dislike and dismay. Yer the movement known asthe New Brutalam, shorthand for the ubiquitous employment of rough concrete, moved tar beyond imitation of Le Corbusier's postwar pesctice: Its essence is ethical. not stylistic (Peter and Alson Smithson. with historian Reyner Banham, coined the term). “Brutalism tres co face up to a mass-produced society, and drag a rough poetry our of the confused and powerful forces at work” (Arrbrtectural Design, April 1957). A \cading force in Team X's revision of modernist planning orthodoxy, the Smith- sens wished to balance technological innovation with humaniatic concerns, reinforcing fruitful interaction and encounters: be tween urbanites, bringing wgether in one enacmble the functions thac had been separated uut by CIAM. Their primary effect on London's architecture was polemical: they built litde, and even the theory promised mote than u delivered. The Smithsons’s compeution design for the Golden Lane estate in 1952 was never realized, but its ingenious linking of public and private space to  create a community was considered exemplary. Such Beutalise Concepts were in Linge measure tealized ar the conc rete-and- brick Barbican Estate (1959-79), constructed aver a hombed-out section of the City be Chamberlin (Peter. 1919-78), Powell (Geoffrey, 1920-), and Ban (Cheistot, 1921 - >, With ity elevated sarcets thst protect pedestrians trom the traffic below, itv mixture of tower blocks (the tallest residential aructures in Europe st the cine) and dabs, and its deft intcemungling of cultural entity: ons (art galleries, a theatre/cancert hall), exposiuun spaces, pat dem, fountains and dwellings. the Barbican creates a discrete community within the City uF London,  Amid che bulky masses of stained concrete and agpresiely sculptural, shabbily detailed behemoths that disfigured the urban landscape in the 1960s and 1970s, 3 few promising works lived up to the post-war dreams of the Welfare State. The Alexandra Road complex (1969 79) hy Neave Brown (1423-1 for the Lon don Borough of Camden Archies provide: housing blocks that embrace a training center tor the menully handicapped. a school, community center, and a local park. These social build ings form the head. wheres the bine hin two pedestrian sercees circumnavigating the path and grving ses to the dwellings to either side. Although incvitably constructed of é¢ten brur, the thoughtfully Lumpused sethack sccnan néires private terraces fot the inhabitants.  By 1980, Brutalsm had can its Woutse. but aunana was not yet at hand for London. Mediocre buildings come in many dit ferent guises and materials. and campant private development undermined inuch uf che sovial agenda chat had ruled die LOGS GIC, One result was che appearance for the first ume on Lon don’s honzen af commercial skyscrapers. Phe Nasional West minster (“Nac West”) Cower (1981) by the Swiss-hors Richard Seifert (1910 2001) was the fiest 1a a regecutably conunuous sequence of undistinguished rall buildings, bur relict was ar hand, A generation bom in the 19306 was poised some 50 year Liter to initiate an caciting new chapter in the life of London atchiie ture. Alubough cach of chese ronewers hus a recognizable personal approach to design, the contenders may be conveniently prouped under two rubrics: High-Tech expunenes are faithlisl tu dhcis aredn of using suphusicared tevhinubogies to create component based, light, fleaible, suructurally capressive. furure-orientad buildings unencumbered by past references. lenule cables. pre- fabricated metal clemenes, large sheets of glass, and occasxinally mesh and doth are favored over masonry and concrete. Post modem practitioners draw on a vanery ot saurces and may not ochew new structural and material possibilities, but overlay these with traditional means and historical motifs, often in the intereses of contestualicm. a cancept wocdully lacking in | ondon in the heyday of Beutalism. Whicheverone’s preference, both  have revitalued London with buildings of asonishing euuberance, flais, and relevance.  Bueh tenctencies owe something te 4 mayor British figuee not mentioned heretofore. because tragically, he burlt fede in the city he loved, the exceptions being the Clore Gallery extension to Tate Britain (1987) and the posthumous No. } Poultry Street. The early work of James Stirling (1926-1993) anticipated High-Tech: he was one of che first t0 look back to 19th-century marvch like the Crystal Palace for inspiration. Then he devel- oped his own brand of Postmodernism, a bend of the dasical and the industrial thar influenced architects who had been his students at Yale University and the AA,  he AA alo brought forth Archigram, whoxe concepes Rich- ard Ragers {1933-4 first actualized in Lloyds of London (1978 - 86). Thie sriking 12-story building gleams and glows amid the congested heart of the Ciry, its stainless acel-clad concrete anc ture hung with shining service duces and pods containing lavato- Ties and mecting rooms, its glazed elevators a wource of endless lascination as they fututisticully climb and amend: [tu hakony- pitt atria, traversed by ewalators, adds to the excitement.  Though Rogers and Norman Foster (1935—) were briefly pater in Team 4, their work is quite different. Fouer’s compo- sitions are tat les complex and do not velebrate servant spaces or clevate the guts of the building: the focus is on the delicately detailed glass surfaces rather than the ssructure, often demateral- ved. The architect's double-height attives with flats above (and a penthouse for Foseer himsclt 0 the south bank of the Thames between Albert and Battersea Bridges (1991) typifies the weem- ingly ardess armplicity that suggests levs is more.  Two other bandon architects af thie generatinn whe arc mas ten of High-Tech ate Michael Hopkins (1935-) and Nicholas Grmubaw (1949) Hopkins is the author of dhe Mound Scand at Lard’: Cricket Stand. St. John's Wood —a fever concoction of tents. guy ropes, and steel strut that make an ideal viewing pavibon. Gonuhae ss pechaps ute more determined of che two to use induaraleed components. The Eurostar Terminal at Wa- terloo Station (1989-92), with ws chartsmatic asymmetrical cx- lenut Uusecs supporung 4 testing glass rool, displays his grasp of intricate engincering formulae.  Postmodemism has many branches, ranging from fairly direct iautation of Palladian and Georgian buildings. advocated by Prince Charles and execured by Quinlan Terry (1937—}, among others. co a neavernacular that stems from the tradition of the Picturesque. to the more successlul synthesis of modern tech: nique, atten High-Tech, and histarical seferences. Terry Farrell (1938~) is the chief exponent uf the latter approach, ax demon- stated in a series of monumetital Londvn buildings: Vauahall Cireas (the headquarters for Military larctligence) an the Thames (1988-92), which has an Att Dev flaeur, and the gigantic mized use develupments of Alban Gate, London Wall (1988-4), and. Tmbankmene Place at Charing Cross (1988-96). Orher archi- teas who cinploy this technique are John Oueram (1934-; Pumping Seauon, Stewart Suect. Blackwall, 1985-88) and Piers Gough (1946~; The Circle, Butler's Wharf, 1987-90) of Camp- bell. Zogolowtch, Wilkinson. and Cough (CZWG).  Another development that commenced in the 1980s was che dominance of the private sector. Whereas for decades after World War II it was the publicly funded housing esrares char constituted the largest agglomerations in Landan, in the boom petiud of the Thatcher years, private commercial development. much af it in the City and caseward—capecially the disused Dockdands—hecame the largest agglomerations. Broadgate (1985-91), a virtual “City within the City.” boasts pubs, resuau- rants, shops, gantena, public sculprute (Richard Serra, George Segal. Barry Flanagan), and cven a skating rink to cheer the houn of the 25,000 office worker who inhabit 1s Large blocks. Its 14 buildings are a mix of Postmodern Pacturesque and Ameri- an Corporate Modern. Phases I-IV {1984-88), were designed by Arup Associates, and for phases V-XIV' (F988-91), Skidm- ‘ore, Onwings, and Merrill (SOM) was called in because of their experience with the rapid construciun of ueet-framed buildings tumusual in London up until then)  
SOM is not the only major Amenican pracace to work in the capital an recent yeary, barker, John Russell Pope (1874~ 1937) designed the Elgin Marbles wing of the Beiush Museum (1937-39) and the Duveen Sculpuire Hall (1937) at the Tate Gallery, Millbank. In the 1980s, several Anvcricans gained entry: Venturi, Scott Brown, and Associates designed the Sainsbury Wing of the Nasunal Gallery (1986-90), and Cesar Pelli (1926-) built one of the tallest commercial buildings in Europe at Canary Wharf in Docklands (1990-95). Canary Wharf bad been planned by SOM, which constructed its own all office building there and established a London office in 1986. Rick Mather (1937-), having studied ar the AA, has his practice in London; works include renovations and a new courtyard at the Wallace Collection (2000), as welll as the master plan for the South Rank (2002).  ‘There have been times in 20ch-century Lorton when archi. textural deugn displayed a conain wonsistency; naincly, during the Edwardian cra and during the long, period of postwar tecan- struction Lasting from 195) chrough the 1970s under the dutni- nance of the LCC and the GLC. Bur for much of the ume, London's architecture has heen extremely heterogeneous. Dur- ing che first hall of che century, it was conscrvauve, and radical tendencies were few. During the middie years, it was necessanly utilitarian, with social needs coming before aesthetic experiment, During the last two decades. however. architecture in London has achieved a level of excitement and experimentation that has merited international revugaiun. With the Millennium fund- ing for large architectural proces, London in the 21st ccatury will undoubtedly witness more and mare architectural triumphs.  Hun Stauna  Nev cle Aschigracs Art Deco; Asplend, Erik Gunaar (Swe- dea); Benham, Reyner (Unised States); Beewet, Marcel (United Senses); Brutalism; Foster, Norman (England); Gropius, Walter (Germany): Lasdus, Denys (England); La- betkia and Tecton; Lutyens, Edwin (Enghad): Meadelsoha, Erich (Germany, United Staves) Pope. Joho Russell (United Seaves); Postmodernism, Rogers, Richard (England); Mies van det Rohe, Ludwig (Germany); Ssinsbary Wing, National Gallery, Landon; Skidmore, Owings aad Merrill; Smithson, Petes and Alison (England); Stirling, James (England); Team X (Netherlands); United Kingdom; St. Joha Wilson, Colin (England)  Further Reading  Understandably. the keerarure about such a vast cary is eself vast, Inng- Incrable runographs on indivdual architects cust, and permdnaks arc important soutces, expecually Ze Architectural Review, Archrrectand De- sngn, AA Folex Biwepring, and the weekly [he Architects Journal, Surveys of madern archwecture in general and Beiush archnecture in parucular include analyses of amparuint London buildings. The books ksted below concentrate on the capital.  Amery. Colin, Four London Anhusevs 1985-88 Uhipperficld, Mather, Parey, Stanton Willams, Cambridge, Masuchinetn: MIT Bros, me  Banham, Reynet, The New: Brusalism Echus or Aesthetic, Lamborn Architectural Press, 1966  Barker, Fob. and Peter Jackson, A Hraary of Landen in Mape, London: Barry and Jenkins, 1991  Beatrie, Ann, A Revelwian in Housing: LOC Homing Archiacct: and Their Work, London: Architectural Press, 1980  Benton, Charlane, A Differras World: Emugre Archatect: in Broain 1928-1958, London: RIBA Heine Gallery, 1995  Clous, Hugh tediter), Lendew Hisery Aras, Landon: Times Booka. 199t  Davies, Colin, High Tech Archuecture, New York: Rirzoli Enemavonal, F988  Faher. Laanet, A Arokrn Ware: The Relwilding of Fagland. 1940— 1980, Landon: Allen Lane. 1981  Glancy, Jonathan, New Beitsh Arhaeceare. London: Thames and Hudson, 1989  Glancy, Jumathan, Serad and Corcein. London: Verio, 2001  Greater London Council, Heese Suez Home: Hewisng Densgned by the Landon County Cownel and Gresser Londen Council Arcmercn, 1888-1975, foreword by Kenneth Campbell, London: Academy Faitons, 1976  Harwood, Blame, and Andrew Sam, Londen, -aploring England's Heritage Senes, London: Her Mayesty’s Stationery Office. 1991  Jackson, Alan, The Pobsser of Archierture, Votonto: University of Toronto Press, 1970  Jencks, Charles, and Andecas Papaslabis tediturs), PestMedern Trinmpés 1 London, London: Academy Edinors, 1991  Jone, babward. and Cheuophes Woodward, A Grade a0 the Archneceure of Landen, London: Wealentedd 1983; and Nxubva, Ind edinon, London; Weidenfeld and Nicolion, 1992. Repeineed with cuereations, 1995.  Lambert, Sam (editor), New Archuecture of Landen. A Selection of Aralding: ance 1930, London: Architecasral Awociatinn, 1963  Leapman, Michael (editoc), London. The Evolanon of « Great City, Landon and New York: Wentlenfeld and Nichukoa, 1989.  Manwell, Robert, Mer Bintrsh Architecture, New York: Praeger. 1975  Mottcer, Nocl, The Best af Brituh Architecenrr, 1980-2000, Landon bard FN. Spun, 1993  Murray. Peter. and Robert Maxwell, Consrunperary Hrisish Arclitects, Munich und New York: Prewel, 1994  Peto, James, and Donna Loveday ieditors), Afodern fintain, 1929 1949, London: Druga Muscum, 1999  Powell, Kenneth (clitor), Werdd Gre: Londew, London. Academy Falitiorn, 1993  Rasmussen, Stren Euler. Lande. che Unique City, Cambridge, Mamachuctce: MIT Press, 1974 (reprint of 19.57 edinon. New Yark: ‘The MacMillan Co. 1937; new revised edition. Landon: J. Cape. 1948, Reprint of 1948 edition. Cambridge. Massachuserts: MIT Press, 1974.  Saint, Andrew, and Gian Dartey, The Chroarcles of lomden, London: Weidenfeld and Nichohen, 1994  Saunden, Ann, She Art and Architecture of Londen: An HUbutrawd Gunde, Oxdord Phadon, 1984  Seaborne, Mike, Photographers” Landen. 1839-1994, London: Muncum of London, 1995.  Service, Alistaw, Londen 1900, New York: Rizoli Internacional, 1979  Trench, Richard. and Elhs Hillman, Lendea ander Loudon: A Subterranean Grade, London: Jaba Murray, 1984  Weinreb, Ben. and Chasophe Hibben (edison), The London Encylopedia, Landon: Macmillan, (944: sevised edition, 1995 (sete publuber)  LOOS, ADOLF 1870-1933 Architect and critic, Austria  Adolf Loos's infamous denunciation of ornament helped change the course of modern architecture not because it was the firse  time that an architect recognized the widening gulf between decoration and structure, but because it was the fine ame char an architect theorized a detrimental relasionship between decora- toon and cultural evolution. In a setics of demonstrative build- ings. built mostly in the Austeo-Hungarian lands beeween the late 18906 and 1914, Loos argued chat the direction of modern culture points away from the adornment of buildings, On the reat facade of the Steiner House (Vienna, 1910), Lous produced a masterpicce of austerity, a white stucco bor of symmetrical windows absent of any symbolic references to the traditions of monumental architecture. For the strect frontage of the Scheu House (1912), this cime aymorenncally mused through seag- gered coof terraces, Loos similarly composed a huuse of severe Beomerric Lines. plain white surfaces. and unframed windows; and, in the seminal essay “Omament and Crime” (1908), be wrote that “the man of our own cimes who covers the walls with erotic amages from an innct compulsion is a criminal ur a degenerare ... culrural evolution is equivalent to the removal of ornament trom articles of daily use.”  In the 19th century, art historians had aonerved of che ans within 2 grand narrative that was inherendy cither progressive or regressive, Examples of the latter were almost exclusively the province of non-European peoples, whose ares were judged 60 fie on a spectrum ranging from ube savage and barbaric: (for  example most hunter-gathetet sucicties) to the static (such as Egypt or China}. Loos, in his essays, contrasted the most “bar- banc” of artistic cultures—the baroque tools and bodies of re- cently studeed Pacific Island cultures [the “Papuans.” as he called them) -- with civilized contemporary Europe. Among the later, he seated. ornament had became an ourdared fetish and wasteful social expenditure, in conflict with modern notions of propeicty, efficiency, and proatuctive labor management.  Loos found his comemporary paradise largely in England and the United States. He ecmarked on numerous occasions that architecture's true course of evolution led toward English values of restraunt and axctxiam. Between 1843 and 1896, he traveled throughout the eastern United Sates and experienced firsthand raw productive budding forces unfcrered by nostalga for the past, the poswhilicy of creating an architecture of the moment. On fus return to Vienna, he undertouk a series off articles for the influential Newe Free Prese chat sought ro inculcate foreign ideas as models for Viennese design. These efforts eventually resulted in the creation of a short-lived. sell-published journal, Das Andere (The Other), devoted to the introduction of Anglo- Sason culeure into Auvia.  Toos criticized the backward educational incthods of the majoe Viennese art and design schools. The truth of modern architecture could never emerge by means of hixcuncnt copying,  Michaclerplarr Building (or Haun Goldman und Salanch), Viena (1909-11) Photo © Mary Ann Sullivan 
of decorated detasly; his resulted in the counterfeit architcceure of Ringstrasse Vienna whete enure neighbuthoods appointed the elabaeate sculptures and florid maklings previously reserved for the palaces of the arutoctay. Indeed, advances in industrial production had bed to the widespread practice of tadang inex: penave and machine-made ornamented facades onto relatrvely simpte buildings. Austrian cines. Lous chimed. were becoming Ike the Potemkin villages that Catherine the Great passed through sn the poor Russian provinces. fabe fronts erected to cover the poverty underneath. Insofar as omamented buiddings pretended to be something that they were not. Loo regarded them as examples of the overall corruption of language. thought, and architecture in contemporary times.  HW Lous condemned historicim, he ales condemned die at- tempts of the newer generation of Viennese aniasts and atchiivets © came up with 9 contemporary artistic and ornamental lan- guage. Although he was well aqusinted with memben of the Vienna Secessing and the German and Austiai varianu of the Art Nouveau (thar is, Jugendsul and Moderne). he felt that shea attempts to unity art and industry were fruitless and nostalgn. After 1900 architeets such as Joset Marta Olbrich. Jasct Hott: mann, aid Hermann Muthesms increasingly became his adver- saries, As Loos wrote in the osay “Cultural Degeneranon” (1908). it was unnecessary to fabncare a contemporary styke from the catlective work of arusts and mdwenalise in the manner of the German Werkhund,  Most important. une did nat find the style of the times in the works af arises. As 1 00s described in his essay “Architecture” (1910), art and architecture have complerety different aims. Art it individualistic and revolutionary: architecture b collective and comervative. based on valucs of purpose and coinfon. Few uf Loos’s ideas were nsore cuncuvensial than this amertion that art should be excluded trom everyday archiustural design, int face, from all design, with the exception af monumencs and funerary shrines,  in designs for chairs and tables and tur the untenor of the Cafe Museum (Vienna, 1899), Loos delincated an architcctural syntax of restraint and propricty. In an cvolutionary sense. he sought to continue what he saw as the last sane epoch of design, the Predermenrt era of the mid-J9th century, a time when middle-class design embodied values ul pracucality. simplicity, and clarity, This approach did not, however, exclude all histwn- cist elements, as indicated by the Duric particnes on che Villa Karma (Clarens, Switzerland, 1904) or the Michaclerplae. Building (Vienna, 1910). Rather, it emphadzed the creaivn of an architecture chat coukd fit in with both itv times and its surroundings, Although the spare surfaces of the Michuclerplary Building stand apan from its ornate historicist neighburs, its tripartite compowtion draws frum traditional Viennese dexgni Loos was grcatly bothered by criticism that the budding was nat contextual.  tn Loos’s buildings, beyond che jolt of seeing archueceure absent of amstic screens and filters, visual imerest emerges from the qualities of surfaces and the progression of intetior spaces. Rooms in the Kaetner Bar (Vienna, 1907-1 9118). the Michaeler- plz Building. and the Knize Store (Vienna, 1913) are covered with sumprunus marerials: contrasts of dark mahogany with brass and mirron, walk of flowing marble. and deep toner of oak and cherry wood paneling. Loos's lavish reveements are the result of his idea that cach material porseses its own languige  of form If one material covers anather, it should strive to the fullese extent to avoid any hine of replication. Loos's Raumplan Gpatial plan) ia present in many of his houses and even some public buikdings, It erubodies the idea of a series of interlocking spaces connected via staecases actos the levels of a building and dasmases the separation by secdonal Hoon (or planes) character- ssuc af most an hutecture. tn has veuvre Loos relied heavily on the effect of shock. As one of the earbest avant-garde architects, opposed tw the waditional archnectural establishment as well as so-called progressive archi- tectural movernents, he was polemical and intentionally enig- matic. Throughout his life, Loos was deeply concemed with realizing the clusive qualities of the contemporary moment and thus bringing architecture closer to the design process that results un a well. cur suit. As his diverse logacy pointy out, however, the logic of contempaeary times that Loos a0 avidly waght out often yielded an architectural portrait of the modern age disunguished by controversy and double entendie. Mivcau Scurwarsin  Nee alo Art Nouveau (Jugendstil); Deurscher Werkbund; Hoffmana, Josef (Austria); Muthcsins, Hermana; Otbrich, Josef Maria (Austria); (Germany); Stciner House, Vienna; Vienna, Austria: Vienna Secession  Biography  Born un Brinn. Moravia (now Brno in the Czech Repubhe). 10 December 1870, son of a stonecutter and sculptor. Suadied ar the State lechnical School, Reichenberg. Bohemia, 1887-88; studied at the Dresden Volyeechnik. Germany. 1890 93. Worked and traveled in the United States, 1893-96, inchiding vinits to New York, Philadelphia, Se. Louis, Chicago, and the World's Columbian Expunition of 1893. Regan caseca as an at- chitece a4 assistane in the building fire of Carl Mayreder, Vi enna, 1896, Published essays. an architecture and design far the Newe Frese Pree, Vor Sacrum, and other periodicals, 1897 eo 1914; founded the journal, Deus Andere (he Other: a peewdical dedicated tu the intenduction of Wester culture to Austria), 19035. O4. Active in independent atchiecctural aod inserior de- sign practice, Vienna, from Late 1890s. Rounded Bauschule (School of Architecrure), Vienna, 1912-14. Officer of the re- serve for the Ausitian Army during World War L Chief architect of the Housing Department of the City of Vienna, 1922-24. Lived in France (Pans and the Riviera), 1922-27. Retumed to Vienna to continue archirectural practice, 1928. Died in Kalhe- burg, 28 August 1933; hady shifted to the main cemetery of Vienna, 1934,  Selected Works  Cafe Muwum, Vienna. 1899  Villa Karma, Clarens, near Monticus, 154 Kartnct Rar (American Bar), Vienna, 1907-08 Stewner House. Vienna. 1910  Mochaclerplaty Building, Vienna, 1911  Scheu House, Vienna, 1912  Homer Howse, Vienna 1912  Kite Store, Vienna. 1913  Strascr Mouuse, Vienna, 1915  Max Dvorak Mawuleum, Vienna (peoect), 121 Rufer Huuse, Vienna. 1922  Grand Hotel Babylon, Nice (prone), 1925 Trutan Trara Howe, Paris, 1926  Maller House, Vienna, 1928  Millet House, Prague, 11130  Austrian Werkbund Seedlung, Vienna, 1952  Selected Publications  Traredem 1900-1940, 931  Ima Leere Goprachen, 1897-1900, \9R1; as Spohen into the Ved. Collated Enayy 189°~ 1900, ieamlaned hy lane O Newman and John H. Sruth, 1982  Due Petemekimvahe Siadt 1897-1934, WBN  Adolf Loos sm Spiegel der Zritgenaven, cdited by Adolf Oped, 19S  “Architecture,” “Ornament and Ceime,” and “Cultural Degeaceanon,” in The Architecture of Adolf Toor, tranalated by Wilfned Wang, with Renamund Diamond and Robert Gadudl, 1985  Konfromationen, Schofien son und Ghee Adolf Loo, editert bry Adult Oped, 19488  Further Reading  Amendolagine, Francene, and Mawumo Cacciasi, Qihus abe Lowi a Witageartern, Rome: Oficina, 1974  Gravagnuolo, Henedeno, Adolf Lew: teria ¢ eperr. Milan: Idea Rewkhs. 1972: as Adolf Loos Theery ana Works, translated by CLL Evans. New York: Ruzzoli, 1982  Loos, Adolf’, Adoif Laor, edited by Heinrich Kulha. Venn: Scheoll, rst  Moos. Stanistaus von. “Le Corbusier and Loos.” Assrmbtzge. 4 (1987)  Manz, Ludwg. and Gustav Kanssler, Der Anvhucht Adolf Loos. Vienna: Schell, Urb: 24 Adolf Loan: Planers of Modern Archutecnere, cranstaicd by Harold Meck. New York: Praeger, and London: Thames and Hudson, 1966  Resaclada, Max (edutor), Rexmmplan cenas Plan bre, Deltt: Dettoe VUneversivare Der, WORT: at Raruuypica tenses flan Libre. Adolf Loos anal Le Corbusier, 1919-1930. New York. Resuli, 1K  Rogers, Emesto, “The Reality at Adolf Los.” Casebelis contents (Nowembes 1994)  Ruksimis, Bushhards, and Roland Schachel, Adolf Leos. Leber und Werk, Salzburg. Resides Veelag, 1982  Scheten, Roberto, Adolf Loos. Arvbiteerare, 1903 1942, New Vink: Momacclli, 19%  Schwartet, Minhell, *Ethnologice of the Priminve in Adalf Loos’ Wraings on Omament” Marteonih-Coninry Cantexo, 18 if 1994)  Tourmikioris, Hanayotis, Zens, Pans: Macula, 1991; as Adolf Lom, translated by Marguevine McCcoldtick. New York: Princeron Architecrural Press, 1994  LOS ANGELES, CALIFORNIA  Charles Moore expliined his attraction to Lox Angeics as the home of nwo aschitecrural Landmarks: the Gamble House and Disneyland. Although neicher of these is within the boundaries of the City of Los Angeles, they both belang to Los Angeles and describe che range of fantasy and possibility discovered there in the 20th century. In a place known for suburban sprawl, 1 15 impossible vo discuss the city except as Greacer Los Angeles, whote boundaries are the San Gabriel and San Fernando Valleys on the north, Orange County and Long Beach to the south, Pomona on the cast. and the Pacific Ocean to the weet. Ft is a horizontal city. interrupted by pockets of skyscrapers, a sprawl- ing megalopolis eweeping everything in its path to the sea. It  abuts or surtourtds and includes several other incorporated ctues, including Pasadena, Beverly Hills, West Hollywood. Glendale, and Sana Monica. Fase Lox Angeles conjures up a vastly differ- eat image than West Loy Angeles or South Central.  Several themes run throughout the architectural development of this aime and pla. They in Inde the concept of experimenta- tion, verging on cadical at times: the inverporatun of the Lind wwape, whether it wax bringing the outdocn in, the indoor out. ot more often, the ambiguity of the difference beewren the cwn; the unquestioned dependence on private transportation: the veo- eration ol cheap building muterials aud building cechmques; and aseatch for a usable and meaningful history, in a city known for being new and for selling che dlusion of heing somewhere else.  fn the 20th cenuury, Los Angeles became the city of curting- edge architecure in the United States, In replaced Chicago, al- though it never developed an cponymous school. Rather. the freedom of the place encouraged several styles that shared an antitude of conscious newness.  By 1900, the City of Los Angeles waa 120 years old and had been past of the United Stares for half a century. Its Native Amaikan and Mexican history was exchanged for a myth, the dream of a Spanish Eden ax depicted by hooters. Hallywoad, and health-seekers. The “Port of lows.” as it was womeumes ualled, drew newcomers, including chen, architects, and some- tomes developers. who were walling to rake risks and experiment with new ways of living. [he newly created movie industry brought people to Los Angeles who understood the creation of place and who had money to spend.  Climate was no obstacke. There were 360 days of sunshine every vear. Earthquakes, tires, and mudstides challenged the be- nign environment, bur ficled the modernist urge tp bulldose and rebuild. The weyrtirion war mostly all imported, but easily adapicd to the environment, shaping it and giving it an exotic look. The image nf the palm tree became an instantly recogniz- able wyrnbol of the place. The land embraced the American as- sumption of the single tamily home and private transportation. The backyard was pettectod here, and chere were more autome- biles than children. ft as no accident that most architectural Lodinaks bere were residential. Public images, whether catly postcards o¢ contemporary picture books, are likely to parry streets lined wich houses or an individual house with a rose garden more often than a public building or shot of downtown. Living focused an the murdones: houses accommodated steepi porches, outdoor dining rooms, swimming pools and backvand grills, and the beach, which was a thared backyard.  The California Budding at the 1894 World's Columbian Faposition sold both the image and che dream of California. Fach facade represented a ditferent miwion. and inside were displays luring tourists. Houcues distributed fresh oranges and pamphiess chat declared “Oranges for health; California for wealth,” The building inutiated a passion for the Masion Revival style depicting a romantic and wmewhat suntized view of he- tory. Phe building stsclf was copied in Julia Morgan's Los Ange- jes Herald-Eaaminer Building m 1912. Pasapets. bell towers, arcades, white stucco walls resembling adobe, red-tiled roofs, and arches appeared in railroad sarions, <chools, shops, Protestant churches, and private houses throughout the Southland and found their way across the country in the cwo decades preceding World War I  
Visiting that Workd's Fait. but more interested in the Japa- nese Pavilion were Frank Loyd Wright and Chatley and Heney Greene, the latter brothen on thes way to California. Irving Gill worked in Louts Sullivan's Chicagy office while the fair was being planned. before conung to southern California. All were intrigued by the pavilion and its flexible walls thae screened space rather than enchosed it, Che ethereal building was reflected in the work of all these architects when they came 10 Los Angeles.  Influenced by the quality of the light and the original mission buildings. Irving Gill abstracted che architectueal traditions ot the Spanish-Indian missions into a universal geometry, Elis ar chitecture was based on four principles found in nature: the straight line of the horizon; the arch from the dome of the sky: the circle seen when a stone touches the water: and the square, symbol of power, justice, honesty and firmness, These elements translated into grand homes, women’s clubs, sxhools, and work- ers’ housing that all used the same principles ar different scales. He experimented with new construction techniques, such as tilt-slab wonstruction, in which the concrete walls were poured in place horizontally, cured, and lifted into place. Gill rejected traditional moldings. chair and phate rails. and gabled roots, opt- ing for a clean look that focused on the geometry of the space. He designed shefver with munded corners wo they would nor cnllect dus, saving Ishor, expecially far women. His roms Jooked dean and were clean becaune they practically cleaned themselves chrough buih-in vacuum deanen and concrete fsors. The houses were uttanged on the site te maximize small yards, minimize mainicnance, aud eavvurage privacy, instead of ven tering dhe house un the muddle af dye fot with the rooms murtor ing the neighbors. .  Mission Revival gave way to simplicity in the Crafrsman houses dewgned by Charles and Henry Greene. In styte from the turn of the cencury until the 1920s, the Crafteman otyle emphasized nature. The Greene opencd up the interioe spaces and the exterior walls with an emphasis on the Landscape, natural colon. Native American fabrics. colors, and dhe light of the Sourhwest. Influenced by Shingle-style materials, Praitic-style honzontality, and Japanese flexibility and charity of space, Greene and Greene developed the reformist ideals of the Acts and Crafts movement inte an ar. ‘They areeacted wealthy clicats whe couk! afford handmade houses and were willing eo sleep outdoors in the winter.  The Gamble House (1908. Greene and Greene) in Pasadena is theee stories call, but appears to hug the ground because of its borizonaality, overhanging routs, and shady patios. le grows from the Lindscape out of the arroyo stone found there naturally, gradually mixing with clinker bricks to foern 4 mansion disguised asa cottage. Redrooms and the informal dining room are out- door where the suggestion of walls and a dominant couf provide the symbolic shelrer of a tree house.  The Craftsman style was democratized into thousands of middle-class homes. The bungalows among the orange groves drew inspirapon and form trom many sources. They were one or one-and-a-half story houses with informal and open plans, multipurpose rooms, a prominent hearth, and a variety of exte- thor stytings that ranged from the practical to the exotic. Buslt-in bookshelves and buftets saved space and fumber, and the houses featured mass-produced Mision furniture and simple stained daw.  “Bungalow fever.” as it was referred to in the press, was highly contagious and quickly spread throughout the United States. Annual bungalow books were used like pattern books of cartier generations, 10 buyers coukd min and match according ta budget and taste. The houses even came prepackaged in do-it-yourself Jats available from the Law Angeles-based Pacific Readi-Cut Homes, as well as dozens of other companies.  ‘The quintessential Lus Angeles home of carly 20th century was period wolonial revival: English Tudor, french, Moorish, and especsally Spanish. Spanish colonial revival was made fash- ionable by the 1915 Panama-California Exposition held in San Diego to celebrate completion of dhe Panama Canal. Vhese white houses decorated with red-tiled roofs and ironwork became sym- bols of the sun-filled lifestyle available in Los Angeles.  Spanish-Italian-Moorish buildings came to be called Medi- tertancan by realtors, and che name not only solved the peablem. of catcgatizing a hybrid style, but also a lifestyle to go with it, evoking blue skies and white cottages on the hilbide, where ane could wander barelout and breathe fresh ait. The white “adobe” looking plaster walls shimmered in the sunlight, framet by palm trees, and frone lawns, creating an exotic but familiar pattern. The front porch becaine a colorful tiled courtyard. Rows ot rwo-storied white. Mexican-tiled duplexes with arched entries soon laced the city.  Frank Lloyd Wright, ou fan of period revival, completed the Baensdall House in 1921, followed by the Millard, Storer. Ennis, and Freeman Houses, in which he pursed a new system of do it-younelf low-caxt huusing. All had a vaguely Mayan theme. Working with his son Lloyd Wright (who had eudied landscape design with Fredericte {aw Olmated and architecture with Irving Gill). Wright experimented with the common concrete block. The blocks wese formed in situ using 1and from the site in the aggregate. Each house had its own design for pattemed blocks, which wete chen woven together with plain and picresd- parremed blocks ro create a variety of shapes, designs, and sizes. ach block had a semicircular edge, that when placed next to the adjacent block created a full circle. As the block walls were erected, stecl rods and concrete were inserted into the horizontal and vertical shafts. chus knirring together a steel-reinforced com- crete wall. Any family could design, create, and build their own houte ar a minimal cost of both material and labor. Lloyd Weight continued to pure this technique in the following combining the patterned blocks with cxpanses of smooth con- crete fo create unique are picturesque settings. He later pro- duced one of the moxt perfect af transparent organic buildings us the Waylaser's Chapel of 1949,  Frank Lloyd Wright employed Rudolf Schindler to supervise eanstruction of the concrete-block houses, Schindler had been bern in Vienna and studsed under Onto W: » but remained in Los Angeles for the rest of his carcer he developed an oeuvre chat he termed “space architecture.” Encouraged by Wright that the reahty of architecture is the interior space, not the exterior wall, Schindler continued his mentor's demuareriali- zation of the wall to define space. Schindler's own house (King’s Road House. 1922) included experiments in alternative living arrangemenns. The plan incorporated a pinwheel design for two at tore families ca share, with a common kitcheo st the center, Each adult had his of her own studio/living space with bork an indoor and an outdoor room. The ruofed interior had a blank wall for privacy and s wood and ghiss wall overlooking the roof-  leas exterior room edgod by shrubs and different levels of plant- ings. ‘The families shared labor and respected each person's aleer- nating nceds for creative space. privacy, and community  Sharing the house with the Schindlers for a brief period were the Neutras. Richard Neutra, also born in Vienna and brought to Los Angeles by Frank Hoyd Wright, made Los Angstes his permanent home. Neutra’s Lovell Health House (1927-29) epitomized and advanced she International Style along Califor- nia lines. The house, built ever 4 ravine, comprised 4 stoel cage sutpended from the roof with the upen dkelecan articulated on the finished exteriors, Because uf the mars-producible sted franc, the house could be erected quickly to Micsian precision. It was built for Dr. Philip Lovell wo gove form ww bis health principles and evidenced Neutra’s own thoughts abour health and survival through space. Ford headlights on the sturwell echoed rhe ma- chine metaphor. Neutra continued wo dematetiatize walls and teok in his unique versions af stech and glass space containers scattered throughout the city.  Californian Cliff May buill on native traditions, modernizing them to merge che romance of the past with the glamuur of the peerent in conremporary ranch houses without the ranch. They were bused on the aesthetic and the plan of the carly rancho and havens surrounding a wourtyatd. The house was une room deep to capture the breezes, and cach room was accessed by att  Eastern Columbia Budding (1929), deagned by Claude Brefman © Robert Landau/CORBIS  outdout hallway. Having no formal training, May used what he knew worked and repeated this vernacular building thousands of times, reintroducing Lox Angeles to its architectural roots. ‘The California ranch house was exported all across the United States, including places where neither the climate ovr tadion supported it.  Art modeme, specifically Art Deco, adorned Los Angeles’s public face. The skyscrapers of 19200 in Low Angeles were typi- tally encased in a hybrid of billboard neon and Cubise Modern architecoure. Art Devo utilized new materials uf (ound novel usce for tradivonal marcrials, such 25 plass, chrome, stoel, terra-cotta, patent Icather, cork, Bakelite, and Formica. Ornament, banned from Eurupean modertinm as overty decadent in the eadly part of the century, found expression in moderne in the form of colorful chevrons, spirals. sunbursts, and abstracted and stylized animal and human forms. Lon Angeles had some of the must exuting Art Devo buildings in the country. induding Morgan Walls. and Clements’s 1928-29 Arantic Richficld Building: Bullocks Wilshire by Parkinson and Parkinson in 1928; and Claude Beetman’s 1929 Eastern Columbia Building. They spar- ded like jewels in green, blue, rurquoise, and gold with beacons fighting che tape like light reflecting off diamonds.  Other buildings, such as Las Angelea’s Central Library, de- signed by Bertram Goodhue and Cartcton Winilew in 1922- 26, melded Deco, Egyptian, Spanish, and Italian Ressaissatie tw create one of the landmarks of downtown. The City Hall by John C. Ausan with John and Donald Parkinson in 1926-28 mixes Deco setbacks with a Byzanrine rorunda, wpped by a copy of the ancent Mausoleum of Hallicarnasus. Parkinson and Parkunson’s Unioa Scation (19391 combined Arr Deco with Spanish in a unique environment that bridged the two halves of the century. It was the last great salruad station Suilt in che United States. superseded after the war by the succest of air traffic. Fach of these buildings has an air of ver design abous it. In fact, they have often been used a truvie seis to reptescnt a variety of building cypes  The other half of art modcmne was Streamline Maderne. alas wrong in the Los Angeles tradition. Streanuline style popularized the hurisontal speed of new modes of transportation in the 1930s, with its imagery supgeued movement. The shape of chat movement ecfleciced modern transports: durigsblo, streamlined focomutives; shups, and tcardrup-shaped cars. Movie theaters, such as S, Charles Lee's 1939 Academy Theatre, competed with medical offices, shops, small offices, and post offices to attract attention through swirling pattems. horizontal speed-lines, round windows, and undulating chrome railings. The best cxam-  ples were the ewin Heets of Wurdeman and Becker's 1938 Pan  Pacific Auditorium and Robert Derrah’s Coca-Cola Bouting Plant, completed in 1937. The latter resembles a ship sailing. down Central Avenue with porthole windaws, raised doorways. simulated rivets in the white tucco, and a captain's bridge. After World War U, Las Angeles wan again the center of posewar modernism and innovation, John Eniensa, editor of Art and Ardnieture magaune sponsored the Case Study House program to promote California architects, raise the aestheue standards of postwat housing, and show the public chat people sould live in glass houses. Richard Neutra, Ecto Saarinen, Charles and Ray Eames, A. Quincy Jones, Rafael Soriano, Craig Flwnad, and Pierre Koenig, among others, were commissioned wm build real houses for a variety of real chents that showcased 
the California lifestyle. Between 1945 and 162, 24 completed projects demanscrated the possibilies for living fovered by the Loe Angeles climate. All dealt with the landscape and cncouraged outdoor living, Roofless dining roums contained autdoor cuok- ing ranges, and larchens hod interchingeable cubor panels made of Formica. Most had uinble coum dividers. pass-throughs 10 the kitchen. Eames- and Saarinen-designed turrushings, snd glass walls facing the backyards. ‘The houses were typically better known by number than by same, buc they were far fram impes- sonal. Case Study House #22 by Pierre Koenig (1959), cantile- vered from the hilkide, was the most dramatic, With nesther neighbours nor ground visible fram the house, it appeared 10 be a glass box floating aver the ary.  The fucare was still evident in hoeues like Lautner’s 1960 Chemosphere Howe. which ruse up aut of the vanyon on a sentral pole. of Bruce Gotl’s1 984 Struckus House, a cylinder of srood and glass with overlapping op att illusions and protruding Gixbeye tens windows.  fn che last two decades of the century, Frank Gehry domi- nuted the city and the world with his unustial busklings of cheap materials and radwally new perspecuves, beginning with bis own house in Santa Monica (1978). Blix work dealt with callisons of space, color, and form, as well as time, matenab, and some- Times the neighbors. He has inspired other Los Angeles archi- tects, including Enc (wen Moss, Steve Ehrlich, Hrederick Fisher. and Morphosis. whuse work can be seen throughout the area from Venice to Culver City.  Ending the century were two projects that reflected the range of 2th-cenmury modernism: Richard Meier's sprawling Getty Conver. dmultaneausly overlooking the Santa Monica Freeway and the Pacific Ocean, and Gchry’s Disney Cuenecr Hall down. town. Both buildings survived public discussion, protest, and succes, setting precedents for che next century.  Macuit Valen vine  See ako Art Deco; Art Nouveau (Jugendstil); Bungalow  Ceaftsman Style; Gehry, Frank (United States); Getty Center,  Los Angeles Gill, Erving (United Seates); Greene, Sleary M.  and Charles S. (Unised Seates); Lovell Health House, Los  Angeles; Meier, Richard (United States); Morgan, Julia  Waited States); Neutra, Richard (Austria); Panama Pacific  Exposition. San Francisco (1915) Schindler, Rudolph M.  Cautia, United States), Williams, Paul (Uniecd States);  ‘Wright, Frank Lloyd (United States)  Further Reading  Gleye, Paul, Ube Archetecture of Los Angeles, Los Angeles, Rosebud Books, 1981  Hines, thomas 5.. "Machines in the Garden, Nutes toward a Histary of Modern Los Angeles” in Sex, Deuth, and Gad in 1A, edited by David Red, New York Panthrun Boule, 1992  MaCoy, Esther, Fire Cabjornia Architects, New York: Renhold, 1960,  McWilliams, Carey, Souaern Califorms Connery An Lilaad on the Land, New York Duell Sloan aid Pearce, 1946,  Mover, Chasles Willant, Peter Becker, and Regula Camphell. Thy Cin Observed. Las Angeles; A Guide to ter Acchuecnery and Landscape, New York: Rasdom Plouse. 1984  Scart. Allen John, and Edward WW’, Soja (editan). Ae Cig fan Angrics and Urhan Theney at the End of the Tuenneth Coun, Berkeley: University of Califomia Pree. 16  LOVELL HEALTH HOUSE, LOS ANGELES Designed by Richard Neutra; completed 1929  The master buikders of 20ch-century architecture asserted their domestic design philowuphics through their groundbreaking houses. What Le Corbusier achieved with the Villa Savoye (Poissy, France, 1930), Ludwig Mies van der Robe with the Tugendhar Villa (Brio. Czechoslovakia. 1930), Frank Uoyd Wright with Fallingwater (Bear Run, Pennsylvania, 1938), and Alvar Aalto with the Villa Mairea (Noormaku. Fintand. 1939), Richard Neutra accomplished with the Lovell Health House, built in Low Angeles in 1927 29. These architect: succeeded in breaking away from cradition and the eckecticnm of the 19th. century bourgeuis reidence to design for a new 20ch-cennury family. Changes in modetn bfestyle required not only different spatial arrangements of the home but also an architectural image reflecting social and politcal shilts and rhe advancement of sc eme and technology. Modcen residential architecture became, in che hands of Le Corbusier, Adolf Loos, Mies, Neurra, and others, devoid of decoration, embellishment. or ornament. Acs thetic strength and purity lay in direct and rruthful expression of erructure, function, and materiale.  Aantrian-American Richard faseph Neutra (1882~1970} moved to the United States in 1923. Before settling in Los Ange- les, he was influenced in Vienna by the piuneering architecture of Lous, Outo Wagner, and Josef Hoffmann. With fellow frend and archivect Rudolph Schindler, these men were active in Vi- enna along with painters Gustav Klum and Egun Schide, the compaser Amold Schoenberg, and che farnily of Sigmund Freud. Neurma worked with Erich Mendelsohn in Germany and chen with the firm of William Holabird and Martin Roche in Chicago and Frank Loyd Wrighr ar his studio and home, Taliesin, in Spring Green, Wisconsin.  Preceding Neutra, who saldicred through World War I. hia friend Schindler arcived in the United States in 1914. In 1926, Neutta atid his wife Dione and infane son joined Schiodker and his wite Pauline in uhcit hime on Kings Road in West Holly- wood, Designed by Schundler and bute in 922, the airy, open- plan house became acclaimed as an architectural masterpiece. At the time, the Schindler house was a place. for bohemian gather- ings of artists, musicians, dance. and the like. Schindler and Neurra went on to collaborate on an entry Far the 1926 interna- tional design compeution for the League of Nations budding in Geneva, Swicertand. Their project, unforninately, did not place in the scandal-ridden campetition in which the jury rejected the nontraditional designs of ssoderniam,  The aime year, in 1926, Dr. Philip Lovell, a naturopath, and his wife Leah hired Schindler tu build them a house on Newport Beah. They commissioned Schindler at the same time chat Leah's sister Harriet and her husband Sam Freeman hired Weight to burld theis iconic textured-block home in Hollywood. The staring modernist Lovell beach house, rising on massive congrete fins, was recognized as Schindler's finest residence. However, unforcunate maunderscandings between Lavell and Schindler prompred the patron to hire Neutra, not Schindlee, as the architect for his city house. This turned our to be the moat important opportunity in Neutra’s professional life.  Thea Ld —  é  Ler  HOUS=  vecmnes ME secty STETES RaTOMN Pate crAVeD  a)  (HEALTH 4COUSE }  ose meena ge reg amv omic amenican  Be lia ee  Deawing by Richard Neutra. Lovell Health House, Los Angle © Historic American Buiddngs Survey. abrary of Congress  In bas work as a physician, Lovell promosed drugiess healing and active, healthy sexuality, His Le Angele Times column, titled “Care of the Body," championed prevention. cxescise, reg: tar sunbathing, and vegetarianism. Neutra, shanng Lovell’s in- terest in physical fimess, thus named the residence the Health House. The simple, reductive. dean lines of modernist archisec- ture were in step with such a wholesome and evennal approach to dean living,  Raitt on a spectacular and precariously steep site, near the city’s Griffith Park, the seructure was the first sted frame houw ever erected in the United States. The prefabricated steel mem- bem were designed with only one-cighth.inch tolerame. Neutra working as # contractor penonalty chouked every enc of 1000 prepunched boltholes and precut cover plates. The spreading stecd skeleton of nine levels of gieders was constructed in a mere 40 hours. A thin shell of canceete coated every wurface (floors, partitions, and vertical enclosures) that was not made of glass. Steel cables supported the slabs and balvonics from above. The suspetision construction and apen-web bar-steel jounts, also used in a residential building for the first time, saved material. Uhus, plumbing pipes and eclectic conduits could run freely in all directions. saving money as well. The building loomed over a swimming pool composed of a thin reinforced-concrete shell sinpended within reinforced-conceete portals curring into a slope.  eared LOVELL (MEALTA ) HOUSE ote par a taal sia ay Sg ate  The architectural expression of the Lovell Elealth House was derived directly from its skeletal stecl frame, clad in a lightweight synthetic skin. ‘The asymmerrical composition of dramatically suspended fluor was generated by the site rapography, the views to surtounding nature, and che open-plan af the house, allowing for maximum ficcibility of space and cireulation. The physical and visual integration of the interiors with the exterior of the house was nut only an acknowledgemenc of modern aesthetic but alo an appropriate reflection of Lovell’s expansive perianal ity and lifestyle, The progressive ideology af the Gicnt as well as the centeal heme af Neutsa’s “hiorealism.” linking architectural Aovm with overall physical health and wellncs, was embodied in the design of the Lovell Health House. As emphasized by Neutra in his book Surminal throwgh Dergn (1954), nothing can be further removed from the exclusively formal motivations of International Style modernism than the philosophy of che Lovell Health House. According tw Neutra, “An architect who prace- ally applies life-ccience co fife, best learns from home design Such acnvity will belp him and helphilly keep him going also on all other projects thac rebate co human beings. All he creates is for organic human wellare™ (1962)  Penk Lizow  See aise Falingwater, Bear Run, Pennsylvania; Mics van der Rohe, Ludwig (Germany) Loos, Adolf (Austria); Mendel- 
noha, Erich (Germaayh Neutra, Richard (Austria); Schin-  dies, Rudolph (Austria, United States); Tegendhar House,  Beno, Czech Republic; Villa Maires, Noormarkku, Finland;  Villa Savoye, Poissy, France  Further Reading  Hines, Thomas 8. ReAerd Newine and the Sanh for Modern Archiseorure: A Bingraphe and Hotory, New York: Oxford University Peesa, 1982  Neutra, Richard, Wie ews Amerske? Stuttgart: Vertag, Julius Hoffmann, 1927; coprated Munchen’ Kraus Repeinn, 1990  Neurra, Richard, Swrecral shrough Deve, New York: Ontord Uneversity Press, 1954  Neutra, Richand, fr and Shape, Now York: Appleton -Ceneary-Crotes, 1962  LU YANZHI 1894-1929 Architect, China  Las Yanzhi was one of the mast significant of (hina's so-called firm generation (di ides) of architects, who received thar archi- tectural traming abroad between 1915 and 1935 and returned wo China to practice. Lu is renowned for two major commissions, the Sun Yat-sen Mawoleum in Nanjing and the Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hall in Guangzhou (Canton), both completed after his untimely death in 1929.  In 1911, when the Chinese Revolution overthrew the last Qing emperor, Lu entered peewtigions Qinghua University m euudy engineering. At that time. Qinghua did nit have a full fledged program of architectural studies, | lowever, students pos- sesang clear aptitude in architecture, construction, of related elds, had the option of applying 10 academic programs in the United Seates under the terms of the Boxer Indemnity Fund, established in (908 as a subobanhip fund for Chinese students.  Ta 1914, Lu began studies in mechanacal engineering at Cor nell University, where he switched w architecture and graduated in 1918. He subsequently worked briefly as a draftsman ar the New York City firm of Murphy and Bana. in their Oriental Department, which was beginning wo design 4 number of com- anistions for China. The commissions were pnmarily campus plans, for Qinghua University, Yale-in-China (Changsha, Hunan), and Fudan Universicy (Shanghai). Lu assisted with the drafting and relaied design casks asseciated with thee and other projects until 1919, when he moved to Shanghai to work in Murphy and Dana's cewly established branch office, Henry Murphy, the partner who spearheaded his firm's China-bused operation, was impressed with Lu's skills and hoped that he would work io Shanghai as une of the office's key architecss. Lu assisted in some of the designs fur Ginling College for Girls (Graling nuzi dacue) in Nanjing, which was onc of the ows daborate examples of what Murphy called an “adaptive Chinese Renaimance.”  In 1921 Lat keft Murphy's firm and began working with Chinese parmer, he established the Southeastern Architectural and Engineering Company (Dongnan jianzhu gongs). one of the eartiost Chinese aecborectura firms. Mast of his design work from the early 1920 remains largely unknown. [n 1924 he began to collaborate with Chincw colleagues in Shanghai, including  Fan Wenthao and Zhuang Jun, on the creation of an archixec- tural wociery whereby Chinese architects could discuss issues and share strategies about architectural cheory and practice. The Society of Chinese Architects (Zhonggwo jianheshi xuctasi ) came to fruition in 1928.  In 1924, following the death of one of Chin tant political leaders, Dr. Sun Yat-sen, the Nationalist: govern- ment organized China's firs majoe architectural competition of the 20th century; it was to design a mausoleum for the fallen leader, on a doping knoll of Purple Hill overlooking the city of Nanyng. The compeution. which attracted 40 entries from China and abroad, provided a focus for Chinese architects to text their mettle against forcign competicors. and Lu’s first-prize design propelled him into the architectural vanguard. Because of its high standards of design and construction, the mausokum (1926~31), which was completed ewo years after L's death, was widely prased by contemporaries and has become a major Chinese monument of the 20th century. [ts prominence was aided by the fact thar San Yat-sen was hailed as a revolutionary hero by the Peuple’s Republic.  Ta’'s concept was tm reflect, within an architectural formar, Sun Yat-sen’s ideals regarding the combination of traditional Chinese philosophical Feiniple with up-to-date scientific prac- tices, To achieve this, Lu retained Chinew archisectural forms, such as the temple and a traditional gateway ( pailow), but usi- lized reinforced concrete as a major structural macrial, Visitors approached the site via a hong, cypress-lined causeway, and they entered it through the psilon. They then ascended a long flight of steps to reach 2 memorial hall that, because of its glazed-tile roof and sweepeng caves, resembled 4 Chinese temple, but was erected using a concrete frame in-filled with brick walls and faced with Kowloon granite. The hall contained a seated statue ot Dr. Sun, similar to the Lincota, Memonal in Washingtue, D.C. Sun Yat-sen’s tomb, located hebind the memorial hall and accessed chrough it, was (and scilf is) within 4 double-shelled concrete dome, also faced in granite. Lu designed the tomb wo that the exterior form would be similas co imperial tombs found chewhere in China. lawever, on che interior be used the preos denrs of Napoleon's Tomb in Paris and Grant's fomb in New York, so that viewers could reflect on the cenrral sarcophagus from behind a balustrade.  Ia April 1926, a month after the mausoleum's groundhreak- ing, Lu wen a second competition memorializing Sun Yat-sen. This time the memonal was set in Guangzhou, the city where ad first mobilized his political forces and where Chiang Kai-shck’s Nationalist government was inaugurated in 1926. Lu's concept foe the Memorial Hall ( jénsensang} wax cimilar to thar of the mausoleum in the manner in which it sought w balance Chinese architeceutal form with Western construction technologies, Nevertheless, it was differen because of its site (within, rather than outside the city of Guangzhou), its size (210 by 240 feet in plan, 160 feet in height, and sccommodating 5000 people), and its structural nature (a steel frame with teinforced-concrcre walls). Vuh-Kee. the company that initiated the hall's cunstruction in April 1928, became China's foremost coateuction firm until 1949, when it briefly moved to Hong Kong and then became ecestablished in Taiwan. After Lu’s death, design supervision of the hall was assumed by Lu’s friend Fan Wenzhan.  Jertrey W. Conv Ser aio Ching Shanghai, China  Biography  Born to @ privileged, wealthy family in Tianjin, China, 1894. Studed in Pasis untd 1908; attended Qinghua University. Beijing 1911-14: degree in engineering; attended Cornell Uni- versity, Ithaca, New York 1914-18: degree in mechanical engy- fcering and architecture. Drafteman, lism of Murphy and Dana. New York 1918-19 drattsman, firm of Murphy and Dana, Shanghai 1919-21. Established Southern Archite tural and En- gineering Company 1921. Founding member, Society of Chinese Architect, 1928. Died in Guangzhou (Canton) 1929.  Seleceed Works  ‘Sun Yat-sea Mausoleum (fest prise, competitive), Nanking, 1941 Sun Yat-soa Memesia} Hall (first pric, competion), (anton (now  Guangzhou), [931 Selected Publication  “Memorials w Dr. Sun Yat-sen in Nanking and Canton,” fer Hastern Revirw: 35 (4929)  Chen, Mingli, “Zhongshan fing yanshu jingtu yun shi shila fieshan® [An lntrodition to the Architecture of the Zhongshan Tornb! Chien cle sib, 3 (1981)  Clémeni, Pierre, anal Zhang Viang, “Lo Yanthi.” ia Dicheanace hel ‘Architecture du XXe Side, cdited by Jean-Paul Midian, Pariv; Hazan, 1996  Cody, Jetiney W.. Bwsddiag in China Henry Ko Murphy's “Adapeive Architecouee,” 1914 1935, Hong Kong Chinne University Prew and Universny of Washingsan Press, 2002  Fan, Liang. Wo airs chengshen xiansheng shesling (Regarding Mr Zhongshan's Tomb] Nanjing: Jiangss Gui Chubanshe. 196  Fu, Chiao ching. Zhomggen padian dipane xin jutnshe [New Chinew Archasecture in Classical Strdes|, Taper Taipei Nantian Shusvo Faxing, 1993  Muang. Jiande, “Lu Yanzhi yu zhongshan ing” “Lu Yanzha and the Thooghan Tomb], Remea, 5 (1986)  Liu, Fan. “Jingzhong changming dingte: Lo Yanzhi sheyi zhonshan ling de yuyi” [The Desig of le Yanebis Zhongshan Tomb! deancdushs 57 (994)  Luo, Zhewen, “Zhongshan big,” Wor wa 3 (b9G5t  Nanjing shi danganguan, Zhongshan lingyuan guanti chu, Zhongshan ling damgan shihac xuankain ‘A Compilation of Archival Information shout che Zhongshan Tomb]. Nanjing: Jungsu Guji Chubanshe. 196  Nanjing shi shengaac wenthi ailiso weipuanhus, Zhongdan Lngrusn shila, Nanpng: Nanjing Chubanvhe. 1989  Rowe. Peter, and Seng Kuan, Architecrral Encawmters with Kuencr and Form in Modern China. Carmboilgy. Masachusers: MIT Press, 2002 -  Wang, Shuren, “Zhongguo pndai jianzhu vu pancho abiguo,” Chien chy betich poe, 4 (December (978)  LUBETKIN AND TECTON  Architecture firm, England  Berthold Luberkin (1901-90) and the Tecton group were among che leading practitioners of modern architecture in Great  Britain in che 1930s and the years immediately following World War II. Lubetkin is credited with introducing inta the United  Kingdom progressive architectural ideals from che Continent. Although the firm's influence declined in the lave 1950s, its reputation remained intact, having created iconic images of the Unternational Style in England.  Lubetkin was born in Russia (Tillis, Georgia) in 1901 and received his initial architectural training at the Vihutemas in Moscow, a heading art and deaign whoal of the newly formed USSR. From 1920 to 1922, he studied under Conseructivises Vladimis Tatlin, Alexander Rodchenko, and Aleaander Vesnin, abuorbeng the lewons of their geometric and spatial cnnfigura- Cons as welll as their revolutsunary social Meals, He left the USSR is 1922 and traveled actos Europe, warking briefly for Bruna Taut and Exnst May. In Paris in 1925, he assisted in the con- struction of Konstantin Melnikov's Soviet Pavilion for the Exhi- bition des Ant Décoratils and was exposed to the work of Le Corbusier. While in Paris, Lubetkin established a small practice and srudied at the Ficote des Beaua-Arns in the studio of Auguste Perret, where he trarned the techniques of reinforced-concrete sonsttuction. In 1935 Lubetkin seteled permanendy in Grear Britain. becoming an influential member of an émigré circle chat eventually included Serge Chermayeff, End Goldfinger, Walter ‘Gropius, and Ench Mendekoho. In 1932 Lubetkin established the firm of Tecton with recent graduates of the Architectural Association, including Lindsey Drake, Frances Skinnet, and An- thony Chiny. Akhough Tecton was intended as a Soviet-seyle collective, Lubetkin was its principal designer, theorist, and spokesperson.  ‘Vectan’s first significant projecta were buildings for the Lan- don Zoo with programs ecquiring specialized rescatch into the wert’ behavior and habin, which Lubetkin as crucial to acommitted modemist practice. In the Gorilla House (1932) and the Peaguin Pool (1934), ngurvus programmatic analysis {of animal occupants and human vistors) was wedded to precise formal gcomeuy a two part, covaung cylinder for the and spiral ramps suspended above an eval pool for the The abstract composition of the Penguin Pool has the dynamism of modemist sculpture and evokes the Constructivism of Lubet- kin’s early teachers. Srrucnurally, che Penguin Pool is 2 tour de force of reinfotved-conctete construction. Engineered by Ove Anup, its 46-foor-long unsupported ramps utilized the most ad- vanced methods then avatlable. Embraced on its completion by both che architectural avant-garde and the mainstream public. the Penguin Pool was onc of the first modernise srructures in Aritain ro receive landmark starus. It wav restored in 1987  Tecton followed the critical and popular wuccess of the 200 building: with a series of private houses and apartments blacks, including Highpoint T and [1 Highpoins 1 (1935) was one of the first Large-scale British buildings to manifest Le Corbusier's “Five Points of Architecture.” ft featured all of che elements that would become diché af the Interrutional Seyte bur utilized them with a remarkable degece of functional larity and compo- tional sophistication. Lubetkin planned the eight-story build- ing as a double cruciform, peoviding ample fight and venulation to all 64 apartments. Although Highpoint | was praised by Le Corbusier himselt as 2 vertical garden city, 1 fell short of Lubet- kan’s social ideological aspitations, quickly becoming a luxury housing complex vath only a few low-rent units,  ‘After Highpoint 1, Lubeckin's use of the Le Corbusian syntax became increasingly formalist and mannered, as in Highpoint 11 (1938), which adjoins the original building. Here, Luberkin utilized oles and glazed brick as a contextual gesture and intro  
Finsbury Health Centre (1938), Londen © Atanas Jone CORBIS  duced reproducuon caryacids in place of pelores {salty ro support the porte-cochere (carriage entrance). | his classical motif has been vanously interpreted ax an exampk of bnicolage, or pastiche (Colin Rowe and Fred Koerter} and as a harbinger af ironic postmodernism (Charles fencks). Inside Highpoint I, Lubetkin continued tw explore Le Corbusian planning with duplex apart- ments and double-height living rooms. Highpoint IL achieved enlt staruy as the home of special agent Emma Peel on the 19605 televinwn show The Avcagers,  Besides working with Tecton, Lubetkin was a founding mem- ber of the Modern Architccural Reseach (MARS) Group in 1933. Aligning itself with CIAM (Congrés Internstionsus Architecture Modeme} against che RIBA (Royal tnstirute of British Architects) otablishinent, MARS procouted the ideals of modernism in the broadest possible technical. social, and eco- oomic contexts, Eventually, Luberkin grew dissatistied with whar he percerved as the MARS Group's untocused social com- mitment. especially with the wonening political ctuation in Eu- cope, In 1935. along with several Tecton members, he founded 2 more mifitant group with an explicie socialist agenda. The short-lived Architects’ and Technicians: Otganwation (ATO) dedicated itself to housing and cown-planning iasues and en gaged in direct, although limited, community action and pofiti: cal organizing For Lubelan, the ATO) provided a forum for  hus ideas on the social efficacy of architecture and offered an opportunity for promoung the social dimension of Tevwn’s Practice, asin its Finsbury Health Centre (1938), a facility com- missioned by the socialist Borough Council of Finsbury for ies blight stricken neighborhoud.  Asa collective firm, Tectan dissolved in 1948, although sev: etal of ite members formed new partnerships, including that of Skinner, Bailey and Lubetkin. Increasingly after Wodd War II, TVubetkin cured his attcotion to planning, although his attempt tw design the Peterles New Town (project. 1948 - 50) was ulti- mately unsuncewful. During the 19501 and 1960s, he designed a number of luw-inconse residential compleacs in and around Landon, inchiding the 16-acre Cranbrook Estates (1955-66), an adsvit composinon af high-rise towers, low-rise terraces, and detached houses. By the time Lubetkin retired from practice in 1970 to devore himiell to farming, his contributions to the Brit- ish Modern movement had heen largely forgorren. He was awarded the RIBA Gold Medal in 1982, which occasioned his return to public life ava vocal critic of Pasemodernis: architec- mural excess. The RIBA award alo prompted a scholarly reap- praisal of Tectan’s work that established the firm's crucial role in che promotion of modemist architecture and ideology in the United Kingdom. Lubetkin died in 1990.  Ganaiie EsrerDy  See ake Apartment Bui Arup, Ove (Great Britain); Congrés Emernsationaux d’Architecture Moderne (CLAM, 1927-); Consractivises, Corbusier, Le (Jeanmeret, Charles-  ) (France); Postmodernism: Royal Imetitute of British Aschivects; Russia and Sovies Union  Born in Tiflis, Georgia, 14 Devember 1901; immigrated w Eng- land 1931. Educated at the Tenishevskaya Gymnasium, $1. Pe  tersburg, and Micdvendikay Tenishevskaya. Moscow, 1910-17; studied under Kasimir Malevich. Alcksands Rodubenko, Alek- sande Vesnin, and Vladimir ‘Valin, Vkhutemas, Moscow and Swomuas Petrograd (St, Petersburg) 1920-22; attended the Tex- tile Academy, Berlin and Building School. Charlottenburg, Ber- Gin 1922-23; studied at Warsaw Polytechnic School of Archites- sure 1923-25; studied at the Ecole Speciale d’Archisecture, Pasis 1925; arrended the Ecole des Beaus-Arts, Paris 1926-27: at- tended, Fonle Supéricur de Béton Armée, Pacis 1927, stualied at the Enutitue d’Usbanime, Sorbonne, Paris 1927 29, Married Margaret Church 1931 (died 1969). Reservist, Red Army, Mos- cow 1919-20. Woeked with Brunv Taut, Berlin 1922-23, worked with Ernst May, Frankfurt 1924; asustant to El Lisstzky and David Sheerenbery, Bertin 1922; architect, with Konstantin Melnikov, Sovict Pavilion, Expositsen Internationale des Ars Devoratifs ot Ladusuriels Modcrnes, Paris 1925; architect, USSR ‘Trades Delegarion, Paris 1926-29. Private practice. Paris 19.26— 30; partner with Jean Ginsherg 1928-30: founder, parmer, von group. London 1932-48: member. editorial board, £ archi- tecture daujourd ini, Paris 1930 31; partace, Skinner. Bailey and Lubetkin, London 1948-52. Retired to Upper Kilcorr, Glouceverthire 1952 and Clifton, Bristol 1969. Founder, memn- ber, MARS (Madern Architectural Research} Group. London 1933. Reval Geld Medal, Royal Instinute of British Architects 1982. Died in Bristol, 23 October 1990.  Tecton Gi  Founded in London 1932 by Berthold Lubetkin in atsaciarion with; Anthony Chitty, Lindsey Drake, Michael Dugdale, Vaten- tine Harding, Godfrey Samuel, and Francis Skinner: by 1936 only Luberkan, Skinner, and Drake remained; Denys fasdun joined the group in 1937: the partnership dissolved in 1948; Skinner. Bailey. and Lubetkin catablished a parmerchip. while Drake and Lasdun continued co work together,  Selected Works  Gorilla House, Londan Zev, 1932  Penguin Pool, London Zoo, 1934: restored. 1987 Highpoine | Flats, Highgate, london. 1935  Berthold Lubetkin House. Whipsnade, Bedfordshire, 1936 Highpoint 1 Flas, Highgate, London, 1938  Finchury Health Cenere, Landon. 1938  Spa Green Houcng Estate, Finsbury. Lorukon. 1946 Pewee New Town Plan (prniect), County Durham, 1950 Cranbrook Escates, neat London, 1966  Selected Publications Opening of Fuebury Heath Conivr, 1938 Planned ARP 1999  Report to Finsbury Bormugh Council un Serucsunl Pretertion for Peeple atgecnas Arrial Bombardment, 1939  Spa Greca Estate, 1982  fa moderate, wn proyest inacheve twith others), 1982  Further Readi Lubedkin and Tecton have been the subject of several monographs and  critical wtucktes that have reassessed the firm's impact on the developmen of madern anchitectuce in Knrain  Allan, Jotus, Herrhold Lasbetkom, Acchisecrare and the Tradstion of! Progres, Landon. RIBA Publications, 1992  Coe, Peter, and Makolm Reading. Lisdcthen and Toston: Archinectare and Secsal Commanernt, Landon: Arts Counal af Great Britain, 19K)  Dichl Thomas, “Theory and Principle: Berthold Lubetlan’s Hlighpomt One and Highpost ‘I we." fournal of An bese renal Edwcation, S24 (May 199)  Gold, Jobo Ru. Thy taperseme of Moderaism: Madern Arvbisests and she Future City. 1928-1953, London: Spon, 1997  Jordan, Rabest Furncaus, “Laberhan,” Andunturad Review uly 1955)  Reading, Malcolm, and Petes Coc, Lubeskin and Trotam: An Architeceured Seuady, Lenker: Triangle Architectural, 1992  LUTYENS, SIR EDWIN LANDSEER 1869-— 1944 Architect. England  Sit Edwin Landscer Cucpens was one of the most noteworthy English archisects of his generation. During the tins four decades of the 20ch century. he designed a remarkable range of buildings. ima wide variery of styles, incerpreted in an inventive and original manner. Dewpite his position of preeminence as a Grand Manner architect before World Was 11, he was above all. a domestic architect, While exscncially an Fawardian, | utyens never refused work. and as 4 result he was able w negutiae the architectural and socal compleazitics of that age.  (nm 1885, he became a student at the Kensington Schoot of Ant, before joining the firm of Emest George and Peto as an apprenuce from Late 1887 tw carly 1889. While there, Lutyens met Herbert Raker who would later become his colleague in New Dethi, Luryens’s early work showed a responsiveness to George's love of quality, craftsmanship, and the natural textures of brick. oak. and tile. He was also influenced by Norman Shaw and Philip Webb,  Luryens began hix independent practice with his first impor ant commission in 1889 in Crookebury. Surrey. with a ecrics of houses that excended the possibilities offered by local vernacu- lar style, The majority were built in Surrey and induded Manstead Wood (1896); Godalnung foe Gertrude Jekyll, 4 gas. den designer who had revived the English conage garden and who provided him with an opportunity to rise rapidly in his profession; Tigbourne Court (1899) in Surrey where be demon- strated an exucptional interpreanion af the load vernicular style that highlighted texture and massing.  Lutyens built Deanery Gardens (1901) in Berkshire for bd- ward Hudson, the owner af Cauniry Life magazine, tor whom he also built an office in Covent Garden, London, which was his first project on the Grand Manner While similar many 
of Luryens’s houses of thir period. Deanery Gardens’ origin were the Elizabethan country house, and made it the exseatial embodiment of Edwardian Romanucism. The huge mullioned window, together with the massive chimncys anchoring the house to the site, are typical Ars and Crafts featutes, but the originality of the handling scent especially in he linking axcs, evokes Frank Lloyd Wright. Lutyens’s houses are carefully cho- reographed spaces, often arranged around a central fireplace.  By 1900, Luryens’s eclecticism became more apparent, as at Litde Thakehans (1902). with its Tudor caterior and classical hall. and! at Marsh Court (1904), which combined bath classical and vernacular features.  Responding ta contemporary preferences. Jaityens intro- duced a language thor included neoclassical forme mannerist features at Overstrand Halt (1901) and Elomewood (1901) in Kacbworth, and neoclassical forms at Papillon Hall (1904). Io this instance, che ecoencric butterfly plan was deternuned by che retention of an original house.  By 1903, Lutyens was extolling the “high game” of Palladian- tam: these chusical preterenoes found their dimax at Heathcote (1906) in Udcy. Yorkshire, which invoked San Micheli. Nash- dom (1908). with iss whitewashed brick and contrived, undet- eared cenrer, heratded his neoieorgian tryle, whereas The Salu- tation (1911) provided whar is arguably the perfect exay in shis gence. ‘he “castle” style was added to his armory, must notably in Overstrand Hall and Red Howe (1899) in Surrey, which exploiced parapets and ocher wonecioa. The enlargement of Lin. disfarne (1904) on Holy Island, Northumberland, showed Luc yens’s respect for che atiginal Romantic silhouette, and Lambay Castle (1912) in Ireland involved rhe repair and enlargement of an old house within che confines of a hage circular rampart wall. Casde Drogo represents the most extravagant example of his work; designed in 1910. ic is unlikely w be mistaken for an original castle, The subtle configuration of granite walls punc- tured by windows shows Lutyens’s veesatility.  A new mood in Britain followed the accession of Edward VIL, and Lutyens was anxious to expand his practice beyoad the domestic. Opportunity came with his appointment in 1912, to the Delhi Manning Commission. Despite his disagrecnents with fellow architect Herbert Baker, together they created one of the finest cxamples of 26th-cencury Beaux-Arts town planning. In- Guenced by the plan for Washington, D.C.. and incorporanng English garden uty prinuple, New Delhi was centered on the Viceroy’s House (1931),  As a principal architect to the Impenal War Graves Commis sion, Lutyens designed a scrics af memorials, most notably The Cenotaph (1920) in Landon and Thicpyal (1929) in Frame, which reheared his geometric, abstracted classicins.  His lore works ranged from university buildings 10 the design for the new Roman Catholic Cathedral in Liverpool. Comunes- ial buildings— including Britannic House (1924), the Midland. Bank Headquarters (1939) in London, and the Brittsh Embassy (1928) in Washington, D.C.—exemplify bis consnuauon of historicist design principles from the 19th. and ento the 20th century,  Hany J. Graiscen  See sho Arts and Crafts Movement Baker, Herbert (England and South Africa)  Biography  Born in London, 29 March 1869. the tenth son of a soldier turned painter. Studied architecture, Kensingron School of Art (now Royal College of Art), Landen 1885-87; apprentice, the office of George and Peta, London 1887-89, Mastind Lady Emily Lytton (daughter. former viceroy of India) 1897: $ chil- dren. Private practice. Surrey 1889) private practice, London from 1890; chief architect for che imperial capital, New Delhi, India 1912. President, Royal Academy 1938. Knighted 1918; Gold Maal, Royal [nstitute of British Architects 1921; Gold Medal. American Institute of Architects 1924. Died in London, b January 3944; funcral held tn Westminster Abbey.  Sclected Works  Crookabury Loaige. Farnham, Surtey, 1890 Musstead Woud, Gudalming. Surrey. 189%  Red House, Godalming, Surrey, 1899  Tighe Carr, Warley, Surrey, 1899  Overssrand Hail. Cromer. Norfolk, 1901  Homewond, Koedworth, Herts, 1901  Deanery Gardens. Sonning, Betkshire. 1902  Blackburn House (Lartle Thakeham), Sussex. 1902  Lidistame Castte (curversion}. Holy Island, Northumberland, 1903 March Cour. Stockbridge, Hann, 1904  Papillon Hall. Leiaestershier, 1904  Heathcote, Uiley, Yorkshire, 1906  Nashdons. Taplow, Buckinghamshire, 1908  The Sahragon. Sandwich, Kent. 190  Lambay Castk. Lambay Island, Ireland, 1912  Castle Drago. Drewaeignton, Devon, 1910-39  The Cenotaph. London. 1920  Beitank House, binbury Cian, Lormbon, 1924  Britsh Embaisy, Washington. D.C.. 1928 Roman Cacholx: Cathodeal (tncompletr), tiserpool, 1929-40 Viceror’s House. New Delhi, 1951  Monument wm che Musing of the Somme. Uhiepeal, France, 1932 Midlind Bunk Headquarten, Puultey, London, 1939  Selected Publications  Whar | Think of Archwecture,” Cownrry Life 64 (1931) ~Vraduson Speaks.” Arrhsernenit Review 72 (1932)  A good deal of lnteraniie is devoted to Lutyens. Hussey's acosuin re. mains ane uf the tinear The catalog of the Arte Cauneil exhibstioan eld in London in 1981 (Lutyema} provides wsefial esays. Brown (1996) dhicune Lusyene and his parrons,  Brown, Janc. Carder of Golden Afiernoon: The Story of a Partersbap: Edwin Lutyens and Gerimade Jelyll. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold and London: Alien Lane, 1982: updated edits, Landan and New York: Penguin, 1994  Brown, Jane. Lanwests and the Kdwardians: An Englisch Anchesect and Ha Chens, New York and Londan. Viking, 1996  Butler, AS.G.. The Andesecnore of Sar Edwin jan Svol., New York: Sctsboes, and London: Country Lae, 1940  Gradidgs, Roderich, Edmia Laryen>. Anhusect Lewreas, London and Boston: Allen and Vawin, 1981  Huey, Chrscopher, le Lif of Sir Eduin Lunes, New York: Scnbner, and London: Country Life, 1950  Canyons, Edwin Landsect, Listyens: The Wark of the English Seo Faden Luspens (1869-1944; (eahib. cav), Landon: Ars Council of Great Brean, 1981  Weaver, Lawrence, House and Gardens by EL. Luvern, London Countey Lite, 1918, New York: Saibners, 1914; repent, Woodbexlge, Suffutk: Antique Collectors’ Chak. 48  LYNCH, KEVIN 1918-84  Urban and architectural theorist United States  Kevin Lynch was one of the leading urban theorse in the United States duting the urban-renewal period whose majoe bouk, fhe draage of the City, belped establish the disapline of usban dengn. Lynch abandoned archiceccure ta study engineering and brology at Rensselact Polytechnic Institute, eventually studying. civ Planning at the Massachusetts Instinice of Technology (MEL), where he returned as a faculty member in 1948, With che assis tance of Gyorgy Kepes, arts profesor at MET, Lynch focused on the virual dimension of cities, namely the perception of the foem of she American metropolis. He ts renowned lot his urban theory and for having educated generations of ciry plannets.  Lynch's seminal text Jwuige of the Caty x based on internews conducted with citizens of Bostun, Jersey City, and Los Angeles abuus the deyrce of legibility of these cities’ layouts. Lynch con cluded that 2 collective mental imuge, a “cognitive map,” woukd guide the citizens through their daily commutes and acuvities. The rote of the urban designer was to make the city comprehenss ble to its arizens by making some of its weaker areas physically amd visually more orderly and logical. he /mtage of the City wutantly became one of the moat popular bucks among prac tioners and academics, The book also brought behavioral theory from peychologists such as James J. Gibion and Edward Tolman inwo city planning and helped outiine a new discipline, that of urban design. During the 1960s, Lynch played a major rol, along with Josep Lluis Sert and others at the Joint Center for Urban Studies berween Harvard University and MIE, in extab- Fishing the parameters of this dacapline. Urban design served as the disciplinary and prulessional plauionm from which the formal tamifivations of such new development isucs as downtown urban renewal, the integration of highways un che city, and uew suburban development could be addressed.  the tage of the City wenutied tive main components used by citizens to anchor theit movement in the city: districts, edges. paths, nodes, and fandmarks. Vhe clearer these elements were in the city—for example, the more srungly defined a street edge was of the more clearly outlined the district was—the more clear the meneal image became and the easier it was for citizens move arvund and feel stable and secure an their cnvirmament The urban image could be distinguished by the qualitics of its singular clements 2s wells by che qualitics of the penceal ompo- sion. Lynch proposed qualides for the indrvidual clements, such as singulanty, simplicity, and directional differenuanon, and a few general principles for the toxal composition, relauing the chements in a rather obvious manner (for example, edges defining districts and paths intersecting at nodes). ‘The inability of Lynch to develop a more elaburate compositional stracegy would eventualty weaken his wance against other urban theorists. such as Colin Rowe and Léon Keies.  Lynch’s other books wavered in subject master between the study of perception of the city across time or space (Wher Time  4s Ths Place?, W972; Wasting Away. V9; and The View from the Road. \94, the bat with John R. Myer and Donald Ap- pleyard) and che study of the formal qualines at large-scale plan. hing (Site Mansing. 1962; Managing the Sense of the Region. 1976, and A Theory of Gand City Form, 1981), the latter theme ingpited by Lewis Mumford’s regionahym. Lynch's work al evolves from a reiance on behavioral scierses earlier in his carcet ta an integranan of polincal ideas and the development of a structuralist tnudelng of cities an his later publications,  Lynch wrote most of his books during a penod of increasing sosial and caaal tension in Amercian cives, but urban problems. such as racial segregation and blight, did not feature strongly in his wrinngs. Beyond affirming a strong fink berween imageabil- tty and social well being, he remained vague about what comu- tuted the lnk beeween the social and the physical Most of the ctiticim of | ynch’s approach focused an its behaviorist naivere and on this ambiguous attitude toward social conditions in the city. He critics took bis silence for complicity with urban- renewal politic that irreversibly changed che crbnic and social composition af urban surety. Keaneth trampron attacked the distration fem social issues dat Lynch's pictorial urbaniin encouraged. Manfredn Tatu interpreted Lynch's promonon of the piecemeal development of the city as 4 form of complacency with laissez-faire capnalsm.  Orher crincs, such as Roland Barthes, observed a lack of symbolic dimension in his analysis while acknowledging his at- tempt to establish an urban smanucs. Lynch separates the struc tural aspects of the image trom its meaning oF its interprctation. Hic more comprehensive and larer book A Theory af Goad City Form (1981), which appeared at a time when urban theory was moving toward the semiorics of Robert Venuri and the histori- Gx of Colin Rowe. clearly illurates this separation. Lynch wemed to prefer the immediacy of cognitive, (what might be described as a gestalt approach tn perception), to linguistic models, It is collective dimemian of Lynch's project chat ap- pealed wo urban theurisn Aldo Russi, who shared with Lymb (ditectly and through the shared influence of social geographer Maurice Malbwachs) the portrayal af urhan ypace as collective memory.  Pethaps the most ickevant interpeetauon of Lynch's social project could he derived ata more general level from hes valua- on of human experience, the use of the scientific method, and the constant revision of valucs, idea inspired by Jun Dewey. To Dewey, these constinited the preconditions at a democratic way of life om which Lynch's theories remained committed throughout his career.  Hasetiat Saris  See ala Frampton, Kenneth (United Seates}; Mumford, Lewis (United Stases}; New Urbanism; Rossi, Aldo (Italy); Sert, Jovep Luis (United States); Tefuri, Manfredo (Italy): Urban Planaing  Biography  Born ? January 1918 in Chicago. Antended Vale University and Taliesin Fellowship 1937-38; joined the LS Army Corps of Engineers in 1941; returned to MIT afier Woekd War UL and through G.1. Bill financial support camed a bachelor’s degree  
in city planning in 3947, Worked in North Carolina fot the Greensboro Planning Commision; acceped position of assss- tant professor in city planning at MIT 1948; later studied urban expenence while in Europe on a Fun! Foundation fellowship: published Thr fusage of the City in 1960. a book that would launch his career as urban theorist: publishal seven books on urban form and its percepuon herween 1960 and 1984: retired from MSI in 1978 but macntained relationdup with academia and became more actively volved in practice with Car/Lynch Assonates baed in Cambridge, Massachusetts, Worked as con sultant and particopated in the planning of agnificane projece. ax the Government Center of Boston and the Rio Salado in Phoenix, Awarded the first Resford G. Tugwell Award in plan fing in 1984. Died at Martha's Vineyard, 25 April 1984.  Sclected Publications  the tmage of che City. 1968  Size Paring, 1962  The View from the Read (with Donald Applevard and John R Mes, 1964  Whar Tome ts Tres Place? 972  Managem she Seme of @ Region, (9%  Coneeng Up in Catto, WITT A Theory of Geod City Foem, 1981 Wateng Atay, edited Michael Southworth, 1991  Farther Reading  The main reviews af Keown Lynch's work have bren featured an the body of the text above Net auih hia heen write sbout his work ounide his immediate citle af influence. More revently, # renewed interest in bis work has been driven by urban modeling and new ur-  haniam.  Banenec. Tres. and Michoel Southworth (editoey), Cary Semre ared City Drage: Writings and Projects of Kevin Lynch, Cambrvlge. Massachurerta MIE fre, 1990  Barthes, Roland, “Semanlogie et urbanisme.” ies 1 aerhisecenre A aajourd bt 908)  Frampton, Kenneth, "Armeriss, 1960 1970. Notes on Urbans Images and Theanes,” Cambeils 359-60 1971  Sarkis, Hashim, “Space foe Revognition.” an Thy Premae of Malnexdturaiiom: Eadevatvon and Awtracmy in the Lot Comsury, edited by George Katiaficas and Teodros Kites. New York Routledge. 199%  Vavnis, Areandes, and Liane Lefarere. ” “Thinking in forms Ac Well Ax Words’ Kevie Lynch and the Cognitive Theory of the City,” Design Book Rersew 26 (Bil 1992)  MACKINTOSH, CHARLES RENNIE 1868- 1928 Architect, Scotland  By the end of the 19th century, the Glasgow School of Act was one af the leading art academies in Europe, and after early success in the fine arts, the late 1RHs saw Glasgow's roputavon in archi tecture and the decorative arte reach an all-time high. At the very heart of this success was a takemied young architet and designer, Charles Rennie Mackintosh, whave reputation was to quickly spread beyund tus ative uty and who. more than 4 century later. is still reganded ay the father of “Claagere atyte.”  In 1884 Mackuneush was apprenuced wa ful architect, John Hutchison, bur in 1889 he teanstetred to the farger. mate eublished ay pracuce of Honeynian and Kepps. To compk ment his architectural apprenticeship, Mackintosh enrolled in evening classes at the Glasgow School of Art, where he pursucd vanous drawing programs, Here, under the watchful cye of the headmaster, Francis Newbery. his takcacs Hounished, and sn the school's library he was able to consult the latest an hatecture and design journals. beconung increaungly aware of his contempor- anes both ar home and abroad.  Mackincosh’s projects fos Honeyman and Keppie during the carly 1890s displayed an inceeased maturity. His design for the Glagow Herald Building (1894) incorporated some curting- edge technology, including a hydrupneumatic lift and tire resistant diatomite woncrete flooring, Eater at Martyrs’ Public Schuol (1895), despiee a somewhat reverted brief, he was able to introduce some elaborate but controlled detailing, intuding, the central rout trusses.  Ata public lecture on architecture un 1893, Mackintosh ar- pool that architects and designers should be given greater artist. frecdum and independence. He binucll began to experiment with a range of decorative forms, producing designs for furniture, metalwork, and the graphic aro (including highly svlized post- ers and waretcolors), often im partnership with his frend and colleague at Honeyman and Keppic. Herbert MacNait, and ewo fellow students, Margaret and Frances MacDonald.  In 1896 Mackintosh gained his most substantial commussion: to devign 2 new building for the Glaguw School of An. This was wo be his masterwork. Significantly, the building was con- structed in two distinct. phases— 1897-99 and 1907-09— because of a lack of maney. Seylistically, the wihstantial delay  in complerion offered Mackintosh che opportunity to amend and fully integrate hiv origin) design (of 1896), which wed much to Scotlands carlees barunial tradition, with a second half to the building that loaked very much to the 20th century chrough ib use of materials and technology. Mane dramatic of all the interiors was the aew Library (completed in 1909), which was a complex space of rimbct posts and beams. [ts construcaon owed much to radivonal Japanese domestic intenors, bur ubti- mately the building was an ecectic mia of styles and influences.  In Europe, rhe originality of Mackintosh’s sryte was quickly appreciared, and in Germany, and particularly in Austria, he received acclaim and recognition for his designs. He enuered an. open competition to design “A House for an Are Lower,” pur forward in 1900 by a German design joumal. Zeitschrift far Inaendrtorution. Nihough he failed to win the competition, his architectural devigns were judged to be of such a high aandard that they were Later reproduced a» a poetfulio of prints  Rack in Scodand at the Hill House (1904) an Helensburgh, the publisher Walter Blackic commissinned Mackineash to de- sign « substantial farmly homse. In ins appearance, t owed much to hit House fut an Art Lover deagns and an carher completed domesric commission, Wandyhill (1900). Externally, the Hill House was notable for its simple and solid massed forms with lide omamentation, yeu internally the rooms cauded light and space. and the use of color and decoration was carefully con- ceived.  Throughout his career, Mackimosh relied on just s handful nf Patrons and supporters. The Glasgow businesswoman Catherine Cranston proved to he one af his most influential, and her series of teasuom interivr (designed and furnished berween 1896 and 1917) provided him with a virnial freedom to experiment, Re- sponsible far their “total design.” Mackintosh provided the tea- rooms with furnsure (inchading the dramatic high-bach chairs), light fierings, wall decorations, and even the cutlery.  Despite success in Europe and the support of dients such as Blackie and Cranston. Mackintosh’s work met with considerable indifference at home. and his carcer son declined. Few private clicnes were sufficently sympathetic to want his “total design” of house and interior. He entered the competition w design a cathedral (1902) for the ary of Liverpool. but although hrs de- sign showed a Gothic quality as requested. his entry was rejected, and his design for Scotland Street School (1904) in Glasgow was to be his last public commission,  
Hill House (1904), Helensburgh. Scodand © Howand DavivGreathinkdings cont  Ry 1914 Mackincosh had despaiced of ever teceiving the level of tcvognition in Glasgow that he felt he deserved. tle became increasingly obstinate and invapable of comprontie. and it is known that this cxceted unnecemary peeeuires on his colleagues. hy an attempt to resurrect his carcer, Machantush tesigned from the peactice and with his wife, Margaret MacDonald, moved to London.  This was unfortunate umung, for with the oaset of Workd ‘War Ff, all budding was severely resenicted. Advenmurous plans for a suste of artists’ studios and a theater were never built, However, after making adjusanenc to the extenor of a midter- raced house (1946) at 78 Demgare in Northampton, the client. WJ. Bassett-Lowke, commissioned Mackintosh to redecurate a number of the building's inveriors. including the Guests’ Bed- oom (1919). These designs shaw him working in a bold new styie of decoration and construction, using pemary colors and frometric motifs, It was an output of extraordinary vitality and originality, but it wene virtually unheeded.  Perva Trowiss  See abe Glasgow School of Art, Scodand; Vieans Secession  Biography  Bor in Glasgow. Scotland. 7 Junc 1868. Apprenticed to archi- tect Joha Hutchinan 1884 -94: right clases, Glasgow School of Art 1884-88; won the prestigious Alexander Thomson Trav-  elling Scudenahip (1890), which allowed him to undertake an architectural cour of Fully in 1891. Married artist Margaret Mac- Denald 1900. Drafesman, Honeyman and Keppic, Glaguw 1BBB; partner 1901-1913: with wife and Frances and Herbert MacNair, formed ube astiatic group The Four, Private practice as architect, textile designer, and painter [rom 1914. Moved to Walberswick, Suffolk 1914, 1914-15, lived in Chelsea, London designing textiles and caccuting small projects. Moved to Port Vendecs. South of France in 1923 and took up wareronlor painr- ing. Fell ill in 1928 and returned to London. Died in London. 10 December 1928.  Sdlected Works  Glaguw Hecakd Budding Tower (with Joho Keppic), 1894  Martyrs’ Publ: School, Clagow (wuh Keppie), 1594  Atgyle Sureet ‘Teatuomn, Glaguw, 1897  Eastern Sectnin, Glaygyw School uf An, 1897-99  Wiliam Davidion House (Windyhdl), Kinacolm, Scotland, 1900-01  Svottish Section (deseruved), International Exhibstion af Modern Decorative An, Tuntt, 1902  Cathedtal (compenuon projet, unbubt), Liverpool. 1902  Scodand Street School, Glagow, 11H  WW Blokic House (Hill Home), Helenaburgh, Scudand, 1902-04  Rodeuge uf Wentern Section, Glugow School of Art, 1907-09  Ingram Scveet Teatcumns, Glasgow, 1900-32  Willow Tearuomns, Glagow, [903-17  W)). Bancts.Lawhe House, 78 Demgate, Northampton, 1916-1919  ames. H. Jefferson, Charles Brame Mackintosh ard the Glasgow: Soheal of Art, Glasgow: The Glasgow School of An. 1961, 2ad edition 1979; 3rd odition 1948  Billcliffe, Roger, Charies Rewmie Mackenrch. The Complete Furnituer, Furniture Drswing and heterion Designs. Landen; Joba Mustay, 1979; Ind edition 1980; 3rd edition 1996  Beets, David, 2 Markinsosh: The Ports: of Workmansiup, Lavcdon Reaktion Books, 1992  Buchanan, Wilkiam, et al. (editor), Mactinterh’s Maseerworh. Glasgove: Drew, and San Francisco: Chronicte Books, 1989  Comper Jackie. Mackinsosh Arcintecrure: The Complete Bei and  Pryects, London: Academy Editions, 1977: 2nd edition  196A; 3rd edition 1989  Crawford, Alan, Charles Renate Mavkineesh, New York and London: Thames and Hudsan, 1995  Howarth, Thoma, Chari Rennie Macktnimah and she Mudern Mocement, Votsdots. Routteuge and Kegan Paul, 1952; 2nd edition 1977; 3nd edition 1990  Kaplan, Wendy (edieor), Charles Rrmie Macksateyh, (lagu: Glmgow Muscuew, and New Yosh: Abbeville Pree, 1996  Lovell, Susan (editor), Four studies on (harley Reunar Mackintosh, New York: New York Schuol of Interior Design. 1996  Macaulay, James, Glargour School of Art: Charkes Rennie Mactinted, London: Phaidom Presa, 1993  Macaulay, Jarnes, The Hill Howse: Charles Rennie Mackinsash, London: Phandon Prema, 1994  Macleod, Robert. Charles Reunar Mackintosh: Archisect and Artot, London: Coumry Life Banks, 1968; 2nd edition baton: Collins, 1983  Robertson, Pamets (edlitoe), Cherie Renwie Machinauh: The Archiectural Papers, Kerilebury. Ordonishire: White Cockade, and Cambrder, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1990  Roberson, P: (editor), Charis Rennie Mackinwosh: Archstecturad Sherches, Glsgow: Huncerian Art Gallery, 1979  Steele. James, Charis Rennie Mackintosh: Synsbeus in Form, New Youk: Wesley. and Londan: Academy Ediuons, 194  MAIDAN  The corm maiden defines a designed upon space in the urban context and has been used particularly to describe such spaces in cities of the Muslim warld. An impustant component of sev- eral urban centers, historically the maidan was created theough enmacinun, premeditated acts of urban design, involving not only ureets, squares, and impoerant linkages uf the city but also ruc- counding groups of building or building emembles within which i¢ was sometimes contained. In chis respect. the maidan differed Gignifwandy from other smaller, relatively minor, and less formal spaces created within the structure of the city through dhe grad. aul accretion and growth of urban fabric. In form and function, maitans were similar in several respects to the piarzas of medieval European cities and frequendy served ax independent elements of aesthetic display or as locations for community activities, such as public gatherings, processions, and parades The study of maidans introduces the issuc of urban desi  in the Islamic context. The tion by several scholars in past few decades thac cites in te Idamic world hisrorically were seldom planned or formally visualized before inception is some- what extreme. Closer co the cruth would be staring char while the city of Islam was seldom designed of preconceived in its totality, its most integral parce were certainly visualized and real- ited. These critical constructions, usually groups of monumental buildings arranged around open spaces, were controlled by strict  urban byéiws and guidelines, as contained in roval decrees and endowment documents. Examining there is of enurmous impor- tance in determining what effect cach such decision had on the formalization of these uthan spaces, Within the major urban centers of the Islamic world, therefore, several spaces or maidans existed, some major and others relatively minor, performing var- ied functions as their roles changed aver time.  Ue itso subject af debate aa co where the fire maidan of the Islamic world developed. Drier to the sophisticated urban camronments of the Central Asian region, such as chase of the ‘Timarid capitals at Samarqandl, Bukhara, and Shaksisyabe, scholars have bong believed char almont no urban ur civic spaces caisted in Islamic cities in other parts of the world. In Conuzal Asia, castern Iran itself, possibly the very land chat gave origin to urban spaces and public buildings appcaring un combination, few cities were left sufficiently intact after the devastating ons- laughs of che Mongol invasions in the first half of the 3th century. The cites of the Delhi and Deccan sultanases on the Indian subcontinent, on the other hand. while expesiencing a change of several dynasties, never suffered wuch destruction, at feast until the raids of Timur in 1398, Theae cities, therefore, Provide us with rate instance of maidan cpaces being created through calculated aces of anhiceciueal und urban design wherein specific legislative mechanisms dictated constructions 06 lines remarkably similar to those evolving the structure of cities in medieval Europe.  While maidans within the urban covironment served a tocio- cultural purpose in die medieval Islamic period. their application in ube modern city was limited. Rather chan being seen as neuss- sary feanutes within the urban structure. as important places of gathering, maidans were in fact seen as wasted spaces within the precious real estate of the caplanding city. By the kate 19th and carly 20th centuries, Islamic cities in several pares of the world, frequently strupgling tw airvive under colonial regimes, initiated radical urban design changes. In some vases. historical urban typologies (such as maidans, courtyards, public buildings, and chabringh of the quadripartite garden), were summarily demo- lished ins search for 4 “modeta” ardhivecure chat would truly reptesent the modern age, Influenced by the West, the city of Iitanbul was transformed in this fashion duting the late nine- teenth aid early twettoeth centunes Ln orher instances, foreign- wained architects and urban designers were commissioned to tum historical urban centers into modern metropolises. such as Cairo undergoing Haussmann-like metamorphoses beginning in 1867, Furthermore, the reign of the automobile in several dense urban sectors hegan the rclencless broadening of narrow strcets and alleyways, breaking down the tradirional contrat that had existed between the uccet and the maidan. During this time. urban spaces were tcconfigured co modify the “old” forms for modem contctis At Isfahan, Iron. the original Maidan-i Shah, built in the early 1600s, gained increasing popularity as a parking oe, whole the impressive Reyustan Square st Samarqand (Uabe- fustan, Circa 15th and }6th Centuries) was the subject of major restoration between 1967-87 by the firm of Zakhidov, Krukow and Sadikow. The Registan ensemble of budklings — including, the ‘Tillya kari masque, educational facilities (madrasa), and Large, open public squares transformed into a venue for cultural performances for visiting tourists,  While some practivoners of modem architecture terected his- tomal forms in favor of nevelty in form and function, others 
sought 10 bridge the Islamic past with various interpretations of reponalist and postmadem eclecticism and reworked themes along nationalist lines, Iranian architect Alb Saremi's Jolfa Revi- dential Comples in Isfahan. ran (1988) was intended to materi  ally and spatully relate tv surrounding city while incorporating, harmonvous bving spaces for the inhabitants, including comman courtyards anid recreation areas, creating in effect, a contempo- tary maidan. Ten years later, Nadee Ardalan sensitively com: bined mixed-use sructutes such as courtyards, arcades. retail shops, and seaside esplanade in his 1988 redesign of the Al-Shang Waterfront project in Kuwait City. Kuwait,  In the bast quarser of the 20th century, Kamran Diba lof D.A.Z. Architects, Planners and Exginects) began to reconfigure the regionalis: traditions of Idamic architecture with contempo- fary nosions of place and humanity, Designed to fuse structures such as the maidan. arcade. cerrace, and landscape with the built environment, Diba’s Shustar New Town redevelopment project (Shustar, Iran, 1977}, Garden of Niavaran (Tehran, 1979), and Jonds-Shapour University (Ahwaz, Iran, 1975) serve as examples of how past and present architectural fornis efleaively commun- ple in modern and contemporary architecture.  Mant I Soprt  See abo Ardalan, Neder (Iran): lotanbul, Tarkey Further Reading  Ashby, Thomas, and Steven Ruwland Pirece, “The Passa dei Popolo: It Hutory and Development.” Town Plastning Keview 11, na, 2 11924)  Gaabe, Heine, feanian Cites, New York: New York Cniverucy Pres, 1978  Houtani, Alben Habil, aml Samuel Miklos Stern, editor, The islamic City A Collogurum, Oxtord: Cassircr. and Phikadelphra: Univeruary of Pennsylvania Press, 1970  Lapidus. Ira Marvin, svlitor, Middle Eastern Citter A Sympestann on Anwient, tslarnic, and Consemporary Middle baurra { rhencm, Berkeley: University of California Prevs, 1969  Moughtin, Chil, Urkam Design: Strort and Square. Onford and Boston: Burterworth Archicexture, 1992  Serjeant, Robert Bertram, amb Ronald B. Lewcock, editors, Sen's An Arabian istanuc City, London: World of tim Festrval Crust. 1983  Zaacher, Paul, Foun and Square: From the Agora te the Vilage Grven, New York: Columba Universi Pros, and Onford: Onford University Press, 1959  MAILLART, ROBERT 1872-1940 Engineer, Swicerland  Robert Maillarr was a Swiss engineer whw designed some of the trent remarkable recinfueced-concrete bridges ever constructed. The genius of Maillart’s work resulted from his dual interes. in the efficient cngincering of reinfurced-conctete structures as well as bis highly developed visual design sensibilities.  Maillany’s cechnical education began in [890 at the Swiss Fedetal Technical Insucute. Several professors had been advanc- ing the revolutionary concept of graphic, visual analysis of struc tures since the middle of the 19th century. and these ideas no. doubt influenced Maillart greatly. ‘The coincidence of these ideas at the came time that reinforced concrete was heing developed created a climate npe tor experimentation.  Daring the carly years of Maillart’s career, engineers were starting to develop systems of construction for reinforced con- ctete, which was recognized as an important new material. Bo- cause it takes the shape af its formwork, creating a mocolithic, cigid structure, concrete is categorically different than steel of woud framing. Engineers who pioneered rcinforced-conctete structural systems were just beginning to underwand che proper: tics of this new material. The French engineet Francois Heaneb- ique patented the first notable sysiem of reinlorced-concrete beams, columns, and stabs in 1892. Hennebique's structural system was based on existing stcel-and-wood framing systems in which the stnicrural members are discrete unies joined together.  In contrast to Henncbique'’s system, Maillart developed a konctete construction system in which che beams were invegrared into the dab—a sprtem similar to contemy Alat-shab con struction. The columns flared out at the top as they joined the floor slab, creating a smooth transition that minimiacd shear stresses, Though more difficult to analyse than a traditional structural system of primary and secondary members, Maillart’s ingovauvon tovk advantage of the wuatinuous, monolithic chat- acter of concrete, In ticu of mathematical engineering analysis, Maullart performed load testing on the slaba in 1908 and wan a contract with chip system for a warehouse in Zurich in 1910. Maillart used the same construction system in the filter building, for a water erearment plant in Rorschach in 1912, In this build- ing, Aared octagonal concrete columns rise up to mect a sloping, hearmless roof slab, creanng a powerful incerioe in this ueilitarian building, Maillart's Federal Granary Building (1912) in Akdort. Swinerland, used this same beamles concrete-sah system to gear cflecr by progressively decreasing the sise of the octagonal column beginning on the ground floor, Whar are out columns on the first bevel bewuie much thinner and lighter on the rop- mont floor,  Muillast utilized the same concept of continuity of sructure in his design for the Train Shed (Chiawo, Switzerland, 1924). Lo this structure. a pitched conciete-slab roof connects and stiffens a scties of trusses spanning 25 meters. These concrete trusses are inverted arches that are supported by splayed columas. The ef- fect, both structurally and visually, is thar rhe columns and Irusses form a scamless. flowing whole. The remarkable facm of this organic structure is a compelling example of Maillart’s fusion of structural and acsthetic principles. Typical of the work of many late 19th- and earty 20th-contury designers who were ea perimenting with marctials and seructuer, Maillasy’s ment com- polling woek is found in utilitarian eructures such as warehouses bevause these vrnctures were nut confined to a preconceived aesthetic. Bridges are one of the most interoting utilitarian struc- tures because of the Lombinatinn of technical and aesthetic chal- kenge.  Unuil the Lace (9th century, bridge building had been domi- nated by the arched masonry bridge, a form used since the times of ancient Rome. fn addinen to tron and steel, reinforced con- crete revohitionized bridge building ar the turn of rhe century. Maillarv’s invesugation of the structural and aesthetic possibili- ties of reinforced concrete is well illustrated in the series of three- hinged arch bndges he designed for three Swiss towns. The Stauffacher Bridge (1899) in Switzerland was Maillart’s fine sig- nificant atched reinforced-concrete beidge. Consisting of a hori- zontal reinforeed-cancrete deck slab supported by a low unreinforced-concrete arched slab, the bridge was an efficient  Bridge (1950), near Schiers  Salginatobe! © Greatbuildingscom  alternative vo a masoncy arch bridge, Clad with stone veneer by an architect, che bridge gave no hine of its concrete uructure Maillaet’s next bridge (1901), crowing the Inn River at Zuez. integrated the tuadway and che supporting anh below inw 4 large bollow box beam, effectively using the deck to stificn the atch below. Both the edge of the roadway and the alge of the arch project beyond the connectung sides of the box beam, giving the hndge the spare elegance that Maillart an his later projects. 1a the Tavanasa Bridge (1405), Maillan refined the concept of the box beam by removing unnecessary marenal from the ends of the bridge. creating both s more elegant and a more efficient form. This bridge achieves 2 fog that is not possible with masonry construction. Maillart’s Salginatobel Bridge (1930) ia generally considered co be the pinnacle of his chree- hinged arched bridges. The bridge integrates roadway deck and low-slung arch into a continuous box beam whose cross seven decreases toward the hinge points of the arch, Spanning above a dramatic ravine, the bridge is stunning and essentially modern in character and is 9 rare synchesis of practical cnginecring and gestural form.  One of the last buildings of Maillar was the Cement Halt at the Swiss National Exhibition in 1939, This cemporary pavil- ion was constructed by spraying concrete over reinforcing to create an amazingly thin concrete shell just six centimeters thick.  The cross seution of the pavilion ix Largest at the center, grachtally decreasing in size to the ends. Though less enduring than many of hix clegane and aametimes subele bridge designs, the Cement Hall is a deatnati statement sbout che structural properties and possibilities of concrete,  Makx ObrkHotzen  Selected Works  Stauttacher Bridge. Switrertand, 1899  Inn River Bndge, Zune, Switzerland, 1901  ‘Tavanasa Brdgr. Switzeriand. 1905  Federal Granary Buskting, Alulort, Sworzerland, 1912  Tran Shed, Chiasso, Swiaerland, 1924  Salgnatobel Bridge. Swarcetland. 1930  Cement Hall (Propect for the Swiss National Extibiaon), 1999  Further Reading  Abel, John F (editar), Rackyround Papen for the Second National Confprence on Cival Engineering: Hecory, Heritage, and the Homaninier: Comrmemorateng the Hursdredsh Anniversary of the Burch of Robert Maillart, Princeton. New Jersey: Princeton Unversity Pres, 1072  Bill. Max. Rsberr Macilart, Zurich: Verlag fur Architekaur, 1949: reprint. as Reber Marllarr- Bridger and Comeractiens. wranslated fy W.P.M. Kearinge Clay. New York. Prseger, 1969 
Kalington, David I, Robert Mattlirr' Reidgre The Art af Engarertng, Princevon, New Jersey: Princeton Univeraty Press. 1970  Billington. David P.. Robert Maidsrr and she Art of Ranferved Cancrewe, Cambridge, Massachusens: MIT Press, 140  MAISON DE VERRE  Designed by Pierre Chareau; completed 1932 Paris, France  The Maison de Verte (House of Glass), designed by Pierre Chas- cau, ranks as ane of the most extraordinary and forward-looking exampkes of high-modern architecture. The conception of the Maitan de Verte was predicated on the srandardizanon. mecha- nization, and specialization of industrial production. Chareau's vac of induserial materials embodied che avant-garde «pirit in architecture of the 1920s and 1930s, Jee manifestasion, however, depended on the individual craftwnannhip and coordinaden of cach imerrelaced budding syucm. The Matson de Verre pivotally joins che wadition of craft and an ideology of modernicy.  The Dalaces, a buurgeon fainidy connected w the ineetlectual community on the Left Bank of Paris, commissioned Chareau in 1928 0 design a house that wouk! accommdate the offices of D1. Dalsace’s gynecological pracuve, a large salon for entcr- taining, private spaces for the family. and servants’ quarters. Berard Bijroét, 2 Dutch archutect, and Louis Dalbet. a metal craftsman, assisted Charcau in the design and production af rhe house through its completion in 1932. ‘Ihe Gamily had bought a three. story 19th century eesadence in a courtyard off Rue Se Guillaume with the intention of rebuilding ir, After an elderly resident on the third flour refused tv move. Chareau demolished the first wo Moors, creating a space with masonry pany walls at both sides and a masonry floor above. Wirhin this «pace. Chateau inserted thece new levels with the medina! uffices on the ground level, communal spaces on the second level (or piane nobile), and bedrooms on the think kevel. Ihe large dauble- height space on the pune nobile became a ceuter of Parisian ineellectual activity: it doubled as a theater foe musical and Iner- ary performance wile displaying che Dalsaces’ creasures of modern an.  Chareau supported the existing apartment above with an  -stee! structure, allowing for an unusually open plan below. Steel had been used tn industrial and commercial build- ings since the mid-19th cenrury, bur it was rarely used in a residential contest when lef exposed. The floors were con- srructed of a neoteric technology: rcintorced concrete, Thus, the flean could cantilever beyond their supports. further freeing the plin from the encumbeunces of structure. Another innovation was casting ventilation ducts for heating art fresh ait into the concrete throughour the house. To maximize the amount of natural light within the vontined site, Charcau designed a von Gnuous skin of industrial glass block. This luminous endusure hung from che cantilevered structure like a translucent veil, Dur- ing the dayume, a diffused tight permeated the entre intctioe apace. In the evening, the interior lights made the extenor of the Maison de Verre glow like a radiant jewed. In addition. exte- rior lights. supported on metal armatures, bathed the glass block surfaces, creating an ersatz daytime light in the intesiat, Chare-  an's appropriation of industrial materials and methods radically proclaimed modern building technologies and more subtly opined that modernity could improve the human condition.  The standardized dimension of the glass block provided Chareau with a module that organized the plan. This module af 91 centimeten, based on the width of four glass blocks, is repeated in che fixed-furninure objects that actually define the interior spaces. In the absence of walls, the fixed-furniruce objects ting the periphery of the major xpaces wich varying levels of transparcncy of opacity. Eauh module is defined by a vtec! frame- wask into which cither perforated metal or wood panels are mounted, depending on their use of position in the house, To- gcther, these ubjects create screens for privacy that is not integral to the structure ver is central to the housc’s programmatic organi- uation. Alehough Chareau used materials from his industrial pal- etre for these objects, they were crafted by Daibet, who see up hes shop on-site for che duration of the project. Paradonically, at chat me an industrial aesthetic was possible only through custom fabncation,  A theme that pervades the Maison de Verte is mechanical movement thar can transform habitation of the space. For exam- ple. at the bettom of the main staircase, cither perforaced metal screens prevented the dactne’s daytime client: from ascending the stair or che screens swung out of the way to invite the evening geese up to the grand salon on the second level. Serilaely, the atuminum partition at the hack of the salon sides laterally to expae an otherwise private study. This action connects ube two. spaces as one fluid continuum. A related preoccupation is hy gene: more than 30 plumbing Gatures are devoted wo bodily ablutions. Hixeures are prominently located in the bedrooms, visible through metal screens that swing out to increase the batb- ing area. Fhe Maison de Verre transforms to accommodate the diurnal cycles and rhythms of life.  Chareau undoubtedly was farnuliar with the work and writing uf bus contemporary Le Corbusier; they were both part of the Parisian avant-garde community. In bis “Five Points of a New Architecture,” published in 1926, le Corbusier professes the virmmes af the “free plan.” sberated by a ratiunal grid of structural polons (Sul), the “free facade” thar wraps the structure fike a membrane, and the “horizontal strip window” to let mare fight into the body of the hous. Charcau incerpreted these ideas, vombined them with specitic responses to his confined site, and Beneratcd a unique modern object that epitnmized its era. Mu- tual reypect wae renimed when Le Corbusier stedly fre- quented the construction sitc to make sketches of the Maison de Verre. Soon thereafter, Le Corbusier began to employ glau black in his designs. In he 1930, the Maison de Verre gained national and international notonery, but subsequently it was largely neglected by the academia and architectural press. The design, which was originally heralded as an architecture for the fucure, in time was scen as idosyncratic and anomalous to the modem fexucon, Not until Kenneth Frampton wrote about the Maison de Verre in the journal Perspecta in 1969 did Chareau's masterwork ecenucr the consciousness of archirecrs worldwide. Late 20th-century High-Tech architeces Richard Rogers and Renzo Piano, designers of the Pompidou Center in Paris (1977), and Jean Nouvel, architect of the Instinute of the Arab World and the Cartier Center, nwo stecl-and-glass buildings in Paris, hve idencfied the Maison de Verre as a pivotal influence mn thew work,  Peres H. Wirpersrann  See abe Cortmater, Le (Joannerct, Charles- Edouard) (France): Chareau, Pierre (France): Framptoo, Keancth (United States); Glass, Nouvel, Jean (France); Piano, Renso (Italy)  Further Reading  Baroni, Danek. “Pierre Chascsu, Protagoniat of the Modern Movement.” Ortegame 21, 00. 8! une 1980)  Wake, Pever, “Chateau Charesu,” faeries Dengn 65, 00. § (May 1994)  Chateau, Pietre, Le meson de Verey, edited by Yuluo Furagawa, Tokyo: ADA. Fuina, 1988  Filler, Maran, and Man Vellay. “House of Glan, Walls of Light: A Beacon of Modcmiam,” /fowe and Garden 185, nw, 2 (February 1983)  Frampeon, Kenneth, “Maton de Verte.” Penpa tt 12: (1969)  Pierre Chavean. sschitecte, un art inténenr (exhib. car), Pare Centre Georges Pompidou, 1995  Taylor, Brian Brace, Pirrre Chacran, Dengner and Architect, Calugne: Taschen. 1992  Vellay, Marc. and Kenneth Frampron, Prrere Charnaw, Archies and Crafisman, (883-1950, New Vath: Rizzoli, 1984; Landon: Thames and Hudson, 1985  MAKI, FUMIHIKO 1928- Architect, Japan  A major figure in Japanese architecture since the Lite 1950s. Fumihiko Maki is recognized for lus architccuural and urban design work as well as his conributions to architeccural theory, Maki's work is characterized by his critical development of the modern model, his desire w create a contemporary urban aruhi- tecture and spaces of public appearance, and hes artempe 10 fuse design concepts of the East and Wes. He is known for his rational approach. intelligent combination of technology with craftsmanship, and delicate details, all of which arc illustrated in projects for cultural, residential, commercial, educational as welll as office. convention, and sports facilities.  Maki is one of the few Japanese architects of his gencrauon to have studied, worked, and taughe in the United Statey and Japan. Following his architecture studies as Tokyo University, he obtained master of architecture degrees at Cranbruok Acad- emy of Art (1953) and the Graduatc School of Design at Harvard University (1954). He worked with Skidmore, Owings and Mer- rill in New York (1954-55) and wath Josep Lluis Sert (Sert. Jackson and Associates; (945-58) in Cambridge, Massachusetss before establishing Maki and Associates in Tokyo in 1965 Awarded a Graham Foundation Fellowship,in 3958, Maki went on two extensive research trips to Southeast Avia, the Middle Fast, and northern and southern Eumpe. Impressed by the for mal and spatial organization of sertlements, particularly the com- munities along the Mediterrancan coast, Maki became interested in collective forme Impressivts frocs this wip led wm hiv fine urban design propuaal, claboraicd with Masato Otaka for che redevelopment of west Shinjuku in Tokyo—comewad not as an actual plan but as an ilfusteation of “group form.” Maks further developed this concept in his /avasiganons ix Colleciey Form, published in 1964 as onc of three paradigms of collective forms. In contrast co “compositional form” and “megaform,” his “group form” is a more flexible urban organization based on  a human sake in which the pate and the whole are mutually anterdependent and connected thiough various Linkages.  A member of the Metabolist movement—a group of ambi- tous postwar Japanese architects who advocated the embrace of new technology with a concomitant belief in architecture's organic, humanist qualitics—since 1959 Maki remained at the fringe of the group. concentrating on space and the relationship between solid and void and not on schemes for entire cines based on industrid technology. His atrempr at an integration of aschiteeture and urbanivn brought him close to Feam X (Ten), whore meeting he attended in 1960 in southern France. Progeces of the 1970s, which expects ins idca af loosely connected and articulated parts, human scale. and transitional spaces, in- dude the Kato Gakuen Elementaty School (1972) in Numazu and the Tsukuba University Centtal Building (1974). The latter already features the foerns of the scepped pyramid and the cross, which play a mayor organizing tole in the Iwasaki An. Museum (1979) as well as he VKK Guest House (1982) and Maki’s lacer works.  The project chat bert reflects the idea of “group form” és also his most renowned carly work: the Hillside Terrace Aparument Complex in Tokyo, realized in six phases herween 1969 and 992. This residential and commercial ensemble is a rare exam ple af a compechensive fong-term development of a large site in a Japanese city. It featurct a unified architectural style on an intimate human wale, with sidewalks and wansitional spaces providing pedestrian access to shops and preserving privacy for the aparrments on the upper levels,  Maki’s preference for collaged and fragenentary composition, similar to the layered spaces of uadional Japanese architeciuce and gardens. is parriaularly evident in the facade af the Wacoal Media Center (1985). The so-called Spiral Building echoes the heterogencous urban contest of Tokyo and. fike che TEPLA Building (1989), pays enihuee to icons of 20th-century architec- ture and Cubist art in particular. The Spiral Building also illus. trates the concept of phenomenological depth (ofm): the aain gallery space. surrounded by a gently slaping semicylindrical ramp. is situated at the back of the building and shielded frnen the street by che enteame lobby, che vale, and gallery space. Naturally ithiminated from above, it can be seen from the srece entrame. An intimate relanaruhip between the inside and the ounide is created by the broad suairease chat shows in the Facade. It is equipped wich chairs and provides a rare (nonpaying) space in Lokyo for visitors to relax and warch the street below. Maki's effort to relate wo the particular esviroament of cach place is further sllustrated in his National Muscum of Modern Art (1986) in Kyoto, the facade of which features an orthogonal pattern in tune with the traditional grid of che city as well asa symmetry, a reference to the surrounding neoclassical buildings.  Maki's attempe at creating a public architecture in Japan. where such 3 concepe traditionally did nine evist, is obvious in his sporn and convention facilities, The exprenive stainless-steel tools of the Fujiaiws Municipal Gymnasium (1984), the Takyo Metropolitan Gytnnasium (1990), and che Makuhari Conven- tron Center (1989 and 1998) ansure these bvaldings of a strong presence on the city. The sports complex of the Metropolitan Gymnasum ar Sendagya Staven torms a dynamic Landscape of three major individual buikdings positioned to create an overall ensemble and connected through pedestrian spaces thar provide ever-changyng views of the scenery, recalling fapanese strolling  
Wacoal Madia Cone (sputal Hhufding), Manan Ward, Lokya, 1985 © Toshihaa Keuajima  gardens. Malu pays lose attention net only to the overall form of the buildings bur alse ta cher structure and delicate detail, which, as he poine ou, gyre architecture ot chythin and scale.  A recurring aspect in Maki’s designs is hes masterful use of tight. a qualiry thar és further developed in his works of the 1990s, The Graluaie School Resear Center (194) at Keio Univerury’s Shonan Fujiawa Campus js characterized by its eransparent entrance wall and the brise-soleil of perforated alumi- num pancls, The Tokyo Church of Cheist (195) features a sheji-like cranslucent wall of light in the main hall, separating che building feom the chavtic vurrounding and providing a place (or spiritual teflection,  Together with Arsta Isozaki, Kisho Kurokawa, and Kazuo Shinohasa, Maki is one of the few Japanese architects of his generations lv enjoy internadional sucess and faine. His works outside Japan include the Center tor the Arts (1993) at Verba Buena Gardens in San brancisco, the bar Buropark (1999) near Munich, the Floaing Pavilion (1996) un Groningen. and the projected Children's House sn Poland. Maki hat been honored with numerous prizes, including the Pritzker Architecture Prize in 1993  Caroia Hrix  Ser ate Isozaki, Arata (Japan); Japen; Kurokawa, Kisho Uspan): Kyow, Japan; Metabolists; Shinohara, Kazuo Gapan)  Bi by  Born in Tokyo. 16 September 1928. Studied in Kenzo ‘Tange's  Research {aboratary 148-52; bachelor’s degree in architecture  1952; attended the Cranbmok Academy of An, Bloomfield  Hilly. Michigan 1952-53, master’s degree in architecture 1953;  studied at the Harvard Graduate School of Design, Cambridge.  Mausachusetts 1953-54, master's degree in architecture 1954  Married Maga: Matuumato 1960; 2 childrens. Designee, Skiden-  ute, Owings and Merrill, New York 1954 -55; designer, firs of  Yowp Huis Ser. Jaduon and Associates, Cambridge 1955-  SA: principal, Maki and Associates, Tokyo from 1965. Assistant  profesor 1946 58, assocute professor 1960-62, Washingron  University School of Architecture. St. Louis, Missouri; axsocuate  professor, Harvard Graduate School of Design 1962-65; lec-  turer, department of urban design 1965-79, professor of archi-  tecture $979-89, Univerury of Lokyo: visiting professor, Har-  vard Graduate School of Design 1967-68; visiting professor,  University of Cahfornia, Berkeley 1970-7t; visiting lectures,  Calumbia University, Now York 1976, 1984; visting critic.  Universicy of California, Lew Angeley 197  Technical Univenity of Vienna 1977;  Gradua School of Design 1978-79 Eine Noves ting Pro-  fessor, Pfarvard University £983. Fellow, Grahain Foundation,  Chicage 1958-60, honorary fellow, American Institute of Archi-  teva 1780; founder and member. Metabolise Group. Lokyo:  member, Japanese Institute of Architects, Awarded Pritsker Price  1993.  Selected Works  Hidhade Terrace Apartment Complex (Mhases IVb. Tokyo, 1969 42  Kato Gakuen Elementary School. Numazu, Japan, 1972  Center for the School of Art and Physical Lducation, Trukuba Univeraty. 1974  Iwasaki Ar: Museum, Kagoshima Pretecoure, 1979  Maczawa Garden Howe (YKK Gace Howe}, Kurohe. 1982  Munsipal Gymnasium, Fursawa, 1984  Wacall Media Conter (Spiral Buikding), Minaiy Ward, Tokyo, (985  Natinal Museum of Modem Art, Kyoto, 1986  TESTA Scence Pavilion, Minain Wand. Pokyo, 1989.  Makuhati Mose Convention Center, Chiba Pretecuure. 1989 and Ine  Tokyo Metnpolaan Gys sbuya Ward, Tokyu, $990  Center fur the Arty, Yert dens. San brancisen, 1993  Graduate Schaal Rewargh Cemet, Keio Caiversity, Shonan Fupxawa Campus, 1994  Tear Bairoparh, near Munich, 1995  Tokyo Church of China, 129%  Floaung Payihon, Groningin, 1996  Selected Publications  “Some Thoughts an Callecsve Form.” in Metatbelum 1960 (ath Oraka Manto), 1960, reprinted in Senetare in Ary aed im Scarce, edited be Gyorgy Kees, 1965  Investigation in Collective Form. \%GA  Fumshibo Mati t 1965-78, 197R  “Lapanewe City Spaces and the Concept of ‘Oku.’ "Japan Ancheseet (May 1979)  *Moderniam at the Crorosds,” Japan Architect (March 1983)  “The Public Dimensinn in Contemporary Anchirectute,” in New! Pasbbe Archuircture: Recent Projects by Femuhske Maki and Arata Joazabi techity can.) 19RS  Fumubibe Maki 2 1979-86, 196  "Gay Image, Matenulity.” in Fraudnko Make An dewhetw of Fragmentation, by Serge Salut and Frangoue Labbe, [Kt  Fragnenntry Figueey The Collected Anboesreral Drsscings of Famsbike Maki, 1989  Kaomsbike Maki A 1980.42. 1995  Fumibvke Maki: Buildings sod Projet, U9  Further Reading  Vhe above-mennoned Kumchiho Mutks: Buildings und Projets vs luntes a tert by Maki ‘Notes on Collecuve Lorm,” that was orginally pub- fished in fapan Architect m 19M Ue aby concains essays on Maki by other authors, including chose bv Botond Hognar and Alex Kneper mentioned below. and gives a well dlustrated and documented werview of Maki’s projets. Salat and Labbe presents Miki work trom the late 19605 to the Lae 1980s and includes an introductory teat by Maks. Rema mtroduces carty projects of the 1960s amd 19°O) in the content of Metabolism and beyond, while Muntuc considers chrce mayne works of the 1980s,  Rognar, Bitued, “From Group Torm ta Lightnow.” an Komibebe Maki. Burkdings and Proyecis, by Fumihiko Maki. New York: Princeton Anhitecural Pren  Casper, Date 0... Funrtite Mati, Masare Aevtetect, Monuicelle. Illinois Vane Bikhographies, 198%  Fredman, Midred (ativan), Joby borer and Spine (evhils vat} Minneapolis, Minnesoca. Walker Art Center. and New York Abrams 1986  Kreger, Alex, “(Ongoing) Inverrigaaone in Collective Form: Maky's Quarter-of-a-Century at Hillside Dertace,” in Aynetiitn Make Raikdsege and Projects. tee Furmbiko Maka, New York: Princetan: Architectural Pres, 1997  Manroc, Alexandra (editor). Nr Prbis Archirecrce Revent Propet: by Fumiiiks Maks and Acasa locas (oh cal, New York Japan Society. 1985  Rows. Michact Franklin, Beyond Metabolisar- The New Japanete Arthatecture, Now York: Architecroral Recent, 1978  Salas, Serge. and Frangowe Labbé. Furninko Maki war poenque de br fragmentatsen, Milan: Flevta, \OR7; as Fumiteke Maki: Ant Ansthetic of Fragmentacion, New York: Riuzzob, 1983  Thome, Martha, etal (editor! Uhy Peitekee Archeteiture Prise: Lhe Hint Twenty Year, New York: Abrams, 1999  MALAGUEIRA HOUSING QUARTER, EVORA, PORTUGAL Designed by Alvaro Siza Vieira:  1977 ~  Alvaro Siza Vicira's Malagueira Housing Quarter occupies the 27 -hecrare site of the fuemer Quinta da, Maligueira estate in Evora, Portugal, 4 small town of 30,000 inhabisanu located in the Alenicjo district 140 kilometer southeast of Lisbon. The estate initially was a privately ewned farm daring from the [6th century, In April, 1974, the Land was expropriated by Evora’s Communist party in order to revitalise the ates by creating 4 permanent residence (or low-income workers.  Che Malagueira Quarter continues Siza’s long: standing com- mitment tu social housing. beginning in 1974-75 with his work for the Serviga de Apojo Ambulaténe Local (MAAL). 3 work group of architects and architecture students who worked with local residents’ associations to reinvigorate the poor housing con- ditions extant throughout Portugal. Although the SAAL brigades  were dishaaded in 1970, a a result of fis parucipanon. Siza received the commission tu create the Malagueira master plan. The iniaal plan was approved in November 1977 and construc tion continues to this day on a site lying aceoss a barren phin just oucsde of the town walls, next 10 an esate of middle-class homes arranged in pacel-colored, seven-story cruciform towers The Quarter, to date, ix comprised af amund 1.200 lew-tiee, high-density house cintaining one- ta five-bedroom dwellings. along with several comercraal and institutional buddings, en- duding an electrical transformer root, 2 commiunuy center, and 2 supermarket.  Uhe designs for the Malagucisa houses denved from Sita's varliet SAAL-cra proposal for the Boa Vontade cooperative north of Malagucira, which Siza affered co the Malagueira municipal administratian for tree. Later. Siza's plans were anisted and elab- orated by several other architects, including Nuno Ribeiro Lopez, Eduardo Souts de Moure, and Aldulberto Dias. The renults have often been compared to the “munirnum cristence” dwellings in Germany and Austiia of che 1920s, wich as the Weisenhotsicdlung in Stuttgart (1927), as well as to Adolf Ganos’s carlice villas in the wealthy outskirts of Vienna. A better campanyon would be to the Maroccan works of ATRAT- Afrique. such as the “Nid d’Abeilles” project in Casablanca's Camreres Cenrrales (1951-53). There, as in Malagueira, modular housing was provided as a flexible frame to which 2 variety of different litestyles could be accommodated.  Sharmng a Latitude and thus 2 dimate with Athens, the town of Evora features a cumbinativn of classical and International Style modernism — along with a tod wo a Moditerrancan vernan ularatchiteceure chat both entiches and complicates its appeat ance. Siza chose forms that paid tribute vo both uaditions, and his ase of white, orthogonal valumes far the principle module evokes both the purity of classical aschitecture and the indige- fous architecture of the Alentejo. Each house is wo floors high. set back from the mad by an intervening patio space. Fhe patios arpculate a separauon between dwellings and the street, whereas high walls provide a sense of enclosure and privacy from adjoin- ing units. ‘The patios aha help with another problem stemming fram budgetary restrictions: they Guntrol the Glimare within indi- vidual unin, providing protecvon Unat the low grade conatruc- tign matetiah themselves could not.  Elewhere Siza uicorpurated specific seferences te bovally pres ent classical architecture. A Roman-cra aqueduct running car the uty provaled Siza with the theme of the conduit. Following dus inspiration, though dictated equally by finanqal ceacerns. Siza constructed a set of elevated serewe ducts of concrete blocks hat carries the water, clecriwity, gas. iclevisian. and telephone networks, with secondary pipes providing services to the individ- wal houses The duct is raised on slender concrete piers, and is a love. inaintenance, single scale solunan ta the provision af ser- vices to all of the quarter's strictures. as well as one char is tespeutful of local hutory,  The resulong construction has been af 4 generally poor qual- ity, manly duc to cottupt contractors and poor focal akill and equipment. but Siza views tha asa valuable process at discovery. preferring the results uf acuislent to retlece the gradual process of concepnan and consruction. The reault is ngorously cmpirt- cal and celevtic, bearing the matks af having been. cancewed against the struggles of external realibes, and with all of the 
conflis that true public participation entaik, This honesty. ptagmatiam, and humility are che keyatancs of Siza’s work.  ‘The project remains an unfinished one, with open spaces left deliberately to eventually receive structures that will serve the community, Siza views this xcheme as one that is prepared to tecewe changes and alterations, as compared two othet, less- flexable progects that fix themidlves in a historical moment vath- out allowing for the vicissitudes of time.  Siza’s Malaguicra Housng Quarter received the fir ever Prince of Wales Prize in Urban Design from Harvard University in November 1988 (sharing she honoe with Swedish architect Raiph Eeckine’s Byker Redevelapment Project in Newcatle-on- Tyne, England), chosen from among 46 notunated projects,  Noan Crasin  See alm Loos, Adolf (Austria): Siza Vieira, Alvaro J.M. (Pocte-  gels Weimenhohtiedbuag, Dentecher Werkbund, Scuttgart (1927)  Further Reading  Callowa, Robert, "Cronobagic: Malagueita. Evora, 1974-1999," Loms dnpermatenal 103 (1999)  Frampton, Kenseth, “Archwecture as Crucat Teanstormanon: the Wark of Alvaro Siza.* an Alnaro Size: Complete Werks, ai. Kenneth Frampron (London: Phaidon Press Lamited, 2000)  Rayon, Jean-Paul, “Il quammere Maligucita.” Caurbella 478, vol. 46 (Mar 1982)  Riso, Vincenzo, “Parvicolanici dea forma urbana de! quarticre Malagueua a Evora.” Peremecro 219 (May-June 1997)  Siza, Alvaru Vieira. "Viviensdas vxiabes en (Quines sla Mataguesra.” #2 Croques 68/69 (1994)  Nisa, Alvar Viciea, “Houamg uv Quins di Malagucua, Evo, Portugal.” Arcbitecrure and Uirbaniom 6 [Exess Edition! (June 1989).  Alvacy Sita Viiea, “CU acauenalasione degli indisi,” Canabelle 498 499, vol. 48 Jan-Feb 1984)  MALLET-STEVENS, ROBERT 1886-1945 Architect and Film Sct Designer, France  Robert Mailet-Stevens played an important role in French mod- ernism at the beginning of the 20ch century. While he practiced architecture within the mode of International Seyle chrough his vollaborations with artists, sculptors. film directors, painters. and furniture designers, he also developed a unique formal language.  Mallet-Stevens was the won of a prominent art expert axsoci- ated with the Paris Impressionists. In 1905 he jouned the Ecole Spéciale d'Architecture in Paris where his interest quickly eirned to the work of Frank Lloyd Wright. whose onganization of inte- hor spaces he admired. The same vear, his uncle Adolf Stocler called on the Viennese architect Josef Hoffmann, a famuly friend, to build his main residence (the Palais Stoctet. Brussels,). Hoff: mann. along with Ono Wagner and the Vienna Secessionist movement, influenced Mallet-Stevens greatly. Encouraged by Francis Jourdain, his projects for furniture and interiors were exhibited in the Salon d'Autamne, access thar allowed him to meet with the devoratos Pierre Charean and with the sculptors the Marrel brothers. with wham he collaborated during his entire life.  In 1922, while Le Corbusier designed his master plan for a Contemporary City for Three Million Inhabitants, Maliet- Stevens was publishing an album of drawings, Une cité moderne that reflected the eclecticism of the Viennese Secession. (What united the Secenion memben was their rejection of historical realism in painting and tevivalism in architecture, in favor of Jugenstil, and the proto-functionaliam of Deco and Bauhaus aesthetics). Use cité moderne consisted of & collection of build- ings, individual fragments of an utban repertoire—a police sta- tiun, a town hall. a bus stop. ar bridges—each type ing an autonomous farm, The project demonstrated 2 tendency toward eclecticism. which he would Liter reject.  Mallet-Stevens's most important commassion came in 1923, when the Viscount de Noailles and hit wife. a young French ariscacrat. decided so build a splendid vila in Hyéres, France. After meeting with Le Corbusier, who declined the invitation, and Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, who was not suitable for polisi- cal reasons, the viscount discovercd Mallet-Stevens, a Paris ac- quaintane who had not yer built any significant commissions, With the Villa Noaitles, however, Maliet-Stevens achieved a te- ductive yet elegam expression of simple cubic volumes. He pre- ferred clean facades to constructive details of ornament; smooth gray and white surfaces and large hocizoneal openings composed the house. The villa was later wo be showcased in a Surrealist film made in 1928 by Man Ray tided Le meystire due chitean de Dé (The Mysenes of che Chateau of Dic), in which rhe artist melded the stark forms of the villa with Stephane Mullarmé’s poem “Un coup de dé pemests nitbolina le hasar” ("A throw of dice will never abolish chance”).  Mallet-Stevens designed numerous sets for the cinema in- dluding Marcel I'Herbier’s Linbumaine (The Inhuman One, 1923). a collaborative project that also included cubo-furunst painter Fernand lager and designer René Lalique, The film was acclaimed by the Club des Amis du Sepsitmee Art (Friends of the Cinemarographic Arts), che First avant-garde ciné-club of its kind to which Mallet Stevens belonged. His colleagues led him wm design his largesr penject in 1926-27, the Rue Maller-Stevens houses in Aurcuil, 2 street of urban mansions for the architect, astists, and his patrons, The ensemble was a scries of houses ending at the barder of the street. expressed through a consistent yet vasiod Cubist vocabulary.  After 1926, influenced in part by De Stijl aesthetics and his own shift towards reductiviamn, Mallet-Srevens abandoned orna- mentation and continued to develop modcmist pavilions for the Exposition Internationale de: Arts Déceratifi (International Exhibision af Decorative Arty, Paris, 1925, 1937), private villas {auch as the Corbusian-inspired Villa Cavruix, in Crom, France, 1932). and commercial buiklings, such as the Garage Alfa- Romeo in Pans (1925), The Later reflected his passion for ma- chines and speed shared with the Italian Futurists. Ar che begin- ning of World War II, Mallet-Stevens fled to southern France with his jewish wife and worked on large-scale compericions in wlhuch he wsisted on the value of volumetric masses. His role in the French avant-garde was 1 until 1980, when his work was brought co light with the reconsruction of the Villa Noailles and the rediscovery of Dadaist cinema. Criticized by his peers for being toa much a formalist, the architect was nevertheless a designer of great importance in the development of modern act and architecture in France in the firs part of the 20th century.  Mane: Hasan Barri  See abo Act Nowveau (Jugendstil); Contemporary City for Three Million Inhabitants; Corbusier, Le (Jeanacret, Charles. (France): Hoffmann, Josef (Austria); Palais Stocket, Brussels; Vienna Secession; Wagner, Otto (Austria)  Biography  Born io Paris, 24 March 1886 00 a Belgian family; unde Baron Stocket was an architect and designer. Artended the Eosde Special d Architecture, Paris 1903- 06. Private peactice, Paris from 1907, designed film sets between 1919 and 1929, Founding membet. Unton des Artiste: Moderne: (929, Dicd in Paris, 8 Februasy 1945, after a long iliness.  Selected Works  Villa Nouilles, Hydro, France, 1925  ‘Seta for che film £" orbwracene, 1924  Reconstruction of the Hitel dey Roaches Naires. Trowville, France. 1924  Garage Alfa-Romen, rut Marbeut, Paris, 1925  Mansion of Mme Callinex, Boulogne. Frame, 1925  Pavilion du Toursme (with Martel Brothers). Exposinon Invernationale des Arcs Décoranfx. 192%  Villa of M. Anget-Prouvent, Ville d'Arvay. France, 1926  Sen for Le vernge, 1926  Manson af Mrs. Reiffenbery, Auteud. Pans, 1927  ‘Mansion of Mrs. Aflauni. Auteuil. Paris, 1927  Mansion of S. and J. Manet, Anteuil, Paris, 1927  Mansion of M. Dreyfus. Aureud, Pars. 1927  Mansion of Matlet-Mevems, Auteuil, Paris, 1927  Casino of Saint-fean-de-Luz. France, 1928  Renavation of the ‘Theatr de Grasse. France, 1950  Delza shop, mic de bs Paix, Pars, 1930  Bar for Les Cafés du Betal, boulevard Haussmann and avenue W: Pans, 19:30  Villa of M. Cavroix, Croia, Brance, 1932  Ville of M. Ti . Sceamx, France, 1932  Fire Sution, Massy, France, 1936  Pavilions, Exposinan Internationale des Ans Davorsniis, 1937  Selected Publications  Une cité maderne, Pass, Jourdain, 1922  Le décor moderne an cinéma, Paris, Main 1928  Liat cntmatographique (with Bons Bibensky and AP) Richard), volume 6, 1929  Maller Servens, dix annie: de obalisatians en archisecrure rt décoration, foreword by Maurice Raynal, incroduction by A. Sarons (Italy), W. Dudok (Holland), F.]. Margold (Germany). M. Meinikaff (USSR), V. Bourgeois (Belgum), M Th. Boancy (U.S.), 1930  Grande consructions, Paris, Charles Moreau, 1929  Further Reading  Banham, Reyner. Beory and Design in she Fint Machine Age, London, Archicectural Press, and New York: Praeger, 1960; 2nd editioe,, New York: Pracger, 1967  Briolle, Cécile, Agnés Fusabet, and Gerard Monnier, La Vilis Neatlles: Reb Maller-Seevens, Matvaller: Parentheses, 1990  Dee Sel ot Farchiseceure on Foance, Liege, Belgium: Mardaga. 1985  Deshoulidres, Dominique, Reb Malle-Sseven, Archuterte (bilingasl French-English edition), Reussels; Archives d’ Architecture Moderne, 1980  Gangnet, Piette, Le wentrment de la nature chee Mallet-Seevens, Parts AMG. 1977  Mousuna., Léon, Maller Mevem, Paris: Cres, 1931  Worley, Richard, “Gabnel Giucvecluan od giadine cubsta,” Rasegnt, 311981)  MANTEOLA, SANCHEZ GOMEZ, SANTOS, SOLSONA, VINOLY Architectural firm, Argentina  Flora Mantevta. Javier Sanchez Gsémez. Josefina Santos, Justo Subsuna, and Rafael Viioly constivuted one of the most signili- cant firms to practice architecture in Argentina beginning an the fate 1960s. Santos and Solsona created the original studio on thew graduauion in 1956. Ignacio Petcherky later became an associate in 1962 and remained until he died in 1972. and Rafael Viboly was an associate from 1966 unsil 1981, when he moved to the United States.  During che 1960 che firm hegan exploring the porencial in architectural renavation. kxemplary of this exploration is their Headquarters of the Bank of Buenos Aires (1968). Converted from an existing department store, it retains its primary metal structure and expresses its original, academic, eripanite facade. The scheme yrelds an interior volume that is unified by an enve- fope of amber glass brick. Ir quickly gained international tecogai- pon for its transparent use of light and color and its strong volumeuic articulation. The building subsquendy became a prototype for che development of the insticution’s additional facilities. ‘wo branch hanks, in Retiro and Parricios, borh in Buenos Aires and from dhe early 19703, are of remarkable qual ity. There, the use of crnictural glass slabs comulrs in cranslucent horizontal planes and evocative poetic form,  Tes the late 1970s che group received several major commis- sions. Among them, the Football (snccer) Stadium in Mendoza (1978) carefully utilizes the natural copugraphy to create the stadium's principal volume. Contest is also of critical concerts in the group's most acclaimed work, the competition for ATC Argentina Iclevisora Calor (Argentinean Calor TV, 1978). in preparauun for the Soccer World Cup of 1978, the design, con- struction, and occupancy took only 18 months and constituted anew typology for the counry. ‘Ihe design resohision was achieved by sinking a large boalike form inva the landscape to continuc the scale of the surrounding area. Four cubes that house the television studios emerge from this large plarform. Ins perfo- rated ceiling accommodates existing trees and provides illumina- tion. The intent a to convey a factury of images and information. The Large, one-story rooftop offers opportunities for public events and provides a whimsical playground chat integrates an artifical landuape inte the park, adding a river, a Lake, and a ceremotial colonnaded entry.  This firm has also contributed significantly co the design of large-scale urban residential compleves. Among them are the Rioya complex (1973) in Parque Patricius, Buenos Aires, and the Piedrabucna complex (1974), designed in association with the firm of Aslan and Excurra. This project combined apan- ments with two commercial centers, a sports center. twa elemen- tary schools, and a high school. Semicircular green spaces are organized to accommodate the facilities and provide ample space t0 realize large-scale dwelling complexes. 
The Aluar Housing Project (1975) presented several con- sructional and lngitical problem. It ix located in a remote semiarid derert, Puerto Madryn, in the province of Chubut, near the Alvar aluminum factory. The climate is harsh, dry, and subjected to constant wand. ‘The sae, however, descends toward the Adantic Ocean, allowing for qualitative views. Phe program consisted of housing for the families uf 800 Lactory workers, a primary school, a commercial center, and admmisranve facil bes. Because of the region’s severe climate, the project utdized pretabricarcd componcats ty expedite construcuion. Parallel  uilding units are arranged in four groups to create an in- between street offering spaces that are pmcected from the harsh weather. The west wall has limited smatt openings te: minimize the wind, whereas the east side has several cnerances facing the ocean.  The firm has alto produced u scries of agruficant shy rapers that are tecognized for their formal and volumetric qualiry, Among then is the headquarters for che Union (nduatrial Argen- tina (Atgentine Industrial Ausociation, 1976). Ic is lovated in the surth quadrant of the city’s historic distnet, known as Catalinas Norte, The 28-sury ollike tower is a pute glos prism that offers visu to the river. [he lower levet houses the auditorium and support facilities, and all scvier ares are capressed wn well-  ed concrete. This burkding carctully aruculates hu uen and  Foothalh lsuccert Suaduim, 1976. Mendes, Argentina © Tene Bernards  materiak and displays a high modernist tradition through the use of the curcain wall.  The CASFPT Fower (1981) in Buenos Aires refers to Aman- tin Williams's use of the rowes as an isolated structure, yer it is Jocated within a traditiunal loc of the original Spanish grid. The CASFPI cower is linked to the urban fabric through a transparent arcade that reveals a thythmnic. facade interrupted by solids and vols. Vhe Prourban Tower (1983) is located along ane of the pnnupal access points to the city center. Its pure cylindrical shape. concrete structure, and use of glass and anodized alumi- num create a feacure chat is unique to its urban context. The twin towers of the Alto Palermo Plaza (1997) are constructed tna sesedentaal area of Palermo. The project was executed in aswociarion with the team of Urgell, Fazio, Penedo. Salaberry, McCormack. and Minond and is considered to represent the bet tradition of design and building in Argentina. The enmplex won recognitinn asa significant landmark in the city. The unique spatial effects of the inteticn and dhe buildings’ ionogra- phy offcr a structure that ts logical, spacious. and poetic.  The fiem of Manteoba, Sinchey Gamer. Santos, Solsona, and Viduly 1s characterized by a professunal excellence, a substantial body of cesprucd work, and a varied typological language. Theit changing vocabulary can be referenced to madcmists such as Pierre Chareau, Le Corbusier, Lendenza. and James Stirling.  Internationally, ches reputation began in the carly 1970s through a actica of ylass-brick bank buildings and was ecintosved lates chat decade by the ATC building,  Although the group's wark is often. seen as culectic, thew designs may be charactenzed by attention to program. spatial organization, and structural logic. Rather than striving for indi vidual uniqueness, cach buikling exploees a aynificant archetype and develaps an architectural theme,  Jon Braxagon  Biographies  Flora Manteola  Born in Argenuna, 1936. Founding member, Manteaka, Perch- ersky, Sdmbee Goincz, Santos, Solsona, Vitioly, Buenos Aares 184. Professor, faculty of architecture. | sity of Buenos Aires. Member, College of Judges of the Central Society of Ar- chiterts, Buenos Aires,  Javier Sanchez Gomez  Born in Argentina. 1936. Founding member, Mantcola, Petch ersky, Sdnchez Gomez, Santos, Safsuna, Vinoly, Buenos Aires 1964. Professor, faculty of architecture, University of Buenos Aires, Member, College of Judges of the Central Society of Ar chitects, Buenos Aires.  Josefina Santos  Born in Argentina, 1931. Founding member, Manteola, Petch- ersky, Sanchez Gomer, Santos, Sokana, Viioly, Bucnos Aires 1964, Member, College of Judges of the Central Saciety of Ar- chitects. Buenos Aires: member and advisor, Profesional Coun- cil of Architecture and Urbanism. Buenos Aircs.  Justos Jorge Solsona  Born in Argentina, 1931, Founding member, Manteola, Petch- ertky, Sd Gamer, Santos, Sobona, Vitiely, Buenos Aires 1964; member, Technical Qualifying Commussion for the Otympic Games, Barcelona 1992. Profeasor, faculty of archirec- ture, University of Bucnos Airey; guest professue, Eqole Polytech: nique de Lausanne. Mettsher, College of Judges of the Central Sociery of Architects, Buenos Aires.  Rafael Vifioly  Boen in Argentina, 1944. Founding member, Mantenla, Petch- erky, Sinchez Gémer, Santos, Solons, Vihaly, Buenas Aires 1964. Left the firm in 1981,  Firm  Partnership cstablished in Bucnus Aires 1964 as Manteala, Peechertky, Sdnchez Gamez, Santos, Solsona, Vitoly. In 1971, parmer Ignacio letchersky died, and the firm became Mantevla, Sénchez Gomez, Santos, Sobona, Vitaly. Partner Ralac! Vitioly left the firm in 1980, and Carlos Sallaberry has since joined the pastnerthip.  Selected. Works  Headquarters, Bank of Buenos Aires. 1968  Rioja Housing Consplex, Buenos Airey, 1973  Piatrabuens Housing Complex, Buenin Airey (with Aslan and Ecusra), 1974  Football tso.uce) Stabuim, Menduza, Argentina, 197%  Veleviuon Production Conter, Bucnos Aires bith Sadkowsha, Voptcnberg. Luma, Cano, and Grennan). 1978  Headquarters, Umon Industrial Argentina, Buenos Aures, 1476  Aluar Housing Complex, Hucrin Madeyn, Argentina, 1975  CASEPL Tower, Bucnor Aites, 1991  Srmurban ‘Tonwer, Buenas Annes, 1283  Tower of Ally Palcrmo Plaza, Bucrin Altes (with Urgell, Passo, Penida, Salaberry, McCormack, and Minna, 1997  Further Reading  Ghasherg is the most comprehensive sureey of this studbo's prodacoon from che late 1970s une the Lae {980% the book places architectural production within the soctal and cultural context of the country. The Gandelwnas aries a critical tesew of the Head ollie of che Bane de Caudal de Buenos Airy  “Review of the huusing compler fur 74@ familie: for the induweial plant in Puerta Madnin.” Germs, 17A/S8H, ou author  Grandelsonas, Muri, Reniw de Cindad de Buena: Airs, Argentina: trad Office, 1968, Lineacs Branch, 1969, Retire Branch, 1970. edited and photographed by Yukio Euugawa, Fohya: ADA. Edirs. 1984  Garber, longs. Herve binsoraa de Le anopuitertons Argentine. 2 yols., Buenos Aires: Fafitorial Clarktad, 1991  “Review of Buenos Aires Calor TW Production Ceater, Private Hones, and CASEPL Office Tirerz.” GA Dacwsment, 10 (May 1984)  MARKELIUS, SVEN 1889-1972 Architect and Town Planner, Sweden  Sven Markets was one of the most influential 20ch-century architects in Sweden. Although Markelius maintained an inde pendent practice ftom as carty as 1910, he also held a number of influential public positions chroughour his life, such as head of carpentry for the Swedish National Committee for Building Industry Seandardamion Design Deparuncat (1920), member of the Nacional Board of Public Building's Research Departmene (1938-44), and direvtoe of the Stockholm City Planning De- parument (1944-54). The range of interest indicated by these posinons was reflected in his work in a number of aseas, inchud- ing architecture. interioe design. furniture and textile deugn, and Maskclius had the opporrunity co cravel extensively through- our northern Europe in the late 1920s and carly (930s, and this expenence clearly influenced his views on architecture. In 1927. be was awarded a travel grant that took him to Germany, France. Belgium, and Holland. While in Germany, Markelius traveled to esau, where he met Walter Gropius and visited the recently completed Bauhaus building: and the hosing under construc. dion at Dessau-Téeten. Markchus also visited the Weissenhof- scidlung exhibition im Stutrgast, where he was exposed to the work of Le Corbusier. Elis intcrest in the ideals of the Modern movement as they werc being expresed in watincotal Europe was dearty reflectod in his atrendance at the Congres Imtematio- naux d'Architecture Moderne (CIAM) meetings in Frankfurt (9929) and Bertin (1931).  Hs travels would profoundly affect Markelius. as evidenced by the 1925 competition for the Hebingberg Concert Hall, One of the most imporrant works of 2Oth-century Swedish architec: 
ture. this building represents the transition from a reliance on classical clements to the simple volumetric cxpresmon charactet- istic of the Modern muvement, which was ty become known as “functionalism” chroughout Scandinavia. Markelius was initially awarded uhurd place in the competition behind the well- established architects Lars Istacl Wahiman and Ragnar Ouberg. However, because the municipal authorities wunsikerod the pro- posals for the inital ompeution 10 be com prohibetiive. 4 second compcrition was held. and Markelus was awarded first place along with the building commision. Both the ininal proposal and the subsequent winning entry by Markelius were decidedly dlassical, however, although the original plan and ses comples entry sequence was not significantly altered. the exterior of the final building was characterized by the clearty delineated vol- umes, expanses of glass, and pure white walls thie Markelius had encountered during his travels berween the time of the initial Lormpetition and the completion of the concert hall in 1932.  Markelius played a significance role in introducing the ideale of the Modern movement to Sweden noc only through bis build: ings but also through his lectures, articles, and partaciparian in the influennal 1930 Stockholm kxhibitivn. Markelius made a number of contributions, including sharing jour aurhoeship for acceptera, the manifesto that accompanied the extubiven, and his built work that comprised pavilions and kiosks (Svenska Skargirdfirbundet, A.-B. Aftonbladet) and prototypes for rental apartments and privare houses. A number of ether imporanr buikdings date from the 1940s, including the Scudent’s Building {1930, with Uno Arhén) at the Royal College af’ Technology, the “collective” tt block (1935) on lohan Ericnongaran, and the Srockhalm Building Associanon Building (1937).  Markelius wis alo involved in both snall- dnd barge-sale town-planning projecrt inchuding the Master Plan for the 1925 Bypge och Bo Exhibition, the Linkaping Community Center {1946+ 53), and the Stockholm Community Center and Theatre (1945-60). As directur of the Stockbulm City Planning Depan- ment in 1944, Markelius strongly influenced planning in and aruund Swekbole. Merhaps his moxt significant contribudan was the “new town” of Villingby, which was envisioned as a suburban extension of che capital As early as 1945, Markelins developed 2 schematic plan and a set of principles for the devel, opment of the area based on a concentrated center bya large strip of parks containing schools, day care facilities,  play  While still serving as the ditector of the Stockholm City Plain ning Department, Markelius was appainted ro the United Na- tons Board of Design. which was assembled in 1947 t0 advise on the design of the UN Headquarters in New York, This associ- ation led to the commission co design the Ecunomic and Social Council Chamber (1951-52). Work on the UN Headquarters led to exposure beyond the borden of Sweden, and us a result Marketius was invited to serve a8 a guicat profesor at a number of American institutions, including Yale University. the Massa: chuscets Institute of Technology, the Univenity of Califarnia, Berkeley, and Cornell University. After his tenure with the Stockholm City Manning Deparument. he went an to complete a qumber of commissions that included a high-rise building (1963) in Steockholm's Hotorgcity area and the Swoden House (1969).  Krsts Mircea See abe Sweden  Biography  Born in Stockholm, 25 October 188%; educated at the Royal lastituce of Technology and the Academy of Arts in Stockholm (1910-15); attained the tide of architect 1913; subvequently traveled on the Continent, retuming so practice in the office of Exik Lallerstedt and other leading Swedish architects (Ragnar Ontbery, Ivar Tengbom, Eric Lallersedt, and Torben Grut). Founding member of Congres Imemanonaux d'Architeceure Moderne (CIAMI 1928. Authored Accepiera, the manifesto of Swedish Functionalism (Stockholm, 1931). Member of the Na- tional Board of Public Building's Research Department 1938— 44, Continued co practice up until his death in Stockholm, 27 February 1972,  Selected Works  Master plan and villas for the Bypge och Ho Exhibition. Ladingd, 1925  Seudent’s Buldmy at the Royal College of Technology (with Uno Arhent, Sundholin, 1930  Vatious Buildings at the 1950 Stockholm Exhabioon (First Aid Comet. Privare House, Rental Apartment. Pavilioa fur Svenska Skargirdiorbunder, A-B. Aftonbladet Kish), Stockholm, 1930  Architect's private home, Nackehy, 1930  Comer Hall, Hetsingborg. 1932  “Collective” apartment block on Johan Encisongaran, Soockholm. 19  Stockholm Building Assocation Building, Scockholm. 1937  Private home for Gunnar an! Alva Myrdal, Stockholm, 1937  Swealids Pavilion at the New Yurk World's Fait, 1939  Count House, Linksping, 1944  Economix and Social Council Chamber of the United Nations, UN Headquarters, New York, 1952  Linkaiping Community Center, 1993  Starkbolin Crmmutty Center and Thesrre, Stockholm, 1960  High-rise un the Hatwegcity ana. Stackholin, 1963  Caleare and Congress Center, Casssen. Germany, 1966  Sweden House. Stockholm, 1969  Further Reading  Dunng the penal 1921-646, « number of arucles of the woek of Mar- helous, 29 well as artictes wenten by Maskelius himpell, appeared in the Swedish journals Arkickoar, Bygpralasteen, ain) Arkinrker ort xavesbatle, A monograph dedicated to che work cof Markclus fu yet to appear in begin, huwever, for a comprehensive acount of his fife and work in Swoalish, we Rudberg, 1989,  Caldenbye, Clact and Aus Walkin, Kelicttivéres: Sates och Swerege emubring 1950, Stockholm: Stains Rad foe Byggnadsforskaing, 1979  Iadetiusx Lan, Folk, form ork funktionaiivee: Orn allmaat ach srimctoatint + offentteghetens arktickrur, Gonhonturg, Sweden: Chalmen Tehnitks Hoghola, 1987  Ray, Stefsen, Jf conenibute Suede all archuoersuna censemporanes ¢ Topera di Sven Marbrtims, Rome: Officina, 1969  Rudberg, Eva, Ser Martriiws, Arkitekt, Seockholm: Arkitckrur Falag, 1989, a0 Seow Mardvlins Archetect, teamtated by Olod Hubin, Stoukholm: Adatchtur Kidag, 1989  Sadenbladh, Gdiran, Plamering fir Stockholm, 1923-1958, Seuckholm: LiberForlag, 1981  Volay, Olle. Markeliar och hessadsfolgen, Stockdolm: PAN Information, 1974  MASONRY-BEARING WALL  Masonsy a used to describe any number of nonmetallic and noncombustible rectangular, relatively amall-unit matcriats, anh as stone, brick, concrete block, of adobe. “Bearing” means that the material suppors mx only its own weight hut the weight of a horizontal element as well, cither a Hoos above or a roof, Masonry-bearing walls are cenainly not a 20th century inven- tion since Ubi weructural system may have been the firs invented by humankind. The development and proliferation af more so- phisticated structural systems. however. expcuully the acel frame, has meant chat masonry walls are just as likely to be non load bearing as not (that is, to be anstailed a> curtain walls or as veneer over another structural system), Of course, throughout the world the masonry-beanng wall conunurs to be ane of the most widespread construction systems for one- and two-story buildings, especially where lumber resmurces are expensive and labor ix cheap. Fven when these economic variables are now favor: able (for example, in the United States). masonry-bearing wall systema can still find popularity.  Masonry load-bearing unita, either bricksor blocks, are inwat tably strong in compression, which means that they are best when piled one atop the next and loaded voncenurically (thar 48, vertically at a right angle ta the ground). There is a practical fimit to the heaghe of such a wall since without some form of lateral bracing, che tall and narrow wall section is unstable. In fact, the capability of 4 masonry-bearing wall wo withstand tensile stress as a result of bending is dependent on the ability of the wall to act monolichically. Stnuzural failure of a masonry wall usually occurs when its individual unite bose uheir bund cv one another, Thus, the moss significant aructural issue ta be resolved is the adhesion of brick nr sma to its neighbor sa thar the wall will act as a single unit.  Mortar is the first solution. Usually composed of 3 cemena tious matcrial- -fine aggregate, sand, and water-— mortar is the gluc binding a masonry wall as well as an important component of its weatherproofing, Although mortar is an adequate adhesive under everyday wuuxtitions (such as when the wall resists the vertical force of gravity}, during carthquakes mortar often fail when laterally foaded (thar is, from a force other than pravity). Steel remforcing hars of meshes making up the masonsy-bearing walls are typecally two wythes chick with an intervenmg cavity filled with grout. Stee! reinforcing hars, called rehars, are placed at interval of approximarely two to four feet, whike horizontal rebars are located every four to cight courses in that same grourted space berween wythes. In some cases, a thin stect mech shaped Tike a small laddes is placed beeween courses in liew of the hori- zontal rebar. [n either case, the reinforcing, grout, mortar, and masonty units act monolithically and, when designed and built properly, can withstand moderate carthquakes without damage. As in the case of reinforced concrete. the steel gives the masonry- bearing wall the ability to withstand tensile stress, and in many junisdicuons where carthquakes are a risk {tor instance in Califor- nis since the late 1970s). contractors are prohibited from build- ing masonry walls without reinforcing. In areas where seismic activity is limited or in markets where steel is prohibitively ex- pensive, vertical reinforcing ix omitted.  The use of reinforcing steel hus made bond patterns its brick lictke more chan decoration (“hand parterning™ it a wchnique for making wythes act monolithically). This is especially true in  tall structures, where the use of stretcher courses and other brick bond patterns cannot adequately ensure stability under the ex- treme loads developed in tall buildings. The Denver Park May- fair East apartments in the 19601 (Anderson and Loom), for euampk, stands (7 stones uil in a seismically active arca. The hrick-bearing wall has (wo wythes sandwiching a 3.75-inch grout lilled cavity with five cighehs-inch-chameter vertical reba spaced wo fect apart. The beick wythe are connected via quarter-inch steel tics embedded in the mortar at every fifth sounse, and the overall thickness of the beating wall is only 11 anches, This relatively thin assembly is possible for such a rall building because the 17 Hoors horizontally brace the wall, pre- venting it from bending, buckling, and twisting. By comparison, the Monadnock Building in Chicago (1892. Burnham and Root) is 16 stories tall, Is tapered hat unrriniarced laad-bearing wall is a staggeting six feet thick at the base. Essentially, without rcinfosving, campreaive maw mint compensate for the Leck of tensile strength. which ix rarely an efficient or cest-effective use of masonry-bearing walls.  The development of the stecl frame, semforacd concrete, and precast concrete have in sume cases made masvary-bearing walis uneconomical, but masonry offers a more human-scaled acy thetic. and in many arcas masonry remains quite economical. The low cost housing project in Vysankere, India (1983, Archi- tect’s Combinel. » an example where muonry bearing walb were used for both acsthetic and exonomic tcasons. Local granite was quarried and sct in lime mostar. and other local macerials were used 23 well: wood for doors and Cuddapah stone for both the lane stones and the roof slabs. The unicinforced masonry was left unplastered, excepr for the granite lintels over the doors and windows and a lawer band of red lime plaster that wrapped the housing unis together. I'he interior face of the walls was whitewashed. ‘The rusticated appearance of the exposed masonry was intended to impart a sense of permanence and to recall bocal sermacular building forms, Utilization of local marcrials, as well as focal labor. helped make these one- and cwo-sroey housing units economical, The masonry’s mass was abo a key passive cooling feature.  Despite che tact that mortar requires sophisticated engines: intg and mixing — as does unit masonry, steel ties, rebar, grouting, and pomeng —muasonsy-bearing wails are often perceived as a relatively low-tech comstructua opuun. lo reality, the expense and technical expertise to buikl such walls often discourage pro- spective designers, builders, and chenes. his has made masonry curtain walls, in-fll panch, and other non—load-bearing solu- Bans increasingly popular, offering relatively little expense while still providing the same or similar acsthetic of solidity and perma- fence.  Jeay Write  See ale Beicks Stone Further Reading Dindale and Schaeider are cxcellent textbook warces, while Mrtrite’y  prectipnve dicuuion contertuslizes mawinry vonstenetion with otber ryctems. Ching and Adams is the beat source fot graphic information and in the beat source for novices Also tusefal are the pr cedings fram ASTM (Amencan Suciety for Testing and Materials) anaual confer ences, publahed annually under varying thes 
Ambeuse, lames F . Sirapittind Drsegn af Masonry Seructurn, New York: Wiley. Lt  Bahga. Sarkpu. Surinder Bahgs, and Yashinder Rahga, Sfadern Archetectare in indsa Dat Independeme Penpeisiry, New Dethi Galgetia 1993  Ching Tramu DK, and Casvandea Adacn, Aucdding Comtrerton Hberaied, Now Yorks Man Nosed Reinhold, 1975; Ind edition, New York: Wier, 2001  Dayudble. Robert C.. Ahmad A Elarmd, and Laurie Ro Baker, Manwnry Srructater Reherwe and Derg, Faglewood Cliff, New forecy Pocatice Hail, 1944  Henry. Arnild Wi. dite, Reiafberd and Preuresed Maanry, Harlow, rex Longman Scrertific and Techaual, and New York: Wiles, 1991  Schnader, Robert R.. Rersforred Masenry Dengn. Englewood Chit. New Jency: Prencice Hall 1980; tnd edition, [044  MAY, ERNST 1886-1970 Anhitect and Urban Planner, Germany  Ernst May was a leading architect and urban planner during the years of the Weimar Republic in Germany, He received his education in 1 ondon, Darmstadt, and Munich. and worked for some yean in the town-plunning office of Raymond Unwin After World War 1, he was fiesr involved in the planning of Breslau. In 1925 he was appointed Stadrbaurat (government building susecyue) in his mative cuy of Frankfurt. As the bead of the department of housing as well as of city planning, May succeeded in building an imprenive 15,000 housing unite un the space of only a few years, ;  May was one of the mont important figures of the early yean uf the Congrés Laternationaua Architecture Moderne (CLAM). Tle belonged co che group of founding members who met in 1a Sarraz in 1928, and he was responsible for che propusal to hold the second conggess in Frankfurt in 1929. Frankturt was indeed meet appropriate for a discussion af the Hiastenz-mintmum dwelling — the theme of the xcond congress. The housing umits tn the new settlements were designed as minimal-space apart- mens or houses thar, thanks en their functional design and their fine equipment such as built-in kitchens and bathrooms. uffered very agreeable housing fr a parr of the population thar hitherto had heen forced wo live in dum condition,  To the aftermath of the economic crisis of 1929, the financial means for the housing program in the Weimar Republic sharply diminsbed and May left Getmany for the USSR. He became the head of one of che building brigades that was tw plan the new industrial towns (inching Magnitogorsk, Steeglussk, and Tirgan) chat were to become the cure of the new communist suciety. Neither May nor the other Western architects whe worked in the USSR during these years—such as Haanes Meyer and Hans Schmidt—reganded their work there as very success given the dearth of a suitable administration, work force and construction materials, Few af the manitold plans they made were realized as the architects had foreseen. and after a few years their presence became politically embaraving for their hows, since the official oudook on architecture and the uty bexame disfavorable toward modem ideas  In 1945 May returned to Germany (after a kong stay in Af. nica), whete he was further involved in the plinning of new seutements such as New Altona These settlement were far bes  suceuful than the anes he designed in Frankfurt in the 1920s. In order to reach high densities, he gave in to the pressure to build high-rises, instead of single-family homes or apartment buildings of fewer wanes. ‘The dearly demarcated urban spaces and the clegant Layout of his Frankfurt sectlements gave way to much larger and mottotoneus quarters where the organization of the traffic was ultimately the determining factor of the design.  May is thus remembered best for the exemplary howsing pro- gram he set up in Frankfurt beeween 1925 and 1931, Every eleventh reudent in the conurhation obtained a new dwelling through this program. The new seclements were all druated in a concentric cing enveloping the existing city of Frankfure, with a large green bele separating the older parts from the new devel- upments. May designed the overall plan for Frankfurt according to the principle of the Trahenten-stadt (Satellite town), May's intetpreration of Ebenezer Howard and Raymond Unwin’s prin- caple of the Garden City, Unlike the Enghsh cramples, however, which tend tu be situated quite a distance from the existing city, May's satcllires are integrated inta the Frankfurt urban complex. the city of Frankfurt remains a whole, with the greenbelt acting asa compley of acy parks rather than a nonurban area situated between the nucleus of the city and the Jrabanten (Satellae).  The publication of a monthly magazine aimed at an interna- toonal readership, titled Phar newe Frankfurt (1925-31; The New Frankfurt), promoted the vast construction program. The name of the magazine came to stand for the whole enterprise in which May announced the cmergence af 9 new. unified, and homoge- neoux metropolitan culture. May prioritized rationality and functionality. Deo newe Frankfurt anticipated a rationally organ: ized and conflict-fee society of people with equal rights and common interests, Uhis distant ideal and the concrete housing aceds of Frankfurt combined te form the basic rence of housing policy in the city. In this endeavor the archutects of the New brankfurt pave pronty ro the industnatizanon and good design of the construction process in dhe use of space. Vhey experi- mented with forms of pretabrication and Platendaw (panel von- struction); Grethe Schatte-Lihorrky developed the famous Frankiurt kitchen, which became a standard part of new housing units,  Vhe Ssedhung (housing development) of Romerstadt (1927- 29) is the mone famous and convincing example of May’s city planning. The basic idea was to make good we of the qualities of the Landscape, the development follows ube contours of che hillude in che form uf tecraces, while it ix related to the valley caf the Nidda by viewpoints un the bastions that punctuate the retaning wall between the Swdbung and the valley. There is a deat herarchy with a main street (the Hadriansrassc). residen- tal sucets, and paths inside the blocks, a hierarchy char the architecture accentuates. The difference between the public front and the private back of the dwellings is emphasized by the neat design of the entrance section on the front. which features a canopy over the front door and a design that prevents from peering in, The blocks are no longer cloted Ikke the 19ch- century cype. By staggering the long straight streets at che height of che bastions, long monoronous tightlines are avoided. Roaers- tadt is a superb combination of cegenic design principles that bear the imprint of the Garden City tradition, with the sensation of simuluneity and movement created by the ism of a new, modem architectural idiom. * ™  Hive Heren  See ako Congres Internationaux d’Architecture Moderne (CIAM, 1927-}; Garden Giry Movement: Public Housing: Urban Planning  Biography  Born in Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 27 July I886. Attended Univerdty College. London 1907-08; sudied at the Techninhe Hochschule, Darmstadt, Germany 1908-10: studied under Friedrich von Thiernh and Thealue Fiaher, the Techiusche Hochschule, Munich 1912-13. Employed in the town planning office of Raymond Unwin, London 1910 EL Served. eastern and western fronts, German Army (914-18, Prvate practice, Frankfurt 1913-14; technical director, Regional Panning Au  thority, Breslau (now Wroctaw, Poland) 1919-21; tounder, edi- tor, Das whlesuche Heim, Breslau 1919-25; dieector, Public Honsng Authority, Breslau 1921-23; director, Central Office for Refugee Welfare/Distressed Peuple's Housing, Breslau 1923-25; founder, editor, Dar newe Frankfurt 1925 . 40; director of the European Towns Planning Veam, USSR 1930-34. Unable ww recum to Nazi Germany. fastned in Tanganviks, Aftica 1934- 37; private practice as architect and town planner, Narobi, Kenya 1937-42: interned ax an encmy alien 1942-45; resuined practice 1945 $4. Head, planning department, then adviser on City Planning and Housing Techtngues. Neue Heamat Housuyy Development Organization, Hanrbueg, West Geemany 1954 - 60; founder, editor, Newe Heimat, Hamburg 1954-60: privare practice. Hamburg Irom 1960, Honorary profesor. Technische Hochschule, Darmstadt. West Germany 1956 Member. Akade- mic der Kinate, Berlin; honorary president. German Associarion of Housing, Vown, and Country Planning: honurary corre  sponding member. British Town Planning Institute; honorary corresponding member. Royal Incriture of Beirish Architects. Died in Hamburg. 12 September 1970  Selected Works  Cottages, Goldschrucden:- Newkuche, Germany, 1919  May House, Frankturt, 1926  Frankfurt Redevelopment Plan, 1928-40  Romersiadt Hauung Development, frankfurt, 1929  Westhausen Housing Development, krankfurt. 1929  Town plans fos S Kasneeazk. ‘Tirgan, Magacugnesk, Stalinak, Nushi-Tagd, aud | crtinaken, USSR, 190-44  May House, Nairoby, 1947  Aga Khan House, Oysier Bay, Dares Salam, Tanganyibs, 1947  Neu-Altona Rodevclopment Pla, Wot Geemaniy, 1954-86  May House. Hamburg, 1970  Selected Publications  Concribunons t0 Des whlovische Hem (Frankfurt). es new Frankfure, and Neue Heat (Hamburg!  Further Reading  In Germany there as an exentive scholarship in soc! hawung during the Weimar Republic. bor Ernst May and Frankfurt the moss important publications ate the work by Mohr and Maller, along with the cataloguc published by the Deutsches Architektur Museum in 1986. Hirdina iv  an extensive sekectian of materia from the magazine Dur anne Foank fort The mont recent pubbeation in English dascuning May's achievements  tn Frankfurt wa chapter in Heynen Fafuri’s article on the homing policy in the Weimar Republic remains 4 paint off refereime:  Theta hes Arhechtur Muscum (oditar!, he Atay wad das acer Frambfurt, 1925-2940. Bern: tun, a6  Heynen, Hilde. “Daa Neue Franktuit ‘The Search tut a Utidied Calture” in Anduatuer and Moderauy A Critigae, by Heynen. (atnbridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 199)  Vizedena, Helis fealnon), Newer Mamee neses Corntalten: Dis noar tranbfert, dre vee Stadt. Berlin: Elephanten. L284  Mohr, Chintoph and Maliel Muller, Ausbioenalisat wad Maderne Dias are Frankfort und seine Rausn, 925-1933, Cologne: Calinan Finke um Risdal? Muller Verlag. UHH  Raewe. Peter CG, “Ratnctmade in Frankfiet att Main” in Modeenisy ad Houting, by Rowe, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1993  Tatun, Mantredo, “Sorialpobtik and che City in Weimar Germany” te. The Sphere snd abe Labyrinch; Avani Gurdes aud Acchitevrere from Pirumes to the 1970. by Tafuri. Cambridge. Miasachuseto: MIT Press, 1987  MAYBECK, BERNARD R. 1862-1957 Architect, United States  Bernaid Maybeck’s architecture can best be described un terms of conrradicrory themes: domesticiry and grandeur; innocence and sophntxavon; referential hisorical stylisuc language and unprecedented torm-maling. is buildings were extraordinary syntheses of innowative and expressive structure, artistic form, experimental materials, and handcrafted uenamem. Maybeck was among a small group of American architects schooled at the bastion of classicism, the Eoole des Beaux-Arts in Paris, yet he is best remembered as the leading light of California regionalism thar established the San Prancisco Bay tradition of redwood fearne snd shingle-clad “simple burmes.” A generation of Imer modernists who admired Maybeck as a pioncer awarded bim with the American Inatiture of Archirects (ATA) Gold Medal, yet Maybeuk himself detercd the Mudera style and repeatedly eudenced in his work what William Jordy once called “eclecti- cism ... with 2 vengeance” (1972). When Maybeck brought together the monumenuality of classiciun and the nasural setang ol informal Landscape, it was to create “an architecture of miood,” as evidenced in his masterly Beaux-Arts project, the Palace of Fine Ares in San Francisco (1915). When the spirit of the client encouraged it. he seta Neve Englund Colonial Revival chapel amid college dormitorics styled as Englith Tudor manor houses. and built in structural steel, stone, and concrete.  Maybeck wrote practically nathing about his work, and he was tately published. yet his reputation and influence prompecd members of the AIA. surveyed as eecently as 1991. co name him among the ten mast significant arclucects in American history, His individualistic personality and style remained open to die widest range of theoreucal and pracucal influences on his work: from che structural cxpressiunism of FE, Viollet-le-Duc to the Ans and Crafts idealism of John Ruskin and William Mortis. and from the canstrucnanal and ornamental comepts ol Sem- perian dadding ro contemporary Germanic theones of percep. tion, psychology of style, empathy, and art as expression. May- beck was a schooled architect as well as a naive “carver at wood,” He approached the art of archite ture as a painter might, using 
conscructional material as impasio for a picture he was compor- ing, His painterly approach at Principia College (1951 - 38) cre ated an architectonic painting full of light and shadow. color and texture, picturesque natural buikling, and—what he said all doign come down to—a beauty of line.  Following his study ac the Ecole des Beaux-Arts and a brict job with Carrére and Hastings wha were then completing their Vonce de Leon Hotel (1888) in St. Augustine, Florida, Maybeuk moved to the West in search of more ferule ground for progres- sive design. His contacts in San Francisco with A. Page Brown and Willis Polk exabliched him peofesionally, and his associa- tion with Charles Keeler cemented his position philosophically as the leader of an emerging Ray Region Tradition of natural building. Maybeck’s redwood houses in Berkeley for Keeler (1895), for himself’ (1892-1902, a second house in 1909), and for fellow member of the “hilhide community” st 4 pattern of environmentally sensitive design, respect fur the landscape, and employment of natural materials that influenced Julia Morgan, Henry Gutterson, amd others of the Bay Region.  Among his most notabk carly buildings is the monumental Hearst Hall (1899, now razed) at che University of California, Berkeley, whuse expressionist form is dominated by a vast range of laminated Gothic arches vaulting a single massive ball. The  Fine Church of Chiat Scemiat, Berkeley, Calfornas (1911) © John Weil/Great Buikdings oom  reception pavilion was intended aa a community living room for women students at che university and was so large it was Lcer converted w a gymnasium. Maybeck's Wyneoon (1902- 03, destrayed by fire) was a baronial stune casthe for Phoebe Appenon Heant, far whom Maybeck had administered the In- ternational Competition for the Phocbe Heart Architectural Plan for the University of California (1899). His Men's Faculty Club (1902) on the Berkeley campus referenced local mission forms while he gave the “great hall” 2 Nordic, rustic, male char- acter,  At the Lean Roos House (1909) in San Francisco, Maybeck foreshadowed the morc histaricist srylistic language he employed in designs during the 1920s and 1930s, combining a half- timbered Tudor imagery outside and Gothic detailing inside. Flere, changing ceiling heights brought a spatiat drama to the open sequence from living mom to dining room, and at the Binghain House (1916-17) in Montecitu, California, a compa- rable plan with a change in floor-level created a performance sage and audience area fur the chent’s musical sointes. At the Chick House (1914) in Oakland, California, Maybeck com- bined an exterior of board and barren siding, shingle cladding, and Gothic ormamencal accents with an interion remarkable for its spatial flew and for the paired, floor-to-ceiling glass doors  thar brought 3 modem openness to the Iving room. On a smaller scale, three houses in Berkeley supgest Maybeck’s range and ec- centricity: the RH. Mathewson House (1915) wax an intimate studio house with a surprisingly ample living room but no dining toom: the Charles Boynton “Temple of Wings” (1912) wax an open classical colonnade, more umbrella than house, for 4 family of Greco- philes; and the Sack House (1924) was an inexpensive replacement for his ewn house lost tv fire. The Sack Hotise was built out of burlap bags dipped in a frochy concrete, lighted by industrial sash, and conuining a baronial concrete fireplace; the whole was an anay-craftsy cottage nestled setaiuvey in the natu- eal setting of the hilkide.  Maybcck’s work moved from the simpler aesthetic of his early redwood houses to the colar and thearricaliry of his work for Fad (~ Anthony in the 1920s, to the painterly imagery and craftsmanship in concrete. steel, stanc. and brick for his targest and last major commission, Principia College en Eluh. Whois. Anthony's Los Angeles house (1927-28) provided a Mediterrancan-style (pari Norman and part Spanish) stage st for an automobile deales whose image of home was inspired by Hollywoud. For Anthony. Maybech built ewo highly imaginative Packard showreums: a manneris Corinthian temple for the San Francisco agency (19.26) and 4 highly romantic modicval foruess foe che Oakland agency (1928). Both were monumental frontis- pieces for utilitarian service and storage garages behind, bur, for the shuwrovnu. Maybeck brought forth his peculiar historivist Gare. He was painting an architectural picture.  Maybeck’s undisputed masterpiece was une of the most noc- ble churches of the 20ch century and a landmark of che Arts and Crafts movement: Fist Church of Christ, Scientist, Berkeley (1909-11). The architect crowned the auditorium with an clab- orate and decp timbcr truss ornamented with Gothic carvings and forming a Greek cross from four Romanesque concrete piers situated in the corners, Industrial sash window-walls brought an openness to the petimecer, while imu great Gothic windows with concrete wracery accented the cross avis, A gilt Venetian Gothic arcade (hiding the vegan pipes) gave forus tw the central exis and the readers’ placform. Outside walls were clad in asbestos panels, while overhanging wood caves and a colonnade of con- crete piers supporting a trellis accented the exterior. Bur inside and out. the roof dominated, and, expressed 2s the great orna- mental truss inside, it was both weighty and miraculously weightless. Hoth sacred and domestic in character and both ex- Ppresive and sincere in intention, First Church of Christ, Scien-  ist. Berkeley. displays Maybeck ac a maxter builder, ornamen- caliss, and craftsman, but most of all as an architect: of extraordinary vision. Roan M. Creu See abo Arts and Crafts Movemenu Carrere, Joha Mervin, aod Thomas Hastings (United States)  Biography  Born in New York. 7 February 1862. Apprentice cabinetmaker, the firm of Portier and Stymus, New York 1879-81; studied under Jules André at the Ecole Nationale ot Speciale des Beaux- Ares, Paris 1882-86. Married Annie White 1890. Wosked for the firm of Casrétre and Hastings, New York 1886-88: partner,  Russell and Maybeck, Kansas City 1B88; worked for Wright and Sanden, San Francisco 1889-90; worked for A. Page Brown, San Francisco 1891-94, Private practice, Berkeley from 1894; evablished an office in San Francisco 1902; eetired from active practice 1938. Directed the Intetnatinnal Competition for the Phache Hearst Architectural Plan [ve the University of Califor- maa 1897-99, Indructor in drawing, University of California. Berkeley 1894-97; director of architeensral udics, Mask Hop- kins Eustiqute of Ant, San Franca 1895-97: instructor in archi- tecture, and devised the firs Womplete curmculum in architec: ture. University of California, Berkeley 1899-1903. Awarded Gold Modal, American Institute of Architects 1951. Died in Berkeley, 3 October 1957,  Selected Works  Kevlet House, Retheley, Calidornia, 1894  Heart Hall (deutoved), University of California, Berkeley, 1899  Men's Faculty Club, Uaiveniny af California, Petkebey, 1902  Wymoon (Phoebe Appenon Heart Reudence: destrored by fire 1929), McCloud River, Calbfomnia, 1903,  Bernard Maybeck Howse (destroyed), Rerkeicy. California, 1902  LL. Roos House, San Francisco, 1509  First Charch of Chris, Saemist, Betkeley, Califorma, 1911; Sunday: School Building (with Henry Gutterson}, 1928  Charles Boynton Hause, Berkeley. California, 1912  Chick House, Oakland, Caltomia, 1914  Palace of Fine Arcs, Panama Pacitic Intemational Exposiuon, San bramisa, 1905  RH. Mathewson House. Berkeley. California, 1945  Bingham House. Montecito, California, 1917  Sak Howe (Berman! Maybeck House #3), 1924  Packard Automobile Showroom foc Ear ( Anthony, San Francisco, 1926  Earl C. Anthony House, Los Angeles. 1928  Packard Automobile Showroom for bad C. Anthony (deatroved), Oakland, California, 1928  Pancipis College, Elsah, Elinows, 1951-48  Selected Publications  Uillede Buslding (bookdet\, 907 Palace of tune Arey and Lagoon, (WS  Further Reading  The dandand anceingraphs on Maybeck arc Mal iay tan early introduc tory eva), Cardwell, who focuses on Maybeck more as archrecet chan 34 artesan of artist, and Wondbeidge, who publishes color photographs thac are unportant ro commurcanng Maybeck’s artic approach t0 ommament, materuals, and imagery—includang color chalk dravangs of Maybeck’s projects. both built and unbuilt, Bostey and Steele each offer feudies of key baskdings, while Hoamer is 2 guidebook 10 Maybeck's National Landmark campus for Principia College. Longsireth. Freuden- heim ang Suwman, and Winter (we Limerick) place Maybeck in the broader serring of California archnecture: Longstreth offers insight on theoretical influences on Mavbock and discustes academic eclecticism: Freudenbam and Susman define the “Bay Region Tradinun” and connect Mayheuk to the Arte and Crafts movement: and Wiater an anthology of Calidornua’s Arts and Crafts architects {a "first genctavon” of nearly owa doten of Maybeck’s contemporaries} as well as a second pencrauion of reponal modemists acknowledging Maybeck's influence. Jordy remauns one of the mest insigh ful dis ttsions of Maybe k's mood imagery and cxprewun,  Banley. Edward R.. Fir Chant of Chit, Srrennst, Berkeley, Tonden: Phaidon, 1994 
Cantwell, Kenneth, Remand Mluybrb: Artuen, Aevhutert, Arti, Sanna Barbara, Calductna: Peregrine Smith, 1977  Freudenheimn, Leake Mandelain, and Elsaherl Sumsman, Bushding wish Nature Roots of the San France Ray Region Tradition, Santa Barbara, California, Peregrine Smub. 1974  Noumer, Chatles B., Jr.. Brenard Maybert amd Prinspia Calloge The Hissors Districs, Vlas, Ulinoie: Principia College. (998  loedy, Witham H.. “Craftwnanship and Grandeur in an Aschereceure af Mond Rernard Maybeck's Palace of Fine Arts amd First Church of Chea, Scacntion” in Progreuiee and Acadena tdeabs at the Turn of she Twenterch Censury, Garden City, New York: Dubleday, 1972  Lemenck, Jeffrey W.. “Berand Maybeck.” in Toward « Simpler Way of Life. The Are and Cnafts Architects af California, edived by Robert Winer. Berkeley: Unnecrvity of California Press, 1997  Longsteech. Richard, On chy Edge of the World Four Architects sm San France ts the Furn of the Centiry, New Yorks Archutectural Himory Foundation. and Cambridge, Massachusetty: MIT Pres, 1983  McCay, Esther, Free Calforms Antitrre, Now York: Reinhobi, 1900  Saecke, James, Aacwlty Clb: Univenety of Cabforma at Berbeley Bernard Maybeck, Londuss: Acadente Editions. 1995  Woodbridge, Sally ., Beraurd Marbeck: Vouomary Arcburcs, New York: Abbeville Pea 192  McKIM, MEAD AND WHITE Architecture firm, United States  Arguably che largest architectural firm iss the world at the tum of the 20th century, this highly successful New York partnership produced nearly a thousand lauildings between 1870 and 1919. Almost every building type is represeneed hotels, apartment houses, genticmen's clubs, casinas, muccums, libraries. universi- es, churches, and civic monuments. Ln 1874, Charles Fallen McKim (1847-§909) and William Rutherford Mead (1846: 1928) worked er, and in 1879 che firm was established when Suanford White (1853-1906), whom McKim bad met in the office of HI.H. Richardson, joined them. They employed an intelligent form of historicism that, combined with funcional, coherent planning: a sophisticated manipulation of space: and a concer for excellence in marerials and constriction, was t0 shape the character of Amencan urban architecture at a time when the ciry was emerging as a dominane force in American Their personalities and interns were complementary. McKim was a conservative traditionalixt who attended Harvard University for a year befure studying at the Evule cles Beaux-Arts in Paris. Mead had worked with the architect Russell Sturgis before pursuing an independent carcer in Floccnec. White, the son of a prominent New York literary and art critn, was an accomplished self-tained draftsman and watercolonst. The part- NETS’ respective social connecnons in artistic. pobtical, business, and literary spheres provided a broad chent base, including the powerful and social elite. They pioneered the concepr of the Cree architectural office organized to address the complexines of dealing with comorate clients. Over 400 people (including Cass Gilbert, Henry Bacon, and [LM, Carrere and Thomas Has- tangs), spanning two generations, passed through the alfice,  which alto acted as an archer for the Columbia University School of Architecture.  The firm rose to prominence in the EBBOs, with the design of Shingle-style country houses and country clubs. The World's Columbian Exposition of 1893 in Chicago, conceived as a thow- case for America’s world power, was designed to be representa- tive of American architecture. Each major building was assigned to a different designer. but all were to be classical in style and painted white. McKim, Mead and White's Agriculture Building confirmed their position as the narion’s leading firm. The classi- cal invagery of the French Beaux-Arts tradition, so admired by McKim. was combined subsequently with advanced planning so cteate a monumental American public architecture, exempli- fied by the Boston Public Library (1895), che largess of ies type in the work! and 4 reinterpretation of Henri Labrouste’s Biblio- téque Saince-Geneveve.  McKim’s casscal plan for Columbia University (fine stage 1901, second 1930) and White's plan for the New York Univer- sity campus also fall inta this category. Daniel H. Bambarn was later to invite McKim to serve on the Senate Park Commission to replace the District of Columbia in 1902 as a result of his plan for the university. The Rhode Island Seate Capitol (1904) in Providence, 3 white marble building, provided the modal for stare capitol buildings for many year, Robinson Hall (1902) for the Schnol of Architecture at Harvand University in Cambridge, Maosachuwetts, war peculiarly Amerivan Beaus-Aris classical in style and fulluwed the Harvard tradition of using red brick with light colored un. McKim, Mead wad White were the club ar- chitcc: for New Yoth City in the carly 1900s, designing or alrorng cight of the largest. men’s clubs, the most presui heing the Univerury Club (1900) in New York. Here the fin's ecdecric crearivity found fill embodiment. After a visit to the second-floor tibeary in 1935, |e Corbusier is epured to have said that he could understand how ane would hecome a Beaux-Arts architect, dececting a “strange new firmness that is not Icalian, but Ammencan.” The Morgan Library (1906) in New York City, une of the firm's finest buildings, was designed for the interna- Gonal finanuer andl collector and had its origins in Italian Ron- aissance garden buildings. Pennsylvania Sution (New York City, 1910) addressed the cuimples functunal and symbolic require- ments of thes building type by combining modern technology wath 3 classical vocabulary. Invuking the Roman baths of Cara- calla, it provided a symbolic gateway to the city of New York. ‘Vhe imagery of their Madison Square Presbyterian Church (New York City, 1906) derived from the Pantheon. Other commis- sion included the Knickerbocker Trust (1904), additions to the Bank of Montreal (1905) in Montreal, dhe patrician Southern Colonial- styled James 1. Breese House (1907) in Southampton, New York, the Army War College (1908) at Fort Lesley J. McNair in Washington, D.C., and the eapansion of the Metro- politan Muscum (1920) in New York. Although only a small portion of McKim’s design for the Broaklyn Instirute of Arts and Sciences (1927) in New York was completed. it bears witness to his “great, siple and monumental style.”  McKim, Mead and White's architecture fell into disfavor wath the advent of international modernism, but their recent Feasseament and acclaim are welll deserved.  Hirary f, Gaaincer  The American Academy in Reme, © Muscum of the City of New York. from the Monograph of the Work of McKim. Mead, and White, Vol IV, plans 374 (1913)  Sev abo Baraham, Daniel (United Stares}; Classicisan, Gil- bert, Cass (United States): Library; Museen  Further Reading  Mekim, Mead anal White. 4 Monogripi of rhe Work of McKim, Mead. and White 1879-1945. 4 sede. New York: Archuectural Bowk, 1914; new edipon. | vol, 1981  Baidvan, Charles Cauienton, Seetfird Whe, New York: Dodd Mead. 1930  Deamond, HW. amd Croty, H."Vhy Work of Moan. McKim, Mead. and White.” Anduecnwral Record 20 (dcpeembee 1406)  Granger, Alftod Hovt. Gharko Pullen Mikio, A Study of He Life and Want, Boston and New York: Houghton Midllio, 1913; ceprins, New York. AMS Prem. 1972  Gacenberg, Allen, Monegraph of the Wark of McKim. Mead, ard Where, (809-1915, 1998  Roth, Leland M.. The Anhitecsorn uf McKim, Mead stned Where, 1870-1920 A Buslding Lis, New York Garland, LTA  Roth, Udand M.. AtcAim. Mead, and White, Architecn, New York Harper and Row, 1983; Landon: Thames and Hudson, 194  Sturges, Russcll, Zi Werks of MeKim Mead, and White, New York: Archaecrural Record, 1895: repeint, Now York: Oa Capo, 1977  White, Samuel G.. Pi Hosses of MrKime, Mead, and White, New York: Rizzoli, and London: Thames and Hudhoa, 1998  MEDGYASZAY (BENKO), ISTVAN 1877- 1959  Architect, Hungary  Livin Medgyazay was one of the most innovative figures of early 2Ouh-century modern architecture in Hungary. He soughe tu synthouze the efforts of structural rationalism and the search foe national expression and was fascinated by the architectural possibilities of reinforced concrete, a new material of his time. His tamiliariry with che qualities of concrete gnes back ro his carly youth. as his father founded rhe first cemene warks in Hungary around 1870. Medgravay started his carcer at a time when young architeces in Hungary were concemed with che quesiua of urcaung 4 national atchicetural style following the ideas of Oden Lechner (1845-1914).  Medpyastay was born as Istvin Benko, but in 1906 he changed his family name, taking on bis mother’s name. He 9- multancousty studied architecnare at the Academy of Ans and enginvering at the Technical University in Vienna. He was ad- mitted to the master school of Oto Wagner {1900-03} and designed onc of the most radically reduced tacades ot hes time 
for a mulustory department store (19023. The fine, entirely glazed iton structure was presented as an evening view illumi- nated by electric light. Medgyaszay absurbed ube aesthetics of the Wagner school, which was based largely on Gorttried Semper's theory of stybe in architecture. He completed his education in Budapest, graduating at the Technical University in 1904.  During the next two years. instead of the usual grand tour in Italy, Medgyastay took field rrips 10 different regions of Hungary (Transylvanis, Transdanubia, and nocthern Hungary) and stud- ied vernacular architecture and folk an in villages, He made illustrations far the livish book scrica of ethnographer Deas Malonyai, A magpar nip mivdscete (1907; The Arc of the Hun- garian People), tle realized his first architectural designs: wo two-story brick villas (1906) for Leo Belmunte and Sindoe Nagy, who were members of the lite reform community in Godelld teat Budapest. These building differed ugnificantly from the contemporary architecture of villas in both thet volumes and their unteriors. They revealed Medgyaszay's familiaricy with the vemacubr house, although he made no attempt to copy or para- phrase it. Both houses were composed of simple stercometnc volumes of different heights and were covered with a flar roof and a low-pirched roof; roof terraces and pergolas introduced asymmetry in their compositions, The exteriocs expressed the complexity of the inrerine spaces, where the heights af the rooms were chosen accunding to their functions. It was alo unusual that Medgyaszay did aoe hide the facades, choosing instead to show on the facade such strnictural parts at iron and reinforced- wncrete Hinwds.  During 1907, Medgyatray worked in Paris in the office of Francois Hennebique. a piunecet of reinforced-vogcrete architec- aure. After nturning bose. be designed the first theater building. in Plungary with a reinforeed-concrete srmicnire (1907-08) in Vewprém. [he theater was a mulufunctonal cultural center for a small community. fts auditorium allowed a vanety of uses and nud be converted to aconmmodate dance evenings and cinema performances. Medgyassay believed that ornament should not be an application bur rather must originate in tectonic form, ‘Through forms, he tried to express the forces working in the elements of the concrese structure and was convinced that ver- nacular wood architecture coal be considered a model for a structurally correct use of concrete. In 1909, the renmndeling of the theater building in Sopron gave Medgyastay the chime to develop his ideas further. The auditarnims of both theaters were ewwered by Uun barrel vaults of precast concrete beeween iron beams. The inner shell of the ceiling, a light cement suo senarnaiction on metallic bath whose function was both acoustical and decorative, was supended from the beams of the vauks. He obcained a patent for the peecaw-concecte windows of the theares.  in 1908, at the eighth International Congress of Architects in Vienna, Medgyaszay delivered & paper on che artistic solunion of reinforced-concrete architecture, He illustrated his lectures with details af the theater in Veprém and noted that his inten- Gon was “to emphasire the supporting character of the elements of the construction such as pillan, beams, riby, and conswles, contrasting them with the surface elements, which have only a scpatating function.” The church in Rirismalyad (1910; today Mulla, Slovakia), which ia composed of an octagonal central space and an adjoining bell cower, was a further step toward tealzing this goal, The dome covering the church us a technical  tour de force: it is buikt of very thin prefabricated vegmenta of reinforced concrete that were tightencd together on-site with « visible bel of iron. The eight angel figures around the dome served not only as decorations but also as ballast to hold down the bel. Medgyaxzay designed many modern school and apart- ment buildings (clementary school in Moson, 1909; apartment building on Dorottya Serect, Budapest, 1914). His experience in theater design resulted in his winning competition enuies for modernizing the Budapest Opera House (1912), built by Mikiés Yb in 1884, and for the National Theater (1913), which would remain unrealized.  From 1912 on Medgyaszay worked incremingly with wood, He covered the octagonal central epace of the church in Ogyalla (1912; eaday Hurbanova, Slovakia) with 4 wooden dome. Dur- ing Wodd War 1. he served in the army as a military engineer and designed the pavilions for the milicary exhibition in Lemberg, (1916; today Lviv, Ukraine). He used the opportunity to experi- ment with cheap matenals and simple tools and realized his innovative ideas in a variety of wooden constructions. Rerumi: to one of his favarite themes in the W: school, he his idea of a monumental cendike construction in the auditorium of the town theater (1926), in Nagykanizsa. The complex volume of the building's high-pitched mos firs per- fectly into the environment of the country town.  To sudy oriental architeceure. Medgyaszay traveled so Egypt and Sudan (1911) and to Indis (1931-32). Like Lochner a¢ the end of the 19th century, Medgyaszay anempted to introduce Asian deen ints modern architecture. He designed che Sports Horel (1927) in Matrahdza with a ‘like roof and the Badr-Madas # Ligh School (1929) in Budapest wich clearly Indian allaions. Hin Last significance work, the TEBE Building (t939) in Budapest. was a mised-furcuon bank and residential bbock.  The elegant. exactly cur geometric volume of the upper floors vovered by polished white stone seems to float above the weight- less, rransparcnr glass boa of the firs: two floor Decorative motifs char were borrowed from Hungarian peasam wood care- ings appear on the front har of che balconies. Megyaszay's mod- era archisecture in the 1930s did noe sever the carlict ties to the vernacular building tradition that was considered authentic because of its capacity to resist academic conventions Karacin Momavinszny-Groncy avin Akos MORWwANSZKY  Biography  Born in Budapest, 23 August 1877, Studied under Onto Wagner at the Ahademic der Biklenden Kanate, Vienna 1900-03; at- tended the Technische Hochschule, Vienna: praduated from the Hungarian Palatine Joseph Technical Universicy, Budapest in 1904. Independent architect, Hungary from 1904. Worked with Frangors Hennebique. Paris 1906-07; created illustrations for A maguir wep minézeste (The Art of the Hungarian People}, by Derti Malonyai 1907. Lecturer, 8th International Congress of Architects, Vienna 1908. Traveled Egypt 1931 and India 1931- 32 to find the origins of Hungarian forms of design. Died in Budapest, 29 April 1959.  Selected Works  Department Store (unbuale), 1902 Two Villas with Studios. Godoll&, Hungary. 1906  Perriti Theater, Veseprém, Hungary, 1908  Theater Reconstruction. Sopron, Hungary, 1909  Hlementary Schonl, Mason, Hungary, 1909  Church, Rarosmulyad, Hungary (now Mal's, Snvalua). 1910  Opera House Renewation (Firw prize, competion), Budapest, 1912  Church, . Hungary (now Hurhanovo, Slovakia). 942  Nanonal wet (First prise, competition: unbuik), 1944  Doronya Sereet Apartment Building, Budapest. 1914  Pavilions, Military Exhibinon. Lem Hungary (now Ly, Ukraine), 1916  Audetorum, Town Theater, Nagyhanizss. Hungary. 1926  Spores Hotel, Matrahiza Hungary, 1927  Bair-Madas High Schonl, Budapest. 1929  TEBE Penn Fund Building Budapest, 1959  Selected Publication  “Uber dic kansterinche {deung dev Eisenbetonbane” (On the Ariane  Solution of Reinforced Concrete), in Hericht aher den VTIT Enternation-  aden Arcinarkien-Koagen, Wiew, 1908 (Repost of the 8th fntemational Congress of Archisects, 1908), 1909  Further Reading  Moravinstky, Akos, Casapeting Vision Anithenc Invention and Sacial Imagination in Central European Archisecrere, 1867 1918 Cambridge, Massachusera; MIT Preas, 1996 (an analyns of Medgranay's major works in the context of the development of Central Furupean architec- ture)  MEIER, RICHARD 1934- Architect, United States  Consistency is a key actribute of the architecture of Richard Meier. For more than 30 years, Meiet has remained unwavering in his commitment tu che exploration of architeciural forms and. the expencace of intcracnng with these forms, Heavily indebred to Le Corbusier's “Five Points of a New Architecture.” Meier's approach to design is characterized by its complex vertical layer- ing of spaces. its interpencisalion of geometric forms (suggesting a kind of phenomenal transparency), and its procliviry far whire, gridded surfaces. Although hased mainly in North America. Meier hecame one of the lare 20th century's most prolif. and successful architects of civit and public buildings. He 5 perhaps mane Farnuus fur his design fos the Getty Center (1997), a com: plex of galleries, libraries, and offices in Los Angeles, California, This building, reminiscent in its structure and sale no a Large medieval monastery, is urban in ats form but isalated from the city on a sctics af Landscaped hills. Clad effernally in a mixture of cravertine and white enamed panels, the Getty Center is de- signed to be bathed in sunlight with crisp, sharp shadows modu- lating its forms, Yer the origins of this approach to design may be traced in Meiet’s carly designs for indrvidual houses.  After working for Skidmore, Owings and Meenill and chen Marcel Breuer in the bate 1950s and easly 1960s, Meier set up his own archirectural practice in New York in 1963 and began work on 4 series of private residences. The first of there tw be completed, the Smith House (1967) in Darien. Connecticut, isa white, seemingly abstract, geometric compositiun of orthogonal planes, walls, and exposed saitcascs. Moct’s Hoffman House (1967) and Salzman House (1969), both in Ease Hamp-  ton, New York, and the house (1971) in Old Wewbury. New York, all utilize the same language of intenecting cubic, rectilin- cat. and cytindsical volumes. The Douglas House (1973) in Har bos Springs, Michigan, represents the cudmanatian of this dosly related sequence of designs. Spectacularly sited on a steeply dop- ang site chat overtooks Lake Michigan, the Douglas House sands in stark concrast co sts natural surroundings. With its whiee walls, Cubist composition, faintly nautical character, and complex vet- Geal secon, the Douglas House is the quintessential early Meier building. Meier's later houses. including the Wesechester House (1986) in Westchester County, New York, the Ackerberg House (1986) in Malibu, California, che Groera House (1989) in Hard- ing. New Jerscy. and the Rachofiky House (1996) in Dallas, Vexas. are chnely related to there carly designs yet uho show a umber af subtle differences. First, thew later houses powcss, ja section and in clevation, more comples und fine-grained com- positions of forma and materials, Whereas the carly houses ap- peared to cumprive a single major volume with various geomeunc adddivons and subtractivns, the later houses comprise several dis- tinct forms that intenect. Finally, dye wale and spatial disposi- tion of these later houses tend co suggest that they arc fragments of urban of public buildings and spaces rather than amply do- mestic structures,  A few of Meier's carly houses were featured, along with the work of four other architects, in an exhibition ar the Museum af Moder Art in New York in 1969. {n addition to Meier, this group of Five architects included Perce Eisenman, Michael Graven, Chaska Gwarhmey. and John Hejduk, Alf five were foosely connected chrvugh a vomimon desire to extend the formal architectural languages of modernism and radonalism, particu- larly the goomettic ar puriss works of Le Corbusier and Giuseppe Terragu. Known at die ume as the “New York Five” of the Whites” (because many of their buitdings followed the modem- ast predilection for pure, white, geomernic sructures), they were Rater desembed by architectural critks as either neoraconalists or late modernists.  Following from his success as part of che "New York Five.” Meier began to complete 2 number of majoc public buildings over the following decades. Starting with the Monroe Develop- ment Center (1974) and the highly acdaimed Bronx Develop- ment Center (1977), bath for the New York Stare Department of Metal Hygiene, Meiet experimented with the repetition of forms and with prefabricated aluminum dadding. However, it was in his design for the Achcneur (1979), a cultural and visitor center in New Harmony, Indiana, that Meier finally translated the white geometric Language of bin houses into 4 major public building. The Atheneum is a striking collage of sharp, georneuric: forms that rests serenely on its site but makes no attempr to blend into the landscape. Extemally. the Achcneum is clad in white, porcelain-enameled panels, and incernally che major pub- lic spaces are fined with ramps and divided by stairs, Following the success of the Atheneum, Meier appliod this same approach to the design of several mflucntial museums in Europe and North America. The first of these, a clear relation of the Athe- neum although with a more open circulation route, was the High Muscam of Ast (1983) in Atlanta, Georgia. This was followed by the Museum for the Decorative Arts (1985) in Frankfurt am Main, Germany. the Des Moines Art Center Addition (1984) wn Des Moines. lows. and the Muscum of Contemporary Art (1995) in Barcelona, Spain. hor the Muscum for the Decorsuve 
Museumn of Cotmempotiry Art. Harucloca (1995) Photo © Mary Ana Sullivan  Arts, Meier ahsrracted architecrural cements from the Ecade of an existing hbtoric building and repeated them on his own de sign. Curiously, this symbolic recognition of the historic context remains ton subtle for most visitors and too contrived for many architevtural critics. Meier's approach to design, like L¢ Carbu- sict’s, is porentially vulnerable tm criticism when working in his coric urban settings. For example, although Meier's Exhibition and Assembly Building (1993) in Ulm, Germany, provides a fich and permeable houndary tw the public piazza in front of Ulm Cathedral, the Museum of Mudera Art in Barcelona seen strangely disconnected from its surrounding pubbe spaces. De- spite this criticium, Meier has had considerable success in several suajor European buildings, including tbe City Hail and Cenural Library (1995) in the Hfague and the Canal + Headquarters (1992) in Paris. Both of these designs feature strong, responses to the surrounding streetscape and urban fabs.  Mickats | Osrwarp  See abo Corbusier, Le (Jeannerei, Chartes-Edouard) (France); Getty Center, Los Angeles, California; High Muscom of Art. Adanta, Georgia: Rationalism: Skidmore, Owings and Mcr- eill (United States)  Biography Born an 12 October 19.34 in Newark. New Jersey: and attended Coenell Univenity «1955-7: worked for Davis, Brody and  Waniewla. New York 1959: Skidmore, Owings and Memill. New York. 1960: Marcel Breuce. New York 1961~-6% estab lished Richard Meter Architects in New York City in 1963. Member of the “New York Five” and Visiting Profemor at the Pract Inscinute, Cooper Union, Yale and Harvard. Resident Ar- chitect az the American Academy in Rome 1973: Elected to the American Academy and Institute af Arty and letters 1983; Awarded the Pritzker Prize 1984; recipscnt of the Royal Gold Medal hy the Revat British Institute of Architects 1988.  Sclecacd Works  Sauth House, Dann, Connecticut, 1967  Bronx Devdupment Gener, the Herons, New York 1970  Douglss House, Harbor Springs. Michigan, 1973  The Athencum, New Harmony, Indiana, 1979  Fahdroue and Ancmbly Buslding, Ulm. Germany, 1983  High Muscum of Ast, Adanta. Georgsa, 1983  Museum for the Dovoraave Arts Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 196s  Canal Headquarters, Matis France, [992  Museum of Contemporary Art, Barcelona, Spain, 1995  City Hall and Central Library. the Flague, the Netherlands, 199%  Museum of Televnion and Ratio, Beverly Hills, Californaa, 1996  Uhe Getty Centet, Low Angeles, Califotrua, 1997  Mans Arp Muscum, Rolundacck. Germany, 2000  Selected Publications  Richard Meier Architect. 1964/1984, New York: Rizo, 1984 (With an introducnon by Joseph Rykwert)  Rachand Meier Architect Volume 2: PONSHI91. Now Yor Rirzoh, 1991 (With essays by Kenneth Frampton and Joscph Rykwett)  Rocherd Meier Arctatest Volume 3. 1992/1999, Now York: Rurzol, 1999 (With emays by Kenneth Frampton and Joseph Rykwest)  Richard Meier Howes, London: Thane and Hudion. 1%  Further Reading  ‘The Rutzoli three-volume set of Richard Merce wks spanning be- twoen 1984 and 1999 is the definitive reference work on Mewr aah of these three volumes contains a detailed bibliography of pubbeanons about his buildings for the relevant perod as well as extracts from heey writings. ‘The introductions and essays from Joseph Rrkwerr andl Kenneth Frampson in these volumes are among the most derailed erin cisons and descriptions of Meser’s works avadatde. The 1946 Thames and Hudson volume presents a good overniew at Meier's bose dexgem,  Esenman, Petes, Mishacl Graves, Charles Gwather, Juha Hepluk. and Riaghard Meier, Fire Antitects: Fuennen/GrieeGuaibmey Hepdut/Meier, Now Yodk: Oxturd Catversin Prom, 1975 (With introductions by Kenneth Frampion and Cobo Rowe  Klos, Henrich. and Waltraud Kease, New Misenors in the bedenal Republic of Germany. London Academy, 1986  Montanet, fou, and Jordi Oliveras, The Museums of the Lane Generanon, Landon: Acadeny, ORG  MELBOURNE, AUSTRALIA  Urban versions of che Australian suburbin federation sre were devised in the carly part of che 20th century, Melbourne archi- tects Ussher and Kemp (Dalswraith House, Kew, 1906) com- posed with elements imaginarively derived fmm both English and Amesican Queen Anne sources. Their Profewional Cham- bets (Pans cud of Collins Surect, 1908) included poinced: arch windows along the street frontage. J.J. and FJ. Clark, with an Edwardian baroque repertoire, designed the Melbourne (City Baths (Swanaton Street, 1904; alterations and additivns by Kevin Greenbauh with Guin Willian Fender, 1980). Red brick and white stucoo Lim, a common fin-de-siécle medium. was eclipsed  by the advent of plin unembellshed surfaces. The epiume of  severe classical revival was the Shrine of Remembrance by Philip Burgoyne Hudson (Hudson and Wardrop. 194; World War I Memorial Forecourt by Frese EK. Milstan, 1954) where a conjectural restoranon of the tomb of King Mausolos. Halwar- nassus. split a modeling of the Parthenon into two parncas.  Mdlbourme architects have ofics made imaginarive compos- taons fram many and varied sources. The formes Auditorium Building (Collins Street, Melbnuene, 1913), by Nahum Barnet, was inspired in program and in detail by Adler and Sullivan's 1889 Chicago building of the sume name. The Rensinance pal- arto inpartite division can be sen, with American Romanesque arches to the entry and vertical windkow bay scrips, yet rendered as “bloud and bandages”: the red brick with contrasting white stucco classical details also refer ra contemporancous Landon buildings In Barnet's building, rows of curved projecting bal- conies were completed with ornate handwrought ironwork bal ustrades, an addition of elements that transfarmed the Chicago model.  Robert Haddon had Art Nouveau origas in mind for his tect brick and stuccn form (Eastbourne Terrace, Fas Md- bourne, 1901} with handwroughe ironwork balcony halustrader and radiant curves. Harold Desbrowe Annear, before he com-  muted to classicism, was a significant Arts and Crafts exponent. His Chadwick House 11903, restored by Peter Crone, 1999} was ante af three Annear houses on The Eyre, Fagkemont, sct beside a steeply inclined pedertrian walk near the riverbank sce- nery Favured by the late- f%h-cemury Impressionist Heitelberg School plein tir paineers, Waltce Butler's Mission to Seamen Building (1917) was also in Ants and Crafts tyke, a new amalgam of Californian Spanish Mision elements finished mm rough cast cement.  Uhe engineer John Monash (with Bates Peeblea and Sman} wed Kahn bar reinforcing (patcotcd by Albert Kahn in the United States, 1902) in the concrete-ribbed Reading Room dome in the Seate Library of Victoria (1911), Walter and Manion Guilin designed the stone-faced reinforced cuncrete Newman College (Universiry of Melbourne. Parkville, 1918). The double-skin tcinforced concrete dome and its pattern of ribbing was lousely based on a Paris patented dome construction system. The Grithins's Capital House and Capitol Theatre (designed with Peck and Kemter, (924) was a alip-foem reinforced- concrete conamuction similarin method to Frank Lloyd Wright's Unity Temple (Oak Park, Hlsnois, 1906), Frederick Romberg’s Stanbill Howse (1950) and Harry Scidler's Shell House (1988) concluded 4 long episode of innovative urban concrete construc: tive.  The Griffins’: own house, Pholiota (Magic Mushroom, 1920), was conseracted out of Kautlock conerete masunry-ule construction (patented by Walrer Burlcy Griffin and David C. Jenkins, building conuactor, Melbuurne, 1917). The Griflim’s Kaidock system was tectonically based in the combenation of French brick cavity walls with mild stecl ccuntorcing and terra  cotta block work that Gonffin wed un his Amencan houses. A number of Knitlock houses by the Griffins were buite in Mel- bourne and Sydney. Kevin Burland, in bis Roce House (1951), and Robin Boyd. with his Weed House and supermarker (1952), used a sprayed concrete system patented by che building contactors McDougall and Ireland in Mebourne (1950).  Some architectural works in Melbourne have been overdy European in inspiration. Peck and Kemter, in association with A.C. Leith and Associates (Heidelherg Municipal Offices and Town Hall, 1937), assembled brickwork blocks in the manner of Willem Dudok (Hilversum Town Hall, Nethertands, 1931). Qn the other hand, Keith Reid (Reid and Pearson with Stuart Calder) with his former McPherson's Pry. Ded. Building (1937) maintained the preference af many local architects foe evoking exprenionitic characteristicn Erich Mendebohn’s Schocken Department Stores are exemplars in this instance. David McGlshan (McGlashan and Evert) at Heide (Bullcen. 1965), for the patrons and collectors of post-World War IT contempo- tary art, fohn and Sunday Reed, designed a serics of view-hinked serene gallery fiveng spaces about an inticate crculation, indica- uve of De Sujl principles and an appreciation of the German Pavilion. Barcelona (Mies van der Robe, 1929), Heide is now the Muscum of Modern Artin Melbourne (extensions by Andrew: Andersons, 1993; rose garden pavilion by Gregory Burgess. 1991).  A cumain wall system was created by Walter Budley Griffin for leonard House (1922. demolished 1970). using different glass casting pacterns and transparencics dotted into mild steel channels. Osbom McCutcheon (Bates, Smart and McCutcheon) developed for ICL Home (Fast Melbourne, 1958) 4 curtain: walling system similar ta Lever Howe (New York. Skidmore, 
‘Owings and Merrill, 1952). The steel traming of 1C1 Howe was wate of the art; its form, however, was clover to the precedent of the Unised Nations Headquarters (Wallace Harrison and Max Abramovitz, New York, 1952). The former BHP House (Wdl- fiam Street, Yuncken Frecman, 1972) was equally seruceuraily inauvauve; the diagonals of the braced steel-lramed core within a braced glazed slecve were expresed. Denton Cotker Marshall (101 Collins Sereet, 1990), with a foyer of pale Postmodem Tuscan columns by Johnson Burgre of New York, and Daryl Jackson (wich Hassell Archicects, 120 Collins Street, 19911 de- lineated stepped skyscraper towers of vital solidity. Carey Lyon (Perron Lyon Mathieson, Telstra Corporare Centre, Exhibition Serect, 1992) and Paul Kataieris (Hassell Architects, Common- wealth Courts, 199) have also proved thar foor-level demarca- Hons and meticulous design development can enhance office tower forms,  Roy Grounds produced a bluestone block form with a wide overhanging coof, long steip windows beneath the eave, and a Richardsonian arched entry for the National Gallcty of Victona (Sa. Kikda Road, 1968; altetations and refurbishment by Mano Bellini, Milan, with Metier IL, Melbourne, 1999), one of three monumens chat cumprise the Victorian Ars Centre. The avocado-shaped plan of the Concert Hall (1981), presented as a cylinder above ground level, and the | heatres Buslding (1984) were completed after Grounds’s death (Sucndermann Douglas McFall, decoration by set designer [ohn Truscoc). Denton Corker Manhall have provided an expressiunisuc airplane wing metal and glass Melbourne Fxhibirian Cenrre beside rhe Yarra Rives (South Methaume, 1996). and their new classicising State Museum (Exhibition Gardens, Carton) will open in 2000. LAR Architects are completing an crsemble of erywal-parrerned pal- feries for the arts media (Federativn Squate, Flinders Sureet) in time fur the centennial of federation <cfebratians in 200),  The Melbourne School was invented by Robin Boyd in 1967 to categorize some 1950s Melbourne buikiings in tenule steel constriction. such as the 1956 Olympic Swimming Stadium (Kevin Borland, Peter Mclntyre, John and Mhylhs Murphy) and the 1959 Sidney Myee Music Bowd (Yunchen Freeman Brothers Griffiths and Simpson). The school creared daring forms using cavalier rechniques and rejecting aesthetic rules. The steel A- framed house uf Peter and Dione MeTnuyre (1955) and Mcln tyre’s Snelleman house of more conventinnal construcnon (1984), bue spiraling in plan down a steep slope aroural an  eaisting eucalyptus tree, ate cxamples uf a number of houses of  this type and approach  Expresioniam remains 4 favored uyle for s younger genera- tien of Melbourne architects, including Norman Day (Mowbray College, Melton from 198t). Lan McDougall (Brunswick Com munity Health Centre, 1990), Gregory Burgess (Eltham Library. 1994), Ashton Ragyatt McDougall (St. Kika Town Hall redey- elopment, 1994), Maggse Edmond and Peter Corrigan (Windsor Fire Saation, 1997).  In the same adventurous spirit, with emphasis on abstract geometry, are warks by Petes Ellioct (Carlton Baths and Com- munity Centre, 1989), Cocks Carmichael Whittord (Yarra Foot- bridge, 1989), Daryl Jackson (Melbourne Cricker Ground Great Southern Stand, 1992), Peter Crone (Trinity Grammar Schoot Chapel, 1992}, Peter Willams (Williams and Boag, Tyne Street Housing, Carlton, 1993), Allan Powell (with Pele Innes Neibon Kealofl, RMIT Building #4, 1996), Wood Marsh (Buildings  #1-5, Deakin University Burwood Campus, 1997), and Nonda Katsalidis (Nation Fender Katalidis, Republic Tower, 1999). Denton Corker Manhall have sculpted che majestic pair of py- lons astride the Henry Boke Bridge (Citylink roadworks, 1999) together with their bright-hued and chythmic Melbourne Gateway.  Jere Turweuu  See abo Arts and Crafts Movement; Australia; Sullivan, Louis (United Seates}s Griffin, Walter Burley, and Marion Mahony Geiffin (United Stases); Seidler, Harry (Australia); Syducy, Avstralia  Further Reading  Boyd. Noban, Vectortun Modern: One Hundred and Eleven Years of Modeen Anbiwrmer in Vittoria, Awtraia, Melbowme, Vitoria: Archstextural Students’ Society of the Ruyal Vicnrian Inecleute of Anhitets, 1947  Ruyd, Robin, “The State of Auntatian Architocnare.” Asvhetestane te Austra, S613 (June 1967)  Goad, Philip, Methewrne Arhitrcnerr, Sydney, New South: Wades: Watermark Prem, 1999  MELNIKOV, KONSTANTIN STEPANOVICH 1890-1974 Architect. Russia  Konstantin S. Melnikew was one of the most original, bur also one of the most important, architects of the Soviet avant-garde. He belongs in dhe woimpany of such architects as the brothers Vernin, Ginrhurg, Ladoviky, and the brothers Gnlosov, With the ctucpuon of the younger Leunidov. Melnikew had anocher characteristic in common with chem: They haul all receved a prerevalutionary traning. party at the same instiuiuon, the Moscow School for Painung, Sculpruse, and Architecture. Aca- demucally onented, cheis educauun was strongly focused on das- sicism, the leading style of the day. Only alter che October Revo- lution, influenced by avant-garde artists in the visual arts (Malevich, Lisitehy. and Tatlin), did they find their way to Modem architecture.  Early in 1917, Melnikov completed bis studies with a neo- classical devign for a sanatorium. Even his fint independence de- signs. including the sdministeative buikding for the AMO auto- mobile factory (1917) in Moscow and his work on the Alexcyey paychiatrn hospital, were clasacistic in conception.  Asvund 1920 Melnikov found his way to Moder architec- ture. He was attracted by the Expressionst work of che “Zhiv- skuliparch” group. in which such architec as Ladowky and Krinsky played a beading role, Soon Melnikov began to follow has own path, outsade the mainstream of the new Soviet archisec- ture. In the design he entered in the competition for the “The Saw.” a residential complex an Serpukhovskaya Street in Mow cow. he laid out the houses asymmetrically in curved lines, is blocks set back [tam one another, so that collective housing, family dwellings, and communal facilities are clearly and recog: nizably articulated. The asymmetrical composition, curved fines, and expression of building volumes are also prescor ins his design for the competition for the Palace of Labor in che fall of 1922.  _ From 1923 Melnikov expericnwed great success as an architect of realized buildings. He received public attennon. particularly for his tobacco pavilion “Makhorka” in the 1923 Agricdtural Exhibition in Moscow. Traditional architects deminared that exposition. and Melnikav’s pavilion was onc of the exceptions. The center of gravity of his design lay in the expressive counter poiat af the volumes of the wooden biukling and its spaual effects, The commission had seme from the traditional architect AV. Shchusev (1873-1949), Metnikey was employed in Shchu- sev's Moscow studio, which was devoted to the recunstruction of the city.  Mednikv’s true breakthrough came in 1924. Shchusev ket him work on the glass bell aver Lenin's sarcophagus tor the semipermanent mausoleum and the administration building Su- charevka, which had a cate and vending stalls. He also won the competition for the Soviet pavilion fur the Exposition des Arts Décoratits (1925) in Paris. in which Ladowsky, Ginzburg, and Famin had also entered designs. The pavilion gave him an inter- national reputation. The pavilion was built on 2 rectangular plan that was divided diagonally by a stainase, The staircase was covered with slanted awnings placed diagonally aceoss frat each other. A transparent tower waa pusitioned neat one of the en- frances to draw attention ta it. The pavilion was made our af slaw and wood that was painted ted and gray. The interior was duac by Alexander Rodchenko and others. OF all the buildings at the exposition, Meinikov's pavilion, which radiated ar once a cerain sobnery and an expressive dynamom, was the mast extenavely discussed an the French and incernatonal press. Dy- namism is also the dominant characteristic of the lire-known desagn for the campeution for the wwer of the “Leningradskaya Pravda™ (1924) in Moscow, in which three vertically arranged spaces were te revolve independently around a ceneral axic.  At the end of his stay in Baris, Metnikew received 4 commis- von from the city of Paris foe a parkang garage. He completed two versions of the design, onc in the form of a clined square box and the other as a rectangular apace built aver a bridge over the Scine and encircled by «double ramp. The unfined diagonals of the ramp gave the project an cxccpturonal appearance of move- ment Neither design was tealized, bur on his return ro Moscow, Mdhikow successfully built four parking garages.  As a tesule of che economic upturn of the second halt of the 1920s, Melnikay was able to realize a number of progects. he dubs for worken are the most imparant of these. Intended for workers’ leisure activities, these clubs presented a new budding type. one based on a theater layout and consisting of a Large hall for dramatic performances and mectings, service areas, and activity rooms While his Constructivint colleagues attempted to cfeate a standard type, Meinikow himmaclif ercated an individual awlurion for each of the six clubs he built. They are bails on different plans, according to the posiuomng of the main hall— wedge shaped, rectangular. oc in the shape of 4 segnent ot 4 arde. Although the spatial arrangement of the plans is very different. the stercometric composition of the different volumes and the contrast of vertical and horizonal modulations are con- sistent throughout. The Rusakov Chub, for the union of Moscow tram conductors, artracted the moat attention, adding space to the hall on the arcet side in the form of three large bays. These spaces, which could he closed off independently. endow the building wich an exceptional spatial dynamic and a highly x- pressive exterior,  This “expressive geometry” is particularly apparent in Melni- kev's own house (1927) in Moscow. Two partially overlapping circles make up che plan, from which nse rwo cylinders of un- equal height, The living room on the second Moor and the audio on the thitd fluae are double high, and the roof above the ving room in the foremost cytinger o designed as a roof tettuce. Inve- tine spaces are highly capressive, 4s the tound shape of the cylin- det has been preserved, except on the ground floor, thro the absence of separating walls, Ac that cime. was unusual an antutcat w design his own house because che avant-garde was intereaed primanly in different forms of collective housing. However, Melnikov's typological solunon was also unusual and beans witness tw his attention for the compasitan of archecctural space and mass. The rounded shapes serum in several later projects, as in the design for the MOSPS Thearer (1930-31) and the Frunze Academy (1931), both in Momow.  Melnikov’s entry foe the competition for a new recreation area, known as “Geeen City Moscow,” in 1931 is more concep: tua) and utupian in charter. Melnikov designed the varivus zones of the aca woods, children’s village, 100, houses, and callective facilities —as segments of a circle. One special feature is the “seep sanatoriam,” where weary workers could revuperate dy means of a sleeping cure, For ucauncnt, Melnikov invented a manipulanion of light. temperarure. umell. and sound.  The utopian character of ts project provoked sharp criuaam related, on the one hand. ro changes in the cultural and political chmate and the increasing reprewion in the USSR and, on the other. 10 the suugule among different architectural groaps. a seruggle char was foughr in political corms, Melnikov did nor participate in collective activities or rhe group polemics. He and his architectuse. particulasty che clubs and his owt house, re ceived a great deal of criticism for their individualism.  Melnikov hal difficuley adapting to new circumstances, In his submissions tor the second round of the competitiun far the Sowier Palace (1931) and che Ministry of I feavy Industry (1934), he continued to emphaize the symbolism of geometric farms while the cultural and political preferences of the party can to 4 revaluation of traditional architecrure. His designs were ac- cused of antisoualtst formalism. During the first congress of the Union of Architects in Moscow in 1937, this critiasin bed to Melnikov’s firing, as leader of the seventh Mascow City Studio, which amounted to the eml of his career as an active architect. He was allowed co teach at engineering schools but was excluded from design work. After rhe war, he participated in comperitions from time to rime bur without success. In the bare 1960s, Melni- how was rehabilitated. and in 1972 he received the title of “De- serving Aichitect.” He died two years later.  Onanan Mictt  Biography  Born in Petrovsko-Razumovsky. Russia, 22 July 1890. Appren- ticed to a firtn of heating engineers, the director of which saw his potential and put him through school; studied painting at the College of Painting. Sculprure. and Architecture, Moscow 1905-11, studbed architecture, under Ilarion lvanov-Schicz and Ivan Zhokovaky. at the College of Painting, Sculpture, and Ar- chitecture. Moscow 1912-17, Gained catly professional experi ence under A.V. Kuenctsov and the engineer LA. Loleit; worked 
with Iwan Zholtovsky and Aickscy Shchusev in the Mussoviet studio an the New Moscow Plan 1968; head of Seudie No. 7, Musonet, Moscow 1932. Taught at the VKBUTEMAS, Mos sow an a suidie established by hum and dlya Golosov called the New Academy 1921-23. Disceedited as an architect by the gov- emument and the First Congress of Soviet Architects 1937; had professional lense revoked 1938; continued to write and de- tign, 1958~GO, Readmitted wo the Union of Architects and al- fowed to do some teaching 1944; allawed to reassume a profes- sional title 1953, Invited to teach ar the All-Ununn Distance Learning Instirute tor Engineering and Construction. signaling the end af his profeional exile 1960. Died in Mowow, 28 November 1974  Selected Works  Mari Bukding of AMO (iow Likhaches) Autonatibe Works (facade), Macasw, 1947  Makhotka Pavilion (destroyed), All-Union Agriculture and Cottage Indusenes Exhubitinn, Miraiw, 1923  Sarcophagus for V1 Lenin, Red Square, Moscow, 1924  Surict Pavibon (destroyed), Lapminon des Avo [ecacatils, Paris, 1925  Runakey Worker’ Chub, Moscow, 1927  Metnikev House. Moscow, 1927  Burevestaih Workers! Chub, Mancow, 1929  Monanw Chamber Thearer (reconstruction), 1930  Frunze Academy, Moscow, 1931  Usavy Indusity Cortunvicsariat, NKTP, Moscow, 19.54  Coneral Departenent Store fintenon), Sarat, USSR, 1949  Selected Publications  “Atkhitekture pervoe mesto,” Strsitelstoo Manuky 1 {1934}  “Arkchuekeure onvocnic rinybh aiaterishey,” Anibierkewne SSSR 11934)  “Trorcheskor samochurseie akhitchioca,” Arkhikewre SSSR 9 O9y)  Further Reading  Cooke, Catherine, Runsan Anant Garde: Theories of Ari, Anbuseciury, and the City, London: Academy Edie, 1995  Fora, Aedris, Kauzteanua Meiiziben. Budapest. Akadema Kisdo, 195A  Funu, Maria, Otakar Mizal, and Maurisin, Mettiggy (editors), Kowssantin S. Mel nskor and she Reconstruction of Mouow. Skyrs, 2000  Gerchuk. Vari, et al., Keauantin Mel nite rumnks + prockyy. ketalog epudedi, Memon: Severski Khudashik, 1989  Khan Magomrdor, 5.0), Kowsantia Mel'sikve, Moscow: Strouzdut. 1990  Saart, S. Frederic, Kemsantin Meinshoe Sola Archivort int Mas Sonery, Princeton. New Jervey: Princeton Univerury Prew, 1978  Serigalev, Anatoli, and Irina Kokkinak: (editors), Kenuantin Stepumorich Mel niker: arkhisektara moet shiz svotcherbsia bontirpeina: werchokais prabaita, Mower. bekuarvo, IRS  Worrmann, Arthur (editor), Melurkev. the Muscles of Invention, Ronerdam: Van Henk Finds 10, 1990  MEMORIAL  Long gone are the days when autocratic governments and che cult of death combined te march “great man,” ut military, me-  morials into public spaces as an uncontested staphe of how society told time, rook ite pulse, and told its tale. By the beginning of the 20th century, memorials in the West had become ax complex and cantankerous as the incivasingly democratic societies creat- ing them, fraught with debates between interest groups and civic committees, aruscs and architects, and government administra- tions. The simple and formulaic memonals to George Washing- ton or Otto von Bumarck, requising a prominent patch of public space and an casy subscription from pubtic and private donors. pate way mo dehates over representation (artistic and muticul- cural), urbaninm, the nature of memory, and the role that govern- ment should play in commemoration,  The monumental, classical memorials that the carly 20th cen- tury inherited —triumphal arches, columns, and equestrian stat ucs- fit easily invo the City Beautiful movernent and coatempo- rary urbanism and kent a Roman grandeur to the efforts of unpetiahst and industnal capitalise nations to celebrate eheis triamphs and promote thar agendas. Thus, three very different memorialk—Onto Wagner's design for a monument dedicated to Emperor Franz Josef 1 (1917) for the Ringstrassc in Vienna, HL Van Buren Magonigh’s Liberty Memorial 0 World War 1 {1926) in Kaneas Ciry, Missouri and Carlos Obregon Santacilia’s Monuinent of the Revolutian (1938) in Mexico Ciry—all oper- are through conventions of scale. siting, and style, sharing more with a cadition gning hack to Augustan Rome than with the memorials that would he built after World War IT. All use the confident visual language of clasicieen on represent the shakicr realities of maxe society and modesnity.  The medhanized harmon of World War tare typwally cived for attcring the nature of ineturialization. Nonetheless, in most of Europe, traditional memorial shafts and ashes were crected after che wat. In the United Seates, regiments of mass- prudured doughboys joined their Civil War counterparts on public squares, but nos withour 4 significant protest from those utilieari- ans who insisted on “useful” or “living” memorials, such as com- munity centers, parks, ut public buildings. many of which were burl as well, At the same time, the nascent USSR required ready-made traditions and deployed memorial strategies aimed as much ac cultural mvention as at amnesia (Hobsbawm and Ranger, 1983). Lenin's idea, based on Campanella's utopian Ciry of the Sunt, to erect dozens of cheap, impermanent statues of Karl Marx and other socialist heroes in order to turn the entire city into a didactic memorial to the revolution belongs to this desperate search for memory.  Where the uadition of “great man” memorials flourished under totalitarianism, democracy fidlded a range of solutions. Compare the commanding monument to Joseph Stalin that browheat the public squares in virtually every Soviet ty with the pluralistic Klatch of quibbling Civil War, Word Wars | and Il, Korean War, and Vietnam War memorials that most Amencan cities tolerate. Uheis cashing styles and scales and the kymnastic way in which they have had to avoid oncoming traffic make memonal sancs some of the least welcoming sites in Amer- scan cities. Their cacophony of memory already offended critics hy the heginning of World War 1. By World War II, with atti- tudes toward death and memory— not to mention tepresenta- tion — io flux, mematiah began to take great cate to sublimate claims to ultimate werifice inte abstractions of useful services, ‘The changing uses of memory itself were behind some of this shift, che solid, centralized memory of che ancien régime dis-  petsed into what Pierre Nora called "Lieux de Mémotre™: mu- scums, archives, collecting, commemorations, and bakt con- sumption.  Word War I marked the end of the classical tradition in memorials, The very hase of the memorial tradition —the iconic memorial—had became nearly imposible. The une prominent American example—che Marine Comps, or bw fima, Mema- tial—ecllingly derwes from a widely diseminated photograph that shows the degree to which photography has complicated the nature of memory and thus the role of memorials. If the Giguranive tradition was under segc, w tuo were other underpin- tung: of the tradicional memonal. Events themselves unfounded memory. The traumatic and cataclysmic narure of wich 20th: century history has pushed the boundaries of representation, Histonans, critics, and theorists ask how, for example. should saciety represent the Holncaunt (a fick! unto evelfs, the killing frelds of Cambodia, E] Salvador, Stalin's purges, or the bombing of Nagauls and Hiroshima. not to mention Dresden,  In the United States aftcs 1945, che “hving meavoral” filly won the day, leading wo memoeiul halls, highways, parks, and stadiums but very few traditional memarial. Only new, $0 years alter che war, ts a nativtul memorial to the w-called Good War being scriously enteruincd. and dus long after memorial w  Korea and Vietnam found their places on national ground and in national comciousness. Living-memonual advocates fought against what they called “dead memorials,” folding memory ineo daily life, im effect avouling memorislsation entirely. Ia re- sponse, Philip Johnson recommended 4 massive mound of dirt, bulldozed into place beside the highway: a modern memorial for the posewas commutet tu contemplate at high speed. Germany faced much trickier memorial problems, One an:  swer has been tu rebuibd: fachdul renorauon a memonaltation. The gicat Romanesque churches of Cologne or the old city an Nuremberg, all carefully sebuily, stand tn conuast wo Egon ficrmann’s Kaiser-Wilhelm-Gedihtnphirche in Berlin, 2 sharch preserved as a suin in the midst of the cammercial gliner of the Kurtiustendamm (1961). In Germany, the problem of anchoring national identity in a positive national memonal is confounded by the omnipresence of sates of ignaminy. Indeed, in recent years the most heated dehates on memory and memo- fiak have taken place in Germany, giving ric to the “Coun termunument.” or Geyer Derkmul. Onc of the most promiocar cumple is the disappearing calumn built by Jochen Gere and Father Shalev-Gert in Hamburg (1986). Exchewing what they consider the fasist tendemy of the uaditional monument, the arusts coated a 12-metcr-high pillar with lead so chat people  Rusuans pay homage to the memory of V1. Lenin in frome of the Kremlin, Monow, Rau,  photograph ca. 1925 © Library of Congres 
could write on its surface, actively engaging in the process of memory. As wating covered the column, it was krwered into the ground in stages, ficeing up more space bur also suggesting both the eventual foss uf memory and the willful burial of the  t.  Pe Maya Lin's Vietnam Veterans Memorial (1982) was an im- portant bridge between eraditians. Its granite wall and coll call recalls the permanent and active mourning thar often goes with traditional memorials. However, as a gash of “scar” in the ground, it defies the icanic, heroic axiality and processional qual  ities of much commemoration and, unlike itx predecessors, con- fronts death directly. The names run in order of death rather than alphabetically, like an cpic poem (Morbersill, in Reynolds, 1996), overlaid with the moutncr’s own reflection in the pol- ished stone. The double encendre on reflection makes memory emphavcally shared, publi: rather than merely grounding and discharging memory. as the Washington Monumene docs. the Vietnam Veterans Memonal absorbs and recharges it. Ins pen- dent on the Washington Mall, the later Korean War Veterans Memorial (1995, by Cooper-Lecky, based on the derigns of BL3IPO), achiewss a similar ctfect buc enhances it hy placing the nvourner in a Geld of life-size soldiers on patrol.  Inevaably, memorials are inert. They express only what we ‘bring to them, although some are casicr to use oF tn coope for use, A day might come when cven the Victnam Veterans Memo- cial fails to do “memary work,” as the sentiment surrounding the Vietnam War wanes with passing generations. This is wen more dramancally with che revolutions in the former Easter bloc, as Sovier memorials were toppled and a whole era thar sysemarically suppressed pre-communist history found its own memanals melted down or rhrown on the junk heap.  ANA M. SiaANkTN  Sev alo City Beautiful Movemens; Lin, Mayn (United Seates); Lincoln Memorial, Washington, D.C, Peace Memorial aad Mascum, Hiroshiass; Postmodernism; Vietnam Veterans Memorial, Washingtoa, D.C.5 Wagner, Otto (Austria)  Purther Reading  Borg. Mowe, and Pichler offer sanded histuties of memorials, The more recent hook by the art histotaan Roune grves sharp-eyed cratnssen af modern memorials in an effort to counter the dangers of the iconic tradinon Young brilianuy ranges over problema of memorislizanon in Germany, Poland. and in relation to the Holociune.  Anes, Philippe, Lemme denen be mort, Pacis: Hlitions du Seuil, 1977, as The Hour of Our Deueh, New York: Keopf, and London. Allen Lane, 1981  Barthes, Roland, 1 chsembre claire, Paris: Cahiers du Cinema, 1980; a2 Comers Lucida: Reflevrians on Phoregraphy, tranalated by Richard Howaed, New York: Hill and Wang, 1981, Londun: Cape, 1982  Baume, Albers, Tlwr Unveiling of the Nanonal kuas: A Plea for Parret: Ironnclam mn 4 Nativastest Era, Cambodge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1998  Borg, Alan, War Armenia’: Frew Antuynity te the Present, London. Lew Cooper, 1990  Hobsbawen. Eric, and Terence Ranger. editars, Thy Zareanne of Tradition, Cambauge and New York: Cambialge University Prews, 1988  Johnon. Philp C.. “What Aewshetic Price Glory?” Are News 44, 00. 91945)  Lowenthal, David, The Past fa Forrugn Casatry, Cambridge and New York. Cambridge University Press, 1985  Mayo, James M.. War Memorial as Political Landscape: The ‘Amenican Experience and Bewnd, Now York and London: Pearger. 1988  MeIneyre, Colin. Manameno of War: How to Read a War Memeniat, Landon: Robert Hale, 1990  Mosse, Georpe |. Fallen Soldion: Reshaping the Memory of the World Wan, New York: Oxford Universaty Prew. 1990  Nora. Prerre, editor. et larur de mémeire, 3 vols, Pare: Gallimard, FORa, 1986, 1992  Pichler. G. Kurt. Remewsbenag War the American Way, Washiegsoa, DC. Smuchsonan bnsairacion Prea. 1995  Reynolds, Dunakd Martin. editor, “Remere Net the Ancient Landmark” Public Monament: and Moral Values, New York: Grdon aml Beeach, 1996  Sherman. Damel J., “Bodses and Names The Emergence of Commemoranon in Inrerwar France.” The American Heterscal Review: 104, no. 2 (Apeil 1998)  Soatag, Susan, On Phosography, New York: Farrar Serans anal Giroux, 1977, Landue: Penguin, 1978  Young, James E., The Texture of Afrmery Holocaust Mowerual and Adeaning, New Haven, Conocuncus: Yak Unevenity Press, 1993  MEMPHIS GROUP, ITALY  Memphis was a dexign mavement hom during the wineer of 1980-81 in Milan of a group of architects and designen passion- atcly devoted to channeling s new approach to design based on an openness in innovation and on the use of creativity as a social force. One uf the main protagonists of the w-.alled Italian new design movemenss in the 1980s, Memphis was part of the cun- certed effort to break away fram ehe hamogenization of mass tharkets, and it newer ceased two reexamine critically the postulates of any and all established aiodern “isms” such as functionalism or ragonalism.  Memphis's notably young designers garhered around the rec- oad leader and educator of the group. Estore Sormsass, Jr. The office of Sonsas: Asiactatt (founded in May 1980) was a ctosstuad for Memphis activi firm. Marco Zanini, Aldo Ci members of Memphis as well.  Memphis developed directly from Studio Alchymia, a radical design group fiuin the Lite 19705 founded by Sandro Guerriero and shortly joined by Sottsass, Alessandro Mendini and Andrea Branai. Studio Alchymia dealt wish problems of “redesigning” and researched issues of kitsch and the banal. Their disagreement manifested ubrough their different views on the perceived neces- sity of the level of social engagement of the design. Although some were content with the avant-garde conceptual experimen- tation, Sousass tended toward scale social participation, which required project realization by manufacturing prototypes and entering real industry. Sorsass’s “silent sevession” marked his evohition away from Alchymia’s radical conceptualism into Memphis’s enthusiastic all-out antirigidiry.  Michele de Liucchi was the next person to leave Alchymia and join Sotsass. The realization of Memphis (whose namc, fir chosen in December of 1980, apparently is an allusion to 4 Bob Dylan song) came through the support af Renzo Brugola,  and the key members of the  c, and Marreo Thun, were core  a friend of Sottass's and owner of a carpentry shop, and Mano and Brunella Godani, who had a showrvom available for exhibi- tion space. ‘The first Memphis exhibition was held 18 Seprembet $981 tn the Are 74 Showroom, and it became an annual event. In 1982 Memphis joined the artists collective Artcmide with financial support from industnalors Fauwe Celati and Ernesto Guismondi.  Although they never formulated a coherent aesthetic philow- phy. they were determined to make 2 head culearal and cavicun, mental impact and to instill a new movement comparable in scale and importance to the Modem movement. According ww Sotran, Memphis “was the invention of a voluminous and heavy packet of recognizable figurauve intuitions: it was the invention of a very lung and complicated list uf posuble compo- sitions, unexpected combinations. possible chords and ditferent chromaticisins” (Sormass, 1988, p, $8},  Memphis rebelliously confronted and challenged the canons of good taste and tame, stenle modemim. The stvle manifested in all forms of art including furninure, lighting, fabrics, silver- ware, glassware and ceramics, industrial design, graphic arts, packaging, jewelry, and fashion bur also “in comphcated and vast architecrural sercings, in claborate and intense design simarinas” (Sorsass. 1988, p. 59), Designers often melded standardized retail furniture made in industrial materials with quirky details such as frescocs of prehiseuric animals for the Fiorucei Shap in Amucedam (1981) of the stripes of warm ecflected color lighting wed for the Casino nightclubs in Venice (1981-82). Memphis's best-known project remains a serie of showtnoms for the Esprit choching manufscturct in Redin. Frankfurt, Stuctgart (2984 85), Cologne, Dusseldorf, Zunch (1985-6), Lugano and Vi- enna (1987). In scope and design comistency the Memphis work encompassed the entire environment. They cultivated not only untraditional Lombinations of buch ideas and materials, andl bok experimentation with textures, colors, shapes, and styles, bur also drew on the irrational. the surtcal, and the exons, Memphis baroque innovations are memorable for their application of plas- cic Laminate, juxtaposed painted wood and metal. and spaces carpeted of tiled in wikl pauerns.  Memphis grew internarional in scale with the regional pact of vontnbutans such as Michael Graves. Hans Hallan, Shiro Kurumara, Javier Mariscal. George Sowden, and Daniel Well, Lesser known bur significant participants in the aesthetic in- duded Martine Bedin, Natalie dis Pasquier, Terry ones, Mi- chele de Lucchi, Daniela Puppa. Maria Sanches, Peter Shire, Gerard Taylor, and Masanori Umeda.  By 1987, when Memphis made its exhibition tour through Amesican nmuscums, its influence on the international deugn arena was already taturated. and the group hegan to diwolve Having captured the attention of mau media from the stan, Memphis managed te curn the international spotlight bach 10 ltalian design, and theis own provocative production provided some inspiration and influence on the geerwing Pustmodeenism in che United States, Japan, and Europe. One of the movement's greatest contributions is chat they permanently opened deugn and aesthetics to the rhythms of life by thew acknowledgement and indusion of popular culture and Iatsch, s0 much so that today we talk about a recognizably flamboyant and bold “Mem- pris style,” which encompasses the work of non-Memphis mem-  sas well.  Goanasa KasicH-Lereavre  Ser ale Postmoderaisas  Further Reading  Runde + wurk sbould be sunsidered a prmary documenntien oa Mem- phs, Horn prosides 2 womprehcusive teview of Mesuipiis abject, he Laliecton ul exsays by Sotoass and others sheds light on deuils snd aemosphetes surrounding Memphis’s opetaiom, A number of beget wale designs, installanuns, and architectural projets of core members are elaborate an, snd the famous Memphis obycts are shuwn in their origgnaily wmtendedt atchiectural settings. Bella positions Memphis in telawun tu a larger design «one, both hiaorwally and conepaually.  Bellats, Nally, New feshan Drage, New York: Rizzoli, 1990  Horn, Richard, Memphis — Objects, Furniture, and Pastrrns, Philadelphia, Penuyfvania Running Hes, (94S; coved and expanded edition, London Calumbus, 1986  Mempha The Siew Dengn. Stamfand, Cannecucur Fducanonal Dimensions Gronp, 1986, vide recording  Radice. Rasbara, Memphis: Ricerche, siperienze, cwltati, Sillomenty 6 accent del mere devign, Milan: Fleces, 1984: as Menephir Research, Experiences, Rewls. Fantures, and Succenes of New Davign. vandlated by Paul Blanchand, New York: Rizzoli. 1984; Condon: Thames and Hudion, 1985  Someast, Fiore. ot al. Sorte Anacette, Harcelona: Gili, V9RR: 26 Sornas: Anonurt. rranslated by Rouney Stringer. New York: Riraole, 1988  MENDELSOHN, ERICH 1887-1953  Architect, United States and Germany  Frich Mendelsohn’s career showcases the evolution of modern- am during the 20th century. He began by dealing with the machine age in ao expressionist: mode bur was later forced to adapt modernism to geographic and technological circumeances different thin those uf Europe. He tried wo develop a Hebrew vention in Palestine and was able to conciude his lifework with a humanized version of modernism in his American period. Mendelsohn was exposed ww expresioniam during his studies in Munich. These encounters with progressive arusts led him To see artistic creation as the discharge of a personal rhythmic feeling. He believed that artists were juided by vision. Mendel swhn based his desigas on the constituent elements of architec: ture, In his early sketches, he tried to find a personal expression for the architecture of the industrial age. ‘The energetic forms and structures of Art Nouveau architecture influenced these designs, Through their continuous surfaces, they emphasized the dy- namic conquest of space. In his forma, Mendelwhan alluded to the novel transportation vehicles fur their rymbulic value. Mendebohn abandoned expressivniam quickly afier World ‘War 1, He tricd to build his eatlice visions, particularly in the Fimtein Tower (1924) in Potwdam, but was unable to find 4 contractor capable of producing the complicared formwork needed for the cast-concrete construction. Morcover, his politi- cal insight, which he rebated in his 1919 article “Das Problem einer neuen Baukunst,” made Mendebohn morc pragmatic. His subsequent designs followed more dusely [nternational-style farms and surfaces. However, he never adhered to che theory that materials, structure. and function were the only requirements for good form. His buildings combined functional performance successfully with a dynamic impresion of the farm, He managed 10 formulate a personal vocabulary that has somcnmes bees den- 
wgrated as “Reklamearchitckrur” lor commercial architecture). Mendebohn himself zimed to develop a coeporate design image for bis clients through his dedgns. An ceample of the is found in the Snumgart Schocken Store (1928). in which the masonry pattern imitates 4 mot! found tn the Schocken comparate logo. His forms were carefully compoued either tu create visually oxcit- ing shapes of to aniculure the tratlic flow of modern city xtrcen. in the addition to the Mosse House (1923) an Berlin, cacining tensions are generated between supporting and supported pares and bewwern open and closed, horizontal and vertical, and flat and uubsal forma, I che large-siale depariment stores and office buildings that made him Iamous, he unified these contrasts unto streamlined favades characterized by alternating hytzontal bands. The various Schocken Depanment Stores amt the Co luinbus House (1932) in Bethn were masterfully integgated ince their urban context, were functionally and tcchnulugically up- to-date, and provided publiciry effects through exterior and ante- tior lighting. Emphati. siainascs and other protrusions allow his bualdings tn be visible from oblique angles. Ihe horizontal window bands. a Mendelsohn trademark, climinated the need for ample interior lighting and light wourts. In the Stuuigart Schocken Store, these devices allowed him to integrare the build- ing into the radically different building contexts chat faced ars four sidev,  tn March 1933. after Hitler became German chancellor, the Mendebohne immigrated to England. In parinenhip with Serge Chermayeff, he peoduced a few desigm that continued the forms developed in his German perind, thus helping bring this style to the United Kingdom, In the De La Warr Pavilion (1935) in Bexhill, emphatic circular staircases ate added to rectangular building blocks to create highly visible accents.  Beginning in 1934, Mendebohu revived comtniswons in Patestine and ultimately moved tc Jerusalem. ‘There, he was in- inigued by che minture of old and sew that he found in the existing local Arab uradition and the modernism brought by the Jewish immigrants. He anempred co alleviate the differences bewween these two contrasts by forging a Hebrew venion of the International Sryle, While still using modemust forms, his buildings tried to accommodate themselves inta the different “ specially in the imeriur layout, these houses exploit imare through open counyards with pools. The houses are closed on the outside buc open up inside. The exte- fons were in local sanlstone to integrate the buildings into the Arab eradinons. His Weizmann # louse (1946) in Rehovor man- ages to combine these diverse suurces masterfully and can sand On its own against che villas of Le Corbusier and Mics van der Rohe. [ts main purpose is to represent, and itm situated on a promontory tt provide views to Jerusalem and the Mediterra- nean. In the Anglo-Paicsine Bank (£939) in Jerusalem, che sulid exterivs makes a reference te the Wailing Wall. The Hadassah Honpital (1939) in Jerusalem explain its site on Mount Scopus to dramatic effect with cupolas, a cantilevered chapel. and verti- cally placed windkw slits,  When World War Il dosed ia on Palestine. the Mendelsohnas decided to move ance more. In 1945 they scttled in San Fran- cisco, The Amencan work consists primarily of synagogues and community centers, By proving additonal spaces for cduca- tional and communal needs, Mendelsohn helped pioneer the use of synagogues during the week. not only on Sundays. His interiors were flexible to accommodate the changing numbers of worshipers on high holy days. The buildings were no longer  purely modernist designs but aimed to create forms and spaces that could be grasped intuitively. Im this way Mendelsohn at- tempted to generate a serve of community in che audience, He humanized his deugns by responding to social, economic. and scientific changes, Building shapes and decoration ecferred to traditional jewish symbolism, particularly to the “Temple in the Wilderness,” [natead of avert atyliaic references, this was exsen- tial architecture made of planar surfaces with skinlike facades. Park Synagogue (195.5) in Cleveland transforms the modernist ocean-lines image into a sweeping uccupanon of its site, Jewish nwtifs make up its interior decoration.  ‘This final creatrve burst shows chat Mendelsoha never aban- doned his voiunary. progressive spirit. He influenced euiny younger colleagues through his teachings at the Universities of Oregon, Oklahoma, and California at Betkeley. He died on 15 September [943 uf canes.  Hans Ro MORGENTHALER  Biography  Born in Allenscin, Fast Prussia (now Olstyn, Poland), 21 March 1887; cmigtated to England 1933: naturalized 1938; un- migrated tv tbe Uniced States 141; naturalized 1946. Ac father’s insastence. studied cconomics ac the Universicy of Munich 1907-08, pursued architecture at the Technische Hochschule, Berlin 1908-10; under Dheodor Fischer, studied architecture at the Technische Hochschule. Munich 1910-12. Worked as an independent designer. Munich 1911-14. Served as an engineer on both fronts, German Anny 1714-18; created many sketches during his service. Visited Rotterdam and Amsterdam 1920; traveled to Ierael 1923; traveled to the United States 1924: toured Russia 1925-28; was invited to Landon by che Royal Tastinate of British Architevas 1934; invited w Palestine 1934. Formed partnership: with Serge Chermayeff, London 1933. 36. Established a branch office in ferssalem 1935; relocated practice there 1939. Moved firm to New York 1941; practiced in San Francine, California from 1946. Taught at numerous colleges and aniversives 1941-46. Jouned Arbeiesrar flr Kunst atid No- vembergruppe 1918; jwined Der Ring, Bertin 1925. 1ied in San Francisco, 1 September 1953.  Selected Works  Berliner Tageblarr Building (addinon), Berd, 1923  Einstein Tower, Ponda. 1924  Schocken Deparrment Srore idemalished), Sontgart, 1928  Columbus House (demolished. Berlin, 1932  De-|a Warr Pavibon, Bexhill-o-Sea. England (with Serge Ohenmayeff, 1935  Wetmann House, Rebover, Palesune, 1936  Anglo-Palestine Bank, Jerusalem, 193  Hadaccah Hospital, Jerusalem. 19.9  Park Synagogue. Chevetand, Ohio, 1953  Atoms Energy Commussion Laboratocies, Berkeley. California. 1953  Selected Publications  Amerika Bildcetuch eines Archisekoon NIU  Rurland. Furopa, Aveerika Fin Archirehienischer Querachastt. 1929  Newes Haus-Newe Welt, 1941  Erich Mendelsohn Laster of an Architect, edited by Ovkar Beyer, 1967  Further Reading  Mendetsohn's work has rarely found the cetical acahum it deverves Praise by noted scholars wich as Nikolaus Pevsner, Bruno Zev, and Reyner Banham came only after his death. In the 1970s. a new genera- ton of historians began dealing with hia works A group af them hay just collaborated on 3 monograph chat combines the lutet scholarship,  Abronev, Mura and Christina Dorea, “The Los Genius of Em Mendclsshn,” flsepernt 42 (November 1987)  Ecdurdh, Wolf von, Ere Meudehobu, New York: Brasiller, (900. Landon: Mayflower. 1961  Der Einueinewrm in Parada: Arvdiecksus nd Actrophynk, Bests. Ary Neola, [995  Hast, Vaughan, “Ech Mendebohn and che Fourth Dimenaon.” Archurctural Research Quarterly 1 (Wuntee 154  Heinze-Mibblob, tea, rich Mendelode: Rawsre wad Prepeher in Pabdsrina (1934-1941), Munuh: Sang, 1986  Jamen, Kathicen, brad Urndebstn ated the Archisecnere of German Madeneam, Cambodge and New Yurk: Cambridge Univernty Press, 1997  Morgenthaler, Hans R. The Early Srevhes of German Anbient Erah Mendelahn (1887 1953) No Compremue with Reality. leweton, New York: Mellen Prew, 14792  Nirgas-Shifisn, Abing, “Contested Zionum— Alternative Modemam: Erich Mendcleohn andl the Vel Aviv Chug in Mandate Palestine,” drcdutecrarad History 39 (1996)  Palmer, Renate, Der Srastgarter Schecken-Has von Frich Mendehadin Die Geubichte cines Kanfhaswes and sore Architetour, Seurtgat. Getmnany: Silberburg. 1996  Posener, Julas and Pence Pfmkuch. Frick Mendeiate, Bodin: Akademie der Kunste, 196K  Poncnet. Julius. and Uriel Ady, “Retrachrungen aber Erich Mendelsohn. Erich Mendelsohns “Carmelseade."* Hanaeit 79 (March 1ORR}  Stephan, Regins. Studien su Waren und Geichifthaasern Erich Me mv ie Detnchlind, Munialy: ‘bund, 1992  Stephan, Regina ‘editor’, Erwh Mendetiohr Archneks 188’-1995, Oalilder-Run, Germany: Hate, 1998: as bw Menard: Archuect, 188.°-1954, New York: Monacell: Press. 1999  Whuk, Amal. frtr Uendebadba. New York: Dodge, and Lomton: Faber and Faber, 140; 2nd edeion, London: Leonard Hull, and New York: Dork, 1956  Zovi, Bruno, Erich Mendebohn, Bologna, laly. Zanehel. 1982. as inch Mondeloba, New Voth: Kuzali. amd Loodua: Archaeceual Press. 1984  Zev, Brune, trich Semdehohn The Complete Werks, Bascl, Swatactland, and Boston. Birkhauser, 1999  MENIL COLLECTION, HOUSTON, TEXAS - Designed by Renzo Piano; completed 1926  The city of Houston, Texas, is home of one of Noh America’s fine cultural eases. In the geographic area between Mandell. Mulberry, Sub Ross, and Branard Steceta, four stunning mu- scunu (Menil Collection, Cy Twombly Gullery, Rothko Chapel. and Byranune Frece Chapel Museum) create an aura of the love for an and the beauty of modem architecture in an otherwoc nondescript, partly derelict suburb. ‘The collection. and the ar- chitectural masterpieces to house then, was made possible by the effors of the late John de Menit (d. 3973), founder uf the  off ficld servigea company Schlumberger Lad, and his Feench wife, Donsinuque (dL 1997)  The de Meni! family started collecting an in the early 19504 with o focus on important works of che modern cra, especially the Cubist School of Paris modernism and surrealist art, yet broadened soon after 10 include works of African tribes and the cultures of Occania to became an expansive and eclectic onllec- con of more than 15,000 preces of fine art that incudes art of the Paleolithic to the pre-Christian era, During the tenure of James Johnson Sweeney as direaiar of Houston's Museum of Fine Arts (denigned by Mies van der Rohe), the de Menils considered donating theit impressive art collection to that mu- scum. The aced for an individual gallery within the museum led to diagreements with the Muscum of Fine Arts and eventually fomered the plan to build a separate muscum to present the collection to the city.  fn 1981, Dominique de Menil, as president of the Menib Foundation, entrusted the Jalan architect Renzo Piano of the firm Piano and Fizgcrakd Architects with the design of the new muscum. Piann’s carly doug strategy of a focus on natural hight had to lead tw theoretical and empirical scientific research cause the artwork needed tu be protected against the damaging effects af ulravioler rays, direct aantighe, and solar hear. The result is a multilayered structure for the roof of the muscum, consisting of a series of 25-millimetes-chick, curved Jerru-cement “leafs” char are bung from 3 structural, ductile iron rooting beam. Three hundred of thane ferro-cement elements act as filren for light and heat. yer allow the ever changing play of dhe natural light conditions tn be an integsal component of the exhibition experience. Whe roof enclisure of the 150-meter-long structure consists of 4 glass platorm made of glass clements, slighty sloped ta accommodate drainage of rainwater. The engsncer Peter Ricc, whu worked with Piano dunng che design of the controversial aac museum of the city of Paris, Pompidou Center, cooperated warh rhe architects 1a develop the leaf and support sructure of the ruof, The result is an degant and innovative museum with a successful utilization of natural light. The plan of the budding. distributes ethibition srcas along a central inner promenade. Gallery areas, a library. shops. and processing areas arc grouped ino public and support areas. All eahibitiun rooms are un the ground-tloor level nf the ewo-sory building. The second floor holds worape. research, and staff facilities (Treasure Hou) Only a veleted number of pieces (200 wy 300 pieces) of the entire collection are exhibited at the same time, which allows foe optimal chmane storage af the rework when noe ethibited as well as variety, The museum has the feel of an aruse’s studio gather chan an insutution. The scale of the Luikting cubucs that of the esidential neighborhood with i capboard singhe-family houses. Its carefully placed: i is damesn, neither 3 landmark for an antithencal statement, such us the Pompidou Center. The matenab used in Hounon tor enclosures are taken trom the context at the bungalows of the surrounding residential neighborhood: haitoon trame and wood, ser inte a steel frame. The ferm-cement elements used inside the galleries are also used an the outside, creating a peripheral teansition space, tetnininent of the verandas of the South: It isa place of quict to enjoy the remarkable cflets of the play of shadows cast by the ferro cement leafs above an the light gray wooden fades. When the museum rebes on the power and cffece of narusal ight an the metropolis of oil, the shaded parh around the muscu recaptures 
Photo © Mary Ann Sullivan  the value of pedestrian movement and comfort in the vertical Ametican City. Inside che museum, enclosed tropical gardens are imerted intn the exhibition zones, allowing 4 visual interaction between an and che lush natural envirunmest. Plants and trees are meant to grow through the building, emphasizing a necessary true relationship between architecture and the environments. Ranrit HAMMANN  See aho Houston, Texas (Uniscd Seates)) Museum; Plano, Renzo (Italy); Pompideu Cemer, Paris  Further Reading  Buchanan, Peter, Rente Pune Auilding Warkvbop Complete Work, ¥ wuls., London: Phaidiin Press, 1993 97; see especialy wal 2. 1995  Dini, Mavsimo. Renae Pismo: Progerti ¢ architetoeer, 1964. 1983. Milan; Electa, 1983; as Renew Putme: Prosects and Building, 1964-1983, New York: Flecta/Rirzols. 1984  Donin, Gianpéero (editor), Renze Purno: Prare prr pease Renzo Piano Piece by Pee (bilingual English and Italian ieee), Rome: Casa ded Libro, 1982  The Hyarr Foundation. he Prinedvr Architecture Prave, 1998- Colebraring the 20h Anniseriary of the Price Presented 0 Renzo Piano. Lon Angeles: lemen and Walker, 1999  Menit Collection Basikling, Houston, Vexax, thesigned by Reneo Piano (1986)  Menil, Dontinajue de, “Foreword” in Thr Ment! Collection: A Srlectaen fro the Pateslithic to the Madern Kea, Now York, beara, 1987  Fiano. Renzo, Renzo Prana: Buildings and Prejecn. 1971-1989, New York: Rizrati, 1989  Piano, Renzo, Renze Prane: Progen ¢ archiserere, 1987-1994, Milan: Hlevta, 1994; as Renne Pieme, 1987-1994, cranslaned by Damid Kerr, Basel, Switzerland, and Boston: Birkhsuet Verlag, 1995  METABOLISTS  The Metaboli movement cmerged at the Tokyo meeting of the 1960 World Design Conference (an epilogue to the Congres Tosermationsux d’Architecture Modeme [CIAM, 1927-]), with the proposal that architecture should not onfy embrace new technologies and the enormous scales of the postwar period, but also develop living, self-generating systems chat could adapt over time. Founded by a group of ambitious young architects intent on challenging the status quo and thus establishing their own Presence among the intetnational co: of leading architects, the movement's onre group includes the architects Kiyononi Kikutake, Fumihiko Maki, and Kisho Kurokawa, all of whom  Imcr enjoyed enduring international reputations, In addition, another architect, Masato Otaka. the critic Noboru Kawaroe, the graphic designer Kiyochi Awazu, and the industrial designee Kenji Ekwen were abo involved in the production uf the bilin- gual manifexo published by the group.  Although the Metabolists were a small group. Metabolism as @ movement inchided others, especially Kenzo Tange and his assistant Takashi Asada, who nurtured the founders through 3 sort of lace-night salon. Tange's “City tor 10 Million People” (1960), to be built along a series of looped roadways stretching acrom Tokyo Bay, was a direct response co his proteges’ work. Arata leosaki, working for Tange during the same period, was aloo identified with the movement, but he took a darker view, feflected in his sketches of brutal concrete cowers rising from ruins,  ‘The original Metabolists’ relative lack of professional experi- ence waa reflected in their audaciously futuristic proposals In the group's only publication, Mensbulism: 1960: The Propesali for Now Urbanism, Kikutske’s skewhes were particularly prominent. taking up over a third the original text: his 1958 Sky House was the only built work included. Kikutake offered up sail- shaped cities floating on ferro-cement bulls. “plug-in” housing tacked on-to soaring towers by magnets, light res trecly connected to clectrified steel wall, and commutes by submarine 0 helicnprer, The Merabolisrs are often accused of tacking the sense of improbable delight fraind in the slightly later Archi- gram’s works, but Kikutake’s uriginal exay shows the same woh- bly, giddy thinking. Unfortunately, his essays’ English tramla- tons are clunky and difficult 10 comprehend. and the humor he brought to the movement war poorly recngnized abroad,  Altbough the group established an apparently united front, the founders heid a diverse set of theoretic concerns char pre- vented them from advancing as a movement after ther debut Mald and Otaka were not concemed with a new technological framework of production issucs, but rather with understanding and incorporating traditional sparial parterns into designs for the unprecedented sale of the new city. For Kurokawa, Metabolism began ax an organizing device. emphasizing sructure—which allowed him 10 build some of its most successful buildings a devade later.  The comparisons heeween Archigeam and the Mecabolists are superficially easy, but whereas Archigram continued to publish increasingly preposterous and charming propouls thriughout the 1960s, the Metabolists used their newly established reputa- tions to snag large-scale commissions and quickly became dis- tracted fram generating additional futuristic sketches. Kikutake offered only one new scheme after the inital manifesto, wherexs Maki and Otaka essentially refined theif intial thesis without offering additional detail or production stracegies. Only Kuro- kawa developed new proposals; his finest was the 1961 “Helix City.” The international press tended to ignore the Metabolises' built work; in 1967, the journal Architectural Derign titked an editorial exsay “Whatever Happened to the Merabolists2” and cuncluded that the group was “watic. if not extinct.” Ar this point, the group's production inchaded a number of buildings that clearly grappled with the movement's ideals, including Ki- kutake’s Administrative building for Izumo Shrine (1963) and hus odd, bellows like Miyakonojo Civic Cencet (1966), Oraka’s Hanaizumi Agricultural Cooperative Association Center (1965),  Maki's Chiba University Auditorium (1963) and Rissho Univer- sty (1967), and Kurokawa's Nitto Food Cannery (1964). Al- though the journal included thumbnuil-sized photographs of a few built works, these were overwhelmed by the use of much larger illustrations dating frum the original [960 manifeto.  As the world withdrew its attention, the Metabolists were finding opportunities to build projects chat most cosely reflected there original intentions. Ki wa produced the greatest range, from the Odakyu Drive-in Restaurant (1969) to the movement's mont convincing commercial work, the Nakagin Capsule Build- ing (1972), where shipping containers were modified for habita- Won and attahed tu core towen with only four bolts apiece. Several of Metabolism’: key works frum this period were fos leisure faciligies, 3 match that would scem on the surface appro- priate: Kurokawa designed a ladge and a theme-based amuse- ment compiles, whereas Kikutake designed hotels for the domes Ge tourism industry. Although the lesure industry ofen most willingly embraces inmwation, critics queaioned the appropri- atcnes of producing theoretic works fur chis roarket.  The 1970 Osaka Exposition appeared most in sync wih a movement based an the idea of an architecture adaptable uhange; many of che designers present in Metabolism’s carly days were involved, including Kikutake, Kurokawa, Tange, and Isozaid. Kikutake and Maki also had major commissions for the subycquent 1975 Okinawa Ocean Expo; Kikutake's Aquapolis, a remarkable pavilion floated just off shore, became a poignant symbel for the movement, unartainable and slowly rusting untit it was scrapped at the end of the 20th century.  However, The Osaka Exposition came a scant three years after the 1967 Montreal Expn and suffceed by comparison, Cate~ gery | expositiuns are usually spaced every sia year, but an caception was made because of Asian locale, a first. However, the resulting pavilions did not receive the same lavish wipport as at Montreal, and cntic found most Lacking verve. There were eaceptions. especially Tange’s extraordinary Festival Plaza, and the Toshiba THP and ‘Makara Pavilions hy Kurokawa. Yer the subdued intemational rapome contibuted wo the Merabolist movement's collapse,  This ix not to say, however, rhar Metabolism’s adherents were persuaded that the movement's theories were irrelevant. ‘Tange, Kikutake, and Kurokawa have each returned to their Metabolist beginnings in detigns produced in the 1980s and 1990. And many of the challenges that Metabotists tonk on—overcrowding, tremendous traffic congestion, and the immobiliey of Japanese souety—remain today, yet to be adequately addressed by the professional commumuty.  Dana Bustruck  See abo Congrés Imtemationaus d'Archiccture Moderne  (CIAM, 1927-); Ito, Toyo (Japan); Kurokawa, Kisho Qupan}; Maki, Fumihiko (Japan): Tange, Kenzo (Japan)  Further Reading  Banham, Reyner, Mepastracture: Urbue Fusures of the Recent Pas, London: Thames and Hudson, and New York Harper amd Row, 1976  Boyd, Robin, New Dsretionr uy Japanese Architecture, New York: Bratilier, and London: Studio Vista, 1964  Jerome. Mike, “Whatever Happened to the Metabesints!” Arvbrectural Deuge 37. po. $ {Mav 14857) 
Kawazwe. Nuboru, “Ftom Metabolam wo Metapola— Proposal for a Caty of the Future,” in Satdistrnkraree far Morgen, by Juseus Dahinden, Stungart Geed Hate, 1971; as Leban Seructarn for the Futwe, cranslated by Getakd Onn, Landon Pall Mall Pres, and New York: Praeger, 1972  Kurokawa, Kitho, Metaboli and Anhitectwre, Boulder, Coloeades Wesrview Prevs, 1977  Maks, Futedhike and Masato Chaka, “Sume Thoughts an Collective Form” in Serwecnwre on Art and Scieniy, odited by Grvergy Kepes. New York: Braziller, 1966  Metabolun The Proposth for a New Urbanum, Tokyo Bitjuru Syuppan Sha, 1960  Bikngual manidoun ecleased by the Metabolinte. The volume iv vety rare, but its ifhaserations and eways wficn served as the basis for tubsequent discussions of the movement  *Metabolist Kiyouari Kikutshe.” Space Design, 10.193 (October 1990)  Nitschke, Ginter, "Che Metaholies of Japan.” Architrcrune! Desagn 4 no. 10 (October 1964)  Niaxchke, Gatecer, “The Metabolises,” Arcbutecrunal Deugn 37. nus, 5 (May 1967)  Rows, Michael Frankdin, Beyond Merabalsor: The New lapancse Architecture, New York: Architectural Records Books, 1978  Yacsuka, Hajime and Hideki Yeuhematin, Meutherizuney: SenKyubyahurekojicn Nendat. Nibon wo Kenchuew Avan (parude: Metabolism: Japan's 190; Architectural Avanse-gurde, Tokyo:  Inax Shappan. 199"  METRO STATION, PARIS Designed by Hector Guimard: completed 1905 Paris, France .  The Pars Metso (1899-1905) is one of che earhest landmarks in the evolutionary development of railway systems designed to serve commuters within a metropolis. Inaugurated concurrently with the opening of the Exposinan Universelle of 1900, its series of architecturally significant station encrames were designed by Frenah architect Hector Guimard (1867 - 1942). Renowned for theis visual energy generared by the intricately detailed, almost calligraphic shaping of Gat iran, each structure's design is un tensely resonant of the Art Nouveau movement, the emerging turn-of-the-century new urban art inspired hy nature. While these structures were intended tu tneet che pragimaux oced fur protected public cransitianal spaces between the underground failway and the surfxe surcets, they eventually came tw be re- garded as urban furms in diakctic relationship with various arcas ot Paris  The Metro statians’ unorthodox design vocabulary, which had come to define the extant populas “style metro.” was created by Hectar Guimard, a celebrated exponent of Art Nouveau. It was predicated on stylized. nearly yolupruous sculprural torms intpited by magnolia, lilies. wisterias, and swaying plane lite, These forms had appeared in vanous combinations in all en: trance seructures, which were constructed courely from pretabri cated modular components comprised of iron and glass, materi- ab whose structaral properties were ideally suited for the production of wich defiate and curvilinear design clements. A contextual identity for cach station. cven under differing atc conditions, was ensured by the varying of the ombinations of the modules along the established design wontinuum, Phus. cach  station's design appeared to be one of a hind and without refer- encing the dominant !Juh-century eclecticism and revivalism. However, the designs were noticeably informed by the works of Guimard's contemporary, Belgian architect, Victor Hores (1861-1947), a recognized leader of the Expressionistic Art Nouveau. ‘This was evidenced by the manner in which the acs- thetic possibilides of iron and glass were exploited to achieve lightnevs,ateration, and opacity of modulated structural form. Stall, because of bis unprecedented freedom ia the mannes in which he gave poetic expression to his aauure-inspired industri- ally produced forms, Guimard had a more profound impact on the collective pryche of Parisians than Horta, Many of the Pari- sians believed thus the design of the Metro stations represcnted a resolution of the contradictions thai had arisen at the beginning of che industrial revolution involving the dichotomies berween: the crafts and indusuial standardization. ‘The stations, therefore. were seen asa tribute to the digniry of the new techni har produced them, and in this newly defined rclationship  art and technology that fused universal aesthetic and usilitarian values, many saw a symbolism of Parisian advancement toward the next miflennium’s modernity.  Three types of structures were constructed: simple open stair tase descending from the sidewalk to she railway enclosed on thice sides, covered stain with elaborate canopies. and some complete pavilioas. The Place Blanche Station, a basic open suitcase entrance, chegantly exemplifies the idiosyncratic treat- ment of sinuous forms thas ate fundamental w the “syle metro.” The balustrades aod raih, finished in green suggestive of patina on stamary bronze, are seemingly fluid as they symbiotically anchor to the white stane base at the openings perimeter. The meeting of the sidewalh’s surface and the staircase is puncauated by iwin lamp sandards, cach terminated by bud-thaped amber- colored glass bghr fixrurcs thar illuminate the signage serategi- cally incorporated into the anh over the entrance. These features were rarionally orchestrated into an integrative design statement 10 fully exploit nor only the expressive powers af style bur also iu integration with strusture. Ty achieve this, Guimard relied 00 FF, Viollet-le-Due's acchitectonic seructural theory and hus hose collaborazion with the lounderie de Saine-Dizier, a foundry that specialized in artinic castings.  The design parameters and acubetics of the Meteo stations had been extensively deliberated by the members of the Sockkié Centtale des Arciutectes before the announcement af the design competition by the Compagnie du Mewropoliuain. A preference for handcrafted structures and expressions of individual creativ- tty had prevailed over uses of standardized industrial products Furthermore, because these cutrances were ta be sited in ascas of intemational note, they were capected tu aexherically fit into such contexts, By August 1899, the winning contestants, archi- tects Duray, Lamaresquict, and Paumier, were awarded prizes for their entries, which wete exhibited in the Hotel de Ville. ‘The jury's decision was rescinded, however, by Adrien Renard, president of the Conseil Municipal de Paris and a patron of Art Nouveau, in favor of Guitnard, wha was not a competition entrant, Although ambiguous acsthet. arguments had been pre- sented as defend this devision, 4 more parametric and less ses- theta consideration may have abe precipitated this bold acuon. The winning entnes wete characterized as shelters constructed of masonry that would have required a disproportionately larger amount of space than what was available because of site-specific  Metro Stanon, Paris, Qctigned I Heer Gaimard (19051 © GreatBuildings com  constraint. I, also stands to reason that the decision was tent pered by che fact that irom was a more Cost-effective marercal ehan masonry and that it was more responsive tu Fabricauun and project delivery methods.  Jn 1904, alver the coostructivn of 141 strapon entrances the “metro style” was rejected by the Conseil Municipal de Faris when another denga in the serics was proposed for the Place de VOpera. The design was deemed dissonant with Parisian archi- tectural craditions and inappropriate m the vicinity of the Opéra, which was unended to become the cultural focus of Paris. An undistinguished classically styled stone balustrade design by Cassien- Bernard was implemented, Nevertheless, the &6 surviv- ing structures thar were designed hy Guimard amicably comple- ment the daily paruerns of contemporary Sarisian life and the urban form of che city. They are a tesumnent 10 the pasion that had driven the experuncntation with new caprasive ftuncuons tor materials by freeing them of their 19th-cencury traditional apphcations and redefining ther soles for 20kh-cencury modern- ism, Their enduring cultural and aesthetic presence continues 49 crystallize out of the masses a growing number of adimurers who believe that even the design of utslitarian seructures cannot be reduced to exervises in the applications of genesalized systems of aesthetics of quantitative analyas. Salvador Dali, the surrealist artist, for example, described the entrance smuctures as “divine,”  and when the Place de fa Bastille Station was slated far dernol- ion i dhe late 1960s, the structure was hastily acquired by the Maseum ot Modern Ast in New York.  Arita Lawrence  See abo Art Nouveau (Jugendstil), Exposition Universelle, Paris (1900); Horts, Victor (Belgium)  Further Reading  Fuhu-Becker Sterne Gabeiche, Jugendisat: Kwoifermen renichen Indisrduutlam wed Manengrelln hats, Cologne: DuMont Schauberg, 1975: as Art Nenewau An Art of Fragusion from Indivududbim to Man Sevtety transtaed by Fredenck G. Perers and Diana S. Peter, Woodbury, Now York, Burion’s. 1962  Frousi. Brigete, “Lines merrepuhtana 14, Pang,” Denna, 48 (February 1999; .  Gmmsed lerbub, cas |, Paris Editaone de fa Réunion des Musées Nasionaux, 1992  Sets, Peter, ard Mildeed Constantine (editaes?. Arr Newseaa: Ars and Dreuign at the Turn of the Cratury, New Yorks Muscum of Montern Art, 1959. revised edition, 1975  Sutcliffe. Anthony, Pare An Atehvteisurad Higon, New Haven, Connecticur: Yale Uoiversiny Prove, 1993  Thormon, Lyane, “Guimard and the Metta.” The Conneiweur 182 TAuguse 1980 
METROPOLITAN FESTIVAL HALL, TOKYO  Designed by Kunio Maekawa, completed 1961 Tokyo, Japan  Kunio Mackawa (sometimes written "Mayckawa"} was one of three Japanese architects clasely associated with Le Corbusict’s atelier, and while the three disciples were supervising the con- struction of Le Corbusier's National Museum of Western Arr (1959) in Tokyo, Mackawa was designing the Tokyo Metropoli- tan Festival Hall, begun in 1957 and completed in 1961. These buildings face each other. creating a public plaza ar the chic entrance to Ucno Park in Tokyo. In 1979 Mackawa completed an annex to the National Muscum of Western An, establishung the form of’ che complea as it stands today.  The challenge of designing a building to complement his mentor’s work resulted in Mackawa's finest design, and he was able (0 carry out intenuons sometimes difficult clewhere, as the budget far che Tokyo Mecropolitan Festival Hall was particularly Benerows. Commemorating the 00th annivenary of Tokyu's founding, the facilities were intended to accommodare Western musical forms unsuited to Japanese halls, especially opera. ‘The building wotals 228,560 square Jeet, with a fly suwer extending 87 feet above grade. Within are two halls, the large hall having 2.300 seats and the small hall having 600 scat. There are also generous rchearsal and support spaces and s library with holdings on Western mutic. The Festival Hall unites many themes recur- ent in Mackawa’s work: the resolution of Western industrial techniques with tmdinonal Japanese form: the cxploicarion of precast snd aite-cast cuncrete. penerally left unfinished; the juxta- position of concrete surlaccs against teatured, natural materials, such as stone and wood: random parterns of tiles and ather materials creating an aristc effect; and the wncurpuration of sculptural reliefs or artworks.  In the Festal Hall, Mackaws demonstrates a rare ability to  create double readings with lus architectural bexkun, an effect thar is diffiasl: to perceive in photographs. This quality is scen. for example. in the weighty turned-up cavex: They both serve as a roof over the entrances and exterior: space, bringing this masse building down to human sale, and read as a datum from which tagger elements, such as the hall roof and Aly rower. fie. ‘The chief designer and project architect on the building was Masato Otaka. Sitnultancuus with this project, Otaka wiete a discourse on Metabolism with Fumihiko Maki, cxhewing the stsuctural emphasis of ather Metabolists in favor of an emphasis co space. Not surprisingly, che Festival Hull's strength is ics spatial richness. ts mass us played against a fluid. honzunully compressed space that stretches beyond the decate curtain wall of the building's cavelope into the surrounding park. This space is said ta be Japanese in character, but typically Western devices articulate distinct zones: steps and ramps displace the Hoar plane, and the ceiling rises and falls, slicing space into dearly arriculated foyers. Within, the large hall is defined by canted walls thar again reverse one’s reading from spatial ro volumetric. suggesting, a smaller building at che core of the larger complex, This nested charatet can also be seen in the building's plan,  Mackawa feared that overreliance on industeulization was leading co degeneration in architectural deugn. Ironseally, he is  credited with advancing the use of precast concrete and the cur tain wall in Japan. However, the manner in which both are used here suggests that Mackawa saw industrial materia as part of a broader paleete: they are mixed with site-cast pieces of great plasticary and with a variety of randomly patterned tiles and differently colored seat fabrics, Mackawa also incorporated ex- tenaive contributions from artists, In the Large hall, a playful wood relief, designed by the artist Ryokuchi Mukai, is made of zelkova wood, Mukai and two other artists also designed curtains to be used in the proscenium. Masayuki Ryu contributed a relict foe the lobby (no longer visible) and sculptural concreee figures in che exterior plaza and garden xpaces. In the small hail, another relief by Ryu tv incorporated into che site-cast concrete. This tavelike space is also enlivencd by « luminous aluminum-leaf screen, apparently of Mackawa'e design, as are beautifully shaped door handles and handrail. The cuncrete itself is frequency foemed intu genile curves, angled channels, and oblique planes. The cesuls is highly sculpeural and projects a seme of craft and industry in harmony.  Although this a by far the most remarkable, Mackawa de-  a numbet of other auditoriums and culnural facilities.  ¢ Kyoro Hall (1960) of roughly the same period is similar in  execudon, although it lacks the artwork and careful detailing seen in Tokyo.  In 1984 a new cchearsal space was incorporated into the Tokyo Metropulitan Festival Hall. This also allowed Mackawa to make some alterations to the interiors, mast notably adding several freezes of goid tiles in random patterns. The effect s dow enwugh ww the earlier work not to be tou jarting but detracts from the use of unfinished materials and bold primary colors painted ehewhere and is mote typical of the era in which the building was first created. More recently, the Metropulizan Festi val Fall underwent an unusually xustive renovation. The build- ing retains che patina appropriare to its age bus has been lovingly testored.  Dana Buntrock  Further Reading  Very Uirde har heen published ite Machiwa, snl his importance in pratwar [apan is little recognized abroad of even by youngcs |apanese. He was more concerned with auhinng buildings that would speak for him and stuilly peevensed one publicanon of collected works from teaching print The few books available have hee west and rely on skerches, drawings. and photographs  Kunwo, Mackawa, Markaua Keane satichtohu: benchiky 90 hohe [The Collected Works of Kuro Mackawa: Method of Aschatcwiure}, 2 vab.. edited by Yoshihisa Miyauchi, Tokyo: Bgutsu Shappanshs, 1990  Proven Architecture, 43 YJanuary 1984) (special usue entitied "Kunso Mackawa. Sources of Modern Japanese Architectiite”)  Shinkenciukn (lune 1901; (special issue on ‘Tokyo Metropolitan Festival Hall)  Zairun to Sebkes, 718 USGL) uporial iue on Tokyo Meuropelitan Festal Hall)  MEXICO  At the beginning of the 20th century, Mexican archstecture was wll influenced by the cultural policies of the regime of President  Porfirio Diaz, Since his ascent to power in 1876, he tied to give Mexico a modern face that could bring ic to the most promi- nent place in the international wciery, The concept of reflecting Mesican modernity in the mirtor of foreign nations brought severe cultural impticatiom. The architectural educauon af the Mexican Schoot of Fine Are was given mainly by foceign profes- sors who brought notions of the French Beaux-Arts. Therctore, the buildings produced in the firs owo decades of the 20th century were full of forcign elements regarding, ommamentation. and chis new aesthetic was the paradigm of the new progresave Mexican society, although it lacked the national clemenes that could give its architecture a more genuine character. The ten dency grew as the most important new buildings were designed by forcign architects; the Italian Adamo Boari (d. 1928) taught in Mexico while he was working on the Pou Office Busing (1902) in Mexico City, on which 4 venetian boggia stands above a series uf richly omamented nco-Gothic windows. His most important work, the exterior of the National Theatre (1904) in Mexivo City, now called che Palace of Fine Arrs. is another fine example of this eclectic arrangement of architectural seyles. Here. the volumetry of the bulding 5 very similar tu the (amier's Opera (1975) of Paris, bur it also incorporates many organic elements that reflect an Ant Nouveau influence.  Urban areas were also altexted by new progressive concepts, and the creation of suburbs began, as those found in Europe. Mexico City grew very rapidly, and soon the agricultural Lands that surrounded it were invaded by the rising middle and upper classes. The buildings in these new seuleinents were neo- Moorish, Gothic, Renaimance, and baroque. Many other stykes appeared on the same strect and wametimes in the same building. This cauticam can be found on the woeks of Emil Donde's (1849- 1905} San Felipe Church (19004 in Mexico City, Anto mio Rivas Mercadn’s (1853-1927) Monument for the Com- memoration of the Centennial of the Declaration of Independ- ence (1910) in Mexien City of the Guanajuate Judes Theatre (1903), and Nicolas (1875-1964) and Federica Masiscal's (1881-1969) Police Headquarrers (1906) in Mexico City, among others.  “The new architecture was also determined by the use of new building techniques, onc of the most important breakthroughs being the extended use of steel structures that could now provide larger spans. In most cases, they were covered with stone, but this technique wan ale capable of providing a new architeceural language beuiuse che scructural elements could remain visible, asin the Guanajuato Market (1904) by keneste Brunel (¢.1875- 1950) o¢ in the Chopo Museum (1910). which was designed in Germany and brought to Mexico for its assembly.  The Mexican Revolution (1910-20) bmught changes to every aspect of Mexican society and affected architectural activity as well, After a period (1919-25) during which the number of new buildings was very low. building was inspired by new ideological concepss as the influence of international exoticiem began to diminish and a new nationalism emerged. The Mexican pre- Hispanic and colonial heritage wat revalidated, and the orna- ments on buildings began to include such motifs, The works of Manuel Armabilis (1883 - 1966), such as the lost Riviera Round: about (1926) in Mexico City, with the eeproduction af Mayan snakes, o¢ the project for the Mezican Pavilion at the Seville Exposition of 1926, on which Mayan elements copied from Usxmal and Mila were combined, ate good examples, Some of  the cost important neo-Colunial works are thaw of Ignacio Marquina (1888-1981) and Manuel Vorres Tutriga (1872-).  Carlos Obregon Santacilia (1896-1961) was one of the prominent architecas of the first half of the 20th century. He buile seme emportant examples of the neo-Colonial style but abo ventured into An Deco, creating a very interesting mix that can be scen in the Revolution Monument (1938). Although Art Deco was also ats aesthetic language that was imported from Furope through the United Stares, ic could tir into the new “revolutionary” architecture in Mexico. The exoricism chat was portrayed in the Art Deco omaments af Chicagn and New York with referrals to antique cultures such as Egyptian and Babylon- tan could alse be adapied in Mexicn, as its own Artec and Mayan tradition could supply abumlant monifs to portray the desired Mexanism. ‘Iwo good examples of such buildings are the l'olice and Firemen Headquarters (1928) of Mexico City by Vicente Mendiola (1899-1986) with sculprures by Maouel Centurion (1883-1948) and the Fronton Mexico (1929) by Joaquin Capi- Ita (¢ 1890. ¢.1960), both of which have pre- Hispanic decoration on their facades.  Art Deco gained importance in Mexico, as it also portrayed the use of a new material that had been scarcely used up to that time: cement, The structures that combined concrete elements with a stcel atmienuee were economical and confident, although Mexican wciery viewed them with reticence until the 19301, Juan Segura (1898-1989) used it abundantly on some Art Deco buildings. such as the Ermita (1931), which also has a very innovative program in chat it incorporates apartments. commer- Gial spaces, and a cinema in a single six-story building in a very articulated manner. One of the most important examples of the new sisuctusal comepp is the wo-called first Mexican skyscraper. the La Nacional Insurance Company Building (1930) in Mexico City by Manuel Ortie Monasterio (1893 ©1960), Bernardo Calderda (¢. 1890 ¢ 1960), and Luis Avila (¢. 1900 ¢.1970). The steel structure fises only £2 levels high, but it is contempocary and has the morphology of the American so-called setback mass buildings of the ume,  The reformation of the revolutionary Mexican architecture was, 1m many cases. simply formal or ornamental. as the spatial conception of the buildings remained the same. The theoretical approach was done by José Villagran Garcia (1901-82), mainly in his clasrenms arnund 1930; he stared that abowe the social “importance” of the architecture was its social “function,” as the work of an artist mutt always be completely identified with the people. In thin way. the “moder,” which scemingly had no national roo, munt be combined with the “Mexian.” which  sscemed antimadern. Combining these required relying on an  architectural peugram that Louk! determine the charaurr of na- tional problems to provide an archicecuural response that would be national as well. [he fundamental question of the architect is. then, not acsthetic but ethical. Uhese ideas were che platiorm of the Mexican School of Architecture thar looked after a“ mod- em national architecture.” Examples of this functional school are works by the same Villagrin: the Sanitary [ostitute (1927) in Popora and the Tuberculwis Sanatorium (1936) in Hui- pulco, both of which were part of an ambitious program by the Mexican government to bring health services to all Mexicans, The other natural application af the theory was in education, and the government initiated a program thar built hundreds of 
schools un the county using the materials and techniques of every region of the country,  The Mexican School of Archetecture also provided the aschi- rectural response for one of the most important social problems: popular housing. in 1932 4 national contest was held to find a “worker's minimum house.” and the works of Alvaro Aburto (c.1900-¢.197O), Ensique Yaiter (1908-90), Juan Legarreta (1908-44), and Augusto Pércs Palacios (1909-6 19804 cxcmpli- fied his new social cural architecture, in which the internal spaces were optimized but sell articulated around 4 sock area an which most of the family life occurred and with an important ‘open space planned for particular crops. Economy and standard: vation were the most important considerations of this contest.  Low-income housing in the cities abso occurred in mulitam- ily housing projects. the firs onc being the Miguel Aleman Com- plex (1949) by Mario Pani (191-93), composed of 1.080 units in an area less than 10.000 square meters with complete services, such as sshuols, playgrounds, sports facilities (including a swim- ming pool), and commercial areas. The (3-story buildings were distrabured diagonally in a sigrag mannes with common ciruls- tion areas and clevators and a facade of exposed brick acd) won- erere.  Among the Mexican architects wich soualot ideas, Juan O'Gorman (1905-82) was une of ube nos inilucnual, Follow ing ube coucepes of Le Cocbuser (1887 - 1965) and uying to achieve the maximum cfficiengy with the minimum waste, Gorman built more rhan 28 schools (1932-35) in the country thar remain as good cramples of the Metican functionalist archi- tecture echnal, His mace well knerwn work is the seudicr (1930) that he built for the Mexican muralint painter Diego Rivera and his wife Frida Kahlo in San Angel. In chis woth, he uses some vernacular elensensts, such as a cactus lence and belbant “Indian” colors, in a very sample structure with a wall of siccl-tramed windows. All pipes and clectrical syatems were exposed on the inside a4 an expression of the machine eta of the madern world.  (Gorman also participated in ane of the most ampociant coumples of Mexico's 20th-century architecture: the Usuversity City (1946-52). All the professional shouls in Mexico City had been scattered among several buildings in the downtown arca for over ewo centunes. but the modern concept of a great campus thar would concencrare all the university's actrvity emerged. Fol lowing this idea. a team of 150 architects led by Mario Pani and Enrique del Moral (1906-87) began work on a project that would ey to swlve the contradiction that had heen haunring Mexican atchitecture the entire century: to build che environ: ment of a modem dynaink suctety while still representing its histwey and identity. fn chis project, the approach was that of vuegracén pléionca (plastic inegrauon). in which architecture, painung, and sculpture would be integrated into unified work of ant, The facades of the several buildings of the complex were covered with murals by such important artists as Juan O'Gorman and Diego Rivers (1886-1957) with diverse motifs, mainly from Mexico's past and present. Alchough University City was de- signed on an urban concept that was inspired by pre-Hispanic principles regarding open spaces, terracing, and sales, it abo responded to the principles of modern urbanism, such as su- perblocks, separation of circulation systema, and zuning of ativa- ties, The result is a very intcreving interpretadon of the func- tionalist_ international Language with the parucrpation of a  multiduciplinary array of artists very compromised with the expressions of their national architectural language.  The same Plasuc Integrason movement also parucipated in several other buildings, such as che Communications and Trans- poet Ministry Office (1954) by Carlos Lazo (1914-55), with paintings by Juan O'Gorman, and the General Hospital Build- ing (1958) by Enrique Yariee, with works by David Alfaro Si- queiros (1898— 1974), among other brilliant muralivn, Although this movement could achieve works of importance, it disinte- grated rapidly, ax different ideologies among. artists prevailed. Notictheicw, it remains one of the mone brilliant and original moments of Mexican architecture.  ‘The adoption of the lnternauonal Styk by Mexican architects began around 1945 and sometimes is still mixed with principles of the Mexican School of Architecture, a5 it represented an eco- nnmical way of building with open spaces and volumetric purrs with no omamentation at all, The influence of such architects as Lasdwig Mies van der Rohe (1886-1969) and Walter Gropius (1884-1969) bevante very powerful. The building of the Latin- wamericana Tower (1952) in Mexico City, a high-rise building with glass facades, marked the historic diwrict af the city and gave way to the demolition of many historic buiklings that were to be replaced by the new models, The author of the tower, Augusto HE. Alvacer (191 4—¢. 1980), was one of the most prolific of this seyte, and he projected several more buildings, some of the most renowned being the Mexico Valley Bank (1955) and the La Libertad Insurance Company (1959).  One building that represencs an interening approach tv the lntemnational Style is the Bank of Meakeo Buikding (1950) on the Port of Veracruz by Culus Lazo. Here, the simple glass wwer is surrounded by huge concrete pergolas and blinds that provide 4 bioclimatic conditioning for the office space while also provid ing a beautiful sct of lights and shades.  Qn the urban bevel, the most importane large-scale project of the second half of che 20ch century was the Thatcloko housing compler (1964) in Mexico Cicy by Mano Pani. Here, more than 100,000 inhabitants hye on a megablock that comprises all semaces. commecraal and recreanonal, including several schools. health center, specialty chaps, day care centers. a cinema, a theater, and a church, ‘The aparrment buildings represent a few prototypes that are repeated, and che overall architecture follows the principles of the International Sryle.  Pedro Ramirez Viaques (1919-) in one of the prominent architects of ehe scvand half of che century, his most important work being che National Museum of Anthropology (1964), in which he sail uses some principles of the Plastic Integration movement, as Ue walls that surround the huge central patio are covered with pre- Hispanic motifs, and the open space is partially covered with an “umbeella” that raises without touching the building because at is suspended from a central column chat is alsa a fountain, The spatial organization of the exhibit halls ix articulated around this patio, each of which is unique, being adapted to the collections of the native culture that it houses. More recent works of this architect that also have great impor- tance are the Aztec Stadium (1965) and the new Nuestra Sefota de Guadalupe shrine (1975). in which the modem senucture is Placed nest to the ok 1 7th-century shrine and rises above it bay a curved cover. under which thousands of Catholics gather  jaily.  An important regional movement is the Escuela Tapatia, cre- ated in Guadalajara and headed by Rafael Uraua (1905-0. 1980), Ignacio Dias Morales (1905-¢.1980). and Luis Basragan (1902- 88). This group of architec. built sime important houses in weuem Mexico, but Barragin grow beyund the regional Ievel to become one of the mow prominent names of 20th-cenmuty Mexican architecture. His own house (1947) in ‘Tacubaya is considered one of his masterworks, as he could mix tradicion and modemity using volumes and walls to confine the space that Hews throughout the building. The ue of color is one of Barragan’s most important assets, He uses bright pinks, blues. and taken from the chromatic scale used in vernacular archites- ture but applied on solid manive surfaces that are proper of the functionalism. Fis language a cinched wich natural chmenis. such as beautiful gardens of fountains. Some of his must eclevant works are the Gilardi hase (1976), the chapel fut the Capuch- ines (1952), and ube San Criseabal house and its ding faulitios (1967), among many othets.  Abraham Zabludovsky (1924 | and Teoderu Gonziler de Leon (1926-1 are ewo bright architects who have worked joindy since 1965. They developed an architectural language that iden- tifies Mexican contemporary architecture, as they use massive columns and walls made of exposed concrete with marbled chips embedded. Phis richty textured marerial has been used in bunld- ings such as INFONAVSET (1973) in Mexico City, rhe Mexican Embassy (1975) at Brasilia, El Colegio de Menion 11975), the Pedagogic National University (1979), the Rutfino Tamayo Mu eum (1981), and the National Auditorium (1990) in Mexico City. In all these buiklings, the we uf 2 patio that works as a transitivnal space between the eateries and che imetivg is present, as is a vast use of platforms and stairs not only ax circulation clemenrs bur sho as exprewive clemenns themselves. A particu- arly interesting building is the Banco de México (1988), which had to be built adjacent to a beautiful 17th-century palace in the historic disenct of Mexico Cary. ‘The sohinon was to transfer the volumerry of the palace (rhythm of openings, window pro- portion, floor levels, and cornices} to the new buskding, thus imitating it respectfully. These architects also have recent works of their own: Gonzale de con did a wonderful urban work {1985} at the Tomés Garrido Canabal Park in Villhermosa in which a 600-meter axis attiwulatcs 2 200, lakes, bridges, and monuments, all of which are morphologically inspired by the Mayan architecture of the region, Zabhidovky has worked on theaters in Aguascalientes (1991), Celaya (1990), Guanajuato (1991), and Dolores (1991); one of bis most prominent works is the residenusal comiplex La Cantera (1992) in Coyoacan, which és an uncommon piogram of 4 «cries of wisely designed low income apartments. o |  Since the fast years of che 20th century. a group of creative artists have continued the search for Mexico's own moder ar- chicecture, including Agustin Herndndey (1924-1 with the use of pre-Hispanic forms in the Military Academy (1985): Ricardo Legorreta (1931) with the masiive Camino Real Hotel (1981) of fatapa or the great MARCO Museum (1991) in Monterrey: Franusco Serrano (1900-82), whu cleverly designed different platforms for the thera-Americana University (1987); and En fique Norten (1954~), who designed the tound roof of the Na- vonal Theatre School (1994) in Mexico City,  In a country with such a vast architectural history as Mexico, the labor of conservation and restoration is also an aspect thar  modern architewts must resolve. The concer for preserving Meaco’s cultural herinige hus been achiewed in many propous dunng the 20th century, some of che most recent being the testoration pryjet of the 18th-century Ciudadela (1988) in Meako Cay by Abrahain Zabludovsky, the Image Center (1994) inside the same historx building by [saa Browd 1452), the library (19921 inside the 17ch-century Sanco Domingo con- vent in Mexico City by Marisa Ata (1955-1, and the Calegia Nacianal, which completely modified a [7th-cenrary building doy Ganzalez de | edn, All these works combine modern materials such as weed, ghas, and aluminum and wuperimpose them on the hiscori, building, attempeng to incorporate the moder we into che old structure. This unportanc part of Meaican architec- ture neds to be reinvigorated in the years to come.  Avbons AL SANG TUR?  Advi. Miquel, Mévice 90% Ctr arquietara contempordnes: A Comeaporary Architecture tbilingual Spanish-English edition). Metco Civ and Barehona Gill, 1996,  Ambast. Emilio, The Arvhearcture of Lust Barrapin, New York: Minewm of Modern An. 1976  Anda, EX. de. La anguitertra de la revalucsin Mexicana: cornentes ¥ ectrles on ia década de tot veimte, The Architecture of the Mexican Revalusion: rrcnds and stytes of the pwenrics| Mexico Cate: Universidad Nacional Aveonoma de Méuco, Insrruto de Investigaciones batéticas, 1990  Arcac, W.. The Architecture of Recardo Legyerta. Austin: Univeraty nf Has Pres, and Berlin: Fen, 1990  Buran, Edward (editor), Afodermity and the Architecture of Mexico, Auain: University of Peaas Pees, 197  Gonzalez Gortizar. Fernando. Angastectusa Mexicana del siglo XX, (Mexican Anhmresrure of the 20th Century} Menco City: Conte Nacional para fa Cultura v las Arces, 1994  Heyer, Paul. Aévaham Zabhedeonky. Architect, 1979..1993, New Yat: Princeton Acchitecrucal Press, 1998  Kappe. Shelly teditor!, Modere reivrertur, Meco, Santa Mona: Southern California Instumte for Archuccrure Press, 1981  Karman, Iseaci. La anqustectura consomperinca Mexwana: precedente: y dearui, (Makan Contcinporay Ardhiteciure: Procedents and Development] Meuco Ciry: Institura Nacional de Antropologia ¢ Histona, 1965  Martin Herindyz. Vicente, Arguiarctsra domenica de bs Crudad de Mexico, 1490-1925, Domestic Archutecture af Mexico Cary. 1890-1925] Meco Cay: Universatad Nacional Autonoma de Mewun, Exucls Naveonat de Arqutcaura, 1981  Noelle, Loune, and Carlos Tepeda, Catdlage guia de arguitectara cansemporines. Ciudad de México, |) and Guide of Contemporary Archaecture: Meaicu City] Meaica City: bomento Cukural Banana. 19935  Kesena de argustestars mexicana; Mexican Arcissecrure Review (bilingual Spanish-English journal) (1992)  Sercet-Poreer, Tum. Casa Mexscaunt: fe Architecture, Lnign, and Sayle of Moxwe, New York: Stewart Lahore: and Chung, 1984  Suzuki, Makoto (editer}. Madera Meacan Ariiieture. Tokyo and New York: Process Architecture, 1984  Tou, Antonio, and Anibal Figueroa Castrcpon, Méxwo: nen arpunectora |Mouco. New Archuecture,, Menton Caty: Gala, £991; Jed editwn, [903  You, Antoni fedbtuel. Anputectunt contemporinet en Maaco [Contemparan Atchtoctute nm Mrswo}. Amapomake: Universidad Aurénoma Mcuopolitans, and Meuco City: Aucrmiba, 1989  
Vidlagran Garcia, J. Jose, Tear de Lt arguiieciura [Atchuteutural Vheory], Mexne Caty: Institute Nacional de Bellas Aries, 1985  MEXICO CITY, MEXICO  The unstable subsoil an which Mexwo City ress has been the politcal. ecanomic, and cultural epicenter of the region for con turics. Whether known as Tenochritlin (1325-1521), the Artec empire's majestic city an Like Texcovo, the “muy noble y Ieal ciudad de Ménco.” capital of the Viceroyahy of New Spain (S25 - £821), of as Capital of a contative republic whose majestic busldings by Lorenz Rodripguce, Manuel Toba, and Framinco Eduardo Tresguerras housed insutuduns unable of unwilling ty adnunister to catizens’ nceds in the bth century, the city’s architecture has served as an agent for political, social, cultural, and evonumas change as well as a signifier of it and has connnued to do 40 in the 20th century.  Indeed, the city may be read as a text, revealing important insight on the nation’s passage from the dictatorship of Portirio Diaz from 1876 to 1910, through she immense pains of ten years of civil war or revolution to 1920, through che gradual consolidation of power in a new revolutionary dite and political parry in the 1920h and 1930h. t0 cfforrs at modernization from the 1940s ta che 1970s, ww a series of counumic crises and booms in the 1980s and 1990s.  A survey of the architectural history of Menu City in the 20h century reveals the use of diverse, often discordant srytes as many Mexican architects rejected what they believed ow be the facile ermulatiun uf exotic architectural styles. They perceived that their revolution had afforded the nation an access (o moder- nity and the means to achieve a uniquely Mexican identity. She capital city indicates wadely varying conceptions of moderuty and identity in this pluratisr society. According to Mexican archi- tect and historian Carlos Lira Vacquee. the search for modernity led 10 the employment of styles as diverse as the neo-colonial, Catiforaia-colonial, Ded, neo-Indigenist, functicnalist, nation- alist, international, postmodern, and pluralist. cach used for util itarian as well as aesthetic needs.  In the fint nwo decade following the armed phase of che Revolution of 1910, Mexcan governments faced the chalhenyges of creating legitimare instinutiens and refining the government's role in relation tw che peuple in consonance with the Consiitu- tion of 1917 and re-constructing society along more cgalitaran lines. ‘The revolution had overthrown the dictatorship of Porfirio Diaz and left in its wake a devastated ation and capital. Whe cityscape bore wimess to this devastation: pock-marked buidd- ings along streets in the city’s historic center evidenced the transit of one revolutionary army of another: massive building projects such as Adamo Boari’s "Mexicanized Ant-Nouveay” Teattn Nac- ional (1904; now the Palacio de Bellas Artes. completed in 1934) and Emile Benard’s neo-classic Palacio de Poder Legislative (1900; now the Monument ta the Revolution, 1933). which Diaz intended to weve a part of the legacy of Porfitian greatness, now stood partially finished, rusting hulks an the city’s profile.  The immediate taska facing the capital's architects were nu- merous: to provide housing for the tens of chousands of reucat Migrants; to repair oe bunk! schools. health care facilines, and other government buildings; and to design commercial struc: tures, Common to these projects was dhe idea af nationalism.  that architecture in service to the state could and should carry a message of identity and greatness. Apparent in such works is the lack of agreement on whar shoukl be the vehicle to convey that message. To Jost Vasconcelos, minister of education in the early 19205, the neo-colonial style was the only language that could convey the Mexican identicy. Hence, his deparunent com- mixsoned young architects, among them Carlos Obsegén San- tacilia, execute works in this style; Obregon Santacilia’s Es- cucla Benito Judrex (1924) remains onc of the most cloquent examples of this scyle, along with commercial structures such as Antonw Torres Torija’s Edificia Gauna (1922) and Rafael Goyenexhe's Hotel Majestic. (1925), Together, thee projects itlustrate the basic strengths and weaknesses in this style: As an evourion of the volonial past, it had no pec. If ane looked co the past for the source of present greatness ut for inspiration, then this style was sound. Although at various times from 1917 to 1940 che government actively promoted this style as represen- tative of navonal sdenuty, Wt presented severe construing, For ‘one, the neo-colonial is primanly a horizontal style; as prices for urban land increased, developers sought projects that would bring higher returns per square meter. ft was necessary to build taller, more “functional” buildings and co consider modern styles, even in the historic center of the city adjacene co distin- guished 17ch- and 18th-century buildings. Second, the nen- colonial is a very expensive style: Vasconcelos’: school building campaign quickly exhausted his deparunent’s budget after only eight schools had been built hardly enough to meet the city's necds, Finalty, a small, yce increasingly vocal group of young architewts, among them Juan O'Goeman, Juan Legarreta, and Alvaro Aburto, dexned the use of the neo-colonial, given theit tnterpretanon of colonial higary. To build in a colonial seve. whether nev-cuonial or Calfornis-colonial, signified a desire 1 fepeat centusics of colonial oppression and a denial of the Progress thar che revolurian promised Mexico. Architecture, they argued. must serve the interests of all the people. not merely the wealthy. Such sentiments gained in popularity in the base 1920s, and 1930s, given evidence of corruption in post-revolutionary geremmens as various public figures indulged in conspicuous consumption. buibding lavish homes in the new colonies of An- xusrea, Lamas de Chapultepec, and Hipédrome de la Condesa, ainuny othen, and embarking an what seemed to many to be piceemeal development projects af liule consequence in address- ing the real problems facing the cty’s tesadents.  For example, in the early 1930s, Carlos Obregon Santacilia sponsored a design competition for the development of low-cost housing for workers. The winning design for these minimalist worker's houses was cubmitted by Juan Leparreta: following strict functionaliss dicuares of economy of materials and form withour ornamentation. the city erected over 300 such units at Colonias Salbuena and Plucarco Elias Calles. Yer che city needed thousands of such units: the remit of chis shortfall was an increase in the populations density of the capital's oldest quarter, where fandlords were continuing the conversinn of colonul-cra resi- dences into recindades, of tenements. This is not to say that no advances were made: Under President Lézaro Casdenat's ditec- tion, the revolution moved distinctly to the left and assumed new social responsibilities. This is che context for the development of the Instituto Nacional de Cardiologia by Jout Villagrin Garcia (1937). the Edificio del Sindicaro de Electristas by Enrique Yahex (1938), the Hospital Militar by Luis McGregor (1940),  the Edificio Guardiola by Carlos Obregon Santacifes (1938), and the Excucks Vocacional by Juan O'Gorman. Functionaliun allowed far massive use of reinforced concrete in monumental structures as well as the incorporation uf new materials such as aluminum and stecl, affording devdupen and ocupanu of such structures flexible use of interior spaces, open fuer plans, and geucr iMuminativa and ventilation. ‘Vhese more cconomical  crionalist designs allowed the government to deperse warce funding on more ambitious projects, demonstrating ity commnt- ment to socal jusnce.  Yet, ilhustrating the complexity of modetnuzation in the con- text of the institutionalization of the Mexican Revolution, Carde- nas also supported directives that atecmpeed ro regulate architer- tural styles cmplayed in various sections of the city. allowing for the further use of the nco-colonial in wructures wich as the new buikting for the Departamento del Distrito Federal by Fernanules Beltrdn Pugs and Federica Mariscal (1935) to maintain the sty- Tistic integrity of the oldest secuuun of the city.  ‘The 1940s and 1950s witnosed further change in govern- mental priocities and the direction of the revolution, which greatly affected construction in the capital. Presidents acuvely courted foreign invesument and indusrnalization, borh serving, to bring prospenty and modernity to dus emerging nanon. Lhe state's promotion of industrialization brought to the capital new waves of foreign investments and new architectural develop- ments: the post-World War II city new convined immense factones and expanded assembly plants such av those of General Motors, D.M. Nacional shopping centers. and supermarkets, whone architecture, at times unieupired. in other instances em- ployed ube most advanced construction uechaiques, wichbed by talented cnginects and architecu. Fumhcrmorc, hc capital gained its first tue skyicraper, the glass and aluminum—dad 42-sory Torre Launoamericano, by architect August H. Al- varez and engineer Adulfo Zecvaert (1948 - 56}. built in danng proumuty to colonial cra structures at the comer of Avenida Madero and San Juan de Lerrin (now Eje Cardenas).  New invesrments brought with them demands for more labor, quickly exceeded by ever-growing migration to the capital. The failure of governmental planning imitiatives tm regulate urban growth was apparene in the increase in informal sede ments on the city’s periphery from 140 10 1960, in which paracaidistas (literally. “parachutiss”), or squatters, occupied marginal lands, built rudimentary shelters from found muterials, and began to form communities, Guvernmental initiatives in the provision of wicial services are seen itt projects such as the Edificio Cenrral for the newly created Instituto Mexicans del Seguro Social by Carlos Obregén Sancacilts (1947) and the Es- cucla Nacional de Maestros by Mario lam (1945).  ‘There is a great deal of vitality evideri in the capital in thase years of the "Mexican Miracle.” in whuch the city witnessed and engendered unprecedented growth. This growth meant prosper- ity for some: As new colonies prospered, aspirations of grandeur found expression in the city’s first condominiums, designed by Mario Pani and Salvador Ortega (1955), and sophisticated office buildings. notably Juan Sordo Madaleno's Seguros Anahuac building (1954) and Augusto H. Alvarez's Edificio Catorena (1957) firmly anchored the [ncernational Style as a central cans ponent of contemporary Mexican architecture. Use of this and the functionalist style in state architecture. as in Pani and Del Moral's Secretaria de Recursos Hidriutions buslding (1950). Au-  gusto Perez Pabicins and Radl Cacho’s Secretaria de Comunicac- jones y Obras Publica (1953). and Enrique de li Mora, Fean- ciwo Lope: Carmona. and Felix Candela's Boba de Vidores building (195.3- $6), manilested Mexico's rise out of revoluson- ary turmoil, and centralizanon of political puwer.  Aa this me, Mano Pani designed the ciry's first wnadzsfameilr- ares (multi-function housing projects, of “cives-within-cines.” with thea uwn markers, clinic, suhoob, and nurseries) in the Centro Urhano Presidente Aleman (1950) and the Centra Ure bano Presidente Juarez (19529, These made! housing projects tor government workers, adapeations of Le Corbusian concepts, dramativally catended state responsibility for the provisian of heating for ite workdatce. These projects later proved insufficient to meet the demands for hygienic housing for the hundreds of thousands of capel city residents lacking such. Instead, chis period marked the deepening of the gap among classes in Mexico Caty, as wealehuct sndividual chose to reside in one of the new develupments, such a EF Pedregal de San Angel (planned by Lais Barragin) ot Crudad Satelite (1957), with sts abstract en- trance towers by Matias Goenrz, providing a new context for urban lfe—regulated and  By the chose of che 1950s, the Internatwnal Style, in sum, had been adopred with the same sort of enchusiasm and ambicion as had tunctionaliam a decade before. In this period, official architecture stressed monumentabty. within this style repeescar- ing the power thar the stare sought tm possess, often using white marble. green Aagntone. red seconsle, and basalt, linkages to mate- tials craditionally employed in Meawan architecture and co the cnloes of the Bag, The many new buildings containing great expanses of windew panes, supported by aluminum frames, were further evidence of the signifiuance of international style archi tecture, under the guidance of architects Enrique Yitez, Luis Barragan, and others. [he optimism inherent un ches style is apparent in new comuruction in Ute cay i die carly 1960s, a5 the government reasserted the image of the stare as the guarantor of development and the provider of education, bealth care, and housing via more monumental propeces. These projects include the Cenrm Médicn Nacional (1961) by Yariez, José Villagran Garcia. and others and museums that conserve and celebrate Meaico’s cultural heritage: notably the Museo de Ane Moderno (1964) and Peden Ramirez Varqiier’s magnificent Museo Nacio- nal de Ancropologia (1964),  The collapse of the “miracle” is abu apparent in the city’s streets, as venerable vicercgal and prehispanic structures: wit- nessed new waves of srudent and labor protests in the midl-1960s, culminating in the massacre of students at Thitclako in October 1968. This daughter severely shadowed the dynamism manifest across town, at Félix Candela’s Palacio de Deportes (erected for the Olympic Games, to be held a week later). Serious economic problems were alo apparent in successive governments’ tahures in the 19705 to provide adequate housing, educatnnal and health care facilines for the burgeoning papulinon.  From 1970 to the clise nf the 20ch century. the architecture of Mexico City continued to illusrate the fundamental tennons in Mexican suciety, as well as its search fot a national identity. Labels attached to utyles were frequently misleading or value- laden: What some observers have percetved as “virtual chaos” given the diverse styles and approaches employed an various parts nf this city, now the largest in the work, other label “pluralist” (Lira Viequee, 182-85). Given the ompleuty and diversity of  
modern urban life. in bving styles. entcrtamment. education, business and commerce. it is not surprising chat a diverse design vecabulary be employed within thus city —with a resulting mon- umental, of tational, of traditional, ar plastic architecture. This pluratises in Mexican architecture signifies more an appeasch than a unified style: It is a rejection of the awumpnon that die International Style can repond to local or regional needs and ambitions. In this context are works as distinct ax the plastic INFONAVIT building, in which Teodoro Gonsiler de Leon y Abraham Zabludovsky blended the exterior into interior smoothly, uang natural clements used such as wood, Large ex- panses of glans with textured reanforced concrete, and the archi teuta’ massive Colegio de Mezco (1976) and the “rational” archi- tecture. as sn Ramén Tortes’s design tor the new Loteria Nacional building (1981). “Monumental” architecture 1s abo significant in this period. As symbols of power or sutus. whether religious of secular, these are grandhase works: the Basilica de Guadalupe by Pedro Ramirez Vazquez, Javier Garcia I ascurain. José Luis Bentliure, Gabriel Chavez de la Mora, and Alejandro Schoenboler (1976) and the Colegio Militar, inapired by prehis panic forms, by Agustin Hernandes and Manuel Goazdles Rul. Further innovations in structural engincering made posible taller skyscrapers, wen in the onmplerian af che Torre de Pemex. designed by Pedro Movterums Diaz Infante (1984). This strac- ture reaffirmed the predictiva made 30 years earlier by Mexno. City Chronicles Salvador Nova that onc day "pyramids af crystal and alumunum™ would cap this august city of palaces, marking yet another conquest of this fragile soil. in sum, the city is conun- ually remodeled and revised, reflecung the diversity and com- plexity of conremporary Mexican Ite in rerms of cnirure, gewern- ment, economy. and identity. .  Parrw: O1stn  Sew aite Barragan, Vanis (Mexico); Candela, Felix (Mexico): Tegorreta, Ricardo (Metico); Mexices del Moral, Enrique (Mexico); O'Gorman, Juan (Mexico); University Library, UNAM, Mexico City  Further Reading  Born, Eather. Thr New Archisecrure in Mexaw, New York Architectural Record and Morrow, 1947  Bullnch, Francisca, New Ditecwons in Latie American Archiovture, New York: Braziller, and London: Studio Virwa, 169  Cotto, Max |. Moderme Arvbiekine in Mexeks, Scantgart: Hatie. 1961; as Modern Aechiterrurr in Mrace, crandated by 0.) Stepbenton, New York: Praeger. aad London: Tirann, 1961  Darna, Paul F.. Artie Let Amuvican Architectere, New York: Reinhold, 1963  Dawss, Diane E,. Uinta Letuathan: Meewo City ne the Twennesh Catary, Philadripha. Pennsylvania: Temple University Press.  be  Franan, fran, ba cudnt moderos on América latins. Mexicn City: Edditorsal Grijatbo, 1985; as fhe Modern Cadsare of Latin America Sooty and the Arret, London: Pall Mall. and New York: Praeger. 1967  Hatchcock. Henry Russell. Lasie Amiericatn Architecture ince 1945, New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1955  Randell, Jonathan, ta Captea The Baography of Meace Cin. New York, Random House. 1984  Kappe, Shelly feditor?, Madrrn Anhnecrure. Mexico. Santa Monwa. Califorma: SCLARC Press, 1981  Myers, Lang Evan, Mexnws Modern Archiecsuee, New York: Ascheectural Bouk, 1952  Sanford, ‘Treat Ehwuud, The Siery of Architecture in Meuse, New York, Norn, 1747  Segse, Ruberto tediut), Awsérsia dating en tu anguitectara, Mexico Cay, Siglo Veintune, aml Para: Unesco, 1975, as Latin America in dy Amhuecture, tranalated by Edith Groaman, edited by Fernandu Kusncuull, New York: Holmes and Mew, 1581  Smith, Clic Bamford, Baiiden in the Sun. Free Mexican Archisen, New York Architrcural Book. 1967  Suzuki, Makoto teditor), Modern Meatuan Acrhitecture(emdai Mekrshubo bea thw (tolingual English-Japanese - Spanith edition), Takyo: Prous Architectuty, 1983  Tovar de Vero, Guillevons, La inde de tos palacios: Crinset de wn patromenie perdide, 2 vols, Morin City: Vuelta, 1790; as The City of Palaces Chronicle of « Lart Heritage, VPRO  Ward, Peter Mo. Mexia City The Prodmsian and Reproducran of an Urban Favivoamens Powon GK Hall. and London: Bdhaven, 1990  MEYER, HANNES 1889-1954 Architect. Germany  Hannes Meyee was an advocate for fanctionaliun and social teferm in modern architecture. Meyer's “xientific” ratioaalism and negation of aesthetics sill inspire Marsian theorists today (hays, 1992), Denied greater individual fame by his preference for vollective work over personal originality ("1 never design alone,” be declared), Meyer's costinued notoriety stems from several uncampromisingly New Sachlichkeit (New Obyaivigy) project: and his sormy Bauhaus directorate. when the school’s endgame commenced.  Shortly atrer esrablishing his practice in Basel in 1919, Meyer built for the Swiss Co-operative Union a progressive garden housing estate, the Freidort Seidlung at Murrens, near Basel {1939-21), Ouewardly Palladian (as seen theough provincial Jura eyes). Freidorf s planning nonetheless exemplified social cul- lectivism- particularly through its intense wrialicy, nascent atandardizannn. and sectionally suphisucated communal hall,  Through the early 1920s, Basel nurtured a left-wing architec- tural group, the ABC, foemed around the peripatetic Russian aniist and designer El Lissitcky. Meyer's fint avant-garde en- deavor after joining ABC. the Co-op series, consisted of exhibi- von/perlormame pieces extolling collectivist virtues, His Co-op Virrine (1925) contained arrays of 36 mass-produced items from couperative factones as a commentary on the anonymity of the worker in the production economy: his Co-op Zimmer’ (1926} was a spare indictment of bourgeois interiors: and his Co-np Unearer comprised life-sized marionettes and actors miming w- cialit themes,  Meyer abo practiced architecture with fellow ABC radical Hans Witwer. Their uncompromisingly functionalist inven- tions briefly captivated the international avant-garde. ‘The Basel Peters hule Competition entry (1927) was a stark, skylit, indus- tnal box chat stood detached within the city, furiously sprouting cantilevered flayesounds. stairs, and transparent walkways. Meyer loved formulae; calculations of illumination levels within the classrooms constituted chree-quarters of che presentation.  Meyer's and Witewer's Geneva League of Nations Competi- fwons entry (1926-27) wrapped a brural aggregation of ine  tonal componene within the echelons of a neutral construction module. Fire waits widened while dexending the building wo accommodate increasing occupant Joad, Althuugh both projects bore traces of Russian Comsteuctiviat aestheucs (gratuitous masts. glass clevators, structural hysterics), the overall impresson was at Facts berett of metaphysical illision—of aschuecture as sachtich (objective, litcrally “thingly”). Meyer and Wirrwer's extremum vast objectivity as ideological: Their cejcction of formal rhetoric became. paradanically, rhetorical.  These unrealized schemes attracted the antension of Bauhaus Director Wahes Gropius. At the December 1926 opening of the Bauhaus's Dessau facilicy, Gropius avked Meyer to initiate the school’s long-delayed pedagogical intention of launching a building department, Meyct. ahhough hewuant over what he interpreted 4s an overly sectanan and acethetn cast uf the Bau- haus work, agreed. Immediately Meyer developed projects tor collaborative student excrises. By | Apnl 1928 Gropius te signed, naming the charismata yet schismatic Meyer as succes- sor. Meyer, feeling thar Gropius's Werkbund menulity pan- dered to the aesthetic tastes af the bourgenisic, declared his opposition 16 formalism in £928 writing, “Huslding is only orga- nization: social, technical, cconomic. peychological aganiza- tion.  Meyer transoemed all workshops toward production. Under his ceign. income from the suhuol's products rose, Student pay increased, allowing pootcr students to attend, Meyer indirectly encouraged a growing Communist student cell.  Architectural wraining inexorably gained the upper hand and became increasingly sicmritik (solar angle studies, serucuural cal culations, How diagrams). Just as he was named diretor, Meyes, in collaboration with Bauhaus snidents, won a “worker's school” (the Bundessciule) competion from the General German Trade Unions Federation (Bernau, 1928 30). In the school, which became Meyer's major reatized work, he radicalized the build- ing’s plan. creating staggered housing volumes that organized the Federation's students inwe “brigades.” The industrial marerials (reinforced cuncrete, beick walling, stect windows) and the ex- pressed citculation recalled his earlier objective proposals. An- other collaborative opportunity with wudents worn folkewed, the Desau-Torten Housing Develupiseot (in Dessau, 1930). But lacking varied communal spaces, the result here verged on banal.  The remaining Bauhaus mastet-teachen undermined Meyes, using as a final precest his encouragement of the Communist cell's activines during a minery’ strike. Dessau's mayor summar- ily dismissed Meyer on } August 1930. Many scholars use Mey- er's dismissal as a benchmark of the rising influence of Fascism in the Weimar Republic.  With several like-minded Bauhaus stylents, Meyer soughe a proletarian culture in Russia. From 1930 to 1933, he was profes- sor at Moscow's VASI, a newly reorganized architectural labora. tory. He designed several unbuilt school projects and worked with planning groups on massive satellite towns Factional cen- sions and reorganizations drove him to the newly founded Mos- cow Academy of Architecture during 934-35. Stalin's imponi- tion of Social Realism gradually ended Meyer's vesting  tunities and hopes of progressive architectural work: by 1936, even his involvement in planning became untenable.  Dejected. Meyer sought solace in native Switzerland in 1936, opening 3 Geneva practice. The Swiss Co-operative Union ot- fered him another commission, the 1938-39 Mamiiswil chil-  dren's canvaleswent home —his only realized. puse- Bauhaus archirevtural work.  After attending several town planning congresses in Mexico, Meyer was on | June 1939 called to Mexico City by President (Cardenas to direct the newly founded Insatute of Urbaniam and Planning. which was closed duc to Jinancsal difficulues by 1945. Despite a lifelong array of prestigiaus academic opportunitics. Meyer never spent more than three years at any institurion. He languished another eight years in Mexican, joining public agencies for shook and chnics. serving intermitcently on governmental planaing commissions, and entering competitions. His bealth ailing, in 1949 he returned again to Switzerland and explored theureuical studies unul his death.  Rasa Ore  See alw Deutcher Werkbund Gropius, Walter (Germany) Bawhaus; Sevhaus, Dessau  Biography  Born 1B November 1889, in Basel, Switzerland, an architect's son. Studied buikling at ube Gewerbeschule, Bad 1905-09; contunwed his crainsng at che Berlin's School of Appticd Ans 1909-12; acended classes ins urban planning at the Landwictschafte Akademie 1909-12. Went to England 1912, where he studied the Co-operative movement and the garden cities né Letchworth, Bourneville, and Port Sunlight for a year, After military service in Switzerland (1914-16), worked foe Krupps Housing Wellare; established his own practice. Basel 1919. Founded the Theater Ca-np 1924 and anilaborated in & wide range of Co-up activities dstoughuut Europe: awets Hane Witwer and begins anblteciute practice with him in Basel 1936; met Walter Gropius 1956 and was named his successor at Bau- haw Desuu April 1928; dismissed August 1930 for political difference, Movad tw Soviet Union, 1930; 1930-36, architec- ture professor, VASI; 1934-35. Moscow Academy of Architec- ture: returned to Switzerland. 1936; moved to Mexico City 1939 to direct the Insitute of Urbanism and Planning, 1939. 41; returned to Lugano, Switzertand, 1949, where he died 19 July 1954.  Selected Publications  Bawen nd Cevettctasfe Schnifien, Briefe, Projekte, odtived by Lena Meyer-Bergner, Dresden. Kunst, 1980  Selected Works  AWorker’s School (Die Houdrucbale) (anh Hane Watwes), Bernat, 1920  Co-op Vienne (peogect), 1925  Carop Zimmer (project), 1926  Co-op Theater (progxt), 1926  Basel Petenshule Compeuuun entry, 1927  Geneva League of Nauons Competitions cnry (with Hans Witwer), 1927  Dessau-Tonen Housing Develapmenc, Dewau, 1931  Mamtiswe Children’s Home, Mumlswil, Switzerland, 1939  Farther Reading  AM quotanons ate by Meyer are hound in Schnande, which remains the pamary, comprehensive source in English The fully west: Meyer's 
Soviet and subsequent experiences that are munumired in other sources Much wubudiary documentation exists only in German  Frampton, Kennech. Medern Archstecrure, A Critical Hutery, Leadon: Uhaines anf Huson, ated New York: Oxford University Prews, 1980  Har, K. Michack, Maderwam aud the Pvsthamnint Subject The Architecture af Hannes Meyer and Ludwig Hulberesmer Cambridge. Masachuseers: MIT Prew, 1992  Kieren, Marin. “The Haudiaus ont the Road to Pruduntion Cooperative: The Director Hannes Meyer” 111 Rewhese, edivedl by Jeannone Feeder and Perce beierabend, Calugne. Konemann, 1)  Moyer, Hannes, Aawer wad Gereila bagi: Scbvafien, Briefe, Projekte, edited by Lena Mever-Bergnet. Drenden Kumt, 1980  Schnandt. Claude, Hanues Meyer Hausen. Prayetic und Scbeafien, Rasikdengs, Properts, and Weiteng (lulingual Goornan-Englah edition), tranulated by 1Q, Stephemon. Teuten, Switrerlaral: Nigh. 1965  Wick. Rainer K. tedivot), it die Rewhase Pirlagegit aktuell? Colugne Konig, 5985  Winkler, Klaus Jéngen, Der Archieete Hannes Meyer Anwhemungen und Werk, Berlin: Bauweren, and Dewau, Germany Bahan, 1989  MIAMI, FLORIDA  The architectural history of Miami (incneporared 1896) is exsen- tally a 20th-century phenomenon, based un Miami's planned idenuiny a5 a courist resort. Boginning with railroad mogul Henry M. Flagler's neo-Colonial Reval Palm Horel (1896, demolished 1930), built as the southern terminus for his Flotida Eas Coast Railroad, much of Miami's archireerure reflecrs che Gry’s ango- ing efforts ¢o attract both courise and residents through the creation of an cxotic built enviroamenc. Similarly, the Lavish, ecclectic vacation homes huilt in the eatly 20th cennury provided influential precedents fur Mismi’s subsequent domestic, civil, and institutional architecture.  Much of Mianti’s significant early 20th-century architecture may be described as Mediterranean Revival, 2 conflation of Venetian, Italian Renaissance, French, Spanish, and Moorish architecture. Characteristic elements indude internal courtyanis; Lage, elaborate door surrounds; arcaded loggsas; arched window and door openings: low-puched, barrel nile sonfs: and pastel- or putty-colored stucco finishes. The earliest example af thic sensibility is Viscava (1917), an Stalanate villa designed by F Burrell Hoffman, fr. and Paul Chalfin for James Deenng, a founder af the Intermauonal Harvester Corporation. Centered around a lange arcaded courtyand fronting Biscayne Bay, Vis- caya's tripartite composition recalls that af 1fth-century Veneto and Venetian villas, wheres its cateriue decoration draws pri- marily from Italian Renansance and Spanish bareque prou- dents. The claherace formal gardens (1921), created from che surrounding mangrove and hardwood hammock, were designed by the Italian-trained Lusdscape architect Diego Suarez and form an integral composition with the house itself. Vizcaya’s influence on Miami's archirecture was profound, particularly on architect Richard Kichnel and his partes John Elliot. heir buildings in Miami include Fi fardin (1918) and La Brisa 11928), Both houses exemplify the firm's signacure hybrid style. in which com- positional elements, such as Joggias, tawers, and interior court.  yards, are overlain with a neobaroque profusion of decoration derived from Italian, Spanish, and Moorish sources,  In the mid-1920s, Miarni’s subtropical climate and growing repucation ss a resoet deaination fucked the city's finer building nam, Motoring tourists from colder northern regions arrived in the late 1910s and afier by way of the Dixie Highway. This link encouraged numerous exuberant resort hotek in Miami and other vacation destinations, Much of Miami's Mediterranean Revival architecture dates frums chis persod, and leading expo- nents of this «yte included Walter de Garmo, architect of the Peabody Residence (1922) in Coral Gables and the Western Union Building (1925, nuw the Burgos Pharmacy) in Miami Beach. and the Swass-born Maurice Fatio, who designed the Vanderbilt Mansion (1928) on Fisher bland. The best known are the New York firm of Leonard Schulze and S. Fullerton Weaver, whowe works include the Roney Plaza Hotel (1926, demolished) in Miami Beach, the Miami Daily News Building (1925), and the Bilemore Hotel (1925) in Coral Gables, whave central tower was directly based on the 15th-centuty Girakds bell wwes in Seville, Spain The Biltmore was built to anchor the newly planned resort community uf Coral Gables (1925), the creation of developer George Merrick. Together with the architects Phineas Phaist and Walter de Garmo and the artist Denman Fink, Merrick aggressively marketed die Mediterra- nean Revival seulement as “Aawerica’s Rivera,” in 1926, Merrick created zoned subdivisions or “villages” within Cord Gables, built in distinctive historiczing architectural styles. including Dutch East Airican, Chinese, and Colonial. Soon afterward, the inventor and enterprencnr Glen Curtiss develnped two equally flamboyant planned cities in this area. the Moorish-inspired Opa Locka (1926) and the Pueblo-scyle Country Club Estates (1926, new Miami Speings),  ‘The Tropical Deco architecture that became widely popular in che 1930s reflects Mianii’s enthusiastic embrace of Streamline Modeme and Ant Deco art and architecture. Strcamiine Mod- ere in Miami is characterired by lang, sweeping curves; hori- zontal string courses; porthoke windows: detailed as “mass”; and pipe ohn. Miami Art Deco reflects a similar buc more decurauve sensibility, inclading carved or painted door and window surrounds and finezes with abstracted organic and gromerric parterns, The influence of the International Exhibi- tion of Decorative Arcs (Paris, 1928) and the Century of Progress Exhibition int Chicago (1933) is evident in a wide range of build- ings buity during the Great Depression and beyond, beginning with the Scars Rochuck and Company Tower (1929) by Nim- mons, Carr and Wright and che Pan American Seaplane Base and Terminal (1931, nuw City Hall) by Delano and Aldrich.  ‘The bright color and abstracted tropical ornamentation of Trupical Devo characterize many of the resort hotels lining the city’s “Hotel Row" in Miami Beach. Among the mast prolific architects in this style were L Murray Dixon, whose work in- cludes the ‘Tides (1936) and Ritz Plaza (1940) hotels, and Heary Hobauses, whose Mayfair (1936) and Governor (1939) hotels employ a remarkably divene set of architectural and decorative Sreamline and Deco forms. The influence of this style was 10 pervasive that even the well-known Mediterranean Revival archi- tects Kiehnel and Filliot produced two outstanding examples of Tropical Deco, the Barclay Plaza (1935) and Carlyle (1941) hotels. The high concentration of Tropical Deco honels in the Havel Rew area fed to the placement of  one-square-mile area  of Miami Beach on the National Registce of Histone Places an 1979. Local adaptations tw Art Deco were alw evident in the work af more identifiably “Modern” architects, such as Robert Law Weed, one of the designer of the Bauhaus-influcnced Uni- versity of Miami campus in Coral Gables (14 Robert Little, Robert Law Weed, and Marion Manley), Weed’s streamlined, lemon-yellow General Electric Model Home (19.45, nuw the Eastman Residence) showcased innovative new maternal. woh as Vitrolite, Formica, and glass black, but alee included a large deourative door surround of local stone bearing unmistakably tropical muoxih.  America’s po- World War Il cconomik expansion fucled Miami's second budding boom, which lated until che mid 1950s, During this period and continuing through the 1970s, Miami's architecture camprised several different sensibilities, cangang from the claborately theatcical modernity of Moers Lap- idus co the more abstracted. stripped-down “Tropical Modern” works of architecs: such as Rufus Nims and George Reed. Among !apidus’s most visible works are his high-nse hotels an Miami Beach, just north of the Art Deca district. These include the Fountamnbleau (1954), whose monumental scale, neobs- rogue curves, and grand “suirncase to nowhere” prompted Groucho Marv to call this hotel the “Eighth Wonder of the  The Carlyle Hotel, designed by Kiehnel and Elhor  Warld”; the Edlen Rox (1955); and the Americana (1957, now the Sheraton Bal Harbour). fn contrast, mare rigorously mod- eTrust works, such as Rufus Numns's Orto Cohen House (1950), were characterized by an absteact, open plan and minimal exte- nor artiqulagon, adapted ww the subtropical climate by placing the living spaces ahove ground level and designing window and door openings for direct flow-through ventilation. This adaptive appeoach echoes that uf Miami's carly vernavular architecture, ach as Ralph Munroe's influential Rarnack House (18911, whose open wooden frame and inventive system of Imuvery is idcally suited ee Miami's subtropical dlimare, Another similarly abstract wurk ia Gearge F. Reed's Eig/Smith House (1963), composed of unadorned glass and wood pavilion “reams” whow transparency and sample detailing recall Philip Johmion's Glass House (1949), munimiang the boundanes beewoen interior space and exterior Landaape. Toward the cad of the following decade, Laurinds Spear and Bemarde Von-Brescia's Spear House (1978) departed from chese more traditional moderne examples through us use of load-bearing masonry, bright colors, Streamline Modeme-inspited details, and essentially urban character, Che subsequent work of ther firm Arquitectonica. which may be described as Miami's firs: Postmodern architec- sural fiem, inclades the Palace (1980), Adlansts (1982), and m-  th,  pet gia Mal  © Historical Association af Southern Florida / Miams News Collection. Photo courtesy the  Historical Museum of Souchern Florida  
perial (1983) high-rise residential tewen and is characterized by creative and often surreal juxtapasitions of scale. form, and materials within an essentially modernist compositional frame- work.  An the Late 20h century. the rrupically inflected Postmodern. asim of Arquitectonica’s work was alo evident in several several large-scale usban projects. including 1M. Per's Centrust Tower (1987, now NarionsBank Uower), whose streamlined curves and atmospherx, vutdoor lighting system have made it one of Miami's most famous buildings. A new generation of architects, many of whom were trained or teach in Maimi, have continued the city’s eclecte architectural craditions, explore and tanec forming a variety of Mediterranean, Caribbean, and vernacular sources. Collectively termed * [he School of Miami” by architec: tural historian Vincent Scully, these archireces include the late Charles Barrer, Andres Duany and Flizabeth Plater-7yberk. founders of the New Urhaniun movement: Maria de la Guardia and Teofilo Victoria; Jurge Hernandes: and Jorge. Luis. and Mari Tere Trelles. Although work in chis gente varies widely, itis often ubaracterized by brightly culored load-bearing masaniry construction, low pitched roof, abstracted classical decoration, and focal vernacular adaptations. auch as raved living areas, wouden verandas, and viewing platforins. As wntemporcary at chitects in Miami continue to buikt on and expand the histosi- izing foundauions of us reson ongins, che presence of diverse burldings suggests that the city’s architeceural wenuty remains  Kuustiy A. Ture  See aio Arquixectonica, Art Deco; Bauhass; Centory of Progress Exposition, Chicage (1933); Classicise: Devons tructiviam; Duany and Plater-Zyberk (United Scares); Inser- national Exhibitien of Decorative Arts, Paris (1925); Jobn- eos, Philip (Unieed States); Modemise: Neorationalicey New Urbanism; Pei, t.M. (Umited Sentes); Postmodernisay Scully, Vincent (United States)  For an expanded biography on Muami’s architecture, sce White. The city’s architectural history ut digi usied in detail in Parneios and in Calor and lejeane: that of Miansi Beach is discussed mm Root. who also pro- vides a chrectory of Art Deco buildings. Fhe work of indridaal archi  tects in discussed in Dunlop and in Friedman. Scully documents the archisectural and urbanisnc peojeces associated with the Unwenity of Mian.  Calor, Maurice and Jean-Franguis, Lejeune (editors), Muses Archasccrute of the Tropics. Miami, Florida: Center of Fine Asta and Brussels: Archives d’Architecture Modetee, 1992  Dunlop, Beth, Mien. Frerads und {eaditioes, New York. Monacells Prean 1996  Friedman, Alice T., “The Lucury of Lapsdue: Glamour, Glase, and Architecture in Miami Beach.” Harvard Design Magecsne U1 (Sumer 2000)  Pattnion, Nicholan N., Building Marvelem Mutms, Gamenville: Usuveraty Press of Florida, 1994  Rout, Keith. Miami Beart Aet Daw Gride, Miami Beach, Ponda Miami Deuga Prevervacion League, 987  Scully. Vincent loneph. Retiwen Tun Tower The Drang af the Schaol of Miners, New Yorks Monacclti Press, 1996  White. Anthony G.. The Arvhisriturr uf Miami, Florida: 4 Selected Babliagraphe, Montacello, Iino: Vance Biblographies, 1982  MIES VAN DER ROHE, LUDWIG 1886- 1969  Architect, Germany and United States  Tadwig Miex van det Rube is commonly regarded among the most uclece company of 20ch-cenctury architects, a distinction he shares with [rank Lloyd Wright and Le Corbusier. A leading figure in the madernist movement that flourished in Europe during the 1920s, Mies later emigrated to the United States, where his reputation and influence took on intemational dimen- sions. At least a dozen of his designs, built and unbuile alike. are customarily numbered among the most distinguished efforts of the century  Born Maria Ludwig Michael Mies in Aachen in 1886, he was known professionally as Ludwig Mies uneit shout 1920, when he decided to splice his father's name with his mather’s marden name, Rohe, dy adding the invented “van der.” Most ut his forebears were stonemasons of modest means, 2 sation that accounts for the fact that he finished trade school at 15 and. fever went an to mare formal training. His initial contact with building consisted of service as an apprentice on construction sites armund Aachen. Relacively low-level employment at several Socal areliers and architectural offices followed, with the first Pronounced evidence of talent manifest in his draftsmanship. which was sufficient w suggest tv friends chat he apply for work at architectural firins in Berlin. This he did successfully, and by 1905, aged 19. be ad ouade his way ve the German capital.  Miss’s first professional experience was served with the de- signet Bruno Paul, with whom he worked from 1906 until 1908. During that time, on his own, he saw to completion, in 1907, his first independent work. a privatc house in Potsdam- Neubahelsberg, commissioned by the philosophy professor and Friedrich Nietasche scholar Alois Richl, Although the design was for the most part truc to the vernacular of the rime, Mics added a loggia and a rampart on one cide of the scructure that took lively advantage of the site. ‘The design. when published, won 2 fait amount of praise in the architectural press. [mpressed with his young designer oot unly as an architect but also as a person, Rich! sponsored Mies on a teip a ltaly in 1908, intending to acquaint him with the classical tradition, at the time newly popu lar among the cultivated classes of Germany. By 1910 a sober, selatively straitlaced manner of archisecture reflective of dassi- asm had largely replaced the frect curvilinearity of Jugendstil (the German equivalent of Art Nouveau) amiong Germany's ar- chitecss.  In this respect, then, it is not insignificant char Mics signed on in 1908 with Perer Behrens, at the time probably the most important living German architect. Behrens was widely known for the commercial work he had donc in Berlin, but he also designed covidences that demonstrated the new regard for classi- tism as a whale and, in particular, for che work of one of Ger- many's most historically distinguished architects, Karl Friedrich Schinkel. While Mies worked on at least one of Behrens's factory buildings, his own proclivities led him 10 pay his most serious penonal anention to Schinkel's classicite style, as two of his endeavors danng from the Behrens years demonstrate: a 1910- 11 house for the gallery owner Hugo Perls and a major competi- Gon project (unbuile) of 1910 thar was meant as a memorial  monument to the flea chancellor of che united modern German Empire, Otto von Bismarck.  Despite a bref interruption of his service with Behrens that lasted from Lave 190) co Late 1910 (during which cme he de- signed the Perls Howe and the Bismank monument), Mics became one of his chicl’s most trusted assistants, and he played a substantial role in rwo major commisaons that Behrens re- ceived in the carly years of the sevond decade of the century: the German embassy in St. Petersburg, vompleted in 1912, and the unrealized design of s house ncar The Hague, meant ava texidence-cum-art gallery for the Dutch mdustriale AG, Keoeller, whose wife. Helene Krocller-Muellet, war the central player in the history of that commission. Kehrens's project was tumed down, and Mic was invited on his own to produce an alternative proposal. which the cheats also rejected, in favue of a third design, by uhe Dutchman Hendnk Petrus Bedlage. (As fare would have n, that, tov, was not built.)  Although his Kroctler project failed to materialize, Mics re- tnained proud of it, and judging from photographs of the model, which sugges a monumentality of form and an impressive inter locking of masses —--2s well a a nournhing influence from Schin- kel—he may well have been justified in his feelings. Even». the work was turned down a wennd time, under different cit cumstances, a development that, as matters turned cut, worked eventually to Mics’ favot because it forced hum to face the fo af a world that he had not learned much about i the years since he worked for Behrens.  Following World Was 1, dunng which Mbes served un the German armed forces, he returned to Bedin un ao independent basis ro find an artisnc climate sn the process af a nearly all- encompassing change from what he recalled of the Behrens year. The classicisen he was familear with was beng rapidly replaced by a pronounced tendency toward a modernist acsthenic, tree of nearly all historicist implications, Thar Mies was sow too embrace chis newer nutinak may be inferred four his decaton to subi the Krocller Mueller project to an exhibition of younger archi- teces staged in 1919 and cupervised hy another of Behecns’s prewar employees, Walter Gropius, himself a determined and accrmplithed devotee of the nivdernust poine of view, Mies’ entry was reyected.  Even though the ncat two yearn were crucial ta Mies’ life and carver, the records of his movements during thar ume ate fess than dear. In 1913 he bad marticd 2 woman of wealth, Ada Bruhn. who bore him chree daughters berween 1914 and £917. Thereafter, he and his family lived largely on her moncy, leaving him free 10 become familiar with the Berlin arusuc avant-garde and to foster Friendships with its more energetic members. None- theless (and ro some extent on that veg account), he and his wife separated in 3921, shordly after he had decided to change his name ww the more professionsl-sounding Ludwig Mics van det Rohe, both moves symptomatic of the changes in the culrural life of Weimar Germany. Perenal freedom was in the air, al- though the new modernism exerted its own form of deminavon, to which Mies responded brilliantly at the professional level. Berween 1921 and 1924, he conceived the design of five projects that, although never built, affected not only bis career but even- tually che mainstream history of 20ch-century archttecrate as well. Two of chese works (1921 and 1922) were high-rise build- ings notable for a scriking use of open glass walls and a sparcnes of incident in elevations rising rom plans entally remote from  sbusical precedent. Both works were virally wuhout cximple in the record of tall buildings erther in Europe or in the United States. A third proposal, known as the Concrete Office Building (1923), was a structure composed more horreontally than veru- sally, with a compelling treatment of ribbon windows recessed decply behind rows of powertul parapets. The remaining two projects were lor country houses, one in concrete (1923) and the other in brick (1924), Because there was ne known clicnt fat cither midence, it is aumed thar Mics designed them for his own aansfaction. Hoth reached outward from 4 central cote, but the later of the nwo featured an open plan in which interior walls, ruc 10 that form so comman among advanced architects of the 1920s, defined rather than encased space in an uncom- monly free layout.  Mies showed models ar drawings of several of these works in exhibnions. thus attracting to himedf the attention of the Berlin ast world Moreover, be made a point of cultivating the major figures of che pan European modernist movement, atud by the middle of the devade he had asumed a place of unpur tance in several of Berlin's professional architectural organiza uons, He helped w finance 2 journal, G (tor “Gestaleung™), which stood for the new elementanst posinon and to which he contributed several mandewo-tike articles.  By 1925 Mies’ work had become steadfastly modemis: in style, for the most part rectilinear in its contours, cubic in its massing, and open in plan whenever possible. He nonetheless retained a distinctly persanal fondness for brick, a marcrial closer to the crafts tradition than to the machine aeahetic that he dined in his writing of the period ty embrace. A unique peud- uct of ch predilection was nut x building ws much as 4 mun: tent, che Licbhnevhe Laxcuiburg Memorial (1926), designed at the behest of a tanking German Communist, Eduard Fuchs, anid made up of'a sce of boldly intersecting brick masses in high relict.  In che cousse of the decade, having developed 2 following within rhe profession not only foe his creacive efforts bur for his administranyve skills as well, Mies was named by the German Werkbund to supervise che organization and conctruction of a housing settlement on a hillside overlooking Scurrgart that arrengthened nue only his reputation bur abo thar of what had come ta he called the “neues Bauen,” ur “new building,” a term synonymonn with the lately congealed modernist wyle. fo bis new capacity, be invited a cumpany of the leading European practiuacrs in dhe idbvin, induling, ainong others, Le Corbu- wer, Geoprus, LLP. Oud, and Berens, wo conuibure desigts, ead when dhe Weisenhofiscdiung, as the sctelement was called,  ‘opened in 1927, it was hailed at the international level as a  tiiumph of the new architectural outlook,  By the late 1920p. Mies was building for a variety of devoted clients, notably two officers of the Verserdag alk-weaving mills, ket Lange and Heemann Esters, for whom he dcugned a pair of hamlwome brick houses in the Rhineland city of Krefeld, where the Verrendag factory was located. Roth buildings were completed un 1930, at a ume when Mies was caceptionally busy not only with other coidemial efforts but with commercial and urban asupnments 4 well, uncluding an ambinous although un- built proposal tor the reconstitution of Berlin's Alexanderplau. ven so, that penod remasts memorable monty lor two commis- sions that were fully realized. in the process carning him a te- 
nown that has endured to che present day: the German Pavilion £1929) at Barcelona and the Tugendhat House (1930) in Beno.  In 1928 che German government had asked Mies to design several buildings as that country's contribution to an interna. tional exposition in Barcelona. wheduled for 1929. The princi- pal suructure was a reception pavilion in which, once it was completed. Mics succeeded in bringing tagether virtually all he feds, all he knew, and all he had learned. The finished structure, mounted on a podium, conssted af a sctics of freely planned walts that shared an asymmetrically flowing space with a group of slender, precisely measured. X-secuoned. chrome-plated col- umns ‘The composition was completed by qwo shallow pals, the smaiier one tearuring a life-size sculprure of a nude worn by the German Georg Kalbe. Lhe screne proportions of the pavilion’s space were matched by some exceptionally clegant muccrialt, most spectacularly a dab of golden onyx that acted we a backdrop for a pair of exquisitely designed chairs, visible on entry,  The chairs, since known as Barcelona Chains, were among 4 number of handbome artickea uf furniture that Mics designed un the late 1920s and carly 19.308, works that added at the time eo his rapidly growing ceputarion. Several more classic pieces of furmivure were created for the second tnayor busking of the pe- fied, the Tugendhar House, completed in Bro an 1930 for a wealthy Cah, couple chat spared av expense in prowding Mies with the kand of budget that allowed him to indulge his caste for patrician marerials. The house contained ewo stories, with the main living area downstain. There ue partue. which was flanked by a dining space and a winrer garden, fearured 2 cenrer- Picce that wok the form of another wall of rich onyx. ‘The plan was open, the fenesiration notable for windows that lowered dlecrrically into the eurer walls in the manner of automobile windows, thus transforming the interiut invy a veranals.  Mies’ fortunes changed markedly in the course of the next decade. In 1930 he accepted che directorship of the state-run Bauhaus in Dessau, where it remained unut bucal right-wing political clements forced its dosure in 1933. Shartly thereafter, he rowpened it as a private whoo! in Berlin.  His own work of the early 1930s was notable luc ue deagn of 3 group of houses char were opposite in plan to his carer residences, particularly vo the two country house projects of 1923 and 1924. Whereas che laticr works extended from a central area outward into the landscape. the newer ones were enclosed by walled courts, hence the naine they have raken on generically in the meantime. Especially noteworthy were the floor-to-ceiling dias walls through which the howe interiors would have been visible. a usage he followed frequently in his Laecer, American ocuyre. None of the court houses was ever conmructed: they appear to have been dane with no specitic client in mind.  Indeed, relatively little of Mics’ architecture of the 1930s was realized. The depression devastated Germany's eunomy, in large pur enabling the National Sacialius to take control of the gov- ernment in 1933 and. under Adulf Hitler, 10 arn the country into a totalitarian state, Having desgned the Licbkneche- Luxemburg Memorial for the Communises, Mics, who was for- ever more commited to his architecture than to any steadfast political position, might have worked for the Nazis had they asked him to—at lease as he perceived them shortly following Hitler's accession, However, when, in 1934, the party fine turned away from any subteantive curdiality coward modernist  expression in the arts, Mics’ years in Germany were numbered. He built nest co nothing for che cemainder of the 1930s. Only by mid-decade did he begin to pay attention to teaching offers that had begun ew come from autside Germany.  By 1938 Mics had moved to Chicago, assuming the headship of the School of Architecture ut the Arinour Instinite of Technol- ogy (as of 1940, che Illinois lnstitute of Technology HT). He spent his Las 30 years in the United States, a span roughly equal to chat of his active career in Germany and one, moreover, in which he built more sctively but went through fewer stylistic shifts.  His Gist major commussion in che United States was a master plan for the campus of IIT, made up of buildings of his own design. Conceived in 1939-40, the plan went through a number of phases before construction began. Meanwhile, Mies’ quite conuderable reputation, which grew greatly in the years follow- ing World War Hl, caened him commissions thas he carried out in a narrow asuctment of building types. The relationship he struck up with the Chicago developer Herbert Greenwald led tou number of high-rise apartment buiklings erected throughout the country, the must impurtant of which were the twin towers ai 860-480 Nomh Lake Shore Drive in Chicago. There, Mies employed the floor-to-cxiling windows he had pioneered in Ger- many, arranging them behind a modular steel frame topped by a flat rool. He followed that recipe over and over in his American high-rises. usually hanging 3 curtain wall of similar form over the main frame. On account of the unomamented simplicity of Mies’ American high-rises. they proved relatively inexpensive to. construct, s fact rhae, together with his reigning position in America's cager postwar acceptance of the madernist zewthetic, exercised a huge influence on corporate-scabed architecture chroughaart che encnery in the 1950s and 1960s. By consensus, his own jee in the form was the Seagram Building (1958), an office building in New York in which Mies enjoyed a tavich budget, cladding the curtain wall eleganily in bronze, lining dhe foyer with hes favorite stone (travertine), and in a gesture notably original for its time, setung the whole serucrure behind a plaza an Park Avenuc.  Together with his treatment of the high-rise building, the preferred form of Mics” American years was the clear-span pavil- ion, in which he indulged his caste for column-free interiors, insisting char such untrammeled openness-—he referred co it a5 “universal space” —-facilitated the accommodation of varying uses over the years. The concept may have becn as much a rationalization asa rationale because Mies’ interest in space inde- pendent of function had heen an inspiration dating back to hiv experiments with the open plan in his buildings of the 1920s,  ‘The chear-span pavilion was most famously realized in the atchitecture building of ITT, S.R. Crown Hall (1956), ins roof hung from exposed plate girders; the monumental project for a Convention Hall (1944) in Chicago, its vast interior covered by a three-dimensional truss; and the Berlin National Gallery (1967), its ceiling 2 grid of web girders. Even so, the earliest realized cxaampk: was a house, one of the few residences he pro- duced in the United States. The Farnsworth House (1951) is quimessential Ametican Mies. The structure consists of a floor slab connected to a roof slab by the wide-flanged cohimne that became an intrinsic part of his American expressive vocabulary. The resthant volume is contained within : Siling walls of glass. the interior space kept free of all but a wood-cladded  ore that accommodates bathrooms, kitchen and utilities, and one Freestanding cabinet.  Mics’ urbanistic efforts in the United States were confined mouly ta the assembly of buildings thar usually featured 3 coup- ling of che types characteristic of his American years, Each was composed of veveral high-rise buildings sited adjacent to one low-rise, the latter more often than not a calumn-free pavihon, ‘The principal examples are in Chicago, Toronto, and Montreal, The one housing settlement in his American catalog was Lafay- emte Park in Detroit. an endeavor in which he worked together with cwo of his colleagues from HIT, planner Laidwig Hilberse- imet (a friend From the old Bauhaus days whom Mics had invited in 1938 to join hin on the IIT faculty) and landscape architect Alfred Caldwell.  Many of Mies’ signature devices in the United States were outgrowths and refinements of uheit counterparts in Parope, The significant differences were manifest i his appmach to ma- terials and in his underlying concept. Finding steel available in quantity in che United States, he used ir ofen co further his belief in structure in the abstract, and che minienalism of his mannet was true to the one morto be coined and fallewed ax an expressive objective ever-more faithfully the oldes he grew: “Beinahe Niches” (almost nothing).  Franz Santis  Biography  Born Ludwig Mies in Aachen, Germany, 27 March 1886; beer adopted mother's maiden name of Rohe; the son of a mater stonemason; immigrated te the United Sares 1938; naruralized 1944. Educated in the Domschule, Aachen 1897-1900; as- tended Aachen Trade School 1900-02; worked at building sites with his father 1900-02. Married Ada Bruhn 1914 (scparared 1921; died 1951): 3 children. Worked as a draftsman and de- signer in a stucco devorating firm. Aachen 1903-04. Moved to Berlin; worked briefly in the office of an architect specializing in wood structures 1905; apprenticed to architect and furnicure designer Bruno Paul, Bertin 1905-07. Private architectural prac- tice. Berlin 1907-09; asainane, with Walter Gropius and Le Corbusier, in the office of Peter Behrens, Berlin 1908-11; pri- vate practive, Bertin [91 f-14 and 1919-37; financed and wre for G (for "Gestalning”)} magazine, Berlin 1921. Moved to Chi- cago 1938; private practice from 1938. Appointed director of the Bauhaus ar the recommendation of Walter Gropius 1930; moved the Bauhaus from Dessau to Sregtirz, Berlin w escape Naui pressure: closed the school in 1933 Jpllowing Nazi interfer- ence; director, architecture department. Armour Institute (now Tlinois Institute of Technoligy), Chicago 1938-59. Director, architectural division, Nuvembergruppe, Berlin 1921-25; foun- det, Zhener Ring (latet Der Ring), Bertin 1925; vice preiident, Deutscher Werkbuad, Berlin 1926-32; member, Prussian Acad- emy of Ares and Sciences 1931; Commander (with cross), Ger- man Onder of Metit 1959; member, Natiueal Inststute of Arts and Letters 1963: president. CLAM. Royal Gold Medal, Royal Instituce of British Architects 1959; Gold Medal, American In- stitute of Architects 1960. Collaborated on crhibinon projects with Lilly Reich; director of Werkbund exhibition Weissenhof- siedhung, Srurtgast 1927; director, Werkbund section “The  Dwelling” a¢ the Berlin Building Exhibition 1931. Died in Chi cago, 1? Auguse 1969.  Selected Works  Rich! How, Potadam-Neuhahehberg, Germany, [907  Monument so Onto von Remank funbudi), 1910  Peels Howse. Berlin, Germany 1917  Liebknecht-Luzemburg Memorial. Bertin. Germany 1926  German Pavibon, Barcelona, 1929  Tugendhat House, Brno, Crrch Republic. 1930  {ifinows Lnssinne of Technology (TT) Campus, Chicago, 1939-56  Lake Shore Drve Apartments, Chicago, 1951  Famworh House, Plano, Itlinass, 1951  Crown Hall, HT Campus, Chicago, 1956  Scagram Budding. New York, 18  Berlin National Gallery. 1967  Further Reading  Neunwyer, Frits, Mier nan der Rube Dias bunstlese Wert, Berlies: Siedler, 1986; 21 The Arties Word Mies ven der Rake on the Bucking Ars, Cambridge, Massachunenty; MIT Pees, 1991  Subalee, Franz, Afies oom der Rohe: A Critical Boagraphy. Chicago: Univernty of Checaga Press, 1985  Togeibull, Woil, Mier nen der Robe die Villon und Landbesaprojekie, Ewen, Germany: Bacht, 1981; as Afies even der Rahe The Villas and Cauntry Hous, wranalated by Russell M. Stockman, edited by William Dyckes, New York: Mascum of Modern An, 1985  MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS, RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA Designed by enning Larsen; completed 1984  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs building in Riyadh, Saudi Ara- bia, resulted fromm an invitational compeution organized in 1979 by the Saudi Arabian government in association with the Uxion Internationale des Architecter. Participants were given a site occu- pying an entire block in the al-Namodhajiyah quarter of the city, which lies cight kilometers frum the Diplomat, Quarter and two kilometers from the oldest distvice in Riyadh. Formu- lated between 1977 and 1979, the program called far offices for dhe Minister and his deputy; banquet ball, mosque, library, coniercnce centce, and training facilities for che diplomatic corps; 5.000 square meters of offke and circulanon space divided between political, social, and cultural affairs; and parking arcas for over 1,000 employees and visitors.  Danish archirecr Henning Larsen was chosen in 1980 by a  “jury that included the Egyptian architect Hassan Fathy and the  Miniser of Foreign Affain. Larsen’s was one of 11 proposals thar included the work of Ricardo Bofill (Spain), Arata Isozaki Qapan}, Veder Daloky (Turkey), Bernhard and Peer Surer (Switzerland), and Roget Taillibert (France).  Building in Saudi Arabia requires dealing with extreme di- matic conduions: Riyadh is dry and hoe, with temperatures chat range from 20 to 47 degeces centigrade. Sand and dust carried by winds from the south in winter and the north in summer also present major challenges. As a result of these extreme condi- tions and the particular sucial structure in the Arab word that sharply delineates between the public space of the city and the Private space occupied by the family, tradmonal buildings ws 
Riyadh were joined to creare massive blocks and were character- ited by blank facades tacing the sereet that shielded private inter- nal courtyards,  Laren’: propowl conudeted both building traditions thar had develuped in the region and the need for an efficicat. techeer logically advanced building to verve the day-to-day autivitses and the representauonal funcpons of the Ministry. Completed in 1984. the bow, compact building os based an 4 square in plan and ts composed of three hlouks that occupy the corner {the fourth corner block is left out, symboliang the embassio abroad). The entry to the building, placed along the diagonal aus of the square, ts defined by nwo cylindrical towers that house the auditorium and library and the exhibition hall. A large vaulted gallery leads to the central wiangular-shaped court, which is defined by the three main “streets.” Covered by barrel vaulis, these theee-story-high strects serve as the major circula- tion comidorns. Fach corner of che triangle contains an ocugon ally chaped domed space that is referred to asa “square ” These mquates occupy the center of the thee blacks and prewide access to the fleaible open office spaces, which are interrupted by a section of internal open-air vourtyards thar are square ut shape and divided inte chree types: the censs garden, the fountain gat den and the water basin garden.  Ministry of Frreign Athi. private courrvanl with window btoces © Ags Khan Truse tor Culture  ‘The interior courtyards, the thick exterior wall system. the small window openings, and the use of iyyas (wooden screets used to protect the privacy of the balconies in tradivional hoses) reveal a sennitivity to both climate and custom. ‘The thick walls that separate intetiot and exterior resule from a double-wall system containing an intemal air cavity: this system insulates the building again the exteeme temperatures and, when com- bined wsth the small windows and shading screens, provides relief frum the intense sunlight characteristic of the regiun. In the Minutey of Fotcign Aflains, as in other work by Lanen, the control and manipulation of light i a prumary conve, and skylghes were employed in varius configurations to illuminate the space.  Given the significance of ornament in Islamu; architecture, the lack of surface treatment in the Ministry at Foreign Affairs is reneworthy. Architests in the Arab world traditionally employed vmament to dematerialize wall surtaces and to aid in making the transitian trom interior to exterior. Larsen rejected amament and relied nn the solid mases of the walls 9 wrongly define the spaces and transitional areas. In fact, the furmal purity of the building 0 such char the clients ominiasoned a serica of panels and othet ornamental teatures that weir installed against the wishes of the architect. .  Lanven’s choses minimalism for the Ministry of Forcagn Af- fairs reveals his affinity with the progenitor of the Modern mowement, The diagrammatic danity of the floor plan recall, the work of Louis Kalin, as does the idea of a “busdding within a building’ thar was used by Kahn ¢o control fight i the National Assembly Building in Dhaka. Although Lassen works within the modernist tradition, he nevertheless adopted principles from Mogul architecture in India and the form language of the emgion that resulted in the fortresstike facades. He antempted to avoid the Pastmudernist tendency toward stylimic pastiche by abstract: ing rather than quoting the borrowed, historical form, In this manner, Larsen’s work is closer to the 1960s Italian neutatianal- ia movement, in particular Aldo Rossi, wha sought create att analogical architecture that responded w the contear via cic ments that were abstracted from vernacular forms.  Awarded the Aga Khan Award tor Architecture in 1989, The Ministry of Foreign Affurs is a significant work of 20ch-century archireceure that represents an attempt to mediate between the universalsms of the Modem movement and regional culrure while grappling with the often-contlicang demands of function. dimate, and custom in the Gulf region.  Kews Mitciret  See tho Kahn, Louis (Unived States); Larsen, Henning (Dea- mark); National Assembly Building, Sher-e-Bangla Nagar, Dhaka; Riyadh, Saudi Arabia  Further Reading  Aa appeipriate monograph covering the work of Henning Lanen has net yet been published an English. Abd provides a lengthy discusion of the building with accompanring drawings and dhustrataans; the mow comprchensive acrount of Lamet’s work remains accesible only 00 those who read Danish (Lund).  Abel, Chris, “Riyadh Angles: Ministry of Kercign Affair. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.” Architectural Reviews 178, no. 1061 (1985)  Davey, Peter, “Laren in Rivadh: Foreign Ministry. Reyadh, Saudi Arabia,” Architecteral Review 173, avy 1031 (1983)  “Henning Larsen: Foreign Ministry. Reyadh, Saudi Arabea.” Aschitectonal Desiga 51. nos. 84 (1981)  Larsen, Henning, “Lesons from the Orient,” Dridain 10 1983)  Lund, Nils-Ole, “Mitestry of Foreign Aitairs Building in Rayadh. Saudi Arabia, 1984," A+ 0/195, na. 12 986)  Land, Nils-Ole, “Henning Laren.” Anbitehter DK 33. oo, 2 (1989)  Land, Nik-Ol. Arbisekt Henning Larsen, Copenhagen: Gvidendal, 1996  “Miniary of Foreign Affain, Riyadh, Saudi Arsbia.” Anvhimereral Desgn 186, no. 1113 (19893  Mona, David. “Desen Buildings,” [regrsune Archuecture 64, 00. 5 (1987)  Petersen, Steen Extvad, “The Ministry of Fincign Affairs un Saudi Arabea.” Liveng Archuectare 311984;  Skriver, Poul Enk, “Henning, barsens Arlutcktut,” Artuekrey DK 29, ter, 7 (1985)  Seeele, farnes, editor, Archyseriere for [hameic Socene Tadsy. Landon Acadeeny Editions, and Berlin. Erise, 1994  MIRALLES, ENRIC 1955-2000 AND CARME PINOS 1954-  Architects, Spain  Enric Miralles (1955-2000) and Carme Pings (1954~-) worked together in a brief bue prolific partnership from 1984 vo  1989. Theit reputauon was established through numerous competition-winning schemes for civic projects sponsored by enlightened political leadership to sumulate the renaissance of Catalan culture following the death of Spanish diatator Francisco Franco, Although only a few of these schemes were realized, Moralies and Pinds achieved worldwide recognition for their ex- quesite drawings and for a modest and distinguished body of work  Enric Miralley was horn in Barcelona, where be attended the School of Architecture, mociving his profesional degree in 1978 and a doctorate in 1982. He worked with Helo Pion and Albest Viaplana fram 1973 co 1985 on prize-winning competi tion entaes and on binlt projects including Sats Plaza and Besos Park wn Barcelona. Carme Pinés ts also a native of Barcelona; she graduated trom the Scbool of Architecture in 1979, She was awarded first prac in the Rural Housing Competition of the Ministry of Public Works and Urbanism in 1982.  Completed crvic projects for which the design was initiated by Miralles and Pinds include, in chronological acder of com- mencement: La Launa School (1994), Igualads CG {1996}, the pergolas of Parets des Vallés (1986), Hostalets Civiy Center (1992), Movella School (1994), the Mina Quarter Civic Cemter (1992), Reus Rambla (1993), Huesca Sporty Center (1994), the Archery Ranges (1992) and the Iearia Avenue Pergo- Lan (1992) for the Olympic Games in Barcelona, and the Alicante Eurhychmic Sports Center (1993). In addition, a private resi- dence, the Garau-Agusti House (1992), was completed. After the partnership ended, one or other of the newly independent offices subsequently adminotered the final dean and construc- on of many of these propre.  Although the work of Mirallcs and Penés clearly grew out of reponal influences. including the surreaksm and inventive form of Antoai Gaudi and Josep Maria Jujul, i abu dutills and carries forward more univenally understned themes of 20th-century modernism. Like the work of Alvar Aalt. which moved away from the notion of the building as an ideal type supesimpused on a tabula rasa, the formal and material language of Miralles and Vinds may be characterized = eopngraphical, both emerging out of and amplifying the characteristics of site. program, and culture, Moving beyond the superficial contextualism of post- modemnm, the work aspires to he deeply cantextual, revealing tnusinsic relauunships betwen built form and landform and be- tween natuee and culture.  While exhibiting fragmenred formal and spatial arcribuutes similar to the work of the deconstructivists, Miralles and Pinds eschewed both the cynicism and theuretical focus of that move- ment. Maintaining a firm commirmenc to the inhented social idealism of modemism, their work reveals a persistent preaccu- pation with the architectural promenade. The designs feacure dramatizavon of movement. cxpressed by elaborately articulated stairs, ramps, and citculation routes. derved in part from a strong belief in the power of architecture i stimulate communal interaction and to shape the sucial matexes of society. Tt abso is derived from a focus on direct physical experience and a coree- sponding disavowal of the representational aspitations of archi- tecture, A conscious awkwardness and Lik of refinement that are intended to distance the work fram the technical virtuosity of much late 20th-century architecture cremplilies chesr empha- sis. on the blont physical presence of construction. ‘This is a reflection of the iniluence of the lite heutalist work of Le Corbu- 
sier and the subsequent generation of new brutalises, notably Alison and Peter Smithsan.  Complexity ve another notable characteristic of the work of Muralles and Pinds. Their buibdings are open-ended and flexible encitics built up of overlapping layers, cach with its own internal Ingic. The plans. rather than being preconeived, express the aggregauve order of che work by emenging from the supcrimposi- tion of many layer of information. In section, a limited range of standard companents ia subtly inflected tm create slightly varying, spatial seyuenve hike a senes uf recze-frame photographs, The architects conceived structure as dynamic components in equi Librium, and they detailed buikdings with multiple layers of mate- rial that create lughly figured tapestries of surface pattern, light. and shadow. Critics have prased the formal and material inven- tiveness of Mirailes and Pinds but with same reservations. Ken- aeth Frampton suggests that Ute work tends toward structural exhibitionism, and Witham Curtis maineains thar its camplextry a mannerint in its averelaborarion.  Of the built work of Miralles and Pings, the most compelling project is the [gualads Cemetery (1996), a powerful synthesis af the themes of topography, promenade, blunt physicality, and complex order. Located on an unpromising site ar the edge of an industrial extate, the cemetery is a imple cut into the earth thet fuses bude form with ube sutural wontwurs of ube ute. The scheme transforms the banal rock-tilled gabion and precast con- crete retaining-wall systems of the civil engineer inw 4 richly expressive cectonis language. Igualada is both fresh and umeless: ix arouses deep and universal emotions while ar the same time being both carefully anuned to its own physical and culrural location and reflecting the particular sensibditics of its architects.  Awards for the work of Miralles and Pinas include the Fo- mento de les Ara, Decoratives (FAD} Interior Design Prize for Va Ubuna School in 1987, the Barcelona Prize for the Archery Ranges in 1992. the FAD Architecture Prize for Igualada Ceme- tery in 1992. and the National Prize foe Spanish Architecture for Marella Schaal in 1995.  After 1989, Miralles and Piods continued their careers sepa rately, Pinta designed numerous schemes for sports facilities in Spain and completed the Petter pedestrian bridge and plaza in 1999. Miralles completed projects ascluding an industrial beidge for Camy-Neselé in Barcelona (1990), the Social tlcadquarters for the Circuby de Lectotes in Madrid (£992), and the Unazuki Meditation Pavilion (1993) and Takaoka Stauon Access Area (1993) in Japan. Beginning in 1994 until his untimely death in 2000, be worked in partnenhip with Benederta Tapliabue and in 1998-99 won international competitions including the Music School in Hamburg, the new Scortish Parkament in Edinburgh, and the Instituto Universitario di Architerrura in Venice.  Annerte W. LeCinea  Biography  Earic Miralles  Born in Barcelona. Spain 1955, Graduated frum the School of Archuccture, Barcelona 1978; was a Fulbnphe Visiting Scholar, Columbia University, New York 1980-81, Married to Carme Pings (divorced 1992). Collaborated with Pinon-Viaplana 1973-85, Pannership with Pinds 1984-89. Partner, Enric Mi-  talles Benedeta Tagliabwe Architects Associates, Barcelona from 1992. Professor, from 1978, chair of architecture 1996, School of Architecture, Barcelona; director, Master Class of Architec- ture, Stadelschule, Frankfurt from 1990; Kenzo Tange Chair, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts from 1993; John Tahatou Chair, Princeton University, New Jersey 1994; lectures. School of Architecture. University of Syracuse, New York 1996; lecturet, School of Architecture, University of Hinois, Chicago 1997; lecturer, Graduate School of Design. Harvard University 1997-98. Died 3 July 2000 in Burcetona,  Carme Pings  Bom in Barcebona, Spain 1954, Graduated from the School of Architecture, Barcelona 1979. Married to Enric Mirallles (di- vorced 1992). Partnershup with Miralles 19B4-89. Part of the group of architects, led by Rem Koothaas, working oa the José Vergara (. Center in Guadalajara, Meaico since 1998. Lecturer, Columbu University, New York 1996; Pym Distinguished Pro- fessurship, Suhool of Architecture, University of Minos, Urbana.  Ensic Miralles and Carme Pinds  Worked un partnership in Bancluns 1984-89; gained interna- donal renown for theit works, especially for the Barcelona Otym- pics in 1992. -  Selected Works  Parees des Valles, Pergolas, Barcelona, 1986 Taam Avenue Pergolas, Barcelona. 1992 Garau-Augusti House. Barcelona. 1992  Civ Center, Hostalets, Spain, 1992  Archery Range, Harcetuna, 1992  Mina Quarters Civic Center, La Mins, Spain, 1992 Reus Rambla. Barcclana. 1993  Eurhythmic Sport Center, Alicante, Spain, 199.5 School, La Liauna. Spain, 1994  Soul, Mutela, Spain, 1994  Spor Center, Hluesca, Spain, 1994  Camneroty, (gualada, Spain, 1996  Selected Publications  Miralles Paborltin de Ralencerse oe Huesca, Barguerball Hail. 1995 Mexed Talis, odived by Benedeus Tagfiabue. 1995  Further Reading  Ganhanan, Peter (odinar), The Archetectuer of Haric Miralin and Carme Prads, New York, STTFS/Lumen Books, 1990)  Carme Pinas, Some Camce 1991), Barcelona: ACTAR, 1998  Cura, Willam [.R.. “Mental Maps and Social Landscapes: The Architecuure uf Miraller and Pinos,” in Mindin/Pine, 1988- 1991, Madnd: Fl Croquis No. 49- 50, 1991  Ff Congnis No, 30 (October 1987)  Frarapon, Kenwicth, Sredins in Tertonic Culnerr- The Portier of Canarruction 1 Ninewerath. and Twentirch. Century Archisectace, Cambodge, Massachuserus: MIT Prew, 1995  Murallen, Enna, Furic Mireles, 1995, Barcelona: El Croquis No. 72, 19%  Mirsllev Pie, 1988-1991, Madrid: 1 Croquis No. 49-50, 1991  Tagiabue Miralles, Benoderea (editor), Enric Mfiralie: Oper ¢ progetn, Milan: Ebecta. 1996; an Enric Miralies Works and Proyece, 1975-1995, New York: Monacdli Press, 1996  Zabalbesscos, Anatsu, Ipneleda Cemetery: Ernie Minalles and Carme Pine, London: Phaxlon, 1996  MOBILE HOME  Increasing industrialization and advanci an the United States throughout the 20th venture, ee fol- lowing World War JI, led co many attempts to produce and market a factory-built houre. The mobile home industry has contributed to the growth and expansion of industrialized hous- ing by producing a complete unsubsidizad house characterized by economy, ease of finance, and innovative techniques and materials, Among factury-built wructures woddwide, the Ameri- can mobile home is the most prevalent. The Mobile Homes Manufacturers Amocation defined the mubile home as a "mova ble of purtable dwelling constructed at a factory to be towed on iu own chasis, connceted to urihties, and designed wubour 2 t foundation fur year round Living.”  The history of the chassis based house is remarkable for irs rapid evoluon over a short time. Physical uansformation, in association wich changes in use and meaning, spun off 3 sucun- sion of entities with different names. Ihe “travel crailer” emerged in che mid-1920s, and its production cuntinued until around 1940; the era of the “house trailer” spans from (40 unul 1953; the “mobile home” perind lasts from the mid-1950s to the mid- 1970s; and the current period begins in the mid- 1970s, when the mobile home officully became “manufatured bowing.” Fach nanse change significs an effort to create a new image and publi. perception of the chassir-based house.  Developing (rom the “travel erailer,” the mobile buene origi- gated in the recreaGonal vehicke industry. Through the 1930s, travel crailers were viewed as recreannnal housing and were in- deed highly mobile. Appealing to households with mobile life- styles and temporary housing needs, manulacturers oflered a variety of designs exploring alternative appearances and mean- ings in order to associatively idenrify this invention with ac- cepted fnems from the paxt ax well 4s popular images of che furure. .  During World Was IT. che rapid development of war indus- tries spawned dispersion and mobility of the labor force, An immedure need for housing resulted, and the travel uailer house satisfied it with a combination of mobility, affordability, and availability. Many units were used as permanent homes wn single installawons or in trailer parks, even as the units remained mu- bile. Housing shortages after World War II increased the use of such homes as year-round residences.  A newly renamed entity, the “house trailer” provided shelter chat was both immediate and within ecanomic reach of many. Families could move these unirs following employment o¢ whimsy. keeping wheels, axles, and hitches obviously in place foe easy trankport. In recognition. however, that the interest in mobile over conventional housing was increasingly an isuc of cconomy rather than mobility, che industry redirected its focus toward developing this industrialized housing type in compari son to other forms of factoey-built housing. This shift marks the beginning of the process by which the potential mobility of the structure becomes ever more iscidental in value.  The “mobile home” emerged as a cistinct carity un che mid- 1950s with the fire production of a ten-foot-wide unit. Larger  than could be pulled behind the family automobile, the mobile home suon attained lengths ins excers of M0 fect. Wich a growing, demand for longer and wider units, the industry produced an array of physical size and material variations for what remained a basic rectilinear unit set on steel travel chassis. Long, cxtra-long, doublewide. multilevel, foldour. pop-up. expandable, and multi secon units enabled physical conhiguranen more akin to those of sutc-built housing. Similarly, pieched-roof forms, interior and eaterion finuhes typical ro conventional constmiction, and mo- tube home court site desigms were adapted to make the mobile home more hause like and lesa vehicular. ‘The shift from the howe trates te the mobile home involved a change in attitude as well as use; the industry began co produce dwellings thar happened 10 be mobile rather than trailers chat could also serve as dwellings.  By the mid-1970s, one-fifth of all aew houses were mobile homes. prumanly for people seeking aflordable starter housing, Manufacturers were faced wach the chowe to remaan in the travel trailer business. to produce larger motile homes exclusively. or fo manufacture both products, essentially foe different markers. In 1963. the ewo indusirics formally sptit. with cravel trailer manufacturers identifying themselves ac the recreational vehicle industry.  Mobile homes, having emerged from the recreatianal vehicle industry, inttially were subject to linde of no regulation for con- struction or installation. Manufacturers were either small firms turning out a few units a month of Large automobile companies producing mubile hoses on the side. As mobile humes became @ permanent honing choice for more people, concemsy about public health and safety arose. Government revognition of the importance of mobile homes in satisfying demand for affordable housing led co federal legislation regulating their consiruction, In 1974, Congress passed what is now known as the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safery Standards Act, which directed the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (IfUD) to develop national building standards and a federal oversight program fot the construction of manufsc- cured homes. In June 1976, the federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safery Standards became law, Known as the “HUD Code.” it distinguishes manufactured housing from other forms of housing and its passage marks che end of mobile home productian.  Uneil relatively recently —if not to che present day—mobile homes have suffered disfavor [ruin the layperson, local and cen- tal government, the design profewsiun, and cven housing insutu- tions. Limitations of thet structural forms by wanapurtation ordinances and the use of low-quilicy construction material to quintain low marker prices have led to the perception chat they are bess than “real” howing. As such, they do not blend well with cxisung built or natural cnvirunments, Design attention by the architectural profession to the mobile home concept has occurred occasionally and sporadically, Nevertheless, mobile home structures satisfy preferences for norms of ownership, de- tached dwelling. and private outdoor space; they have found strong market acceptance as a coat-worthy substiture for conven- ional construction. Recognized generally on a vernacular level by those who built and use chem, mobile home structures pro- side a realntic option within che housing market.  Caron J. Burns 
Purther Reading  Bembards, Arthur D.. Building Fomorrew: The Mobrld Manufactured Honung Indwery, Cambodge, Manachuserts: MIT Pres, 10  Drury, Margaret J., Module Home: The Unrevegnicad Resolution in American Homing, Ithaca, New York. Camell Univeraty. 1967, revised atinon, New York: Pracger, 1972  Kronenburg, Robert. HMotse in Metron: Ube Genesis, Hivmery, and Develepment af she Portable Busldsyg, London: Academy Editions, 1995  Sanders, Welford, Mcmufactured Howsing: Regulation, Desogn fraovaniots, and Drvelapment Opaons, Chicage: Amenean Planning Asscianon, 1998  Verinees, Kinnherly and Josephine Lansic, The Farure of Mamufactnred Housing. Cambrelge. Mauachwete: foint Center for Hoaueg. Srudace of Harvard Universiry. (997  Wallis, Allan 1D,, Wheel Fraate The Rie and Devtine of Madste Homes, New Yorks: Oxford University Prev, 1991  MODERNISM  What don maderniam mean today when many cdebrate che “end” of the project of modernity, or claim its “incompleteness”? More important, could any discusuon of modernism taday avnid the fact that many counties, which were penpheral tw tse cathy stages of modernization, are now formulating dheit own undes- standing of modernism in general and of modem architecuure tn particular?  Among other connocanons, the ctymology of the word “mod- ern” suggests a manner of way of acting, a mode. but abo the form or way of being. Another helptul word derived tcom mode is madich, alluding to the stare of being in rhe laresr wyle and fashion. To be stylish means vo submit to the constant flow of eransformation that is instigated by modernization. Transience is perhaps one of the mest important axpects of modernity. It sugypsts eaperiencing the “now” of the present. This understand ing of the word “modern” emerged in the (9rh century. “Ry moderuse.” Charles Baudelaire wrote in 1863, “1 mean the ephemeral, the fugiave, the contngent, the half of ast whos other halfis the eternal and the immutahle” (p. 13). Before that, the term was discussed and understood differently. fin the 17th century, the idea of modern was used in conjunction with an cients; most remarkable was the case of the so-called quarrel between the ancients and the moderns. Chis was a dispute abour history and the rehrionship of the past to the present. Whereas some literary scholars of thar century aw the past in 3 perfect state of values and norms, uihers. the madems, questioned the validity of such a stronghold on the past, The histoncity of the idea of modernity, however, is herter understood when “mod. em” is spoused with the secularization of value and aburaction, when the authoritative role of the past is superseded and 4 differ- ent order of relationships among people and nature has emenged thar is contingent to the Aow and accumulation of capital and technological innovations.  Was the relavonship beeween modernity and modernism transparent? In retraspect, one can agree wath “TJ. Clark that . iam had oruck with a modemity not yer fully in place” (Clark, 1999). It was indeed the blindness of modernity, its nihilism, and the drive for perpetual crandormation that alien- ated modernism from ms historical concert, Since its inception,  modernism had ta confront a situation that was marked by che remnant of antiquity and even a peasant lifestyle chat, again according to Clark, “resisted the disenchantment of the workd.~ While industrialication was rapidly transforming the old order of the medheval towns of Europe. it took architects a long time lw accommodate the disciplinary history of archivecture to the demands of the new society and industrial materials and tech- niques. Seene scholars, however, argue that the beginning of mademism should be pushed back to the carly 18th century. when intellectual work broke with the classical discourse on art and architecture. The rupture was considered formative for the autonomy of arustec creativity, even though its borizon soon had to be modified according ev the subjective and objective condinons of the rising industrial bourgeois society.  As the cultural acurtbute of modemiry, modernism is rather a new phenomenon. It was not until mademity was questioned. after World War 11, that the idea of modernism was sought ro represent the cotality of a moavemene thar most architectural historians identify with the years spanning 1850 1 1945. The search foe an antwer to one of the fundamental questions of modern architecture, “In Whar Style Should We Build,” framed by Henmh Hubsch, the (9h ceneury German architect, wan, in the 19404, reduced to the idium of doe International Style. Such was the verdict of wuine histonnans and architects who chan- ocled modernism through a speculative reading of the Zeitgeist and its peeumed lincar and coherent development. Histencism prevailed in Nikolaus Pevaner’s encen of Madera Movement, first published in 1936, though his many generalizations stayed intact for a couple of decades.  Beneath the unified visiua of modernism depicted in the carly writings of the history of modern architecture lies diverse srraregies artempeing tn formulare an “objectivity” thar shares the following concerns: firs. how to reformulate a masonry based craft Language with material and techniques produced by wel. concrete, and glass industries. Second, what is the furure uf the ant of building in the metropolis where architecture had to contront the anguish unteashed by production and the cna. sumption system of capitalism? This observation underlines the heterugeneous character of moder architectuse, but more im portant, it suggests that architects understoad avodernism differ- ently chan historians or theoreticians, Scill, among architects, modemisn and the effect of moderation on architecture was interpreted variously: [he avant-garde arrempted to picture an image of architecture that formally and aesthericalty was in- formed by a sociocubniral siruation that was not yet realized. Foe them, architecture was cto play a constructive role in the realization of utopias that were mostly nurcured by the formative themes of the Enlightenment. Progress and creation of artistic work unimaginable previoudy wete sought as basic 0 moder: tity. For the avant-garde, practicing individually or collaborat- ing in groups, the advocacy fur the autonomy of art and architec- ture was ewcntial, Autonomy was soughe as the passing moment of art taward its destiny: the teintegration of the work of art into the hife-world. Abstraction was appropriated for its capacity 10 opening a space through which creative work could flourish independent of the realities of a given situation.  Futurists and the Dutch De Stijl. among other avant-garde gloups, radicalized the holistic vision of the Romantic modem- ists, propagating a “modernist” relationship between architecture and soctery that today wems naive in its understanding of the  sakes involved in the nihiliem perpetuated through moderniza  tion, Oxhen purucd a rather modest agenda. these architects atcempted to approach modermty through the architectural tra- dition of a particular region. The geographic distance separaung the Scandinavian counties and America from the metropoliun centers uf the Europe of the catly decades of the Last century produced a regionalist architecture, the best of which is exempli- fied in the work of Alvar Aalto and Frank Lhd Wright. Both tendencies (the avant-garde and the others), however, shared the fobowing convictions: that in modernity. there is Au room 1 conunue the symbolic languagy of classcal architecture: chat at is necessary to rethink the plinimeric organization of architecture based on new building types and tn concewe the enterser space of the domenic architecture according co the spatial needs of modern fife that was unfolding in the meteopolisan centers; and finally, chat technology is escotial tur che formubes af modern architecture.  The question cuncerming technology is cntical tor under standing the different faxets of mvdermsm. Although echnical reproducibility dit not have the same vttect on architecture as it did on visual aro (like film and painting), nevertheless, the subject's discussion coukd shed some light on the state of mental and technical possibilities chat informed modern architecture. Before modernization of rechniques, there was no undentanding of technology as it is known enday, A departure from a concept of fabrwauion in which technique is congenial to the image of the final product was inscrumencal (or dhe modemization of architecture's méticr. To he modern, architecture had no choice bu to menge inte che technological univene of capitaliven, l'ech- nufication of architecture metnt emptying the tect of any import to atchiteyaurc, The use of tochnologics vented outside of architecture's intcriority (the dixciphnary history of architec- ture), aligned design wich the cxigencies of technical planning. Thar capialist developmen: cook away certain tasks trom ache tecture not only is clear from architectural ideologies sought by the historical avant-garde and some sectors of the Hashaus school bur, more important. it is exemplified in the linguistic pularicis differentiating, for example, Peter Behrens's AFG Turbine Fac- tory. Berlin, 1908. 09, fram Adolf Meyer and Walter Gropius'’s design for Fagus Werk, Alfeld-an-det-Leine, Germany, 19E1 These building: demanstzate the fraginentativn of the craft of building bur ales the struggle of architects to retain a level of symbole meaning, acsthetically or otherwise. that war no longer attainable. [t was left to wme postwar architects whose work discarded the 19th century's concern tor the symbolic capression of structure. Archiggam of Great Britain, for one, channeled architecture's rapport with the machine through transparency of form and structure. -  Ac the constructive level, modernism offered archicectuse 3 structural frame system. the spatial and tectonic porennialities of which varies as one moves from Le Corbusier's Villa Savove. Poisy, France (1929-31), to Mies van der Rohe's devign for the German Pavilion, World Exhibition. Barcelona (1925). These two buiklings disclose differenc interpretations of modemism: Le Corbusier's lessons of Rome found its oudce in the Dom-ino frame, a modernist state of seeing and malung in which convric- tion “plays the tole of the subconsuous” (p. 87). discussed by Sigtned Giedion five years after the first publication of Le Cor- busier’s Vers ame Architecture (Towatds a New Architecture) in 1923. Mics inscad articulated the architectonics of “exhibison  value.” a concept comed by Walter Benjamin, Mics showed one way of internalizing the nihalisn of moderity into architecture. ln the pavilion, the suggested transparency between modemity and modernism as shattered by recollecteun of what Baudelaire would have called the artaic half of the art uf building; the matter-of-fact quality of column, wall, and roof, but also decans- tration of the metaphysics of che interior space. [f modernism succecdad in simulaung various interpretavons of che new ob- jectviry, (th horizon was minimized when architecrure met the sty, the site where many facets of capitalism were expenenced dhrectly. This much ia clear from the Rehance Building (1890- 95), designed by Daniel H. Burnham and Company, Chicago, and Miev's Scogram Buikding (in cooperation with Philip Joha- sun), New York City (1958). In both cases, design strategies disuse adheet link with the institutions and techniques operat- ing i the city. Each work also articulates a particular architec- ronan response to the proces of accumulanon of capital: from producaon of building as a pure sign to an attempt to renounce the mechanism of the city. To speak of the disiunction between modemity and modernism. it is cnongh to remember how quickly the “Chicago School” of architecture became a norma- lve style and how soon Mics's curtain wall system was subjected fo mass-repmduction and repetition ro che poinr that posrmod- exnists coukd claim. “less is bore." a satirical twist on Miev's famous dictum, “less is more.”  Modernity has constancly heen in conflict wich ies own con- text -- that is, architecture and the city. It has alo been in con- frontation with any intellectual work suggesting a vision of mod- emixm that cannot accommodate inmelf 1 che logic of modemization If Kul Marx was correct in suggesting that in capitalism, “all chat is solid melts into au,” chen whet happens to the art of bulding far which durability is seill one of its esenual aspecny? Ir is only through the act of csnstruction thar modermizauion Linds the space to operate tully. The disjunction berween space and ime, pertinent to architecture's resistance 10 modernization. is addressed by the Austrian architect Adolf Loos. To him, the architect was a Roman builder who had leamed [arm, In criticizing borh the Deutscher Werkbund and the Vienna Secessionist groups, Lous shunned designing the syle (ornament) appropriate to modem times, He also did nut value technology as highty as his contemporaries did. The architect's house (Laoshens, Micharlplarz, Voenna, 1909-11) isan analogue tw the confruntation of the culture of building with madernity. It also speaks for Loos's conviction that only tombs and monu- ments deserve the name architecture. The interior spaces of mast of his houses too were conceived in line with the same bebe. ‘The idea of Kanmplan snetmingles “place” with space and ume. One could suggest that for Loos, modernism was not a macter of subjective speculation: if was rather already there, in the acru- ality of modemization, necessitating the rethinking of architec- cural tradition in che matrix of human labor. money, and mate- nal, but also in making a space where “things” are reminded of theiz collective use-valuc.  In a different time and place, “things” were cullected to mark the dialogue between modetniam and socialism. The work of Rinsian Constructivists disduses a different approach co vechnal- ogy and abstraction. [n the absence af any organized industrial insututions, and impired in part by the ideas of Boris Arvatuy and other theoretigans, most Constructivists invested an the aeforms of material culture and tts laden potenualiry. They  
produced a bady of work that desired ta resist the reduction of the word of consumption to mere commodiries. The uniform use of wooden structural elements in Aleksander Rodchenko’s constructs and Konstantin Melinkov's USSR Pavilion at the [n- ternational Exhibition of Decorative Arts, Paris (1925), does noe minuc the rational organization of the world of technolagy. Here technique is derived from material, and both are perceived to be at the scrvice of macctial culture. The much is clear from Vesmin brothers’ Pravda Building, Moscow (1924), where the act of construction is intertwined with the realm of man-machine- communication, undedining the collective dimension of archi- tecture. Most artists and architects associated with Constructty- 5m assumed that they had the historical opportunity to capture the time/space dialectics of modernization and could freeze its image in a constructed place where rhe anncipatory porentalities of mademism could avoid adeology. Paradoxically, i1 was the realm of ideology that made constractivists sec and incerpret objects differently —different among themselves, but alvo differ- ent from the vision of the so-called vanguard party, That at one point the state realized its own ideological survival in the production of practical objects is clear from its adherence to an instrumental idea of “plan” chat slowly dinunished the aura of rewalution and turned the original energy af constructivist ob- jects into a pormative praxis, Noe tou late, constructivist had to abandon every norm excepe those associated with the classical a of architecture. ‘Uhis was an uncanny rerum to the “narural” stare of the object. an tdeological rebuff w the crisis of the object unleashed by modernizarion. tc also contirmed that in modernism, the adeclogy of plan could not contradict the instrumental logic of modernization.  If all heroes eventually die, so did the heroes of collocrivem and rhe romantic (i.¢,. modern) genius, Modernization had int own heroes at stake in the United States: Mickey Mouse and other icons of the culture industry, and cheit landwape. Disney- land, heralded an image of modernism that was tnass- produced and ready two be delivered, bur more imporcant, i¢ opted for an economy of sign, where pure exchange value marks the difference berween one reperentative order and another, In this 10-man’s- land, abstraction arid relativism prevails, time is disconnected from its past and future, and everything is memory, if not the metnury tw become. The stand-stitiness of the ume, the time that celebrates che end of modemsm. sarurates the 4 of imagination too, Many contemporary »chulars have for the “death of ube subject.” and the “end of history.”  {n postmoderanty. eclecticism returned to the archisects’ and designers’ drawing board. and in search for che archaic types or formal autonorny, architecture Ine its "mear.” Since the post-war years, architects have moved further from modernity, regardless of how much their work is informed by the experience af modern architecture. The Team X group in the Netherlands, und Louis 1. Kaho in the United Scates, reformulated architecture within ita own phenomenal space or charged architecture with civic values, respectively. No design strategy —even those purposed by the advocates of the “greys” an the “whites” — could remain immune to che level of abstraction permeating as technology moved its realrn of operation trom the technical to the culeural. This development 1s dramatized today by the perceptual horizon opened by electronic technologies. Thus, the physical distance ‘once governing the abstract aesthetic of carly modern art and architecture has heen largely neutralized by computee-gencrated  images that have become enmeshed in every aspect of the present world.  The situanan of possmademity endorses devaluation of all values and architecture's reduction to a sign. Nevertheless, com- modification and technification af architecture is not sotal, Al- though tnodemism was not conceivable without modernization of the vasious procesiet involved in the production of architec- ture, and even though skills and techniques operating in hand- work were mostly discarded duting the carly stages of modern architecture, there still remains an srtisanal residue in sechitec- ture that resists architecture's total reduction to « commodity form. In addition, many interpretations of modernism, permear- ing since the 196Us, suggest chat history itself failed modernises. Uncertain as we enter the new millennium, one thing sems to be clear: the historical claim of the project of modernity still hevers above architects and histonans like a ghow. Whar chis means is that today. architects and historians are facing a body of work —mndern architecrure—that wax not available to mod- ernists. This necessitates a different approach to the immediace past: insicad of total negation os affirmation of modernism, the task ahead should be to inflict the present material world by recollection of the tectonic Culture af modern architecture.  -Grvorx Ha oUNIAN  See aie Aalto, Alvar (Finland); Abstraction; AEG Turbine Factory, Bertin; Archigram; Amstria; Avant-Garde; Banhans; Bauhaus, Dessau; Behrens, Peter (Germany); Berlin, Ger- many; Burnham, Dasiel (United States); Chicage (LL), United States; Chicago School; Le Corbusier (Jeanseret, Charles-Edoward) (France): Cubisa De Sik Deutaches Werkbund; Dom-ine Houses (1914-15); Fagus Werk, Al- feld, Germany; Farnsworth House, Plano, Ilisoiss Futurisa; German Pavilion, Barcelona (1929); Giedien, Sigfried (Switzerland): Glass House, New Canaan, Connection Gropias Howse, Lincoln, Mamachusess, Gropius, Waker (Germany); Hischoock, Henry-Runeell (United Seases); later national Exhibition of Decorative Arte, Paris (1925); later- national Style; Intcrmational Style Exhibition, New York (1932); Jehnsoa, Philip (Uniscd Seates); Kaha, Louis (United States); Loos, Adolf (Austria); Mdlnikev, Koestantin (Russia); Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig (Germany) New York (NY), United Staten Pevsner, Nikolaus (England); Postmad- erniam; Seagram Building, New York City; Skyscraper; Team X (Netherlands); Vienna Secemian; Vesnia, Alexander, Leonid, and Viktor (Russia); Villa Savoye, Poissy, France; ‘Weight, Frank ord (United States)  Further Reading  Aremdt, Hannah, The Huraan Condision, Chivage: University of Chicago Pres, 1974  Benpimin, Walter, Sdevera! Writomgs. vol. J, 1935-1948, Cambridge: The Bekoap Pree, 2002  Raudelaite, Chatles, The Painter of Medeen Life and Ocher Emap. tramtated by Jonathan Mayne, New York: Da Capo Pres, 1986  Berman, Matthall, AW shat is Solid Ateln inte Air: The Experience of Modernity, London Verso, 1982  Buck-Moric, Susan, Dresrmworld and Catastrophe: The Pesing of Mas Utopia im Fast and West, Cambeiige, Mamachusceu: MIT Presa, 2000  Caceasti, Mamaroo, Archisectury and Nibilom: On the Phibnephy of Modern Archurcrare, Now Haven, Consecticut: Yale Casvenity Prem, 1993  Caltnescu, Matei, Five Faces of Medeoniy: Madertum, Avant-Garde, Decadence, Kinch, Porretmdcrniim, Darhaw, North Catalina. Drake University Prew, 1987  Clark, T. J. Farewell se an idea Epuordes froma Hotory of Modermura, New Havers, Connect: Vale Unevenaty Press, 1999  Fontes, Hal (cditor}, The Anti Acstheric: Exaeys on Pasrmodern Cadturr, Port Townsend, Washington: Bay Prem. 1983  Frampton, Kenneth, fabewe. Werk and Anbitetur, New York Phaidon Press, 2002  Frampton, Kenneth, Afodern Architecture: A Critwal Huteey. London: Thame and Hudwe, 1980  Goodson, Sightied, Building sa France, Ruilding on leon. Basidinng in Ferre-Cancrvte, Santa Monica: The Getry Ceeter far the Hisery of Art and the Humanities, 1995  Hartoonsan, Gevoth, Madernity and its Ooher A Post-Serps ew Camemporary Archetecrere, College Statin: Texas A & M Univeruty Press, 1997  Hartoanian, Gevork, Onmlegy of Comiznarten On Nitto of Techaolegy in Thearits of Modern Arckitectere, Cambridge Cambrdge Univerney Press. 1994  Heynen, Hilde, Architecture and Modernity. Cambndge. Massachusetos: MIT Press, 1999  Herrmann, Walfgang, dx What Sryle Showdd We Busia: The German Debate on Architectural Sole, Sania Monica, California: The Getty Centre for the Hiscary of Art and the Humanines, 1992  Hirchcock. Henry-Ruseell. and Philip Johnson, The fnteruational Sale, New York: Norton, 1966  Pevsner. Nikolaus, Proneers of Madern Design, New York: Penguin Banks, 1976  Tatun. Mantredo, Architecture and Utopia: Design and Capuaies Develapment, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Pros, 1976,  Varuumo, Gianm, Tbe End of Modernity, Balumoce, Marytand: The John Hopkins University Ines, 1988  Venmn, Robert, Cowspleaty und Contradicriog in Archutecrute, New York: The Museura of Mudem Art. 1996.  ‘Williams, Raymand, The Polines of Madernism, London: Verso, 1989  MOLNAR, FARKAS 1897-1945 Architect, Hungary  Farkas Molnar was an outstanding figure of the European avant-garde movement. After two years of graphic amv studies at the Academy of Fine Ans in Budapes, he enrolled in the Architectural School of the Technical University in Budapest in 1917. Because of his involvement in lets pulitical actions, he had to keave Flungary after the fall of the Republic of Councils in 1920, After a study tour in Italy, he became a Bauhaus student in Weimar, Germany, in 1921. He took the graphic ars course of Johannes Iteun.  In 1922. the Bauhaus published a sct of lithographs by Mol- nar and his friend Henk Stefin in the album Maia 1921 (Italy 1921). Soon, he became involved in theater art and architeccurat design. workang in Oskar Schlemmer's workshop and in Waker Gropius's architectural practice with his Hungarian friend Fred Foebar, who joined che Bauhaus before his arrival. Influenced by lectures given by Theo van Doesburg, he organized the KURI group (1922) to unite avant-garde artistic effors in constructive  art and functionalist architecture. She mame of the group came from the tithe of sts manifesto, che initials of the German words fonstrubty (constructive), wtilitte (utibeasian). national. and im- ternational. Malnar’s “Red Cube” project (1923) was an carty attempt to realize his ideas in architecture: a neo-story family hate with a fat roof, minimal footing, and flexible room con- nections in the interior. The howe was connected to the garden by a pergola. It was planned for the housing estate Ame Hore and was shown at the Bauhaus Exhibition in Weima (1923). With as radical geometrical coduction, the design represented a new direction in architecture and was the starting point for Mol- nis's Later villa projects. He experimented with mobile parsitions and new possibilities of room connections in his U-Theater project (1923) as well. He published the book Dse Bidhne im Kawhsus (1925; The Stage in the Bauhaus} in callaborarion with Onkar Schlemmer and [ise Mohaly-Nagy in the series af Raw- Aawbicher (Bauhaus Books), From 1923 on. his designs and articles appeared in the publications of Hungarian avant-garde (ep MA, Munka, 100%, and Ter & Forma). introducing and ting cunsrucovise art and fiusctionalist architecuure.  In 1925, when the Bauhaus moved to Dessau, Mulnir re- turned 10 Budapest and continued his studies in archieccture at the Technical University, graduaung in 1928. He became a lead- ing figure of the functionalist movement in Hungary. His aes- thetic views were closer to thase of Le Corbusier than to those: of the Newes Rawen in Germany. He proposed standardized, mass-produced housing with affordable minimal apartments and communal spaces based on a new social structure in which the traditional family would lose irs imporsance. All his friends were on the political Left, Whey connected the gnal of a new archinec- ture with questions of political and social changes.  In 1929, Molnds participated at the Cungrés Internationaux Architecture Modem (CIAM), which fouused on the mini- mum dwelling in Frankfur. He became 4 member of the Comité International pour fa Réalixauion dea Problitnes d’Architecue Contemporaine (CIRPAC) and organized the Hungarian CLAM group. whose most important members were Jozsef Fischer, Pal Ligeti. Maté Major. Fred Forbac, Gyorgy Racz, and Gabor Prei- sich. The group met regularly in Budapest uncil 1938, In the fall of 1931, the group showed the utopian KOL HAZ project, a collective house for 800 peaple in the Houschold and Interior Design Fxhibition in Budapest, In 1932, Molnir introduced his similarly utopian KOLVAROS project, a schematic design of 3 collective city in the ‘Tams Gallery, Budapest. ‘The social criti- cism of the third CIAM exhibition, “House. City. Society” (1932. Iparesamok, Budapest), was cven mote radical, confront- {ng the existing unhealthy housing sicuation of poor people in Budapesr with healthy social housing for low-income people, a vision of the modem architeccure.  Molnar worked berween 1928 and 19.31 in Pal Ligeti's office, and together they ecalired the first modern functionalist building in Hungary, the Dele Villa at 11 Mihaly Street (1929) in Buda- pest. Motndr's own aparsment of minimal footing (52 square meters) was also in the villa. In the inseriar, he achieved a high grade of flexibility by diding partiouns In furniture design. be used new materials, such as plastic of Bakelite, and exclusive marefials, such as ebony. Furniture, apartment, building, ciry, and region design were all logical components in hss svstemaric thinking.  
From 1931 on, Molndr worked on bis awn, occasionally collabutating with members of the CIAM group. He buile a number of private villas far maddle-clas intellectuals who were open ta new idess, but he never received any communsion for a pubhe bubling The villa at 2/a Leite Street (1932) in Budapest was built tor une family. fe has a cubic yulume enlarged by nwo half cylinders, the smaller of which conains the staircase and covers exactly one-lourth of une side of the buikding and the larger of which extends the living room on the tint Hoos the lange roof terrace, accesible from the steeping rooms on the sevund floor. covers exactly half the acu side of the building. The four-story apartment house at 4/b Lorz Karoly Stecet (1933) in Budapew hav a compact volume as well with a flat roof and horizontal stripes of windows and balconies. The Malnan’ new fwo-story apartment was also to be found in the silla. The slid- ing walk were made posaible a new “dynamix space connection.” as Liszld Moholy. Nagy described it. The ides of ideneical and connectable cells for mat and woman hal already appeared in the "Red Cube” projet. Now the idea was elaborated in detail. The volt suhemc for the walk, the vextiles, and ube furniture was carefully planned.  Molnar frequenth used lus own constructivist as well as other artists’ figurative decararions in the cntrance areas of his villas (Gparment house ar Pasaréti Suet, Budapest, 1956; walla ar Trombitas Strcet, Budapest. 1936). The light depance of the villa at 7/a Csévi koz (1935, with fonef Fischer) in Budapest made the most of the usual rvintorced-concrete structures of Molnde’s buiktings. He occasionally worked with Béla Samsondi Kiss, an inventive engincer of reinfosced-conceete structures, Molndt’s idea of the collective hause became partly realized in the black of emplayre apartmens for the OT] Worker Hospital (1936, with Jéenef Fischer) in Pestijhely.  Tp 1937 Molnir was clected the secretary af the CIAM-OS1, hat a year later, under growing poliucal pressure, the CLAM group dissolved. Molndr abandoned hic leftist ideas and mowed in the opposite ditecrion. Uhe villa st 8 Mese Street (1947) in Budapest indicated diat his archetcctural principles changed as well, He became interested un the aesrherics of Hungarian peas- ane architecture and started to use building forms and materials (high-pitched oot and rubble stanc) that were never accepted by orthodox modernists. His fast project. the Church of the Holy Land, was designed in 1938 and was between 1940 49 pardy finished. It had a lange oval plan and was to he covered with a concrete shell. In the interior. Molnar planned to accom- tmodate replicas of the haly sites in forusalem. Motnar died when his home was hit by a homb during the siege of Budapest in 1945.  Karas Moravian Grover asc Anus Monmavanacay  Biography  Born in Pécs, Hungary. 21 June 1897. Antcoded, Fine Ans Col- lege, Buulapest; stuched at the Hunganan Palaune Joseph Iech- nical University. Budapest, but did not carn a degree: studied at the Bauhaus, Weimar, Germany 1921-24: worked in the office of Walter Gropius, Weimar 1921-25; resumed studies m Budapest 1925; graduated 1928, Private practice, Budapest from (931. President, Hunganan chapter of CLAM 1929-38: ap- pointed Hungarian delegace 1 CIAM £929; secretary, CLAM-  Ost. formed to ocganize the architects of caster Europe 1937. Died in Budapese, 12 January 1945.  Selecsed Works  Red Cube (proyectt, Hauhaus exhibition, Weimar, 1923  U-Theater (proves), L923  Dele, Vill at #1 Mibily Servet (with Pal Lageu), Buclapess, 1929  KOLVAROS (project), 1932  Villa ot 2a Lejeds Sttcet, Pudapes, 1242  Apanimcet Howse at db Lor Karuly Steet, Bodapest, 1933  Villa an Va Codat hie, Huclapeat swith iaaed Fin her}, 1935  Aparinents, OTT Worker Heapital, Peoijhely, (with Jozsef Fincher), 19k  Apantment IInuae at 7 Panarétr Setect, Handapea, 1916  Villa at Tromfacis Sever, Budapest, 1936  Villa at 8 Mowe Sereet, Budapest, (937  Hungarian Holy Land Church (unfinrthed). Budapest. 140-49  Selected Publication Die Bishne sm Bardens (with L. Muboly. Nagy and Q, Schlemmer), 35  Further Reading  Ferkai. Andras, “Hungarian Architecture bérween the Wan.” in The Atchisecrare of Histone Hungary. edited by Duta Wiebenson and Kirnef Sia, Cambridge, Massachusert: MIT Press, 1998  Menei, Onto. "Farkas Mulnis.” un Wedel winkuagen: Ungensebe Atwnnpunde in der Weimarer Repwbist \loccracuans: Hungarian Avant Garde an the Womar Ripuble! odued by Hubertas Gassoer, Marburg, Germany: Jonas, 1986  Molnie, Parkas. “A lakisgpites racionalizalaa.” [The Ranonalzanon ot Housing, Tér és Forma 3 (19281  Modnar, barks Uy Lpudi: Molnar Farkas Afumkas, 1929-1983 [Farkas Mudnie’s Works, 1923 1933;, Bradapes: Magyar Mihely Sapeeudg. 1944  MONEO VALLES, JOSE RAFAEL 1937- Architect, Spain  José Ratacl Monco Vailés 1s onc of the most influential architects in Spain today. His carcer has served as a model for numerous younger architecss both in Spain and abroad. Moneo was known in architectural circles since the 1970s nos onfy bor his role as an architect but also for his rheorctical contributions to the avant-garde publication onginating in Barcelona, Anguiterteras bis, and his work with Petct Fisenman’s Institute foe Architecture and Urban Sridies, He was relatively anknown outside these sphetes, 4 condition usffered by almont all Spanish archiece uf chat teme. His name beuume inure familias eo American audi- ences when he was appoinced chase of Harvard's Graduate School of Design in 1985. This coincided with a period of in- tense acuvity at hus “atelies” in Madrid. The acceptance of a position at Harvard rellevts Moncu's deep commitment to teach- sng and investigation chat has consistently lived alongside his love for building.  In Rafael Monco’s subtle and varied oeuvre, the importance of the site, the context, and the mission of the building all inform the resultant structure. His projects display a deep underwanding of the craft of building. His apparent rejecting of “type” necesai- tates a careful reading of his buildings chat have multiple layers  of imverpreution. Monco’s buildings must be understood an the basis of thei: clements rather than heit major forms. ‘The underlying concerns and tnterests are ever present, but their formal expression takes on a variety of umaggs.  One of Monco’s fint projects that gained national artention was an apartment building (1970) along the Urumea River in San Sebastian, Spain. in collaboration with the three architects of Marquet, Unzurrinzaga, and Zulaica. There is a clever juxta- Position between the horizontal bands uf windiuws and the veri: cal pull of the curved hays. The budding is located on the river bank ina prominent position, tes pitched roof and dark brick ftepand to the ncighboring buildings.  The Bankinter buikding (1977), offices and banking faciliues located on a main axis in Madrid is still considered one of the architeet’s most outstanding works It sited behind an existing small palace on a difficult plot. Phe architect mainuains 4 princi pal facade parallel co the strcet, almost forming a backdrop for the smaller mansion in the forctront. he irregular shape of the building fits the site nearly, and the carctul use of brak and the oversize tree panels on the upper ery seem to pay homage tm history and especially to the works of Louis Sullivan.  Uhe Narional Museum of Roman Acc (1986-85) in Mérida, Spain, launched Monen’s inrernational reputation. Although immediately inspiring to all who enter the main exhibition space wich its dramatic arches, chis building has many camplerities. The museum was constructed of brick, in the spirit of Roman building. and it fite wichin the madest wale of the ciry through its cateful handling of the different facades. Moreover. the build- ing is in dialogue with the still powerful renuants of ancient Rome nearby. The oxterion buttressed walb of the main hall indicare the rhythm of the arches inside. “The dimenuons, color, and positioning of the back gram a sense of permanente and timelessness to the space. Elevated walkways allow the visitor to view the works on the upper level while experiencing the whole nave. ‘The light that enters through the windows at the mofline adds co the drama of the main hall and intensifies the visitor's petception of space.  The Kursaal Culrural Center (1999) in San Sebastian. Spain. comprises ewo enormous gles cube that wontain performing arts facilities, culuural facilities, and the necessary support scr vices. The catensive use of glass appears as. a departure from the mote traditional materials thas Monev wed in the pus, How- ever, his choice is clearly understood when one witnesses the dramatic change from sold mass in daylight (0 glowing cubes at night. In this project, he could have continued the normal cityscape af San Sebastian right to the beach ste. However, from the placement of the Kursaal Cultural Center and the formal solutions adopred. it becomes apparent that the dewre was to highlight the natural attributes of the site—the beach, the river. and the sea, The simply yet bold forms employed, the emphasis on materials, and the response ta che site and contest all lustrate anguing, deep concerns of the architect that are present in all his works.  Mono was increasingly called on for international museum commissions, including the Pilar and Joan Miré Foundaoon (1993) im Palma de Mallorca; the Davis Muscum (1995) at Wellesicy College, Massachusetts; the Museums of Modern Art and Architecture (1997) in Stockholm, Sweden: and the Audrey Jones Beck Building (2000) of the Museum of Fine Ans in Houston, Texas.  Among other noteworthy preyecis throughour Monco’s cs- feet aie the headquarters (1988} for the Prevision bspafiola in- surance company in Seville, che new Atochs Train Scauon (1992) in Madrid, a city hall (1998) in Marcia. and the Our Lady of the Angels Cathedral of Los Angeles (20021.  Maetiia Tioant  See abe Spain  Biography  Born in 1937 an the village of Ludeta in the Navarre repon of northern Spain. Studied architecture at the Polytechnic Univer- sity of Madrid; received degree in 1961. Practical experience gained in the ateliers of Spanish architece Francisco Javier Saenz de Oiza and the Danish architect Jorn Utron before opening his awn office, Spent two years as a fellow ac the Spanith Academy in Rome. Taught in the 1960s in Madrid. until offered a tenured position at the School of Architecture in Barcelona.  Taught #¢ Cooper Uninn (1976-77) and Princeton Univer: sity (1982), Appointed Chair of Harvard's Graduate School of design in 1985. a posiven he fulfilled unul 1990. Received nu- merous prizes, including the Brunncr Memorial Prize of the American Academy of Arts and Letters (1993) and the Prinker Architecture (1996).  Selected Works  Aparment building (with Marquee, Unvurntieraga. and Zulaica), San Sebastian. Spam, 1970  Hankinics Bankding. Madrid. Spain 1977  ‘National Museum of Roman Art. Menda, Spain, 1985  Arocha ain Suarion, Madad. Spain. 1992  Pilar and Joan Mira Foundation, Palma de Muatlorca. 1993,  Dans Museum, Walesley College. Massachuserts, 1994  Masums of Modem art anal Archieuure, Swickholn, Swelen, we  Karrsaal Cultural Cemter, San Sebastian, Spain, 1992  Audrey Jones Beck Bunkding. Museum ot Fine Ara in Houston, texas, 2000  ur Lady of che Angels Cathedral, Los Angeles Cahlornia, 2002  Selected Publications  “On tnternationalisn.” Casebefla, 6) (November 1997), 9. 3  “On Typology,” Oppennens 13 (Summer 1978). pp. 22-44  “The Solitude of Buildings,” Caabeiy 63 tApeil 19991, pp. 30-31  “Third Manfredo Tahari Lecture: Ratad Monro: Archirecture, Critses, Hestary.” Cansbedie 62 (rebruary 1948), pp. 42-51  “Paradigmas fin de siglo; las noventa. entre fa fragertacin y ba  * compacidad” (kad of the Cencury Paradigms, fragmentation and compactness). Avquetevtwra Vent 66 (May. fune 199), pp. 17 24, binglish translauwn, pp. 11-111  Further Reading  Frampton. Kenneth, “Ratzel Moneo.” Architecture 83 January (943  Nakamura Toshes teditort, d+ 0 Ratacl Meneo 227 {August T9R  “Rafael Monen, 1986 192" 4 Monggraflas 36 Juby- Auguet sou :  Levene, Pachard ©, am) bernande Marquez Coolia (alitor|, "Rafad Monee, 19871994." #7 (Croguit 64 (1994)  Levene, Richard C. and Fernando Marques Cecilia (alison), “Ratael Manes 195-2000, EF Crogate 98 (19991 
Monee, Rael, and Johan Marcchus. Madera Museum and Swestsh Micieum of Arcbateczure ix Seocthetnn, Stockholm. Arburektur Hirlag and Rasyer Forlag, 1998  Thome. Martha, Rifar! Meaco, The Audrey Jones Beck Busiding, Museum of Fine Art Houston, Stutcgart: Edivun Axel Menges. 2000  MONTREAL, QUEBEC  For students of 20th-entury architeceure, Montreal's greatest dim w Bme ib it beroie architectural designs of the 1960s. For international visitors. its attraction hes in its vibrant urban bfe and in the diversity of its premeyacity districe: and Land- amarks. Facing the harbor chat veas recently echabiluated for tour- ism and entertainment, the old mercantile city looks very much as it did around 1910. at a time when 2 second downtown developed further west. around Phillips. and Dominion Squares and along cast-west arteries. This area inchides Boulevard René Levewque (formerly Dorchester}, a popular business address since its enlargement in the mid- 1950s: St. Catherine Street, the heart of retail and mas entertainment; and Sherbrooke Street, how to cultural and educativnal institutions. Thrce upscale residentiat discrices of great architectural significance—the Golden Square Mile, Westmount, and Outretnont—vccupy the southern, weet em, and northern slopes of Mount Royal, respectively. To the east, the French lewer-middle-class district of Plateau Mont Royal ullen a dense fabric of dupkea ve ciples (Las with unique enfilades of individual extenor staircases,  Shaped by architects, buiklers, and clients born or rained in Scodand, England, France, and the United States, these districts remind tounsts of Fdinburgh, london, Paris, and New York City. Cosmopolitanism hay born a major defining factor for this former French secdlement (founded in 1642) and Barish colony, located 40 miles from the U.S. border, which even narive-bom historians have deemed a ville demprusts (a city of borrowings} (Lintcau, 1992), Other historical forces have shaped Monercal’s 20th-century architecture, Because of its eclatively weak political status and major rule as Canada’s - - and today specifically Que hec's—financial, transportation, and manufacturing center, comminsions frum entreprencun, tather than public buiklings. have taken center stage in its prowth process. The dommating influence of the Catholic clergy nver the French-epeaking mayor- ity unul the 1960s explains why convents and eckecuc parish churches are bigger and more conspicuous than in any other large Norch American city.  As the United Staces beyan supplanting Britain as its main economic partner, Canada was che first country to umport Amer- ican architectural expertise. The cranstoemarion of Montreal into a modern metropolls begaa with the building boom of the late 1880s. especially with two designs hy New York architects: Bruce Price's Windsor Station, and Babb, Cook and Willard’s cight: story New York Life Insurance Cumpany Building. The 1890 founding of the Province of Quebec Associatinn of Architects was manly a teaction agains this U.S. “invasion.”  Around 1910 and in the 1920:, Montreal and its suburbs eapericnced two penods of intense budding activity and demo- graphic eapanwun, with the populauon reaching the one million Mark in 1931, With the exceppan of Westmount and the indus  trial town of Maisonneuve, which implemented cohesive urban and architectural images along British and Ciry Beautiful lines, respectively. bourgeois reformism was unable to defeat the apa- thy and demagoguery of local politicians, and Montreal's growth was not regulated by cumpechensive planning. Nonetheless, the fires theve decades of the 20th century have left a rich legacy, with Anglophone archisects mostly in charge of commercial work and the French-speaking colleagues taking a majority most of she public commmussions, cach catering 10 the residential, civic, educe- tiunal, and teligious needs of theie linguistic group.  Asuund 19!0 a distinctively North American version of Beaux-Arts classicism was exhibited in high-end commercial work by New Yorkers McKim, Mead and White's awe-inspiring addition to the Bank of Montreal (1905) and adjacent Royal ‘Trust Building (1912). whose tripartite composition set new standards fur Canada's commercial archirecture: Carrére and Hantings's Transporation Building (1912). whose T-shaped suncounse anticipated the inrerior street network of the 19605; and Warren and Wermore’s Ritz Carlson Hotel (1912). The same subdued and clegant style was used by local architects for major cultural institutions—in particular Edward and William Maxwell's Montreal Art Gallery (1912) and Eugine Puyette’s Bibliotheque Saint-Sulpuce (1915). On the British side, Scottish émugré Percy Nebbs played a major mole as a critic of Canadian architecture and promoter of the Garden City movement; for Mctiill University, he designed the Scottish Baronial Student Union Hall (1906: coday McCord Museum) and Shavian Mac- donald Engineering Building (1908).  Th the 1920s Amcricanism was channeled by local designen: trained in the United States, especially Roes and Macdonald. Canada’s Largest firm at the time. The 130-foot beight limit was finally repealed. Skyscrapers ranged from the ultrsclassical Sun Life headquarrers (1914-18, 1923-25, and 1929 31) by Das- ling and Pearson of Toronto to York and Sawyer’s Greco Horentine Royal Bank and Ernest Barron’s trendy Aldred Build. ing. Although advanced from a technical and programmatic nandpoiunt. Montreal's architecture remained stylistically con- servative. Three diplémés of the Paris Kenle des Beaun-Arts were among those pointing in new directions. As evidenced in his Généreux Public Baths (1926), Jean-Omer Marchand was an articulate eaponent of Julien Guader’s canvmuctive rationalism. Fenest Cormier designed Canada's firs truly modern institu- sonal building, the mammoth main pavilion of the Universicé de Montedal (1927, 1942) the rwo dates are necessary which aombined baroque planning with Wright-inspired brickwork, the monumental with the picturesque. the comb-shaped su- perblock with the tower ileal. Along with Faton’s penthouse sesaurant (1930) by French architect Jacques Cartu. Cormier's own house (1931) is Montreal's Ast Deco treasure. And during the mid- 1930s, alchough the economic depression had particu- larly devastating effects on Montreal's building industry, Marcel Parizeaw was able w acclimate the machine acsthetic in his ele- gant designs for Outremone tuwnhauses.  In the carly 1940s Bauhaus dexign methods and social agends wese introduced at McGill University, and a municipal City Planning Department finally was created. Nonetheless, the mainstreaming of modern urbanism and archisecture in Mon- ural occurred only in 1957 with the unveiling of ewo ambitious  f ti i  Bank of Montreal, Winnipeg beans, designed by McKim, Mead and White 1911) © Muscum of the City of New York. from the Manograph of the Work of McKim, Mead, and  White. Vol 1¥, plac: 345 (1911)  projects for the downtown, Tes Habirarions Jeanne Mance and Place Ville-Masie. ‘The first. a public-housing onmplex, was planned locally by Rother, Bland. Trudeau and designed by Greenspoon, Freedlandes and Dunne, and it would remuin Monurcal’s only radical urban renewal operation. The second, entrusted ta the New York architcct/develaper team of 1M. Pei and Willum Zeckendorf. brought wo frusuen au ar nghts development project firse envisioned in 1913. Tes abstract crui- form wwer, vast esplanade, and gallery of bouriques connected with Central Station were harbingers of a new integrated urban core suited ca cold climaric conditicns.  In the 1960s Montreal experienced rapid social and political modernization and a rise in its population's standard of lnving. Modernizing transportation infrastructures became a priarity for the surong municipal government headed by Jean Draper. While urban highways gave rise to tremendous suburban sprawl of a particularly sorry nature, the Metro opened in 1966, with stations of varied character entrusted to major architects and artists. In Reyner Banhams’s (176) words, the entire downtown rapidly became a megastructure, “unified by a subterranean net- work of shopping malls, pedescrian tunacls, Meteo stations and parking silos, like cight kilometers of an underground root sys-  tem of which the office wwer and hotch above ground were mere outgrowths.” Forcign comprcnce was called on with mixed cesults; while Luigi Moretti and Picrluigi Nervi’s reudorced-concrcic Stak Exchange | ower (1964) contributed to disfiguring Victoria Square, Mies van der Robe's Wermount Square (1966) provided 2 sensitive cesponse to increased density. With its facade of curved precast concrete clements. the most original high-rise design was the Chiteaa Champlain Hore (1966) by Roger d’Astous, a former apprentice of Frank Lloyd Wright. The most awesome element of the ville souterraine (the subterrancan network of pasages and shops connected to mass transportations.) was Raymond Afileck’s lace Bonaventure (1968), a Forsress in beter bras chat superimposed a mega ethibition hall, a merchandise mart, and 4 surpesingly intimate 400-bedroam bore! at its top. The climax of Montreal's mega- wMructure eta was its 1967 World’: Fair. “Man and His Wodd” pointed to the future with Buckminster Fuller's geodesic U.S. Pavihon and its “multiplicity of levels, emphasis on fun or dnd: igne expetiences, stylish Azchigsam-type calars, people in com: artificial environmens, visual uvformation saturation” (Basham, 1976), Derived from his masice’s thesas at McG, the fair's housing showcase way Moshe Safdie’s Habstat: its saggered 
sithouctte established a striking dialog with the harbor's grain elevators, once celebraced by Gropius and Le Corbusier. As Montseal’s most widely discuswd landmark. Habitas established a model for cellular peefabrication and residential design.  In the 197s Montreal detinitely had relinquished its national leadership ro Toronto and hegan experiencing an counamic and dermographix slowdown from which it has yet to recover. Built for the 1976 Sumince Olympxs, Frenchman Roger Taillibert’s stadsum and the high-rise athlete howang by d'Astaus were ulti- mate manifestations of Deapeau’s folie aes grandeur. Influenced by contemporary European theory, a hew generation of designers condemned the transformation of Montreal's public space unto a “commodity” and sought to reevaluate the uaditeonal grid determined by the old lazm boundaries. in which hierarchical networks of avenucs, sircets, and alleys have primacy over ini- vidual buildings. Uheir leader was the artist/architect and Uni- versié de Montiéal professor Melvin Chamcy. This trend for an urban architecture of fragmente—mending new buildings with existing ones—-was best exemplified in ARCOP’s (Archi- sects in Co-Partnership) Maison Alcan office complex (1984), Tewent hand in hand with » strong involvement in preservation, spearheaded by such organizations as Heritage Mantreal and DOCOMOMO (Inrernational Association For the Documen- tation of the Conservation of the Mader Movement) Quebe, a well as adaptive reuse.  How has Montreal architecture fared)? With a few exceptions, auch as the Marathon Building (1901) by New York's Kohn Pederson Fox, Postmodem office buildings have been medbocre and inflated. and the be commercial designs are invenors for shops and restaurants, such as Luc Laporte’s Lux (1985). Jacques Rousseau’s much-pubticired Maison Colonialed 1990} is a mar- ginal expetiment in an umlistinguished housing market. Mean- while, a new crop of muscums, thearers, and university buildings have strengthened Montreal s cultural scene: best known are the Pointe.d-Cailléte archeologxal museum (1992) by Romanian immigrant Dan Hanganu, and the Canadian Center for Archi- tecture (1988) by Peter Rose, with Phyllis Lambert acting as consulting architect. These designs take theit cue from the aus tere grey stone. which had marked Montreal before the 18805, Uf the many political and counumit unceruintia hunging over this metropolitan center of thice million inhabitants do not augur well for asother major building boom, Montreal, with the impews provided by die Canadtan Centre for Architecture, has became one of the cities in the world in which architecture, past and present, is most studied, discussed, and appreciated in professional, academic, and journalistic circies.  (sapere Gowanay  Banham, Reyner, "Megacity Moncreal.” in Megastrucrure Urban Funwres of the Revens Pax, by Banham, New York: Harper and Row, and London’ Thames and Hudson. 1476  Bergeron, Claude, Arehisertire du XX" aécle au Queber, Archirecrace of the XXth century on Puchec Montreal: Mendicn, 1989  Chamey, Melvin, “The Manitealnew of Montreal.” Architectural Rernne (May 180)  Choke. Marc H., Le grander plares publigues do Mentréal, Montreal Menten. 1987  Choke, Marc H.. Ler habrtarions feanne-Mance, Monireak Saunt-Maron, 1995  Communaurd Urbaune de Monuéal, Scevice de Plauficanion du Terrnotre, Répertorre diarcbriectare trudisionnetic sur ke weerisive de dt commmunante whaine de Montréal, Mantrcal. Service, 1980-87  Couturier, Manc-Alan. Marcel Parizenw, Montreal: | “Adbre, 1945  Forge. Madeleine. Let grarse-cid de Mowsrtal, Manarcal: Méridicn, 1990  Gournay, luabelle (editat). Ernest Cormuer ot [Ufaivernee de Montreal. Monweal: Centre Canadien d'Architecture, 1990; a Ernest Carsesee and the Universite de Montréal, Cambridge. Massahusetn, MIT Brew, 19400  Gournay, Inabelle. und France Vanlsether (editors), Moearried Meteepot 1880 1930, Varones: Staddan, 1998  Kalman, Harold, A Husery of Canadian Archuecenre, 2 vols. Turanto ar New York: Oxford University Pees, 194  Linccau, Paul André. Hirwire de Montréal depuis ba Confidéeation, Moutteal: Roréal, 1992  Marsan, Jean-Claude. Mentefal en drelution: Hisarique du devdlopmem de Tarchitecture of de Cenvivornement Moeirialais, Montreal: Fides, 1974; 3ed editing, Laval, Quebec: Méridien, 194, an Mantreal mm Evotunon Huterical Anaipis of the  arnt af Monerral’s Anchntecture and Urban Exverearent,  Moannseal: McGill-Queen’t University Prew, 1981  Pepall, Rinslinat M., Consnuction diem Musée Bearex-Art, Mencréal, 1912: Baskding « Beaux Arn Mascam (baliogual French-baglise edition), Montreal: Monereal Museu of Fine Art. 1986  Remillard, Frangoix. and Brian Merrett. {architecture de Moncrdial: Gusde der styler ct der bétoments, Morareal: Mendicn. 1990: as Martread Architecture: A Guside 1a Seydes and Buikdiogs, Monreal: Mendiaz. 1990  Wagg. Susan, Percy tnskine Nobhu: Architects, artis, artioan: Percy Erskine Nobbs: Arcinters. Artist, Ceaftrman (bilingual French-English edinon). Kingston: Mctill Queen's University Pres, F9R2  ‘Wagg, Susan, Ermest Libel! Barois, archstecte: tine inroduction: Ernest Bibel Raraw, Archiuct: An Incroducteen (bilingual French-English echtion). Montreal: Canadian Centre tor Architecture, 1985  MONUMENT TO THE THIRD INTERNATIONAL  Designed by Viadimir ‘Vatlin, 1920 Moxow, Russia  Although unrealized at full scale. the Monument to the Third International (1920), designed by Vladimir Tarlin (1885-1953), 2 protagonist of the Sowet avant-garde, was a notable, influential project. As a symbol of modern technology, revolusion, and a utopian future, the monument was intended to signal a renewed sociery, based on Communis tenca, through its and func- tien, Tatlin’s materialist construction synthesiaed art and archi- tecture and explored the nature, of “culture,” of materials. The architoct professed thar it glass and iron components would fulfill boeh structural and metaphoric roles and imbue the project with contemporary significance.  The Monument w the Third Inveenarional was commis sioned in 1919 by the Department of Fine Aris as part of Lenin's Plan for Monumental Propaganda, a division overseen partly by Tatlin. Like other artists after che Ocrober Revolucion, Tarlin offered his services to the nascent state and directed his energy toward creacing institutions and objects useful w che govern:  ment and the probetariat. His tower, commemorating the found- ing of the Third International by the Balaheviks in 1919. rejoured Lenin's directive of disseminating realistic heroic statuary and instead anempred to alter the physical and social Landa ape: Planned as the center of world revolution, the tower was att abstract monument ta an idea.  The monument’s framework was a conical double spiral of tran, tilted at a 4$-degree angle in accordance with the earth's axis, and was meant to tise 1500 feet over Petrograd’s Neva River. Suspended in venical alignment within the external skele- tal frame were immense geometric volumes. cach of glass. that coupled human activities with celestial chythms, A ground-level cube that rotated once annually was planned for legslanve as- semblies. A pyramid intended for executive functions spun once a month, while a narrow cylinder, a control center lor news, manifexox, and proclamations, rotated weekly. Vhe uppermost hemispheric space. which likely revolved daily, housed an open: air screen on which news coukl be presented at night and a special apparatus tn project a daily moto onto the Gouda. The inclined spiral, bursting forth frat the earth and reaching for che stags, amd the cowmologically determined kinctic forms within Prochimed the dynamin and powibilicies of the new age.  The symbolic and historical attributes of the apiral presuin ably informed Taulin’s design decisions because the employment of the motif was farmal rather than structutal. Traditionally a symbol of aspiration amd utopiannm, change, and progress, the spiral has precedent un images of the Tower of Babel, aiggurats. and church spires. The monument’s cosmologica) elements were most likely derived from the spacetime thearics posited by Tar- fin’s friend, visionary fucurist poet Velimit Khlebnikov. Al though many other influences have been posited by scholars, such as the Eiffel Tower. ship masts. and the human body. the dearth of documentation has left Vatlin's intentions merely speculative  The first of several small-scale model of the tower (which merely reflecied the volumetric and spatial forms bur nor the constructive ideas of the final version) war 20 feet high: built of wood, wire. meta), and oi] paper: and held together with 2000 hand-hewn wooden pegs. Ruile manually in Tadin's Moscow studio with the help of thice assistants, it wat cvhibited in Mos. cow in December 1920 at the Eighth Congros of Sovicu, adorned with a red banner that pronounced, “Fngincen, create new forms.” As an artist/engincer, ‘Tatlin intended both to invent fnew forms and w bring them to technical Iniition, By conjoining art with engincering and ideology wuh tcchoolugy and caplou ing the inerinsic quality of materials, the tower became a promi- nent symbol ol the machine age. Lattin was pivotal to the evolu- tion of Russian Constructivism, and the Monument to the Third Enrernational is considered the cpitome of that abstract art move- ment. Concerned with raconally and uruthtully constructing art with madem industrial materials and technologies. Constructy- iam stimulated the 20rh-century urge to abstract and manipulare diverse materials, Tadin’s intuitive, utopian, and socially respon sible approach diverged somewhat from the emphasis on pure engineering championed by the mainstream adherents of Con structivisrn.  The tower model was widely cxlubsted in the Soviet Union in the carly 1920s and was re-created for the 1925 Eaposinon Internationale des Arts Decoratifs et Industricks Modernes in Paris, where it was awarded a gokd medal. Fo Sovict avant-garde contemporaries. such as Alexander Rodchenko, Ef Lissitzky, and  Konstaniin Melnikov, the tower symbolzed urban modernity and the potential of the machine (and art) to create a new soci cultural order. In the West, particularly in Germany at the Bau- haus and among Dodie, the mechanistic, nonact character of the monument and its appropriateness as an emblem of the sucntific and te hnological achuevernents of the modern age were lauded. Some, however, Critscized it aa an architecturally infeasi- ble romanticizanon of the machine, and Leon Trotsky con- demned it as impractical and too abstract. By che lane 1920s, the kkeulogical meaning of the monument was fractured. ft came to represent nat only the defeat of Soviet avant-garde art because it, along with numerous other projects, was never buds, bur it alse signified the failed atapianism of the Socialist experiment. The Monument to the Thitd International was Tatlin’s moet significant peojcet, He hogan his cares as a painter, inspired by Ranian icons and folk art as well as impresionicm, furusiem, and Cubism, modes that swept Russia in the fine decades of the 20th century, Following a 1913 wait to Picasso's studio in Pasis, where he witnessed the origins of enllage and assemblage, Taslin began two explore threc-dimensional construction in space. His compkea, purely abstract Countet-relicts (1913 16), assembled of various matenals, signal the emergence of a preoccupation with materials, volume, and construction, ideas that reached theis apex in the monument. Throughout the 1920s, Tadin produced objects for everyday use (c.g, cloching and stoves). designed stage sets. caught numerous design courses. and at- tempted to fly his man powered omithopter Letadin (1932). With the advent of socialise ecatism in 1932, Tarlin and his tower were virtually fargeeten in the Soviet Union and the West. Te was not until the 1960s that the Monument to the Third International was rediscovered. Tarlin's rower tcemerged as an jenn to social consieusnes, utopian idealism. and artist. poten- dal Emblemati, of its culture and ecprescating the fusion of tevollutionary art and idcolngy, ir has become an importance sub-  ject of scholarly research and public exhibison, ANpata Pouutr Protnin  Ser she Constructivism Further Reading  Seunes that mae the pouwar genetanon aware of Tatlin and the Resaan avant-garde are Andetch and Gray. Milnet's critical biography analyzes the ndnument’s mulavalent ideological prograt ana sa fos oa) qualities, as du Eddcrfickd and Loxkder (1987). Zhadova’s eylume is an emential wurcehoak of sesnurces previously budden an Sarit at- chive that includes illustrations, Tatler's veritingg, camemporary cain  mentary, and scholatly cimuasm, Loddet's (198 4) sacial history of Con Mtructivam suggets that Tatlin helped develop the (areal language ol! wut movement Roman caplores the tower's impact on the West while Rowell discusses Tatlin’s materialist sctnsitnlity  Andersen, Trocls, Visdimir Jitdtn, Stuckholm: Modema Museet, 18  Uddertidd. John. “The Line of Free Mets Fadins “Sewer and che Age ol Inventican,” Seuelso Atternanancl, 1d (November 19691  Gay. Camalla, The Great Experiment, Rasitates Art 1863-1922, London: Thames and Hudson, and New Yurk: Abeamu, 162. new edtion. as TA Runian Experiment in At, 1865-1922. New York. Abrams, (970; Londen: Dhames and Hudson, 1971  Lanldes, CRintisa, Rugatn Constractrsnm, New Haven, Lonnectcut Yabe University Press. 190.3  Lodder, Chranns, “Tathn's Mesument te the Third Entcenatenat x Symbul of Rovulution. in The Decneiented Image Veron on  
Art Hetory, eduod by Gabriel B. Wenberg and Laurinda 8. Dixon, Syracuse, New York. Syracue Unnvesity [’ress, 1967  Miner, John, Viadiosr Tatts aed the Ruvutn Avant-Garde, New Haven, Connectruc: Vale University Itteas, 1983  Roman, Gail Haernon, “Tadin's Tower: Revolutionary Symbul and Acstheun,” in The Aint Gerdes Meunter Russet Alret the Woo, 1910-1940, odecd by Gail ELartivan Roman and Virginia Hagestein Marquardt, Guinewille. Uttiveray Press af Plonda. 1992  Rowell, Marge, “Whalenit Tatlin: Fern Fakrusa.” Ociber, > (Winter (978)  Zhadova, Larnas (editor), Jasin, Budapes. Connna, 1984: av Tathn, translated by Paul Filutaa, New York: Rirzali, 1988  MOORE, CHARLES WILLARD 1925-93 Architect, United States  Along with Robert Venturi, Michael Graves. and Robert A.M. Seern, Charkes W. Moore is widely considered a leading architect of the Pastemodem movement. Moore's ideas and influence, however, stretch weil beyond the confines of any particular movement of style and have had a significant independent influ- eme un architenural education and pratice. As a traveler. writer, teacher, kecturcr, illustrator, and connoisseur, Moare aw architecture as a vehicle fur enriching the everyday live: uf people through memory. [aniasy, scisory stimulauon, and visual de light.  After carning his professional degree from the Univenity of Michigan in 1947, Moore moved to San Francisco, where he worked in several architectural offices before acuspang a teaching. appoinument at che University of tah in 1950, Atcer mulitary service in the Korean War from 1952 to 1954, he connnued his education at Princeton University. carning an MFA. in 1956 and a Ph.D. in 1957, During hes graduate work and in the two years he stayed on at Princeran to teach, he developed valuable long-term relauionslups with peuple such as Louis Kahn. Donlyn Lyndon, and William Turnbull,  Moore's return to the Hay Area in 1959 t0 became an asso. tant professor at the University of California, Berkeley, matked the rckindling of 3 love affair with California that he would nurture for the rest of his life. In 1962, he helped eseablish the firm Moore Lyndon Turnbull Whitaker, and in 1965 chac fiem designed the Condominium | project in Sea Ranch, which rap- idly became a hallinark of innovauon in American residential design. (Moore purchased one of the condominium units him- self and continued to use ir as a home base for his peripatetic lifestyle for the next 30 yean.) He juggled his increasing activiry in professional practice with added responsibility in his academic career, serving as chairman of the Deparment of Architecture at Berkeley from 1962 to 1965.  Moore continued his leadership in architeceural education hy accepting the position of department chair and tater dean of the School of Architecture at Yale University, where he served from 1965 to 1975. Although he continued work with his California practice, MI.TWiMoore Turnbuil, he abso established 2 new Fast Coast office undes the names Charles W. Moore Associates {1970—75), Moore Grover Harper (1975-78), and Cen- tetbrook (after 1978). When be returned to California in 1975 to take a position ar the University of California, Los Angeles, he  similarly establehed new practice venues dere: UCLA-Urben Innovations early on and Moore Ruble Yudell after 1976. Hav. ing made four moves back and forth berween the East Coast and the West Coast. in 1984 Moore finally eclocated in the middle of the country, where he became the O'Neil Ford Cen- tennial Chair in Architecture at the Universiy of Texas, Austin, and where he established the firms Charles W. Moore Archisect in 1985 and Moore/Anderson Architects m 1991. He remained in Austin until his death in 1993.  Moore's remarkable mobility and range of associations with various universities and firme were signals of his mastery of the an of collaboration, In writing, teaching, and design, he worked productively with « very broad range of colleagues, He deew talented peuple to him like a magnet and had the ability to extract from them the very best chey hud to offer, He owed a great deal ro Jung-term callaborators in practice, such as Donlyn Lyndon, William Turnbull, Richard Peters, Marvin Buchanan, William Grover, Robert Harper. Glenn Arbonies, Jefferson Riley, Mark Simon, Chad Floyd, Barbara Solomon, Tina Beebe, John Ruble, Buzz Yudell, Richard Dodge, Arthur Anderson, and many others. Likewise. in his teaching and writing, he worked closely with Donlyn Lyndon. Gerald Allen, Kent Bloomer, Ri- chard Oliver, William Mitchell, Peter Zweig, Simon Askinson, and many more. His collaboration with other, according to Moore, was like a musician playing with a jace ensemble where “the process is informal and evolutionary enough to encourage, indeed to be dependent upan, individual expression within this comeunal context.”  Moore's mobility. woupled with his propensity to Linker and experiment, also led him ro build cight houses for himself that are among his best-known works. His homes in Orinda, Califor- nia (1962); at Sea Ranch (1964); in New Haven (1967) and Essex (1973), Connecticut; and in Austin, Texas (1986) are especially poignant portraits of his architecrural values. They are full of the wit, comfort, and enjoyment of living that inspired much of his work. They also took great chances. from the sunken bath and shower (‘liberated from the cramped conventional bathroom” and open to view from most of the house) in Orinda to the cutout plywood towers (which he named Howard, Be- rengaria, and Ethel) in New Haven. The houses, Moore said, “pave cight special chances to walk the thin edge of disaster.”  The houses also became treasure roves fur Moore's collec- uous He was an inveterate traveler and seldom returned home empty-handed. He not only gamered miniatures, folk wy, books. and kitsch souvemmn from all over the world but also wollected, at the same time, a rich and diverse bunk of architec- tural images—generally documented in photographic stides but sometimes just tiled away in his seemingly limitless visual mem- ory. Moore mined those mental collections producively in his design work, which, throughout his carver, drew eclectically on a stastling range of fresh and divere sources. The Sea Ranch candominiums, for example, broke new ground by forming a hybrid berween the modern humanim of architects ne a Alvar Aalto and the vernaculas redwood bars in northern Cali- fornia, Keerge College (1974) at the Universicy of California, Santa Cruz, vonjoined lulian hill towns and the i character of Archi Moore's power came from his broad appreciation of architecture and from his belief that “the things buildings can say. be they wistful uc wise or powerful or gentle of heretical or silly, have to respond to the wide range of human  Keesge College, Phota © Mary Anu Sullivan  .Triumphal Arch.” UC. Sane: Crus 1974)  feelings.” His work is characterized by an accommodating adapt ability rather shan by fidelity co ripit formalism or a holier-than- thou doctrine. He was at his bese building light dappled, cner- getic places full of freshness, vitality. and a love of lite. Tawaence W. Srecx.  Biography  Born in Benton Harbor, Michigan, 31 October 1925. Attended the Universicy of Michigan. Ann Arbor 1942—47; bachelor's degree in architecture 1947; waveled to Europe and the Near East on a University of Michigan Travefihg Fellowship 1949; studied under Louis 1. Kahn at Princeton University. New Jersey 1954-57; camed a master of fine arts degroc 1956; cared a Ph.D. 1957. Served in che United States Army, United States, Japan, Korea 1952-54. Draftsman in the firms of Mario Cor- bent, Clark and Beurder, and faseph Alan Stein, San Francisco, Californis 1962. Private practic from 1962; partner, Moore Lyndon Turnbull Whitaker, Berkeley, California 1962-65; fier renamed MLTW 1965--69, Principal, Charles W. Moore Asso- ciates, Essex, Connecticut 1970-75; consultant. Urban [nnova- ions Group, Los Angeles from 1974; partner, Moore Grover Harper, Centerbrook, Connecticut 1975-85; consuleant, Cen-  terbruok Architects, Essa, Connecticut from 1975. Parmer, Moore Ruble Yudell, Santa Monica, California frome 1976. Prin- apal, Charles W. Moore, Architect, Austin, Texas 1985-90; partner, Moore/Anderson Architects, Austin from 1991. Assix- tant professor, University of Utah, Salt Lake City 1950-52; assistant professor, Princeton Universiry 1957-59; associate pro- fessor, 1959-65, chairman of che department of architecture, 1962. 65, University of California. Betheley: professur of archi- tecuure, 1965-76, chair of the department of architecture, 1965 - 69, dean of the School of Architecture, 1969-71, Yale Univer- sity, New Haven, Connecticut: profemor of architecuuse 1975— pr head, School of Architecture, 1978-82, University of California, Los Angeles, O'Neal Fotd Centennial Chair in Architecture, Univeruty of ‘Texas, Austin from 1984; visiang professor, Harvard University Graduate School of Design, Cam- bridge. Massachusetts. Senior member of the Architecture Advi- sory Board, United States State Department's Office of Foresgn Building Operations; fellow, American Inuirute of Architects, Gadd Medal, American Institute of Archiecets 1991. Died in Austin, 16 Devember 1993.  Selected Works  Charles Moore House, Griida, California, 162 Charla Muore Hou, Sea Ranch, near San Framine, 1904 
Condominium 1, Sez Ranch. 1965  Charles Moore House (renovation), New Haven, Conncctnut, 1967 Church Street South Housing, New Haven, 1968  Klom House, Westerly. le Eddand, 1969  Charles Moore House, Essex, Coanecucut, 1973  Keenge College, Uneversity of Calsdurnia, Sant Cruz, 1974  Paazza d’Halia. Ncw Orleans, 1978  St. Marthew Episcopal Church. Watafa Palisades, California, (982 Moare-Andetsson Residence aml Studio. Ausin, Tex, 1986  Selected Publications The Place of Hower (with G. Allen and D. Lendoni, 1974 Drometsons (wich G. Allen), 1976  Beety Memory and Architecture (with K.C. Bloomer), 1977 The Poetics of Gardens (voth W.|. Marchell), 1988  Further Reading The best penonal scoount of Charley Moore's hfe and career is Lit- Hejohn. ‘The acher references focus more on bis archisevtural work.  Allen, Gerald, Charles: Meare, New York: Whutney Libwary of Design. 1990; London: Granada. 198!  Crosbie, Michael, Cortrrbreek: rinrenung American Architevtwrr, Washington, D.C. ALA Press, and Rockport. Masachinerts: Rockport, 1993  Fuju, Wayne (editor), Charter Moore and Cormpany. Vokyo: A.D.A. Ealita, 1980  Johneon, Eugene J (editor), Charin Moore: Building: and Progects M9 1986, New York: Ritzali, 1986  Keim, Kevin, Aw Architectural Lifes Memes and Memories of Charler WF. Moere, Boston: Little Breer, 19M  Linkejohn. David. Arrérmect. The Life and Work of Charles W. Mnwer, New Yurk: Hott Rinchen and Wingon, 1984  Nakamura, Toshio (editor), Moor Bubb Yudril 1979-1992. Fokyo A+ UL1992  Riera Ojeda, Onear, and! Lucas H. Gueiea feditare). Moore Ricble Vusdelt: Houses and Hewsmg, Washington, D.C: American Inetieine of Architects Prew 1994  The Work of Charles W Mower. Vukye: A > 1, 197%  MORAL, ENRIQUE DEL 1906-1987 Architect, Mexico  Ennque del Moral was a leading figure in the first generation of postrevolunionary Mexican architects. Over the coune of over five decades of professional practice, del Moral participated in the search for a new nacional identity expressed in archinecture and struggled with defining a new mission for iuelf in the wake of the Mexican Revolution of 1910,  Del Moral began his studies in architecture in 1923 az the Academy of San Carlos in Mexico City, a school that had trained Menican students in classical architectural theory and practice since 1785, He had witnessed the destruction af the Revolution as well as the promise embedded in the Constitution of 1917 and noted a disparity between bis training in archstecture and  the enormous needs of a socicty attempting to reconstruct itself  along more egalitarian lines, With classmates Juan Gorman, Alvaro Aburo, and Juan Legarreta, he read Le Corbusier's works and interpreted them to fit a Mexican reality. In sum, dicy believed urgent problems facing Mexico co be social in nature; the answer was structural.  Under the leadership of José Villagrin Garcia, del Moral was guided toward functionalist theory, which involved incelli use of construction methods and matenals, spplication of ad- vanced techniques sich as reinforced-concrete foundations, the creation of forms corresponding to functions that buildings must discharge. and the imperative ta construct new housing for the popular clases, hospitals, schools, and markets. among other facilities.  From $928 to 1935, det Maral worked in the studio of Carlos Obregon Sanucilia, whose warks in those years encompassed dhveree projects sponsored by the national government, indud- ing the massive Monuments de la Revelucién, The functionalint movement Lontinued to mect with cunsederable negative reac- tion from many architects throughout the carly 1930s, who la- beled funcnonalism an impenulist importation and 2 factor in the destruction of the city's scenery. insisting 09 an architecture that coukl convey the Mexican national spint and a “native” Mexican architecture—which they defined as cotonial-era styles, sometimes with the additions of Aztec, Mayan or Toltec ele- ments.  In 1933 Alfonso Pallares, president of the Sorwded de Argui- tect de México, inveited architect and engineers oo participate in a historic debate at the Academy of Sgn Carka on the issue of nauonal architectural styler. Discussions centered on the defense of funcrionalist an hicevuure, paitacularty the “cconomical, sound and industrial architecture” that working people needed, as sus- tained by Juan Legarreta, Juan O'Gorman, ad Alvaro Aburto, and the defense of ue spiritual necessities and the production of architeviusal beauty by det Moral and others.  Det Maral believed it was imperative w fulfill economic needs while responding to cultural and geographic facton, employing, a sense of aesthetic beauty and balance. This is early seen his first works, in association with Marcial Guriétrez Camarena, sach as the workers’ homes in hin buthplace of lrapuaso (1936) or a senes of houses in Colonia Chapultepec, Mexion City (1938-42}. His use of nacive maseriak combined with modern corstruction techniques and an underuanding of Mexican cul- ture and use of interior space.  At the end at the 19405 he began to collaborate with architect Mario Pani. This prolific association culminated with the rheir development of the mastet plan for the new campus of the Uni- versidad Nacional Auténoma de México (UNAM) and the de- agn of the Jorn Rectoris, Construction of this massive project on apprusimately sis emullion square meters of the Pedregal of San Angel began in July 1950, Over 40 architects comtibuted to deugn of buikdings in the schoal and administrauve zones, such as those for the schools of law. medicine. architecture, and the Central Library. The Torre Rectoria, with its mural by David Alvaro Siqueirs depicting young people ascending to give their knowledge to the people, provides an example of unification of art and architecture. Additional works in collaboration with Pani include hotch and an airport in Acapulcn (1952) and the Secre- tatia de Recursos | fidrSulicos Building in Mexica City (1950).  Over the coune of his career, del Moral designed hundreds of structures. Each manifests his dedication to aesthetic: and economy. To this point, che Tejeda House (1943) and del Mor- a's own home (1949) Wustrate in particular his acention to light and color, Similar care is apparent in large-scale projects, including his catensive work in health care facilities, such as in the Hospital General de San Luis Potos! (1946) and the Hospital  de Urgencias del Centro Médico (1958), and in government buildings, such as the Tesareria del Distrito Federal (1963) and the Procuraduria General de Justicia (1969).  Par Otsenw  Ser abo Legorreta, Ricardo (Mexico); Mexico City, Mexico: University Library, UNAM, Mexico City  Biography  Born 20 January 1906, lrapuato, State of Guanajuato, Mexico: studied architecture at Escucka Nacional de Arquitectura, Uni- versidad Nacional Aurdnoma de México, Mew City 1923-28 under José Villagran Garcia; received professional certification 1928; advanced studies in philosophy in the Facultad de Flu: sofia y Letras from 1944 10 3946. Assinant Professor. Dacucla Nacional de Arquitectura 1934-46, prolewor 1938-50, and di- rector 1933-48. Profeaor, Universidad Iberoameriuina 1959~ 63. Employed in the studio of Cados Obregon Santacila, from 1928-35, began private pracuce in 1935. Appointed to various governmental posivons pertauung tv shoul aod hospital con- struction programs Jefe del Zona del CAPPCE in Guanajuato 1944—46; member of the Comité de Consmuccion del Centro Médico 1945. 46 and dhe Comisién Nacional de Hospitales. Drafted the master plan for the construction of the new campus for the Universidad Nacional Aurénoma de Méxica, 1947-52. Activities in profesional associations include bis participation in the CAM-SAM froin 1954, serving ay president of its Junta de Honor trom 1972 to 1973 and from 1974 to 1975; the Academia de Artes, and the Asaciacian Mexicana de Cririons de Ane. Died 1) June 1987, Mexicu City.  Selected Works  Ten Workers’ Houses, Lrapusto, Guanajuato {with Marcal Guuérecz ‘Camarena), 1936  Apartencnt building, Panuco, Colonia Cuauhtémoc, Mexico, 1940  Tejeda House, Aida and Cedsos, Slacopac, Méaco, 143  Hospital General de San Luis Potosi, San Lins Potosi, 1946  Kindergarten, Colonia Buenos Aires, Mixa, 146  Mamer lan for the Coudad Uruvenitama, Unreemidad Nacional Auténoma de Mexicy, Mexico (wrth Mario Pant, 1952  Del Moral House, Francisca Ramirez, Méuwo. 1949  Secretaria de Recursoy Hidviulious, Mace de la Refnrma, Méxica twrh Mano Pani), 1990  Tare de Rextoria, Gudad Univenitana, Méacn (wath Mano Pane and matrale by David Alfarn Siqueson), Mexico City, 1952  Acapuko Aupact, Guerteto (with Mariv Pani). 1952  cy Hospital, Centro Médico Federal, México, 1958  Children’s Hospital, Villahermoss, Tabano, 4958  Hospital-Cliaic, Tampico, Tamaubpas, 1964  Hospital Clinic. IMSS, Ciudad Obregan, Sonora, 1968  Medical Center, Villa Olimpica, Méxeco, 1968  Procusaduria General de Juscacla, México, 1969  Selected Publications  “Arquitectura en Acapulcy.” Arguitectura/Méxaco 45 (1954)  Deferia y Conservacitn de las Cindades y Conjuntes Urbenes Monumentales, México, 1).F.: Academis de Anes, 1980  Et Fula: La iesegracés Hlistica, Méuco, D.F.. Scrunatio de Cultura Manana, 1966  EL Hombre y la Arquiectura, Méaica, 1E.; UNAM, 1984  “Reflexiones wibee el Estilo,” Argucerctara’Méxice 69 (1160)  *Villagran Garcia y Ja Feulucsin de Nucotrs Anquitecturs.” Arquiterrura!Meace 55 (1953)  La Comeracciin de bs Ciudad Univerearse del Pedvepal (with Marios Pani), Mexico, DF, UNAM, 1979  Further Reading  Anda, Ennque X. de, feelecton de Li anguitecturs en Mixuce: prhipénisa, verveinal, madera y contempurénes, Mesicu City’ Panorama Editorial, 1987; revined edition, aa Historsd de de anquiterters motivene, Merivo City. GG, 1995  Bunun, Fdward Radolf (editut), Medernuty and the Architecture af Meas, Austin Universay of Vea Drew, 1997  Caro, Alejandm, “El humaniomo en la nbra del arquatecto Enrique del Moral.” Anpuassecsure y aacandedd 25 (1983)  Fernindez, Juviino, Aric oederno y comtemporance de Méxice, Mexico Ciry: Unwveridad Navional Autonoma de Mévivo, 1952: 2nd edition, 1994  Gomes, Lilia and Miguel Angel Quevedo. Feitimeniec sizer 20 anquiterter: 1781 1981: Breentenarve de be Excucia de pratura, esculeura, » arguizectara, Mexico Ciry: Secretaria de Fducaciin Publica. Insite Nacional de Rellas Artes, £98)  Gonzalez Gararar, Fernando, La aegnitecruns mexicana ded sige 1X, Mevign City: Come Nacinnal para ta Cukura y las Antes, 194  Morsen. Xaner. “Le formacién tilosotica de Eanque del Moral.” Arquisectura y wewdad 25 \9831  Noxtlc, Louse. “Ennque del Moral.” in Arqussecres contemportncos de Sféxico, edced by Noelle. Metin City: kdioral Tollas, 1989; 2nd edivon, 196  Pinoncally, Salvador, Lat obva de Enrigue del Moral, Mexico City: Universidad Nacional Auténoma de México, Facultad de Arquitecira, 1983  Vous, Amara, Anpeterture contrmpurdnet ex Méxtce, Axcapotiaio, Mexico: Uneversidsd Auténoma Metropolitana, and Meco Ciry: Gerniha, 19RD  MORETTI, LUIGI 1907-73 Architect, Italy  Luigi Moretti remains one of che mos enigmatic figures of Ital- tan modern architecture. His work falls in the cracks berween art-historical categories, and his writings lack the social polemic of mnt of his contemporaries, Yet be exercised a profound and lasting influence on Modern and Postmodem architecture. Born in Rome, he was educated there at the University of Rome. receiving his degere in 1930. He taught at the University of Rome (mainly history courses) from 1931 10 1934.  Two contlicting opinions by recent Italian historians can ex- plain chis problem. Manfredo ‘Vafuri and Francesco Dal Co, in then Moder Architecture, mention Moretti only once, stating, “Luigi Morety (1907-74) locked hirnsel’ into a formalism that vas an end in itself in the so-called Suntlower house of 1950 in Rome. in the Olympic Village realized there with A. Libera, and in the Watergare Complex in Washington done in 1959- 1961." On the other hand, Luciano Patetra, in his entry foe the Macmillian Encyclopedia of Archuects, ssid, “Probably the most successful result... is the Watergate... 4 work of Bull marurity and in full possesion of expressive means.”  Moretti never allicd himself wieh either side of the heaued debate about atchitexture of the Fascist period. When he emerged un the Lite 1940s and carly 19508 with what were to 
become his major works—the Astrea and Sunflower apartment houses—he still remained aloof from contemporary polemics. However, during the Fascist peniod he was an ardent follower of the regime of Benite Mussolini. Even after Fascism fell and Mussolini was installed by che Germans in a puppet regime in northern Iealy, Moretti joined Mussolini in the so-called Repub- lx of Sala. Por this cramgresion against civility, he served 18 months in prison in Milan, and during his confinement he met a developer who gave him a number of imporune commissions in the immediate postwar perind. [t has been wid that Moretti never boot his love of Mussolini and Fascism, The fire of these commissions was an apartment hotel (1948) in Milan, followed by the muhtifunctional “I ransatlantxe” building (1952-56). also in Milan. However, the ewo buildings that made Moretci's feputation and that remain his undisputed Rome masterpieces are the Casa Astrea (1949-50) and the Casa Gurasole (1950— 51). These two bunklings are soptustiated examples of a kind of mannerist modemism. Moretti used the cements of the mod- esttist vocabulary in a highly decorative, somewhat Expressionist way. employing chin outrigger walls and spandrch. tike decora- Gons, travertine reverments, and glass handrails. The Casa Gisa  sole (Sunflower Houxe) was laver published by Robert Veaniri in his seminal Cowpplenity and Contradiction in An bitecrurr (1966). making the building a locus of architeccural pilgrimages. Venturi  Casa Gurasole, Rame (195 tb € ‘Thoma: Schumacher  and others have asked the question, “Is this one building splie, or rwo buildings combined?” It was both, and the gash down the middle would become a Moretti trademark.  The building was influcntial in the dlecelopenent of Ux palas- sina building type, a modern equivalent of the palazzo whereby the courryard of the typical Florentine/Roman palazzo becomes the core, and the building, a squat cower, is free on all sides, In the massing and facades of the Casa Girasale, Moretti used a shallow layering system combined with the assertive horizon- tality of spandrels and window blinds to establish an aggressively modetn equivalent of traditional formal composition. He even hinted ata split pediment in the top profile of the building.  Ac the same time in the early 1950s, Moretti began publishing a magazine, Spario, which lasted lor only eight issucs but was quite influenual in cstablishing this new formalism in Iealian modem architecrure. tle also published analyses of traditional buildings and spaces. including solid modes of the interior spaces of baroque churches. These analyses had an important influence on Moremti’s younger contemporary, the historian! theorist Bruno Zzvi, and Zevi adapted Moretti’s spatial and te- quential analyses for his popular book Saper redere Larchitettuns (1957: Architecture ax Space).  Moeetti’s mature buildings include the Olympic Village housing blocks for the 1960 Olympica in Rome. an exercise in  Le Corbusian Ville Radicuse urbanism and architecture. The facades of these buildings were in the Brutalist manner of cun- crete slabs and brick in-fill, with varying window sizes and open: ings. The Le Corbusian system of the “five paints” — prlotis, etb- bon window, free plan, Itee farade, and roof garden—was employed here to positive ctfect.  Rather than having any architectural significance. the Water- fate complex is best known for its pohtical signiticance during the Nixon era in the United Seates. Yer chs building, a cunsy artay of great plasticaty on the Potomac River acat the Lincoln Metnorial and the Kennedy Center, was one of the first multinne busldings to be built in Washington in the post-World War II era. It, noe the Kennedy Center, revitalized itt neighbochood, and the budding’s aertive votumetrics were influential in changing a dow Washingtan style.  Moretti died at the time che Watergate hearings were under way in Washington.  THontas Su UM AC HILR  Biography  Bom in Rome, 2 January 1907. Scudied humanities at the Isu- tuto Raman de Merode: studied architecture at the University of Rome; graduated 1930. In private practice. Rene from 1931: foundes, editor, Spuzse, Rome 1956; comributor wo Crna delle machine and 1 architecture d aujourd hui, Founder, tsucuww Na donale de Ricerca Matematica ¢ Operativa per ['Usbanistica (IRMOU), Rome 1957, Academician, Accademia di San Luca. Rome 1960: honorary fellow. Amencan Institute of Architects 1964. Died in Isola di Capraia, Iraly, 14 July (973.  Selected Works  Casa det Gievennd, Rame, 1933  Fencing Academy. Rome. 1937  Caza Albergo, Milan, 1948  Casa Astrea, Roroe. 1950  Casa Girasole, Rome, 1951  D Tramshansico, Milan. 1956  ‘Villa Saracens, Senca Marinella. 1963  Watergare Complex. Washington, D.C. 1964  Eso Society EUR, Rome. 1967  Stock Exchange Tower, Monrreat (with Pier Lings Nervi). 1969  Selected Publications  Apecabion (with P. Pascal), 1964  "The Values of Profiles” and "Seructures acd Sequences of Spaces,” Opperitions, 4 (Ocwwber 1974)  Further Reading -  Collins, Pevet, “Stock Exchange Tower. Monercal,” Arcdvtestura! Revinw, 199/832  Santuccio, Salvatote (editar), Luigi Mente. Bologna, Italy: Zanichelli, 1986  MORGAN, JULIA 1872-1957 Architect, Unired States  ‘When Julia Morgan was boen in San Francisco in 1872, the newly emerging architecture schools in the United States had  not yet graduated thes fire architcetural studenc, mabe or fernuale. A quarter of a century lates, there were fess than 400 architecture students in the nine cnisting U.S. architccnyral chook, while the 1900 censw would recon! more thin 10,000 architects in the United States. These were almost exclusively men and alist all "unschooked”; that is, they revcived their waining through apprenticeships in established architectural offices, by experience with builders, or by the presumpron of simply hanging out a shingle and declaring themselves to be qualified architects. But very few were diploma-bearing architects. In carly 1902, Julia Morgan (already a graduate in engineering from the University of California, Berkeley) hecame the fine woman in histary graduate from the Evoke des Beaux-Aru in Paris, the best design school in the West and, since its founding in the 17th cencury undet Lauix XIV, a conservative and exclusively male academy.  Even the men whe were enrufled in the new American shouls of architecture at che um of the 20th century represented a mere four percent of the practicing profession at the time. In this respect, all the would-be architec of Morgan's gencragun who sought formal waining in schools, including those rare mca who amended the Paris Eonle, were pioneers in architecrural education. To recognize this fact and also cake into consideragon that women were far outnumbered by men in the school is to identify the formidable accamplishment and extraordinary significance of Morgan's prufessional achievement ax the 20th century opened. By century's end and long alter Morgan's retare- ment, there would he thousands of women caceuraged and ena- bled te enter the peeviousdy restricted prufecion and to practice the are of building as creative archiecces with full credentials, thanks m the example of Morgan.  Indeed. Morgan's unassailable position 4: 3 pioneer in carly 20th century architecuure, unlike chat of Frank Lloyd Wright, Augusr Perret, or others of the avant-garde af her gencranon, is based not on her advancing a revolutiunary modem design aes- ahetic of on her kadership in 2Uch-century suructural engneenng and the «se of new materials, but rather on her advanang a revolutionary idea: thar architecture as a profession should be open to women, Nevertheless, it also is noteworthy, considering the greatcr nosoriery of Wright and Perret as pionect architects at the num of the century, chat Morgan was ako interested in, and st the vanguard in the use of, che newly revived material uf concrete. In 1903 she designed Fl Campanil (completed 1904), 2 72-foot reinforced concrere bell mwer for Mitlk Callege in Oakland, California. a building chat survived the great earth- quake of 1906. Morgan's cempanile dates from the same year as Pereet’s ruc Franklin concrete apartment building in Paris and thece years before Wright's concrete Unity Lemple in Oak Park, Hlinois. By 1906 Morgan abo had built a concrete library at Mills College and a reinforced concrete house in Berkeley.  Three themes inform Morgan's life's work and define her aesthetic: academic eclecticism (an outgrowth of her training in the dassical tradition of the Ecole}: a respect for nature and a concer for creating a sensitive and sympathetic man-made environment that remained narural; and 4 love of craft, reflecting in hee work the ideals of the internatinnal Arts and Crafts move- meat, The first theme is expecially evident in auch designs as the dasmc Heant Memorial Gymnasium and Poal for Women (1925-26) on the Cnivenity of Californias-Rerkeley campus— a joint proyect with Bernard Maybeck—and her ongoing work at San Simeon for Willuum Randolph Hearst, where she proced 
together collected fragments af architeceural byory and decora- tive asts to create an enchanted hilltop castle. which is both residence and muscum ‘The second theme ts mast evident at Asilomar Conference Center sn Pacific Grove. Cahtornia, where she built some 20 Ans and Crafts-style buildings berween 1913 and 1928, cheis drecin a natural oceanside setting of remarkable beauty. The Admini Chapel (1915). and Crocker Dining Hall (1918) are among the earlient Morgan warks there. and Merrill Hall (1928) also in noteworthy, Finally, Morgan was part of the “Bay Region ‘Tradt- tion” spearheaded by Bernanl Mayteck and Charles Keeler chat found tn natural redwood ftaming, structural expression, and shingle cladding an honest and environmentally sensutive ap- proah to the building uf simple homes. [he Foute Howe (1905) in Grass Valley, California, several modest arts-and- ctalts-style cortages in Berkeley, and “the Hearthstone” (1928) in a redwood grove at Dyerville Flat, Califorma, reflect these interests, Her masterpiece in the style, however, is Sc John’s  Presbyterian Church and Sunday School (1908-10) in Rerkeley.  4 project contemporary with Maybeck’s landmark Christian Sei- ence Church in Berkeley (1909-11),  Throughout her life Mangan developed a women's network, fret finding clients among her former surunty sisters and gaining an invreming reputation intemationally from het numerous  cation Buitding (1913), Lodge (1984 - 15),  commissions for Young Women's Christian Associations (YWCAs). She became a swimming-pool specialist. and while nome rival enther the Roman Pool (1927-32) or Neptune Pool (1935-36) at San Simeon, the 25 by 75-foot indoor pool for the Berkeley Women's City Club is remarkable, Her most formi- dable and best-known cheat, however, was William Randolph Hearst. for whom she buill San Simeon (1919-42) and Wyn- toon (1933-41), The latter wav a complex of Gothic and fairy- tale bunhlings whore spirit reached from Wilham Burges to Watt Disney. Named Bear House, Cinderella Hous, and Fairy House, the coctages at Wyntoon, together with “The Bend” 4193541) and the towered. shingle-clad Badge House (1933), form a village for the ghost of the fine Wyntoon, a baronial seven-Mory castle that Maybeck had bust in 1903 bur chat was clauned by fire during the winter af 1929-30.  After 44 years af pracnce. Morgan closed her office in 1951 and requested that the building superintendent burn her files. blueprints, and office records, believing no ane besides clicnts (who already had their own documents and drawings) would he interested in ber paper documents, Her buildings would speak eloquently for themuclves. In the end. Morgan's significance be- yond the 20th century quintessentially lies in a histntic role that she neither wught nor acknowledged as particulary her mission. Tn het serving as a catalyst for revolutionary changes in tbe  United Presbyteran Church inow College Avenue Prevbvterian Churcht, Oaldand, California (19177 Phora €: Mare Ann Sultivan  makeup of the praftision of architecture, she became one of the most influential architects in history, Rather than establishing 4 “Morgan” aesthetic chat followers then tranyplanted w new fickds internationally, this pionees of 20¢h-contury architectural education, without intentiva, defined her position of influence uniquely. bs assests inell long after her death, as a result of thou: sands of female designers who might nut have produced a single building were n not for Morgan's example.  Ronen M. Caan,  Ser also Arts and Crafts Movement: Concrete; Maybeck, Ber- ward R. (United States)  Biography  Born in San Francisco. Calitutnia, 20 January 1872. Graduated trom the Univenity nf Cahfornia, Berkeley, with a degree in engineering: was the firse female praduste of che Ecole des Beaux-Arts, Pans. In private practice, California fram 1902; de signed numerous facilitics for the Young Women’s Chrisuan Association 1913-30; worked on projects tur William Randolph Hearst intermittently 19 9-41. Died m San Francisco, 2 Febra- ary 1957,  Selected Works (All works on Califoenaa untceu atherwin outed)  Beli Tower, Mills C Oakland, 1904  Foore Hose, Gras Valley, 1905  Cate House. Berkeley, 1906  Goddard » Berkder. 190"  M4. John's Presbyterian Church (nove Julia Morgan Center for the Pertormung Arts}, Berkeley. 1910  Aslomar Canderenee Crates, Paufic Grove, 1413-29  ‘Willums and Machell House, Berkeley. 1918  San Sencon (Walia Randolph Hears Howse), 1919-42  Phoebe Appersoa Hearst Memonul Gymnasum and Pool. University of Califorma, Berkeley (with Bernard Mayberk), 19.26  Young Women's Christian Associaton. Honolulu, Hawai, 1927  Young Women's Christian Assouatmtt, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1927  The Hearthstone, Dyervitie, 1928  ‘Wiliams House, Herkeicy, 1928  Young Women’s Chrutian Assocution, San bramou, 1930  Wyniwoa, MuCloud Raver, 1933-41  Further Resding  Sara Holmes Bourelle was the major scholar on fulia Moryan, and her monagraph publshed by Abbeville is the standard source. Longstreth 's Penspecta aniiche and pamphier for the Hanan reali Club were tardy introducnions offering judiious appraisals of the work. Bourelle’s esusy an Tonoard a Scrnpler Way of Lif 1 part of an anthology of sime wo dozen Cabdorna “Ans and Crafts archicects,” including Morgan and including 2s well a seuond generaton group of carly modern dewgn en iri fi nal influence from Maybeck and his contem- poranes. Wright's and Boueelle's (L981 and (989) essays addres issues of gender by considering Morgan's rake as a pioneer for women in architecture. Steitherg, who worked for Morgan. presents some of her early work. and Woodbridge includes Morgan huuses en hes general survey of Hizy area domestic design, Andals (with Carus photographs) is a monograph and picture bouk on the mast popularly known of Morgan's work—her “castle” tor William Randolph Hearst—and n-  cludes dawweu of the an hutecture of the house, ma collecnons, and surrounding prounds and pools  Ardula. Thoma R.. and Brice Cut, Hasne Cade, Sew Someone, New York: Hudwon Hills. 1981  BouteKe, Sara Holmes, fhe Woman Who Built San Simeon,” Califerma Monthly 6, 90.6 (pnt 1976)  Bourclic, Sara Holmes, “Women's Networks: Julia Morgan and Her Chen.” Herein 1h. a0. Fast)  Boutelie. Sata Holrocs, fadia Mengan, Andues, New York: Abbeville Press, 198K teved edition, 1995  Boutellc, Sara Holines, "An tlusive Puncer: Pracang the Work of Julia Morgan.” in Architecture: A Place for Women, ednced by Ellen Perry Berkeley. Washiagion, D.C. Smihwnian Jnscinutian Press. [OR  Boutelfe, Sara Holmes, “Julia Morgan.” in foward « Simpler Way of Life: Vhe Arts and Crafis Architects of Calfornes, edited by Roben Winter, Washingtan, D.C.: Preservanon Press, 1995  Lungstecth, Raduard, "Julaa Morgan: Some Invodkatury Note.” Ponspecta £51975). seprint, as flor Morgan, Archisect, Berkeley, Californa: Berkeley Antaectimal Hemage Asusanin, 1977  Seeilberg, Walter, "Some Examples of che Work of Jules Morgan.” The Anbiteet and kagyacer af California $$. 1m. 2 (November Toi ay  Woodbridge, Sally, Bay Arve Honus, New York: Oafied Univeruty Peers, 197%, new cdtvion, Salt Lake City, Utah: Peregrine Smith, 1988  Wight, Gearndalyn, "Oe the Fringe of the Prokesasue: Weaten in Amerwan Architecture,” in The Archtect: Chapters in the History af the Prafrsion, edated by Spine Kuntof, New York: Orford Cniversity Press, 1976  MORPHOSIS  The architecnural firm Morphous was founded by Tham Mayne arsd Jun Staflord in Sanita Monica, California, in 1972. One year later, Michal Rotandi, recently graduaced trom the Southern Califorma lesriture of Archicoorure (SCI-ARC), jouned the fiers and worked as a partner between 1975 and 1991, Suaning with modestly sized projects, che firm established a significant media presence. leading to larger and more complex urhan-scaled works. Their work has consinenty emphasized the tectonics of construction, formalist compositions, and saturated representa tions from its origin.  Revognizing the increasingly overlapping relationship be- tween architecture and medis, Morphoss maintained 2 suung media prewnce, receiving a significant number of Progressive Architecture and American Institute of Architects (ALA) awards, many for unbuilt prayeas. Their pursuit of che image of architec- ture as a projcwied work is an analogue of che Lensirucuen pro- ass. Their published works isolate and exaggerate particular fragments of elements and spaces within the overall order. These (sometimes cryptic) layered drawings are intended to clarify che inventions af conscuction with extreme formalist insensity, al- though the intennons are often conthcring. Their absorpnon of artistic practice into design is most evident in their design development, primarily in the media of waled study models tand later digital models) chat transgreas the disciplinary separanen of sculpeure and architectural representation, and it is significant that cher models are often the only budding arising from a projet. Mode and drawings supplement the partially cotmcaled  
meanings and readings of their dengns, privileging the fragmen- tary as a formalist coding af che real.  The earliest work reveals the significant mfluence of james Stirling's work, contextualized within the expansive sprawl of Los Angeles, Thom Mayne once stated, “[ am interested in pro- ducing work with a meuning that can be understood anly ax absoxbing and comprehending the culture for which it is made. Since culture, particulaily chat of the late twenticth century, in constant flux, architecture is abo perpetually in flue.” The search (at comprehemive ordet with unique localized conditions drwes their buildings and representations. creating dchistomized fragmentary assemblages that atc complicated for the sake of  iccting. not resolving, cule.  ‘The earliest small houses, renavavons, and restaurants exag- gerate the tectonsc connections between discrete planes and sculprural forms, subordinatng the constraints of program and site condmions to a larger “reflexive” agenda. In che Mexico House 1 (1978) and the bile Venice IS (1982), hoch in Los Angeles, the overall form mimics the typologies of the context. The interior functional spaces appear co he carved from the exterior form, selectively revealing themselves as assemblages of smaller integrated compuncnis that arc orgatuzed along formal ied citculation paths and vertical zoning. The remodeled Sixth Street House (1987) vertically stratifies public and private spaces upward through the cxuting structural shell. The cnclosurc often femains partial of bare, 2 self-conscious revelation of the process of emoding widun dhe work and a refereme to che fashions of Los Angeles culture. The intemal incerporation of defunct tmechanical objects into functioning scructure, stairs, skylights, and a shower draw distiacdy urban debas into the workings of the domestic space. This sculprural appmach expresses the fragmentation of functional space. duplicated in theie early com- mercial work, such as the Angeli Restaurant (1984) and the Kate Manwilini Restaurant (1987), both in Los Angeles. Here the architecture frames activitics while self-consciously projecting inte those activities. In the 72 Market Rescaurant (1983) in Tos Angele, a prominent rotated building within a building in the entry appears to create a torsional dining space while socretly doubling as an earthquake-sshilizing seructural device.  The Crawford House (1990), a large suburban villa, culmi- nares the heurisic pursuit of the materializing of the art and artifice of demesti, architecnsre frum che earlier howwng projects. Its repetitive linear structure becomes the fuil for diverse and ssolated canisters of space, aften themselves assembled ol discrete and separate matctials. | he duplication of chis strategy in muluphe scales within the same project anticipates an expan- sion beyand the domestic scale, 24 a type of fractal urbanism. ‘The success of the carfier works led inevitably co projects of a Larges scale, where the previous influence of urban thought could be tested in diverse programs and cers (increasingly removed fram che dissipating Lin Angeles tops).  The built Cedars-Sinai Comprehensive Cancer Clinic (1987) in Los Angeles adds co an existing shyrinthine husprul compler by plicing the majority of the 52,000-square-foot outpatient fhuility underground. ‘The desiga overcomes the potentially dis. heartening function and location by introduang a kinetic subp- tural folly, gencrous skylighting, and apumitk detailing. The complex programming necessity of baspital spaces is concealed behind a clear hicrarchy of simple circulation paths culminating in pubhe spaces.  The competition entry for the addinon ta the Amerika Ged- enkbibliacek (1988) in Berlin proposed a doubling of the library stack area of the 1950s icon and placed a diversity of specialized spaces on the periphery of the project to respond to di localized site edge conditions. A courtyard oriented toward the center of Mehringplatz picrces the linear “core” of tean, pro- posed to he a cathedral-like structure imposed on the scarred landbcape near the Berlin Wall of the late Cold War,  The unbuilt MTV Studios (1990) is perhaps the mow defini- tive Morphosis projent. Hete the interest in absorbing and re- flecung the workings of popular culture literally becomes dy- nar skis of images. icams, and forms clad on intetiorized specular spaces. Space is structured as a “tension berween ob- jects” set ubbyquely lv one anuther and framing fragments through apertures of space. The distinction beween Mat image and deep space has heen abandoned. a procedural conclusion of the firm's carlier representational methods.  In 199] partner Michael Rotondi, whe had heen director of SCLARC, left the Firm to form ROTO Architects in Los Ange- tes. ‘This split caused a period of refocusing and required rebuild- ing the firm during its move into larger urban and international markets, Toward the end of the 20th century, Morphosis peo- posed multiple urban planning x hemes along the single collagist theme of a laycring of objects within rotational gridded urban fabrics, The Paris “Architecture et Utapie” Competition entry (1989). the Berlin Wall Competivon (1988), the Potsdamer Plu Competition (1990) in Berlin, and an urban development foe a town cenrer and educational instinue submisted to the Disney media corporation (1991) in Orlando pursue the frag- tuentaon and wecmblage ol parts from the eatliest tectonic prnjects, evteriorized and projected ourward without a clearly defined boundary or horizon. It is as if cach urhan proposal is a Fragmecoe of a larger urbanism, a Bobalization of their carlest Law Angeles context.  The late-20th-centusy adnprinn of computer rechnology in architectural design and production in the United States pre- sented Marphosic with hirther opportunitics to examine the plice of tnedia in the built environment. As mote of their design work occurs on a serece, user to the advances in technological media, ut prows more distant from the brute Lauts of construction and will become the morivaring tension of their future work.  Trusas Micat  Biographies  Thom Mayne  Born in Connecticut 1943, Graduated from the University of Southern California 1968; masters degree from the Graduate School of Design, Harvard University, Cambridge, Masachu- aces 1978. Catounder, Southern California Instiruse of Archi- seceure (SCI-ARC) 1972: cofounder, with Jims Seafford, Mor- phous, Santa Monica, Califumnia 1972; president, Morphosis 1977-78. Eliel Saarinen Chais, Yale University, New Haven. Connecticut 1991, Elliog Noyes Chair, Harvard University 1998; has uught at Columbia University, Berlange Insticuce. Holland, Bartlett School of Architecture, Landon, Academy of Applied Ars, Vienna. and UCLA, Rome Prize Fellowship. American Academy of Design. Rome 1997.  Michel Rotoadi  Born in the United States 1949, Graduated from the Southern California Instieute of Architecture (SCI-ARC) 1974. Partner, Morphosis, Santa Monica, California 1975-91, directs, SCL- ARC until 1997. Founded architectural firm ROTO. Los Ange- les 1991; currently president of ROTO.  Selected Works  Mexico House II, Los Anpetes, 1978  Venice IIL, Low Angeles, 1982  72 Market Revaurant, Los Angeles, 1983  Angeli Rewaurane, Loc Anprles, 1984  Sixth Serees Huuae (remodeling), Lon Angeles, 1987  Kate Mantilies Restaurant, Los Angeles, 1987  Conpachentive Cancer Chiuc, Cedars-Sinai Howpatal, Lov Angeles, 987  Crawford House, Los Angles. 1990  MTV Studios (unbuik, 1990  Selected Publications  Connected Loletion Mayne), 1992 Tangens and Outtakes: Morphesis (Mayne), 193 Morphests: Burldings and Prajece. 1993 (997 (Mayne), 1999  Further Reading Cook, Peter, Merphoi: Busldings and Propects, New York: Risa, 1989  Nakamura, Tushio (editor), Morphous Urban Proje: Mefous (bilingual English-Japanese ednion), Tokyo. A + U Publishing, 1994  Weinstean, Richard, Afarphmnis, Authdingy and Peopects, 1989-1992, New York Razroli, 194  MOSCOW, RUSSIA  Moscow has displayed variants of every major international style in 20th-cenury architecture as well as some peculiar stylistic hybrids, At the beginning of the 20th century. the most decisive impact of the wyle modeme (the Russian equivalent of Ant Now veau) on the city's architecture occurred in the dewlopment of apartment and office buildings, whose standants of efficiency, comfort, and technological progres were suited te aammodate the prowth of an increasingly prosperous profesuunal and muddle class. The distinctive aesthetic approach of the stryke moderne, with its emphasis on the decosative arts, alsa appeared in the design of the private house. primarily for che merchant dlite. Fedor Shekbrel (1859-1926), Ley Kekushev (1863-1919), and William Walcos (1874-1943) were a the most prominent of the many Moscow architects that designed in the new style. Shekhtel produced the grearest body of work in the style moderne. However, the new style’s most impressive monument in Mascow in the Hotel Metropole (1899. 1904), designed by Walcot with the axiatance of Kekushev and other architects. There are many aspecis of the Metropole chat classify it ax 4 landmark of the style moderne, including a concept af tectonics in which che structural mass ia shaped without ecference to ilu- sionistic supporting elements. Vhe facade itself contains ede reference to the classical order system. The contrasts of textures and materials create a space within which the decorative arts and structural form ase combined. Of particular nate are the  large ceramk ule panels by Mekhail Vrubel and Alexander Go- knin.  ‘The style moderne im Moscow was complemented by a var- iunt known as the neo-Russun style, which kepe the new style’s emphass on plasticity and asymmetry but allowed a greater coke to decorative elements drawn from traditional fatk motifs. The mast notable proponents of che neo-Kussian School in Moscow were the artists Viktor Vasnetsoy (1848 - 1926) and Serger Mali- uuin (1859-1937). The laccer's Pertsav aparement house (1905 - 07) is a particulary well-preserved cxample of the sryte.  By the end of de 1900s, the style moderne had yielded to or merged with 4 form al neoclassical revival known in Russian as neokLeuinizm, which ranged from historicist designs of fvan Zhohovskit (1867~ 1959) 10 4 modernized, stripped classicism. In Momow the most accomplished revivalist was Roman Kein (1858-1924), architect of the Muscum of Fine Arts (1897 - 1912) and the Muir and Mirnclees department store (1906-08). Although less peoldic than Klein, other architects distinguished d Ives in a more modern variant of ncoclassicism: Hlarion Ivanov-Schitz (1865-1937), Alexander Kuznersov (1875— 1954), Boris Velikoviky (1878-1937), the Vernin brothers, and §van Rerherg (1869-1932), who designed one of the firs Mos- cow skyscrapers (the Nowthern Insurance Company Building, 1909-11) for che Kisai-Gorod district in the heart of Moscow's commercial center, In che same district, Ivan Kuznetsov desi 4 Large office comples called Business Court (1912-13), which combined classicizang details with he extensive une of reinforced concrete.  After the revolution and civil war. construction gradually re- sumed an dhe mid- 1920s in Moscow, which had now become the capeal of the entire USSR. At tirst, che ideals of uke vant- garde held sway in educarional instieutions and in cultural circles, ‘The beading movement of the period, Constructivism, appeared in che design of stare office buildings, aparunent bouses, and workers’ clubs throughout Moscow. Nowable monuments in- clude the Lrvestiia Building (1927) by Grigori Barkhin (1R80— 1969), the Zucy Workers’ Club (1927 29) by Ilia Gelosow (1RR3—1945), the State Trade Agency (1925-27) in Gostorg, by Boris Velikevsky (1878-1937), the apartment brane for the People's Commissaiut of Finance (1928 30} in Narkomfin by Moisei Ginzburg (1892-1946) and [gnary Milinis (1899 19774), the Commissariat of Agriculture (1929-33) by Aleksei Shchuscy (1873 149), and tbe Palace of Culuune uf the Prole- tanan District (1932-37) by the Vesnin brothers. Although be did not consider himself one of the Constructivists, Konstantin Melmkov (1890-1974) created a number of highty innovative works in Moscow, such as the Rusakus Club (1927-29).  With the beginning of the Stalinst era and the intensified pace of industrializarion. state-sponsored architectural deagn in Moscow turned to more conservative stytistic approaches. Not only was architecture commanded to gloeily the achievements of the new industnal power, but the very appearance of Moscow was also transtormed, The carlier disputes herwren the “urhan- fat” and “deurhanisty” was sesolved in favor of regulated but intensive urban development, as set forth in a speech by Seahn's saurap Larat Kaganovich at the Central Committee plenum in June 1931. Aga rewult, Mascow develaped a comprehensive cits plan by Vladimir Semenen (1474-19601 and Sergei Chemyshev 41882-1963) that served as a setting for the new monumental architecture. 
4  Moscow State University (1949-53). designed by Lev Rudpev with asustance from Pavel Abnnimon and Alexander Khrakov © Wiliam (. Biumfidd  By the time the Moncow plan was formally adopted un 1945, Meauire were urmder way to impleinent a major reconstruction of the Soviet capital. The Okhoiny Ratd market area between the folshos Theater and the Kremlin was cicared, and the former Tverskaia Surcet renamed in honor of Maxim Gorky in  1932—was widened and endowed in 1936-40 with rows off  buildings designed primarily by Arkady Mordvinov (1896- 1964} mn an eclectic style that defines the easly phase of Stalinist architecture. Osher major projects included the construction of Peace Prospekt as the main thoroughfare in the north of the sity, the Gorky Park of Culture and Rest (1934-46) co a design by Alexander Viasow (190-62), and the construction of the first phases of the Moscow subway,  After World War J, Moscow's architecture achieved new levels of decorative extravagance, cpitomized by the Stalinist skyscraper. Ultimarcly. only seven of the towers were built (the eighth was intended for a site tw the southeast of Red Square now occupied by che Hotel Rossia). Their placement defined contain key points in the topagraphy af the city—a rok empha- sized by cheit large spices, redolent bath of medieval bell rowers amd of the spires of Petersburg. [he role of a verucal dominant an organizing a low, «emingly chaotic array of surrounding structures had long been a feanire of Russian architecture, and although not all these “tall buildings” (rpormve zdantia) were  originally designed with the spires, they obtained them in the final designs ax a reongnition of their symbolic and visual role in a city that woukl retain a largely horizantel, “communal” profile.  Te the wucheast of the city center, Dmitni Chechulia (1901-81). assured by 4 scam of architects and engineers, erected in 1948.52 a 24-st0ry apartment building wich ramifying wings on the Korelnicheskara Chuay at the confluence of the lauza and Moscow Huvers. On the north af the Boulevard Ring, Aleksei Dushkin (1903-77) designed an office and aparrmenc building at Lermontov Square (1953), and in the same area, Leonid Potia- kor (1906-65) built the Horel Leningrad (1949-53) near the Leningrad Station. The west porsion of the Boulevard Ring was masked by an apartment building by Mikhail Posokhin (1910- 89) and Ashor Madoianu (1909-66) at Insurrection Square (1950-54), and at the southwest portion of the Ring stands the Ministry of Farcign Affairs and Foreign Trade (1948-53) on Smolensk Square by Vladimir Gelfreikh (1885-1967) and Mik- hait Minkus (1948-53). Further to che southwest, beyond the Moscow River, 1s perhaps the most grotesque of the seven: the Hotel Ukraina (1950-56) by Arkadii Mordvinov.  However, the mos imposing of all was the new central build- ing of Moscow State Universisy on Lenin (formerly Sparrow) His. a grandiose, symmetrical comple built in 1949-53 ew a  design by Lev Rudnev (1885-1996), Pavel Abeosimay (1000-- G1}, and Alexander Khriakov (UMII-76). The main architet, Rualney, had played an important role in defining Soviet monu- mentaliam with buildings such as the M.V, Frunte Military Academy (1932-37, in collaboration with V.O, Munb), whose rectangular mass was defined in carly “tocaltarian style” by an unyielding grid of square windows above a long aylobase, The new university building represents a later. Hamboyant stage of cotalitarian architecture and was designed ax 2 self-contained and tightly regulated communicy, a melding of utupian auton of communism with the unparalleled clitism ot the late Stalinist period.  The post-Stalinist period in Moscow architecture was domi- nated by Mikhail Posokhin, who became mun architect of che city, In the 1960s Posokhin adapted utc internativnd inodern style, with ws glass and aluminum facades, wo industrialised mmcthods of construction in the creation of such ensembles as Kalinin Prospekt (1964-69), also known as the New Arbat. extending wesward from the Kremlin and Arbat Square. Ib idemical towers and shopping complexes provided the capiral with the facade of cosmopolitan prosperity {and its beaders with a direct highway co theie dachas), but the Gumplex wreaked incal- ctlable and lasting damage on the orginal Arbat district, To che right of the bridge that rakes Kalinin Prospekt over the Mos cow River, Posokhin and Mndoiant interpeeted modernism in more dramatic fashion in their “open book” design for the bud  ing of the Council of Murual Economic Assistance (194-69). the institution through which Moscow controlled its cunenic  relanons with the countries of the Wanaw Pact Ina similar repetstrve style, a team headed by Dmiten Chechulin (and as- sisted with Komsumul laburi buth the garpantuan Hotel Russias neat Red Square an (64-69 with accommodauons tor 6.000 gues.  Posokhin was also entrused with deviang a new general plan far Mosgow, which was accepted hy the Central Committee and Council of Maniten in 1971, The oty’s boundary was extended to the limite af the new ring expecwway (and even some arcay beyond), within which were cight large mnes. The outcr zones connined numerous developing “micturegions.”  deigned within 4 system of new tramporuation atterica. These arcas were marked above all by vase “housing massifs” with thousands af apartments. Although succewhal in inereaung che city’s wauble space, the penud pruduced only 4 few caamples of disunctive architecture, such as the Chiklicn’s Music hearer (1979) by Alexandes Vehkanay and V. Krasilnikov.  Although Soviet-era construcuon methods continue for large projects mich as howing developments, post-Soveet architecruse in Moscow has been influenced by Western styles and building techniques, Notable recent examples of this vemlemy include Moxow fntcrnational Bank (1991-44). the McDbonald’s Cor- poration building (1990-93), the Sovmorrrans Building (1990— 99), the International Busines Center of the Academy of Na- tional Econorny (1992 95), the Gazprom Building (1996-97), and the International Cultural Complex (1989-2000), With a disproportionate shure of the country's invesument capital, Mos wow and its wchitecture have entered a phase of rapid change  Kalmen Proupekt (alse kaown as the New Arbor buildings, 1964), deegned by Mukhuil Poenkhin  © Willan © Brumfield 
thar has undoubtedly led to tosses for the histone fabnc of the city bur that has also in many cases produced an exciting and colorful urban environment.  Winant C. Bromine  Farther Reading  Althuugh there ase fow speculued studs of modem abhurecture on Moscow, the city rrectres primary attention in mow sudaes af Sowies modern. For thow with a knowledge of Russian, che eeventhy pub: lished, mammoth eriylopedia Masia Faneklapedis bas cescllent comeeage af the cey's architecture,  Barklun, M.G., et all teitons), Mastera sovetstus anthuekiure ob arkbneknine, 2 vols, Mowow: Ishusscvo. 1975  Brumfick!, Witham Craft, Jie Ongis af Modemion i Rusoan Archarcrury. Rerkeley: University of California Prew, 1291  Brumficld, Wiliam Craft. 4 Erstory of Russian Architecture, Cambridge and New Yurk: Cambadge Gmverory Pres, 1995  Coben, Jean Lous, Le Corbasicr o¢ be mpingue de {URIS Thonn pour Mexea, 1928-1956, Brusch: Manlaga. (987, as Le Corbusser and the Myssicgue of rhe USSR Theorie: and Presevt: for Moxcew, 1926-1956, rranstated by Kenneth Hylton, Princetos, New Jeary. Primewn Univermty Pres, 1993  Cocke, Catherine, Ruunien Anaer- Garde Thrones of Art, Arvbitecture, and the Cuty, Londen: Academy bainnns, 1995  Thonnihoy, Anderi Vindioinovich, Arkhttehtens Maubiy AX ork (Moscow Architevrure. 20th Century], Moscow. Moskoskin Rabochi, 1984  Khan Magomedov, Selim O., Pioneer of Senet Architecture, The Search for New Selucions sa the $9208 and 19th, translated by Alexander Lieven, edited by Catherine Cooke, New Youd: Rirzali, and Londen: Thames and Hudion, 1987  Kirichenko. Cvgeniia, Runksia arhiitebtera, 18 90-1910-bh gador (Russian Archit ture, 1830 1910), Mowow- bkuatro, 1978  Kopp. Anatole, Comsracrnvisr Archntreture m the USSR. London Acadenw Editions, and New York: St. Martin's Press. 1985,  Murrell, Kathlorn Beran. Meson Art Neuoean, London Wilson, 197  Riabushin, A.V., and Nu Smoling, Eandsnaris of Series Aechiternure. 191°. 1991, New York: Rizalt, 1992  Shmadt, 5.0... Moskva: Emsisklopediia ‘Moscow. Encydopalia|, Marcin: Hobhaa Runsitkaa Rivikbopediia, 1997  Saar, S. Frederick, Metushor: Sole Awturecs in a Mats Sociery, Princeton, New Jeney: Princetan Loniversuy Prew, 1978  Zemray, $M. Ceduor. Zodchr Morbry (Arctucects of Moscow), 2 vols.. Moscow: Moskovskii Rabochis. 1981-88  MOSQUE The mosque. a Muslim house of worship, has and continues to function as the focal pornr af Muslim communities worddwide and has served as an ourveard and visible symbol of Islam since the seventh century.  According to [slam (submisinon wo God's will), Allah is every- where, and a devout Mudim docs oot require a defined space ar structure fur divine wonhip, The mosque, or in Arabic msgid, which means “a plice where one prasitates onesclf,” is a prayer hall rather than a building cnshrining a deity, Its interior is an architectural expression of ttudid, a ductring of divine umty, and ts usually an open unobstructed space, with ao defined progressive path. .  Because Mecca is considered as the center of the Islamic uni- verse. every morque, whether 2 masjid (district or neghborhoud  mosque), a masjid jam: (congregational or principal mosque), oc a magid-i sama (Friday masque), which is la to aconmmodate an encire adult community co assemble for Friday peayen, must have a avchrab (recess o¢ niche) in the gible wall indicating its direction. A place for prayer alongside this wall, a minbar (pulpit) for the khuthe (oration) at Friday prayers, and a facility for the rinual ablution are the few obligatory require- ment that must be met in every mosque design. The other elements, such 2 portal, courtyard, and even the dome and the evet-present minarct, are all opional.  The sexes have to be segregated during worship, and some mowques provide women with a special area. Women are cither relegated behmnd a barrier such as a cunain or 3 screen of to a small space within the mosque such as a gallery, 3 mezzanine, on a separate side hall  The absence of any fixed of prescribed forms in moaque de- sign allowed geeat flexibility in the architectural expression of the building and permitted each region to develop its own style and use of muterials, Thus, mosque architecture reflects a grent variety of saykes resulting from the influence of such factors as geographical environment, available raw maccrials, culture, aims of the patrons, and the skills of the architect and. craftsmen engaged in the building process. The carliest moxques were based on the fayour of the Propher Muhammad's house in Medina and had a ithe (courtyard) and a Aanem (sanctuary). Akhough the distinction herween the outer courtyard and the prayer-ball hax heen kept. cach region developed its own style, and in India the derign of the mosque was influenced by che Hind Temple, whereas in the castern Mediterranean, the Byzantine church wan a strong influence, as is evident in the Blue Mosque in Istanbul, Turkey (early 1600s).  The wien word and floral and gevmeuix design are the only omamentation considered appropriate for a mosque be- cane human representation is prohibited. Qur’anic inscription ‘on tiled surfaces or caved in stone of stucco serve to record and transmit the word of Allah, Because the words need to be reada- ble and nn necessarity legible, they are often incorporated into the floral and geomerric patterns.  Islam welds together the sacred and the secular, and through time the monque has been viewed not only os a congregational priyer place but abo aa a center of social life. In addition to a prayer-hall, che musque has provided apace for education, vom- munity gatherings, and public and political functions. Until modem tines when secular law was introduced to many Eslamic sounceics, the mosque also functioned as 2 court of justice. In many instances, these subsaliary functions were provided with Separate buildings, and the masque served as a focal point in a complex.  Regardless of its architectural sryle, che mosque has served as a symbol of identity, political power, social control, justice, and piety throughout history. In the madetn era, the mosque contin: ues to reflect the values and the changes occurring in Muslim wciety. The 20th century, and more specifically the second half of the century, saw the mosque change not only in terms of wyle, matcrial, and building eechnology but also in its symbol- tsm. During this time, the masque acquired a pan-Istamic char- acter worldwide, that is, a design that incorporares elements that are considered recognizably [skamic without being represermative of any one particular culrure, and became a symbol of national  King Saut Mosaic on H-Medina Read, designed by Abd al-Walud al-Wrakil (1986) Photo cvurtesy Zouher A. Hashem  independence and of declaration of Muslim presence in non- Mudim countries.  Many new Muslim independent nation-states were crated our of formes colonial territories in the late 1940s and the 1950. These new political entities aspired to present themactves as buh “modern” and Islamic through their new buildings and more specifically the nvosques, which were viewed 23 monuments to independence. This led to the construcuan of state mosques. buildings initiated by the government, which wok over the traditional rede of che king or ruler in egmmissioning the con- struction of a mosque 10 express nationhood, and paid for by public funds. Stare mosques are the embodiment of palisical will and national identity symbals for auchonry within the nations of the Islamic world and the legitimization of state regime in the eycs of the word. Therefore, their design is intended to have a dearly recognizable visual identity, which must be explicit iss its regional, modern, and Idamic reference.  The architecture of mosques such as the Isriglal Mosque in Jakarta. Indonesia (1955-84), and Masitd Sulan Salahuddin Abdul Aziz Shah Mosque Alam, Selangor. Malaysia (1988). re- veal the conscious arrempt to synthesize modernity and tradi- tional form. The use of historic references serves as a reminder  of a gonous past and remforce the ideas of continuity and tradbuional values in Idam.  Scale is an important factor of these monumental structures: most mosques have been immense, with the capacity to accom- Mmodate from 20,000 wonhippers under covered space. and up to 200,000 in the wourtyatd during the major Mudim festivals wach as Fid (festival marking che end af Ramadan). They were usually concenved a complexes that inorpurate multiple-use spaces and inclide a madrast (place of study}, a library, and spaces for social gatherings.  The King Saud Muxquc ons El-Medina Road in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, designed by Abd al-Wahid al- Wakil (1986), features an open central courtyard Jue gathering with shading devices denne to circulate watm and cvol air naturally through the  op, making the space comfortable for large groups. The King Saud Mosque baasts a novel type of dome construciion that had not been realized except in architects and engineers’ Plans; To minimize weight (and therefore increase height), al- Wakil used hallow bricks that were load bearing in only ane direction.  Unlike must of che ursditional kxal community mosques that were integrated inty the urban fabric, state mosyues were treated as isolated monuments and are intended w be as visible as possi ble. When first planned. the Masjid Negara, in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia (1957-65), was located at the edge of city, whereas the King Fasal Masjid. Islamabad, Paksstant (1960-86) was con- structed at the foor of the Margakk Hills on the main approach to the city, so that all coukd sec it as they approached the capital.  Mont of the ware masquer were constructed berween the 1900s and the 1980s. Afterward their need was diminished as the expressinn of national identity was nn longer imperative, and the cane for such buildings was prohibitive.  Local authosities in Muslim nations act as beanches of central government aod distribute che government funds. ‘I hey oversce the provision of huang, school, and hospitals and bave been responsible for the cunstruction ofa large number of community mosques since the middle of the 20ch century. These new mos ques ate cither unique structures erected mosdy in new urban setlements, such as the Village Mosque. Ma‘ader. Algeria (1975 80). of a sepeatable mosque design, such as the Housing and Development Board Mosques in Singapore ot the Capital Development Authority Mosques in Pakistan.  Coinciding with the establishment of independent states in the Islamic world was a Muslim imigration to Europe as well as to North America, and the immigrant communities felt the desire Co capress thew presence by building new mosques. Projects tor Islamic centers expressing a Muslim presence in non-Muslim countrics started co take shape in the 1950s.  Mayor mosques burlr in the Wess, like their counterparts in new independent Islamic countries, served as statements of Mus- lim identity, They were initiated by the influence of members of Muslim diplomat masions and financed either by their own or other Islamic guvernmenss, most notably that of Saudi Arabia. These buildings atc usually found in capitals of other cosmopoli- tan cites. Deugns for these mosques ase generally influcnced by the local context and comply with the local construction regulations and planting laws, but usually enclude reference to Tegional tradinons of the group Urat financed, deugned, or acted as the project keader. 
Faamples of such structures are the idanuc Center, Washing- ten. D.C. (1947-57), the London Ceneral (Regent's Park} Mos- que (1969-77), the Idamic Center and Mosque, Rome. ltaly (1979-94), and the Idamic Cultutal Center of New York in New York Caty (1987-91). These centers not only serve as places af prayer bur abo promote soul, educational, and cultural ac- Snities foe the local Mualim population. Notwithstanding the presence of Islami, centers, che immugrant Muslim communities wanted to manifess cher presence in predominantly non Mushm countnes on a more local level. For those who found themsdves distant from their hame wountey, the mnusque was the embodiment of their klenuty and became a symbol of cele- brauon and pride.  Mosques such as the Great Masque. Nionv, Mali (148- 73), and the Yaama Mosque. Yaama, Tahoua. Niger (1962 86), rely on the community's own resources and are ennstructed by builders and other skilled artisans. aided by members of the community. However, some of the mare recent examples, such at the Dat al-Idam Mosque, Abiquiu, New Mexica (1981), and Baie ul-Isam, Maple, Vornate, Ontario, Canada (1987-92), were derigned by professional engineers and architects from out side the immediate community.  A sign of che preseine of a communicies that have cubraced the Muslim religion are the so-called sturefront mosques (ound in North Amerxan that signal the presence of Affo-American Muslims and the comparable situiton in Indonesia, with the Chinese “shop-house” mosques in Jakarta,  Individual patruns have always played an important role in die construction of mosques. Throughout history mosques have been financed by wealthy individuals such as members of she ruling of social clite, monarchs, princes. sheiks, rigrous leaders. fandowners or merchants, usually as an act of piety, a gesture roward thet own cumimunity, or dominance. Lis recent times. moder patmns range from national and religious Icaders to businessmen, and che buildings range from the world’s Largest new menque, the Great Mosque of Hassan T1, Casablama. Mo- row (1986-93), commissioned by King Hawan IT of Morowo, to rhe more modes Bin Madiya Mosque in Deira, Dubai, United Arab Emirates (1982-90), which was donated for public use by a private patron. Majid Al Fuuaim. Regardless of uheire size, the resulting mosques usually reflect the inulividuat taste af the praject initiator,  In recent decades mosques have abo become a standard inte: gyal feature af complexes for institunians such as those dedicated to higher educanon, che University of Petroleum and Minerals Mosque. Dhahran, Saudi Arabia 11969-7741, health care, Avi cenno Miltary Hospital Mosque, Marrakech, Morocco (1982), 23 well as major providers of commercial and public tranyporta- Gon services such as airports and the King Khalid International Airport Mosque. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia (1974.83). These inss tutions recngnized the nced for the provision of places for collec tive prayer amd have called for the inclusion of a prayer ball. it not 3 munuincatal musjue, in there fauditier. The design of these structures is meant to signal the centrality of Islam in the msututton. ‘Thee rehgous structures are intended for the use of'a setcct group. although the insututions anticipated that their Prestige and location might eventually attract worshippers trom a wider background.  Wherever Muslims went, they constructed (nosques to meet the fundamental religious requirements. that is, congreganonal  pravers five times a day. Whereas in the past the architecture of the inosque was affected by ics environment, be it the climare, materials, or technology, mosques of the modem era are the product of cultural cachange and desigs idexs tranamiteed on a warldwide scale, and it is na longet possible to find buddings with whic im termed “3 purely regional mode.” and they can no longer be grouped according to geographic areas,  Dexpite its appearance, as a building type, the masque is ubiquitous and remained immutable over time. Although styles, construcuon technolugy, and context have changed, it continues to accommodate collective acts of prayer and is a pow- erlul symbol tv both Muslims and non-Musims alike. In is an everlaging “public affirmation of being and being seen to be Muslim” (Hofod, 1997).  Haat Haars  See sho Great mosque, Nioaoy Great msesque of Hassan Ll, Caseblanca  Further Reading  Fishman (1994) prowules acumpechensive architectural hiscory af mos- ques aruund the world, whereas Hlolod 11997} fauunes spexificaly of the mosques that were bali un the second half of che 20th cenmury. Husiphery (1997) and Conti (19781 look af the masque 23 a celepous building among sacted structures. The addinonal sources provide fus- thet gencral information on eather and contemporaty mosques and Islan, act,  Ardalan. Nader, “On Mosque Architecture.” an Aprhetevtieer and Community: Building on the tdewic World Today, cdoced bry Renara Hfolod and Dad Rastorter, Millerton, Now York: Aperture. 1983  Cong. Flavio. & of the Gods, translaced by Partich Creagh, Boston: HBI Pres, 19°8  Frediman. Marin and Ibasan-UUsklin Khan, The Masque: Hiawry. Arohtecturat Development & Regional Direnity, london: Thames and Huduin bed. 1994  Grabar, Oleg. The Farmanon of islamw Art. Now Haven: Yale Unversity Pres, 1974  Holod. Renata and Hasan-tlddm Khan, The Consemporary Mosque: Archiecn, Chen. and Desgre ace the 19505, New Youk: Rizzoli, 1997 trhs book was abo pubhshed under the site The Mosque of the Modern World: Arvbeterts, Patras and Desagns sive the 1950, Loeden: Thames and Hudvin. 19971  Humphrey, Carohac aod Tees Vitebsky. Marea! Architecture, Totomo, Latle. Brown aud Campany, 1997  Imarmatdin, Abu H.. Shamim Ara ![faman, and Diebashit Sarkar, “Communny Mosgue—A Synibul of Souety.” ia Reguenalione 10 Archies ture (Pioxcedungs of a seminar held by the Aga Khan Award foe Artutecture), edited by R. Powell, Singapore: Compt Media Pac. Had., 1985  Kuban, Dogan, Afwdim Religious Arhuecrure, 2 vols. Linden: Ball, 1974  Perears. fous, Adtenn Saved Archuriture: A Mtylate Mister, New Delhi- Rooks and Bavks, 1994  MOSQUE OF THE GRAND NATIONAL ASSEMBLY, ANKARA, TURKEY  Designed by Behruz Cinici and Can Gini, completed 1991  The Mosque of the Grand National Asembly, designed by Bch. tac Cinici (1932-) in collaboration with his son Can Cina  (1962-), was completed in (991. To appreciate the specificity of this moague, it is necessary to conuder 1b relationship co its physical surroundings, which it shares with the Grand National Assembly, and to situate it within the current debates about modernity, secularism, and religion in ‘Turkey.  Located on a genily sloped 117.4-acte 1475 ,000- aquare- Meter) campus, the main building of the Cerand National Assem- bly is based on Austrian architect Clemens Hol:meiner's win ning 1942 competition entry. [nthe yean following the inauguration of the Assembly building in 1962, changes in the Turkish partiamentary system that made representatives mote accountable to their respective conatitucncies led to an increase in the numbers and diversity of visitors and personnel. steaung an evential demand for new facibstics. Husband and wife Behruz and Altug (19.35-) Cinici wete first commissianed tw design a public relations annex with offices, mecting eoms, and food services in 1978. In 1985, in response to the growing number of people using makeshift prayer spaces throughout the complex, the Cinicis were asked to design a mosque large enough to a- sommodate 450 worshipers on the Assembly campus.  Serung along the central axis bwecting the roughly symmetri- eal site, the main Assembly building, the Public Relations Annes, and the mowue form a tripartite layout with a distinctive out door space in Frone of cach srixture. ‘To the north, che solemn main entrance of the Aucmbly building, overlooking dowatuwn Ankara, is reserved for formal use by representatives, cabinet members, and forcign dignuarica, Meanwhile, dhe Luge court yard between the Assembly buikling and the public relations annex ts bustling with personnel, various delegarions, press cosps, and visitors. The ewo wings of the Publ: Relanons Anncx form a narrow transnivnal vorndor alang the centval axis leading, to the base of the rangular courtyard of the mosque. Changes in geomenry. scale, and soundscape highlight ube sigmificance af this transition. The remarkably quiet and secluded courtyard is bordered by the library on the suuthwest side and the mosquc on the southeast side, both af which are modest in size. The caster corner of the courtyard is truncated by a criangular poul. icaving a square shaped paved ares between the ewo buildings. A canopy runs the full length of the buildings along the court- yard, and at their intenectian two superimposed square prisms highlight the apex of rhe rriangle. the final reach of die cena) aus.  What ts surihing about ehis buikiing is how the componenrs of the conventional vocabulary of mosque architecture are re- duced to an abstraction, fragmented, reconfigured, and some- times even consciousty omitted in the final design. Yer the aschi- tects maintain a dialogue with established historical precedenss in each reinterpretation by invoking the assets’ famifiariny with these compatitional principles. This becomes immediately cvi dent in che courryard, where the canopy has replaced the typical colonnaded portion, yet the columns chemselves are implied through indentations along the edge of the canopy and its projec- Gon on the ground. Sunilarly, che overlapping prisins at the apex and a slender cypress tree on the side stand in for the munaret that the designers chose to suggest without building it.  Of equal interest is the architects’ tesalve to connect with broader Islamic traditions beyond the Ortoman, 2s excmplified in their selective reuse of Onoman precedents. Thus, although the site layout clearly takes after Ottoman Abidlives, the formal articulation of individual spaces and masses hearkens back to  —} I  — — —,  |  Tacede of the glass gible wall, Mosque of the Geran Nasional Asembly:  Photo by Reha Giunay © Aga Khan Award for Architecture  earlier and mot necessarily Anatohan Islamic prototypes. By re- Placing the archetypal dome, characrenstic of Occoman mosque desigat, with 4 squat, off-centeted, xepped pyramid, the aichi tects have opted for a different geometry that deemphasizes the verucality implied by dye dame and a centralized plan. More important, this design imeacionally reintraduces the organiza- onal principtes of the carly Islamic: mosque as a simple congre- gauional space accommodating ruws of unditferentiared believers based on Mohammed's own home in Mecca. Uhe split-level plan celegates men and women to pasate areas as required: temarkably, however. the tranducenr plaques between the nwo define their boundary without xevering their vtual connection.  The Cinicis’ experimentations with established composi- tional principles included the ineoduction of new spatial cle ments acknowledging Istannc liturgy. Thus, for example, the use of transparent materials to demarcate the grbia wall and the mthrab niche, provading a view of the sunken garden with > teflecung pool carved out of the hullsate in which the mosque is ensconced, ts intended as an unmistakable reference to the Isfamic concept of the Paradise Garden Moreover, the conscious omission of cenain clement: {such as the minaret or the calon- nade), which entices each beholder in camplete the picture her 
AY  Mann sraramuc with sriangular court, Moique of che Grand Nanonal Assembly (1991) Photo br Reha Gunay © Aga Khan Awand for Anhitewuire  or himself, serves as a reference to the profoundly perwonsl di- menuva of one’s relationsbip wich God in (slamic faith.  As evidenced by che chotwe of materials and scale, the budding eschews monumenealicy and opuleme. The Cinicis are experi- enced at using reinforced conctete for ms teatural, sculptural. and structural posubilicies. In this building. vanations in texture maximize the effects of ight and shadow on both interior and exterior walls, Sunilarly. structural dements. such as the beams that support the stepped pyramid on the rot. alo form cye- arching thrce-dimensional decorative partems in the mterior.  The Cinicis’ project must be wewed within a long-running search for a new vocabulary in monque design by 20th-century Turkish architects chat expresses the contemporary modernist senaibilitics of architectural discourse and practice in Turkey. [n earlier designs, Bebruz Cinici’s contemporaries — such as Congit Bektas in his Frimesgut Masque, Vedad Dakokay in his unbuilt Ankara Kocaepe Masque, and later King Fusal Mosque in bla- mabad—have inteuduced tiew geometries, What disunguishes the Mosque of the Grand National Assembly within this context has been the architects’ decision to rework entrenched composi- tional pancipics and programmats requirements as well. Al- though the contnbutiors of the Mosque of the Grand National Assembly have been recognized internationally with the 1994 Aga Khan Award for Architecture, its reception in Turkey has  been wontrovenial, Canservative religious cirdes. who consider tbe archetypal Ottoman musque almost as sacred as che function it houses, have attacked it for its iconoclastic design. Meanwhile, the sheer introduction of 4 mosque into the campus of the Grand Navonal Assembly was denounced by secularists, who  this to be a vinlanion of the fundamental principles of the Repub- hic, Whereas the Qanics have ried ro mitigate this concem by emphasizing the individual and private aspects of communion, the same cannot be said of the increasingly larger and more Prominent mosques commissioned by other state agencies in the following years.  Further Reading  Cinici, Hehrus, feprovisssion. Momarlshie Dugeclema ve Bebras Cinwé, Ieanbul. oyun Kitaplasi. 1999  Davidwoo, Crnthia, and Tonail Serageldin (edicuts), Archieraary beyond Acchetectuse: Creasrvity tad Social Transfarenations in Iilawic Culrarer: The 1995 Age Khan Arward for Architecture, Landos: Academy Faitions, 199%  Holod, Renata, and Hasan-Uddin Khan (editors), Ty Con Mougue: Architect, Clicass, and Designs ance she 1950s, New York: Rizzoh, 1997; a The Mowgue and the Madera World: Architects. Pesroms, anal Denwgpa sincy the 19501, London: Tharnses and Hudson, 1997  Zavner Keven  MOTEL  The motel literally grew up with the modem highway and Amer- ica's growing enthusiasm for motor touring. The term “motel,” formed as 2 combination of “motorist” and “batel,” suggesss a derivational connection to the traditional hotel, but the evolu- Gon of the motel itself has more humble roots that are more directly tied ro the road than the city. Along with kindred busld- ing types—the gas aation and the diner—that developed into the architecture of big signs and litle buildings, che motel helped to establish the unique and colorful character of the J0th-century  ‘The advent of the private automobile brought 4 new sense of freedom to travelers who could now choose their own routes, schedules, and destinatians, Compared to the train, Lae travel was more casual and more independent. $t was alo more of an adventure, particularly in the carly year, when roads were pour and the service infrastructure for travelen was sull tied w the railroads and centered in cowns and citics. Finding a onunuda- tions tovk travelers off the road, where they faced a choice be- tween fleabag hoiels usually bovaced in seedy parts of town along the nilroads of swanky versions in the centeal city with their elaborate public spaces and expensive amenitics. In cither case, the auto traveler faced the ravails af in-rown traffic, and because the hotels were more uften than not oriented to streetvar lines  Howard Johnion’s, Mineola, Long bland, New York (1938) © Philip Langdan  and taxicabs, there were inadequate pruviaons for parking as well,  The need for cheaper am! more efficient overnight lodging along the highway engendered 4 succession of accommodations, fies in the Gorm of tents at auto camps, tollowed by cabins and ontiage courts. Inutially at lease, these were more rural than urban in character and likely ro be found on the outskirts of town, where land was cheap. Cabins were rustic in appearance with few modern conveniences and must often uscd exclusively for wavonal trade, whereas the cottages thar followed were more modern, better built, and usually designed to look like idealized Jittle suburban houses, Both were likely to he family-owned and -operated businesses, with the manager and his fanuly living on the premucs. Muny ravelers were romanucally attracted to these Tietle houses with their sense of independence, privacy, and self- sufficiency, but as modern consumen, they were alse demanding, of a higher level of service, comfort, and security. The refinement and modernization of these carly, rustic models of rvadside ax commodatioas led to the formulation at the modern marel.  The motel was a tighter and more communal organization of individual units than was found in is predecessors, In the more! format, units were characteristically gathered together int an cconomaal pasty-wall arrangement under one root and or- ganecd in a single row or, more popularly, in an L- of U-shaped Plan to form an outdoor common spa. Parking was directly  
adjacent to the scams and sometimes accommodated ie aleermat- ing carports of garages. Although the plans tended to be formu: lak, the buildings were packaged in road-wale imagery designed ta make them into cye-cass hing, architectural billboards. Motels were fashioned in every conceivable architectural style, with re- gional themes that promised a scisc of the locale beg particu larly popular. Sometimes the units wete shaped like Indeat te- pees. little rephcas of the Alamo, or even airplanes and railroad cars, After World War IL, designs retlected mote contemporary styles of Art Deco. populuxe, and modeme that resonated well with the aesthetics of the automobile and fulfilled a hunges tor che future. Highway architecture was lively, garish, and deugned to catch the eve of drivers speeding by. As the form of the motel buildings serrled into familiar eypes. deagn energies (and a greater dice of the budgend were invested in novel adverrising signs thar made one motel sand our fram another. ‘The signs thenselye were elaborate, colorful works of ant; usually embla  toned wich neon to make them visible at night, they added 4 heraldic, vertical dimension co what was baically 4 horizontal building.  Although a ich proliferation of styliatic treatments prevailed an the outside, the rooms within were charcterstically clean, efficent carbon copica of ute another and tull of polyester and plasne—durable materials that were part of the posewar ser thetic. Over time, the motel format was expanded on wih larger lobbies, restaurants, and other amenities, such as swimming, pools and playground eqpsipment.  The evolutionary development of the motel was driven by a cambinarion of economics and changing tastes and lifestyles. Individual entrepreneurs seeking to atiract the greatest number of consumers at the lowest possible consrracnéin and mainte- nance cast had to balance herween econamics and ambience and personality. The novelty that prevailed during the carlier period af individual experimentation was significancly quicted down with the proliferation of motel chains such as Holiday Inn and Howard Johnson's, found at the interchanges ot the spreading intertate highway system. Offering reliabiliry, familiarity. and quality cuntrol, ube chase viardardized eheir designs in variants that were more often than not multistory and more hotel like than their predecessors. Maas replication of designs and furmush- ings was a cost-saving measure. Except for eccentric examples, such as the Madonna Inn, a vast motel as theme park where cach rear is 4 surprise, the motel today ts typically a model of lamiliasity and reliabliry, Onc chain's motel began to resemble another, and differences among them shifted from design differ- ences ta brand loyalties fueled by incentives that included free breakfasts. reservarions services, and various discounts and pre- miuma along with a lack of surprises,  Mast of the rusdside motels from the past aaflered fram the proliferation af the interstate highway system. Like the carly roads phat redirected traffic away From the railroads, the inter states have in turn redirected moor ursffic away from the ald toads, Individual mocel owners whe had consiousty sought to create a unique sense-nf-place experience ax a part of uheis mar- keting serategics had also set themselves against the perceived uniformity of modernism. Today, these older models live precar- rously along litde-used highways. where they have become ex- hibits in a living museum. The motel and horet industries have blended into indistinguishable architectural Mandness. Morel formats on the freeway are similar to thine inside of towns and  cities, However, few building types offer such a compelling story of their evolution. The evolution is not yer complete. As compe- tition for the nation’s leisure dollars continues unabated. new formn will likely appear chat continue to wrestle with the di- Jernma berween the familiar and the unique and between econ-  omy and a senic of place. Beuce C. Wenn  Ser she Roadside Architeccure  Further Reading  Andenoun, Warten H.. Vaeibing Rauditde Americt, Tucron: Uneveruny of Anzons Prew, 1981  Belaco, Warten James. Asercuns on she Nae. From Antecamp so Mate 1910-1945, Retmbeld Pablubing Corporanion, 1955  Jalde, Juha A.. Keith A Sauille, and Jeffersan $. Rogen. The Motel an Aneericat, Balamare: The Joho Hopkins University Prev. 1996  Margolis. John, Home Away finn Home Motels sn Amerreca, Benton; Little, Brows and Company, 1995  Marling. Karal Aon, The Geloun of Reads: Mych and Symbol Along the American Highway, Minneapals; The Caivenity of Minnewra Prew, 1984  MOVIE THEATER  A cultural icon of the 2Uth century. the movie theater borrowed, adapted, and invented forms, responding ro changes in cen- nomic and social conditions. Above all, it was an expression of novelty and dlusion, an environment of wal escape. The Ameri- can movie thearer ser the standard and gencrally remained che Prost exaggerated.  On 14 April 1894. the kinetosupe debuted ut a New York City phonograph parlor, introducing moving picturcs two the Ateercan publi, combining 4 French invention with Yankee ingenuity, A single viewer deposited a quarter and peered down inte ghe machine to sce the flickering image. Two years later. the invenuon of new machinery allowed the images wo be projected on a wall. When Vaudeville operators added the nov- dey co their programs, attendance doubted, and for the next nen years the mouon picture was 2 staple in Vaudeville in all majoc American cities.  For those cities not on a Vaudeville Grcuit. minerant film exhibitor would buy a movie, rene a large room and dozens of folding chairs. st up a wooden crate in the doorway to collect receipts (thus, the “bos office”), and cun che film until it fel apan o¢ people stopped arrending. These storefrone cheaters began to appear crerywhere. even competing with Vaudeville in large ci- ties, Haberdasherica were quickly remodeled, and occadonally anew building was created for the purpase of exhibition, begin- ning with Tally's Electric Theatre in Los Angeles in 1902. They wete small, dark, shachox-thaped buildings with a single aisle down the middle and the projector mounted in the back over the doorway. Overhead was munimal, and the buildings went up whereves there was an affordable lor. Whereas Vaudeville borrowed from che tradition and form of live theater. these were simple, nondescript, single-story wooden buildings that bor- Towed from citcus carnival traditions — posters, sandwich boards, and spontancous attendance. For reasons of coat, the number of seats was kepe just below the legal definition of » theater,  which required 4 license, Building code safety standards were looser at well, and fires were not uncomman,  in 1905, Joh Harns and Henry Davis, operating 2 96-scat storefront in Pittsburgh, changed their marketing surategy. In- stead of one showing 4 night, they ran continuous performances all day, lowenng the cost of admussion to five cents. The nickelo- deon was born. “Nickel madness” engulfed the nanon in what appeared to be a get-rich-quick wheme, Phe “nicks,” as they came to be known, were the primary woue for echibisors until World War 1. with names such ax Eleverin. Bijou, Liberty, of Empite outlined in bright lights in an attemps to counteract their wedy reputation,  Motion picture theaters wete olten named the “Opera Hoatise” in small to medium-size towns, giving an aur of European legsumacy to counter the preacher’ admonitions trem the pul- pic Popular sheer music. sach as “Vake Your Girlie to the Mov fe IF You Can't Make Love at Home.” did nar help, Whereas the Hays Office attempted em clean up Hollywood from the production end, architects were commissioned ta improve the exhibition end. Hollywood studios that had begun buying inde- pendent theater to ensure a distribution outlet began tw invest in the construction of new movic theaters,  . ;  Mone theater, Southside, Chicago  In 1913, the plush 1.845-scat Regent Theatre opened in New York City inuating the so-called mowic palace, Modeled after the Duge’s Palauc in Venice, it was uptown beth in locaniue and uv connutanon. Ihe movie palice was the big-uty venue for first-run movies until World War If and set the standard Lor the movie theater asa distin building wpe. Ie was a large steel framed building with sets of halconses, studied sight lines, and asbestos curtains, containing several thousand seats and ame- nities wich as hallrooms, marble restrooms, ted carpets. chande- lies, magnilicent curving stairways, gilded armament and rail- ings. nunery ronma, and revaurancs. Theater in the South had egicgated enttanes, lables, buluonies, and faciliues The natnes desuribed the envitonment (Majenic. Princ, Rivals. Royal), brand names (Fux, Warner's, Loew's), or the name of the ity (Chicagu, Lue Angeles.  The movec theater had Co fit into the streetscape but be omme- diately recognizable as a type while distinguishing itself from the competition. The building was draped in whatever the latest fashion dhetated. evolving from opulent permed revival to shiny Art Deco to sleek Streamline Mode me ta jazzy ponrwar Moder Overcaled, lighted pylons promoted visibiliry and made the building appear much larger. The marquee might wrap around  © Ransell Lee/Farm Securiry Adminicration. Office af War Informacion Photograph Collective,  Libeary of Congress 
a comer or overlap across adjacent storefronts, Flashing nghts and teaen spelled out the name al the theater and pointed m the box office, a separate steucture. prominendy placed on the sidewalk,  Roth the exterior and the interior were dexigned and exploited tw plea the custamet and to encourage attendance and loyalty Banners outhned with miles encouraged matinee attendance in the suramer. Terrazeo patterns of marble chips divided by broaze bands wold the customen chat they were in a world of escape even betore they bought their tickets. Patrons were induced to enter with seductive lines and subtle arrows that pointed toward the entry lobby.  For a quarter. patrons were treated like rovalty or movie stars,  beginning wath the misroted lobby, Huge plaster feathers sur- rounded the auditorium, encircling pacrons in their plush velver scats like feather boas. Mulaple aisker and floral mons led to 4 framed promenium. There were claskal paintings, statues, cherubim and seraphim, dragons, allegorical paintings on the ceiling, and organ music, usually reserved for the church, Uni- formed ushers, armed with white gloves, flashlights, and caps, showed patrons w their seats. The fantasy, adventure, uf ro- mance extended from shadows on the silver sercem to a physical environment when the lights came back on alter the feature. The so-called armospheric theater, introduced by fohn Eberson. touk dus approach to it ultimate expression, creaung the illusion that guests were seated outdoors in velvet seats on a hallsake. Plaster peacocks sar on rile rots, and stars rwinkled overhead and the moon moved across che night sky.  The U.S. Supreme Court's divestiture ruling in 1948 seating thar studio ownership of production, distribution, and exhibi- tion conetiruted a monopaly, combined with the advene of rele- visian, spelled change for the theater and increased the amt of operation considerably. Theaters in the 1950s offered what urte- vision could not, Cinerama, 3-D, and CinemaSoope had theater owners ripping our sears and inaralling wider screens, new projec- tors, and additional speakers. Unsubsidized by production cam- panies, the constna.uon and operation costs, now including film tenral, drove ticket prices up and services down. Exhibition was increasingly automated, culminanng in the mutuplex, operated from a single projection booth. ‘Ihe remnants are still there in references. often out of consext: a pylon stabbing the sky, the marquee with irs flashers and ceasers, the Klieg lights (even if just painted an the wall), the coming-attraction signs and post eta, and the video rental emplayees wearing cheap cummer- bunds.  Magcur VaLeNTine  Hall, Ben M.. The Best Remaining Sean: fhe Story of she Golden Age of the Move Palace, New York. Bramhall House. 1961  Naylor, David. Armerican Prunire Palaces: The Archteectare of Fantasy. New York and London: Van Nowrand Reinhokd, $981  Naylor, David, Great American Manse Theaters, Washingron, D.C Preservarion Prem, 1987  Pumam, Michal, Sdent Srrrac The Decline and Tramformation of the American Maar Theater, Baluenore, Marsland: Joos Hopkins University Prese, 2000  Valentine, Maggoe, The Show: Stare aw she Sidewadl: An Archttecturad Hrstery of the Movie Theatre. New Haven, Connecocur: Yale University Press. 1994  MUMFORD, LEWIS 1895-1990  Architecture caitic, United Seates  Best known a a pioneering 20ch-century critic of architecture, technology. and planning, Lewis Mumford served as the de facto conscience of the modern movement, urging ics participanis to remake the built world for the berterment of society. He was a humanist and selt-styled “generalise” who wrote more than 20 books and hundreds of articles and reviews on 3 broad range of subjects. His writings are linked by the onmmon theme of “uto- pia.” of the good place, achievable through the pusitive deeds of the individual and the communnty. Partly because of his eru- dite yet accessible and often acerbic writing style, Mumford’s influence was considerable, Profesionals and laypeople ulike valuc his criticism, even when they might disagree with his mor- alaing pronouncements His writings continue to be relevant and, in many ways, preient. as many of his fearful predictions regarding a technolugy's dominance af socety have come to Trustion.  Mumfoed’s ininal interest in architecture and planning was sparked by the writings of Patrick Geddes, the Scottish biokogist tumed regional planner, and of Ebenezer Howard. the originator of the Garden Caty. From Geddes, Mumford adopted an organic theory of civibzation in which the region was identified 3s the natural unit of settlement. Subsequently, Mumford wedded Geddes’ regioealim to Howard's Garden City tn create the re. onal city, which Mumford believal would be the most effective means for siphoning population growth away fram America's burgeoning metropolitan centers and restoring an organic bal- ance in daily life. Toward this goal, Mumford joined with a group of progressive architects, planners, economists, and sociol- ogists during the 1920s ww form the Regioaal Planning Associa thon of America. Based in New York City. the associacion advo- cared chiefly for improved and affordable working- and middle-class housing and designed and built ewo limited- dividend projects in the metropolitan area: Sunnyside Gardesu, Queens, and Radburn, New Jemey. ‘The larter project, designed by Clarence Stein, Henry Wright, anid Feederick Lee Ackerman, was especially notable for its inteoduction of the residential as- perblock co American planning and its separation of pedestrian and auturmobile traffic, As a critic, Mumford promoted these Projects in print as examples foe architects everywhere to emu- hate.  Beginning in the bite 1910s and continuing into the 1930s, Mumford supported himself primarily as a journalist. writing on architecture and regionalism as well as other topics for a diverse cange of periodicals, including the Dial, the Freeman, the Jowrnal of the American Instituse of Archisece, the Amevican Mevenry, Commenweaith, and the New Republic. At the time, the field of architectucal criticiam war largely free of compesitors, although he was preceded by auch notable figures as Montgo- recty Schuyler, Mariana Griswold van Rensselaer, and Herben Croly. From the very beginning, Mumford advocated function covet style in modem architecture, believing that buildings should be utilitarian in form and well suited to human need. He es- chewed che historical revivalism then waning within the Ameri- can profession bur also what he perceived to be the ornamental excesses of the more forwarddooking Ar Deco movement. Among American architects, he admired the work of Claude  Bragdon. F. Barry Byrne, and expecially Frank Woyd Weight, whoee organicism struck a responsive chard. Through Catherine Bauer. « collcaguc in the Regional Planning Asouianun of Amer- tca, Mumford came to appreciauc the innovations of European modemists such as J.J.2, Oud, Exnst May, and Walter Gropius, even before secing their work in person. Mumford was invited by Henry-Russell Hitchcock, Jr.. and Philip Johnson to contrib- utc a housing exaty to the 1932 “Modern Architecture: Interna- onal Style Exhibition,” which they curated at the Muscum of Modem An. Although this exhibitian launched the Interna- tional Style in che United States, Mumford distanced himelf from this mewement, belicving that a genuinely modern archi tecture would he regionally based and free to use traditional aa well as modem matrriah,  Reeween 19.31 and 1963 Mumford served as the New Yorker's architecture critic. He inherited 4 volumn called “Sky Line.” the firs of its kind in a gencial-interest Ametican magazine, and it became his mosr important and widely tead forum. His carly columns focused on New York City and its environs. covering subjects as grand as Rockeleller Center and as small as the comer coffee shop, with cach building given the same careful scruriny a3 to selection of sire, expression of purpose. choice of materials. and fatness ww human purpose. Following a hiarus during World ‘War IT, Mumford resumed his post but expanded the enluma’c reach to cover such major European develupments as Le Corbu- ter's Unité d'tlabitarinn and che rebuilt core of Rotterdam. His lament aver the neglect of New York CGiry's Peaneytvania Railroad Suton became a rallying uy fur preservationists and for those alarmed by the dominance of the automobile in the United States. By the rime he relinquished “Sky Linc.” a new peneracion of aschirecusre critucs, including Ada Louise Huxtable and Wolf von Ecards. had filled the void. Mumford’s best columns have been collected and republished in From the Ground Up (1956). Hightoay and she Cary (1963), and Sidewabl Crisis (1998), His work for Architecture and Architectural Record bas been collected in Architecture ata Home for Man (1975).  Mumford wrote few books specifically on the ropics of archi- tecture and planning, and these must be placed within the con- text of his other writings. His fint book, The Story of Usopias (1922), sdumbrates an intellectual blueprint for his Lrer work, in it, he surveyed utopian schemes from Plate to the modern ema and concluded with a utopian vision—Lirgely inspired by Geddes —of organically balanced cominunities planted coaven- tency within ele regions. His ncat four books adhered to strictly American themes, investigating whar his literary col-  Van Wyck Brooks dubbed the “usable past.” Sachs and Scenes (1924), 2 social analysis of architecture, generated a great deal of controversy among professionals. who found Mumford's attacks on stylistic conservatism to be alternately refreshing and vitviolic. The Golden Day (1926), 0 survey of literature, and Herman Melville (1929), @ biography af the writer, prompted Mumford to reexamine creative exprevion in the lace 19th cen- tury. The result was The Brows evade (1931), a well-received interdisciplinary study that celcbraicd, among others, Frederick Law Olensted in landscape archuecture, Joha snd Washington Roebling in engineering, and Henry Hobson Richardson and Louis Sullivan in architecture. Mumford revisited Richardson's work, using Thomas Jefferson's work as a creative foil, in The South in Architecture (1941). Somewhat later, Mumford edited Roees of Contemporary American Architecture (1952), an impor-  tant collection of primary and secondary sources that posited a ditincdy Amencan pedigree for the modetn movement.  Around 1930, cager ta tackle weaghtier themes affecting Western civilization, Mumford embarked on the Renewal of Life, a four-part serics thar traced che parallel histones of technol- ogy. urbanism, and intellectual rhoughr trom the Middle Ages to the 20th century. ending with a plea for regionalism and individual renewal along the tenets of a scculurized humanism. The first rwo volumes of the senes, Tehorics and Civilization (N934) and The Cudnere of Ciner (1938), established Mumford asa beading American intellectual and an international authority on city and regwonal planning. Ciy Development (1945), a vepa- rate collcction of his previously published essays and articles, built on this newfound reputation. The last ewo volumes of the Renewal af Life. The Condition of Man (1944) and the Conduct of Life (1751), focused on the lesa-cangyble cheme of the human Personality and were met with a less-enthusiastic reception by boch reviewers and the gencral pubtic. Believing that he had not yet exhausted these themes, however, Mumford spent the greater part of the 1950s revising and expanding The Culture of Coties as Phe City in History (1961). tis most acclaimed work and rhe winner of the 1962 National Book Award for Nen-biction, fhe Caty tt Hatory caaroines human seulemenss from the Palcolithic cave to the 20th-cenniry suburb, A profnund pessimism charac- terizes the lat section of the book, in which Mumford details a civilization on the brink of nuclear annihilauon. The Urban Prospect (1968), a collection of Mumford’s postwar emays an architecture, was intended by Mumford to function as « kind of appendix to The City in History. That bumankind’s destcucuive impulse was deeply rooted in the historical consciqusness became che overriding there of the cwo-volume Mysh of the Machine (1967, 1970), in which he vondemned the screntilik establish- ment for allowing irself to become a pawn in the Cold War.  Mumford was a committed modernist who believed dur 20ch-century archutecture should fook 1 the future without bos- ing sight of the lessons of the past. In his respect for history, his search for meaning, and his analysis of context in architecture, he may be wen as a harbinger of Postmodernism. even though he would have loathed che theoretical posturing and ornamental pastiches often sssnciated with this movement, Mumford’s ute- pian visian of maderately waked comununisics filled wich decent, utilitarian buildings may now be regarded as hopelessly outdated or even quaint, but his concern for the primacy of the human being. sill informs the bes architecture everywhere.  Rosin: Worrowicz  ‘ Biography  Botn in Flushing, New York, 19 October 1895. Helped organize the exhibit “International Style” at the Muscurm of Modem Art. New York 1932. Member, Regional Planning Association of America 1923-33, Archiecture cridc, New Yorker magazine, 1931-63. Died in Amen, New York, 26 January 1990.  Selected Publications Elmer S. Newman's Lewis Muarford: A Rebleography, 1919-19709 1) is the mon comprehensive listing ot Mamford's wntings. Mumtoed's  papers have been deposed in the Special Collections of Van Pelt Lit brary at the University of Pennsylrunia in Philadelphia. Hu drawings 
and he library are kept at Manaus Carvenaty, Wes Long Bramh. New Jersey  The Story of Utopias, 1922  Stacks sand Seomes A Study af Amenvan Archetecture and Crvikzatum, 1924  The Golden Play: A Study in American Experience and Culture, S926  Herman Melilla, 1929  The Brown Decades A Stmdy of the Arts in Amernst, 1865-1895, 1931  Techies and Civilizatren, 1934  The Culture of Crier, \O¥6  The Seuth in Archiecture. 14}  The Condition of Man. 1944  Cary Development Studies in Duintagnation and Renewal, W945  The Conduct of Life. 1951  An and Techaws. 1952  Krom the Gromnd Up: Obereanuns on Conseraporary Archusecture, Housing, Highway Bushing, and Corse Design. 196  The Trassfermasan: of Man, V6  The City in Hestery: fa Origgns, tv Tranformasien, anal In Propen. 1961  The Highway and she City, 1963  The Mych of the Machine. 1, Techascs and Human Development, 1967  The Urbaxe Prospect, 19%  The Myth of the Mactine {1 The Pentagun of Power, 1970  b and Formaat: 1922-1972. Studses in Liscratute, HMissary, Bregraphy, Lochous, und Canteonparary Secsety. VIPS  Archssecrure as a Home for Man. Enay for Architectural Revend, cdc by Jeanne M. Daven, 1975.  Findings amd Keeping: Austen for an Autobiography. 17S  My Works and Diy. A Personal Chronicle, (979:  Sketches from Life The Ausobiography of Lewes Munafand: The Farts Voar, 1982  The Lewis Mumford Reader, edited by Donald L. Miller, 1986  Sidewwath Critic: Leeds Mumford’: Writings on New York, cdlacd by Robert Woztownee. 1998  Further Reading  A wholarly liceause on Lewis Mumford it just boprining wo emerge. and it covers hin cuntebutions tw architecture, planning, literary crits cium, and public discourse,  Blake, Casey New, Aeloced Contanniy: Phe Cadeural (risivion of Randelph Bexrne, Var Weck Brooks, Walde Frank, and Levis Mamford, Chapd Hil Uneeniry of Nonth Carolina Press, 1990  Hoghes. Thomas Parke, and Agatha C. Hughes toditoest. Lew Momsford: Public Insellecmal. New York: Oxtord Unuversaty Press, 10  Mallee, Donald L., Lens Mumford A Life. New York. Werdenteld and Nicolson, 1984  Novak, Frank G, he Autobingraplical Warsegs of Lown Mumford: A Study in Literary Audacity. Hooolulu: Univenuty af Hawant Pres, [OKA  Trchachler. Heinz, Lemas Mfumiford’s Receptson in Gerrean I rasctaiion ated Craicum, Lanham, Maryland. Uniceuny Ure of Aimetica, 1994  Wojrewes, Robert, Lewis Mumford and American Modrewine: Exsaputn Theerva for Arahtievture and Unban Planning, Cambridge aad New York: Combeidge Univcraity Mews, 1996  MUSEUMS  The anuient rites of grving sanctuary cw che muse whie bringing the muse to the people ate the dual intentions of the museum.  In the 20th century, these cites increasingly call forth the muses of both ast and architecture. Because a museum as architecture is also judged as a work of art, 4 tremendous cultural and aesthetic burden falls on the designer of a muscum. for the building is surely co be che largest acquisition that any art museum is likely to make. and therefore the aructure becomes a majoc accession to the museum's collection. Thus, through the typology of the museum, bricks and stones and steel come to connoisscurship.  Because they encompass so much artistic axpiration, museums are important acthetx touchstones, and those of the 20th cen- tury will become significane pointy of reference fot furure inter- pretation of the arsthencs of our za. Today. we have come to expect modern Lundmarks in inuseum devign and comple bunkding programs detining cach neve decade. Mayor European and American cities, from Paris to Los Angeles, have demon- strared cheer artistic commitment through muscum construction, but smaller places as well, such as Nimes, Bilbao, Milwaukee, and Denver, have invested in important buildings, ev the surprise and admiration of the rest of the world.  in the Mhh-century explosion of muscum design, architects have explored myriad manifesarions of the m. ranging fram the formalized, classical geometry of Mics van der Rohe's Altes Museum (Berlin) through the vaulted light and space of Louis Kahn's Kimbell Acc Muscum (Fort Worth, Texas) m the curvilinear expressionism of the two Guggenheims, Feank Lloyd Wright's (New York City) and Frauk Geluy's (Bilbao. Spain). Museum architecture of the late 20th century has taken many forma programmarically as well: the creation of wholly ncw edif- ices, such as Marc Breuet’s Whitney Museum of Ameran An (New York Caryl: agglomerative ensembles of existing museum buildings, as in Gwathmey Seigel's Harvard Universiry Art Mu- xeunn; contemporary additiom to historic muscums, such as Roche Pankoloo’s Temple of Dendur at the Metropolitan Mu- seum of Are (New York City) and Robert Venruri's Sainsbury Wing of the National Gallery (London); and adapratians of neamuscum architeceure to museum space, a at the Musee Picaao (Paris) and the Tate Gallery (London) by Jacques Hersog. and Pietre de Meurua of Switzerland.  Muscums must strike a subth balance: ew be stunning sites and spaces in their own right and yet 10 be friends to art. Works of att on themselves, they must he cruc co their stated mission, which is to show other art to its best advantage. Tour-de-force architectural form must not forget artisuc function, and for the muscum, this mens to show paintings and sculpture advanca- geously within an inviung public arcna, This is the singular challenge of muscum architecture, for as abways, architecture is found to be the only ar form to bear the burden of function and necessity.  A amall sclechion of truly caceptional masterpieces of modern museum architecture whose quality is based an design creativity. sagnificance of influence of design, and appropriateness of archi- tecture to art will undercore the signiticance of this building type in the 20th century. Therefore, the designs chosen are howe that likely will become models defining modern museum archi- tecutre rather than the most site-specatic of idiosyncratic works. Sclecied works ate ones that demonstrate aesthetic insight, that arc complementary to an, and that together begin to define the wypalogy of che 20th-cennury museum. These works of hte modernism wall serve to explain the relationship among art, ar- chitecture, and viewer in che future, as earticr buildings. such as  Le Corbusies’s Pavillon de Vesprit nouveau (1925) and Mic's German Pavilion (1929) for the Barcelona Extubinna, have de- fined exhibition architeccure in the past. Some exemplars of 20th-ventury museums architecture that une can study are the Mascum of Modern Art (£939) in New York, the East Building of the National Gallery (1978) in Washington, D.C,, and the J. Baul Gerty Museum (1997) in Los Angeles,  The Maseum af Modem Aniin New York City (MoMAD is the wormentone of moder museum architecture, for itis both concretely and evmbolically representative of the meaning of the modern museum, Founded in 1929, MoMA advanced the first modern architecture exhibitions in the United States as well as the first architecture and deugn collecuuns and wuraturs. Even the atchitcctural term “Internatonal Sevie.” uv its Ameruan in- camation, was coined there by the 1932 exhibition of the same name.  The original 1939 buikling by Philip L. Guodwin and Ed- ward Durell Stone. a deck, highly polished, streamlined envelope for art within an urban setting, was well abead at its time stylisti- wally foe America of the 1930s, Programmatically. ron, MoMA was shaping the future of museum design, for now muscu architecaure would acconvmedare the hanging and viewing of works, ranging from the casel-sire canvases of Cezanne m the wall-size ones of Pollock, The typalogy of the modern museum,  Arata [aneahi, Musuem af Contemporary Art, Los Angeles (1986) © Donald Corner and Jenny Young/GrearPusdings.com  in contradiction to the weighty buildings of the Beaus-Arts, was, ulter MoMA, to be conceived of as a ligheweaght, permeable, volumecten endiusare of an hutecture about works uf ar. MoMA is currently undergoing a 2Ist-century expansion. a project de- signed by the ‘Tokyo architect Yashio Taniguchi (begun in 1997 with a completion dare of 2005). With the many iterations of is architecture en the last decades af the 20th century, MoMA wems w be consantly in flix, although perhaps this sate is frting to the meaning of madernism.  ‘The passage of light and views from within to without 2 MoMA iv seamless. Ina great contribution to the history of muscum deugn, the galletics are well designed for the unineer- rupted contemplation of the works, whereas the pubbe spaces are designed to arient the viewer to the urban world outside the museum's wal.  Earty an the design history of MoMA, archirecs Philip John- son there created one of the most sophisticated open spaces wathin any city: che Abby Aldrich Rocketetler Sculpture Garden, a madcentury urban space thar 15 cruly innovative and almost comantically modern, if such a thing is possible. Here, tee: dimensional works by Picasso, Rodin, Matsse, and Henry Moore ate played in counterpaine to nature, the sculprure dis- pereed smang stands of weeping beech and still water, in a Zen- like cumponition. Basically umhanged since ia inception in  
1953, this space is a sancuary Co modernism, where quict con- semplzoun of art and nature os enclosed by walls of abutting skyscrapers and townhouses and enlivened by thew urbane arch tectural presence. Here art, architecture, nature, and cty inter- rect,  Another of the significant mupeum space ain the United Stares that alkows space, architecture, and city to interact with art is the East Building of the National Gallery (1978), Washingson, DC. by LM. Pet, This yoomettk. aulptural comporinan in acute angkes and white marble sev the sandard to whuh Amer can publi. architecture should aspue. In a complex program that simultancously must cxhibic art, create public spaces. respond to its context (which includes che U.S. Capitol and Pennsytvania Avenue), and creare a visual landmark on the Nanonal Mall, the architect hax more than succeeded. Po has gone further. designing a building that hoch shew: art m its advantage via visually varied galleries in breathtaking interior spaces filled wich the sunlight of the south and cues on to create an exterior design se dlegant as tu becotne an anchitetursl Landmark and a work of art in ive. Pei's highly creative solution in based on geometry. concretely and metaphotcally. He has used the esianghe, the traperoid, the tetrahedron, and the acute angle of T'Enfanc’s Washington plan ta dictate his plan. Within this geometnc con- text, the complex interior glassed spaces and the contrasting smooth white marble exterior clevacons together create compa- sidunal integrity.  The American Nationa Gallery foreshadowed ['ei’s work for another national gallery, the French Louvre (1989). Here, again in a challenging program for a structure symbolic of a nation’s artistic heritage, the architect found a solurion bated 00 gcome- try. Faced not any with che long historical memory of France bur also with a muasive site along the Seine River, including an elonguted palace and enclosed courtyards, Pei wisely did not key to imitate the Louvre of history. Instead. in a multilayered juxtaposition, he designed a buldly modern plas pyramidal structure that responds co dhe ancient buildings, Pei’s pyramid seems fo comment on the French love of exoticism in art. on Napolenaic history, and an the Feyprian callecnons of the Louvre.  Aa the geometry of the pytamid is to the | ouvre, the goamerry of the incaceles triangle is to the Nasional Gallery. Because ge- ometry in architecture is eternal, Pei’v pyramid and his triangle speak equally to modernism and tw che antique.  The continuity of antiquity with mudemiam has abo been explored thematwally by Richard Maer in the J. Paul Getty Museum (1997) in Los Angeles. fn a number of ways, this mon- umental project the summation of museum architecrure— even architecture in general—af the bate 20th century, a kind of fin-de-siécle starement of an era. Opening with the dose of the millennium and having been under construction during ane of the mow devastating earthquakes co hit an American citry— and surviving—the Getty is a triumph of che spitic of modem architecture. Sited atop a sismically active city, i¢ represents almost 2 challenge to the gods. We recall that the predecessor to Meier's Getty, the Getty Villa (1980, under renuvation) is Malibu, Cabfornu, a repbca of a villa in Hetcglaneum (and we peed no reminder uf the fate of char place). Perhaps i is hubns to bring art to Olympus. bur this as exactly what the monumental Getty has done.  The giant editice, Hoating white above the city and the Pa- cific, is a metaphor for the history of modem archwecture and sdeology. The building is ich with architectural references wais- ing to be read. The most apparent reference is to the Le Corbu- sian white machine in the garden, but the building alse recalls the Bauhaus “crystalline carhedral of the arts” imagery as well as the futurist manifesto, Mare contemporary references are 10 Louis Kahn's Salk [nstinute and Kimball Art Muneum and fess direcaly w Wright's spiraling Guggenheim,  As a silent white train pulh the viewer up the mountain through Fragram chaparral, the city of today—its freeways and tes wR hills away below, The viewer begins to feel a strong, sense of awent to the promontory, a latter-day Athenian proces- ssonal to the Acropolis. At the hilltop, the visitor must leave the white tain and climb higher, via syinbolic marble steps, toward the modern temple to art, Now at last, one wews Meier's Getty in full, the sleek, machined, semicircular, arcing monumental entrance, leading into a dramatically void space of sun and wulpted waterways, Configured like a Mediterranean village, the fimestonc-faced pavilions housing the art are dispersed axially about, and cling to, che sunlit central courtyard. Although on Firw saghe it is completely Mediterranean whisc, the materiale— enanvled metal squares and cubic cur travertine—are eubtly varied and change coloe and contrast with the setting sun. In a subtle rouch, dhe arcbitest has exposed rough cut limestone honcycombed with primitive tassils. Thus, trom the most primi- uve grofoysc sources in narure—through the finely cur, uamar- tared stone of the ancients to the machined metals of the mod- erns—the macctials of the muscum symbolically re-create the history of art.  Lesur Hes Coemicn  Ser who Getty Center, Los Angeles; Guggenheim Museum, Bilbao, Spala; Guggeahcim Museum, New York City; High Mauscem of Art, Atlant, Georgia; Holocaust Memorial Mu- seum, Washington, D.C; Jatnson, Philip (Uaited Seates): Kiaabell Art Museusm, Fort Werth, Texas; Museum of Mod- ere Art, New York City; National Gallery of Art, East Build- ing, Washington, D.C.; Peace Memorial and Museum, Hiro- shims; Pei, 1M. (United States): Sainsbury Wing, Nasional Galery, Londo; Stone, Edward Durell (United States)  Further Reading  Biasiru, Ermie, Jean Lebrat, Dominique Broombeg, andl Jean-Michel Vincent, Le greted Loueve: Métemorphose dun mashe, 1981-1993, Paris: Ehocta Moniteur, 1989: as The Grind Lowsre: A Museum Tranfigured, 1981-1995, transdaved by Chartorte Ells snd Murray Wollic, Pats: blects Moniexr, 1989  McLanathan. Richanl (ednor), Ease Building. National Gallery of Art: A Profile, Washington, D.C. Naunnal Gallery off Art, 1978  Wabb, John, and Dchorsh Gribbon, The f- Paul Geity Maucscm and Jes Collections, A Muscusn for a New Contwry, Los Angeles: J. Pau Getty Museum, 1997  MUSEUM OF MODERN ART, FRANKFURT, GERMANY  Designed by Hans Hollein; completed 1991  When the Darmstadt industrialist Karl Suroher died in 1977, he left not only a vast collection of exceptional American and  European arewurk to the city of Frankfurt, Germany but also the dilemma of housing for these artworks. The modem collection centered on works from che 1960s induding works by then- obscure artists induding Carl André, Joseph Bueys. Dan Flavin, Donald judd, Roy Lichtenstein, Walter De Maria, Claes Ohden- burg, Blinky Palermo, Reince Rushenbeck. Franz. Erhard Wal- ther, and Andy Warhol.  Hilmar Hoffmann, chief of Frankturr's department of cul- ture, drew up a proposal for a new muscum building and ac- quired for the city an irregular, triangular tract of land measuring 2,140 equase meters at the intersection of Docutrasse, Beau bachsirasse, and Berliner Strasse that had stoud empty caccpt for a wcattct of Niwan huts since Wodd War 11 Whe erat was located in the ancient seation of Frankfurt inside the old ay walls and batdered by the cathedral Ramer in the center and a Domunican monastery on the cast and a Carmelite monastery on the west, City officials cuphemistically put the spin on the sterile location as an arrow pointing to the cast, or tu the more progressive. modem of the city, and in 1983 when an open  comperition tor the museum was initiated, 98 architects or ficms entered. In May of thar sear the Gomminion was awarded to the Viennese architect Hans Tollein.  The site perfectly complemented Hollein's architectural phi lesphy, The unusual ecquirements imposed hy bath the topng- taphy and purpeve of the Domstiasse wact presented myriad powibiliues far Holbein. As carly as 1963, when Stroher was amassing his vollecaun. Hallien was building madels of utopian cities cxchewing the functionalisns and the narrowly controlled aesthetic of the pas-Bauhaus period. Hollein sought cw return ty the joy of buukling and rediscover not anty the practical as- pects of the craft, but abu the interpretation of meaning in construction. To Hollcin and his teow enuhusias, Peter Cook, Dennis Crompton, Kisho Kurokawa, laozaki Arara and others. architeccure was nat a shell showcasing the activiry within. hur an interactive, philosophical stauement that transformed build ing and funciion iaco a whole.  Hollein’s design was immediatly dubbed Tortenrenck (Slice of Cake) because of the atypical physical fearures of the existing site. He built a Posemodern consuuction reminiscent of both the flatiron of the past century and a mighty occan lince, cresting lato the cityscape of Frankfurr. Hollen managed te integrate the building with the traditional architeceure surrounding the museum, despite its challenging geography. He accomplished this primarily through the we of conventional materials such as glass. gray-blue stucco. and ced sandstone to echo the buildings of the neighborhood.  Although the competition was decided in 1983, canstructian did not hegin on the muscum until June, four vears later. During that time, plans were made for the inclusion of an exhibition space of 4.150 square meters, which incorparate an area with natural lighting of 1.472 squire meten. fn addition, 4 714- square-meter administration atea twusing uhe mascum’s library was planned as well as a 519-square-mneter area for workshaps and conservation. The museum opened to the publa 6 June 1991 and won a special commendation fram the Europcan Mu- scum Awards in 1994.  ‘The building may be viewed as an cxample of arrwork equal to the premier collection of modern and contemporary art it houses. The entrance to the building is not in the expected center of any of the three sides but is located at the comer end of  Museum of Modern Art. Erankfuct (1991) Photo & Rudolf Nagel  Dometrawe and Beauhachersesc, The chrust of the main- foot gallery reveah an interior structure that riser the entire three norics to the sectional skylit gallery chat occupies much of the tnof acca. The central spine of stairs cuts through the length of the building connecting each of the 40 exhibition rooms. In add:uep, cach roorn ts also linked to che next by asymmetrical passages. Each exhibition arca is unformed by lighung. peespec- ave, and ambiance. Hollein crcates a sense of anticipation as the visitor wanders throughour the structure in 3 nonregimented manner, creating interaction not only with the artworks but also with the building itself.  Pethaps the most ingenious component of she Frankfurt Mu- seum of Modern Art is Hollein's treatment of the roof. Although he has reserved arcas in the narrow cast point of the building for purposes requiring darkened cavironments, the uppermost skylights created by a network of tempered glaa— suffuse the space with brilliant but mediated daylight. fo addition tw this, Hollein has @ varual city in miniature housing the infraseructure of ait-conditioning and technical transformers, Cased in copper, oxidized into luminous greens and bronze. the technical struc: tures combine wich ube tempered glass like a rebquary reminss- cene of the surrounding monastiy architecture.  The Frankfurt Museum of Modern Art defies reference to both past srylisne developments as well ac contemporary ones, 
ln this buslding, Hollcin has cucceeded in pruducing in his words an abwolute architecture, an expression pos just of the intellect but abo of the spin.  Auuson Houston Sauns  Ser aio Frankfurt, Germany; Hollein, Hans (Austria); Mo- scum  Ammann. Jeph, and lean-Chostaphe Rvkwer, “Hans Hollein Museurn of Modern An, Frankton/ Main.” Doms 731 (1991)  “EI collage arquitecténico: Museo de arte moderno en Franka” Anhneaonk Collage: Muscum of Modern Artin Frankdurt}, AGH 18 1989)  Crtwell, Konaanze, “Kuna Koma van Kansder: ean-Chniophe Ammann und das neue Museum fur Modeme Kunst” {Art trom the Artist: Jean-Christophe Ammann and the New Muscurn of Modem Arif, Aine and Antupussasen 6 (1991)  Doubdet, Susan, “Hewn trom the City Block.” /rugresrve An bitecare 10 (1991)  “Franctort: Musée d'Art Moderne.” "Franktun. Museum of Mader An,” Anchusecture insériewre Crt 246 1991)  "Hans Haller: Mesavin for Modem An, Frankfon aim Stun, Germany, 1982~84, 1985-90; Construction: 1987-91," GA Decument $i (1991)  Kalusche, Bernd, and Wolf Christian Setseptamde, Antutecrurfisher Frautfart am Alain, Betlin: Reimet, 1992  Kio, Hench (editor), fabriucd far Archinkine 1984 dos neve Frankfurt 2. (1984 Yearbouk of new Frankfurt Architecture]. Beaunschwog, Germany. and Wiesbaden, Germany. Views, 1984  Kubr, Mark, "Museum fiir Moderne Kunot in Frankfurt am Main” TMutcum of Modern Artin Frankfurt am Mash), Beemescer 8 a)  MacAuley, Michael, [e's the Tasee That Counts.” Butidiag Dergn 1940 1991)  “Le nmetee: Hans Holhin a Francodone” |Frecnded overlap: Hany Hollen in Frankfurt, 2 Archsttrenra, Cromache ¢ Seorta, 445/1 (1992;  Maurie Arrbstretare in Frankfurt, (980.1990 iechib at.t, Munich and New York. Preseel, 10  “The Museunt of Modern Art [projeat], Frankfurt am Main. West Germany, design. 1983." GA Decemont 18 (1987)  Paghan. Francesco, “Una sfida urbana” [An Ueban Challenge].  EL Arca 68 (1992)  “Projet de musce d'art moderne 4 Pranctort-pue-le-Main® [Museum of Modem Arr Projet in Feankfur am Mam). ¢ -trefnecrere @ Avjourd bai 228 (1983)  “Trangle de la modernad” ‘Modem Trangk’. Cannsnasnce dev Arcs 473 474 (1998)  Wes, Klaus Dieter, “Auttot: tus Kunst.” [An Ried. 244 7 9D.  MUSEUM OF MODERN ART, NEW YORK  The Museum af Modern Artin New York City was the first museum in the word dedicated to modem art. Founded in 1929 as the private initiative of 2 unall group of wealthy, advance- minded collectors, its goal was ce create an environment for the public presentation of works of modern art at atime when the major anistic initutaons in New York scorned the new style. Ininally loied in rental apace on the t2th floor of the  Heckscher Buikling at 730 Fifth Avenue, the muscum soon began to consider construction of a permanent home, George Howe and William Lercaze. sill engaged in the design of the PSFS Building in Philadelphia and recently in partnership, were invited to prepare schemes for a hypothetical madblock site. Over the neat year and a half, they prepared six schemes, including, one of daringly stacked Constructivit-styfe boxes, bur plans were pur on hold when in 1932 the museum moved co a brownstone ar U1 West 53rd Sereet donated by foha 1). Rockefeller. Je, I was not until after the dissolution af che Howe-Lescaze partner- ship and the acquisition of further brownstones that the museum again began to consider contruction of a permancar site along 53rd Street.  Selection of the architect was, hawever, a delicate matter. As the arhites of taste in modernism, a role the museurn daimed for ieelf, the architect and the nature of the building were neces- sary significant, Alfred H. Barr. Jr., the first direvtor, argued in favor of Ludwig Mics van der Robe, Walter Gropius, of J.J.P. Oud, When Qud and Grupius pulled out. he endorsed Mics van der Rohe, who was invited to New York in 1937. However, Barr was overruled by Abby Aldrich (Mrs John) Rockefeller and other building wommittee members who favored Philip L. Goodwin, a tradivonalist architect who had 2 taste for modem ary, excellent family connections. and money. Under pressure from Bast. the committee agreed that the young Edward Durell Stone, then working for the architect Wallace Harrison at Rock- eteller Center, would assier Goodwin in an attempt to give the devign 2 mote up-to-date appearance. Bart rexigned from the building commitice in protest.  The Gandwin-Senne building, naw largely submerged in a sea of testwtauiots and improvement, was a daappoinement to modernists, Although the caterir lines were simplificd and boxlike. the overall effect was modernized Art Deco, with a curving canopy thet reached out over the sidewath and was echoed by a cured information booth inside and by the stepped-back roof terrace. ‘The galleries were defined on the fa cade bv whne Thermolux, the excrior walis were created in marble. and two stotics of offices were shielded by gridded win- dows. At First glance at least, the facade seemed to express mod- crnist design principles in which distinct interior Functions re- ceived distinctive exterior treatments, yet the reality was iflusion, far the facade elements were merely hung off the floor sabe, Contempeeary ctitia much as Taibo Hamlin lamented the fact that the result was “pure facade pictorial architecture,” no differ- ent from “old fashioned buildings with a colossal order.” The sculpture garden at the cear of the building was designed by Barr and curator of architecture John McAndrew and has bees called “the fine attempt to building 2 sculprure garden according 1 modemist principles” (Benes).  Segnalicant renovations by Philip Johnson began after World War U) and, ironically, reflect a rerum to tbe architectural style of Mies van der Rohe, the architect onginally preferred by Barr. Though the Grace Rainey Rogers Annex (1991), the resuk of the purchase and dewraction of yet another brownstone along 53rd Street, was in she words of its architect, “just a sliver.” the use of decorative mullioes expressed the undertying steel skeleton, much like Mies's contemporary projects in Chicago. Johmon also added a facade to the Whitney Museums of Ameri- can Art (1954) an S4th Street (which backed onto the museum's Sculpture Garden) and built ewo further wings to the museum—  the Fass Wing and the Garden Wing (1964), recalling Mics van det Robe, With the addition of 4 reconfigured lobby (also 1964) and the elimination of the curving sidewalk canopy, much of the Ast Deco character of the original scructure was now eliminated.  In the Abby Aldnch Rocketeller Scaulprure Garden (1953), which replaced chat of Bare and McAndrew, Johman made whar wae most acclaimed space. ‘The surtace of the garden was paved, and two offset, shallow-water channels were laid into the ground, bridged by identical stone dubs, A serics of croe groupe were disposed around a central piazcs-lhe space. Ass whole, the gar den recalled Mics garden court designs from Germany and from the Barcelona Pavilion as well as the newly popular Japs nese garden.  In 1979 -84, Cesar Pelli added 4 glass nulation sak to house acalaton facing the Sculptute Gaiden as well as a rencal tower, Muscum Towen, at the west end of the blak. Fsetucly enitiazed at the ume, the additions were made un a pened uf economic cnsis for the museum and represented ws attempt 10 transform itself into an international center of modern art.  In 1997, a new in-fill expansion lot was added to the muscum wich the purchase of the Dorset Hotel (on 54th Screet). The compettion atomed much interest. [wo megamuseums, Ri- chard Meier's Gerry Center in Las Angeles and Frank Gehry's Guggeaheun, Bilbao, had just opened, and it wae thoughe chat  the Muscum of Modern An camperinon might have the same éclar, Vhough the complex press of selectian was much de- hated, the resulis were both strangely predsctable and conally surprising. In he end, che muscum passed over the most-noted contemporary architects and selected Yoshio ‘{ anigushi, a Japa- dese archuext virtually unknown in North Ametica and Eurmpe  ‘Taniguchi’s renovation, now under way, will reatient the en trance to the avascun and provide [or a more varied setics of paths through the gallerics as welll as providing a higgh-modernist connection to the muxcum’s varicgated modernistic past, In 1999, the museum merged with P.S. 1, the Contemporary Gul  tery in Long Inland City.  Though the archsteceure built of the museum has been insut faicntly bold. the muscum has maintained its standing aad tn- creased ats reputition through cahibinuns, symposia, and lec- tutes. In 1932. the muscuns was the site of “Modern Acchiteceure— International Exhilitiva,” organucd by Philip Johnson and Henry-Russell Hitchcock. which heralded the new moder style and defined ts characteristics. Fiercely debated. the exhibition served a catalytic function in bringing saves about modern architecture to the fore, Indeed. the museum has often served an educanonal role, informing visitors about the advan tages of new design or the new housing, In the $970s, the mu- scum even took up what seemed to be antimodemist postions,  Muscum of Modem Art. New York City (1939 Facade by Philp Gonibwin and Edward Durell  Stone) © Lawrence A. Martin/Grea Buiktings.com 
asan the exhibution organized by curator Arthur Dreulet on the French Exoke des Beaux-Arts (1975-76) and the Deconstructi- vist Architecture exhibitwn (1988). Under Terence Ridey (ap- pointed 1995). the muscum has been the site of important exhi- bitions on key figures af madernam (Alvar Aalto and Mics vai der Robe) as well as the site fur discussions of issues sn conrempo- tary architecture.  NicHoras Apass  See tho Art Deon; Hamlin, Talbot (United Seares); Enterne- tional Style Exhibition, New York (1932); Johnson, Philip (United States); Mies van der Robe, Ludwig (Germany): Mu- sewm: Stone, Edward Durell (United Stetes)  Further Reading  Dened, Matha, “A Moder Clase: The Abby Aldnch Rockefeller Sculpture Garden,” an Philip Johnsen and the Micewma af Madern Art Elderfidd, Jobo feditoel pp. 104-151.  Elderfield, John (editor), Philip feheswn and the Muucum of Modern Art. Rew York Museum of Modem Ar, 1998  Hamlin. Talbot F., “Modern Dinplay of Works of Act.” Provsl Porese 20 (September 1949); reprinted in New York 1930- Artnsectnre and Urbanism Between the lwo World Want, edited by Robert A. M. Stern. Gregory Gilmartin, and Vhorsas Hellins, New York Riszuh, 1987  Kantor. Spi Galen, Alferd H Karr, Jo amd the Incelleersal Orngzes af the Museum of Modem Art. Carmbradgr: MIT Press, 2002  Lynes, Russell. Good Old Madera: An Intimate Portrait of the Marcon of Modems Art, New York: Athencum, 1973  Stern, Robert AM.. George Howe: Towed « Modern American Architecrare, New Haven, Connecticur: Yale Univerucy Press, 1975 .  Seer, Robert AML. G: Gibmaran, and Thomas Mellin, New York (930: Archvecture and Urbanrin Between the Two Wars, New York: Rizroli, 1987  MUTHESIUS, HERMANN 1861-1927 Architect, Germany  Hermann Muthesius is one of several influential architects born during the 1860s whose written and built works shaped the architectural culture of Germany belore World War |. Working at the crossroads of the architecture and government policy professions, Muthesius enjoyed an unusually prolific career ab an architect, writer, diplomatic atusché, civil vervant, and te- formes of Prussian arts-and-crafu: education.  Seeking to enhance German architectural culture while boosting the nation’s competitiveness, Muthesius exeried a formative influence on Germany's approach to 20th-<entury ar- chitecture, the applied ans, and the application of design to industry. Working in Japan, Germany, and England between 1888 and 1903, Mushesius became known for reinterpreting the principles of che British Arts and Crafts movement in light of contemporary German econamnc, culcural, and technological conditions. Assigned to report to his government on English cultural. economic, and technical affairs from the German Em- bassy in London berween 1896 and 1903, he authored counriess articles, reports, and such well-known bouks as Siple-Architecture and Building-Art, and hin landmark thece-volume study, The English House. \n docens of buildings and mote than 100 articles  and books published before Word War [. Muthesins was re- spomible foe design theories and policy formulations which, in combination with the leadership of the politician Friedrich Naumann and the crafteman-entreprencur Karl Schmidt. would lay the basis for the Deutscher Werkbund in 1907,  Muthesius was perhaps inant influential in the realrn of design theory. Building on writings fram the 1890s by the art historian Ruchard Screntes and the cudturad critic Ferdinand Avenarius, he was the first to disseminate widely the principle of ratianal, objective, of realist design. known as Nene Sachiachheis (New Objectivity). Muthesius succeeded at insututionalising this and such related ideas as firess of farm to functional purpose, workshop-based instruction, and the centrality of the machine ta modern design in dozens of Prussian apphed anss and building trades schools.  Developed simultaneoudy in his writings, government work, and in houses that bridged traditional Germanic forms and ra- tional, pracucal planning, these principles went on to have a formate influence on the Werkbund. In a speech delivered ia honor of being appuinted Chair of Applied Art at the newly opened Bethn Commeraal College in January 1907, entitled “The Significance of the Applied Arts,” Muthesius provoked a split beeween s-called “traditional” ‘crafts: practitioners and  se artists, architects, and crafts manufactures interested in caploring new relationships berween tradion, che possibilities of machine-influenced design, and more comperitive modes of imegrated, atust-driven production. The resulting “Muthesius case.” as the eight-month public controversy over Muthesius’s divisive speech was dubbed, provoked the formation of the Deutscher Werkbund in October of 1907 as a private. national aunciarion of progrestive producen and designen. Comprised of architects, artist, crafiatnen, and manufacturing and business leaders, the Werkbund sought to influence producers, con- sumers, and markets. Ies excremely divere membership xaught to strengthen German culture and national competitiveness through improvement in the quality of German products, facto- ries, and the designed environment generally.  Muthesius earned his architectural reputation through the refinement of a modified suburban “country house” type known as the Landhaus. Designing the Landhaus asa paradigmatic mod- em dwelling for the accomplished, professional chan elite, Muthesius eliminated the characteristic raised plinth of the wadi- tional aristocratic villa and serdled the Landhaws directly onto ita site, Providing highly rational and individualized day-lit rooms in accordance with the free planning principles of the Arts and Crafts movement, the architect emphasized the provision of di- rect acces to light, aiz, and “outdoor rooms” that extended do- mest, spaces ante terraces in favorable weather and further wo geometrically planed gardens beyund. Reflecting German con- dicons following Work War I, Muthesius wrote numerous pop- ular books on the design of middle-class houses as well as modest yet efficient dwellings for workers in publicavons that ran into several editions,  ‘The buildings for which Muthesius is besr known indude the Freudenberg House in Berlin-Nikolassee (1908, built adja- cent (0 the Muthesius House of 1906), the de Burtt House and the Mohrbutter House in Bertin-Schlachtensce (1911 and 1913), worker’ housing and single-family dwellings at Hellersu Garden City (1910), the Cramer House in Berlin-Dahiem (1912), and the Sitk Factory of Michels & Co, (1912). Best  remembered as a peagmatist whore passions lay at the uiterse- tion of architectural practice, poly making. and writing, Muthesius achieved his teputsnon in ways other chan through great formal innovatwns or radical new buildings. Nevertheless. bis dear formulanons and ureless campaign to ve changes in early 20th-century German architecture and design to tehno- logical. potincal, social. and econonuy developments guaranteed that the architect's ideas would exercise a formative impact on tuch of Germany's subsequence 20ch-century architectural cul- ture.  Junow Vo Maciuina  Ser abo Arts and Crafts Movement; Deutscher Werkbund; ‘Werkbuad Exhibition, Cologne (1914)  Biography  Bom in Gross-Neuhausen in the Grand Duwhy of Saxony  Weimar-Eisenach. 20 Apsil 1861. Completed appeenticeahip in masonty with bis fathes, a master mason and contractue, camned, an architecture degrec, Rayal Technical University in Berlin (Churluttenburg) in 1887; worked foe the firm of Ende and Bockmann in Tokyo. Japan 1887-91, returned to Germany in 1891 after a four-month journcy through Cluna. Siam, India. and Egypt: passed stare architectural examinations in 1893. De- signed buildings for Prussian Ministry of Public Works (1893— 96); guest edited its juurnal. the Central Newspaper for Building Adminutration (Contralblatt der Raxrerwalrung). Ocvober 1896- Junc 1903 stanioned at the German Embassy in London as a Prussian technical reporter and cultural arraché: returned tw the Pruaian Ministry of Commetce and Trade in Berlin to reforin the state applied arts, crafts. and trades schaal system (1903~ 26); opened peivare architrcrural practice (1904-27). Helped found Deutscher Werkbund in 1907; served as Werkbund vice president in 1912. Died at Berlin, 26 October 1927,  Selected Works Mutherius House, Berlin-Nikatasiee, 1906 Freudenberg House, Berkin-Nibolassee. 1908  Worken’ housing aod single-family dwellings, Iellerau Ganden City. 90  Be Burke House, Berlin Schlaluencce. (011  Cramer House, Bertin-Duhtem, 1912  Salk Factory, Mabel: & Co., Nowawes-ber-Potdam, Germany, wiz  Mutubasicr Homuse, Berlin Shhahtensee, 1915  Sclected Publications  Atilanctusekrar und Bamdunse Wandlingen der Archisckrar sey NIX > Jabe- founders une she heutiger Stundpunds, Mutheim Rube, Germany: Verlag won Ko Scherametpfeng. 1902; reprinted av Nopde-drvivevtwre aed Rurlding Ars Tesnformatcon of Arebitecture on the Nineteenth Contisty and In Prevent Condition. rranslated and iniroduced by Stanford Andes won, Santa Motes, Calilotnia Genty Center for the Hintery of Art and the bhumaniics, 5944  Dre engtische hans Enneschiung. Redingengen. Auage, Anthem. Fiserichting und Inarnraum, 4 vols., Berlin: Wantnuth, 190405; as The Lnghsh Howse, cdxed and introduced by Dennis Sharp. tramlated ty Janet Seligman, New York; Rirzoli, 1979  andbane wed Garterc Beispicle nenecittivber Landhauser nobis Grendrsses, Innearaxmen ond Career (Country Howe and Garden: Examples of Recent Counay Houses with Pans, Ententors, and Gardens}, Munch: Brickmann, 1907  Further Readiag  Hermunst Muthetm, 1861-1927 \exbib. cat.). London: Architectural Assocution, 1979  Hubrich, HansJuachim. Hermann Muthesus Dic Schriften om Archuckier, Kuctgemerbe, tndustets in der “Newent Hewegung.” [Hermano Muchatr: the Writings an Architecture, applied atts, and Indussry in the “New Movement”, Berlin: Mana, 1980  Masquiks, John Vincent, “Art in che Age of Government intereenuon. Hermann Muthesus, Swcbletdeis, and the State, 1897 1907,° Germase Seudies Keview, 112 (May 1998)  Macuiba, Joke Vaxcnt. “Hermann Muthesius and the Reform of German Archutecente. Ana and Crafts, 1890-1914," PRD. dus, Unwersity of Californta at Berkeley. 1998  Macuska, Jobin Vencent. Before the femwhans: Awhrtectuce, Politics. and the German Seats. 1890 1919, Cambridge: Cambridge Unversity Mra (oe pres)  Poncsct, Julius, Herlin suf deme Wege 2a erect newen archuckeut: Das cavalier Witheles {f. (Betore on the Path co 2 New Architecture. The Age of Wilhelm U} Mumch Mrestel. 1979  
NATIONAL ART SCHOOLS, HAVANA, CUBA  On 1 January 1959, a new period in Cuban history commenced wath Fidel Castro's revolutionary ousting of the diaauntup of Fulgemio Batisca (1952 $8), iniuaung a process of radical pulit- teal transformanons chat would culsunate with the integration of the councy with a socialist syxtcon trum 196) paward. The Rew government attributed particutar significame to archirec- ture, mandesc in three works baile in Havana that symbolize the epoch of the Revulutivn (1959-65): the Neighborhood Center of La [Habana del Este, the “fost Antonin Echeverria” University Campus, and the National Subuol of An.  With the exodus of the high bourgeuisie. the mansions, golf counea, and country dubs that once dated the vuekires of the capital were abandoned. Castro decided co turn duis ate inte 4 center for anisur education for approximately 3000 scholarsiup studenss who were cormung to Cuba from other chird world coun- tres. In 1961 he assigned a ceam of young architects the con- struction of the ENA (National School of Art. The architears included Ricardo Porro of Camagiicy, who designed the schools of Visual Arts and Modern Dance: Vittono Garatti of Milan architect for the schools of Music and Ballet; and Roberio Got tardi of Venice, who designed che school of Dramatic Ans. The buildings were to be finished in the course af the year to open by L962, However, hecauve of differences among the directors of the teaching center. the project for an impresaive “City of the Arts” on the urban periphery was finally limited to a series of independent buildings plied along the border of the golf course, Despite the autonomy of architectural syntax used by each of the three designers, some common norms were estah- lished. Porro, Gararti, and Gortardi each sought to relate the buildings to che natural surroundings with minimal alrerarions; to create open, organic compositions based on the organization of interrelated “pavilions”; to clearly separate the various school functions (administration. library, classrooms, refectories, re- hearsal spaces, workshops, main auditorium); and to define inte- fior common spaces. The various National Art Schuols were also designed to achueve natural ventilation and climactic condition- ing through filter and laracework. All three structures were built of brick and constructed with Caralan vaults because of the  scarcity af steel and cement, brought about hy North American Frvemmenral cmbargocs,  ‘The symbolic nature of archicevture greatly influcnced the astintic vanguard in Cuba. Regivealist expresionixm wat em- played us signify che cultural traditiuns of the Hispanic colonial past and af the African cultural betiuige, transcribed into con- temporary language. Whercas the Eurupean socialist counties eapencnced a post-Malinist dogmatism chat bed to a schematic funcuonalsm, the Nanonal Ary Schools represented the search fot a national identity alongside the innovative and critical wends of che archiuxture in capitalist counrrics. Porro identified him- self with the Afro-Cuban tradition, filrered through sustealiam. and Te Corbusier's rational Brucalism. In contrast, Garatti and Gotrardi incorporated ludian neorealism and rhe reclamation of historical memory in works that echoed Frank Uloyd Weight, Carlo Scarpa, and Ernesto Rogers. Porn conveys wo diferent mesxagex through the Schouls Jor Visual Ars and Modern Dance. tn the first, he freely organizes owu systema of vaulted enclosures—the painting and sculpture workshops—around a central court, united by a ticely drawn curvilinear gallery thar allows crcularion under the shade of continuous vaults. The brick domes evoke the cytindrical shapes of African huts. whereas the persistent cnuosity of the corridors echoes the organicismn of the cropical landscape. The Modem Danwe school. in contrast, comprises a monumental, angular ceneral court with cough, white brick surfaces, In Garatti's Ballet building, he submerges the «1: polis of the dance hall in a massive, hollow space where galleries freely fullow the natural curves of the site. In the Music schoul, the rehearsal hulls and classrooms are built along a sinuous, J00- meter-long nbbon that kinks an ancient cerha (a sacred tree) with the Quibd river. Finally Gotrardi, in the Dramatic Ans building, effects a system of vaulted spaces with irregular perimeters whose compositional freedom recalls medieval [ralian cities,  The complexity of the projects, the sophistication of the con- struction, compounded by che marenal difficulnes during a con wuhive phase of Cuban hietory extended she completion of the National Art Schools indefinitely. Av the Havana celebration of the VII Congress of Architcuts of the UTA (1963), only Parro’s two schoob had been completed. Moreuver, internat questioning around the National Art Schools began. namdy trom cotics who atgued that the project represented an excessive investment in 
Nanonal Art School, Schoot of Visual Are, Hirens € Robertyo Segre  light of the widespread aschiteceural poverty that already existed throughour the counrry. In 1965 che project was halred by the government. The Ballet. Mus, amd Dramatx: Arts buildings were left unfinished. Subsequent detcrioration and vandalism tured them, according tn critic Geranda Mosquera, into an abandoned ruin in the middle of the jungle. thereby constituting the fires porrmodern ruin in Cubs. [n the 1980. a young pencta- tion af Cuban architerts vought to restore ehe Schools of Any, but they received a meager governmental tespotuc. Tuday, the extant buildings construte an cxample of passionate creativity in the search for new social and cultural values on a peripheral counuy that aspired to become independent of the incxotable tutelage of the metropolitan centers.  ROBERTO SEGRE  See ale Bricks Beutalisry Catalan (Guastavino) Vaute, Con-  tructivisay, Contextualise: Expeessionism; International  Style; Masonry Bearing Wall; Perteghesi, Paole (Italy); Post-  modernism; Regionalism; Scarpa, Carlo (Italy); Schook,  Wright, Frank Lloyd (United Scares)  Rareni Sergio, “Rapporio dall'Avana.” Zoddutc, Revista Insermasisnale ai Antitertuns 19935  Barre, Frangens, and Heabelle Cane, Ricardo Horm, Parte: Ineriur Framyass VArchoteccure, Pandira Futons, 199)  Bulltich, Francisco, Nucros canines de ia argusctere datenoamericana, Barcelona: Muse, 1969  Laantine, Ramen, Arpucrrzura 7 urbanismo em iberoamérice, Madrid: Edwiones Cacedra, 1965  Loomus, foha A. Reveluten of Kermu, Cuba's Fergectea Art Schook, New York: Princeton Archireceural Press, 1999  Porn. Ricatdo. Hecate Parra Anchitekt, de Veis/Glan: Rucrer Klageafurt, 1994  Porro, Ricardo, “Porte por Moree. Obra construide.” Anpuitecnans Ciba (1998)  Rodriguet, Eduarde Luis, tar Hahanw, Anguisecruns del sigh XX, Parures by Pepe Navarro, Barcelona: Blume, 1998  Seyre, Roberta, Cabs. Arcintrtrune delie Riveluaonr, Padus: Manilio, 1970  Segre, Roberto, Arpisirctura y urhewisao de ki Revelacide cubens, Havana: Faleoral Pueblo y Educacidn, 1995.  Segre. Robern, “Trex décadias de arquetectura cabana: bs herencis hustdrica y ef mito de lo nuevo,” Revobarién y Codnene (1994)  NATIONAL ASSEMBLY BUILDING, SHER-E-BANGLANAGAR, DHAKA Designed by Louis Kahn; completed 1974-83  Designed by Louis Kahn as che capital of cat Pakistan, the Sher-c-Ranglanagas complex was commissioned in 1962 and  eventually completed in 1974 (the year of Kahn's death) to be the capitol of the newly formed country uf Bangladesh, although work oo the assembly building itself continucd thi 1983. The National Assembly comples is organized with a civic soctot in the north, followed by the sccectarial sector, and eventu- ally che assembly scctor no the south. The citadel! of institutions with the secretariat and a citadel of assembly face cach other on the north-south axis, The Assembly Building itself constinites the formal and political focus of this complex and is surrounded ‘by «bake thar the residential quarters for ministers and members of che assembly abso face: che approuch from the north is empha- tized by a sweeping axix up a brick plinth that epitomizes an acropolis. Kahn chase brick for mont af the buildings, but the importance of the central assembly building was cmphasized by contrast. Instead of brick, it is built of rough-shuttered, poured- in-place concrete, the walls being inset with bands of white mar- ble a1 regular intervals. Arranged in thee concentric nngs, the octagonal] assembly building is organized around an incernal surcet that encircles che building and extends to its full height. This provides light and air and emphasizes space dramatically light and shadew. Ar the core, the central chamber  that bouses the assembly is a 300-seat, 30-metes-high, domed arophitheater flanked by the library. The outer layer is composed  Narional Amembly Building (1983). designed by Louis Kohn © Ags Khan Trust fos Culture  of vanous office spaces that surround the circulation cing. In each of the cardinal directions these is a distinct feature —the garden entrance hall co the aurth, a cafeteria and recreational space to the cast, the ministenal lounge co the west, and a praycs hall above the entrance to the south.  The Assembly Building evinces many characteristics that one finds in Kahn's lates work: the served inner focus that houses the parliament chamber itself and the service spaces in the outer fing thar consist of offices and weial spaces, a great interest in the play of light and shadow — especially evident in the handling of intemal street and more so in the columns of light in the prayers hall, the contrasts of maw and void, and the complex juxtapenition of forms to satisfy secular institutional and more transwecraental spiritual requirements. An important aspect that Kaho was trying to incorporate was the celebration af democ- tacy. The concept of the acropolis or the citadel derives partially from this idea. In another sense this symbolism is achieved through 2 centralized focus that is equatly expressed and visible in all directions.  Arrention has heen drawn to influences from ocher architec- tures in Kahn's designs. Among them ase references 10 Mughal mausoleum gardens — especially in che format qualities and spa- Gal organizanon of che octagonal plan. the transformations of  
shapes. the ewo-ticted articularian of the facade with openings that allow for deep shadaws. the scale of the monumental build- ing, and the reflecting pool, The contrasting use of materials recalls the Taj Mahal and especially Humayun’s tomb in the dynamics of the ced-brick buildings surrounding the asembly building itself and the treatment of the Larter, which ines the contrasting concrete and marble strips. The forteess-Like qualities afe reminiscent of the forts of Rajasthan, Delhi, and Agra. In addition to these eastern anociations, there are references (0 western influences such as Roman monumentality and enginect- ing, che spatial organization of Renaissance churches, Beaux Arts planning, classicism, and the work of other architects from Louis-Eucnne Boullée wo Le Corbusier. Qualities ftom all these different sources are present in Kahn's architecuure and in the assembly building in a very refined manner.  Architectural critics, historians, and the public have desunibed Kahn's work in Dhaka as icon, monumental. symbolic. uan- scendental, and a white dephant. [fis masserful juxtaposition of geometries and forms can be read as an expression of regionalism and humanism. As a recipient of the Aga Khan award for archi- tecture in its fourth cycle (1987-89), this building can in various ways be scen to emulate all these qualities and more. There has been some feeling abour this building being foresgn and nox “Bangladeshi” in character. Nevertheless, quite 2 contrary upin- jon was evident in the Aga Khan jury report, which emphasized thar the building “white universal in irs sources of forms, aesther- ics, and vechnlogies could be in no other place” and, sn fact, praised it for having “assimilated both the vernacular and monu- mental archetypes of the region, and abstracted and transformed, to a degree of never purity, lasting architectural ideas fram many eras and civilizations.”  Fos many, the national assembly building t especially fasui- nating to study because it seers as emblematic of the furure: it has often been refereed to as xymbolic of Bangladesh's independ- ence and an iconic beginning of a new architccture in the region.  Aanatr KANEKAR  See abo Concrete; Dhaka, Bangladesh; Kahn, Louis (United  Sexses); Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Riyadh, Sandi Arabia  Further Reading  Ashraf, Kazi K.. “Louis J. Kahn, National Capreal of Bangladesh. Dhaka, Bangladesh, 1962-83." Global Archatectuse 72 (1994)  Browntee, Dad Bruce, and David Guson De Long, Lowes 1, Kahn: kn the Real of Archiseceure, New York: Rizzoli. and Los Angeles: Museum of Cant rary Ar, 1991  Giurgola, Romaldo, and Jarmni Mehu, Los / Ashe, Boulder. Colorado: Weseview Press, 1975  Kedatek, Sarah, “Architcerural Cufture un che Fifties; Lnain Kaho and the Natlanal Awembly Complex in Dhaka,” /S4/f, 5204 (December 1995)  Langford, Pred. “Concrete in Dacca.” Miwue @ (Chtubet!?December 1982}  Taylor. Reian Reace, “Natioeal Asarsmbly Hall, Dacca.” Memar 6 (October Dreoem ber 1982)  Vallchwona, Renzo, “Louis Khan in Wonderland.” Dsidalas 61 (Nepeermber 196)  NATIONAL FARMERS’ BANK Designed by Louis Sullivan; completed 1908  Owatonna, Minnesota  The Navonal Farmer’ Bank in Owatonna, Minnesota, is the earliest and most notable of cight innovative bank buildings  that Louis Sullivan designed between 1906 and 1920 for small farming communities in the upper Midwest. By closely uniting function, structure, and artistic form in these designs, Sullivan Clearly illustrated the basic tenets expressed in his writings on organic architecture. Ac the same time, be introdpoed a unk American solution for a particular building type: the 5 tural bank.  Like many small-town financial institutions of che lane 19h century, the National Farmer’ Bank was originally loceted in a comer sorefrone. In 1906, when this facility was deemed ne longer suitable, the bank's board of directors, Jed by Vice Presi- dent Cael Bennett, appropriated one-sinth of the benk’s tonal assets for the construction of a new building. Bennet: firmly believed that the new building should aot only scrve the local tesidents but also arlebrate the bank's central role in the prosper- azy of che surrounding agricultural community. Firmly . the prevailing trend of adapting classical remple forms for buildings, he searched for an architecrure that would more ap- propriately reprerene his progressive financial insunution while also meting its functional necds. Bennett's quest caded with his discovery of the work and idcas of Louis Sullivan, most likely through an emay by the architect in Craftomen magazine.  Sullivan fisst visited Bennett in Owsonna during the fall of 1906. Immediately upon returning to his Chicago office, he and hia Jangrime chief draftsman, George Grant Elmulie, went to work on the bank’s desiyn. Appealing wo Bennett's musical back- ground, Sullivan wrote to the banker that he was stempting to create “a culor symphony” for the bank thas reflected the “many shades of the surings and the woodwinds and the bras.”  The resulring design, often reterred to as a “jewel box,” was well recerved by Bennett and his fellow bankers. In the design, Sullivan successfully unified simple. goometric massing with rich. colorful deraiting. The variegated red-brick eaterior walls of che square banking hall were highlighted by a massive semi- circular window on each vf the two street facades, These large arched voids recall the grand portal of Sullivan's Transportation Building at the World's Columbian Fxposition of 1893 ve the atcuared features of the Richandonian Romanesque popular throughout the Midwest, Divided by verucal steel mulfions sym- boliually representing the bars of a tcllet’s wicker, the windows prowect a sense of security to chose entrusting theie savings inside. The buikding’s heavy cornice and small, decp, square window openings in the ashlar wone base contribue to this expression of strengrs apd financial protection.  The boldness of the exterior massing gives way to delicate deuiling as ene approaches the bank. The upper pare of each facade is framed by a hand of identical "Teco green.” verra-cona elicf pancls of teed pods, swirling leaves, and stretched geamet- tic forms characteristic of Sullivan's organic armament. Large brown cartouches, comprised of timilar geometric and vegetative dements, fill the upper comers of the banding. ‘The small win- dows at atrect level provide » human scale to the monumental facades.  Like the exterior, the interior of the bank is simple in its hassc geometric form yet intricate in its devails. On entering the grand banking hall. alter passing under a low, deep lintel, one becomes engulfed in Sullivan's color ry of predomi- nantly green and gold tones: the colors of money, On sunny days, the hall is bathed in greenish-singed light shining through the opalescent glass panes of the great arched windows and through a large skylight above. Opposite the windows are two  Imterwve, Nauonal Farmen Hark of Owatonna, Stecle County, Munnesota. br Lou Sullrvan (1908) © Mustoric American Busldings Survev/Libeary of Congress  large semicircular murals by Oscar Gross depicting a pastoral scene and a harvest in cecognition of the agriculcurst base uf the lacal ecanomy. Outlining the baic geomet. elements ate elaborate bands of colorful stenciling and twrracoua pancis. The upper space of che banking hall is dominated hy four mauive gieen cast-iron clectrohers with large spiraling tendrils that ap- pear to grow out of the ceiling.  Accoading to Bennett, the basic interior avout of the building was compased prior to Sullivan's involvement in the design pro- cess, The bank's desire far 2 demacraric office plan thar avoided an obvious hicrarchy af graces was in keeping with Sullivan's ideas for an American architecture. Small office spaces lined the lower level af the banking hall. The president's office located ‘on one side of che entrance was balanced by the farmer’ x change roam lovated an the other side. Instead of huding the vault, as was typical at the time, it was placed in full view of patrons, immediately behind the teller’s enclosure and on axis with the main entrance.  Phe main hall has undergone four major remodclings. cach of which was carried out to better meet the evolving needs of the hank. During the first remodeling in 1940, intenor brick partition walls and the teller counters aml wickets were replaced by freestanding counters to create an open plan. | ater remodel- ings, including one carried out under the direction of Harwell Hamilton Harris in 1956, strove 10 bring hack some of the  original character of Sulfivan’s design that had been lost in the earlier alteratians, A 1997 remodeling incorporated an alley and an adjacent two-atury wing that was part of Sullivan's orginal design, Norwest Bank, the occupant took great cafe to ensure that the new spaces complemented Sullivan's bank design.  From the start, the Nacional Farmers’ Bank was well publi- civet in both architectural and financial journals, Phe commis- ston led co a small but imponant resisrgence of Sullivan's fading career. It also contributed to 2 wave of civac and commercial burktings comtructed in small midwescern cowns by other mem- bers of the Peaine School, including Purcell and Elmstic. Claude and Stack, and William Stecke-—designers who shared Sullivan's belief thar organic design principles could produce an architec- ture appropriate foe the American Midwest,  Lisa D. Sc timex See aho Prairie School; Sullivan, Louis (United States)  Furthes Reading  Andrew, David §.. Lane Sudfrees and the Paleontcs of Modern Arvhitertare The Proens ageenis the Pas, Urbana Univernty of Mlineis Prose, 1985  Benner. Cad K.. "A Bank Rails for Farner: Caois Sullivan Designs 2 Budding which Marks 2 New Epnch in American Architecture.” Jhe (raftrmsn, 15 ‘Newember 19081 
Dx Wer, Warm tcditorl, Lows: Sadlivan fhe Huncten of Opnarecnt, New York: Notron, 1986  Frazier, Nancy. Louts Sailzean and she Checego School, New York: Cresent Books, 1991  Manieri-Ebia, Mano, Louis Henry Sullivan, 1856-1924, Malan: Elects, 1994: as Lonis Henry Sullivan, New York: Prnceton Architectural Press, 196  Monocal. Naresso G.. Archerectiere a Narare: The Trancendemtalast idea of Lous Suifvar. Madison: Unavenay of Wiconsn Mees, 1981  Millett, Larry, She Carve of the Arch: The Stary of Lane Sullrvan’s Ometonns Bank, St. Paul, Minnesota. Minnesots Hatorical Society Press, 198  Prasvie School Architetuce in Minnewta, lowe, Wesorsen (cabd. cat). St. Paul, Mansesota: hhnnescts Maseumn of Ar, 1962  Sprague. Paul E., “The National Parmers’ Henk, Ouatunns, Minnesota,” Peasrie School Revarw, 4 (1967)  Sullivan, Loui H., Nattomed Farmert’ Rank, Owssernd, Afinnesots, 1907-08; Mercbann' Natenal Bank, Grinnell. towa. 1914, Faracev and Mevchants’ Union Bank, Calumbes, Wimowin, 1919, Tukyo: A.D.A. Falita, 1979  “Sullivan's Owatonna Bank,” Nerrinmsre Architect, 22 (July August 1958)  Twombly, Robert C., Lewn Sultan: His fifo and Work, New York: Viking, and Chicago: Univeniry of Chicago Press, 1986  Warn, Robert R.. “Retnett aod Sullivan, Cliens and Cacator,” Praine School Review. 10 i973)  Weingatden. Lauren S.. Lawii 11, Selleas: The Banks, Cambridge. Massachusetts: MFT Presa. 1987  NATIONAL GALLERY OF ART, EAST BUILDING, WASHINGTON, D.C. Designed by 1.M. Pei; completed 1978  The National Gallery of Art, Fast Building. opened in 1978, was a gift from Andrew Mellon’: son, Paul Mellun. apd his late sistes, Alisa Bruce Mellon, and the Andrew W. Mcllon Founda- tion, The National Gallery of An, Wes Building, opened in 1941 was designed by John Russell Pope, a gift from Andrew W. Mellon to the United States of America.  The site for the bax Building, bordered by the Mall and Pennsylvania Avenuc and facing the Capaul to che cast, is pros: nent and significant within the urhan framework of Washington. Site restrictions nduded building scthacks along the streers, ctif- ferent building heghs timuts along the Mall and Pennsylvania Avenue, and entry only from Faurth Sereet. The budding design needed to relate directly ta the existing, neoclassical West Build- ing. The program required a variety of flexible galleries for rem- porary and 20th-century exhibitions and a Center for Advanced Study in the Visual Arts totaling 450,000 square feet of floor ates.  The Fast Building's architect. [.M. Pes, reanlved these ecatria- dions and requirements with a brilliant design concept. He di- vided the wapezoidal site into an isos cles triangle for the mu- scum and a right tnangle foe the study center with a yap in berween. ‘The muscum cement has its entrance facade on Fourth Street, on axis with che West Building, and its pnmary facade along Pennsylvania Avenue. The study center facades face the Capitol and the Mall with as entry in the gap on Fourth Sueet. The 20-degrce angie of Pennsylvania Avenue yielded the triangu- Jar gnd and spatial module for the building plans.  This resulted in a knifelike edge of marble, 70 feet high, at the entry to the study cencer. A concourse below a plaza physically connects the old and new buildings. The spatial for the muscum component is based on an isoscely-tlangle-haped atrium surrounded by galleries with rowers at the three comers. The study center has a right-triangle-shaped atrium surrounded by sin levets of fibraries, offices, und study spaces. The spacial sequence from open plaza to recessed porch to low bobby to expansive atrium is dramatic and dynamic. Circulation stffusce the museum atrium with a grand suircase and escalator leading to bridges chat cross the space at cach level, Entry to the study center bs also afforded from the museum atrium, whose tetra- hedron skylight bridges the gap berween the ewo primary build- ing componcats.  ]. Carice Brown, director of the National Gallery. was con- cemed with flexibility in the galleries and the experience of a visitor. The architect provided a variety of gallery shapes, such as trapezoids, triangles, parallelugeams, and hexagons, some with adjustable walls and ceilings. The spatial configuration of the muscum enables visitors to penonalize their experience visiting ‘one gallery at a time. In between, they return co the atrium for ofentason, repose, tdlaxatioa, and socialization.  ‘The builder, Charles H. Tompkists Company, produced an extremely high level of construction crafumanship. The finished surfaces of the cast-in-place concrete ssructure, in! with mar- dle dust, were formed using furniture-quality fir. The exterior cladding is of Tenncasce marble from the same quarry utiliaed for the West Building, placed in the same-size pices and same color gradation, fram hroen at the bottom to pink at the top. Thin marble in also utilized in triangular pieces for floor paving. ‘The 16,000-square-fout museum atrium is covered by a tetra- horus stcel sructure suppurting skylights with integral tubular Ghers. Tempered glass railings with chrome handrails line the bridges and bakonics.  Brown wanted che buikling to be a work of art in its own right but also to exhibit specilic works of art commissioned for this building, The most notable is uhe giganti: untitled alumi- num mobile by Alexander Calder. his last work Io red and black shapes undulate slowly around the atrium guided by the building's air supply system. At the entry porch is a large bronze sculpture by Henry Moore called Knife Edge Mirrer Two Piece.  The East Building demonstrated unequivocally that madern architecture coukt strongly contribute to a neociassical context, albeit through different stylistic capression, This is due wo the clear geometric relationship to the site and the azial relationship to the West Building. The nwo buildings share an affinity because of the common marble exterior; they are also equally epic befir- ting the scale of monumental Washington. This was the marure expression of Pei’s vision of modem architecture and one of his finest works,  The ewo buildings abo relate well to each other through similar spatial concepts, for example. a grand entrance leading directly ww 4 dramatic central space that leads to a variety of gallencs. The difference is that the circulation in che West Build- tng is in docrete halls, whereas in the East Building it is all in the central space, Another difference is char many of the West Building galleries have natural light and are fixed in size an thape. The orchogonal spaces of the West Budding symbolize an era of stauc cultural values, whereas the angular spaces of the  National Gallery of An, Eat Buikdang, designed by ILM. Pei (1978) © Michedl Bednar  East Building reflect che dynamic circumstances of comtempo- rasy life.  When President Jimay Carter opened the East Building in 1978, he sated thar it symbolized the connection between art and public life in the United Searex. ‘The design makes the mu- seum available to the publi, chrough in welcoming openness; the movement from inall to plaza to potch tv lobby to atsium is an cffortless transition. Motcover, some of the art is in the atrium, enabling vistors to freely mingle with it. The muscum and us exhibia arc nue placed on « pedestal of an cased. ‘This accessibility is accomplished mainly through the dramatic inan- gular atrium that tums pedesttian citgulanion into chorco- graphed movement where every visitor is a public dances, In this way, the design selares to the earlier Gugernheim Museum in New York by Frank Uoyd Weight with its circular atrium and spiral ramp.  The architectural critics ar the ume gave the Fast Building design mixed reviews. Everyone applauded the contettual resolu- tion and constructional mastery, but the most comman criticism was the spatial disseciarian becwoen the galleries and the atrium and the awkward exterior massing. The art and cultural critics were much more in their views. The public, however, voted with its feet and embraced the building with great enthusi- asm, with more than a million visiting the building in the first  Twn months. It is best known as a provocative work of architec- tare chat engages the senses of the visitor and provides 4 memora- ble muscum experience.  Mictiart J. Bronar  Sev alo Maseuau Pei, 1M. (United States)  Further Reading  Cannell, Machacl 1. LAt Ha: Manderin of Modernsm, Now Vath: Care Southern Books, 1995  Canty, Donald, “Building as bse,” Ald fowrnal (hlid-May 1979)  Marlin, William, “M1. Pa Goo to Washington.” Arckitecriern! Recond (August 1978)  Mitanathua, Richard B., Mattenal Galley of Acs, £45 Hailding, Washington, DC: Nanonal Gallery, 1978  Wiwetnan, Cattet, 1M. Pee A Profile ut Amerian Archstectuse, Now York: Abrarm. 1990  NAVARRO BALDEWEG, JUAN 1939-  Archutect, Spain  Juan Navarro Baldeweg & conadered one of the mast talented architects practicing in Spain coday. His buildings can be charac- 
cetized as serene, elegant. refined compontions, Born in the northem Spanish city of Nanuander, hee tint artisoc studies were begun in 1959 in the field of engraving ar the School of Fine Ans in Madnd He continued snudying architecture at the Poly- technic University of Madrid, ceceiving his doctorate in 1969 He tecewed a special rewearch grant for the Center for Advanced Visual Scudies at the Massachusetts Instirute of Technology. On his return to Spain, the fing publi, seuagnition was granted ino the artistic Geld chrough ehibitians of his installations, His aschitectural reputation was established by his catrics to compe- niions. In 1979. be wun first prze in the international Shinken- chika Competition and tn £982 pliced Hint in a major competi- tion for hus ideas for the restructuring of 4 large area of Madnid. Many of his pubbc buildings are alas the result of important competitions.  Navarro Baldeweg currently has bis own architectural prac- tice in Madnd and combines architecture, painting, and aca- demic pursuits, He has been professor at the School of Archirec- ture of the University of Madrid since 1977 and has held visiting profeswrships at Princeton University. Yale University, and the University of Pennsytvania.  Navarro Baldeweg has stated that architecture is made in wo fooms of cwo chambers. One custs only in the mind of che architect, and thar is where the principal woek ix realized. This votmcuon distances Navarro Buldeweg from his contemporar ies, who sate thae architecture is the resolution of situations imposed by reality. On the one hand. his work is very penonal. His investigation into the held of painting was carried a sep Further in his archirectare. On the other hand, his architecture is the must uuly anivensal, cclebrating what comneces the inhab- itant and building with 4 wider world. The constant in the architecture of Navarro Baldeweg is an exploration of natural phenomena as a participant influencing and intorming the built environment: rain, light, graviry, of wind. Hae architecrure cele- brates the natura} pheaumena and heightens the user's percep: tion of ix.  Navarre Baldewep’s fint builr wark, House of Rain (1982), located in a village in the northern province of Santander, Spain. ix reprerented in an early drawing totally surrounded by rain The howe looks out over 4 valley. The matetial configurasion is structured as simple layering: stone connecung it to the ground, glus for light and vews, and the zinc roof. From inside Ube bouse, onc van always see out. During the rain, the extenot marerials change. intensifying their appearance,  The Hydraulic Museum of the Segura River Mills, completed in 1988 in Murcia, incorporates the remains ol an 18ch-century mull with the new constniction on its civerside site. The new addinon for a muscum, cafeteria. and library 35 dad in a smooch stone often devoid of windows and rather free in form, in con- trast to the punctuated, strictly ardered foemer building, A new roohtap terrace on top of the old building connects the river and the city. The laght that penctraccs through the mulissory well creates an axis of light that changes in intensity and quality with the panage of time. The dome above a small theater in the building ems 1 hover there 4s the light filets chrongh trom above,  The 1985 compention for the Castilla-Leon Congress Comet in Salamanes resulted un one of the architect's move significant works to date, Complaed in 1992, che Center aompnses two parts: a main building housng che auditoriums, and a smaller  volume for cchubitions and seminar ruoms. The architect often seeks to create poines of equilihrum in his buildings through coniraas. The main building is basically 2 solid cube. whereas the smaller building farms a contrast by using more glass, The two ste connected at the lower level. The main building is really an hitectute within architecture. A giant concrete dame covets the main hall. However, the fight entering through the top and all around the sides makes it seem tu float, Reality and perception are forced in opposite directions, as are ideas of gravity and ingravity.  ‘The winning competition heme lor the Extremadura Gov- cenment Offices ar Mérida (1995) iv a large building, meant to be aven as part of the cityscape from actems the river. It is stretched horisantally, maintaining 2 height similar to io urban context. However, the male of the facade toward the river it heaken downs through the creation of courtyards. These recessed bay, which teflect the different depanments uf the regional government, establish light as a theme of this uulding. Daylight enters the offices but 15 mitigated on the west through the we of meal brise-soteil.  In 1997, Navarro Baldeweg completed his firsr commission in the Unired Srates—an addition to the Department of Music at Princeton University, ft was also the fie fie that Princeton emploved a foreign architect to build on its campus, The new building is an understated neighbor to some of the nearby build- ings. The building contributes to its surroundings, enhancing, voids and creating spaces. The brick and concrete buikding fo- cates the main entrance wwwatd the network of pedesurian path- ways thar cross the campus. ‘The arrium entrance lobby embadies the conrextual characteristics at rhe street. As one passes through the building toward the back garden. a more domestic of private character is created, Light. which enters through the large over: head skylights, flows inen the atrium and brary, The lower-level tehearsal oon is also partially cixdlosed with glass to allow light to coer,  Orher noteworthy works of the architect include a cultural center oursde Madnd: a courchouse (199) us Mahon, Men- orca; and the new Museum andl Visitors Center (2000) at the Abtamisa Caves site in northern Spain.  Mastita Troane  See abe Spain  Selected Publications  Juan Navarre Babdeweg, V9 Jaan Navaren Baideweg: Opere ¢ progern. \IX: new edition. 1996  Farther Reading  Buchanan, Peter, “Geavitanonal Mull.” Arehitecrwre ALA fownal 86, te. 10 (Oktober 1997)  Cohn, David. “Proyeus The Mahon Courthouse, Minorca, Spais.” Anhttectura! Reverd 187. no. § (1999)  Levence. Richad ©, and Fernanda Mirquee (edicors). Af Craguit (1992) (specail issue on Juan Navan Baldeweg)  bu, Simin Marchan, Juan Nanerra Baldeweg: Anpuitecnine pores: y pentura. Sancander, Spain: bundaciéa Mascetino Botin, 1997  Lupano. Mane teditorl, fuan Navarro Baldewrg- HH risorme delle bere. Milan: Morea, 1996  NEO-RATIONALISM  Much mate than being yet another style in the accond: hall of the 20th century, New-Rationalism developed fram within Postmodern architecture. It was already taking shape at the be- emnning of the 1960s but found unegrated capression in the 1970p aml 1980s, les chic ecpreseatatives, Aldo Ross and Leon Krict—who became known as Neo-Rationalists—associated their name with the urban planning crinque of Modernism and the pursuit of a cagonal austerity in the principtes of companition and the morphology of architec. Lhe Archuremura raztontis and Rational Architecture exhibitans that were held in 1973 and 1975, respectively, at the Milan Tricnnale and in London, av well as various publicanions thar followed, helped tu publicize this trend. Behind the unity of the term, however, vanous ap  Peaaches associared with the chought and work of it, more im: portant representatives can be tevugnised: there is an Italian school (the Tencenzs), in which the names of Aldo Rossi (1941 - 97) and Giorgio Grasi (1935-) predominate: a Belgian whol with individual extensions into France and Britain and the name of Leon Kner (1946-1 in a kading posinen: and a German, a Swiss, and 2 Spanish school.  Neo-Rauonalism was an architectural formalization based on reason, classificarion, and a will to overcume indivaluality by establishing a rigid language ot architectural cypes and its own body of rules. The Neo-Rarionalists invoked an interpretanan of architecture's autonomy that made reference tv ctemal principles and lasting values as those that arc formulated only by man's reann, ‘To provide a foundation for theit approach, Rossi and Grassi went back to two periods when Rationalian was in great favors to the 18th century and the French theory of architecure. with references to M.A. Vaugicr (1713-69), CN. Ledoux (1736-1806), and [-N.L. Durand: (1760-1834), on the one hand, and un che other. to the early decades of the 20th ventury and the minimalist aesthetic of architecture, with references ro Adolf Laas (1870-1933) oF Ludwig Hilherseimer (1885-1967), ‘Their theorerical claboration was marked by a return w the tarionalism of the Classical on the eve of the Industnal Revolu- tion in the form that the classical rank in the period of errict Modernism and in the form ir acquired during che 1930s in che Sovier Union, Germany, and Italy under the domination of communism and fascism. At the same time, Peon Krier cubi- vated the idea of a return to the logic and the forms of traditional building actrvicy; that is, co the innate and archetypal raiser of ordinary builders, which contrasted the repeation of the fa- mitiar with the pursunt of novelty.  fn Neo-Rationalism, certam set forms (archetypes) are recog nized that permeate the whole of architecture and develup auton- omously and self-retlexively, whereas fiction 1s more variable and dependant an the complexity and fluidity of sociery. Conse- quently, ro a very large degree Function follows form rather than the other way around. The theoreacal underpinning af this ap- proach is grounded in cypology and makes clear reference ws the dassificatory approach to architectural forms in the late 18h and early 19th centuries. Rob Krict (1938-) has devoted 4 large part of his theoretical work to the study of urban planning and architectural typology. Leon Krier has recognized diachrome at- chetypes even in the form of the siggurat and has resorted tu them to design the contemporary European aty. Aldo Rosse designed his architecture with the help of typology, only he  has charged fis own archetypes with emouonal memones and indireee winbulisms, Rows of anhes, factory chimneys, pyrami- dal of conical roabs, oblong glass-ruoted arcades, purely geomet ical solids, and square windows with cruciform divnsions co-exist with modes of organizing space char refer to the typology of typical buildings of the carly 1th century, such as hospitals and prisans.  In contrast to the urhan planning principles of Modernism, which supported the functional construction of large-scale build- ings on boundless green areas, the Neo: Rationaliate have brought hack the blogic and che wale of the strcet, the myuaee. and the Mock that were a characteriatic of historic Furopean cities from the Maddle Ages and the Renaissance to the 20th century.  (ew diffkul to undesstand die thought uf the Nev- Ravanaiats without taking into account assocauted architectural wurk. Fue example, Rosi often deugncd experimentally, bur tus architecture went beyond the woutines of paper and was transformed into realivy fir of all in Italy and later throw the world. ‘The Modena cemetery (1984) and the housing black at Gallaratese, Milan (1973), sum up bis fundamentally austere Classiasm. Equally imposing ix the austerity of the Scudent housing at Chieti (1980) by Giorgia Grassi and Antonio Monestiroli (1940); the Publi, Library in Groningen (1992) hy Giorgio Grassi: the school at fkaqola in she Basque country, Spain (1978), by Miguel Garay (1936-3 and Joné-Ignacio Lina- zasoro (1947); and the Riticesteasse housing in Bedlsn (1980) by Rob Krier. The eypological and morpholngicat disciptine of these projects tecalls 4 vense af the public in architecture. which is the central theme of Neo Rationalism.  The revitalized reading and interpreration of urban space un- dertaken by the New Ranonalists bas cuntributed to a new ap- proach to the relationships between architeuure aud urban plan nung as well as to a more ashsrancive understanding af the fundamental values of urbanism. More parucularly, the recogni gon of the conunuity and significance of the fabric of streets and squares and a recognition of the structural tole of the cnn- trasting of ordinary (private) and distinctive (public) architec- tural forms have towed as the basis for an urban approach to Contemporary megalopolises thar predominared in the fare 20ch century,  Panarorts Touaniicits  See alo Postmodernism; Roesi, Alda (Italy) Further Reading  Archaecruce ratsennelle: La reconstruction de ba vsile cwropécane = Rational Archivecture: The Reconstraction wf the Ewropeae City. Brussels: Archives d'Architecrare Muderne, 1978  “Coratas, Giorgi, Antueettnrs, lingua marta = Architecture. dead  Lengrage, Milare Electa, and New York: Rireut, 1988  Krier, Rob, Architerruml Compoution, London: Academy Ldsoons and New York: Rizzoti, 1988  Kier, Leu, Arhinecnure: Chowe ar Pane, Windsor: Andreas Papadakis, 1998  Porphyrien, Demetri (editor), Haukteng cb Rerianal Ancbatecrery, London: Architectural Design. 194  Rasat, Aldo (edn). Archiiettura razionale, Milano: b. Angeli. 1978  Ross. Aldo, Me Architecture af the Cory, ranted by Diane Ghiratdo and Joan Ockan, Cambridge. Massachusetts: MUT Press, 1482  Cngers, Oswald Mathias, decintrsniced vwme tems = Architectare Theme. Mulan: Elovta and New York: Rizzob, 198! 
NERVI, PIER LUIGI 1891-1979 Engineer and architect, Italy  Piet Iasigi Nervi was one of the great engincers of the 20th century who applied his engineering innovations to the deiign of buildings. From the 1930s co the 1960s. he built a varicty of public building types in Italy and around the world, ranging from airport hangars to ukyscrapers to stadiums. In many of his designs, Nervi made novel use of modern materials, especially concrete, to create his rrademark style. He opencd his first office in 1920, called Nervi and Nebbiosi, in Rome and practiced bis craft for almow 50 year. Tn 1932, the name of the practic was changed to Nervi and Bantoli. Believing architecture and engineering tw he interrelated, Nervi designed his arrctiares with an eye to knowing laws of ature, matcriads, and comtrucion.  Impoerane buildings by Nervi begin with the Municipal Sead- ium of Florence (1932), with 4 grandstand convructed of dea- matic cantilevered ecintosced concrete beams and a helectical concrete staircase. Lmmediatcly, Nervi displayed his virtuase skill in the manipulaiun of woncrete sunuctures, mulding them inte. dynamic configurations that always retain their structural pus- pose and integrity, “An archicect is a buikéer. noe an artist.” he  panaae ORB  Palarervo dello Spore, Rome (1957) © Greathaldings.com  said in his Norton Lectures detivered in 1961-62 at Harvard Univenity. The heaury and dynamism of the forms come from theit structural capacities and necessities, not from an applied aesthetic. A good structural solution has an inherent aesthetic force: thus, aesthetic theories were not necemasy in archisecture. The building is conceived as a structural organism, eaploiting the quadities of che materials with which it is buile. In the case of Neni's publ: works, the macerials arc mainty steel and rein- forced concrete.  Between 1955 and 1955, Nervi built a series of airplane hang- ars, cahibition halls, and stadiums with long-span concrete roof structures. ribbed reinforced-concrete trusses, and assembled precast-concrere components. With his particular understanding of concrete’s potential for an expressive combination of strength and beauty. Nervi utilized ewo important concrete construction methods in his buildings, both of which have continued w define the struceural limits of concrete. Nervi's buildings, like others of concrete, use reinforced concrete that is cast in place or from prefabricated forms, creating carefully engineered structures that this architect and theosist imbued with an enduring sense of simplicity and power. In this way, some believe, Nervi rivals Mies van der Rohe as a pioncer in the adaptation of building  We Zins kins el  materials and technology in the 20th century, Nervi's mast com- pelling structures include che Turin Exhibition Hull, with 4 vaulted roof and a penmetnic roof system of precast beams in a material called “ferro-cement.” Ferro-cement combines rein: forced concrete and several layers of fine sicel mesh sprayed with cement mortar. This malleable matenal provides strength and elasticity as a building material and enabled Nervi to sculpt his dynamic structures. Whereas the sructural accessities of the building create its aesthetic, the “structural architecture” of Nervi is based on the combination of structural analysis, static systems, and tension and compression in materials, Other factars in the design of his buildings are economic efficiency (as in the low-cunt production of steel and concrete}, the technology of the can- struction, and the functional tequirements of the building,  All these factoes were optimized by Nervi in a series of impar- tnt buildings realized berween 1955 and 1961, Nervi included chese designs in a book called New Serectures in 1963, These structures inchude the UNESCO Headquarters (1958, in collab- oration with Marcel Breuer atid others) in Paris, the Pirelli Build- ing (1959, in collaboration with Gid Ponti and others) in Milan, and the three sports stadiums built in Rome for she Olympic Games in 1961: the Palazetto dello Sport (Small Spor Palace, 1957), the Palazzo detlo Sport (Large Sports Palace. 1958), and the Flaminin Sradium (1958), The Palazzo per Lavoro (1961, Warker’s Palace) in ‘Turn has mushroom columns and floor slabs with ribs following wurtatic lines of bending movements, which were also applied to the Gatti Wool Factory (1951) in Rome. Nervi's Port Authority Station (1962) at Genrge Wash- ingnon Bridge in New York City is characterizad by eriangulated. roof tnoses. The Nathaniel Leveroue Field Houx (1962) at Dartmouth College in Hanover. New Hampshire, feanures a vaulted constuction. Whe Cathedral of Sant Mary (1971) un San Francisco features a roof made from large wement slabs in the form of a cross. The Auk delle udienze pontiticie (Papal Audience Hall, 1971) in Varican City in Rome is in clastic structural forms sculpred in white cement.  Netvi exprewed his ideas about architecture in several books and articles, including Arte # scienza del cortruire (1945; The Are and Science of Contraction), Costruite correttamente (VI54, To Construct C2 ), Structures (1956), aml Agshetics and Tech nology in Building (1961 - 62; The Chasles Eliot Norton [ ectures, Harvard University), For many architccrusal historians, Nervi joins Frank Lloyd Wright for his profound grasp of the meaning of materials and theit intricate relauonship with nature and methods of constuction, and both were (carless experimenters. In 1962, Nervi cevervedl honorary degrees from Darumauth Col- lege and Harvard Universicy. Contemporary with Kenzo Tange, Nervi was the architecrural craftsman pat exceflence of the 20th century, making use of the structural capabilities and malleabiliry of steel and precast concrete to create large-scale urban projects chat anawer the demands of modern functions and make opri- mum use of modem technologic, All of Nervi's buildings are intricate structures of grace and clegance barn from an insightful underseanding of che structural capabilities of materials and a figorous adherence to the role of the architect as servicing the functional needs of a society. He was awarded a Gald Medal by the Royal Institute of British Architeves, the American Insticute of Architects, and the Academi d’Archicecture.  JouN HENpax  Biography  Born in Soadriv, Italy, 21 func 1891, Graduated with a degree tn engineenng from the University of Bologna 1913. Married Irene Caton 1924: 3 children. Served sn the Italian Army 1915-18. Engineer with the Society for Cement Consmnuctioa, Bologna 191 3-15 and 1918-23. In peivate practice, Rame from 1923: partner, Nervi and Nebbiosi 1923-32: president, Nervi and Rartolia from 1932~60; parner with sons Antonin, Mana, and me. Studia Nervi from 1960; consultant chgincer, UNESCO, Paris 1952, Profevsne of the technique of construc: tien, faculty of architecture. University of Rome 1947-61. Han- orary member, American Instieute of Archiseces 1956; honorary member, Navonal Insitute of Am and Letien 1957; foreign member, Royal Academy of Fine Art, Stockholm 1957; corn sponding member, Academia Nacional de Ciencias Exactas Fisi- «as y Naturales, Buenos Aires 1959, corresponding member, Barerischen Akademie der Schinen Kiinste, Munich 1960; member, Accademia di San Luca, Rume 1960; honorary mem- ber. American Academy of Arcs and Sciences 1960; member, Royal Institute of Dutch Engincers 1964; member, Akademie der Kunute, Berlin 1964; member, Inatitur des Reaux-Ares, Paris 1973; foreign member, Institut de France, Paris 1973. Gold Medal, Royal Instinite of British Architects 1960; Gold Medal, American Instituce af Architects 1964. Died in Rome, 9 January 1979.  Sclected Works  Municipal Seadium of Florence, 1932  Turin Exhibition Halt, Turin, 1949  Gani Wool Faery, Rome, 1951  Palazcero dello Spon. Rome, E57  Palazzo dello Speer, Rome, 1958  Flaminio Stadium. Rome. 1958  UNESCO Headqaurtets, Parn Qwith Suna Bectct), 1958  Pirelli Building, Mitan (with Gia Panel). 1959  Palasen pet Lavoro, Tunn. 1961  Poet Authoney Terminal, New York City, 1962  Nathaniel Leverone Field House, Darenouth College, Hanover, New Hamphire. 1962  Cathedral of Si, Magy, San Keng isco, 1977  Auls delle wliense pantifice, Cana del Varacano, Rome, 1971  Seleceed Publications  Arte o sconea del costrurre. Y94S  Costruire vorreteamentr, VISA  Serwcrsres, 1956  ‘Now Seracture., iraraiared| by Guseppe Nicole, 1965  Anithenis and Tecbnology in Butiding (The Charles Ehot Noron Lectures 1961-62), translated by Robert Esnaudi, 1965  Further Reading  Deuderi, Paolo, Per Leigr Neriy, Bologoa: Zanichelh, 1979  Hluatable, Ada Loune, Pier Paigs Neri. Now Yurk: Branlles, and London: Mayfloave, 160  Pica, Agnokbomemtn, Pier Laigs Never, Rome. Editala, 1969  New. Dser Lungs, the Works of fer Laige Nerv, canslated by Erne Finefert. New York: Prager, and London: Architectural Pres, 195?  
NETHERLANDS  Drang the 20rh century. the Netherlands experienced an anchi- tectural blossoming unknown in its history. The opening and conduding decades brought forth buildings that attained world renown for their formal inventivencss, fine execution, and social rewmance. Even during the 50-year fallow petind that com- metued in the ae 1930s, individual contributions maintained the spark of ingenuity and commitment to excellence that woukd teignite on a much larger scale in the avid-198Us, wher the evopomy exploded and uhe geographic range of autable build- ings expanded.  Although Dutch architecture often reflects internateonal cus- tents, it displays some distinctive features derived tram special topographical and historcal condinons. Uhe land is predonu- nandy flat, which means that it tends to be organized alang Canesian principles. The straight line predominates, although the carve and the polygon have occasionally provided alternative layouts in cities and suburbs. Throughout much of ixs history, Durch architecture has been modest in scale: cypically, grandeur has been shunned and size tamed by intricate and vaticd details, The discomfor with the grandiose stems in part from the fact thar housing is the overwhelmingly dominant building type in the wurkl’s must deasely pupalated nation. The dwelling. whether the single-family house or publicly funded aparment, has always been a preeccupation, and in that realm, intimacy 0 a cherished characteristic.  Because much of the country has first wo be won and then peotecied from che sea, an unusual degree of couperation is re- quired, and regularions ow foster colisharation are mandated. Neverdicless, despite the smallness of dvcir country, the Dutch have a penchant for ideological div ce. although this in rum has been complemented by a tendency fo india vo forge alliances to disseminate their beliefs. [n architecture, this can be seen in the consistent formarinn of small. usually short-lived polemical factions. often congregated in a given city and invaria- bly mounting exhibitions and publishing tendencious manites- toes and periodicals. Groups such as the Amsterdam School, De Sajl, “Opbouw” in Rotterdam und “De 8” and “Groep 32” in Amsterdam, pilus the later “Forum” group of Structuralinss, have shaped Dutch architevure in profound ways.  Tf an idealist strain persisu, practical objectives cannot be ignored in s country where every particle of the man-made envi ruament is cultivated. Standardization in the interes of cost- effectiveness and rapid production isan cver-burning issue, lung with ingenious ateempe to temper its propensity towand manet- ony. Another significant and enduring trait that relates to practi- cality is the long tradition of recycling. Commissions often in- solve the metamorphosis of an existing shell for new uses; some of the most interesting dwellings to have been created since rhe 1970s are inserted into farmer warehouses.  Although the Dutch are often typecast as wold, frugal. and businewlike (eabelijh), a pencrous quoacnt of playfulness invigu- rates their environment, deimonceated in the historic canal houses, which may cunfarm in plan and clevatin but are enlev- ened by unique and whimoral details. In the 20th century. thes quality is on view in the ludic imagery of the Amstentum School; in the witty metaphor af Forum architecu such as Aldo van byck, Herman Heroberger. and Piet Blam: and in the proveca- tive inversions of firms like the Office for Metsopalitan Arc hitec-  ture (OMA), Mecanoo, MVRDV (Winy Maas, Jacob van Rip, and Nathabe de Vries), and Neutelings Ricdijk Jan Neutetings). A complementary characteristic is a fondness for polychromy: brick has been manufactured in many hues and textures, laid in novel patterns, and employed, together with tile and stone, in contrasting colons, to charming effect. Since the 1980s, clapboarded, metallic. und polymer surfaces and details, simitarly multihued and mulutcxcured, have become popular, che com- pletely monochromatic building, even when fashioned of con- crete. finds little free in this nation where shies are often ovet- cast, A further source of unity is the preference for the employment of gcometric systems of proportion to generate bar mony,  Vhe individualism that lurks behind che genenc, and some- times borders on the idiosyncratic, may relate to a fundamental aversion to classicism and to the compositional methods of the Eonle dex Beaux Arts, Nevertheless, a brake on mo extreme a degree uf heterogenery has been rhe numerous rules and regula- tions impoted by government. cepecially after * the passage in 1901 of the National Housing Act. Frequently revised and con tinually capanded. government policy, operating st both the national and municipal level, manipulates chrough financing projects with pubic finds na less chandirect legal action. Re- cently, the tediousness and utilitarian expediency characterintic of architecture dusing the post-World War U1 eta anid its lang. aftermath have becn mitigaed by the recognition that formal inventiveness and atypical solutions tailored to local siruarions contribure tv social as well as aesthetic satisfaction. ‘This aninsde has been abetted by a new government policy giving architects more autonomy and by a wealthy economy that has supported experimencal design and construction.  These general observations should serve 2 guide to the brief chronological survey of 20ch-cencury Dutch buildings thar fol- lows. Whe curn of the century set the stage for renewal. From 1890 co 1905 che fundamental contrasts that woukd be recapitw- lated throughout the century were adumbrated the fancifully libidinous versus the wherly Calviniatic. In the 18905 chese con. trasts are scen in the two currents related to Art Nouveau, one indebted to the dominant Franco-Belgan interpretation propa- gating the cumilinesr ant the sembolically laden, with The Hague as che center atul H.P. Murters (1884-1954) the chief. architect, and the other represenung a peculiarly Dutch vanane dubbed Niewe Kunst, whose avatars concentrated on sturdy, rectilinear construction and disciplined organic forms geomerric stylization, They were also motivated by ethical con- siderations, secking to create a beautiful and moral environment for a more egalitarian spcicty.  The fin-de-sidcle initiated an architectural flowering chat Lused uncil the 194 and was sunilasly rife with contradictions and callisions. ‘The ane fignee chat seems to have provided inspi- ration of varying kinds to almost cvery subsequent movement was Hendrik P. Derlage. Although there were commen poines of reference, including Retlage himself, especially his advocacy of gootnetsic systema, the Amserdatn School and De Stijl, which neat tok center stage. display contrasts comparable to those between the two variants of Art Nouveau. Some architec. moved from one mode of expression to the other. Two works in The Hague, stemming from the office of Jan Buijs (1889— 1961) and J.B. Liissen (1894-1995), illustrate chis path: che Rudolf Steiner Clinic (1926-281, predictably paying homage  Apartments, Mercaturpien, Amsterdam, Headnk P. Berlage. 1927 © GrearfBuildings.com  to the Gocthranum and therefore kin te productions of the Amaerdam School, and the multipurpose headquaren (office, dental clinic, shops) of the cooperative society, De Volhuarding (1927 28), indebted t0 De Seijl for its composition. Russian Constructivism is another source because the cryvtalline encko- sure incorporates advertising. at night, De Volhanding is a glow- ing signboard of imerpenctrating volumes “decorated” with words and Jogans. Jan Buijs offered not a synchesis bur aleernative approaches, whereas some sought to blend che best of butt worlds. The chiet ts of a merger are Willem Dudok 11884-1974) and S, J. Bouwma (1899-1959). Dudok. munigpal architect of Hilver- sum. forged an enduring personal legacy in the town where he planned numerous neighborhoods and executed 19 schools, municipal housing and offices, public baths, and the manumen- tal Hilversum Town Hall (1924 - 30). Contrasting vertical and horizontal envelopes of yellow Roman brick accented with glazed tile, stone, and pls are slotted together, dramaric cantilever hover over the pool and gardens that are incorporated into the ensemble. Bouwma, les renowned, alia deserves attention asa spectacular combiner of the nwo idioms. Employed by che Public Works Deparment of the northeastern city of Groningen, Bouma. at first influenced exclusively by the Amsterdam School, increasingly applied cubistic strategies. Interlocking curved and  rectilinear volumes and beautifully shaped windows and stairs executed in wood, metal, rile, and stained glass, draw attention to his Public Works building (1929) and numerous schools, which restify to the assimilation during che 1920s throughour the length and breadth of che Netherlands of metropoliuan aes thetic thovetnents,  Groningen offets yet another surprise: the first cxample of Dutch Functionalim (Mies Bowaven); the Polytechnic School (1922-24) by ].G. Wiehenga (1886-1964) and IC. van der Viugt (1894-1936), The nbbun windows thac rua the length cof the ennire Facade are an innovation made possible via the concrete frame devised by Wichenga, ar the time director of the school. Although few buildings thar muty belong to this movement were produced in the Netherlands, those executed are among the mast poetic examples in the International Style canon. Several exponenrs af the Miemie Rowwen joined the Con- gre Insernationzuz d'Architecture Moderne (CIAM) and Cor van Eesteren, ita preandent from 1930 47, made the ideal of chat group common curtency in the Netherlands. The separation of functions and the use of open-row houung shaped the new extenuons in Dutch cities until the 1970s and beyand,  By 1930, the econema wundown hud put paid to the exteava- gances of the Amstcrdam School, and former De Sujl members had accepted the strictutes af the Neewae Bosse, with its pre-  
dominantly left-wing rympathies, [he oppositeon, conservative horh politically and architecturally, was motivated by religious of nationalist consideration tu nvaintain traditional forms and materiak as symbolic of cternat Dutch vahaca (though they ale admired Scandmavian Romanticism). They equated Functional: ism with matertalam and godlewnes. Uchewing classicism per sc. they nonetheless adapted symmetry us ther ordered compost tions, The Roman Catholic Delft Suboot, bed by the converts MJ. Granpré Molidte (1883-1972) and A]. Krophollcr (1881 - 1973), sought truth and beaury in the harmonious eelasion be- ween farm and technique. In addition to designing low-rise. pitched-roof housing for che “little peuple” —farmen and the devout working class—-the Delft School eacedled in churches and town halls, where their affection for ritual and divinely andained hierarchy could he expreswed. Representative examples include the town hall in Waalwijk, (Kropboller, 1929-31) and the Semi- nary Church in Haaren (Granpré-Moliére, 1938-39}, both in the preduminandy Catholic southeast Catmervatives abo ob  tained imporant cultural wumuusions such as che Boyman Museum in Rotierdam (1928 34) and ube Van Abbe Muscum in Enschede (1933-35), the former by A.J. van der Scour (L893 1953) and the larter by Kropholiter.  Several former Funcnonalists became disillusioned in the larer 1930s; alchought not making a common cause with the conmervatives, they nevertheless came Lo disapprove of the appaz- eat bch of sybulic content in the Niewwe Boutoe and sought to moderate its mechanistic and minimalist thrust. Sybold van Ravestcyn (1889- 1983} skillfully retained the sophistication of madernitm white alleviating its doueness thenugh art decn detail- ing (generally noe much in evidence in che Netherlands) and complex shapes deriving frum an adimusatiun fue the Baruque: foe example, the office bunkding “Holland van 1899" (1957-39) and the addition 10 the Kunsumen Theaue (1958 40), both in Dordreche. Most members of Griep 32, having tervendy em: braced the ideas of De 8 in 19358, withdrew and prosetytized fora more consciously aesthetic and less ephemeral approach withour adopting the Delft School's tradinoaalixm. By this time, linger- ing economic depression, the rise af fancum. the gathering war chowds, and for the Netherlands, eventual Nazi occupation, re- sulted in conditions that were handly conducive tu consteucnen of any sort,  After the war, Gropp 32 went on the offensive by repudiating the CIAM-dominated planning practice dusing the reconsteuc- tion. The most potent challenge to CIAM came from within its ranks. [.B. Bakers (1914-81), with Van Eyck, helped form Team X and used Forum cv protest against CLAMS technacratic agidity and doctrinaire separation of funcuons—work, dwell- Ing, recreation, tied together by transit —in favor of making che built environment more responave 10 specifixn human needs. including those of productive and emotionally surfing per- tonal encounters, maximized through dehwcring an agglomera- tion of small units rather chan a festurcless mas, An example of what this meant in practice is Herzebcrger's Centraal Beheer in Apeldoorn (1967-72). The modular concrete frame produces a gnd of spaces that may be contigueed by the occupane as private ar communal offices and mutual mecting places. Al- though mos Structuralists fa name associated with the Forum group thar found insprration in anthropology rather than the  mechanistic dictates of CIAM) use cubic modules, some into- duce rhomboids and pyramids: Piet Blom {experimental hous- ing, De Kasbah [1969-73]. in Hengelo: “pole dwellings” {1975] in Helmand), Onno Greiner (Silveren, Schor youth center [1962 -67} in Ammenuiden), and Frank van Klingeten (comemu- nity center "t Karregat [1970-73] in Eindhoven). Nevertheless, all emphasurc the domestically waled modular unit and typically offer passibilities fur growth and change.  At dunng the 1960s and (970s the international professional press focused on the Seructuralists, their output could net com- pete with thar of large firms who were complicit ia dismantling many historic centers. An ominous development was the replace- ment of small-scale housing sock by gigantic government and commercial complexes. Alehough affordable housing never ceased production, increasingly it was relegated to vast settie- ments beyond the urban care, served by megalomanic rapid uansit systems and highwayt that were devouring the land, FLA, Maaskant, a respected figuee from his Niewwie Bowen days, became a vocal apolagist for bigness and did his share cw trans- form the skyline with obtrusively huge ensembles sculpted from monochromaric concrete, such as his Brasilia-like ensemble for the Province of North Brabant (1963-71) in Hertogenbosch. Hereberger, wo. eventually partiapated in this un-Dutch folie & grandeur (Ministry of Social Affairs, 1973-79, The Hague), as did the numerous firms who produced behemoths gigantic in height and breadth for burcaucracies such as che postal service (Headquarters PTT, Groningen, 1985-90, by F.J. van Gool), and municipalities (Town #lall in Apeldoorn, 1985~90, which inchides 4 parking garage and commercial and cultural spaces, by HJM. Ruijsenaars),  Nevertheless, in the lite [970s a renewed appreciation fos the Mexwe Bouwen surfaced ta counter both Seructurahsm and Bratalise (which appeared in the Netherlands afer its heyday wn Brian and the United States) and reprises of the modestly scaled. white Functionalist projects and buildings of che 1920s and carly 1930s appeared (Row housing. Amsterdam [1978- 83] hy Arne van Herk [b. 1944 |, and Coes Nagelkerke [1944]. an updated version af Qud’s project for dwellings un the Strand- boulevard of 1917). The bartle cry became “Modernism without Dogma,” and it did seem that a revival, without the moral imper- atives that putatively animated che Functionalism of the peewar petwad, was underway.  However, soon thereafter such approaches were by Rem Koolhaas, the firss Durch winnes of the Prtzker Prize 12000) and founder uf che firm OMA (Office of Metropolitan Archnecture}, Kuothaas’s cosmopolitan background ses him apart from many of his concemporanes. A confrontational and controversial figure who arouses hoch admiration and hostility, he has set the agenda for much of che theory and practice of the 1990s in his native country and abroad. His critique of the historic smallness of Dutch architecture has been heeded wich a vengeance, and hus caploration of the effect of glabsl economic forces hay been tevelatury for many architeco—and dients.  During nvost of the century, Dutch architecture has mainly been a matter for professionals and government regubators; only the Amsterdam School garnered popular artention. Buc that dra- matically changed in the last two decades of the 20h century. As architectural practice became theoretically mare sophisticated,  treating design asa more open and fliusd process that incecantigly takes into account changes wrought by the information age and the possibilities offered by chectrunic media, and as buildings became stylistically more diverse, exuberant, and somenmes downnght outrageous, a cadre of arnculate younger archirects attained the celebniy al pop stars, and comment and cithom moved from the elite journal: to the lay press. Dutch architects began ro win preaigious commissions (ium abroad, in part he vate they embarked on research and caplurations that were plobal in character and implication,  To an imporaot degree, this sutuation was fostctod by the government, which created a namber of institutes and prizes. ‘Phe Nederlands Archicceuurinstitue/NAi. imcorporating a Dux- umentapon Center, bookstore, and Gale aluny with exhibition halls, opened in 1993 an an extravagant new buikling in Rotter- dam, subject of an invited competinon af 1987, The winner was Jo Coenen, who set the cripartite composition of transparent, transtucent, and opaque volumes over an ornamental pool. The Berlage Instirure, Funded in 1990, fosters architectural research and grants Master's degrees to students from all over the world. The Netherlands Architectural bund wat establiched to subadize architecture centers, in numerous owns throughout the country. that disseminate information and give guided tours of notable  In 1900, che Netherlands, isolated architecrurally foe two and a half contusies, began w aun architectural autentivn fidfully bur surcty and became an inspiration toe all chose intcrested in renewal, cansolidanon, and social responsibihry in archatocrure as interpreted by chis small but morally authoritative natiun. As ft moves int new millennium. with is gteat peospenty and growing and well-cducated popularian, which requires new buildings of various purposes thar public and prvace bodies are eager to supply, and itx wealth of design talent, which now in cludes foreign practitioners, the Netherlands definitively is on the cutting edge and has become the international mecca for architecture's funtre potential and realization,  Hritn Stauine  Ser sho Ammerdam, Netherland Amsterdam School, Art Nouvesu; Berlage, Heecrik Petrus (Netherlands); Brutaliam; De Stij Dudok, Willem (Netherlands); Duiker, Johannes (Nethertands); vas Eyck, Aldo (Netherlands); Hestzberger, Herman (Netherlands); Hilversum Town Hall, Netherlands: Keolhass, Rem (Netherlands); Oud, J.J.P. (Netherlands); Rietveld, Gerrit (Netherlands): Rotterdam, Netherlands Screcturalism; Team X (Netherlands)  Further Reading “  From the late 1960s, when the Dutch as well as foreigners (especially the Ftakans) began co redixover Durch modern architecture, there de veloped (in comirast to the previous paucity) an cnormous hibliography. initially in Purch—snd ltalian but incteasingly biingual (English Dusch). The goverment {aational. provincial, and municipal) issues pamphlets on cities and regions describing city planning efforts and buildings, historical and new. and there are a number of firms chat specialize in archaecture and urbanism, such as SUN (Sociaslistiche Uingeveri) Nederland), which became 110, che Dutch Archiecrural In- wirure (NAi: Nederlands Architecruur Instituut, previously the Docu- meneatiecentrum voor de Bouwkunst), which published a definitrre  series of italugiie in conte ion wich muncuns eahubeions in addion, the temurkable bocdkstore in Amserdim, Arcistectind os Natked, has ben the pulgrmage for architcuiure enchusias tut Wh sea atid sine. 1000. has been publuher uf ity own vilumea, anluding thos lor ARCAM Phere ean anintd An dite tice inthe Nethechinds Yearbook Grevently edited by Flan van Dake:  Barbier! §. Umberto tedaorl, Anchuseticar en Planning. Nederland. 1940-1980, Rottetdam: 10, 1088  Barbier, S. Umbeeia, and Leen van Duin ieditun). Henderd jaar Nederlande arctntecruue, 1901-2000, Nyegem: SUN, 1999  Bergvelt. Litinuor, Frans van Barkorn. and Karin Gaillard, ore Neo Rendunine to fot-Madernom A Huadeed and f wenty-Fire rans of Duh Intenen. Ranserdam. 010, 1996  Buch, Joseph, A Century of Anititesnare 19 the Nethrolandi, 1880— £990, Rotndum NAi, 1995  Canute. Marutdla. Cane Puseini, snd Serpe Polano, Anduectunr os vedbbureniung, Nederland: 1870 $9460, Nipuegen SUN, 1980, tramtacon of anginal [ulian publication, Fncienr ¢ See Acchetctrira, Case, Citta, 1856-1940, Milan: Electa, 1980  Crinwon (Wouter Varutiphout and Cassandra Willans), Michael Speaks, and Gerard Hadden, Mart Sean's Treasert Sierin from Bedrend the Scones af Dutch Atonal Moaderninn, Reaterdan: O10! Crimean, 1999)  Derwig. Jan. and Fink Mactic, Fenctoonadirm i the Netherirndy. Amecrdam: Architectura et Natura, 1995  Digk, Hans van, 200 Century Architecture in the Netherlands, Rotterdam: G10 Publishirs, 1999.  Fanelli, Gualo. Aruirtrura oder ot Olande, borer Marchi & Bertolli, 1968: as Moderne archrtccreur in Nederland, 1900-1940, revised edition in Dutch. with English summary and cansanoa by Wim de Wit, The Hogue. Scaatsuugevert). 1978  Panel, Ganlo. AnAinnent, hdilizss, Urbanistica Charade 1917- 1940. Moreme: Papafava, 1978  Ganberg, Donald, Howing in the Netherlands, 1900-1940, Rotecedam. Niigh-Wolters-Noordhot? Uaivenitare, 1977  Crococndiyh. Paul, and Pace Vellaad. Guede se Aloders Arciaseczure iu the Netherlands, Restcndam: 110, Vt edition, 1987, Jod revised ediGan, 1997  Theliogs, Hans, Awserivannm,: Deirh Antitecture and the tranecantic Maddel, Runecrdamn: NAi, 1907  Thelings, Hans, 20ch Century Archetertare in the Netherlands, Rorreedam: NAi. 196  Ibelings. Hans, The Mocdern Fifticr and Sixteer The Spreading of Contemporary Archisecrure orer the Netherlands, Rencerdam: NAi, 1996  Kraaywanger, LLM. (editor), Nederbrnd bosae mm bakreen, 1800- #940 (exhib. cat}, Roerdam: Bovmans Museum. 141  Langmead, Donald. Duich Modermism: Architectural Reowrce in the bagtend 1, . Westport, CT: Grocawoad Press, 1996.  Loosma. Bart, Super Dutch: New Arrhitesture in she Netherlands, London: Thames and Hudbon, 2000  Lochunger, Arnold, Srmcrerationt ia Arctntecsury and Urban Planning, Seartgan:: Karl Kramer, 1961  Macrae, [P.. Nacsorkegse bommkernt ta Nederland, Amwuctdam Kourmos. 1954  Macras, JP. and E.R. Yeebury, Dasok Archetecture of the 20th Coneary. New York: Charles Scribner'e Sana, 1920  Molema. Jan, The New Movement in the Netherlands 1924-1936, Rotterdam 110, 1996  Strasser, Emil E.. Neuere Holiindiche Rawkame, Miachen-Gladbach: Fahrer Verlage, 1926.  Wond. Auke van det, The Act of Buskding, from Classteisme to Madermtty: The Dock Archtrectarel Debate. 1840-1990, Burhingron. VT: Ashgate, 2000  Yerbury, Frank. Mader Durch Buziding.. Kew York: Charles Scribner, 19.31,  
NEUE STAATSGALERIE, STUTTGART  Designed by James Stirling. Michael Wilford, and Associates; completed 1984  One of the most energets examples of the museum a culural cemtce constructed during the sccand half of the 26th century. the Neue Staatgalesie in Stuttgart, designed by James Seiting, Michael Wilford, and Asouates, is regarded as the culmination of Sticling’s practice Reflecting the comples program of extend ing the cuisting Italianate State Gallery (1838-44) of Baden- Wartemburg en northwest Germany. te which it os linked by a bridge at the sevond story, with permanent and temputary exhibioon galleries for 20th-century art and including a chamber theatre, munn, schuol, cafe. the Bauhaus theatre archive, hbrary, and administrative offices, the Neue Staatsgalerie rescmbles 4 terraced village that has sympathetically incorporated older ad- fotning structures into its precincts.  Sticking and Wilford (partners since 1965) embarked in the raid. 1970s on a more inclusive approach to design that would embrace a wider range of past precedent. both typological and urhanittic, while continuing en incorporate the formal and eech- nical innovations of the Modern movement. This odywey com. menced in two competition designs for German muscums that  Neus Suungatene, Stuttgart 1977 84 © Donald Corer and Jenny Young’GreatPuildings.com  obfiged Stirling to weave the new building into the fabric af the existing citics damaged both by war and by carclews postwar development. ‘The mixture of modernist und historical refer- emes, the employment of the roeunda form, and the distribution of the compasmpon into distinct parts that link the new steucture with ousting ones, manifest in the two unsuccessful entries of 1975 for the North Rhine Westphalia Museum. Dusseldorf, and the Wallraf-Richarty Gallery, Cologne, would be majestically realized in the controversial premuated proposal for Srucegart. The firm was one of four foreign and nine German firms invited tm enter the competitian of 1977, as an earlict one in 1974. won by Rehnisch, Kammerce, and Belz, wis aborted. The monunecntality of Stirling's componition and its evocauon of such primal 19th-comury instininons as Karl Friedrich Schin- kel's Alics Muscum in Berlin (1823-30) brought accusations of toulitanansm and megalomania trom such disappointed Ger- man contender as Frei Oxto and third-prize winner Gonther Behinesch. However, internanonal opinion overwhelmingly can- onized Stirling's solution as democratic and populist, and he received a aumber of inajor muscuin commissions thereafter. The buikling was to serve the city beyond the creation of an ensetnble for cultural activities by knicung che upper and lower sown together, Seirling’s brilliant solucion was a pedestrian ramp  that could be negotiated without entcring the muscum and ter- faces and plastic forms that restored an urban presence along the six-lane motorway that had replaced the street in front of the original U-shaped insarution. Above the garage that consti- tutes the pedestal of this small acropolis, the main platform is reached from the parking area or the sidewalk through a metal and glass pavilion, a wet of Laugerian “primitive hut” as dreamed by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe. ‘Uhere is no clawed facade ws one would have in a proper classical balding but, rathee, a series of incidents, inchiding an irregularly curved glass and steel wall that boldly contrasts with the masanry-cavetod walls (broad tray- eninc bands alternating with nasrower ones of local andstone) and the cavetto comice that lines the inner “U" of rhe museum proper, which is che only symmetrical ekement in the plan. the Neue Staatsgalene is entered via two revolving doors (the restau- fant can be accessed directly from the terrace) that bead inte the fluid spaces of the ground floor. There, the irregularly shaped exhibition areas arc lit artificially and subdivided by mushroom.  shaped columns of cancrete with the form-work lett visible, a devive wed by Stirling’s ovcaxinnal hero, Le Cathunicr. Another resolutely 20th-century tounh is the glazed elevator shaft where the machinery that governs the rising and falling cab is butt visible and the elevator inelf heonmes 4 kinetic ecilpaure, a strategy employed by Russian Constructivise,, whose work had Fascinated Stirling snce he desgned, with lus fecmer paruncr Jamis Gowan, che engineering labs ar I cicester University.  Ar the upper level. Sriding rejected the amorphous flexible Spaces in vogue at the dime un tavor of a formal sequence of evnventional rooms arranged cntilade within che “U" char sur- rounds the central conunda. Fhis sory. given over enurdy w exhibition space. is cop-lighted to accord with the approved prac- fice that after the bate 1960s restored natural tight ro museums (a prautice pionceted by Louis Kabn and Alvar Aaltn). he clabo- rate mechanisms required to control eenithal-entering light arc concealed by a flat ceiling of tranducent panes tet in a green- painted metal grid, 1 contemporary touch thar contrasts with the light fiasures hidden in fragments of wurnice and the doors topped by stytized Neo-Greek pediments. The organization and detailing of che main Dour thus departs from the aggressively 20th-cenrury character of the ground level to establish a dialogue between uld and new totally fitting the muscum enterprise.  The same symbolic dualism pervades the exterior, At the fear, two exhaust funneds in green and blue cheekily evoke the Pompidou Center, a distinerty alternarive home for comtempo- sary art. Because Sturngart is famed as the site of the Weissenhof- siedlung, the Deutsche Werkbund’s housing cthibitian of 1927, Stirling could nor resixt allusions to its plastered facades and  ially to Ve Corbusier's double house with its long narrow windows and piletis (stilts), which he used on the administration wing. However, the strip windows cutting the flat plane of the wall are mocked by the square openings above, which are framed in stone, and by the ferrovitrcous temple front over the revolving door of che entrance. Similarly, che Kammertheates is both tradi- tional (stone~clad first story wath arched openings} and modern- iat (stuccoed second level), and che ubiquitous square windows, in single and quadruple format, speak of the lave 1960s (works by Robert Venturi. Aldo Rossi, and Michael Graves), Stirling also plays this double game on himself when he deconstructs a portion of the adjacent street wall w9 demonstrate that it is nor bearing but merely cladding over the crnceete frame. The re-  moved blocks of cone rest like a Richard Long sculpeure in tront of the “excavatinn”; same Seurtgart residents find it an unhappy reminder of wartime devavtation, Controversial as well, bur absolutely characteristic. is the dash herween the well- mannered stone and stucco surfaces and the metal detailing— sath ban and tubular railings—painced in day-glow culurs of Muvrescent pink and aud green 4s well as the less hallucinatory primaries (ed, blue, and yellow), The colors are coded to func- tion: green always signal metal aash ban, and orange-red eevoly- ing doors.  The rotunda revalls not only the very difictent work of Swed- ash architect Gunnar Asplund, who fike Stirling attempted co reconcile chassiasm and modernism, but alus one of che defining elements of the fint public museums. However, at Seuttgart the rotunda ts open and avergrown by plants. a Feature thar together with the indeterminate facade suggests Scieling’s: ambivalence towand the Enlightenment pusitivem manifest in the onginal institution and his acknowledgement of the muscum’s diffe trajectory berween the compering claims of the past and the contemporary. Stirling has created a stunning building, contex- tual in every sense of the word, that also is consummately appro- Priate to its manifold purpores.  Hewen Starine  Sev ake Abtciberg Municipal Museum, Manchengladbach, Germany; Asphind, Erik Gannar (Sweden); Graves, Robert {United States); Museum; Stirling, James (England); Vencuri, Robert (United States)  Further Reading  Amel. Peter, and Ted Bickford (edivors). Jamar Stirling: Buildings cand Projects Jusmes Suirteng Michael Wilford and Astectates, New York: Razzoli, 1984  Calguhoun, Alan "Democratic Monument.” The Archstectunnt Review 1054 (December 1984}  Dal Co, Francesco, and Tom Muirhead, f meweer ai famer Sririing, Michael Wilford and Acotaes, Adan: Eleca, 1490  Guwouard, Mark, Brg frm: The Life and Work of lamer Sciking, Fandan: Chatto and Windus, 1998  Medini, Alessandro, “Neue Scaangaletiv.” Donne 651 (hune 1984)  Raich, Thorsten, faones Sirting- Die Nene Staazgalone, Scongar: Gerd Hatie, 1984  Suadjic. Deyan. Norman Forrer, Richard Rogers, james String: New Derectiges mm Brisk Antutecesre, London: Thames and Hudson. 1986  Wernes, Frank. "The New Actopolis of Srumgar: The Newe Susarsgalene,” Lasus fnarrnaniynal 44 (1984)  NEUTRA, RICHARD 1892-1970 Architect, Austria and United States  More than three decades after his death, Richard Neutra remuanis among the most celebrated of the founders of modem architec: ture who managed to captuse the spirit of modernism in 4 power- ful and memorable way. and several of his works have become icons of rwentieth-century architecture.  Born and ceared in Vienna sround the ture of the century. Neutsa very carly an demonstrated the facility for exquiste draftsmanship thas would mark his later drawings. In t9T1 he  
enrolled in architccuure departmenc of the Vienna Technical University. His professor at the Technical University induded Rudolf Salinger, Katt Mayreder, and Max Fabiant. In additiun, Neutra was deawn wo the teachings and sdeas uf Ono Wagner and Adolf Loos, and he regularly attended Loos's private lectures and tours of Vienna's architecture.  The outbreak of World War | meerrupted hus education, and Neutra. who served tor a time as an artillery otlicer in the Bal- kans, was unable to complete bis cramming une 1918, He subse- quently worked briefly for Erich Mendelsohn and others in Ber- lin before immigrating, sn 1923, to the United States. He settled firse in Chicago, Ending employment with the venerable firm of Holabird and Roche, but, ever restlen, he suon accepted a Posinon with onc his carly heroes, Frank Loyd Weight. ar Talie- sin, By 1925, Neutra wax in Loe Angeles, whete he established a partnership with his Viennese friend and former clanmate. Rudolph Schindler,  Neutta's early designs, wach as his viionary project for “Rush City Reformed” (1923. ), show the unprine pot only of the ideas of Wright, Wagner, and Lacs but ako of the flowing lines and curvilinear forms of Menddsohn and Antuaio Sant’ Mia and the ocher Iralian futurists. By 1927, he had begun 10 develop 4 more demental design Linguage based on simple post and lintel Constructions of steel or wood, wrapped with dun wall planes, ribbon windows, and Har overhanging roots. This new styke teached its apotheoss in his design br the Lovell Health House  an Los Angeles (1927-29). now widely regarded as one of the signal contributions to the Modem movement.  In the Lovell House, the lyrical qualities of Neutra’s spare feame structures detived as much from theit honest and direct usc of madera materuls—metal, concrete, and glass—as from their undisguised, almost classical componition. Enthralled with these new industrial building products, Neutra caploted the pos sibilines of prefabrication and tectonic austerity, transforming, bss tath in a technologxal modernity into a distinctive design vouabulary.  In contrast to many of his contemporaries, Neutra demon- strated a particularly strong interest in meeting the needs and wishes of those for whom he built. He sometimes observed his clients for days, a6 even weeks, in an effort to discern which type of laymit woukl best suit their lifesryles and habio. Throughout his career, he was also attentive co the siting and landscaping of his buildings—a sensitivity he had learned from Frank Uoyd Wright. Neutra’s designs, however, although sttangly touted in cher contexts. retain a more abstract quality: They appear kas part of the macural landscape than artificial objects in the Landscape, an approach later adopted by many of the younger Caldurmian antutet  Dusing the 19.45 and 1940s, Noutra’s architecture became compact and controlled while retaining the elemental vocabulary of the Lovell House, The repetition of his distinguishing man- nensms. such as hit use of parapets. spandrels, or spider legs.  Lowell Health House intenoe (1928-29), Los Angeles, California, Detigned by Richard Nowtrs,  Photo © Roberto Schesen / Esta. AN nghes reserved.  evoke an impression of strong uniformity in his deugns despite manifest differences ia their planning and composivon, This uniformity was further reintorced by Neutra's preoccupation with che single-family house, which constituted the mainstay of his practice for much of his career. Indeed, he preferred thee houses to the commissions for large-scale buildings he began to receive after World War II. Many ot his later works, produced in collaboration with Robert Alexander, lack the complexity and visual potency of his best designs, berraying at inability to trans fer his concepes to Large wale.  Among Neutra's important mature designs however. was the house he designed in Palm Springs, Californu, fue Ledward Kaut- mann (1947), which has become one of the most widely repro- duced buildings un the history af modemism. Jt is notable not only for its splendid realization uf the pnnaples of openness and transparency that were so central for Neutra bur also for the introduction of naniral marenals—-stone rubble and wood — that became emblematic of his lare domesne dengns and of the Cahtomia Modern in general.  Neurra’s role as begenver af modernism extended beyond his work as an architect, He was also a tireless advocate for his own work and the causc of the new architecture. Over the course of his career. be wrote numerous snicles and several books that brought his work and ideas abuur modernism ww workiwide at- tentinn,  Crraroris Lac  See abo Holabird, William, and Martin Roche (United States); Lows, Adolf (Austria); Lovell Health House, Low Aa- eles; Mendebokn, Erich (Germany, United States); Wagner, Ouo (Austria)  Selected Works  Rudolf-Moste Pres Building «Berliner Tageblace}. Berim, 1924  Lavell Health Hinne. Los Angeles, 1929  V.BLL-Research House, Los Angeles, 1933  Villa von Josef von Seeruberg, San Femanda Valley. 1935  Kaufman House, Palm Springs, Cahfornia 1947  Etkay Apartments, Los Angeles, 1949  Miramar Chapel. La Jota, 1957  Lincoln Memonal Museum, Geaysburg, Peansylama (with Robert Aloandes!, 1963  Peychizone Children's Clink, University of Souchern Caletornia, Los Angeles (with Robert Alexander), 1963  Cultural Centre, Reno, Newaila. 1965  Selected Publications  Wie bant Amersha? (How doce Amenca build?) 1927 Survanel Through Deage, 1954 Building With Narwre. 1971  Further Reading  Drewler, Arthur, and Thomas 5, Hines, The Arvhunecture of Richard Neutra. From Internationa! Sle Cabfoona Madera (cub, sat). New York: Muscum of Modern An, (982  Hines, Thomas §., Richard Newtet aad the Search for Modern “Architecture: A Riagraphy and Hutory, New Vek: Onfoed University Prem, 1982; Berkeley Univerucy of California Press, 1994  Lamprecht. Barbara Mac, Newire—Coorpirte Work, Cologne. Germany: Taschen, 2000  McCoy, Father, Richard Neutra, New Vork: Brasiller, 1360  McGor, Esther, Viena to Len Angeles. Ime Journey, Santa Munna, Califoresa: Any and Anchutecure Prew, 1979  Neutra Richard Jascplt, Mailing: and Projeco: Banten wd Projekse, Réalnations of Projects ‘atilangual Laghsh-rench- German ediwn}, 3 vols, edaed by Willy Huruger, New York: Peaeget, 159 66  Neutra, Richard Joxeph, Rupert Spade, and Yuhoo Futagews, Ruchord Newns. bub Thames and Hudsoo, 1971  Sack, Manfred. Richard Newsra: ont evnera Exay von Dion Newsrs, Frennerwugen an meine Zest mit Richard Newsva: Richard Newtra With am Exay by Laon Neutra. Memarin of aty Yours with Rubard Neutra (bilingual German - Eaylub editian). Zorich: Verlag fir Archutchius. 193; 2od edition, Zanih. Artemes, 194  Zevi, Brune, Richard Neutra, in Archieetti del movimento modeeno, vol 10, Milan Tl Balcanc, 1954  NEW DELHI, INDIA  At his Delhi coronation ceremony in 1911, King George V of Great Beitain made a surprise announcement—the transfer of the Indian capital trom Calourta (the seat of British power for over a century) ro Delhi. The British had been considenng a more central administrative capital as early a3 1857, when revolu throughout northern India shook their control. Dethi’s strategic oorth-central location, where che ancient Grand Trunk Rasd and the navigable Yamuna River come together, made it a logical choice. The Jace that it was cooler and leas polluted than Calcutta certainly helped as well. The site had bocn home to at least a dozen different citics aver the pecvious theee millennia and served as capital for over six centuries during the rule uf the Hindu Rajpuw, the Dethi Sultanain, and the Moguls.  After the announcesent, the Dethy Town Planning Commit- foe was ummodiately csrablished, whereas the election of princi- pal architect was a more contennous affair. Brinsh archirece Edwin Luryens (1869-1944) was awarded the prestigiow project of dexymn of tbe imperial city, more for his politica) con- nections than for hus professional experience. The British viceroy had prefered architect Herbert Baker (1862-1946). who war asked to callaborare.  At the time, half of the native pupulstsun of 233.000 lived in the crowded city of Shahjahanabad (founded in 1648 by the Mogul emperor Shab Jahan), in an area of about four square kilometers. The Committee seatched for a location at a respecta- ble distance from the {aden city bur close cnough thar they would be able ro make their presence felt. hey ultimatcly se- lected a site on Raising Hill some $ kilometers souchwest of the  “gate ary, between a high ridge and the Yamuna River. The  few city would accommodate over 50,000 residents on an area of 26 square kilumeten and would have provisions for fururc expansion.  The tam of Luryens and Baker organized the layout of the city in the tradition of the City Beautiful, a stylistic movement with roots in 1 9th-cencuty France. ‘The styke was then becoming fashionable for large civic projects throughout che world and was particularly popular in colonial capitals because it conveys with case a sense of boch dominance and exclusivity. two impor- tant constructs to maintain when controlling aben regions. The plan for New Dethi incorporated all the basic tenets of City Beautiful dengn. including lange-wale Beaux-Arts architectural 
elements. grand howevards. and an abundance of gardens. parks, fountains, and sculpture.  The apes of Raising Gill was blasted to create an artificial plateau above che old city. Atup this plateau were located the most important buildings of the Beitish Raj: che Viveruy's House (1929, new Raevrapats Bhawin) and the Scuciatiat Blouks (1928). Despite its solat horizontal massing (measuring 189 by (58 meters). the Viceroy’s Flouse appears monumental, given its hdhtop locatiun and a dome that nscs $5 mectets abave the ground, Deagned by Lutyens, the Vaccray's Howse contains sev- eral grand halls and courtyard, including the famous arcular throne room under the dome for the Viceroy and his wite (pres- eady Durbar Hall, used for ceremonial occadians), The gardens on the west side of the Viceroy's Howe were bid out in the Mogul! tradition of Four-squares with watercourses and toun- tans. The Secretariat Blacks, designed by Baker. are identical oblong classical srnictures on the cast side of the Viceruv's House and today haus the offices of the vanous govermmene ministrics, The Viccroy’s court and the courts of the two secretariat blocks create a grand urban ypace known as the Government Coun, This space is furber defined by the Jaipur Column (1931). gift of the Maharaja of Jaipur, and the Dominion Columns (1951), gifts fron the other great dominions within the British Empite.  From this commanding acropulis, the team laid our the Procesmonal avenue Kingsway (presently Raypathl cunning be tween the Secretariat Blocks and cast for 3 kilometers; it was fined by canals and fountains for its entire length. At the termi: pus Lutyens designed the monumencal AlLIndia War Memorial Arch, popularly called India Gate (1931), which. located ar the center of five radiating axes, recalls Paris's Arv de Triomphe, The Palladian style India Gate is 43 meters high and commemorares the Indian and British saldices who died in duree wan, including, World War |. Facing it ix a sandstone canopy that originally contained a seanic of George V sculpred after his death in 1936; the statue has since been relocared to a more peripheral laauen.  The Kingsway was mcersevied by perpendicular aves and by grand diagonal boulevards radiating out from these axes to form @ bexagonal network ‘the overall effect was reminiscent of L'En fant’s plan for Washington, for which Lutyens especially had capressed great admuratinn. The intersccung oudes of this set- work contained plazas and important buildings such as the two churches designod by Henry Alexander Medd: the Cathodral Church of Redempoon (1931, che main Anglican church for the British officials) and the talianzte Roman Carholic Church of che Sacred Heart (1934). The boulevards themselves were lined with bungalows, residences derived from the indigcnout architecture of Bengal (Aungedow is, in fact, an English cormup- tion of the word bangle, meaning “fom Bengal"). A typical bungalow was a single-storied horizontal ctructure with covered verandahs and a high ¢ to keep the interior shaded and cool. ‘The bungalows originally housed British ufficiah and today are home to miniaten and othes high bureaucrats us the Indian government,  Other prominent buildings of New Ddlhi indlude Connaught Place (1934), designed by Robert Tor Russell and named after the king's unde, the Duke of Connaught. North of Luryens! and Baker's central plan, this nvo-story shopping arcade with Palladian arches and stuccoed colonnades s arranged radially in two rings abouc a central lawn. Russell also designed the Commander-in-Chief's House (1930) south of the Viceroy’s  House, fates the home of Prime Minister Nehru and today a museum.  Lutyens wished to use a purely dassical European idiom for the entire design: he was expecially open in his aversion to Hindu and Mogul architecture and his disdain for stylistic admixtures. Baker wax more open tu integrating fadian and European ele- ment, Fur pulitical reasons, however, Lutyens used Indian mo- tify in his final deugns for many of the buildings: chese include the cAdya (stone cornice), chattn (rouftop cupola) and other decorative detailing. Sume critics argue that the use of Indian motits an hardly qualify as being a ruc synthesis of traditions, whereas others testify to the harmanious effect created by the miature.  The British ruled India far anly 16 years aftcr the completion of New Delhi, until Independence in 1947. In chat Gime, and in the over 50 years vince independence. New Delhi has ex- panded into new territory in every direction beyond the relatively emall City Beautiful envisioned by Luryens and Baker. The city’s pupulation is now estimated at 12 million people: this unpreve- dented growth 1 permarily a result of mugration first from west- ern Punjab after partition with Pakistan in 1947 and more te cently from the entire country. In the process, it has expanded to incorporate Shakyubanabad (now called Old Dethit and other older cities and villages around it. Lutyens’ and Baker's colonial architecture and Briush urban plansung (characterized by low- tying buildings in garden setings with uec-lined avenues) re main mostly intact in whac w now called Central Dethi, with sone sevtistically mixed and high-rise in-fill. The remainder of the ciry is more diverse in teems of both evamomic bevel and styke: modern New Delhi encompasics everything from the slum to the gated community, and styles as diverse as Furopean classi- al, Islamic, Modern, and Poumudern, blended with vernacular ttaditiuns foam an entire aabrantincnt.  Manistt CHALANA  See ho Baker, Herbert (England and South Africa): India;  Laayens, Edwin (England); Plan of New Delhi  Further Reading  Halt. Peter Gooltiey. (en of Lemorrow. An intellecrual Hisery of Urban Plaraing and Lesign in the lwenticth Gentry, Oxtoud, UK and New York: Hlxhwell, 1988.  Enang, Kobert Grant, indsant Swmumer. Lutyens Baker, and Imperial Debit, New Elaven: Yale Uruvervity Mees. 1981  NEW TOWNS MOVEMENT  Ie in Latgely mcequed that ewo mayor design trends influenced the shape of the bush environment in the 20th century: the new towns manement and the madern movement in architecture. Many reform movements emerged in response to the rapid in- dustrialiavon uf the 19th century, which had left cities in a puor state of overcrowding and social strife. kor | ewis Mumioed, the arrival of the new towns, which offered a recipe for social reform as well as environmental change, was as important as the invention of the airplane,  Ebenezer Howard. who introduced the ides of garden citics in 1898. argued for a marriage between town and country to create places thar had the advantages of both and the disadvan:  tages of neither. In Britain the ewe garden cities of Letchworth (1903-04) and Welwyn (1919-20) were developed, to be fol- lowed by a gencranon of neve towns after World War I. The posrwar fnew towns were planned and developed as an alternative  th to city overgrowth and congestuin and (o intensified subur- banization,  The approach to, apd principles used in the design of, the fnew towns changed over the period uf their development, in line with the wider changes in society, Alehough cach new sown was a tpevific cane, it is posible ta arrive at a typology af design approaches in four main stages. The first stage is that of nolated, small towns with limited mobdity and a cadial. divpensed pattern of form. The second is a more compact urban entity that, undet the influence of the automobile, tinds a linear form, Uhe thicd is a synthesis of these two oppasites, and the lourth is the intmo- duction of an open matrix of roads to which urban Fabra is freely adapred.  In the first stage. the arm was to create a healthy and relaxed environment as opposed to the overcrowded city and ts poten- tial conthect of social classes. (he design beiet was ta create 3 small settlement whose inhabitants, with their supposedly simple and predictable activity patterns, were expevued te form well- integrated communities.  In the fint generation of the new towns, nich asin Srevenage, Crawley, and Hemel Hempstead. the influence of garden cities is visible. The town consists of separate, relauvely independent neighborhoad units of low denury brmught tngcther around a town center. Ie 1s possible 10 walk w the shopping center or the workplace in a few nunutes. The anduial zone is olten concentrated en central focations served by railways and major roads, which alsa serve the mwn center, Ihe town center is designed on the pattern of a market square. One- or two-story cottages Hank winding roads and cul-de-sacs. Fach nerghbor- hood unis, formed af one or mare superblocks, has enongh pop- ulation tm support a primary school located at it center fur caxy and safe acces, and the community center 1 not far away. Greenery fills the space berween ncighborhand units. Socal inte gration is to be achieved through clustering peuple and plices and serving them through 4 number of centers.  An increase in the target population of the new towns leads to the design of larger towns x¢ in a regional contest and linked with a demand for incecased mability and a .neique of kdcaleing, social integration at the neighborhood level. The increase in wale caused changes in transportation: from slow patterns of movement to higher mobility and from relving on walking and cycling 10 public transport and private automobile.  In response to the demand for “urbanity.” as opposed to the suburban character of che fint xtage. a gampart, linear form was adopted. All che inhabitanes lived within walking distance of concentrated linear center shat included cavered shopping streets with multilevel vehucular and pedestrian access, Separate ncigh- hothoods were climinated, density was increased, buildings he- came taller, and the industrial zone spread across the town, Only one new cown, Cumbernauld, was developed 1 this stage.  The third stage of the evolution of new tawn desis vom: bined the first rwo stages. [n what is knawn as the second gencra- tion of new towns, such as in Runcorn, Redditch. and Irvine, a town is formed of separate residential unity of certain size connected to one another by a pubbe transport route around whore stopping points local facilities are concentrated. bach umt  shows a radial scheme based on walking distance. A numbes of units are grouped together in 2 linear deem around a public transport route as the genesator of urban farm, A aciwork of toads encompasses these component parts of the town simicture, connecung them ty one another,  (n the wealthier and more mobile soxiety of the 1960), the problem war nor simply providing minimum acceptable san dards but abe ariving tor a better quality of life shat inchuded morte freedom of chowe and fleaibiliry. The design approaches had ta be adapted to the new circumstances of cle be regarded as ourdated of paternalistic peescriptians belonging to previous ages, espeually at a tne when before 2 scheme could be oper- ated, ity rationale war subject to change.  lo the fourth stage of the cvulution of new town deagn (for eample, Washington), these ideas are reflected on the complete dominance of the private automobile over che cown structure. The grid network as a large, flexible infrastructure as the charac- terisnc of the last new town, Milton Keynes. In the course of change. the private automobile shifts the local center from the heart of the residential area to us boundaries to make it accesible from rhe road nerwork.  Nearly all these transformations in 30 yearn of new town design show the increased inportance of muveinent and inobil- ity. which was also at the heart of the modern mavernent. They alsa show a continucus seatch for some form of social interaction through design, as reflected in the use of cul-de-sas and cluster housing, despite heavy criticism against theit systematic use as 2 means of social engineering, Superblocks, abundant green spaces and preen bels, and furtional segregation uf access are other constant feacures. although considcrable change in detail 38 traceable. Despite ther failure in meeting thes social agenda. such as halung the growih of cides and suburban sprawl or attracting a cross secrion of the population. new rewns conrinuc as viable rowns. Apart from the four towns in Northern Ireland. the 28 new owns created nearly halla million jobs and added morc than a million peaple ta the original poputarion af the detignared areac They inspire current debate and practice in Briain and the United Suter, where new wulemenu and New Urbanism are wen as a form of sustainable urban expansion.  Att Mapanirocr  See alo Garden City Movement: Mumford, Lewis (United States); New Urbaniom  NEW URBANISM  “New Urbanism is a planning cform movement that evolved in she United States during the carly 19%) trom a marriage be- sween owe radical critiques of madernust planning and uchan design: traditional neighborhnod development (TND) and tranut-oriented development (TOP. The movement aims to change the ways in which people understand and buikd eawne and urties, opposing modernist concept of separated aingke-use zoning atcas. buildingy wolated in open apace, and an environ: ment dominated by the automubile, Instead, the main organiz- ing principles involve the creanon of compact. defined urban neighborhoods comprising a compatible muxture of uses and housing Ipes: 2 network af connected streets with sxlewalks and sect rrees to facilitate convenient and sate: movement 
throughout neighborhoods for all modes of transportation; the primacy of the pedestnan over the automobile, che integration of parks and public spaces inta cach neighborhood: and the ploement of important civic buildings on key sites to creae 4 strung and memotable vision as well ax appearance  The inovement has provided a new paradigm for wburban developenent and relawucd interes an existing urban areas. Dunng the Late 1990s, che ideals and priniples of New Urban- im melded with the upsurge of professional and publ interest in “smart growth.” of “sustunable development,” as an antidote to suburban speaw! and a way of managing urban growth into mare environmencally responsible patterns, The utle “New Us- hanism” comes from a desire to counteract the faults of a sprawd- ing ssburkan model of city devedopment by a coherent srban form, with the adiective “New” added to distinguish the ideals from the old and now discredited urbanism of Le Corbusier, Wales Gropius, and other pioneess of Moderniun.  Traditional neighborhood development (alto known as nico: traditional develapment of neotraditional planning) is the term used co describe the planning and urban design of new develop: mene that specifically take their forms from the structure and Layout of *pre-auomobile” acghborhouds. Uhese are pritnuarily sueetcat suburbs and commuter ral suburbs around larger cuties auting from the early decades of the 20th century and, at 4 smallet «ale, uadsbonal Amencan small towns of the same pe- fied. The planning concepts and physical artnbures of wich places. with ther human scale and lively mix of uses, are consid- cred co be as appropriate now as chey were when originally devel- oped, 60 10 100 years ago,  The oniginal propunents of TND were the Miarmu-based firm of DPZ. and Company. founded by the husband-and-wife team of Andres Uuany and Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk. Ubeir best. known developments inchide the new communities of Seaside (1981, Walmn County, Flarida, 90 acres) and Kentlands (1988, Gaithersburg, Maryland, 356 ates).  The plan of Scaside features 3 range of traditional urban foeins laid out an the site in a series of grids averlaid with diagonal aacs focusing on the wwa center and peuviding key lucations for monumental buildings. The sreets are designed as narrow pedestrian “ours” along which cars can move at slow speed and that often termunate at a public building ur public space. Garages are accessed from the rear by means of narrow planted alleyways.  Duany and Phaet-Zyberk acknowledge the impact of Léon Kater and his neorationaliss ideas derived from the Fusopean city on tbe planning of Seaside. Krict was a consulrane during the deugn process and has remained an important contributor to New Urbanist theory. During che 1970s in Furope. Krier was a leading advocate in the Movement for the Reconstruction of the European City, whose major themes included the preact- vatiag of historic centers, the we of historic urban types and urban parcerns such ws the sirect, square, and neighborhood (quartier in Krier’s bexivon) as the baus for new city development; and the reconstrucuon of single-use residential “bedroum sub- urbs” into articulate mixed-use neighborhoods, Although the specific European urban morphologies and rypologies were transformed by chet travel across die Atlanuc dunng the follow- ing decade, these uindeslyng theoretical principles beaame founding concepts for TND in the 1980s and New Urbanist theory in the 1990s.  The parallel strand of TOD embodies many similar and com- plementary ideas but cvolved specifically from the concept of the “pedestrian pocket.” a place organized primarily around the needs of the pedestrian, and developed with an urban form thar made it possible for public crandt— usually Eght rail—to meet matty individual mobiliry nocds. ledestian pockets were devel- oped in theoretical studies un che West Coast primarily by Peter Calthorpe in conjunction with Douglas Kelbsugh and others. The best-known built development following these ideas is Caltborpe's plan for Laguna West (1990, Sacramento County, Califarrua), although the execution of the master plan by othen falls short of Calthorpe's orginal wsion and intentions, The 1,033-acre development comprises 3,300 housing units, 66 acres of bakes, $5 acres of parks, and a town square for a fucuse transit stop surrounded by a town hall. communiry center, offices, thops, and apartments.  The City of San Dicgn adopred Calthorpe’s transit-onented development principles in an official city ordinance in 1992, ated New Urbanist ideas have had considerable influence in Cali- fornia on the design and planning of new project. Calthorpe’s reconaimuction of 4 I-acre derelict mall in Mountain View, Califorma, into 4 mucd-use neighborhood (1996) exemplifies this end.  Vransit-onented development extended the same planmng and urban design ideas found in TND into a regional context by connecnng development along fixed rranut corridors, untiring mainly lazhe rail or commuter rail wchnulogy. Each tcansit xop catalysed a neighborhood planned for a minure of higher density uses within a five- ar ren-minute walking radius [one- quarter w one-half mile) laid our around pedestrian-fiendly streets, squares. and parks.  Beginning as isolared developments duning the 1980s, TNDs and TOD: became far more common during the 1990s, largely because of the avid proselytizing of the kleas aruund the nation by Duany, Plarer-Z:yherk, Calthorpe, and others. These wo moveresits Wuilesced in the formation of the Congress for the New Urbanism (CNU) in 1993, which has held annual con- greases every year since then, The basic eenets of the movement were defined in che Charter of the New Urbanism, which was taufied at the CNUs louth congress in Charleszon in 1996,  Although it stands for principles that are often in direct con- tradiction to those of modemis: architecture and planning, the CNU models itself on the Congres Invematianaux d'Architec- ture Modeme (CTAM), seeking to become the primary organiza- twa for town-planning theory and practive in the period, as was CIAM during the heyday of modemim. In adopaed Charter of the New Urhanism consciously recalls the Charter of Athens produced at the fourth congress of CIAM in 1933: whereas the older document set forth the ideals of the modernist city, the new charter establishes guiding princi and paradigms for postmodern urbanism. ® Principles  he charter is organwed inw four sections: (1) an untitled preface of general statements; (2) the Region—Merropolis, City, and Town: (3) the Neighborhood, District, and Comdoe; and (4) the Block, the Street, and the Building. The document first emphasizes coherent urban design and ning at a regional scale, promoting the renewed urbanity of existing areas and the increased urbanity of new development. This focused urbanism is balanced by 3 concern for the environmentally sustainable relationship berween any metropolis and its agrarian hinterland  Urban Code for Howe uf seaside, Florida, designed bv Duany and Plarer-Zyberk,  © Duanv/Parer-Zyberk  and natural lindscapes. ‘The subsequent sections spell out the movement's concerns for the reconstruction of American cities at 4 variety of scales, utilizing many of the concepts articulated previously by Krier and his fellow neosationalise in theit mani- fexto for the reconstruction of the Eurvpean uty and sdapung them tw American practice.  Although Krics was a major influence on the development of New Urbanism, his was by no means the only European influence. Ebenezer Howard's Garden City relurm movement of the cur of che 20th century. wath its emphasis on well-planned, self-contained new towns served by rransit and defined by large tracts of productive countryside, was also an imporcant contribu- tor to New Urbanist cheory. The British architect and planner Raymond Unwin. with his brother-in-law Barry Parker, gave tangible form ec Howard’: Garden City ideals in the English new town of Lecchworth (begun 1903) and Hamprecad Garden Suburb in north London (begun 1907, developed in collabora tion with Sie Edwin Lutyens). Unwin's bauk Town Planning in Practice (1909) sptcad his planning and urban design ideas through Europe and the United States carly in the 20th century, and the volume’'s republication (1994) has revived the relevance of the work fo postmodern urban designers.  A theoretical backbone of Unwin's treatise was the work of Austrian teacher and designer Camillo Site, whose book City  Planning Acconding te Artisric Principles (originally published in German in 1889) set out principles regarding the arrful compasi- thon of public space. Sitte’s work looked back to medieval. Ren- aivsance, and baraque Furope in ity analysis of human-scaled public space. but in an cpirical and experiential rather than a fationalist of typological manner.  In the United Scares, apart from the extensive vernacular Uadition of small-town and suburban design from the Late 19th century cw the 1930s, de lineage of New Urbanist influcnces includes the Beaux-Arts traditions of the Cry Beautiful move- ment, the Ants and Crafts movement, the wark of F.1. Olmsted ‘and his successors, the innovative town plans of John Nolen, and Clarence Perry's work in 3929 to define the ideal neighbor- hood unit,  More recently. Werner Hegemann and Elbert Peets’s repub- lished work from the 1920s, The American Vitrusins (1988), became a seminat text for traditional neighborhood design in the 1990s, summarizing the work of Siete and European garden ties as well as codifying Beaux-Arts and City Beautiful concepes for Amenman use.  The rediscovery of these older works that were banished by the docannes of modernist urban design and planning illustrates a developing trend toward reponalism. histoncism, contex- tualism, and the vernacular that is traceable from the carly 1960s. 
ty Beitain, this was evident in the Townscape movement and especially in the work of Gordon Cullen, whose hook Townwape (1961) became a seminal work about pedestrian-scaked urban environments based on traditional elements of streets and squares. From the 1970s on, this approach to urbanism gave rise th neotraditional developments in Britain under the rubric “neovernacular design.” This trend was furmalized with the pub- licauon of the official County of Essex Derign Gaude for Rest- dennal Areas (V973), 4 vistal Lodebouk thar otablubed the principles of goud (i.c., traditional) urban design that new devel- opments were expected to follow.  In France this neotraditional direction was presaged in 1966 by the kbosyncran development uf “Provinceal Urbanism” by Jacques Riboud at La Verridre-Maurepas in St. Quentin-co- Veeines outside Paris. Seven years later, in southern France, Franguise Spoerry expanded on this use of traditional and pictur- esque urban forms in his resort development at Port Grimaod (1973) and later hill-sown developments at nearby Gass  Both European neotraditional townscape and the neoration- alist approach m city design emphasized the art of relationships between buildings and the imporame of well-defined public space. This view of the human-wated city found its American counterpart in the work of Paul Goodman. Kevin Lynch, and Jane Jacobs during the eatly 1960s, Lynch's seminal work /muge of the City (1900) introduced the powerful idea of making the ty “legible” to dhe user through the coding and smanipulauion of smplified urban clements. such as districts, paths, edges, nodes, and landmarks. Jacobs, in her powerful indicunent of modernist aty planning. The Death aod Life of Amercan Cites (1961), refncused artenrion on the street as the basic building, tock of neighbuthood and community and lantbasted modern- ist ideas of urban renewal as being too large wale, too abstract, and devnid of human scale and f&eling.  The emphasis on conteatwaism and respect for the older parterne of the city is also evidens in works nf Calin Rewe and Fred Koetter (Collage Ciry [1978]) and Chriwpher Aleaander {Pattern Language [1977] and A New Theory of Urban Design [1987}). These hooks focused designen’ artration on, among ether chings, bringmy bak sucets and squares as the public living roams of the city, thereby reversing the destruction of the street by madernat thevry and. practice.  During dhe lace 1Y8Us and 1990s. un parallel to New Urban- ism, a new interest in “urban villages” developed. In Britain, under the impetus of HRH Prince Charles and his planning, adviser Léon Krier, this work focused on the creatoon of sustaina- be mixed-use urban developments as the incremencal building blocks of urban expansion and redevelopment, creating high- quality burt affordable urban living while pretering the coo nomic and environmental resources of the countryside. One tangible result of this initiative was the new village of Poundbury, outside Dorchester, designed by Léon Krier in 1988, the fins pihate of which (1997) is complete. Similar concepes are evident in the contemporancous German acw town of Potsdain- Drewits, by Léeun Krier’s elder brother, Rub Krier.  Preserving the sural landscape is ao che main concern of American planness sch ax Randall Arendt, whose bouk Rural by Deugn (1994) sets oat planning principles for readentual sub- drvinun developinent thar conserve as much as possible of the appearance and ecology of natural landscapes under develop-  ment.  Outside Chicago, in Grayslake. {linois, developers recused! award-winning ressdential architects to design vernacular-stye houses around festored wetlands and prairies in a conservauon community called Peaine Crossing. C “ahhorpe TOD ideas were ecjected by city officials, demonstrating the difficulties that many New Urbanist planner uill face.  New Urhanists and like-minded designers in the United States face a major obstacke in implementing their ideas: mast aspects of this traditionally based urbanism are illegal under con- ventional Arnezcan soning onlinances. These ordinances, devel- oped in the decades after World War Ii, provide the framework of detailed regulativns that have implemented the modernin and wihurhantzed view of the «ty, categorized by low-densiey single-use developments separated our aruss the landscape, The solution adopted by New Urbanist designers has been to rewrite deechopment codes on the basis of 1s of traditional urban- asm and to persuade municipaliues to implement these as parallel or substitute zoning tcgulations.  Planner, local governinent officials, citizens, and some devel opers have shown great interest in New Urbanist design, particu- larly those in arcas thar atc experiencing growth-rdared conflicts, Many see New Urbanism as an approach that cnables a commu- nity's growth ro be channeled inca a physical form that is more compatible with the wale of existing neighborhoods. discourages exceuive automohile use. is lew costly to service, and user bean Lund and natusal resources  However, New Ushanians continues te mect resistance te it. implementation, and nor simply because of antiquated regula- tions. The lughly unegrated deveuprient srategy wsherent to New Urbanium requires a more holistic approach tn community building than the ceal estate and descluposent usdusties are currently scructured to deliver. These industries are highly weg- mented by land use category (c.g., singke-tanuly bousng, mulu- family housing, reuil, office, and endustrial), and each category has its own practices, markets, trade associavons, and finanung sources that are somewbal resistant to change. From within these sear, New Urbanism is often perceived as 4 threat to current proficable practices.  Other critics of New Urbanism. particularly academics in American schools of architecture, often retabel it “New Sudur- anism” and eritnize it for being nathing more than bewer- designed sprawl. New Urbanists defend themselves by pointing our thar the CNU charter argues explicitely for “the restoration of canting urban centen and rowns within caberent menmpolizan regions. the reconfiguration af sprawling suburhs into communi ties of real neighborhoods and diverse districu, the camervation of natural environments, and the preservation of our built leg acy,” that iv, an integrated approach to city building that gives full weight to redevelopment uf existing urhan areas. Unforiu- nately. many of the current social, political, and economic reali- ties in the United States pnontize development at the metrupoli- tan periphery, and only during the late 1990s have development oppeeunices in the inner city provided a cleat forum for New Urbanist ideas.  Despite opposition from these various quarters, New Urban- sm remains at the heart of the American debate regarding the tucure of its cities and suburbs. By ies emphasis on human-scaled community design based on traditional models, New Urbanism has established itself as one of the central themes of postmodern urban theary and practice.  Davin Wartens  See abe Athens Charter (1943) City Beautiful Movement; Congrés laternationaux d'Architeceure Moderae (CLAM, 1927-), Corbusier, Le (eanneret, Charles-Edouard) {France}: Duany and Plater-Zyberk (United States); Gropius, Waltee (Germany); Krier, Léon (Laxembourg): Suburban Plaaning Urban Planning  Further Reading  Akdoas, Tory, Unban Vilage: A Conrept of Creating Mened. te Urban Developments an a Sunsineble Sale London: Urban Villages Gresip, 1992; 2nd edition, London (than Vallages Forum, 1497  Alexander. Onritopher, 4 New Theeny of Urban Derg, New York and Onferd: Ontord Uneverury Drees, 1987  Alexander. Christopher, Sara Ihhikawa, and Murtas Setversiern: Parieen Language: Taw, Rutidings, Comvruction, Now York: Onxtord Univerary Prew, 1977  Arends, Randall, Rwrad by Deg Maintarning Small Town Character, Chicage American Planing Asociatum Planners Pree, 1994  Barnett, Jonathan, Tw Fructicred Metrepotir: fonpreving the New City, Ressering the Old City, Reshaping she Region, Now Vack: Harper Calling, 1995  Calthorpe, Veer, The Next American Metropeli: Exley, Caromucnin. and the American Dream, Now York: Princston An hiteseutal Press, 1993  Calllins, Geonge R.. and Chrissane Crasemann Collins, Camille Sirte and the Birth of Madern City Planning, New York: Rarubom Tlouse, and Londen: Phaidon, 1805: revned dition, New York: Rizzoti, 1986  Cullen, Gordan, Trtcascape, Landun: Archirectural Press, and New: York: Reinhold, 1961; new editian, ac fhe Concie Lous ape, Landon: Burtermorth Architecture, 1990)  Dengan Guide for Residencial Areas, Chetrnsford: Essex Conny Council, 1973; new edition, as The Farx Digan (inde for Revidensial and Moved (ie dress, Yssex: Essex Planning Officers Avocunon, 1997  Duany. Andres, e¢ al., Towns and Toun Making Principle, New York: Riveuls, 1994; 2nd etition, 1992  Duany, Andres, ct al. the Lentcant of the New Urienion, Miami; DPZ, 1999  Hegemann. Weer, and Elbert Preis. The American Vierwsis Aw Arcketect’s Handbook of Civse Ars, Now York: Aschscectural Book. 1922, reprint, New York: Princeton Arcturectural Press, and Braunschweig, Germany: Friedrich Vieweg, 1988  Jacobs, Jane. The Breath and life of Great Amerscan Citta, Now York: Random Hour, 1961; London: Jonathan Cape. 1462  Katz. Pecer. Thy Nowe Urbanism: Tomsted an Archizecrere of ‘Community, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994  Kettough, Douglas (cdisor). Tie Pedesernurm Pocket Bask: A New Suberhan Design Sate. New York: Princeton Architectural Prem, 1989  Kelbaugh. Douglas, Cammen Place: Toward Newhborkoad end Regenal Dewgn, Seattle: Universicy of Washmgyan Press, 1997  Krier, Léon, Hanser, Palaces, Crties. Landon: Architeccural Deagn Fdinan, 1984  Kunetler, James Howard, Home from Nowhere: Remaking Our Fervydty World for the 21st Century, New York: Simon and Schumtez, 1996  Lecace, Michael, and Karhleen McCormick (editors), Charter of the New Urbantun, New York: McGraw-Hill, 2000  Lynch, Kein, The dmage of the City. Cambridge. Massachusetrs: MIT Press, 160  Rowe, Cohn. and bead Kuctter, College Cin, Cambralge, Mawachwere, MIT Press, . Laradon: MOV Press. 1979  Site, Carnal, fone Nededte Aas nach inutce kuspticeschen Grumebatzen, Vienna: Gracset, 1889; ax Chay Planing according te Aniutes Prveapics, traralated by George R. Colliny and Christiane ‘Crasemann Calluns. Now York: Random House, and London. Phaidon, 1965  NEW YORK (NEW YORK), UNITED STATES  Acwhetically, New York is gencsally considered the preeminent city of the 20th century, Av the 18th century was the century of the London terriec and square, and the 19th that of the Parisian boulevards and Beau Ans, the 20th century belongs to the skyscraper, the subway, and the prid. For New York, unwible of American indigenous ideals and imported European styte, has achieved in the modern eta the stature of internauonal urban icon.  Manhattan Island  One cannor think of the architecture of New York City withour the asnciarions of skyscraper and deyline, Here on a skinny land, skyscraper seem to grow out uf the stony soil. The nats tal conditions of Manhattan [sLind are fertile ground for skyscra- pens, for the city is built on a rocky outcropping of Manharean schist, geulupaally stung enough io support high buildings. Poets including Walt Whitman have described it 2s "an island sixteen miles long. solid-founded” ("Mannaharta,” 1860).  Physical constraints uf the wland site are also creates of form tor the city, The actual pwenry-cwo and a half square miles of Manharzan arc highly circumscribed, surrounded on all sides by fas-moving rivers and a deep harbor, pushing the city’s evo- nomic developmenr while simultancoudy limiting its physical expansion. Long piers ance were once thrown out from the fland’s shores. capanding the city into its waterways, The city grew further horizantalty, crossing its waterways into ncighbor- ing cities and counties, and eventually annexing them, For the urban core of Manhattan, however. the only way to go was up, and the city teached ever skyward,  tn the modern cra, New York has becnme the symbolic em- blem of American aleals, dhe akyscraping architectural triumph of Ameraa. The city’s national symbolise has been noted by tmany—for good and for bad, In the fall of 2001, a prece of the Manhattan skyline was obliterated in a violent terrarist act. Two of the tallest buildings in history. the twin towers of the World Trade Center (Minoru Yamasaki and Associates, 1973}, with occupants and other innocent victims, were destroyed an 1) Seprember, 2001, Manharran, however, is built on rock and American urban ideals, and thus New York City endures.  The Boroughs and the New York Metropolitan Arca  New York. un the broad sense, is an agglomerative environment with a population of eight millian composed of five counties of 
boroughs: Manharran, Brooklyn, Queens, the Bronx, and Staten Idand-—-counties with populations cach larger than most Amen- can cities. The New Yark metropolitan repon further expands into vast leafy suburbs from long Idand to the east and West- chester to the north in northern New Jercy and to shoreline Connecticut. In the narrower definition of New York. as in common parlance, New York City is Manhatuan Idand.  Cerain features of the boroughs individually, though, may of some interest tw the reader—-especially the boroughs’ unique upen spaces. (open space being in abort supply in Manhatsan), and their linkages to Manhattan, particularly their bridges. Far cramp, the creatues of Manhatuin’s Cenceal Park in the heart of Manhatran (Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaua, 1460), Later designed Brooklyn's Prospect Park (18741. The New York Botanical Gardens (Vaux and Passons, 1895), wath its prac  conservatory, can be found in the Bruna. Queens’ Flushing Meadows Park still exhsbies reminders of its history as the futuris- the site of the 1939 and 1964 World's Fairs.  The Brooklyn Badge John and Washington Rocbbng, 1883). to Manhatann, is justly farmed fue both its engineer: and its monumental Egyptoid aesthetic. Also of achtecurd nore are the haroque (Queensboro Bridge (Palmer and Hornbos- tal, 1909) across the Eas Raver and the sweeping cables of the George Washington Bridge (Cas Gilbert, 1931) crossing the Hudson River. ‘The old-fashioned Seaten Island Ferry offers the most stunning approach to the pinnaded skyscrapers of the fower Manhartan skyline. Ir sails through New York Harbor blithely pase tbe Statuc of Liberty.  Modera Architecture in New York, 21 Century ‘  (n the cartiest part of che 20th cencury, che architecture of New York was influenced by European styles, fint by die Beaux-Arex  New York Caty skyline, 2001 Pham © Raber Mo Byme  and then by Art Nouveau Qugensnil) and the decorative arts. Larer in the century. however, New York began throw off its foreign-designcd cloak and to assert itself architecturally. creat- ing a modern architectural language that is, in many respects, unique va the city. This was the city's first modern urban archi- tecture that was truly architectonic. based an form, upward thn, and massing, a dictated by the vetback skyscraper soning Law (1916). By mid-censury however, European influence again returned to Manhartan — this time via the entry of émigré archi- tects fleeing artistic and iateliccrual oppression.  The modern architecture of New York City can therefore be classified into five major periods: che Beaux-Arts, the Deco Skyscraper, Manhattan Moder, the Internanonal Style, and Alternative Modernism. Though these classifications can only begin to detine che myriad form of the city that comprise New York's distinctively urbane modemiry, this article will briefly define and cxamine examples of cach sryle chosen not only for their architectural presence but ales for their public accessibility to the reader.  Beaux-Arts Architecture in New York, 1900-205  Although the Beaux-Arts booked back ta classical Rome for ins facades and clevarions, it was truly a modem movement in it. epprosch ty plan and function. Through this yk, New York was able co weave the gravity of ancient forms and facades into in madern functional fabric. Significant public urban monuments were deugned in the easly part of the 20th century by Beaux- Arts-teained architects and theit large firms. Lmportant commis- sions such as the New York Public Library (Carrere and Uas- ung, 1911), dhe Metrupebtan Museum of Art (Richard Morris Huns, 1902), and Columbia University (McKim, Mead, and White, 1897) are lasting examples of the stye.  Columbia Universiry, on the upper west side, 1s perhaps the leareat cxampte of the melding of the symbolic antique cloth of the Beaux-Arts with modern plan and intent, Here Charles McKim’s Pantheon-like Low Library (1897) overlooks a classi- cally arranged campus in a highly funcional and urban setting. The ponderous domed facade, ity giant arden, and ranges of ascending stone steps remind the mudern student that all knows edge, even the ground-breaking inudern thuught of the conten: Porary university, represents a ventinuity with the puat.  MeKim's ability to integrate historical symbol wah modern function was even more strongly felt in Pennsylvania Staion (1910), a much-lamented Landmark of stcel and glass conligueed in classecal form (demolished, 1962}. Fortunately as New York has gained a renewed appreciation for the Beaus-Ans, old Penn Seanon is now scheduled to be replaced by another McKim, Mead, and White building across the street, substiniting their decommissioned clawical General Pose Office (1913) for the los train station. Further, New York has recently witnesscd a renaissance of restoration in ewe other classical monuments, the New York Public Libeury and Grand Central Seation (Reed and Stem and Warren and Wetmore, 1913). Thus, the Beaua-Arts remains a living and vital part of today’s city.  Art Deco Skyscrapers, 1920s-30s  During the teens, through the 1920s. and onto the cra of the 1939 World's Fair. the viszal historicicm of the Beaux-Arre gave way to the fucuriam of the fair. A new look in New York was apparent, as architecture sow changed from a decorative dress of classicism into one of organic and vigzagging omament. New York architecture continued w be quite ornamental chruughout the 1920s, although, in contrast 10 the freestanding classical orders, deco ornament is usually suppecssed inca the facade's frontal plane. Ry the 1950s, New Yark moved urward new insegranion of the bawc cube and grid patecen of Manhatcan with a stylized devorative motif.  Though this style was oot generally applied to pubbc monu- ments, other than the World's Fair. perhaps being conudered too frivolous, excellent cxamplcs of deco modernism can be found from meltown and north, on the entrance facades and rising stories of commercial skyscrapers and residential buildings alike  One of the most attractive and accessible deco facades is found on the Chanin building (Sloan and Robertsan, 1929) near Grand Central Station, where flat-partemed carved ornament, temiaixent of Louis Sullivan, rings the-building’s walls. The Chanin construction firm and other cummercial rather than architectural firms spread the devo style along Central Park West in the chain of striking entrances to high-rise aparment wer that form che western architectural backdrop of Central Park today, induding examples such as the Majestic and the San Remo Apartments. Continuing furtber north in Manhattan, one finds the unique Masters Ay ts and Muscum (Harvey Corbett, rendered by Hugh Ferriss, 1929) along Riverside Drive. This building sululy trantforms fom dark brick to light ax it tises upward in an unusual coloristic display. which is less clear today. The Masten, fusing ornament and color with farm, may be read as a transitional work. moving carly modernism from  the deca verve of applied omament inta a more restrained mod- emism $0 Come.  The epitome of art deco modernism and the crowning pinna- cle (1048 fret) of the decu deyntaper is without queition the Chrysler Building (William Van Alen, 1930), 2 fully integrated spire shining in steel, deck and dynamic as the automobiles it symbolizes fur the modern age. lis mid-cown setting, its beautiful presence on the skyline, and its urbane ineerives set che Chiysber Building forever apart from all deco structures. 1t 5 without pees, even in the city that defined the cancept of dhe devo skyacraper.  Manhattan Modern, 1930s—40s  “Manhattan Modem” is the first truly architectonic, rather chan decorative, movement in modern New York architecture, de signed exclusively by American architects. This is the indigenous American modernism of tall, spare, attenuated wtructures of pot ished granite, steel, and glass, conceived on the principle of Sullivan's treatise, “The Tall Office Building Artistically Consid- ered.”  For it as here in New York that Sullivan's ideal of dhe shyscra- per as “it is botty” os dest illustrated. Loftiness ss certainly the defining characteristic af New York, and Sullivan's aesthetic ap-  dovetailed well with New Yurk’s 1916 zoning law, which obligated tall budkdings to set back as they rose from the sirect. ‘The fortunate resulting massing of che New York skyline thus dame ty point upward in a collecuon of closely sited. skyscraping pinnacles.  ‘The finew examples af rhe formal aesthetics of Manharan Modem may be found in the Empire State Buikding (Shreve. Lamb and Harmon, 1931), as an individual pinnacle; and in Rockefeller Center (The Avnciated Architecr: Reinhard and Hofmeisuer, Corbeu. Hatrison., and McMurray: Raymond Hood, Godicy, and Fouilhoux, 1932-40), an urban agglomera- tien af buildings and space.  Just as ube Chryster building is che perfevtioa uf deco skysera- per, the Empire Seate Building is the perfoct Manhattan Modern compoxinon. trom the day it opened, che Empire Stare Building was notable for its height (1254 fect}, is function and efficiency, its feat of speedy construction, and ics stylistic simplicity and aesthetic spareness. Symbolic of the city inelf. the composition of the Empire State Building exhibits a synthesis of restraint and power that creates a lasting icons design.  The other grear exponcnr of Modernism is an ensemble of tall buildings nghrly dispersed about a midrown plaza of benchey under clipped uces. of banners and monumental deco sulprure Rockefeller Center. Created during che Depression as a public - private pedestrian urban place, Rocketeller Center proves that skyscrapers need not affront human scale in the city. Sumewhas analogous tw the meaning of Central Park, che open space of Rockefeller Center, protected space amid a series of stone skys- erapets, here provides a welcome Fifth Avenue counterpoint foe the pedestrian within the relentless city gnd_  The International Style, 1950s-70s  The Incernational Scybe in mid-century turned the great stone face of modernism to glass. The 20th century is bisected by the 
arrival of the European modernise, including Mies van der Rahe, Wahtes Gropius, and Marcel Breues. and theie Intcena- tional Stybe. The transparent shining glaw dabs of Park Avenue, in particular. are the legacy of the émigré movement of mod ernisin.  The carhest inklings of the International Style in New York, however, were American, based on European aesthetics, inetid- ing the New Schuol for Sovial Research (Joseph Urban. 1930) and the original modern home of che Museum of Modern Ar (Philip Goodwin and Edward Durell Stone, 1939).  The high point of the style in New York is certainly the Park Avenue duo of the Seagram Building (Mics van der Rohe with Phitip Johnson, 1958) and Lever Howe (Gordon Bunshaft of Skidmore, Owings, and Merrill, 19511, The steck, dark bronze, wedl, and glass dib of the Seagram rites out of ies opposition, an open cube of space, creating a dislectie of architectural ypace with object as significant as thas dynam in classical architecture. Lever House takes a more constructivist approach to space and object, with an me-blue gliss cower ming asymmennully from its base. Thus, these ewo buildings are of interest not only as perfected examplars of classical Intemational Seyle, itself, bur also for ther daring spaual musing,  Both the Seagram and the Lever tonk advantage of the mid- century changes in the set-back zoning laws thar had dictated the pinnacle torm of che cartics Manhattan modern. New zomng, pow allowed buildings s rise straight upward in exchange for creating open plaza space at street level. Though here experi- ments breaking rhe New York City grid have provided interest- ing effects of sulid- void relationships, in the case of theis neigh- har, building outside the grid was disastious for the city. As the Pan Am Building (Emery Rath and Sons, Piettn Belluschi, and Walter Gropius, 1963) illustrates, a shymsaper set atup the Beaux-Are landmark Grand Central Terminal in the middle of Park Avenue, breaking the How of che avenue, casts shadows aad cabbies a basic disregard foe the urhan fabric. At feast thes problemaricat building has scrved to promute setivus questions on the idea of urban context.  The United Narions (Wallace Hatriwn of Harnson, Abramuviwz, and Harris, with Oscar Niemeyer and Sven Market- ius, 1947—$3). sited along che East River on land donated by the Rockefeller family. by contrast, created its own urhan conrest. A powerful and symbolically signiticant skyscraper. appropriately “umternapunal” in style, the United Nations comple is an a Le Corbusier design. The open site aflords the New York International Style a viewing of the chin green glass and white stone building, very rare in the canyons of Manhantan, for the United Nations Secretariat slab (544 fret) may he scen unob- structed from the Queensboro Bridge, while crouing the East Raver, in all its shining symbolic aptimicm. Fxpecially while lit at nighe, it scems to stand as a beacon culling 4 global community tugether. Appropeinte ta ita functinn of bringing together dispar- ate nations, the United Nations twwer is alse an crsemble al highly varied farm, The inverted bow! shapes and sweeping curve: of the General Asermbly chambers point toward Lie ro- mantic variations on the modern.  Alternative Modernism in New York, 1960s--80s  ‘The endurance of modernism in Manhattan, through adaptation and altemative forms, is exemplified by variations on the atybe  in the law decades of the 20th century. Succetsful examples include the Ford Foundation Building with its glass-cnclosed atrium {Kevin Roche, John Dinkeloo and Associates, 1967), the CiCorp Center with its simple but daring slanced roofline (ugh Stubbins and Associates, 1978), and the quite reoent return to the pure Intemational Sryte ry of the cube and the sphere in the millennial Rose Center for Earth and Space, American Museum of Natural History (Polcheck and Partners, 2000).  Akcrnative modernism, or perhaps modernisms, in New York have always heen exemplified best by museums, for by nature, muscums will be daring in their artisuc choices, Certainly the public has long been enthralled by that most obvious New York landmark by the most famou American architect, Frank Loyd Wright's Guggenheim Museum (1959). A romancc, spi- ralinng, shell-Luke suulpture, the Guggenheim sits on Fifth Avenise overlooking Central Park. Its location and relation to the urban envitanment mu give us pause a. we chink of the architecture of New York. Fur although the buikking is certainly mascerly, it defies its place within the order of the city grid and thes does not speak to its environment.  By contrast, the Whitney Museum of American Art (Marcel Breuer, 1960), a hulking Brutalist, abstract compasicon over- hanging Madison Avenue, comments on its cry. ‘the conereve svulptural quality of the work. although accepting its contain- ment within the grid, srill makes itself a powerful urban wsta-  ment to its surbulent times.  New Architecture in New York, 2001 into the Pature  Times are curbulemt again today in che ciry of the new millen- nium. not from inremal urban unrest but from causes far away. New York has always heen an architectural bellwether for Amet- ica, and thus the nation watches intently as Manhattan, perpetu- ally constructing, now s ce-consruction. Major architec: tural devisaons await. as the city re-cnvisions itself, Of one thing we can be certain though: out of rubble and hope. the furure of the American city will rise again, literally, from the ashes. Leste Huma Coretta  Sev ako Art Decat Bunshaft, Gerdon (United States); Chrysler Building, New York City; Empire State Building, New York Giy; Grand Central Station, New York City; Guggenhein Maseum, New York City; international Style: Lever Howse, New York City, Lincela Center, New York City; McKim, Mead, and White (United States); Museum of Modern Art, New York City; Rockefeller Center, New York City; Seagram Beilding, New York City; Skyscraper, United Nations Head- quarters, New York City; Woolworth Building, New York City; World Trade Center, New York City  Further Reading  Huxtable, Ada Louise, The Archisnsere of New Vorb: A History and Guide, Garden Caty, New York: Anchor Books, 1904  Revoalds, Donald Martin. Manharuen Arcbiseonme, New York: Prentice Vall, 19#8: Landan: Bloomsbury. 1989  Robinsos, Corvin, and Rosemane Bletcce, Sepwraper Avyle- Are Devo. New York. Orford and New tak Ontord Uaiversty Pres, 1975  Stem, Robert AM. Thomas Melhns. and Qavid Fshman, New! York 1960. Architecture and (Urbanism berwten the Second Word War and the Bicenvennial, New York: Munaudlli Press, 1995  White, Normal, and Elho« Willemky (editor), ALA Gusde wm New York City, New York: Amencan hustituce of Architects, 1967; 4th eduion, New York: Random House, and Lorulon: Hi Marketing, 2000  NEW YORK WORLD'S FAIR (1939)  The New York World's Fair of 1939~40 was, ra many commen: taton, the last rruc world exposicion in a bong line strerching back te the Crystal Palace Exhibition of 1851, he fair arrived ata critical historical juncture at the end of the Great Depression and on the eve of World War If, Alchough the architecture and planning of the fair were evoted in the uruggles of the 193s between Beaux Arty clasiciim and modemiam, behind the streamlined facades the theme and cxbibits presaged the von sumer culeure of the 1950s, Under che guiding eheme of “Build- ing the World of Tomorrow.” exhibits insude the modem classi- cal buildings heralded an American society with a renewed faith in the private sector and the power of consumprion, supporied ‘by government subsidies of automobilicy, domesticity. and sub- urbanization.  he New York hair, as originally conceived, was ostensibly a 50th-anniversary celebration of George Washington's inau- guration and the ratification of the Constitution, but it quickly adopred other agendas. The idea of a fair in New York began in 1934 as the brainchild of an obscure civil engineer named Joseph F. Shadgen of Queens, New York. Through a distant relauve of Franklin Roosewlt, Shadgen brought the idea to George McAneny. president of Tithe Guarantee and ‘Init and the Regional Man Asoxistion. who joined forces with Perey Straus, president of RH. Macy's, to lorm a commutece under the auspices of the Regional Plan Assocation in 1935. From the onset, progressive planning and consumensm were wed ip the planning of the fair. McAneny’s committee would become the World's Fair Corporauon. adding New Yor Curv’s “official greeter.” Grover A. Whalen, a5 president in 1936.  Although there is same evidence af an initial struggle. Robert Moses, the infamous crar of city planning in New York City. showed little ineerest in controfling the management oF content of the fair. However, he fought hard and cffectively to lncate the fair on ube site of the ald Corona Ash Dump in Queens Author F, Scott Firgerald had called the ste “4 valicy of ashes a fantastic farm where ashes grow bike wheat into ridges and hills and grotesque gardens,” but Moses saw semething csc. In an interview in 1936, Moses crowed that long after the 1959 Gir was gone. he would have a cleared, leveled. and Landscaped size for the largest urban park in his domain. a Iinchpin in hes system of parkways leading from the city to the srure suburts of Long sland.  The evolution of the fait's theme. “Building the City of To- morrow.” reflects the transformation of progressive sdeas about planning and society during the 1930; from a preoccupation with science and production ce a celebration of consumption and abundance. Early in $936, the Theme Committee of the  Board of Design. consisting of indudinal designer Waker Dor- win ‘Teague and former president of the American Ineitute of Architec: Robert Kaho, scteed on the theme of “Building che World of Tomorrow,” qpecifically, “a happier way of American living through the Interdependence uf Man and he Building ofa Ketter Wark! of Tomorrow with the Tools of Today.” Under presure from the fait's epanecrs and rectal sponsors, the mote idcalstic rhetoric of the therne became in reality a focus on future progsms Utuugh images of abundance, As the Planned buddings filled with commercial exhibstors, space re- served foe the beme-driven “focal exhibies” designed by the Baard of Design quickly gave way te exhibition space for re- nailers.  ‘The physical arrangement of the fair drew sharp criticism from planners and pommentators expecting a modemiv plan in the manner of Le Corbusier or Ludwig Mics van der Rohe, Where Chicagn’s Century of Progress Fapexitian (1933) had permitted pavilions to wand alone in a moderniss free plan, the New York Fair plan. designed by consultant William Orr Lud- low and architectural delincator Hugh Ferriss, followed a rigid dasucal heme char many saw asa tefutanon of the faic's fururiat theme. Ar its heart, just olf Muses's Grand Central Parkway, tose the “Theme Center’: Wallace K. Harrison and J. André Foullhour’s Trvlon and Penspbere. Radiating eastward from the Theme Center, broad avenucs divided the fair into fuur pie- shaped shces. The main axis ted east from the Tryton abong the Constitudon Mall, past statues by laud Manship. through a statuc of George Washington to the Lagoon of Navons (home for the foreign pavihans). rerminaring ar the Court of Peace and the United States Pavilion. ‘Tu the northeast, the Avenue of Pattioas kd to the Community Interests Zone. containing a peotatypical Town of Tomornnw, The Avenuc af Pioneers lod southeast to the Food Zune and Court of Sues. Nurth of the Theme Center sae Communications. To che immediate south was Production and Distribution. and beyond them the Amuse- ment Zone sprawled along the shure of Founuain Lake. Actus the Grand Central paukway to the wes lay the Transporation Zone, including the popular Ford and GM Pavilions,  The architecture of ube fair has been variously described as “Medem Clasacusm.” a synthesis toftcn incom phete and less than successful) of modemist forms and Beaux-Ans logic that had emenged in the 1930s; Depression Moderne; or Sereamline Mod- em. The common theme is the identification of a style of styles thar sought to stand apart fram both classicism and Furopean modemism. Uhe dominance of the various “moderne” styles at the expense of what many considered @ more honest “modern jem” was, in part. the result of the preponderance of industrial designers, such ax Teague, Raymand Loewy. Henry Dreyfus, and Gilbert Rhode, on the Board af Design. The consensus of contemporary critha was thar the Fair Corporation's architechuire represented a “confused” and “pompous” modernism, while they singled out the works of 4 few, such as Willan Lesxcare and George Howe. as well as Harrison and Fouilhoux, fur praise.  Harrison and Fouithous’s [rive and Peasphete expressed an abstract modernism that met with critical approval, even as many tound rhe buildings’ meaning obscure. The Persphere, a 180-toor-diameter sphere, lay ar the focus of the fairs radiating avenues, attached co the 610-foor-high pyramidal Triton by a G5. foot spiral bridge, or Hielicline. The Trylon and Penisphere were composed of a steel structure covered in gypsum board 
New York World's Fass, Court of Peace, Federal Building, Italian tuikding, New York World's Fair and League of Nationa © Underwood & Underwoud/CORAIS  painted white, producing an effect of pure abstraction. Although the architects never idennfied thei specific insparations, the most compelling precedents come from the Romanuc Classical work of enlighteninent architects Claude Nicholas Ledoux and Exicnne-Louis Baulee. specifically Boulee’s famous unbuil tand unbuildable) project fir a Cenotaph for Newton (1784).  Emiering the Theme Center's Perisphere, audiences tooked down from peripheral galleria ono Heary Dreyfus's “Demo orxity.” an courmous diorama of a city circa 2039. Centerton, the central city for 250,000 white-collar workers, was sur rounded by satellite suburbs foe 1.5 million residenes. “Pleasane- villes” were dormitory suburbs, und *Millvilles” were light indus- trial developments. Visitors saw a five-and-a-half-minute show portraying a 24-hour day with light and sound cflects—a 1930s virtual reality show.  The Fair Corporation's buildings provided focal exhibits for cach zone. To provide srytistic cnherence, the Fair-builr build- ings foflowed the Design Committee's cxact aexthetic specifica- tions. Long expanses of windowless wall, colonnades, abstract domes, and exedra characterized these structures. A complex system of color cading determined the hue of each building, from bright white at the Theme Center through pale hues to darker hues a1 the “Rainbow Avenue” on the periphery. The  Larger Fair-buh paviliuos would roanidese funcuon through form. The Marine Transpiration Building is perhaps the most famous of che Fair-builr buildings in the mode of such “speaking architecture.” Framing the entrance were ewo cnormous ships’ prow,  If consistency was the byword of the Fait Corporation's buildings, then eclecticism characterized the houses af the Town of Tanwerow. Although she Fair Corporation designed the sub- urban cul-de-sac around which they were arranged, the houses af the Town of Tomorrow were cach designed by individual architects chosen by thar corpotate sponsors. Promoting inno- vatsons in comlort and convenicace, the homes themselves were souble for their traditionalim and historical familarity indud- ing the Home Inurance Company's “Fire-Safe House,” and the Johns-Manwille “Triple insulated House.” Two exceptions deserve mention: the Douglas Fir Plywood Association's “House af Plywood,” designed by A. Lawrence Kocher, celebrated the properties of plywood in a vaguely modernist scheme shat in- cluded strip windows and an asymmetrical plan and a free facade stripped of historical allusion, The “Pittsburgh House of Glass,” designed by Landefeld and Hatch, comes closest to the Interna- tional Style domestic paradigm, with a free plan, great expanses of glass, and a free-flowing connection between inside and ous-  tide that draws heavily on European examples and ees Philip Johnson's Glass House (1949). i. me  Perhaps the most intriguing and significant architecture ox- curred around! the Lagoon of Nauons. Among the internanenal luminaries participating were Michele Bison Vice of ftaly; Bors JoGn of che Soviet Union; Belgians Victor Bourgeois, Eco Sty. then, and Henry van der Velde: Sven Markelnus of Sweden: Ohcar Niemeyer of Brazil; and famed Kinny Alvar Aalte and Aino Marsio-Aalto. Fifty-cight forcign nations participated in the fair, 21 building their own pavilions around the Hall of Nations, which framed the Lagoon. The [ralian and Soviet Pavibets were among the mow memorable for ther hyperbol. modern cLass- ciom, Each focused on a monumental elevated wtatuc— Italy's 0a a replica af the seated female “Roma” (rom the Capituline Hill and the Soviets’ on 4 Russian youth hulding alott a five- pointed star. Both pavilions uscd stripped classical colonmades and blocky massing to provide a base for these figural symbols of people and narion. Lewss Mumtund encapsulated the common cesponse to Buson-Vice’s monumental pile with typical mor- dancy, writing that “the Italian Building is funny almost to the point of pathos.”  lofan and Alabean’s Soviet Pavilion fared a bit better, Like it oF aca, critics agreed that ir was among the most-talhed about buildings at the fair. A stainieus-steel Socialist Realise youth sinod atop a marble-and-purphyry pylon excceded in height unly by the Trylon itself, The pavilion wrapped around the base wn 4 horeshoc, housing exhibition halls celebrating the industrial ad- vances and socal hurmony in the Soviet Limon. Although the use of monumental sinpped modern chasicism in buch the fal jan and the Savict Pavilion seems to support the long-standing association of the style with totalitarianism, it must be noted that Howard Cheney's United States Pavilion rivaled the Italian and Sovict Pavilions in its use of stripped classical mors and surpassed both in scale.  More modest works in the International Style would cactcise greater influence among later architcets. Oscar Niemeyer and Licio Costa's Brazil Pavilion heralded the Lire modernism and Brutalivn of Le Corbusier and other in ip use of concrete brie sobeil and ramps, Alvat Aalto and Aino Mamio-Aalto’s Finnish exhibit has achieved iconic status in the academy as the paradigen fox regionalist modernism, The Swedish Pavilion, by Sven Mar- kedius, was a collection af oper wooden canupics supported by liche columns, tapered at wop and bottom, all surrounding a  Alchough che international pavilions hold special appeal for histosians. ic was the commercial pavilions that drove the fair and attracted popular accention. Advertising and architecture collided in buildings designed to sell products, Skidmore and Owings produced a radio tube—shaped building for RCA and a Wonder Bread wrapper facade for Continental Baking. Perhaps the most un-self-conscinus celebration of design in the service of consumption was Ely Jauques Kahn and Waleer Dorwin Teague’s National Cash Register building, 4 nondescript shed with a hypertrophic cash reguter sitting on its wp. Beyond cele- braring the almighty dollar, the numbers on the register tallied the daily attendance.  Pride of place, just across Robert Moses’s Grand Central Parkway from the Theme Center, was reserved for the automo- bile pavilions. Designed by industrial madernist Albert Kahn, the GM and Ford Pavilions would hecome ewo of the most  popular attraouns, Phe Ford building included a onc-and-a- half-mile “Road of Tomorrow,” a miniature version of a modern highway (right nexe to che real ching, bunle by master builder Moser). including a full-size replica of a doverbeal camp. where visivors could tew-drve new Fords, Perhaps even more signili- cant than the more passive entertaniments, the Ford exhibit put viewers literally in the driver's scat tuwatd the sutamiotive future.  However, the most popular exhibit win GM's “Highvays and Hota” Pavibon, dominared by Norman Hel Geddes's “Futurama.” Entering the architect Albert Kahn's pavilion on two serpentine “oo-ramps” and passing through a dramatic rent in the curving facade. mos visitors would go straight to Geddes’s $6.5 million, %1,000-square-toot_ model of the Ametican land- scape in 1960, The exhibis drew an csrimated 25 million viewers aver two years, with up to 28.000 people per day brung up wo sec it As an industrial deagner, Geddes was pot bound by the convenbuns of city plannen, architects, or policymakers and thus could wntheaize a popular vision of the future that bor- rowed oppantuniatcally from a variety af fields.  Not surpraingly, the aucomobile heh pride of place in Ged- des's vision of che future. Where 1920s planners might have placed modest parkways, railroads, of even canals, the “City of 1960" ran eight-lane motorways, a ctoss-continental system of highways ecrving as the means for radical decentralization, Al- though mast af the population lived in che countryside, large cities with 1500:foot-high skyscrapers housed the corporate. white-collar labor force and scavie acuvities. Most significant. an dse end of the ride. vniters found uhetselves ounide in a full-size “intersection uf tomorrow,” based on Geddes’s model and filled with (GM cars. [he roads and stores of the aty of (960 would he full of 1939 GiM praducts. The fair would be dismanted in 1940, bur the vision of automobiliry, consamp- tion, and domesticity sold by “the world of tomorrow” would be a Lasting legacy.  Asgpiew Merve  See ute Century of Progress Exposition, Chicago (1933) Costa, Licio (Brazil); Exhibition Building: Ferriss, Hugh (Uniecd Seascs}; Kaho, Albert (United States}; New York (New York), United States: Niemeyer, Oscar (Brazil)  Further Reading  Blotter, Rosemane Haag, ot al, Rooembering the Farure: The New Fork World's Farr from 1939 10 194. New York: Rizzoli, 1989  Cunker, Joseph 2, et al., Dawn of a New Day: The New York World's Barr, 193940, bhushing, New York: Quecns Muscum, and New York: New York Unreensicy Press, 1980  Federal Weatcss' Project, New York Cary Guide. A Comprehensive Gasde 10 the Five Boroughs of the Merropoin: Manhattan, Brooklyn. the Bronx, Queens, and Rechwend. Neve York: Random House. and London: Constable, 1959  Rydell, Robert W.. Wordd of Fairs: The Contnry-of Progress Expoutsems, Chicago: Uneversity of Chicago Prev, 1993  Rydell, Robert W.. John E. kindling, and Kimberly 1. Pelle, Kasr Amenca: Workd's Fairs in the United Stare, Washingson, D.C, Smithsoatan Iasnrucion Press, 2000  Steen, Robert A.M.. Geegan Gilmarun, and Thomas Mellins. New York 1940. Architesuce and Urbanism betecen the Twa World Wan, New York: Rrzaoli, 1917  
NEW ZEALAND  New Zealand architecture of the 2h century has retleceed the country’s strong cultural Ges with Eurape and the United States on the one hand and a romantic wish for navonal dennty on the other Influences from international metmpolitan centers were ukeo up in cum as they emerged and were disseminated through architectural journals and books. New Zealand archi- tects, always acutely aware of the country’s geographic wolarion and small scale, also traveled widely and brought direct experi: ence of international precedenes tv bear on their own work at home. The concern for a kcal architecture became strong at midkentury as 3 reaction to the centennial in 1940 of the esuab- lishment of British cule and the relative isulation cxperiemed dunng the war years. This localuin was played our moss self- consciously in small, cimber houses, Their designs reflected both the adoprian of modcrnést principles and a wish to establish identity through links to a putative local prancer cradinon trom the carly days of European serrlemenr, Architecture in New ‘Zealand hax consequently focused on the small house as its most imponant achievement, to the neglect of the arhan realm.  In the first part of the century, architecture in New Zealand was uvettly derived (rum American and British models. The hear work of William Gray Young, one af the most succeuful architects of the prewar yean, reflects his interest in English Georgian architecture, as in the Wellesley Chub (1925} in Wel- ington. However, hia munt notable public work, the Wellingzan Railway Scauun (1937), 3s influcaved by American prevodenus, The work of the distinguished practice (summer & Ford also fas a mia of Amerikan and British themes, Wilban Gummer spent periods in che offices of both Edwin [ utyens and Danict Bumbam before recurning tw practice in New Zealand in 1913. Principal works are die Auckland Railway Station (1930), the Dominion Muscum (1936) in Wellington, and the Scare Insur- ance building (1941) in Wellington.  After World War I, suburbs in che tawns expanded quickly Popular housing since the 1880s had followed American prece- dens; the Californian bungalow siyle became dominant in the 1920s in part ander the influence of [allywood movies, How- ever. the popularity of this type can be attributed not only to the ongoing New Zealand enthusiasm for American popular culture bur alo cs the flexibility of domestic organization it entailed, Economic depression the following doude caused & massive downturn in building acuvity, alchough after the major earthquake of 1931, the tawns of Napicr and Hastings were rebuilt in a modest but consistent An Devo style. The eanh- quake also led ta an ongoing interest in improving the seismic performance of building stock in the country.  In the years following 1937, the government built tens of thousands of conservatively designed “state houses.” However, this housing program also included experiments with high tise dabs—natably Dixon Street Flats (1942) in Wellingron—de- signed in a much more contemporary style under the guidance of Gorden Wilson. Modern explorations imeeacd after the ar. tival of several Cenaral European refugee architeves in the late 1930s. More notable was Fmst Plichke, who had worked for Ely Kahn in New York in the late $92¢h and designed important buildings at the Vienna Werkbumdsiedlung (1930-52) and for the Government Employment Office (1930-31) at Leising, Vi- enna. Before returning to Vienna in 1963, Phschke undertook  town-planning work for the New Zealand government and de- sagned private houses, such as the Surch house (1956) and, with Cedric Firth, the Masscy House office block (1957), both in Wellington.  In 1947, Plchke published design and Living, one of a num- ber of postwar initiatives to promote moder architecture in Now Zealand, Orhers included the foundation in 1946 of the Architectural Centre in Wellington and the Architectural Group in Auckland. ‘The Architectural Centre evolved inte a still-cxtant lobby organization, and in che 1950s the Architectural Group developed a domestic architecture based on local timber building construcoon coupled with modernist economy of plan and structure. Im experiment. with the small, single-family house were the most rigorous uf the penod and are now the most locally revered. Ihe Group's 1946 manifesta, On the Necessity for Architecture, called for an architecture specific to New Zealand,  By 1960, a number of architects were employing 3 kanguage of concrete-block walls Ich unrendered. concrete frames, and tuuls with complex timber structures. An carfy achievement in this ideo is the Funina Chapel (1960) in Karori by John Scott, also influenced by Maoei building traditions. However, the most successful devotces of this Brutalist mode, the Christchurch u- chiteces Peter Beaven and Warren & Mahoney, were still looking to Scandinavia and to England, As well as restrained domestic work, these architects were responsible for a number of innova- tuve instituwonal buddings: the Lytution Road Tunnel Author: ity Building (1965) by Beaven and Chriswhurch College (1966) and Christchurch Town Hall (1972). both by Warren & Ma- honcy.  During the 1960s and 1970s, there was cxpansion in office and induerrial biniding, but quality was uncven. In the 1960., in teaction ta the back of character in emenging urban and suburban environments, Wellingron architects fan Athficld and Roger Walker began w make intricately scaled buildings thar extended the vernacular references of earlier New Zealand domestic work but no longer framed them in modernist terms. The village-like qualities of theu work offered a challenge to the social isolarion of the dormitory suburb and che functional separations of mod- ern teen planning. Achitld has cootinued to develop macctial and social complexity in the work of his incresingly prominent practice (Wellington Public Library, 1992, and Palmerscon Narth Public Tibracy, 1997),  Economic reform from the mil-1980s has generated wealth foe an entreprencurial Auckland business class. [ts members have sommissioned adventurous aid often indulgent houses from as- chitews such ts Marshall Cook, David Mitchell, Pete Bossley, Pip Cheshire, and Noel ane, They have worked under a range of international influences: Cook seems to have been heavily influenced by Charles Moore, for example, whereas Cheshire's mon accomplished building to date, the Congreve house (1994), apparently reflects a careful study of Mario Botta and other Tixino architects, In reaponse to this eclecticism, the firm of Architectus Bowes Clifford Thompson has setrieved the consis. tent structural and constructional rigor of the immediate postwar yean (Mathematics and Statistics and Computer Science Build- ing, Univenity of Cancerbury, Christchurch, 1998), and Rewi ‘Thompson bas developed an approach hased in material ditect- ness and aspects of Maori culture.  Paur WALKER  Further Reading  Clark Justine. and Paul Walker, Looking for the Lecal: Archte tury and the New Zealand Modem, Wellingron: Victona Univeewry Press, 2000  Muchell, Dad. and Gilkan Chaplin, The Edgganr Shed New Zealand Arcintecture Since 1945, Auckland: Ondord Unrveriey Press. 1984  Shaw. Peter, Maw Zenkind Architeture frow Polneriae Regroning nll 1990, Auckland: Hodder & Stoughton, 1991  Toumath, William, Bai in New Zeademal the Howes We Live fn, Auckland Harpert.ollins 1996  NIEMEYER, OSCAR 1907- Architect, Brazil  Owwas Ribeiro de Almeida de Niemeyet Soares, (b. Rio de [a- neiro, 1907 -) is Brazil's mow celebrated architcet, known inter atianally for his designs and weitings. His lcfuist politics support an acchitetural philosophy with a strung moral agenda dedi- cated to social change. Many of Niemeyer’s commusuons have been for progressive clients secking to use architecture as a trans: formative medium,  fe . ‘ we os Cultural Comer, Le Havre, France (1482) Photo © Mary Ann Sullivan  Nicmeyce studied at the Escola Nacional das Betas-Artes in Rio de Jancito with atchetcies, Lixio Cesta and Gregor War- chavchuk, who antruduced him te works by European modern: ots, Conta encouraged Nicmeyer tv sock 4 personal capresdon rvuted in his own national iradiions, tempering mouera tech. nology and theury with a respect tor Brazil's complex culture and landscape. Asa draftsman in Costa's office, Niemeyer partic- apated on team headed by Costa that designed the headquarters of the Ministry of Fducagon and Publix Health in Rio (1936— 43), Le Corbusier's initial parncipation as a consultant greatly affected Niemeyer. who, mn developing Le Corbusier's project, significantly shaped and executed scheme. By advocating rein- forced concrete for the building, Le Corbusier furehes influenced Niemeyer and other Brazdian designen.  Necmcyer’s kcy role in the Ministry design son led to other noteworthy commissions, His Obra do Rergo (1937), a philan- thropic daycare and maternity center in Rie displayed his adapts von of Le Corbutian forms to local climatic conditions. "This Compusition anticipated his design with Lixio Costa for the Brazitian Pavilion at the 1939 New York Workl’s baie. The central ramp curved dramuativally Unrough a cectangular lagade screened by brises-solcil and supported on pilotis. In respuese, stitics proclaunsed Costa and Nacincyer formeivers of a new Bra- zihan modermam.  
‘The sensuous asymmetry of the Brazdian pavilion fully ar Pampulha. a suburban reset complex (1942-43) near Belo Horrzonte. Nierneyer’s lakesade Casino linked 2 rectangular gambling hall on pilotis to an ovoid nightclub pavilion, At che Casa do Baile, a crescent shaped restaurant encircled an open dance space connected to a circular seage via a sinuoan pergola. ‘This commiuion introduced Niemeyer to hix most important client, President Juucelina Kubitschek, then. mayor of Belo Ho- Fizonte and, subsequently, founder of Brasilia.  While such innovative spaces for social ritual addrewed the urban clite of Belo Horizonte, they prefigured more soul unto save works while compelling Naemeyer to think wn terms of com- prehensive plannang. The Larter proved essential to Niemeyet’s Partripation on the international team designing che Unused Nauons Headquarters (New York, 1947). Evolving from a hy- brid af schemes by Le Corbusier and Niemeyer, the Headquas- ters design recalls the Ministry of Educagon while anncipanag, Niemeyer's work of che 195s and 1960s.  In helping Kubitschek realize his dream of a modern central- ized capital, Niemeyer directed a vast, politically senative project. Niemeyer's designs complemented Lucia Casea's Pilot Plan (1956). Resernbling an airplane, the plan disposes key gov- emment agencies along a monumental eaxt-west ati wath com: mercial and residential functions relegated to north-south “wings.” Niemevet’s palatial miniscry buildings, faced with  arcades of tapered pilotis. frame Costa’s monumental axis At as head, anchoring the Plaza of the Three Powers, the Na cunal Congresy comples suikingly articulates ius functions Meeting chambers for the Senate and Deputies rise fram 4 bong low platform as a shallow dome and a low ewelling bowl, with twin offline towen behind. While batowing social and politcal symbolicm upan such monurnental plastic cbupes, Niemeyer cre- atcs the effect of sculprure on a Cartesian plane, one paraticled by the preseme of city itelf un Brazil's Planalto. Critica subsequently artacked Brasilia’s inhumune scale, noting its elitist zoning and ciung and citing the fadure of Neemeyer's abseract forms as symbuls.  Despite such criticesm, Niemeyer has artived at a distinctive individual style. In the biomorphic shapes of his most original designs the architect reveals his engagement with the beauty of Brazil's landscape and che human form, he undularing para- bolic vaults of the church of Sdo Francisco de Assis (Pampulha, 1943) clearly synthesize Le Corbusian and Bamque colonial forms. Yer, in manure works such as his Meteopolitan Cathedral for Brasilia (1958-60) Niemeyer achieves a more delicate per- sonal statement. From a distance, skeletal concrete nhs serve as a metaphor for a crown of thorns, Approached via a subterranean ramp through a low entrance. the apace of the sanctuary opens dramatically overhead, with light filtering through bluc. green and frosted white glans, creating a nearly submarine effect, and evoking a state of reverence.  lnaisting “architeciure is not important, tife ix imporrant.” Nicmeycr reiccrates his commitment to socially reaponsible de sgn through works celebrating poletical or cultural allegiances, such ax the Communist Party Headquarters (aris, 1967~ 80) and the Memorial da America Latina (S30 Paolo, 1989}, Ex- presed through architecture. Nicmeyct’s aims are ultimately hu- manistic, grounded in a respect for nature but retying on tech- nology to achieve them.  Oscar Niemeyer has wotten extensively on his works and ideas in monographs and, since 1955, in his journal, Médule.  Niemeyer's work has been covered extensively in archieecrural journals and books in multiple languages. His archive, the Fun- dagdo Oscar Niemeyer, in Rio de Janeiro. contains important corre: . photographs and drawings documenung his  work  See alo Ricardo Burle-Marx, Roberin (Brasil); (CLAM, 1927-); Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-Edosard) (France); Costa, Lacie (Brazil)  Selected Works  Ohta do Berga, Rio de farwira, 1937 Brarilian Pavilion, New York World's Fair (with Luce Costa), 1939 Pamputha buildings, Beko Horinmte, Brazil, 1944  Charu of St France of Aun, Pamputha 1943  Merropoliran Cathedral. Brasilia, 1960  Communsst Parry (PCT) Headquartens. Paris, 1980  Cukural Centre, Le Havee, France, 1982  Samba Stadium. Rio de Janciro, 1984  Memonal da Amenca Latina, Séa Paolo, 1989  Muscu de Are Contemparines, Nitersi, Bracil, 196  Selected Publications  Comet w faz arquitetura, Pewtopolss: Voacs. 986  Mex sonia ¢ ex, Rio de Janeiro: Editoris Revan, 1992  Minha experiencia co Brustlut. Rao de Janerro: Vitoria. 1961  Meseu de Arte Contemporanca de Narraz, Pao de Janewe: Edvorts Revan. 1997  Nineeper. Paris: Alphabet, 1975, 1977  Quase memortas: veagens, tenipes de enrustasme ¢ revelte— 1963-19665, uo de Janero, Cavileagao Beasibeira. [968  Textes ex desans pour Brasiie, Pans: Eduions Forces Vives, 1965  Further Reading  Bruand. Yves, Anputtenee Coxtempordaea ne Hrasl, analed from the French by Ana M. Gohdbergre, Séo Paolo, Brasil: Edinoris Petspectiva. 1981  Bullrich, Francece, New Deveions im Laan American Archsteerure, New York: Reinbold. 1969  Lvenwon, Newma, fiw Mracchan capttats; archisecrere and urbantom am Rio de Janeire and Brasilia. New \taven: Yale University Press, 1974.  Gaahein, Phitp, and GE, Kidder Simeh, Seated duslds; archetertare were tel old, 165!-19482, New Yoth: [he Museum of Modern Art, 143  Goutwun, Philp, Oscar Niemeyer, and Juxclino Kubitecbek. Pampatha, Riv ide fncitu, Beasil: Impeema Nacional, 1944.  Hares, Ecabeth Davis, "Le Carbuner and the Headquarters of the Brankin Munn of Fdinaon aint Heath, 19.6-1945," Ph.D, diss, Unisenity uf Chicago, 1986  Hyart Foundanon, fhe Prieaker Archticcture Prise 1988: presseted te Gordow Runshafi and Oncar Nrevaryer, Lon Angeles The Foundanon, 198%  Kannaky, Julio Rabereo, Anedius cm tres empar a arguttetunn de Oscar Niemeyer na capital. Rio de janeiro: Edimes Revan, 1991  Mindlin, Henraque, Meudern Archiecture sn Brazil, New York Rembold, 1956  Papadahi. Sumo, The wert of Oscar Niemeyer, New York; Reinhold, 1950,  Papadaki. Stam, Oncar Mirmeyer works én progres, New York: Reinhold, 1956  Santos, Cecilia Rodngues dos (et al), Le Corbesier ¢ 9 Brasil, Sin Paolo: ‘Vrawla, Projecto Editoria, 1987  Spade. Rupert. and Yukio Fircagawa, Orcar Niemeyer. Masser of adem archaccturt, London: Thames and Hudson, 1971  Undereood, David, Onar Niemeyer and she Aniusccnire af Rracal, New York. Rizsol, 1994  Underwood, David, Onar Madernism, New Yok:  Published Interviews  Daatlege pre-secratice com Clandio M. Valenesnetti, Sao Paolo, Inantwto Ling Bo EP.M. Bardi, 1998  Niemeyer par lus-reeme: Varchueste de Bonita parie a Ldowerd Hatlby, Pasa: Batbrd, 1993  Niemeyer, Oncar, and Henri Ruillasd, Let csurhes ati temp: memesres, Par: imand, 1990  Niemeyet, Oncar, Josep Maria Butcy, and Dalmay Miquel, Ower Niomeer, Batcdona: Fundicn Cana Barcelona. Genetaluat de Catalunya, Deparment de Poltica Terttanal i Obes Publiquer. Collegy d’Anjutetes de Catahinya, 1990  Viemeyrr and Fracsluatn Free: Form vege Beasilles, Inc.. 1994  NITZCHKE, OSCAR 1900-1991  Architect, France  Although he built Inttbe and seldom appears in standard histones of modern architecture, Oscar Nitechke war much admired among avant-garde archicects, During 50 yean in practice in France and the United Seares, Nitschke produced consistently innovative designs that remain surprisingly fresh Ax an influen- tial professor of design at Yale University School uf Architecture (1938~48), he invited 4 series of progressive European artists and architects for visiung lectures and studios and helped establish a graduate program in usban planning, Nitechhe owed his ap- poinement to Wallace K. Hastison. whom he met in Paris. Di- viding his time berween New Ifaven, Conneancur, and New York, Nitzchke alo worked for Harrison and Abramovitz (1938 - 54), where he contributed co some ot the firm's most inventive buildings.  Although Nitzchke’s training combined apprenticeship and formal academic study. his sensibilities were distinctly modem. Unhappy with the conservatism of the Feoles des Beaux Aris in Geneva, Swirrerland (1917-20). and in Paris (L925 ~27), he sought prngrenive architects as mentors. Abandoning the staid Atéher Laloux-Lemarequiet (1920), Niachke and other sudents asked Le Corbusier to create an alternative atélier. He referred them instead to Auguste Perret, who founded the Auber du Palais de Bois. Verret taht Nicahihe (1923.27) to articulate structural form with a clarity chat would rypify his later work. By worlung for Le Corbusier and the Perret brothers, Nuzchke further refined his abiliries. Friendships with avant-garde artists (Pablo Picasso, Femand Léger, Amedée Ovenfant, Alexander Calder, and Man Ray] opened a world of experimental ap- proaches to design ina wide range of media trom which Niachke continucusty drew inspiratron.  Early projects suggest the direction of Nitschke s Later wark in their articulation of form and materials and in their marked legibility of functions. His interest in pecfabricated housing ong, inated in the Maisons Métalliques (1929), 4 collaboration wath formes Perret seudents, Adrien Brelet and André Le Donne, for a competition sponsored by the Forges de Suasbourg, Perrct’s influence emerged clearly in the frank expression of the external corrugated copper and sted cladding, which made no attempt to imitate traditional materials, as earlier prefabricated metal buildings had, Their first-place design was displayed m a proto:  wpe that drew considerable interest, but only 520 houses were constructed. Natechke deew from thus project in subsequent re- search lor prefabricated housing for Harrisoa and Nelson Rocke- feller's LLBLE.C_ Corporauon in the 1940s and 19505. in his de- taiting of the cellular slaminum skin of the Akoa Building (Has- tison and Abramovit7, Pirtsburgh, 1949-53). Nirzchke’s prior experiments elided perfectly with Alcoa's demands thar its main product he conspicuninty deployed in its new headquarters.  Niachke's opennew to technology and willingness 10 draw from vernacular sources cmerged in hiv application of electrical signs on his buildings. His Pavilion de li Musique (1922) study for the International Exhibiuon of Decorative Arts, Pans (1925), assumed the form of an ovenized gramaphone with inscripsons on the main block. Evolving from the Enlightenment tradition of architecture parlance. the Pavilion anticipated by several decades the bold expressiveness of pop art. ‘The pronounced legibility of this work prefigured the Maison de la Iubbicieé (1934-36), his hest-knawn project Commissioned by an advertising executive for a narrow site on the Champs-Elysées, the Maison hosted a variety of functions inchuding offices, café, newarcel cinema, inte. thor courtyard, and huury apartments. The building intuded 12 levels, with Girculation relegated tw a peripheral volume separated by a curving wall of glins block. Here, the sophisticated disposi- don of functions and innovative usc of materials ably synchesized Te Corbusier's and Pereer’s tormal wacabularics,  Yer Nirzchke's trearment of the facade, asa giant metallic frame supporring a panoply of changing clectne ugns and cinemaric Projections, offered freth wilurions m a novel problem. Periodic installations of colored neon exploited the larest developments in commercial outdoor lighting white recalling such cartier Con- structisist projects as the Vesniso's 1924 Pravda tower. It also an- ticipated che megastrun tural framework of the Pompadou Conver (Thane and Rogers, 1977). The promitene signage in this project drew praise fruns Post modcenust architects and critics who redis voveted Nitzchke’s carly work tn the 1970s. Because the dicac mysteriously disappeared, the project, like many of Nitzchke's most beithane schemes, remained unexecured.  In Pans, collahoranng with the American architect Paul Nel- son, Nierchke prepared a diverse series of designs, Their 1937 Palais de la Découverte twith Paul Jourdain) offered a monu- mental complex for the exploration of the sciences for the Jardin des Plantes. Combining such functions as planetarium, audito- fia, and flexible spaces for exhibins grouped by disipline, the Malas assumed a senes of concentric fortna on two level, radist- ing out from a centeal conical great hall, Cris praised che Mexibibry in the Qour plans, but cuastruction was peevented by World War IL Nitzchike realized Further innovations in eabibs- Gon design un che African Habitat at the Bronx Zoo (New York, Hastison and Abramovitz, 1939), where he provided a senes of dear tubes from which visitors could observe animals freely coaming in their native habitat.  After 1954, Nuseclike worked fur a series of other New York firm, occasionally serving asa design critic at Cahimbia Univer- sity, and caccuting small jobs like che Addo-X busitiess machines daplay coom (1956-57, with Hans Lindblom) and the Martha Jackson Gallery (1957-58). Despne becoming deal in 1951, Niachke continued tu devclop tinagmative projects for competi- tions such as San Salvador Cathedral (1953-54), with soaring concrete shell vaults. In 1970. he retired to Paris, preparing  
drawings for exhibitions of his work, and lived with his family undl his death in 1991, Tins Phares  See ato Hasrison, Wallace K., and Max Abramovits (United States): Internacional Exhibition of Decorative Aru, Parts (1925): Perret, Auguate (France); Pompidou Center, Paris  Biography  Bom in 1900. Altoona, Germany, died in 1991. Baris, France,  Further Reading  Calners dArt recorded some of Nigchhe’s moat significant catty  proyects, ncluding the Manon dela Pubbcite. Nicichke's former col  league. George Duilley, af the Harrison and Abramuvits office. an his son, Gus Dudley. helped organize a retrospective exhibstion of  Nitachke's work at the Cooper Union in 1985. The catalogue of this  exhibinon constitutes the mos comprehensive scholarly warce on the  architect. Edited by Gus Dudley. 1c inchides essays bv Joseph Abram,  Teabelle Gournay, Keuneth Frampion, jubn Hedjsk, and Gonrge  Dudicy.  beans, Joseph. “Oxcar Nitachké. notse contemporain (obituary).  b Anhitecure dAujourd hie (Apol 191)  “Addo X showeouen despned by H. Loadblom and (Nien bibe,” dnterters VAT (Nowember 1957)  “Cathedsal in acel aad concrete fine San Salvador: O Natzchhe, architeut,” faterions, 117 (Devemnbsre 1957)  Dudley, Gus (editor), Guar Nitachhe; Arcbriect. New York: lewin S Chanin School of Aechitectute of the Cenper Unions 1988  Morey, Colette. “Design Genius: Colerte Morey de Morand remembers Oscar Nucechke.” Buslatng Design, WO? (March 1991)  “Museum of Scence deagned for Amabiliry and extennibility, Nelson, ©. Neachke and £.P. Jourdain, archicects,” Archiwcreral Recard 88 (Peheary 1939)  “Oscar Narzchke: La Maison de fa Publiciee, Pans 1944." AMC (Architecture! MouventonUConunuaté) (Decenber 1984)  “Proper d'un palars de la decouverte, 193°: Po Nebon, O. Nirchke and FP. Jourdain. archwcctes,” Cabien dct, 15/54 (1940)  devon, Chintian, *Architiciure et publiont: projet dan immeuble publicitaire par O. Nitechke.” Cadvers ddr. 10-7  NORBERG-SCHULZ, CHRISTIAN 1926-2000  Architecture historian and critic, Norway  The historian Christian Norberg-Schulz ix a solitary figuee who began by snidying the cultural and formal ruuts of Western architecture and then went on te explore mare deeply the con- cept of genius loci, of spirit of place. In has later year he concen trated on Scandinavian themes because he felt that the northern Scandinavian peoples had preserved a partaularly strong connoc- Gos with nature.  Norberg-Schulz's earliest. comprehensive thearencal state- menc ts presented in fntentiom tn Architecture (1963), based on the phenomenological premise that considered human perep- tion as a trandormative rather chan 3 passive exercise. In perceiv- ing abjects. we change che phenomena by changing our attitude.  Founded by Edmund Husserl at the beginniag of the 20th cen- tury, phenomenology distinguishes sharply between peroeprual properties on the one hand and abserace properties on the other. Following Egon Brunewik, Norberg-Schulr replaced “attitude” with “intention.” Tu deal with the active character of perception. he introduced the concept af scheena and it plural. schemata, whah he defined as “habits of perception.” These acquire the character of “quasi-object” as che important: plarforms from which we burld relatively stable mental representauons of exter- gal seality.  Although he regarded modernism as che only (ruc tradition, Norberg-Schulz conswlered that modem architecture suffered from an inner contradiction because tt conunued to rely on static classical ideas, such as proportion and balance. in practice, however. modem architecture, with 1s “free plan.” demanded flexibility abave all che. and this did not sdmit any classical balancing of the pasts. The challenge, accardingly. was to unify the “organic” and the “technological” tetbencics. Norberg: Schulz further emphasized that every building must “express its charaver™ through the formulation of distinc: and recognizable types in wich a way that they constitute a hierarchy correspond- ang te the cask structure.  Norberg-Schulz’s argument was antxipated in a joint easy by Tobias P aber and Jorn Utzon in 1947, He came anty contact with Uuon through Are Korsmo. Uwon's architecture cosy apptoximaces the organic ideal advocated by Norherg-Schulz mn the Sydney Opera House and other of the architect's works.  Norberg-Schulz’s phenomenological theory of architecture as presented in Inzentions sn Archrtecture was lacet widenod and expanded to include topography and landscape in mach works as Existence. Space and Architecture (1971), which traverned much the same theory uong simplified language and with a broader set of hintorical references, Genius Loc (1979) examined the rok of landscape in urban and archite utal place making in defining haw humans may create places that better serve the complesities and contiadictions of contemporary life.  Asa historian who attached so much significance eo percep- twa, Nosherp-Schuls believed that baroque architecture, with 1s untegrabon of space, painting, sculpture, and decoration in 2 total work, presented a unnque challenge. He pursued this topic We a senes at triumphant monographs: Ailian Ignaz, Dsentzen- hafer ¢ tl barocce boemo (1908; Kilan Ignaz Dientzenhofer and the Bohemian Baroque). Baroque Architecture (V971), and Late Barague and Rocace Architecture (1974).  tn 1980, in Venice, Norberg-Schulz advocated his phenom- nological approach, which he defined as “the study of the nature of what is given ” He based his understanding on what can be inferred from the philowphical thisking of Martin Heidegger (1889-1976) and Maurice Merlcau-Ponty (1907-65), It was the philovophy of Healegger especially that was of primary im- portance in Norberg: Schule's development of a theory of archi- tevure. The aim was to help man find a better way of life by offering him scoess to meanings already inherent in the wodd and based on a poctic perception. Significantly, Norberg/Schulz called for suebilis foci as being particulary importante, as he felt that there was a bos of place as a “general fact” that threatened a “total boss of content.” The only way our of rhis dilemma was, wn his words, “a rediscovery of the world.” Fo make this happen, man must again become aware af his environment a a concretely  given “here.” In Nightland: Nordic Building (1996), Norberg:  Schule secks to do precisely this for the urhern Scandinavian countries by examining what Nordic butlding wuly is by con trasung it with ite Gountcrpart: the dlasical an tutccrure of the south.  ‘The significance of Norberg-Schulz's chinking and ideals 1s exemplified by architects sich as Utzon in Denmark. Alvar Aalto and Rema Peinla in Finland, and Kossmo and Febn in Norway. In Scandinavia and elsewhere in the 1980s, he acted asa counter weight against a pluralist-cum-Postmodernist electiciun almest wholly severed from a sense af regional identity and hwaliey that refused (o recognize the nced for vegans hinkiges as they existed in the past between architecture and its setting, history, and culture. In counties such a Australia, where European settlers encountered strange and unprecedented types of landscapes, Norberg-Schuls's phenumenological approach supplied an in- valuable theoretical perspective tor unerpreting and evaluating such Australian pioneer architects as Glen Murcut. Richard Le Plastrice, and Gregory Burgess.  Norberg-Schutz wrote mostly in English, and his texts were translated by his wife, Anna Mana. inte Italian and then inte Spanish and French editions from the Englyh. Further iransla- fans appeared in German and other Furepean and Awati. Lu Rttages,  fun Deow  Biography  Buen in Onlu, 23 May 1926. Completed diplama in architecture at the Fidgendwishe Technische Hochschule in Zurich under Sigfried Giedion 1949, then tcturned te Norway; helped wo start PAGON (the Noowegun section of CIAM) in 1950 with Aine Korsmv, and a yeas axisted Korsmo in building up the study of design at che Norwegian College of Art Craft and De- sign in Osto: Fulbright scholar at Harvard Cowersity 1952 $53, studying with Walrer Gropius and visiting Mies van des Rohe in Chicago at the Hhnois Institute of Technulogy. formed part- nership with Kotsmo 1951.56; with Korsmo completed 3 houw tor thtce families ar Verdkallen, Odlo, 1955, comprising Micsian glass cubes wirh open interion mounted on a cammon timber deck; collaborated with wveral ocher noved Norwegian architects during this time; studied architectural history and building rech- nology with Pict Luigi Nervi in Rome 1956-58; member of Group $ (with Sverre Fehn. Geir Grung, Hikuo Mjelva, and Odd @srbye); asmpleted doceeral degsce at the Polytechnic in Trondheim 1964; appointed professor at the School of Archie. - ture in Oslo 1966, later becoming its dean (1984-86); member of the organizing committee of the first International Exhibition of Architecture at rhe 1980 Venice Biennale directed by Paolo Portoghes. Died 2000,  Sedected Publications  Michelangele som artitekt, \95B  Insentsoni in Architecture, 1963  Kilian Ignaz, Dientzenbofer it barocco bweme (Kilian Ignaz Dientzenhofer and the Boheruan Baroque), 1968  Architecture, \IF1  Esauence, Space and Archtecrnre, V7  Late Baroque and Recnve Architecture, \974  Significase well archieettora occidentale. OTA: ax Meaning in Western Architeceare, 1975; revised edition, 1980  Alla rneva dell asbutctinea perdutu te opere ds Paolo Pectoghen, Vittoria Ciaglestts, 1959-195: as On the Search for Lent Archiserture The Werk of Paols foneghen. Vitecte Gighutts, L959 LIS LS  Melle yord og Inmemet, as Hesween Earth and Sey 197%  Comins bod pacraggen, ambiente, archivieura, ttatslated by Ana Mana De Damen t 1979; an Grate Lect Tesnerds a Phenemenolugy of Antetectere, 1979  Altaduams, Draew, LOO  Lous b Kahn, idea ¢ imonegine, 941)  “Jeers Utsen Sydney Opera House 1957-74." Globee! Arche aure 54 {VON  “Oharch at Bagaratd.” Global Aecditecrare GF (19H2)  The Concept of Pavelling On ihe Way to bogucatine Anvbitertmre, 1985  Cans Moberm. Diseimtads, 1980; Ind edicion, 1986  The Functionatst Arar Kone, VORG  Modern Nocwegian Anbisecture, \IG  Architecture, Meaning and Place, VOHK  Now World Aechrevture, (ORE  Roots af Modern Archiinture, cdited bry Yulao Furagawa, 198K  Scandinania arvbatestura, gh xdscon ventt'anni, LO  Minaesjord, 1971  Balthasar Naumann, Abseckitche Nerobern, 1994  Mightlands: Nord Buriding, translated by Thomas McQuillan. 1996  Stedkwnss, 1996  Surrre bebn: Wark: Prejecrr, Wririegs, 1949-1996 (with Gennaro Postighone), 1997  Further Reading  Bugs. Gunnar, Ser af lift @ Norge, Osbe: Huggdunss, 1969  Funagawa, Yukio editor), Ricardo Rofitt: Taller de Arqustrcture, New York: Rerzoli, 1484  NORTEN, ENRIQUE 1954-  Architent, Mexico  Karl Marx ance weore that humankind sers itself che casks that it can solve, There taska, however, are part of a particular historical paradigm in which the material wonuditivss are already preent for cheit solutions ot arc, at beast, in their formative stages. The history of Mexican madern architecture is the paradigm through whah Ennque Norten’s work operates and responds, Within this logic, it is insufficient to describe the work of Norten as being representative of a tension of postmodern globalization. Equally tndequate would! be to ascribe to it a character derived solely from the metropolitan condition of Mexico City, the gro- praphic center of his practice. Although historians have been quick vo judge the work as foreign to Mexican sensibilities and to say that, using Marx's own logic. it offers solutions that are not present in Mexico's material conditions of production. we can see it as inheritor of the legacies of Mexica’s historical avant- pane. It would be hest, thercfore, co position Norten as a figure ita Jong historical lineage that comptines the history of modern architecture in Mexico.  Like his immediate architectural forefathers. Juan O'Gorman and the radical funcuonalists, Norten’s work uses the mast con- temporary matctials—in his case, stainless steel, concrete, and glaw—to ceconceptualize our understanding of these within che context and the needs of contemporary Mexico. Surely it would be casy ta atenhe to them as foreign. but che tradition of modern forms and sensibilities is deeply rooted and ss part of the Mexican 
Lindsape. Whar Norten lus done is to make them do things that they had not done before, He was using them. in other words, not aa sgnifers of a new modernity ty the extenor work! but rather as referent of a new self-idenuty. Although critics Lament the loss uf a Menican architecture—a lass founded on some mythical and highly idealogical construcuon of history and style—the development of Norten's work shows an active celation with the tradigan of syncretism, expermentanan, alter. nate space making. and legibiliry. ‘These, historically, have been part of the modus operands of architects and buskders since the time of the colony. Noren’s wark, theretare. poignantly shifts architectural peoducrion from purcty formal and stylistic refer  ences ta the Lonceptual explorations of these traditions,  Norten 1s, himself, a result of modern syncretism: erained at the Linivenidad theroamericana in Mexico City and az Cornell Unuversity un Iehaca, New York. His work ts putt of a collabora: tive effort of the firm that lic founded in 1985 (TEN Arqua- textos: Taller de brvrique Norten), which was joined by Bernardo Gomez Pimieut in 1987. Noren’s wachung, much bke his prac- nee, is not timited tw Mexico, as he has also taught chroughout the United Sutes.  Norten's carly work, sich as the Laghting Center (1988-89) in Mexico Cary and Houses N and R (1989-90) in Valle de Bravo. cupresses an active investigation inte the materiality of archivecture. Both buildings express nor only the craft tradition of brick comtruction but also a reconfiguration of traditional archirecniral clemenrs through rhe increduction nf industrialized materials, As with the historical avant-garde. these new materials, however, are mediated equally by the hand of the craftsman. Perforated! sheet metal, for example, wax painseakingly punched by hand, reminding us of the obsession of craft in William Mur- fis’s work, In Houses N and R, we Find the result of mosphologi ul explorativas of the home 2 mediated by the eclluric agency of the place. The pitched, wed roof cleady cferemes vernacular forms. ‘Ihe open, douhle-height inrerines and the reliance on industrial mutenuls expres, on contrast, the duminution of forms needed in this geographic place. Instcad of reproducing the ty pology of the courtyard common to Valle de Bravo, for campte, Norten chose to rethece what that ipology does through an exploration of how the marenals themselves can sender and cx- press what traditional form has maintained for cencuries, The same can be said af rhe Brasil Stroct Workers Housing (199) - 92), which adheres to some of the social concerns of the radical Mexican functionalists about the tole of architecture and orna- ment. This huilding resolves a traditional rypological require: ment fue a wecindad (an internalized and autonomous acighbor- hood) through the disposition of the housing block, urtvulation sytem, and courtyard. while ormament is cxplicily abolished and the musenils and forthe are left to speak for themsetves. In addition, the proyeet itself solves a concer that has been at the forefront of Mexican modem architecture since the revolution: housing for the urban proletariat.  The work of the Alliance Franyaise (1990-92), Moda en Casa {1991-93}, and Insurgences Theater (1993-95) reflects a long adition of experimentation with known forms and stylistic tra- ditions. In the same way that Albert's Four Books on Archttecturr ‘was interpreted in the Spanish colony of Le Corbusier's Ver ame architecture was toad as 2 manilesto foe a sewulutianacy archi- tectuse ins the 1920s and 1930s, these works show a keen under standing and incerporaian uf a contemporary stylistic vocabu-  lary. Here, the formal Language of Norman Fouce, Rem Koolhass, and othet contemporary architects is competently pre- sented and reproduced using a craft tradition that would appear to be antithetical to ine farms. ‘These projects would become budding blocks for some of Noren's later work insofar as they explore tectonic expresmon. materiality, and craft.  His later work llusarates an additive process of forms, materi- als. and spaces. Paradigmatic of chi» are the National School Theater (1995-94) and the TELEVISA Scrvices Building, (1993-95), all in Mexico City; House LE (1994-95); and the Addams Hall and Fine Ans Building (1999-} at the University of Pennsylvania. Although they conform to the concems out- lined previously, this new work— of which part is locared oc penpased outside of Mexico —could he described as a spatial tnvecuon of its predecessors, In ir, the abift is rendered from the objects in space of his earlier work (which create clearly defined spatial buundaries) w the ubjeces within spaces of his hater work twhich arcate internulized formal and spatial telations within sometimes ambiguous boundanes}. The transformative could also be undertuod as a shift frum clearly tectonic cxprenions to 2 messy stercotomm: manifestarion— mewsy because the can- ems of structural expression are in tenaon with the volume of the architectural objects and because ‘these volumes are rendered primarily as thin surfaces in consion around a scemingSy cxagger- ated arucrural frame. We could asctibe to this work the volumer- rit qualities of pre-Hispanic forms ap they sit on the bindscape. However, thew forms, marerials, and structures develop new formal relationships with the interior, where, while appearing to close off frum the eatetiur, they generate new spatial interrela- Cionships with the interior.  Tans F, Carranza  Ser abo Coctusicr, Le (Jeannerct, Chartes-Edouard) (Fraace)s Mexicey Mexico City, Mexico; O'Gorman, Juan (Mexico)  Biography  Born in Mexso City. 1954, Graduated from the Universidad Theroamericans 1978, recived « master's degree in architecture from Coenell University 1980, Co-director, Albin and Norten Architects, Mexico City 1981-85; director of TEN Arquitectos, Mexico City from 1986; principal. Waller de Enrique Norten, Mexico Ciry: techawal coordinatot for the José Vergara C. Cen- ter project in Guadalajara, Mexico, from 1998: cofounder and member of editorial board. Arguiteceura. Taught at insicutions in the United States and Mexico, incuding Sci-Arc. Rice Uni- versity, and the Pract Insticute; O'Neil Ford Chair in Architec- cure, University of Vexas. Austin 1996; Emil Lorch Professor of Archisecture and Urban Planning, University of Michigan.  Selected Works  Lighting Center, Meaice City, 1989  House N, Valle de Beavo, Mexico, 1990  House R, Valle de Bravo, Mezion, 190  Beaul Street Worker Housing, Mexico Cary, 1992 Alliance Frasgans, Mexico City, 1992  Meala ca Casa, Mexico Cary, 1993  Nawooal School Theater, Maaco Ciry, 194 Jouargentes Theater, Mexico City, 1995  TELEVISA Serncen Building, Menco Cay, 1995  House LE, 1995  Addams Hall ond Fine Arts Building, University of Penmylvarna, Philadelphia, 1999  Parking Garage. School of Engineering. Princeton Uaivenny, Princeton, New Jersey, 2000  Selected Publication The Work of TEN Arqusecses, 1997 Farther Reading  Addtih, Miquel, Mecice 901 wna anquitectune consrerpenence, Mevice Cary and Barcelona: Gili, 1996  TEN Argnitectos. Enregue Norton, Rernards Gomet-Prmseraa, Now York: Monacelli Press, 1998  TEN Argustector: Valier de Enrique Norton Areeizecim, SC. Barcelona: Gili, 1995  NORWAY  ‘Twenricth-cenrury architecture in Norway in characterized by a search for a cultural, historical, and acschetic identity, primarily ae the result of the country's independence from the Swedish union in 1905. Thus, Nurwegian atchitects at the rum of the 20h century sought more jutional waditiuns, as displayed in the other arts.  A Norwegian architect who tried to create a national architec: tural style at che begnning of the 20ch century was Amutein Arneberg. Arncberg joined forces with the Norwegias architect Magnus Poulscon in building farmers’ houses that used gables and turfed roats, Arenberg’s house ar Madserud All 38 (1924) is an example of this regional style, with iw red exterive wood pancling and with its half-hipped root, Arnebeng and Poutsson were educated in Sweden, 2 country also in quest of a natinnat identity that could he represented in a national architectural style. Arneberg returned co Norway from Sweden in 1906, with Poulson arriving four years later; they went an to develop a postwar romantic style in town bouts as well as for large public huildings. Their design fur the competition for the Cay Hull (Radhus) in Christiania (Oslo) un 1925-17 was a culmination of this idea. However, it was not built until 1930, and thus. new ideas were included in the final deugn.  However, after World War I, the works of Arneberg and Poulson would be criticized for ther “Norwegian-ness” and theis superficial ornamentation. A rejection of historical stylex and monumentulity ensued. Although not created as such, these older styles were thought of as expressions of powee and repres- sion. Classicism —with its emphasis on universal architectural forms—-came to the forefront at this time, Architects arrempred to create an objective architecture that would replace Norwegian architects’ preocupation with national romanticiam. Many of these architects had been trained at the new Norwegian Institute of Techitology, vehich had opencd in 1910. wich its first gradu- ates in 1914,  Gudolf Blakstad and Dunker’s winning neoclassical project for the New ‘Theatre in Oste (1919), which displayed an ordered plan and exterior symmetry. was the first ro be shown in the new periodical Byggehanss. which was first published that same year. Following this competition, neoclassicism’s major propo-  nent, Heiman Munthe- Kaas, would herald ches new style in the same journal, A large portion of buildings from 1920 to 1925 appeared in chis new, testraned classical style. During his time, Blistad and Munthe-Kaas won the competition and had built the new city hall in Haugesund (1924-31), also hased on neo- classical principles.  Two of Norway's leading exponents of natianal romanticiem, Areberg and Poukson, tned to adapt to Neodassicism, but withous complete success, In 1924 and 1925, the Norwegian paimers Henrik Sorensen and Erik Werenskiokd began to attack neoclamicism in architecture ws being fuscign. There was to be no middle ground reached beeween the ewo schools of national ronunticism and clisucism: instead, architects turned toward modern functionalism.  Modetn architecture Mlourished in Nuoway between the world wan. Expecially during the 1930s, some Norwegian architects became concerned wich creating an international architecture based on global sameness. Sud formal expressiuns as white building volumes. flar roofs. strip windows, free plan, and mini- mal detailing made their way inte che language of Norwegian architecture.  T¢ Corbusier's Pavillon de [Esprit Nouveau was praised in 1925 by Edvard Heiberg ava new form created from a functional acstbers. Lars Backer adopted che new architecture of function- alim, declaring it to be the new objective atchitecture in which form follows function, In 1927, Johan Filefien, in an asticle entited “What is Modern Archite.ture?” Claimed that function- alism creates forms that contain both national and Socal charac teristic. He ceyected any use of historical styles and advocated in Use manner vf Le Corbusier the consideration of landscape, clemate, matenals. and construction.  Backer's firse project. the Skansen Restauranc in Oslo (1927), was the first modernist building in Norway. Here he introduced the continuous window band, che flat roof. clear skeleton con- struction, free plan, and continuaus glass sections, An amalgam- atuuon of other architectural precedents——such as the work af Le Corbusier, Frank Lloyd Wright, and the German expressionist architect Frich Mendehohn—Racker's restaurant also contains hurieonatal and vertnal chements af De Sujl architecture.  Ideas on modern architecwure also catered che Norwegian architectural discipline through a srudy tour to Holland in 1928 and abo through a 1930 minifesta of Nordic functionalian. This manifate was written in conyuncion with the 1930 Stock holm exhibition displaying architecture and urilitarian objects. Chis exhibition. with Gunnar Asplund as the featured architect, influenced many Norwegian as well as Swedish architecss. Munthe-Kaas, the Norwegian architect, became the Norwegian delegate to the Congrés Internarionaux d’Architecture Moderne {CJAM} and had direct contact with international ideas on archi- tecture. In 1932, he made a sudy cour of ten Luropean countries and reported his findings in Arggetwnet in the following year  Ove Rang, who opened hin architeturad practice in Ode in 1930, alwo helped lay the foundatiun foe modem architecture in Norway, His Villa Ditkey-Simonsen (1937) and che worker's assouanon {Samfunnshusct) in Oslo (1939) combine modernuat structure with the tradinonal material of wood. This Norwegian interpretation of modernism contaned architectural clemene. vath a sense foe nature and humanism chat would be further incorporated in Nomegian architecture dunng the postwar yean. 
Vila Busk, Bamble, Norway (1990), dhesignal by Sverre keha © Richard Dargavel  After World War IF, the architeceural historian Siegtried Cie- diva brought to the forefront the need for a mudernist architer- ture thar comadeted dhe hucal csrence of place, aften cited as the "new nalism.” According te Giedion, Alvar Aalto’s work exemy nied such an architectural kanguape. Many Norwegian architects, induding Knut Knuucn, responded to Aaleo's o¢- ganic funcnonalism. Knursen, like other Norwegian architects alter World War II, attacked international modernise architec- ture, daiming that it threatened Norwegian identity. Kautsen's approach is exemplified in his design nf the Porror house (1948). in which he shandons modernist ectilinearity for the organic shape of the landscape that in turn, influences, the house's plan  Tn canczast to Knutson, Ame Korsmo, an casty proponent of functionalism, cmerged 4 the leading proponent of Interna: tinal Style anhuccture during the tine, In 149, be uaveled to the United States to study the works of Frank Loyd Wright, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe. Walter Gropuus, and other modem- ats. Korsmo became fascinated wich Groptus’s teaching meth- ods, and he introduced there to Norway at the Arts and Crafts school in Oslo, Hit own house in Oslo (1952-55). with free plan and modernist structure. combines the saturated colors of traditional Norwegian farm intenors. Korsmo’s archirecture did fot bang nature inte a mare tegional ariculauon of clements, as in Knutsen’s work, which gained a wider acceptance in Norway  Korume became inpired by Gropius’s ideas off solving usaks by cullaborauon and fed 10 the founding of the Norwegian group within CIAM named PAGON (Progresuve Architects’ Group Oslo Norway). Members included Karsmo, Sverre Feha, Geir Grung, Odd Ostbye, PAM. Melbye, Hakon Mjelva, Robert Esdaile, and Christian Norberg-Schulz, This group took part in numerous architectural competitions during the 1950s.  The dissolution of CIAM in 1956 triggered the beginning of the criss in modern architecture. The free plan of modern architecture used in an urban content brought an end to tradi- tional urbap spaces wach ax the srreer and the square, with the cowlt of a loss of place. This lost of place created by late modem- ism was ako discussed in Kevin Lynch's bouk The lmage of the City (1960), To counteract thin seme of Jom, Norwegian atchi- tects began tw create a strong identity in the building inelf through expresionistic caperiments. tere Saarinen’s TWA air terminal im New York (1962) and lus United States Embassy in Oslo (1955-59) emphasized a sculptural quality to architecuure. Both buildings reflect the expressionistic tendencies thar soon would develop in Norwegian architecture,  Expressionistic experiments in Norwegian archisecture con- tinued. bur other architects still developed ideas char followed Kautsen's organic functionatism and Koexsmo's modem idiom. Eliassen and Lambertz-Nilssen carried Knutsen’s ideas farther,  aa seen in theie the Aust-Agder Central Hospital (Arendal) and ‘Telemark Central Hospital (Skien) and in the 1970s with Sande- fjord’s Civic Center (1969-75), Korsme's snadone Fehn carried his ideas into a regional and individualized architecture, as did Kjell Lund and Nib Slaarco.  One of Fehn’s cartier works, the Norwegian Pavilion at the Beussels World's Fair in 1958. shows the use of the simutural cfarity of Mies van det Rohe along with the use of tradinional Norwegian eaterials. In his Archbyshopric Museum in Hamar (1979), Febn inserts inta ruins of the medieval bishop's quarters a modernist form. In this project, he combines wood and con- crete in an interest for the tectonk, His Cilacier Museum in Fhertand (1991) alao displays the same qualitics and transhates the focal landscape inte the architectural design and form. Feha has become a major influence in Norwegsan architecture with his incorporation of the ideas introduced by Korsmo concerning the poctry of architecture and using past architectural forms within a modernist Language.  Significant shifts in Postmodernism also appeared in Noewe- gin architecture, often filtered through the writings of American archisect Robert Venturi, who promoted an architecture thar reflected the complexiry of life by incorporating memories of idensity and historic architectural forms in a new content. Archi tect Jan Digerud, who war educated in the United States,  ¢ Venturi's ideas to Norway in an article in Apegchwnst titled “An Inchaive Architecture,” Digerud eventually joined with Jon Lundberg to create the firm Jan and Jon; they designed Give one-family buuses as well as a cutrage near Rises illustrating these Posrmodern tendencics.  Venturi's and Louis Kahn's ideas also inspired Are Telje. Fredrik AS. ‘Torp, Knut Aasen, Ame Henriksen, Harald Hille, Thomas Thiis-Evensen, and uw group 4B. Throughout the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s, Postmodernist architecture developed alongside works produced by Korsmo’s and Knursen’s followers,  Mast recently, during the 1990s, Norwegian architects began tw develop a sense of place within building peactices by integrar- ing ideas of sustainsbiliry and tectonics, One work thar is a response to climare is Jarrnund’s and Viganas’s Offices for the Governor of Svalbard (1997-98). Svalbard, located in the Arctic, hax severe winters wich litde light, harsh wind, and large amounts of snowfall. The west face of the building resembles the wind- beeakers scen across the mountainous roads of Norway, which give peorection from harsh winds, indicative of the winter ch- mate. Jarmund and Vigsnzs apply tectonics in a metaphorical and functional manner giving a sense of place to the building. Bjerk's and Bjorge’s Samelandssenreret (Sami Center, 1998- 2000) in Karasjok—the Norwegian capital of the Sami people— alto responds to the harsh environment and culturst identity of northern Norway. The center, used for cultural, commercial, and political activity, combines, to a cereain extens, symbols of the Sami culture. One of the seructures is reminiscent of the traditional dwellings of the Sami and uses exposed timber, and a few window frames use the national colons of red, yellow, and blue. Sustainable design is beginning to infiltrate the Norwegian landscape. In che Steiner School in Stavanger. designed by Ar- beidsgruppen HUS, there is a focus on healthy marcrials. The architects used low-emission matenals. They have alto ercated the wood with traditional beeswax lacquers. With a predomi- nantly cold and wet climate. this building has walls thar breathe  to avoid condensadon, The wall comprises an outer permeable layer of buckskin, 4 cavity, adding of umber or board, then insulation and plasterboard as the ince finish.  Reateca Darvin  See abv Aalto, Alvar (Finland); Fehn, Sverre (Norway); Gie- dice, Sigfried (Switzerland), Glacier Museum, Fjectland Fjord, Norway; Norberg-Schulz, Cheistias (Norway); Ses- tainability and Sumainable Architecture; Venturi, Rebest (Unived Seates)  Further Reading  Bartiaons, Jan, “Notvegia: Archnettuna ¢ tradinone,” Ceusbetls 209 MJanuary/Februury 1946)  Davey, Peter, "Norwegian Reilcutions.” Byggebwnar nox, 4-5 (1986)  Davey, Peter, "Human and Fusdageal Dimenwany Newer Furyceten.” Neruk Semeidarkitehrar Brggekwnt nos. 1-2 (1996)  Ellefien, fohan, “Whit u Maden Architecture,” Ayggekweat 9 (1927)  Grenvild, UI, “Summer House Porter Cantage,” Aevbatectunel Review 200, no. 1194 August 1996)  Nerergue Wood: A Tradinen of Building. New Vork:  990  Tanhorm, Norumgian An hisectees: Pat and Prevent, Oder: Dreyer: and London: Bautord, 1958  Lund. Nik-Ole, “Ame Korma og den Norke Funkrioaalame,” Brggrhanrt ns 111966)  Lund. Nils-Ole. “To Norske Arlucekren: Ame Korsmo og Kaut Knuen.” Arhisehirn 76, nv. 22 (December 1974)  Manne. Anna, “Midnight Sun-Dance; Civic Center, Karasjo.” Archuectaral Reverw 200, 00, 1194 (Aust 1996)  Miles. Henry, “Horizon. Arvetact, Namare: Privane House, Bamble. Sverre Fehn,” Architectural Review 200, on. 1V94 (Angus, 1996)  Mikes. Henry, “Love ina Cold Climare: School. Scavanget.” Archnecrural Review 200, wo. 1194 (August 1996)  Norberg-Suhule, Chrian, Madera Morsseguan Architecture, Oske Noraegian Unrversny Press, 1986  Overgaand, Ole, “Ur av Romanakken, 191-1926," Aygrehiose nos, 56 (1956)  Thus-Evensen, Thomas. “Recent Trends in Norwegian Archirecture: Toward a Drematy on a Human Sade,” At 0120, no. (September 1980)  Uhots Evensen. ‘Thomas “An Rapenetce at Norargian Archwecture,” A> O17, no. 12 (December 1984)  Forp, Nucl A. “Aaker Stasjon,” Ayppebanse no. 6 (1999)  Vigra, Hikon, “Administrasjonsbyge for Symelmannen pi ‘Svalhard.” Ayggehwus no. t (1998)  NOTRE DAME, LE RAINCY, FRANCE Designed by Auguste Perret; completed 1923  A number of churches were built in France in the period between the two world wan, especially in the north, where they replaced those desteayed in the devastated areas. but some were to serve the new suburhs of the big cities, The casliest and mon sechni- cally innovative of these was undoubtedly Notee Dame (1923) at Le Raincy. near Paris, Intended as a war memorial to the soldicrs who fell at the Battle of the Qurcq—one of the most dramatic and tragic battles of Workd War l—the church eatab- lished its French architect Auguste Perret (1874-1954) as the leading exponent of reinforced-concrete construction. Designed in collaburation with Perret’s brother Gustave, the structure demonstrates the way in whach 4 modern matenal such 
as enforced concrete could be used to reinterpret traditional ecclesiastical typologies while maintaining 2 visual connection with established forms. It marked a departure fram, and yet a logical culmination of, Perret's pre-World War 1 work. The limitations of a small budger were curned to advantage by the architects in their buld, frank use of ccinforced concrete. The church has a tradicional rectangular plan with 2 138-foot tower dominsting the center of the west end, Notre Dame forms a prototype for their design fur Ste. Thérdse at Monumagny (1925). The coof has a Mat segmental vault in the concer with a senes of transverse segmeneal vausdes at the aides creating the reminiscence of bays. Above the plinth, which is about seven fer Nip. the outer walls are almast entirety composed of prefab- ‘ components forming geometric latticed windows, allow- ing the light to filter into the interior. These combine with the nave, aisles, and slim columas carrying shallow, segmental “bartel” vaults to create a light and graceful intensos. This lami- Nosity x suggestive of a 20th-centuy reinterpretation of the 13eh-century spirit of See. Chapelle, freed from historical refcr- ence. Traditional principles, both clamical and Gothic, are in- voked, and yet che building denies adherence to either. In his texpect, it could be conrrasted with the church of St. Anthony (1926) in Basle by Karl Moser, who alo wurked with a modem teinforced-concrete structure but who was reluctant to dispense  Norte Dame, Le Rainey. designed by Auguste Perret © Donald Comer and Jenny Young/(ireatBuildings.com  with tradinonal elemencs, such as deep classical offering in is. vaults, deriving from an carer constructional system.  The stepped-up concrete steeple of Notre Dame is of almost Gothic powes, although the whole spirit of the building is clearly danical. The motif of the long, plain, slender columns of the interior is repeated in the cower, which is in three stages. Sm character is very largely determined by the slendes, rodlike col- umns. A long window forms a panel in the fint mage and a ventilator in che second, and the terminacion consists of chrce vertical concrete rods and decatative fret panels formed to but- tress the slender tower,  The design of the church, especially the treatment of the columns, has proved very disturbing to many traditionalists who assert that it is primanty cngincering. Perhaps such concerns ster from che misapplication of the principles of brick-and- stone comtruction to reinforced concrete construction. A. Trystan Edwards criticized the design of the tower, believing ic to be so strangely composed thas it appeared “to suffer from a mechanical instability.” He contended that the lack of vertical punctuation and of terminal features for the long, straight con- cteve cibs gave rise to the idea that the stages are capable of sliding downward in telescopic fasbion. Tradiconalists looking at the tower are apt to judge it by towers where walls play a supportive structural role, whereas here they are scrcens on a framed constnuction. The vertical ribs criticized by Fdwards are the uprights of the frame, and they are given more prominence than the horizontal members because versical emphasis was de- sired, The architects were clearly anxious to achicve a pleasing Proportional sequence in the three stages of the mnwer. Their church of St. Thérése at Montmagny follows the same principles of design and constructivn. although it varies in many decails. ‘The same geomenic laticewark is used for the windaws, indood, the same molds were employed as im the church at Le Raincy. ‘The first ewo stages of che cower are similar, bur che rerminaring stage is much simpler and finishes with a pyramid and a conc. Perret was later to design the church of St, Joseph (1952), which occupied a site in the plaza at Le Havre (1956), the master plan for che recomaruction of which stands as Perret's most important postwar commisiad.  Hitaay Gaamcen  See abo Churchs Pervet, Auguste (France); Reinforced Caa-  crete  Further Reading  Colina (1959) provides the mon compechensive connideration of Derrct's work in eeinitwced concrete.  Ache, Jean-Baptiac (edisae), Ferre (eahib. cat.), Paria: 1959  Champigneuile, Bernard, Permet, Pari: Ares et Mériers Graphiques, 1959  Collins, Peter, Canrrvts: The Vision of a New Archiorcture: A Study off Argan Prevet and His Precunwn, Londen: Faber and Faber. and New York: Horizon Presa, 1959  Jamot, Paul. AG. Perret et larchisecrare das bhten and, Paris and Geneva: Vannest, $927  Perret. Auguste, A. and G. Perret: 24 Phetotypics, Patix: Librairie de France, 1928  Perret, Auguste, Comeribution 4 wre shéeriz de Varchésecture, Parix: Concle d'Etudes Archicecturales Cher A. Wahl, 1952  Rogers, Ernesto Nathan, Auguste Prowe, Milan: Il Balcone. 1955  NOUVEL, JEAN 1945- Architect, France  Beginning in 1970 and over the next 24 years, Jean Nouvel formed four different partnerships with other French architects eventually taking the nante Architectures Jean Nouvel in 1994. Nouvel began to acquire incernational recognition for his work in che 1980s, culminating in the critically acclaimed Carier museum (Paris, 1994),  The Cartier Foundation for Contemporary Art (1994) in Paris is representative of the perceptual illusions that are the crux of Nouvel’s architecture. The layered glass wall. partly framing and sandwiching the cristing «ces (including une planted by the writer Chateaubriand in 1823). create ambiguous perceptions of the building's volurse and mass, As one walks or drives along Boulevard Raspail, the pliss face, with its changing reflections and refractions, appears to alternately materialize and vanish. The “Parisian jewel,” as it has been called. is often photo- graphed under different lighting conditions, as if to call attention. to the building's primary cxlstence as a light prism.  The glass-walled exhibition spaces are well suited for the scon- acdastic artwork for which the Carticr is known. Issey Miyake’s 1998 exhibition “Making Things” particularly captured the am-  Caniee Foundation for Contemporary Art, Paris (1994) © Masia Sicita  biguiry that is charactenstic of the architecture. Similar to Nouvel’s work. the Japanese designer's dothes are simultane: ously insubstantial and solid, the perceived mass of the object differing from its physical reality by vircue of its texture or shape and its interaction with the human body, A later example of Nouvel's use of light and glass to generate illusory spaces as the Friedrichstrasse departmenc wore (1996) in Berlm. While the parti for the Cartier Foundation building was planar and in its facade, here it is conrrifugal and in its core. Interior cones of curved, partly reflective silvered glass provide a kaleidumopic view of the spaces surrounding the center void. The lobby of the Lyons Opera House (1793) is yet another cxample of his mastery of the architecture of illusion. Nouvel created a ghostly, ethereal space by surrounding une’s descent and ascent on eacala- tors with dimly lit black curved shiny wsrfaces.  Conemporary an bas had a marked influence on Nouvel’s architecture. The Chocolate Factory (1990) in Blais, clad in black and sitting un a grass lawn, is reminiscent of che woek of munimalist and environmental sculptor Richard Serra. Also Dan Graham's work. specifically the use of alternately reflective and transparent surfaces and the incorporation of landscape elements to create fragmented views through Layers of glass (much as the Chateaubriand cedar functions at the Cartier Center), has bad a decisive and acknowledged influence on the architect.  
The commusion that catapulred him onto the international scene was the Institut du Mande Atabe (Arab Wortd Institute) that he won in 1981 with several ocher French architects in the fint competition of Prevident Frangoie Mitterand’s ambitions new architecture agenda. The building was a critical success, and ac the time of ip completion in 1987 i¢ was hailed as the best high-tech building sine the Pompidou Cenier, In the context of his latce work, however, 11 is more significant as an carly example of spaual dhusinas, refleciina, and refraction, in whah, as the architect himacll has observed, st is sometimes difficult 10 ascenain whether a wallas 5 of $0 feet away. The south bicade sa skin uf hight-scnsitive metal diaphragms. These open and close like camera apertures, embedding modern technology in a mora of Arabx patterns. By alluding to past and present, the facade acquires the dlusion of permanence typically assout- ated with monumenn, vet ic is ight as air a eeflected sunset or sunrise vaporizes the wall. rransforming the metal laver behind the glass into a shimmering lacy curtain,  Nowwel’s architecture reconfigures the curtain wall, whether Blass and aluminum ot sainicss steel, into an image-making device, and hence his facades ate akin to ccreens. He alludes tv modern techoology in an effort w make architecuure that reAcces enatemporary society. He sametimes uses forms and materials that make portions of hin buildings and sites resemble boats. trains, of even airport cunways, as in the Onyx Center (1988). Superimposed and office grids or views through pettorated metal to a beighter space allude en the pixilated and striated nature uf computer and clevision screens. Sometimes he scecen prints onm the glazing, as in the holographic scenes on Euralille’s shop- ping ceacer (1995) in Lill, France, or the text that wraps the Cartier Factory (1993). 2  Although his work may differ greatly from such posumodern- ists as che Spanish-bom Ricardo Hoffil, whose historicist ap- proach Nouvel has openty criticized, in cthibits some affinities with the United States firm Venturi. Scott Brown and Associates, namely, in che use of signage and graphics as architectural com- ponents and in the reconfiguration uf vernacular elements into a new language. such as the wood shurters of the Horel det Thermes (1992) in Dax. ur the hotel in Bouliac, both in South. west France, where he was born. In addition, clements of archi- eectural 1 ion often inform his buildings, as in che Bel- fort Theater (1984), in which a scvered wall is patterned with the stripang of a section drawing, ue in the high-rise project for La Défense (1989}, in which he emphasizes the perspectival diminished vinibiliey uf 4 100-mcter rower as viewed from the ground by gradating matcrials and colurs from black to grays to white. so that the “Endless Hower” usappears into the often overcast Parisian sky.  Nouvel has cransformed the picture window of modem archi- tecture iio an image screen. He uses the same glass curain walts wich which Gropius built literal ransparency but toward phenomenal ends, in the service of space thar constantly reconfi- gures itself a5 the light changes. Although Nouvel’s work demon- strates dexterity with new building technology, i is the constnic- tion of spatial illusions thac makes his architecture, In this regard. he rightly claims Mies van der Rohe as his artistic father, another master of glaas and light whose precisely detailed physical struc tures were only the means co more ethereal architectural ends.  Maris Suita  Ser aise Bofilt, Ricardo (Spain); Curtain Wall Systens: Glass; Gropius, Walter (Gernany)t Mics van des Rohe, Ludwig (Germany): Venturi, Robert (United Seates)  Biography  Born in Fumed. Lot et Garonne, France, 12 August 1945, Stud- ied archirccture at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, Paris 1966-71. Vrivate practice, Paris 1971 - 88; partnership with engincers Em- manuel Catuani from 1988: founder and director af an, Biewnuele o'Anbutecture 1980: co-founder, MARS 1976; co-founder, Syn- dicat de PArchiteceure 1979; vice president. Insticst Frangais d’Architeture, Paris 1991. Chevalier des Arts et Letures 1983; F_A.LA, honorary fellow, ALA Chicago 993; honorary fellow, RIBA (Royal Institute of British Architects) 1995.  Selected Works  Thearer Restoration, Belfan, 1984  lenttut du Monde Arabe (Fins priee, competinant, Pare (wah Che Arhitestural Studen, Galhert Léziné, and Pierre Soria), 1987  Nemausus Housing Development 1, Nimes fwith Joan-Man Shea), voRe  Centre Cultured “Onys.” Saint Heeblaien (rich) Myre: Virani), 1988  Elites Suint-Jamer. Boulac-Bourdeau, France, 1989  La Tour Sane Fin (projenn. ba DNfenu, Pati twith Ramaneel Cactani}, 1989  (Nine Paulaine Headquarters, Mois (wich Casrani). 1990  Hotel der Thermes et Thalassotherspie. Dax, France (with Catrani), wy  Opera House Fatension, | yon (with Cacani), 1993  Camer-Fagade Incerchca. Fribourg, Swiszerland (with Cacrani), 1993  bondation Cartaet. Pasis (vath Cantani). 1994  Exralille Shopping Center, Lille, 1995  Friednichstrasse Deparcment Store, Berlin, 1996.  Selected Publications  “The Meeting Line.” Aevitecterel Denign QulyfAugust 1991)  “On Designing,” Doma (October 172)  “Nouvel Cusine.” R/BA foornnal Januaty 1993)  “Ant Nouvel ~ Shop, Berlin. Germany.” The Archiencsunal Review, 200 (Sepeember 196)  Further Reeding  Berpold. Barry, “New Challenges for Nouvel.” Progresive Arohetectare, 78 11989)  Honsicre, Obvier, fran Nowvel. Pacis: Pheree Terral, 1996; revised and bikngual Caglsh and German edition. Boston and Back Virkhauser, 1996  Duron, John, “Vheatrical Revreal,” Pregrenive Architecture, 66 (1985)  Goulet, Paince, Jean Nowsel, Para: Elects Morutcur, 1987  Loners, Mare Chratinc. “Through the Looking Glass.” Progressive Archuercture, OHS (L988)  McGaue, Penny, “Art Nouvd,” Archrrcraral Revaew, 200 (1996)  Morgan, Conway Llovd, fats Nowsel. lhe Elements of Arcbisecrare, New York: Unwverse, and London: Thames and Hudsoa, 1998.  Sham Barbara, “Pansian Jewel,” Arctusecture, 83/9 (September 194)  Zacta, Alcundro, Jean Nouvel 1987-1998, Madrid: El Croquis 6 6, IFS  OFFICE BUILDING  No other building type serves as a more reliable indicator of the complex and interwoven conumis. political. cultural, and tegional changes reflected by architecture chan structures de- signed and built co house the funcuons of wummercial, culeural, or government administeanon, At che tum of the 20th century. strong economic development im the two major industrial growth sectors in the United States. livestock and meat process, ing and the steel industry, created a new extraordinary demand for office space in metropolitan centers, Chicago and New York excmplified a trend to accommodate administrative functions away frony the actual places of production. A new building rype was born.  Form, technology. construction methods, and the organia- donal system of the office work environment: significantly changed in the next 100 years. Ar the beginning of the 20ch century, office building architects and chents still needed che stylistic assurance of the classical template for the new building type. The carly office building designs by the fiems of Holabird and Roche, D,H. Bumham and Company, and later Adler and Sullivan in Chicago; Cass Gilbert, Sloan and Roberuon; and McKim. Mead and White in New York resembled montly Iralizn Renansance palaces or the French nobility’s city residences in the style of Second Empire buildings, Examples inulude the Flainon Building (1902) by Danicl Burnham and the F.\. Woulworth Building (1911) by Cass Gilbert in New York Cary.  Despite its neoclassical appearance, the building type was technologically the most advanced architectural expression of its time. The new technique en carry che load of a building was no bonger by use uf massive walls but rather by a system of vertical stcel columns and horizontal beams, a wind-braced steel frame and its fireproofing, organized in a rational grid. This was che result of cooperation among client, architect, and the stect iadus- ury. Using the technique of the seed frame meant decreasing the obstructing traditional walls, increasing the usable office space per floar, Imporrant technological progress in other areas, such as in mechanical building systems for vertical Groulation (such as the 1852 invention of the safety cevatot, a mechanism for a lifting plarfoom by Elisha Oris in New York), ventilarion, and artificial lighting, freed che new building type ftom limitations  of heights and depth of the flour pln, With the Larkin Building (1904, demolished 1950) in Fuffilo, New York. Frank floyd NCright opened a dramatic new path by unoducing new tectonic and tochovlopical clements such as curtain walls, steel furniture, and ais condinoning, The discourse among architects and inves- tom berween “classical” and “modern” expression of the new buthting ype continued well into che 1920s. finding its dimax during the quarrels abour the international competition tor the new office building of the Chicago /ribunein 1922. ‘The winning design, which celebrated an office building in a Gothic Revival style, succeeded over entries including a design by German archi- tect and then director of the Bauhaus, Walter Gropius, The jury and the genera public were not yer willing wo accepe his design based on a sensible balance of expsession derived from the sation- ality of the structural grid sywem. Uhin dixcusdon continued, enriched by events such as dhe Exposition des Arts Dévuratifiy in Paris on the 1920s, which recharged che formal cacalog of architeco, especially in the United States, with decorative edle- ments. The Cheysler Building (1930) by William Van Alea in New York City is an cxample of a highly developed Art Deco style. With the immigration of the majority of the leading propo- nents of the Bauhaus, such as Grnpius and Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, to the United States, the avant-garde philosophy of the use of marerial and production techniques finally alsered the course of the formal expresson of the building type. The far of the office building changed from historicism to congrucnce herween structure and expression ax the International Style emerged.  Advances in material technology, mainly in che areas of glass, stainless weed, and aluminum in the years after Wodd War I. led 1 the custain-wall office buildings of che [necrnational Style and their domination of city centers around the world. Lxamples are the Lever House (New York, 1952) by Gordon Bunshaft. Skidmore, Owings and Merrill; the Scegram Building (New York, 1958) by Mies van der Rohe and Philip Johnson: and the Caticorp Center (New York. 1978) by Hugh Seubbuna. Higher energy costs in Europe drove the expression af a “pure” Inecena- onal Ste, with the reduction of the office facade to a glass- and-metal-frame skin, to change 10 highly developed multi- layered systems. Qutside louvers. blinds, and balconies reduced energy consumption by reducing solar heat gain and ako allow- ing for casy acces and muintenance. 
The internal spatial organization of the office between 1945 and the present has been a combination of open-plan (German. Borolandschaft) and cellular offices. In European counteics, dif- ferent organizational patterns, labor laws, and building codes generated a hybrid affice plan (Swedish, Combr-Cffices), result- ing in chflcrent building forms, The Central Bebeer Adminisera- don Budding (1967-72) by Hermann Herzberper in Apel- doorn. the Netherlands, 1s an example. Despite changes in office work and technological advances of cdectronic media and infor- mation processing, extensive office building develapment will mast surely continue. In the lax decade, an increase in the up- ward building trend in the cosmopolitan arcas af Scutheast Asia serve as 3 way’ to recoup for the high coat of urban land. Never before has the race tor the tallest office building created interest. ing designs in both s structural and an aesthetic sense. Office buildings such as the 1,483-fooc Petronas Towers (1998) by Cevar Pelli in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia; the 1,379-fooe Jin Maa Building (1998) by Skidmore, Owings and Mertill in Shanghai, China, Hongkong and Shanghai Bank (Norman Foxer and Pannen, 1986). and che Wark! Financial Center (2000) by Koho Pedenon Fox in Shangha: have long left behind the once- admired wonders of office design, such as che Scars Towet (1976) by Bruce Graham (Skidmore, Owings and Merrill) in  Hongkong and Shanghai Bank, designed hy Norman Foster and Partners (19863 © Howard Davixit reat Buildings, com  Chicago, the Empire State Building (1931), and the Wodd Trade Center (1977) by Minoru Yamasaki in New York City, tate 20th-ceneury European and Asian tendencies in office building design shew an increased concern far energy efficiency and biodimata considerations as promising design primen for sustainable archiecrure.  Raton HAMMANN  See she Bunshah, Gardon (United Stases)}; Chicago (IL), United Sease, Chrysler Building, New York; Empire State Building, New Yorks Fladroa Building, New York; Gilbert, Casa (United States); Glass; Hertrberger, Herman (che Neth- erlands): Holsbird, William, and Martin Roche (United States International Exhibition of Decorative Arts, Paris (1925); Laskin Building, Buffalo, New York; McKim, Mead and White (United Seates); Pelli, Cesar (Argentina, Unieed Scares); Petronas Towers, Kuala Lumpus; Seagram Building, New York: Scars Tower, Chicago; Skidmore, Owings and Merrill (United States); World Trade Centes, New Yorks Ya- mesaki, Minoru (United Statce)  Condit. Carl W", The Ruse of she Skyscnaper, Chicago: Univerury of Chisago Pres, 1952; revised alution, as Phe Checage Schaal of Arcbuerctwre: A Hismory of Commeriial and Peblec Buskdings sm the Chucage Area, 1475-1925, 1964  anid Klos, fihelogir det Obeloginhes banens Grundlagen und masnabinen, beirpicle wed sdeen, Base) and Boson: Pirkhauscr, 1998; an The techanlegy of Prolagical Ruikdong: Basic Pranciples waned Measures, Exaeples, and ideas, Bowoo snd Basel. Berhhauscs, we  Fratmpions, Kenneth, Maderw Antitecrure A Critical History. New York: Oxford Univertity Prea. and Landon. ‘Mame and, Hudson, 1980, And sition. revised and . Londan: Thames and Hudson. 1992, New York: Thames aii] Hudson, 199"  Gicdion, Sigiticl, Space, Time. and Architecrare, Cambeulgr. Massachusetts: Harvard University Peru, and London: HL Miliond, Orford University Pres, 1941. Sch edition, revised atl enbuged, Cambridge, Masuchusettx: Harvard Univenicy Press, 1907  Goldberger, Paul, The Skyscraper. New York Knopf, 1981; Londoa: Allen Lane. 1982  Hbrchonch, Heney Russell and P. johnuon. The frerrastwnal Src: Architecture Since 1922, New York: Norton, 1932: as The International Stele, London and New York: Norton, 1996  Slew, Catherine, Eve Feit: Saststnahle Architecture and High Technology, London and New York: Thames and Hudson, 1997  Yeang. Ken. Phe Green Skyscraper The Basis for Designing Sontatmable Intensive Buildings. Munich and New York: Prestel, 1999  O'GORMAN, JUAN 1905-82 Architect, Mexico  The architectural career of che Mexican architect and painter Juan O'Gorman can be roughly divided into ewo phases: his carly Functionalin phase and his later organic phase. Separating the ewo is a pivotal understanding of the cole of architecture that. for some time, prompted him to abandon architecture to focus exchuively on painting.  O'Gorman began his studics in 1922 at the Architecure School of the National University, where he studied under, among othen, Guillermo Zarraga and José Luis Cuevas. Dunng this time, he worked in the offices of his professors, Carlos ‘Obregdn Santacilia and José Villagrin Garcia. These two archi- tects were involved in important architectucal inveviigations: the first was building the Centro Escolar Benito Juarce (1923-25), which explored the possibilities of reinforced-conurcte vonstnn- Gon on neo-Colonialis forms, and the second was buihling the Granja Sanitaria (1925), which became one af the carlicn explo fratons into functionaliam in Medco. Also influential was the publication and arrival in Mexico of Le Corbusier's Vers une archiseceure, which he read asa manifesto for a ravonalot func tionalism of the engineer and a call for a self-reterential. autono- mous architecture.  O'Gorman'’s earliest works conformed w these concems. as demonsirated by rwo of his early works: the House-Studie (1930) for the painter Diegn Rivera and his work for the Depart- ment of Public Education in 1932. The House-Studin was a simple volume with a sawtoathed roof and exposed industrial materiale, Expressive of O'Gorman’ functionalism. it attempted to solve practical nevessitics rather than co addrew acathetic inter: ese, These concerns would materialize in his designs fur the Deparrmcat of Public Education, where, under the apices of the socialist-minded Secretary of Fducation Narciso Rassols, O'Gorman would build and renoeae a coral of 53 public schools. These schuul buiklings were unornamented and con- structed in concrete, were ellicendly planned on a 3-meter grid, and used standardized and mass-produced architectural elements and fixtures. bor both Baseols and O'Gorman, these schools responded to the Lack of adequate teaching Gcilities in a direct. efficient. and economical way while providing the sudents an education in economy and efficiency.  During this time, O'Garman slo participated in che found: ing of the School of Comtruceion Technicians (19321, which was to teach students how ww produce rational buildings while avoiding aesthetic ssucs associated with architecture. It was the founding of this school, bnwever, that initiated 2 series ol de- bates, under the auspices of the Suucty of Meacan Architcets, about che direwisun chat architecture should take in Mexico. This conference. knewn as che “Talks about Architecture” (1933), expressed the culmination of wo intellectusa! asseruons tegarding architeccure in Mexico. On one hand, the “Functional” line was advocated by a group of young sucialist-minded archareces headed by O'Gorman and Juan Legarreta: on the other hand. the “Academic” line was a reactionary position waged by the professional architectural establishment. The primary intent of these debates was to clarify the role-el architecture in post revolutionary Mexico and, subsequently, the role of hunctional- tam within that defininan. In bis presentation, O'Gurman at tacked the architectural establishment for trying, to establish 11s hegemony over architecture by limiting tt to spirtual and acy- thetic considerations that, for him, served only tu reproduce their capital. Instead. he called for an architecture that was honest to its time and to its function and construction and that, because of its efficiency. allawed a greater of number of buildings to be constructed and chus solve the needs of a larger population  By 1936, however, O'Gorman had become fully disillusioned with functionalist architecture, forcing him so abandon it com- pletely for painting, a passion from his childhoud. Traditional  hestoriography has not clantied this sudden change but rather has hnued ss interpretation of it cither to an interest in pursuing Frank Loyd Woghr’s organic architecture ur to his distaste of the business of architectural practice, O'Gorman’: writings at the ame, however, point to a disillusionment duc to a clear understanding of the ideological aspects chat structured func- tionalise architectural production and it inevitable social failure. In “Capicalit Architecture and Socialist Architecture,” pub- lished un the 1935-36 issue of Edificarin: (the journal of the School of Conmrucion Technnians}, O'Gorman defined fanc- tionalist architecture a3 4 mocans through which the bourgeoisie reproduced their power and capital while pretending to address the concerms of the population. Specifically, functionalist archi- tecture allowed 11s user to conform to the new realitics of stand- ardaanon, industial:zation, and mass production that were cen- tral 10 capitalist reproduction of its conditions of production and thus in power. In functionalist architecture. its awn autonomy prevented it not only from reflecting bourgeois class incerests (as O'Gorman had believed ar the beginning of his carecr) but alus, dialectically, from heing wed for political and social change.  On his brief retum to architecture, O'Gorman adopted Wright's theories on organic architecture, reflecting his inecrest, on the ane hand, in the importance of 4 telburic agency and, on the other. in eaphoring the wommunicative qualities of architer- ture. Two buildings trom this period ate indicative of these con- cerns, O'Gorman’s House (1949) in the Pedrepal regian of Mex- io City—an area known for its volcanic rock landscape— formally wncurporated icsel’ into the site and used its materials in its construction. (in its extenor, O'Gorman decorated its walls with sculprures and mosaics made with colored rocks. Uhis was the same method that he, along wich Gustavo Saavedra and Juan Marriner Velasco, would employ for the decorarion of rhe Narional library (1952) for the National University in Mexico. The library stack (a windowkess vertical mass)» separated from the reading rooms (3 double-height and functionally organized harionral maw) through its formal relations and its exterior treatment. The volume of the library stuck is covered in colured mosaics that were intended to be didactic in ature, although O'Gorman later acknowledged their failure in communicating a clear message.  Luts E. Cannanza  See at Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard) (France): Mexice; Meaico City, Mexico; Norten, Enrique (Mexico Wright, Frank Lloyd (United States)  "Biography  Bota in Meaico City, 6 July 1905; father was the painter Cecil Gorman. Studied undce Jove Villagran Garces and Guillerme Zimraga at the Schoal of Architecture, University of Mexico, Mexico City 1922-26; degree in architectute 1926; apprenticed to Carlos Obregon Samacilia 1927; studied painting with Anto- pw Rurz, Drego Rivera, and Frida Kahlo. Worked in the archi tectural offices of José Villgein Garcia, Carlos Vardi, and Cas- los Contreras, Mexica City 1927-29: chief draftsman, the office of Carlos Obregon Santacilia 1929~32; chuet architect for the Ministry of Education. Meawo City 1932-34. Withdrew trom architectural practice for ideological reasons 1934-48; 
co-founder and professor, Facucla Superiat de Ingenicros y Ar- quitectos, Instituto Nacional Politécnico, Mexico City 1932-48: founder. Workers’ Howing Study Group, Mexica City 1936 Retumed to architcurural practice 1948, Member, National Col- bege of Architects of Mexico 1956; member, Bolivarian Society of Architects, Caracas 1967; member. Academy of Ans, Mex: City B97 L. Died. by suicide, Mexico Cary, 18 January 1982,  Selected Works  Diego Rivera House and Studio, Mexico City, 1990  Juan OY Gorman House |, San Angel. Mean Ciry, 1930  Toeniés O Gorman Howe, San Angel, Mexica Cry, 1941  28 Primary Schools throughout Mexico for the Minserv of Educanon, 1932-34  Technical School. Mexico Ciry. 1944  Castellaas Hote, Mentco City, 194  Flecencians’ Union Building, Mexico Cary, 1936  Nanonal Libsary, State University of Metico, Mexica City (with Gustavo Saavedra anid fan Martiner Vetanvi, 1952  Juan O'Gorman House II (destroyed!. San Angel. Menco City. 19%  Selected Publicasions  FT arse aitil 5 ef ance avtistics, VAD Ausabsografia, antaloginn juactes criticas y dacamentacién evhaustive saber a oltre, 1T3  Further Reading  Aja, Marisol, “Juan O'Gurman” in Agana para le hrstersa y critica del La argussectura vecsratna del sighs 1900-2980, cdivod by Alaandnn be ude, cube 2, Mesion City Negeetaria de Educacion Publica, 1982  Bam, Lather, Thy New: Antutecmer in Mexico, New York. Atchitneural Reoaed, 1937  Burian, Edward R., “The Architecture of Juan O'Gorman: Dichatamy and Dik” in Madersuy and the Architecture of Mexico, edited by Barian, Austin: University of Tora Press, 1997  Casranza, Luis E.. “Paradigom of the Avant-Garde: Metican Manes Architn tore. 1920-1940" (PhD. dinenation), Harvard University, 1998 (see chapter oxled “Againsc as New Architecture: Juan O'Gorman and the Disillusionment of Modetaian”)  O'Gaeman, Juan, fear Garman: avsobivgrafia. anselogia, juicios crinces, y docwmentacion echauttna iobre iy obea, edited by Antonin Lana Arroyo. Moin City: Cuadernes Populares de Pintura Mexicana Moderna, 1973  Rodrigues Prampolini. Ids, fous (Garman: archnteres y punter, Marke City: Uneversatad Naconal Autonoma de Mexico, 1982  Rodriguez Prampolins, Ida (editor), La palabra de fats O Gorman ferlecenin de textos), Mexico City: Coordinacion de Externén Unuvermana, Darecadn Genera de Ditusion Cultural. Unidad Editonal/LUINAM, lastauto de tavestigacioma burticas, IYKS  Sanh. Clive Bambord, Buslders oy che Sun: Five Mowsan Architer. New York: Architccural Book, 1967  O'HARE INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT, CHICAGO  in the second half of the 20th century. Chicago's O'Hare Inter- national Airport was the largest and busiest facility of its kind in the world, Remarkable Int ita seamless integration of anspor: tation infrastauceute and architec tural expression, O'[Lase served  as an international model for modern airport planning and de- sign as well as an example of a modern architecture nearly com- pletely conditioned by technology. An architectural ensemble at the scale of a umall city, the scope and complexity of O'Hare's planning provided an unprecedented opportunity for the testing of modernise principles by generations of Chicago architects and engincets.  Tn the years folowing World War I!, Ralph Burke and Ausoci- ates began preliminasy planning on what would become O'Hare. Ahhough construction began in 1949, O'Hare's development accelerated following the election of Mayor Richard J. Daley in 1955. By 1957, folkewing Burke's death, the Chicago architec- tural firm of Naess and Musphy (later C.F, Murphy Associates) was retained to prepare plans for the ict-age sxpansion of O'Hare. The 1958 plan described three pairs of parallel runways that remain in use today, The facility profised from a number of breakthroughs in airport design and planning fint imple- mented hy CE, Murphy and Associates at O'Hare as well as from the adapusion af many precedents from other facilities internationally. Among these was the development of a two-tier split-level roadway system bringing enplaning passengers to the uppet level and deplining passengers to the lower lewel of the two-story corminal buildings. The extensive system of ¥ finger mented with the addition of mechanically telescoping gangways connecting passengers and crew from gate to plane on the same level. The hasic premises of the 1958 C.F, Murphy plan. its ongnization of multiple infrasuructures, its innovation of a dual-level entry and crit roadway, and ics use of mechanical telescoping jetwayx have all served che facility admirably over the course of its neatly continuous expansion and renovation. The airport's still-serviceable planning was derived froin the near-direct extruson of its complex programmatic organization, and its architectural capression was unified though the applica- tian of an International Seyke caclosure system of steel and glass over 4 suructural frame of reinforced concrete.  By the Gime of ie offical dalication ceremonies in 1963, O'Hare was the busiest airport in the world, serving 13.5 million Passenngers per yeas, a volume of craffic exceeding even the most optimistic growth projections by nearly 20 years, The comple- tion of the Northwest (later Kennedy) Expressway in 1960 and the introduction of a Chicago Transit Authority (CTA) erain/ bus cannevtion itum the city to (Hare fucked this extraordinary yrowth, The entire facility wuntinues to he weved by a remaska- Me transparent urility building that houses massive pumps, fur- qaces, and refigeration equipment in a steel-and-glass box, In- tended ax an image of the airport's modem aspirations and faith in the image of technology, the bowels of the airport are served up to areving and departing pasengers—well lit and promi- nently visible from planc, train, or automobile,  lo 1963 the American Lnsticute of Architects recognized C_F. Murphy Aswerates for their work at O'Hare. and subsequent work at the site has consistently garnered awards and critical acclaim. More recent work at the site. as well as the passing of time. has reflected favorably on the initial site planning and archicectural design decisions taken at O'Hare, even as growth has occasionally threatened to overwhelm the facility.  {a 1971 conmruction was completed on a new ait eraffic contrat rower of dlip-formed concrete construction designed by LM. Pei Associates with Landrum and Brown Architects. [n  United Aittines Terminal, O'Hare Imctaationsl Aiport, designed by Helmut Jahn (19881 © Donald Comer and Jenny Yourng/GreasBuildings. com  1973 construction was completed on a new aitpore buted and. parking garage at che center of the tcimisud comples, dengned by C.F. Murphy Associates.  Tn 1981, a consornum of firms, induding the reorganized Murphy/jahn (formerly C.F. Murphy Associates}, Envirodyne  Engineers. Schal Assoctates, and Landrum and Brown, com- pleted plans for further expansion at ()'Hlare, including the addi- tion of domestic and internanional gases. This plan further speci fied the conemuction of several long-awaited transporarion infrastructures, including the completion of the CTA train con- nection two the city, a highway connection to the Northwest Tollway, and the construction af an detra-airport transit tran, or ATS, system.  In 1988 constructiun was cumpleted un a new domesuc tet minal building for United Aurlines, designed by Murphy/Jahn. ‘Vhe United terminal appropriated the original terminal's Inter- national Style vocabulary of a glass-and-stedl enclosure for use as a structural frame but fearured a Postmodem arched section and other architectural devices as references eo the extruded hails of 1 9th-cencury train sheds and gallery buildings. Frve years lates. construction was completed oa a new international terminal designed by Chicago architects Perkins and Will in collaboration with Heard and Associates as well as Consner. Townsend, and Asmociates.  Although the arguing expansion af the world's busiest airport through the addiuon of buildings of such high quality and antu- rectural merit has been an extractdinary accomplishment, the more important cuntnbution of O'Hare is to be found in its integration of muluple intrastructural stems and their expres- sion in architectural terms, By this measure, O'Hare ranks as ane of the world's mast significance sites for the development and testing of the principles of modern planning applied at the scale, complexity. and indeterminacy of the city elf.  Cranes Watoeease  See abe Aisport and Avintion Building; Jahn, Hdmut (United  Staves); Perkins and Will (Voited States)  Further Reading  Bouman, Mach, “Cine of the Plane. Asports in the Networked Coty” an Baling fer Arr Travel, edited by John Zakowsky, Chicage. Art Lestat uf Chicago aed Munal amd New York: Prestel, 1900  Brudhetwn, David “All Aarports Load eo Chicagu. Aapore Planning and Design in a Mudwest Metropol” an Chicago Arvbiteczure and Detegn, 1924-1993, edited by Jolin Zakuwsbhy, Chiage: Ant Institute of Chicago, and Munich Prestcl 1994  Brodhervon, David. “An Airport in Every City: The History ut Anstuat Auport Druga" ann Burling for Av Travel, dated  
John Zukowsky, Chicago: Art Inacitute of Chicago. and: Munich and New York: Prestel. 1996  Beucgmann, Robert. “Aiport City” in Bwilding for Air Trav, edined by John Zukowsky, Chicago An Institute of Chacagn, and Munich and New York: Premed, 1996  Kirchherr, Eugene, “the Changing Patrern of Auport Land Use in the Chicago Repon, 1941-1975," Audictin of the ISeneis Geographical Society, 25 (Spring 1983)  OLBRICH, JOSEPH MARIA 1867-1908 Architect, Austria  Joseph Maria Olbrich was among the foremost representatives of the small group of tusts-of-the century reformers in Central Europe who sought ro forge a new style liberated from the con- erraines of late 19th-cennury historic revivaliam. During the carly yean of the century, his works in Austria and Germany won wide acclaim from contemporary critics, and later histarians have generally cegarded him as one of the carly pioneers of modern aschitecture and design. Yet, despite the seminal role he played in the architectural experiments of the carly years of the century, Olbrich’s position with regard to boch the uses of past forms and the formation of a new, modern architectonac language is  Upan graduating irom Vienna Staagewerbeschule (State Trades School), Otbrich rerurned ro Troppau ra work for a focal builder, bur in 1890 he entered che Academy of Fine Arta in Vienna, where he was a sudcat of Carl von Hascnaucr, onc of the preeminent architects of the city’s famed Ringstrasse, A brilliant draftsman, Olbrich won sumerous prized, including the school’s prestigious Rome Prize, which allowed him to undertake an extended trip through Italy and North Affica. In 1894, after completing his studies, he was olfered 4 pusition in the office of Crna Wagner, who had succeeded von fH fatenaner ar the acad- emy. He soun became Wagner's chief assistant, working princi- pally on the Stedthade (city railway) project, and by 1896 his work for Wagner bepan io manifest the transition from late histonicism wo the new florid Jugendstil language.  Offnch’s arrempt to tind an alternative to histoncism, how- ever, is most strikingly evident is his first inde work, an exhibstion hall for the Vienna Secession (1897-98), The dengn. inspired partly by a sketch by Gustav Khime, featured a large Perforated dome of lded metal Laure! leaves set on four squar pylons and high battered stucco walls with incised vegetal forms framing the entrance and the corners. The building's uncoaven Higa! exterior, however, concealed the innovative character of its imtersos that centered on a large, Alesible exhibition gallery. Lighted by four skyfights and three sorth windows, the entite space had only six permanent stanchions; scumdary walls could be positioned o¢ removed at vill, allowing the gallery wo be recontigured tar cach new show.  Although the Secession provoked a storm of indignation from the Viennese public, who mockingly referred to ie as the *Mahdi’s Tomb" and the “Golden Cabbage.” it brought bnich internananal accolades and an invitation, in 1899, from Ema Ludwig. the grand duke of Hesse. co join the artisss’ colony he was establishing in Mathildenhdhe Park in Darmstadt. Olbnch found kindred spitits amang the new colony's painters, sculp- con, and dengners (which included Peter Behrens), and Lud-  igs patron rovided him the freedom co pursue his ideas: cennally, one for Bebrens's house, he would design all the buildings at the colony, including the astits’ residences snd studios, and a variety of permanent and temporary exhibition buildi  Olbeich’s carly designs on the Mathildenbohe represented a continuation of che free mixing of historical forms—often fram quite disparate epochs —and Jugendstit decorative elements that had been a hallmark of his later Viennese works, The Ernst Ludwig Haus (1899-1901), designed to be a communal studio and exhibition hall for che colony's first public exhibicion, “Ein Dokument dewtcher Kans" CA Document of German An°), in 1901, offered an celectic blending of seripped dassicinom and geometric ornament, suggesting an updating of Wagner's own formal inflections. However, for many of the colony's houses, including his awn house of 1901, Olbvich employed teaditioeal German folk clements and pis jue maming and compos- tion, co which he added Jugendatil accents, This style, although widely influential at the time, drew strong condemnation far its sapensive, overabundant ornamentation and its seeming detach- mene from cveryday life.  ‘Olbrich’s arrogance and his privileged position with Ludwi aroused resenument al the other cise. and a number the colony after 1901. Undeterred by the crisicasins and defec- dons, Olbrich continued to experiment with a weber of new ideas, bur his lates works show a gradual shift toward an emphasis on simple recilinear forms ands pared down dassicum., This fnew attitude is disvernible already in the Hocheristsrm (Wed: ding Tower, 1905-08), designed to commemorate the grand duke's marriage. which hecame the dominant motif of the amem- Lage of buildings crowning che Mathildenbohe and an ufters- tependuced icon of the carly Modem movement. Olbrich’s move trward clusiciem, hawever, hecame even more conspicums in a sctics of buildings he designed outside Darmstadt after 1906, including the Villa Feinhals (1909) in Cologne and his Last project, the Netz Department Stare (1906-09) in Dusseldort.  After his death, Ollbrich was lauded ax onc of the leaders of the effort to crate a modern architecture in Germany. and although he was farer somerimes criticized for his “overcuncen- tration on decorative aims” (Giedion, 1967), he has nonetheless found a secure place in the modernist pantheon. Hewever, al- though Olbrich invesnigated the possibilities of a new architec- tonic language. he never wholly ahandoned the idea that history could provide useful and incaningful forms and ideas. Indeed. much tike Wagner, Olbrich sought tw reconcile the new and ald, to shape a contemporary style while still maintaining a link to the past. [0 utat sere, Olbrich’s approsch was profoundly different from the Later radscal functionalises, who attempted to devise an architecture devoid of hiswrical precedent and acs- theuc aspiration.  CHRISTOPHER Lone  See aie Are Nowvean (Jugendstil); Austrians Behrens, Poser (Germany); Darmstedt, Germany; Hoffmann, Jeoef (Aus- tria); Vienna Secession; Wagner, Otto (Austria)  Biography Born in Troppau, Silesia (now Opava, Czech Republic), 22 De- cember 1867, Stuclied in the building department under Camila  Secenion Buibling, Karlplute, Photo © Mary Ano Sullivan  Siue, Staatsgewerbeschule. Vienna 1881-86; apprentice to a builder, Troppau 1886-90, attended the Akademie det Bilder den Kinste, Vienna 1890-93; traveled tw Italy and North Africa 1893-94, Amiscant to Qua Wagner, Viena 1894-98. In pri- vate pracucc, Vienna from 1898. Founding member, Vicana Secession 1897. Died in Dusseldort, 8 August 1908.  Selected Works  Max Friedmann House {First prize, uomperition), Hiwerbrabl, Awina, 1898 Secession Building, Vienna, 1898 Hermann Bakr Hou, Vienna, 1900 Ermat Lndwig House, Darmscadr, 1901 Mana Olbnich House, Darevaade. 190) Wedding ‘Tower and Exhbion Building, Darmsade, 1908 Tierz Deparcment Store, Dissekdne!, 1909 Joxeph Feinhals House, Cologne. 1909  Selected Publications  der, 1900 Archutetrur von Profesor feirph Maria Otbrich, 3 vals, 1901-04  Further Reading  Clark, Robert Judson, “Joseph Maria Olbrich and Vienna” Ph.D. disertauon), Princeron University, 1973  mit Gacate, designed by fost Mana Olbnich (1898)  Giedion, Sigtried, Space, Time, and Architecture: The Growsh of a New Tradiven, Cambridge. Mavschsette: Harvan! Uniernity Presa, and Landon: Oxford University Press, 1941; Sth edition, revmed and enlarged, Cambndge. Mansachusets: Harvatd Univenity Pres 1967  Krimmed, Bernd (editor), Ein Dokwment deutuber Kunst: Darmitedt, 19011976, 5 oh, Darmaade, Germany: Rocther, 1976  Krummel, Berd (cdssor), faurph M Olbrich, 1867-1908. Darmstac, Goctmany: Mathildennbishe. 1983  Latham. lan, foxph Mane Ofbrich, London: Academy, and New York: Rinnb, 1980  Lax, Joseph Augusy, Josep Mf. Ofori, Bern: Wasmuth. 1919  Schreyl. Karl Heinz, Kris Klosterman, and Gerhard Bott teditors]. Joseph Marca Otbrich, 1867-1908. Das Werk de, Archiselien. Darmecad, Germany: Hesteehes Landesmuseum, 1967  Speriach, Hans-Guncher, Verrewh aber foieph Maria Ulbrich, Darmotadt, Germany: Lictig, 1964  Veronen. Ginla. Jexrph Mans Oldrich, Milan: Balcone. 1948  OLIVETTI FACTORY, BUENOS AIRES Designed by Marco Zanuso; completed 1954  In 1954 Marco Zanus was cumminioned by Ariane Olivetti to design a fatory to manulaceure typewriters and calculatan 
on a 123,000-.quare-meter triangular ute in Merlo, on the pe- tiphery of Bucous Aires, Zanuvo at the time was primarily known asan industaal deiigner who designed produce for numerous ftalian companies inchsling Olivetti and who had been edie of the anchucctural publcarivns Denna and Candela. Ho prod ucts were cxlubited at the Low-Cost Furniture shaw at the Mu- scum af Modern Art sn 1448, and his wetl-nown chairs include the Atropus Chair and the Lady Chais.  The Buenos Aires Olivetti project was his fiest large-scale building and was used as a way ta begin his architectural practice in eament, It also allowed for him to turther explore che issucs of building as product and sinucture ax service, transforming the concept af the “machine for living” 10a “machine for working” and initiating Zanuso's investigation of the tranderence between industrial deaga and architecuure from dhe small cumponent to the larger complex building. This exemplified his treatment nf a building as a Large-saled machine. The project abo alhowed hien te pursuc ideas of relating the buildings to the open Lind scape. creating a harmony berwren the civic and the natural. Viewed a an industrial product, ie building ements became the points of design ennovanon.  In following the tescarch of the Oliveeri production ecam. the buikling was requited to conuin light industnal processing under a 25.000-merersquare mot in a closed production se~ quence but with a structure chat wuuld allow for expandability at each cide for the company’s furure growth. Zanwo chose a repeatable module of 18 by 12 meters to develop the building on the vast site with a grand axis for central interiue divtribution. The plan of the building consisted of the main entrance that led 1 a clasroum, a dining coum, and an infirmary and changing moms opposite the administrative and technical offices which opened onto the main manufacturing Roar, Beynad was the Lishaped cenual assembly ruin wanerted w ihe plant and maintenance rom at the petiphery of the site. The cones be tween the work areas and feisure arcas were separated to create 2 transition point asa place of wil unmcracuua, This could be seen in the microcoam of the factory as the place of consumpcon versus that of production. There vea liule diviuon between the head offices and che plane, so the space had a potential flexibility. A heat and clectre plant was built separarely from the main facility, and outside the complex, Oliveti built housing for the workers,  The one-story factory had few bur very dominant and innova- Five design concepts, One was che tubular hallow concrete ginder sytem containing the air conditioning and air cinulation Four pronged lightweight and highly articulated cancrete col umne equally spaced apart supported the hullow avoid shaped gitden, which in turn supported the roof structure. Between the columns, glazed walls cose to the height af the shed and were wet back from the roof line, creating a much needed brise-soleit. The sheds opened ra intetiog courtyards that scparated the as- sembly from che mun hill.  The concrete construcuen technique was new with steel ca- bles ewisted in spirals as a helical metal cage around which che concrete was poured and stabilized by this internal system. Other columns were prefabricated and brought to the site. The col- urns kept the ground open with many distribution points for power and energy, and they created a vertical union between the tansmision elements underground and trom the central hearing plant that passed along the side of the aructural system  and the length of the hollow columns Inside che bollow girder. air exchanges and technical cables created a coontinated system between structure, physical plane, and architecrural detaih.  The main thrust of the building was che mechanical system invented by Zanuso, who dewribed the building as a living of- iam. with che fife-support elements distributed through hol- low beams chat are abo structural. Chis guided che articulation of the ait low spaces and those protected zone, cmphasizing differences berween production and rest. ‘The unique air condi- boning systems for the microclimate transformed the building into a machine of technical box tncegrated into the building design. The system was made of two parts: one was fined out in a body shop in sheet metal and the casing was built in a metal and varnished. This long: beam system became the standard sy tem for all the Olivetti projects in Argentina. The sechnical elements became architectonic, forms that influenced the carty concepe af a Shigh-teh” architecture, where the pieces of the buildings are functional not only as systems of wupport buc as the internal plant, electrical systems, and urgans of the building. ‘The flexibility proved itself later. as partitions could be moved to change the space. and it was eventually adapted by a cigarette  factory that could use the space without mayor alternations. Zanuso uated the project ay 4 large-scale industrial habiuable abject chat emphasized his crassewver between industrial dengner and architect ae was a key ropic at the time, especially in Italy. This liked the mental process Jur creating highly functional  industrial buildings to thar af creating the industrial object. Nava Rappaport  Farther Reading  Burkhard. Fratcon, Marre Zenuso. Motta Editor, 1974 Gunducei, Roberto, *Caubella coninuna.” Dy Maree Zatuse & Auemn Aire, 229 (1959)  OLYMPIC GAMES SPORTS ARENA, TOKYO 1964 Designed by Kenzo Tange ard others: completed 1964  Kenzo Tange, together with Yoshikaras Tsuboi, scructural engi- neer. and Uichi Inoue, mechanical engineer. designed Japan's national gymnasium for the 18th Olympic Games. The con- struction began in 1963 and was completed in time for the Olympics of the fall of L964, It conciee of two atenas, The main arena. wating about 15.000 spectaton, was for swimming competitions and a cuovertble for ice-skating of flooe activities when cnaciete slabs ate slid aver the pools. The smuller arena of about 4,000 seats was initially for wrestling, and other pouible activiucs including basketball, A low, linear block of building with adminptrauye offices and restaurants runs beeween the peu arenas as if to mediate their strong and independent forms. The ewe arenas employ tensile structure in which cables hear the load of the roofs. ‘This seructural system aflows an expansive inreting space devoid of load-bearing columns or walls. This type of srructure had been carried our in other counsries, including the exhibition hall (1953) in Raleigh, North Carolina, by Mat- thew Nowicki; the Philips Pavilion (1958) at the World's Fair in Brussels, by Le Corbusier, and the Yale University hockey rink (1958) in New Haven, Connecticut, by Eero Saarinen,  Tange's design is & mature application of this system, realizing sot only the largest spans ever but alse a form convincing and even teflective of Japanese tradition anal spirit.  ‘The main arena’s primary structural clements are nwo main steel cables, each of which is made of 37 rapes to achieve 4 high-tension capability. These cables are anchored tu the pwn concrete blocks on the ground level at the two ends af the build ing, The own tall concrete pots carry the cables to abou 27.5 meters from the ground. The specially desygned ucel pices were placed in these concecte pots in order to allow the main cables to men in both axial and oblique directions. The suburdi- nate cables, cach of which is connected 10 a main cable at one end and anchored e9 the reinturced- concrete stands at the other, easty the weight of the roof. Stcel ing joints allow fleable con- nection between the main and subordinate cabbes. Che result geomenry of rovational semmetry along the ans hire between the two posts and the nwa anchos blocks. The smaller arena, in Somparison, m ina spiral shape with the cables radiating from its single post, In both buiklings. visually dominant from outude at well ac inside are the sweeping curves of this suspension str, ture. Particularly notable in this regard ix the main arena’s inte tior illumination. The pwo mais cables, pulled spare by the weight of the ade roof, create an almond shaped veid. which was then cummed in the suane of horh natural and artificial light. It gives a sense of anis to the intetior space. which coincides with the direction of the swimming lanes. The result » a success- ful synthess of structural system, formal order, and the use of space.  ‘Tange’s price and concurrent contemplauve quests on archi- tecture are reflected on his arena design, particularly in regard w the role of Japanese building traditions within modem build- ing. The successful realization of this quest placed ange's work in the critical position against the modernists’ banner of incre functionalism, Tange had previously been involved in what was called “The Debate on Iradition” (Dente Rerso) with ober ar- chisects and critics, writing magazine articles and designing, for example, the Kagawa Prefecture Government Office. In the lat ter building, the posts and beams of traditional wooden structure were replicated in form in concrete construction. At the time of the stadium design, Tange was woauthormng 4 book on Isc, Japan's Shiro Shrine. In the case of Olympic Stadium, Tange’s efforts were nor so much to imitate traditional buddings’ forms bur to ercare. using the most progressive building technology, a communicative space that allows the users. both athletes and spectators, to have an exhilarating experience. Fac Tange. this was the kind of symbolism appropriate ro contemporary society.  The complet is laid along 4 north-south orientation that par allets the main axix of the Meiji Shrine nearby. The rooftop of the low, linear building between the owo arenas serves as the multilevel pedestrian passages from nearby train vations. As a result, the spectators enter the gymnasium from the upper level and descend to theit seats looking down to the event floor as well a5 looking up to the sweeping coiling. The singularity of the interior space. with no columns of walls co interrups the vision. allows che sense of unity among the spectators as well ax the sense of yy becween the athletes and spectators.  Tokyo Olympic Stadium played the decisive role in placing Tange's work on the inerarional stage. He had already been recognized as one of Japan's top architects when he designed Hiroshima Peace Hall (1949) and Kagawa Prefecture Govern-  ment Office Building 11955-$8:. He had held the presaprous Postion ofa professor of architecture at the University of Tokyo. Engaging the snternauional audence for the Olympic games, Vange's stadium brought apportunities for hrs works to be publi- Lied widely its the intecnational scenes. The Otympsc Cominit- tee awarded an Olymypac Deplomna of Merit to Tange, the first architect co receive this hanvr, The Royal Instinie of British Architects awarded ta Gold Medal in 1965, and the Amenan lostitute of Architects Gold Medal Fallawed in 1966, both of which were based primarily on the stadium design. Tange’s ca- feet was to be further daborated in the coming decades. his quests were (0 continu ati a number of tupio, and cclebrated tecords of honors wete to contiouc, including the Prizker Archi tecture Prize of 1987. Yer this stadium design conunues to be atone of the culmination points of Tange’s opus and of 20ch- century architecrure at large.  Unono HANda  Funther Reading  Tange, Keno, “From Anhitecrue co Urban Design,” Japon Archisert (May 1967)  ‘Lange. Kerize, “Revallevian: Architest Kents Tange 6.” Japon Archetect September 1985]  Tange. Kenzo, and Noboru Kawasin, he: Nebo keachiiee ne geukei, Tokyo: Asahi Shinbunshs, 1962: as Le Prazonype af Japanese Archetectuse, Cambridge. Massschuserts MUL Press, 1965  lange. Kenzo, and Noboru Kawazoe, Gijxtew to Nogen (Technology and Man!. Tokve: Byuru Shuppantha, 1968  ange, Kesea, anil Usto Kukternann. Aeweo Tange, 1946-1969 Archstecture and Urian Dengn, Archekins und Stadirberw: Arvbetecture et urbaninme (\clinguat English. German- French edipon!, Zunch: Ve far Archrekrur Artemis, New York: Pracget. and London: Pall Mall Pos, 19%  OPEN-AIR SCHOOL, THE NETHERLANDS  Designed by Johannes (Jan) Duiker, completed 1930 Amsterdam. the Netherlands The Open-Air Schoul (opendudschool) in Amsterdam, the Netherlands. was designed and construceed beeween 1927-30. Canceptualized by Johannes (Jan) Duvker (1890-1935), it was @ reponse to the necessity of providing a healthier and more therapeune educational alternative for feeble children. Developed during the new movement known as functional in, it was a marriage berween the dichotomous rational and  , spintual philowphies or aprit mowers, while retaining its func-  fonality. This movement decried the importance of hygiene with designs that were spacious and allowed the mast possible light and ais,  Afvet graduating from Delft Univeruty uf Technology, Dui- ket worked in the offic of his former professor, Henri Evers, aschitect of the Rotterdam City Hall, along with tellow student and future partner, Bernhard Bijvoet. Dwiker’s burgeoning ca- reer was initially influenced by Evers, Hendrtk Petrus Berlage (1856-1934) and the Amsendam School, and the American architect, Frank Hovd Wright (1867-1959); and later affected by the developing International Siyle and the Nuria Betewen movement. Because influence to Dutker's evolving carcet can be arribueed to a cacophony of individual and the era's incipient 
movements, including the De Stijl, he ensentially developed his own design philosophy and aesthetic that emplayed the use of new building matenals and methods in the integration of archi- teuure and science  This functionalist idiom became stronger and more expres- sive as hes style developed. The dissonance between simplistic and complex avant-garde architecture created by his quest for an ideal straccural form was influential enough to have inspired Ludwig Mics van det Rohe's (1896-1969) Tuberculosis Sanato- vium at Pane (1929-33). Sadly, beiween his limucd dexgo repenirc, due wa his carty death at age 45, and the demolitions  much of his built an hicecture. bus life, carcer, and legacy have become increasingly obscure, slowly dereringauing the eccogni- tion of his promunence in the Dutch modern movement. Fertu- nately, the work that gamered him the carliewe and greatest visi- bility. the Zonnestraal Sanatorium (1926-31) in Hilversum, was auspiciously restored and is suill extant.  Fotlowing the success of the Zonnestraal Sanatorium. the Oppen-Air School was designed to also reflect Duiker’s propensity for natural and therapeutic archirecrure, “The non-residential Open-Air School in Amsterdam began conceprually with Jan Duiker and Bernard Bijyoet on 12 May 1927, This proposal gave Duiker, without Bijvoet. the commission for an epen- buchtecheo! voor het gezonde kind (open-ait whool for the healthy  child) and has become known as one of his most characteristic and significant buildings.  The first design concept was a cruciform-shaped plan, the main axis rising threc stories, With the exact locacion not yet defined and the layout ave optimally designed, it was soon modi- fied. The original proposed site was ane block to the cast of its present location, was one-half che suze, and was sited amid park- land fronting Cliostraat. Project eubsidies were unavailable and asa tesult, the parkland concept was abandoned. Aftes a zoning, modilicatiun, a revised design presented the madem freestand- ing structure in the central courtyard of a perimeter block, bounded by Rubens Steaat, Anthonic V. Duckseraat, Quinten Massus Suraat, and Clostraat, as it is today.  Five uches varuants were developed for dhe school as well as four propusals for the gateway entrance bhuck, Some of the most significant changes within these proposals led to the creation of the extant structure, First. in contrast to its immediate surround- ings. the building was rotatcd 45 degrees, creating a diagonal juxtaposition to the lineas and perpendicular forms of the perim- erer block. Second, the concrete srructural elements were moved from the buslding’s corners co the center of cach quadrant edge, producing an open, cantilevered corner and creating a delicate floating appearance thar allowed for ayrenusted window and dour frames and large exparues of glass, Finally, a reduction in  Open-Ait Schoul. shond complet facade (1930), Amentendam, Netherlands. Designed by Jan Duiker (1930) Photo © Elnabeth A Bakker [shrew  the number of outdoor classrooms as well as their locanions were ako modified. Influenced by Wright's “beyond the building.” detailed design approach, Duiker also designed special study tables thar complemented the architecture.  Like an tsland of modemism surrounded by a sea of Dutch vernacular, the Open-Air School is the antithesis of its cnvirons, Its slender concrete skeleton with Large expanses of glass are in sharp contrast co the adjacent solid dark brick residential masses, producing an open and free educational environment tnse ta its name.  In floor plan, the overall four-story cube Lan be divided intw four quadrants surrounding a central core sur wwer. ‘Whe cast and west quadrants house the cLiswouns; the nomh ws 4 void, and the vouth-facing quadrant contains the open-air terraces, essentially a hybrid between the solid and void. Arached to the east quadrant stands a one-story gymnasium. Whe building's focation in the northern end of che courtyard allows the most available sunlight onto the south-facing open-air terraces.  The portal, or entrance into the courryard. consists of a column-supported narrow passage connecting flanking spaces, the largest to the cast being a three-story concecte, steel, and glass unit with small-railed balconies, This gateway clarcs the void created by the two ends uf the citcumacriptive perimeter black. Access is currently restricted by a chain-link feave, but it wa once apen and inviting.  Critics have consistently lamented the school's obscured foca- Gon as well as dhe contrax between its open air, free deagn intent and its restricted, urban reality. Because of its close proximity w the neighboring residences, rhere is a marked lack of privacy for both assemblages, Also, ic is fete thar larer alterations, albeir small, have destroyed the overall sculptural quality of the complex.  Nevertheless, the functional modem aesthetic of simple che- gane design and lightweight construction creates an ethereal edu- cational atmosphere with the freedum of light, air, and space maxitsiced, remaining true to its original intent. Although the school’s site may be if] suited, the Zonnestraal Sanatorium and the Open-Air School cultiveted Duiker’s design philosophy, where he subsequently produced other arcisccturally significant structures including Nirwana Flats in The Hague and the Schev- eningen School. This serics of outstanding examples would ulti- mately [ead to the Cineac News Theater (Amsterdam), Magazin ‘Winer (Amsterdam), and the Gooiland Hote (Hilversum). Sull functionally extant, ihe Open-Air School is 3 significane mod- emist example and a transitional, while symbolic structure in Duiker’s individual carcer and limited design repertoire.  Expert A. Baxker Jorsson See alse Berlage, Hedrick Petrus (Netherlands); Duiker, Jo- hannes (Netherlands); Modernism: Wright, Frank Lloyd (United States); Zonnontreal Sanatorium, Hilversum Further Resding A Girly compecheniive, albcit brief, history of Duiker and his acchitc.: tural accosn can be found on Mobema (5989). Derwig (1995),  Welings (1995), and Overy (1991) offer antight unto the seyhatic devel- opment of the period.  Derwig, Jan. Functionslame ta Nederland (Functronalive in the Nesberlands), Amsterdam: Archisecturs & Narura, 1995  Ibelengs, Hana, 2006 Crarmry Architevtues sn the Netherlands. Rowerdam: Netherlands Architecture Inacitute, 1995  Leuthawser, Gabnuele aml Voacs Cidesel, Fussbtmeale ancduzekrur, 1925-19400 Functional Anchitesuee The tatemanionsl Soe, 1925-1940), ttanslacod by Jolin Bannister and Karen Williams, Kath A ‘Taschen, 1990  Molenta, Jan, fan Deiher: (bron y provectos UJan Duster Works and Project). Rotterdam. Uitgeveryy 010, 198)  Moleina, Jan and Pett Hak, fam Gerke Wiebengs, apossel nan her Neceny Bowen Yan Gerke Wirbeaga Ao Apwele of the New Haskdings Movement), Renserdam: Cigevery 010, 1987  Overy. Paul, De Seip New York. Thames and Pludbon, 192  ORDINANCES: DESIGN  The incorporauon of design codes and guidelines into ordi- ganue covernng urban redevelupment has a long history. Their purpose. whether used by a public agency of a private developer, has generally hecn to ensure the huild-our of a mastcr develop- ment plan at a consistent level of quality and detail. An impor- tant secondary usc has been to control the appearance of new development in relatinn mo the hiworic urban fabric of an area.  Un Paris, for example. during the raign of Louis XIV, building regulations required that all new buildings respect the srcet alignment and specified details such as the solid-co-weid ratio of building facades, the cuntinuity of eaves lines from ane building to the neat, and the depth of courtyards an che building plans (Nan Ellin, Pastraders Urbanism, revised edition, 1999). Whereas this level of aesthetic control has remained common vo varying degrees auross several Eurupean counties, Amerian urhan development has hiorically been far less constricted,  (n the Untred Seares, the powers of government oo contro! povate development have been much more linuted than in Euro- pean countries and have rarely extended heyond the zoning of land according to use. Isucs of design have been restricted to specifying the placement of buildings in relation to parking, landscape requiremenn, and so on,  One of the carliest American examples of deagn affecting soning ordinances dates from 1916 in New York. These regula- ons followed German models in constraining the bulk of sky- scrapers ring directly from the line of the strect by limiting theit eight and mandating sexbacks at specific levels above ground level in order to case the overshadowing of public strcets and adjacent buildings. Vhe architectural illustrator Hugh berris rendered these ordinances mw threc-damensonal forms in his famous series of drawings tided “Zoning Envelopes: First through Fourth Stages,” firss published in The New York Virmes mn 1922. This zoning Law was not replaced until 1961, when new ordinances were enacted on the basis of different design ideas.  The 1961 New York ordinance was based an the modernist design concept of the tower surrounded by open space. Model for thix new ardigane- buildings such as the Scagram Paulding (1958) by Mics van der Rohe and Philip Johnson— were simple vertical bores posiuoncd well back From the street with an intes- vening plaza. Resnlential ordinances im the city followed the same partern, and these regulations became a prototype for simi- Lar ordinances in canes actoss the United States.  These codes virtually climinaced the traditional idea of the street asa linear public space defined by the walls of buildings, and not until che 1980s did cities such as New York, Pinsburgh, and San Francisen Sead a revision: crend in urban design, 
bonging back requirements for streets and plazas defined by continuous “sirect wall” of building facades,  ‘Typicat of these new soning codes during the 1980. and 1990, have beco a puuliferaion of “urban devign guidelines” attached tu, of parallel with, zoning categuricn Such guidctines spell our critetia that developers and their architects are obliged tu fallow in developing their designs. ‘These criteria include street width and building heaght, volumernc massing, percentages and arcangements of glared areas in buihling tacades, entrances and storefrones at skdewalk bevel, and landscaping provnions to streces and sidewalks.  This approach to regulating the urban environment would thot be possible without the rise, dating from che face 1940s, of’ the new discipline of “urban design.” Specifically deuigned to fil the gap between architecrure and planning. urban design eatends the two dimensions of planning - soning areas on a map— into three-dimensional farm and space. Urban design is concerned primarily with the spaces between buildings and the relationships of buildings 1 the urban inftasizucture ef space, transportation, atid urilitics.  One of the most mnovative attempts Ww code the urban envi ronment was devel in the 1960s by the English urban de- signer Gordon Cullen. Under the utle "Noranon,” Cullen devel- oped the “HAMS Code™ (Humanity, Anifacs, Mond. and Space), un which he used a system of symbols and numeric values both to record the conrenr and quality of an existing urban setting and then ra orchestrate future urban development by means of a nounional system that he likened toa musical score. In this analogy. the urban designer became the conductor, and individual architects for indsvidual projects played the rale ot musicians, interpreting their parts of the melody Within the over- all arrangemene. This approach has overtones of Camillo Sitte’s view, expressed in his 1889 bouk Cig Planning According so Artistic Principles, that architects “should wompone the city like a Beethoven: symphony.” (Sifte's work wns reprinted in full with detailed commentary by Cienege R. Collins and Christiane Cra- semants Collins in Camille Site and the Bisth of Madern City Planning, (965, revised edition, 1986.)  Although unsuccesful in rerms of wide acceptance, Cullen's method of coding towns and cities informed his own influcntial work. ffs bias toward the reinterpretation of traditional urban forms and spaces— what he cefcried te as ~Townsape"— boasted the me of nentraditional planning practices during the fullowing decades, The influential design cnde manual A Deagn Grade for Rendential Areas, prepared tos the Country Council af Essex in England by Melvin Dunbar and others (1973), is a direct descendant of Cullen's work and is a model fue many similar ordinances in England,  Ordinances in the Linited States during the pust-World War Tl period that governed suburban development maundated the dasification of buildings by single-use categunes (reslential, retail, office, and so on) and the separation in open space of these bruldings, set back from strects and surmunded by private parking.  However, punt as the design ordinances for ceneral cities were being revised in the 1980s to incorporate traditional concepts of defined urban spaces, urban designers began to examine sub- urban environments [rom simular viewpoints, secking to ametio- fate the bland appearance and environmental degradation of suburban areas  In the United States, che 1980s and 1990s saw the rise of *nentraditzonal” design under the rubrics of Traditional Neigh- barhood Development, Transit-Oriented Development, and later New Urbanism. This approach wo the design and planning of towns and Guies formed a radical criuque of conventional planning and zoning. reorganuzing sprawling suburbs into cober- ent urban neighborhoods in a more environmenually sensitive manner.  However, one of the main obstactes faced by New Urbanist architects and plunnees tw the implementation of their ideas is the fact chat mont aspects of this traditionally based urbanism are illegal undee most American roning ordinances develuped after World War 11. The solution of these designers has been tu rewrite develapment ordinames on the basis of models of traditional urban design and ta implement these as paralfel or substitute zomng regulations,  Simplified graphic diagrams and dimensions deal explicitly with the scale, massing, and placement of buildings; the organi- zation of parking; and the design of wrcert. parks, and squares. ‘This ending of development in easy-to-undentand piatorial for- mats was first devebsped hy Andres Duany and Elizabeth Plater ‘Zryberck in theit design for the new town uf Seaude (1981). The “Seaside Cade” has provided a model for similar design-based ordinates actos the United Sutes.  In privately controlled developments, these private codes can specify derail in terms uf architectural style. materials, and con struction (c.g. Scasale and Celebration [1995], the larter a new town near Orlando, Florida, financed by the Disney Corpara- Son). However, in nprmal suburban contests, where municipal soning controls development, state laws usually restrict the abil ity of municipalitics to cunts chia levet of detail, and during the 1990. much work focused on marrying the concepts and practices of the New Urbanist design codes with the full com- phouty of public coning ordinances for wwns and cities  This has ted ew the development of “parallel codes,” by which a set of New Urbanist ordinances is established as the oprian for developmens but thar beaves the old sprawl-producing Fegulatiuns in phice as a mattcr of political expediency, and, mare radically, to the creation of full zaning ordinances based on undiluted New Urhanist design principles, One accesible example of buth types of municipal codes can be found in the three contiguous North Carolina tawns of Davidson, Cornelius, and Huntersville. an area of 100 square miles where New Utban- if zoning ordinances were enacted in 1995 and 1996,  Such ordinances indicate a change from convenrinnal soning, which has been predicated on building use ax the main criterion for organizing urban development. Instead, these design-based codes operate on the principle chat buildings and spaces outlast their original uses and thar regulations should be based on good design criteria rather than wansient activites, Accordingly, the creaton of such new regulations analyze examples of successful urbanism, eather from history or from detailed design studies, and then encode these models into three-dimensional envelopex of urban form and public space that become the vocabulary for building towns and cities. A range of uses is then allowed within these various typologies, with the emphasis on mixing compati- ble aves rather than separating them.  Davip Wat reas  Further Reading  The primary soutces tor dough urdinances ate the andes thensebes The mont famous cade in America ate the aidinames for the prvate few times of Scade and Celebranon, in Horida, Other andinanes noted cxenplity the vanous types of regulary din uments typrcally in uve in North American preacewe  Ramet, Jonathan, The Fractured Mesropodn toproving the New: Cty, Rewtaring the Old City, Rechaping the Regios. New Noth Harper Calling, $995  Burgra, Warten, et al. Thy Tard Wand Piao, Chashute, Noth Creokina: Charlone! Mecklenburg Planning Commeninn, (97  Calthorpe Aneniater, Transir Onented Development Deuign Gridetines, Son Drege, California: City of San Drege, 1992  Cullen, Gorton, “Notation 1-4." fhe An Aven Jonenal (Sapplemencs) 31 May 1967, 12 Jule 1967, 24 Auguw 1967, 27 September 1967)  Drrgn Garde for Resdential Arras, Checlestord. Taeen Coury Council, 1974; new edition. as The Fury Degas Conde for Residentetl and Mixed Use Aca, Essex: Fass Planning Uiticers Amaxiuinen, 1097  Duany, Andres and Elizabeth Pater-Zyberk, “Urban Cade: The Town ot Seande” in Seaside, Making « fown in Amensa. edited by David Mohney and Keller Faserhng. New York: Princeton Archirectural Press. and London: Phaidon, 1991  Dagny. Andres and Flasher Mater Zyberk, “Codey” in. Towns and Toum- Making Principles, edited bv Alex Kreiger and Wilkaim Lenneets, New York: Rirash, 1994; Stat edition, 1992  Hammond. Ann and Dand Walters, Tawn of Luntersvitle Zong Ondinance, Hunrerwitl, Nenh Carolina: Town ol Hanterwille, 1996  Keane. limathy and David Walters, the Daradion Land Maa, Dandson, North Carolina: Town of Davidson, 1995  Leah. fean Festise, Archetectural Vion: fhe Drawangs of Hugh Ferns, New York: Whitney Librasy of Deaga. 1980  Marshall, Macklin (cdivon:. Mabing Chowec Alteruatve Developmicat Standards, Toronto. Ontariy Booksture. 199%  ORDINANCES: ZONING  Zoning onlinances govern the funcoon and form of land and the structures on that land and are part of a more encompassing system of regulations concerning the built environment that in- dude subdivision controh, building codes, deeds, and housing occupancy codes, among many others. Unlike these ather regula- tions, which apply uniformly throughout a city, soning osdets Rand inco districts (zones) and assigns w cach permitted uscs (c.g. industrial, commercial, of readential) while detailing restrictions and other conditions (c.g. regarding height, bulk, deraity. suze. and setback requirements).  ‘This brief article covers the United States, where zoning 1 a far more Jocal marter than in Europe, where ic must conform more often to plans developed at highcr levels of government.  Alchough legislated Land use regulations in the United States  back ro che time of the colonists in the early 17th century. the foundations for modern land use controls are nuisance cases from the 1800s, when the courts upheld restrictions on the uses of land deemed to threaten public health. safety, of morals. The actions were reactive rather than preventive and were oriented to the elimination of negative arrangemeno rather than to the establishment of positive ancy.  Tn the lite 14th century, the development of land use regula- bons was stimulated by several factors. Fins, there was a need foe planning health and other basic public services for urban populations whine murmbers were growing because of an unprec- edented influx of smmigrans, Further impetus came trom tech: nological factors — fur example. the inteoduction of clectew trot fevs (promoting strectuar suburbs) ax well as stecl-frame constructor and elevaton (leading to high-density urban cen- ters). Ar the turn of the century. sponsors of zoning induded the Progressive reform movement. concemed with imposing re- straings on undesirable urban development. ax well as powertul teal estate and buuness intereyts concerned with preserymg prop- efty values and maximizing profits,  In 1916 New York City was the fine to adopt a comprehen: ave toning ordinance. It applied only tw new development and thus did not address prublems atising from existing condition. Herbert Houver's Advisory Conunittee on Burlding Codes and Zonmg drafted the Standard State Zoning Enabling Act, pub- lished im 1924, whith quickly became the model for sitnilar legilavon in many states. The annals of U.S. zoning history are replete with court cases documenting challenges to a local government's autharity to exercise palce power in the control at land uses. In 1926 the US, Supreme Court upheld the consti- tutionality of zoning in the case of Villege of Faclid, Obio, Ambler Reality Co This mitewnne decision became an important eeference point in comprehensive land use regulation for decades tw come. By 1929 60 percent of the U.S. urban population lived in areas governed by zoning ordinances,  Although osteribly argeuing physical aspecis of the envirun- incnt, coning has aby been a frequent ansteument on din cimina- lofty pracuces aimed at prevenung unwanted pupulativa groups trom residing in particular neighborhoods. Certain zoning ordi ances require minimum lor sizes for teadential development. specity minimum house sizes, prohibir mobile homes of muli- family buildings, or impose unusually high subdivision stan- dards. Intentionally ot otherwise, such ordinances drive up the cme of homing and thus keep out low-income houscholds, among whem racial and ethnic minorities are overrepresented. Kauwn as exdusionary zoning, this peactior is most common in afucnt, suburban commmunitics. Critics have decried it as 2 form of discrimination and 4 utuse of reduced bousing affurd- ability and comentrated poverty in inner-city areas. They have challenged it in legislative and litigative actions. In this connec- tion, the series of Mount Laurel cases, argued in the New Jersey Supreme Court (1975--86}, became a landmark, evablishing the dowtrine shat a municipality's land use regulations had to offer a “realistic opporuanicy for the contraction of ies Gir share of the prospecuve and future regional need fue low and moderate uncome housing.” This decuine wis sho alupted in other states (Arizona, California, and Oregon) but has becn dificult to en- forue. Exclusiunary zuning is subject to federal law only fn violaces the Far Housing Act or the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S, Consutuation. Ln uhus regard, the U.S. Supreme Court has held thar the equal prorewuon cause does not apply to in- come (ic. zoning that excludes the poor is not illegal) and dhat  in the case of minantics 1¢ must be shown that discriminating Purpose was a motivating factor, However. in cases brought under the Fait Housing Act, lower federal courte have held that des riminatory effect is enough. 
[nclusonary zoning ordinances are meant to promote the Provision of low-cow housing by allowing residential developers a higher density in return (so-called incentive romng) of as 4 mandatory set-aside, Another technique is toning for mobile homes, which are becoming more important ax a source of af. fordable housny, Local gavernments may alo target nonresi- dential develupers, for cxample. in the form of a linkage program that makes permits for commercial building conningent on a specified funding percentage toc low-cost housing.  Zoning is 3 tool of, but nor a substitute for, planning. Zoning ordinances tor local distewss are intendedly developed within the cuntest of 4 comprehensive plan for a larger tegion. How- ever, roning decisions frequently are politically mutivated by desires to produce tax revenues, co exclude unwanted ses of Population groupe (the Not-In-My-Back-Yand iNIMBY] syn- dime}, and to preserve che srarus quo. The retulung configura tion of commercial, industrial, residential, and other Land usca often reflects the bulance of power among competing local juris- dictions rather than what is best for che tegion as a whole.  Wittem van Vue  Further Reading  Cublingworth, J.B. the Petitical Cateere of Planning Americtn Land Cie Plennong sn Comparative Perspective, New York: Routledge. 13  Haar, Charles Monte and Jetold $, Kayden (ecieors}. Zang, and the American Drotm: Proves Sill te Keep, Chicago: Planners Prem, 1989  Malach, Alan, /nctusionary Homing Programs: Polures and Prvcssces, New Hrunwick, New fetver: Comer for Urban Puboy Research, 1984 .  Mandeller, Daniel R. and Ruger A. Cunomgham, Plavung and Cantevl of Lied Developrent. Cases and Materia, Chatlotiewille, Virginia: Michie, 1990; 4th edition, 1995  Siew, Mary Cochin and Chentopher Silwr (editors). Planning the Twentieth Conterry American City, Baltimers, Maryland: Juhos Hoplans University Press, 1996  ORNAMENT  Omamenranon as a crincal derment in architecture demonstrat ing significant choives and intentions of the architect, including the selection of specific materials, the decision to inchide of exdude applied decoration, and the cxpression of symbolic meaning. During the 20th century. the significance af omament in architecture was carefully considered by architects who eaperi- mented with, rejevied, or created new forny and decoration to express attitudes toward ur reactions against the incredible uul- tural and technologsea! changes taking place in the woeld around them. The ideus introduced by Owen Jones (1809-74) in the middle of the 19th century, linking cudture and architecture and advocating the use of ornament co enhance structure and evoke a few contemporary style, were repeated by some and rejected and fiercely debated by other.  Before the cum of the century, designers continued the histo- neam, eclecticism, and Beaux-Arts classicism of their predeces- sors, selecting conventional decorative elements tn imbue a building with a parucular character and associations. The abilizy of ornament to communicate specific values and stimulate ex- pected emotional respomes was clearly understood. As a result,  designer interested in producing a new style reflective of a changing world rejected the motifs of the past and experimented with new types of embellishment expressing accepunce of tech- folugial advances and the latex thinking. Art Nouveau Jugendsujl} represents one of the eastiest experiments, substirut- ang ecw forms inspired by nature for traditional motifs. Euro- pean designers, including Victor Horta, Hector Guimard, and Henry van de Velde, demonstrated the structural possibilities of ion and glass by developing thin, plantlike stalks wich wispy whiplash curves to replace the staunch columns and solid lintels ‘of masonry construction.  Exhibitions and the increase in architectural publications pro- mored a widevpread interest in this novel style, and designers throughout the Western world became aware of the possibilities of creating additional styles and s new aesthetic through changes in form, materials, and decocauon. Vhis realization stimulated strong reacnons and further experimentation. In an article tithed “Omament and Crime.” the architect. Adolf Loos condemned the use of ornamentation as wasreful, debased. and uncivilized. At the ame time, Frank Loyd Wright argued for simplified omament adapted to machine production to achieve items of sample good taste for modem frvng Examples of new uytes introduced carly in the century include'a development in Hul- land, known as De Seijl (1918), and an international style nich: named Art Deco, derived fram abbreviating the tide of the Fxpo- wnien Internationale des Arti Diveratifi et Industries Moderna (Paris, 1925). De Seijl displayed the direct influence of Cubism, intrnducing a vocabulary of forms imluding geometric shapes, orthogonal gnds, and intcrscceing planes dynamically in wolids and voids and intersecting with continuous space. ‘Tra- sbuinnal oraunenr was climinated, replaced by simple elements Paimed in the primary colors uc in black. white, and gray and Raihed to appear suachine produced. An Deco cominued the  ration of mechanization with stylized, geomerricized pat- cerns fabricated in exotic woods aod expensve metal, At he same ume, designers in the Deutsche Werkbund and leer in the Bauhaus focused on the production of everyday abjects made from nuxdern materials and industrialized components, such as ship railings and steel nubing, ew elevace and ename the design of mass-produced objevn,  When Heney-Russcll Hirchcock and Philip Johnson codified the Modern movement in the text accompanying the 1932 exhi- bition at the Muscun of Modern An in New York. they ex- Phined thar one of the tenets of the International Style was the avuidance of applied decoration. Sophisticated architects, such as Ludwig Mies van der Rohe. understood the importance of ornamentation to enhance design and recognized the difference berween elements used for decoration and those components hecessary to produce designs of eloquence and expresiveness. As a result, be used exquisite materials, pure forms and propor- tions, and walls of clear glam to reveal the beauty of nature and achieve a level of refinement and modern elegance. At the same time, Mies and other modernisrs emphasized che expression of structure and highlighted the industrial components af construc- tion. The most abyious example is Mies” attachment of ! beams on the exterior of the Lake Shore Drive Apartments (1948) in Chicago. Following World War Il, Ray and Charles Eames and other designers used standardized parts in their Case Houses in California in an attempt to produce both affordable and cantcmporary design; however, moat architects and the gen-  eral populace continued to prefer traditional design and orna- ment, both classical and vernacular.  Before World Was [J. another international phenomenon is observable in the influence of modernism on buildings with clasically inspired amament, Ironically, this phcnomenan ap- peared in the symbolic structures etcctad to proclaims and serve the Fascist governmencs of Italy and Germany anit the stripped: down classicism expressing economy and a modern acsthetic in the thousands of government buiklings constructed and financed during the New Deal in the United States.  Reactions against the Modern movement began in the 1950s and 1960s with architects such as Louis Kahn conunuing to use modern materials but shifting the focus of design ta an increased emphasis on form, space, and light. In the works of Eero Saari- nen, Jom Urtan, and Kenzo Tange, the increased attention w form resulted in buildings scen as sculprural of ornamental ob- jects in the bandscape.  Robert Venturi joined the critique of the Modern movement by parodying Mies’ dictum that “leas is more” with his phrase “lem isa bore.” In Complexity and Contradicrian (1966), Venturi Praned architecture of carliet periods and pronwied the impor- tatwe of context. cole, texnurc, and especially ornaineat in archi- tecture, Venturi sanctioned a plurality of styles to bring back  Castel Beranger. Pans, front enury with wrought ian gate, designed by Hector Guimard (¢.1890) © Donna M. Matthews GreatBuildings cam  the vixual vibrancy and fife of earlier cities and to allow buildings to communicate with the public. Asa result, architects, including Robert Stern. Charles Moore, and Charles Jencks, began to rely on ornament to intenduce a new Language of architecture and dialogue with the public. At times. their overscaled architectural elements contained witticisms and a¢ other times irony, instigat- ing confusion for a public and prutcsson unaccustomed to orma- ment and uneducated in the onginal meanings of the dements being used. Consequently, “enlightened” Postmodernism did fot receive universal acceptance, but mr did initiate a new awarc- ness of the importance of our built environment and a pluralistic diversity in design.  Subsequent developments have continued to respond w the function and visibility of ornamenc as a critical design compo- nent. For example, in deconstructivive and postsrructuralist at- chitecture, the assemblages of materials and shapes in the work of Peter Eisenman, Rem Koolhaas, and Eric Owen Moss are more ornamental than functional and are introduced for critique and aesthetic rather than as a display of new construction meth- ods of new principles of structure. ‘I his is also erue in the work of Frank Gehry. who does not espouse poststructuralism but produces assemblages of unconventional components and mate- tiaks used in new ways, such ax his specification of tianium for che surface covering of the Guggenheim Museum (1997) in Bifbau, Spain. New uchoulogy. materials, and methods of con- suuctiog are expressed ommanientally in the High-Tech works of Norman Foster, Richard Rogecs, Will Bruder, and others, At the same time, Postmodcinism’s acceptance of previous ideas and styles has prompted a renewed emphasis on classicism, al- lowing designers, incliding Quinlan Terry and Demern Porph- yes, to continue the vocabulary and omamentation of conven- tional architecture. Minumalise architects, such as 1 adao Ando, Anroine Predock. and the bte Luis Sarragin. recognize that che avoidance of applied ornament can still make a powerful statement. and their works achieve a level uf serenity and sublim- ity unusual in the oventimulated aumusphere of the Late 20ch century. :  Today, a plurality of polemics and styles cocais, with no dunuaam posiuon oa die tole of ornament and meaning in archuectuse established. A review of the century's built works, huwever. reveal the cotical signdicance of ornament in both enhanang and articulating the form and expression of contem- porary seruccure and ideas.  Canon A. Hrvor Flores  Sve also Arc Deco; Art Nouveau (Jugendstil); Barragin, Luis (Mexice): De Seijl; Deutscher Werkbund: Eisenman, Peter (United States); Foster, Norman (England); Guggenheim Maseum, Bibso, Horta, Victor (Belgium); inceenational Ex- hibition of Decorative Arts, Paris (1925); International Scyte; International Style Exhibition, New York (1932): Kahn, Louis (United States); Koolhaas, Rem (Netherlands); Loos, Adolf (Austria)y Mics van der Rohe, Ludwig (Germany); Symbolisea; van de Velde, Henri (Belgium); Vienna Secession  Further Reading Fernie, Eeic (evtinn). Ant Hntory aend In Methods A Cotncat Asthelogy, Londoe: Phaidon Prow. 1995 
jameson, Fredris. Poumodernism, 0, The Catrucal Loge of Lase Caprese, Durham, Narh Cambna. Duke Universiny Press, and Tendon: Verw, 1997  Nowhiee, Kare (editor), Tewraing a New Agendas for Architecture: An Anthology of Architectural Finan, 1965-1995, New York Pronceton Architectaral Press, 1996  Rone, Margarce. Thy Par-Madem and the Port Industrial, Cambodge and New Vork: Cambodge Unrenity Pees. 1991  Steele, Lames, Archuecrure Ted, London: Phaidon Press. 1997  Wogley, Mark. Phe Ancbiteceure of Decontrmttion: Deridai Haunt, Cambndge. Massachusetts: MIT Pres, 193  OTTO, FREI 1925- Architect, Germany  Frei Otto's contribution is avach greater than his act af bringing the tent into the 20th century and taking it past of the current architectural vocabulary would sugges. Not only did he high- tight minimal ligheweight seructures in architecuure as a liberat- ing forve and bridge to natural ur otyank form, but hes tormula- tion of membranc and cable-ner surface and convertible structures, as well ax lattice grid shells. led w the realizauon that they could be used tg advance an adaptable and fleable approach ta building. ‘This had the additional property of oprmizing the comumpuon of energy and materials while being mote respon sive to changing human requirements, Tle soughr to apply ecn- nomica lightweight whutions on a large scale to solve environ- menaal and microclimatic adaptation in harsh regions in simple, ingenious ways.  In place of the artit—anhitent who creates from his imagina tion, Ore substituted auramatic iterative processes to produce a series of structures from which he selected the fittest. Coinci- deoully, they were often ute most beautiful. This is encapsulated in hit operational phrase “form finding,” a procedure wherchy he classified structural shapes into systerm and chen chose one from among the many that best fic the task.  Brom 1931 wo 1943, Out attended Schadew School ar Zeh- Jendort, Berlin, as 2 trainee mason. in World War H, he served as a fighter piloe in the German air force, an expenence that unquesuonably condstioned him to chink im terms of tightweight solutions in architecture. At the end of a penod of compulsory labor service. Orta studied architecture ar the Technical Univer- sity in Berlin under Freese, Bickenbach, and Jobat, Soon after this, he tounded a srudio at Zehlendort (1952. 58). Its activities were laree transferred tw Sturtgart. where Onto established his new Institute for Lightweight Structures. Otto worked closely with Perer Scoymeyer, a German tent manufacturer who, from the carly year, served as both a client and a source of practical advice on tent fabrication cechaiques and design.  Historically, European urban tenes were fabricated with + timple predetermined geomeiry: consequently. there was no need fur architests or engineers to adopt a form-finding proce- dure, Otto broke with tent uradition and brought che tent into the Arh century by introducing more complex surface shapes that demanded a more sophisticated approach in determining their true shape. This happened in the 1950s, when the static analyvis of complex surface structures was only beginning. Oro employed models 10 define and test the behavior of his shapes. Betore the mid-1960s, his textile pavilions were made up of  primary anticlastic saddle shapes arranged additively, often in tepetitive symmetrical compositions.  The amall Bundesgarten textile pavilions are among Orto's mont clegant carly constructions, bath for their beauty and for theie simpticiey. The best are the riverside uheler and dance pavilion at Cologne (1957) and the small wat pavilions at Ham- burg (1963). These modest tene shelters integrated sesthetica with construction and display an udussal purity of conception chat was rarely cyualed un the later, larger, more eechnically eleb- orate structures that followed.  The German Pavilion of the Federal German Republic at Fxpo ‘67 (Montreal) represented a significant departure, being, many times larger and having a picturesque combanation of low funnel-shaped anchor poines and eye-shaped cable-loop high points attached to masts in a deliberately asymmetrical confign- cation, suggesting the up-and-down physical terrain of Germany.  The testaurant pavilions at the Swisa National Exhibidon at Lausanne (1964) intmduced cable nets for the first time to strengthen amd support a membrane, Prior to this, all Orto's ruck were fabricated from cotton canvas with modest spans of 20 to 30 meter. The Lausanne restaurant paviliom marked a new technical stage in modern tensile roots, when they could be said to have come of age in their‘introductian of a new cable-net technology.  Ono's new great opportunity came after he was appointed cool design consultant by Gunter Behnisch, who won the com- petition for the main stadium and indoor arenas for the Munich Olympics (1972), with a scheme inspired by the Montreal Ger- man Pavilion. The Ofympic roofs realized an catirely new scale for chix type of strucnire, which simulated the development of purely mathersataal computer-based procedure to determine their exact dimensions, shape, and behavior in parallel with elab- orate modeling techniques that allowed che new mathemarical procedures ww be cruss-checked.  Onto’s verwrility and reules creativity fed bim w eaplore few types of systems and applications chat exploded such unrec- ognized propenics of went as their flexibility and economical use af matenal to achieve new goaki of adaptability and respon- siveness to changing human and cnvironmeatal needs, His vwn- vertible of retractable routs are an instance of this, These roofs had a variable geometry that allowed them to be mechanically extended or rerracted—in effect, they were converted into self- erecting and self-sriking tents. A number of such convertible ranks were erected over swimming packs and sporting facilities in Germany. France. and elsewhere, but none proved so sculp- tually captivating or appropriate, in contrast with the historical main that it covers, a3 the Open-Air Theater at Bad Hersfeld, Henen (1968),  Falluwing completion of the Munich Olympic roofs, Otto received a variety of cornmissions, including the delightful um- brella roofs at Cologne (1971); the rools of che Conference Cenure at Mexca, Saudi Arabia (1974); the timber-grid-shell Multi-Purpose Hall and Restaurant ar Mannheim (1975); a sports complex and stadium at King Abdul Aziz University, Jed-  (1975-78) an aviary for Munich (1980) and the Dipto- matic Club ar Riyadh (1985),  Less active in the 1980s, Otto created a series of production pavilions for a German furniture manufactures (1988) based on his 11. test structure at Vathingen, a series of inverted bowls for his German pavilion at the Seville Expo (1992), and a remarks-  Olyingic Stadiam, north concourse, Munich, Germany (1971) © GreatBuildings. com  ble Gathic roof cover for the old shell of St. Nikolai Church. Hamburg (1988).  After 1972 Onto focused increasingly on the study and inter- pretation of biological structures, ar the same rime pursuing and extending his research into grid whells and other cops.  Ono must be ranked with Felix Candela, Richard Buckmins- ter Fuller, and Pier Lusgi Nervi as a structural innovarae. He was responsible for bringing the tent into line with 20th-centuty structural and materials technologies and thereby creating a new range of flexible building types. He is leas an architect in the conventional sense and much more an innovator and experimen- ter who worked in collaboration with other architects and struc- tural researchers, His most unique creation was his Institute for Lightweight Scrucnures ar Vaihingen, which depended so much on his personal vision that it coukd noc be conrinued without him. Because he wax interested in minimal structures, Oto was driven to explore minimal ligheweight sqructures in nature 10 farther his objectives.  Pisic Darw  Biography Born in Siegmar, Saxony, 31 May 1925. Accended the Tech- nische Universitde, Berlin; degree in engincering 1952; dactorate  in engsneering 1954, Served in the German Air Force 1943- 45; Prisoner of War, France 1945-47; prsan camp architect, Depot 501, Chartres, France 1946-47. Private practice, Zeh- lendurf, Berlin 1952 58; adviser ta L. Suumeyer and Company, Constance, Wes Germany 1953-74; founder, Development Ceotet for Lightweight Construction, Berlits 1947; established architecture studio in Zehlendort 1958-68; studio in Warn- bronn, West Germany from 1968. Professor, director, Inszitute. for Lightweight Structures, University of Sturrgatt 1964-91; vis- ining professor, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri 1958; vissting professor, Yake University, New Haven, Connecti- cur 1960; visinng pratessor, Massachuserts Instinute af Technal- ogy and Harvard Univessiry, Cambridge 1962; visiting pmfes- sor, University of Maracaibo, Venerucla 1962: vititing professor, Navonal Institute of Design, Ahmedabad, India 1966; visiting, professor, Ulm, West Germany 1969; visiting profesor, Interna- ponal Summer Academy, Salzburg, Austria 1971. [onotary fel- low, American Institute of Architects 1968; member, Akademie der Kanste, Berlin 1970; honorary fellow, Royal Insutute of British Architects 1982; member. Academia di Archacologica, Lettere ct Belle Arta, Naples 1983; member, Académie d’Archi- tecture, Paris 1983; member, International Academy of Archi- tecture, Sophia, Bulgaria 1987, Aga Khan Award for Aechitex: ture. with Rolf Gutbrad 1980,  
Selected Works  Bundogarienschau, dance floor tent, cnuance canopy, and tent shelters, Cologne. 1957  Bundesgartenschant, undulating tent, metnbtane wructure hall and stat hull, Hamburg, 1963  Sauw and Rocks Rewaurunt Pantion, Sua Nasional Exhiditen, Lawsanne, 1964  German Pavihon, Expo ‘67, Montreal, Canads (with Guthrod and Loonhands), 1967  Open-Aue Theater with Retractable Roof, Bad Henfetd, Germany (with Roeuberg and Hubner), 1968  Mobde Umbrella Rooh tor Mua Puvihen, Cologne, 1971  Olympia Stadasm, Arenas, and Roof, Muruch (with Behnisch, Leonhardt, atal Bubact), 1972  Hod and Conference Center, Mecca, Saudi Arabia (with Arup and Gutbeud), 1974  Multi-Puspoac Hall and Restaurant, Mannheim, Germany. 1975  Sports Hall, King Abul Atiz University. Jeddah, Saud: Arabia (wath Gerbrod, Henning, Anup, and Happohd), 1978  Great Aviary, Hellabruan, Germany (with Grill and Happold). 1980  Diplomaric Club. Riyadh. Saudi Arabia (wich Omrania and Happold), 1985  Producoon Pavibons, Wikhahn Furniture Factory, Bad Minder. Germany, 198K  Root Cover, $¢ Nikola: Church, Hamborg. 1988  German Pavilion. Seville Exposition. 1992  Selected Publications  Daw Rargende Dach: Geunlt ond Strukner, V4  recter Kenstraknancy icondnet with R Trostel snd F.K.  Schleves), 2 vols. 1962, 1966; a0 Tensile Suctures. Deviga, Serurture, and Caleadascan of Building of Cable, New, and Membranes. wanslaved by D Ben-Yaakow and T. Petz, 2 vols, 1967, 1969  HL Pubhecarens (edisor), 25 wal. 1969 85  Nartictiche Konstskteonen (with others:, 1982  Schriften und Reden, 1951 1983, vital by B. Buekhanh, 1984  Genatwerdang Zur Formennectung ia Natur, Techack, und Haxkaset, 1988  Further Reading  Frei Okto's principal publications in German are available in Engin translations His carly reports from Enrwacklangstsere fir den Lerchrbaus HEL) at Berlin-Zchiendarf, which commenced in Janiary 1948, ane toe penesalty available The farer (f-Publication series (see Selected Publicanons) 1 25 volumes chat began publication in 1966 provides vahiable devaileil tchnucal reports of the form finding and modelmg procedures. as well as reporting presentations ar colloquimms, at the Tnveituss Ar lechte Fichentragwerke (U3, at the Uneverdtat Srucgart. an ns sive at Scutrgan-Vaihingen  Deoumato, Lamia, Fre: Ores Tenis Seruvturrs A Selevied Bibliography, Mocinello, Iilinoi. Vare Biblingtaphien, 1979 Drew, Philip, Feri Ore: Form und Keosrrektion, Srutigart, Germany: Hatje, 1976: an Fret Orta ern wad Strvtare, Landon: Crnby  Leckwood Staples, and Boulder, Colorads: Wesmew Prew, 19°  Glaeser. Ludwig, The Wark of Feri Otto, New York: Muscum of Modeen An, 1972  Roland, Conrad, Feri Otte —Spannuntten teen wad Verte cam Lerohthen, Bedan: Ufleein, 1965: an Free Ooo Touran Srevctumn, trandated by CV, Amerongen. London: Longman, and New York: Pracger, 19%  Schana, Sabine. Pre: Onte, Hodo Raich Caalt finden auf dem Weg a erner Banker dev Minemalea: der Werkbund seige Fret Ose,  Fret Onto seign Beale Resch: Axsntellung su der Villa Sewck, Minchen, anlissiich der Preiswerterloung des Deutichen Werbundes Hayern 1992 an Fees Otte und Bode Ras, Suuregart, Germany. Axel Menges, 1995: as Fre’ Ore, Body Rasch: Feeding Form: Towards sm Arctutecoure of the Mininetl The Werktand Shows Frei Otte, Fret Otte Shuacs Bade Raict: Exhibseion im the Villa Siuch, Munich on the Occassen af the Qusurd of the 1992 Deuncher Werbbund Rayer Preat vo Feet Otte and Bode Rasch, Stunngan. Germany: Aucl Menges, 995  Teague, Edward H., Feri Orso: A Bibliography and Busldimy Lust, Monticello, llinoix Vance Bibbugraphies, 1985  OUD, J.J.P. 1890-1963 Architect, the Netherlands  In the 1930s, architecture critics on both sides of the Actantic were hailing the apostles of the International Style: Le Corbusier, Walter Gropius, Mics van der Rohe. and the Duschman J.J.P. Ord. ‘There is no question that Oud was an imporeant figure in modern architecture, yet in a 57-year careet he undertook only 90 projects, lexs than half of whicl: were realized. Just five were outside the Netherlands, and only anc of those was buitt.  Qud began his studies in 1903 at the Quellinus School of Decorative Arm in Amsterdam. ‘Uhre years later, he designed his first building: 4 howe for a relative in his native Purmerend. fn 1907, under pressure trom his father, he began to srudy archi- tecrure, finding work 2s a draftsman in the office of Joscph Cosypers and Jan Stuijt. In May 1908 be beft them to enruil at the Nauonal School for Drawing Education, where in 1910 he was awarded the Seructural and Mechanical Engineering Draft- ing Diploma; he augmented his studies with various courses ar the Deitt Institute of Technology. In 1932 Oud worked briefly in che Munich office af Theador Fischer (who was then engaged in public housing and urban redevelapmenn) and arvended Fi achet's lectures at the Munich Polytechnic.  Oud returned to Holland eathusiastic about an architecture hhased on new consurustion and materials, but his practice in Purmerend produced only a few vernaculaz buildings: che Vaor- uit Laborer’ Asocianon promises (1911), che Schinkel Cinema (1912), and a house (1912) 1 Aalseer, In 1913 Oud moved to Leiden, but he found hide work unsil, in 1915-16, he de- signed the Leiderdorp housing eseare with Willem Marinus Dudek.  tn 1916 Ohad met the painter-critic Then van Doesburg and. together with architects Jan Wils and Bart van der Leck and expatriate Hungarian painter Vilmos Huszir, founded the De Sphinx art club, Soon, joined by philosopher Anthony Kok snd painter Piet Mondrian, they formed the loos-knit group of avant-garde artists known at De Srijl. For varying periods over the next decade, others came and went. Membenhip seems 00 have consisted of westing for the polemical journal De Sey, ed- tted by van Ducsburg: beeween 1918 and 1920, Oud published seven pieces. However, he did not sign De Stijl's November 1918 manifesto, finally withdrawing the group in 1921 because. like all the rest, he tell cue with van Doesbu  Meanwhile, they collaborated on several projects. including the Altegonda villa (1917) at Katwijk aan Zee and the De Vonk holiday house (1917) ar Noordwijkeshout. Van Doesburg's role  was limited to color schemes and stained-glass windows. The assaciation ended in 1919, when Oud disagreed about colon for a public housing scheme. Oud also expounded on Frank Loyd Wright's work for De Stijl as well as the European archi  tecrural community, Unlike hi De Scijt colleagues Wits and Robert van ‘t Hoff, he was interested morte in Wright's technol  ogy than in his philosophy. Oud had hnown about Wright since 1912, but his work showed none of the American's influence woul some unrealized projecta—concrete low-income houses (1918) and industrial buildings (1918-19) for his father’s Pure  esend distillery—echoed Wrighvan forms. Although Oud thought thar Waghe's architecture was “llawkes," he accurately predicted widespread. ill-informed imicacon.  In 1918 Oud became the Rorrerdam municipality's chiet housing architect. His bland schemes in the Spangen (1919-20) and Tusschendijken (1920-23) districes of Rotterdam led ob- server two conclude thar he was 4 socially concermed architeus He later denied thar motive. stating thas he simply sought “a good and agreeable form for [the housing] |. as exact and as clear as the form of 2 good vat.” Those words puint ww 4 change of path, Oud read Le Carbusies’s Vers Une Architecture (1923) soon after it was published. and hic subsequent work demon- strates 1 immediate cflet. Ha worker's row houses (1924-27)-- brick disguised as wooctete. in Hock van Holland  Netherlands Exhibiuon Hall, main catrance from weut (1969) © GreatBuddings com  and his “dwelling Fords” (1925-2) in Ronerdam's Kiefhock ate stuccoed white cubes. Neither scheme hinted ar Wright or De Stijl. Indeed, Qud's only references to the lateer can he found in the Rotterdam Witte Dorp site office 11923) and the Café De Unie facade (1925), boeh in Rotterdam.  Oud's reputating a a madernie was emablihed in 1927 by a “model dwelling” — znocher cow of white boxes — for the Stutt- gant Weissenhofiiedlung exhibition. Thereafter, largely through his frenetic. self-publicaty, he was applauded in Europe and espe- ctally in Armenia as a leader of whar Heney-Russell Hitchcock and Philp Johnson dubbed the Internaponal Style. Johnson kates asserted that Oud inspiced him to become an architect. He commussioned the Hollander to design a house (1931) toe his parents, bur it was newer built.  After shout 1928, Qud's anxiety about fame, combined with his workload, plunged him into depression far several years. He accepted few commissions, and fewer were realized—notably, a church (1928-29) at Kiethock and wome furniture after 1931 Public housing proposed for Blijdorp. Rotterdam, in 1931 re- inained unbuilt, The breakdown interrupeed his caret for al- most a decade and changed his dewtiny.  Oud’s career Linped dhrough the 1930s. In 1935 he resigned lus puse w concentrate on private practice, Three years later, he was offered a | taevaed professorship but declined st, and Gropius  
was appointed. Only some interton of the liner Nieuwe Amster dam (1937) and a new headquarters (1938-42) foe the Shell Company in The Hague were realized. For che Shell building. Oud chine again in embrace ormamene, and when his former American devotees aiw phixugraphs of it after World War ID, they immediately consigned him to the wrap heap. accusing him of compromising modernnt principles.  Qud’s st major project, a Nanonal Congres Center in The Hague, begun un 1956, was unfinished at hin death. Nuching distinguishes it as his of even as Holland's. Hes slender ocuvte reveals him as a secker after architectural cruth in the Dutch vernacular and én the wock of Wright and. because be was cager for recognition. in the anonymous. austere forms of Western European objectiviey, Perhaps in the Shell building. he found ir in being auc to bimselll.  Donarp Laxcathap  See aio Amsterdam Netherlands; Corbusier, Le (Jeanseret, Charles-Edouard) (France); De Stijl Doesburg, Theo van (the Netherlands); the Nethertamds; Rotterdam, the Nether- lands: Weissenhofsiedluag, Deutscher Werkbuad (Stuttgart 1927)  Selected Publications  Auibding and Teamwork, Ronendam: privately publahed, 1981  Mein Wag on “De Sojl.” The Hague: Niggh co Van Dumar, 1958.  Hellanduche Actneckise, Muish: Latygcn, $926; as Holandse Aechitecensr, tranalced inco German from the Dutch. Nijmegen, The Netherlands: Socaulisticu Uligesss} Nejueegers, 1983  Barboeri, Umberto, J f-P. Oud, Bologna: Zanachdli, 1986  Langmead, Donal. {.2.?. (ud and the lnrernanenal Sryle. A Aw diblompaphy, Westport, Connecucut: Greenwood, 1999  Ond, Hans, JP Ond Arciistels, 1890-1963, We Hague: Nugh en. Van Disuas, 1984  Taverne Ed and Dolt Brockhuiten, Her dieil-gebence van fj) P. One: Ontwcerp en receptie. Ohad’ Shell Building: Penign and Receptoon (bilingual Dosh English edition), Rotterdam: NAL Uiigevers, 1995  OUR LADY OF PEACE BASILICA  Designed by Picrre Fakhoury; completed 1989 Yamoussoukro, Ivory Coast  Our Lady of Peace Basilica in Yamoussoukro, Ivory Coast. was designed by the | chanese-Ivorian-Feemwh architect Pierre Fak- houry for the late President Houphoute-Boigny, who donated the edifice as a personal gift to the Roman Carholic Church on 9 and 10 Seprember 1990. With an appraised price ag of U.S.$150 ta $300 million (15 percent of the Evory Caast national budget in 1987), chis personal gift 1a Pope Johns Paul II holds a unique position in the hiscory of architecture. Built un three years (1986-89), ot is taller than St. Peter's dome in Rome, which can fit within it. Uniike its contemporary, the Hassan It Mosque, which could not be seen from a distance in the center of Casablanca, Our Lady of Peace Basilica could he seen from the center of the cown at Yamoussoukro. The visibility of its 300-ton silver dome from a lang distance encourages a curious spatial incecaction between a pedestrian and the monument.  The face chat out of an estimated toul national populsion of 12.91 mitlion only sbour 10 percenc are Catholics makes it difficult to justify a Roman Catholic church on the scale of Our Lady of Peace Basilica at Yamoussoukro, When the national population daca are broken down according to religious prefer- ences, the scale of the project raises issues of vacial justice and power dynamics berweet: Cathalua and Christians of other de- bominations as well 4s among Moslems and people who believe in other religions, For cxample. 27.5 percent af the toral popula- tion of the country ts Christian, 40 percent is Moslem, 17 per- cent 3s ancestor worshipers, and che remaining 16 percent might bdieve in nothing of in other religions.  francons Mathcy (1990), chef conservator of the Ivorine Mu- seum of Fine Arcs, suggests that what one expenences al Yamous- souks is an illusion that “Rome -. . is no longer in Rome, bur Rome 1s in Yamousseukro”—rhat the basilica is designed convince people thar places like Rame can be replicated in Africa. The basilica is partially obscured from view until one goes through a modest onc story building whose explicit symmetry, through the treatment of its mof, cornice, and edges, forecasns the chasicism of the main edifice tht lies beyond. Moreover, the sale of Our Lady of Peace Basilica becomes clearer as one ascends the steps keading to the parvis! The cloister of Doric columns dwarfs the individual as one ascends the steps, and the hases of the columns are at cre level. Its a humbling experience as one realizes how small one is compared to the ivory trunks — the columns —ol the edifice. Once ane reaches the parvis, the structure exhibrs itself in component parts that sogether form a unified whole. ‘The cruciform Aoor plan resembles others. such as St. Peter's in Rome, but with a arcle similar to the Roman Pantheon inscribed inside it. Whereas the crow forms rhe sir- tounding parvix, the circle forms the interior of the shrine. The crucitix forts of the balcuny and its cuffed ceilings read very well. ‘The gigantic shiny Doric columns read hath sndividually and vollectively in harmany as they hold the fluor of the halcony abave, and the flutes of che shafts emphasize the muscles and strength of cach column. An ambulatory skylight goes around the main chapel and separates the baluony from the tambour, Creating a transition space between the parvis and the chapel. The wansision space is further highbgbred by a layer of marble that screens the vitrail drum of the shrine ar che rop, acting both as a protecuve shield for the vitrail and as a transitional demarcation from the parvis. ‘The articulation of the parvs cul- Mmunates on the rectangulac and linear stained-glass bays thar enckee the shrine. especially the enormous doors. The of the parvis makes its own starement like any other part of the edifice: it is 2 cross that spreads cut to the four major cardinal points and is lavishly decorated with ivery-white, ochre, and brown marbles on which anc wes onc’s reflection while wanding.  The creatment of the floor of the parvis with ivory-white, brown, and ochre marbles is extended to the esplanade to create a sense of continuity of the spaces. A careful observation of che souchern facade of the edifice shaws six major segments chat sonsiture the superstructure of the basilica in four basic colon: (E) a cruatix platorm (a white, solid base) chat is raised above the surrounding fields by layers of steps, (2) a choiser of majestic ivory-colored Doric columns that give volume and shade vo the platform, (3) an ivory-colored terrace that forms the fricte and the porricocs of the edifice following the crucifix plan, (4) an ivory-colored tambour that is braced with pairs of Corinthian  columns, (5) a silver dome with double-spaced cule on its panel, and (6) a golden copula that is surmounted with a golden cross, This is che fundamental tacade af the edifice, except for the northern facade. which has an elaborate esplanade that is defined by the peristyle, Here. the oblong peristyle spreads ate arms out as onc walks toward it  The canopy focated in the center of the basilica 1 the fiest structure one secs when entering the shrine, ft has four polished bronze and bras spitaling trcetike columns, repped with 4 light and dark blue chandelier with center and edges tammed by beilliantly congated strings of crystals. Here is the cynosure. The chandelier seats under a throne of God. Next ts the dome, whab Tises more than 60 meters with a diameter of 90 meten and undoubtedly is che largest dome in the workt, Architect Pierre Fakhoury produced a drawing that shows how the dome of St Perer’s Rasilica in Rome coukl fit comfortably inside the dame of Our Lady of Peace Basilica. fe is made primarily of laminated aluminum panels chat are installed on a frame of galvanized mec. ft aby crowned by a waterproof vitrail at its pinnacle. on which is seated a 38-meter-high stainless-xtcel golden lantern. Altogether, the dame weighs 320 cons. The glistening burgundy-colored Afncan iroko-wood pews follow the citculas form of the intemal floor plan, and here, undike the hall of the mosques whose interiors are to be open and teve of furniture for prayers. the pews are wouden gems. delyhtfully made tw reflect the extravagance af the entire project. Next are the vitrails: there is no building on the face of the earth that can bosst of such an amaunt of luxuriously done stained glass as in Our Lady of Peace Basilica, cach ane finished ta narrate 4 biblical passage. There ase 12 rectangular bays of virrail. 21 meters high by 11 meters wick, and 12 cvlindrical bays, 28 mezers high by 11  meters wide. In the ambulatory balcony ate 12 bays of Apostle windows, 13 meters high by 8 meter wide. The largest of the windows ts the Holy Spirit window, 40 micters wale, resulang in a total stained-glass surface area of 7400 square meters. Bach window 1s luxurizndly colored to mimic the African vegetation, eupevially the palma. As one wanders around the balcony. the gant Connthian pilasters (a total of 48) that delineate the Apot- thes window hays read very well. More important, the tinted air from the surrounding glistening variegated vitrail that ericloves the shrine makes che interne louk like a giant jewelry box. More- over, une obtains a perspective of the ranmda and iu cylindsical pews, especially the drum of the base of the hakany, which is tartied by 12 hybridized tonic columns, A series of 12 arnately cuffed barrel vaules are held by four Dori columns cach, Twelve gpant lonx columns contain elevaton w whisk people to the balcony. It es indeed a “merreiliewx (marvelous)” spectacle. as Francors Marhcy (1990) has suggested, but the basilica has re- ceived mixed reviews frum the worldwide press because it was buik in a countey that was suffering severe economic problems. Some Catholic priests protested the building of the edifice. One poicw began a hunger suike when the pope went to consecrate it, contirming the fact thar the editice divided opinions along tetigious, class, cehnic, and political affiliatinns,  Nam Ente  Basstica of Our Lady of Peace, Yamoussoukro: Basifique Notre Dame deb Paix, BY Yarnnisoukro, Céte d’lvence, 1990  Fakhoury. Pierre. La Baadigue Neree Davee de bt Parr, Yamousoukre, Liege: Mardaga. 1990  Mathey, Franco, “Preface” in fa Raatique Newre-Damae de be Par, Yamousionkre, Lege: Mardaga, 190 