BOOK Vittorio M Lampugnani.pdf
General Editor’s Preface  The predecessor of this work, the Encyclopaedia of Modern Architecture, was first published in 1963. Now, after an interval of twenty years. new, expanded and completely revised version is available  Any attempt at an overview of architectural development. such as that presented in an encyclopaedia, is inevitably rooted in the s+ sumptions and historical perspectives of the period in which it is compiled. It comes as ue surprise, therefore, that in the carly iyo. an over-riding concern was to present an extensive panorama of architectural modemism, with the resule that concepts and movements ike con- temporary historicism or Art Deco were despite their wide implications omitted Similarly, important figures such as Hemnich Tessenow, then not the subject of much discus individual alongside a Mies van der Rohe or a Terragin: even Erich Mendelsohn was included primarily for his bold use of modern materials, rather than for the expressive and sculptural qualities of his work; and, in the context of building materials, glass, steel and reinforced concrete primary stimuli in the evolution of a new architecture  In short, after more than twenty years, the Preparation of a new edition could not he restricted to bringing existing entries up to date and introducing new names and concepts Rather, the entire work had to be revised and given a broader historical basis. It is thus nat 3 matter of chance that this latest edition appears under a different title, one in which the emotive and subjective concept of the Modern Move- ment has been replaced by 4 neutral designation based on the period covered  The scape of this encyclopaedia is, then. the architecture and urban planning of the 207); century scen in an overall spectrum and pre- sented in three different general categories ci subject-matter: biographies of individual archs- teets; surveys of architectural developinents tt individual countries; and overviews of move- ments, groups and stylistic trends.  The number of individual biographical vo- tries which can be included in an encyclopacdia  sion, were not accorded entries  viewed as  were accorded their own entries  of this type is of necessity limited, but an mdex of proper names is also included for thy reader's convenience. In cach case the decision for or against inclusion has to be hased on at variety of criteria, and many an omission may well sccm unjust individual countries whose sigiiicant architec-  The same holds true in the case of chose  tural output is the subject of closer serutiny: as with the biographical entries, the choice has had to be severely restricted and the coveraue general, The siruation is no different. cher. in the case of mevements, groups aid trends: their inclusion brings with it an invelyvement ip the questionable gaine of philological classiticanion and Jabelling - something which inevitably tends to categorize in crude terms the commples and mutofarious elements that interact with each other wa cultural contexte  The era in which an cneyelopacdia could bey clains to being a tool for ‘knowing evervihin’ past. Denis Diderut d'Alembert could stil put forch wt choroughts unified and complete syste of hurnan kinew=  and Jean-Buapuste  ledge as a manifesta of the Enlightenment Today, when knowledge presents itech us fragmentary and contradigtory. iis be longer possible ta produce encyelopacdias an x hich  great deal of varted information is pistaposes with equal weighting ofter a handbook which contains and even more a Book to provide the reader  Pus. cur sina ete is te  Wyer ier  wath a oserse of erienbaben within 6 Sigs context, nether than Co presente detiagy aid complete compihotran af fats Tbe ets berra ibbs edn works devoted dey opis Teg bos Fe noes) Scitercni thi Gee pes ss et neralaycrk dirs sre tendon te ' boa et by Vipin boo ceteris ons Sa ase ‘ Po patire de hihi iad rant rs Oe Peed os iad es bar tacit So che ema as keer ad Hess weet Neil tives eddie poe . oan waed Ws ed as .  
themselves embodied shifts in entirely new directions); the countries are those which have witnessed important and influential architec- tural developments: and the movements those which have had a decisive influence on the entire architectural panorama  Even if the final responsibility for the selec- tion and the balancing of the entries lies with the editor, there is certainly no other type of book in Which one rehes more on che help of others than as the case with an encyclopaedia. The present work is the result of the collective efforts of a group of colleagues, almost: without exception well-acquainted and often close friends, who, holdin varying viewpoints, united an this conimon purpose These  despite  contributors cainot all) be suitably  thanked here, and least of all Axel Menges, who. was the most closely involved with the book asa relentless reader and a most competent con- tributor, as well as bearing the brunt of the task of co-ordination; and Gerd Hage. who was naturally also closely involved as a contributor. friend, critic, adviser and publisher.  Finally. mention must be made of the fact that a significant part of my own work on this book was done at Columbia University, New York, especially on those articles which dircetly concem the USA. This would not have been possible without the generous support of the American Council of Learned Societies and, in particular, the personal and friendly interest of Richard Downar, Director of the American Studies Program. VML  
RB  List of contributors  Friedrich Achleitner Reyner Banham Barry Bergdoll Moritz Besser Peter Blake Christian Borngraber Robert Bruegmann Max Cetto Alexandre Cirici-Pellicer Jean Louis Cohen Robert L. Delevoy Philip Drew Tobias Faber Kenneth Frampton Jorge Glusberg Vittorio Gregotti Oswald W. Grube Ids Haagsma  Hilde de Haan Horst Hartung Gerd Haye  Gilbert Herbert Antonio Hernandez Thomas Herzog John M, Jacobus. Jr Falk Jaeger  Jurgen Joedicke William H., Jordy Walter KieB  Bjorn Linn  David Mackay  VML cM KM RM HM AM NM RMi KM HEM LM CFO Pa WP Po CR PR R  PCvS  MS GS  PS  $s BT GV IV  FW AW IBW AWi HY  Vittorio Magnayo Lampugnans Carolina Mang  Karl Mang  Robert Maxwell Harald Meck  Axel Menges Norbert MeBler Robin Middleton Kirino Mikkola Henrique E. Mindlin Leonardo Mosso Christian F. Otto Jurgen Paul Wolfgang Pehnt Julms Posener Christopher Riopelle Peter Rump? Joseph Rykwert Peter C. von Seidlein Margit Staber  Gavin Stamp  Pekka Suhonen  Julia Szabo  Barbara Tilson Giuha Veronesi Jacobus Johannes Vrieni Frank Werner Arnold Whittick  Tam Boyd Whyte Alfred Willis  Uajime Yarsuka 
Aalto, (Hugo) Alvar (Henrik). b. Kuortane. Finland 188. d. Helsinki 1y76. Studied at the Polytechnic in Helsinki from ty 16, graduating in 1g24, he was a pupil of Armas Lindgren and Lars Sonck. In the following years he travelled widely in Scandinavia, Central Europe and Italy and was probably active for a short time in the Planning Office of the Gothenburg Pair of 1923. His career began ofheially with the Tampere Industrial Eximbiuon of although various minor works dating from his student years are known  In 123 A. opened his first office in [ywdsk va, and in 192s he married the architect: Amo Marsio, wha was to be his most important collaborator until her death in ty 49, above allin handling the production and direction of the firm of Artck Wooden Furniture. which way first conceived in 1y28 in conjunction with the construction of the Sanatorium at Paine  In 1927 A. left Jyvaskyla. where le had designed several tm portant buildings including the Workers” Club of 1923-5 and the building for the Patriots’ Associations. 1y27 4 which belong to bis pre-functional, neo-class- cal period, He settled in Turku. then Fintand’s most artistically receptive city. These were Key years in his development as an architect, a period in which his works attest to the sam direction and the : as the most advanced contemporary work in Central Europe. The standardized block of Hats of 1927-8 in Turku, with its prefabricated concrete elements, is comparable with the contemporary experiments of *Mivy ¥ Rohe and *Gropius in Stuttgart  In ty2y A. worked in collaboration with *Bryggman on the exhibition held to celebrate the 7ooth anniversary of the city of Turki: staged one year before the better-known Stoun- holm Exhibition designed by * Asplund. it was. together with the house A. built in Turku. che first complete and public expression of moder architecture in Scandinavia. In the same year 4 was drawn into the international arehitectus avant garde as the result of Sigfhied Giedien praise and through his participation ar t+ meeting of *CIAM. This year also marks te  Waa.  works  same level of quality  der  beginning of his relucionslip wrth artists se7 Fernand Léy nied Moholy-Nagy. Georges Brague and Viesands: Calder. A. and his family moved to Helsiks on ty3t. an event which signalled his comple imtegredion into Finnish cultural dite  The highly important Turku period closed with the shit of Avs work and of Finnish architecture in general towards modermivin. At the sante time his work in Turku anticipated the later, fully developed Aalto style. Vhus. che works of this period already encapsulated the outstanding characterisuc of ASS architeeture its capacity to be both of its time and essentially timeless, Examples are the Headquarters of the Turan Sanonut newspaper in Turku 612 ty28 ye the Library in Viipurt fiy27. iy gee and the Sanatorium of Southwest Finland in Paina fi. 1y2g-4ari works date trom this period, many of which  Constantin Brune  Numerous other were soon to become classics of modern arehi- tecture: A.sown house in Helsinki ig34. 025  6), the Finnish Pavilion at the Pans Pxposnon Universelle frugs. 193 vthe complex far the Celhdose Factory in Snniha fiy3s the Villa Mairea, near Noormakku ‘1 the Finnish Payikon atthe New York World's Fair tigay. tas ys anil Kanttia Saye. igh gar unexccuted designs of tis period ure esentutl La  Ly ite;  he Terrace House th  Morcover, soverdl  gorthe complies themes or As  a tenderstandis work. These include: the Blomberg Cine Helsinki fiya8i the vomipeution desig: far ily extension ofthe Ci  Aalto.  
Aalto. Cellulose Factury, Sunila (13s 2. 1y36 oi  Aalto. Town Hail. Sivnatsalo (iugy. tyso 2)  (1938); the competition entry for the Huka district in Helsink! {1o4o}: the ‘Experimental City’ (1940), and the development plan for the Kokemaki valley (:y41 2)  The war years, during which A. served on the front, and the period immediately after the war, in which he was acnvely engaged in reconstruction work in Preland (including the development plan for che ruined capital of Finnish Lapland, Rovanivni, which he drew up in 1944-5), interrupted Cie orchitect’s cre- ative development; around i: <2. however, his fertile mind was directed tov o*!s even more complex problems, considerin;; the fundamental physical, psyci. 9) <1, social and cultural needs of the era. Fro :i:is period date: the Senior Students’ Dorm -:.. (Baker  nuctancously  House) at the Massachusetts Institute of Tech- nology in Cambridge, Mass. (1947-8); and the Town Hall in Saynitsalo (1949, (9s0 2), a umeless masterpiece in which a love of ma terials and a romantic sense of space are rediscovered as a means to enhance the social and political values of the community. The unrealized design for the cemetery chapel in Malm in north Helsinki (1950) reflectsa psycho- logical sensitivity to human fragility and a respect for the pain experienced by those having. to face the fact of another person’s death; here Aalto achieved the profundity and tenderness of high poetry, for which no parallel exists in the architecture of this period. Likewise unrealized, the cemetery project for Kongens Lyngby, near Copenhagen (1931), succeeded more than any other design in encapsulating A.’s rela- tionship to Nature as a logical collaborator in the creative process. Finally, the project for the Vogelweidplatz in Vienna (1953) expresses another recurrent and complex theme in A.’s work — the effect on the individual of being handled as part of the greater mass.  A. achieved at this point an absolute control in the handling of technique and space, based on his thirty years’ experience and enriched by his continual involvement with human and psy- chological needs. This was also the period of his urban involvement, culminating in his different plans for the centre of the Finnish capital (1959- 73). His most important buildings in Helsinki include: the National Pensions Institution (1948, 1952-6); the Rautatalo Office Building (1952, 1953—5); the Cultural Centre (1955-8); the Administration Building of the Enso-  
Aalto. Culeural Centre. Flelsinkt (russ: 8}  Gutzeit Company (1959, 1960-2): the Seandi- navian Bank Building. (1962, 1962 4): the University Bookshop (1962, 1966- y); the Con- cert and Congress Hall (1y62, 1y7-71): and finally the ‘Finlandia’ conference centre and concert hall (1970, 1973-5).  The architect Elissa Makiniemi, whom A had married in 1952, collaborated increasingly in his later works, and particularly on the extension to the Polytechnic in Oranienn and the Lappia Cultural Centre in Rovaniemi, the latter built 1970-5 as part of the administrative and cultural centre originally projected in 1963 Since 1976 Elissa Aalto has continued the work of A.’s office, having finished work left incum- plete or still at the planning stages at the time of the master’s death, including the Essen Opere House (19s9ff.), the Civic Centre in Jyvisky (1964ff.), and the church at Lahti (competition project 1950, realized 1970ff.)  In addition to work in Helsinki, a whol series of buildings, development plans ant Projects outside the capital bear witness to 1 high quality of A.’s design capabilities and tat: profundity of his thought, deeply rooted ini. historical, cultural, and geographical traditiei:. of his country. For example: the prograne  Aalto. Vaokscuniska Church, Giitra trust oy  and the prototype houses tor the reconstruction alter the war (gg). the master-plin for bratra (1947-83): the regtonal pha tor Lapland tgs:  shi the campus of the College of Pducation  Jyvaskyla (iyse, t9sa-6), the centre ef Sei  ajoki with the Procestunt Church (rasa. 198s 60), the Town Hall fiyde, tute si. bibrars (1963, 1964-8) and Parish Commiuanity Phouse (1663. tod Ob ASS own summer hase an Muuratale (1983 Munkkiniems (last si the aan boilduns ot the Polytechnic ia bnwira Gase, past uo thy  his own studi cn  Vaoksenniska church. Inmatra (ous@. caso ue the Muscum af Central Finland Ie casa la frgsg. tee tn the Pabrary er the Polarg isis  Mest hiye gy. byes Gi the Sports eters  BEAL bums  er Peucatian, iss  Atte  habs Aivar Mincum  sible por ss  Wie dk. Prog ts outside Pia 1 Ceo neaddhte nm re thas oo ese cre t  1 Don - ] sey ' pyso fi NPs: tarred n moun the Nort Poorman css  
Aalto. Maison Carré, azochessur- Guyotnie, France (ys ub  Aalto. Chorch at Riola di Vergato (iget) 78  1969-73); the apartment block in- Bremen's Neue Vahr development (loss, tys9-62); the cultural centre (1ysk. 1089 62) and the parish community centre (19s, 1960 2) In Woifs- burg; the Vastmanland-Dala Students’ Associ- ation headquarters in Uppsala (1y61, 1963. 5): Scandinavia House in Reykjavik (1962-3.  1965-8); the interior design of the Institute of  International Education, New York (1903, 1g64-5); the Schonbubl apartment house, Lu-  cere, (1965, 1966-8), the Library of Mount Angel Benedictine College, Mount Angel, Oregon (1965-6, 1967-70): and the parish community contre in Riola di Vergato, near Bologna (1966 78). Among A.’s unrealized projects these for town halls in Gothenburg (1gss-7). Marl (1957) and Castrop-Rauxel (1y65), fora cultural centre in Leverkusen (1962), and for muscums in Bagh- dad (1958) and Shiraz (1970).  The furniture, lighting fixtures and other useful objects designed by A. in conjunction with his individual building projects fram 1928 on, and produced under his supervision, re- Hected the same development stages as are seen in his architecture. These interior fittings  were  were always conceived as ‘detached parts’ of the particular building for which they were in- tended - they should not be regarded simply as instruments of, but rather as one aspect of an all- encompassing architectonic vision. LM (] Aalto, Alvar, ‘Rationalism and Man’, The Architectural Forum (New York), September  1938; ——, ‘Zwischen Humanisimus und Matcrialismus’, Der Bax (Vienna). nos. 7/8, 19$§; —. Problemi di architettura’, Quaderni  ACT (Turin), November 1956; Labd, Giorgia, Alvar Aalto, Milan 1948; Gutheim, Frederick, Alvar Aalto, New York 1960; Mosso, Leonardo, L'opera di Alvar Aalto, Milan 196s: Alvar Aalto, ts 1922-62, Zurich 1963; Alvar Aalto, H: 1963-70, Zurich 1971; Alvar Aalto, HI: Projekte und letzte Zeichnungen, Zurich 1978;  
Pearson, P. 1D., Alvar Aalto, New York (978, 1980; Mosso, Leonardo, Alvar Aalte (exhibition catalogue), Turin 1981; Quantill, Malcolm, Alvar Aalto: a critical study, London 1983.  Abramovitz, Max, b. Chicago, 1908. Studied at the University of Mlinois at Champaign- Urbana, Columbia University in New York, and at the *Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris. In 194t he entered the office of Wallace K *Harrison and Jacques André Fouilhoux; from 194$ to 1976 he was Harrison's partmer.  QO The Architecture of Max Abramovitz, Champaign-Urbana, III. 1963.  Adler, Dankmar, b. Stadt Lengsfeld, near Weimar, Germany 1844, d. Chicago tyoo. The son of a cantor, A. began his drawing studies at fifteen. Emigrated to Detroit, 1854. Worked in association with A.J. Kinney, 1869-71; Edward Burling, 1871 9; Louis H. Sullivan, 1881 95 (*USA; *Chicago School).  With Burling, he collaborated on numerous designs during the building boom in Chicago which followed the great fire of 1871. In 1879, he set up independent practice and was joined two years later by Sullivan. His most important work was the Central Music Hall in Chicago (later demolished to provide space for the present retail store of Marshall Field and Co.), which was entirely A.’s work Sullivan’s decorative organ grilles. Finished in 1879, it was the prototype for a subsequent series of theatres by the firm, notably the Auditorium Building. The planning, layout and lighting were noteworthy in these build- ings, although A. was praised primarily for his instinctive mastery of acoustics. Sullivan rose rapidly to the position of chief draughtsman During his later years, A. managed the cn- gineering and business aspects of the firm and was active in various architectural organiza- tions, introducing many progressive reforms and attempting to improve the position of architecture in American society. Among lis works were a scrics of interesting synagogues one, Anshe Ma’arev, for his — father’s congregation,  D Salzstein, Joan; ‘Dankmar Adler: the Mati, the Architect, the Author’, Wisconsin Architect 38.  except for  Aida, Takefumi, b. Tokyo 1937. A member 01 the *Architext group, he represents an architec  ture of voncealent, be the care alien the building itself) asin bis PE Gastinate Sa  garten in Osaka (1974). ora camserois resus  in architectural expression. asa the Nuss. House in Fujisawa (1972) or in the Annihilation House in Matsuura (also 1972) AM M1 The Japan Archiver (Tokyo), 232. vol. st (1976), no. 6 pp. 29 38: op. cit, (6977), nos. 1ofit. pp. sa 4.  Fivol. 52  Aillaud, Emile, b. Mexico 1902. The housing estates which A. built after World War JI in France, such as Les Courtili¢res in Pantin (1ys5  §6, 1987-60), Wiesberg at Sorbach (rysy, 1961 ff) and La Grande Borne at Grigny (1904-71). are representative of the attempts to compen= sate for the uniformity which resulted from extensively industrialized constructional meth- ods (principally heavy construction cmploving prefabricated reinforced-conercte panels) by adopting more individuatizing lrrban planning strategies. ‘This is chiefl arrangement of the building muysey, reduced wo smooth abstract forms, in curved serpentine compositions, through the integration of works of art; and finally through the careful handling of public spaces, at ines eccentrically shaped and colourfully by given an impetus to identify: with dei  chieved in the overall  ated. The residents are there-  environment. AM CL Dhuys, Joan-Frangeis, L'aretutenture selon Emile Ailland, Paris 1083  ostaty Pann  Aillaud. Les Courtilicres tous Tiyss G, tysF 60}  
Albini, Franco, b. Robbiate, Como, 1905, d. Milan 1977. Studied at Milan Politecnic diploma 1925. From 1930 he practised alone and after iygs2 with Franea Helg: in 1962 Antonio Piva joined the practice, followed in 1965 by A.’s son Marco. He was a professor at Milan Politecnico, 1963-77. and a member of *CIAM.  The Pavilion for the Istituto Nazionale delle Assicurazione (INA) at the Milan Congress of 1935. A.’s first executed work, exhibits already in unmistakable fashion his. straightforward reductivist style, which is not uninfluenced by the architectural vocabulary of *Mies van der Rohe. His style is characterized by formal restraint, geometric order, technical perfection and the careful attention to detail.  A. applied these principles in the totality of his artistic activity. Important stages in his strictly-defined architectural work are: the Favio Filzi workers’ housing in Milan (1936; with Renato Camus and Giancarlo Palanti); the Villa Pestarini, also in Milan (1938); the INA Building in Parma (1951); and the department store La Rinascente in Rome (1957 -62; with Franca Helg). in which the mat black steel construction takes up the moulding patterns of  Albini. La Rinascente departmer' store, Rome (with Franca Helg; 1957-62)  Roman Renaissance palaces, while the infill panels harmonize with the existing urban envi- ronment through their reddish colour and granular texture. Representative of his interior schemes and restorations, principally of mu- seums, is the Musco del Palazzo Bianco at Genoa (1951), where the metaphysical spatial effects of clear geometries and transparent or intersecting glass surfaces became prototypical; the Musco del Tesoro di San Lorenzo (1934-6), also in Genoa, with its crystalline dovetailed ground-plan and dramatic lighting effects; and the restoration of the Chiostro degli Eremitani for the municipal muscum in Padua (1969-74). A.’s industrial design work extends from his role in the team-designed metal chair for the 1936 Triennale to the circular ‘Margherita’ armchair of Spanish cane and bamboo (with Franca Helg) for the (y60 Triennale. Among his town-planning activities, the plan for Reggio Emilia (1947-8) is noteworthy; Giancarlo *De Carlo and other architects collaborated on this  . architectural work, in which the identifi- cation of form and structure isa constant theme, in practice went — in its attention to the historical urban context — beyond the limits of dogmatic *Rationalism, though without aban- doning its fundamental principles. VML Argan, Giulio Carlo, France Albini, Milan 1962, Moschimi, F., France Albini, London 1979.  Alexander, Christopher, b. Vienna 1936 (the son of English parents). Studied architecture and mathemanics. In 1970 he became Professor of Architecture at the University of California in Berkeley. His contribution to contemporary architecture lies foremost in the realm of planning dicory, which he attempts to establish on a more solid basis by the application of scientific principles. A. started from the obser- vation that original native cultures, because of their gradual organic development, uncon- sciously produce forms in complete harmony with their environment. He then developed complex mathematical formulae, as equivalents of this type of ‘unconscious’ form-creation process, by which design and planning prob- lems are decomposed into a series of compo- nents and then by reversal recomposed into fundamental ‘patterns’ to synthesize form. The experimental results achieved at the Center for Environmental Structures (CES) tounded in 1967 at Berkeley led to a greater emphasis on  
empirical investigation of the needs and de- mands of users. The first major practical testing of A.’s theories was his contribution to the competition fora residential quarter with 1,500 units in Lima (1969).  O Alexander, C., Notes on the Synthesise, Cambridge, Mass. 1yf4, » The Oregon Experiment, London 1975; ——, A Pattern Language, London 1977; » The Timeless Way of Building, London 1979.  Almvist, Osvald, b. Trankil, near Karlstad 1884, d. Stockholm 1950. Studied first at the Technical College and then at the Academy of Fine Arts in Stockholm, which he leftin igioto establish, along with six fellow-students includ- ing Sigurd *Lewerentz, the short-lived Free Architectural School. There — under the profes- sors Car] Bergsten, Ragnar QOstherg, !var Tengbom and Carl Westman *Asplund was to study. In opposition to the academic *neo-classicism which was taught at the time in Sweden, A. and his associates embraced a re-evaluation of the Swedish ver- nacular tradition, a sort of ‘national realism” With his designs for standardized kitchen com- ponents (1922) and his hydro-electric power plants near Hammarstors and Krangfors (both 1925-8), in which all ties to the past are cut. A became one of the pioneers of modernism in Sweden. la © Linn, Bjorn, Osvald Almgrist: En Arkitekt och Hans Arbete, Stockholm 1967.  Gunnar  Alvarez, Mario Roberto, b. Buenos Aires 1913. Immediately upon completing his studies in Buenos Aires in 1937, he opened his own office (since 1947 Mario Roberto Alvarez y Asociados). He was Architect to the Ministry for Public Works in Buenos Aires, 1937 42. and City Architect of Avellaneda, 1942-7; he acted as Advisor to the Secretary of Public Works of his native city, 1958-62. A. became one of the leading architects of Argentina and an impor- tant advocate of the Modern Movement, t> which he remained consistently faithful. bite ested in the shaping of all aspects of the physical environment, he has been active not only in conventional architectural matters, but also, for instance, in dealing with issues of engineering, construction and the problems of pretabricaue: in relation to prevailing conditions in Arye.  tina. An example of his more recent work is tii  headquarters of the Somisa firm in Bucs.  Atres (1966), the cout  fist funda, sa entirely of steel  {1 Trabuco. Marcelo A Alvarez, Buenos Aires 1975  fata Rober  Amsterdam, School of. Group of architerts whose analysis of the works of *Berlage and the young Frank Lloyd * Wright served as a point of departure for their own work, and who represented a local ‘vernacular’ parallel to Ger- man *Expressionism, particularly ay it had been manifested in the early works of Erich *Mendelsohn. Their mouthpiece was the mag- azine Wrendingert (1g 18- 36). edited — by Hendricus Theodorus Wijdeveld. Their sculp- turally-conceived, —_ picturesquely-composed brick buildings stand in abrupt contrast to the spare rationalist buildings of the contemporary De *Styl gronp. The most eminent exponents of the Amsterdam School were J. M. van der *Mey, P.L. *Kramer and Michel de *Klerk  {1 Pehnt, Wolfgang, Expressionist Architecture, London and New York 1980; Searing. Helen. ‘Berlage or Cuypers? The Father of them all’ in Searing, Hl. (ed.}, fa Search of Modern Archites- ture, Cambridge, Mass. 1983. pp. 226 44  Andrews, John, b. Syducy 1933. Studied athe University of Sydney and at Harvard Oniver- sity under [. L. *Sert. fn 1962 he opericd his awit office in Toronto and in iy73 one in Sydney, Ele taught atthe Universtiy of Toronce ty62 4. Eis debut on the international architectural scene  came with Scarborough College. Ontario 1s phase 1963; 2nd phase 1g6y!. a Late Masterpn cs of New Brutalism fn addidon to the empha  
on raw materials and monumental forms, an esscutial characteristic of the building is the internal street (a concession to the cold Cana- dian winter) which serves to unite all the college functions one to another. A.’s other important buildings imclude the Seaport Passenger Termi~ nal in the Port of Miami, Florida (1967), the Graduate School of Design at Harvard Univer- sity (1968), and the Cameron Office Block at Beleonnen, Canberra. Australia. AM Ll Drew, Philip, The Third Generation, che Changing Meaning of Architecture, New York 1972: ‘Conversations with the John Andrews Architects’, Progressive Architecture, no. 54 (Feb. 1972), pp. 62-75.  Arbeitsrat fiir Kunst. Group of German architects and artists founded in December ryt under the leadership of Bruno *Taut; it rapidly gained a large membership, which included the architects Otto *Bartning. Walter *Gropius. Erich *Mendelsohn and Max *Taut, the paint- ers César Klein, Erich Heckel, Ludwig Meidner, Max Pechstein, Karl Schmidt- Rotthut and Lyonel Feininger, and the sculp- tors Rudolf Belling, Oswald Herzog and Gerhard Marcks. It was Taut’s original inten- tion chat the Arbetsrat unlike the *Novem- bergruppe should exercise political influence in the post-revolutionar  government as an artistic equivalent to the workers’ and soldiers’ councily which briefly held power in Novem- ber and December gis. The founding mani- festo demanded: “Art and the people must form a unity moulder of the sensibilities of the people, will be responsible tor the visible fabric of the new state.” No political power was gained, however, and Taut resigned trom the leadership at the end of February tyty, to he replaced by Gropius.  Dismissing any ciscet: political aspirations Gropius suggested i] atthe Arbeitsrat should be reorganized into a¢o.miunity of radical archi- tects, painters and seu'ptars who would work together on a symbo! building task, the *‘Bauprojeke’. This wouli provide the means of achicving the group's ms ertistic atm, which was defined as ‘the fusion «1 the arts under the wing of a great architec: However, the combination of political 1. bility. inflation and material shortages prech :d any concrete progress on this project.  In April igty, Gropius took uj; iis post at the newly-established * Bauhaus at We ornar, whose  From now on the artist alone, as  first programme closely reflected the ideals of the Arbeitstrat. Although the ‘Bauprojekt’ was retained as an ultimate goal, the group increas- ingly devoted its attention to publications and exhibitions. In addition to its own programmes and the ‘Architcktur-Programm’ of Bruno Taut, the group also published two books, Ja! Stimmen des Arbeitsrates fiir Kunst in Berlin (1gt9), and Ruf zu Bawen (1920). Among the exhibitions organized by the Arbeitsrat were the ‘Ausstellung fiir unbekannte Architekten’ (April 1919), another devoted to workers’ and children’s art (January tg20), and ‘Neues Bauen® (May 1920). The group also arranged exhibitions of contemporary German art in Antwerp and Aimsterdam. Although the exhi- bitions attracted considerable public attention, the finances of the group became increasingly strained during 1920 and the Arbeitstrat was formally dissolved on 30 May 1921. Bw ] Arbeistrat fur Kunst (exhibition catalogue). Berlin ty80; Whyte, lain Boyd, Brine Taut and the Architecture of Activism, Cambridge 1982.  Archigram. The Archigram group formed through the collaboration of six young architects who came together in 1y60 while working for Taylor Woodrow Construction Co. on the redevelopment of Euston Station, London, under the direction of Theo Crosby Warren Chalk (b. 1927). Peter *Cook, Dennis Crompton (b. 1935}, David Greene (b. 1437), Ron Herron (b. 1930) and Michael Webb (b. 1937). The first number of Archigram appeared in 1961, and the name of the publication soon became the name of the group and a statement of their method: architecture by drawing. They were identified publicly after their first exhi- bition - ‘Living City’ in 1463 at the Institute of Contemporary Arts in London.  Their ideas were initially directed against formal conventions and towards all kinds of loose and free associations. This led towards expendables, towards pop culture and its opti- mistic assimilation of new technology, and the idea that the most advanced space hardware should be available as an everyday enabling system to generate more personal choices and to break down the tyranny of the traditional city. As architects, they were able to project their ideas graphically with great verisimilitude and knowledge of technical gadgetry.  The group found a strong supporter in the critic Reyner Banham, whose writings, in  was  
Archigram, Walung Cte. prec Kot 1964  addition to their awn prolific talents. spread their ideas worldwide. [ft could be said that the group did for architecture something waka co what the Beads did for music in the Their concepts of expendability adopted by the *Metabolism schoul in Japan  Their most influential utopian projects were Fulham Study (#943). Plug-in Cin (Cook. 1964-6), Walking City (Herron, 1964). Cars icle (Webb, 1960/7), Instant City (Cook. 1ués and Inflatable suit-Home (Greene. among their realized or realizable designs were the Archigram Capsule at Expo “yo in Osaka. the project for a samuner casino at Monte Carle  Lyte  WOT isc  1y08  {ty7t), areview of contemporary British design at the Louvre in Paris (1975) and the still extant Malaysian Exhibition at the Commonwealth Institute in London (1973). RNS (1 Archivram (London), 1961 70: Cook, Peter, Architecture. Action and Plan, London and New York 1967; ——, Experimental Architeenre. London and New York 1y7o:-- |, Arcigrant. London and New York 1974.  Architects’ Co-Partnership. Practice or inally founded m 1939 by cight former student. of the Architectural Association, London, and reformed in 1o4s by C.K. Capon, PLL ke. M. H. Cooke-Yarborough, L. M. de Ssllas J.-M. Grice and M, A. R. Powers. Their rubber factory at Brynmawr, South Wales (1949). with its repetition of simple but powerru: shapes, gave the first indication of the feeling for sculptural effect which characterizes the firuts style and anmounced their pragmatic, modern- ist-intoned approach to design. This was subse-  uuently displayed ar seTies 0 Guid tt  Woe  uid Ubi  botdings. ine ading Scheels a bauer.  wiekshite. Eicrttordshirs are Durset  emises ae Leicester. Claranarthe Vo building mater  VeEsiy ft  Cambridi ip evry Use OF andluseriuize  Is aad thew preterenee far an Tatonvatous tea  approach G architecture legacies of the Furopean contentl Moder Movement, were developed into the current sfiruy Vis.  sophisticated consultant cage  Architext. An inform, centred on the periadieal ef the sante qin founded in tute by Puketucn *Auh. nuitsu * Astra. Mayuni Mivasaki Makots Suzuki and Mimuru Takesani. th members subseriby tote complet de. cane. as  group of an bitoets  bikae  VAPL ous  wasthe cic with *Ar higram ie faghinder dis representatives of #Metabolisy an Japan. bau adich  rather the rejection of such doe they consider ta he expressiane ol the conaiar=  Lun pretensions of modernisAL Cope sn. cu ts  viduatnts, they far Ser tesns disvontitauiy wad contr ' 1 : vob i Art ieca whih Sobtbhe ber cn Watherdte iy Haddoa vt iF : a : 1 Y 1 MOL ! vo 1 1 wpe aa vetais beurre \ : fe od in i . pepe Mad et 
In French architecture Art Deco appeared in the mose varied guises: pseudo-purist in *Mal- let-Stevens’ residential complex in the Rue Mallet-Srevens in Paris (1926-7), a style-con- scious offspring of Cubist thought which draws markedly on *Le Corbusier's formal vocabu- y: opulent, luxuriant, and trankly ornamen- tal in Pierre Patout’s Pavillon du Collec- tionneur at the Paris exhibition of 1925, where the pyramidal massing predominates over structural expression: decidedly arid in Pacout’s house in the Avenue Jean-Baptiste Clément at Boulogne-sur-Seime (1y2y), which is articulated by clear cubic forms: and, finally, idealistic- wechnological in *Chareau and Bijyoet’s Mai- son de Verre ip Paris (1928-32}, which points clearly beyond Art Deco as the expression of a bourgeois fashion for the avant garde in the radical nature of its machine metaphor.  Elsewhere in Europe. Art Deco was inte- grated with existing architectural traditions such as the School of *Amsterdam in Holland {Bijenkort department store in The Hague by *Kramer. 1924S). as well as with the legacy of Frank Lloyd *Wright, or with Expressionism in Germany {Paula Modersohn-Becker House in the Bottchergasse, Bremen, by Bernhard  lar  Hoetger. 1926)  Art Devo’s stylisae flourishing is to be found inthe *USA, where a scenoyraphie architecture of highly decorative figades was launched through the ae of polychromy and ommamen- tation (modermistie ay well ay historictzing), Vhere. Art Deco mediated between the tra~ dition of the French *heole des Beaux-Arts and modern constructiaual techniques tn its distine= tion between skeleton and cladding. ft com- bined influcnees denved trom skyscraper Gothic (Cass Guberi. Art Nouveau ornanicnt (*Suilivan}. (radioinaisi lel * Saarinen) and the emerging *totermiional Stvie. a melange bese exemplitied by Vr Deca’s American ion, William van Alen’: ¢ tiny ster Building in New York (1928 30) NM 1 Hillier, Bevis, lr) ec. Minneapolis 1971: Robinson, Cervin, and Bletter, Rosemarie Haag, Skyscraper Style. Now York 1a7s.  Art Deco. Residential com) xs Ron Maile Stevens an the Rue Mallet-Ste. Pans fash 3)  Art Deco. The Chrysler Build New York. by Wilham van Alen (1g28 30)  
Art Nouveau. An individualist and highly ro- mantic reaction to the currents of *eclecticnm and academic classicism (*Ecole des Beaux Arts) in late igth-century architecture, Art Nouveau was a diverse phenomenon which affected most of Europe and, some historians argue, even North America between 18yo and  gio. Known at the me under a varicty of,  rubrics which reflect its sources in the investiga- tions of individual architects and the specific contexts of various national traditions. It was known for instance in England at the time as the ‘modern style’ in * Belgium as the coup de fouer (whiplash) or pating (cel) style (from the Hexible line introduced by *Horta), or the style des Vingt (in view of the important past played by the group Les Vingt led by Octave Mausj; m Germany it was called the Jugendstil, from the Munich periodical Jugend: tn France 1 was known variously as the style none Moodle style), style Guimard (atter the architect Henri *Guimard, who designed the decorative en- trances to the Paris Métro stations in rNyy). or Art Nouveant. The Austrians named it the Secessionssil {after the Viennese group, led from 1897 on by the pamter Gusta Klimt and the architeets *Hofimann and *OU- brich): in Italy it was the stile Ltberty or ile floreale; and in Spain modertsme. Vhe ano- historicist. (*historicism) polemic otten ob scured a considerable debt to ornamental anid structural research which had been miculis conducted within the context of the revis i! styles, as for instance in the case of the varrou theories of tindmg the geometric or org. principles underlying all historical styles so as use those principles in turn as the staring pom: for defining a new. ‘modern’ stwic  Often referred to simply as the sreie f9en Nouveau expresses an eyentialiy dev trend that aims to highlight che ornaments value of the curved line, which may be feral i: origin (Belgium, France) or geometries iScut= land, Austria). This line gives rise to We dimensional, slender, sinuous, undulating invariably asymmetrical forms. ‘The applica arts were the first to be affected (textiles b William Morris. (880: wood-engraved uu. page to Wren’s City Churches by Arthur If Mackmurdao, 1883: vases by Emile Gall, 058: omamental lettering by Fernand Khnopf an Georges Lemmien, :8y0-4: mural tapestry fi Angels’ Wigit by Henry *van de Velde. ty furniture by Gustave Serrurier-Bovy, cdot  Secession  OTL  title page tor Dominnal by van du Seiden  Neat came architecture. reprosenien e+ house which Vietor Horta hale i: Brust: 1 1Sy2- 3 for the engineer Tassel a kev work > the new stvle. which way to find a dazziny counterparta few years later in the Eloisa tunis in Munich by August *knadell frsyc on. de stroyed), Among the most characterisie archi- tectural products of Art Nouveau. albert widely differing in purpose aud plastic expression the houses built by Paul Haak. in Brussels tiNyg3 ryooj: the works or Wallem Krombout (i864 1y4o} Th. Slayternias rs6y iugtand L.A. HL Wolfin the *Neuher lands, Guimard’s Castel Bérang  entraness to Métro stations and the audicormia  were  vysyre 
Art Nouveau. Porel Sotvas, Brussels frsas Iyoo} py Vietor Horta  Art Nouveau. Karbkpliy Station of the Vienna Stadtbalm tSu7 Ss Ore Wagner  of the Humbert de Romans building (1902, destroyed) in Paris: Horta’s Maison du Peuple (i890-y, destroyed) and the former Hotel Solvay (18ys- goo) in Brussels: the overhead Stadtbahn station in the Karlsplatz. Vienna (897) by Octo *Wagner: and the Museum Folkwang. with interior design by van de Velde. at Hagen (ty00-2}  All these works are the result of a deliberate Attempt to putan end to imitations of past styles; in ity place is offered a florid type of architecture which exploits craft skills, using coloured mat- erialy (taignee cabochons, stoneware, terracotta panels, stained glass}, cxotie veneers, moulded stonework, grilles, balconies, and tapered brackets im wrought iror  nd burgeoning with asymmetrical door- and window-frames, bow and horseshoe windows, ete. The common devonnnator of these diverse works is then more a new conception of the relationship between surtace and omament, rather than a change in spatial expression of plan. An excep- gon to thismay, however, be found in buildings  designed in the tradition of the English countr house (*Voys *Mackintosh). with their principle of building from inside to out: and the Continental examples based on them (Olbrich’s houses on the Mathildenhohe at Darmstade). In the later phases of Art Nouveau, fagade decora-  tion Was accompanied by a powerful plastic treatment of the whole building, either by the dramatic accentuation of individual parts of the Structure (Glasgow Art School, 18g8> 1y09, by Mackintosh) or by the sculptural modelling of the whole buildmg mass (Werkbundtheater. Cologne, 1914 by van de Velde: Casa Mila, Barcelona, 1yos. 19, by *Gaudi).  Art Nouveau was first and foremost an aesthetic undertaking. based on social theories and inspired by aesthetes such as Ruskin, Morris and Oscar Wilde. It was born of a reaction to the rise of industrialivm, and from a determination to create a new style. in view of the belier thar the ryth century had been stylistically impo- tent. [ts proponents sought a style which would affect che design of objects of everyday use as well as architecture and leave ity mark ulti- mately on the décor and surroundings of daily life. In terms of its cheory, from the ethical and political point of view Art Nouveau appears as an attempt to integrate art with social lite; in practice, and from the cultural point of view, however, it quietly assumes the manner of a reactionary bourgeois movement. Art Nou- 
by Antonio Gaudi  veau tried, in effect, to reheve man from the pressures of a technological miheu, Faced with the machine. which it regarded as the work of the devil, it aimed at renewing contact with nature and rehabilitating the tool in its role ot the ‘lengthener of the hand’: by the samme token it obliged the artist to express himself in the margin of the living forces of technology. On the other hand, it claimed to be able to fashion a three-dimensional universe, independent of the fundamental support of the true creators oF the epoch (Cézanne, Gauguin, Van Gogh. Munch) or rather, only borrowing the most exter! trappings of their inspiration. The point m.ty thus be seen at which Art Nouveau {in the midst of ws romantic, sentimental and social out- bursts) posed in contradictory terms the prob- lem of the social relations of art. It may also be seen how it produced, in all fields, a real severance between lite and thought, and par- tially destroyed the ‘relation between plant aid soil’.  Art Nouveau may thus be compared to an electrical short cireuit; by confounding sivle  and surtiee ornament, and by basin ll its farts on theeries ob decorilon. if wast  stylistic recuperation with relatives few reper cussions in subsequent architec tural des clep ments. Disunguished architects at the Art Nouveau style, such ay Muckimtosh. * Beh: and the Viennese masters became pioneers of bic wath then  ay  modert architecture, i ws Unie. forward-looking buildings ches overstepped the tronticrs whieh the style had tnapescu per  as adherents Pv pels Sehimalenbach, boo fugeudsnis £1. Hesnng cs Theorss id Gres duclite der Plata rkies War -  bury 193 4, Madsest, Steph us Ts bust, Sue  fie Noveran New York tose ,  Selim. Pictur  Dor Were se flak  wed. juger  Phadelberg beste Sela. Peter aid Corsets Mildred Lip Sore bere Deon Hie Tine file forte Now York tase tins Poni. Se Novethnnds bese  ‘er tredit bac © ass '  ree ba nu peawe Naketips fer Mein ' 1 " en  da 1 1 Sobamtela K vot! Pee Nunn STL te 
Arts and Crafts. Movement which developed in reaction to the cheap. machine-produced kitsch dated the furnishing and architecture market of the mid-tyth century in the wake of the fudustrial Revolution. Much inspired by the wotings of Pugin and especially  which i  of Raskin, the Enehsh archttect and social sone of the tirst of handicratt. The svanbolivel start was the Red House 1Nsyi at Heath. Kent. which Morris commis-  crormer Wiluint * Morr w, wosimve Gor a revival Besicy stoned waiter hry marriage trom his triend Philip * Webb. Scon as an escape front the tasteless and ‘tbe! *eclecticism of conteniporary devign, the iRed House represented the fist and most Mporlant attempt to renew domiesue architec ture within the Gotme Revival  However, this indisidualistic response was not sutigent tor the socially-engazed Morris he wasaimember of Engels Social Democratic Federation and liter sy). wrote the socialist utepan novel News trod Nowhere. In psoi.on the model of Henry Cole's Art Manutuctures. Morris founded. together with a group. of firm of Morris. te produce high-  painters apd architects, the Marshall, Fiulkoer and Co. quality wallpapers. woven and printed fabrics, Cipestries. aiid stutned alas. Subsequently: Mor- my ran the company alone as Morrty & Co. The products ofthe Morris workshops, as successful as they wore oselusive, were oriented towards  medieval medens. as wells more exotic pate  terps draw froin that vere same Grannnur ef  Omnunen bs Ocon Fones which was subse- quendy to presdge au seurce ef mspiration to *Suilean and * YX onebt in America. With this undertuking, Motos iiid the toundations fora far-reaghing, ares orient. which atmed at the renewal of hanenerare and was characterized by morahving tuidertomces. In place of the ‘ugly and ‘decadent densidion of the machine, he advocated an aivhromatie anticmachine stance. In spate ot vs their socal claims and intentions. howeser. he adherents of the Arts and Crafts philes  contront the dilen  wwowere not prepared te ver that handicraft was tar  more costly than im... ee production and that  their handsome provicvt. were indeed lirgels beyond the means oF CO wide spectrum of the very public for when they were orignully intended  This was equally the cas. tor the associations of architects and artusts +  grew up withm  Morris's circle: from the Cencary Guild os  Arts and Crafts. Red House, Bexles Heath. Kent issu. bv Philp Webb  Artists, founded m 1882 by Ruskin’s pupil Arthur Hevgate Mackniurdo and a small group of friends: to Se George's Art Society, which was started by tive students of *Shaw. including *Lethaby and Edward § established one year later ay the Art Workers” Guald. From this group there developed in i888 a parailel organization. the Arts and Cratts Exhibinon Society. which abe represented Morris’. workshops: it was here for the first time that the “Arty mmtreduced, Also in issx, the Guild and School of Handicrart way tounded by C. R. *Ashbee. an independent disciple of Ruskin. This was to represent a highpoint of the movement and would continue to dourish unul tyes  In the meantime the much-hatcd phenom-  Prior, in 1883 and  term) and Cratts’ was  chon of industrial production had become a reality that could no longer be ignered, Ashbee cane to terms with in if only famt-heartedly, and accepted at least in theory the aeton of collaboraden with the machine. He thus intro- duced the methods of mdustrial deugn. whieh had seemed, since the Crystal Palace of 1851. predeternuned tor the Muchine era  Vhe Arts and Cratts Socict¥ mamtained a Or more conservative posinon. Its tirst president, Walter Crane. who was personally allied with the remantic-regressive aesthetic of the Pre- Raphaclites. was at first opposed to any open- ing-up ofthe movement, Thus the voung C. R *Mackintosh and the entire Glagew School o Are Nouveau) were categorically exchided | from their exhibitions. In any case. numerous architects figured among the first members and 
exhibitors, including Ashbee, Prior, *Voysey. George Walton, *Lutyens and W.R. Lethaby the leading promoter and. in 1ky4. the first Director of the Central School of Arts and Crafts in London.  The effeets of the Arts and Crafts niovement were, for all its contradictions, as protound as they were lasting and far-reaching. In *Great Britain a notably bigh professional standard was established in its circles, which was character- ized by an intensive reformatory involvement with the problem of the house. ft was here that che concept of the house asa ‘total work of art was developed. It was also out of the theoretical principles and architectural statements of the Domestic Revival that the Garden City move- ment developed. This was launched in isg8 by Ebenezer *Howard with his book ‘Pomorreiv, 1 Peaceful Path to Social Reform (retitled in. the second edition of 1902 Garden Cities of Tomor-  row). The battle against the stylisuc revivals of  the roth century, the rejection of lusionistic representation in decorative design and the preference for closed form provided the bass for that break with the aesthetic of the ruth century that was advocated by artists at the turn of the century. Finally, the idea of a reunion of art, handicratt and architecture was introduced in Germany, through the agency of *Muthe- sus, into the circle of the *Deutscher Werkbund. GV VMI C) Pevsner, N.. The Sources of Modern Archi tecture and Design, London and New York 1968; —-- . Pioneers of Modern Design from William Morris to Walter Gropius, Harmonds- worth rg74i Davey. P.. The Arts and Cratis Movement in Architecture, London 1y80.  Arup, Ove (Nyquist). b. Newecastle-upou- Tyne 18ys. A. studied at first philosophy and mathematics and then civil engineering. Prom  1934 to 1938 he was Director and Chie  Engineer of the English engineering firm J. 1 Kier and Company. Then, in 1938 he tounded. together with his cousin, the engineering aud consulting firm Arup and Arup, which he lettin 1946 to open an independent engineermy ol fice, active since 1949 under the name Ove Arup and Partners. Finally in 1963 he launched, together with the architect Philip Dowson and others, the interdisciplinary planning firm Arup Associates, which today employs a staff of over 1,600 in Great Britain and a further worldwide. From early on, A. was inclined to  1.000  architectural modernism: He way che es 4  founding members in tygh of the Modern Architecture Research Group MARS: 6 subsequently was active as a consultant 1 *Lubetkin and his *Tecton group. Other examples of his cngincering acuvities are the school at Hunstanton, Norfolk (iy49. tys2  by Alison and Peter *Smithson, the Sydiey Opera House (1956 74) by *Utzon, the mulu- functional elall for the 1975 Bundesgartenschau (Federal Garden $ 1974-5) by Carlfried Muttschler, Joachim Langner and Frei *Octo. as well ay the Centre Pompidou in Paris (1y71-7) by *Piano and *Ragers, Not only as engineers, but abo oy architects, Arup Associates have undertaken pumerous university buildings. The pedestrian bridge over the River Wear in Durham (1g63 is an example of A.’s personal design work. AM 1 Arup Journal (London): ‘Arup’s First “Pen Years’. Architecmre Plus (New York}. Noven- ber December 1974: Arup Associates’, drcit- tecture and Urbanism {Tokve), December 177: Michael. sleep  how) im Mannheim (u73) 4  Brawne eliseciates, London  1983  Ashbee, Charles Robert. b. Londo ie. d London 1g. Strongly influenced by the ideas of Ruskin and *Morris, A. tounded the Crold and School of Handicraft in 188 the *Arts and Cratt. movement. Elis own  cahighpoinem  works included several houses in Ches ne Wak London (isy7 ryogi and Norman Chapel  Astrbec. [louis oc bark  Liss beg 
Horse. Broad Campden. Glos. f1yo6). His induence way especially felt through bis elegant designe for craft objects. He was acnive as an urban planner in Egypt during World Warland later m Jerasaleni e*dyrach In ty24 he returned co Kent VMI Ashbbee, C2 Rol Book of Cortages and Lite Horses. Landon 1go6: Service, Alistair, Bdtaar- SLCLR. Ashbee and ¢ Guild ef Plundicratt fexhibition catalogue}, Cheltenham 1981,  dian clrclutectare, London (05  Aslin. Charles Herbert. b. Sheficld rsu3. ud. rosy. Studied at Sheffield University Depart ment of Architecture. After a career un Carlous local authority. offices. A. became County Architect for Hertfordshire im tags. where he staved tll his retirement in 1gss  At the end of World War fl an acute shortage of school places in’ Hertfordshire, together with lack of manpower and craftsmen in the building trade. moved A. to tackle the problem as quasi-milicary “planned oper- avon. Taking advantige of the production potennal of hghe mduscry, built up during the war. he organzed a system of school pretabrica- tion trom factory-made parts, bur with sufi- cient Aeability to allow cach school to be ureated midividually  The prototype was) Cheshunt Primary School, built in i9g6 on an 8 ft 3 in. (2°32 11) grid. In. 1yq7-cleven schools were projected ona serial production basis, vwairh far roots, sold floors, and standardized stanchions and beam connections. nn yg yo development proceeded on twenty-one primary schools, while the 1947 completed. The handredth school of this ty pe was opened in rgss (*Great Britain). HM C Asling Co 1. Specutized developments in school construct, AIBA, November 1y50% Test, K Redpath. |. T. and Evans. K. C.. ‘Hertfordshire Schoo!s Devetopment’, Archi- tects’ Journal (Londons. t2 and 26 May russ. 19 April and 2 August tus  schools were bein  Asplund, (Erik) Guniar > Stockholm 1885, d. Stockholm iygo. Aypicnd was one of the most prominent Swedish ichitects of the first half ofthe 2oth century: his work is of historical significance tor its combunmn, ot traditional and modern architecture. He recused his architee- tural training at the Teenuical College im Stockholm and at the Free Arcintectural Acad-  Asplund. Restaurant building at the Stockholm Exhibition (1930)  Asplund. Stockholm South Cemetery: Crematorium (1435 40)  emy founded there in iyio by *Almgvist, *Lewerentz and others. From ty3t to 1940 he  was a professor at the Technical College.  
In tg14 A., in collaboration with Leweremz. won the competition tor the layout of Stock- holm South Cemetery. where he later built che Woodland Chapel (198 20). Other works of these years include the Snellman villa in Djurs- holm (1917-8), the Skandia Cinema (ty22 3) and the Stockholan City Library (1y24 71. The  Skandia Cinema. much adinired at the ume oF  its construction, is rectangular in shape. with side balconies: it depends tor aesthetic effect ona balance of verticals and horizontals and a restrained use of classical decoration. The City Library is symmetrical in plan with a large central cylindrical lending area enclosed on three sides by rectangular volumes contuining reading and study rooms and offices. The work is classicist in conception, recalling ultimately the ageless theme of the merging of cube and cylinder: the accent on simplicity and severics was a trend of the time. However, had A continued designing in the stvle of che cinema and library, he might have been regarded simply as just another competent tradiuonalist With the buildings for the Stockholm Extuli- tion of 1930, he revealed bimsel fas amodernot. skilfully handling glass and steel expressively to achieve a great lightness of erfeet. This is seer especially in the Paradise Restauranr. with its slender supports, glass walls, circular glass tower and large coloured sunblinds, elements which were to be basic to ‘the new architecture in Europe.  After this exhibition A. designed the Breden- berg store in Stockholm (1933-5). which Tay something of the lightness of the exhibition buildings: the State Bacteriological Laboratory Stockholm (1933-7); the Gothenburg City Hall Extension (#934-7). the design of which is modern in spirit yet harmonizes in scale with the original building in the classical styles aud lastly the Crematorium, Stockholm South Cemetery (1935-40). The group of buildings consists of three chapels, the crematorium and the columbarium; at the main entrance is a large portico with numerous plain shafts. Simple dramatic and original as is the design tor a purpose of this kind, it is essentially Greek a conception, the feeling of repose that i creates depending on the relationship of verdeals waid horizontals; it demonstrates clearly Ayplund's conviction that the classical Greek architecaural sense can harmenize with the modern spirit. a8 O Zevi, Bruno, Guanar Asplund. Nhlar 1948: Holmdahl, Gustav, Lind. Sven Ivar. and  Odeon. Kjell feds Cs 188s tyge, Steckbolaa ase ak ot  Vode Tey Londen iyss. Wrede. 8. Pe 4  Guinan Asplind. A Creat  Gunnar Asplind, Boston. Miss tu-  Atelier §. Groupotarchites ts tonndvd ia Boi in dyss by brwim Fritz. Samuel Geroer, io Hesserberg. Huims Hostetler and Algrede: Poul Tao toss Ateher s inetuded teelve pariicrs Jacques Blumer, Chrisnan btickiger. Araicis  du Fresne. Ralph Genter. Christiane Heras  gartoer, Rolf Hesterberg, Hans Hostetler. Pict Tanini. Aifrede Pini, Danis Row, Stebler and Frite ‘Thormanin, The ssreng mtia-  Bormtard  ence of *Le Corbusier on the group's carly Work ivevident in the Halen housing tare neat Berne loss 6b: which is basgdon the masters unrealized project for a housing estan at ba Sainte-Baume frygsi an which rows of terre houses were rolled out almost fike a cirper on the Jandseape. Therrearhs style. dominated by a united format Brutalista, gave way iiereasmigey  youabulary derived trom *Nosw me the cars ryvos roa tendency co derive forand expression from the particular demands of che coninesten and the local contest. Examples of dats tre thie Thalmatt housing estate at Llerrense tw andes  near Berne ttyey 72. and the Sivtieart Unversity Dining Hall crate Gnu Stat art Vathingen aa  Bezzola, Peonarde. Therma Wire ther.and Thorium. brie, (edie fhihs ove Terie we Aachen s  Terrace Houses Hakan A Bros Global linear Toksot me 2k. 1e7 as Ate Hier $. Basten + ohne Muah. ss gies 78  Areluteknurrepornsee. Flanaace  LySO. pp. i4  etait ts Boe  Atelier 5. Shag  Hgss tle  
Athens Charter. Acute fourth congress. held in lgzzen acrune berween Marseilles and Athens the Parts i. the *CIAM organization undertook a sostemade investigation of chirty-  aboard  Caree mater ities. dig result was the “Principles  or thy Fourth Congress. These were concerned woth the fimetional cacy as ithad been defined DWeovears carder ata meeting in Berlin’ and © aed prinapalis on *Le Corbusier's ideas huch he revped in yg) and published anony- mousiv i dyad ay a Beek under the ude La  Clrarte d Anieties  One of the six baste principles ering of dhe four prinuirs functions of the erty residential. work, ame and trathe  was thy disurbunon and «  Irce which established the urbe: plarning of modernism on a sunple formuli at anes conve and. arguably, dé  BST  soncerved  = fLe Corbusier}, Urhanisme des CLAM, La Charte d' Athenes. Paris 1943 (English ed.: The Athens Charter, New York 1973).  Austria. As the capital of a muln-nation state, Vierma had. by the late igth century. devel- oped. even in) architecture, that polyglot character and that emphatic consciousness of janguage. which have remained typical of the cultural lite of the city to this day. This social pluralism was reflected in the multiplicity or architectural schools and trends. Otto *Wag- ner, the executor of Gotttried *Semper’s will and the last architect of the epoch of the Viennese Raingstralie, introduced the new ap-  proaches of the Secession *Ar¢ Nouveaul and the seeds of architectural modernism into the broad current of Viennese classicism. Wagner's empirical pasigvism, got up in the slogan-like doctrme ofa ‘Nutzsul’ :funenonalist stwle: and united with a solid artistic training, endowed his schoo] wath the legendary reputation that it still enjoys. To ate his most important pupils as to  Aust  bes  2 Palen Hous  by briedr  Obma  Austria. Proeet tor che NNIInd District, Vienna fui D8 Otte Wagner  
Austria. Sanatorium at Pur Josef Hoffmann  ersdorf signs: by  Austria. Steiner House. Viet tigier. by Adolf Loos  demonstrate the geographical extent of his miluence: active im Vienna Herniann Aichinger, Leopold Bauer, Karl *Eha, Mas Fellerer, Franz and Hubert Geliner. foset *Hotfmann, Emil Hoppe, Marcel Kammerer, Oskar Laske. Ernst Lichthlau, Rudolf Perce Josef Pletnik (later in Prague and Lanbach now Ljubljanal), Hemrich Schimd and Ono Schin- tal: in the provinces Mauriz Balzarck (Ling; and Wunibald Deininger (Salzburg). Working in Prague were Josef Chochol, Bohumil Hubsch- mann, Pavel Jandk and Jan Kottra the central figures of Czech *Cubism. Sumlariv  Istvan Benké-Medgyaszay (Budapests, Viktor Kovacie (Zagreb) and Giorgio Zanmovich (Trieste) were co be major influential f their native countries, Rudolph *Sclundler’s work in Califorma is well known. In addition, alchough they were noc Wagner's pupils. Mus Fabiani (Vienna and Girz) and J. M. *Oibrich (Vienna, Darmstadt and Dtisseldort) strongly influenced by him.  Wagner’s opposite mumber was Friedrich: Ohmann. a native of Prague and director of the second ‘special class’ ac the Akadenne de bildenden Kiinste. Today. his romances. atmospheric and emotionally charged arel: ture more direct Viennese fin-de-siecle. than does the optimise: forward-looking ethos of Wagner. The conser vative schools (such as thatof Karl Kémigs it th Technische Hochschule also had a partici  were  wes i  wwere  scems a reflection or ibe  nihealias bor  schoois stmergsd ie ertical on Viennese arehites Ginn. stick: ts Oskar Sera weber Liter as  werbeschu le  thay ou  particular wathe  Seen) ied RC  intr ctu  thre uu one oc be \ ve ea re ! 1 \ wo fey :  tetas thes  sort  Loli ts  
unguestionabls dominated by the School of Otte Wagner. The architecture of the “Super- blocks’ derived from a strong typology of the iparuieng, a labour-intensive building tech- nology ilo counteract unemployment), from the expressvinn of planed urban form and from 2 pluralisuc language of derail. The revolurion= sries ot the Wagner School became pragmiatists who understood bow te clothe the new polin-  cally provocative building types so as ta conve (ALappropriate sense af architectural conanuity fi oppostuon. Loos, Joser Prank, Franz Schuster snd others nvatved themselves in the residenty’ movement, The Viennese Werk bundssiedlung sunder the general direction of Frank. 1932) onee again uinited all progressive forces with a programme Co provide for the workers housing that combined the maximum of “bourgeois culture’ with a minimum ot building costs. Anew school besa to exercise its mifaence tn Vienna after World Waar * Behrens, *ELolz- Incister, Tessenosy. ay well as Smad and Frank} Atthe same time Vienna witiessed a loosening ofits hold over the regions, accelerated by the Red Tyrol under Uhe ufuence of Munich, there developed a regional modertism (Franz Baw mann, Theodor and Wilhelm Nikolaus Prachensky, Welzenbacher}: Wunibald Deinmager and Clemens Holzmeister deninat- edin Salzburg, Mauriz Balzarek. Julus Schulte. Kart Kiihne and Elans Stemeder im Upper Austria, A small bur ctlective opposition was tormed in Styria by Hlabert Eicholzer, Max Lukas and Rambald von Steinblichel-R hein= wall, Finally in Vienna ater ig34 the progres- After  political oppesiti Vienna}. In the  Las  sive forces went over ta the de  ensive Josef Frank's cmigeatien and the dissolution of the Werkbund Guagg) only Ernst A. Plischke was able to maintam a firm posigen in the tee of regionalism and a pew national romanticism fith the caception of several and “Sidtiroler Sted- lungen’ (South Tyrolean housing estates}, the architecture of National Socialist Austria daung from the period of the ‘Austrotascist’ Assembly (1934-8) established by the [fitler regime repre- sents a questionable legacy. After World Wart many architects tried ta pick up Tost threads: among these were Clemens Holzmeister, who returned from exile im Ankara, Oswald Haerdtl Max Fellerer, Eugen Worle, Franz Schuster and Lois Welzenbacher. tn contrast to this, Roland *Rainer delibersicly sought, on  industrial  CHteT prises Tune rous,  Austria. Parish Commins Centre, Pucbenan, near Ling ty7a #4, bs Roland Ramer  Austria. latenor of che brinch bank of che Zeattulparkuse der Gemeinde Wien at Floridsdort! tute gS Frcdach Kurrent and Jotuaines Spalr  the one hand, to consolidate the ‘consequences and perceptions of modernism’ and, on the other, to adapt the urban planning ideas of the English Garden City movement (*Howard) 0 new condidons. The architectural scene began to change in the wake both of Rainer’s work as Vienma’s city planner (rgs8-63) and of the contemporary buildings of Karl Schwanzer. Above all, the Arbeitsgruppe 4 (consising of Wilhelm) *Holzbauer, Friedrich = Kurrent. Jehannes Spalt and for a short ume Otto Leitner) began in the 1ysos to revive architec tural debate through exemplary designs, exhi- 
Austria. Vorarlberg Prov menl Government Building, Bregenz fiyty Sos. bs Welhelhin Holzbauer and others  bitions and writings. At the same ume they begap to mine Vienna’s own aitehitectural history, from: Octo Wagner to Josef Frank Thus the lessons of history were introduced carly on in Vienna among a younger gencrauon of architects and came to play architectural theory. Even today, this view of history continues to be the link between the diversified work of such architects as Johann Georg Gsteu, Wilhelm Holzbauer, Viktor | fut= nagl, Gustav *Peichl, Hans Puchbammer, An- ton Schweighofer, Giinther Wawrik, Ouokar Uhl and others. While most of the members of this group were strongly influenced by Konrad *Wachsmann’s Summer Sentinars at Salzburg in 1963 Hans *Hollein and Walter Pichler launched the Viennese functionalist critique Far trom Vienna, Pichler is building bis ‘Cal Places’, a testimeny to the fact that a “universal meaning’ is still possible in architecture  In the early tg60s Giinther Feuerstein’s Club- Seminar wasa hothouse for architectural theory which gave birth to the activist and utepiis: groups *Haus-Rucker-Co, *Coop Hinael- blau, Ziind up-Salz der Erde, and Missing Link  a major role in  Phe cwild changes in Graz, On the one lind, teachers stich as Priedich Zotter, Karl Rugound boreas Hubert guaranteed a continuity at dexehopaen. on  totes also spurred: funduneents  Hotfmann and Ferdinand Schuste  which architecturar cacaperatives tithe tt Werksruppe Graz shuren Grot. Pitedr Grof-Rannsbach. Werner btviomes. tf  nia Pichlert and) Porn A] Girne Cetharg. Dietrich buker. Herbert Miisssag, [ire Wallmdller? coudd build. Oka chy  there was the “Gree Schoo! an ch  firane  ether and  ISL tis  wah its expressive formal Siesta aise such architents as Gunther Doane. Pitried Ttath. Klaus Rade. Karke Koewu Sialic Srvsckowits, Pterdal® Ger nd th dae Rachter whe emerged fron ihe feat tn  Pechoscbe Haovtschuie tn Gris |  Vspeclrens ai Sertias urd tonite  Po :  a Praad meee bar party oN eet th lope uid na emUpoa oR men bk coat  cor dria Raphara cn We  4 vi. al  t . a"  Sale t vtetl  Pasns M1  
Austria. The Favoriten branch in WV Zomirarparkasse der Gometide Wien Gunther [or  neat the bats y. by  ne Carmtlia by Kart Heck. Mantied Kowatseh, Gerno: Kulterer and belixy, Oram-Rosenberg:  and tinalivin di Vorarlee ron by a bome-  represented by Ehany Gtinther Weratzteld and arcniteets  Dareter  Ali of these regona: aevetor=  geneous Bausehiui. Parin, Rudolf Wag the vourger Markus Kosn  ments rede y meer wyaress t  Bperie and  strong: self dena. In Vienna a vibr  Sesto PTT are hty= ture whieh toespeccill: peuna up with ae branx. nas developed in opposer te ne cauimercial architecture of large offic. Diacks generation which hay grown up in the charged eld thar hes between Ar cruppe 4 and Hans Hollein has showe . purneulaniy high level of architectural awarcogs. Luigi Blau. Hermann Czech, [girien Worner Appelt. Lberhard FE. Kneissel, Elsa Proc tiseka insets Link (Otte Kaptinger. Adolt nriscnanit. and Heinz Tesar, together with a.  Viennese tradition of tase ane  The new  even wider  circle, will assure both the niiupheity of  whe  Austria. Head Sales Offive of the Austrian ‘Lravel Bureau. Viena sigt6 8). by Hans Hollen  the architectural continuity that has been so typical of the capital and above all a critical approach to architecture scenasasocialart. FA - Schwanzer, Karl (od.j. Wiener Baten. roe bis hente, Vienna 1y64: Uhl. Ottokar. Modertie Architektur in Wien. Van Otto Wagner bis heute. Vienna 196g: Grat, Otto Antonia, Die rergessenie MDagnerschule. Vienna 1y6g: Neue Architektur in Osterreich iggs—ro. Vierma ryzo. Seels Archi- tehten vom Schillerplitz (exhibition catalogue). Vienna ty Bode. Peter M.. and) Peichl. Gustav, Architektur ans Osterreich sett 1960. Salzburg tySo: Achleitner. Friedrich. Oster-  retchische Architektur im 20. falirhundert. 3 vols. Salzburg 1yso- $2 Architektur aus Gras, Vast  Graz  Aymonino, Carlo. b Rome ty. Studied at  tne University of Rome: diploma rsa. ble was  ancditer of Cusubeltd-continings. Lysy O4. and became a professor at the Istinita Waiversitario alt Architetturain Venice in 1y68. Since ry8s he has been an architectural consultant to the city authorities in Rome  in 1yso. in the construction of the populist INA-Casa in the Tiburtino quarter of Rome. he shared the experience of Italian architectural with members of the “Rome School. such as Lodovice Quaroni and Marco *Ridolti Lacr he designed the residential coorplex ‘Gallaratese 2° in Milan (built 1y67 zac in collaboration with his son Maurizio. as well as with Giorgio Ciueci, Vittorio De Feo.  neo-realism  
Aymonino. Gallaratee 2 residential conples Milan (Aymonino and others: 1967  Alessandro De Rossi, Mario Mameri-Elia and Sachin Messaré). The rows of houses cue by Aldo * Rossi -are mostly seven storeys hugh and are arranged geometrically and urbanisdcally around an amphitheatre-shaped centre. “Phe architects sought thus to recapture urban quali- ties in this desolate suburban arca through a simultaneously strong and expressive multi- plicity of formal elements and types, fn the G. Marconi Technical School in Pesaro, but in 1970, the fundamental principles of *Kationa- ist architecture are independently worked out  Through his role in city-centre planmig schemes - Turin, Bologna (both ty62. Regus Emilia (iy7t: with Constandne Durdi and  ee Tio ae 3 £  Florence (tuts: with Aldo Rowil and his numerous publications, A. work has greatly influenced recent architecture. particularly through hay view of the city asa fimetionally Integrated and histoneally created form. VMI  Aymonino. © tipologia edilizia, Venice 165.  La formaziane del concetty di . Origine ¢ siluppe della cttta moderna, Padua 1y6s: Hl signiftcato della citta, Bari 1 « Le strdio der fenoment Rome igs) Carle Aymonine . clrehitecnire and Crbaniant (Tokyo, February 1y7s.  urban.  Azuma. Takaminu. 6. Osaka 1y33. Before opening his own office in Tokyo. A. was for many vears head designer m funzo Sakakura’s ofc. Tle was *Architextgroupin 1y7t harmonies it fis architecture, chat is dhe hare  founding member of the  A-secks oppositional  Monic juxtaposition of opposites which by does not seek ta resolye. but rather te stress order to engender tension, A celling example of las design plilosaphy as ins owar house an Tokyo f1y67) a tal narrow concrete tower deliberatety contrasted with the tradimonal simgiestares buildings dhat sarround it. da che Satuks Kine  dergarten in Osaka .iy6g 730 the relationship  ber ween courtyard and street spaces s ende s  witha degree of tension by the inchiston or wid  nthe smooth tay ade AN Tokve pp. gu gacabut. 24  openings The  LgTh aa e  pad bb fuites vel v1  en re  
vb Berend Studied at tng Technikuim tm  Bakema, | Rotterdam 1o8t  ob. Groningen 114. ¢  werotioger: Cie Areimites Cura. Acadein sin Alt  am ans the Teohmea: Colles ti Delite Wie sul stadent. ios orked duder Cor var unas Wollem: van Ho AL Maupkans as Wels as tor the maniipal In 1948 he Bhovan den  Puen ant  Mtectural once an  otterdani cotyred tite putnerhip with | * Brock roree im Dutch architecture. In tg47 Be became a member of *CTAM and in 1g63 ot Team Xz he  and thes soon became an influential  was coceditor. rysu-ég. of the journal Foriw, wluch belped at that cine te prepare the ground for Dutch *Structuralism. From ryfis Bo was a professor atthe Staathche Hochschule fir Bild- ende Riinste in Hamburg.  Vanden Broek und Bakenns architecture has remained indebted ta the fermial and philo- sophical adeals of De *Stijl and the *inter- national Style. The Libaan shopping street (1952 4) the centre of Rotterdam, an area destroyed in. World War I, te, rly articulated and partially covered urban en- vironment: fanked by low. unobtrusive build- ings, the street is 4 pedestrian zone. The sculp-  tures a cle.  turally expressive town hall in’ Terneuzen (1968) and the psvehiacrie hospital in Middel- harnis (1973 4) display an optimism ultimately  derived from *Coustructivism GU OC) Bakema. Jacob. Vorards an Architecture for Society, Deltt 1903: -——, Stidtchautiche Archi-  tektur, Salzburg 196s, Jvedicke, Itirgen (ed.), Architektur und Staltehan, Dus Werk der Archi- tekten van den Brock wid Bakona, Stuttgart 1963, {ed.}, Architectengemrrnschap van den Brock en Bakema, Architektur + C rhantsmus, Stuttgart 1976.  Baldessari, Luciano, b. Rovereto 18y6, d Milan 1982. Studied at the Politeenico in Milan: diploma 1922. Baldessari boa iis carcer in the 1920s as a stage designer and iter. In to2y.  32, together with Luigi *Figini and Gino *Pollini, he undertook the elegant rationalist building of the De Angeli Frua lress in Milan, In 1932-3 he built, with Gino *Poau, the Cima chocolate factory, also in Milan. Or his varied  ® ee  eR rT  Bakema. Psvchurric Hoypital, Middelharnis Bakema and van den Broek i973 4  work m the tleld ofexhibiton architecture. nwo exunples stand out: the Vesta Pavilion for the Milan Pair of 1933. a strong. formalistic struc ture with an propertioned and multhoned glass fagade: and the Brida Pavilion atthe Milan Pair of 195i, with a bold free-form roof of thin concrete. B, is one of the least conventional exponents of Etaliin *Rational- ism: very carly in lis career he abandoned unthinking *Functionalism im order to create spaces endowed with a more pronounced ab- stract clarity. VMI ~ Contraspazio, 10° (1978), special issue: Veronesi, Giulia, Luciano Buldessari architetta, Trent 1957  elegantly  Banfi, Gnanluigi, b. Milan ryto. d. in the Mauthausen concentration camp 1y4s. Studied at the Milan Politecnico. In 1y32 he was a founding member of the firm *BBPR in Milan.  Barnes, Edward Larrabee, b. Chicago 1922. Studied under *Gropius and *Breuer at Har- vard. Since 1949 he has had his own office in New York. Strongly influenced through his teachers by the *Bauhaus. B. has favoured abstract compositions of clear geometric form with smooth, unornamented surfaces, which are designed with notable sensitivity for the specific situation, The Student Center of Mon- terey Peninsula College in Monterey, Cal. (1973). the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis (1974) and the IBM World Trade Americas/Par East Corporation Headquarters in Mount Plea-  
Barragan. San Cristobal estate, Mesicn Cink {1y67 8)  sant, NLY. (1977). and the Visual Ares Center of Bowdoin College in Brunswick, Maing f1ytsy, are among his best works AM [2 Robinson, Cervin, “Edward Barnes: Profile of Firm and Work’, fastinite of Architects Journal, April 180. pp. 64 FI.  Larrabee danerioan  Barragan, Luis. b. Guadalajara, Mexice tyot Trained as an engineer, B. is selraught as an architect. After travel in Spain and France. he established himself in Guadalajara in iy27. bur since £936 he has worked and dived in Mesico City. His earliest work was characterived by the adaptation of indigenous vernacular forms ot Mexican architecture. as well as by Clements drawn from Islamuc architecture, particularly that of Morocco, which he had studied i books. His move to Mexico City cont ube with a shift to the *Intermational Styie tid especially to *Le Corbusier. Around tage ancl under the influence of the French paiier and landscape architect Ferdinand Bag and the Ge. man-born Mexican sculptor Mathias Geer:  B. finaly developed : personal torent of artists  espresion, Vegetation, water and a siniple arclutectare ef primiiry secometrie forms are combmed an his compostuon of surrealisen retreats. Tae bis Luter works this ettect is berght- cued by mages osedlunng colours. Amon, the most important ns stones mi thas Let phase  bucdins: oridiin  wluch traushitcd Mestean into ar abstract architectural languages. are chi ardinteces owit Rotsean bacubasa tgs? red in Mosxtea Citys the towers af the Cridad Satthee flas7 with Goontee the over piane  nung aud se  Hh opable spaces ter the Las Arboledis resdetal quarer ase Gt aid  house and stud-terma stables ford. San Criste La} state wis vr Ninhase. Brule. fhe  Yes dities Here  Barca Now York paca. bans) Hatrasu Hlopss tee Pus Barra Xo Su Criseabal Chee ah ded cee Dokxc sue pss bute  Bartning. Oo. 8 Karhribes ssc den  sent cusa Stedied ood te chon. fe Heck wisn an Perae and hoahtote bbe ws Dyce othe Piodischur fur bhidactk uid Sumit da Wert race a Bos werk  opsatsorindustrii idmaestsune. restdentitl  cspiiai burkde spur abeass Th Prostar 
churches, mostly planned around a central altar.  His early country house designy are part of  architectural *Expressionismi, as is the project for a Sternkirche (Star Chureh; ty2t-2) in which the structuralidea of the Gothic was to be realized with modern building methods. The church for the ‘Pressa’ exhibition im Cologne (1928) and the Church of the Resur- rection, with a circular ground-plan, in Essen (1930) seem closer to the *Rationalism of those years in German architecture. After the war, he was involved with the emergency programme to provide churches of prefabricated timber construction. sponsored by the German Evan- gelical Relict Organization (designed 1946). 1} Bartming, O., Vom neuen Nirchenbat, Berlin igty; Mayer, Hans K. Der Baumeister Otte Bartuing und die Wiederentdeckung des Rawnes, Heidelberg tus.  st  Basile, Emesto, b. Palermo i837. d. Palermo tyz2. Studied at the University of Palermo, moved to Rome m S81, where he taught after 1883 at the University. In iky2 he was ap- pointed a professor at the University of Paler- mo. After several varly eclectic works (project for the Parliament Building in Rome, 1883-4: Villino Florio in Palermo, 1899). B. adopted the Italian version of *Art Nouveau around the tum of the century (Villino Basile, Palermo. 1403). Later, his architecture adapted classicist- traditional traits (Istituto Provinciale Anti- Palermo, 1y20 53: Albergo Diurno, Palermo, 1925) and thereby came into opposition with the *Rationalism: of the 1ya0s in Italy. VML O Emesto Basile architetto hibition cata- logue), Venice ry8o.  tubercolare,  Baudot, Anatole de, b. Sarrebourg 1834, d. Paris tyts. Pupil of Henri Labrouste and the  Bartning. Star Church proyeet (1y21- 2)  favoured disciple of Viollet-le-Duc, he was active as a restorer of medieval buildings in *PFrance and a propagandist of Viollet-le-Duce’s rationalized gothic point of view. After the master’s death, his attention turned increasingly to experiments with reinforced concrete and brickwork, culminating in his church of St Jean-de-Montmartre in Paris (1894-1904), where reinforced conerete is combined with a metal roof structure. B.’s attempts to incorpo-  Baudot. St Joan-de-Montmartre, Paris (18y4 1904) 
rate his experiments into Viollet-le-Duc’s his- torical schema are reflected also in his numerous writings, notably L'drehitecnre et le beron arnn (1g0s). RL OF Francoise Boudon. Recherche sur la pensce et Veeuvre d’Anatole de Baudet rs34 0 ryos” Architecnire, mouvement, conttnite, March 1973.  Bauhaus. In the fourteen years of its existence the Bauhaus showed itself to be not just an important school of art, design and (belated) y) architecture, but much more mnpertanthy it was a crucible of European modernism, an organi- zation which took up numerous reterm ideas of the epoch and helped to ensure that they were pursued to the greatest possible ctfect. Al though its director and teachers always use chewed the notion of a Bauhaus style. ats teaching and artistic successes nade the Institute and its production an oft-imitated model, Not without some part in this was the Bauhans’s own self-dramatization, which arose from its continual sense of a need to legitimize itselt Like the Weimar Republic itself, the Bauhaus was founded in the city of Goethe and Nietz- sche, lasted from igty until 1933 and exper- ienced heated political confrontation to which it finally fell victim, Its fate was, tor better or for worse, tied to that of Germany's first demo- cratic government. This parallel as well, lent the Bauhaus an exemplary role.  The involvement of the Grand Duchy of  Saxe-Weimar with Walter *Gropius went back as far as 1915. Henry *van de Velde had suggested Gropius as his successer at Weimar’s Kunstgewerbeschule (Arts and Crafts School while lecturers of the Hochschule tir Bildende Kunst had declared their interest in Gropius as director of a new architecture section, he spring 1919, Gropius was charged with the direction ot both schools, now to be united, to which he gave the name ‘Staatliches Bauhaus in Weimar This background history attests to his ination ofcreatinga comprehensive art insutution: ~The Bauhaus strives to collect all artistic creativ- ity into a unity, to reunite all artistic disciplines  sculpture, painting, design and handicrart nie anew architecture’, as it was formatted an the Prospectus of April 1gig. la thi celebration ot handicraft, of teaching workshops. of com  munal collaboration of teachers and students  and the synthesis of all the arts. the curls Bauhaus took up notions which had cr: ulated in expressionist artistic circles in che tual  iminediately atter World War 1 Expression isoty. bur which go back ulumately to the *Arts and Crafts movement of the iyth century  fo the first years this union ofartaned craft was achieved in communal teaching activity di- rected by "Formmeisteriy {masters af designs and “Workimeistern’ @work amasters). that is of Studies conducted am workshops feulpture  arasts and) framed craftsmen were theatre. stained glass, phorography, metalwork, wood- work, ceramics, typography advertising exhi- bron design. mural painting. weaving). and this provided the oppurtunity for mdividuals ta carn money for themselves. At dic end of the course, examinations were held for associates’ or masters’ diplonias  Gropiay’ skill in the selection of his callabo- rators explains, in the end. the fuct thatctvpical school ofthe period could succeed in becoming an artsne and inrellecutal contre of the republic Arusts were engaged as masters, including the painters Lyonel Beininger, Oskar Sehlonmmer, ieorg Muche, Paul Klee and Vassily Kandin- skys and the sculptor Gerbard Marcky. Johannes Ttten. who developed the “Vorkurs’ Gutroduc- tory course). was especially influential mi the carly phase. This elementary mytracton. corm  pulsory forall beginners at the Batthats, intros duced the student ta the principles of farin, taught bim to work with materials and colours, directed hin to an analy tigal study of preter works of art and soughe above all to stunulate a free creativity independent of ull preconcer ed notions or models.  The onentation of thy Baphaus was orditted be the influence or De * Sag hw diese teadine, spokesman Pheo van *Uoesburg gave nidepen denteourses ir Wermar, and bx Russian ®t on struceivism “The cseterme ined comnts  replaced by active tsadvemienc one ths con  fem porary scone, active cometh ith dhe vw rotnent, and a realiscte wosesstrent at she needs  ot ant indusuab sicets. Gropios lecised thc  maetto CArt inch Tec bneles: bow outs” eRunst and Steak. ete neue Fo rtbeat Whenleodtt che Bauhaus usta ce bisrespen  wbiues sete Girken esr bs Pasek Mebot Nags ind hosel Vibsrs  Phe resutine rare at  dirconoa taanatested tse bor the tisr tina om the Baubeess uevelserornt a the eshopiied tacraved by the Tiurinaiin prossiesit tex cetirentan gts Bsetan are bicstirabe sper  meen the Thos cae Horn designed 9s Mache  woo saan alibeeie! the Bauhaus, despite ats 
Bauhaus. The experimental Haus am Hor by Georg Muche (exhibited 1ys3)  Bauhaus. Views of the Dessau buildingy by Walter Gropius (125. 6)  name, did not have an architectural departinent until 1927 when Hannes *Meyer arrived While the early Bauhaus had startled the  Weimar populace with its utopian social ideas and numerous flirtations with mystical and  esoteric doctrines and life-styles, che opposition, especially in Thuringian handicraft circles, in- creased after the students began to cake an interest in design prototypes for industrial serial production; the production of its workshops began to seem to be in competition with local workshops, Especially attacked was the link between a state-subsidized teaching institution and workshops run by private enterprise. The provincial clections of 1y24 gave the political night wing amajority.a development which led to the masters’ decision at the end of the year to dishand the school  In Weimar, the Hochschule ftir Handwerk und Baukunst, of which Otte *Barming was director, became successor to the Bauhaus. Gropius and most of the teachers and students of the Bauhaus took up an offer of the city of Dessau te continue their work a that small provincial capital, Thus Dessau noc only took over the school, but made possible the construc- tion of anew complex of Bauhaus buildings as well as residences for the masters. Gropius” new Baubaus complex was occupied by 1926. [ts freely disposed Tayout with three extending Wings. a two-storey bridge spanning the street. and the great curtain wall of the workshop bunlding were to serve ay practical demonstra Hons of a modern architecture.  With the new home came a thoroughgoing consolidation. Former associates such as Josef” Albers, Herbert Bayer. Marcel *Brener. Hin- nerk Scheper, Joost Schmide and Gunta Stolz], who dominated both theoretical and practical principles, took over the workshops and rendered supertluous the former distinction between ‘Forouneistern’ and ‘Werkimeistern’. The production of the Bauhaus — itself now linked, via numerous international comections, with the other centres of European modernism  was determined by functionality, economy, a  preference for primary stereometric forms and the crisp elegance of machine-produced objects. Through commissions such as that of 1926 for the experimental housing estate ac Dessau- Torten, which was buile using industrialized techniques, the Bauhaus was given oppor tunities to acquire practical experience in the field of mass housing. Notleast in its testivals, for which the Bauhaus was renowned, was the new ideal life-style highlighted: unburdened by history, spontancous, creative, of one mind and uncompromisingly ofits own ime. [twas thus a matter for general astonishment when, in (928,  
Gropius gave up bis relatively assured position as director of the school he had founded and justified his action by reference to the renewal of political difficulties.  Gropius himself selected as his successor Hannes Meyer, who sought to emphasize the social aspect of the Bauhaus’s work. Meyer ex- pounded the notion of ‘the needs of the people instead of the needs of luxury’ (Volksbedarf statt Luxusbedarf"), engaged the city planner Ludwig *Hilberseimer for the architecture department (in which Meyer's professional partner Hans Wittwer was also active creased the output of the workshops and pressed for the development of inexpensive furniture, textiles, carpets and lamps that could be afforded by the working classes. He unequivocally op- posed both the open and the latent aestheticism of the Bauhaus: “Everything in the world is a product of the formula: function times econ- omy ... Building is a biological procedure. Building is not an aesthetic process... Architec- ture as the “artist's realization of effects” ts without justification.’ This stance led to internal conflicts among the artists at the Bauhaus. Meyer’s political leanings became increasingly leftist, and he was attacked from outside by the right, increasingly more influential. Finally, the liberal mayor of Dessau, Fritz Hess supporter of the Bauhaus, was forced to dismiss Meyer.  In its last director, Ludwig *Mies van der Rohe, the Bauhaus gained a leader devoted to absolute standards of quality and a relentless work ethic. This work was especially concen trated on those skills related to Ausbau’ (‘Building and Development’), so that the conflict with the advocates of an mdepeu- dent art which bad begun under Meyer's directorship was continued, even ifnow under different banners, under Mies van der Robe. lo 1932 the right-radical faction of the Dessay municipal council put dawn a motion to close the Bauhaus, and this was adopted with the support of the Social Democrats. Por over si months Mies van der Rohe carried on the work of the Bavhaus as a private institute. hotsed a an abandoned telephone factory in Berlur- Steglitz. However, after the enforced closure of the school by the Gestapo and the S.A. the Bauhaus’s board voted on 20 July disband for good.  According to the estimate of its chroncter Hans M. Wingler, the Bauhaus had sareets  i  . aD active  ‘Bau und  Iygaa to  more than 1,250 pupils in total. Its influence stands in inverse propordion to thiy limited number. The enforced emigration of many Bauhaus members dispersed its principles throughout the world. lis work was continucd inthe *USA, by Gropius and Breuer at Harvard University, by Moholy-Nagy at the New Bauhaus in Chicago, by Mies van der Robe, Hilberseimar and Walter Peterhans at the Armour Institute (today Mlinois Institute of Technology), also in Chicago, and by Albers at Black Mountain College in North Carolina. Exhibitions, such as that at the Museum of Modern Art in New York m the winter of (938 y.and numerous publications spread the faine of the school worldwide. The Bauhaus became alegend of modernism and thus attract- ed much of the criticism voiced in the 1960s in connection wich the discussion of *functional- ism. Both in its reputation and as a target, the Bauhaus assumed in later history, and for the first time, a monolithic character that it had never possessed during its brief career characterized rather by contradiction, contro- versy. and lively artistic discussion. wp C1 Staatliches Bauhaus Weiniar 191g 1923 Mu- nich and Weimar iyo3: Gropius, Walter, fdew wad Anfhan des Staatichen Bauhuyses. Munich and Weimar 1y23; Bayer, Herbert. and Gro- pius, Walter and Ise (eds.), Bahiaus 1979 1928, New York ryan; Wingler, Plans M.. Dus Bauhaus 119 1953 Ueimar Dessau Berlin, Com logne ty62: se Julie Barthans (exhibition cata logue), Stutagart cyan: Marcel. Walter Grepius and the creation of the Butihaits in [etmar, Urbana WL iy7zt. Hilter, Kari-Heine. Das Banhans ie Weimar, Berlin tose  acareer  Franciscona,  BBPR, Partnendup founded in Mili in ry32 hy Gianinigi *Banti, Lodovicn *Belaeroso, Foro *Poresutii and Emesto Nathan "age ers. BBP was launched in the overheated atmosphere of the Hatin Raneanalist debate. creating: rts first misterprece im the bite rages. the Sapatormin at begnane ceg37 St The Tobe - nvity matntested there wae centmued im the rede tivist peometaes of ther Menrarial so the actin of the Gonecntriuen caneps. erected an Mhlunan fyg6. With the borne Velucrin Mihir figs4 Spthey created a building w bili reacted reamsethe poten of the *internacenial Sts de. treating 1s miacing testhetic a an iselared anid  rintque cpody in modern architecture Wath sts rhstracied medicvit remmnscenees, the desighs 
BBPR. Torre Velie Sluis basa  ous location,  of the tower responds ta its pres  This rejeetion ot  near Milan's Getbie cathicdzal  dogniatie modenisin. wluck was vigorously  eriticized by many at dhe tune, anticipated by a decade the later ternational reorientation ot sur volated incident in BBPR’s development. Alrgady in the restoration of diy Monastery of San Sim ph- ciano in Milan fiygen with [Eo Radice Fossatii. they detmonstrated an unusual awareness of traditional values. which recurs im the same city both in the equally elegant and clear miuscunt installation in the Castello Storzesco fiysc 6 and in the offices of the Chase Manhattan Bank (1969), notable for an uxpressive steel tigade harmonized  architecture. It was not, ho  sensitively woth ots urban surroundings. Vat oO Paci, Enzo, “Continuits © courenze de BBPR’, Zodiac (Milan), ne. 4. 1ysy. pp. 82  11s; Bonfanti, E., and Porta, M0 Cirra, mntiseo « architettura: TT gruppo BBPR acike cult archi- tettonica italiana 1932-70, Florenes gta: Pavia,  Antonio, BBPR a Milane, Milan igs  1 a oo  25  Beaudouin, Eugene, b. Paris 1898. Studied at the *Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris and. the Académie de France in Rome. One of the loading exponents of the Modern Movement in France, he designed, an collaboration with Marcel *Lods. thy Cité de la Muette at Dranev. near Parts (1y32-4). a mixed-development es- tate Where prefabricated reinforeed-conerete unity were used (developed in collaboration since). the Pavilion School at Suresnes (1932 s}:and the Maison du Peuple at Clichy (1937 *Prouvé played an important part. He drew up the plans for the Cité Rotterdam suburb at Strasbourg (1951-3) and bint (with *Nervi and Alberto Camenzind) the extension to the Palac of the League of Nations in Geneva (1y67_ 73).  with Fugene *Fre  y). in which the engineer Jean  Behnisch, Ginter, b. Lockwitz, near Dresden, 1y22. Studied at the Technische Hochschule in Stuttgart, where in tys2 he founded an office with Bruno Lambart. After their partnership was dissolved in ty56, he continued alone until 4g66 when che firm of Behnisch and Partners formed, consisting of Fritz Auer (left 1981).  
Behnisch. Study Centre of the Lusher: Churet Sturtgart-Birkach Guts 4)  Winfried Biixel, Manfred Sabatke. Erhard Trankner and Karlheinz Weber {left tysii Since 1967 he has served as a professor at the Technische Hochschule in Darnosttdt  Undoubtedly the best-known works of the Behnisch office are the sports buildings of che Oly mpiapark, Munich ((y67 72), built tor che 1972 Olympic Games. The tent-reof construc= uion (designed in collaboration with Frei *Orta} over the stadium, sports hall and swinaning pool seems at first glance uncharacterstig of the work of B. and his partners in it. virtuove engineering. Yet the concept expresses very clearly their understanding of the architectural requirement to create an adaptable aruricial environment, and was notable tor its reflection of the festive character of the games.  Initially, BL was active almost exclusivels in school building, in which field he made several important pionecring contributions in the use of pretabrica the Hohenstaufen-Gymnasium in Goppingen (1956-y), the Staatliche Fachhochschule fiir Technik in Ulm (1ysy 63). the Mituclpunkt- schule in Oppelsbohm (1966 9) and the Pre- gymnasium in Lorch, Wiirttemberg (107 The strong circular form of the seheal am Oppelsbohm is further developed in Lorel: site. a free framework of a classroom core and attached wings for special uses. The gravetil looseness of this composition estublished the pattern for the firm's work. Among their mest important recent designs are: the Old Poopk s  tion, Importantstages were  3  and Convalescent Home at Reutlingen (1973  4): various projects for the governmental quar- ter of Bonn (1973-81): the replanming of the Konigstrabe and the Schlolplacz in’ Stuttyart (1973-80): the Sports Hall in) Smideltingen (1y76@ 7)cand the Study Centre of the Lutheran Church in Stuttgart-Birkach (1977 9). H LL Behnisch & Partuer, Banter und Enanetirte, Stuttgart 1973: Klotz. Heinrich, conversation with Ginter Behnisch, in: Bundesrepublik. Gespriiche mit secs Architekten. Frankfore am) Main, Berlin and Viewna tut7. pp. 63 03: “Behnisch ~ Partner’, Das Kunst- werk (Stuttgart), 32 (ty7y}, nos. 2/3. pp. 22 2y: Offenheit und Vielfult. Belinisch & Partner, Stuttuard. Dewtsche Bua reiting (Sarttgart), 166 (1gNa}no. 3. pp. t2 4  Arcuitckna ti der  Behrens, Peter. bo Hamburg ps6s. db Berlin 1940. Ina society torn between archaie mental attitudes wid ia blind tuth in the rapid progress  of technology, Bo was one of the first architects of the 20th century to develop a form of architectural thought that would aisweer to the demands of an tidustrdized cnviltzagon, Ata period sehen the moral and social denuands put forward by the Eapresionisc pamters of Dres-  den (Die Brticker were leading, to new direc  dons in the graphic arts. be was att the birth et) modern architecture im Gerniny. where he exerted leading influence between tor and ya architecture ia which he cugaged tagurited  Furthermore, che sidelines dermved trea  (gor) a form Gl specialization that has become widely kneawn in our times uoder de mane ot Industrial Design. Here. coo. he deeply aitha  enced the development of technology ind style  addres when the propagadien of erittecletiecd forms by dig exponents of *Art Nausea was thretteni br aindernine any atlenapss to formulate desigir principles at coucarnrcs wid  new ways of leas  Bo didnot discover ts tate venation: fine Take *van de Velde and *he Corbusier fe bras a painter and came tesuebttectane tt  t he  chose celled applied ats Bren Sst issu  trended) panting Chases at the ants bork. ot Karksrahe ad Dnisscleeat ta tsa te was  wl he disnuieraes  mnipresed is the wos Jeset  [areli ny Tooting, ang the work or pavers  stedioas Perblon Memb he was) tounider  ineniber of the Mim hner Seren an ous  Already meorested at the eraphis ares hes carly  coampesstiens oyalaue dd swoadents,  Tremtts 
Behrens. The architects house on the Mathilderhohe, Darmstadt (ryety  Behrens. AVG high-rension plant, Berlis (igiot  picces for books, ete.) are still permeated by the decorative influence of Art Nouveau.  After travelling in Italy (1896), B. turned in 1898 to problems of industrial production and designed a number of prototype flasks for mass production by a large glass works; these are already notable for their plain, straightforward shapes. In 18yy the Grand Duke Ernst Ludwig invited him to stay at Darmstadt and join a group of young artists (the architect J. M. *Olbrich, the interior decorators P. Huber and P. Biirck, the painter H. Christiansen, and the sculptors L. Habich and R. Bosselt) who under the name of ‘Die Sicben’ (The Seven) had as their aim the establishment of effective relationships between all the plastic arts. It was then chat B. took up architecture and, as van de Velde had done at Ucele five years before, built his own house and fitted it out completely in a unitary style that betrayed the influence of both van de Velde and *Mackintosh. At the instance of *Muthesius, he was appointed head of the Diisseldorf School of Art in 1903, a post he held until tyo7. From this period onwards his classical temperament led hini to design sober, powerful and massive works, strongly functionalist in  
style. The Obenauer House (Saarbriicken, 1905-6), as well as the Cuno and Schroeder Houses (Eppenhausen, near Hagen, 1yo8-10) express this rationalistic tendency, that was ultimately to distinguish the work of Behrens  from the plastic dynamism and lyricism of  *Poelzig and *Mendelsohn  In 1907 (the year the *Peutscher Werk bund was founded), B. was summoned to Berlin by the AEG (the German General Electrical Coin- pany). His duties comprised the design not only of electrical appliances (cookers, radiators, ven- ulators, lamps, ete.), but also of the firm's packaging, catalogues, leaflets, posters, letter- heads, showrooms, shops, and, to boot. fhe- tories and workshops. This marks for the first time, in a large industrial context, the cmer- gence of a desire to humanize technology. By employing an architect to ensure a good visual appearance for their products, the AEG way bringing objects into daily life that were not only functionally efficient, but were harmoni- ously and sensitively designed as well, per- meated as they were by an authentic creative style which, in the last analysis, projected the brand image of a major industrial company. At  Behrens. Technical administration building ot div Hoechst Dyeworks, Frankfurt (yo <)  the same time, B. introduced a new expression of monunientality to European architecture with his turbine factory for AEG (tgok-9) ~ the first German building in glass and steel — the high-tension plant (1yto)} and the factory for small motors (tgto-11), etc. B. also built a complete district of Aats for AEG workers at Henningsdorf, near Berlin (1gto/1i). Apart from numerous factories erected at various comes throughout his career. mention should be made of certain other major works designed ina neo-classic style that expressed the clients’ need for prestige. These include the Mannesmann AG offices at Diisseldorf (1gt1-12), those for the Continental Rubber Company at Hanover (193 20), and the German Embassy in St Petersburg (now Leningrad, ryt1-12),  In tg22 B. was appointed director of the School of Architecture at the Vienna Akademie der bildenden Kiinste: some of the buildings he designed in the following years may be consid- cred as examples of German *Expressionism (Hoechst Dyeworks. 1920 §). In 1936 he be- came head of the department of architecture at the Prussian Academy of Arts, Berlin. Among B.’s most outstanding pupils are: Le Corbusier, who worked in his Berlin office from ty10 to tytt; *Gropius, from 1yo7 to 1g10; and * Mies van der Rohe, from 1ga8 to 1Qtt. RD TT Behrens, Beste des Leheus anid ier Kunst, Jena tgoa: Hoeber, Fritz, Peter Behretys, Munich Behrens, Sein Werk von tgog bis tur Gegenitart. riotme, K. M., Peter Behrens sod Vieni  Peter,  tyrat Cremers. Paul Joseph. Peter  Fssen 1y28, seine Wiener ukadenttoche Meisterselinte,  tyzo, Buddensieg, Tilman, ct al. dads trivkultur, Peter Behrens und die ALC rye pry. Berlin ig7y. Windsor, Alin, Perer Bolaens,  clrctuteer and Designer, 1868 1940. London 1984  Belgiojoso. Lodovice (Barbrie di bo Maan igoy. Studied atthe Milan Politecine. Ele wast Universitari dh  Loss G3. and tren (ge3  professor it the Tsatuce Acchitotturt in Venice anthe Pohtecaieu tn Milan. Ble was a tounder- member of the tin *BBPR  Malan ue ty32  escablished in  Belgium, Brassch was the leading Furepear contre for advanced: architectural production durme the Art Nous eau phasean the rues, Uhe in Att Nouveau ni its anna guises was wadely felt. particularly in #Lrancs  influence of Bel  aud *Gerniauy, the proeipal features were the 
distinctive personal styles of Victor *Horta and Paul Hankar, both based in Brussels and ered- ited with independently achieving a non-his- toricizing, architecture as early as 1893. Horta went further than any other architect of his time in dissolving traditional interior volumes into unified fowing space. Hankar superimposed and interlocked interior volumes just as he did the structural and graphic elements that detined thein. so as to express their special integrity as diserete components of a whole. Henry *yan de Velde, interior designer, craftsman, and artist, as wellas architect and theorctician, was invited in 1902 to teach at the design school in Weimar, whence he exerted a great influence on German fugendstil.  Fhe determining sources of Belgian Art Nouveau lay in dhe ferment of architectural ideas in Brussels during the 188os, catalyzed by the completion there of Joseph Poclacrt’s overwhelming Palace of Justice (866 83) and tempered by the contriburions of such celectic architects as Alphonse Balat, Henri Be and Jean Baes. Phe theories of Viollet-le-Duc permeated the scene net only during that decade but also during chose chat preceded and followed it, Another major intluence on the ctHorescence of Belgian Arc Nouveau was the English *Arts and Crafty movement. Begin- ning in C888, Gustave Serrurter-Bovy, a Litge cabinet-maker and the leading Belgian expo- nent of Art Nouveau outside Brussels. im- ported the products of Liberty and Company of London.  The various Art Nouveau styles attained immense popularity throughout Belgium around the turn ef the century. Some of the considerable production m these modes was of unquestionable originality, but the mass of it was derivative. based on the successes of the  OTE,  style’s leading practitioners. Among the more original minor masters of Art Nouveau were Octave van Rijsselberghe and Gustave Strau- ven in Brussels; Paul Jaspar in Liéges and Emile van Averbeke in Antwerp.  Even as Art Nouveau enjoyed its greatest vogue in the design of residential buildings, gaining an enviable reputation abroad, revival styles remained in extensive use for all building types. Not infrequently, Art’Nouveau mouts  Belgium. Hotel Tassel, Brussels (1892 3). by Victor Horta: fugade and internal staircase 
were eclectically mingled with scvlistic ele- ments of neo-Gothie and neo-R enaissanee deri vation. French academic classicism (*Feole des Beaux-Arts) was favoured by King Leopold I personally and particularly for large-scale secu- lar work: usually executed in nco-Gothie style. Byr y10. Art Nouveau was losing its prominenee. ev en in the domestic sector. to the very hiscaricizing styles whose hegemony it had originally chal- lenged. Designers such as Horta and Antoiae Pompe switched from primarily fluid geome- tries to more rigid. mamly orthogonal anes.  ceclesiastival commissions were  responding to conservative trends in taste and. also to the tone set by Viennese work (imtroduc sels by Josef *Hoffinann’s Palais Staclew. tog 11). and prefiguring *Art Deco. Meanwhile, desire for a quaint regional character in new buildings informed much Belgian archicecatre from ¢.1900 onwards. Bruges, perlutps. wus major centre for regionalist deotogs an Flin ders, with Lidge playing this role m Wallonia  After World War [, niost of the recenstrue- van  early 2oth-centurs  d directly ince Bros  tion work iv such devastated cities ats be and Ypres was carried out my the comservatiny regionalist vem that had setin well betore tytg  Advanced Belgian architecture of the tases. such as that of Phuibreche Hoste. often reflected contemporary Dutch building as well as the rationalise cradition, ultimately dering trom Viollet-le-Duc, carried on in Belgitim by Louts Cloquet of Ghent, Garden-ciy housiy, estates planned along English lines were occasionally the setting for progressive damestio ar iter ture of Cubist character (* Cubism).  In the late ryz0s and ig3es., Art Deca and streamlined styles were widely employed, no- tably in Ghent and Charleroi and their subtrbs Albert van Huffel stunningly exploited au Art Deco manner in his moditied design for che unfinished national memorial basilica, Kockel- berg, Brussels (ty2t: completed 1y7et  The *International Style, on the other hand. made less of an impact in Belgium although not for any lack of talented and dedicated representatives there: *Le Corbusier hinsct built the Guiette studio-house (1y2s 7) ib. Antwerp suburb, and he had many Belgse followers, including Renaat Braem. LH. 1: Koninck, and Victor *Bourgeois. Belgas were present at La Sarraz and subsequent *CIAM mectings, as well as at the Weillen hel housing exhibition in Stuttgare in 127. Thc  New (FNeue — Sachliehkeit). brought to Belgiam principally via the Nether- lands, appealed mainly to Femish architects like  Objectivity  Bracm and Leon Stijnen, The Bresseis design shoulof La Cambre, opened in ry28 with van de Velde is director. was a ventible Belgian *Bauhaus. Belgmin was to be a crossroads or vanous modern tendencies without ever niak+ ung ua orignal contrbudon of mportunes to developments outside the country, Consers as five public taste beeween the warswas the niajor factor in Taniting the opportummes avolable ws Belgiin architects to caperinicat fruitfully None af the ambitious modernist projects Corbusier and) Floste IMALSO compeauon for elie development of the lete hank of dhe Schelde mver opposite Anowerp figa3h  Atter Workd War li }  pobtted) and economic order nade 4 propons  mdudmye one hy be entered ji dhe  was executed the new unternage:  derant Ameren mifiaence on Belyian arehites = tury an planing inevitable, The applicaaon ot pseudo-CIAM principles in conjemeton sath Americansimspurcd tiittie-Alow inode. ne the development notonts aleercun suburban treats bur also the centralareas ob sucite ties Brtessets dnd Liege benetited che inarraay aiterests of developers iroere than sagen at large. and in nny plaves resiitcd inv serreus crasian of cae Distore urban fabric. Uheough the tases and tgGos, Gulented architects suchas Broce und vali  Det coneribacois were ebsctrcd bx che  Suujnen continued to praditce ds sais o  but  chormous quanats ot gidistn guished sertain  woul straetires thar irnetetingds  densrited  auany Beltane... Pho Hruss: is F \possions et  fysS provided a Ggeasian fer Leaioistyain brine new budding ance tea tc hati auchease. Dut gnany en ie pa aheens scemedi to carncature dh Pane tieesadit vestige PPbrtectinilisin. Sich: pas tliat ded sen less thor cle aycssiprins desist be *Skatiete Or mad Moetathorocteel ii Hesse fs nar tie Hangne Leiber gtes to mispres syrcttear! MPT ie th te fed tie st Sandy od Borseni ssisarshesign. bur gather casi d hoe iepheancer ot baearre paren dacs ae Gi be tutes. Lhe titisah a Serpe. wvebree tune Deva ig say. s abd: cate TOUCHE TE DE ate besb tit sg nrib ot scid Tarr verry sts  Res nting ) bates ech senna,  mrserea ps str hasddie Veoh Gd  Xtron Wirbamn st Brussets. wer lve te 
Belgium. Studenes’ Residence, Université Catholique de bonvana, Woluvé Saint-Lambert tute by Lucien Krotl  organize popular opposition to grandiose plan- ning schemes and the banal architecture that Uhe rehabilitation of dis- used structures, che preservation of signiticant older buildings. and the rights of squatters beeame bsucy with which municipal authorities have been forced to reckon, Widespread disillu- sionment with late Modern architecture, such as that sce in the Quarder Nord in Brussels (1960- ongoing), favoured che development in Bel- ginm of a nexns af fertile Post-Modernist alternatives i*Post-Madernism). Belyium’s leading Post-Modernist. Lucien * Kroll, has had a profound influence on many members of  younger generation or architeets. including Rudy Vael of Sint-Niklaas. In Lidge, Charles Vandenhove has ranenalzed local vernacular stvles and deployed ticn sensitively in a variety of different: situauens. An ‘ geometry and proportcinny tectural design runs sure.  accomipamed them  interest in pure systems in arehi- yn the Belgian Post- Modernist milieu, which wacludes such notable figures as Bob Van Recih, Mare Van Bortel, and Georges Baines of Aviwerp: Paul Rob- brecht and [de Daem of Ghent: and Philippe Caucheteux of Mons. AW)  Belluschi, Pictro, b. Ancona iSyy. Studied at the University of Rome and at Comell Univer- sity. He was chief designer in the office of A. E, Doyle and Associates in Portland, Oregon, 1927-42. In 1943 he founded his own office there, which was taken over by *Skidmore. Owings & Merrill in rgso. He was Dean of the School of Architecture and Planning at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cam- bridge. 1y51-6s. From 196s he again had his own office in Portland. B. first came to public attention with his Equitable Savings Building in Portland (1948), an carly example of a curtain wall in which all the tayade clements are composed in the same plane. The Juilliard School of Music in New York's Lincoln Center (1970), with its incorporation of various func- tions within a large single structure, is evidence of B.’s continued devotion to the ideal of a late *Internauional Style container architecture. GEa C Gubitosi. C., and Izzo, A. (eds.). Pietro Belluschi: Edifier ¢ progetti, 1932 1973. Rome {O74  Berg. Max, b. Stettin 1870, d. Baden-Baden 1947. Studied at the Technische Hochschule in Berlin-Charlottenburg. Later he was Municipal Architect in Breslau. His Jahrhunderthalle (Century Hall) in Breslau (1912-13). a huge cupola with exposed ribs, was one of the buldest reinforeed-concrete buildings of its time. Its expressionistic (*Expressionism) feeling is de- rived purely from the formal pattern of its structural skeleton  Berlage. Hendrik Petrus, b. Amsterdam i854. d. The Hague 1934. Studied in Zurich, and had his own practice in Amsterdam trom 188g onwards; he figures among the great immovators of architecture around the turn of the century. Reacting against iyth-century *eelecticism, he aimed at an “honest awareness of the problems of architecture’ and a craftsmanlike approach to materials and construction. 1. rev more to his contemporaries the meaning and magic of brickwork. Plastering a wall was in his view tantamount to falsification, and he es- chewed the practice even in the reoms of private bonses. His ‘moral’ outlook was in harmony with the social climate of the times, which since ¢. 1895 was strongly influenced by the rising labour movement.  B. felt attracted by the massive gravity of the Romanesque, which is reflected in his semi-  led once  
circular arches and his large unbroken wall  surfaces, These features also recall the work of  the American architect) Ho H. Richardson Louis *Sullivan and Frank Lloyd * Wright. whose work he had seen on his ry1i trip to the *USA. Characteristic works of his own melude the Diamond-Workers’ House, Ampsterdum (1899-1900). Holland House, London i114. and above all the Amsterdam Stock Exchange, completed in 1903. The Stock Fxehange was the outcome of acompetinon heldin isy7s Ls winning design was subsequently altered by him in many details. In chis monumental work. he used a light-coloured stone for special  featares, in addition te brick. The steel root  structure over the main hall is lett exposed  As an architectural writer, Boos influence (notably bringing the wark of Prank Lloyd Wright to pubhe notice in Europe through his numerous publications and lee- tures. Many buildings, espeenilly in the *Ncih- erlands. are in fact based on Bos work. even though they differ formally from it. The poetry of smooth surfaces had considerable influence on the Modern Movement in Holland :De *Sujl), while his ox pressive use of histone toraay influenced the development of Durch *Expres- sionism (*Amsterdam, School or: In ty2s he attended the first congress of *CIAM at La Sarraz, but felt himself to be too committed to a  tod great  Berg. Jahrhunderthalle, Breslau siyt2 03  Berlage. Suck dos  eSlerosr rid uate on  more traditimal conception af aire big. nug be  be able to sou CLAM  WS Ge  Bortage. Hendrix Petrus, Ga daekie tay dor Nefieider Bardinit bovpens taney Carats hicoruned Lotid Ate der de dieekou eo linaied Wetter ine tues Sad to Berek Sriden Sane loran Rottertain bate Gittins tin da PEP Breage Baswiemesster Rotter  yes The clea PEE 2 Berta Avasterdune  Preis FPP Bertage Aan  bye Mabie  aa tore dine rye  Moprathur tac Banter. ss ulps  Sede ar  Ball. Mas be hor osdnbioon dosigsier. ar hitees  Whe lista werbes Tehoan Zuntcb aid tren 
Bill. Hochschule fir Gestaltung, Ulin rigs3) sy  1y27 to 1y2y at the *Bauhaus in Dessau. From 1yg4he was involved in industrial design. From 1ys1 to 1986 he was Rector of the Hochschule fr Gestaltung at Ulin, as well as being in charge of the departments of architecture and indus- trial desir, He taught at the Hechschule ftir Bildende Kunst, Hamburg. 1y67-74. His best~ known architectural work. the Hochschule fiir Gestallang in Ulin (igs3- 5). plex scheme in an open, easily grasped layout.  embodies a com=-  which harmonizes well with its setting (*Switverland) Maldonado, Vomas, Max Bill, Buenos  Aares 1985. Staber, Margit, Max Bill, St Gallen jy7t; Hattunger, Eduard. Max Bill, Zurich 1977.  Block, Der (The Block}. Association of tradi- tionally-oriented German architects, founded in Berlin in 1y28 principally as a counter- movement to the avant-gardist * Rang group, The impetus was the dispute over the WeiBen- hofsiedlung in Stuttgart. in which both Paul *Bonatz and Paul Schmithenner were meant to have participated. At the behest of the *Deutscher Werkbund. Bonatz prepared a site- plan which proposed . scheme for building pitched-reot houses a plan which soon met with resistance. Ludwig *Mics van der Kohe was then called in. and his ‘modermist™ solution won favour. In protest. Bonatz and Schmitthenner withdrew from the undertak- ing: a year later they were jomed by German Bestelmeyer, Paul Schultze-Nasmburg and other form the “Block”. whose members were united to create  overall  conservative architects to  an architecture ‘which takes account of the life- styles and views of a people and the conditions and nature of the country. VML Blom, Pict (Pieter), b. Amsterdam 1934. Stud- ied under Aldo van *Eyck at the Architectural Academy ty62 he was awarded the Rome Prize for a project for a Pestalozzi Village, Since 1967 he has had his office in Monnickendam. Alongside van Eyck, Herman *Hertzberger, and Frank van Klin geren, B. is one of the most important expo- nents of Dutch *Structuralism, the pursuit of which has sometimes given rise in his work to  in Amsterdam, In  extremely provocative forms. The ‘Kasbah? housing estate at Hengelo (1965-73) is a mani- festo of structuralist urban planning: the houses were densely packed and the ground level was kept free and open with the intention of creating an which, however, was not achieved. B. built ‘t Speelhuis community centre and its surround-  unobstructed circulation zone,  Blom. ‘Kasbah’ housing estate, Hengelo (1yos 73) 
ing ring of houses at Helmond, ty7s &. Here the dominant theme was that of a cube set on one comer; the housing units are stacked on hexagonal shafts, resulting in a kind of ‘forest’ formed of a series of “tree” dwellings. AM O Liichinger, Arnult. Serukturalismus in der Architektur, Stuttgart 1y81  Bofill (Levi). Ricardo, b. Barcelona ty34 Studied at the Escuela Veenica Superior de Arquitectura in Barcelona and at the University of Geneva. In 1962 he founded Tuller de Arquitectura, an interdisciplinary team of art- ists, writers, musicians and architects. With the Taller de Arquitectura team B. realized, among other projects: the Calle J. S. Bach flas in Barcelona (1964-3); the Barrio Gaudi residen- dal quarter in Reus (1964 7): che La Muralla Roja holiday complex in Calpe (1968 73): the “Walden 7’ flats at Sant fust Desvern. near Barcelona (1970-5); and, in France, the housing complex Les Arcades du Lac at Saint-Quentun- en-Yvelines. After his neo-realist and *Now Brutalist experiments in the “Bareclona school” of the 1960s, B. turned decisively in the mid- 1970s ta historical prototypes. He developed. most prominently at Saint-Quenun-cu- Yvelines, a monumental nve-classical architec- tural language which. he claims, recoustructs the collective consciousness. BW O Bofill, Ricardo, 1? Architecture d'un homme, Paris 1978; Goytisolo, José Augustin, Taller de Arquitectura, Barcelona 1977: Taller de Argii tectura. Ricardo Bofill (exhibition cacoguci, London 1981.  Bohigas (Guardiola), Oriol, b, Barcelona tyzs Studied at the Escuela Veenica Superior de Arquitectura in Barcelona. In ig§i he formed 4 partnership with Joseph *Martorell, which was joined in 1962 by David *Mackay. He became professor at the Architecture School in Barve- lona in 1971 and its director in 1977. Since 1981 he has served as architectural adviser to the Cits of Barcelona. B. has achieved prominence nor only as a practising architect but also ws  theorist. AMY OD Bohigas, Oriol, Arquitectura modernista, Bar celona 1968; —-— -, Contra ima arqiitcernrat ad-  Jetivada, Barcelona 1469; . La argentina espafiola de la Segunda Republica, Barcelona 1970; Proceso y erotica del diseto, Barcclous 197. » Catalunya: Arquitcenera y irhariom: durant la Republica, Barcelona 197%  Bohm, Pomimkis. Frivhpgsdort parish church, near Cofogae figat 7  Béhm, Dominikus. b. Jettingen, Bavaria 180, do Cologne toss. Studied under Theodor *Fischer ae the Technische Hochschule in Sate gart. In 1go2 he opened bis own office in Cologne, which he directed trom igs on, in collaboration with his son Gocttricd * Bohm He wasa profesor ut the Kunstges erbeschule in Offenbach. iyty 2h. and oat the Werkschule, 1g26 3s. Prom the rysos on, B vhosiastis ll architecture  Cologne  advocated a reform ice  in Germany. by the abandonment or che  historival formid vouthulary ay wells by patton urd aluar. A  bringing Cogether of conga  strong scisory-emotoral element pers tides Lins  work. whether if be chat which depeads ulie  monn the Cty ui  mately on #Esprestoussn  States project La2ct the Chisstaonigskirche a  Muainz-Brecbotshbern tuc6 oi the parish churehan Pitcligesdort near Cole: fuse with rho damaterted abstricth edt  cline white foldsoor whether be Canis hes ot tidy are tore aithiveesd bs  Ievrt at  his tate period,  harepesn moderns suchas St br weRivhl ryae cid SO Mbu Kec  Gata  a Marenburs cuss ol  Phot Nucser. Pen enckar Be fan Uberti regen Dheb VO Muck. U! mf Phonak  Dowsakus Heine ba contend Pak. Mugaclt aid  Jutel bates Siar dt Crests SN idter ote  Qancweda Bete Bere and Droiknart cacy 
Bohm, fet i isn lutzos  Bohm, Gocttred. b. Of oi bach am Main 1290 In Munich he studied architecture at) the Tevhnbehe Hochschule and sculpture at the Akademie der bridenden Kiiaste entered the office ot bis futher Donimkus *Bohm. whici: death in igss.  In tys2 he  ts tank aver upon the latter's  Sige ae as been Professor tor Regional Plainsig ani Pubhy Works atthe Technische Hochsehuie in Aachen. Following his father, Bo italy was primarily a church designer, his work be characterized bv oa highly language derived from *Expressiomisni  expressive fornia! A biehpeint was the pikgrimage church iy Ne erystalline forms are composed inte tower  sex 190308, where  rugged mountain of corerce The same sculp- cural approach also endows the town hall im Bernsberg (1y62 7) wath a posserful shape. In this case. B. enlarged the oxncne ruins of, medieval casde to produce ai semble in a harmonious architectural stwle. The Old) People’s Home m  Doasscldor Garath 1y63-7) and the residential quarter m Cologne- Chorweiler {1g6g 73) rew patterns of social relationships, «well as to the Y vears have Imrissions, as  HUPTESsive: en=  alot SEPSTIOVIEY CO  nature of specitic sites. The last witnessed entirely new types oF vs  well as a marked tendency towards an architec tural Language more influenced by *Rational- often mictal skeletal structures such ay in the Landesame fir Daten- verarbeitug wid Statistik ‘Provincial Admin- istration tor Data Processing and Statisues? in Diiseldort iiyeg-7ai and the pilgrimage church in Wigratzbad | ty72i HH  “Gottfried Bohim’. Archutectire and Crhanisn Tokvoi, March 197s (Bohm. Das Kunstwerk Stuttgart. 32. lyTyh nos. 2 a. pp. 30 7 Rae, Svetlozar, Gottried Bolin. Banter iid Progekte rar 1980, Cologne 182.  ms examples are the  Bonatz, Paul. b. Solgne. Lorraine is7z, do Stuttgart iysh. Sendied at the Technische Hochschule in Munich 18yo- rg00. Worked as Theodor *Fischer’s assistant at the Technische Hochschule in Stuttgart, 1y02-6, and) was appointed a professor there in 1yo8. He was in partnership with Friedrich Eugen Scholer. 1y13- 27, and served as adviser to Fritz Todt tor the construction of the rman Autobahn system, 1y35 40. After a period as consulting architeet to the City of Ankara, 1y43 6, and asa professor at the Technical University in [stan- bul. togu-s3. he returned to Stuttgart in 1934.  The forcefully expressed monumentality of the Central Station in Stuttgart (1911-27; with Scholer) recalls the contemporary industrial  
buildings of Peter *Bebrens, In its umon of  functionalist articulation and reduced *histori- cism, itis related to Eliel *Saarinen’s Helsinki Station, which actually served as a model. In residential architecture B. purveyed a tasteful and definite traditionalism, while in transporta- tion and industrial structures he tended to a rationalist ‘objectivity’ (*Neue Sachlichkeit) which was only superficially disguised under the Third Reich. From the ty3os he adopted a conservative architectural stance in his theorcti- cal writings. Gia C Bonatz, P., Leber and Bauen, Stuttgart 1950; Graubner, G. (cd). Paul Bonatz utd seine Schiiler, Seuttgart 1930; Tamuins, Fricdrich (ed.), Paul Bonatz: Arbeiten aus den fahren 1907 his 1937, Stuttgart 1937; Bongartz, N.. Ditbbers, B., and Werner, F., Paul Bonarz 1877 1956. Stuttgart 1977.  Botta, Mario. b. Mendrisio, Ticiny (Swuzer- land) 1943. Trained asa technical draughtsman. 1gs8-G1. and studied at the Istituto Uni- versitario di Architettura in Venice, 1964. 9. lo 1976 he was a visiting professor at the Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale, Lausanne. He worked in *Le Corbusier’s office in 1g6s and with Louts *Kabn in 1y6y, and isone of the most important members of the “Ticenese School’ (*Switzer- land). Already in his first building. the clergy house in Genestretta, built: in fthus before his architectural studies). che principal lines of bis later work were cneupsulated attention to topographical conditions, regional ist sensibility, preference for clear architectural types, desire for geometric order and emphasis on craftsmanship. These maxims reach a pone synthesis in the school at Merbio Interiors  1gOt 3  Bonatz. Central Station. Stutrgart (with F | Scholer, ty1t 27)  Botta. School at Morite Intertare rigt2 71  ftyz2 7) a straight. three-storeved series of concrete units, additively composed ot sughtly  varied cletments. Although carved out of the  lundseape as an azuficial ordered feuenre. at reflects thy visual amipulses of ite vere natural setting. Go's legible tornraistie atatide is es-  presed above all ina series of retined ang  farmiy houses. tram die horse ia Stabie rye.  iostils strongly reniinns cnt of le Corbusier. 16 the mdependent butkiings a: Caadenarze iy? Riva San {  Hatt Vitale tute te uid lie  mannered. elegantly staped baie at L hom Ras Se  Vitale renders the rehiceaship beew cen butd=  Poet tats The  mg and Landscape problometic as an tower constructed uate shepe. tots Sulton pes tarast sophia. but rt us ouppertinass bevel crgams boron bed bye want : Sordi tie adn aitssratices s ptlan tho Sioocheekors bubow ~ ALi fits hei crt cik che probdoms ots my pea beahra gs with ane stian rete  
Bourgeois. Victor, b. Charleroi 1897, d. Brus- sels (962. Studied at the Académie Royale des Beaux-Arts i Brussels, ryig iy. Active as an architeetin Brussels from 1920. he also became a professor at the Feole Nationale Supérieure editor of various technical periodicals, and was vice- president of *CIAM. 1928 go. The most im- portant advocate of modernism im Belgium, he  W Architecture. Brussels. He was  realized his masterpiece carly in his career: the Cité Moderne at Berchem-Sainte-Agathe, near (ig22-s). Influenced in its formal expression by Tony *Gamier’s Cité Industrielle ay well as by Frank Lloyd *Wright’s carly works, the architecture of the estate is distin- guished by differentiated articulation of the housing terraces, numerous squares and court- yards, aud by an elegant and classically enliv- ened fagade composition. It was to influence * May's first work in Frankfurt am Main, the Hats in the Bruchteldstrabe (gas: with C. HH. Rudlot. Boy other works include his own house in Brussels (iy2s).a house atthe Weiben- hofaediung an Stuttgart (ig27), and the house tor the sculptor ©) Jaspers in Brussels (1g28}  Brussels  Flonquet, Prerre-Louis sirclittectie 0922 1952 lysas Georges, Lictor Bourgeois, Brussels Lysy: Fictor Bourgcors 1897-1962 jexhibigon catalogued. Brussels 1y71  Dhtor Bourgeuts:  Brussels Linge,  Brazil. When in to43 the Museum of Modern Artin New York presented its exhibition on old and new architecture in Bravil, che world was sware that here the *Inter- national Style ofthe ty2os bad blossomied into 4 tropical version. Characterized by its darmg formal expression. its Tyrie! content, and. its  suddenly made  regional conmotations. 1 ho had strong spiri- tual links wath the country’s colonial past. In fact, it had sprung ep in the wake of two rebel movements, the Modern Arc Week in Sie Paulo, 1922. and the Regionalist movement i Reeite, 1926, led bs Gitberte Ereyre. which aimed at giving new shupe to Brazilian intellec tual and arnstic life. wot only by introducing a truly modern outloosx rooted in the most but abso by aliens  genuine sources of Brasviian lif attempting, to which had dominated dre country since the arrivalin c8o6 ofthe King of Portugal, who fed the Napoleonic invasion and transterred his court to Rio de Janeiro. In ts16 Dom Joie V1 invited a French mission of painters, sculptors,  destros the influences  and architects to ‘civilize’ the country, with the result that the organic development of a local architecture, brought about throughout the colonial period by an ecological assimilation of the Portuguese Baroque style, was disrupted, and all kinds of foreign pscudo-styles were introduced, turning the ryth cencury into an uncharacteristic interval, chiefly notable for the copying of whatever might be done abroad — not only in architecture but in all the arts,  A few years before these Wo new move- ments, scientific studies of the effect of sunlight in relation to buildings had been started by Alexandre Albuquergue, who in 1916 suc- ceeded in incorporating into the Building Code of the city of $40 Paulo precise requirements as to the minimum provision of sunlight in. anew building. Thus, there existed in the 1920s not only an intellectual atmosphere receptive to  new ideas in architecture but also a sound regional approach to the basic problem of the exposure of buildings. both in order to assure a minimuar of sunlight and alse to control any excess. In 1927 in $30 Paulo, Gregori *War- chavehik, a newcomer from Russia, presented his first cube-like houses to the public, and was later joined in partnership by Ldcio *Costa. When the Revolution of 1y30 upset all the convendonal political and cultural values of the country and launched a programme of impor- tant new public works. the younger architects were already prepared for the decisive. if paradoxical, episode of the new building for the Ministry of Education and [ealth. A competi- Gon was held for the design of this building. and all the modern projects were disqualitied by a conservative Jury. But the Minister of Educa  tion, Gustavo Capanema, who was surrounded by a group of far-seeing collaborators, was bold enough — after the paying the prizes awarded by the jury - te invite Lucio Costa, one of the unsuccessful competitors, to design the final project. Costa insisted on the formation of team to include all the other rejected candidates, and this was done. Thus Costa, Oscar *Nie- mever, Jorge Machado Morcira, Affonso Eduardo * Reidy, Ernani Vasconcelos and Car- los Ledo were jointly responsible for the devel- opment of the final design, with landscaping by Roberto *Burle Marx. In 1936, *L¢ Corbusier Was invited to act asa consultant on this project, ays well as on one for the New University City. He stayed in Brazil only three weeks, but during this short stay the curning-point was reached  
and modern architecture was irrevocably estub- lished. Le Corbusier's main ideas fell on fertile ground. The use of piloris was especially appro- priate for the Brazilian climate, the hrise-sofeif was in many cases an absolute necessity. and hits basically lyrical formal approach was thorvugh-  Brazil. Ministry of Education and Health, Rio dk Janeiro (1936 43), by Litcie Cost, with Le Corbusier and others  Brazil. Sio Franenco Chapel, Pampiilha (aa. by Oscar Niemeyer  ly suited ro the Brazilian spirit. A local version of)  the International Seyle thuy emerged.  The high quality of modern architecture achieved in Brazal from: 1936 on can be seen in an impresive number of buildings, including: Ring Lesis Art Palacio Cinema in S4o Paulo (1436). Oscar Niemeyer’s Day Nursery in Rie de  anciro (1939). his Oure Preto Hotel 4940). his Casino. Yacht Club and Restaurant (19431 and the Sie Franence Chapel froggi at Pampulha; Luiz Nunes’s (with Fernanda Sacre nto de Brito} Water Tower at Olinda fig37i: Auulia Santos Hidres Airport im Rio de fineiro (69383. with Jorge Renate Mesquita dos Santos and Renato Seero: Liao Costa's and Oscar Niemever’s sith Paul Lester Wiener) Brazilian Pavilion at the New York World's Parr (1930: Milton Roberto’s ABE (Braziian Aysoctation Building: 1y38}. the Eastitute: de Ressegtires Building (ry42}. and the Santos Duriont Aire pore Building Gogg) al mi Rue de Janeiro: Alvaro Vital Brasil’ Edificio Esther apartment building (with Adhomar Marinhosin Sao Pade Cigan): Olavo Redig de Campos Suetal Cen= tre in Baa sippt (iy38; and  Goro Lima's Durnone de  Ferreira. Thomaz Estrella,  Marceles and  Press  Firming Saldanha Mussis-  Mossard (rygul aparonept buildimysin Kio. net to menten the Ministry of Fdueaton and Health itselt started im ty 37 and finished in 1643  Atter che war vears the counuy catered phascot rapid ndisnidiecien 6 bich helped oo rae standards of comserucuon, as well as a period of tremendous reakeestat. speculation  whith naturally gave tie tr various medione  Brazil. \!  wend  
Brazil. General plan tor Betula iius7) by Lacio Costa  Brazil. Presidential Palace. Bravia figs}. by Oscar Niemeyer  buildings alongside those of yenuine quality. Architects whose work has become better known abroad include Paulo Aniunes Ribeiro, Jodo Vilanova Artigas, Sergio Bernurdes, Fran- cisco Bolonha, Oswaldo Bratke, [. aro de Cas- tro Mello, Ary Garcia Roza, Fienrique E.  Mindlin and Giancarlo Palanti. The most im- portant examples of Brazilian architecture since iyso are Oscar Niemeyer’s [birapucra Exhibi- tion Pavilions in Sie Paulo (igst- 4); in Rio, Lacio Costa's Parque Guinle apartment build- ings (1948, tgso and 1954): Affonso Eduardo Reidy’s Pedregulho Housing Estate (1947 5 and Museum of Modern Art (1954-9), both in Rio de Janeiro: Jorge Machado Moreira’s Uni- versity City, Rio de Janeiro (1949-62); and, of course, Niemeyer’s buildings in Brasilia. Brasilia, the new capital for che country, was founded some 1.000 kin (600 miles) from the Atlantic coast, in hitherto virgin territory. Located on gently sloping highlands, half sur- rounded by a huge artificial lake, this new city, planned for 600,000 inhabitants, was formally inaugurated as the new seat of the Federal Government on 21 April 1g60, only three years after an international jury had selected Liicio Costa’s plan in an open competition among Brazilian architects. In a general outline remi- niscent of an aeroplane, the wings are devoted to the super-blocks of apartment dwellings; the main axis, along what would correspond to the fuselage of the plane, to the monumental  
distribution of the Ministries and the Plaza of the Three Powers (Presidential Palace, Supreme Court, and Congress), with the business and entertainment districts at the intersection. which is emphasized by the bus depot, arranged on several levels. Thoroughly planned with deep human concern, yet deliberately aiming; at a clear symbolic expression of the city's unique function, Brasilia has carried to the man-in-the- street the concept of urban planning to an unsurpassed degree. The unity and integrated character of Brasilia derive not only from Costa’s lucid plan but also from Oscar Nie- meyers striking designs for the public buildings.  Building Brasilia was not only the highest peak of Brazilian architecture, as a mere furie- tion of the sheer magnitude of the task and the architectural postulates formulated there. Lt alse implied a certain break with rationalist mod- emism. Although buildings continued to be built according to International Style principles and in keeping with its utilitarian and cechmical as wellas economic guidelines, it is important to stress the significance of new trends. One. the improvement of the ‘quality of life’, argued for an ecologically minded point of view, while the other sought explicit references to Brazil's traditions and life-style.  The deaths of Rino Levi and Marcello Roberto in 1965 and of Mindlin in coincided with the coming of age of a new generation of Brazilian architects. One of the most brilliant among these is Joaquim Guedes Critical of Le Corbusier, whose influence in Brazil was indeed considerable, Guedes rejected  1yFl  Brazil. Anna Moreau Residence, Hhiuma, Sic Paulo (1978), by Joaquim Guedes  formalism in favour of an architecture based on environmental, and even more significantly. on economic conditions. He objected to a transpo- sition to Brazil of architectural models origin- ally created for societies with high purchasing power. Guedes is predominantly concerned with housing, particularly for low-income groups. A demonstration of his ideals is to be found in the uew city of Caraiba (1y76 ) Another architect who seeks expression i themes identifiable with the environment is Carlos Nelson Ferreira dos Santos, who worked eatensively on Brazil's shanty towns or farefas. Furthermare, the process of change has evi- dently broughtabout anes . locally inspired. use of materials. In this context it is appropriate to mention Zanino Caldas and his simple building techniques. The ‘new generation of architects also includes Fabio Penteado (although his professional beginnings 1yso). Filgueitas Lima (ereater of the exceptional  date from  Bahia Administrative Centre) and Paulo Mendes da Rocha HEM IG Pi Goodwin, Philip L.. Brazil Builds, New  York 1943: itcheock, Henry-Russell, Latin American Architecture since togs. New York 1yssiMindlin, Henrique E.. Moder Architectire in Brazil, Rao de faneire and Armsterdain tysé Braceo, S., Brastle, Bologna 1y67. Bullrich, Po. New! Directions on Latin American Architecture. New York 1y69  Toarchiterura inoc N  rind  Breuer. Marcel (Lako), bo Pees. Hungary 1go2.d. New York iy8t_ In ty20, 13 entered the Akademie der bildenden Kunste in Vienna, intendmg to become a painter and sculptor After a briefattendance there be becante disitlu= sloned with its “ured cclecuctsm” and looked around for a practical apprenticesip i ong of the crafts. Before long. he heard of Walter *Gropius aid the * Bauhaus, and, he nn toe. he lefe Vienna tor Weintar to become one or the youngest members of ithe tist geuenibon ot . ents Hos prnvipalmecsest. at hat  Bauhaus stu ume, waisia the anor tumitate destin and by rag he age ab awentts -f a he took over the  eetns ot the Burhaus’s farmitar. tepart-  ies paper wat  Jong. Hw preocet  ment. Hesore sturdarduced. modtilar dent firauere led ante  razed. Cerda anit  ay ited stand,  wanton dus  Heaste nud ties to ue ttey tate  Bos rst nerable Cortipetiand to conten:  porta fess ge ta rie Tats w bon the tield et  rari tor he had eevented. ascaels as bac 
Breuer. Muluple housing on in Tags Gt  Iesidertal, Zurich  Breuer. Phe architert’s ue lie Coun, ygtd  » Canaan,  series of systems chat employed conunucusly bent steel tubes (painted or chrennum-plated) to form the structural frames of stools, chairs, and tables. Much of this important experimen-  tal work in furniture design was made possible by the move. in tyes. ofthe Bauhaus to Dessau, and the construcuion of the new Bauhaus by Gropius. Bo way commissioned to design all the furniture necded in the new buildings, and this commission provided an important stimulus to his work in this field. In hater years he main- tained his interest in furniture design and produced some of the first bent and moulded plywood chairs. as well as some of the first chairs using ing frame.  He left che Bauhaus m ty28 to practise as an architect and interior designer i Berlin, and during the next halfdozen years built several houses and apartments quite as radical as — and often more practical than the contemporary work of *Le Corbusier and others. Moreover, he entered a number of competitions and prepared theoretical projects for cities, theatres, factories, ete. In ty35 B. moved to England and soon entered into parmership with F. R. $ *Yorke in London. The partnership lasted until 1937. when Walter Gropius. who had been appointed Chairman of the Department of Architecture at Harvard, invited B. to join him  aluminiui ay a structural support-  
there as Associate Professor. At the same time. the two men formed an architectural partuer- ship in Cambridge, Mass.  While it is difficult, if not impossible, to separate the individual contributions of Gropius and Breucr both to the teaching at Harvard and to the houses designed in their office, it is fair to say that B.’s contact with individual Harvard students was especially close (he way closer to them in age. and he tended to be exeremely practical in his approaches to design problem): and it is fair, also, to say that much of B.'s attention to detail is evident in the work completed by the Gropius and Breuer partner- ship. In any event, both B.'s teaching and his completed buildings left a profound impression on a new generation of American architects Among his students, for example. were Philip *Johnson, Paul *Rudolph, John *Johansen, and Edward L. *Barnes.  In s94t B. set up an independent practice in mbridge, and in 1944 he moved to New York City. Por the first few years, his work was limited largely to houses and relatively small- scale institutional buildings: but im tys2 he way  Breuer. Whitney Museum of American Art, New York (Marcel Breuer and Associates: 163.6  selected (with *Nervi and *Zchrtuss) to be one of the three architects for the new Headquarters for UNESCO in Paris (built 1953.8). Among his other buildings were St John's Abbey and University in Collegeville, Minn. (1953-61). the fermer New York University campus at University Heights, N.Y. (1ys6 62. the IBM Research Centre at La Gaude. France {1g60—y, the Winter Sports Centre at Flaine. France (1g60-4). the Whines Muscunt of Americar. Artin New York (1963 6}. ay well as the IBM comples in Boca Raton, Fla, (1907 973  A characteristic feature of Breuer’s architec- ture. which reflects the decisive influence of the *Conseructivist movemientin Russia and West ern Europe an his carly strony articulation  y career. ix his sense of All his designs were highly aruculated: a Breuer char would express every element separately, both in form and in ma- terial, a Breuer house would express diferent areas of activity in different and separate terns (his Heplans for houses, which separate the day- ume areas from the nighttime areas. are eapeeuilly well kneyenis in his construction detaily always clearly defined and separately art lated: and even in his large bunldings, stech as the UNESCO Headquarters. there sway a clear disuinetion and separaton oF figetionally  every clement of the structure was us  Iwas a  different elements whether diferent: kinds ot  building of cdaiferent parceot the same baildnrgs Already in his carly Amer  abandoned the mead tormaudae ef the *tater-  an houses Uo had  natiotal Style and had adepecd «styler wliash reginnal characternties were gtven new le bs rich mite rnads wid dy Tose  the generous vse or texturalls such as wood and rubble masenrs  attenoan te the mature af the tepesraphy ia  specitic Lindseaps Ee Linge braking of dls  early pgs) s styled shith Goswards str  epresive forms, whether mde tal suck  fagade cho mentsor the HEM Rosca h © Ta Gand the church ot Se fe  fy che fies ot ine  Hrewerall fori ass the Ps ltes at  wes Abbe a Cherry itis  mabstions EAR porcini 1  san bu conatd ators che best vet pri dphs ee Site tet rho ee thot dd Mio Henin Nat Stain PRL PES ere it Poredoun Nw Sak aaa Dorentes vist Vegan. Gaui ooh Nfare! Brie Hern rae weentetnnd. Mutha tas  
Brinkman, Van Nelle Tobacco Factory, Rotterdam (wath |. Ef van den Brock: 1g6 30}  Jones, Cranston (cd. Marcel Brener, i921 1961, Buildings amd Projects. London 1962, Papa- christou, Ticlan, Uarcel Brewer. Newe Batten und Projekte, Stuttgart 1970, Wiek, Christopher, Marcel Breners Furniture and Literwors (exhibition catalogue), New York 1y81  Brinkman, Johannes Andreas, b. Rotterdam 1yo2, d. Rotterdam 1ygy. From tyss he was in partnership with Lo ©. van der *Viuge: later, 1937 48. with J. H. van den *Brock. The Van Nelle Tobacco Factory im Korterdam (1g26- 30). to whose design Mart *Staor contributed substantially, is, with its Qansparent fagade and exposed structure, one of che most important industrial buildings of the 2oth century and an  elegant manifesto of the modern movement. The slab-shaped Bergpolder block in Rotter- dam. built in 1933-4 (Brinkman, van der Viugt and Willem van Tijen). was an car!y example of a domestic building elevated on sciles  Broek, Johannes Hendrik van den, b. Rotter- dam sys, d. The Hague 1978. Studhed at Delft  Technical College. from which he graduated in ty24. He started his own practice in 1y27 at Rotterdam, entering into partnership with]. A. *Brinkman in 1937, and with J. B. *Bakema in pgs. JV () Brock. J. HL. van den, Creative Krachten in de architectonische conceptie, Delft 1948.  Bryggman, Erik. b. Turku 18gi, d. Turku 195s. Studied at the Helsinki Polytechnic, where be graduated in architecture in 1916. After collaborating on a variety of projects, he opened his own office in 1923 in the old capital. where he always lived, and where he was joined afew years later by Aino and Alvar * Aalto. This collaboration did not last long. however. as the Aaltos moved on to Helsinki; but it came during the most critical period in the develop- ment of their architectural thought and resulted in a unique work of collaboration, of great umportance in the history ot Finnish architec- ture: the design for the Exhibition commemo- tating the 7ooth anniversary of the City of Turku, which took place in 129.  B. had carried outa good many works before the Turku Exhibition, they mark che most important stages in thac process lading to a 
modernism which was silently devclopmyg in Finnish architecture. Amongst them may be noted: a block of flats for employees of the Finnish Sugar Company at Turku (1923 4): some houses in Turku and elsewhere: and two hotels in Turku — the Seurahuone, with very sophisticated décor (1928), and the Hospits Bete? (1927-9). His finest work. characterized bya very pure Rationalist seyle, was carried out, however, hetween 1930 and 1y4o, starting with the Parainen Cemetery Chapel and the Finnish Pavilion at the Antwerp International Exhibi- don, both dating from 1y30; the Vierumaki Sports Club (1931-6); and the Library of Obo Academy in Turku (1935). Phe tower of the Library rises in a district of the old city, over which the dark mass of the Cathedral looms in  the distance. It is remarkable for the balance of)  its openings in the large white walls, and for the perfect way it fits in with its surroundings. by means of subtle handling of proportions and a complete understanding of the genits loci. Tur- ku Cemetery Chapel (1938-41) ty B.'s best- known work, and is undoubtedly very due. especially in the magical lightness of its internal space, but taken as a whole it reveals the  Bryggman. Cemetery Chapel. Turku (uss at  intrusion of romanticism into the serene ration- alism of the architect's previous work.  B.'s notable post-war works, in the decade from 1y4s to loss decline imelude a housing estate ar Pansio. near Turku (1946). the Students’ chemistry laboratory of Obo Academy, Turku (ioso). and Rihinwiki Water Tower (1952 These later works show a tendency towards more comples forms, at Gimies pointing toward  a period of romantic  Union and the  ‘organic architecture, with the careful siting of bunidings m the landscape, ai others revealing a miore strictly “national” inspiration. LM  L. Mosso, Leonardo, ‘Eopera di Enk Brygy  man nella storia dell architettura’ tinlande Ain Sip. (Vurin}, December ross: Sagell. Anna-Lisa, Entk- Bryyentan. Ekeiits 196 Piironen, Psa, Erik Brygeman fexhibition cate Jogue}, Turku 1y67  Burle Marx, ioberto. b. Sada Paulo bgog After a long stay im Berlin, where he attended 4 private art school and way inspired by the Botanical Gardens in Dahlen to take a close interest in the world of plaints, he studied for a ume at the Escola Nacional de Belas Artes in Rao de Janeiro. In ty34 he established himself as a landscape architect. Although he had had ne professional training iu garden design, he soon gained « reputition throughout Brazil, A pro- found knowledge of tropical flora, developed on extensive mips throughout che country. 1 the basis of his art. Spacious, rhytimically ardiculited form which offen seem an abstrac- dion of the hordseape atedi) are typaed of his gardens and parks. His involvement wu pamt= ing is especially evident nb conscious mae nipulation of the colours ae dittyrent pinnts Among the highponts of bis extensive wuyry are: the garden of the Former Education Vine binding designed by  try in io de fingire, Lice *Caste. Osean * Nine ver and is comsultant ety gst che  anthers with 416 Corbrser arden scting of the Yacht Club and estan: LUgae grounds af Botsloge ds Rao de [ancie User ANT  rintom Pamptlha by Niemever rhe rosa tnd tae Delebsec Park at Caracas  Mardi Pico Marit, Lite Bieke \iory. New York ye  Vier festibacion catel:  Propiatt Caadens ot Burt  Roberts  aes id  
Canada. A country formerly subject to cole- nial rute, and new to economic domination by ws ueighbour, the United States (*USA), Canada reflects its colonial past in the essential features of its nauonal architecture imported from abroad. At the time of Contederation in 1807, Gothic Revival dominated public build- ing. Prederick William Cumberland followed his friend John Ruykin’s precepts when he built University College at the University of Tor- ento (isso), while Thomas Fuller tnitiated a  Jong hine of government facilities m Godhie style wid the Centre Block and Library of the Parliament Buildings, Ottawa (i8sy 67), 4 powertul ssimbol of Briush autho-  Dominion  rity. crowning acliton what was den die edge of wilderness. (Destroyed by fire in tyt6, the Centre Block was rebuilt to the more severe design of John A. Pearson and J. Omar Mar- chand.) The patienal rulways su tourist po- tential in this controntation of picturesque architecture and dramatic natural sites, and built umposing chatecuesivle hotels. all turrets and pinnacles, ot which an impressive example is the Chiteau Frontenac im Quebec City (begun by Bruce Price in i8y2: additions by Edward and B.S. Maxwell iy26 4) While Collegiate Gothic played an important role well into the 2oth century (Henry Sproatr & E.R. Rolph.  Hart House and Soldiers Lower, Guiversity of”  Toronte, ig? 283, architects explored the full  Tange of historical styles current at the turn of  the century. Traimed at the Ecole des Beaux- Arts in Paris, Edward Maxwell was ay adept at mixing Romanesque and ftaitianate elements (Henry Birks & Sons Score, Montreal, 18g3) as he was with pure chissical torms (Montreal Art Association Gallery, now Musce des Beaus- Arts, 1glo-12). Edward J. Lennox. frankly unitated He 1 Richardson's Allegheny County Courthouse, Pittsburgh, when he built the Toronto Municipal Burtding and Court- house in i887 9, and F.M. Rattenbury won the 18g competition for the British Columbia Legislature, Victoria, with 2 design combining English Renaissance and Richardsonian Ro- ements. Frank Darling and John A Pearson provided the financial world with  mianesque el  elegant Beaux-Arts banking halls and office towers (Bank of Commerce Main Branch, Winnipeg, Man., 1910-11), while John Lyle, who with Hugh Jones designed Toronto's cavernous Union Station (1912). ‘nationalized* the foreign-born styles with architectural orna- ment based on Canadian flora and fauuna. Although the influence came first from the United States, French-speaking architects in Quebec, sympathetic to emerging nationalism in the province, saw in the Second Empire style a way to proclaim their commitment to French colture (*France). Henry Maurice Perrault’s Bureau de Poste (1872) and Hotel de Ville (1873) in Moatreal, both destroyed. and E. E. Taché’s Assemblée Nationale in Quebec City (L878), which translates the High Victorian plan of Puller’s Parliament into a French idiom, are all carried out in the Second Empire style, while Taché's Manége militaire (1888) in the same city ais a rare North American example of Gothic Revival influenced by Viollet-le-Duc Among domestic architects, Samuel Machure  provided the sedate ascendancy of Victoria, B.C. with residences such as the Biggerstaft- Wilson House (1905. 6) characterized by the use of natural materials, sensitive siting ina rugged landscape, and compact cross-axial plans focus- ing on stairwa spaces. Francis C. Sullivan, a student of Frank Lloyd *Wright. introduced a version of the Prairie Style house (Connors House, Ottawa, rots). while ata later date Robert Blatter (Bourdon House. Sillery, Que. ry. and Ernest Cormier (his own house, Montreal, 1934 5) Were influenced by the asvinmetrical, planar forms of European modernism  os or darge., open entertainment  Canada. Supreme Court Banding, Ottawa (103% so}, by Erest Cormier  
Cormier (188s 1y80) must be accounted the leading architect of the half-century. Trained at the *Ecole des Beaux-Arts and in Rome. he combined rare gifts for rational planning. rich ornament and the creation of ceremonial spac with a mastery of new technology and materi- als. His masterpiece is the *Art Deco building for the Université de Montréal (1928 ss). The Supreme Court, Ottawa (1938 50), Shows that he was alive to the r7th-century Frenel classical tradition, curtain-wall National Printing Bureau, Hull, Que. (iso 8), places Cormier among technical innovators  Atter World War Il the *International Style gained ground, first in Vancouver where the innovative firm of Sharp & Thompson, Ber- wick, Pratt built the sleck Vocational Insarute in ig48 -gand the BC Hydro Building. an carly curtain-wall skyscraper. in tyss 7. John © Parkin, whose masters were Walter *Gropius and Ludwig *Mies van der Rohe, provided Toronto with a manifesto of the new funcuien- alisna in the steel-and-glass office he built for his firm (1954; demolished) Parkin deftly solved complicated transportation problems at Malton International Airport, Poronte (1964; and at Ottawa Railway Station (1467). In the 1ifoy banks and corporations imported presuyiouy architects such as Mies van der Robe and f. M *Pei to design their office towers and it was coly  while the  later that Canadian firms received major corpo- rate commissions; unfortunately the were often over-wrought inntauions of the latest. American angularities. Notable, how- ever, are Arthur *Erickson’s (Dorie) MacMil- lan-Bloedel Building, Vancouver (yO 4}, and the NOVA Building. Calgary, Alta. tiysiy. by J. UL Cook. Mention should be made ot the speculative building activities of the huge Cana- dian real lopment which have employed teams of architects to transform city skylines across the country and are finding a ready market for their eteient expertise in the USA.  In an inhospitable climate architects have proved skilful in the design of large. techologi- cally sophisticated, multi-use structures. often incorporating interior circulation spines and atria, such as Place Bonaventure m Montreal (1964-7) by Affleck, Dina kopoulos, Lebensold & Sisey Simon fraser University, Burnaby, B.C. (1964. s). urd shi Provincial Government Oices and foie Courts, Vancouver (1974. 9), both by Erickson  results  restate de  corporations.  Desbarats,  and the University of Alberta Students’ Union, Edmonton (1y74), by Jack Diamond and Barton Myers. Although in plan a variatian on the suburhan shopping mall. Eberhard) Zesdler’s immense and immensely popular Baton Centre in downtown Torouto (igta Sis with Bre  man & Hamann) recaptures die urban aime von of the ryth-century kerepean galferar Moshe *Satdic’s much remarked experiment in modular mass housing. “Habitay (Montreal. 1967) builtutthe ume ot Pxpo 67, has had betle influence i Canada Canadian cities attempe tr ensure that Sarge,  direct Nonetiteless. ats heterogencons sectors Of the population Jive m the city cons. nuns housing remus a lively  Canada. Concordia Hal’. Mice Boras contre Montreal yiufa viv Adtleck Dimnakopoutos,  » Dosbarats, Leberscid aS Ste  Canada. Stidean’ Vion. University at Aibersa  blmostar crecg bs fick Denon ad Bartay Maur 
Canada. Scarborough College. Ontarie ¢1y66), by toho Andrews  architectural concern. The ‘towers-in-the-park* has been favour of communities integral to the urban fabric, such as the co-operative St Lawrence Neighbour- hood, Toronto (by various architects), and False Creek Development. Vancouver (Thompson, Berwick, Pratt& Partners, co-ordinating archi- tects), both projects adjacent to the respective city cenures. Athisowu house in Toronto (1972) Barton Myers offered a prototype of the small, efficient single-tumily home, easily replicated, and sensitively adapted to the existing urban fabric, Where no recognizable urban centre existed, Ravmond Morivama (Scarborough, Ont, Civic Centre, 1y75). Phillip H. Carter (Markham, Ont... Village Green and Commu- nity Library, 1981}, and J. Michacl Kirkland, winner of the ty82 com peution for Mississauga, Ont., City Hall are providing them. Historical areas are being preserved in St John’s, New- foundland, Halifax, N.S.. Montreal and, most remarkably, at Granville Island, Vancouver, where 2oth-century industrial buildings and warchouses are being wituly recycled under the direction of Norman Hoven  Mention should be made. finally, of the Australian architect John * Andrews, whose Canadian works include Scarborough College (1966) and che eerily beautiful CN Tower (1975), both in Toronto; of Paul Cardinal's  concept abandoned in  sinuous St Mary's Church, Red Deer, Alta. (1977), 4 vivid focus of attention in a flat prairie landscape: of Arthur *Erickson’s Museum of Anthropology, University of British Colum- bia, Vancouver (1971-7); and of Peter Rose's private residences near Montreal, subtle evoca- tions of Shingle Style vacation homes. CR S Gowans, Alan, Building Canada: An Archi- tectural Listory of Canadian Life, Toronto 1966; Ritchie, Thomas, Butlding Canada 1867-1967, Voronto 1967; Noppen, Luc, and others, Qué- bee: “Trois Siecles d'architecture, Quebec 1979; Architectural Review, special Canada issue, May iyo: Bernstein, William, and Cawker, Ruth, Building with Words: Canadian Architects on Architecture, Toronto 181.  Candela. Félix, b. Madrid ryro, Studied at the Escucla Superior de Arquitectura and at the Academia de Bellas Artes de San Fernando, Madrid. Towards the end of his studies. C. had the opportunity of watching two of the best- known structures by *Torroja, the roof of the spectators’ stand at the La Zarzuela racecourse and the roof of the Frontén Recoletos, being built. The double barrel-vault of the lacter, spanning an arca of 60 x 36m (197 x 118 ft), and other works by Torroja probably awakened s interest in shell vaulting, a construction method which combines, to an almost unparal- leled degree. inspiration and precise calculation. After fighting in the Spanish Civil War on the Republican side, C. arrived in *Mexico in the  
summer of 1939 via the refugee camps at Perpignan. After twelve years in his adopted country, during which time he, and Jater his brother Antonio, made their living ay architects and builders, he began advocating the use of shell vaulting, at first in articles and lectures The building of the University City in Mexico City gave him an opportunity to construct the first hyperbolic paraboloids, which enabled him to reduce the roof of the Cosmic Ray Building (1951) toa thickness of 1§ mm. (8 in.) A special advantage of hyperbolic para- boloids {as compared with the sphere or other types of vaule) is chat the shuttering required van be made from straight boards, Due to the relative simplicity of this process, and the great saving in material, C.’s constructions are more economical than other rigid roots. and this fact alone won his firm numerous industrial com missions. His spans increased with every project and he became increasingly bolder in the exploitation of shell vaulting. When be main- tams that he has been guided less by exact  calculation than by an intuitive feeling ‘in the  manner of the old master-builders of cathe-  Candela. Church of Santa Maria Miraculosa Mexico City (with Enrique de ha Moras 1ys4 <  drals', we must recall that his mtuition has.a very firm foundation in his knowledge of raterials and stresses, Which has grown with cach new building  As an architect and designer. ©. bas distin- gushed himself with his Church of Santa Maria Miraculosa in Mexico City (1ys4-s. with Enrique dela Mora) which shows the unmistak- able influence of *Gaudj. Later buildings of a non-industrial nature, such as several churches and pavilions in Mexico City and Cuernavaca, the Loy Mananuales restaurant in Xochimileo. (rossi. and the Olympic Stadium in Mexico City (1y68}, were executed ia collaboranon with different architects, who were glad to avail themselves of the free outlines of bis structures in their search for organic or baroque shapes  From ts} to 1y7o C. was 4 professer at the National University of Mesico, and from 1971 to ly7S in the CSA atthe University of hina, Chicago. where he hus abe worked as an architect McoGHi 1) Faber. Colin, Candehts The Shell Builder. New York and London, (963: Smith, Clive B., Builders in the Sun: Fire Mexican Architects. New  York. 1y67; “Candela: Recent Works’. Zodia (Milan). no. 22. 1y73) pp. 7 S87 Candilis. Georges. bo Bakul Russia tgi3  Studied atthe Polytechmburn in Athens where. wethe 133 *CLAM Congress. he tirst cricoun- tered *Le Corbusier. He cmigrited to Parts in  office aud be  fygs to goin he Corbuster’s remained uaul ryse trom by gh as site are hteet of the Unie dEtabieiion, Marseides: Te worked in partuersap with Vladimir Bod. ansky and Shadrach *Woods gr the Atreas otice of ATBAT Ascher des Batisscure ia Casablanca pyss fh Poubedted ie  tid Woods. tly  witias  Wgxi Xan  Vario wide Ateats fost. tint  Candilis Joss Words. whit bs  with Woods alone after fost s departuss us reg Sasee duet de Los had bis casn eth eon  Pars In cui wali dost anh Worsds ty phan. wis Phactialsest ts lyst ! COMaan serapetriast \ rotearion fp To ae sda tthe finn wht Ge chee diieroetied urban sp. Pothier Kseparat sath ee prapestcons dean Nocasupie CD AME ait itis  PAs Eble ara Ptic tedis were ints  bolas pos abc um arden ta Piseur a 
Candilis. Phin tor Loutouse te Mira) (Cundlitis Jove Woods: ns  more organic surface distribniaon. in the cont ples of Institute buildings for the Free Univer- sity in Berlin-Dahlens (ry6a. 6y67) Fycalso with Josic and Woods. togedier with) Mantred Selnedhelinj. Jean *Prouveé served ay consultant on the fagade construction. The individual buildings are freely inserted an an orthogonal transportation network Gia T. Candilisffosici Voods. Ein fubrzetunt .lrchi- tektur und Stadiplanung, Stuttgart 1yO8: Tanfotse Te Mirail. Geburt ehicr nenen Stadt, Candilss fostes Woods, Stuttgart 1o7s, Candily, Georges. Recherches sur Uarchitecture des loisirs, Paris tu73;  +, Batir da Vier a architecte temoii ite son tenips, Paris 1977-  Casson, Sir Hugh (Maxwell), b. Londou igto. Studied at Cambridge; the British School at  Candilis. Free University, Berlin-Dahlem (Candily:Josicy Woods, with Mantred Schiedhela, tyo? 70) 
Athens; and the Bartlett School of Architecture, University of London. In private practice from 1937 with the late C. Nicholson; resumed 1946, after war service, latterly with Neville Conder He has been senior partner of Casson, Conder and Partners since 1953, and was Professor of Incerior Design, Royal College of Art. 1953 75. His directorship of architecture at the *Festival of Britain, (y48-51, ensured its re- markable triumph as a piece of organized townscape; the same powers of urbanistic con- trol are evident in his schemes for Cambridge University (with N. Conder). His Youth Hos telin Holland Park, London, blendssvmpatheu- cally with the remains of Holland House (17th century).  He has exercised considerable influence over the British art establishment, especially during his period of office as President of the Royal Academy of Arts (1971 84).  O Casson, H.. omes by the Million, London, 1946; Murray, Peter, ‘Looking Back’, Buildin Design, January 1975.  Chamberlin, Powell and Bon. Firm cstub- lished in &95 Powell and Christof Bon. In the same year they first attracted attention for their prize-winning scheme for high-density housing at Golden  by Peter Chamberlin, Geotttey  Lane, London (1933 7), a controversial layout wath interesting treatment of mulaple ground levels, a preoccupation Jater (1ys7) developed int their plan for the Barbican district of London, with separate routes for trafic and pedestrians: concern for urban mise-en-seene and the large- seale design characterizes all the firna’s work Their Bousfield Primary School. with its cs- teriors in the manner of *Mies van der Rohe. was awarded the London Bronze Medal tor Architecture in 156. othey schemes mention may be made of the Sports Centre for Birmingham University. sculpturesque buildings atop a large podium, and the development plan for Leeds University, which closely integrates the academue layout with the city centre. Nt 0 ‘Detailed Proposals for the Barbican Rede- velopment’, in Architects’ Journal (London). 4 June 1989; “Barbican Metropolitan Neigh bour- hood’, Basen und Wohnen (Zurich), April ty? 4  Among. their  wich  Chateau, Vierre, b. Bordeaux 1883. do bast Hampton, N.¥.. 1ys0. After studies ai thy *Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris and a period of  c Cuperike  aiberlin, Powell and Bon. Now fli Litt  Us  Chareau. Manor do Vat i Sos  hee ob ur  Pars  upprenticesling yuh che Linglish Ginaeire tina ho ostabbsbed cpa tice sau pmece ur tinect ait erature de sgaaet a Phe fist caine te puble attention it dhs iuiy Salon hh  eshibavd turnmire desgaivd tes die  Byds  dNcuarm. on Buss when  Palace aperanens Dr Pvusacc aid his wite ihe coms Hoswense che Sbasore de Verne tie Paras pegs po eo onee one ol Ure rant theron  Mache  postuthucd by Le Cor hunter an  song  realy rons at ths ide ar che voket  Paxueacin .lirs: ths dexcciphar ot the Maisan Crtrohiia dy stan Hirose exuiphe ot  and probably the poots  mebizestate dpspured bs the weald of urodera 
technology. The Maison de Verre was realized. as were several other buildings of those years, in collaboration with Bernard Bijvoet who, as Johannes *Duiker’s partner, had also worked on the Zonnestraal Sanatorium at Hilversum (ip26 St. C. was a founding member of the Union des Artistes Modernes, launched in Paris in y2y. In 1940 he enugrated to the USA where he built, notably, a house for the pameter Robert Motherwell at East Hampton. N.Y AM  Herbst. René. (1 inventeur, Uurchitecte Pierre Chareau, Paris 1ys4; Frampton, Kenneth. “Maison de Verre’, Perspecta (New Haven), no. rz (1y6y), pp. 77 126; ‘Pierre Chareau with Bernard Bijvovt. Maison Dalsace (’Maison de Verre’). Global Architecture (Vokyo), no. 46  Chermayeff, Serge. b. tyoo in Russia. A leading British Modernist in die late rgzos and ry3os, C. achicved prominence in interior design as Modern Are Department director at Waring and Gillow. London. 1y28-31, and with his interiors for the Exhibition of Modern ftyg28 yy and the Cambridge Theatre. irg2y 30). As a fre designer. he worked op BBC studios (1930) in London and Birmingham, but principally on domestic intenors. By 1935. his work embraced clocks and  Furnishings  London lance  furniture. rugs. textiles, exhibitions radios  In ty3ze Cy entered che field of architecture proper. designing Jus own house in Rugby (buile 1933). Fle was an partnership with Erich Mendebohn, 1y33 -6. This phase dominated his carcer and resulted a promiment British Mod- erm Movement buildings fusing Samuely’s structural engineering: including: Shrubs Wood (1933) 4): De La Warr Pavilion, Bexhill- on-Sea (1933-38 Hote in Chelsca tru 0): Gilbey offices (yas 72 and TCL Manchester (1936-8). The architect's own house. Bendey Wood (1y37 Si. American period and his experiments with wood-trame  anticipated bis  structures  After emigration to the *USA in iggo, he distinguished himself as a teacher, promoting curriculum planning, urban organization, and research into the multivalent dise:pline of *envi- ronmental design’. He was successively Dire tor, Department of Art. Brooklyn College, 1942 6; President, Chicago Institute of Design, togé-sty Protessor of Architecture. Harvard University, 1952- 62; and Protessor, Yale Uni-  versity, 1962-9. Collaboration with other ar- chitects and several key students was an important force in crystallizing his architectural theories. He was in partnership with Heywood Cutting (ex-Chicago Institute), 1952-7: at Har- vard he collaborated with Christopher Alexan- der, and at Yale with Alexander Tzonis. Executed works include fabrics, paintings, inte- nors and exhibitions, while his domestic archi- tectural projects inchide: houses in Piedmont @with Clarence Mayhew) and in Redwood (both 1942), extensions to his own house at Truro (1945 -72):; a house in Portland and his own studio in Truro (both ty52); houses in Truro (fgs4, 1956); and his own house in New Haven, Conn. (1962--3) BT Chermayetf, $.. and Alexander, C.. Com- munity and Priracy, London (963: Chermayeth. S..and Tzonis, A, Shape of Community, London 1y71: Plunz, Richard (ed.), Design and the Public Good, Cambridge, Mass. 1y83  Chiattone. Mario, b. Bergamo t8yt,d. Luga- no 1987. Surdied architecture and painting at the Accademia di Brera in Milan. In torg. in Milan, he exhibited, together with his fellow- student *Sant’Elia, a group of drawings with the tithes Structures for a modern Metropolis’. ‘Factory’ and ‘Forms’: these were among the most Important formulations of *Fucurist ar- chitecture. In his later work, however. C. approached increasingly the harmonic monu- mentality of the Novecento Italiano group (*Tealy).  Veronesi, Giulia, and Regoli, Gigetta Dalli, Lopera di Chiattone (exhibition catalogue), Pisa 1yds.  Chicago School. Designation for a group of architects active in the last quarter of the tgth century, above all in Chicago, or rather for a group of commercial and office buildings constructed in Chicago between 1875 and 1yto. These buildings have two principal charac- teristic features: a steel-skeleton supporting structure, and a clear expression of the static and functional structure in the building's form, whereby a straightforward and often novel architectural vocabulary, which anticipated modernism, was employed.  After the great fire of 1871 and the world- wide depression two years later, Chicago wit- nessed a tremendous expansion within a very brief period. This resulted from the shift in 
AAA  SCCHECTSUCUAULY SRNNEKAR ALR,  SANNA ANTEERAA,  TET RNAS,  ss Fs exes  Chiattone. Structures for a modern metropolis {project, 1914)  agricultural production from hand labour to industrialization; Chicago benefited tremen- dously due to its position as the market place for the region. Buildings began to grow like mushrooms, and as sites were expensive and scarce, the new structures rose toa great height and were in close juxtaposition. Single multi- storey high-rise buildings had already been constructed in the *USA. One of the first was the Jayne Building in Philadelphia, built in 1849-50 by William Johnston; among the most impressive was the Tribune Building in New York by Richard Morris Hunt (1873-5). None- theless, as a new constructive, functional and aesthetic creation built in significant numbers, the skyscraper type was born in Chicago. One of the two prerequisites for multi-storey resi- dential, commercial and office buildings had been available since the mid-igth-century  Elisha Graves Otis had invented the elevator and m 1853 demonstrated it in spectacular style in New York. The second prerequisite was an appropriate construction system which would at once allow construction to great height and be fireproof, this was still lacking.  The credit for having discovered a structural solution able to carry loads for tall tireproot buildings largely erected by assembly fell ro William Le Baron Jenney. He used a sicel skeleton, in contrast to the cast-iron type which the inventor and architect James Bogardus had  already tested in a five-storey factory building in New York in 1848. This proved not only rehable under stress bur also under strain and thus formed a completely mgid structural sys tem, which he clad with masonry to make it more heat-resistant. The first Leiter Building (later Morris Building, today 208 West Monroe Street) was erected in Chicago in 1&7: al- though it still had a cast-iron skeleton. the structure already suggested the lightness of later works. [t was followed by the Home Insurance Building in 1883-§ (subsequently extended): the Manhattan Building in 189 go, together with DHL Bumham and J. W. Roat’s contem- porary and McNally Building, one of the first skyscrapers entirely of steel-skeleton construc- dion; and the second Leiter Building (today Sears, Roebuck & Co.) in 1889 gi. a classic of the Chicago ‘commercial style’. With his new  mode of construction, Jenney overcame the height restrictions associated with conventional load-bearing masonr  Jenney’s technologically pioneering ten- storey Home Insurance Building did not, in terms of external articulation, free itself any  construction.  more from the *historicism of the Victorian period than did the 16-storey Manhattan Build- ing. both were out of step with the innovative structural type on account of their conventional additive fagade articulation. In fact formal vocabulary was concerned, it was not  as faras a  Jenney who provided the most impartant  impulses for the Chicago School tuor by any Richardson Richardson studied in Pariy at the *Ecole des Beaux-Arts, worked in the ateher of Eleni Labrouste and, after his return to America. designed numerous buildings in « puritied and  means only for it), buc Ho HL  powerful neo-Romanesque style. Ele com- pleted the Marshall Field Wboiesale Store in Chicago Gisss 7  _omasive, tatonalhy, de- signed masonry building. the effect of which derived principaily trom the expressiveness od  its rusteated fagade Phas strugherorw ard  nrontanentailion, schose closed character wats  softened be he great round-arched windows, wwavta be Goittaed by anony ethers.) uikinar * Ader and Dou ®Sullivanin the arebite: cara langtuage of the Auditorium Brddimg (i887 9 ws thabpenad in  lot Toosevele Clhserip,  peo tircerand: bimpuige ais th was technolo  Eocinadson’ model was abo taken over and dues}ay Burnhart aid Raat the powertal 
Chicago School. The Marshall Field Whoiesale  Store. Cligige Sisss 7 by HT Rachardsor Rookery Building (F885 6) andin the Monad- nock Building (1889-91) — the last tall building in this group with load-bearing outer walls all ornament is avoided: instead the exterior of the i6-storey building is enlivened by simple. can- ted bow-windows which elegantly subdivide the fagade. ‘Lhe comer of the buildimg from ground level to the upper window ledge is sharply angled. and the projecting comice as well as its upward tapered base are reduced to simple curves. The steel frame for skyscrapers received a significant exterior form for the first dme in D. H. Burnham & Co.'s Reliance Building (today 32 North State Street), erected in Chicago in 1894-5 (design by Charles B. Atwood), The light. almost floating skcletal structure, with its overwhelmingly vertically- articulated facade, anticipated the aesthetic of the glass-and-stecl buildings of the mid-2oth century.  William Holabird and Martin Roche like- wise followed in the tracks of Richardson, with the Tacoma Buildmy (1887-9), and the re- served and elegant Marquette Building (1893- 4). both in Chicago, Their unpretentious and well-balanced aesthetic reached a highpoint, as as it was noteworthy, in. the McClurg Building (today Crown Building) of L&gg--1900.  The most important protagonist of the Chi- cago School and its formative head was, how- ever, Louis Sullivan, He studied briefly at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and later, like Richardson, in Paris; Jie worked in Philadelphia under Frank Furness ind in Chi- cago under Jenney, then in 188: formed a partnership with Dankmar Adler in which he  unobtrusive  Chicago School. The Monadnock Building, Chicago (188-91), by Burnham and Root  Chicago School. The Reliance Building, Chicago (1894-8). by D. H. Burnham & Co. 
took responsibility for the form of the building Inhis works, the elegant neo-R omanesque style of Richardson was transformed into a rugged tigorism with classic handling of masses and oriental-gothicist decoration. The Wainwright Building in St Louis, a bold upward-souniog steel-skeleron structure, dates fram 18y0 1: ic already manifests Sullivan's typical tripartite division into a massive lower storey with 4 mezzanine, a vertically articulated office see- tion, as well as a tall attic for mechanical services. It marked the moment of birth tor the skyscraper as an mdependent and significant building type. In 1898-9, Sullivan designed one part of the fagade of Holabird & Roche's G Building in Chicago; while respecting the existing grid of the construction, he created «1 fully independent work. The diverse quulities of the Chicago School are clearly seen in this fagade: the directness and simplicity of Holabird and Roche's work formed a revealing contrast to Sullivan's refined, complicated, but nonethe- less uncommonly clear design.  Sullivan built the Schlesinger and Maver Department Store (today Carson Pirie Scott & Co.) in two phases (1899 and 1903-4); he  Chicago School. [is Gace  ius gos Holiied & Kosky  Lagade des  eteated there one of die most significant build- ings of the Chicago School, The aitertor space, with is contmuouy surhices, Was er the con eeu The partienka ptdavin the fayade the cantly or  seTlisl bings  uonal deparument stare O pe  achieveni nized network et horizontal and  ave express ce the under! yng heleton  construction, disphoing ao strends at ores tisanetaly  manenal wrod iegible The wige  asso ave ca distorts  arranged Chi  brow fined barren sis  veins ty bani ascites, ths Poteet deg Wr ratte MO Omen oth ord ied enaant arate s irc) sabtast te Cs dest rit th ores fons display wb abso badvna ¥ i rs soot thigdee sat oir  j : viene b \pestuer in Chie  acs re tote. wary treaty Uae  : 1s Sor raitsubscquendy  
tealized in the calmer Beaux-Arts manner of Burnham's plan, marked the end of the Chi- go School's heyday. This opting in favour of the neo-classicist ‘White City’ was no coinci- dence. After che grand episode of noble, but mainly disparate individuals, with each reaching separately for the sky, it was necessary for gain to the traditional concept of the city as a coherent continuum. Thus, by ©. 1yoo the period of the proto- modermist commercial buildings of Chicago was over. Isolated later instances are to be found in such works as the Chaplin and Gore Building (iyor—4; later Nepeenauk Building, today 63 East Adams Street) by Richard Schmidt; the Montgomery Ward and Co. Warehouse (1906— 8) by Schmidt, Garden & Martin; and, in an especially challenging way, in the Larkin Build- ing in Buffalo. N.Y. (1yog-s), built by Sullivan's most independently minded pupil — Frank Lloyd * Wright. Nearly thirty years were to pass before Ray mond * Hood and John Mead Howells, under the influence of European *Rationalism, would erect the Daily News Building in New York (1929-30), and thus introduce a pew era for the modern American skyscraper. VML Fl karly Modern Architecture: Chicago 1870- 1gia, New York 1930, 2nd ed. rygo; Tall- madge, Thomas E., Architecture in Old Chicago, Chicago 1y41: Randall, F. A. A Histery of the Development of Building Construction in Chicago,  architecture to turn  Urbana, Wl. r94y, Condit, Carl W., The Rise of  the Skyscraper, Chicago 1952: ——, The Chicago School of Architecture, Chicago 1964,  CIAM (Congres Internationaux d’Architec- ture Moderne). The foundation of CIAM in 1928 has been called the beginning of the ‘academic’ phase of modern architecture: the ume certainly appeared propitious for the introduction of some kind of international order into the scattered and independent essays towards a new architecture whose international unity of intention and style had been demon strated at the Wei®enhot exhibition of the previous year.  The effective impetus towards the founda- dion of CIAM came from Helene de Mandrot, a sincere and intelligent woman who had aspira- tions towards being a patroness of the arts. She proposed in the first place a reunion of creative spirits at her chateau at La Sarraz, Switzerland, but this romantic project was turned to some-  thing more purposeful after consultation with Sigfricd Giedion and *Le Corbusier, The pre- paratory document, issued to intending dele- gates, stated: ‘This first congress is convened with the aim of establishing a programme of action to drag architecture from the academic impasse and to place it in its proper social and economic milieu. This congress should determine the limits of the studies and discus- sions shortly to be undertaken by further congresses.” Although a distinction was thus made between the preparatory congress and later meetings, the date of 26, 27, and 28 June 1928 at La Sarraz is remembered and recorded as CIAM I, in spite of the fact that the properly constituted series of congresses did not begin until the following year.  The contents of the declaration of 28 June embodied most of the best aspirations as well as the most fashionable fetishes of the architecture of the time. Sample statements read: ‘Ir is only from the present that our architectural work should be derived’, and ‘The intention that brings us together is that of attaining a harmony of existing elements — a harmony indispensable to the present — BY PUTTING ARCHITECTURE BACK ON ITS REAL PLANE, THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL PLANE; therefore architecture should be freed of the sterile influence of the Academies and of antiquated formulas’, and again, ‘The most efficacious production is derived from ration- alization and standardization.”  The historical irony of these repeated invec- tives against che Academies is underlined by the dry, formalistic statement of aims that appears as the preamble to the statutes drawn up at Frankfurt-am-Main in 1929 (CIAM II). The Frankfurt Statutes also gave CIAM three opera- tive organs; (t} the Congrés or general assembly of the members; (2) CIRPAC (Comité Inter- nationale pour la Résolution des Problémes de l’Architecture Contemporaine), to be elected by the Congrés; and (3) working groups, to apply themselves to specific subjects in collaboration with non-architectural specialists. At the same time the hierarchy of membership was stabilized in the form of national member-groups, to which individuals belonged.  The Frankfurt Congress had been called under the auspices of Ernst *May, the city architect and Europe’s greatest expert on low- cost housing, and its outcome was a serious report, Die Wohnung fiir das Existenzminimum. CIAM IMI was held in Brussels in 1930, through  
the good offices of Victor *Bourgeois, and applied itself to basic problems of land-organi- zation for housing, publishing an equally im- portant report, Rationelle Bebauungsiveisen,  By i930 it was already becoming apparent that CIAM was neither intellectually nor orga- nizationally prepared for the problem to which the logic of its discussions had driven it town planning. In order to deal with this situation CIAM set to work to standardize the graphic techniques, scales, and methods of presentation used by its members (an enterprise that was not really completed until the adoption of the Grille-CLAM after 1949). The Dutch national group, under Cor van *Eesteren, became the  working group entrusted with the evoluuion of  an effective symbol language for town plan- ning. These labours, conducted against a back- ground of growing political tensions and dis- integrating international relations, proved to be protracted, and CIRPAC met three umes (Berlin, 1931, Barcelona, 1932, and Paris, 1933) before it was felt chat work was sufficiently advanced for another plenary Congres to be called.  CIAM IV — theme ‘The Functional City” took place in July and August aboard the $.S Patris, between Marseilles and Athens. [tc was the first of the ‘romantic’ congresses. set against a background of scenic splendour, not the reality of industrial Europe, and it was the first Congrés to be dominated by *Le Corbusier and the French, rather than the tough German realists. The Mediterranean cruise was clearly a  welcome relief from the worsening situation of  Europe, and in this brief respite from reality the delegates produced the most Olympian, rhe- torical, and ultimately most misapplied docu- ment to come out of CIAM: the *Athens Charter.  Its cone remained dogmatic, but was general- ized and less specifically related to immediate practical problems than the Frankfurt and Brussels reports had been. The generalization had its virtues, where it brought with ita greater breadth of vision and insisted that cities could be considered only in relation to their surrounding, regions, but this persuasive generality which gave the Athens Charter its air of univers’! applicability concealed a very narrow concep- tion of both architecture and cown planning and committed CIAM unequivocally to: (a) rigid functional zoning of city plans, wich green belts between the areas reserved to the diferent  functions, and (4) a single ype of urban housing, expressed in the words of the Charter as “high, widely-spaced apartment blocks wherever the necessity ofhousing high densities of population With the benefit of hindsight. we recognize this as merely the expression of an  CXISES)  aesthetic preference, but at the ame it had the power of a Mosaic commandment and eff  uvely paralysed research into other forms of) housing. The Paris Congres of 1y37 (CIAM V) did litde more than make marginal mnotatons co the Charter.  Atter World War IL thenextinceting. CIAM V1. was held in rgg7 at Bridgwater, England: this was a joyous reunion of the heroes of Weibenhofand the followers they had collected in the 1y30s, and its ourcome Was a review of buildings erected since CIAM V by the mem- bers. edited by Giedion and published under the  nite of -l Deeude of New Architecture. But at CIAM VIL, held at Bergamo in 1ygy, a new pattern was beginning to emerge, with the growing importance of the Italian delegation and th students on the fringes of the Congres in order to sirat the feetof those. tothent, legendary tures, the qaakers of modern architecture.  Ac CIAM VIIL, heid ac Hoddesdon in Eng- land. in honour of the *Festival of Britain. tos b. the new pattern of CIAM way becoming plain increasing numbers of students. and. otficual recognition of the inadequacy of the Charter, since the theme was The Urb. Core™. For this theme the delegates were as unprepared intel  uhering of numbers of war-toughened  Jectually as they had been tar town planing im 1930, and the Congress report was littl more than a compendium ot fashionable cliches, such as the need to integrate painting and sculpture mito architecaire  Te was not Jong before the tidure of CLAM VIL was recognuzed. bat un the CIAM AIX ae Atseen-Prosenice had taker pits its Uheme Ww Habrad lat the Congres will be chicthy remenibered ais a mass  Tie oMe  oll iis  rally of be orptisier « stedteuit fi rads and clas  SOT UE, ar ainiproaeptu  procecebas Seaam on the rood at dig Urirte secre marked Dy  eeleermuen Veta Mas  Siriptoss  rotons cant Aone  haa aturs  comm owho nmlerraok co deiver  CEN Lb eran aateabh Hmpasse” ante vhs digest Vhe group whe wer  1 vig preparation ef CLAM N v ve selore Rots Pea Ni took 
up a posidieon that, though it drew to some eatent on the documents for CIAM IN break swith both the mood and the content of the Athens Charter diagrapumatic generalizations of the Athenian tradition, Team X setup the personal, the paruculur, and the precise: “Rach architect is isked to appear with his project under his arm, ready to comunit humself. Today we recognize  programme nevertheless represented a elean  Against: the large-scale  the existence of anew spirit, [tis manitest in our rovolt from uiechanical concepts of order . . CIAM X make it clear that we. as architects. accept: the responsibility for the ereauon of order through form ponsibility for cach act of creation, however small”  Though the theme of CLAM X was still nominally “Habitav. the real business oF the Congres, which took place m Dubrovnik in 1956. was the direct challenge presented to the  must  the res-  eablished members by the veung radicals of Team X. *Bakema, *Candilis, the *Snuthsons. ind van *hvek. By the end of the congress, CLAM wasin ruins and Team X stood upen the wreckage of something that they had joined with enthusiasm. and with equal enthusiasm - destroved. The sense of the end ofan epoch was  so strong that the Congres accepted the fact of death with comparauve calm, the national groups were instructed to wind up their affairs, POverIng twenty-five years of work way seriously dis cussed. But there Were national proups, notably the Etalian, who felt that CIAM could sull be of service. In addition, Team X were not averse to international nicctings as such, and the comsbi- nation of these two parties produced. in tysg. a further congressin Otterlo, Holland. In content this was co be sumilar to what Team X had intended for CIAM X. and particular projects were indeed discussed. individual responsibility was accepted, and the results, edited by Oscar Newinan, were published as CLAM 's9 in QOtterlo. These published documents reveal that close discussion of the particular could often be as trivial as broad discussion of generalities, while the utle of the report conceals a bitter dispute among the delegates who, in fact, voted to dissociate their activities trom the label ‘CIAM’.  This was neither a productive nora dignified outcome to thirty years of internanonal a tivity, and the blame for the final collapse of  and the project ofa memorial volume  CIAM must be laid chiefly on the inability of the founder-members to resist the temptation to faire cole. They failed to guard against the academic tendencies in their midst. and became the victims of what van Eesteren termed ‘a too formal structure’ to which work-programmes had to be subordinated. Nevertheless, in two vital periods 1930 4 and toso- 5 - CIAM was the major instrument through which the ideas of modern architecture and town planning were made known to the world, while it performed an equally vital function during the war years in maintaming the nucleus of an international network of communications be- (ween progressive-minded architects. [tis quite possible that these achievements may ultimately prove to be of greater lustorical importance than any of the documents that CIAM pro-  duced, even the Athens Charter. RB ~. Die MWohbnung fir day Existencminiminn, Stuttgart ryz0. Rarionelle  Beharaorgesireisen,  Stuttgart 193 ts Logts ef foistrs, Paris 1938: Sorts]. L.. and CIAM, Can Our Cities Surmive?, Cam-  bridge, Mass. and London tyg2: [Le Cor- busier]. Crbunione des CLAM La Charte d!  dihenes, Paris 1943: Giedion, Sigitied, 4 Decade of New Architecture. Zurich 1ys tz Rogers. E.N.. Sert.J.L.and Tyrwhitt. | (eds). Phe Heart of the City, New York and London i952; Newman, Osear fed.) CLAM *s9 in Onterlo, Stuttgart 1y61,  CLASP (acronym for Consortium ef Local Authorities Special Programme) In 1937, a group of local education authorities in England banded together to exploita system of pretabri- cating schools, originally devised in Notting ham under Donald Gibson to counteract sib- sidence in mining areas and later extended, as in ©. H. *Aslin’s Hertfordshire schools, to allow buildings to be erected rapidly from mass- produced prefabricated units ac low cost and with a small labour force. Consortium compo- nents accounted for about half the cost of CLASP schools: £7 million worth of work was built in 1961-2, and a second consortium wa formed by other authorities (SCOLA).  Aj ft 4in.(t-otm) planning grid was used, with external walls that can change direction at Gft8 in. (2-02 m) or fo ft (3-05 m) intervals. An organic grouping of elements with carefully controlled relationships between the spaces creates a deceptive, though usually successful fecling of informality. The same informality.  
CLASP, Crosley Green Jumor School, Hertfordshire (1937 9) by C. HE Ashn  however, when evoked in the choice of external cladding components often appears arbitrary and visually confused, lessening the cfeet of the carefully related spaces. HIM  Coates, Wells (Windemut), b. Tokyo risus of  Canadian parents, d. London ys. After en- gineering studies in Vancouver and Loudon. first worked for a number of years ay a journalist for the Daily Express (London) and then for a short time as an engineerin  nd architectural consultant. In 1924 he opened his own architectural office in London which he continued until his death, with the exception of periods during World War If and during several years involvement in urban planning affairs in *Canada. He was a founder-member in 1933 of the *MARS group and one of the leading English exponents of modernism before the war. His Lawn Road Flats in Hampstead. London (1933), a slender concrete hurding with continuous balcony fronts. is one of tie earliest expressions of the *International Sth in *Greact Britain. C. was particularly active industrial design, designing notably a radio set which can be considered a classic of its tume. AN O Camtacuzino, Sherban, Wells Coates. Lon- don 1978.  Constructivism As  drarked. Crnstrucens isin ts notte Lith  al  re aie  Pe Corptnct  fer vnilac  eM tes  ores  Stone bes cane  doonadsmi ct boundaries were ne ser  elied Lois pessibhe, Bow ey cr te assist  orotihe te Const ty Isnt sae yt  Pritile dhe te adiaenal distr Gey  arr trans [ts  Peg Tees  SPL NTSC  eras thes  Iu!  watels vals  Producti tats  ue  |  Down  tre Try 
two distinet phases. The first was a period of agitprep timber construction which was em- ploved for exhibitions or for revolutionary forms of street art. The second was a pro- fessional phase in which buildings were con- ecived as a genre lying somewhere between machine form and biological structures. The scientitic ideology of this second phase accounts, in part. for the invention of complex sections such as interlocking dwelling units, and for the expression of access systems such as ramps and elevators. This drive also accounts for the introduction of extra-architectural elements  such as searchlights, electrical sky-signs, radio acnials and ciematographic equipment. Such a thetoric of machine expression subsequently formalist artists like the Suprematist-Elementarist, El *Lissitzky, or the leader of Dutch *Neo-plasticism, Theo van *Doesburg, or certain’ Russians who were scemingly closer to the radical impulse, such as the VKHUTEMAS architect Nikolai Ladovsky, who founded the formalist asNova group (Now Association of Architects) in 3923.  The canonical Constructivist work was Vla- dimir *Tathn’s project for a gigantic Monu- ment to the Third International, first exbibited in 1920. This design, projected as a distorted frustum (logarithmically diminishing in a spiral vortex towards the summit), was inspired, like all Constructivism, by the triumphs of modern technology. And yet, while the precedent for this project was clearly the Eiffel Tower of 1889, the science-fiction aura ofits form derived from Alexei Kruchenikh’s Futurist opera I ‘fetory over the Sun. Naum Gabo's public criticism of Fatlin’s proposal ‘Hither build functional houses and bridges or create pure art, not both. Don’t confuse one with the other.” (made within the Moscow VKHUTEMAS) persuading a number of artists to abandon fine art to work as industrial designers; figures such as Alexei Gan, Liubow Popova, Alexander Rodchenko, Varvara Stepanova and Vladimir Tatlin claimed for themselves the description Productivist rather than Constructivist.  As far as architecture is concerned, Russian Constructivism was never more ‘production’- oriented than in the early timber structures designed by Konstantin *Melnikoy, whose Mahorka pavilion at the All-Russia Agricul- tural and Craft Exhibition in Moscow of 1923 was a non-folkloric reinterpretation of tradi-  alicnated = more  Was Instrumental in  Constructivism. Monument to the Third International (1y20), project by Vladimir Tatlin  donal Russian agrarian construction. This viva- cious method of building was to be repeated in Melnikov's Sucharey Market, built in Moscow in 1923. and in his Russian Pavilion (1925) erected in Paris for the “Exposition inter- nationale des arts décoratifs ct industriel *. Articulated pre-cut, standard tim- ber members, wood-block stencils, interlock- ing mono-pitched roofs and rhetorical stair- ways are the salient features of Meinikov’s carly style, Melnikov’s manner changed, however, when he started to use sophisticated technology in a series of workers’ clubs, of which the Rusakov Club in Moscow (1y27-8), with its cantilevered concrete lecture halls, is the most characteristic example.  The post-R evolutionary attempt to evolve a totally new architectural expression, one which would be based on the direct revelation of structural and technical form, gave rise within  moderne  
= = x ra mH S| ba = 4  Constructivism. The Rusakoy Club, Moscow (1927: 8), by Konstantin Melnikov  Constructivism, Project for the Leninerudskays Pravda building, Moscow (1923). by Alexander Vesnin  the VKHUTEMAS to a number of rival factions. The most prominent of these. the functionally- oriented OSA group (Association of Contem- porary Architects}. was founded in iy23 by Alexander Vesnin. Vesnin, who taught in the v  HUTEMAS from tg2t onwards, was one of the first to formulate the architectural svntax of Constructivism in his project for the Lenin gradskaya Pravda Building in Moscow (1923). of which Lissitzky wrote in 1g2g:  such as signs, advertising, clocks, loud- speakers and even the clevators inside, have been meorporated as integral clements of the  All accessories  design and combined inte a anutied whole. This is the agsthetic af Construcovism.”  However. the methoa for determining form vaned from one faction Co tie next. There was a wide divergence between the functionalist ideology of Vespin's OSA group and the more Vormial gestalt theories advanced by Asnova, the latter ultimately seeking a lexicon of pure forms which could be scen as inducing certain psycho- logical states.  In programmatic termy, Russian Construc- uvist architects focused on two prunary themes. In the first place, they attempred to invent the form of the ideal socialist town an endeavour which attamed its apotheosis in N. A. Maliutin’s model for a “six-banded” linear city f1ggei. In the second place, they tied to postulate the new tsocial condensers’ of the socieey at beth an architectural and ansututional level. “This ace counts for the prevalence of workers’ clubs in the hate 1g20. and for boviet resetrch nee communal housing prototypes under the fead-  ceship of the OSA architect. Moise: Guizbury re? i:  inzbu prototype in his Narkemtin houung bleck m  realized one such dovi-keuritseend  Moscow frgcut The dwelling unereraplosed inchis block wasderived froma the OSA housing competition of ig2t. and trem an maqguay which was conducted by the OSA mh  vat  Given the prienmes of dhe Soviet Cinen, Rasctan Construcuviin conte ta be des etcd an the nro comectang the tifrasstrus tur] needs  ubsnaes. mostar eis reattved works berg: sue  de partic nt Seaes, saint  Wel its as  Tia puma plait, Wess reli stations Pieters, ceo debs ard. hast but rot lait, hyde tastaliataas Atieti this bist ttegtens  nn mest poate os tlecuiies Tiagh UI  deat tie anter sa period. the fartetis  Dy persen Phan compacted te dhe desis et  
ft was in the late ry2os that Constructivism began to exert an influence outside the Soviet Giron in countrivs as diverse as France. Sweden, Switzerland. Czechoslovakia, Eng- land and even the United States (Philadelphia Saving Fund Society Biulding in Philadelphia by *Elawe and *Lescaze). Constructivism at its minst authentic. however, was largely restricted to the Netherlands and Germany, where such architects as Mart *Stam and Johannes *Duiker, or in Gerinany Hannes *Meyer and Walter *Gropius, realzcd works which consisted of. Tete more than transhicent envelopes, stretched over exposed structural frames, with directly expressed systems ofaccess and circulation. The  Constructivist work of this cra  most pure seems to have been in the Van Nelle factory in Rotterdam (4926 30) by Johamues Andreas *Brinkman and Leendert Cornelius Van der Vlugt, on which job Stam also worked, Close in spirit to Hannes Meyer and Hans Wituwer's Constructivist entry for the League of Nations competition of 4y26-7, the Van Nelle factory still stands today as a ter de force i curtuin- walled, crete construction, What finally confirms it asa Constructivist work. however, is the use of ‘or belts, crossing  mushrooni-cohumn, reinforced-con-  continuously moving conve back and forth in transparent elevated utbes, between the factory slab and the canal-side warehouse. With the work of Duiker and his partner Bernard Biyvoct. however, we are a Constructivism which 1s more formalist in its intentions, This much is dear from Duiker’s symmetrically planned Zonnestraal Sanatorium in Hilversum (1926-8) and from his equally symmetrical Open Air School built in Ainsterdam in ig28-30. A higherlevel synthesis between these two as- pects of International Constructivism — that is, between the asymunctrcal Functionalism of Stam on the one hand. and the symmetrical formalism of Duiker on the other was possibly attained in Pierre *Chareau’s Maison de Verre (designed in collaboration with Bijvoet), Paris (1928-32). It says something for the continu- ation of the Constructivist tradition that Richard * Rogers —the co-designer with Renzo *Piano of the Centre Pompidou in Paris (1972 - 7) — was to make a study of this machine-house in the carly 1y6os. KE (4 Kopp. Anatole, Ville et révolution, Paris 1967; Quilic, —-Vieri, — L’architettra del costruttivisma, Bari 1960; Shvidkowky, O. A.  confronted with  {ed.), Building in the USSR, 1917-1932, London and New York 1971; Lissitzky, El, Russia: An Architecture for World Revolution, Cambridge. Mass. 1970.  Cook, Peter. b. 1936 Southend, Essex. Re- ceived his architectural education first at the Bournemouth College of Art, and then at the Architectural Association in London, His low  for seaside suburbia (where he grew up) and the fantasy of holiday resorts has imbued his whole production with a sense of play and enjoyment. His free-ranging imagination was equally at home unche technologically super-heated 1960s and the regressive ‘70s. Asa founder-member of the *Archigram group, in 1960, his reputation has been both enhanced and obscured by the success of that group, His own peculiar brand of eclecticism has become more apparent in his more recent work, particularly in the Green, Yellow, Red and Blug Houses he designed with Christine Hawley ur iy7y. where a kind of Californian *Art Deco spirit emerges: as these houses were designed to be built. they are more  important as concrete indications of his specifi- cally architectural talent than are the more wayward and fantastical drawings such as the Arcadia sequence of 1977-4, which exist pri- marily as art works. They blend a reflection of the aspirations of the bigh technology era with a kind of intense hedonism, indeed croticism, which may well provide evidence for future generations of the fantasy inherent in techio- logical dreams RM Ll Cook, Peter, Architecture, Action and Plan, London and New York 1967; ----. Experimen- tal lrchitecture, London and New York 1970; wlrchigramt. London and New York  . The Arcadian City, London 1978.  1O7 4,  Coop Himmelblau. Group of architects foun- ded in Vienna in 1968 by Wolf 1D, Prix, Helmut Swiczinsky and Rainer Michacl Holzer (dis- solved in 1971). Under the influence of Hans *Hollein and contemporary teams such as *Haus-Rucker-Co, the group was at first concerned with pneumatic space structures. It was, however, pyschological and aesthetic matters rather than technological con- cerns which engaged their interest, With their ‘Wiener Supersommer’ (Viennese Super Sum- mer) of 1976, Coop Himmelblau for the first time made strong play with their alternatives to currently accepted modes of urban design. This  experimental 
form of confrontation became a hallmark oft die group. Architecture should not mollity or reconcile, but rather represent in a) visually heightened way the contemporary tensions of a particular pla tural projects that were evocative of terror, harmful, or even aflame. The group produced  >. Thus they conceived architer-  such poctically aggressive “demonstration ob-  jects’ as the Reiss Bar in Vienna (1977). the branches of Humanic’ in Mistelbach (1y7yj and  Vienna (1980), and the Flammenfliigel (Flame- wing; 1980), as well as the “Roter Engel’ (Red Angel) Music Bar in Vienna (i811. Las C} Coop Himmelblau, rehitcktir ming bren- nen, Graz 1y8o.  Costa, Licio, b, Toulon 1y02. After graduating in 1924 from the Escola Nacional de [clas Artes in Rio de Janeiro, he entered into an carl partnership with Gregori *Warchavchik, In 1931 he was appointed to the directorship of the School of Fine Arts in Rio de Janeiro, which included the School of Architecture, and adopted new teaching methods. through which a generation of young architects were given a grounding in the principles of the European avant garde of the 1920s and "30s. Between 193 and 1943 the Ministry of Education and Health (now Palace of Culture) in Rio de Janeiro tor which *Le Corbusier was consulting architect and C, was for a time the leader of the team of architects, which included *Niemeyer anil *Reidy — was under construction; this proved to be the most important building in * Braziulin terms of spreading Modern Movement ideis there. With Niemeyer, C. designed the Bra- zifian Pavilion at the New York World's Far  ly  Cook. Muyan City. projece Archigrum,  iver)  Coop Himmelblau. Cloud prayect :196s  GRUPPE NoyNatersec}# F OPINURGAN: S45 ©  fiytor Subyequently he was acaveby uivelved gecy plas. utmaimatarein hes aasier-plan for Brash cegs6. on this plan the proicaiples or de *Athors Charter found chen greatest oy  poewien. pracidion, a superb trantew srk Lor  Noonieser’s publ butldinss HMC MI Gazi oO FO) ind Searane. MOM Pirate Coser Husties Aires bys, Cust, Pticta, Sobre  cide. Moria Viggre too:  
Cubism. Movement in European painting in the carly 20th century which developed the new “way of seeing’ which Paul Cézanne had already introduced around the turn of the century, whereby the representation of objects is reduced to compositions of clemental forms. The Cubist movement arose in Paris between 1905 and tyio from parallel developments in which, above all, Georges Braque and Pablo Picasso played decisive roles. The essence of. their experiments. which drew their formal inspiration from a variety of sources including African art, was the depiction of three-dimen- sional space without recourse to illusionistic perspective devices. Among the most impor- tant characteristics of the Cubist formal lan- guage simple geometric structures; sculptural repro- ductions of objects in their spatial entirety, in which they separated the component surfs and either placed them next to one another or represented then as penetrating one another by transparent effects, simulation of the simulta- neous perception of the diverse aspects of an object. in which no single aspect is given priority. All of these techniques gave expression to their principal aim: to represent not only what can be seen but, above all, what is known about an object.  The direct application of Cubism to architec- ture remained problematic. The project for a ‘Villa Cubiste’ by the sculptor Raymond Du- champ-Villon (1912) was nothing more than a conventional neo-classical house with applied Cubist decoration. The situation was not greatly different in the case of the Prague or Czech architectural Cubist group, which co- alesced after Tg11 around the magazine U'méleky Mésiénik. Yet. even im their work the Cubist elements were confined to ornament, or at best a sculptural handling of fagades, which did nat affect either the ground-plan or the ‘type’ of the buildings. In any case the relatively short-lived episode produced bizarre architectural sculp- ture often close in spirit to contemporary *Expressionism. The principal protagonists of Cubist architecture were Joset Capek, Josef Chochol, Josef Goéar, Vlastislav Hofman, Pa- vel Janak and Otokar Novouy .  A less rushed and immediate nisestigation of the application of Cubist principles to architec~ cure was reserved for the masters of the Modern Movement; but with their work the ftundamen- tal experiences of Cubism — asymmetry, trans-  were: composition of pictures with  s  parency, volumetric interpenetration and the sinwultancity of perception — were adapted to a more comprehensive view of architecture as an independent discipline. VML ( Barr, Alfred H., Jr, Cubism and abstract art, New York 1936; Sting, HL. Der Kubismus und seine Kinwirkung auf die Wegbereiter der modernen Architektur, Aachen ty6s: Burkhardt, Fran- gois, and Lamarova, Milena, Cubismno cecosto- vaceo, architetture ¢ interni, Milan 1982.  Cuypers, Petrus Josephus Hubertus, b. Roer- mond 1827, d. Roermond ig2t. Studied at the Antwerp Academy; a follower of the theories of Viollet-le-Duc. and like him an admirer of the Gothic style, C. stood at the watershed between *historicism and the Modern Move- ment in the *Netherlands. He designed mumerous Roman Catholic churches in a freely adapted Gothic manner. The Rijksmuseum (1877-85) and Central Station in Amsterdam (1881-9), both with strongly symmetrical plans, display lively, monumental silhouettes. They are examples ofa picturesque architecture whose principles of truth to materials and expressivity were to be important impetuses for the School of *Amsterdam,  Co Het Werk van Dr. Petrus Josephus Hubertus Cuypers, 1827-1917, Amsterdam 1917.  Cuypers. Riyksmuscum. Amsterdam (1877. 85)  
D’Aronco, Raimondo, b. Gemona, Udine 1857, d. Naples 1932. After receiving a diploma from the Accademia delle Belli Arte in Venice, he was active in Italy and Turkey. With Ernesto *Basile and Giuseppe *Sommaruga, he v of the leading exponents of Italian *Art Nou- veau. He designed the entrance pavilions and the main building for the Turin Arts and Crafts Exhibition of 1902 — a stylistically bizarre mixture revealing the most varied influences: especially apparent was that of the Viennese School centred on Outo * Wagner and that of Joseph Maria *Olbrich’s buildings in Darm-~ stadt. Later, however — like *Horta and *Beh- rens — he turned to a more classically oriented architectural style, as in the town hall at Udine (1909).  O Nicoletti, Manfredi, Raimoride D' Aronce, Milan 1955.  one  De Carlo, Giancarlo, b. Genoa iyiy. After studying engineering at che Milan Politecnico and architecture at the Istituto Universitario d’Architettura in Venice, he established himself in 1950 as an architect in Milan. He was appointed Professor of Town Planning at the architecture school in Venice in 1955. As a member of Team X (*CIAM), he was at the heart of the movement sccking an ethical and formal renewal within modernism during the 1950s. His first important work was the Stu- dents’ Residence in Urbino (1962-6), in which are convincingly united the vocabulary of *New Brutalism, responses to particular his- toric and geographic conditions, as well as the specific programmatic solutions. Urbino has remained the centre of his activity, and his work has continued to display the virtues of the Students’ Residence. In collaboration with Fausto Colombo and Valeria Fossati, he built the Matteotti workers’ housing in Terni (it phase 1970-4). The scheme was planned in close co-operation with che inhabitants and forms a dense complex of three-storey houses with differentiated floor-plans and with a garden ot garden terrace for each dwelling. AM O De Carlo, G., Question? di architettura + urbanistica, Urbino 1965; Colombo, C., Géar-  De Carlo. Student’ Residence, Urbine (1y62 4; site plan  carlo De Carle, Milan tg64. °G. De Carlo. La réconciliation de Farchitecture ect de da politique’, L’ Architecture d’aujourd’ hui (Paris), no. 177, January Eobruary 1975, pp. 32° 43.  Denmark. The {anes have always drawn Inspiration from the majer centres of world culture, but have shown a critical and cautious approach when adapting borrowed ideas to Danish landscape and climate, customs and building practices. Thus the process whereby Danish architecture acquired its own character was markedly evolutionary. in their own tradition of craftsmanship. the Danes developed a sense for simple order, natural proportions and rhythm, first through half-timbered work and afterwards through the brick buildings of the Empire pened. Emotion- alismin architecture was distrusted, and thus the worst excesses of eclecticism were avorded: on the otber hand. avant-garde tendeuctes were slow to muke themselves felt  A functional uadition runs through Damsb architecture, from the simple brick housing of the Empire period. via] Michael Gatrlieb Bindesbell onward 1a 2oth-century *neo-claysi-  Securely anchored  cismoand ro Tvatr Bentsen and Kay) Fisker. Bindesbolls Medical Assocnition eases and Onnge Hospi to i850) are simple buildings of yellow brick serving a dear fincuenal {Us wark « aso0 tay a  parpese Daniel Hert bist opronemncrd stylisne exprosen, bot nialitalits Che sarge respect tor simple structures  od sruchful cspression of taatertals Herholdt  a nthe drs: ta use castiron in amyor building Copenhagen tversity Library (2860) The bitcce oF Copentagen's Grey Hall, Marnn 
Denmark, Grondtvig Church, Copenhagen (113. 1y21 40). by Jensen Klint  Nyrop, developed this materialist approach to architecture further, while Jensen *Klint. who also took the Danish brick-building tradition as his point of departure, achieved an architecture of expressive effects in the Grundtvig Church (1913, [921 (940) in Copenhagen, a gigantic paraphrase of the Danish village church type. The *Art Nouveau period left only a few notable traces in Denmark: its most important exponents were Anton Resen and Thorvald Bindesboll.  The chief monuments of the nco-classicism which predominated immediately — before World War J are: Carl Petersen's Faborg Mu- scum (designed 1912), and, in Copenhagen, the Police Station (1918-22) by Hack Kampmann, his two sons, and Age Rafn. In terms of future developments, the chief signiticance of this neo- classicism was that it led to a more severe artistic discipline and a heightened fecling for the qualities of craftsmanship and material.  Denmark. Arhus Unversity: mau building fiyas 6) by C.F. Maller  From the ty2os Kay Fisker was the leading exponent of traditionalism, playing a leading part in the efforts to improve the quality of housing. The most important product of tradi- donalism is Arhus University (begun 1931). the first part of which was designed by Fisker in collaboration with Christian Frederik Moller and PovtStegmann, Its many separate buildings stand skilfully related to one another itt a park- hike campus. Moller later continued work on the University alone, without sacrificing the unity projected in the original design. Fisker’s strong personality shows to advantage in Copenhagen’s Voldparkens School and the Maternity Care Building of the mid-1gsos. Kaare Klint carried on the ideas of his father Jensen Khint in the Bethlehem Church (1937) in Copenhagen, and also became the leading figure in Danish furniture design, with tradi- tional work of the highest craftsmanship. Char- acteristic of such traditionalist housing of the post-war years as Sonderpardsparken in Bags- vaerd (1950) by Povt Ernst Hoff and Bennet Windinge is a harmonic relationship of build- ings to the terrain and its landscaping. The traditionalist-oriented school architecture of the 1950s consisted principally of one-and two- storey buildings intended to provide a milicu on an intimate scale for the pupils. One of the finest examples is the Hansstedt School in Copenha- gen (1954-8) by Frederik Christian Lund and Hans Christian Hansen. 
The *International Style first made tsclf seriously felt after the Stockholm Exhibition of 1930, Which was a revelation tor young Danish architects. Vilhelm Launtzen became an out i standing exponent in projects such as Copenha- gen Airporcat Kastrup (1y3y) and Broadcasting House (1938 45). Mogens Lassen built the tirst *Le Corbusier-inspired villas and Fritz Schlcyer became the Danish exponent ofa freedom from aesthetic preconceptions established by *Perret with his use of reinforced concrete (Mariehjacrg Crematorium at Lyngby. near Copenhagen 1937). The young Arne *Jacobscn also. be- longed to this pioneering group, with the Bellavista residential developinent at Bellevue, near Copenhagen, and later (in collaboranion with Moller and Lassen) with the Arhuy and Sollerod town halls. These represented the climax of avant-garde building in the 1930s, before the material shortages during the war and in subsequent years brought a return to the cultivation of traditional qualities.  The post-war years have been marked espe- cially by inspiration trom the USA, tirt by Frank Lloyd * Wright's houses and their adapt- tion to the landscape, later by *Mies van der Rohe’s disciplined steel structures. Again Jacobsen was the leading figure, with jarge administration buildings and hotels, like Rodovre Town Hall (1955), and the SAS Building (195X860) and the National Bank (1965~71), both in the capital. In his schools and housing Jacobsen convincingly combined for- cign inspiration with Danish tradition. Jorn *Utzon is the country’s most important repre- sentative of a dynamic and expressive architec- ture, In Denmark he has built noteworthy single-family and terrace houses and his only public building, the church at Bagsvacrd (1974- 6). In the Sydney Opera House in Australia he realized a building of great expressive power Halldor Gunnlogsson is a fine exponent of severe classicist architecture (Kastrup town hall, 1957-60, with Jorn Nielsen). Vilhelm Woh- lert and Jorgen Bo have created a delightul setting for contemporary art in Louisiana Mu- seum at Humleback, near Copenhagen (1958)  Through the 1960s the country enjoyed eet. ie puis Fea. Copentins economic growth, with plentiful building ac- . avity. Industrialized building methods now yyegmnark. Nonond: Kank Cepenkaven .1yes began to dominate the scene to such an extent = a brine that they accounted for the greater part of new housing. Building projects have increasingly | Deuenark Poses, Heninger past fa bs  involved Jarger units. One of the first big ees 4 
me eh  Denmark, Lousiana Muycum, Humlehack (1y ssi. by Jorgen Bo and Vilhelm Wolrlert  Denmark. Odense University ryt 761 by Krohn, Rasmuysen and Holscher  housing developments carried out entirely in prefabrication was Huje Gladsaxe near Co- penhagen (1960-4). The concept of ‘open architecture’ offering the highest degree of flexibility has been realized in such institutional buildings as Odense University (1y66 76) by Gunnar Krohn, Hartvig Ra nand Knud Holscher, and in the Copenhagen Country Hospital at Herlev (1960-76) by Gehrdt Borne- busch, Max Briel and Jorgen Selchau. Between 1y68 and 1974 Knud Friis and Elmar Moltke Nielsen, with their secondary schools at Riiskov, Skanderborg and Viborg. created some of the finest works of the period  Most recently, architecture has been charac- terized by a strong reaction against huge resi- dential developments such as those of the 1960s.  mu  Smaller units of high-density low-rise develop- ments, providing greater opportunities for community life and with variations in design, are now more frequent. A fine example is Galgebakken at Herstedeme (1969-74) by J. P. Storgard, J. @rum-Nielsen, H. Marcussen and A, @rum-Niclsen. In recent years a growing general interest in historical buildings and cityscapes has also Ied to a series of well- executed examples of conservation. TF OC] Fisker, Kay, and Millech, Knut, Danske Arkitektur stromminger 1850-1950, Copenhagen 1951; Faber, Tobias, Nese danische Architektur, Stuttgart 1968; ——, Danske Arkitektur, Co- penhagen 1977.  Deutscher Werkbund. Founded in Munich on y October 1907 as an association of archi- craitsmen, industrialists, teachers and publicists, its aim was the ‘ennobling of German work’. Its members conceived of work as embracing both handiwork and industrial work, which constituted the major difference between the Werkbund and the English *Arts and Crafts movement, which had served as the basis for the German group. The Artsand Crafts embodied the protestations of men such as William *Morris against the flood of flimsy, ugly, characterless objects produced by indus- trial methods. Morris considered the machine inappropriate tor producing objects intended for everyday use. Such objects should be reserved for handiwork, so that the quality of products and of work might be re-established. The Werkbund took up this protest against an environment lacking in quality, but its founders - Hermann *Muthesius, Fritz Schumacher and Peter *Behrens ~ saw in the machine an improved tool which must, and could, be used to ensure that its products were also of high quality. The Werkbund took as a starting point the idea that industrial development could not be reversed.  Their efforts had a strong echo immediately, and the effect of their movement extended throughout the cultivated middle classes who suffered from the general lack of culture during this period. Industrialists and businessmen rec- ognized the advantage that tasteful modern products could afford. In the very year of the Werkbund’s foundation, 1907, Emil Kathenau, the founder of the AEG (Allgemeine Elektri- citits-Gesellschaft, or General Electric Com- pany), chose the painter-architect Peter Behrens  tects,  
nana ne  Bie » Bl  Deutscher Werkbund. Model factory building by Gropius and Glass Pavihon by Bruno Tauc at the Cologne exhibition (gig)  as designer for his factories, workers’ estates, company graphics, and even for certain of the company’s products, such as che lamps which have, justly, been considered early examples of Industrial Design. The Werkbund was also considered good for the standing of German work in the world. Friedrich Naumann, who can be considered the chief ideologue of the Werkbund in the early years, never ured of pointing this out,  Between 1907 and 191g new developments included: factories by Behrens, *Poelzig and *Gropius; country houses by Muthesius: furni~ ture made by the Deutsche Werkstatte fiir Handwerkkunst (German handicraft work - shops) in Hellerau, near Dresden, as well as the Garden City of Hellerau itself (*Ricmer- schmid, Muthesius and *Tessenow). Also pro-  duced were railway coaches designed by Gropius, automobiles sty led by Ernst Neumann and steamships with interiors by Bruno Paul These were presented annually (from: 1gt2) in che Werkbund’s faebrcher, Their indlucnee was mmnediaely fel inkeeping with the activity of the Werkbund. which comprised handicraft, art and industry, the annaals abo dhustrated alver designs, painted ghass, applied sculpture and even panting  In fuly 1914. on the occasion of the first erkbund exhibiuen held in Cologne, at which *van de VeldeS Werkbund Gropius’s model fictory and Brane *Taut’s Glass Pavihon were shawn, Muthesiny pac out  Vheatre,  a stiggestion which he heped would overcome the duality of the Werk bund: Die Werk bund- arbeit der Zukuntt’ (Phe Werkbund’s work of the future} should serve as the typical object. not as att ttidayadul  the ithe of dits discourse  work of art oor diundicratt. Vlas stgestian provoked considerable and lively. opposition: within the Werkbund. Van de inthe name ab iree art Wutanst ins se,  wav aiid the youn  Velde protested  estan ot  scamon or a stan.turdiz  Incmbers. Fant aid Grapits, supported bin  But ehe adseniar World War P prevented che Htediate cobapse ai the Workbund Work cbe endothe wr pers canre the victors of the Maes In by He waters or Thardic tare dh baer hi crapaciine: speech Stare con mete ts Noataiaun ane  ‘ write badernnt as the  ir ev baad. Escenas though the  rhe tovcttang te the adeolags  
Deutscher Werkbund. Wocnhotsicdiung. Stuttgart (1y27}  But German industry was not devastated and the Werkbund again took up the question of industrial work; now it was essentially the social aspect which interested them, and housing and advice for the “Existenzmimimum’ (minimal existence) im particular. Walter Gropius, who had founded the *Bauhaus in Weimar - the name was meant to call to mind the workshops or “Bauhiitte’ of medieval cathedrals claimed m 1926 that all men’s needs were the same and. that they could be better and less expensiv satisfied by machine than by the hand. *A violation of the individual through standardiza~ tion is not to be feared’; Gropius and his Bauhaus were again on the path towards industry after 1922  The Weibenhotsicdlung (housing estate) in Stuttgart in 1y27 was the great accomplishment of the Werkbund in that year. Designed under the supervision of *Mics van der Rohe, it was the first of the Werkbundsicdlungen (Werk- bund housing estates): that in Breslau came two years later, that im Vienna in 1932. Foreign architects were heavily invelyved in’ the Weibenhof estate: *Le Corbusier from Paris, Victor * Bourgeois from Brussels, J. J. P. *Oud from Rotterdam, Mart *Stam from Amster- dam, Josef Frank from Viena. Even before the war, Werkbiinde had been tounded in * Austria andi *Switzerland, and in 1915, ithe niidst of the war, the Design Association was founded in  *Creat Britain, intended as an English counter- part of the Werkbund.  The Werkbund exhibition in Paris in 1930, which Gropius designed, had rather horritic results in terms of both doctrine and discipline. [t was more an exhibition of the Bauhaus than of the Werkbund. It should not be forgotten that men like Adloph Schneck worked in the Werkbund, and that their clear and straight- forward furniture designs were not indebted to the machine aesthetic of the Bauhaus. Nor should it be forgotten chat others, such as Paul *Bonatz and Paul Schinitthenner, also be- longed to the Werkbund.  The political transition from Republic to Third Reich witnessed a situation m which several members sought to assure their position by a cautious strategy - Mics van der Rohe belonged to this group, along with several committed National Socialists and others, such as Winfried Wendland. who joined the Party, ‘There were also those such as Walter Riezler, who remained unswerving. The National So- cialists adopted catchwords of the Werkbund such as ‘quality’, ‘value of work’, ‘meaning’ ‘accomplishment’, but these w lways quali- fied by the adjective ‘German’. The dissolution of the Werkbund as an essentially organiz- ational entity can be dated to 1934, although the National Socialists sought to preserve its princi- ples in an ‘Amt Schénheit der Arbeit’ (Office for the beauty of work),  The Werkbund was refounded in 1947. In the first ten years of the new Werkbund, it  re  
seemed as though the old union with industry would again find validity. The German section at the Brussels World's Fair of 1987 was created by the Werkbund and revealed to an astonished world that German work had won back its high quality: this was equally que of the exhibition buildings (by Egon *Eiermann and Sep Rut). the gardens (Walter Rassow) and the objects exhibited.  However, it also s campaign for ‘good form’ the Werkbuad had been too successfil. Industry thought it tie longer needed the Werkbund, and the Werk- bund was more critical of it in the context of a world faced with new require- ments and new problems. Vhis was in keeping with Werkbund tradition, and it had been the desire to re-establish the Werkbund on the basis of a simple design — or overseeing - function But the Werkbund had in fact never been satisfied with ‘good form’. In the tg6os the expression — “Tassenwerkbund' — (cotfec-cup Werkbund) was coined to indicate a Werkbund which could be satistied with "good fornr. The Werkbund had never been such an organization and now it desired less than ever to become such a Tassenwerkbund, Certainly the Werkbund both before and after the war has concerned itself with our immediate environment: that of the table, bed, lamp and. by extension, the street, garden and greenery, But it is also concerned with threats to the environment, to che status quo which it wishes to maintain, with its form, its tradition and its substance. The ctle would now have to be changed for an essay on the activities of the Werkbund, but the essence has remained the same: it has always striven to be broader in scope than the narrow concept of an industrial culture.  The theme of the Werkbund is, in the broadest sense, that of a cultural critique. It has never been anything else. That the Werk bund should find it less simple today than in the 1y20s and 1930s to imagine and define its relationship to economic forces is evident. [Po O Jahebticher des Dentschen [Verkbundes. 1yt2. 1913, 1914, 1915, (917, 1920; Die Form, montily publication, 1922, 1925-34: Werk und Zett. monthly publication, since 1952: Zivischien Kunst und Industrie. Der Deutsche Werkhund (exhibition catalogue), Munich 1975, also Ber- lin and Hamburg 2976; Burckhardt, Lucius {ed.), Werkbund. Germania, Austria, Svizzeru. Venice 1977; Campbell, Joan, The German  erved as proof that in its  Werkbund, The policy of reform in the applied arts, Princeton, Nf ig78: Jonghanns, Kurt. Der Dentsche Werkbund. Sein erstes fauliezehne, Berlin (East) rys2  Dinkeloo, fobn (Gerard). bo Holkind, Mich tot. d. Fredericksburg, Va. 1y8c. After studies at the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor, he jeined the Chicago office of *Skidmore, Owings & Merrill, where he was head of project planning, 1946 50. He began his col- laboration with kero *S  aarinen ity £g30 im the same capacity and was promoted to parcuersup in toso. Aiter Saartnen’s death in tyor, 1D. cook over the office, together with Kevin *Rache, and moved it from Bloomfield Hills and Birmingham, Mich. te Hamden, where, until Ds death, it was known as Kevin Roche John Dinkeloo and Associates. In hus vollaboration with Roche, 1. was especially  Conn...  responsible for the high formal value of the structural aspect of the firm's work, Fle was the technical mmovator to whom can be ateributed the introduction of synethetic rubber mould- ings, mictallic smoked glass and Weatherproot steel in an architectural context AM 1 See under Roche  Doesburg, ‘Vheo van, b Davos 193 Kiipper. He began his career as at painter and. after conventional beginnings. broke away. ¢ tyra and invesugated the forme] lingua Kandinsky. His contacts with Mondrian. saith whom he planned as carly as tyis a journal to  Utrecht iss3. d real name Christiaan: binil Maric  propagate the new ideas of *Neo-phistiasi, resulted in his first neosplasticist pictures In collaboration withthe arclitecty *Qud and [au Wils, he eudeavourcd to trunster hiy pamony from the es o-dimensional ite something spa- taland tocommeceinorganically wath arehite:  ture, In foie. together wath Quad. he totnded the Splans group ip berden. butat did gor ast  Jone. One ve baer, he yorticda group ot atasts  andarchitests im Pe * Sag) amo venicol setup te  adieab renew tbod arts be became the  aCe et  spokesman of the araup. whose Weak. wats  haconalist-t lined id advocated a geaniers i Seulpronat arebrteetare Gi apposttiamt te thy pictitesqtie effects of *L spressionisin and uty Schott of * Ameer  fon Oud. he desagned the hull of  Chit shea at Noordwukerhout near beter,  aovlich be sought ce remotes and stress the 
Doesburg. Café L’Auberte, Strasbourg (1y6 8)  architecture through the medium of pamting. His use of primary colours, tiled Hooring and geometrical leading en the windows is in harmony with De Sujl methods. In the follow- ing years, 1. was invited to lecture on the movement's activities at the *Bauhaus in Des- sau and Berlin. The Bauhaus published his book on the fundamental principles of art (originally published in Dutch, Amsterdam, 191g) as the sixth of the series of Bauhaushticher, entitled Grundbegriffe der bildenden Kunst (Munich, 192.4).  When the Café L’Aubette in Strasbourg was renovated in (ty26-8, 1). was able to realize his ideas of space and colour on a larger scale, in collaboration with Hans Arp. Moving to Paris, he built a house and studio for himself at Meudon-Val-Fleury (1929-30). which soon became the focal point of De Stijl, He renewed his collaboration with Cor van *Eesteren, with whom he had worked in the early tg20s, and turned his attention co applying the prmeiples of De Stijl to town planning  1>.’s death in 1931 marked the end of De Stijl as a group. Although his emphasis on the primacy of the fine arts over architecture had already come under critical attack in the 1y20s and had resulted in his break with Oud, the concepts of space which he helped to define  remain a living issue today yy 4 Doesburg, Theo van, De Nieuwe Beweging tn de Schilderkunst. Delft: wgiz. ----. Drie  voordrachten over de nienwe bildende Kunst, Am- sterdam 11g: — . Grondbegrippen der beel-  denden Kunst, Amsterdam tgiy: - - -, Klassiek,  barek, modern, The Hague 1920; . L’ Architecture vivante, Paris ty2s; Theo van Doesburg 1883-1931 (exhibition catalogue),  Eindhoven 1968; Balieu, Joost, Thee van Does- burg, London 1974.  Drew, Jane Beverley, bo tgtt. Studied at the Architectural Association School, London. In partnership with J. T. Allison, 1934-9. Indepen- dent practice, 1939-45. In partnership with Maxwell *Fry (whom she married in 1942) from 1945. Early work in Kenya led to special- ization in tropical architecture. She was As tant Town Planning Adviser, West Africa, 1944 §. As wellas being responsible for schools, housing and colleges in Ghana, she undertook joint work with Fry on the University of Ibadan, Nigeria. Other projects were in: Ku- wait (1,000-hed hospital), India (hospitals. housing. and a large school: senior architect at Chandigarh in collaboration with *Le Cor- busier); Singapore: Sri Lanka, south Persia (housing, town planning, hospital extensions, cinemas); and Mauritius (hospitals and hous- ing). She was Beamis Protessor at the Massa- chusetts Institute of Technology in 1961, and has lectured widely clsewhere. She retired from practice in 1974  L Drew, Jane, Kitchen Planning, London 145: Fry, E., and Drew. J., Tropical Architecture in the Dry and Humid Zones, London 1966; Brock- man. FAL NL, Fry, Drew, Knight, Cramer. Architecture, London 1978.  Ss  Dudok, Willem Marinus, b. Amsterdam 1884, d. Hilversum 1974. Trained as an engineer at the Royal Military Academy, Breda. !n 1913-14 he had his own office in Leiden, and from 1g? in Hilversum, where he was alse director of municipal works, 1915 27, and municipal ar- chitect from 1y27, Although deriving some- thing from both the School of * Amsterdam and De *Stil, D. evolved an independent position of his own. The contrast of solid and void areas, horizontals and verticals, recalls De Stijl. but 1D.’s brick buildings nearly always retain chat quality of mass and weight which also charac- terizes the work of Michel de *Klerk. His formal solutions also reveal the influence of Frank Lloyd *Wright. 1).’s most important buildings are at Hilversum, including the Von- del School (1928-9) and the Town Hall (1g28  30). He also designed Netherlands House at the 
Cité Universitaire, Paris (1y27-8). and the Bijenkorf department store in| Rotterdam (1929-30, destroyed in World War IL).  CJ Stuiveling, G., Bakker-Schut. F.. et al. Willem M. Dudok, Amsterdam 1ys4.  Duiker, Johannes, b. The Hague igo, d. Amsterdam 1935. Studied at the Technical College in Delft. From 1916 he was in partner- ship with Bernard Bijvoet m1 Amsterdam, and was editor of the journal De & en Opboww, 1y32  3. D. was an independently minded ngure of the Modern Movement in Holland. in his Zonnestraal Sanatorium at Hilversum (1926 8. with Bijvoet) the geometrical strength of *Neo-plasticism is softened by combining it with curved volumetric forms. [ts generous glazing and powerfully projectin: roofs are not without some influence on Alvar * Aalto’s Sanatorium at Paimio (1y29-33). [he Open Air School in the Clioseraat in Amster- dam (1928-30), a five-starey complex with terraces for outdoor classes, is a highly transpar- ent structure that makes free display of its concrete skeleton. The Handelsblad-Cineac Cinema in Amsterdam, completed in 134, the year before [).’s early death, is an elegant composition of white surtaces, glass and a light metal structure, in which the influences of *Le Corbusier and above all of Russian *Construc- tivism are evident. VMI OD Duiker, Johannes, Hoogbouu, Rotterdam 1930; ‘Duiker 1 and ‘Duiker (Amsterdam), November 197t and January 1972.  terraced  in Forum  Duiker. Zonnestraal Sanatorium, Hilversum) perth Bijveets 126 8)  E  Eames, Charles. b. St Louis, Missouri 1y07, St Louis 1978. Architect and designer. Together with his wife Kay. E, was active in almost every domain of design trom toys and furniture (including the Eames Chair, tys6), to films and exhibitions. His own house at Pacific Palisades, Cal. (194g). a steel-frame building constructed from prefabricated units, is reminiscent proportions and light appearance Japanese house.  Dresler, Arthur, Charles Eames (exhibition catalogue), New York i973  an its of an old  eclecticism. The free use of clements of various styles, even within a simgle building. The highpoint of eclecticnim was reached as ap expression of *historicism in the architecture of It has also. played a major role in *Post-Modernisin.  the second half of the roth century  Eames. The architects ewan house, Paucatic Call tague  
Ecole des Beaux-Arts. Phe Ecole des Beaux- Artoan Paris, which dates back uldimately to Colbert’s of the Académie  dV Architeceure in L671, was reorganized in 1816  Isternieatacali)  and quickly became net only the most impor- tance school of architecture in *Prance, but by the third quarter or the ryth century the most influciitial world, Although various reforms were ctfected, no- tably in is63. the methods and philosophy of the Poole des Beaux-Arts displayed an overall years, The same teaching methods were emploved unal the studenc tyg6S, which led tater alia to the separation of the architecture scction from the fine arts divisions of dhe Ecole des Beaux-Arts. Thos. despite often virulent internal contlices, the Eeole came to representa bastion of official  such institution in’ the  unity tor seme 10  revolts of  taste and to serve as the symbol of the architec- turalestublishmient. Earher. in the rth century, Viollet-le-Due had taken a polenueal stance 1 refusing ats mstruction, although his own cri tique Was sharpened after his ill-fated tecaures U863. Architectural manifestos and (eatyes from Viollet-le-Duc to Le Corbusier ~ have used the Ecole aya negative postulate in definmy a rational moder architecture.  Tfas an institution the school defended the classical tradition - and especially that of the Freneh ‘grand sicele” and the late International Baroque which had been the formative intl its method was  there in  cnees in ats nascent period more one of abstract design: principles than stylistic representation, While the classical ideal was upheld. it was subjected to considerable remterpretagen aid renewal at the hands of ‘rebels’ turned niastery from the generation of Henri Labrouste and Polis Duban in the 18308 to Charks Garmer in the 1860s and finally Tony *Garnier in the ry2os. The unifving method  belatedly codified in Julien Guadet voltune Elements er theorie de Parchitectire (1g03- 3) was the basis of design in composition, i.e  ‘great four-  athe abstraction of the bedding programme into a balance between expression and formal pattern. Students were taught to conceptualize the essence of an assigned programme and then according to the rules of proportion, symume- try. axial organization. and couric uunee or typol- ogy. to find an appropriate compositional expression (part).  Technically speaking, the Ecole uselfdid not provide practical instruction in design. It of Jectures in mathematics,  fered perspective,  stercotomy, construction, and history of archi- tecture, Design and dratting however were taught in independent ateliers (studios), run by practising architects, many of whom also served ay professors within the E students were prepared te compete in the monthly concenrs (competitions) set by the Académie and administered by the faculty of the school. These culminated in che renowned Grand Prix (Prix de Rome) which permitted one student a year to continue his study for several years (the number varied from three to five over the century) atthe French Academy in Rome (Villa Medici) and Jater in Athens as well. This system, formalized by the regulations of  cole. In the ateliers  tSiy, was designed to cultivate architects to hl the prestigious posts which dominated the hicrarchy of the profession in France  By the late roth century, the Feole des Beaux-Arts counted numerous foreign students large 1863), meluding the Fo MeKun i* McKim. Mead & White) as well as numerous English and German students. Even more im- portandy, the French Feole served as a proto= type for architectural education either by emu- as in the earliest American architectural  governmental architectural  In its various atediers {there were thre ‘omheial’  Americans Louis *Sullivan and ©  ateliers after  lanon schools at MIT in Cambridge, Mass., or Co- hunbia University in New York - or by eriaque  If the Ecole des Beattx-Arts system came increasingly under attack at the hands of the misters ofthe Modern Moventent, its influence remained nonetheless strong until World War Ih. Vhe *Art Deco style. for instance, was in many respects a streamlined image for estab lished compositional principles whoxe relacion to Beaux-Arts teaching was especially evident in American examples. Even the most vehe- mentcritics of the Ecole, such as *Le Corbusier, were not totally free from: its mAuence or methods.  A re-evaluation of the Ecole. that héte noire of the avant garde, might be said to have begun in the igsos, and notably in the work of Louis *Kabn and his disciples. Kahn's formalized composition, hicrarchy of spaces. and prefer- ence for sequential articulation of volumes draw heavily on the Beaux-Arts element in his own training under Paul Cret at the University of Pennsylvania. Through Kahn and Robert  *Vencuri the Ecole was to be re-examined not  
only for its formal principles, but as a particular approach to the probleu of style, raised agin in the context of the growing disiMusionment with the *International Style in Aterica  A tg7s exhibition of Beaux-Arts student drawings held at the Museum of Modern Artin New York marked a watershed in historical study and architectural taste. ‘Beaux-Arts once again became a household word tn Angle- American architectural circles and its imagery and approach to representation were quickly assimilated in the celectie catalogue of *Post- Modernism. Contemporary appreciation of the French tradition is, however, highly inflected according to architectural position and philo- sophy. from the self-styled defenders of an eternal classicism to the most independently spirited proponents of an imagistic and me phorical architectural language. BB M7 Drexler, Arthur (odo). The Ancdiitectre ef dhe Eeole des Beaux-Arts, New York and Londen 1y7s; Lipstadt, Helene. Architects et Ingentenr dans la Presse; Debat-Conflit-Polemigue, Paris iyo. Egbert. Donald Drew. Phe Besx- Ares Tradition in Architecture, Princeton, NoJ. Lysis Middleton, Robin (edi). Phe Beaexe arts and French Nineteenth-Century Architecture, London and Cambridge, Mass. 1982 (paperback edition, London ty84).  i‘  Eesteren, Cor (Cornelius) van, b. Kinderdiik (Alblasserdam)}, 1897, Fly worked with Willem Krombout in Rotterdam, 1914, and gained his Architectural Diploma at the Academie van Kunsten en Technische Weten- schappen, Rotterdam. in 1gt7. le studivd ar  Beeldende  Eha. Vhe Lindenhot Vienna tiycas  juh  the Hoger Bouwkunstonderwaijs im Amster- dam. tgig 220he won the Prix de Rome wand spent some tine at the * Bauhaus. fle belonged to De *Stuyl and in qy2z2 met Vheo van *Doesburg., with whom he formated the architectonic prinerples of *Neo-phaticisan, He worked under Jan Wils, (yg. 7. Ay Architect of the Town Phinning Office of Antsterdarn fiyag syvaiter 1ys2 Directory. he corordinated the aity’s expansion, basing his work on a plan prepared be *#Beriage in tyt7. which be suh- Muntially revised and enlarged. For many years he was president of *CIAM.  date, hans (Co Pror C. van Besteren 4 jaar. Borkiedtio Weekblad “Ainster- 2 1g67. pp. ans  dam. no. s  Ehn. Karl. hb. Vienna ¢&s4. d. Vienna tus After attending the Stuatsygewerbes tule and studying we the Akademie der bildenden Kunste funder Orta * Wagner in Vienna, be worked as official City Architect sn Vieni  In the 1y2 sible for the pubhe housing proicers in whieh he  sand carly 14368 he was respons  etuublished prototypes ror Viennese archites= ture of the imter-war sears. Elis Hormeswiese  fygaa; was still onented towards the Eng tit  Join che Dinden= 1  ds.  Garden City movement, ¥  bor cigts: be focused more on social ne  looking especially to such Dutch examples ay Michel de *Klerk’s or Hats on the Vinjheidslaan (rust erm Amsterdam, OF Fs subsequent buildings. dhe Bebelhot Karl-Marx-Hof) iga7iandthe Adel! Hat srya2, deserse spoaal mention, Iv fornia  block  byes.  id-Popp- terns. bis work beus witness toa prog resstan  Ehn. [ly Ker <a  
front Biedermeter-inspired stylistic elements (Hermeswise} ving monumental *Expression- ism) (Karl-Marx-Hof) to a smooth cubistic (Adclhcid-Popp-Hot). Atterthe Civil Warin 1y34and to the end of the Socal Democratic cra in the Viennese city administration, EF. found himself unable to realize anything more than a few smaller CM.KM i" Mang. Karl, Rontauinaler Wohnunesbau in Wren. dafbruch, 1923 1934, dusstrahling (oxhi- binon catalogue}, Vienna 1977; Haatmann, EH. and IR., Die Gemeindebauren des Reten Wien 1org tg74. Vienna ty8o.  composiional mode  private houses.  Eiermann, Egon, b. Neuendort near Berlin iyo. d. Baden-Baden 1970. In the post-war period E. became the dominant figure among architects in West *Germany during the first quarter century of the Federal Republic's exist- ence. The example of his buildings, as well as his teaching career at the Technische Hochschule in Karlsruhe (1447-70) and his membership of nunicrous competition juries, assured him a degree of influence in ¢ lifetime comparable only to that exercised by Hans *Scharoun. E., who preferred the resilient precision ofstecl to the sculptural possibilities of  rmany in his own  remtorced concrete, attached tremendous im portance to pronounced articulation, logical etal structure and clarit detail. His buildings evoke impressions of ex- ceptonal clarity and rigid organization, For E  who also desizmed furnishings, the require  expression of the sk of  nents of architecture were ‘to make visible thy order of urban planning down to the smallest structure.” Components of circulation or tech- nology, such as stair or litt towers, heating equipment or machine shops for industrial in- stallations (handkerchief factory in Blumberg, Ig4y-S1t), are treated ay aesthetically enlivening architectural elements. In his later work, E. tended to establish a secondary outer skin of steel railings, balconies and sun screens placed in fronr of the building voluine. Vhus, even large building masses, such as the Neekermann Ex- port Company in Frankfurt am Main (1988 61), the rower of the Bundestuy (Parliament) in Bonn (1965 9) or the IBM Administration Building in Scuttgart (1967-72) were given a light, clegant, indeed cheerful character.  E. Studied at the Technische Hochschule in Berlin-Charlottenburg, 1923.7. where he wasa pupil of Hans *Poelzig. He wrote a diploma  Biermann, Handkerchie factory. Blumberg (1y4y $1)  Eiermann, Neckermann Export Company building. Frankfurt am) Main cigss 61)  thesis on department stores and worked first in the building office of the Karstadt department store chain: from 1920 he had his own practice. Decorative screens were used in his post-war department stores for the Horten chains (Heil- bronn, Stuttgart and Heidelberg). as well as in several churches. most notably the Matthius- Kirche in Pforzheim and the Kaiser-Wilhelm- Gediachtnis-Kirche in Berlin (1959-3), whose existing wat-damaged tower is contrasted with the simple geometry of the new building. In these church buildings, he employed coloured glazing which produces an unreal lighting effect in the interior. The dramatic contrast between old and new in the Gedachinis-Kirche was symbolic of the post-war rebuilding of West Berlin. In his later works E, also sought to create striking architectural images through the  
Eiffel. Vhe Eiffel Tower, Paris (887 9) with part of the site of the Exposition Universelle (1937) showing the German Pavilion (lett) ad. facing ic. the Russian Pavillon  structure itself} the towers of the Oliveeti headquarters in Frank furt-Niederrad (1968 72) are raised on gradually widening concrete supports.  After his pavilion group at the Brussels World's Fair (1ys8, with Sep Ruf) E. re- ceived numerous government commiissians The new German Embassy in) Washington (19$y-64), an act of architectural diplomacy in its contextual diseretion, won him a certain international success, we O Rosenthal, H. Werner, Egon Biermann 1904-1970', JRIBA, January 1971.  Eiffel, Gustave, b. Dijon £832, d. Paris 1923 After taining as a chemist, he became a structural engineer almost by chance. Several years as a consultant to building firms and later as an independent consulting engmeer im- mersed him in the problems confronting bridge designers as railway construction extended into ever more difficult territory, In his much acclaimed wide-span railway bridges. such is the Douro bridge near Oporto (18977 8) and the  Pruyere bridge near Garabit in the Massif Central (1880 4), E. was able to exploit the advantages of rolled ste  ] tor Jargesseale strue-  tures. He used choy material. itsely much more resistant to stress than cast iron. in the construc= anes built up fron) stall individual menibers and riveted together significance for the modern aesthetic of reduced use OF miatertals Gis exetuplifted in *Mies var der Rohe’s dictuim “Less ts more}. Ply mest  ton of dhree-dimensional space-f  This structures were of fundamental  renowned structure, the fattel Tower in Parts CISS7 yg). was buile ror the Exposition Uia- verselle in exsys the enthusiasm: for the Gower shown by such ardisty oy Rebert Delaunay and Fernand Leger became a reality in soth-contary arehecture only io the toges, through the work of be Raecolas aid Konrad *W ac hsmnain und Space SUCRATES ola ©) Beaset. Moarice, Giistare bite. Milau bast Joseph. Phe Pallest Ppegue. Boston. Mass estubitian  apd Pare syusao Phares feta Hie Be  tags. fetuie Milfet et song  Poieer femps  cabilowts ) Guts ry82  Eisenman. Por Nowak. Sodus. Stud.  wal ut Hoa Colurrbia Coss ersiies ard Wher ag beaten Caugnbrdge Qareversia dn Pave ollaboragor ot the * PAC team  wo 
Eisenman. Horse i Barcnholte Paviltor., Priweton, Nf. iar 8  Taught at Cambridge and Princeton Universi- ues and, tram: iy67, at the Cooper Union in New York. Unal io82 he was Director of the Institute tor Architecture and Urban Studies in New York, which he founded in 1967, and co- editor of the architectural review Oppositions E., whose work draws especially on the [ralian *Rationalsm associated with Giuseppe *Ter- ragni, hay closely bound theory and practice i his investigation of the relationship of form and function or the meaning of form ‘an seh’ (form gta form). His reakzcd wuvre consists of houses which are at the same tame archicectural expert- ments and products which he numbers like abstract sculptural works or paintings, includ- my: House f (Barenholty Pavilion) in Princeton, NL]. g67-8); House Ho Fak Housel im Hard- wick. Conn. Gu6y Oo House HL (Miller House) im Lakeville, Conn. vtgoy- 70), A high- point in his disdain for function was achieved in House VI, builtin ig72, the Frank Residence in Cornwall. Comn.. cannot be climbed and leads to a oor which does not exist, These construcdons of complex geometrical systems are not meant te tulfil any needs: E.'s aesthetic mannerism brushes aside the chent’sexpectations in order to entice them. In  with tts red staircase: which  the El Even Odd House of 1978, an “Axono- metric object’ based on a background play with the representation and the reality of architec- ture. E. carried to its limits his radical plea for an autonomous architecture (New York Five). VML  © Five Architects, New York 1972; Eisenman, DP... Howse of Cards, New York ig78.  Ellwood. Craig, b. Clarendon, Texas 1922. He first worked for several years as an accountant and manager for a contracting tirm before opening his own architectural office in Los Angeles in 1948. In order to deepen the practical knowledge he had gained. he enrotled in evemmny courses in’ civil engineering at the University of California in Los Angeles, 1949 - S4. Since 1976 has been active as a painter and sculptor and spends part of cach year in Tus- cany. E.. who has built almost exclusively in steel.is known chiefly for che houses he realized from 1951 on in the context of the Case-Study programme of the journal Arts and Architecture. In his dependence on *Mies van der Rohe, as well asm his structural sense and spatial organi- zation, his work displays an uncommon cle- vance and reductivist discipline. Ameng his mast important works - all in California — are the Case Study House No. 18 in Beverly Hills ftyss. toys? 8). the Hunt House in Malibu (iyss. 19s@ 7). the Scientific Data Systems Building (today Xerox Building) in El Segundo (1y6§. 1966), and the bridge-like Arts Center of the College of Design which spans a street in Pasadena. AM TD MeCoy, Esther, Craig Ellwood, New York 168  Endell, August. b. Berlin i871. d. Breslau 1925. Self-taught craftsman and architect of the German Jugendstil (Art Nouveau). Member of the Munich group and art journal _fagend (Youth): from iyoo he was director of the Kunstgewerbeschule in Breslau. His most im- portant works, the Elvira Photo Studio in Munich (18y7-8) and the decoration of the Buntes Theater (Multi-coloured theatre} in Berlin (yor), are characterized by li mentation attached to Aat surfaces. In igt2 the Trabrennbalin in Berlin-Maricndorf was buile to his designs.  T] Weiss. Peg (ed.). Kandinsky in Munich: the  ly ora  formative years, Princeton, NJ. 1979, pp. 34-40:  Killy, H. E.. Pfankuch, P.. and Scheper, 1D.. 
Erskine. Byker housmy development, Newent upon-Tyne (ig6y) 8a}  Poelzig-Endell-Moll rand die Brestauer Kutt ukademie: 1911-32 (exhibition catalogues. Bertay 16s. 7 England. *Great Britain  Erickson. Arthur (Charles). bo Vancouver 1y24. Studied ac the University Columbiain Vancouver and MeGill Ginversity in Montreal, 1942 50. Active in various part netships from 1ys3. and since 1997 as priaipal of the firm Arthur Erickson Associates, with offices in. Vancouver, Toronto, Kuwait and Jeddah. Simon Fraser University at Burnaby near Vancouver (begun 1963) assumes a kev position in E.'s work: it reveals the influence of *Le Corbusier, *Kahn, *Rudolph and #New Brutatism, all independendy reworked anid further developed in this building. The sectin: of the campus is particularly striking. [assumes the image ofa mountain peak wath its fucurists autononious forms. With his paradigmatic use of axes, symunectries, linear rows of arcades and iconographic fecling, FE. embraced theoretic positions which would only later be reclined  of Uniti  by the practtdoners ot the *Intermatienat Sty dy A tremendous interest am the apoio aplins wpeet of arelaterture is alse evident tn such warks as the Cunadiin Pavilion at BXpa tin Osaka. the Museum of Anthropole: Canversity of Briish Colimbu i Vanesa 197 apd che great urban-bleck stra aie at the new Justices Building ay Vaan saver tut 3  voot the  sor, lnaddition to hurgessctle pric protests. f  bas developed a number of sarpho wenden housesan the scracdusalist (aiditean ob ™ Mies .an  der Rashes a: whieh he  fais iat boo athoid os  adopt tes  henabst clint teneties. Phe equens compara at Pos werk wal that er Philqs  is he has  Ffolunan is call at fase anes exercncd os coside ripe ea the postewsu Ctradne eC nna seers vs baliisct  has onthe Minera "SN  Pie ledita tire ee Ponsa Niortai org o Devadoe tery Abcpatints ae Ce vadbpor Woldocr TD sses  Pests dius te es bas des ep Nocona stesds Wipe Repent Seve hook tobecsien Ts urosed  rysa ‘ i. shah sevired tas bier che  1 vedas win ths  
and modern architecture was understoud to be its servant. In 3944s he completed further studies at the Stockholm Art Academy and in the following vear opened his own office in Drottiningholm, which he now supervises in partoersmip with the Danish architect Aage Rosenvold. The determinant factors in E.'s architecture are, on the one hand, a pronounced social consciousness. and, on the other, che extreme climatic conditions of his adopted homeland. The challenge of the climate led E. to a specifically Scandinavian regionalism free trom historical models. This prompted his adherence in 1g9sy to the precepts of Team X (FCIAM). His first important work was the Ski Horel, Borgafjall, Lapland (1948> 50), in which the roof grows out of the ground so that under the winter snow the building is at one with the ground below. Further examples of this cli- mauically inspired architecture are the paper factory at Fors (1950-3), the housing estates in Kiruna (1961 2) and Svappavara (1963), as well as the new town on Resolute Bay in *Canada, on which work began in 1973. E. was to receive the greatest international acclaim for his plan- ning of the new housing development at Byker in Neweastle-upon-Tyne (194g -8o), the form of which was developed in close dialogue with the residents. Drawing on his earlier concepts,  he designed an immense housing scheme. up to eight storeys in height, stretching for over 1 kin (@ mile); it features few and small window openings on the outer wall, thus protecting an inner zone of two-storey terrace houses (some So™% of the programme) from the noise of traffic on the adjacent expressway. AM CG Egelius, Mats, ‘Ralph Erskine: the humane architect’, Architecturad Design (London). 47 (1977). nos. 11/12 (special number); Collymore.  Peter, The Architecture of Ralph Erskine, Lov- don, Toronto, Sydney  nd New York 1082.  Ervi, Aarne (Adrian), b. Forssa, Finland 1910, do Helsinki 1y77. Studied irchitecture at the Helsinki Technical Institute. and in 1935 colla- borated with * Aalto; from ty38 he had his own pracuce. E. drew up the master-plan (192) for the garden city of Vapiola. near Helsinki, for which he also designed and executed a number of projects (city centre and terraced housing. 1ys2-64; swiniming hall, 1962: Tapiola Garden Hotel. 1974). Tapiola is one of the most successful of the 2oth century’s new towns, not least because its city centre and three residential  quarters are separated one from the other by a green belt and ideally combined with the natural conditions of the site. E. also realized buildings for the University of Turku (1952-6). GHa CG Solla, Pentti, Aarne Ervi arkkitehiuria, Hel- sinki 1979.  Expressionism. Expressionist architects, like Expressionist painters, had no cultural group- ings, with unified programmes and activities, and most architects who came within the ambit of Expressionism did so only for a short period of their development, although this often proved to be the zenith of their artistic careers. In the work of the best of them, the must varied outlooks and artistic influences must be rec ognized. {rt principally a = German phenomenon.  was  In *Germany, during the years unmediately prior to 19t4. the architectural avant garde consisted of men who owed their allegiance to *Art Nouveau, with its considerable inheri- tance from the historical styles and its general picturesqueness and a taste for organic forms, and hence we shall readily perceive the nume- rous connecting links with avant-garde Ger- man Expressionist: movements such as Dic Briickeand Der Blaine Reiter, fn this contextone thinks ofthe work of Otte Eckmann, Bernhard Bankok. Hermann Obrist. August *Endell, Joseph Maria *Olbrich, who played a key rele at this period with his activiaes at Darmstadt. and above all of Richard *Riemerschmid with his Hellerau factory (1gto) and Henry *van de Velde, tor their direct mHuence on the archi- tects of  It was Peter *Bchrens who achieved the transition to Expressionism with his buildings for the AEG in Berlin (igo8 13). We are not concerned here with those elements which clearly anticipated the  Rationalist — seyle. Behrens’ factories were not designed with the kind of utilitarian character associated with the functional tradition, but rather as the representa- tion ofa new power. and they took on an almost representational character which, as it were, apologised for their actual function.  Apart trom Behrens, only two architects before World War I were clearly distinguish- able as Expressionists: Hans *Poelzig and Max *Berg. The conventional exterior of Berg's reinforced-concrete Centenary Hall in Breslau (1912-13) gives no indication of the exciting three-dimensional treatment inside the cnor-  xpressionism.  
mous dome 6§ m (213 ft) in diameter. No other carly reinforced-conerete building was as com- pelling or had as little of the schematic about it in comparison with the rich spatial ueatiment of this hall. Of these three architects, however, it was Poglaig who adhered most consciously to Expressionism. His large industrial comples at Luban (igtt-12) seems even more unpreju- diced in design than the best works of Behrens at this period. His volumes are built up of asym- metrical blocks, whose orgamic unity scemy to oF the design. Three years previously. Poclzig had built a large house near Breslau. where the plastic fusion of all the elements towards a volunetric continuity recalls some of van de Velde’s villas of the same epoch.  Thanks to the absence of preconceived types it way industrial architecture that offered the path of least resistance to progressive experi-  underline the peculiar individuality  ments at the tine. This may be seen in the great structure built by Poelzig at Posen (yt. with a water-tower above and an exhibition ball below. brick is clad a framework. The bold handhng of volumes makes it one of the most significant German buildings of its day — the “total transposition of a personal idea into a work’ which Kirchner  used here to steel  demanded as the basis for art. A yeries of  Expressionism. Water-tower and exhibition hull Posen (now Poznan; 1y1 1), by Poclz,  sketches dating from this period are clearly mfueneed m conception by certam drawings ot Oskar Rokoschka. and show adesire to model a burlding wach an aggressive unmedtacy chat leaves no part of ats surface unmarked by its author's wall  German culture in the years atter World War I became progessively more pohtieal in charac- ter. The Socialist revolunon accompanied Es- Prosioniym asa form of protes: tor atleast ten years. an ideologically hybrid idenuticanon between cultural avant-gardism and: progres wave polities. Examples of this tendency may be seen un the *Arbeiterat fGr Kunst and) the *Novembergruppe. Uhe later group attracted ull the foremost representauves of German artistic life in che years 1ybs 20. niany archirects were members. including *Groprys. *Men= *Vaut. hy particular mmportanee to archiceeture,  deholm and Brune programme  sccorde: regarded aya direct instrument for raising social standards. The group was dissolved after che bloody suppression of the Spartacise rising. and the ensuing disillusion among the progressive spirits of the Weimar Republic contibuwd decisively so the emergence of * Neue Sachiieli- ker. which wok up. the Expressionism  The *Bauhaus. toa. especially during ats Weimar period. absorbed many feaiures ot  essential tdeas of  Expressionism: the crude pragmigcim: the stark caprenive simplicts sa tenacious eripatt reales sombmed with wi cthaeal sense of hiunan obligation: al] accord well with the Schools methodological programme ts so wath wry pe of design that Was a) Treqtignt eutoaie of Espressione theory. fosan dis fight that some ofthe works ofthe procigenits ot Karta designed .t this pertest may be clearly expianed  Tybee with dos, attiaes  works carried out: ina to baprestostan Ehev include Mies vin der Rohes prowe: for ar othee buthding the  Berta  Priedrichotraly rytat and tis aon  ort ta Resa basvinburg aed Karl bicpanies be  why dy  in fSerhae cat . as wccllas Coro pius War Shou oo Wana aoe ed tins theatre ou dene bass  Anions dhe ptost aepertiat Pxpressicaist Dtsidtess oe Ga me i tre fest wits aren Tic ae oe Phonerte che Chichen bs Broo FRala sop Ue Binintaas ox ily brn h Po Oa isnt bare 3 nd h Nos hay bate SN oadb updrcneed is  fone sa Wore Ponda che Tansteter 
Expressionism. Othee budding 1 PricdrichstraBe. Berlin (project. tan. by Mies van der Rohe  Expressionism. Chilehaus, Hambu- by Fritz Hoger  Expressionism. Einstem Tower. Powdam (117  ate by Mendedohn  Tower by Erich Mendelsohn (1957-21); and in Frankfurt the administration building of the Hoechst Dyeworks by Peter Behrens (1920-5). In the entrance hall of Behrens’ building. the wallaurfice features continuous punctuation  by varying textures and materials, which em- phasizes a fecling of unrest and instability that seems to lurk beneath the severe overall design. The brickwork ts in shades which range from blue to orange and yellow. a palette which recalls the watercolours of Nolde or Kirchner. Mendelsohn. on the other hand, was influenced by the movement Der Blaue Reiter hy knew Franz Mare and Vassily Kandinsky when a student at Munich in rgit — and his Jugendstil reminiscences derive from that source, His sketches. executed between myig and 1g20. display the same stylistic idioms. and. that character of cosmicand stylistic search and lyric effusion as an act of liberation, and at the same time the mystical union with che world that is typical of Der Blaue Reiter’s spiritual posture. His use of sketches to work out his approach to a theme, without reference to structure. is typi- cally Expressionist.  two other architects deserve special notice: Hugo *t firing and Ouo *Bartning. For Hare ing adherence to the Expressionist aesthetic was tantamount to a recognition of German Gothic ay an anti-illuminist culture that shunned the laws of geometry and was hence organic in form (farm buildings. Garkau, 1y24 5). For Bartning, however, architecture was growth and activity, the force of nature itself (Star church project. ty2t 2). Poclzig’s development between 1giy and 130 is m two phases. The GroBes Schauspiclhaus in Berlin (1g18-1ty) and the designs for the Salzburg Festival Theatre (1g20-2) carry the process of dissolving not only  
Expressionism. Salzburg Festival Theatre, project Qrd version, 1921), by Poelzig  Expressionisn. The second Goetheanam, Dornach (1924. 8), by Rudolf Steiner  the classic rules of composition but the very constituent elements of the structure itself to extraordinary lengths. A second phase witnesse: the reassertion of volumetric values, with a severer and more monumental style, as exem= plified by his designs for the IG-Farben offices at Frankfurt (1928-31) and his broadcasting stu- dios in Berlin. Rudolf Steiner’s second Goetheanum at Dornach (1924-8) is linked to Expressionism by its picturesque treatment, but occupies a place apart, as it was designed in accordance with the principles of Anthro- posophy.  Under the stress of the menacing political situation in the early 1yzos, the artistic forces of the time tended to crystallize into groups  centring around the democratic opposition or  the Nazi party. The sharpening of this crisis betokened the end of Expressiomsm, which by its intrinsic nature could not tolerate extreme ideological conditions, although it tended to promote and duce them. The white’ architec ture of Rationalism became a symbol of the democratic opposition, while Expressionism began to acquire pan-Germuni¢ and nagonalist traits, and in ity ideological uncertainty was relegated toa position of cultural insignificance,  The School of *Amsterdam, too, whose mouthpicee was the yournal HW cadingen. dis- played im its buildings paralicls to German Expressionism. but was more concerned with the developnient of low-cost housing estates in South Amsterdam. The Expressronist character of these buildmys derives fronra peculiar ability toevolve an endless variety of forms, ina thr donensvienal treatment that often achieves al- most fairy-tale effects. VG and Konig, Giovanni Klaus, Genoa ond.  “3 Borst, France, Architenura —delPespressionismo Sharp, Dennis, Modern Architecture and Pehnt, Wolt: ixpressiontst circhitecture, London 1973  sionisen, London 1906:  gang.  Eyck, Aldo van, b. Dricbergen, Holland, 1y1s Studied at the Hochschule, Zurich, He was a protessor at Deltt Technical Callege (rem 1967) and has held numerous guest Jectureships in Europe and the USA, A member of Team X (CHAM) from tgs3. be came to an adherence to *Strue- turalism through fis studies of the Dogon, the African tribe of the upper Niger region (Mali), where he spent the winter of 1gsy 60, as well as  Eidgendssische Technische  through hiy wivelvement with the archetype ot the House, As co-editor ofthe periodical Foran, he became one of the movement’s most influen- tial spokesmen. In the Municipal Orphanage in Amsterdam, built) 1937 60, small and large torms are developed on a quadratic frame to produce the effect of a small city. Important later buildings arc the sculpture pavilion in Armhem (iy66) and the Pastoor van Arskerk church in The Hague (i979), GH MT] ‘Aldo van Eyck. En quéte d'une clarté Jabyrmthionne’,  L'Architecture dd anjourd het (Paris), no. 177. January February 1975. pp. 14-30. 
Fahrenkamp, Fil. b. Aachen i885. d_ Diissel- dort training at the Vechnische Hochschule in Aachen and at the Kunstgewerbeschule in Diisseldort under Wil- helm *Kreis. In tyty be became a professor at the Diisseldorf Kunstakadentie. and in 1939 its As architect to the Rhemstahl AG 13. he de-  1960, Received his  director. (Rhine Steel Corporation). 19. adnunistration buildings. In 1927 he won. with A. Denecke, a  signed various factory and first prize in the conipetition for the League of Nations Building for Geneva. His most elegant work iy “Shell House’ (today Bewag-Adminis- tration Building. Berlin Gas & Electric Co.) on the Landwehr canal in Berlin (1930 2 frame building clad in travertine with strip front. and gency curved step-backs in both plan and elevation t ti Hotl A. Beal Pabreekanp, Stuttgart 128  a stecl~  Fathy. tfassan. b. Alexandria tyoo, Practises in Cairo, where he is head of the Architecture Faculty of the University. [iy attempt to reinvigorate the nearly forgotten traditional local building methods of the underdeveloped rural areas of Egypt began early on. Ie has employed expensive, imported technigtes only when they have permitted amore effective use  of existing local resources. He thus set an example, since adopted worldwide for building in amanner that is in ity context at once socially, ecologically, economically. and not least ac thetically appropriate. His best-known work is the New Gourna village near Luxor. built of) traditional sun-dned bricks: entangled in countless quarrels between the residents and the bureaucrats, this has not, untortunately, proved  to be an unqualified success. AM C Fathy, Hassan, Geum A Tule of Tue Villages, Cairo 1969; (expanded edution: Archi-  tecture for the Poor, Chicaye and London 1973): ——, The Arab House in the Urban Setting. Past, Present, Future, London ot z: “Hassan Fathy’. L' Architecture aujourd'hui (Parisy. no. igs. Feb- ruary 1978. pp. 42-78.  Fehling, Hermann, b. Hy France 1yoy Received his training at the Bougewerkschule  Febling. European Southern Observatury, Garching, near Munich (sith Daniel Gogel: jyze Nan  in Hamburg and established himself as an independent architect in Berlin in 1g4s. Since 1y§3 he has directed his office in collaboration with Daniel *Gogel, and in thetr own way they continue the work of Hans *Scharoun. Their architecture, which disdains right-angles in ation, is developed anew from the ground up in each commission: the dynamic of form grows out of the almost scholastic graphic indications of functions and their interrelationships. Among their most iin- portant buildings are the Max-Planck-Institut fiir Bildungstorschung (Educational Research) in’ Berhn-Dablen (1965-74) and the Max- Planck-Inscicut for Astrophysics (197 s—8o) and the European Southern Observatory (1976-S80} at Garching, near Munich. gy TT Conrads, U., and Sack, M. (eds.), Felling + Gegel, Berlin and Brunswick 1981.  either plan or ele  Festival of Britain. A national manifestation organized throughout *Great Britain in 1931, at the original suggestion of Sir Gerald Barry, to mark the centenary of the Great Exhibition of 18s1. Its most important architectural expres- sion was the exhibition laid out on the South 
Bank of the Thames in London (Director of  Architecture: Hugh *Casson). This was signiti- cant not only for the opportunity ic afforded millions of people to sce samulating modern architecture of an almost uniformly bigh level of design, but because it provided an occasion for displaying the principles of townscape which had been developing and clarifying themselves over the previous years. Eschewing the formal layouts that had been usual in earlier major exhibitions, subuly planned disposition of buildings and features, an exploitation of changes of lev evolving views and the dramatic long-distance backdrop of the north bank of the Thames to give an exciting complexity and size that was quite extraordinary for so small a site. OF the various buildings on the Souch Bank site only the Royal Festival Hall by Sir Leslie *Martin remals.  Notable contributions were made by Ralph Tubbs (Dome of Discovery), Arcon (Trans- port), Maxwell *Fry and Jane *Drew, kdward *Mills (adniinistration building), = -R. Y Goodden and R. 1D. Russell (Lion and Uni- corn), HT. Cadbury-Brown (Land of Britain), Brian O’Rorke and F. Hi. K. Henrion (The Natural Scene and the Country), *Architecty’ Co-Parmership (Minerals of the Land), G Grenfell Baines and H. J. Reitenberg (Power and Production) and Basil *Spence (Sea and Ships).  OS Casson, He. ‘The 19st Exhibition’, {RIBA.  recourse Was had to a  I, progressively  Festival of Britain. The Royal Festival Hall (tys1) by Sir Leslie Martin  April ryso; Banham. Mary, and Hilher, Bevis (cds.), 4 “Ponie for the Nation, London 1976  Figini, Luigi, b. Milan 1yo3. Studied at the Milan Founding member of *Gruppo 7 and of the *MLLAR. movement From ry2y he worked ju collaboration with Cano *Pollne their residential and industrial buildings tor Olivetti at Ivrea (1934. $7) hgure among the masterpieces of Italian *Rational- im, However, the Church of the Madonna dei Povert in Milan (193 plan. seeks to evoke a mystical atmosphere of, faith by way of its visible concrete frame, narrow she lighting the nave. and the desired  Politecnico  6), built on a basilican  appearance of being raw and untinished (*New Bratalism). thereby leading away from the principles they had earlier advocated  sentile, Eugenio, Migut « Pollini, Milan 1gsor Blasi. Cesare, Higiné ¢ Potlini, Milan 1963.  Finland. The origins of modern architecture in Finland Tic in the sty'listis occurred around the turn of the century. Both  revolution that  nauional and international io character, Nation- al Rotnantionm — further cneouraged by the political pressure of neighbouring Russia on fluenced all the arts. It inspired arebiteets also ta seck the native and popular roots of Finnish architecture, which they felt lay partly m the birthplice of the Finnish national epic poona, Kuterifa, the Karce lian border country scoured by Pimms: arusts and architects m the psyos. and partly ia the country’s medieval stone churches and cascies  Finnish autonomy  Vhe resulting so-called Karclian wooden archi tecture found ity best ex pressons in the Ftehinks area with the Kuallcla studio bouse ofthe painter Akseli Gallén-Kallele in Ruovesi (sus). the house of the architect Lars Sanck on Aland (also rkys} and che Hyitirisk studio house near Helsmki {ryoaj by the architects Hermann Geselhus, Armas Lindgren and Ebel * Saarinen. Sonck, Gesellus, Lindgren and Saarinen were Nadenal Romantic architectural style using stone: the Jast three  alsa the creators of a designed the Binnsh Paviion ac the Paris Exposition Universelle of ry00, which proved to be especnlly important sembolcally as an intelectual focal pomt. In the Pohjola Insur- ance Company Building (180g 1g0t) and the Finnish Natrona Muscum {igog 10) in Hel- sinki, both likewise by Gesellius, Lmdgren and  Saarinen, National Romantic mouts were 
spats? cbretly a detail, while the overall  drew oon  AV exttiot ntemauenal move- nnd ospevialiy on EL HL Richardson's © Rachankon’s nco-Romanesgue formal ngtage abe plays a considerable role in Tam- Gathedrai tyo2t 7) and the Telephone  Compan Building in H  pkttiyos) by Lars Nomen  Purther iiternational influence was excrted bs bagtand and by Vienna. The ideas of the Tagish #Arc and Crafts reform movement  meludig a new concept of domsae lite which permitted a much looser arrangement of internal spaces. Typical exam pees are the villas of the trio Gesellius, Lindgren and Saarinen. ay well ay Sonck’s Eira Hospital  os. The mfluence of carly Viennese mod- evnism is especially evident in the ‘Vakaharju Sattortin 4031 by Onni Tarjanne, as well as the Swaalabtr Power Plantin Hebinki andan the Villa Ent Gigith. both b Linduvist. the latter building being stronyls reminscent of *Floffmann’s Palaix Stoclet in Brussels  1goX 13] Selo A.  In 1ryo4. as a response to the competition for Hohinki Central Station. Sigurd Frosterus and Gustar Strengell published a polemical pam- phiet ur which called tor ap national approach and for rationaliss design  they inter= principles. About this time the Nagenal Ro- Finnish ved by an archaicizing  mantic vocabuiars Jose its hold) on architecture. to be rept monuimentality omen with a strongly syinmet- nical emphasy. 3 ceonemic prospec. i the period befure World War | works of this period are the Hyporhoque Bank rgo8i and the Stock Exchange tari ain Helunki, both by Sonck. as well as th. Suddmegs of the Suomi tytt} and Kaleva oi  ndoston of the country’s  Chir acteristes  ¥ Psurance Companies  in Helsinki by Liner A inere modern tendency cam be deooedo in the Wuorte Company Building int iat tues by Gesel- liuy, and especially in I Scarmen’s Helinki  {1yo4, ta. Saarmien’s dar for Munk-  Central Station large sity plannmg proje  hinignn-Haaga i tgto-1s) toaeneral plan tor Greater Hehunkii ty tt>! usemueipated tuture developments in th sey modern  ture. traffic i War band  stagnanon  approach to considerations o: circulation and demography. \ the subsequent period of econ: hindered, however, the realiz. a grand schemes. and in tg23 ana .  these  unem-—  Finland. Tampere Cathedral igo 7 by Lars Sonck  Finland. Suvilabt Power Plant. Hebinkt yuk 1a. by Selim A. Lindgense  ployed Saannen emigrated to the FU SA. where he had already won second prize in the Chisage Prbune Tower competion  A massive *neo-classicism was typical of Finnish architecture of the ryzos: this trend reflected. on one hand. the tight econonne conditions and, on the other band, increased Scandinavian influence. especially that of the Swede Gunnar * Asplund. Public houung way the dominant concern until the new economic 
upswing at the end of the decade: the mast successtul projects were Kapyla Garden City in Helsinki (1920-3) by Martti V as Gunnar Taucher’s designs for blocks of flats in Helsinki (1926). The most important public buildings of the time were *Aalto’s church in Muurame (1927). Hilding Ekeland’s Art Mu- seum in Helsinki (1928). Erik *Brygeman’s Hospits Betel Hotel in Turku (1927-9). and especially the monumental Parhamenc Build- ing in Helsinki (ig24 31) by Johan Sigtrid Sirén.  Modernism began to penetrate Finland in 1g28, As the leading architects of the ume. Aalto, Bryggman, PE. Blomstedt and Ekelund had all worked already in a reductivist neo- classical style: they thus made the transter to a modemist camp with litle dificulty. Even public opinion offered no noteworthy resis- tance ta the new style. Because of the Position, however, the accent of Finnish mod- ernismt unlike the situation on the Contunent and in Sweden, where prototypes were espe- cially sought by Finnish architects - was di- rected not so much to housing, but rather way regarded, more than anywhere else. asa style tor public buildings. which underlined the moder- nity of the young Republic.  Alvar Aalto immediately assumed the lead- ing position among the maderniyes: hay Sanato- rium in Paimio (1g28 33) and Municipal Lib-  dlikangas. ay well  monic  Finland, Heluki Central Stauion tii 14h by Ehel Saarmien  Finland, Olympic Seudhuan. Helsinki truge son by Cindegren and Tanta 
row Supurt:tg27 3sinow inthe USSR) are nese honuments at the Modern Movement. Oder unperuint buildings included: Erkki ‘ocnunen’s Mills in Viipuri (1g31, destroyed in World War (1) and church in Nakkila (1937): PE Blomstede’s Pohjanhovi Hotel, Rovaniemi rags. destroyed in World War ID: and Yr Lindegren and Vorvo Jante’s Olympic Stadium in Helsinkt (1y40 $2). Aalto, who had from the outset been critical of the mechanistic thinking of the Modern Movement, developed a per- sonal form of expression around the mid-19305 which led him towards “organic architecture. Great curved forms were already introduced in she wuditoriam ceiling of the Vipuri library as wellasin the great exhibition wall of the Finnish Pavihon atthe New York World's Fair of 1939. In the Cellulose Factory complex at Sunila ityas~y) he employed red brick for the first cone, while in the accompanying workers’  housing estate the housing groups blended harmoniously with the sloping terrain. The Finnish Pavilion at the Paris Exposition Um- verselle of 1937 heralded the beginning of a predominance of wood as a building material, and the Villa Mairea near Noormarkku {1937- 9) represents a synthesis of all these themes.  Psychological and regionalist: factors were introduced in bis work at the end of the 19308, and these were to expand considerably the vocabulary of modern architecture. A parallel line of development. which corresponded roughly to Swedish neo-emprricipm, was chief ly represented by Bryggman and the Neo- romanticism of the 1y40s. There was a culcural and philosophical basis for che former, while in the case of the latter the paucity of available building materials also contributed to a revival of traditional methods  At the beginning of the tysos there w. return to the modernist tradition, the lead being taken by Viljo *Revell i particular; an es ple is the industrial centre Helsinki (1952) by Revell and Keio Petaja. On the other hand, Aalto introduced in the Sew or Students’ Dor- mitory at the Massachusetts Insticute of Tech- nology in Cambridge (1947 81 his cred” period (so called for the predominant use af red brick), of which the masterpieces were the Town Hall in nitsale (1949-52) and the administration building of the National Pensions Institution in Helsinki (1948-36). Acthe same tian bach Aulis Blomstedt and Kaija and Heikki *Sirén created sensitively conceived housing; the Sircns also  ami  Finland, National Pensions Institution, Helsinki fiygk sol, by Aalto  reahzed notably the chapel in Otamemi (1957)~ imbued with a pantheistic spirit. Aare *Ervi came closest to Revell, and like Revell was especially interested in industrial building (Por- thania Institute at the University of Helsinki, 1957)  The ideal ex perimental field for Finnish town planning in the post-war years was Tapiola Garden City, where construction began in  3. Tapiola is the only comimunity in which the structural principles of Saarinen’s Greater Helsinki Plan of tg917-18 have been realized. As Finnish town planning had net advanced in social terms beyond the workers’ housing at Sunila and the Olympic Village in Helsinki (1940) by Hilding Ekelund and Martti Vali- kangas. Tapiola was an important testing ground. At the same time it is the most representative application in Finland of the “Wooded City” ideal, where the town is embed- ded in natural surroundings. The urban milicu of Tapiola is toa certain degree heterogeneous: but careful environmental planning eliminated this shortcoming toa large extent. The centre of Tapiola (1954-09) by Ervi is an important  
Finland. Municipal Theatre, Helsinks (1944 7). by Timo Penteiia  realization of the town-planning principles of *Le Corbusier; later additions have, however. adversely affected its expressive character Towards the end of the 1950s the profile of Finnish architecture began to diversity. Aalto entered his white ‘Baroque’ period, Revell embraced geometric formalism, spiritually re- lated to *Niemeyer’s architecture; while Blom- stedt remained the most prominent adherent to modernist *Rationalism. Aarno Ruusuvuor, Pekka Pitkanen and Osmo Lappo were the principal upholders of the modernist legacy in the 1960s. Although Aalto never created a ‘schoo? in Finland, his spirit is nevertheless present in the works of Timo Pentrila (Munici- pal Theatre in Helsinki, 1964 7) and Reima *Pietila (Kaleva Church in Tampere. 1966 Dipoli Students’ Residence in Otaniemi, 1967) Pictila’s individualist solutions fired a lively discussion between younger generation who had studied under Blomstedt. This touched on — among, other things — the dispute which flared up in the 1y6os between informal and constructive art. Out of this dispute developed a sort of constructivism in the 1970s; as the dominant strain in Finnish architecture, its goal was the creation of an anonymous and flexible architecture. It was hoped to resolve the social problems of the day. which had been aggravated by the trend to- wards urbanization prevalent in the 1960s. This architectural aesthetic was based on the beauty of construction and materials and on the har- mony of proportions, as well as on the careful handling of details. Although several small  Pictila. himself and = the  house projects, such as the Modular System (1970-4) by Kristian Gullichsen and Juhani Pallasmaa achieved this goal, they were unable to make an impact on a building industry that relied on its own crude prefabrication systems. Several industrial buildings which were mani- festations of new technologies can be seen as successful examples of this constructivism, no- tably the Marimekke factory (1972) by Erkki Kairamo and Reijo Labtinen, but on the whale the architectural achievements of this construc- uvist period were few. One of the principal was no doubr che alien nature of industrialized building methods in the context of Finish architectural tradition *Post-Modernism instigated a lively archi- tectural debate in Finland, which had an influ- ence on architectural practice. Post-Modern- ism's Own characteristic *historicism and its individualistic formal experiments are hardly Finland. although *Pietila’s buildings might be cited in this context. Char- acteristic instead is a striving to enrich the prosaic and technological nature of modernism through a partial rerum to manual production and by the use of a wider range of materials and forms. Examples of this ‘softened’ modernism are the churches by Juha Leiviski. On the other hand, noteworthy examples of the application ofthe most recent technology are to be found in the Traiming Centre for the Metalworkery’  reasons  represented in  Finland. Crammyg Centre for the Metalworkers” Union, ‘Teiske (ig76i, by Pekka Helin and Tuono Sutonen,  
Finland. Vale Duary Company adininisteacon pnilding. Helmia diecu: by Maca Ro Mikinen and Karin Lotstrony  by PekRa Helin and Puen Sitencn. as well as ui the administra-  Union in beso tiy76). non brildius tor the Walio Dairy Company in Helinks Cryzyi. by Matti Ko Miukinen and Kaaring Lofstram KM TY Warkbera, Nuk Erik. Bpegnudskonsti Fine land. Stockholm rysy. Beeker, Hlans 1. and Schtote, Wollman: Neteer [alisha a Pinnlatd, Stittgart iyeg: Subonen, Pekkal Curd seam faista arkktivhsunea, Helsinki ry67. Tempel, won. Finnish dn iite tie Today, Helsinki cg68: Richards. J. Ma See Yeas of Finnish Arehitecie, Newton Abbot tots; Suhonen, Pekka ted.  Finitish architects and uti weerk since toga. Helsinki 1ySo, Finsterlin, [Hermann Mimich rssc. d  Stuttgart 1973. Ele first sande res and: chemistry. and  nredieine, phys- hen plulosophy and  painting. He participated in che “EXbibioon of  unknown architects” arty Berhoin igig. wasaimembo: orthe *Arbertsrat fiir Konst and of Dig *Glisernis Kette Close to  aby *Gropius in  the theoxophivs, he desgned unreal sculptural  Finstertin. Villa on the lake iproye  lyiky  architecture, biomorphie torm fantasies. in fine with Darwin's evoluponary teachings. harbin- yers of anew great cultural level which would supersede othe contemporary geometric epoch’. Asa theoretican and dreamer Bway spared the conflicts wath reality which his own expreswionnric departures stimulated within the *Ratonalist camp. After 1g22 he way little concemmed with architecture, Moving to Stutt- gare 1926, he subsequently worked princi- pally asa paniter and writer "  Finsterlin, “Dic Weltirchitek cur Deszendenz der Dome als Sulbenpacl. Braddite no. 3. spring gta. pp. Ta fh: Bort. Franco ted.}. Hermann Finsterlin, ddea del! architern@a. Arcutektur in seiner Adee, Plorence ty6y: Licnemann, Knut, ind Weidner. EL PL Cl. Ffermuaie Piasteriin . Stutrgart nd.  Plormann, Genesis der  oder dic  Techatektriren. agit 2  Fischer, |beodor. bo Schwemturr 1862, de Munich igas. Collahorated wirh Paul Walloc on the Reichstag Binding. Berlin. He was aeuve as teacher and architect i Stuttgart.  Munich and chewhere, and was a signatory of  the foundation manitesto of the * Deutscher Werkbund. tis work is characterized by a peronal combination of classietst and regional- wt formal clements, controlled restraint in decoration and the use of new: building materi+ al such as remforced concrete. He designed the Pfallinger Hallen m Pfullingen i1yo4 7). the Fyangelical Garrison Church ac Glam (igit). nunterous offices. schools and miuscunis Karlinger, Hans. Theodor Fischer, Ein deut- sher Banueister, Munich 1g32: Ptister. Radolf.  
Theodor Fischer. Leben und Wirken eines deutschen Baumeister, Munich 168  Férderer, Walter Maria. b. Laufen-Uliwiesen (Canton Zurich) ig2k. After working isa sculptor. he became an apprentice to the Basle architect Hermann Baur, tgs4--6. Since 1966 he has held a professorship in the discipline “Arr in Construction’ at the Staatliche Akademie der bildenden Kiste in Karlsruhe. Asa plinner  isa proponent of the attempt ta achieve finectionally indeterminant spaces which per- mit the accommodation of a variety of acti ties. In formal rerms. his buildings are closest co *New Brutalisaa in their use of enipharic compositional clement and im the cebrstic. sculptural development of the building mytss ay aresponse to the variegated internal spauial articulation. His architectural career began wich the Hochschule fiir Wirtschafis- und Sozial- Wwissenschatten in St Gallen (ty Georg Oto and Hany Sub- sequently bis work focused principally oo design. such as St Nicholas in Heérémence, Canton Wallis G:y63 7 Church ofthe Holy Crosyin Chur (1y63. gin the St Konrad multi-purpose contre. Schat= hausen (ry68 71}. In the tyzos urban renewal schemes came co the fore, and he dias recenily revived his interest in sculpture. AM Lt Férderer, Walter Maria, Kirctetbanten ren heute fiir morgen?. Wiirzburg Ty64: Burchbardt.  Zwimptery  church she  Foster Associates. Willy. Faber & Dumas administration building, Ipswich 11475  7 6xwith Rolf  Lucius, and Porderer, Walter Maria, Benen cin Prozess, Touten igO8. Walter Maria Forderer, Architckna ind Skulprur, Neuchatel 1yz  Foster, Norman. b. Manchester tyas. After study at che Universiey of Manchester and at Yale University, he founded, in collaboration with his wife Wendy and Su and Richard * Rovers. the office ‘Team 47 in London. which Mince 1967 has practised under the name of) Foster Associates. This includes eight partners int addition ca Norman and Wendy Foscer (Loren Buu. Chubby 8. Chhabra, Spencer de Gray, Roy Heer ood, Birkin Haward. James Meller, Graham Phillips aind Mark Robertson). Along with his carly parmer Rogers, Fis one of the  Wosr UNporiint representanves of an archi cecture based on moder technology High feehp The dominating building type in his work is rhe great neutral space cuyelape, whoxe Interior can adjust to the most differentated functions. In contrast to *#Mies cin der Rohe's essential classictin, b. does not strive to clewate  the mundane fimetonal requirements into commemoraaye monuments: his overall forms and decals refer much more consciously to the world of inachinery. Their beauty arises tram proche cogineering caleulavons. asin aireratt or industrial design. Among his most important works are the passenger terminal and adminis+ tration building of Fred Olsen Lines in London trv the headquarters of the Willis Fuber & Dionas imurance company in ipswich f1g7 st whose curved lis Mgade harmonizes wat the  urban coveraumenc. che Sainsbury Centre for 
Foster Associates. Samsbury Centre for Visual  Are. Norwich ryt  Visual Arts ac che University of East Angha near Narwich sues. as welloas die head quarters of che Hongkong and Shanghai Bank= me Carporauen in Heng Keng AM . Pritecterad Deon Londons, vel. 47 19 Nos. g Epp. Org Foster Associates, London ryty: Recent Works of Foster Assoenitys’.  ‘Toksos bebrugry fash pp ga ti  Roster Assoctuces’,  da fatectere aad UC rhartisnr  France. fn a counts which saw the beginnings of the Industral Revolution several decades jacer than Bnydand. the use oftron and glass it boiling further spurred efforts cowards a classitication of types and ssstenis mm archicee- cures tk process already initiated: bs such me- chodieal ciinkers as dean-Nicolas-T ours Durand and Jean-Boptnte Rondelet at the daw of the  igth century. Io was the combinanen of this chasifving approach and newly learned lessons based on recent archacologieal excavagons i Greece carried auton accordance with new great uterest was shown i which  opened the way for sorks stich as those of Henri  guiding principles polvebromy and auggite consirucen  Labrouste, and which led co cerisin the *Ecole dex Beaux-Arts. The Fee shaken by the reform efforts which comeded with the short-lived period of teaching by Viollet-le-Due in 2863) 4 hostile outeries Of the students. this theorist  was especially  Awas from the persisted in his efforts to controncaew techiucal posubilitics and historical lessons, notably in the parte prs of Cabsoluce sincerity” evoked in his ntuential Enrreriens sur Carehitecture (Discourses  on Architecture. 1863 and cam se  The contradicuens inherent in) Viellet-le- Dues dectrines were made marstest in the temporary constructions built for the Exposi- noms Cniverselles of r8e8. 1 88y and ryoo, held in Party in these the decorauyve envelopes of the buildings were ever more in open contradiction with their metal skeletons, This scace of conflict was also echoed in the domestic architecture which followed the great building boon: under Haussmann. Although French architects rarely attained the acuity of a * Hora in Belgnium of an Otte * Wagner in Austria. in the buildings of *Guimard such ay the Castel Beranger in Paris  Tsg7-seorm the works of the Reale de Nancy *Sauvazer a typological renewal way com- bined with a uew aesthene freed from scrict adherence to historic styles  Despite the contributions of theo: such ay Auguste Choiss. whose analyses introduced a architectural huscory whose four-volunie (yor gia the nieve Complete expression of the compositional doctrines of the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, it was im fice reinforced conerete whieh was. ac cht very  ragonal ordering of all Srsgyr and Julien Guade  Elontents ot theorte de Parcintecture  moment. to provide the basis for pew ideas im architecture. The technical immovations of con- tractors stick as Frangeis Hennichique. whe had  developed earlier contribudens by men such as  Joseph Monier, were soon earned further im dhe  work ofarchizcess like Anatole de *Baudot. His churelt OF Samte-[can-de-Montmartre im Paris Osyg fgod: and his projects for public build- ings extended the spacial and cocknical possibili-  France. Bibliotheque Swmte-Genevieve. Parts isg3 so. by Henn Labreuste  
France. Cité Industrielle (project. 1yar 4) by Garnier: harbour area aud residential quarter  tes of this new onaterial well beyond the suggestions of Viollet-le-Duc. Atthe same time these researches received a new impetus in the hands of engineers, including *Freyssinet. whose works became emblematic of concrete’s role in modern architecture, and architects such as *Perret, whose aparunent house in the Rue Franklin (1903) and garage in the Rue de Ponthieu (1906), Paris. both had concrete frames. ft was, however, on an entirely different plane that young architects were to break with the educational establishment.  Unlike in *Germany, where the border area between architecture and the decorative art provided an experimental testing ground for new ideas, the graducates of the Ecole des  Beaux-Arts cumed to urbanism where cies soughe to apply the techniques of monumental composition tanght by Guadet. The generation which succeeded ‘Pony *Gamuer in Raine had the same intense curiosity for urban organiza tion. This was true in the case of Léon Jansvely, who won the ryog competition for the exten- sion of Barcelona and of Houry Prose who won second prize in the ryro competition tor the replanning of the former ring of fortifications m Antwerp. Their eforty to define the goverming principles of che replanming and expansion of large cities complemented those of Alfred Agache and cspecially che metropolitan visions of Eugene Hdnard’s études sar des gnsformattions de Paris (tgos yh in which he sought. to reconcile the new trathe requirements wich the urban legacy of Haussmana’s major schemes. ft Was atosuch dnseucions as the Musce Social, which gave birth in’ tyra te the Savicté Frangaise des Architcetey Urbanistes. that these architects first met the partisans of housing for the working clases, Who were to yom in their efforts fo create a convinemy approach to urban planning  In Paris, Henri *Sauvage’s habitations . marché hygicnignes’ in the Rue de Tretaigne (1yoz} and the housing which A. Augustm-Rey built m the Rue de Prague aya result of the Important compentioen organized mm 1ygoas by the Rothschild Foundation reflect the often  bon  
Girkenic retacions between the new social poli- ces ated comadern architeerure sell somewhat vainure of uel) At the same tiue the Asseci- aoon Prangase des Cués-lardins, created in uns bs Georges Benoit-Léevy. achieved little che bestdes afew modest suburban schemes. rdehoon to novel public buildings such as the Central Telephone Office in the Rue Bergére iv Prangois Le Cavur (yt) and the swimming poolon the Bucte-aux-Cailles by Louis Bonnier Hlyi2 24}. the features of the new urban archie iveture of Party were claritied before 1y1g with Sauvage’s apartment butlding im the Rue Vavin rand with the Uhearre des Champs fort ia} where snatched Henry *.ande Velde’s commission on che hasis  Ligi  Elysces Perret of his dual role as architect and contractor The effects of World War [were so rapidly felt thac *Le Corbusier, whe had only recently arrived in Paris, seized the opportunity offered by still hypothetical reconstruction te pro= pose, begmmming in tytg-ts. hi Dom-me Phe Reconstructed Cin” exbibition in fyi6 marked the launching of a  housing protary pes  regionablst architecture which predominated during the canre inter-war pened, appearing notably a the garden cities such ay those at Tergmer. Longucan, Fille and Rheims, and on the outskirts of Pans. as ac Drainey or Sains With these pardon cites the hygiene ideals of the pre-war years. which had won the political support or die Conseil General de bi Sete in the person of the socialist mayer of Suresnes, Henri Seller, were contimilly discusscd and kept alive untrh feivtag received state funding for the constriction of liousing: under the Lei Lou-  cheur of ryss. these ideas encountercd the themes of modernism  Che principles af rhe new architecture were formed by the integragen of the structural researches launehed by *Perret and the explora fons of form which stout to establisi the new aesthetic “apres le er isure. to borrow the tide of the manifesto publsted fy Fe Corbusier and Amédée Oventanc an tyes was disseminated throueh the pages of the The New Spin.  founded 19 1926,ay Well 4s ta nes tuposition with  Phis archieceture periodical L'Esprit neurccs  foreign work in the plates of Joan Badosrer’s journal L “rgsa. Arthe tas Exposition litcrnacionale des res Décoratits ct Induseriels Modernes in Paris  rehitecture vinarte Srst published in  where the presence of the Soviet Union's spectacular pavilion should not make one forget  the absence of a Germany still subject to post- war mistrust — the only manifestos of a new architectural approach were Le Corbusier's Pavillon de VEsprit Nouveau and *Maillet- Stevens’ Pavillon du Tourisme. Their radiance way reflected elkewhere mainly in the private houses by these same owo architects and by André *Lurgat and Gabriel Guévrékian, to which should be added the Maison de Verre im Paris by Picrre *Charean and Bernard Bijvoet {1g28-32) and the Villa at Roquebrime (1927- y) by Eileen Bray and Jean Badovies. Complexes ot public housing designed by modernist architects were in tact the exception. Atthe Cité du Champ des Oiseaux at Bagneus (1932) and the Cité de la Muerte ac Drancy (1934) Fugene *Beaudouin and Marcel Lods unide extensive use of prefabrication. Morice Leroux’s proposal for a ‘skyscraper’ zone at Villeurbanne, at the gates of Lyons, where Tony *Garnicr realized the Quartier des Etats-  Unis Gu24 38) more inemumencal even if bearing the stamp of aimodernist idiom. It was especially the rise of tourism an the seuth of France which spurred the wide diffision of) modernist architecture, from Lurgat's Hotel Nord-Sud at Calvi (1g30} to Chareau’s Golf Club at Beauvallon (1y27). or especially to Georges-Henri Pingusson's Hotel Latitude 43 at Saint-Propez (1933). The Imporcant, fettered opportunines were to he found.  most  France. Pavillon de [Esprit Nouyean, Pars s192s), ov Le Corbusier  
France. Karl-Marx School, Ville itg31 38. by Lurgat  however, in municipal patronage. the only sector where building activity was umaticesed by the econonne criss. This margin of treedonu: was exploited by Lurgaem his Karl Marx School at Villejuif (1931 3) and especially by Beaudouin and Lods in the Open Air School at Suresnes (1932) 5) and the Maison du Peuple at Clichy (1937-9), im which Jean *Prouvé collaborated. However. as the architectural debate which was occasioned by the Exposition Universelle of 1937 demonstrated, the climate a France was more susceptible to compromise than to conflict i forms or doctrmes. “Vhe appearance inthe 1930s ofa ‘third way’ between classicism) and modernisny, marked by die launching oof the journal EAdrehitectre aujourd'hui, is particularly evident in the architecture of Michel Roux-Spitz  The preparations for post-war reconstruc= Gon begun by the Vichy government (1949. 4! resulted in a crnumph, as clear as it was shart- lived, fora more sober form of modernism wad especially for regionalisin, After the war, how- actor was the direct imrerven= uon of the authoritarian state im urbanism and architectural patronage. The reconstructions of  ever, the decisive  Le Havre by Perret. of Maubenge by Lurgat. of Sortevillesle-R oven by Lods, by Pigusson in the Saarland. and Le Corbusier's wandenings from La Rochelle-Palhee to Sain-Dié and from Marseilles to Strasbourg — all these are examples of that centralized state: patronage  France. Mason din Peupie, Chchs raat us. as Besudoui. Pods and Preuss  France. Residearial buildin oo the Phtee de  VHorel de Ville be bres begun py yt soy Perret  
fostered the widest dispersal of proto= vpes of functionalist: buildings and urban forms. As a result of these immense undertak- mgs. which were contnued tram the mid- rysosm the “Grands Ensembles’ and the “Zones a Urbaniser en Prioricé’. industrialized con struction reached a level in France unparalleled Yet the success of Modern Move-  wae  elsewhere ment architects did not in practice open the doors of the *Ecale des Beaux-Are ta new  ideas, This deticteney in architectural educa-  tion. which was made worse by the paralysis of  the architectural press, accounts for the feeble success of the Follow ing generations to develop a doctrinal debate. It was rather mm the open fields of opportumiry im Tunisia. Moreceo and Algeria that *Zehrtiny, Michel Pierre-André Emery, Roland Simounct, Louis Miguel and Georges *Candilis set about renew=  Eeochard,  ing modernist orthodoxy. Candilis was a lead- ing hghtin France of Team X  bornot che crisis with *CIAM by him. together with Alesis *Josic and Sha- drach *Woods, m the new town project for  Toulouse le Mirail (fy62. 1964 77).  whose ideas were developed  In such  France. Notre-Jame-du-t laut. Renchamp fyse yi bw Le Corbusier  individual approaches as those of Jean Du- buisson. André Wogenscky. Edouard Albert. Raymond Lopez or Emile *Aillaud, formal researches and curiosity in technology exist side by side without ever being integrated. Le Corbusier continued his series of Unités @habitation and forged an influential change in style with Notre-Dame-du-Haut at Ronchamp figso-4) and Samte-Marie-de-la-Tourette at Eveux-sur-lArbresle (1937 60). while Jean Prouvé pursued his researches into a light  metal architecture, and Paul Bossard explored industrializauion in an entirely personal manner at Créteil (igsy 60, 1961-2)  In the 1y60s, the urban utopias of Paul Maymoncand Yona *Friedman bore witess to an escapist desire entirely foreign to the more prosaic adventures of the generation involved in the “multi-disciplinary teams’ such as the Atelier de Montrouge (Pierre Riboulet, G. Thurnauer, Joan-Louns Veéret and Jean Ren- audiel or the Ateher d'Urhanisme et Architec- ture (ACA. Paul Chemetoy, Maria Deroche, Georges Loiseau, Jean Perrottet. Jean ‘Tribel, Valenun Fabre, Jacques Allégret). These teams produced the finest buildings of French *New Brutalism for municipal clients in the suburbs of Pans. The launching of the Villes nouvelles in  
France. Town centre, [vry (1970 8), by Joan  Renaudie  the Paris region in 1y6s marked the re-anima- tion of that state building policy which had been inaugurated earlier in a series of Pretecttres, with notably mediocre results. [tis nonetheless here that one must seek the anchorimy point of the new themes which emerged trom the crisis of 1968.  The real turning point in che debate and in architectural culture im general way indeed marked by a crisis in education and in the architectural profession: the principal conse- quence of chis was the reconstitution of the intellectual fundamentals of training and prac- tice and a greater receptiveness in France to the incernational architectural debate. The works of the A.U.A. — trom che urban plan tor die satellite town of Grenoble (1968) to the housing built in the Paris region — and Jean Renaudie’s work at Ivry (1970 8) coincided with new efforts on the part of the state and numerous architects to create cities formed of the simple muldphication of industrialized cells. ‘innevative’ schemes were soon widely applied in the Villes nouvelles. Towards the mid-1y7os, this spurred a reaction, much totiuenced by Italian ideas, amongst such architects as Bernard Huet or Antoine Grumbach, who advocated an architecture based on urban values. At the same tame the debate over industrialization was  These  relaunched with the propositions of Alain Sarfati and Bernard Hamburger. while the cunning and patience of Paul Chemetov suc- ceeded in by-passmy some of the closed systems which dominated the housiag market  France. Housing development at Samt-Quen tyset by Paul Chemerov  Despite the success of Renzo *Piano aud Richard *Rogers in the compeution for the Centre National d'Art et de Culture Georges Pompidou in Paris (ry7t 7), the role of foreign architects in Fe  ance remained marginal. asithad done throughout the century, fF one excepts several isolated works such as those of Adolt *Loos (Tara House, Paris, 1926}. Theo van *Doesburg (Van Doesburg House, Meudon- Val-Fleury, 1929-303, Alvar * Aalto (Maison Carré, Bazochesssur-Guyonne. bys 9}. Mare cel *Breuer and Prer Luigi *Nersi (UNESCO Headquarters, Paris. rys3 8! or Josep: 1 lais Sere fhondatian Maeght. Saint-Paul-de- Vonee. bosy 64)  While  foreigners with few opemngs  architectural polities — provided the snes de seandale of Ricurdy * Bohl remains a spectacu= hirexcepnon  ithas under the culcaral pressure of the rysos, gIVER Tse Tad Dew generation notably Heart Ciriani. Heart Guadin, Yves Lion and Christian de Portampare who. despite seylistie divergences, share the same concern for maintaining culearal vues and an interest ne the existing urbwo fabric inte whieh an individual budding is to be merted. tte > Giedion, Sigtticd, Bauer in Frankreeh. Lisew und Fisenbeton, Lcipig tyso: Gansburger, Rog- ory Prankreid, Viona ta3o. Dormoy. Maric. Lo Architecture francaise, Paris ty 38. La Contre bution franguse 3 Pévelution de Parchitecture’. Li Architecture david hur (Parish, nos. 46,47 tush: Piccmato, Gaorgig, Larcditetiurd conteti-  Mau-  poranes in Francia, Bologna 1965; Besse  
Pace Nowe hacesiede lrdiitekvar, Stuttgart ant, Lvcnsen. Norn. Pars. ol Century of 1oc8. Berkeley. Cal tytg: drchi- cofmrescen Prane, Moderate. postmodern fox Sibraan estalogue’, tgsiz Roneaylo. Marcel ed. 2 far Ville d Angonrd ita. Crotssanee uMuute er tie de fecte. Paris rysay Areliceerure WAmeurd bur ced. Guide fdrclatecaare on  Prane. (94s ta8s. Paris Lyng  Pars  Freyssinet, fugcne. b. Obgat, Corréze, 187y, do SwinteMartin-Vosubice.  AlpesManumes. fo62. Pursuing his technical studies, f  ated From both the Ecole Polytechnique and the p.  gradu  Feole des Ponts et Chaussées in Paris, where  Charles Rabur. one of the proneers i the use ef  reinforced concrete, Gist directed his attention to thi new burding technique. He worked in 13. and from fy ts ta igs was Director of the Société  pubhe adimmastretion i Moalins, 1997  des Entreprises Limousin tn Paris. in whieh city  he opened his own engineering office in rg2  Fos one of the most important pioneermny advocates of pre-stressed cancrete. The fact that thiy process requires smaller cros-sectiamd sure faees for the installigen of che spanning cables than ts required in loosedy stretched remforced~ cvonerete construction led am both bridges and buildings so hghter, more cconemre construe- tions and thus to che slender and elegant tormys of modern gngmeering constructions. As both rehed muh more mathematical regard he  vonstructor and destuier, f on bis own instmet than on  valculations. fy dis Should be  Freyssinet. Airship hunigar at Ork tai 24)  Freyssinet. Bridge near Plouasted tines go  grouped with the other reinforced-conerete designers: *Maillart, *Nervi, and *Vorroja, He hinwelf claimed ay the basis of his work a perception of facts and an intuition conerotled by experience which was enhanced by a sense of) responsibility snd daring.  Already in his early bridges of the Moulins period (bridges over the Allier near Le Veurdre and near Boutiron) he had begun to move away trom conventional techniques; although still built of compressed concrete. the bridges were boldly conceived and executed.  Later. F warcraft baugars. asat Istres, Bouches-du-R hone (lorg) and at Avord, Cher (1y16). The exper- lence gained there prepared him for the two dirigible hangars but at Orly (1gie 24. de- stroved lyg4i. Here he crete arches - only gent 3} ing thick - with 4  buile several reinforced-concrete  used remforced-con~  profile determined by che stress lines of a eatenary arch. These were jomed ina regular  
corrugated pattern to lend then longicudimal rigidity. Thus the supporting construction and the form-giving infill created an architectonic unity. Although the very large hangars were devoid of artistic ambitions, they expressed harmony, stability and clarity simply by their size. In the locomotive depot at Bagneux (1924) F. perfected the technique of thin shell constrac-  tion to an even greater degree. Fron 1933 on, be  was involved with large-scale applications of  pre-stressed concrete: he built the substructure of the Gare Maritime at Le Havre (1y3s). the Beni-Bahdel Dam in Algeria (1935 40). the runway of Orly airfield (1y46). the rectangular water tower (capacity 7,000 m3) at Orléans (1948). and the subterranean Basilica of St Prus X at Lourdes (1os8: with Pierre Vagoj. In addition to the earlier bridges, F. sible for, among others, those at Tonnems-sur- Garonne (1y22), Saint-Pierre-du-Vauvray (1922-3). Plongastel  (1y25-30), Luzancy (1941-3) and Esbly (1946-50), as well as the Saint-Michel bridge in Toulouse (1ysy), alll most impressive in formal appearance.  Incessane research, practical adjustment, a consistent handling of materials and a rare ability asa designer enabled F. to achieve in his ceuvre a complete unity of structural needs and aesthetic expression. WK O Freyssinet, E.. Une Révolution dans les tech- niques du héton, Paris 1926; —-, ‘Une Révolu- tion dans Vare de batir, Les constructions pré- contraintes’, Travaux, November ty4gi: Gin- schel, Ginter, Grofie Konstruktenre. 1. Preyssinet — Maillart - Dischinger - Finsteriealder, Berlin, Frankfurt am Main and Vienna Pere nandez Ordotiez, José, Hugene Mreyssinet, Barec- lona 1978.  Was respou-  ghd:  Friedman, Yona, b. Budapest 1y23. Alter studying in Budapest and Haifa (Israeli, he  worked ay an independent architect before  going to Paris in 19573 order todevore himself?  entirely to research on urban planning. In tgs8 he founded the Groupe d'Etude d’Architecture Mobile (GEAM) which also included) Frei *Orto, Werner Ruhnau and Eckhard Schulze- Fielitz, aniong others. Since 1956 F. has pursued the idea. highiy influential on the utopian urbanism of the 1960s, of dissecting the city into a permanent primary structure — the infrastruc- ture — anda changeable secondary structure. He imagines the primary element as a spatial supporting structure suspended above the  ground, the secondary features being: the in- serted nll clement whose development would more than ever before involve the users in the shaping of their environment. ‘Ihe generalized “Ville Spatiale’ (iyso). which F designed to demonstrate hiy mobile architec- Cure’) was soon followed by more concrete projects such ay “Paris Spatial’ and “Tunis Spatial’ jboth 1460}, as well as Bridg  City over the Armel Canal {ig3). Since the 1yzos he has been chiefly concerned with build-it-yourselt” methods and simple technologies. AM -- Fnedman. Yona. L'drehitecnire Brussely rgo8: — . Les Brussels rus: riftigue, Paris tyt1: - Alternatives ectiguecs, Saint-Jean-de-Bray 1y82  mobile, Mtcanismes urbatits, +. Power wnte architecture scten- eee  Fry, Edwin Maxwell. b. London 18gy. Smadied atthe School of Architecture Worked ty24 34 i the firm of Adams & Thompson; was in partnership with *Gropius 1434-6. and with Jane *Drew 1y4s—sor peac- tised as Fry, Drew, Drake and Lasdun. tryst and subsequently as Fry. Drew and Partners. He (YPR modems in Great Britam, he shows Sun House, Frognal, London toga Ss} his debt to *Mies vant der Rohe. while his Kensal House housing scheme at  Liverpool  reGred from practice in A pioneer of in his  Hampstead,  Ladbroke Grove. London (1937: in collabora- tion) was the nearest Brith pre-war approach toa Continental Srediung. In igq6 he collab- erated with Gropius on the design for the Impington — Village Cambs. and in the following year collaborated on the *MARS plan for London. From 142. with hts wil in West Africa and specialized: in cropreal architecture and design problems. He worked asa town planner in Were Africa togy s. and  progressive College.  Jane Drew, he worked extensively  way ascnior architect at Chandigarh in collibo- ration with *Le Corbusier, Gost 4 See under Drew.  Fuller, ichard Buekounster. b. Milton. Mas IXos. de boy Angeles 1983 Not aa atelitect in the usual scse ofthe word, butanstead a imique rotlecuion of those toth-century concept re= formal rad dal not progress  lated to the machine aesthete. dy cdiicanon was sketchy much bevond Geo sears at | barvard. ryt 1s In dest he pertected a Kind of Sniichme tor called the “Dymaxion  living in’ which he 
Hstanac plus maximum efficiency} House’. Ln vontnist fo the poetic expressions of the ma- vhing age which were so frequently manifested uv the buildings of the tg20s in Europe, and mm *Le Corbusier's Villa Savoye hy29 38. Bs product wasa machine tor living  csperialls  mma hteral rather than ma metaphorical sense. Unlike the Puropean *Rationalism, the Dymaxion House Was hot in any consequential way an object for  comtemporary masterpieces of  xeschetie contemplation, but i more correctly viewed ay an assemblage of mechanical services m congunetion with living areas. In 1933 6 developed a motorized version of this idea in his Chree-Wheeled Auta’. Subsequently, he devoted much ume and effort ro the art of structures, and these studies  “Dymasxion  led to hiy Geodesic Domes, structures of metal, plascic, or even of cardboard based upon octar He came to use the domucal shape not for a traditional, architec-  hedrons or cetrahedrons  not for mstance. because it Was an bur because of its nacural of haeney m providing the greatest space enclosed  tural reason ‘ideal forns  m relation to the surface area of the enclosing form. In ther use of stmdardized parts. these Geodesie Domes are. nna sense, the most recent descendants of the assembly techniques that were Hrscemployed by Sir Joseph Paxton in the Crystal Palace, London, 131. The largest of these domes ta be erected was the repair shop tor the Union Tank Car Ca. Baton Rouge, La. Q9s8}. with adiameter of rim (384 ft} aspan that excceds those of the lgth- century exhibition halls. F's best-known donte is without doubt the one tor the GS. Pavihon at the World's Pair in Montreal (ige7s.  He also produced a structural sy ster kaawn as Tensegnity Structures bi contraction of Ten- vion Integrity). spatial skeletal structures uuliz- ing distmet clement in compression and ten=  manuueth  sion rods, whereby che tension rods are joined together only via elements m compressa Understandably more popular with students than with the established clements in the archi- tectural profession, Fenix ed notable suceess as architectural schools in the USA. among them Cornell, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Prince- ton University and Yale University. He held a professorship at Southern Hho Institute of  aovisiting lecturer mm various  Technology. 1949 75, and Way an nidetatigable author and promoter of his ideas IM] Marks, Robert W.. and Fuller, ROB 1  Fuller. Dymaxion Howe (project. 192  Fuller. US Pavilion at  po (67, Montreal (i967!  Dymanion World of Backutiuster Puller, Garden city. N.Y. 1y7a Ufint pub. igo); Metfale, John. R. Bucksninster Fuller, New York 1y62: Rosen, Sidney, Wicarnd of he Dome. Re Bue utinster Fuller, Designer for the Future, Boston Ty6y; Meller, James (ed). ‘The Buckminster Fuller Reader, Loudon 1970: Robertson, Donald W.. Mind's Eye of Buckminster Fuller, New York (O74.  Functionalism, Architectural principle ac- cording to which the form of a building is to be derived from the function it is intended to 
fulfill; the schematic and technological aspect of architectural modernism (* Rationalism). whose wider theoretical stance comprises also philosophical, political, social, economic, sty lis- tic and symbolical questions.  Functionalism in architecture remains in part the essence of the modern as opposed to the traditional. Therefore there iy hardly an archi- tectural principle which occurs with greater persistence in the history of architecture, ner one which is less appropriate to characterize wy particular chronologically delimited move ment. Even in palacolithie  avedwellings and in neolithic lake dwellmgs form was decermined by function; in Roman fortifications and ague- ducts, in medieval castles, in Renaissance pal- aces and Baroque country houses, in t8th- century warehouses, in residential architecture of the ryth century and office skyscrapers of the 2oth, there iy a close relationship beiween torus and function. Functionalism is as old as building itself.  Parallel to that, che theoretical basis oF Functionalism also goes back to the beginnings of architectural theory: thus. Vitruvius insisted that the form of a structure must be derived from its intended use. Funetioualist postulates reappear from then on, above allin the rational ist treatises of the ESth century by Carlo Loduli. Mare-Antoine Laugier and Francesco Milizia In the ryth century it was above all Viollet-le- Due, Gottfried Semper, Henri Labrouste and Julien Guadet who advocated a close and reall  ble relationship between form and func- don in architecture,  Lous *Sullivan iy considered the founder of  ‘modern’ functionalisin, In his 1846 essay “The tall office building. artistically considered’, he coined the maxim ‘form follows fanction’. He was building on the thoughts of the sculptor Horatio Greenough, who had introduced the notion of a dialectic between form and fimetion in objects such as a frigate. mn which design considerations were dictated by exposure to xtreme physical conditions, Although Sulli- van drew parallels with ‘circling eagles’ and open apple blossom, his ¢.  <pression Way soon restricted in meaning to scarcely more than ‘naked functionality’ in the view of Function- alisin.  Thuy restricted, the concept of Functionalism was to be used as the slogan for the most varied directions in avant-garde architecture during the first half of the 20th century: from the  romantic *organic architecture of * Wright to the classicnt * Rationalism of *Miex van der Rohe, from the lively *Expressionism of *Meudebolin to the severe monumentalisn of *Terragot, from the independent farmal play of *Hiting to the strong geometes of *Le Corbusier. Sharper contrases are hardly umagin- able. and the bitter dispute berw cen Haring and Le Corbusier alone makes evident the inappro- priateness of such generalizing clayiticauon Phe matter is further complicated by the Fact thatim the architectural discussion af the 1y205. Ranonalom and Funcdoralism were highs disputed as to both meaning and relaconship However, after Alberto Sartorts «as persuaded by Le Corbusier to change the te of the book he had originally planned in iga2 co call Trohirenra razionale it was published iascead as Gili Blementt delVurchuemura functonale: dius, che concept of Funcnonatsan cntered: everyday parlance asa svnonyi of or even a replacement for Rationalism. Henes, his meaning was re soneted, and he thus aligned hintself with chat very architecrural movement chac was least functionalist, I the term ean still be ased jusely wo describe the vorganie houses by Hiring. which tried to ateribute to cach finetion town specially formed corer. 101 hardly also appro priate in relagon te a biulding by *Gropius or Mies can der Rohe, Indeed, function is prace- cally the Jast factor which determined the eminently symbolic form of the Fagus Factory or the Barcelona Pavibon. Their implications are far more complex and the first aspect to be sacrificed is precisely chat usefulness on which their reputation bad been founded. With regard to the inadmissible conflation af Rutesabsm and Functionalism, the words of Le Corbusier, chat great apologist oFogneers, ated adnurer of the Bléniot. the tgierunia and the Buyates. should not be forgoten: “Arehicceture as the masterly. correct and magnificent play of  masses brought together am light cube  are the  canes. spheres. ey imders or py ramic great primary forms which hght reveal to efthevbare feared forms, the most heautipul forms” (Ver tae arhitectmre) ea VMI LO Zurko, bo Re de. Ortgins of Putaromatist: Theory, Now Yotk ys7: Bavham, Reyner, Theory and Desig in the first Machine Age, London tau: Posener, fulius. cliafanee des burke  advantage  Honafismas. Von clr aid Crafts crm Dettsehen WVerkbutit. Berl. Prankrure am Mam and Vienna cyo4: “RKritik der Kriik des  
Ioektronalistuus. cbeh + (Berlin). vel. 27  Irs Futurism. In ryey the Italian writer Filippo Tommiae Marnett: publiyhed the ‘Mantfeste da ticarsme in che Paris newspaper Figaro and ammoonced “We athri that the world’s mag- Hieence has beer enriched by anew beauty: the Geanty of speed.” Wath thac the central concern of Futurism was tormulated ay a reaction to the decadent and swinbolic bourgeois art of the fin-  destécle, “Le this was joined a polemically advanced break wath che past. an emouanally mtoned mache culture, activism, and a fasei- with  mined almost cndrely contined to *italy, and  naden workd-scale war. Futurism re- soon dried up after entering the service of” Fascism often ma bombastic. spectacular. and prop.  gandisne way - were to bear fruit chroughour  The ideas it propagated. however  the international avant garde Phe Pucurist writers, painters, sculptors. architects, stage  movement, which counted dosamers. mustetans, and film-makers among is members, had already put forth elements of an individual architectural theory  pablication of Umberto Boeciom's “Manifesto  wath the  tecnico della scultara fiuturista’ (ig ttt and with Marinetti’s essay (Lo splendore geametrica ¢ meceamico nelle parole in hiberta’ which ap- peared m carly rytg imi the periodical Lacerda. Wath Ancomo *Sane Elia’ inte the movement and che publication of the manifesto, Warchitetcur uturisea’ an Lacerta ft August fy tg. Butuineny also became officially estab lished an the Held of architecture.  SCD  The nvamtita ssas nothmy other than a version. slighth: longchened, by Marinetti of a text which had appeared seweral weeks earlier under Sant Elia s name sand with his choughes) in acatalogue of an oshilyoon held a Milan of) the young pen-thtunst group of artistes “Nuove Tendenze’, althougn it had heen originally written by Ugo Nebbia catalogue) and was ier crated “Messaggio’ (ax Next to the furieusy ais. an architecture was  who had edited the  opposed te “Mani sso rejection of all past  advocated which we which was expressive  Lomploy new material  vdbartistic: which gay o! Hiptical lines (these emotionally  preference to diagonal were charged): which renounce. ornament; which found its inspiration in th.  supposed to hb. mare  vrld of machines; which accepted no precon..iscd design max-  Futurism, Cacti Nuova iprojeet, tyi3 14) by Sant-Eha  ims: which would bring the environment into harmony with the new man: which would be light. perishable and dynamic so that every generanen can, and must, build it, own city hese propositions took account of new scienti- tic and technological developments and ace vorded extemively with the Futurists’ demands for the other arts: the “preference for Hghtness, usctuiness, ephemeralness and speed’ as evi Boccioni’s theory of Phus an unresolved con-  dently derived from ‘dinampme plastica’ tradiction was introduced into the movement's architecture, which is confirmed by comparing the texes with Futunst architectural drawings: if the first encouraged a simultaneity, speed. and winporariness, the latter displayed a monumien- talarchitecture which radiated most effectively. for all its Inpovative potential, an expressive modernist classicism,  In reality the manifesto served as a coura- geous theoretic document which engaged Ialy in the European architectural discussion: other- wise it remained, simply. potent rhetoric. Along with SantElia, Mario *Chiattone. his litclong friend, entered the Futurist movement Somewhat later, they were joined by the architect: Virgiho Marchi. Burt in tyts [taly entered World War [- chanks in part co the interventionism of, among others, the Fucurises, ofall people and the following vear Sant’Elia lost his lite on the front. No importance Futurist 
work was ever built. Apart from the manitestos — to which were added: Marchi’y “Muanitesto deilarchitettura | tucurisca: d’anime drammatica’ (1y20, in the avant-garde publication Rom fiturtsni): ista, published only un 1g24 although wericen for the mose part in 191g: and somewluir later Halia nuova, architeritna nueva fiy3ri at only the virtuoso drawings of these three men which bear architectural witness to this short episode.  Fourteen years passed before Pucumst archi- tecture again became a live issue in the contest of the search for an arcstic identity for young Italian tascism. In 1y28.in Turin. the pater and journalist Fillia (Luigi © most convinced followers of Futurist mounted the first (and last) “Mostra di archi- tettura futurista’ different origins way exhibited was represented by Sant Lha, Chiattone. Al- berto Sartoris, Virgiho Marchi. Enrico Pram- polini, Nicola) Diulgherot® and Depero. The only architecture, apart trom: the exhibition building itself actually to be built Was by Sartorisy if was in any case a chissic example of Itahan * Rationalism and had noth- ing to do with Futurist principles. Bat Fillia retained his faith in the possibility of a Eucurist architecture as an official state style and pursued  dinamico. state  Techaetnira Brtur-  was  domnbo}. one of the  ules,  The work of artist: af vers  Architecture  Fortunate  his goal in the various publications which he edited or launched te this end (La Cina preturtsta: Lacitia nueva), in articles and books (Art fisetsta ty28) La nuove architetira. 1g3t). The buturise aesthetic witnessed bork it. coronatien and its conclusion in the ‘Mostra della tascista’ (Exhibition of the Fasent Revolution; in Rome in 1932. Largely organized by arehi- lets, painters and graphic artists, who for the most part had their origins in Futurism. this exhibition was the only artistic manifestation under fascism, which demonstrated a historical connection with the rest of Europe, but bucurist senament was already merged with Radenal-  rivoluzione  ist, Expressionist or even neo-classicist notions,  Likewise che few buildings which appeared under the banner of Futurism in the ty20s were scarcel  ¥ to be distinguished in their formal language from those of Rationalism or the Novecento Italiane, This is as true tor Duil- gherofs futurise villas’ in Turin and Albisola as for Depero’s Bestetti-c-Tumminelli pavilion at the Biennale in Monza of 1927 or Prampolini’s pavilion for the “Mostra di architetcura futur-  ata’ inthe Parco del Valentine, Turin (ty28). In fret the significance of Fucurism resides less in its direct production than in ity de principles intlucnced nearly the entire European and Amerie avant garde af the carly goth It was Tealian Puturistn which served as  pantinence. les  eontnry  aostarting pomt tor Soviec *Construccisun  even aun individualise alent such ay *Le Cor- busier’s Was an ne snrall measure indebted: te Sant bhavand Chiattone. amd even to such tre Fiorini and) hiy sta3gh Finally, even to ti day the entire Tnternadonale” of technological Cropia. from RB. Buckminster *buller via *Archiyrany a *Piano, * Rogers, curd *Poster. continues ta feed on the bald sisians of Pururnsim GYM  [SanCbla Alp CLoarchitereura fieirisea’,  known Fururist. as Guide  grateicielo my tensistratoara”  Lacrhaiblorences. ¢ August 1g ig: Arata, Giulia Chse. Turchitettura fturista’, Pagine dare  UMilani IL tytge Marchi, Virgilio, reaterine fnrosta. Polina to2g: Marinetth. b pola, E. and bscodame, Sau’ Plia fentire tier aoudiude. Milan cyt: Sartori, A. Sunt bla farchiretin ditiaista, Rome (ogg: Banbant Resner. ‘Puturisne Modern Archircemre’, (RIB beb. 19st; Gambillo, 1). and Fiori, T..  Taytor, Joshua C.. Birmisn. New York 1y6t: Clough. Rosa. Eunnin: de Story of a Moder fet Movement, New York got: Apollonia, Umbro todas. Punmerise Miaatestas, London and New Yark ty73  P. Pram Murehi-  and  froier del trisaa, Rome 1yss:  Gardella, Ignazio, b. Milan ajay. Studied at Milan and at che Isniture Universitario de Architettur later wah Ts his generation, he did not have recourse te any  the Poltieenico in Venice where he  contrast co the other architeets of  social of aesthenie ideologies for the yemume *Ranonalom displayed in hn test works. His designs were vharacrenzed by cleganec and purity of camposinon, ina lyric vein which he used to provide magivierially free and simple sohutons to the most compley problemi  He hogan his earect with intettor decoration and rebuilding schemes. notably the renoy ation  af che theatre at Busta: Aria t1g34) and an 
(1935). neh esublished his reputation. Soon after-  estension ofthe Villa Borletti in Milan  watds came his tmese work to that date, ‘an ountinding, example ot Italian rationelisny’ the Anti-tuberculous Dispensary {tya6 8}. In this building the  lines of Gos architecture are  Mageinal it Alessandria most wceresung defined: clarity im the handling of plane surfaces und a juchicious use of materials as a means of expression. In this connection, the extensive cniployment of brick to face a reinforced- conerete building shows G.’\ tendency to re= and this ata time when such respect was hardly  Uhe Dispensary was the firse and signiticunt of Gs many architectural activities wm Alessandria. where his most important works were built. including the Provinetal Laboratory  Vor Vygiene and Prophylaxis (1g37 yh. and a  spect local traditions common most  block of Hats for employees of the Borsaline COPAY TLS E 3h interesting,  in which he tried. by an ples of movement on che clevadon  and the emphatic use of projecting caves, to Zo bevond a purely rauonalise’ scheme. In 1y46. in ablock of flatshe designed at Castana, particular chiphasis was Lud on an attempt to reinterpret regional and traditional elements in a medern dion. Little by hitde. this characteristic was to lead G way from his imtial sandpoint. with hiy architecture diverging from the tenets Rationalism, He returned to the ‘rationalise’ manner with the annexe for the Museum of Modern Art im Milan (1igsa).  along  of strict  Gardella. Fass tor employees of the Borsalino Company. Alessandria tiyst 38  Thereafter, however, he achieved - as in the Casa alle Zattere, Venice (1957)—a light, playful synthesis of sensible, functional forms and regional traditions. GVGHa 7 Argan. G. C., lanazie Gardella, Milan 1ysg: Rossi. Aldo, ‘Ignazio Gardella’, Architecture and Urbanism (Tokyo), December 1976  Garnier, Tony, b. Lyons 1x6y, d. La Bédoule 1948. Studied at the Ecole Arts in Lyons and in Paris at the *Ecole des Beaux-Arts and in the atelier of Julien Guadet Awarded the Prix de Rome, he spent the years rkyy 1yog in Rome; he was city architect of: Lyons, 1yoas-ty. wards in private practice,  During his vears in Paris, he moved in the  vationale des Beas  and continued there atter-  socialist circles of Jean Jaurés and Emile Zola, mereasingly radicahed by the Dreyviiy atfair, Subsequently, his studies at the Villa Medici in Rome were focused less on historical buildings than on the preparation of one of the most important projects of 2oth-century architec ture: the Cité Industnelie, He addressed hiniself to the theme ofan industrial city because he was convinced that such was to be overwhelmingly the trend for new cities im che new century. He selected a terrain half-flat and halt-hilly im a tiver valley, which setting, although hypotheri- cal. Was in practice similar co that of his home town, Lyons. he even included a medieval sectlement inn his planning. For a population of 35.000 (scarcely greater than in) *Howard’s Garden City}. G. envisaged a residential quar- cer city centre, industry. a railway station and all che requisite public buildings; he omitted, however. barracks, police stations, prisons and churches. all of which he considered would be unnecessary in the new socialist society. He decided that the buildings would be prumanty in reinforced concrete, even though at the time only a handful of experimental structures had been built by this method. He thus presented a revolutionary urban vision, which already con- uined in essence the fundamental planning principles of the Modern Movement: clear distinction between various functions — resi- dence. work, division of vehicular and pedestrian trathe, with afurther distinction beeween through and local trate corridors, decentralized layout, though based on an urban grid system to guarantee  recreation, and transportation;  origntation and still permit expansion: ‘residen- tal islands’, cach 30 x 1501 (approx. Loo x soo 
ft), wichout interior courtyards but surrounded by green space equal to at least 50 per cent of their area. In addition, be projected trathic-tree. generously planted pedestrian paths; a commiu- nity centre which not only anticipated in its programme the social centres of modern hous- ing estates, but bore on its fagade - and net by chance (vo quotations from Zola’s utopian socialist novel Travail: a completely equipped sports ground with a stadium for 20,000 specta- tors: and finally  Taking this global vision as a starting point, G.immersed himself with equal protundity and creativity in the architectonic, constructive and technological detail of his plan. He des cloped formal elements which took the greatest advan- tage of the possibilities of remforeed concrete: strip windows, glass walls, pilots, projecting canopies, open ground-plans, and roof terraces. With these means he projected: a modernistie railway station with subterranean platfornis and tracks: clearly disposed factories and work- shops: a single-level. practically organized school on an open site: a hospital composed of easily surveyed pavilions: small residential  ~ a novel canal system  miuly houses  blocks and loosely divided single-f. of elegant cubic simplicity and with well- organized: plans. Everything. even down to technical innovations such as electric heaung, systems and temperature controls (for the econ omy of the Cité Industrielle way to be based on the availability of inexpensive clectricity |, was precisely set out in the accompanying (xt For all his innovative powers. G. did not conceive his project ina vacoun. Nocoanty was he influenced by the Rationalism of his teacher Guadet, but he also drew on the experiments of the pioneer of reinforce Hennebique, as well avon thy progressive urban  doconerete. Frangar  planning teas of his contemporaries Con Jausely and Eugene Hénard. Fle by ne means rejected tradition. which he had aubibed dur- ing his Beaux-Arts training and on a wip to Greece in yo. In faet, the residential quarter of the Cité Industrielle is represented as an area dian-meridional garden city with clear chasical formal reminiscences; and the community een- tre is nothing but a modern mterpretition of a roofed agora. under whose reinforced-concrew peristyle people in Biedermeier-like dress strall about like ancient Greek citizens  The Cité Industrielle. of which the plans were exhibited in ryog and published in igiz. was, despite limited public response, rapidly  taken up in progressive architectural circles. Both its overall planning concept and. the architectonic types influenced the entire Mod- em Movement. Its influence on *Le Corbusier, for instance, was substantial; he published party of the Cité IndustricHe in the yournal L'Esprit nouvemie tm (420 and later in his book [ers ane archuectire (1923). G.'s planning principles were reworked theoretically by *CIAM and accord with the later *Athons Charter  Alinost uninediately after completing the plans of the Cité IndustricHe. Ge was given an opportunity to realize same of the ideas em-= bodied there. In tyes the new Iv elected reform= Edouard Herriot. appomnted him ciry architect, with abrictto take over the “Grands Travaux de la Ville de Lyon’.  munded mayer of Lyons.  Between 1yog and gia he built the Abattoirs de ja Mouche, a slaughterhouse comples centred around a huge open hall, che mterior of which, with its exposed steel struts and glazed roof. recalls the Galerie des Machines in Paris ()8gy) by Ferdinand Dutert and Victor Contamin: the smoke stacks were formed as simplified col+ tinny which narrowed towards the top. The Olympic Stadium was built in 11g 16. the Grange-Blanche Hospital with as 2 ga, and the ‘Les Etats-Unis’ residential quarter between tytg and ryas. In all of these  pavilions in 1yts  executed works G, needed to leuk no furthes For ideas than the solutions already worked out in the Cité biduycrielle VMI G frude pour da constriction des villes, Party tute. ty  nicer, bony. Cae Cire tudistrielic,  Garnier. Abutrous dooli Mouche. bersis ay tt  
ind Marans. A  Pars tuyge  LOenrre de Gauha, Care. Malan bags: Pawlowski, Chess  Con binie, Paris roe, Wicbason, D New York  Vorone  ! anh,  Hote  foes Career Ely Cha Paduorraie.  Gaudi, Anton bo Reus. Catalonia ssi. d Tarlo Comn  Copperas, G. bez  Iych nhs archrteetural studies  wm Bareslona  the age uP seventeen and whadtaated nn i878 Fle tel the omontl courses. whereas. duriig: his vers as  letle wteraetlon far  retudirt, feos an asstdiious treauenter ef thie philosophy chisses of Tlorens 1 Barba and the lectures on aesthetes by Pau Mild a bssutarals. In sos vouth Mhiled Fentanis had died in Rome durtags ats rennuintie pertod, where he hed mevedin the arele athe Nazirenes, bricdrich Overbeek and bis tratermity. Asam rans plives which had  Uiwass maneumed a certain desree of cultural  in Lurepe. there was in Cutiboni  and pobre! independence m Spanish history the Renaisenye this wwas concerned sath Catuhit language and  doromduntig mies einent poem. as wall as the medieval history and architecture of the * Modernism  movement towards:  region. “The Spanish  which developed from this  vehd onthe tyth century had a deciise qattience on Gos imaginaden, and edb ro Comeriden of ents ork and the honesty of mediew al arty cor inechanisie logic mospured by Vioiletle- Dues  Harchite cure: del to niture ay a souree:  medicy. of inspiration, det only fer decaraave details but for scructures as well. dp this context he ale voncermed bunscit widi the weay of the * Ares and Craftsmovenrenr. with which be came inte contac: through the a centile muunufacturer Gitell  In 1878, shortly after graduating. he designed the Casa Vices  suggestive of Is  ehey of his patron, the  4 Barcelona, a huikting  hie prototypes with ity step- ped prismatic biowks. its iterations of stone and brick, and its bathane decoration m poly-  chrome tiles. Cons when revivalism wos in full flood. it had the merit of belonging  ected ays rt wats ata period  no known stele. An Important feature ot the rterion was the modu- linen otindireet light, semething that way te be asniuch part and parce! of his architecture as was his use of mosans and of polychromy. A milestone i Gas artistic development was the  fotrem oa fam ot  voneeption of  Gaudi. Manu Gtiel, Bargelona o1sas 4  Paluu Giell Barcelona sss gs where his Seructaral expermients the use of parabolic arches isthe mostewidentony > created personal sole, which formed the basis of his complete liberation trom *historicism  In 1883 G. was commusioned to continue the work on the Church of the Segrada Familia in Barcelona. a building of great size that ways progresively to monopolye his activities, but which remains unfinished even today. A neo- Gothre design by Villar was already tn exist- ence: this G apse. the tint part he built. sci) contain many Gothre remmniscences, although the mouldings and decorative details are drawn much more  abandoned. but the ines of the  closely from naire.  Work on the Sagrada Familia continued with the Nativity tayade of the east cramsept. This consnts of three open poral between four interpenetrating square-based towers, set diag- only, which rise toa height of 107m. (30 tt) and cerminate ut thin, curved, circular fea crowned by a piece of capricious play with  atures  intersecting surfaces. covered i mosaic. A complex and tively world, modelled tor che most part by G. himself and comprising an 
Gaudi. Church of the Sagrada Familia, Barcelona (1883 1926)  immense variety of plants and animals, throngs the great concavities below the gubles  Henceforth, as in the Casa Batllé in the Pasco de Gracia, Barcelona (tgos—7). natural and organic forms no longer simply comprise a kind of ornament superimposed on the building. but go on to constitute essential structural elements, as in the case of the bone-shaped columns, the undulating fagade covered with polychrome mosaics like a sheet of sea-water set on end, and the imbricated root ike an armiadillo’s back. This type of effcet is a transitional one between the sculptural plasticity of G.’s earlier years (1878 91). and the structural type characteristic of his later period  This structural plasticity has as one of its chief  features the system of design used by G. for the Colonia Giiell Church at Santa Coloma de Cervellé, near Barcelona (18y8--1914). which was planned by means of a string model tepresenting the structural ribs of the building, from which were bung weights proportional to  the loads which cach member would have to carry. The catenarics formed by these strings gave the inverted shape of the building’s col-  ums. Ie permitted a type of vaulted structure without buttresses of any kind. since wll thrusts are taken up by suits ably inched pillars. ‘This taethod was later used in designing the naves of) the Sagrada Familia  In the Giiell Park,  made systematic  Barcelona (190014), G use of inclined supports for and bridges. An important feature in Uity park is the abundant coyploy ment of ceramie aod ghiss mosaic, which presents an  retaining walls  extraordinary ememble of powertully expres+ sive abstract conrpesitions  The Casa Mali (iyos- to}. called fa Pedrena the auarey sh is perhaps Gs most original work Plastedly speaking. 1 comsccutes great stone Streetnre of organic shape, with a rhythm of) undulanng horvental edges. comparable to eyebrows or lips: aa altinity beoween G.'s work and Surrealism is especially evident here. His seructural masterpiece is the Sagrada Pamulia schools (1909), walled and roofed by undulat ig membranes of thin brick.  Powards the end of his career, Gr. asserted diate the straight line belonged ta men. the curved one ta God. Shartly before his death he invented aaystem of well-nigh universal appli- cation, based on hyperboloids and paraboloids, though his designs were never purely geo- metrical They always preserved a close tie with familiar diving and petals, even stars and clouds  shapes: bones, muscles, wings and at other times with caves and  Because of its inereasmyly accentuated indi- viduals, Go's architecture could not serve as and with the growing adherence to Madernism in the  the nucleus of a school or following  Gaudi. €  asa Batll, Barcelona (ges. 7) 
hos ial Oot the century, appreciation way long J Tndicatiy eof this reappraisal are to. curs of Sir Nikolaus Pevsner: Gandi’s Church of the prada Bamba sll wichout.a doubt be judged  while he  in inay thac  Qe mest wichromtstie example of the eternal southern: concluded finally in ryst. te ais the only genus produced by the Art Nouveau AUC GHL  Coilins, George. Ttane Gadi, New York Chad. Su  Baroaue’. he  iyo. Brunet. César Muragelli v. ahi aefeand, sieabra, Barcetona fy67: Sweeney,  Toboand Sern fb. ctimni Gand, New York  forts Mower. 2), Gated, London roo: Collins, Gooand Basegoda, No. The Designs and Draw fags of Antoure Gadi, Princeton. N fo nyse  Gehry, Prink Ob. Toronto tucu. Sundied at the Cniversicy of Souther Cahroroie in Los Angeles and at Harvard Univeraty be worked under Victor Gruen, Hidea Sasaks and Willan Percina among others. hefore  estubiishmg an independent office m Las Ange  brom tgs3  le in rye. Gos Timited wuyre. compring largely unrealized works. 1s neither dheeretical= Is nor tornially alkgned ath any speeitic trend Atter a series of mteriers and shops. he builem  family hoses in which, igrcavog)s. cradtion=  dtormsare chimmated. Fsow no house me Santa  Moniea iutttytS 9  r the experunents pursued en such buddings as the Davis Hous in Mahbi Cai tyce a. the De Mesnil Residenice in New: York and che Spiller Residences mm Verne. Cul  both tyes ge ly  Gehry. The arches os hone, Cal iy sy  Sanity Magu  roids sv nthests of  house. in pringiple only the renovation of an esnsting complex, breaks out of existing aghe Suuctures and spatial boundaries in order to restructure them in mulu-layered, overlapping and antithetical ways; the result’ evokes a comparison with the spatial stratifications of a Guano Guarini. Evidence of G.'s ability. to master large-scale composition is provided in Santa Monica Place. a complex of shops and parking facilities in Santa Monica (iyzg- 81) which. in its relatively strnghtforward con- struction, recalls older, traditionally structured buildings FW 22 Nairn, Janet. Prank Gehry: the search for a  architecture’, Archiectural Record,  “ho rules)  June tyta, pp. ys fez  Germany. In the closing years of the tyth century and beginmmy of the 2oth the German Empire was successtul in cacchimg up with countries stich as *Great Britain where industri- ahzacion bad begun much carlier. This was achieved through the developmentofcommer- el trade relations, the acquisition ef colonial posessions and the sudden acceleranion of qndustrial production istecl chemicals and elec- tical industries), Both public architecture and that commissioned be the growmg industrial concerns reHected this count among the deading nations. A steady upward trend. even if interrupted by the Depression,  ambinen ce  freed capital co an unprecedented extent: for vonstrucdon. at the same time asa policy ot provided the While Great Britain remained the only real econamie rival, inwas Parts. despite the French defeat 1870-6 which retained unblemished its ghitcering role as cultural ‘Capital of the Ningecenth Century’ Wadter Benponis. and thus provided the Stimulus for official architectural pohey. In particular the development of Walhelnunian Berhn looked co the French capital as a model. The aspirations of Schinkel and Semper wo foster anew indigenous architectural style from. the Charmonious melding of the best of all periods’ Schinkel) and the meorporation of new needs, material. and construction methods  culuvating national prestige  necessary aesthetic. meentives  were noc abandoned but, with the new interest in the associational values of certain: historie style, merely retreated into the background.  For nanonalisieg representauien. the Gothic, which had been given a great impetns through the completion of Cologne Cathedral. as well ay 
the ‘German Renaissance’ movement and fi- nally — because of its abundant representation in German architecture the Baroque, were all called into service. On the other hand *neo- classicism, which was stamped with remi- niscences of the Wars of Liberation in 1813 and (thanks to Schinkel’s pupils) had long domi- nated in Prussia, was stall a viable alternative in the early 20th century. Architects maintained various rapports to this stylistic repertoire in accordance with the nature of building tasks Thus, for civic buildings the Remapsance style of the bourgeois city-states scomed mast appro- priate, while for large official buildings, such as Parliament buildings. Law Courts. or adminis- tadon buildings, Barogue prototypes were often chosen; this was also funetionwly appro- priate, for the axially-ordered monastic and castle complexes of the rsth century had already united a variety of administrative func- architecture the called “Germanic” Style, ie. Remanesque and Gothic, was codified for the Protestant part of Germany in the ten theses of the Eisenach Regulations of 1861. These relationships were  tions. For ecclesiastical sos  either negated or enhanced by regional tradi- tions and landscapes. Thus. iyth-century *hi- toricim had at its disposal rather differentiated architectural means whose complicated rules im the end came increasingly to compromise the very understanding they were meant ta engen- of the late iyth century  der. The tendene  got forms resulted ian *eelecticism which increas ingly obscured the possibilities for entirely new demands: there fact historical Prototypes for factories, modern transport fa- cilities and large-scale apartment houses.  towards richness, exuberance, and cnerusti  were 1 no  The entire social structure was alsa cranss formed by advancing industrializacion.  Be- Gveen INS2 and 1yo7 the proporton of the population employed im agriculture and for= etry dropped trom 43 to 2y per cont. while the percentage employed as labourers and in ser As a result. the rapid growth of population was almost exclusively in the cities and the new industrial regions long the Rhine and in the Ruhr, in Central Germany and Upper Silesia. An unprecedented rise in the demand for inexpensive housing and the liber- alization of the property market caused the Price of land to rise rapidly and led to densely populated ‘Micthaus’ (barracks) quarters. in contrast to the prevailing type of artisans’  vices rose accordingly.  dwelling in England, the terrace house. The catastrophic living conditions that resulted were hardly improved through the first reforin efforts of co-operative or cottage housing. Che problem of housing continued unt] well into the 2oth century to be an unresolved preagcu- pagon of polidiciuny. architects and that new breed which was itself born in the dace tyth century: urban planners. ‘These unmiastered problems steod in great contrast with the tremendous organizational efforts and invest- mients that went into tramways and railway construction, sewers and clevtritication, and even inte the beautification of public streets and squares  While Pan offered the model for the gran- deur of'a capital city, the impetus for 4 practical Approach to achieving more confortable hous- jag and reasonable ving condinons came from England. In tyce the Asociation was founded on the British madel. and realized its tint noteworthy scheme at  vermum Garden Cities  Helleran, near Dresden. Hermann *Muthesius,  who had worked as an attueheé in the Germs  Embassy in London, studied the English  country house and soughr to introduce some of Both Richard *Ricmerschmid and Peter * Behrens launched  us qualities an Germany.  their architectural careers with their own  houses. his narrowness way not intended as a dental of the problem. ance the residential reform was net to he determined by popular but Henry Velde  expressed at, from) the ‘ethos Mest  de of the intimate of man’s possessions’. Le. the ethos of  The Exhibitions on chy Muach= Darinstade itrom individ but  taste. rather, ay Fran  his own home ildenhOhe in souk, which  consisted manly of such homes.  were thus by no iicans private. rather  publie events of considerable significance Cnhke the stustion in *hrance or * Belgian,  *Art  dominated. atleast urebiteeture, by ascuse at  Nouscan cfaeesdsaf a Germanyi was proven sohdty and of honesty a the expression of oneterids aod tuneuons. Tae inner com i= poms of diy fiends! contoucd thus to flourish even when the outward signs oF the new style bad huterprises such as the Vere cmigten Werkstitten United Workshops! in Mnmech. che Werkstitten mir bland erkskurnst Workshops tor Ehindieratt: in Presdoaas and above all che *Becutscher Werk bund tn  withered  founded  in got amd to whick che smest ampertant  figendsal artists belonged earned these teas  
Germany. The Buntey Theater. Beran riya, by Anyust Endell  further. The departure trom the frigendsti was Indeed much easier in Germany, For ne Geran architect had so thoroughly subscribed to the aims oF the style as had *Horea in Brussels, *Mackintoshin Glasgow, *Gaudiin Barcelona. or *Guimard in Parts. August *Endell’s build- ings, the Most Ingenious creations of German dugendsud in architecture. remain principally decorative art. in: which three-dimensional architectural clensents are subordinate to ate tached two-dimensional surtuces. The Belgian van de Velde buile too date in Germany to have apy significant mduence on trehitectural devel- opments there, Already © tyto other model, such as the Fmpire and Bicdermeier style. were adopted. as the fugendsit had been. to help counteract historicnnn, Thes inspired a buirger- liche Sachkionst) (Muthesius: a bourgeois, mat- ter-of-fict art) ip housing and interior design. while Behrens and other designers of industrial buildings employed a monumentalized neo- classicism for their great factory and adiminis- cration building commissions.  These various tendencies Were summarized, on the eve of World War Lat che Werkbund Exhibition of 1yt4 in Cologne. Beside he representative festival buildings by Behrens and *Hothmann and the theatre endowed by van de Velde with the most generous Howing lines of Tate Art Nouveau. two buildings pointed to the future: Bruno *Taut’s pasilion for the German glass industry and the model fictory by Walter *Gropius. Both buildings ‘cauured an expres: sively exaggerated use of materials. glass and steel, and reinforced conere  respectively  Thus the comparatively new materials were now translated from utilitarian buildings to public architecture. The firm Wayss and Freytag, having acquired patents from Joseph Monier. developed reinforced concrete inte an Wnovative undertaking, Germany witessed  technical novelties of international importance with the reintorced-conerete dome of Max *Berg’s Jabrhunderthalle (Century Hall) in ireslau (f912-13) and the shell structures of the 19208 and 1930s. World War quences for the countries of Central Europe  Land its unfortunate conse-  caused stylistic discussions as well as experimen= tation with new muacertals and technologies to be pushed into the background for the duration. Shortages of building materials, spiralling building costs and the high cost of credit combined to hinder the building trades from taking advantage of the inflationary conditions of the first post-war years. Phe housing short- age inherited trem the ryth century became even more critical, Architecture was synony- mous with the administration of shortages. In this situation of urgency, which was atthe same ume a period of political hope, the avant garde dreamed of utopias, which ran the gamut from new schemes for town and country to cosmic visions. Nearly all the architects who played an ‘important role in the 1y20s went through an Bruno Taut. whole circle of younger artists and architects assembled (*Gliserne Kette), his brother Max *Taut, Erich Mendelsohn, Hans *Poelzig, Ludwig *Mies van der Rohe (in his glass-tower designs and the memorial to Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg in Berlin: 1926), and Walter Gropius (in the War Mem- orial in Weimar: 1922).  For the *Neues Bauen group the *Bauhaus beeame a kind of high school, tirst in Weimar, Tater at Dessau, which was accompanied by 2 series of other buportant schools in Frankfurt. Berlin, Breslau. and ac Burg Giebichenstein. Although the educational principles were estab- lished ac the Bauhaus and although its school buildings in Descau became exemplary models for *Radonalism in Europe, the real test of the Modern Movement took place in the major cities, with Berlin at the centre. Since the new zonal plan which Martin Michler had presented in ig20, and due to the activi *Novembergruppe and the *Arbeitsrat fir Kunst, a sense of creative activicy prevailed in  Expressionist pliase: around  whom  ies of the  
q ic  Far Le: |  sabi.  i gp sett, CA ; | h ‘Ae.  Germany. Glass tower (project, 1y21 2) by Mies van der Rohe  Germany. Memorial to Karl Liebkneche and Rosa Luxemburg. Berlin (1926). by Mies van der Rohe  Berliny this was not confined to the individual buildings, but encompassed a town-planning concept. Berlin's housing estates, with their rows of buildings set in green surroundings, still hear witness to this spirit even today. The Weileohotiedhing (1y27}) at Stuttgart was in Jarge measure disputed by Berlin architects, who. despite stylistic and conceptual differ ences, had formed the association know ay the *Ring, Their seerctary was Huge Firing. who. together with *Scharoun, represented the orgame version of the new architecture,  Phe new architevture spread it tendrils from Berlin. It principal outposts were represented by Brune ‘Laut who fora while served as City Archiivet in Magdeburg: Erist *May. who built the ‘Vororterabanten’” suburban sacle Tites dio Frankfurt and ads ocated the induscrial  wanon of building: and Otte *Haester i Celle and Kassel, Contacts ith the *Netherlands and with */rance strengthend the avane garde, Mics van der Rohe’s German Pavilion atthe World's  Fair in Barcelona g1g28 9). a subtle compasi-  noo of flat. spacesereatme planes. as well as munmerous buildings of the Prussian seate. reveal that this architecture was alo beginning to be recognized as represen tage of the young Re- public  The position of the new ‘object o! architee- ture was by no dems undisputed. In North Germany. where Fritz Schumacher ereated the foundations for to regional plan that went beyond the limits of civic design, architects felt at home with an architecture that was based on the local tenkgon of building in brick and preserved its expressive character somewhat longer. Just as this was characterized in the North as a sort of de-sentimentalized local wart. sean the South sttuilar efforts to presetve local features were launched by the Stutggart school around Paul #Bonats and Paul Sehruttheaner andan Munich by dhe Liberal Theodor *Pischer and che comervadve German Bestelmever: Pobtically. these architeets were more receptive tothe deokags of National Socialisin than were the adherents of the "Neues Bauen. who tound their success in the middle-lett gos cernnients ot cortam cities and. provinces  The caming tj pawer at the Naronal Soentists marked a sudden end tor rhe new architecture. Phe Baulnws was disbanded. and architects. stich as. Gropius. *Thilherseimer, * Brower, Marun * Wagner. Mies van der Rohe, Moetidelsoli. May and *Mever enigrated. In  13? 
conease to Italian Fascism, Nagonal Socialism would telerate virtually no modern architec- ture Phy offical seyle would be modernized neo-elasstonim, the tormulation of which was largely the work of the Flihrer’s ‘erster Bau- menter’, Paul Ludwig Troost. He was su ceeded by the young Albert *Speer, a pupil of che respected Heinrich *Tessenow. Speers plans and the colleagues he installed in the “Fihrerstadten’ and regional ‘Gauhauptstidten’  foresaw a monumental remodelling of the most mpertant German cities, a process in which Hider personally played a part. Aside trom official state and party buildings, a regionalism was purveyed which looked back to the conser- vative architecture of the Weimar Republic aud even turther te ig antecedents before To t4 Only in industrial buildings was a functional, prefabricated architecture still possible: this wave mse To a sert of mtemal emigration  The tabiht rasa after 1948 was complete. German architecture of the 1y20s had been able to look back to pioneer work done before World War I, after World War IL there was no cradition that could be immediately resumied or revived. It way anecessary but laborious process tomvesnyate the accomplishments of the 1g20s, without ever reaching the formal and social qualiges of that decade. Up to that point. the upper hand had heen held by conservative  Germany. The Markiches Viertel. Berlin fete =a}, by Hany Muller, Georg Heinrichs and Werner Durtnann  clementys, whose representatives had made great compromises in order to co-operate with the Third Reich. Now, the emergency situation was far worse than that of yi: the need for housing in West Germany alone was estimated in 1y48.at 6-3 million units and in 1960 still stood at .-3 million. Building production in the 1960s and carly 1970s, impressive in quantitative terms, showed a yearly average of more than $00,000 units, in pe ye housing units. At first the tendency was to concentrate on the hasty, and often bad, re- building of the cities and on the state-sponsored estates of single-family homes, When problems of trafic arculation and building maintenance became evident, attention was turned to more concentrated satellite towns, at first extending horizontally, asin the case of the Nene Vahr in Bremen (1937-62). then in chains of apartnicnt towers such as the problematic “Gropiusstadt’ (1960, 1964 75) and the Markisches Viertel (1962, 1963-74), both ip Berlin. Nearly every mayer German city would mo oame have a Markisches Viertel of its own  In the meantime, growing prosperity fos-  ars aver 600,000  tered the massive renovation of inner-city areas.  Admmuntrauon and other service functions acquired the most expensive sites and forced increasing NuMbers of residents into the outer neighbourhoods. Attempts were made to set aside compact areas for offices, such asm Hamburg (City Nord) and in Frankturt (Nie- derrad), but ay single-function areas they re-  mamed unhappy selugons and even an these  
cines they were not successful in counteracting the pressure of change which was exerted on the inner cities. With the change of direction from wholesale redevelopmentto smaller-scale, trag- mentary renewal schemes and construction in the context of the existing urban fabric a trend which developed in the late 1y70s — a different kind of expulsion process arose: cheap inner- city housing was now replaced by expensive property.  Since 1y60 the legal basis of construction in the Federal Republic has been the Bundes- baugesetz (Federal Building Code), this re- placed the reconstruction laws of the various Lander with their sometimes more favourable planning provisions. The scandal of profits arising from land speculation and) planning decisions persisted. The social responsibility of property ownership esublished by the consatu- Gon (section rg of the Basie Law) was as haphazardly respected in reality as the mrore fare reaching provisions of the Weimar Imperial Constitution of tytg had been. Indeed. im the case of the cities, one must wonder whether the paucity of planning instrumenty has not proven for the worst  The architecture of the German Democratic Republic (East. Germany). which accorded much greater powers to its planners. of whom the most important was Hermann Henselimann. provides the negative response to this question Monotony and an absence of standards were even more dominant in the East through the absolute priority accorded to industrialized building production which after ¢ 1yss sue ceeded an academic formalist phase. The second segment of the Stalinailee (later Karl~Marx Allee) in East Berlin — the first had been begun in Lys2-® as a closed urban space Was continued in 19sy-65 with prefabricated ¢le- ments and in a series of independent building blocks. This was a prelude to the compubory industrialization of construction iw order to achieve economic housing throughout the country. Neither in dic East nor in the West did an intelligent and useful simplification of the procedure result: rather, a rigid and flat build- ing technique continued to dominate.  With the advent of international competi- tions in West Germany in the rysos, architects began to orient themselves to the architectural standards of the *USA, which in turn had been decisively shaped by the German émigré archi- tects. Both Gropius and Mies van der Rohe  Germany. Phocnix-kiemrohr ALG adimimstraton bukhug eUhysephaus!, Diiweldort lyst do. by Hentrich, Petchmgy and Partners  received German commissions, For the ‘Inter- baw exbibirien in Berlin of tryst leading architects of the Western world were invited te design a model inner-city quarter. In keeping with the then reigning dectrings. this merely resulted ina collecuon of individual buddings Reetilinesr steel mmu-ulasy cubes, stich ay die North American  setin green surroundings  office buildings which *SOM had developed under the uituenee of Mies van der Rohe. were seen ay testimony te a regained respeeability bothan the West and in the East. Important pabhe buildings in East  although slightly later  Berlin, such as che Stausrabgebande (u62) 43 or the Palase der Republik ery73. 4) by Heinz Gratfunder and arhers, were ne longer us the prevailing reintorced-concrete idiom, but were built rather as slender stecl-skeleton structures  In West Gesimany this architecture of ensply cut pratiles and hang figades was purveyed by Otto Apel. Ficlmur Heotrich and Tubert Pere 
whge. Friedrich Walbehn Kraemer, Egon *ocmiann and mam others. Inecontrast. Hans  aroun and his school, especially in Berlin.  sented an architecture of free yround- plans and adisadualisnc forms. Characteristic of Seharoun’s work are the Philharmonic I fall  tyte grand the Suuuosbibliothek PreuBischer Katurhoaty (Prussian State Library: 1y67 78). sauatedin the cultural complex on the southern edge of Cie Tiergarten: as clear evidence of the achievements of the free world. they are syne bohe rivals to communist East Berlin's Stalinallee and city centre. Scharoun’s lead has heen followed by a narrow fiction with Hers mann *f ehling and Daniel *Gogel at the head  Tn dhe field of coclesiasueal architecture. Donnnkus *Bohm, Rudolf *Schwarz, Emil *Stofin, Dicter Qesterten and others continued inte the ty6o. to produce works of calculated simphorty and sculpeural directness. Tr was precisely an this arca that taumph ef emedan could scck to compensate for the pervading sadness of the environment by means of sirongly expressed individuality in church de- sign. Gottfried *Bohim’s great space-ereating, Sculpuures in reimforced concrete demonstrate just how much freedom ecclestasacal and off- cial patrons were prepared to grant architcets in ONETEMTE Cases,  Among the relttively siaall group of interna- Gonally recognized successes In German post- war architecrre are the sports buildings am the Olympic Park in Munich (4967 32). in which Gunter *Behniseb and fas partners adopted the tent principle developed by Pret *Otto, The  contemporary scene is no more uniticd in  Germany thin in other countries, Megalo= Brutaliss  (*New Brutaliva) megascructures ue longer cominand  maniac | projects. and respects instead a respect for urban preservation Curban repair) has gained support. and conser- vation Issues can be relicd upon to produce a surprisingly large public response. At che level at which prestigious new awarded. the liberal, Behnisch and his partners sand in contrase to  conunissions are opet the severely ornamented hastoricism ot Alexander von Branea: Ludwig Leo's designs derive from particular functional requirements ofany situation and contrase with tbe projects of an architect such as Joset Bata) *K berhugs, who works largely within the Prussian tradition O.M. *Unyers has achteved i? international reputation. his reputation berg rounded almost  buildings of  enurely on his teaching acuvity and his mor- phological studies: only recently ~ atter a break of nearly ten years — has he attracted conimis- Mons again. History asa source of architectural inspiration has gained a new prestige. be itas a Signpost to the archetype or ax a source = especially for a whole group of younger archi- tects — for a Wide variety of quotations.  Germany. Chureh of St Bonitunus. Aachen niges 4h by Rudolf Schwarz  Germany. Phe DLRG Building, Berhn-Spandan Hoty 1. by Ludwig Lee  
Germany. Lightweight umbrellas by Frei Ort at the Bundesgartenschau, Cologne (iyo 1  Amidst this contradictory panorama, anu ber of structures primarily determined by technological considerations serve as examples for the minimizing of expense and the continu- ity of research: Fritz Leonhard’s television tower (1956) in Stuttgart. with an elegance unequalled by any of its successors: bridges. including the inclined cable types. a German speciality: halls and other large enclosed spaces using lightweight construction, in which Frei Otto has been a pioneer. Thy economy ef means is a lesson of which architecture will have iNcreasmg need ma period of dwindling re- sources. we G Milller-Wulckow, W.. Dentsche Burtktinst der Gegenwart (3 vols.), Leipzig tyzs 8: Herr- mann, Wolfgang, Deutsche Baukunst des 1g. nud 20. fakrhunderts, (pt L) Breslau 1932. (pts |and Ip Basle and Stuttgart 19 Schumacher, Fritz. Strdtmingen in dettscher Baukunst seit i800, Leip- Zig 1935: Haqje. Hoffmann, Fe. and Kaspar, K., New German Architecture, London tgs: Planen und Bauen im neuen Deutschland, Cologne 1960; Neue deutsche Architekur 2, Stuttgart 1962: Pehnt, Wolfgang, Neue deutsche Architektur Stuttgart 1970; Huse, Norbert, ‘Neues Banen’ 1918 bis 1933, Munich ty7s; Nestler, P.. and Bode, Peter M., Deutsche Kunst seit 160, Aretir teknur, Munich 1976; Petsch. Joachim, Batrkuist und Stadtplaming im Dritten Reich, Munich ig? Klotz, Heinrich, Architektur in der Bundes- republik, Frankfurt and Berlin 1977; Pehnt. Wolfgang. ‘Architektur’, in: Erich Steingriber (ed.), Dettsche Kunst der 20er und joer Jahre. Munich 1979; Bofinger, Helge and Margret (eds.), ‘Architektur in Deutschland’, Das Kanst- werk (Stuttgart), 32 (197g), nos. 2/  Gibberd. (Liverpool Cathedral RCL: tugu Ty  Gibberd, Sir trederick. b. Kenihvarth, 1 Coventry iyo. do rys4. Studied at Birnuny ham School of Architecture, where he met PLOROS. *Yorkeoin private practice from 1936 Planning consuleant to several borough coun-  dil and architect and planner of Harlow New Town, G. was responsible for a wide range of buildings. including Ha: Notable post-war buildings were  housing schemes ind hospitals Scunthorpe steelworks tnd power house (1g 47  yh Heathrow Airport. London ytyse 6g) National Dock Labour Board Onlices 1ysO}. Dideot Power Station, Berkshire: buy  Si Ulster Hospital, Belfast Gros) Gri Elis prizee Winning “Crown of Thorns’ design for the Ronan Catholic Catheds zy shows dhe intlucuce of *Nicmieyer’s Brasilia  London  hat Liverpool (iy6a  Cathedral. His more recent work in the capital included the Inter-Continental Hotel. Flyde Park Commer Gigs}, and the Central London Mosgne coger an Regent's Park  
Gill, Jeang Jolin, bo Syracuse. NY. 18 Carkbad, Cale 1g30. Firse worked in the office of * Adder ond *Sullivan in Chicago; atter 18g6 San Diego on hisown, Hiscarly buildings are style, allowed attere. 1906 by work mo which sunple geometric elements assume Tpertance: ‘the stratght line. the are. the cube aad the circle, thy mightiest of all lines’ (Wilson Acton Hotel at La Jolla, tyo8: Dodge House. Fis whitewashed, flat- asymmetrically  many  Tos Angeles. 1g) rooted disposed remforced- concrete buildings, which often display ne mouldings ot any kind and are presented ay abstract stereametric Compositions, were in=  spired by Spanish missions in California and are  markedly similar te the Cubist architecture of  Adolt * Loos  frving Gill 8-0) tga fexhibition catalogue), Tos Angeles toss: MeCos. Esther. Mire Califare mia Architects, New York tyoo. Kamerling. Bruce. fremy Gill) Phe Artitas Architect. San Diese. Cal. 1g7y.  Gisel, krmst. b After tun and studying  Adlswill, near Zunch tg22 yoayain architectural draughtsman the Kunstgewerbeschule in Zurich, he worked under Alfred Roth. the principal proponent of the Moder Movement an *Swatverland, Tr dugs he entered inte part- nership with Emst Sehiir since 1y47 he has bad his own office me Zurich, Charteteristic of Gos architecture, FNew cabie and cireular geomet forms: large, calm and natural material or those handled  Brutiisni, are the lively  surface  Vaduz  Gisel. Gymnasium and Reals HiygGs Tal  which esa distant reflection ef collision of  ay if natural, including stone. brick, concrete and wood. Among G.’s most important works figure, besides the relatively atypical Park Theatre in Grenchen (tg4y $s): the Bergkirche in Rigi-Kaltbad (1962-4); the Protestant Com- munity Centre mm Stuttgart-Sonnenberg (1964 6}ca residential complex with 1.800 units in the *Markisches Viertel’ of Berlin (196s 8).): and the Gy nmasium and Realschule in Vaduz, Liech- tenstem (1yO8 73} F] ~ Maurer, [.. anc Kiminig. Eo. Erase Gisel Baniten wad Projekte, pamphlet on the exhibition of the Wirttemberg section of the Asocnition of German Architeets (Bund (Deutscher Archi- cekten), Stuttgart 1y66. “Ernst Gisel. drchiter- mre and Cvhantsar (Pokvo}, August Ly7e: “Ernst Gaisel. Werk, Baacn + Holmen (Munich). vol oy. nos, TX. pp. iS 7a. Munich 1y82  Glaserne Kette. In November ryty. Bruno *Tant wrote to thirteen German architects, artists and eritics. suggesting that they should band thenisclyes into a private forum for the exchange of architectural ideas, drawings and fantisies. Wath one exception the critic Adolf Bohne allagreed. The group was made up of Walhelm Brockmann, Hermann *Finsterlin, Paul Goesch. lakobus Gottel, Walter *Gropius, Wenzel August Hablik, Plans Hansen, Carl Kravl Hans *Luckhardt. Wassil *Luckharde, Hans *Schareun. Brune Taut and May *Taut These thirteen were later jomed by the play- wright Alfred Brust. who also coined the ttle Die glaserne Kette’) Ac Bruno gation, pseudonyms were used in the corre=  Paut’s inst  spondence  The common factor shared by dhe members ofthe group was a desire to break away from the norms of academic architecture. and riany had cabibited at the “Ausstellung fir unbe- kanate Architekten’ orgamzed by the *Arbeits— rattir Kunstin April igiy. There was no group sevle. but rather a tendency to look tor funda- mental constructional torus taken from uature: and plant forms were favoured as models for future architecture. For structural purposes, glass, steel and concrete  crystals. shells, amoeba  were the favoured materials. reflecting the influence of Bruno Faut and his mentor, the glass fantasist, Paul Scheerbart. Also from Seheerbart, reimtorced by the Berlin Dadaists. came the wilful mhilism and infantilism which appeared particularly in the concributions of Goesch, Krayl and Bruno Taut. Most of the  
work of the members of the group was pub- lished by Taut in the journal Mrihtiche  The correspondence ran unk December 1920. Several members of the group later Joined the *Ring, whose aims were more in accord with the new spirit of *Functionalism and *Neue Sachlichkeit. IBM C2 Die ghiserne Rette. Uistonare Architcktaren aus dem Kreis um Bruno Tat (exhibition catalogue). Leverkusen and Berlin 1y63: Whyte, lain Boyd. Braco ‘Paut and the Architecture of Activisin, Cambridge 1y82.  Goff, Bruce. b. Alton. Kansas ty04. d. Tyler. Texas 1082. He had his first independent office in Chicago, 1935 42. and later practised in Berkeley, Cal. 1y4s-6, Bartlesville. Oklav. 1gs6 64, Kansas City, 1964-9, and Tyler 1970 82. He was a professor at the School of Architecture of the University of Oklahoma at  Norman, 1947 ss.and from 1948 also Dean of  the school, His biilt work consisted mostly of in which the influence of Frank Lloyd * Wright is especially evident in the early years G.'s ebullient individualism resulted in designs  hous  of an expressionist eccentricity, Technical cal- culations and emotional improvisations are often the mutually contradictory sources of his inspiration. In the Bavinger House in Norman, Okla. (1as0-s contained externally by a wail of raw sandstone, while the irregular roof, the stairs, the access bridges and the living quarters are all suspended from a central mast by steel cables CHa  a logarithmic spiral of pace is  Goff. Wavinger House, Norman. Okla. (1yso. 3)  DeLong. David. Phe Architecture of Brice Goff) Butldings and Projects, 1916 tar7 (2 vols.), New York 19 elechitectiral Design, AD Profiles 16: Bruce Goff) London ty78: Cook, Jottrey. The Architecture af Bruce Gof, London  and New York 178  Gogel, Danicl. b. Berlin 1y27. Atter study at the Hochschule fir bildende Kuste in Berlin, G. established himselfay an independent archi- teet in his native city. and since tysa he has worked in partnership with Hermann *Feh- ling  Gollins, Melvin, Ward Partnership. Part- nership established in 1gg7 by Frank Gollins, James Melvin and Edmiand Fisher Ward. E tensive practice initially invelved largely with postawar rchabilitation work, distinguished for ability to handle large niasses and exploit the results of caret research work. Extensive work for schools and universities and for the National  Health Services as well ay numerous offices. Their offices in New Cavendish Street, London QUs7 curtuin-wall glass fagade. Che firm. which nos  represented a pioneering use of the  has some 130 employees, enjoys an inter- national ehenedle  © Architecture of the Gollins Melvin Ward Partuership. London 1974  Grassi, Giorgio, b. Milan rg3s. Studied ac the Milan Politecnico: diplosia 1y60. From 1y6t to tyog he worked for the periodical Casahclhe contnmita. In yy6s he was appomted wt professor ac Milan Politecnico, and 1g6s 78 abso at the University in Pescara. Even more radically than Aldo *Rost. Go attacks individualisn and fahionable experimentation in architecture. He  considers that architectural history already makes abundantly available the archetypes which can be applied to the entire spectrum of possible architectural tasks. Not comeidentally,  the rigorons work of Hemrich * Fesscrow is, alongside the traditional architecture of che large. sengly articulated farm buildings et Lombardy. one at his principal models. “Vhe house in Vela di Marone on the Lago dleco. built in ry@2 in collaboration with CG. Bavaz= zeni, already demonstrates Gas reduetivist m= pube. In his project for the conversion of the Castel Viscanteo at Abbnitegrisc into a Town Phd) yrgzo) he contrasts bistorigal fornis  with woneainal mionmtinentalo. fi 1o76 he 
otaborated with Antena Monesaroli on the cosiee oP che Students’ Residence in Chieu. under comstructen trem 1aza roof the Vostraight agorastyle street  fhe he  obipositian as which. in ats tall colonnades of slender square pilasters Hanking the street. the recalls Friedrich nee sown quest for a  Wembrenner’s unrealized design for che L Strabe in Kurkruhe (1808), G collective, maximally objective. formal tan-  gthige, represents the limits of * Rational archi- tecture. nn Chat ccononie factors and reason alone determine design VM  Grassi, Ga. Liat vestrizione fogica delfurchi- fetrrd, Venice 1a: » Lourchiternira come mestiore ¢ dlire scrtti, Milan rg8o (originally published ay La argittcertina come officio y otros escttes, Bareclona tozy): Giorete Grassi. Pro- germ eisegnid 1965-1980 (exhibition catalogue). Mantua tys2  Graves, Michael. b. Indianapolis i934. Studied at the University of Cinginnati, Ohio. and at Harvard after which he was a Fellow at the American Academy in Rome for two years. In iyfg. he opened his own office in Princeton, N.J.. where he was appointed pro- fessor at the University in bya. Gos name first came to wide publ attention in ig  University.  2 through the inclusion of his work in Fire Architects, alongside chat of *Excnman, *Gwachmey and Siegel. *Hejduk and *Meier (*New York Five). His work at that point - such as the Hanselinann | fouse in Fore Wayne, lid. (1967), and the addition to the Benacerrat House in Princeton (ty60j, both Hustrated in the book  shared with that of the other four architects a formal, often radical, return to the style of *Le Corbusier's work of the Ty20s. The primacy of architectural fornt soun led G reaching excursions nico history, first to Boullée  to some fare  and Ledoux and tinally to dhe antique and thus continually further Hom a rationalistic white architecture toa more colourful one of debeate pastel tones. As earlier wath his neo-modernism, this neo-historicisia (A stories) alo moved towards a highly abstiacs level which elimin- ated direct borrowings froin carly styles. Char- acteristic examples of bis piost recent creative phase are the Fargo-Moorhead Cultural Center Bridge between Farge, S19. and Moorhead, Minn. (designed 1977), O. Kalko House in Green Brook, NJ. (desigaee ig78). and che Public Services Building in? octland, Oregon (hgso- 2). AM  =  —  2s  z= 5s #2 # # # 3 @ @ # & a mpeepeeameuseasrrer  es  Graves. Public Services Building, Portland, Oregon (1yso 2)  Five Architects. = New York lyz2t Colquhoun, Alan, and Carl, Peter, Michael Graves, London 179.  Great Britain. At the turn of the century British architecture seemed in some respeets to be the most advanced. In the second half of the toth century. the movement for the reform of y Henry Cole way centred on the South Kensington (later Victoria and) Albert} Muscum, and the Royal College of Art produced several genera- tions of well-trained designers. Art. schools were influenced by the preaching of John Ruskin, as well as by the teaching and example of William *Morris, who contributed to a powerful revival of crafts and opposed the spread of mechanization in everyday life. At- tempts were made to bridge the contradiction by architect-designers of the *Arts and Cratts  design teaching and patronage led by $ 
movement such as C. R. *Ashbeo and C.F. A. *Voysey. as Well as by other leading architects of the time, notably Richard Norman *Shaw, Perhaps the most important attempt in this direction was the creation of the Garden Ciry movement through the teaching of Ebenezer *Howard. While England remained virtually untouched by *Art Nouveau, Scodand had in Charles Rennie *Mackintosh a one-niin pro- tagonist of this movement. In Englind the Arts and Crafts designers. produced simplification of Continental exe decorative ares, and this was re-exporied to the Continent by the carly exponents of the *Neue Sachlichkeit, notably Hermann *Muthesius However. in the years before World War 1 and for some time after, British architecture was dominated by a revival of r8th-century menu-  suceesstul  esta the  mentalism, strongly imflucnced by French academic teaching. Shaw became the most Important protagonist of this tendency, fol- lowed by bis) principal disciples: Reginald Blomfield (Piccadilly Hotel, the Regent Street Quadrant and the layout of Piccadilly Cireus im London. 1904 23) and Sir Edwin *Lutyer,  who presided over the maximum extension of  British architecture in the heyday of the Eu pire. Its clamax was the building of the govern- ment city of New Delhi in *India (1yt2 34). though the manner was abo exported to Canada, Australia and South Africa. At home, it dominated new commercial building in the City of London, as in Britannic House (1920. 4) and the Midland Bank (1924. 39) by Lutyens.  Meanwhile, a modified ryth-century style (Neo-Georgian) was taken up by the Garden Cities (Letchworth, Welwyn) and by the newly consututed architectural offices of local govern- ment authorities, notably the Londen County Council (LCC). The new (1918 and. after) London Underground authority, amalgamated with others in’ 1933 to become the London Passenger Transport) Board. patronized an overall standard of design which extended from leering and trains (1922) to the actual build- ings, their architects, C. Percy Adams, Charles Holden and J. L. Pearson. achieved a remark- able amalgam of imperted Dutch (*Amster- dam, School of) and native elements, creating a homogencous and impressive style.  The 1920s were also a time when Britain was infected with an enthusiasm for the *Art Deco fashion from Paris. This was fused with certain Swedish and German Expressionist f  ALUEeS.  Great Britain. Arnos Grove Underground Stagon, Londen £122), by © Perey: Adams, Chailes Holden and J. 1. Pearson  (*lxpressionisim) inte a) persuasive miterior munner, often in conjunction with Dutch- inducneed exteriors, which was used an the many town halls. crimemias, hotels and restaurant chains (particularly. of this last type. those done for}. Lyons & Co. by Oliver 2. Bernard). The post-war period was dominated by the ava demic ponipicr architects; besides Lutyens and Blomticld, Sir Gales Gilbert Scott, Sir Edwin Cooper (Marylebone Town Hall: Port of Lon- don Authority) and Sir Herbert Baker (Othices and Assembly in New Delbi: rebuilding of the Bank of England in London) deserve mention. The younger generation was represented by three renuirkable architect-teachers, who were inclined to entertain both new ideas and new  Great Britain. Peter jones department store, London (usgi by CoE Rely with Crabtree Slater and Mobertey 
naaterials: Albert Richardson. Howard Rob- erent and ©. H. Reilly. Richardson (Financial lunes Building in London) represented the extreme acadenic posinon: Robertson (Royal Horncultural Society Hall in Londen, 123. with Murray Easton: British Paviliony im Parts. tgs. Brussels, ry3s; New York. 1939) demi- nated the Architectural Association; and Reilly Dorset House in Piceadilly, 1923, with Carrere & Hastings of New York, the Peter Jones department store in Sloane Square, London, jyrg. with hus ex-pupils Crabtree, Slater and Moberley - a showpiece of the new *Function- alism) made the Liverpool University Architec- tural School the leading one in Britain. Thomas J. Taw, who worked through the established practice of the Scot, Sir John Burnet (extension of the Britsh Muscum, London), introduced a daring Dutch strain into their later work such as the Royal Masonic Hospital in Hammersmith (1y30 4), the Mount Royal Hotel in Oxford Sereet. London {1y32-3). and St Andrew's House, the monumental Scottish government centre in Edinburgh /1933-9). Joseph Ember- ton had been an assistant of Tait’s, and began his  career with the vast concrete Expressionist Olympia Exhibition Halls (1g2y~30). The Royal Corinthian Yacht Club at Bumham-on- Crouch way a much more sober conerete-and- glass pavilion in the Water. OF his later build- ings. the stores for Simpson's in Piccadilly {1933 4) and His Master's Voice in Oxtord Street. London f1y38—9), both variants on the horizontal articulation of the serect fagade, are the best known  However. the nose showy innovator of the period was not an architect: Owen * Williams had worked on the design of railways and aircratt. He became a specialist in remforced- . His first major building was the mushroom-colunmed and continu- ously glazed factory tor Boots at Beeston, near Nottingham (1930-2). the next was the Wem- bley swimming pool -iy33-4). while at the same time he worked on the Pioncer Health  concrete constructio!  Centre in Peckham, another concrete-frame building, largely faced wis glass. ‘Phe office building for the Daily carly experiment in the use of opaque glass as a facing material. In the area of 4 nuestic building the scene was dominated by +  transport, which was co-ordin 0.) with subur- ban developments on a large +. ie, this hap- pened particularly around Londer. Uhe Garden  Expies. in London was an  expansion of  Great Britain. Boots Factory, Beeston, near Nottingham (1930 2). by Owen Willams  Great Britain. ‘High and Over’, Amersham. Bucks. f1y2y 30). by Amyas Connell 
Cities grew only moderately, and did noe multiply, though the new LCC office did attempt to experiment with relativel building (Somerstown, tg22 32). Meanwhile a new generation of architects had matured. Amyas Connell built ‘High and Over at Amersham, Bucks. (1g2y 30), for the archacologist Bernard Ashmole: but his best work was done in collaboration with Basil Ward (after 1931) and Colin Lucas (after 1933). a partnership which lasted until 1939. Aparc from some film studios, their work consisted entirely of houses and apartments which, de~ spite their modest le, revealed a) daring formal attack, and amony British architgets this group comes nearest to a Constructivist ap- proach (Constructivism). E. Maxwell *Fry had been a pupil of Reilly, and his first major independent building was the Sun House in Frognal, Hampstead, London (1934 Ss). a re markably accomplished exercise in concrete and glass, Fry was to work in partnership with Walter *Gropius during the latter's first exile i Britain in 1935. The partnership's only impor- tant non-domestic building, Impington Village College, Cambs, (1930-40), became the proto- type for much English scholastic architecture after the war. Fry at this time also completed his Pioneering housing scheme, Kensal House, London. Marcel * Breuer entered into a similar partnership with F. R. S *Yorke, as did Erich *Mendelsohn with Serge *Chermayeth an anglicized Russian, with whom he built 2 number of houses and De La Warr Pavilion. a seaside concert hall and restaurant complex, in Bexhill, Sussex. After Mendelsohn’s departure for Palestine. Chermayeff designed a large warehouse in Camden Town, London, and was working on an industrial complex for ICI Ltd in Manchester, and meanwhile had also built a remarkable all-timber house at Bentley, Susse for himself. However, at the beginning of World War Il he left for the United Seates Another Russian, Berthold *Lubetkin, bad arrived in London from Paris (where he had worked for Auguste *Perret) in 193t. The group of younger architects which formed around him, *Tecton, did some work at the London Zoo, including a virtuose exercise in reinforced concrete for the penguin pool; and in the very important blacks of flats, Highpoint I (1933-5) and Highpoint Il (1936-8). in High- gate, north London, the new architecture was treated with a brie and elegance unrivalled ia  high-rise  Ta Warr Pavilion,  Great Britain. [he De Bexhill-on-Sea, Sussex tiug4i. by Mendeloha and Chermasett  Great Britain. Pengun: pool at the London Zou fyage by Lecton 
Ieee After the war Lubetkin worked pri- soon the New urban  Poterlee was one of the many New Towns  Town of Peterlee. near  eng cased and dostgnated: after the war. The foost mipersait group of them was sited co the This policy way the imple- lestcition at government level or some Garden The last othe New Downs, Milton spated until yor, and is She war period was  serth ov London  Cty tdeas  Revnes. was toc des sill under construetian devoted ta temporary construction various types af prevabricaccd dress and ta) the scting of tawn-plannimg exercises of some ambition. of yuch the Abercrombie plan tor the FOO best known. Poste ar reconserue= dononevitably started with emergency hous- ing, though trom the ousset planning ideas were being nplemented. The tyg4 educational re- forms required the building of many new schools, amd seme Tocatl authorities fnotably Hertfordshire under Charles Herbert *Astin}  experimented with vartous methods of preiab-  Great Britain. Phe Nanonal Vhyarre. London  1h oh Y Denys Lesdun  ricacion. The methods used were taken aver and developed by the Ministry of Education into the metal-frame and concrete system which came to be known as *CLASP  Uy way of contrast with the rather restrictive nature of the reconstruction programmes and the earnest atmosphere of post-war austerity, the *Festival of Britain took place m tyst. the centenary of the Great Exhibition, with the participation of established architects who had been active before the war. as well as many neweamers. The most important feature was the complex of exhibition buildings on the South Bank of che Thames. of which only one remains, the ikoval Festival Hall, a major concert hall designed by a team in the LOC architects’ office led by Sir Leslie *Martin. It has vince become a major feature of the South Bank cultural complex: which now includes two smaller concert halls and a Jarge exhibition qallery (LOC. 1y68 y). the National Film Theatre. and the National Theatre Denys *Lasdum, ry67-7A)  In the sysos a new generation of architects was already making its mark. Peter ind Alison *Smithson had won the competition for a  
school at Hunstanton, Norfolk. which they designed ina manner scaled down trom the work of *Mies van der Rohe: ther attack on the rather happy-go-lucky formal articudes in Britain and chew attempe to form a Bratalise movement (*New Brutalism) seemed im con-  tradiction. In any case, attention was sall very much focused on the work coming out of the local authorities’ design offices, and the LCC office assumed the characteristics of a school The most famous of its products was the which clearly showed the debate between the ‘em piri- cists’, or Swedish-oriented group that designed the first section consisting of tower blocks (1952). and the “formalist, *Le Corbusier- oriented group responsible tor the later (1933s) point blocks and slabs set in the undulating park SILC.  housing estate at Roehampton, London  The forecasts ofa rapid population rise led to an expansion of the educational system, espe- dally of the universities in che rysos and “Gos. A number of new universides were founded, and their new buildings were the only large-scale institutional commissions in the country. Whe first, and one of the most successful, was the University of Sussex im Brighton (begun 1952) by Sir Basil *Spence, which institutionalized Le Corbusier's Maisons Jaoul; York University was built by Sir Robert Matthew (who had headed the LCC office at the height of it activity) and S. Johnson-Marshall, using 4 modified version of the CLASP pretabrication system; the University of East Anglia at Nor- wich (1962-8) was planned by Lasdun ay a continuous spatial structure. At this time the first public authority mega-struccure ceived by Geoffrey  was con- Zopcutt as part of Cumber-  Great Britain, Housing estate at Rochampton, Tandon trass si, by the London County Couned erdnteets office Hubert: Bennett  Great Britain, Universin of Sussex, near Brighton fiyfs!, bv Sur Basil Spence  nauld New Town near Glagow, a conerete shopping and civic contre begun in ig60. An  analogous housmy scheme m London was the Brunswick Contre im Bloomsbury fty62 Si by Patrick Hodgkinson tvwath Sir Lesbe Miaruot,  lo the Lice rgsos and “6os dere developed: a local brand oF scienev=Netion Buitisy proyects associated with the *Archignagi group. most notably their scheme for a Plug 6). Aldhough the group had fitch: dircet influ enee on arclitectare. 1 dndireet impact was Tuchurd *Rogers with Renzo High-Tech Archigrant in the  IN CUtA LE Eyog  considerabh *Piamnos  TRINET  monumentalized the popularved by 
rhab | . Wiac:  ao  Great Britain, Brunsoick Contre. Bhoomsburs Leadon styg2 sc be Prtack Elodgivupon  design of the Centre Pompiden in Paris L1y7 m1. Phe tense conmmereial bualding acne ies being undertaken im cite centres had produced no architecture ef great disameuon, but did, in the amd-tyzos, produce a governmientspon= sored movement for urban renew al. The prin-  cipal innovations are sull to be scen im the field of academic burtldings: the Leicester Cniversits Engineering Building fiusg 63) by *Stirling and Gowan became perhaps the most-publi- clzed new Brinsh building. Caiversigy build- ings by Stirling inetuded those in Oxtord (at Queen's Colle: tyo6 7) and Cambridge (History Faculty Brilding. cg64 7), ay well avin Scothind at St Andrews (cudent housing, (964  8). Among his other works are a large housing development in Runcorn New Lown (by67- 74). as Well as the extension of the Pate Gallery in London. IR SD EMS. C. Wo. and Sunmmerson, J. Aretates- ture Here and Now. Loudar to34: Roval [nsa- tute of British Architects, Que Fhindred Years of British Architecture, ist toast. Londen tryst: Mills. Edward DL. fhe News clecfecture in Great Britain, r946- 1983. London 1983: Summerson, J. fen Years of British Arehitectin., London 1936: “Great Britain’. Zodiac (Milas. ia. 1S (1968); Landau, Royston, New Direciens ot British Archtectire London and New York ner, No, Proneers of Modern Design, Harmonds- Maxwell. Robert. New British  968. Peys-  worth fy72:  cbedutecttre. London ty72 and New York (73. Uhirtees: British Art and Design hefore the How texhibition catalogue), London iy7y: Lyall, Sutherland. Phe State of British Architec- sive, London igse: Architectural Design (ed.}, British York  Iys2  Irchirecture, London and New  Greene, Charles Sunmer. b. Brighton, Ohio isos, de Carmeh Calo tys7. Studied: at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cam= bridge. He wasin joint practice with his brother Henry Mather *Greene in Pasadena and Los Angeles. t89g ty22. then independently in Carmel, Cal ‘The houses of Greene & Greene were trom the be: handicratt ideal of the *Arty & Crates move- ment. Acthe highpoint of their extensive euvre stind the Blacker House ((go7) and the Gambie House (fyos-y), both m Pasadena, which, with  dining stamped with the  their mierpenctration of interior and exterior space. their projecting roots. their Hac gables. their Warm materials (wood, shingle-clad walls.  Muiined-glass windows) tnd highly claborated detuls. are among the best examples of a Californian version of *Are Nouveau, inspired by the japenisne of the epoch.  2. McCoy, Esther, Five Culiforiia Architects, ew York 1y6o:; Current, William, Greene aid Greene: Architecture in the Residential Style. Dobbs Ferry, N.Y. tuzg: Strand. Janann, Greene and Greene Guide, Pasadena 1 Aak- inson, Randell L., Greene and Greene (2 vols), Salt Lake City 1977/0.  
Greene, Charles S. and Heury M, Ube Gamble House, Pasadena, Cal. {1y08 y}  Greene, Henry Mather, b. Brighton, Ohio i870, do Altadena, Cal. 1gs4. Studied at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cani- bridge. Worked in partnership with his brother Charles Summer *Greene in Pasadena and Los Angeles, t8yg-1y22. then independendy in Pasadena.  Gregotti, Vittorio. b. Novara 1y27. Studied at the Milan Politecnico: diploma tys2. From 1952 to 1967 he was in partnership in Milan with Lodovico Meneghetti and Gtotto Stop- Pino as Architetti Associati; since 1974 with Pierluigi Cerri and Hiramichi Matsui as Gre: otti Associati. He was an editor of Cusahellie  Gregotti. Residence for employees of a textile factory, Cameri, near Novara (Archiretti Associa 1ys6 7)  comtinuita, 1982-60, of Edilizia Moder. 1962- 4. and of He Terri, tyo3-s; Director of La Rassegna inaiaed since 1y8o and, since igs Cusahella. Fle has been a protessar, first at the Milan Politecnico, 1y64 78. and, since ty78, at the Istiture Cniversitario di Architettura in Venice.  G.. whe during the years he spent with EL N. *Rogers on the editorial staff of Casahefla- contdita had boon an apologist for Italian Neo- liberty (block of Hats for the Bossi company in Camen, near Novara, 1y50—7). developed in the course of hiv work a progressively more  detached, rationally controlled formal kin= ywuage. His interest in topographical fictors ay a ady evident in hiy urban plan for Novara (executed 1y62 7}  reached spectacular heights in the grand prajcets for Palermo University (from 170). the Quarticre Zen i Palermo (from 1yza), and the University of Calabria (from 1973). near Cosenza, The last (designed with Emilio Bat- toc, Airomichi Matsui, Pierluigi Nicolin, Fran- co Purind, Carlo R. Clerici, Bruno Vigand) isan extensive, bridye-like structure set in the kand- seape at right-angles to the nearby parallel mountain ranges. Communal services and pub- he plazas are chistered at the point where the two-storey “bridge” (for vehicles and pedestri-  bavis for determining adesign alr  ans) adjoins the old streets ofthe town, while the University services housed in buildings at- tached to the bridye-like spine serve to“tillup’ the valley. G's constant concern to base his own artistic positions on rational ideas and co express them in theoretical terms, lends his work a particular weight, This, together with his un- dogmatic openness, has placed hint ina middle position in the comtemporary architectural scene. one which iy at once individual and fruithul. VMI TT Gregetti, Vittorio, Ho terrtterie dell’ arcti- tentitra, Milan 1y6: New Directions ir fala Architecture, London 1y6S aud New York ry6y, Vittorio Gregor, Architect and Urbanism (Tokyo), duly tg77, “Tatori, Man- fredo. Einerio Grewont, Buildings and Projects, New York tos.  Gropius, Walter, b. Berlm 1883. do Boston, Mass., 1g6y. One of the outstanding architects and teachers of the 2oth century, G. was the sou of an architece who occupied an important official position in) Berlm. His great-uncle. Martin Gropius, binnscif aa architect of some  of, 
pate served ws Principal of the Kunst- und Gowerbeschule rArts and) Cratts: School) in Borla Director of art cducation in Prussia. Go reverved bis craming in architceture at the fechnische Elochsehule. first in Munich and  then Berlin. hi ages. he entered the office of  docu *  Behrens, where so many young archi- ceets hiter to become famous had alo worked, among them *Mics van der Rohe and *Le Corbusier. Atter three years in Behrens’ office G. sturted on his own im tye ay an industrial designer and arehitces, Pls designing covered a wide range and included: interior-decoracion schemes, Wall-fabries, models for mass-pro- duced furmeure, motor-car bodies, and a diesel Jocomotive, His first importance building was the Fagus Factory at Alteld an der Leine, built in igtiin collaboration with Adolf *Meyer. This building marked a step forward in stecl-and- glass construction. [tis chree-storeved. the steel t become glass screens. dhe nonestructural charac-  une supports the Hoors, and the walls have  ter of which is cmphasized by che absence of verueal supports at che corners. Ac the fimous *Doutscher Werkbund Exhibition at Cologne in fotg. Ce and Mever designed the Adminis- trative Oftice Building which proved to be a very notible contribution to modem archites= ture. The circular glass towers cnelosing the staircases represent the Urst use of ain architec tara) mont dit was to become ap important feature in otans modern binldings, especially department scores. ft way often used by Erich *Mendebolin to ting cect.  From tysg te cots came a break while G served in the Germany Army, tn tyrs he was appointed by the Grand Duke of Saxe- Weimar to succeed Heury *van de Velde as Director of the GroBherzogheh-Sichsische Kunstgewerbe= schule and of the GroBherzogtich-Sachsische Hochsebule tir Hildeede Runseat Weimar, and in 1919 he combrxd the 20 schools under the name of Day ‘st: Bauhaus Weimar @ Bauhaus), an expression of is own belief in the unity of design: id crutt. of artand technics. He was Director to Weniar from fgg to 1y25 and then at De irom loss to 1y28, in which year he resign cnergics more wholeh. untrammelled by offen.  While Director of the the school’s buildings acl) ai, completed in 1y26 building, a workshop bur ou. a students’  Tiche  toorder to devote his oddly to architecture Juates  haus, G. designed  The complex cons: Wa classroom  hostel. a building with community facilities and a covered bridge between the first two build- ings, Which, besides administrative rooms and clubrooms, contained a private atglier for G. himself. In the workshops” wing reinforced- concrete Hoor-slabs and supporung mushroont posts were employed, with the supports set well back to allow a large uninterrupted glass screen on the fagade extending for three storeys. This was probably the first time so ambitious a use of che glass sereen was adopted in an industrial building, and it paved the way for similar constructions throughout Europe and America  Among other works was the rebuilding of the Municipal Pheatre at Jena (1923). designed in collaboration with Meyer, and two very  interesting projects, one 4a building tor an international academy of philosophical studies wm Frlangen (1924) and che other dhe Teta theater, a design made in 1927 in collaboration with Erwin Piseator, che Berlin theatrical pro- ducer. The purpose was to design a theatre that could be adapted to sant the type of play to be performed, from the Greek theatre with semi- circular orchestra, co the cireuy with cencral arena, and toa modern proscenium-arch type. The tiers of seats could be revolved in sections to onable the change from one forni to another to be effected quickly. A model was exhibited at the 1930 Part Exhibition, butit wasnever built.  G. was not only an architect and industrial deagner, bue a sociologist who wanted to build on the bast of a rational interpretation of the needs of people. During the litter part of his directorship of the Baubans, he studicd the problem of obtaining che best living conditions in cities While preserving their urban character, He aimed to produce city dwellings in whieh the mhabitants obtained as much suntight and open space with trees and lawns as possible at very much the same density as then existed. To achieve this he evalved the tall dab-like apart- ment block ofabout ten storeys, sited to gain the Maximunr of sunshine, with cross-ventilation and with broad stretches of garden between the blocks and open at both ends. He showed that higher blacks housing people at the same overall density would allow far more space ac ground-level and greater advantage to be caken of natural light.  G. was able to realize his ideas partially in the Damunerstock housing scheme im Karlsruhe (1y27-8): there he pot only designed some of the five-storey blocks bur acted as a co-  
ordinator for eght other architeets. In this scheme several blocks are arranged in parallel hnes transversely with the streets. A mere ambitious scheme was the large Sicmensstadt estare in Berhn (1929) 30}. in which G. acted as supervising architect with several ethers cok laborating. while he was himself responsible for  nwo of the blocks. The general layout comists of  long  ve-storey blocks, orientated north-souch soastu receive the maximum sunlight, widely spaced with stretches of grass and tall trees with light delicate foliage between. The blocks have pale plain walls with large windows. and they are planned with two Mary per danding. hese Siemensstadt dary exerted a wide taiflucnee and have been much imitated.  With the accession to power of the National  Socialists in 1933, conditions became diticule  for liberal and moderm-minded architects, sein 1934G. left Germany tor England. He setiled in London and entered inte parmership with f. Maxwell *Fry. one of the mast successtt of the younger British architects. Together they de- signed tlm laboratories for London Film Pro- ductions at Denham (1936); twe houses, ong un Sussex (1936) and one in Old Church Stree: Chelsea (1935): and Impington Village College. Cambridgeshire (1936). one of tour village colleges erected by the Counry Council. This was G.'s most important contribucon to archi- tecture in England. Jt is a one-storey building with single-depth classrooms, fneshaped hall. and dub amenities, sited amongst aways and trees to serve the dual purpose of a secondary school and community centre for adults. Early ww 1437, G, accepted an invitaden to become a professor at Harvard University and left for the United States: the following year, he became Chairman of the Department of Arehitecture at Rarvard. One year later, he built his own howe in Lincola, Mass... which has much of the classic restraint of the houses that he had designed for himself and che Bauhaus leaders in 1926. This was followed by a large number of private residences built in collaboration with other architects in America. In the year of his arrival he entered into a parmership with Marcel *Breuer. a former student and master at the Bauhaus, In the years of their parmership, in addition to several houses, including one for Breuer himself, they designed the Pennsylvania Pavilion at New York World’s Fair in 193y. and an interesting housing scheme at New Kensing: ton near Pittsburgh for workers in an alumin-  Gropius. Aparcurent block in the Siamensstadt  estate, Berhin staay 30  tum factory stggiis the buildings were irregue larly sited. following the contours of the hills, ind reached by winding paths. Phe paruiership with Breuer ended im roge.  Already in Germany. m 1g32.G. had begun eaperiments with standarized building cle- menty for masproduced housmg. and he resumed these experiments durmg the war veary fgg3) S$. While the carter ideas were con- corned with the use of copperssheer chiding. these later dev opments employed sunber par both horvontally amd of 46 in. ior é cn, After experic ments with Konrad *Wachymann on Long sland, NOY. these  uly based on a module vertically made in’ collaboragen  houses were erected m considerable numbers in Cahtoran  Inogs G. wentinte partnership with several architcets of the vounger generation. tormiing a ceam ofcight under the name of Che Archirects Collaporadve’ TAC). In this cnterprise he Phat he was able to encer with cothestass nica so Large a  wvas the guide and leading spirit  troup demonstraces lus great belief m che value ofteamwork something he had always felt te be necessary in modern building. Phe work of the team tneludes the Graduate Center. frare yard University, Canbridge (rug so}, which consists of a group of seven darmitary blocks. all sited around the social centre  Mach of Go. activity ain the hist vears of lis life. Prom. fast to Poet. wasn West Berlin In bys7 be built candsoine ten-storey apartnent 
Gropius. Harvard Graduate Counter, Cy Mass. TAC. tyia  block as part of the Interbau Exhibition m the Hansa distrres. dt has a concave baleonicd front facing south, wath an open ground Hoor and froestanding piers. late modern idiom. Inthe oy6es the New Town of Britz-Buckow-Rudow was built so an over= alurban plan formutared by G, The Bauhaus Archive inthe Berlut Tiergarten wats built long,  aawork very such in the  after G.'s death. my 1y°6-*. Originally planned for Darmstadt, it was adjusted rans new site by Alexander Cvijanovic  Gos buildings are distinguished by av adven- turous use of modern niacerials steel, conerete and glass — while he may be regarded as perhaps  che principal innevater in the use of the glass sereen in forming the entire outer shell af a building. thus admitting the maximum of ight Architecturally, his work iy always distin-  guished by a clawic restraint and excellence of  proportion, of which the houses for the statf at the Bauhaus in Dessau are an example. But  Gropius. Apartment block in the Hansavtertel. Berlin with Wilk Ebern, ryscr  MmMportant as Go way as an architect. he was possibly even more induential as. teacher. He was a great believer jn the intelligent applica- oon of standardization and prefabrication, but above all he wanted a building to be the product of teamwork in which cach member of the team appreciated fully how his contribution related to the whole design. G. regarded this as a symbol of community living and the intelligent mitegration of society. AW L- Gropius, W.. Idee tind Anfthau des Staatlichen Baha, Munich and Weimar 1y23: -. The New Architecture and the Bauhans, London and New York 1936: ——. Scape of total architecture. New York 1943 -, Apollo in der Demokratie. Mainz 1g07. Giedion, S.. Wale ter Gropins. Mensch und Werk, Stattgart: tos4: Fitch, James Marston, TPulter Gropins. New York and London ty6o: Franciscono, Marcel, Walter Gropius and the creation of the Bathaus in Weimar, Urbana. HL, 1971.  
Gruen, Victor. b. Vienna (as Viktor Crriin- baum) 1903. Studied in Vienna under Peter *Behrens (1924-s)}. Emigrated to che USA in 1938. Mainly known for his town and country planning projects (c.g. plan for Fort Worth. Texas 1955). His conception of “shopping cen- tres’ was epoch-making: sited out of town and catering for the needs of a car-owning society (Northland Shopping Center, Detroit, 1ys2). they became prototypes for the American post- war suburban expansion, although he himself advocated striking a balance between private and mass transit. These ideas were developed in his Fort Worth plan and expounded in his /feart of our Cities (New York 1964).  O Tunnard, Christopher, Man-Made America, New Haven, Conn. 1963.  Gruppo 7. Alliance of seven Milanese archi- tects (from the Scuola Superiore di Architettura del Politecnico di Milano): Ubaldo Castagnoli, Luigi *Figini, Guido Frette, Sebastiano Larco, Gino *Pollini, Carlo Enrico Rava and Giuseppe *Terragni. The group was founded in 1926, but Castagnoli left after several months and was replaced by Adalberto *Libera. They first came to public attention in 1927 with their exhibition at the Biennale in Monza. In a four-part manifesto, published in 1926-7 in the magazine La Rassegna fialiana, the members declared their withdrawal from a much too ‘romantic’ depen- dence on the past, as the Italian Futurists (*Futurism) had already demanded years earlier, and proposed an ‘Italian’ version of rationalist modernism. Their work was characterized by a balance between a reverence for *Le Corbusier's machine aesthetic on the one hand, and the classical monumentality of Greek temples on the other: the group laid the theoretical groundwork for [talian *[Qation- alism. In 1y28 the M.A.R. (Movimento Archi- tettura Razionale) grew out of the group. This gave birth two years later to the *M.LA.R (Movimento ftaliano per VArchitettura Ra- zionale), VMI O Articles in La Rassegna Htaliana, December 1926-May 1y27; Kruft, Hanno-Walter, ‘Ra- tionalismus in der Architektur — vine Be- griffsklarung’. Architectura, vol. gy, 1979.  twelve  Guimard, Hector, b, Paris 1867, d. New York 1942. Studied in Paris at the Ecole des Arts Décoratifs and at the * Ecole des Beaux-Arts. He was influenced by *Horta, the most brilliaut  Guimard. Fntrance to a Pariy Metro station (Sug yoo)  and important architect of *Art Nouveau Among his principal works are the still eclecti- cally composed Castel Béranger in Paris (T8y7— 8). the entrances to the Paris Métro stations (18yy (yoo), Virmoso pieces of organic design evocative of fortns in nature. as well as the Humbert-de-R omanys building in Paris (1yo2), a large auditorium of iron construction, G.s originality lay principally in ornamental design. He transtormed railings, balustrades, furniture, and even the structural clements of his buildings into charged images of highly individual associ-  adonal richness and retinement  O Grahain, F. L., Hector Guinard. New York 1y7o. Naylor, G.. and Brunhammer, Y., Flector Guimard, London 1978.  Gwathmey, Charles, b. Charlotte. N.C. 1938. Studied at the University of Penusylvania in Philadelphia (ander *Kahn and *Venturi) and at Yale University (under * Rudolph. *Stirling and * Woods). Fle was Professor of Design at the Prate Institute. New York. ty64-6. Sub- sequently, he taught at Yale. Princeton, and Harvard Universities and at the University of California in Los Angeles. In 1966 he opened.  together with Richard Henderson. his own practice in New York, which he has continued since TyTh in partnership with Robert Siegel. who had joined the firm in the previous year. G belonged, long with *Eisenman, *Graves. *Hojdun and *Mcier, to the *New York Five. who were much discussed in the mid-ty7es for their formal, indecd overtly radical. return to carly modernism, especially *Le Corbusier's 
veers ace carly rygos. In addition to numer  ops mt  urs, G. has for the move part designed  pry houses. such as bis own house ac Aonagansett. N.Y. iiyas. 7). the Steel and Orly Houses in Bridgehampean, N.Y. (gay tus suith Siegel ay well as the Cogan House in bast Hampoon, NOY. igti 2: with Siegel). OF dhe tree seale proieets of recent years, the Fast Campns Comples of Columbia University in New Yors icgar. wath Fmery Roth & Sons) is especialy to be noted AM  Hire refuted. New York tg72. ‘Other spatial realuas’. Progressive trchitecture. Feb, Cutt. pp. 72832 Breslow. Kay and Paul (cds.). Charles Guathacy & Robert Siegel, WVobnbanten 1966 1977. Pribourg cy7y: Marhn, William, "A section chreugh the thinking of Gwathiney Segel Architects’. Architeamral Record, Sep. erg, ppg) tot: Abererambie. 8. Greathiney Siegel, New York and London iys1.  Haesler, Otto, b. Munich r8so, d. Wilhelms- horst, near Potsdam, ry62, After studying at the Baugewerkschulen of Augsburg and Nurem- berg and working for a time asa mason, he worked for a dine im collaboration with Lud- wig Bernoully in Frankfurt am Main before startng his own office nm Celle m ig06. He was an advocate of the maximuny possible industri- alization of housmy construction. Such symp  chies Were, he felt, in harmony with the aims of the architectural association Der *Ring. which he joined in fy26. Among Hos individual buildmys ef this period the best known is the Damnnerstock estate Karbruhe (1927: 8, buile under the direction of *Gropius), Of his con- temporary public work, Use “Iralienischer Gar- cen’ (Eealian garden} in Celle (1y24) — isolated portions of which sll sur.tve - as well as the s), the Roth- enberg estate in Kassel (igzu-31) and the Bhlumenlagerteld estate ur Celle (tg31}, all of which adhere strongly te che strip-building principle. shouid be notes. With the rise of National Socialism, Hl wishdrew in tg34 ta Eutin, where he was active «garden designe: In 1446 he went to Rathe: oes cto rebuild the historic town centre, and fre 1: 1ys3 he lived in Wilhelinshorst. FI  Georgsgarten estate in Celle (iy  Thaesler, Otto, Zia Problem des Wohnnungs- haus. Berlin 193 «Mein Lebensiwerk als Arhitekt, Berlin (East) 1as7) Lane. Barbara Miller, drchiteenire and Politics in Germany, igtd-194s, Cambridge, Mass. tg68  Haller, Fritz. b. Solothurn. Switzerland 1y24. After apprenticeship and collaboration with various Swiss architects, ay well as with Willem van Tijen and HA. Maaskant in Rotterdam, H. established his own practice in his home town m 1949. From 1966 to 1971 he was guest professor at the University of Southern Califor- nia in Los Angeles, where he worked with Konrad * Wachsmann on pioneering studies on movement patterns m space. Since 1y77 he has been a professor at the Technische Universitit in Karlsruhe.  H. made his name above all with his stcel building system. which is one of the nuest ments in industrialized building. In ty60 he was viven the task of erecting a fabrication building for che metal constructions firm USM in Miinsingen. ‘Chis was the impetus for his development of a universally appheable system for spanning great distances in building (Maxi system). Several vears later. for an admimistra- tion building to be erected next to the factory, he developed a system involving shorter spany for smaller buildings with appended extension spaces (Mini system). A third building system. likewise developed for che Miinsingen-based firm, was the USM Hlailer office furniture system, which he developed m= 1y64-7o and which has since become a classic of modern furnicure design, Finally, in the carly ry7os, H. developed a system for highly systematized construction of buildings with medium span- ning distances (Midi system). This was used for the first ume on a large seale in’ the Swiss Railways Training Centre at Murten (1y80-2, with Alfons Barth and Hans Zauge). Among H.'s other buildings, the bese known are: those for USM in Miinsingen (1960-4); the Wagsen- ring School in Basle (ist phase tryst -s: 2nd phase 1gs8-62); the Canton School in Baden (igs8-64); and the Hohere Technische Lehr- anstalt (Higher Techmieal Training Centre) in Brugg- Windisch (1461-6).  H., who with Franz Fiieg is the most promt nent representative of the ‘Solothurn School’ (*Switzerland), has never sought orginalicy, but rather has always aimed at the generally valid solution. His primary concern is the  achiev  Sy. 
Haller. Swin Railways Training Centre, Murten (with Alfons Barth and Hans Zaugg: ty8o. 2}  mastery of a given task on an abstract level. Just mn architecture — which he considers as based his approach led him to develop building systems, so in town planning.  as  in construction  on which he has written two basic works, he develops ideal plans which exclude any element of chance. tH CO Haller, Fritz, Totale Stadt. Lin Modell, Olten 1968, ——, Totale Stadt. Ein globules Modell, Olten 1978; “Die Solothurner Schule’, Bares + Wohnen (Munich). 36 (1981), nos. 7  Hardy, Hugh (Gelsten), b. Majorca 1y32 (the son of American parents). Studied at Princeton University and then worked for sev  al years is assistant to the New York stage designer Jo Mielziner. In 1g62. he established his own architectural office in New York, and in 1967 encered into a parmership with his carlier collaborators Matcolm Holzman and Norman Pteiffer as Hardy Holzman Pfeiffer Associates (HHPA), Their work is one of the most convincing examples of the ‘third way’  American architecture, between the radical-  m  ization of the abstract formal language of  modernism on the one hand (*New York Five) and a no less formally obsessed * Post-Modern- ism oon the other. Their work takes up the  imagery of everyday culture from that of  modern technology, with its prefabricated con-  structional and installation elements, via that of)  ‘roadway culture’ to that of vernacular con- struction, which at Gimes are combined into an astounding syneretism. A major part of their production falls into the category of ‘cultural’  Hardy. Olmsted Theater. Adelphi Canveruty. Garden City, NOY. (HOPEPAL cu7g)  buildings. for example the Orchestra Hall in Minneapolis (174: in collaboration with Ham- mel Green & Abrahamson). the Olmsted Vheater at Adelphi University in Garden City, N.Y. also tyt4). the renovation of the ryo4 buildings ef the City Art Muscum in St Louis, Mo. (1gs7), as well as the Boettcher Concert Hail in Denver, Col. (1978). A typical example of their residential Work is the Cloisters Condo- nunm im Cineinan, Ohio (1yze). AM — CHHPA'S USA‘ Progressive clrehitecttire. February 19 pp. 42 sg0 (Hardy Holzman Pfoiffer Associates’) clrehitecnire atid Urbanist (Tokyo), March 176: Sorkin, Michael, Hardy Holzman Pleifter, New York and London 1ys1  Haring, tinge. bo Biberach css. d. pingen 1ys8. Sutdicd ac the Saaugare Tech nische Hochschule (ander Theodor *Mischer) and in Dresden, In tryst. he established his own architectural practice in Berlin. In ty24 che Zehnerring was tounded to tight the tendencies propagated by Berlin’s city architect, Ludwig Hotfinann, and this group was later enlarged The Ghite of the avant-  Gép-  become Der *Ring  garde architects of Germany belonged to it. and HL. as ars secretary, was the leader of the associudan, and ua rye he participated im the first *CEAM meeting at Ta Sarraz. In tg33 the Ring was disolved by the Nazis, Though *Gropius and *Mies van der Rohe emigrated, FL remained in Gerniany. where he was the head of a private art schoolin Berlin from 1y35 to 1y4g3. In 1943 he returned to his tative town of Biberach 
Psu cosponsible for a number of gapor ee workssobw did the Garkau farm buildings sand the housing project in’ Berlin- Sranensstid: igs dri became widely known: his roth umpertance, however, lies in the thee-  rosical field. He expounded his views on organic binlding in) pumerous articles and) lectures Sutecture). He maintained that the work of rejuvenating architecture had to  Organi  procs rs rwe stages. The first is concerned wol:rosearch into changing uceds, and aims at hoass for purpose and die ‘organism’: the scoond, on the other hand. deals with ‘design’, Wile in ratianahst thinking arehiteccural Forms were determined by using geometric  torn accepted ay @ prior: beautiful, FT. attempt- white develop designs solely in line with their  tenes tor a purpose. without) preconceived esthetic tdeas. Phe decisive criterion in organic building is the determination of form trom an object’s identity. A building derives its shape tram the function which it has to discharge as the tool (or “organ” as EL called it) of man. The house as the tool ofits inhabitants is the starting point of his thinking.  H.'s ideas. which in the ry20s were limited to asmall circle. became increasingly important with the new phase of modern architecture that started «. 1y30. Later, architects as ditferent as Alvar *Aalto, Louis *Kabn and Hans *Scha- roun adopted similar views MN Hiring, HL. “Wege zur Form’, Die Fern, vol. 1. 1925: ——. “Geometric und Organik’. Barkunst und Werkfornt, volo. 19st: Die Aushifdung des Geistes ur clrbeit an der Gestalt, Berlin 1968; Lauterbach, 14. and Joedicke. J. (eds. Hugo Haring, Schrifien, Hateurte, Barten, Stuttgart 1ydsi Joedicke, J. ied.i, Duy andere Bauen — Gedanken und Zeichimrgen von Hugo Haring, Stuttgart 1g82  Harrison, Wallace K(irkinani. b. Worcester. Mass. tSgs,d. New York 1ysi. Studied bric#y at the *Ecole des Beaux-Arts iu Paris. He worked in association with Harvey Wiley Corbett and William H. MacMurray. tg2y 34: together. they formed one of the three arehiter- tural teams tor the planning of Rockefeller Center in New York (ty31 40}. In 1y34 he formed a parmership with Jacques Andre Fouil- houx. Raymond *Hood's former partner, which was joined in tog: by Max *Abram- ovit7, After Foutlhoux’s death, H continued wo work with Abramovit? (Iy4s-7o}: their firme  GUT GARKAU f  Haring. Gark.u farm buildings, near Libeck {ty24 $s)  Was one of the most successful in) post-war America and played a major role in the planning of dhe United Nations Complex (1947-50) and Lincoln Center (1y62-8) in New York, as well as the Albany Mall state administrative and plaza complex in Albany, N.Y. (1972-8). AM  EA  Haus-Rucker-Co. Architectural group founded by Laurids Ortner, Ginter Zamp Kelp and Mantred Orter in Vienna in 1967, and also active in Diisseldorf since 1y7o, as well as in New York since 1971. The work of Haus- Rucker-Co, which occupies a mtddle-ground between art and architecture, is to be under- stood as 4 “School of Astonishment’, that is asa means co set learning and selfexpericnee pro- cesses in motion, They seck to propagate a ‘provisional’, disposable architecture, a concept which anticipates changes in the environment.  Among the group's best-known achieve- ments are: Balloon for Two, Vienna (1967): the shell around the Haus Lange Museum, Krefeld (ig7t sand the Oasis Number 5 at ‘Documenta 3) in Kassel (1y72). In addition, a considerable  
Harrison, View over Lincoln Center Plaza. New York (overall plan by Harrison & Abramovit7), showing: (left) the New York State Theater (1964) by Philip Johnson, (right) Philharmonic Hall (1962) by Max Abramovitz, and (centre) the arches of the new: Metropolitan Opera House (1g60) by Harrison ,  Haus-Rucker Co. Preumacosm (project, 1467}  number of ‘paper projects’ have been under t an expansion proposal for New York using, pneumatic cell, and the Big Piano (1972) posed of a revounding artiticial cloud with a gigantic ladder leading up inte it EW — Ortner, Laurids, Prowisertsche rehitekn  Medium der Stadtgestaltung, Diisseldert 1976  nm. These include: the Pacumacosm £1967), {19467  com  Havlicék, Josef. b ryg6., Studied at the Techoreal Cniversity aad the Fane Arts Academy in Prague tigi 26) Influenced by the cubic architecture of Josef *Hominann, he became in the 1y20. one of the  leading, advocates of moderna in Czeeho-  Prague tkgy. do Prague  Movaku.  Among his most important works way the headquarters ot the State Pensions Office in Prague (1929 33. with Karel Houzik), at come ples consisting of a cruciform office tower of by and y storeys and attached wings wath shopy, apartnents tor che employees, ete. leis one ot 
Mie tmest significant buildings of the 1y30s in Lurope AM Havhces. J. Nderhy ua starhy: 1925-1960,  Prague ry64  Hejduk, Jolin, b. New York 1929. Studied at the Cooper Union in New York, the Univer- sity of Cincinnati in Ohio and at Harvard University tivluding that of LM. *Pei. he established an independent pracace im New York in. 196s. Since (964 he has been protessor at the Cooper Union. International interest in FE is based not se much on his limited built work - which includes the Demlin House in Locust Valley, Long Island (1960), the Hommel Apartment in New York (1y6y) and the restoration of the Foundaden Building of the Cooper Union tryzs) but rather much more on his theoretic- didactic engagement with architecture in which he strives to drive space and seale to their  After working in various offices,  absolute limits. His experimental, abstract ap- proach to spatial and formal conflicts made HL. together with *Eiseniman, the leading theoreti- cian in the *New York Five  “i Five Architects. New York tg72: dak, Architect (exhibition catalogue), Zurich TUF}  Hertzberger, J ferman. b. Amsterdam 1932. lnmediately after completny lis studies at the Technical College in Delft m ty58. he estab- lished his own office in Amsterdam, He taught at the Academy of Architecture in Amsterdam, 1445-70, and since 1970 has been a professor at the Technical College in Deltt. Together with *Bakema. van *Evek and others, he edited the architectural review, Ferma, 19sy- 63; this jour- nal helped prepare the way for the Structuralist (*Structuralism) movement ta the *Nether- lands, with HE and van Eyek as its leaders. For FL. the architect’s task does not consist of offering ready-made solutions. but rather iy providing & spatial framework to be filled in eventually by its users, In keeping with seructuralist thought, this spatial framework conceived as a regular system based on ‘Archeforms’ which are con- unually reinterpreted in new ways. The system not only provides for individual expression, but creates the very conditions to make that expres- sion possible. Among H.'s most important buildings are: the Montessori School in Deltt (1966-79}, the “Diagoon” houses in Delft (1971); the administration building of the Centraal  Hertzberger. Centraal Behcer Insurance Co. Apeldoorn (1970-2): exterior and incerior  Beheer Insurance Company in Apeldoorn (1y7o 2). De Drie Hoven Old People’s Home in Amsterdam-Slotervaart (1972-4): and the Vredenburg Music Centre in Utrecht (1976 8) AM i) Hertzberger, Herman, “Huiswerk mnecr herbergzame verm’, For: (Amsterdam), 3/1973; Ltichinger, Arnulf, Strukturalismins in der Architektur, Stuttgart 1981.  voor 
Hilberseimer, Ludwig. b. Karlsruhe rsss. d. Chicago 1967. Studied at the Technische Hoch- schule in Karlsruhe, 1906-10, and principally active 1 Berlin as an architect, ry1o 28. Hie taught at the *Bauhaus, 1y29-33, and later became Director of the Seminar for Housing and Urban Planning there. He was ayain in practice as an independence architect nm Berlin. 193378. He held the post of Professor of City and Regional Planning at the Armour Tnsicute (from rg4o Mlinois institute) of Technology m Chicage, 1938 ss, and was Director of the Department of City and Regional Planning there, 1955-7.  From the beginning Hl. moved in the most advanced of avant-garde circles in| German architecture: in 1919 he shared in che exper- iences of the *Arbeitsrat fiir Kunst and the *Novembergruppe; in 1925 he was a meober of the Expressionist-oriented group of artists known as Der Sturm (*Expressionism) and way the first architect to exhibit with them: in 1g27 he joined the *Ring and in 1y28 *CIAM; in tg3t he was a direetor of the *Deutscher Werkbund. His involvement in city planning, begun in tgty for the “Existenzminimun’, culminated in his ty24 project for a “skyscraper city’, which developed *Le Corbusier's revel- udonary notions of Ty22 for a ‘Ville con- temporaine’. Enormots uniform slabs form  two superimposed cities; below, the city of  business activity and automobile trafhe; above it, the residential city with its pedestrian paths This was intended to minimize the distance between home and work and thus reduce trathie  Hilberseimer. Skyscraper city (project. 1424)  creulation, Apart trom ineagre roof no tree and no lawn interrupted the prismatic artificiality of this antimnature atticude deter- mined by reason. H. applicd these theoretical studies ma 1y2y plan for central Berlin, With his few, but programmatic buildings (house at the Weifienhofsicdlimy in Stuttgart, ty27: house on the Rupenhorn, Berlin, 1938). his city-planning projects and schemes (among others that for Chicago, 1937 8, reworked Tgso} and his writings. EE represented an extreme reductivist position within German *Rarionalism, Tle way thus close to the position of *Mics van der Rohe, whose friend he had been since the tine of the magazine G and with whom he also collaborated in Chicago. The  strony geometric ordering and conscions fore mal restraint which characterize hiy obsessively repetitive works arc kepe alive in the most radical wing of * Rational architecture, VMI L- Hilberscimer, Ludwig. Grofstadthauten. Hanover ty2s: ted... Putentationale nee Bankunst, Stuttgart 19272 . Cropstadtarchi- tekow. Scuttgart 192 the New City, Chicago tud4i -—- Phe Newt Regional Pattern, Chicayo tg4g; ——-. futtalnine citer Phanungs- idee. Berlin, Frankfurt am Main and Vienna 1463: ——, Contemporary Architecture: Tts Roots and Trends, Chicago 1963; —-. The Nature of Cities. Chicago ry6s: Malcolmson. Reginald ciudad: La obra de  alementos de la nuew.  Ludwig Hilberseimer’, Hfegar yp Arguitectura (Madrid}, May-June 148  historicism. ‘The concept of historicism in historical sienee. and paruieularly in the Ger- man philosophical tradinen, bas been used to designate a consciousness of historical genesis and relativity in not oniv che material but also the intellectual realm. This view arose in reaction to carhier forms of historical determin~ ism, In acritical sense historicism designated the  progression from a ‘critique of historical reason” (Wilhelm Dilthey} to an “irresolute relativisny (Friedrich Meinecke) and the often culturally pessimistic retreat from: ihe present into the past. The first scholar co replace such negative cermy as revivalism aud (even more unambig- uously scornful) *eclecticisia ay evaluations of iyth-century architecture as a whole, and in particular che stylistic mixtares of the last decades of the century. was the German art ‘he  historian Hermann Beenken, and in ty introduced the purely histonographical term  
Shistormcisny) (with the intent of a positive re- evaluation ot the architecture of the ‘roniantic® period in Germany) into architectural history. Wrh his work the corm was accorded a neutral Meaning ay atime period, although implicitly a fundamental qualitadive difference was imain- tained between the stylistic borrowings of the ryth century and comparable phenomena in the Renaisance. With Beenken the term: became standard sunong German art historians, but even today ithas found only limited application in Anglo-American or French art-historical studies, as aterm which imparts a structural unity to the salient historical approach which is the common ground in the formally and iconographically diverse architectural solutions Recent Anglo- tended,  adopted in the ryth cepcury America usage has following Mandelbaum’s suggestions, to distinguish clearly berween eclecticism, as one particular architectural strategy, and historicism as the more general description of an architecture highly self 1 larger chain of development. the structure of which can be assessed by historical analysis. Thus historicism describes a wide variety of architec- tural theories and doctrines in the ryth century, allof which conceived what Gotz has labelled programimaue relationship to history’. These include the social utopian-inspired architectural philosophies of Labrouste, Vaudoyer and their French contemporaries, the structurally analyt- ical and democratic theories of Viollet-le-Duc and Gottfried Semper’s approach to the devel- opment of types on materialist bases, as well as  conscious of its position in  the clearly historicist notion of ‘development’ purseyed particularly by the architects of the English High Victorian movement.  From art history the concept of historicism has recently entered into contemporary archi- tectural criticism, where it is often used as an alle defined and unditferenttated evaluation of the most varied phenomena of 2oth-century archi- tecture. The point of departure of the historicist critique is, broadly speaking, the premise that the present century's cultural achievement re- sides precisely in the emancipation of architec- ture from historical hinks and ¢raditions and in the conviction that created a ‘true’ unity of form and function and thereby an ideal unity of art and function, theory and practice, which could mdeed be linked to history through common principles, but not by formal analogy.  ‘modern’ architecture  The adoption of a stylistic concept — devised in the context of an idealist-intoned German approach to art history ~ to serve as the symbol of the intellectual and cultural unit epoch and to evoke the theory of an artistic avant garde, opened the way for the postulate of an aesthetic of ‘pure’ abstract (techmecal) form. This was asserted as the fulfilment of the old search for a ‘new style’ and, indeed, the only ‘style’ of the 20th century. This intellectualized cultural and artistic model, however, denied that historicism: remained alive with varying Intensity in the artistic consciousness of the 2oth century, The by now well-known portrait ofa straighttorward development of the *Inter-  y of an entire  national Style out of the revolution of modern architecture against historicism ¢. 1910 is but a myth of architectural history. Throughout the 2oth century historicism has continued to play a role in architecture which cannot be understood Munply in terms ofthe characterized antithesis of the *Neues Bauen or *Rationalism and tra- dition. This requires rather a differentiating analysis of culcural detinitions. ideological con- tent and use of historical forms. The rejection of. stylistic celecticism of the late 19 century did not come about by a radical denial of all historical relationships. It was much more a fundamental- ist return — after the brief aestheticist episode of the pure decorative freedom and stylistic inven- ton known as *Art Nouveau — to ‘genune™ historical principles. that is to the typological and formal paradigms of true’ monumentality and ‘native’ traditionalism. The unpretentious *neo-classicism on the model of the Prussian style’ (Artur Moeller van den Bruck, 1916) seen in the architecture of ¢, 1800 (as in the works of Peter *Behreus. Heimrich Tessenow or Wil- helny *Kreis), the timeless rusticated monu- mentality of the Stuttgart Central Station (Paul *Bonatz), or the simplified Baroque forms applied to late medieval or Biedermeier types (as in the works of Theodor *Fischer, Paul Schmitthenner or German Bestelmeyer) were, as expressions of conservative bourgeois ata- tudes, quanucatively much more important in the architecture of the 19205 in *Germany than were the examples of *Neue Sachlichkeit. Even Expressionist architecture (*Expressionism) displayed strong historicist traits, especially in those gothic abstractions based on gestalt and cultural psychology (Wilhelm Worringer); and moreover not exclusively in church architec- ture (Dominikus * BGhm, Peter Vilhelm Jensen  
*Klint). This is also true of the brick architec- tural styles with their ethos of materials and consciousness of tradition (Fritz Schumacher, Fritz *Hoéger, *Amsterdam, School of), in which the border with anthropological and natural analogies was fluid (Bernhard Hoctger, Anthroposophical architecture). The cultural ideological ‘racist’ conservatism (Paul Schultze- Naumburg) on the one hand, and the social- utopian futurist pathos (Bruno * faut) on the other, represent only the extremes of these historicist: positions.  The opposition between ‘traditionalist’ and modern’ architecture — especially in Gerniany — was first polarized towards the end of the ly20s (controversy over the Weibenhotsied- lung, Stuttgart), in which more general social conflicts underlay the artistic issues (small town and rural interests. v. structures, handicraft v. industrial culture, indi- vidual v standardized form). Thus the monu- mental building programme and the “Blut und  metropolitan societal  Boden’ (Bived and Earth} Housing Estates of  National Socialism represented less an interrup- tion of a modern line of architectural develop- ment than a canonization of — existing conservative tendencies, albeit now with a strengthened emphasts on historical character and above all the ideological content of a building. In contrast, both of these aspects were less strongly intoned in the official architecture of Fascist *Italy. The League of Nations Com- petition ((y27-8) for Geneva and the govern mental and cultural buildings of the 1y4os in Washington, D.C.. demonstrate, however. that  historicism. Pfullinger Hallen community Pfullingen (ty04 -7), by Theodor Fischer  entre,  reneva dactuao  historicism. | cage of Nations Palace (proivet. 1y2ch by Marcello Piacentim, Rapisardi and Angelo Mazon  even m countries with democratic institutions the novien of 4 representative architecture Was scl strongly Ged to bistormeal models. The Strongly celectic. which held sway i *Russia from the time of the competition for the Palace of the Soviets (1y3t} into the 1ysos. and which after 1945 was adominant mflucnce also in the Soviet satellite states, Was intended to convey the idea of  sunilar, more historicism  national architecture. increasingly imbued with a cultural propagandistic significance.  The general label *historicism” encompasses also the more or less preservation-conscious post-war reconstruction of historic city centres destroyed in World War UL. The strong need for a tangible manifested not only in the imitative reconstruc- tion, as in Poland (with its desire for a national historical idenuty), but also in the restoration of West German cityscapes, in which everywhere a sympathetic-restorative recan- struction found favour, suggestions for new construction.  The various strains of *Post-Modernism have developed ina rather contradictory con- text. These include a historicizing architecture of Jusury in the *USA (Philip: *Johnson, Minoru * Yamasaki), which continues the im- plicit, protest against the abstract aesthetic rigour of Rationalism first formulated theoreti- cally by Robert *Venturi in 1966. as well as which - historical  sense of historical continuity is  nearly  rather than radical  more recently im architecture in through elements are used playtuily, ironically, or mere~ ly aesthetically as a pretorial book of quota-  intellectual distance - 
historicism. New Play Howe Theater, Cleveland. Ohio fyi qi. by Philip Johnson and john Burgee  tions’ (Charles W. *Moore), and finally chat which formal canon of classic modernism iy reworked aes thetically chrough historical distancing (*New York Five). In Europe, historicism is manifested mm *Raconal architecture which harks back to classical architectural theory and the autono- mous character of art (Aldo * Rossi} as well as in emphatic formal eclecticism: (James *Surling) and even an minded Carchitecture ina historical approaches (Alexander vor Branca).  Despite numerous parallels, chess contem- porary trends are comparable neither in intent formal with tyth-century They are indeed sceptical of pro=  architecture Mm the structural  more or less comservationist-  context”  nor in character historivism gress, but are im ne way generally escapist or culeurally pessimustic reactions co the ahistorical cultural utopia of an identity of theory and practice. through which the Modern Move- ment thought to tniph over history. [ba BB Lo Gitz, Woifiang, “Historismis’, Zeitschrift des Deutschen Vervins far Kristin tosenoctiaft., 24. 1970; Mandelbatin, Maurice, Pistory, Man, aed Reason. ol Study in Ninetecnth Cenniry Thought. Baltsmore, Md tu7t: Pehnt. Wolfgang. Die Architektur des EXpressionismims, Stuttgart 1973) Tafuri, M.. and Dal Co. b. Alodern New York, toXo: Moos. S. yon. ‘Schwierig- keiten mit Historsmius. Arehithese, 2 (special number), tyes  lrehitectare.  den  Hoffmann, Josef. b. Purity. Moravia (870. d. Vienna tos6. He completed his architectural studies in Vienna under Orto * Wagner, whose most faithful and convinced disciple he re- mained. The rationalistic theories that underlay Wagner's teaching and the intuence of *Mack- intosh, who was represented at che 1y00 exhibi-  tion of the Wiener Secession. had a decisive influence on the course steered by H. himself’, However, his elegance and refinement of taste was far removed trom the severity of *Lous. He did not. in fact. despise ornament and this led him to show particular interest in the produc- tion of cratt objects. He taught at the Kunst- gewerbeschule in Vienna fron t8yy onwards, and in 1yo3, together with Kolonian Moser, set up a group of studios and workshops, which under the name of Wiener Werkstitte enjoyed widespread success and fame for thirty years.  In i8y7 he had joined wath other young artists, including Joseph *Olbrich. in founding the Wiener Secession, Under the influence of the Glasygow School and of Belgian and French *Are Nouveau, its aims were more radically  modemiust than chose of Wagner's school, In the opening years of the 2oth century HH. designed exhibition pavilions, decorative schemes for miteriors, and four houses (Moser, Moll, Henne- berg and Spitzer). With the Purkersdorf Sana- torium (1903) he became one of the foremost exponents of the early: Modern Movement: here the various elements of the external wall were combined in a surface which served to cmphasize the abstract quality of the building’s volumes. His Palais Stoclet, Brussels (1yos). is an architectural masterpiece that evokes the exquisite poetry of Post-lmpressionism and Symbolam, Although completely based on modernist theories. it is rich and refined to the point of decadence, a monument of the late bourgeow age which represents a milestone in H.sown career, and in the history of European architecture.  In the years that followed, he built dozens of villasin Vienna with few essential variations. At the lorg *Deutscher Werkbund Exhibition in Cologne, for which he designed the Austrian Pavilion in an elegance style of vaguely neo- classic derivation, he encountered in the work  
of *Gropius and Bruno *Taut a new and more vigorous form of architectural modernity, which gained ever greater influence in conjune- tion with De *Stijl, the *Bauhaus and *Le Corbusier's circle in Europe: it was also not without its effects on H.'s subsequent work, Thus, the public housing schemes he carried out in 1924 and 192s in Vienma, and in particular his terrace houses for the ‘Internationale Werk- bundsiediung’ of 1932, are built ina style of extreme architectural purity that recalls the houses of *Neutra, *Loos, *Rictveld and *Lur- gat. The results bear witness to Ho's conscious and deliberate ‘presence’ at a time of revo- lutionary development in architecture. H. de- signed the Austrian Pavilion for the 1934 Venice Biennale and. after World War Tl a series of dwellings. GV GHa CO Kleiner, Leopold, Josef Hoffitann, Berlin, Leipzig and Vienna ry27, Weiser. Armand, Josef Hoffmann, Geneva 1930: Rochowanski, L. W., fosef Hoffmann, Vienna tyso; Veronesi, Giulia, Josef Hoffmann, Milan 1956: Sckler, Eduard F., fosef Hoffmann, Salzburg 1y82.  Héger, Fritz Johann Friedrich), b. Becken- teihe, Holstein 1877, d. Bad Segeberg 1949 Trained in the Baugewerkeschule in Hamburg. in which city he opened his own office in 1907 After numerous sniall houses, showing clearly the influence of Hermann *Muthesius, he designed a number of office buildings in Ham- burg, whose clinker-brick fagades introduced a renaissance of north German brick architecture The best known is his Chilehaus (1y22 3)  Hoffmann. Palais Stoclet, Brussels (1y05)  whose sharply angled castern corner recalls the prow ofa great ship. With its dynamic crystal- Tine form, the building is one of the masterpieces of north German *Expressionism. H.'s ether important works include the Anzefger Tower in Hanover (1927 -8) and the Town Hall in Riist- ringen (1429) F T Westphal, Carl J. H. (ed.}, Frits Hoger. Der ntederdentsche — Backstvin-Baunetster, — Wolfs- hagen-Scharbeutz 1938; Gebhard. J.. Fritz Hoger, Batunvister in Hamburg, Hamburg ys Kamphausen, A. ‘Der Baumeister Héger’, Suidien cur Schlesiwig-Holsteinischen Kunst eeschichte (Miinster}, vol. 12. 1972.  Holford, William, b. Johannesburg 1go7. d. London 1978. Studied under Charles Reilly at Liverpool University School of Architecture. He became Professor of Civic Design at Liver~ pool Lniversity, 1937: active in formulaung framework of English town-planning legisla- tion, he was appointed Profesor of Town Planning. University College. London, 1948 He designed houses, factories and public build- ings. Planning proposal, for the County of Cambridge. 1oso. design for St Paul's C thedral precinct. 195 Piccadilly. He also developed plans for many universities. He was chiefly active as a consul- tant and planner. but his fourteen-storey block of flats at Kensal, London (1ys8), has been called the first large-scale modular building  three-level plan for  Holland. *Netherlands.  Hollein, Hans. b. Vienna 134. Studied at the Akademie dev bildenden Kiinste in) Vienna Qinder Clemens *Folemeister). as well as at the Minow Inseicute of Technology in Chicago and the University of Cabtomia at Berkeley. In 1976 7 he conducted a class in architecture at the Staatliche Kunstakademic in Dtsseldort: since Ty76 be hay been a professor at the Hochschule fiir angewandce Kunst in Vienna.  FE is one of the most important and yitted intermedtarics between art, design, and archi tecture, With his first commission, the renova- tim of che Reto Candle Company in Vienna (964-5). he came te ntermational attention and attracted iny further commissions for rons ovations. Fypectdly notable among these are: the Richard Feigen Gallery an New York (1967 9}: the interior design tor Siemens AG in Munich Gigte sh the Schullin jewellery store 
Hollein. Schullin jewellery store. Vienna (tuzs 4)  in Vienna (igz2 4): and the head sales office of)  the Austrian Travel Bureau in Vienna (1976-8).  All these works are characterized by the use of  expensive materials (predominantly marble. brass, and chrome) and by elegant staging. as well as an all but insurpassable atcention to details. H.'s imaginative and ironic pleasure in allusions ix especially called into play in the Travel Office. where alien accessories or props are meant to evoke associations of travel.  No less do Ins graphi¢ and environmental works participate in this credo that everything is architecture. Through altenation, cult-wor- ship suggestion and syinbolic architectural rit- uals, H. seeks to foster new ways of seving and to provok Stadtstruk- tur (City Structure, (962). Airera arrier City (1963), ‘Austriennaly’ ac the XPVth Tricnnale in Milan (1948), the Exhibition “Tod? (Death’) in the Stidtisches Museum of Ménchengladbach (1970), ‘Media-Limien’ in the Olympic Village  subconscious aysociador  in’ Munich (1971 The building of the Abteiberg Museum in Ménchengladbach (lu72 82) bears witness to H.'s total indepen- dence even when dealing with large building volumes: smooth cubes, organic velumes and petrified architectural settings produce an arti- ficial landscape at once influential and pencerat- ing tn effect. and form a self-conscious ac- compamment to the ‘art’ on display. PR c— Fans Hollein: Walter Pichler, Architektur (ex- hibition catalogue), Vienna 1y63: Dortmander Jrchieknorausstelling tgré (exhibition cata- logue}, Dortmund iy76.  Holzbauer, Wilhelm, b. Salzburg 1y30. After preliminary traming at che Technikum in Salz- burg, he studied under Clemens *Holzmeister at the Akademie der bildenden Viepna. In 1gs3 he founded. together with Friedrich Kurrent. Otto Leiter and Johannes Spalt. che Arbeitsgruppe 4 (Work Group 4) which played an important role in Austrian post-war architecture. There followed a break of several years during which. among other things, he undertook further studies at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cam- bridge, and his collaboration with Kurrent and Spalt was resumed only after he opened his own office in Vienna in 1964. After several guest professorships, he was appointed a professor at the Akademie fiir angewandte Kunst in Vienna in ty70. H.'s architecture cunnot be classitied under any current trend or theory, While in his St Joseph College in Salzburg-Aigen (1960-4. with Kurrent and Spalt) the influence of Kon- rad *Wachsmann (who taught at the Salzburg Summer Academy) can be detected in the determination of form entirely through con- struction, H."s later works © like, for example, the St Virgil School in Salzburg-Aigen (1966- 76). the De Bijenkort department store in Uurecht (1978 82) or the Amsterdam City Hall (1y78 fh) reveal his concern to develop cach building in corms ofits particular context. AM  Habl. Heinrich, (ilheln Holzhater, Portrait eines Architekten, Vienna 1977: Sechs Architekten vom Schillerplatz. Vienna 1977.  Kiinste in  Helzmeister, Clemens, b. Fulpmes. Tyrol 1886, d. Hallein rg83. Studied at the Technische Hochschule in Vienna, where he was later active as an architect, 1914-38, and again (after a period in Turkey), rysg-7. An influential teacher, he was active notably at the Akademie 
Senco a  der bildenden Kiinste in Vienna (1924-38, 1954-7) and at the Technical College in Istanbul (1940-9); many important Austrian architects were his pupils, including *Hollein, *Holz- bauer and *Peichl. Strongly stamped with a basic ‘scenographic’ sensualism which can be traced back ultimately to the Buareque. #1 remained faithful to tradition throughout his career, even when outwardly he drew close to contemporary trends, such as *Expressionisny Among his most important works, in addition to various government buildings in Istanbul and Ankara (1931-2, are the church of St Adalbert in Berlin (1933) and the various renovations and additions to the Festspielbaus (Festival Concert Hall) in Salzburg (from 1926). AM O Gregor. J.. Clemens Holzmeister. Das archi- tektonische Werk, Vienna 19$3, Clemens Holz- meister (exhibition catalogue) Vienna 1982.  Hood, Raymond (Mathewson), b. Pawtucket, RL. 1881, d. Stamford, Conn. 1934. Studied at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge and afterwards at the *Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris, He worked in partnership with Frederick A. Godley and Jacques André Fouilhoux, 1924-31, after 1y31 with Fouilhoux alone. In 1922, in collaboration with John Mead Howells, he won the competition for the Chicago Tribune Tower (finished 192$) with a neo-Gothic design; the other entrants included Elicl *Saarinen, *Gropius, and *Loos. H.'s further evolution brought an abandonment of *historicism and a turning towards a restrained rationalist formal language, with borrowings from the *Art eco style. Nearly all external  Holzbauer. St Virgil School, Salzburg-Aigen lytt “61  decoration is avoided in the Daily News Build- ing in New York (y2u 30). Thesimple facade,  conspting of vertical bands of stone and glass.  lends the exterior 2 pronounced verticality of  monumental effect, as is also to be found in the buildings of Rockcteller Center in New York, where Hand Fouilhoux formed one of three  Hood. McGraw-l hill Building, New York (1930)  Te? 
eehireetural teamts responsible for planning, The MeGraw-Hill Building in New York nyse with i horizontal bands of cerracotta panels and glass, introduced the curtuin-wall Tiytdes of the *incernational Stvic GHa  Schwartzman, John B., Raymond Hood: The Cheralded Architect, Charlottesville, Val 196. Rilham, Walter HL. Rayntond Hood, Architect, New Yark 1973: Raymond Mf. Hoed jexhibition New York 1982  catalogue  Horta, Victor, b. Ghent 1861, d. Brussels tyg7 \ieading figure of Continental *Art Nouveau and the creator of an original vocabulary of omament. HH. helped te open up new paths to ceth-century architecture by domg away with the traditional plan of the private house and providing an architectural expression for che new building programmes set im train by the social and cultural developments of his time. He was abo instrumental in devising a number of subde struceural formy chat drew on the re- sources ofdren and glass. and was a keen disciple ot Viollet-le-Duc  He began his architectural studies at Ghent Acidems iscvei and continued them at the Acadénne des Beaux-Arts at Brussels. After spending some time am the office of Alphonse Balat. a nco-clasacal architect of repute, he built a group of three littl: houses in Ghent (18861 in which his special arclutectural ability was ale ready obvious despite the modest scale of the project. Ffowever, the building which revealed Hioay an architect of great creative miaturiey way the Hdtel Tasse a veritable manitesto of Art Nouveau, is revo- lutionary in foro and structure and is regarded today as one of the slissie muomuments in the  Brussels $9238. This house.  history oF architecture, Ie was the product of ut country with an eNpanduig niddle-class poou- omy. strony craft cadiions anda high degree of induscrializadon, Abuse all, the Hotel Tassel is remarkable for the novelty of ig plan: instead of the corridor usual ip *Be'e an octagonal hall, from ew dich a broad staircase departs, giving access fo fre various reams at different levels. The arrangement broke with the practice of uniform laveur door by floor. foreshadowing the “plan ct velumes’ con- ceived by *Loos in ig10 and *1  qo. He subseituted  u  Corbusier's Gwoestarey svstent of 1y30.  Vhe Hotel Tassel is also remae  tiles being the first private house in which ion as used extensively, both asa structural ma srtal ya huge  winter garden on the ground Aeor is carried on an exposed iron frame, while an elegant iron column supports the staircase) and to supply decorative elements in a flexible linear style. exemplified by the wrought-iron handrails of the staircase and balconies. It is in this building. too, that an impressive repertoire of two- dimensional forms was initiated, based on a close study of plants and flowers: the ‘whiplash ne’ or ‘Horta line’ literally covers the floors, wally and ceilings: it is in evidence everywhere, coiling, interlacing. Aying loose, climbing across glazing bars, encircling the feet of furni- ture, branching out in chandeliers and oucserip- ping, offen to excess, every stractural requirement.  One year later, in the Hatel Solvay. Brussels EPSgs-rgoo), Art Nouveau can be seen in its fullest maturity: it is an astonishing symbiosis, of Baroque aud classical, sentiment and reason, craftsmanship and mdustry, colour and form, with aesthetics dominating technology. This tulding. wholly fitted out and furnished by H., is undoubted)y the most significant and com- plete example of its period. HL built numerous houses in Brassels before World War [in the same style (Autrique. 1893: Winssinger, 1895-6; Van Eetvelde. 18y7-1y00. Aubecg. 1900}.  The Matson du Peuple. designed for the Brussels branch of the Secialise Party (18y6-y). and che department stere “A VInnovation’ Brussel. tyot) both emploved the seructural resources Of iron in the service of a new programme. The large glazed fagades of these buildings prefigure the light transparent curtain wally that took the place of the load-bearing wall.  Horta. Manson du Peuple, Brussels (189% 4) 
After his appointment (1912) 4s a protessor at the Academie des Beaux-Arts, and a stay in the USA (i916—Ty). H.'s architecture assumed an austere, classical direction; the picturesque and calligraphic tendencies of Art Nouveau were conclusively superseded by the scraight ling, The Palais des Beaux-Arts in Brussels (1y22 8) was the principal work of this period: well laid- ont and designed in concrete, it was the first cultural centre of a type that was to gain wider diffusion after World War II. RID LI Delevey, Robert Lo. Victor Horta, Brussels 1958; Paolo Ortoghesi. Victor Horta, Rome 1964; Hoppenbrouwers, A.. Vandenbreden, J.. and Bruggemans, J... Victor Horta archi- tectonographie, Brussels 197  Howard, Sir Ebenezer. b. London 1X50, d Welwyn Garden City 1928. Began as a clerk and then as a snecesstil stenographer. While visiting America 1872-7, he met Walt Whit- man and Ralph Waldo Emerson, who first stimulated him to contemplate the possibility of a better life than that of the overcrowded and filthy industrial city. Subsequent inthiences came from the anarchist theories of Peter Kropotkin, the economic ideas of Henry George, John Ruskin’s St George's Guild (Arts and Cratts) and above all from Edward Bellamy’s utopian Looking Buckivard. All of these trends have echoes in H.'s book of 18ox. A Peaceftit, Path te Social Reform {entitled Garden Cities of Tomorrows in the second edition of tyo2). In it, be described his reforming vision of an ideal type of settlement: a self-sufficient Garden City for some 32,000 inhabitants, consisting of rural-tike residenual neighbourhoods, extensive cultivable terrams (which were to be arranged as a green belt to xclude any urban extension), shopping areas. cultural facilities, a central park for community  Tomorrow:  and recreational activities enclosed in a crystal palace. This organic whole was intended to be related to a large town of no more than s%.000 inhabitants: neither railways nor highways were to pass through the Garden City area.  H.'s ideas were by no means conegived ina void. He relied. on the one band, on dhe notions of the utopian socialists such as Robert Owen and Charles Fourier, and on the other hand, on private endeavours such as the company towns of Saltaire and Port Sunlight. With English pragmatism, he sought to find a’middle ground on co-operative principles, with help from  —N2-  @ARVER - Troy  Howard. Garden city scheme: “Rurisville’ ffrom Pamrorron, 18¢  private moanves, but assured against specula- tion. The basie idea of his concentrically dis- posed plan which he developed only asa diagram had already been proposed iny the Renaissance. The English architect J. B. Fap- worth had proposal, for ‘rural cowns’ ay carly as 1827 (Aygen). In addition, James Silk Buckinghan’s Ideal City  of Vietoria of 184g and Joseph Paxton’s Great  worked on  Victorian Way proposals of 183s were precur- sors of FES formal scheme.  Hi. campaigned actively in numerous publi- cations, ascipbled tansy sympathetic collibo- ritors, and organized the Gruncing of the project. The Garden City launched in isyy. The tirst Garden City wes begun on the plans of Barry Parker and Raymond Cinwin tn 1ge3 at Letchworth near ably from H.'s dead conception. [owas to serve us the  Assoenition was  London: however, it diverged conside  procotype for *R iemerschmid’s desien of Hel- lerwu Gouden City near Dresden chaile 1ge9 second Garden City new London, Welwyn, was begun in igty:s in this instance the  onwards  plans were drawn up by Louis de Sorsens Countless further new garden cities were sub= sequently lammched direughour the werld Although most of the garden cites devel- oped into Viable reslennal towns, they te= mitined pokued apd weak palliatives aginst die eNplosion of city populitions in the carly 2oth century. Towa only in *Great Brita with the Now owns polies ofthe lgsos, thar the garden 
vv ider was descloped into an edeetive, if not vuproblenwee, means to limit the expansion of the great mictropolises VMI  Howard. [. Tomerrow: A Peaceful Path to i Reform, London i8o8 (and ed. Garden Cines ef Tentarrow, Londen tyo2); Mackadyen, Dugald. Sir Ebrueser Howard and the Pung Movement, Cambridge. Mass... 1y70: Pohman. Robert. Crhan Ctopias tn the 20th Contury, New York 1977  Nvet  Town  Howe, George. b. Worcester. Mass. TRSO, d. tgss. Studied at Harvard. mjo4. and *Eeole des Beaux-Arts, 1907, He was a partaer in various firms: Mellor. Meigs & Howe, Loh 1a: Howe and *Lescaze. 1y2y -34) Howe and Bel Geddes, 1935: Howe and *Kahbn tLouts} tygh: Howe, Stonoroy and Kahn, 1942  3: Howe and Brown, 1yso-s. Hawe's major work, with William Leseaze. was the Philadel- phia Saving Fund Society (PSFS) Building built sg2y- 32. One af the first major buildings of the early *International Style un the *USA, PSES is noteworthy for its strong expression of horizontal and vertical structuring and its T- shaped plan. packaging the services separately from the office spaces, Elements such as the curved corner of the banking room set a trend for skyscraper cliches of the later fy3os. The PSFS Building marked a transition fram the first European phase of the International Style tothe second American phase. Indeed. Hs own original, basically Beaux-Arts scheme had been modified to conform to International Style concepts.  Other notable works by H. are: High Hal- low. his own house in Chestnut Hill. Pa. (1914 16): the Newbold Farm, Laverock, Pa. (1922-8, since destroyed): the Oakland School, Croton- on-Hudson, N.Y. (1929), the first International Style building on the East Coast of the USA; arver Court Housing. Coatesville, Pa. (1gg2- 4): the Philadelphia Evening Bulletin Building (tys4). Square Shadows, in Whitemarch Val- ey. Pa. (1y34). marked a departure from the stuccoed boxes of European modernism by its use of local materials. further developed in his Fortune Rock House (1938-9) on Soames Sound, Maine.  In che ty4os H. was Supervising Architect for the Public Buildings Administration and, later, Deputy Commissioner for Design and Con- struction. He was Chairman of the Deparement of Archirecture at Yale, tyso 4.  Cambridge. Mass  SERS,  Sh SSS  Sew  SSSR  SSSR SS  SSS  Sey  SSS  Sete  oS SS  ASS Sees SSS SSSSSS  See “SS  4  Se  Howe. Philadelphia Saving Fund Society Building. Philadelphia. Pa. (with William Lescaze; 1y2y 32)  Lo Jordy, W. HL. PSFS: It Development and ity Significance in Modern Architecture’, four- nal of the Society of Architectiral Historians, 21 (1962), pp. 47-83. West, Helen Howe, George Howe, Architect, 1886-1955. Philadelphia 19735 Stern, Robert A. M.. George Howe, New Haven, Conn. 1975.  Howell, Killick, Partridge and Amis. Prac- tice established in ty9sy by William Cough Howell, John Alexander Wentzel Killick, John Albert Partridge and Stanley Frederick Amis, all of whom had worked for the London County Council. Their style is characterized by 4 powerful striving after plastic originality. The project for the Department of Commerce and Social Science at Birmingham University fea- tures *Gaud ¢ fagades of precast-conerete balcony units: a redevelopment plan for St Anne’s College, Oxford, consists of a series of curved blocks with highly modelled surface treatment, set ina wide oval round the college garden.  
Surongly influenced by the principles of the *Smithsons, one of their most important pro- jects while wich the LCC was the Rochampton housing estate (19s2~-s) in south London  Hungarian Activism was neither a school of moder architecture, nor an association of architects, but a literary and arustic movernent which had much in common with the pnuci- ples of *Constructivism and of the * Bauhaus in the second period of is history. The first circle of Activist artists, writers, poets. pamcers and sculptors formed around the tortnightly 4 TETT (‘Action’), edited by Lajos Kassik im 1915-16 and banned by the Austro-Hungarian authorities because of its anti-war stance. 4 second periodical with the utle \f4 today’ or “present age’), issued in rgié-ry in Budapest, was characterized by an Expressive-Cubistic (*Cubism) in literature and in graphic art and influenced also by the dynamism of the Furcurists. Great technical architecture were admired in the poems af Lajos Kassak, Erzsi Ujvdry and other peets of the group. After the failure of the 1yt®-19 revolu- tions and the Hungarian Republic of Councils, all che members of the MA group were forced to emigrate. ALA was published in Vienna fram Ty20 to 1925, during which time the Activist movement became more closely related to the theoretical problems of contemporary architec- ture. The Dadaist Merz-building of Kurt Schwitters, the Constructivist arebitecture and art of Theo van Doesburg, J. J. P. *Oud and Pamo en Hardeveld appeared in MA. together with the ‘engineer's architecture’ of Viktor Servrankx, the utopianism of Raoul | fausimann and the constructions of Naum Gabo, Vladimir *Tathin and the 'Prouns’ of El *Lissitzky  In 1y22 Lajos Kassik and Laszlé Mohaly- Nagy published in Vienna their Buch neuer Kiinstler, a piccure-book of new art and archi- tecture where industrial buildings. such as *Bonatz’s railway station at Stuttgart and *Poelzig’s water-tower at Poznan, were repro= duced along with buildings of Hardeweld, Oud, Kurt Schwitters, Tatlin and Huszir. OF the architects at the Bauhaus, Walter *Gropius was included in .\W4 and his Hungarian com- panion Farkas Molnar published some woad- cuts of his house-design, although his utopistic Red Cube House (1921) was to be published in the Activist paper Novi Sad (Yugoslavia) under the tide Az UT (the way’), along with che  tendenc  achievements in  Hungarian Activism. Red Cube House design tysie by Burks Molo  manifesto “KURI  rational, international’) which way signed by a  Coonstructive. uoliturian,  great number of the younger members of the Bauhaus.  In gar Lavvky Moholy-Nagy edited a special iysue of MA. in which his ‘railway piceures’ and graphics were published ftogether with an article by Peter Matyas, which was the very first published interpretation of Moholy’sart. On t May 1y22 his ‘Glass architecture’ appeared on  ALAS cover, a coloured woodeut variant of his pellucid: paintings with the same title, These were based on the Expressionist ideas of Scheer= bart and the *Taut brothers. Mohaly published his tiest article on modern architecture in the Dadaist lkascroe Father Hanged Man’), where Ernst K allai also published in 1y22. Bodh men declared a deep belicfin the tuactional and acsthetical values of anew constructive archi- tecture which might create a new social bar  mony. Taking up che pictorial and tival approach to the principles of modern architec ture, Lajos Kassik himself became a founder of a new trondoain graphic art. punting and plastic art, labelled Bildarehtre:  ture) in rat. He published as manifesto under  ear  vr iptetorial architec =  the sane Gde mm Viennain which he dechered again bears his art with him aya manifesta, Nat his view of the world.  “The artist of taday  Architecture Construc- The absolute picture is  but dhe essence of the world The synthess of the new order Gon iy architecture  Bikdarchitekte. Art translorms us and we be- 
some capable oF transtarming our surround- mes! Rassak’s Bildurdutektar cook the torn sberot punted watercolours of a collage or of firecuts composed) of geontetrical elements. Among the members of the MA group Liszlé Mohohly-Nags and Laszié Péri dealt with a special type of sculpto-architecture in graphic ut iMoholy-Nagy’s Kincuc-construcuive sys- tent, 1y2e So and Péri’s Livelseluritte published by Der Sr. Berlin tg22t. In March 1g23 there \vas published a statement of Alfred Kemeny, Frist Killa. Lasvlé Moboly-Nagy and Laszlé Pérn. which appeared in the periodical of the trom the MA group. This periodical way called Kgység Unie i and che statemene of fy23 proposed a svnthesizing of deologieal and functional goals In his series of Buatthashucher Moholy-Nagy vonunucd the Activist-Construccivist urge to cansiorn: div face of the whole world into a  Hungarian leftists separate  visual revolution, sammmirized in his Von Afa- ternal cu drditiektar (iy sg)  The reproductions and articles published in Vid had a deep intuence on such architects as Farkas Molair, Marcel *Breuer, Alfred Forbat and Andor Wenger. and on such artists as Moholy-Nagy and Péri Its editor, Lajos Kase Sak. attempted a Constructivist: Gesunrkurst- werk in his programmes and publications, Js  Che Hangartin Avant Garde, The Eight aid the Ateiss (exhibition catalogue), London, Hasward Gallery tyse: Szabo. tulia, ol magyar aktivi zis auivescete CArtot Hungarian Acuv- ii), Budapest tysi  Tadia. Before mdependenee and the partition of Indiain 1y47. architecture in the sub-continent was dominated by Luropean styles and British architects. Although, in the tyth century, tradi- donal building cratts survived in domestic architecture, public buildings. churches and even the palaces of native princes became the responsibility of British architcets and engi- neers. At first. engineers directed the construc- don of public buildings but, in the mid-toth century, the first trained architects came out trom Britain or buildings were executed locally trom designs prepared in London. The results thus reflected architectural developments in  Britain: Bombay became dominated by the Gothic Revival while Calcutta remained toyal to the Classical tradition. In both cities, talented local architects were in practice by the 1860s: Walter Granville in Calcutta and F. W. Stevens in Bombay.  By the 1870s, however, a number of British architects began to have doubts about the wisdom of imposing Western styles on an Asian culture, Inspired by the ideals of Ruskin and *Morris, Lockwood Kipling cncouraged the employment of native crattsmen and sculpters in new building works, while a number of architects. notably Robert Chisholm, William Emerson, Swinton Jacob and Major Mant, grafted Mughal features onto Gothic Revival compositions, producing the picturesque and adaptable style Known as “Indo-Saracenic’  By the carly 20th century, however, the reaction agaist Victorian ecleeticism also af fected India, and the revived Classicism of ‘Edwardian Baroque’ manifested itself in such buildings as the vast Victoria Memorial in Calcutta, designed by Emerson. The appoint- mene of the tirst Consulting Architect to the Government of India in 1g02 James Ransome, who was succeeded by John Begg in ryos) brought a new professtonalism and sophistic tion, but the most significant event was the decision to move the capital from Caleutca to Dchhi in ryt  The building of New Dethi between 1y12 and fyzt and the appointment of Edwin *Lutyens and Herbert Baker as its architects brought European architecture to India into the  a.  avant garde for the firse tine. New Delhi was Important both ayan out on a grand, imperial scale, and for the developmentot Lutyens’ monumental Classical manner, fused with Mughal and Buddhist elements, Viceroy’s House, now Rashtrapati Bhavan, is both one of Lutyens’ finest achieve- ments and the climax of British architectural enterprise in India. *Le Corbusier later praised New Delhi tor being built ‘with extreme care, great talent and true success”.  Lutyens dominated the remaining years of British architecture in India. Although pring and maharajahs sometimes employed ‘Art Deco? and other moderne styles for cheir palaces, most official commissions were strongly influ- enced by the Lutyens style. This is particularly evident in the work of the last two Chief Architects to the Government of India, R. T.  lish garden city carried  
India. Viceroy’s House (now Rashtrapati Bhavan}, New Delhi (1912 30). by Sir Edwin Lutyens  Russell and N. A. N. Medd. One building designed by Lutyens’ assistant, A. G. Shoo- smith, St Martin’s Church, New Delhi (1y28 30), is remarkable as an essay in abstracr geometry in brick, the Lutyens manner of composition being fused with both the modern industrial aesthetic and the resonances of tra- dition. This single church is one of the finest British buildings of the 20th centur  Another Lutyens assistant, Walter George. carried the legacy of Lutyens past independence m 1947 and his influence and importance resulted in his twice becoming President of the Indian Institute of Architects. However, the British imperial tradition inevitably waned in potency although, ironically, when a new regional capital at Chandigarh was planned by the Indian government in tyso, a European architect was chosen, Le Corbusier, a an Englishman, Maxwell *Fry  sisted by  India has con-  tinued to be dominated by Western cultural imperialism by its acceptance of the *Inter-  national Style, regardless of the fact that it requires sophisticated services and continuous  energy consumption in order to function in a  India. High Court Building. Chandigarh duse 6). by Le Corbusier  hot climate. Only in recent years bas a more basic modern architecture. More appropriate to Tnchan conditions, been promoted by Tidian  architects such as Charles Correa, recipient off  the RIBA's Gold Medal in 184 OMS fT Nilsson. Sten, Laropean Architectire at Dudia i750 1830, London toss. The New Cap- itals of India, Pakistan and Bangladesh. Land 1g3: Tarapor, Mahrakh, ‘John Lockwood Kipling  and British Art Eduestion in India’) (ictortan 
Siafes Undiana University), xxiv, nos ry Aurumn 1980: George, Walter. Indian Archi- cecture: The Prospect before Us’, fonrnal of the fusdian destitute af lrehiieets, January-March fast: Shoosmith, A. G.. Present-Day Archi- reeture in Indie. The tgif Century and After, xx. London rg3s: Stamp, Gavin, ‘British Architec- ture in India iss7 1947. FRSA exxix, May Lys: © Indias The end of the Classical Pradinion’. Lots faternational (Milan), 3.4, Ty82  International Style. The phrase ‘Snternational Style was one among many cerns used in che architecture. Intro- duced by an American inorder to characterize 4  Ty2os to denote modern  particular kind of European architecture (Rationalism), the term became generally ipplied in later decades to a broad range of comremporary buildings  In his hook Modern Architectire, Romanticism and Renuegration (1929), Henry-R uysell Hitch- cock argued that ‘the international style of Le Corbusier, Oud, Gropius. of Lurgat, Rietveld ind Mies van der Rohe’ was a separate strain of mnodern architecture, (Hitchcock had first writ- ten about the international style the year before m the magazine Hamid aad Horny but the mare widely circulated book thoroughly discussed the architecture, placing tina line of historical development.) Basing his analysis on formal characteristies, Hitchcock claimed that a mod- crately modern architecture of the ‘New Tra- dition, ashe designated it, was distinguished by J historical continuity with earher work, sim- plified mass. emphasis on surface texture, and reduced and vbstracted ornament. On the other hand, the “New Pioneers’ - for him the Euro- pean practitioners of the International Style, influenced by the aesthetic vision of Cubist and Neo-Plasticist panting deleted all reference to past arehirecture, emphasized volume and plane rather than mass, and avoided ornament, em- ploying the machine as an “art-cool’, The latest advances in engineering that made thiy work possible lent it a ‘technical beauty’, although advanced technology was not of primary im- portance ip these structures  By 1931, the enthusiastic advecacy of Philip ‘Johnson - then a recent graduate in classics and philosophy who, though not vet an architect, had voluntarily caken up the cause of the new architecture — led him, and other critics follow- ing his lead. to detine this architecture as the International Style, thereby capitalizing on  Hitchcock's generic designation. The term was used more assertively and was given slightly wider application in 1932. In that year, the first show of architecture at the Museum of Modern Art. New York » “Modern Architecture: Incer- national Exhibition’ — and a book published in conjuncuon with it, The International Style: Architectitve since 1922. both by Hitchcock and Johnson, presented an International Style archi- tecrure based on a specific set of ‘agsthetic principles’: volume (space enclosed by thin planes) rather than mass: regularity as opposed to symmerry: elegant materials; technical per- fection and tine proportions in place of applied ornament: Related to these principles was the precept of Hexibilicy, especially in plan,  The norton of an architecture as international was in all likelihood derived from Germany, where the term had been used trom the mid- 1g205 on. In 1y25. Walter *Gropius published Iiternationale Arehitekiar, the first in a series of Batthaushiicher. wo years later, Ludwig *Hil- berseimer brought out his faternarionale neue Bautkunst, and in 1y27, in conjunction with the Weibenhot housing exhibition, an ‘Inter- narionale Plan- und Modell-Ausstellung neuer Baukunst’ was held. All illustrated an architec- ture that Hitcheock had initially considered the ‘International Style’. However, in this Euro- pean context. international mreane architecture that expressed the spirit of the times, one that, bike the burgeoning technological culture of the 2oth century, would spread throughout the West: the machine was international and to the Europeans this architecture was derived trom  the processes and products of the machine. In addition, the designation was infused with social and political ideology: international al- luded to the socialist: and Bolshevik Inter- nationals. and an international architecture was  seen as a catalyst in the transformation of society - as *Mies van der Rohe put ic in 1y27 in relation to new efforts at housing, ©... the struggle tor the new dwelling is but part of the larger struggle for a new soctal order.’  None of this technical or social import was associated with the American use of the phrase International Style. Here the emphasis on for- mal properties overwhelmed concem for tunc- tional considerations that were crucial to European practitioners. Hitchcock and Johnson claimed that it was ‘nearly impossible to orga- nize and execute a complicated building with- out making some choices not wholly derer- 
mined by technics and economics. One may therefore refuse to admit that intentionally functionalist building {*Functionalism | is quite without a potential aesthetic element.’ And by employing the adjective ‘international’ the socio-political content of the term as used in Europe was drained away, and ‘International Style’ beeame another art-historical category, similar to a rubric such as ‘International Gothic Scyle’.  The Museum of Modern Art exhibition travelled to eleven other cities in the United States, and a more portable version of it circulated for six years. While the latter was still making the roun tial statements on the new architecture height- ened its meaning. In his Piorcers of the Modern Movement from Willian Morris te Walter Gropits (1936), Nikolaus Pevsner examined English tyth-century reform efforts im the arts and architecture (* Arts and Crafts), and saw then as. feading to the Modern Movement, initiated by 1914 in Germany on the basis of Gropiuy’s Fagus Factory and through the agency of the *Deurscher Werkbund: this suggested that the new architecture was the main stream of historical development. The following year, Walter Curt Behrendt - in Moder Building, Its Nature, Problenis, and Forms equated European modem architecture with the work of the Modern Movement, as the architecture of the times. Then in 1938-9, Sigfried Giedion deliv- ered the Norton Lectures at Harvard. sub- sequently published as Space, ‘Fine and cArcti- tecture. The Growth ofa New Tradition (ty41).in which the new architecture was depicted as inevitably of the time and as a developinent of progressive design. The cumulative ctfect of this activity was to establish International Style  s, three popular and influen-  as the cutting edge of contemporary building When Tine magazine, in its issue of 8 February 1937, greeted the arrival of Gropius in the United States, he was celebrated ay ‘one of the founders of the concrete-pipe-and-plate-glass school of architectural modernism: known «ty the International Style.”  According to Hitchcock and Johnson's re- strictive definition, almost none of the architec- ture in the United States up to 1932) was International Style, and of the little chat existed most Was on a small scale, and virtually none was by Americans, William *Lescaze, trained in Zurich by the first-generation modernise Karl *Moser, and settled in America since the carly  1426s, submitted a modern design in the League of Nations competition (1927-8), published another modern project as *The Future Ameri- can Country House” (in -irchitectral Record, ry28), and built the oursery at Qak Lane Country Day School near Philadelphia (1428). Rudolph *Schindler, caimed by Orto * Wagner and an émigré from Austria in ryt4, lent a heroic appearance to his beach house for the Lovells (Newport Beach, Cal; 1y25 6) by using asseruve, reintorced-concrety cantilevers, strip windows, and fat roof. Richard *Neutra, compatriot of Schindler and in America from 1y23, began the Lovell House in Los Angeles in 1927: in this a thin steel frame, window walls, flat strips of stucco wall, fat roof and open plan were arranged with the tendon of providing a healthy living environment. Several other Sprigrés were also building in America, such as Albert: Frey, Frederick Kiesler. and) Oscar Stonorey  More visible (and more specifically associ- ated with America) were skyscrapers, of which two or three were drawn inte the International Style orbit. Raymond *Elood’s Daily News Building in New York City was a tall block composed of asymmetrical setbacks. and orna- ment play structure  ‘dono role in larger views of the  buc in other ways the building was ‘Tess pure in expression’, according to Hitch cock and Johnson. A different attitude way displiyed in Hood's McGraw-Hill Building  International Style. Lovell Beach House, Newport Beach, Cal ius 01, by Rudolph Schindler  
vhs horizontal. volumetric quality of the ex- rior was the result of considering cach floor a  continuous open space. On the other hand, the \ynumctrical arrangement of setbacks suggested traditianal methods of composing a tall build- ing. A national Style of these years was the Phila- delphia Saving Fund Society by Howe and Feseave. tor which designing began wn 1929. Smooth, hard, machined surfaces were used mide and our. and the Aoors of offices were Sacked as ao single slab without setbacks. Bat in other ways the building was  third high-rise related to the Tnter-  vertically  more complex and structural: piers were placed outside the slab, anarrower slab was set at right- angles to it for stairs and elevators, and recessed mechanical Moors at the base separated it from the larger volumetric ground floors that con- tained retail stores and: public banking spaces The result was a complex design cniphasizing function and structure. quite different trem the contamed volumes ilhistrated in Hitchcock and Johnson,  The Gghtiess of detinition created) other problems when fntern.ttional Style was applicd to America, The towernnyg figure of Frank Lloyd * Wright was largely exeluded. His work continned aspects of the International Style: he replaced enclosing. solid) walls with ‘freely arranged planes. his plans explored open, con- tinuous space, he advocated the use af advanced building technologies. Yet he maimtained a separate and umque position in regard to Internationa Style architecture, attacking the ‘ready-made culture’ of the “mternationalisty’, and employing warn materials and carth- hugyang designs diate had ete to do with the weightless. niichined perfection promoted by other exponents of modernism  Also excluded from this detinition were the plentitude of “madernistic’ skyscrapers erected ty American cities throughout the +y20s and 130s by the likes of Wilham Van Alen: Harvey Wiley Corbet: Jolin Mead Howell: Jacques Ely-Kahn: Miller aod Phueger: Morgan. Walls and Clements: and Varhices. Gniclin and Walk- er. These buildings were based on vertically composed mass. symmetrical setbacks, and ornament (which, however. was selectively used and abstracted, because st way considered to be both for and about a meder, technologi- cal society). Other work, for which a strong International Style argument could have been made, was passed over by Hitchcock and  Jobnson, such as the glazed and volumetric projects by Norman Bel Geddes, like chat for the Toledo Scale Company factory (1g2y) or Albert *Kahn's factories. beginning even be- fore World War] with the Packard Motor Car Company Forge Shop. Detroit (1yrt). and fully realized by the time of the Ford Glass Plant. Rouge River (1922). where steel trame, sheets of glass, and precise detail were used ina manner that was similar to (nternadonal Style design  Despite the severe cconomic conditions of the 1430s. some architecture thac could be seen as International Style continued to be built throughout the United States. Several archi- tects maintained their practices for a time, such as Neutra and Howe & Leseaze, and others fora dime brought theirs into bemg: Gregory Ain, Philip 1. Goodwin, Vineent G. Kling. Edward Stone, Wilham Wihon Wurster, Franklin and RKuump, Keck & Keck, A. Lawrence Kocher and Albert Frey  Also during the to3os. however. a broad range of issues started to emerge within the Anicrican architectural profession, shitting che complexion of modern design. Vernacular ar- chitecture began to be assessed for its direct use of materials and sensitive adaptadon to climate and site; fifty years of redwood architecture in California was examined for sinmlar lessons. The impact of different climates on design was seen as an issue to be explored. Interest grew in the nature of materials used in construction: Jaminates and plywood as stressed skin. ply wood and plastics and metals in) moulded shapes. Prefabrication was evaluated afresh as a  means “to set a depressed economy on its feet’. More varied types of construction opened the possibilities tor new forms the ‘free curve’. the diagonal, the hexagon - and for anew freedom in comprising roothne and wall arrangement. Standardized equipment introduced the poten- ual of greater design flexibility. It was tele chat the open plan had not grappled with the individual's needs for privacy and quiet, so that assumptions about plan arrangements were challenged. Issues of city and neighbourhood planning grew in importance, and the question of monumentality was raised, the abihty to achieve an architecture that would ‘syinbolize social ideals and aspirations’.  These deliberations were given unexpected confirmation in the late 1g20s. The rise of National Socialism in’ Germany prompted  
major designers and theorists to emigrate to the United States, where many assumed teaching positions and eventually ¢ among them Behrendt, * Breuer, Gropius, El berseimer, Liiszl6 Moholy-Nagy, Mies van der Rohe, and Martin * Wagner. In their teaching. through publications and exhibitions, and by means of their architecture, they advanced a set of proposidens about che buile domain that were similar to the issues already bemy broached in America. Thus they contirmed changes underway in architectural education,  ablished) carcers,  and the discipline that emerged was the one under which many architects practismy mto thy late 19705 Were trained.  After World War IH, when the explosively expanding American cconomy provided un- equalled opportunities to build. International Style was given new prominence by beng generally associated with buildings that were composed of right-angles and parallel lines m machine-like, unernamented precision, wing technical materials and glass walls, and favour- ing open interiors. In a tyg7 exhibition ar the Museum of Modern Art devoted to Mics van der Rohe’s work, and m the accompanying monograph by Johnson, the tenets of the International Style were reiterated: Johnson now an influential architect and critic, would continue te refer to these principles in various statemenes, but by the mid-1960s he had modi- bed the definition of the International Style to: “structural modular thythms: clarity, expressed by oceans of glass: flat roof, box ays perfect containers no orna-  honesty:  repetitive  ment.” The change was indicative of the popu- lar but simplified use of the term that had by this dime come into general use.  The shift was already underway by the carly tysos. When Hitchcock wrote abour ‘The International Style Twenty Years After’ (Archi- tectural Recard, 1951), he could claim that ‘the establishment of a fixed body of discipline in c. the International Style, had been ‘successful’ in America, and that this work was ‘probably the major achievement of the 2oth century’. Now generally ass notions of an industrial, technological society. new building in stcel and glass became, as Colin Rowe noted, *.. a suitable veneer for the Corporate activities of an “enlightened” capital ism.” The early phases of this connection can be seen in Pietro *Belluschi’s Equitable Lite Assur- ance Building (1944-7). a twelve-storey. glass-  architecture’, t  yetated with  International Style. Lake Shore Drive Apartments, Chicaze (48) 6). by Mies van der  Rohe  andestecl slab an Portland, Oregon: Wallace * Harrison's WEY broadcasting studios, Sehen- ectady, NUY.. New York University-Bellevue Medical Center, New York City, by *Skid+ more, Owings & Merrill (SOM: begun 194s). and Nathaniel Owings’ Office Building Project for the Building Managers Association (1947). But it was Mies van der Rohe’s Lake Shore Drive Apartments in Chivage (logS 31) that provided the model for the steel-tramed Iigh- rise Chat was to profiterate throughout Ameri- can cties durmyg the nest decades: a rectangular tower or slab sheathed in sheets of glass that im turn were held in place by thn metal frames set oa renvudatcd pattern. the whole sparsely clegant and conveying the impression of being a highly technical Simultancotsly, Harrison, ay Director of Plan  the product of SOCIETY  ning of an interustional Board) of Design Consolrants, produced a similar proposal tor  the 
AAAAAN  VA  if  International Style. Lever House. New York (gst 2). by Skidmore, Owings & Merrill  the United Nations Secretariat Building, New York City (ry47 so} firm of SOM, chiefly under the impetus of  The rapidly expanding  Gordon Bunshaft- as head designer, began to apply the concept: to a series of corporate Structures: Lever House (rast -2).and Muannfie- turers Hanover Trust (iys3 4). both in New York, and Inland Stech Chicago (1ys6-8), 2 notable instances. Mies van der Rohe himself  created the Timpeccable image of power and presage’ (Frampton) in the genre with the bronze-clad Seagram) Building, New York flys4 NS).  Mics van der Rohe ise 1 low, horizontal rademnie (limes  worked on an analagous design strategs buildings. whether in an Institute of Technology, Chi vze. ty3y on) or domestic (Farnsworth House. ano HL. 146 so} context. Eero *Saarmen efforts for the corporate client with his: vast General Motors Technical Cearer. Warren,  matched these  Mich. (ty46 $s): and for more than two decades, other corporate centres - located on park-like suburban tracts or in generous, land- scaped ploty along urban outer ring roads — were constructed along these lines, such as the Connecticut General Life Insurance Company, Bloomfield, Conn. (1954-7). by SOM. Other architects used the steel-and-glass box in small- er, domestic designs: Gregory Ain, Edward Larrabee * Barnes, John *Johansen, Philip John- son. The importance of this type of dwelling at the time is shown in the West Coast “Case- Study" houses: Charles *Eames picced his together in Ty4y using standard, factory-pro- duced clements in order to achieve maximum with Raphael Soriano’s proj sored by Arts and Archi- tecture, Was developed from Mies’s work, bur  enclosure minimal means:  t. spor  onthe basis of available building techniques and hand-crafted components. Gropius, together with Breuer, built several houses in the Boston suburbs in a manner reminiscent of the volu- 1927 WeiBenbotViedlung, Stuttgart, and both adapt- ed enlarged versions of these designs to aca- demic buildings: Harkness Commons dormi- tories, Harvard (1949) by Gropius; and Ferry House dormitory, Vassar (lyg8- $1) by Breuer.  In this setting. the term International Style had come ty assume a double meaning. On the  metric. stucco-surfaced houses at the  one hand, it was compressed to refer to a select architectural repertoire of the ty2os, on the other expanded as the implied basis tor any of the innumerable institutional buildings that were transforming American swhere in the iysos. Yet in both instances, the historical circumstances of the 1y205 that bad lent meaning to the architecture in Europe were left aside, and the International Style came to designate an approach to design in formal terms, a European theme and ity Ameri-  corporate or  cities ever  can VaTLItlons, CFO { Power. Richard (ed.). “Revising Modernist History’. Are Journal (USA), Summer 1483 {special number): sce also works cited above.  Isozaki, Arata. b. Oita, Kyushu ry3t. Studied under Kenzo *’Fange’s at the University of Vokvo (igso 4) and later joined Tange’s team (1984-63) prior fo leaving to establish his own practice in Tokyo in 1963. During the ten-year period with Tange. spanming what must be considered Tange’s most creative phase. 1 actively contributed to the design of the Ka- 
Isozaki. Fupnu Country Clubhouse, Oita (t972 4)  gawa Pretectural Offices in Takamatsu (1955 8). the Imabari City all (iys7 8) and the Tokyo Plan (1ysy--60). Even after 1. had lett his office. Tange continued to employ him on such projects as the reconstruction plan for Skopje. Yugoslavia (1965 6). and the Festival Plaza at Expo ’7o in Osaka (1966-70). In the ty9608 |. was identified with the *Metabolism movement. even though he eschewed any direct commit- mene to its principles. In 1973 he married the prominent Japanese seulptar Aiko Mivakt and this led to an extension of his interests in Dadaism. An increasingly historicise (*histori- cism) emphasis in J.’s architecture during the 1970s led to the assimilation of motifs derived from such architects as Giulio Romano, Andrea Palladio, Etienne-Louis Boullée and Claude- Nicolas Ledoux.  Inthe 1960s, the period ofhis first manner, bs architecture took on an exaggerated trabeated expression of reinforced-concrete members not  dissimilar in style to Tange, but with a stronger conceptual bias and gigantism of scale. The Festival Plaza for the Osaka Expo “jo marked a stylistic crisis in his architecture that heralded the beginning of his second manner: in this his work shows a much greater reliance on Euro- pean and American models and is typified by highly abstract compositions using additive constructions of cubes or arbitrarily bent scmi- cylindrical vaults  This new style grew from his determination to break away from the rationalistic principles of modern architecture which he sought to  replace with a neo-mnannerist aesthetic that abrogated the tenets of orthodox modernism. His mannerist approach emphasized fragmen- tation, dissonance, debasentent of the skeleton and compositions bascd on a heterogencous assemblag,  of parts accompanied by an exten-  sive use of inctaphor. The most outstanding of  his cubic compositions are: the Gunma Prefec- tural Museum of Modern Art in Takasaki (ryt gy the Kitakwushu City Museum of Art Gye 4h and the Shukosha Building in Pukuoka (to7s}, Notable examples of the semi- cylindrical vault type are the Fujimi Country Clubhouse in Orta fty72 y}and the Kitakyushu Central Library sty720 S33  Towards the end of the decade there was a further sbitt im emphasis in L's taste towards a More austere neo-classical form in such projects asthe Tsukuba Civic Centre (197y 82) and his competition project for a recreation and resi- dential complex by Lake Tegel in West Berlin (TYySo} PD  Drew. Philip. The Aretireetire of Arata frozakt, London and New York tys2  Israel. At the beginning of this century the architecture of the land of Isracl, then part of the Ottoman Empire. consisted of the nronuments of the successive masters of the Floly Land, set in a contest: compounded af European *eclec- ticism and a prevailing Arab vernacular. In a seemingly timeless landscape. the only obtru- sions of the machine age were the railway, the brickworks outside Jerusalem, and those monu- ments to the functional tradition, the wineries  in the newly established Jewish secdements of Zichron Yaakov and Rishon Lezion. Only a few architects. such as Alexander Baerwald. in  Israel. Vochnian, Harty treat Bacrwald  by Alesander  
on building at Haita figte sought an indigenous sevle ina synthesis of Fast wad West. Atter World Warr loam what was rtow the Brinsh-inandated terricary of Palestine. the foundations were hid for orderly urban plan- amg amd aw eivie architecture of considerable quahics, by vise Geddes and, tater, Patrick Abercrombie, and rodent Brush architects and planners of the  consultants such ay Pacrick  professonal cahbreorCharles Rabere * Ashbee. Austen St Barbe Harrison and Clifford Hol- Indy. By che iyses Erich *Mendelohn had paid fis first visit to Palestine. and deft. in his unrealized but nfluenoal projects, animportant Jegaey. Eis vision of a regional mutation of the *Tntermagonal Style. responsive to the climate and eture of the Middle East. was realized. not only in bis later work in the country, but by oder European architeets. most notably by Rochard Kautmana. who was also ta make his oiark asa planner of Isracl’s proncer communal settlements, the “kibbutz” amd the cmeshay” With che exodus of progressive architects front  Navi Germany in the 1y3os. die group of  architects in Palestine imbued wach che spine oF the Modern Movement were strongly: rein forced, OF this group same. such as Arich Sharou and Munio Wemriaub, were direct products of the * Bauhaus. Others, hke Dow Carmiand Zee Rechter, who had studied in Europe, retlected the new spirit more mdirect- ly. Phey. together with talented architects stich ay L. Krakauer. J. Neuteld, Ge. Averbuch, Max Loeb, co nate just.s few, constituted a cadre of modern architects. | hey were joined by archi- tects of internauunl repute: by Mendelsohn. who set up office in Jerusalem, to build several (Schocken, Ty aay Weizmann, 1935 30nd hospitals (Mt Scopus,  outstanding houses  as. Teh Aviw fiu3al. by  Israel. Apartment bu Arch Sharon  1y36, Haita, i936): Alexander Klein, who Gught at the Technion in Haifa; Johanan Rater: and Adolf Rading, practising in Haifa, who later jomed the Haifa Municipality. These architects and many others transformed entire areas of Tel Aviv and Haifa into unique homogencous zones of “Bauhaus vernacular’, unrivalled except by the Siedhmeen (estates) of Berlin. or Frankfurt, The outbreak of war broughe a halt to construction, which was not Significantly to recommence until the establish- ment of the Stace of Israclin rgg8. Then. with the food of immigrants, frst priority was given projects Cshikunini’) sprang up across the country, There already existed. of course. a tradition of social housing. in co-operative workers’ hous ing schemes, by Sharon and others, in the 1930s.  te howing, and mays-housing  In the new housing, quanuty, speed, economy, were the prime considerations, uniformity and austerity the result. By the 1g608 standards were toumprove. Apartinents Were larger, construc- don techniques more sophisticated: wich exten- sive use of prefabrication, house types were diversiticd: and the approach to neighbourhood planning became more comprehensive. with an cuhanced sensitivity to Jocality. From the model neighbourhood of Beersheva in the 1ghos to che Jerusalem: satellite communities East Palprot. Giloh and Kamat in the 1y7os, there is a whole range of interesting experi- ments in housing form. On a larger scale of regional planning. it should be noted, pioncer- Ing work was donc. especially by Arthur Glikson. In addition to housing peripheral to existing cities, there was tho a bold New Towns programing, from Carmiclin Galilee to Aradin the Negev, At the same Ume, more venerable, bistory-laden, and picturesque centres - Jaffa, Safed. and, after 1967, the Old City of Jerusalem {and especially the ravaged Jewish Quarter) - underwent a process of restoration and creative renewal. It was in, or adjacent to the old city, that some of Moshe *Satdie’s most exciting projects were located. The centres of the cities developed in Isracl, as elsewhere: comprehen- sive shopping centres, high-rise office towers, many luxurieus hotels. These buildings are generally of a high standard of architecteral competence, but are stylistically cosmopolitan, [tisan the Held of institutional buildings that the more significant contributions lic. There are several fine university campuses, of which those at Beersheva and Jerusalem — both in its old  
Israel. [srac] Muscum, Jerusalem (1ysy). by AL Mansfeld and Dora Gat  Israel. Convalescent home, Zichron Yaakov (196y), by Yacov Rechter  campus at Givat Ram, and its new and highly controversial megastructure on its original Mt Scopus site - are architecturally the most challenging. A new round of major hospitals. ranging from the Carmel] Hospital (1y6y- 75). compact and monumental, on Haifa’s skyline, to the giant organism that is the new Tel Hashomer hospital in the making: the former by Yacoy Rechter and Moshe Zarhi, the latter by Zarhialane. Of all the concert halls, the older Mann Auditorium in Tel Aviv (1933-7) by Dov Carmi and Ze'ev Rechter still dominates: serene, monumental, functional. Two fine mu- scums, different in concept and expression, arc Al Mansteld and Dora Gat’s Israel Museum in  Jerusalem (rysg), whose clegant pavilions pre= dicate 4 cellular plan capable of growed, and the Tel Aviv Muscum by Dan Eitan and Itzhak Yashar (rogj. ur exciting spatial exercise, bur in more finite terms. Israel is rich wa niuseums and memorutls because. for che fowish people, memory. 4 btunan and national resource, is thus appropriately instirurionalized.  Arich Elhanani’s Yad Vashem in Jerusalem (ty sy 64)  is both a container of historical documentation  and a powertul evocation of the tragedy of the Holocaust. These instirunonalized buildings are usually in Acton brat {exposed conercteh a material handled with great virtuosiry and skill by Israch) architects. Ins inherent: qualities  are parteularly appropriate for a ploncering maven trying Co  Strength. uolity, directness  make a phice for iselrin che san GHe “Architecture  “Architecture en Palesdine’,  Paniourd hia Paris), Sept. 1y37. Canaan, Gere 
ston, Refuuidiny the Land af tyrael, New York vosg: Planen tid Bauen in Istacl’, Batnneister Munch) January rg62: Architektur, Planung woud Rumscin Israel) (Uerk (St Gallen). 60 (1973). ve. Harlap. Amiram, New Israclé Architect base Brunswick, NJ. tu8t  Traly. Although an Arty and Crafts exhibition was organized in fyo2 in Purin, which marked the oficial entry of Italy into the international * Art Nouvean movement (stile Liberty’ is the name usually employed in Italy). in reality the crisis of *historicism had it. beginnings more chan thirty vears cartier im the works of Camillo Boito and Alessandro Antonelli, In the quest for aravona architecture Borto’s contribution was above lin critical and theoretical speculation, while  Amonelli way given to structural reflection.  Cersunly che most important Milanese are chitects betore tytg were two pupils of Boito: Gactano Moretti and Girseppe *Sommarug Jn Moretet’s finese work, the Cencral Electricicy Station of Trezzo d’ Adda, the influence of Art  Nouveau is indireet, and it ty more a paturalist- romantic smplificagon which characterizes the formal language. Sommuaruga interpreted Art Nouveau decoration in strongly sculptural terms, intermingled with Neo-Renaissince in- fluences. ay scen in his Palazzo Castighioni im Milan (1900-3) and numerous other houses in Bergamo. Milan and Picdmont trom the same period.  The orher two important representatives of ftahian Art Nouveau. Ernesto *Basile and Raimondo *1YAronce. had difference origins. Basile, who was the son of Gian Battista Basile, the most important Sichan architect of the second half of che tyth century, combined with extraordinary refinement an Art Nouveau taste with his Neo-Norman formal approach,  IY Aronco was Venetian ind dircetly influcuced by Otro *Wagner. He way the protagonist of the Turin Exhibition of ige2 and afterwards buile various buildings of unusually modern conception in Turkey. meluding the Santoro House im [stanbul (1yos)  Clisse Stacchini (designer of the Milan Cen- tral Station, won in competition in 1yo6), Emesto Pirovano, Giovanni Michelazzi, Pietro Fenoglio and Annibale Rigaui were. in addi- dion, the most important exponents of the widespread renewal movement in which the nost important personality ot architectural  Italy. Main building at the Turis: Exhibition f1yo2) by Raimondo 1D’ Aronco  Ttaly. Electricity generating station (project. 1914) by Antonio Sant Elia  vee  APRN FRG  *Fucurism, Antonio *Sant Elia. had bis roots.  In contrast to North Italy, Rome's most. important architects. such as Guglielmo Calderini or Cesare Bazzani (the creator of the 
Museo d’Arte Moderna built for the major exhibition of 19tt) remained firmly historicist in approach. The activity of Gino Coppede. who was one of the most imaginative expo- nents of late mention.  The Fucurist episode was, at least in archites- ture, rather more diverse and long-lived than legend would have it. Between 1yoy. the year of Marinetti’s “Maniteste du futurisme) and rgr4. when the manifesto ‘Larchitetcura: fururista’ appeared, lie not only five years, but also  *eclecticism. also deserves  numerous Dnportant events, including the es tablishment of che friendship of Sant’Elia and *Chiattone, both of whom were represented in the 1914 ‘'Nuove Tendenze’ (New Tendencies) exhibition. Architectural Futurism had an in- fluence. after this first explosive inroad. on every exhibition through the 1930s. One should cite in this regard Fillfa (Luigi: Colombo). Virgiho Marchi, Enrico Prampolini, and Fortunato Depero (who created the “futurist” pavilion at the Monza Biennale of ty27), Nicola Diulgherotf and Ortorino Aloisio, as well as the extraordinary Interno fucurista of lve Pannagei of 1935.  The Futurist strain continued as an impetus to an authentic avant garde which ran parallel to the concept of a ‘return to order’ which was a common attitude after World War 1 even among the Italian modernists. Between tyi4 and 1926 (the year of the foundation of the modemist association *Gruppo 7), Italian cul- ture in general — from: the literary journal La Rondato Walori Plastici, the magazine of the new Visual culture — revealed a tendency to regard the romantic avant garde of the pre-war years as obsolete and to rally behind a new nanionalisic *neo-classicism.  The Milan architects Giovanni Muzio. Arpago Novello. Giuseppe de Finerti and Gio *Ponti especially worked in this direction. although with different accents. In 1923 Muzio built the Ca’briitta in the Via Moseova in Milan, a building which in formal terms paid homage to Giorgio de Chirico’s ‘Pittura metatisica® Also in Milan, in rg25 Finetti designed the Casa della Meridiana. a building rich in reminiscences of *Loos.  In the same period in Rome, Pietro Aschien. Alessandro Limongelli and Gino Capponi sought the way to a hesitant renewal. In ry28. Adalberto *Libera and Gaetano Minucei orga- nized in Rome the first  ‘Esposizione dell”  aly  architettura razionale’, through which medium the young Rationalists entered inte competi- tion with academic architects for the official fy our of the Fascist regime. A decision was, in any case, not to be reached ung ten years datery although the academicians, with *Piacentini at their head. always cnjoved institutional sup- port. the regime did not adopt a repressive stance towards the Rathonalists until 1937 PPALLA RG:  Likewise in 1y28, an exhibition held in Turin ta mark the tenth anniversary of victory im World War I provided experimental possibili- hes for young architects, cluding Giuseppe Pagano and Levi Montaleini fwho built the Gualino office building in ty2y). Alberto Sartoris and Lavinia Perona. They all joined Ted by was also the  together to form the Group of Six,  Edoardo Persico. Moreover. ty year of Torragai’s Novecomum in Como, the first significant Rattonalise building in Iuly. Uni ga6 the cultural scene was tense. duc to the rivalry of the moderately modern Novecente Italiano and Rationalism. The 193¢ exhibition in Monza was dominated by the Novecento. but the Rationalists were repre- sented by the Casa Elettrica of *Figam, *Pollin. and) Bottoni. Jo Milan in 1933. the First Triennale was held in a building designed by Murio. in which the Ratonalists and tte “Novecentists’ were equally represented. Expe- cially to be noted are the graphic arts hall by Mausio and Sironi and the Prows Pavilion by the Rationalist *Baldessari. In iy32. the Roman “Mostra della rivolazione tisesta’ was put en in an exceptional pavilion by Sironi and Terragni.  Maly. Press Pavilion at the First Mim Lricimate Hyd) by Luciano Buldyssart  
si toga the Salon of Air Pravel presented  seecot the mose bedliant products of Ration- isins the Hall ot the Gold Medals by Persico aid Nigeoin tat directed by Ponti and Pagano, was the ennale oF Rutionalism.  The Second Milan Tricnmale of  eat L Between fg22 and fy3f the most important alan che buildmgs for Olivetti by Figin and Polini with Terragni and Libera, were the oly members of Gruppo 7 to remam crue to  or draban Rawonalism were ereeted  who. along  che principles of modernist architecture): the Parker Company by Persico and Nizzoli; the drt of * Albin s retined building: group Pietro Cartanco ind Cianm Manteror and above all  vthe works of  che Came Longeri, Cesare the Duportant works of “Verragnt. In ty34. *Michclucet’s group won the conmpention for the Santa Marta Novella Station in Florence  Only a tew noteworthy Ratgonalist: build- Ings were realized in Rome before iy3o: the Post Osfice mm the Quarticre Namentano 1g32t ind che Houscan the Via Valentine by *Ridola, a weil ay che Justice Building by Quarem and Murator: in addinen there were the urban planning projects for the new towns of Pontnta fyz3. by Pieemato and Sabaudia ‘rai by Quarent  The general atmosphere worsened atter 1436 and the academicians fof wham mans were members of the exhausted Novecento move-  ments agai gauined the upper hand.  Traly. Santa Maria Novella Station, Florenve fuga 6. by Cao ani Micheluve: aud others  In the Rationalise camp the *BBPR group Baath, *Belgioioso, *Peresurd and *Rog- ersi,aswellay *Gardella and Mollino. effected a sort of eriteal Rationalism which showed 4 great sensitivity to problems orhistory and Jocal tradition. In ty3t. Adriano Olivetti {the clear- sighted industrialist of great importance in the history of Italian architecture, design and ur- banism: entrusted the BBPR group, together with Bollom. Figint and Poilini, with the planning of the Aosta valley. In 1g38. the Milan Rationalists preparcd the plan tor the model quarter Milano Verde. Muzio built the Bonaiti and Maluganr bouses in Milan fty3s-6) in which he introduced Italy to the taste of *Bonatz and *Pahrenkamp, while in his build- ing tor the Montecatini’ Company in Milan. Ponu turned to a moderate Rationalism. The unine terminals at OrbetchHo were realized by *Nervi in 194g 3  Atter the government ordered the journal Cusahella-contimata — the most important organ ot Italian Rationalism: = to cease publication, nearly the entire group of R.abenalists joned the political underground. Raffaello Giolli, Gian Luigi Banti and Giuseppe Pagano were arrested  and deported to German camps. where they died in tygs: what had scemed a ‘question of) sevle’ became a question of freedom: and death.  The reconstruction atter World War I umted the Rationalists around a policy of Strong continuity with pre-war tradition. In Milan. BBPR built the victims of the concentration camps (ty46)}. The Seventh Milan Tricnnale and the experimental  memortal for the  
y. Airerate hangar. Orbetello age 4. bv Pret Nervi  residential quarter QTS. built in conpuncuen with it, are representative of the hopes of drose years, and the inclination toa new relaganship between Italy’s architectural culture and the realities of the day. The archicectonig nco- lism of the following years developed in tion to the disappointrnent of the lett’s atin the provincial clections of ry48 and the cultural bureaucratization of the Italian Com- munist Party, which sereened itself From con- temporary avant-garde culture. This found expression in the work of Mario Ridolti in Rome. the ideology of the ‘commune’ and the new Interese i spontancous architecture. in Scandinavian neo-empiricim and in the con- tradictions of the ‘milieu’  The INA-Casa Tiburtino quarter in Rome (a sort of manifesto of architectural neo-realism |. the ‘Case a torre’ in the Viale Etiopia, also im Rome, by Ridolfi, che village of La Marrella near Matera by Quaroni, and the Borsaline houses in Alessandria by Gardella were all realized in the Tysos, In addition to his beauutul  de!  Rtaly, INA-C pa Libertas quater, Ronse stay by Mass  Wade aid esters 
Italy. Manco del Tesoro dr San Lorenzo, Puri interior design (lus4 61 by Franco Albind  muscums (Palazzo Bianco in Genoa. 1ystj. Franco Aldini built the INA Building in Parma  dikewise 1981) which for twenty years served as  a model tor the architecture of the region.  The discussion of the internal conflicts of  Rationalism, and especially its reladonship to tradition, was opened in the second half of the 1gsos, first: by {Roberta Gabett. Vittorio *Gregotc. Aimara Oreglia INbola, Giuseppe Rameri). then alo by Gardella (Casa alle Zattere i Venice, 1987). Albini (Museo del Tesoro di San Lorenzo in  young architects  Ttaly. City contre. Turta cproject, i9qay. by Lodovico Quarant  Genoa, 1954 6; and La Rinascente Department Store in Rome, 1957-62) and finally by the BBPR group (the Torre Velasca in’ Milan, tys4 8).  Atthe same dime a middle generation (Marco Zanuso, Vico  Maxistretti, Gigi Chessa, Vittoriano Viganda, Ezio Segreili, Marcello TY Ohve, Angelo *Mangiarott?) developed an interest 1 industrial production and its ideo- logical and practical implications for buildings Ling: Cosenza built a noteworthy industrial complex tor Olivetti (195s) in Naples. *Nervi, *Morandi and Zorzi also offered: interesting constructional experiments. The Pirelli sk seraper ia Milan by Gio Ponti and others, built In 1YS6-8, Was typical of a modernistic formal- ism which had become rather widespread.  The end of the 1ysos was characterized by a  double crisis. On the one hand anew interest in urban problems developed, especially with che book Lirbanistica e Povvenire della citta CUrban- ism and the future of the city’. tysy) by *Samond (the founder of the architectural school in Florence), On the other hand there  was a shiftin the relationship between ideologi- cal obligation and language in favour of a #reater concentragon on questions specific to architectural discipline  The competition for the San Giuliano quar- ter across from Venice was held in rysy. and Quaroni submitted a project based on the problem of hierarchies in the planning of the city. The (y61 competition for the administra- tive centre of the city of Turin elicited many architecturally importane and engaged contri- butions, as did the later competition (1467) for  
the extension of che Chamber of Deputics in Rome.  The important protagonists of the ry6os were Leonardo Rice, who worked with the theme of informality, Maurizio Sacripand with his interest in the expressive means of advanced technologies, Giovanni *Michelucci, who built the Church of San Giovanni Battista (1960 -3) on the Autostrada del Sole (motorway) near Florence, and not least Carlo *Searpa, who had already realized his fumous pavilion at the  Italy. Zanussi aduunistranion building, Pordenone (1961), by Gino Valle  Italy. House at Borgo, ‘Ticino Gyzal. by Aldo Rossi and Gian? Braghieri  TAMER  Vente Biennale in tgs and now continued with his exceptional remodelling of museums (Palermo. Verona, Venice} irchitects were also confirmed in dhe ry6os  Several younger  Gino *Valle, who created a series of industrial buildings in Pordenone (1yg61), *Aymonina, Vittorio Gregor. Cac Aulenti, *Rosst and Guido Canella  The Triennale of Free Vine, held in Malan in Jy64. once again took up problema of architec- que after three successive Trignmales had: fto- cased on questions of design  In 1y66 two boaks were published which were to have considerable inflacnce: f/ terrore dellrchaetnoa by Vittorio Gregorti and L'Avchiterra della atta by Aldo Rassi Rational architecture)  
!  taster confidence ina limitless progress  vided widi the onset uf che world-wide eco oni crits or thy lire tyeos and with the crisis ofideads which cubninated inthe movements of ros  The architecture of che ly7os sought to provide aseries of answers to this deep cris, On the one band there developed a new avant garde *Snperstudio, Archizoam, Ettore Sotsas) which raceted Rauonaliyn and advocated a new creatrg. while on the ether hand a group of young architects in the cirele of the stitute, Cinversitaria di Arelitettura in) Venice pro- posed a reconsideration of the traditional prin- ciples of urban form. Aymonino, Rossi. Polesello. and Semerant were ity most iMpor- tant proponents. A further group mamtained a strong urban plaining posiven which concen- trated essentiuly on the management and con-  servation of the evisting urban fabric.  Important testing: grounds for these various tendencies were orfered in the great compeu- doy for new university complexes which were fagliart.  heldin the carly rg7os {Florence. byt lyr Giancarlo *De Carlo has assumed a special position in recent [talian architecture. He has concentrated bis efforts principally on che city of Urbina, whose development he hay deter- mined not only ast plinner but alo with built  + Cosenza. ita.  work of a noteworthy standard of architectural quality.  Among the youngest architects one should cite Ennio Battisti, Franco Purini, Pierluigi Nicolin and Emiho Pughell, whose grounding hy the school of Gregotti, as well as Massima Seolari, Giorgio *Grassi, Camberto Siola aud Salvatore Bisogi. who take Rossi's work asa Murting point VG Kidder Sinich, G. b.. Haly Builds, London tyss: Pagane. Carlo. Avehttertra —ttaltana ogi ftaly’s cirditecnie Today. Milan tgs: Meeks. Carroll Lo Vo. draian Architecture, 1750 - tory. New Haven. Comi.. and London (goo; Galardi. Alberto. Neve iattentsche Architektac, Stuttgart 1y67: Fanctl, G.. Anchiretira moderna ta tala 1g00-19ge. Florence 1yO8; ‘Italia’, Zodiac (Milan), no. 20. lyzo: Crestt, Carlo, Appunti storie’ ¢ critter sul architertia indiana dall rg0ee ad eva. Florence 17 Patetta, Uarchitettura in falta tog tyg3. Le polemicte, Milan iy72: Patetta. bo. and Danesi, S.. Uf razionalismo e Carehitetiura in Malia durante il fascism, Venice 1976. Contorto, C.. De  Luciano,  Giorgi, G.. Muntoni. A.. and Pazzaglin, M.. I dihattite architettontce in Talia t9gs torts, Rome lyry.  Jacobsen, Arne. b. Copenhagen tyo2, d. Co- penhayen tovd. In his work J. way to a notable degree open to new impulses without losing hiy auachiment to the Danish architectural tra- dinon, ‘The same sense of order, modular rhythms and natural propertions characterizes Jes architecture. When he was a student, *neo= Classen was sul dominant in *Denmark and the architecture of the period around isco was grealy admired. in particular those buildings by Nicolai Abildgard. However, J's first en- counter with the architecture of *Le © and * Mies van der Rohe in exhibitions in Paris (1928) and Berlin (iy27 8) was important both tor himyelf and tor che whole development of Danish architecture  rbusicr  Trained in the architectural school of the Academy of Art. Copenhagen. from which he graduated in 128, J. later taught there (1ys6é 71}. While stilla student. he built the first ofa long series of single-family houses. reminiycent extemally, with its yellow bricks and tiled root, of the period around 1800. The flexibility af his talent enabled him, however, at the same ume to try his hand at the cubord forms of the  Jacobsen. Bellavista estate, Copenhagen (1934) 
modernist style. Together with Flenming Lassen, he ercated a sensation at an exhibinen in 1g2y with a circular “house of the future’, complete with helicopter landing-pad on the roof. In 1930-5 he ercated a harmontous group of buildings in the Bellevue beach area near Copenhagen, beginning with the baths. whose cabins and kiosks were designed with elegance These were followed by the three-storey Bellavista. housing development, with staggered fagade features. Finally came the Bellevue Theatre, which was thought of pri- marily as a summer theatre and therefore given asliding ceiling to allow the night sky to serve ay a root.  It was through his close friendship with the Swedish architect Gunnar *Asplund that J learned to work ata building. both technically and architecturally, and) te respect detail Asplund’s influence shows clearly in’ the Stelling House in Copenhagen (1937) and the town halls of Arhus (1937) and Sallerad (1930 4), designed in collaboration with Erik Moller and Flemming, Lassen respectively  After a period of enforced isolation during World War IE. J. regained his position among the leaders of Danish architecture with his Seholm housing scheme (1yso 3). In the Mankegard School at Gentofte (1952 6), a single-storey construction with pumerous bays and courtyards, he combined a sense of total unity of design and quality witb an atmosphere of intimacy. Ina series of buildings he adopted the largely American-de constriction with internal supporting columns and curtain-wall fagades, to which he brought a high degree of refinement. asm the fespersen ofhee building in Copenhagen (iyssh: Redovre town hall (1955): and the SAS Build- ing in Copenhagen (1958-60)  Among his industrial buildings, special men- tion must be made of: the Massey-Harris exhibition and works building. Glostrup  1952), and the Carl Cliristensen factory in  Iborg (1956). In his later years J. also designed a number of buildings abroad. including: St Catherine's College, Oxford (1y6o 4) the main administration — building of — the Hamburgische Electricitits- Werke, Hamburg, (1962 -70); and the City Hall, Mainz (iy7o 3: completed by his colleagues Hans Dissing and Otto Weitling).  Athome J.’s last major work was his design for the Danish National Bank in Copenhagen  japed principle of  So GPRS  eye  th  Jacobsen. Jospersen office building. Copeuhagen  TLyssh  Jacobsen. Cigy Hall. Mani igzu 3: complewed hy Hany Dissing wind Oro Weielmg,  
iyo: The There. the simple. monumental urass of che baldng: and reflective surtaces were vonverved toa blend well with the old ware- houses nea dhe harbour. J. in fact never wanted te be a specialist. In addition to being an arehitcet he also was vu influential designer of Silverware. furmture and) fabric patterns. Although these were mostly undertaken for particular buildings, they were never of such an individual nature chat they could not be put to generalusc, and many were in fact subsequently mass-produced i} ©) Faber, Tobias, Arie Jacobsen, Stuttgart 1964: Shriver. Pond nik, Arie facohsen, Copenhagen  tyre  Japan. Japan bay a long tradition of expanding its own culture by absorbing elements of foreign cultures and then modifying them in its en Japanese traditional architec- ture Way cmixture of older indigenous building  owat idiom, E  mnethads and the Buddhist temple style imt- ported from China and Korea. Likewne. the Smodernizadion oF Japanese architecture was essentially synonymous with “westernizagon 1 practic inarchiceeture but in the whole of Japanese civilization atter the downfall of the feudal system of the Tokugawa Shogunate (1603- i867 and the cuergence of the new Mey) era  this phenomenon occurred not only  QS6S 1git. Even prior te this era of western= T7Aton. a fee instances of the transplantation of Western domestic architcetural styles had o¢- curred. However, after the Mei restoration, this transplantation process became ene af che Most Wperuant components of the uanonal policy tor the modernization of the whole nation. Inaccerdance with this policy. the Meiji government mvited many specialists of the building industry to expedite the task at con- struction of public buildings and to establish a moder system of architectural education. The British architect: Jowah Condor, who was among these toreign specialists, nade a great contribunon to fapuiese architecture asa lee- turer at the Tokyo huperial University  Since the architecture of the Meiji period was patronized by che government and the aca demic establishment, actiig ay motivating forces. its development: rctlected a detinite commitment to technoeriey and attached greater pertance to structural engineering, and building economy than to thy creativity of the individial architect.  This kind of literal *funcuonalisny’ derived from the concept of ‘architecture for the nation’, combined with the eclectic style chiefly derived from Victorian architecture in *Great Britain, gradually came to be regarded in the eyes of young students as oppressive. The Parsho period (1912-26), immediately follow- ing the Meiji era. was marked by the pursuit of new architecture by the vounger generation. In Ty20, several students of Tokyo Imperial University formed the ‘Japanese Secession’, declaring their detachment trom the architec ture of the past and generating stimulative manifestos and exhibitians of their “fancastic” projects which were undoubtedly affected by the architecture of German * Expressionism. Among the founding members of the Seces- slonbt movement were Sutemi Horiguchi. Mavunu Takizawa. Mamoru Yamada and Kikuji Ishinoto. Ay the Meiji ‘modernization’ was aspecitically Japanese phenomenon and its architectural style was in fact nething new by Western standards, this new moventent was virtually the first expression of modern archi-+ tecture m Japan. In the ensuing years came a number of examples of ‘new’ architecture, competing with the eclectic works of the older generation of architects. If the frst buildings, Tike the early prajeces of the Seceysionists, still Showed Expresstonist features for example. dhe Central Telegraph Office by Yanraida (1920) and the Asahi News Press Building ttg2tbby Ishimoto. both in Tokyo - there was  Soon a movement towards the purer *Inter- national Style. OF particular interest is the faet that this revolutionary change in the ‘architec- tural language’ was reflected in the work not only of independent architects but also of these working for official organs such ay the Building Department of the Tokyo Metropolitan Office Qvhich produced several notable school build- ings), the Dojunkan Housing Corporation and the ‘Teishin-sho (Communications Services Corporation), In particular. the ‘Teishin-sho staff included a mumber of talented architects such as Roku Iwamoto, Mamoru Yamada (termer Secessionns}, Tetsuo Yoshida and Hideo Kosaka. Yamada’s Teishin hospitals in Tokyo (1937) and Osaka (1941) and Yoshida’s General Pose Office in Tokve (1y38) could be counted among the most successful examples of the Modern Movement in pre-war Japan. Although Japanese architects had already demonstrated in this period that their abilities 
Japan. Central Tele  by Mamoru Yoonada  aph Otte, Lokyo race  Japan. Asahi News Press Building, Lokwa "1ya7i. by Kikwi Ishunoto  Were not inferior to those of most Western  architects (a typical example iy 28-year-old  Renshichiro Kawakita’s project: which won  Japanese architects than did Wt  fourth prizem the compention tor the theatre of Kharkoy USSI&s, som  exerted a protound inducnee ot the architects of  wed Western miasters  Japan. Pwo af these masters. Brank Elavd * Wright and Brune * Laut. were vetive there ts. Wareht built the Imperial livugskuen wbotham Lokwa. and some  for seve  Hotel tyes as owelboas the Kindergarten ¢ty21 residetices. bauds niosc sniticant works were  eture and culture ina  waits on fapanese are]  general, Ultimately. however. Laut’s works  proved 10 have ater dhrect influence on  she's buildmgs Wrights wooks. m spite of their prominence: were too indin ndualisie isd uriguie to serve as  model for fapaness archiseets who were just  begiumag ti establish shor own niodern idiom  bor this reason, aside front several miitacive  works by such architects as Shin aud Bale. the  i  mnduenee of the Amenean aaster remtned  rather peripheral excepting dhe tact that some  et his collaboratars congibuted much te the  future desclopiment of Japanese wuelntee cure Antonin Raanrond  eunte te dapan together with Wright. remamed  a Crech architect: who  in fupan unut ha death coscept during the wa years uid produced «number of excellens aid gemumely modernise buildings such as the Lokye Golf Club Akabosbi lyase Kamekr tstchiara, whe had  tag) and the residence eather bea one of Wright assptants, deagned his own botse russia notable work having a Speer place mothe history of Japanese residen=  nal architecture. Bur neither et dheir styles 
contained any important features reminiscent ot Wright.  The lessons of the "New Architecture’ were alse introduced into Japan by young Japanese architeets who had gone to Europe to study under the leading figures of the Modern Move- ment. Kunio *Mayekawa and Junzo Sakakura worked under *Le Corbusier in Paris, and Bunzo Yagamuchi worked under *Gropius in Berlin. Yamaguchi’s remarkable Constructivist annexe to the Tokyo Dental School (1934) and Sakakura’s Japanese Pavilion at the World’s Fair of 1937 in Paris exhibited the skill of the younger generation of Japanese architects.  In the late 1y30s and early ‘4yos, however, this anional language had to confront a new situation, a call for a ‘national style’. This problem had already been discussed in the Japanese Architectural Academy as carly as ty20, a tact which revealed the Japanese archi- Iects’ awareness of their own national identity. This issue had been raised during the long planning process for the National Parliament Building, which was ultimately completed in 1936 in a classic *Art Deco style. The rise of Japanese militarism accelerated this call for a ‘national style” and gave birth to a strange stylistic mixture of European Fascist: architec- ture, which became known as the ‘Imperial- Crown Style’, Hitoshi: Watanabe’s: winning project in the competition for the Vokyo Imperial Museum (1931, built in 1938). which  hew inter:  Japan. Tokyo Imperial Museum {1938} by Hitoshi Watanabe  was chosen in preference to Mayekawa's entry in the manner of Le Corbusier, was among the earliest typical cxamples of this hybrid style. Kenzo *Tange’s sensational début in two competitions was also marked by a definite tendency toward the nationalistic style. In this difficult period, Japanese architects who were opposed to vulgar nationalism formed the Kosaku Burka Renmei (based on the idea of the *Deutscher Werkbund) to defend the ideals of modern architecture. but the movement soon lost its momentum. During the years of eco= nomic recovery after World War II, Japanese architects advocated ‘architecture for demo- cracy’, as represented in Ryuichi Hamaguchi’s book Architecture of Humanism, and the N.A.U. (New Japan Architects Union) was formed in 1947 to further this goal. Maycekawa, Sakakura and other modernists held the leadership in this movement for the next two decades. And in 1949. Tange reappeared as a champion of the younger architects after winning the competi- tion for the Hiroshima Peace Centre. After a short period of optimistic belief in Functional- ism, a theory of Socialist Realism was intro- duced to re-evaluate the problem of a national or regional architectural language. During the 1ysos, Mayekawa and Tange, among others, showed their ability to synthesize modern technology and ‘Japanese character’ strongly influenced by the late work of Le Corbusier. In the sy6os the major concern of Japanese archi- tects lay in developing 4 systematic planning methodology applicable both to building de- sign and construction and to urbanism. Tange,  
Japan, Plan for Tokyo (1ysy 60} by Kenzo Tange  with his Tokyo Plan (1959-f0), became once again the leader in this phase. and younger architects formed the Metabolist movement under his influence (*Metabolism)}. Typical works of this period included several of Tange’s public buildings, such as the Kagawa Prefectur- al Office Building, Takamatsu (1955-%), and the Tokyo National High School (1y61- 4). as well as Kiyonori *Kikutake’s Tokoen Hotel, Yonago (1964), Fumihiko Maki's buildings for Rissho University in Kumagava (1967 8) and Sachio Ohtani’s Kyoto Intemational Conter- ence Hall (1966). Concurrently with the growth of the movement of Metabolism, a number of architects (including some of the older generation) produced highly individual works, as if in reaction against the rigidly  systematic designs ot the Merabolist main= stream, Togo Murano’s Nisei Insurance Build ing (14964) and Martin Luther Schoo! (1702 and Seiichi Shirai’s Shunwa Bank. Sasebo f1yhs-77  Uhe Osaka World's bar ef 1976 represented the culminadgen of the Metabolist mainstreant movement after a decade of grow th supported  Theological  J ywere among these works  by the grear Japanese ccanamie heont of the Ty6os. Among the works presented ar Expo [oa were “Linge’s huge space-trame. the novel mentholte capsiles of Kikutake and) * Kure kawa. tod various pnenniine strugcares. Tn the wake orthis Metbolist orgs opuntisnt about the future valuc of Mettholisin evaporated, and the architceraral profession was polarized: be aveen the ‘conceptual’ minority  nrofessinnabst gery and che Arata ®bozaki. with Kazuo  his neo-platone aesthetic. and 
*Shinohara. with is mcensive symbolisin, be- came the new feadors of the ‘conceptualists’ in the 1970s and contnue in these roles. Young Japanese architects todiy are even more radical and are individualistic, as young artists have tended to be. HY T Rulterman, Udo. Neve Japanese Architecture, London 1y60: Boyd. Rebin, New Directions the Japanese Architecture. New York 1968: Tafuri, Mantred, L’an tierra moderna in Giappene, Rome 196g: Boys, Michael Frank-  my  oT Tee  Japan. Intermanonal Contercace Hall, Kyoro (1466), by Sachio Ohtani  Japan. Gunma Prefectural Museum of Fine Arts, Tagasaki (7) 4), by Arata bozaki  lin. Beyond Metabolism, New York (978: Yatsuka, Hajime, ‘Architecture in) Urban Desert’. Oppositions (Cambridge. Mass... and London}, 23  
Johansen, John M(acLane), b. New York 1916, Studied at Harvard University under Walter *Gropiuy and Marcel *Breuer and worked in the offices of Breuer and *Skidmore. Owings & Merrill. From 1948 to Ty7o he had his own office in New Canaan, Conn: in ty70 be entered a parmership in New York with Ashok M. Bhavnani. In 1976 he became a professor at the Pract Institute in New York. J. is keenly interested in structural experiments: designs for a holiday house with a reintorced- concrete shell and a walls of sprayed reinforced concrete. His design tor the U Embassy ain Dublin (iy64). a  treamlined house” with  rotunda with circular courtyard and a fagade of  prefabricated, reinforced-concrete frames. is based on the Irish round-tower tradition  In the Oklahoma Theater Center in OkJa- homa City (1y66-70} the various elements building volumes, services. pedestrian ramps are expressive! composition of dynamic movement. ‘I his is at once a revival of the approach of [Russian *Constructivism and an attempe to reahze a ‘kinetic’ architecture for the electronic era. (Ha CHeyer. Paul, Architects on Architecture. New York 1966, Johansen, John M.. The New Orhan Aesthetic, New York 1972.  articulated and combmed ina  Johansen, Oklahoma Theater Center, Oklahoma City (1y66 -70)  Johnson, Philip. b. Cleveland ryo06. Scudied philology at Harvard University. 1y23) 20. and was the tint director of the Architecture De- parement of the Museum of Modern Art in New York (MOMA). 19306. He turned to Harvard to study architecture under *Cropius and *Breuer. 1ygo- 3. and had his own architectural office in Cambridge. Mass...  Jater re-  tog? 6.In tyyohe again became Director ofthe Architecture Deparement of the Museum of) Modern Art. and since 1954 has practised as an architect in New York (194-7 1p partnership with Richard Fosters since 1g67 with Joho Burgee)  His attention was first directed to European wantegarde architecture ats carly as tya7 by an esay by the architectural historian Henry- Wussell Hitchcock. and | most Jpfuential American propagandists for  became one of the  the stvle in the 13  s. He arranged for *Mics van der ehe’s Firsc trip to New York (where the Jacter redesigned J.°y apartment). as well as uhat of *Le Corbusien, and in 1932 published with Hitcheock char mostintuential book. fhe hnernational Stryte. which defined the Modern Mevenienr as a formally determined stylistic tendeney with no reference to ideological or sociological prmuipley and thereby coined the widely used term: *Intermavional Sevde? (the suggestion originally came from Aifred Barr, then director of MOMAL  In the rygos [.. inspired by his own activity as a publicist, himself tuned te active architec tural practice. His first work, realized in ty42. wwashis own house in Cann bridge. Mass. Ia fg4y he built. also for himself the ‘Class House” in New Canaan, Coum.; for all the unmistakable influence of Mies van der Rohe’s Parnsworth House m Plano. Hi (designed 194s). Jo's elegant glass prism ts adecidedly independent work, Its placement in a park-hke landscape and. its relaionsnp to the neighbouring guest house and the ornamental poud set betore it hear witness to an individual sensibility. The areular bathroom: core revealy a new interest in elementary geornetrical tornis and Mies van der Rohe’s saving to make the construcdve frame of a burdding legible takes on a formial-decora- tive aspeet tn fs equa} concern tor pertecnion of detail. Hedrew notonly on the German master of *Racionaliso, but also on those architects who Pitcheock bad labelled “romant classi- cists such as Ledous and Sebinkel. A whole series oF smooih and tasteful buildings was to  Thy 
Johnson, Ghias House. New Canaan, Conn (5y49): exterior and interior  follow, including the Hodgson House in New Canaan and the Onete House in Irvington, N.Y. (both rosi. built in collaboration with Landes Gores), as well as the delicately com- posed garden of the MOMA (1953).  With the Kneses Titereth Israel Synagogue in Port Chester, N.Y. (iys2 6} J. widened radi- cally the spectrum of coy *ecleeticism) and announced an entire sequence of ever more audacious experiments, notable for displaying a  hedonistic nonchalanee ina context of equally refined and tickle *histericism. The experi- ments inclided the Roofless Church in New Harmony. Indiana (1y60), che Sheldon Mem- orial Art Gallery of the University of Nebraska at Lincoln (1963), as well as the New York State Theater (1960 4). one of the components in *Harrison and *Abramovitz’s Lincoln Center complex, which fits easily within the tradition of the *Ecole des Beaux-Arts in American architecture. The fact that}. could also collabo- rate at the same time with Mies van der Rohe on the puritan-spirited Seagram Building in New York (tys4-8) is symptomatic of his lick of rigid aesthetic convictions.  This whimsical changeability is also evident in Jos subsequent work. The Kline Geology Laboratory Tower at Yale University. a heavy, monumental tower whose historical solemnity recalls Louis *Kahn, was built in 1462-4: the Art Museum of South Texas at Corpus Christi, completed in 1972, is a white complex com- posed of elementary stereometric volumes. The IDS (nvestors Diversitied Services) Center in Minneapolis, completed in 1973, was one of the first combined hotel/ofhice buildings with an extensive public lobby, a type developed on an even larger scale by John *Portman. The Pennzoil Place complex in Houston was real-  
Johnson. Pennzoil Place, Houston, Texas tuto 6  ized in 1y70 6, and comprises two crisply-cut. dark mirror-glass clad administration towers with an immense public glass hall slipped in between as a unifying element.  In the 1980s J.’s frivolity combined with his craving for the spectacular reached a highpomt. In 1980 he built the ‘Crystal Cathedral’ in Garden Grove near Los Angeles, an immense glass-enclosed space with breathtaking light effects. The AT&T Building in New York (1978-83) is a skyscraper which sports a md lange of Gothic, Renaissance, neo-classical. and *Art Deco elements. Also under construction is the PPG (Pittsburgh Plate Glass) Building in Pittsburgh, a filigreed complex, which draws on the neo-Gothie of Sir Charles Barry and A. W.N. Pugin and refers with light ironic reverence to che old (Gothic-inspired) Univer- sity buildings in Pittsburgh.  J. has had and continues to have a probably unequalled influence on American architecture. With the same Glan with which he eased the penetration of European modernism into the USA in the 1930s and 1y4os, he became subsequently a precursor of *Post-Modernism. However, most of his epigones lack his sure  actheuc sense and cultivated-cynical refine- ment: they are only able to initate the hollow tasks of his forms in order to make architecture attractive for patrons who are concerned only with appearances and to satisfy a novelty craving public VMI ~ Hitchcock. Henry-Russell. and Johnson, Philp. The Luternational Style, New York 1932 Johnson Philip, Machine drt, New York 1934:  « Afies van der Rohe, New York 1947: Jacobus, John, Jr. Philip Johison. New York lyoa: Hitchcock, Henry-Russell, Philip John 1949-1965. New York and oble, Charles, Philip Johnson, ‘Philip Johnson’, The Architee- gird Forum (New York}. vol. 138 (1y73). no. 1, pp. 26 74: Miller, Nory, folinson:Burgees Archi- tecuure. New York ty7g: Stern. Robert A.M. tedy, Philip foluson, Writings, New York 1979.  sons Architectire London iyoa; Pondon tyt  Josic, Alexi. b. Start Boece}. Yugoslavia tg2t Studied painting and was active asa fila scen- ographer before turning toarchitecture, In ry s3 he went to Paris where he joined the ATBAT office {Atelier des Bauisseurs). In loss ap ship was formed with *Candilis and * Woods: since 1442 J. has maintained his own office in Stvres. near Parts. Lake Candibs and Woods, he made his name principally for his role in the collaborative planning of the new town of: Toulouse le Mirail competition 1y62 tion (y64-77). His designs are generally based on a three-dimensional modular system which  aier=  realiza~  permits an orderly growth without compro- mising the original concept. An example is the new town of Lille-Est (ty72-8, with Frangois Calsat). AM — See under Candilis  Kahn, Albert. b. Rhaunen, Westphalia 1869, d, Detroit 1942. Emigrated to the *USA in TBRo, He spent the years ty28- 32 in * Russia, working on an industrial building programmic. Early on, K. paved the way for the precise and finely delineated cubic forms of the tysos and 1960s (*Mies van der Roh sro * Saarinen). Among the most successful examples of a functionalist architecture in the best sense — one in which the restruncd architectural language harmonizes  
Kahn, Albert. ouge Raver Ghos Plant, Ford Motor Compan, Dearborn. Miho lcd  with industrial requirements - iy his Rouge River Glass Plant ofthe Ford Motor Company m Dearborn, Mich. (1g2g) Detroit Institute of Arty. The Legacy of dihert Rader fexhibition catalogue? Detroit, tute: Hildebrand, Grant, Designing for dahesiry Lhe clechitectire of Albert Kalin. Carbridge.  Mass, 174  Kahn, Loms | isaderes b. on the Island of Osel. Bstonta tat. dl. New York rozg. Studied at the University of Penusylvania in Philadetphia. ig2o 4, *Ecole dey Beausx-Arss. After work in vartous professional ofives Lameng them that of the acadenueally oneated archirect Panl Cretj. as well as several extended visits to Europe. K. opened Ins own office in Philadelphia in 1937  within the tradition of the French  In tygt he formed a paruership with George *Howe, one or the pioneers of modernism in the USA: In 1og2 Oscar Stonoroy joined the partnership, and connnucd his collaboration with K. until tags. although Howe lett in 1943 K. taught at various inygtutions, meluding Yale University, the Massachusetts Insticute of Fech= pology and the Garversiry of Pennsylvania. He was aimember of |oant X (*ClAM)  In 1941 3 Kahn. Howe and Stonores real- ized the much-acclaned Carver Court Hous- ing estate in Coatesville. Va tithe late iygos K. of Frederick *Kiesler and especially of Roo Buckminster *Fuller, Fuller’ simpactisespeciall: rong in the various projects based on geodesic principles which K  came under the infnenc  Kahn, Louis. City Tower Municipal Building Philadelphia, Pas iwith Anne ‘Lyng: project. 1957)  drew up beaween ros for the City Tower Manicipal Building in Philadelphia, in collabo- radon with Anne Lyng Fuller. Such experiments with utopian mega- structures led in 1956-7 to the project for the Midtown City Center Forum in Philadelphia, which drew on his carlier project fora Rational City, which had in turn been inspired by *Le Corbusier’s Ville Radieuse (Radiant City) and in which the geometric-technological euphoria is seen to give way to a heavy, historical  an ardent disciple of  monumentality. In tys1-3. in collaboration with Douglas Orr, he realized the extension to the Yale Art 
Gallery in New Haven. At a time when the majority of avant-garde American architect, in the wake of an extreme faith in prosperity and growth, advocated that elegant technical per- fection which had been introduced hy *Mics van der Robe, K. although starting from the aesthetic of the master of German Rationalism  presented a bold and skilful ruggedness. He clad the architecture of “beinahe nichts’ tabinost nothing) in an expressive, massive monu- mentality, thereby creating one of the most unportant buildings in the sphere of *New Brutalisin.  Yer the Yale Art Gallery was much iore than just that: the streng geometric plan, the simple, clear, prismatic volumes, the visible frame construction, the smooth brick fagades and the ceiling of concrete tetrahedra were carly evidence of K.°y deep interest in the elementary and in archetypes in architecture. This interest would continue through his entire work. and influence an entire generation.  K.’s preference for stringent adherence Beaux-Arts typology ree in the bathhouse for the Center in Trenton, NJ on a cruciform ground-plan, cach roofed with cut-off pyramids except the middle clement. In the context of the revivitied academicism of the Tgsos. the bathhouse is an emblem of classic simplicity and rational strength.  What had been articulated stl with some hesitation — in New Haven and Trenton way brought to a synthesis and a highpoint in the Alfred Newton Richards Medical Research Building at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia (1957 60). The three laboratory blocks, to which the two towers of the Biology Building were added in 1960 -4. are all joined by connecting elements to an open block and are ‘served’ by appended towers in which the staircase and ventilation systems are housed Thus the laboratory spaces, square in plan, arc entirely free and unencumbered. The agyeres- sive towers are axially arranged in relation to the likewise axially composed laboratory blocks; but while the first are entirely closed, the latter are extensively glazed. Rationalistic, fu- turistic and medieval-romantic elements are  ived full expression Jewish Commutnics five square rooms rise  here melded into an independent poetic archi- tectural language.  In this building K. had given expression to the principal elements of his future architectural development: his preference for elementary  Kahn, Louis. Altred Newton Richards Medical Research Building, Guiversity of Pomiyfeania  Philadelphia ys 6e  Kahn, Louis. Jonas Salk Dostituce laboratory building. Fa Tell. Gd  Lysy 6s  geommetie torus and conmpositions: the overs fl  heightened emphasis on faction and constrac ton tending tow. ds rorm.distic autonomy: the created,  Inerarelical and often dramatically  differensaenon besween “served” and servant 
spaces, a feature adopted from) * Wright's Larkin Building: the monumentalization of typical of | *New Brucalism: the involvement with the dualism of ‘silence and light’ by no means tree of mythic connotations: and finally the return to the past, which is manifested partly in abstract terms and parcly (particularly in lace works) explicitly.  In the laboratory buildings of the Jonas Salk Institute at La Jolla, Cal, built r9sy-6s, the ‘serving’ mezzanine floor below cach labora- tory level (in which both the supporting struc- ture and the technical/mechanical installations are housed) permitted an entirely free and functional organization of work spaces as in the Medical Research Building. In the (unbuilt) reception centre, K. developed for the first time that’ House-within-a-house’ principle which he had already sketched out in rosy (American Consulate in Luanda, Angola) and which was later to become a principal theme of QO. M. *Ungers’ work. The Unitarian Church in Rochester, N-Y., built t9sg 67, was as much a restrained as an elegantly controlled complex. The additively conceived Erdman Hall Dormi- tories at Bryn Mawr College in Bryn Mawr, Pa.. were built in 1960s. Among his later important works in the USA is the Kimbell Art Museum in Fort Worth, Texas (1966-72, in collaboration with Preston M. Gerne and Asso- ciates), and the Yale Center for British Art, New Haven. Conn, (1969-74).  It was the Third World that finally afforded K. the opportunity to put his urban planning and architectural notions into practice ona large scale: the planning for the government centre of Dacca began in tg6z and building was under- taken in 1973-6, thus largely after K.’s death. Like the Indian Institute of Management in Ahmedabad. India (1962-7, in collaboration with B. V. Doshi and A.D. Raje), the fortress- like closed buildings display numerous geo- metric-decorative types, principally derived from antique Roman models. The “House- within-a-house’ principle is masterfully dem- onstrated in the Central Building of the Assembly: the supporting brick walls, into which reinforced-concrete elements are set and in which round and arched clements are cut, evoke traditional precedents. The formal Jan- guage attests to an abstracted *historicism, which seems to strive to fultil with monumental solemnity the — deeply American - craving for history.  secondary — elements,  K. is the figurehead of an important transi- tion in architectural culture, in which the late *International Style of the post-war years was dissolved, via *New Brutalism, into a new formalism, the most extreme manifestations of. which are, on the one hand, *Post-Modernism and, on che other, *Rational architecture. Supported by a sometimes decidedly cryptic and metaphysically imbued architectural philo- sophy, K.’s projects as well as his executed buildings have influenced the architects of the succeeding generation in a most decisive man- cting search for architectural form was for him, in the first place. a spiritual, indeed mythical, act: it is no coincidence that his most successful buildings are those of a religious or symbohe nature. Through his creative involve- ment with the past. provided a restraint and an impulse for his imagination, K. anticipated one of the central problems of the architecture of the 1970s and 1gSos and thus prepared the way for personal- ities as diverse as Aldo *Rossi, James *Stirling, and Mario *Botta. VML C] Kahn. Louis “Architecture Is the Thonghrful Making of Spaces’. Perspecta (New Haven), 4 (1957); ——. ‘Remarks’, Perspeeta, yfto (1g6s); Wurman, R. S.. and Feldman, E. (eds.), The Notebooks and Drawings of Louis 1. Kahn, Philadelphia ty62; Scully. Vincent. Jr, Louis 1. Kalin, New York 1962; Louis ]. Kahn’, L’Architecture d'aujourd'hui (Paris), no. 142 (February/March ty6g); Giurgola, R.. and Mehta. J., Lewis f. Kaha, Zurich and Boulder, Col. 1975: Konner, H., Jhaveri. S., and Vesella, A., Louis f. Kahn: The Complete Works 1935— 1974. Basle, Stuttgart and Boulder, Col. 1977: Lobel, John, Between Silence and Light: Spirit in the Architecture of Louis 1 Kahn, 1979.  ner. His exa  which simultaneously  Kiesler, Frederick. b. Vienna i8ygo. d. New York 196s. Studied at the Akademie der bildenden Kiinste and the Technische Hochschule in Vienna. After a brief collabora- tion with *Loos in 1920, he was active notably as a stage designer. In 1923 he joined the artistic group De Stijl. and in ty25 he directed the Austrian section of the "Exposition inter- nationale des arts décoratifs et industriels modernes’ in Paris * Art Deco}. In 1926 he went to New York, where in the same year he formed a partnership with Harvey Wiley Corbett which lasted until 1928. He was Direc- tor of Stage Design at the Juilliard School of  
Masic in New York, 1934-47. and Director of the Laboratory for Design Correlation of the School of Architecture at Columbia Univer- sity, 1936-42. In 1957 he formed a partnership with Armand Bartos, which concinued until K.’s death. His fundamental concern was wich the ‘endless’, with continuous space, which in various guises informs his entire work, begin- ning with the Endless House (1923. revised repeatedly until 1960), via stage sets — such as that for che Berlin production of Karel Capek's R.ULR. (also 123) — and the Endless Theatre (1924) to the Universal Theater project for the Ford Foundation (1961). The Endless The. exercised an influence on Walter *Gropius'’s Totaltheater of 1927. AM Cl Frederick Kiesler: Environmental Sculpture (exhibition catalogue}, New York ty6g: ‘Kiester by Kiesler’, lrchitectural Fornm (New York), September 1965; Kiesler. Frederic Inside the Endless House, New York ty66: “Frederick Kiesler 1923-1964'. Zodiac (Milan), no. ty (1969), pp. I8-gy. Frederick Niester (exhibition catalogue), Vienna 1975.  ter  Kikutake, Kiyonori, b. Kurume 1928. Seudied at the Waseda University in Tokyo. where he has had his own effice since 1953. His career is closely tied to Japanese *Metabolism, in which he played an important formulating role through his projects for cities in the sea. such as the Tower Shaped Community (i958) and the various Marine Cities (1958, 1960, 1463), as well as the Sky House built for himself in Tokyo (1959). In the Sky House the interior service accessories are not united in a central core but rather disposed on the periphery of the open living space. Similarly, in che Pacific Hotel in Chigasaki (1966) the bathrooms are prefabri- cated units hung on the exterior walls of the bedroom cower. In both cases the underlying principle is that the elements most subject to change should be so arranged that they can easily be replaced, an expression of the Metabolist conception of life as a continual developing stream that architecture must fol- low. This idea was manifested differently in the Shimane Prefectural Museum in Matsue (1959) with the division of the building into a strongly expressed fixed part in the lower evo storeys and an open exhibition hall above, and in the Miyakonoyo Civic Hall (1966) where a light, collapsible roof is raised over a fixed platform. The ties between Metabolism and Japanese  Kikurake. Miytkonoyo Civic Hall (iyeds  tradition found architectural expression in the Administration Building of the great shrine in Izumo (1963) and in the Tokoen Hotel in Yonago (ty64). Kos carly conceptions of an extension of civilization into the sea was in part realized in the Aquapolis at Okinawa (1y75).AM TJ Kawazoe, N.. Kikutake. Ko. and Kurokawa, K.. Metabolisen 1960, Propesaty for New Urbans, Tokyo ty6o, Kikutake. K., Tatsha Kenchikuran (Metabolic Architecture), Tokyo tg68; Drew, Philip, Che Third Genera Hon: the changing meaning of architecturc, New York 1972; Atyouori Kikutake. Works and Meth- ods r9sé—1970, Tokyo 1973: Riyonort Rikutake. Concepts and Plannntg, Tokyo tg78  Kleihues, Joscf Paul, b. Rheine 1933. Studied first at the Technische Hochsebule in Stuttgart and then in Berlin. ay well as at the *Ecale des Beaux-Arts in Paris, He worked in the offi Peter Poelzig (as projcet director for the new Koptklinik Westend building in Berlin-Char- louenburg), :y60-2, and since 1962 has bad his own odice in Berlin (antl 1g67 in partnership He be- camea professor at the University in Dortmund in 1973 the ‘Internauonale Bauausstellung (g84° (IBA) in 197g. While his early works reflect a contin= ued invelvement with *New Brutalisn and *Seructuralnm, Ko developed atthe end of the fy6es ur independene architectural Linguage which, on the one hand. has a certain affinity with Italia Ratieuatia and. on the other  cor  with Hans Hemrch Moldenschardd)  and was appointed Planning Director of  
Klerk. Spaarndainiie biure housing, Amsordam West aytz tu)  hand. stands clearly in the tradition of Prussian neo-chassiciin, In addinon to the Koptkhnik Westend building (196 4. 1962 8). Ks most Upportant works include: the Altenelub (Sener CGiuzens’ Club) in Berhln-Rcinickendort (1966  7): the main workshops of the Berlin Sanitation Service um Berlin-Tempelhot (iy6y 76, 1y70  83); the apartment block 270 in Beriin-Wed- ding (ty6g-So}: and the Hospital in) Berlin- Neukdiln (1973. 1y76t). Or his unrealized works, especially noteworthy projects are those  Kleihues. Workshops of the Berluy Sanitauon Service. Berne Tempelhunt stytu 831  for: the Cniversity im Bielefeld (168 9): che Sprengel Miuscum in Hanover (ryz2i: the (undesglerie Nordrhein Westhilen in Diissel- Siand the Park Lenné Quarter in Berlin (1y76-7). Ww  “Rlethues’. Das Runstwerk (Seutegart}, 32 (97h Nos. 22. pp. So g.  dort try  Klerk, Michel de. b. Amsterdam Amsterdam 123 School of *Amsterdam. be created, in’ his Spaarndammerbuurt housing in Ampoterdam West (yid-ig) a fascinaung and in part decidedly eccentric type of stage architecture notable for its almost complete disregard for constructional and functional considerations, In the Amptellaan housmg in Ampscerdam South  tsSg. d A leading member of the  (iy20-2), however. he reverted to closed, flat forms in the tradition of * Berlage: GHa  Frank, Suzanne, “Michel de Klerk’s Design for Amsterdam’s | Spaarndammerbuurt’, Nederlands Kunsthistorik faarboe! (1971), pp. 175-203; Searing, Helen. “With Red Flags Flying: Politiey and Architecture in Amster- dani’, in: Millon, He and Nochlin, 1. (eds.j. Are and Architecture in the Service of Politics, Cam- bridge, Mass. 1y78.  Kline, Peter Vilhelm Jensen, b. near Skelskeor, Denmark 1853. d. ty30. Worked first ay an  
engineer, then ay a painter and from P86 as an architect, He strove in his buildings to achieve a synthesis of che brick style of northern Euro- pean Gothie churches and contemporary arehi- tectural * is the Grundivig Church in Copenhagen (1913. 1921-40, completed by his son}. with its expres-  Expressions, His best-known work  sive vertica) emphasis on the west front atone reminiscent of Gothic types and of a great pipe  organ Gt (2 Fisker, Kay. “Den Klinwke  Skole’. clrkiteknir, 7 (1g63). special number  Koolhaas, Rem, b. Rotterdam tugg. Atior a  bricf career as a copywriter, he left Holland in 1y65 to study ac the Architectural Asotin School in London, where he worked with Elia Zenghelis, who Tater became fis partner when the Office for Metropolitan Architecture  Koolhaas. Housmy, on Roosevelt Iland. New York City (praicet by OMA. taza  \  OMA was formed in 1y75. K. and Zenghelis were jomed by the painters Zoe Zenghelis and Madelon V4  responsible  Sendorp. these so ardsts bemg many oof the rendermas produced by OMA. The first jomt work of k  tormer was sill a scudent  wherearter for  and Zenghehs occurred while the This wasn phantas- maigorie collige Saved on the theme of the Berlin Wall and cnotled Fvedis (ryt. Wath the formation of OMA. the work of Ky and Zeughelis assumed a mare protessinnal sanee.  dou tier Fut 8 corppention entry tor a housiig comnples on Roosevelt Island New York Ciry Around die same tint. RK. designed din cellabo= ration wilt Laurinda Spearttbe Spear blouse in Mint Beach. Ploridas a work which was Maly redived am tycy bs the firm or Arquikcctnnes, Ag die sume Gene K. published is manitesco on Manhuttaussa, cnttled Delie ous New York fyt8roustudy which, aside fron ity docuumentinoen. was co refeer the © sensibiliy af OMA projects for Manhac  ving  rough a series OF hatasy  
hache formation of their highly chromatic style. Ke and the OMA team have been affected by a number of mtluences. ranging from the Neo-Supremuatis( architecture of Iwan *Leonidoy, to the Continuous Monument, projected in the 1960s by Adolfo Natalini and *Superstudio.  Tn almost all of their subsequent work, from their Parliament extension in The Hague (1978, with Zahar Hadid) to the various designs they Submitted in 1981 for che Internationale Bauausstellung tg84 in Berlin, OMA hay demonstrated a form of unsentimental con- textualism, in which the architectural syntax remains unrelentingly modern, while respond- ing to the specific context. KF  ~ Koolhaas, Rem, Delirions New York. A Remoactive Manifesto for Manhattan, New York and London 1978; (OMA, Architectiral Design (london), vol. 47 (1977), ne. $: OMA Projects tore rg8r (exhibition catalogue), London 1ys1.  Kramer, Picter Lodewigk, b. Amsterdam 1881, d. Amsterdam iy6r. With van der *Mevy and de *Klerk. he was one of the triumvirate whose virtuosity lay behind the School of *Ampter- dam's reputation as a stringent opponent of ‘objective’ modernism (Neue Sachlichk vie) Like his frieud de Klerk. K. had enjoyed no  Kramer. Housing i Amsterdam South fiysi 41  formal architectural education, but had ac- quired the essential professional skills through working in Eduard Cuyper’s office. After collaborating with van der Mey on the latter's Scheepvaarthuis in Amsterdam (1911-16), K. concentrated on housing (terrace houses in Park Meerwijk, Bergen. 1g1s- 16; communal hous- ing in Amsterdam). Despite their highly culti- vated individuality, his buildings — are nonetheless developed from their particular urban situation and architectonic context. espe- cially in the case of the Amsterdam bridges (1918-37). After de Klerk’s early death, none of the Amsterdain Expressionists built with the degree of fantasy he had incorporated in his designs. None of the characteristically softly modelled wall planes of K.’s works surpassed the comer solution achieved in his housing complex in Amsterdam South (1921-3) for De Dageraad housing corperation. In the De Byenkorf department store in The Hague (1924-5). he applied his treatment to a com- pletely different building type. In his later housing (Amoterdam West. on the Hoofdweg. 1923. 5). K. adopted amore restrained style. WP — Retera, W., PL Kramer, Amsterdam 1927.  Kreis, Wilhelm. b. Eltville. Germany 1873, d. Bad Honnef, Germany tyss. After studies at the Technische Hochschulen of Munich, Brunswick. Berlin and Karkruhe, he became Paul Wallot’s assistant and collaborator. Twice. 1402 in Dresden, and tyoy-26 in Diisseldorf. K.’s career opened with his first prize in the competi- Gon for the Batee of Leipzig Memorial (1895) and with bis Burschenschaft Menument: in Fisenach (1899); over fifty Bismarck Towers throughout Germany were erected to his de- signs, His first large commissions were the bridge over the Rhine ac DiisseldorfNeuss (1904) and the Augustus Bridge in Dresden (1g08). In the numerous department stores which he completed between 1g10 and igt4. emmnitz,  and 1926-41, he was active as a teacher  eg. those in Elberfeld, Cologne. Essen and Dortmund, K contemporary Alfred Messel — remained large- Iy tied to historical canons and forms. After World War L however, a tendency towards *Expressionism appears in his work. as in the Rheinhalle at Diisseldorf (1925) built on the occasion of the “Gesolei exhibition: but it was finally a more abstract *neo-classicism which gained the upper hand. Under the National  — in contrast to his 
Socialists K. was much tavoured, designing notably the buildings intended for the army High Command headquarters, situated on the proposed Berlin ‘North-South Axis’ planned by *Speer. He also designed a number of memorials (‘Totenburgen’ or Castles of the Dead), which were intended to be erected on former battle sites after the war. Fj O Kreis, Wilhelm,  Soldatengraher und Gedenkstatten, Munich 1y44: Stephan, Hans, Deutsche Kiinstler unserer Zeit. Withelm Kreis, Oldenburg 1944; Rehder, G., Withelnt Kreis, Architekt in dieser Zeit, Leben und Werk, Essen 1953.  Krier, Leon, b. Luxembourg 1946. After a  short period at the Technische Hochschule m Stucrgart, he worked under Jamey *Stirling  Krier, Leon. Reconstruction project tor Luxembourg City (1478)  Krier, Rob. Dickes House, Bridel, Luxembourg (1974-0)  (1968—-7o) and then under J. P. *Kleihues (1971 2). In 1974 he opened an office in London, where he has also taught. 1973-6, at the Architectural Association Schoo] and in 1977 at the Royal College of Art. Like his older brother Rob *Krier, but more radically, he seeks a restoration of the pre-industrial European city through the conceptual tools of *rational archi- tecture. He has seized upon carly 1yth-cencury neo-classicism asa valid timeless style, exempli- fied architectonically with tremendous graphic virtuosity in such polemically intended ideal plans as that for the Ly Classique at Echternach, Luxembourg (1970), the Royal Mint Square Project for London (1974). the La Villette quarter in Paris (1976), and the centre of, Luxembourg City (1978). AM ot Krier. ‘La reconstruction de la ville’, Rational Architecinre; Architecture Rationelle, Brussels 1y78. pp. 43. 42: . Leon Krier, Drawings 1967-1980, Brussels 1981.  Krier, Rob(ert), b. Grevenmacher. Luxem- bourg 1938. After study at the ‘Technische Hochschule in Munich, he worked under O. M. *Ungers in Cologne and under Fret *Orto in Berlin and Scuttgart. Sine professorat the Technical University in Vienna. Like his brother Leon *Krier and the Brussels- based Maurice Culoc, with whom he forms the Belgiam-Luxembourgeois line of *Rational architecture, K. has above all been interested in  iy7s he has been a  resnvesting the contemporary city widh the order and form it possessed before the Industrial Revolution, His reconstruction proposals, such as that for inner-city Scuctgart (1978), are based on Camillo Sitte’s theses which yee urban fabric as the product of the handling of negative spaces. in tine with this theory, he extracts a typology ef strongly-defined urban spaces from historical prototypes which in carn he Implants in exists urban contexts. During his Seuregare vears, K. bole the Siermer House at Warnbronn, near Stuttgart (1968), which draws heavily on *Stirding’s work: and the Diekes Howse at Bridel, Luxembourg (174 6). endirely caclosed in a dominating cubic tori His most recent building is the block of Hats in the Ratterstraie. Berle (1g78) So), reminiscent of Karl *Bhn’s Karl-Marx-Hot im Vienna.  Krier, R.. Stadtranan in Theorie und Praais. Stuttgare bye . The Work of Rob Krier. ln itectise and Urhanion (Lokyob June 197?  lor 
Kroll, Lacten. b. Brussels ry27. Studied at the beoie Natromile Superieure dela Cambre. at the Josteus Seperour de la Canmibre. and at the institut Supericur d’ Urbane im Brussel. He  ais ay purtiership with the archiccer Charles Vandonhowe an Brussels trom fgst andl 19s when he opened the Ateher Lucwn Kroll in  Brussel. Since 197 he hay been a profesor at tte Poole Samiebue de Samt-Gilles im Brussel. Boas among the niose prominent advocates of a liberation  creaive parteipation’ su buildia  of che visas of paranuliturs ” regunentation ind their direction towards the most therough- gomig seli-determination. fis ast ampor- tantwork sche Student Centre of tie faculty of inedicme at the Universicé Catholique de Samt-Lainbert. Brussels  a Pocere users wall te  Toussin un Woke lure 1 considerable degree paruerpate in the continuing claboratien ofthe design. Sinvarly, in the realizadon of the project. the architects formal vision deters in  ia  work  ree meastre Co that ot those who execute the Phe resuleisa living formalenvironiment of controlled anarchy AM  Hunviger, Chostian, “Portrait de Lucien Reroll) fo lectin tire Parisi ne. bss. dan. bebo tuce. pp Willams. Stephane. “Reological Architecture of Lucien Kroll. clufiicenmal Rericne, OS4,  february futy. pp. ug der.  Uatgornd lar fy Sor  elxy. one  Kurokawa, Kisho. b. Nagosa. 1y34. Studied atk yoto and Pokve Universines. After work= ing under Kenzo * Tange le opened has own office in Tokya am A key figure of Japanese *Motabolisiy, he hay played an essen  1got tal role in Chis movement, not only through protects and buildings bur uke through theo- After purung projects for the Wal Cluster (1g60), the Helix City (tg6n) and his proposal for a house of pretabricated conerese components (1y62), K  retical writings forward his  realized for the isc ume his notions of an adaptable architecuire of high technolo: Jarge scale in the factory building for the Nitto~ Sukushin Company at Sagae (1g64). Expo “70 in Osaka offered an unrestricted field of activity en which to  yon  demonstuite his theories, He designed several exhibition buildings, including the Takara Beautilion and the Living Capsule These ideas were carried fursher in the Nagakin Capsule Tower Building in Lokye (1972) and a (1976). Reminiscences of traditional Japanese architec-  again in the Sony Tower in Osa  Kurokawa. Nugakin Capsule Power, Fokve ilytlt  Kurokawa. Hawaii Dreamland, Yamagata (1960 FI  ture are also manifested ins his work, for example the central building of the National Children’s Land in Yokohama (1964s) and the Hawaii Dreamland in Yamagata (ty66-7). AM Kurokawa, Kisho, and others, Metabolism 1960, Proposals for New Urbanism, Tokyo 1460: Kurokawa, Kisho, The Concept ef Metabolisin, Tokyo tyza: Werks of Kishe Kurokawa, Tokyo  
1970: Drew, Philip, Uhe ‘Viird Generation: the changing meaning of architecture, New York (gt 25 The World of Kishe Kurokawa, Tokyo tyzs  Lasdun, Sir Denys. b. London toty. Studicd at the Architectural Association School London Worked under Wells *Coates, ig3s 7. before joining the *Tecton group where he was active. with interruptions during the war. unul its dissolution in 1948 (from 1946 he was a part- ner). In tggy: so he ran an office wath | indses Drake in London, where in ty6o he founded Denys Lasdun and Partners. which has worked simce Ty78 under the name Denys Lasdun, Redhouse and Sottley style is characterized by biy emph.ory on hou zontal fines, either through the disposiuon of the building mass itselt) asin the block of tats in Bethnal Green. London (tyss). or by means ot  Pos own archites tural  plattorms, terraces or bridges which serve to create a sere of built landscape. Particwdarly  expressive examples of this are the University oF  East Anglia at Norwich (1962 and the National Theatre in London (1y67 Fos AM J Curtis, William Jo Ro A Langage aid a Themes de Work of Denys Lasdin and Partuers. London 1y76.  Le Corbusier {pscudonvin of  Cliirles Edouard Jeanneret). b. La Chaux-de-Fonds. Swarerland i887. d. Roguebrune on Cap Martin, South oF France 1y6s, Le Corbusier @vho used this pseudonym from 1yz0 on as an author, trom igs ay an architect: and an everyday affairs, and from iy28 aya painter) was the dominant figure internationally in modern  architecture from 1y20 to 1y6o,  In the absence of an academic education, he developed bis practical and artistic skills at the arts and crafts schoo] in La Chaux-de-Fends (training as a metal engraver under Charles LEplattenier), on study crips (italy, Balkans. Istanbul, Mr Athos. the Athenian Acropolis: through his acquaintanceship with Josef *Ho mann in Vienna (1yo8) and Henri *Sauvage in Paris (1yoX). by apprenticeship with Auguste *Perret in Paris (winter ryok-y) and) Peter *Behreny in Berlin (1gic 11), as well as by encounters with the leaders of the German ares and crafts  reform movement and the  *Deutscher Werkbund ¢Hermiaan *Muthesius Karl krost Osthaus, Heinrich *Tesenow). on which subject he prepared a report tor the school administration of bis nanve crown. He became acquainted carly on wirh the werk of Drank Llovd * Wright through publications, OF the commonty used textbooks of the period it was. in addition to Charles Bhane’s Grananarre desir above all Auguste Choisy’s Histoire de Hacfatwenie Paris, rsyg! that iufluenced him  OF his carly buildings in La Chaus-de-Fonds toawas especially the Villa Schwob irg16; one which reflects the Hapressions of diese formative Vers foffimann and Perret Here the *Art Nouveau style of bis engraver’s  of die Hest remborced-conerets houses oftnavel and the work of  runme gatve was te tn individualist and clistent retormatory art printed with the idealot bandicrart. Burry chose same vous Le Corbuster lad already worked  although still im-  outa building (epe adapted to industrial pro- dacoon, Ay was to be typical throughout his cucer, this was endowed with a slogan-like name: the Maason Donicino, Lhe prototype for series production. it comprised door platformy wath recosed supports and no doad-hearing walls. and indisidual units could) be jomed to ope another in any direction (lgty 1st  When he settled (ollowing a sense of mission nourisied by Nietschvei in Paris in tytn te make dis career. one oF bis aspirations was precisely the trbrication of cinderblocks tor use in Hing: out skeleton consteuctions, ‘his um- dertuking was dhwarted. howes er as were his the needs of thy  other plans. by pote war  Le Corbusier, Vila SShwob, 1a Chaes-de-bonds hiyies  
roconstenenon and by inereasing industrial Inevhamiz.gen  However, he rose astoundingly quickly to the fore among the avant garde of Parisian pamters, The order ot the day was *Cubism and die “return to order. Together widh Amédeée Qventint, he published the manifesto ctpres fe TOES:  aden  HD Esti dis was followed in ry2s by fa the movement *Puriinm and cdited dhe successful roforming art journal L'Esprit nourean (1g20 si the programanaue tide came trem formeola- tien of Guillaume Apollinaires. The themes of  his pure paintings were everyday objects and  Periinre coped new artsue  musical instruments ir clear views and analy sex, often wich outhines capable of two alternative The further development of Le Corbusier's painting can be anticipated at this juncture: frond 1y28 on he introduced - follew- my Fermand Léger’ example the human nd deep spacal effects inte From 1932 on, the influ- ence of Preasa becomes evident. In place of  readings  Hure. ahjers trent his scillite paint  herms. that carly celebration of the “ty pes) of moder lite. the later paintings and graphic  works took Ins own or traditional myths as  Le Corbusier, Ville contemporaine :project. 1922:  4 in,  (ae om ea) gcors =; 3  bls +  ‘  4  goign  aN  ABN  efi 0  subjects and had numerous points of intersec= don with contemporaneous architectural and urbanistic designs. In addition to canvases, Le  . anim portant mural in the Pavillon Suisse of the Cité Universitaire in Paris. sculptures. as well as graphics. For along time Le Corbusier's colour Nthographs were an icon of che modern archi- tectural office where, ay tt guarantee oF good composition, his *Modulor was also used. This Was a system of proportions grounded on the golden section or the Fibonacci series using the  Corbusier produced collages. tapestric  human figures ay its basis, The furniture he designed from 1y29 on with Charlotte Perriand set standlirdy of taste toan even more marked degree.  Le Corbusier's aesthetic influence 1s insepara bly Jinked to his activity as a publierst. which began in 1y20. As Le Corbusier’ - nym being derived from the surname of his  the pseudo-  great-grandmather. Lecorbésier, which yield- ed. through the separation of the predicate, a punning reference suggested by hiy facial re- he published that series of essays in the periodical L'Esprit aenveae which later appeared in book form (Vers une architecture, 1923) and achieved inter- national recognition. Here he formulated the  semblance to a raven {corbeau}  Comore  (A eC  or  mit  elt  fr | an] carga) Loge  cl Ed; ae]  j  md  Co  reise  = OC Roe  | on. | | ce} race] ca ma 
famous detinition of architecture asthe master jy. correct and magnificent play of masses brought together in ght. His comparisons with engineering constructions and with mod= ern forms of trapsportanon were formulated into such oft-misunderstood postulates ay “die: house is a machine for living in” and thar it should be as practically constructed as a type= writer. By this he meant not a mechanistic ‘machine aesthetic’ but rather complete rationality in plan, capacity for serial-produc- don and function. A further enunciation of principles followed im ty26 (printed in Alfred Roth’s Zed Woludrinser von Le Pierre Jeanneret, Stuttgart 1g27) with the “Five points for anew architecuure’: the piers. root  Corbusier und  terraces. free plan. continuous window stripy and free fagade composition were ta he the essential clements of the new (* Rationalism).  Of the other carly programimuauc writings. Crhanisote and Let décoracifd aijenrd lad (both 1925) were assured of an equally song inpact thanks co their radical proposals, In 1y30 the first volume of his collected works 2 projects. and executed buildings - appeared: these were t grow to several volumes over the course of the following years. The resulting Qenrre cone plete has been one of the most important source books of modern architecture.  aesthetic  these’  The history of this influence derives as much from the demonstration models and city-plan~ ning projects which Le Corbuster. who from §y22 collaborated cCOUsT Jeanneret, exhibited at the Paris Salon, ay it did from his executed work, In 1y22. he exhibited the Maison Citrohan - a simple box with supporting wally on the Tong sides, ina later  with his Pierre  Le Corbusier. Second Manon Crtrohan iproqect. 1922): model  Jeannerct ma Parts-Aureud) (ru2ah.  Le Corbusier. Play Vowin for Pars proses: Pysse model  Le Corbusier. flouses ac the WerBenhotvie dung Sturtyart  byocs  by well ay the “Ville conten porame for three mulln aulsalatants. In  version carried on prletis  Tyas the Leprit Nouveau Lethon was mtended (wa prototype fora mass-produced hyving umt with a garden terrace (© he meorporated ite multicterey aputinent blacks no om by Corbusier's Plain Vorm: tor Parisi Phe ose couted work inehided the Villa Besnos in igsni the Masons ba Roche and the Matson Cook an Boulogne-surSeine iozen the Vill Stein  Waticnheriedhmg in  Viauncresen  Garches ftyacs the Owe Touses tt the  Stattgart dlikew we  bos. 
Le Corbusier, Villa Savoye,  Pousy tigsy 345  Le Corbusier. Pavillon Stuse. Cité Universitaire, Parls (1930 2)  1927), the Villa Savove at Poissy (1g29-3 1) and the Clarté apartment house in Geneva (1930-2). Characteristic of all these buildings which have became monuments of modern architec- are their general independence of terrain  ture -  as well as a rich variety of interior and exterior spaces achieved by means of donble-height rooms, gallery floors, bridges and ramps with views into the interior as well as “framed” views looking out, all expressions of a genuine luxury in architecture which (as so expressively con- veyed in the houses at Stuttgart) is conceived as  Le Corbusier. Cité de Retiage. Pars uaa 3}  Le  iprojeet. dy sto  rbusier. Palace of the Soviets, Moscow  ‘machine for livmg in’, but not as the  istenzminimuny of a social housing design.  The same holds truce in the architecture of his buildings tor collective living. in which the enclosed rooms, or bedrooms as the case nay be, are complemented by generously propor- doned circulation areas and communal spaces which are treated as distinct architectural parts (Pavillon Suisse in the Cité Universitaire, Paris, 1y30 2; Cite de Refuge. Paris, 1932-3)  Le with the design of large-scale buildings. Thoshe took part in the competitions tor the Palace of the League of Nations in Geneva (1927) and for the Palace of the Soviets in Moscow (931), and built the Centrosoyus Building in Moscow (1929 31). Especially impressive was the design for the great hall of the Palace of the Soviets, the roof of which was to be carried at the stage end by a great paraboli¢ arch.  lorbusier also began to concern himsel!’  
Le Corbusier. League of Nations Palace. Gi (project. 1927)  As successors of the Centrosoyus came the projects for Carthesian skyscrapers (193%) and a skyscraper in Algiers (1938-42), and the con- struction of the Ministry of Health and Educa- tion in Rio de Janeiro (1y36-43: executed by Licio *Costa, Oscar *Niemeyer and Atfonso Eduardo *Reidy) and of the United Nations Building in New York (1947-50; carried out by Wallace K. *Harrison and Max * Abramovitz) These latter two buildings especially were Prototypes for numerous office buildings throughout the world in the 1950s and 1y60s.  The urban planning schemes which Le Corbusier worked out, first for Paris and then in the 1930s for several large North African and South American cities, proceeded trom the assumption that an absolute authority over land and finances can ignore historical developments and democratic rights, that traffic takes prior- aty, that the life ofa person can be fulfilled by the planned ordering of places of production, administration, apartment houses and sports facilities, and finally that a modern metropolis of a million inhabitants requires a visibly monumental expression. These assumptions also formed the principles of the *Athens  Charter, which resulted from the conclusions of  the fourth congress of *CIAM in 1933. Much more humanistic visions of the future were Presented in Le Corbusier's books La 1 ile radieuse (1935) and Les Trois Ftablissements humains (1945).  That Le Corbusier was hardly involved at all in the post-war reconstruction programme derived not so much from prejudice against his theses as from the attitude to restoration  Le Corbusier. Umté d’Habitation, Marseilles y47 32)  adopted in Western Europe after World War U the beliefin a golden future, so dear to the 1y20s, was not reintroduced m any field. Thus Le Corbusier's programmatic Propos d'urhanisme (lugs) Was seen aya renewed vision of a better world which did not respond to contemporary needs and heice seemed doubly anachronistic.  However. his postwar work was in no way inferior in its creative power to thar of the pioneering years and was to be even more influential. The Unité dHabitation at Mar- seilley (1y47) 52) masterfully accommodated in 
block ros in fi) high oa prodigious volume of space (337 apartments), Uhe coches! requirements ithe living units are for osuuple for reascus of sound-prooting toseried Like individual cartons mto the grid Skeleton trame:. the internal circulation and all urban duly requirements shopping streets. community services. hotel, reereaGenal Land-  ee varrousiv articulate  ett dong and) s@ om it  scape on the root which is as large as stadium):  moreover, it alo provides — for some 1.800  residents the very twoestorey living units which since tye Le Corbusier had heen clabo- rating as the modern habitat. Compared with Le Corbuster’s own carly horizontally extended housmg at Pesae (igas), the vertical neigh- bourhood units which incorporated apartments woasingle tower these included the later schemes at) Nantes-Rezé (tys2 7). Berlin LEysG S}. Meaux  (tys  itys7-60) wand Firminy-Vert iry62 8) - bear  yg), Briey-en-Foret wimess to their usefulness im mass heusin: When compared with conventional apartment towen,  ey are of an incomparably greater sculpcural power and experential richness: the analogy to ocean liner ts scl perhaps the best.  Characteristic of Le Corbusier s later works is that they arene longer prototypes for a “fueure architecture’ and hence mdependent of any  Le Corbusier. Maisons Jaoul, Neuillysur-Seme ys O  Le Corbusier, Monastery of Ste Mare-de-ia- Dourette. Peeus-sur-lArbrosle i1us7 ou  
rather they are unrepeatable, indi- vidual creations, even if many metroduced motifs’ that have since been widely imitated. Thus the pilgrimage church of Notre Dame- du-Hauc ac Ronchamp (1yso- 4) is a highly specific sculptural creation which derives from its place and sociv-religious function and repre- sents a wealth of novel general and particular aspeets. Ina different respect, this can also be claimed for the Maisous Jaoul at Neuilly-sur- Seine (1952-6), the monastery of Ste Marie-de- la-Tourette at and the Carpenter Center tor the Visual Ares at Harvard University im Mas. (1g61-4).  Le Corbusier realized a complete syntheus of his carly progranunatic and proncering: buritd-  specific sit  eveux-sur-l Arbresle (igs7 60}.  ambridge.  ings and his Jater sculptural-volumetric arclu- tecture in *India. Ffis Abmedabad — the Museum (1084-6), the build- ing of the Wool Weavers Association (1gs4. 6), the Sarabhai louse (igss 6) and the Shodhan Villa (14ys6) combine the precision in plan and aesthetic of the Villas Scein and Savoye with a freedom which was a harbinger of the arvhitee-  four buildings at  ture of the second half of the ccutury. In these buildings, a new richly created in which reinforced conerete is placed in dialogue with other building materials and with nacure. On a rational engineering technology is how superimposed an ‘inexpressible” (the word was coined by Le Corbusier to describe che feeling of space at Ronchamp) spatial and formal experience  Le Corbusier's active role in Chandigarh, the new capital of the Indian state of Punjab (founded 1947), remained unfinished in terms of a ‘Gesamtkunsewerk’. He was responsible only for che general plan (1yso- 1: with Max- well *Fry and Jane *Drew) and che capitol area with its government buildings (1952-64), while the residential and commercial quarters were buile by Indian architects. Le Corbusier achieved spatial creations of the highest quality in his own modern idiom which, however. in no way contradicts the historic architecture of India.  Le Corbusier's long period asa leading hgure m modern architecture — for nearly half a century — was unique among architects of his time and is, finally, endow architecture with an expression which evokes the spirit of his epoch. In this sense he was at once the ‘terrible simplificateur’ in the  intoned language is  areflection of bis capacity te  tradition of the rationalist enlightenment and a creator of formy which will endure well be  yond his time Mb Ozentane, Amédée. and feammerer, Charles- Rdouard, clpres fe cubism, Paris ryt 8: Le Cor- busier. Vers ave architecttere Parts 1y23 (English eds Poeads anew Arvhitectire, London 5937): Crhanione, Pans igss (8th cd, publiyhed  wn cranshition ass Phe City of Tomorrow and its Planning simile cditions 1y45. oF hs  London tyay. and reissucd im fae » Precisions sur naeenar preset de Parchitecnire et de Purhanisme, 5 La ith ikuglish ed. The Radiat Cuy. London and New York tyo7): » Qteand des cathedrales ctaten! flunehis. Voyage ant pays dey timides, Paris ta37 Chnylish cdi: [hen dhe Cathedrals were white, London tyaray  Parts 193 rudicuse, Paris ty3s  «Sur les qttatre routes, Paris toga (English cdis Phe four Rovtes, Lon don 14th: Prois Prablissements Inunains. Paris 1945: Propos durbanisne, Party rygo: ~~~ and Pierrefeu. Frangois de. La Maison des hommes, Paris to42: Boesiger, W  —. les  ied. be Corhusier, Ocuvre complete (8 vols.). Zurich 1930 tht Papadaki. S.. Le Corbusier Arcitect, Patter, iP rites, New York iy4s Choav. Francoise, Le Corbusier. New York 1960; Besser, Mo. (Qué etait he Carhusier?, Goneva 1y08. Moos S. van. Le Corfiisier: Elemente ciner Synthese, Fecuenteld 1y08, foncks. Charles. Le Corhusicr and the Tragt London 1o73a: be Corbusier Skerhbooks (4 vols.  View of clreliteenire, Cambridge. Mays. 19812.  Leonidoy, Ivan Tlich. b. Viaukh. near Kalinin. Russia. tgat. de Moscow rusg. Pee worked first asa docker and firma. uritit fas calene was first recognized by an icon painter in Fver': this recogmition enabled him in igig to jem the Peer art school, Atier developing his skill asa painter. he gained adiminsson in ty2t te the VRHUTEALAS i Moscow. where he came under the inflmence or Alexander Vesnin andl transys ferred fom parting to arebitecture, He dem of the syntax of  onstrated Dis fall mastery  *Copstructaisa in reo wath his student proqect for the fovesna printing plant in Mos cow. He began te break new ground yidt his finaly car student project, a design tor the Lenin Postituce in Moscow. which was displaced atthe fist OSA TAssociation of Contemporary Ar chitveisy exhibidien held i Moscass in cg27 With its gla scelad. free-standing siructires and  is elevated monorail i envisaged a form of  Tana 
Leonidoy. | cnn fnstitute, Moscow (project. tyst): model  continuous open-ended regional development Los mature vision was strongly influenced by the mmagery of *Suprematism and it was no doubt this that led him to design a dynamic non-rhetorieal curtain-walled architecture in  et  the 1y30 Palace of Culture projected for the site of the Simones nionastery in Moscow. In this characterisacally simple yet powerful composi- tion, he combined into a single complex a Pp benuspherical, transformable auditorium and an orthogoual research building. Above these  amidal sports halleeum-winter garden: a  glistening solids hovered an warship attached toa light steel-lattice mooring mast. As with other Construcavist  Suprematists, Loy style changed decisively after 1432, when elements drawn from traditional Russian ico- nography began to influence his later, some- what barogue manner, as for example in the rather emblematic smonamentalicy of his entry for the 1933 Narkomtiazprom competition. It is one of the tragedies of the pioneering period of the Modern Movement that L. was to realize only one notable work. namely, an extensively landscaped amphitheatre and ornamental stair- way built for Ordjobikedze Sanatorium at Kislovodsk in 1y32. KF  [> Magomedoy. 8. O. Khan. ‘1. L Leonidoy 1902 -1ysy, in O. A. Shvidowsky (ed.). Build- ing in the COSSR, 1917-1932. London and New York 0971; Quilici, Vo. and Scolari, M. (eds), fvan Leonidov, Milan 1975; Koolhaas. R.. and Oorthuys. G.. fran Leonider, New York to81.  Lescaze, William. b. Geneva, tso6, d. New York, iyéy. Studied ander Karl *Moser at the hidgendssische Teelmische Hochschule in Zurich, Worked in France undl ty20 under Henri *Sauvage. He emigrated to the USA in 1y20, and at first worked in Cleveland for Hubbell and Benes. In 1923 he went to New York, where he designed in a succession of sevles, from the Collegiate Gothic of the Edge- wood School, Greenwich, Conn., to the 1925 Paris Modern of his interiors for the Macy's Exposition of rg28. In 1y2y he joined George *Howe to form the Howe and 1 ship in New York  To Howe's maturity and experience, L. brought an abilicy to handle newer modern forms. His own house in Manhattan (1934) was the first *International Style building ofits kind in New York and may be profitably contrasted with Howe's Speizer House in Philadelphia (1938). The most significant product of this partnership was the Philadelphia Saving Fund Society (PSFS} Building (1929 32). After the dissolution of the firm, L. designed Unity House in the Pocono Mountains. Pa. and Williamsbridge Housing in Brooklyn, N.Y..an early modern housing development. His Long- fellow Building in Washington, D.C., was the first International Style work in that city: it established a trend towards the exploitation of the cantilever that resulted in unrelieved piles of horizontal stripped windows,  Atter World War I, L.. enjoyed tremendous success as a designer of commercial space in New York. His building at 711 Third Avenue is arestatement of the parti established at the PSFS. Buildir CJ) Lescaze, William, Ou Betig an Architect, New York 1942; Institute for Architecture and Urban Studies, catalogue 16: William Lescaze. New York 1982  Sea7e partner=  Lethaby, William Richard, b. Barnstaple, Devon, 1857, d. 1931. Studied at the Royal Academy Schools in London. From 1877 worked under R. N. *Shaw, after 1889 in independent practice. L., who was strongly  
influenced by *Morris and *Webb, in both design and theary, created some of the mast noteworthy and original buildings of the * Arty and Crafts movement, including Avon Tyrell in Hampshire (1891), the Eagle Insurance Co Building in Birmingham (189g) and the church at Brockhampton, Herefordshire (1y00 2 his work Gothic Revival theory is developed and submitted to a regionally oriented syimbol- ism. In 18g4 he became the first Dircetor of the Central Schoal of Arts and Crafts in Londan, the first Architecture School with teaching workshops for the individual crafty and thus a prototype for the *Bauhauy. VMI O Lethaby, W. R., Architecture, Mysticism and Myth, London 18y2;—- . Form in Civilization, Oxford 1957. Rubens, G.. Pifliam Richard Lethaby and His Work, London 1983  In  Lewerentz, Sigurd, b. Bjartra near Sundsvall, Sweden 1885, d. Lund 1975. After graduating from Gothenburg Technical College (1y08) he worked in Germany under Bruno Méhring in Berlin (:g908-10) and Theodor * Fischer (1909) and Richard *Riemerschmid in Munich (tg10). He was one of the founders of the separatist Free School of Architecture in Stock- holm in ty1o, which aligned itself with the ‘national realist’ tendency (*Sweden). L. estab- lished his own practice in Stockholm (1ytl-t7 with Torsten Stubelius; 1917 43 alone), mov- ing subsequently to Ekilstuma (1943 38 Skanér (1958-70), and finally to Lund where he was an influential teacher. The early competi-  Lewerentz, Church at Skarpniick (1960)  tion designs, such as thar with *Asplund for Woodland Cemetery in Stockholm (1gt4). where L. was respousible for the landscape design, revealed the influence of the simplicity and poctic approach of *Tessenow’s architec- ture. Elis late brick churches at Skarpniick (1960) and K lippan (1966) continue the Ivricism which announced a quiet cridque of the fine- tionalist tradition in European * Rationalism  Codrington, J.. “Sigurd Lewerentz 1885 ly7s). Architectural Review no. gso. April 1y76: Finnish Muscum of Architecture, Nordic Classi- cist. Helsinki 1982  Libera, Adalberto. b. Trento 1903. d. Rome 1963. After studying at the University of Rome. he jomed *Gruppo 7 in ty27. the first offteial organization of Italian * Rationalism, [1  ty2k he organized the first "Esposizione deWVarchitettura razionale’. As secretary of *MLLA.R., launched in 1y30, he way engaged  in the polemical debate with the group of academic architects (who were very strong in Rome) and sought to have adopted as the official architecture of Fascism. The attempt ended in defeat, despite efforts put forth for a compromise such as the Palazzo dei  Rationalism  Ricevimenti ¢ Congress’ at the ‘Esposizione Universale di Roma’ (EUR) projected in 1938 Numerous notable works of the 1y30% melude: above all, his contribution to the exhibition “Mostra della Riveluzione Fascista’ (1932); houses at Ostia (1433) the Post Office in the Quartiere Aventing of Rome (1y38; with Mario de Renzi}: and the Malparte house on Capri (1938). After World War IL. L.'s various works included the Olympic Village in Rome (gsy: with others) VG 1) Aheri. A. Clerici, M., Palpacelli, Po. and Vacearo, N. G.. ‘Adalberto Libera’. L'arci- fettiera — cronache e staria (KKome), nos. 124 33. 1y66; Aragon, Giulio, Aldalherte Libera, Rome 1976.  Lissitzky, EL (Ehever Markovich). b. Polshinetz. near Smalensk i &yo. do Mowow tyg1. Studied architecture first at the Technische Hochschule, Darmstadt. 19090 14. In tars he was awarded his architectural diplo- ma in Moscow. Uhe year 1g ty saw his collabo- ration with * Malevich and the first Prous’, He taughrat the Moscow Academy tn tga t, and in Germany and Switverland, 1922) sy he returned ro Russa in 1928 He worked with van  ary 
*Doesburg and *Mies van der Rohe and was a *Comeructivisin.  Simulta- neousle with badin’s project tora Memorial to  vestounder of  che Ttard Intemational, Ls office designed a speaker's platform {fuze} tor Leni in the form ofa sioprog steeh structure of great expressi¥o= hess. In ty24) Ss. together with Mare *Stam. he designed the ‘Cloud Props’ project. an exten- sively cantilevered office block on immense prets, Lo was the mast important linking figure berween Rinsian Constructivism and the West- ern burepean avant-garde of the tysos. Fis futuristic dy namic conception was nur without inttuence on the High-Tech archicecture of the Tyas,  Rachter BLO EEL tssuckys Sieg uber die Sonate. Zur Rast ates Konsteakteusmns. Colosne rgss: Lusitthy-Kiippers. 8 El Lissirsky. Lite, Letters. Feats. Condon and New York 168; Frampton. Keoneth. “Phe werk and influence ot El Lis- sik. clrdatca's Year Book, 1241968), pp. 253 ba: Lastezky, BL Rissstas da Architecture jor Mork? Revofeion, Canbridye. Mass. cyto: El Lisstisky (eshibicion canoguer, Cologne 1y76  Lods, Marcel. bo Pars tsgi. do Paris rg7s Tramed atthe keote Nationale des Arts Déca- rages vnd the *heole des Beaux-Arts, Paris idiplonie ty23i. sind taughe at the latter 194s  fg. Cotlaborated with LIg2s 40ccn private practice trout tags. Lo was amember ar *CLAML. He is bese Known for his  bugene *Beaudoum  Ploveering work on prefabricated housing such as that in the Cite de la Muette at Draney. and for his collaboragion with Beaudeum on the Open At School at Suresnes (1y33) and with Beaudoutn aid Jean *Prouve op the Maien du Pouple at Clichy vra3u: After World War [Lhe was charged with the reconstruction of one Us Latter work inchides the Manson des Setences del Homme in Paris (1967, with Deponat and Beauchir).  Lods. Marcel. fe Mrticn durchitecte, Paris (y76.  sector of che sty of Reuen  Loos, Adolf. b. Brno rst dl. Vienna 1933. An admirer equally of the Joga, of Roman architee- ture and of vernacular an hicecture. b. was one of the pioneers of the European Modern Move- ment. He was one of the first architects to react agaist che decorative trends ot *Art Nouveau and to expound rationalist design theories. Che son ofa stone-mason, Le strended classes at Reichenberg Polytechnic berore studying  architecture at the Technische Hochschule in Dresden. Upon completion of his studies, he was eager to broaden his outlook: tm 1893 he made a journey to the *USA, where he remained for three years, working as a mason, a  floor-laver. and even as a dish-washer. During this me he observed the innovations of the young *Chicage School: che expressive steel frame structures William Le Baron Jenney introduced for office buildings. che austere blocks of Bornham and Root, and the uncom- promising severicy which * Sullivan manifested Building (Buffalo. rsyg si. it ways Sullivan who. after  in his famous Guarancy NLY.. providing American architecuire with an origi-  nal and personal style of floral surtace decora- tan, Psgo in oan essay entitled ‘Omament ino Archttecture’s “Ie would be greathy for our esthetic good if we should  wrote In  retram churely trom the use of ornament for a period of years. in order thar our thought might concentrate acutely upon the producdon of buildings well tormed and comely in the nude.”  Phis reHection was te become the central poe of Los aesthetre. On bis recur to Europe m dSQ6. he settled in’ Vienna. a cosmepelitan centre with a culture typined by elegance of thought and sophisticated manners. In this nohea, he showed hinself forthwith to be an ardent and aggressive polemicist. ia first serics of articles. published chictly in the Newe Freie Presse (So7 and sg. he took up arms against the styliscig and aestheticizing — tendencies preached by the painter Gustay Klimt and the architeces *Olbrich and *Hoffmann who had (X97.  founded the Secession movement in Basing himseif pardy on Sullivan's purist argu- ment and partly on the rationalist doctrine  which * Wagner had expounded to the Vienna Akademie der bildenden Riinste in 1894. L. set out to show that the tye of ornament incul- cated by Arte Nouveau was not suited to Furepean culture: that a work divested of ornament isasign of pure and Jucid thought and a bigh degree of avilzation; thar good form must find its beauty in the degree of usefulness it expresses, and in the indissoluble unity of its parts: and that consequently all ormamentarion must be systematically rejected  L. way to resume and develop chis thesis in a major essay published in 1yo8 entitled “Orma- ment und Verbrechen’ (Ornament and Crime). In order to help spread his theories, he had founded a Free School of Architecture in 1906. 
Loos. Kirntner Bar. Viena (107!  Among his most important works at this tie were the renovation of the Villa Karnia wt Clarens, near Montreux (1906); the Karnmer Bar in’ Vienna (1907): the Stemer Tlouse. Vienna. of 1y10. one of the Hirst private houses to be built in reinforced concrete and a land mark in the architecture of this) century (reshaping of plan. new method of condensing and articulating internal space, purity of die straight line, Mac roof, horizontal fenestrauion, dominance of solids, cubic style}: the conmer- cial block on the Michaclerplatz, Vienna (1y to}. where the arrangement of the various levers looks forward to the complete expression of the ‘volumetric plan’ achieved in his Ruder Plouse. Vienna (1922).  From ty20 to 1g22 L. municipal housing in Vienna. where he drew up some bold development schemes, such as the Heuberg model estate. In iy23 he settled in Paris, where he established contict with the leading figures of Esprit Netwveaw. He also frequented Dadaist circles and built a house tor Tristan Tzara (1926). After his return to Vienna in 1928, hiy buildings include: the Moller House at Potzleinsdorf (1y28): the Kuliner House at Payerbach (1930); and, also in ty30. the Miller House in Prague, which represents a highpoint im his ocuvre. It exerted a lasting influence on the next generation of architeets, among them  was in charge of  Loos. House tor Trecin Tua. Parts i tase:  *Lurgat. 0 #Mendekobn, — *Neutra and *Schindler ROE Mijaz. Lo. and Kiinsder, Go. Ide’ Las  Pioneer of Medert Archer ture. Londen and New York gon: Loos Al Spoke ante the Uord. collected says, Cambridge, Mays. tnd London lyss  Lubetkin, Berchold bh “Tiflis. Georgia. Russia igor. Studied principally in Moscow. Lente vrad aod Part. Atter co brief collaboration with  fughsute. Ponder  Lubetkin, Fighpoue ht  (aga  2G3 
deen Ginsburg in Pariy ty27-30 (Apartment house at 2s avenue de Versailles. Paris; 1927), he estublished himselfin London in 1931, where he was one of the founding members of the *J]ecton group in the following year and a Ploncermg advocate of Continental modern- wor. In addition to his major architectural the penguin pool (1934) and other buildings ac the Regent's Park and Whipsnade Zoos and the two north London apartment blocks Highpoint I (1933. 5) and Highpoint II (1930 8) L. worked on the planning of Peterlee New Town, after the dissolution of Tecton in ty4&. [p retirement since 1yso, he was awarded the RIBA Gold Medal in tg82.  “) Furneaux-Jordan, R., “Lubetkin’, Architec- niral Review, July 1933; Coe, Peter, and Read- ing. Malcolm, Luhetkin aud Tecton. Architecture and Social Commitment, London and Bristol IY.  works  Luckhardt, Hans. b. Berlin 18yo, d. Bad Wiessce 1ys4. Studied at the Technische Hoch- schule in Karlsruhe. He was a member of the *Arbeitsrat fir Kunst, the *Novembergruppe and later of the *Ring. From ig2the worked in partnership with his brother Wassili *Luck- hardt. In tys2 he was appomted a professor at the Hochschule fiir bildende Kiinste, Berlin.  Luckhardt, Wassili. b. Berlin r88y, d. Berlin 1972. Studied at the Technische Hochschule in Berlin-Charlottenburg. He was a member of, the *Arbeisrat fir Kunst, the *November- gruppe and later of the *Ring. He worked in partuerstup with his brother Hans *Luckhardt, 1g2t-S4. After their first works in the spirit of *Expressionism project for che. Hygiene Museum in Dresden (1921), project tor an offic cower at the FricdrichstraBe station in Berlin (1922) - the brothers turned in the mid-ty20s to a consistent *Radionalism. In addition to their use of precise right-angles as in their experi- mental housing in the Schorlemer Allee in Berlin (1927), houses on the Rupenhorn, Berlin (1g28), the Berlin Pavilion at che ‘Conscructa’ exhibition in Hanover ‘iysi) - dynamically surging forms feature iti their projects for che rearrangement of the Alcs anderplatz in Berlin (1929), for che Medical College on the Burg berg in PreBburg (1933). «nd for the Freie Universitat in Berlin-Dahle-:. (1y52).  UU Kultermann, Udo, Wasses und Hans Luck- hardt, Bauten und Entwiirfe, tibingen 1958;  Kliemann, H.. 1973.  Wassili Luckhardt, Tiibingen  Lundy, Victor A.,b. New York 1925. Studied at Harvard under *Gropius. His buildings include timber churches with lurge curved roofs (Firse Unitarian Church at Westport, Conn., 1g6t), and a motel with reinforced concrece awnings at different heights (Warm Mineral Springs [nn at Venice, Fla., 1958). He designed the exhibition pavilion of the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, a ‘preumati at Seattle (1962)  structure,  Lurgat, André, b. Bruyéres, Vosges 18g4. d. Sceaux 1970. Studied at the *Ecole des Beaux- Arts in Paris. In 1y28 he was one of the founding members of *CIAM. His arnsts’ studios, the Villa Seurat, in Paris (1925 6). together with the Villa Bomsel in Versailles (1926) and the Villa Guggenbuhl in Paris (1927), are among the pioneering works of the Modern Move- ment in *France. At the same cime he drew up a number of other (unrealized) projects, at ames radical, for dwelling houses. Atter his theoreti- cal manifesto Architecture (Paris 1929) and the Hotel Nord-Sud in Calvi (1930), which is a virtual homage to the intense Mediteranean light, L. became, with his Ecole Karl-Marx at Villejuif (1931 3), an advocate of the coalition of new architectural forms and the workers’ movement. On the basis of this demonstration of architectural and social allegiances, L. was invited to Moscow in 1934, and remained there until 1937. There the ‘Socialist Realist’ debate renewed his awareness of such traditional values as monumentality and axiality, and this was reflected in his post-war buildings (mostly in Maubeuge and Saint-Denis) and in his ambi- tious essay Formes, composition et lois d’harmonie (Paris 1933-7). ye (2 ‘André Lurgat’\, Architecture, Mouvement, Continnité (Paris), no. 40 (1976), pp. 4-38.  Lutyens, Sir Edwin (Landseer), b. London 1869, d. London ty44. When only twenty years old. he opened his own office in- London, having worked for two years under the country-house architect Ernest George (where | he met Herbert Baker, later his colleague in | New Dethi). Influenced also by *Shaw and , *Webb, he began his carcer with a series of | often opulent country houses (in a style related to that of the *Arts and Crafts movement), 
including Munstead Wood at Godalining, Sur- Tey (1896), for Gertrude Jekyll, a garden de- signer who had created or rather revived the English cottage garden. as well as Deanery Garden at Sonning, Berks. (184g 1yo2). The creative freshness of these garly houses soon, gave Way to a neo-classical langu in Nashdom, a country house at ‘Taplow. Bucks. (1905-9). The plan of New Delhi (ry 02  and the Viceroy’s House (1902-30) are along with the commercial buildings Britannic House (1y20-4) and the Midland Bank headquarters in London (1924-39). as well as the British Em- bassy in Washington, 19.C. (1y25-8) among the last great examples of the continuation of historicist design principles frou the tyth cen- tury into the 2oth. AM © Lutyens, ‘What 1 Think of Modern Architecture’, Counry Life, vol. 6y (1g3t}. pp  775-7; Butler, A. S.G., with George Stewart and Christapher Hussey, ‘Mhe Architecture of Sir Edwin Lutyens G vals.), London toso: Green- berg, Alan, ‘Lutyens’ Architecture Re-studied’, Perspectano. 12 (1g6y), New Haven, Conn, pp. 129-52; Inskip, Peter, Edwin Lutyens, London 1979, O'Neill, Daniel, Edwin Lutyens: Country Houses, London 180: Gradidye, R.. Kduin Lutyens: Architecture Laureate, London 1y8iz  ee oftornis as  Lucyens. Downers Garden, Sonmmg, Bork shires  Hpsyy runs  exhibiuon catalogue Latyers. Phe (Pork of the Buglist Ardatea Sir Eben Lutyens (6860 1944h London tryst  Lyons, Pric Alfred. b. London tyra. d. Lomton iyTs. lathe tyses dasschemes sera new standard at Britain, where be controlled the planting and  for private-enterprie housing in *G  landscaping ofentire estates. His layouts feature hat display an eve for testur  Simple build and the highly elements and cyurpnicnt in disxposans which  repedtive use af structural largely avoid streets by creaung courtyards aid varying partons of external cuclosurey this he considered to be the secret of urbarity. Plats at Hon Common. nea Rachmond: at Blake heath: and Wese Hil, Highgate stor the Sowier Trade Deleg cttes tt Carbridges hotsiag tor old people at Ree.  accom modanen,  etiam, Houses. thats andy  Isa  Bognar with vertan shared  Funiesux-fordan, Robert. “SPAN: The Spee Builder as a Patron or Modern Arcbitee= ture. obenin Review frosyl pp. bul at  Vondont 125 
Mackay, Dui John b. Pasthourne, Sussex u32. Arter studying in bondon atthe Northen Polytechnic. he moved ta Spain. Since 1y62 he bas worked ur partnership with *Martorell aad Oriel *Bohigas. Mackay tommicats, Londen Lu7 1 Pande. Starttgart 1y77  Jovep  AM 1). Commadictions un Living Envi- == Wokanmgshan im  McKim, Mead & White. One of the largest and most prolific architectural tirms ino the FUSA ac che turn of the century. the New York-based office of Mekini. Mead & White cultivated a sophisticated and urbane historicist i fthistorteismy) vocabulary, first in elegant do- tocste designs wud increasingly in monumental pubhe architecture. Phe tirm’s carly work way alternately imbued wath the decorative and preturesque sensibilides of the youngest partner  Stunford White ch. New York 1Ss3.d. New York 1yeei, who way closely asociated with  many ofthe period's Jeading artists and by the  controlled and austere monumental deign of  Charles Pollen Moki th. Chester County, Pa. psgc.d Now York 1yog), whose training had been wt the *heole des Beaux-Arts. The office, which produced some one thousand butldings by tyty. was disaplincd by the organizational skills of Willuim Rutherford Mead (bh, Brattle- boro, Vermont. i84o.d. New York ry28}. The firin’s carhest fame was won largely with large Shingle Style mansions and country clubs. such ay the Willan G. Low House at Bristol, RAI (886 7), and the New port Casino (N79 No), both of which bad dheir roots in the planning amd the picturesque sense of materials and eratt H. Richard- yon. in whose othce MeRana and White had met in the carly 1870s, Wad the H. A.C. Taylor House in Newport, Rol 1188-6). the firm heralded the revival of interest in) American colonial architecture which nrarked che shift in sole to a more rigorous order and. classical conception of composition. ‘This shift paralleled by the use of Renaissance typologies and details in such urban residences as the Henry Villard Houses in New York iiss -s} and the consolidation of the planning techniques and imagery of the French Beaux-Arts  of the domestic architecture of tI  was  classical  tadigon inte a menumental American public architecture. Beginning with MeKimn's Boston Public Library ¢1887- 8}, a re-interpretation of Henri Labrouste’s Bibliotheque Sainte-Gene- vieve (*Prance). the tirm: cultivated a new approach to urban architecture which came to present a counter-tradition to the *Chicago School. The triumph of neo-classieal image- making in the 18y3 World's Columbian Expo- assured the success of MeKim. Mead & Whites classical tinesse which from die Rhode Island State Capitol ac Providence (18y1- 1903) to Columbia University 1y02). Penn- wvlvania Station (tgo2- ti} and the Brooklyn Muscum {1893 1y1s).allm New York. created an image of orban America to be cultivated and reworked by the countless architeets trained in  sition  LING3  the firm’s ofhces Gineludmg such mayor figures ay Cass Gilbert, Henry Bacon, and J. M. Carrere and Thomas Hastings). Phe publication of - Monograph of dhe Work of McKim, Mead and White (ruts) was to have an influence in Aierican architectural schools inte the 1940s. as Well as abroad. The enthusiasm of ©. H. Realy for their work was to have considerable cchoes in English publig and commercial archi- tecture. particularly through the Liverpool University School of Architecture. Much dis dained by the advocates of the *[oternational  Style. the urban and architectanic values of MeRim. Mead & White's work have recendy  found new  appreciation among a younger generadon of American architects. BB  1 Monograph of the Works of MeKim, Mead and White, 1879) tg1s, New York tots (reprint ed ry73)}: Really, Charles HL. MeAia, Mead, and Hite. New York 924: Baldwin, Charles: Stanford (hire, New York 1y31: Scully, Vin- cent. The Shiugle Style, New Haven. Conn. tyss: Roth, Leland M0 The Architecture of MeKim, Mead & White, 18r0 1920: A Building List, New York 1y78; ——. McKim, Mead & Whae, Architects, New York ry83 and London  1Od4.  Mackintosh, Charles Rennic. b. Glasgow sok, de London yas. A resolute adversary of historic revivalism, M. way one of the most important precursors of 2oth-century rational ist As the leader of the *Art Nouveat movement in Great’ Britain, the Scottish architect made a contribution of funda~ mental importance in reappraising the role of function in building, expressed ima style which  architecture.  
draws often on ancient Celtic ornament and on the cultural traditions of Japan.  When he was barely sixteen. M. entered Joh Hutchinson's office ay an arccled pupil: trom TAR he attended evening classes atthe Glogow School of Art. In e8xg he was engaged as a draughesman in the building tinn ef J. Honey- man and Keppie, where he remained until ry 13 (from ryog asa partner), and while there he met the architect J. Herbert McNair. lis fucure brother-in-law. In t8go. he was awarded a scholarship which enabled him to make a study cour in France and Italy. Already in his tirse executed work. the corner tower of the Glas gow Herald Building (1804). M. revealed a rejection ofacademic traditions which was to by fundamental to his work. One year later. in December r&ys, he participated in thy opening exhibition of L’Art Nouveau in Paris with a number of posters which already displayed clearly the linear. symbolic seyle of the Ghisgow School. In f8y7 he won the competition tor the new building of the Glagow School of Art. erected between 1Xy8 and 1gay. In EXys he drew up a bold scheme for a concert hall on a circular plan, covered by a parabolic dome. which was not however premiated at the Glagow exhibr- Udon of yor.  Acthe same time M. was involved in interior decoration and in furniture design. The pieces he designed are notable for them character. which is at once exquisite and austere, ender and taut, based on the straight line and the right- angle, and set off in light cones (ivory). The upswing of their slim parallels elongates their forms beyond any functional requirement, as M.'s aesthetic fancy turns to mannerisin. This is the style he adopeed when commissioned im 1897 co design the chain of Glasgow tea-rooms. The Buchanan Street Tea-room (1897-8) itlas- trated the curvilinear style of this first period (1894-1yoo) most completely: the walls were dominated by two-dimensional figures, tall and graceful, enclosed within a network of vertical lines and enewined by circular waves that evoked the manner of the painter Gustay Klimt This style became known on the Continent  especially after the exhibition of a suite of  farniture at Munich in 1898, and through the contribution M. sent to Vienna for the annual exhibition of the Secession in 1goo. ‘The furni- ture and panels he showed in Vienna empha- sized the close links between the Scottish tends and the Viennese School  Mackintosh. Glasgow School of Art aus yor!  Jn dhe same year Mo married a tormer student ofthe Glasgaw School of Art. Margarce Muac- Vonald. Herberr MeNair im tkgy knit together more cloely a little group united  whose sister Frauces had marricd  There ties helped to  since Esue by sunilar protessional ind aesthetic interests. which had already won an inter national reputation under the mame ot ‘The hour’. ft was.ts the lender of this group that M entered a compedition in tyer, organied under the auspices ot the Zette: belt fier Lanerdekaratioy ot Darnsctade by itsecditor. A. Koch  The subieet was a house fora cammoiscur, ieluding its interior decpradions Mwy awarded) second price. Pes scheme ens isaed ores ola tionary use of space. wth i arrangement of large. siniple volumecdstinetly cubic in appearance. stripped  in clovanen oof any km of ornament on moulding. and marked by an aseimmeoieal prodomunance of sohds over words ae was a harbinger of the purse style of *Loos  Inehe cours houses ME builitn the environs  of Glasgow Windy Hill ait Kilmacoln. 1syy 
roots PAIL Pleuse ac Helensburgh, 1902-3) he evoked the Scottish baronial cradiuon (angle rowers with conical caps, huge double-pitch roofs, massive chitnneys}. The internal layouts ot these houses evince great boldness in the handling of space. The hall oP Hill House (1903) wa masterpiece where light. colour, openwork partitions, cage-type lamps and light furniture combing ta sparto-dynamie composition that antapates Rusian *Conscructivisny and Dutch *Suiil  The superb library which M. built ay an 9) shows simalar stylistic tends. the straight line  tddinon to the Glasgow School of Art (1907  reigns supreme, and the subtle arrangement of  horvontil beams and ree  angular pillars which support. the galleries punctuate space ina manner hitherto unknown, raismy architecture Similar principles are at work. with equal ctfect. in M Cranston Toa rt}. Apart from this. ta his short architectural career. the Seotush Pavilion (which M. built and tarnished) at che Vurty Lvhibition of 1yoz may alsa be noted  to the level of poctic abstraction  room i Engram Street (1yo7  He moved to London in iyi3. where his acunides were limited to designing fumicure and printed fabrics, fn ty20, he reared to Port Vendres ta devote hinselfexclusively to waters  RED Fhans emes Runsifrcindes, Darmstadt ryoa: Pevsner, No Charles Rennie Mackintosh. Milan iysor Howarth, Phony. Charles Reantie Mackintosh and the Modern Movement, London tgs2. Mac- leod, Robert, Claufes Reanic Mackintash, Lon- don gos. Billclitte. Roger. Architcenmal Sketches and Flower Drawings hy Charles Rennie Mackintosh, Loudon 1az7s Charles Rennie Mackmtosh, the Compleie Furniture, Furnitie Drawings and Interior Designs, Guild- ford and London ogy: Cooper. Jackie (ed.). Mackintosh Archiecure. The Complete Buildings and Selected: Projects. London to7% Gnd ed. 1yko)  colour paincing  Mauthesins. Hermann.  Maillare, Robert. b. Berne 1s iggo. After studying sructural engineering from L8ygo to T8y4 at the Fidgendssiche Tech- nische Hochschule (ETH) in Zurich, he worked mM ¥arious engineering offices until he became  2d. Geneva  an independent partner im the bvalding firm of  Malart and Co., Zurich, in tyes. In ryett he Was appointed a lecturer at the ETH in Zurich.  Mackintosh. Library building, Glasgow School of Art (107 9}: exterior and reading reom  In 1912 he lett Switzerland to build m Russia, whence he returned penniless atter the October Revolution. In torg he started an engineering  
office In Geneva. followed in ty24 by others mn Bere and Zurich,  M. built not only bridges but also designed the structural details for a large uumber ot multi-storey buildings. Vhe intrinsic character of his constructions shows up) particularly clearly. however,  in bis bridges: these designs are the outcome of his ability to chink through a problem in its enurety and to seek a specitic solution to each sicuarion based on his own specially developed methods of construction. In tydt he built the fire of his forty or so reinforced-concrete bridges, ac Zuoz in the Engadine. [ce already displayed some of the essential features of chat concept of his which did away with the old principle of separation between the functions of bearing and loading All parts of a bridge were now integrated in their structural funenon, the roadway being nu longer a load carried by the bridge vaults but incorporated as a structural element  M.’s mast important bridges are those built according to the principle he developed of the triply articulated box girder: they include the Rhine bridge at Vavanasa. Graubtinden: the Rossgraben bridge near Schwarvenburg in che Canton of Berne (1932), 82m (269 ft) long, aad  the overpass between Altendart’ and Lachen.  Maillart, Bridge over the Thur. aear tels  ‘ St Gallen (1g33}  Canton Schwy? (1940). the last project person- Another of his structural system was the so-called suffcaed bar arch whieh he uscd notably in the following: the Valo fsehich bridge (ryasj. and the curved Landquart railway bridge at Klosters (930).  ally supervised by) Maillarr  both alse in Graubunden: the Schwandbach bridge berween Hinterfultigen and Schnen- tannen i the Canton of Berne £1933), also ona curve: and tinally the Aire bridge at Lancy, Geneva, with anoarchespau of som (167 ft). dexigned mig 38and buileigss 4. A number of his boldest bridge designs were never executed  Among the multi-storey buiidings for whose architeecural form: M.'s contribution Was essen= cally responsible, the following may be men noned: die cntmmece hath of a warehouse ar end che barsel-vanted Ce  Chiase (ruta s ment Payihon at the Swos Provinces Exhibi- don, Zunch, iy3y. 4 saw building for the Swiss cement mdustry. Pls mest important mMvention i die Held oF Iagh structures was made nm rgo8 with mushroom slab conscruc~ tron. which be used for the first time ona large scale in taro. In this method, columns, beams smd floors are tie longer treated ay separate Units nin omber ar steel structures, but the column passes organically inte the beanaless Foor slab  Maillare. Cement biduscry Pavan, Sas Provanres Dshiistion, Zant ty 3u  
Hore again, a structural system that ps economi- cabin the use of materials permits Aesibility in ippleatton and helps te ensure a hght and clei appearance, MIS  Ball. Max. Robers Mallar. Zurich togy Grd edo co62e Abel. John R.. Billngton, David P.. dod Miaurk. Robert ieds.j. The Marllart Papers, Princeton, Noo 1973  Maki, Funuhike. b. Tokyo ty2s8. Studied at  Tokyo University. the Cranbrook Academy of  Art. Bloomticld Hills. Mich. and at Harvard University. From rgs4 to 1966 he worked in the New York offices of *Skidmore, Owings & Merrill, as well ax under J. L. *Sere in Cam- bridge. Mays. In 1968 he opened his own office in Tokyo. Although he belonged to the group of vonny Japanese architects who Jaunched *Metabolsniin ty60, M. did not himself share in the utopian speculations of his associates *Rurokawa and *Kikutaki. Elis buildings such ay the campus of Risho University in Kumagaya (1967-8), the Hillside Terrace Housing Complex in Tokyo (96g. 1473 8). the Kate Gakuen Numazu (tyt2}. the Austrian Embassy in To- kyo (tycét or the National Museum of Modern: Artin Kyote cigs} are characterized by a strongly sculptural, but nonetheless rationally cool formal language. which occasionally re calls the work of his teacher, Sert. AM  Maki, bumihiko. and others, Metabolisut 1g6e, Proposals tor News Urbanism. Tokyo 1y60; Maki. Fumihiko, faeestigatons ie Collernve Form. St Lowy. Mo. tg64: Fumihiko Maki’ elrchitectiral Recond (New York}. August pp. 67: So.  Elementary school im  uz6,  Malevich, Kasimir (Severmovicht. bo near Kiev 88. do Leningrad 1y3s. Painter and sculptor. Studied atthe School of Art in Kiev, and in tyo2 moved ta Moscow. In his carly career be way strong) y influenced by the paint- ing of the Post-lmpresstonists. the Fauvises and later the Cubists (*Cubrini, Between ty13 and tyts he moved in the dircetion of *Supre- mation: his preture Blak Square on White Grotnd was tirsteshibiced in tyrs. Inthe 1y20s he turned cto sculpture and architecture: he worked with EL *Lhisaczky, *Bauhau and investigated compositional rela- tionships and possibihaes ot simple cubes in his “Architcktona) and *Planity’. architectomie and sculpturally abstract  visited the  constructions in wood.  After 1y30 he encountered inereasing resistance wy the Stahnist era (* Russia): finally he confined himself to hyurative pamting and constructing architectural models VML  Malevich, K. S.. fhe Non-Obiective World, Chicago rysy: Andenmen, Troch. Malevich, Amoterdin ryco: Zhadova, Latina AL, Malevich: Suprematism and Revolution in Russian Are, rgre-ig3e. Landon 182  Mallet-Stevens, Robiert), b. Paris 1886, d. Paris 1ygs. Studied at the Ecole Spéciale d Architecture in Paris, where he himself taught trom ty24. In ty2y he founded. together with *Chareau and others, the Union des Artistes Modernes. The leading exponent of the *Art Deco style in *France, be assimilated intuences trom Josef *Hotfmann and Charles Rennic * Mackintosh. In his buildings. notably the flats syothe Rue Mallet-Stevens in Paris (ig26- 7), comphasis is Jaid on a Cubist type of formal inige GHa  Roh Maller as, architecte. Brussels ys Delorme. Jean Claude, and Chair, Philippe. L'Evole de Paris. 10 architectes et leurs immienhles. 190s 1937. Paris 1y8t, pp. 61-70.  Mangiarotti, Angelo, b. Milan iyot. Studied atthe Milan Politecnico. In tyss he entered into partnership with Bruno Morassutti, but since 1y60 he has practied independently, For M, construction is the deepive determinant of  architecture. The general appearance of his buildings suggests the influence of *Micy van  der Robe an thei disciplined simpheity — M.  Mangiarotti. Mater Macricordiac church, Baranzate with: Morasstuttis 1ys7  
wasa visinng professor atthe Hino Institute ot Technology in Chieage in iys3 40 while the formal relationship of construcdonal elements to lines of static force reveals a kinship wach tlic works of Pier Lutg: *Nervi, Hs protabricated structures. mostly of concrete, are never com-= posed in an addigve way of independent unie, but rather are made up of elements which are ned ane  related to one another and are so vom produce a unified form, Mo hay builenatably the Mater Misericordiag church in Baran2ate near Milan (rys7. with Morassuttiy. an exhibicen pavilion tor the Fiera del Mare in Genoa 1193! a workshop hall for the Soecicti Elmag at Lisone, near Monza (1964). as well as an administration and factory building ar Cinnello Bahamo near Milan (1y68). AM DS Anerle Mangiaretti, Tokyo tgs: “Angelo Mangiarout, Arehirectire and Urhania | o- kyo), September (974: Bona, Enrico $).. dagelo Mangiarotti_ I processe del castruite, Malan Ty8o  Markelius, Sven. b. Stockholi tsxy. de ty Studied in Stockholm at the Technical College and at the Academy of Fine Arts. Although influenced by *Le Corbusier, he never opposed the Scandinavian romantic tradition, with rs own special conception of scale and space. but took account of ir empirically in his own tempered modernism. He built Hats and offices. and a concert hall at Hilsingborg (1y34i. and first won international recognition with his Swedish Pavilion at the New York World's Fair (1439). In his capacity as head of the towne planning department of the city of Stockholin (1944 $4) he was responsible for the extablish- ment of the satellite town of Wallingby (1933  y): this was notable for its remarkable variety of  design and for a central pedestrian zone, the  Markelius. Concert hall, Hiliagbory (1us4)  ads antages of which were at that time not vet seleev ident  as. Stefano. contribute seedese alParchi- retin vaitonparmed Peper dé Seen Manketins, Rome byt  AARS Group iMaodern Architectural Re- search Group: Gronp of archircets founded in London in 133. which ads ocated the introduc- HorotContmental dieories oF * Radonalism in *Great Brigan, Antony the founding members architects Wells *Coares and Berthold *fuberkin and the engineer Ove *Arup  group was their plan tor the conmplete recon-  weere the cng  Phe most noteworthy project of the Mruction of London on a iincar model  Martin, Sir fol: Leste, b. Manchester 1y08 Tramed atthe School of Architecture, Univer- smecot Manchester, ig27 30. Where he subse- TysO 4: head ofthe School of Architecture, University of Hull, rgs4 cot Professor and Head of the De- paronent of Architecture, University of Came TOS >  quently served as assistant lecturer  bridge. Mio served asa co-editor {with the punter Ber Nicbobon and the sculptor Neu Gabot of the ssortlived *Construcnviss review Cire in 1y37. one of the organs for the introduction of Continental England. He was prmeipal assistant architect to the London. Midhural and Scortisty Railway, heseknown work. the with Rab- Moro and kelwun Walliams:  modernisn in  tyay 48. Hay carly oval Foetal Halk Condon ys t ert Matthew, Pete: daces trom his period rggs sa in the archisee- ture department of the Londen County Coun-  rehitest lyse &  cH the was chier. From 1st he condneted a private practice nm Cumbridge  Harvey Court  where be has built notably cy Residential Building  College usc ec: with Coli St Toba Wilbon: and the Stone Burldirg at Petorhotse .fyer 4: also wath Woiset AEs  ning approach and concern tor materials and  goat Gonville and Cans  omprebasice plane  ronson) methods $ave esereed canstd=  enable intigence vleetiy throueh tie Centre for  Land Use and Hanit be Marta Contre a Cuinbridge Bis  pW Studies qiaw ihe  Murun. bese. oNates on Developan Archiccnue Deliictiat Renee. ne. 1g Cryo. pe i Martorell Como... Jescp Mata. be Bare  celoma tyes Studied the bseuehe Pecnieg Sue  ait  
Marcorell. Santa Agueda holiday flats. Bentcasim yee A  perior de Arquitectura in Barcelona. In tryst he formed a parmership with Oriol *Bohigas. which David *Mackay joined in 1962. In the content of architectural developments in Cata- Jonta, Martorell, Bohigas and Mackay have played a leading role m theoretical matters as well ay in their buildmes. They maintain that a uniticd formal language of the type that the *International Style represented cannot be ap- plied uniformly to various building tayks and sitianony, and they have thay developed a rormally rich stylisde pluralism. which none- theless has avoided a tradinonalise regionalisin Among the most convimeng examples of ther work are the Santa Agueda holiday colony in Bemieasun true oe the Sant Jord: School in Pineda (1967 9+ and the Bonanova apartment building in Barcelona tig7o 3} AM “Marrorell, Bohigas, Mackaw. fo drchiter- tire Eanivurd hin in>, January February ruts. pp. 74 Sy: Murrorell  Boltigay Mackaye oTrguitectana rgsa ng78. Madrid 1yty  Parisi no  May, Frost. bo Frankfuri am) Main isso. d Hamburg 1970. Studicd ar Wanversitry College, London. and at the Techrische Hochschule in Darnistadt. as well as that in: Mumeh under Pricdrigh won Uhierseh and Cheodor *Fischer: in between he worked am the London city planning office of Raymond Crwin, tg10 12 Tewas City Planning Adviser i Frankfurt am Main. tgs 3e. during which time he planned New Frankfurt’ in the context of an exemplary social democratic  the housing estates for the  housing policy: these included Praunheim and Romertadt thoth 1y27 30), la these, M. com-=  bined the urbamistic principles of the English satellite towns with the typologies and formal language of the rationalist *Neues Bauen. In execution he adopted the so-called ‘montage’ construction method, novel at the time: even the kitchens, the “Frankfurter Kiiche’ (design: Grete Schittte-Lihotzky}, which were - from the functional point of view - radically reduced. were themselves prefabricated. From 1y30 to 1933 M. was active m *Russia on large: urban planning: architect in  ale Next. 134 $4. asa farmer and Africa: and then. tysq—vi. as director of the planning section of the "Neue Heimat) community housing association im Hamburg. Fram 1ys7 he was a professor at the Technische Hochschule in) Darmstadt. and from iy6t was municipal planning commis- sioner in Wiesbaden. VMI ~ Bueksehmutt. [.. Erase May Planungen, Stattgart 1963.  Bauten und  Maybeck, Bernard (Ralph). b. New York i862. do Berkeley. Cal. tryst. Studied at the  *Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris. where he was  much impressed by the restoration wark of Viollet-le-Duc. From 1894 he had his own office in Berkeley. atter fg in San Francisco: he retired from practice m ty3s. Taughe at the University of Cabfornia ac Berkeley and at the Mark Hopkins Insutute of Artin San brancisco. M-.was the carliest representative of the region= alt Bay Region Style. which Willam Wilson *Wurster was to bring te a restramed high- pot. Ecleetic. expecially Far Eastern mouts,  May. Kamerstad: estate, branktart am Mann  tye  80 
Maybeck. First Church of Chrnt Scientnt, Ber! vy. Cal. (ig1o}  which have always played an important part im architecture on the West Coastof Amerivaeven to this very day, were combined by M. with structural experiments such as the use of prefab- ricated units (First Church of Christ Scientist. with its expressive use of Wooden construction, at Berkeley. tyto). He built: private houses, clubs (Faculty Club of the University of Cah- fornia at Berkeley, tg02) and shops, and de- signed the Palace of Fine Arts for the ‘Panama- Pacific Exposition’. San Francisco (tots). in neo-classical style with romantic trappings.  T] MeCoy, Esther, Five California An fitects, New York ry60. Cardwell. Kenneth H.. Ber nard Maybeck: Artisan, Architect, Artist, Santa Barbara 1977.  Mayekawa, Kunio, b. Niigata-shi, Japan tyos. Studied at Tokyo University: worked first for *Le Corbusier in Paris, and independently from 1935. His investigations into the structural possibilities of reinforced concrete (stimulated by Pier Luigi *Nervi) led co buildings in a srongly sculptural idiom: City Hall, Kyoto {1gs8-60), Metropolitan Hall. Tokyo (tyss  61). His apartment block at Harumi in Tokyo (1957) carries over Japanese domestic traditions into the dimensions of a modern skyscraper. In the office building for the Janome Sewing Machine Company in Tokyo (194s). the office floors are decoratively clad in expressively treated concrete elements placed in front of the fagade to form a sun screen. M. had a consider- able influence on younger Japanese architects:  Kenzo * Tange. among others. has worked in collaboraten with him  Altherr. Alfred, Drei japanische Architekton Mayekawa. Tange, Sukakura, Teulon and Stuu- Bart 1968  Meier, Richard (Alun). b. Newark Seudicd architecture at Cornell University Worked successively with, among. others, *Skidimere. Owings & Merrill and Marcel *Breverin New York. Since 1y63 he bas been in practice intependendy in New York. His early built work ss primarily domesne, including: the Meier House. Fysex Fells, No. Cros the Smich House. Danen, Conn. loos 7} the Saltzman House, bast Hampeon, N.Y. ¢ry67) y)s and the Douglas House in TLarbor Springs, Mich. diytt 3. He also did a number of studies for public buildings, but his first executed Jarge- scale buildings were alo housing: the Bell  J. 1934.  Meier. Douglas Howse, Harbor Sprmgs, Mich HOTT 3  
Meier, [he Atheneum. Now Elarmnony. nd Ivamomet is prods. Gon  ys  Laborutones mi downtown New York cons verted mite Westherh arest. apartnrents: and Twin Parks housing nthe Bronx (roy 74h A wider pubhe noney accrued to him ay the result ofthe *New York Bive exhibition (1g6y) and book etom ai Pe was the ost prolitie builder in the group and the persistent use of white in his biildings iy perhaps the main reason for the Well  began receiving  group's soubriquee “white architects’ betore the exhibition, M public aid industrial conmuissions. Phe Phys- jeal Education Center at bredoma for New York State University dates trom: 1u68 72. Ip yt) began a whole series OF projects for Olivetn. but these rel v retain to wor change of company porey. Tn tury came the Athe- neumat New Harmony. tnd. though the most important carly public building, the Bronx York. was designed in ty76°t and finished in 1yt6 “The scheme for the Muscuzn fir Kunschandwerk (arty and crafts) in’ brankfure won  Developmental Center ni New  a closed  eompetition We 197g and was completed: in  tuSg. That vear Me was chosen to design the  new Gerty Muscum in Loy Angeles, Of the architects of hay generation, Mois perhaps the most committed to the cultural contest of his work and to a conscious mediation between public and private in. ancurban fabric. to which his entire tormul language is devote Ie  Pine Architects, New York toa: Richard Meter. Architect, New York Richard Meicr: Buildings and Projects #968) toi. Zurich tys2, Ridtard Meer. drelitert, New York tysy.  1y7o,  Melnikov, Konstantin  Stepanovich), b. Mos cow TSya. d. Moscow tytg. The first Sovict architect to achieve qoternadienal repure, with his bold design for the Pavilion at the Paris “Exposition internationale des arts décorauts et nutastriel modernes’ (gis). Ele was without a doubt the most individualistic of the young architects ace after the Revolution, Starting widh his projects tor a workers’ quarter mn Moscow figa2i or the Moscow offices of the journal Lenmgradskaya Pravda (1923). his work way characterived by the architectural expres Mon ommevement within great dynamic fornn.  His own house in Moscow (rutz) was a amgular binding a the Russta of the tg20s, its design based on the intersection of twe cylin= der. The tive workers’ clubs he designed: in Moscow (1927 y} cach have a specific mani- festo, revealing externally the auditera and eirculagen spaces i ain expression of condnu= ou movement. Mis radicalism and his rejec= von of the orthodexics of the various organized want gardes was expressed in his proqects for the Chrstopher Cohimbus Lighthouse on Haiti fiyay} and for the Palace of the Soviets in Moscow fiugip The ovo parking garages whieh he bile ins Moscow yig26 and (924) mereascd his interest iu the manipulation of Movement m the city an a grand scale: his project for the People’s Commmissarnaitof Heavy Tudusery (193.4) is the most striking example. br the cnsumg years, his output apart: from interior refurbishment schemes was confined to purely graphic expression Ie  Starr. S. Frederick, Mehikov, Solo Architect fr a Mass Society, Princeton, No} 138  Mendelsohn, Frich. b. Aflenstem,. East Prossta ESS7. d. San Francisco tys 3. Studied ftrse at che Pechnisehe Jlochschule in Berlin-Charlotten- burg and then in Miumich, He was initially influenced by *Expressionii, ay is especially  clear in hiy carly typological sketches. which  
Mendelsohn. Hat Pactory for Friedrich Stermberg, Herman & Co. Luckemwalde Gast a  distantly recall che works of Henry *yan de Velde and *Behrens. He during bis ume inthe army (rgtg 28) in Russia and on the Western front, producing sketches which, ence translated into pen-and-ink draw-  Peter even drew  ings, were to win him considerable notice ata tyty exhibition im Paul Casstrer’s gallery im Berlin.  The machine-like aspects and the symbolic rendering of function by expressive amd dy- namic outing in these project draw ings was carried over mto his first major building: the Observatory and Astrophysics Laboratory at Poodam, known as the Einstein Tower atter its completion in ty2t. Although the tower was of masonry construction, it had the formal and appearance or concrete. A whole series of oth  constructive reintorced-  7 buildings soon followed, including: the [fat bactory for Friedrich Stemberg. Herrmann & Co. in Luckenwalde (1y2t 3); a two-fimily house in Berlm-Charlottenburg (iy22). a commercial building in Gleiwitz (6y23): and a machinery building for actextile factory in Wiistegiersdort Qlso 1g23). In addition during these years, he renovated the Rudolf Mosse House in Berlin {1921 3. with Richard J. *Neutra and R. P. Henning).  Especially decisive for the expression of his personal style were the ovo department store buildings for Schocken in Seuctgart (1y26 8} and Chemnitz (1928-9). These are character- ized simultaneously by a constructional disci pling and by a dowing sense of line that iy especially manifested in the band windows, which are cantilevered out from the structural Members, and in the staircase achieved an carly highpoint in his nearly  towers. M  Mendelsohn. Cinema on dhe Kurtiusrendasia Rerlis tty26 34s  procorype-free formal inventiveness in the  Woga comples in Berhn f1g26 37; This ine  clided a cinema for an audience of £800 fits meerior Was to become a medel for ai entire series of large cmemas throughout dhe world. cabarer, café and aparements  ML sway Jewish, and chose to leave Germans In Mareh py33. travelling via Brussels ta Lon- don. where in ty26 he shared an office with Serge *Chermayelh, The most famous of che handtul of buildings he realized ut *Great Britain is the Be La Warr Pavihon ar Bexhdl- oneSer cig ast  Already during bis stay im England. which anol tyag Mo had Palestine where, in addition to private houses,  Jasted cominissions 10 he designed a hospital in Plati siyat Si and buildings for the Hebrew Canversity in Tere roag he setdled uy  (*israch. Due to lick oFemplos arent, bow ever. he ennyrated un iyge to the *USA. where he had made a study crip in tysg. Tn spite of Sis good introduction through vw exibition attic Minscum of Modern Artin New York. he received practically oo commissions amd imstead  Jou fty37 gn In Palesane  undertook extensive lecture cours, In tags he New York to San  where he lived unal bis death. 1  moved from braneisce, the Jase sas.  vears of his ite Mo agai enjoyed a pemad at considerable acavicy, principally designing rehe gious buddings ior Jewish comanuniges Se Loup, Mo. deage sor Cleveland. Ole. rage + Gren Rapids, Mich. rags S. Paul. Minn. igse 4  After bis dy parture from Germniny. MP ever  agam atainicd the originality of his earls work. and even aim das ative hind he wats followed Ly only secondeclass unitators rather than genuine 
Mendelsohn, Howse on Pacitie Hemghts. Sar Francisco i hase 6  disciples. Vhe ourscanding aspect of his German  work was not only its freedom: in the use and  combmation of reittoreed-concrete. steel  glass. and masonry, but also and above all the powerlully sculptural treatment of velumetric composigon. Functonalisi plays a less evident role in bry binldings than it dees in those of the * Bauhaus circle tnd its architects: construction and function were rather subordinated toa dynamic overall form and an urbanisae concep- dion of ensemble. PR t= Mendelsako. 1 drehitekten. Berlin ig26: Amerika, Berlin 1y2y: frich Meudebsolin. Das Gesamitschaplen des Inhitekten, Berlin tg30: Whittick. Arnohd. Lrtch Mendelsohar (and, revised. ed.). London and New York rysé: Eckardt, Wolf von. Erich) Mendelsohn. New York and London rye: Zevi, Bruno, and Posener, Julius. Mrich Mendelsolia fexhibition catalogue}, Berlin iyos, Zevi, Bruno. Eric Mendelsohn, Opera complen, Milan tyzo:  tmerika, Brlderbuch eines  ~ RuBhand Europa  Metabolism. As a concept and as a group, Metabolism came into evisterce on the occasion of the Tokyo World Conterenc: 1960 under the strony itluence of Kenzo *Vange and his chief collaborator Takashi Asada. The original memraers included owo voung architects, Kiyonort *Kikutake and Kisho *Kurokawa, and the architectural critie Noboru Kawazoe: this group was later joined by the architects Masato Ohtaka and Fumihiko  of Design in  Metabolisim. Sky House. Tokyo (rysyi. by Kayonori Kikutake  *Maki. Their activities ranged from regional phoning and architecture to industrial design and various forms of propaganda, strongly affectmag Japanese architecture of the 1960s and culminating in the Osaka World's Pair 1y7o.  Underlying most of the projects ot the Metabolists was the pursuit of a dialectic syn- theses of the public realm and private spaces: and an many cases these private spaces were expressed as minimal capsules produced by advanced mass-technology. Kurokawa’s archi- tecture best typified the Metabolist image. characterized by strikingly science-tiction-like forms. Kikutake’s major concern centred on the concept or an archetype of spaual components — ay represented by his awn Sky House m Tokyo (1yso}) while Obrakaand especially Maki were developing the idea of what they called group as represented by Makr's design for the campus of Rissho University in Kumagaya (1967 8). A housing project submitted to the international competition of Peru (1968) was the last occasion in which the Metabolists acted asa group, and since the closing of the Osaka World’s Fair, when the former optimism about the future of Metabolism began to tade away. their activities turned out to be more personal and multi-polar. Kurokawa’s concern now co-existence of hetero- geneous objects or concepts: in spite of the  form  concentrated on the  classicist-hke appearance of his subsequent works, Kurokawa maintained that this ap- preach was not an ideological shift but a 
development of his former Metabolist group form theory, while Ohtaka adjusted his ap- proach, turning in his designs to the use ofa neo- vernacular style. Hy TG Kawazoc, N., Kikutake, K.. and Kuro- kawa, Metabolism tg60. Proposals for New Urbanism. Vokyo 1960, Kurokawa. K.. The Concept of Metabolism, Tokyo (972.  Mexico. ‘Vhe Revolution of ig1o and the turbulence of the following years broke the influence of the Paris *Ecole des Beaux-Arts which had prevailed over Mexican architecture since the mid-tyth century and had largely replaced a tradition of dependency on the Spanish motherland. [tale signalled the re- evaluation of the vernacular architecture of the country, especially that of the Spanish colonial period. Parallel to this developmene — bue in many young archi- tects, under the leadership and instruction of  marked opposition to it  José *Villagrin Garcia, including Juan Legor- reta, Enrique Yaner and Enrique de la Mora, and independently of them: Juan *O'Gormun, began. ¢. 1925, to plan their buildings on the principles of the Modern Movement, particu- larly in the area of hospitals and schools. weil as in workers’ housing. At the same ume a Mexican variant of *Art Deco served ay a  Metabolism, Rissho Unversity, Kumagaya (14678). by Fumihike Maki  mediating seyle between these contrsdn tory positions.  Ao noteworthy developed in Guadalajara in the hate lygos. Luss *Barragin, Ratuel Urata and Ignacio Diaz Morales went back to the simple local building forms of the early colonial perrod. bar decades their buildings went unmouced: today, they are considered exemplars of an  regional style in housing  how- ever, abstract redefining of regional architecture. Berween 1930 and Toso the principles ot modermism established thenpevles on broader basis: in tggy the Mesican government mivited the former director of the * Bauhaus. | lanes *Meyer. to the country. way for anew seyle of urban planning. The we of tower blocks for public housing began with the Presidente Aleman residential conyplex in Mesico City by Mano Pant with 1 3-storey buildings for 4 total of s.c00 mhabitants ¢1y47 30}. Tall othce buildings. which followed the  here he paved the  iy curtun-wall fae  international trend for ¢ gades, sprang up along the Pacso de bt Reforms wm Mexico City. as well as in the heart of the old city with the Torre Latinoamericano by Augeste Alvarez and Adolto Zeev  A modern Mesiean architecture with decid- edly individual characteristics first appeared only largesc undertakings of die period, the Uinver- sity City in the southern pare of the capital After many years of planning igeneral vite plan by Mario Pani and) Iaariqgue de! Morale the orignily intended tor was realized in 1gso. 3. using  derh (LUSO},  1gsGand was most evident im one of tie  enormous comples 20.000 students  the projects of nearly too architects and engi  veer. Tn spite ef the pameraus individual contabutions, a certain overall concepocn did emerge. vertical building volumes and extensive open  The contradag of horizontal and spaces is not without reminiscences of Pree  Columbian urban layout. Asm those proto-  types, an imtegradon of art and arehueccure was sought. “Phe cll building block of che main library gave the pumterarchitecr fun O'Gorman the opportuniny co clothe dhe fagude indecorative moscz other buildings are treated with murals and strong seatptural celiets wide realistic sulyect.. “The Olympic Stadion is eSceplionalin an harmony with the landscape Itsy external Conical shape conforms wath chacor an extinet voleane  Alo an the  *Candela’s first well-known shell constuction,  University City is boli 
Mexico. Naconal Mascum of Anthropology. Mexico City ipa, by Pedro Ramirez Vazquez  the Cosme Ray Building (ust In the follow- mg twa decades Candela collaborated wath yartous architects on similar constructions for imatket halls and factories; Candela also devel- oped impressive spatial solutions for churches. A novel approsch to plasticity im architecture was the result of his technical experiments.  Asa continuazion of his sculpoaral consider- ations, which, however, were always insepare able from the surrounding environment, the sculptor Mathias Goeriz built the Expermen- cal Museum “EL go in Mexico City in raszand thus suggested the trend towards an eoouonal’ and ‘minimal’ architecture. Phe five faacuen- loss towers in the Ciudad) Sarélire suburb ot Mexico City truss. with Barragin) represented an especially influencial formal solucon,  The Pedregal sector was developed. begin- ming in ty4g8. on a bava field adjacent to the University Cacy site. Barragan was responsible for the site plan. in which modern single-family houses were harmonized with av garden layout created by contrasang Belds af raw lava with interconnected planted areas with dowermyg  trees (architects: Francisco Artigas, Barray Mas Cetto. Santuige Greenham and others). In this same arca Juan O'Gorman created his own  in,  fotasde farytale-like house (1ys3-6) In the early ry6os the Nonoaleo- Patelolco quarter of Mexico City was constructed for  Mexico. Ciudad Sacclite. near Mexico City ags7h by Mathias Goer and Luis Barrag.in  Mexico. The architece’s own house, San Angel Hys3 63, by Juan O'Gorman 
Mexico. Hotel Cannne Real, Meareo (ite 1uGst, by Ricardo Legorrete  Mexico. Colegio de Mexicn, Mexico Cty 175: by Teadore Gonzales de béon and Abrahacs Zablodovsky  70,000 residents to the plans af Mario Pant. Lhe mix of different social classes Wasa primary aim tn chiy project im which buildings ranging from 4to 32 storeys in height allowed half of the gs- he  are ate to be lett open and: green,  Pedro Ramirez Vazquez’ soluten for the Anthropological Museum in’ Mexico City Hyg), which is arranged around a rectangular patio. was both acclaimed and criticized. hats balance of open and closed surtuces this building tulfils che Jocal requirements much more suc- costly than the glass curtuin-wall sernettire of the same architect's nearby Museunt of Moder Art (196s).  A rejection of the *International Style which persisted in José *Villagrin Garcia and Juan Sordo Madaleno’s Hotel Maria babel in Mexico City (1962) - is clearly evident in another Mexico City hotel, the Hatel Camme Real (1968) by Ricardo Legorrere, with ats emphasis on the wall sunlight conditions and maximum privacy mm  surbices. attention to  the arrangement af the rooms,  The public buildmgs of the rygzos in Mexico City display au tendeney to monumentalits which is frequently characterized by the use of large supporting and intill clemens. At che same tine there bay been increased attention to terior courts. Three buildings by Leodore Gonedlez de Leén and Abraham Zabludaysk  are typi) of ths aendenes: che tarenavat Adomnatratron Burlding 17 ai the Categia de Rutine  tostio which ts wetlantegrated wath  Mesieo oiytsis suid the Tamive Museu is Chapulrepec Park site. Ane even inare pros nounced monuments isto be seen aa the new Militury: Acadeiny which was desagned by Augustin Hertindes and Mantel Gunziles Rad  Many of che dircetion om Mexican  found im the  Honore Colegio Militurs,  haste theories ar the news  architecture wre  snake oeusis oof Barr  Aidhotigh dre sense of nis stein anid werghes significance which characectize brs sinipis Voie Gines bach oxtermally and: merry ire  diticule to miiac. his mHocncy cathe werk et  the Seunger generation of aretiteets ay unnintikable aw  Moers bod. Vieatits fede Lrdteis irre, New York fysi. Cette, Max | Miuderne bean keer of Vexne. Stutsart tued, Snnth, Cise Bo Basiders ur die Sen Bare Moxa  Indah New York 1y67 
ae  Mey, Johann Melduor van der, b, DelMiaven Sos. do Beek. the Netheriands. toge. Elis clarm ro place iy archttestaral history reuides prin- oipaily in the Scheepeaartinays in Anosterdam tot 16% the formal compositen of which Tus office building asan carly expresion otthe umsotshe School ot* Arsterdaim: in tehitecture and sculptural decoranon. which is spread across the  yeas largely to bis design  eration of.  brick fiyade moa Runcastie richness of detaik dramatic opening-up of the building by means er star-hall which penetrates the building's comer vite diagonally. The function of the steel and-concrete bunkding, which contained the adminisirative offices of six shipping compan- tess as expressed an the sculptural decoration the iconography of the sea and mariume trade. For this building he procured  based on  the collaboration of his slightly younger col / whom he hed inet during his years in Eduard Cuyper’s office and studio. He had lett Cuyper im igo. havmg won the Prix de Rome for the municipality of Amsterdam. 1yog-12.  leagues de *Klerk and *Krame  he worked  designing several bridges. He collaborated in the large-scale housing programmes in Ampscer- dant West and South with a series of projects, 730) WP  inchiding the Hootdorpplein (19  Meyer, Adolf. b. Mechernich, Eifel i881, doon the blind of Baltrum. in the North Sea ty2o. Attended the Art School at Dubsscldorfand worked as an architect with *Bebrens and Brune Paul, He taughtat the *Bauhaus gig 2s. and was city architect in Frankfurt luce ay. He colltborated with *Gropius (bugus Factors at Alfeld. rgti: and Jena Municipal Theatre. rytsi. then built dats, schoois, the plinctariunt of the Zeiss Works at Jena (yas 4s. and designed municipal build ings in Frankfurt  Tramed ay a cabinet-make  Meyer, Hannes. b. Basle iSay.d. Crocitisse di Savosa, Switzerland vys 4. Pramed im Basle asa mason and architessural draughtsman. Con- temporancously with bis frst works in architec=  ture, he pursued further tammy in evening  courses at the Kunstgew erbovchule, the Land= wirtschaftsakademie and te Pechnische Hoeh- schule in Berlin. From igo he was active im the  movement for land reform: aid communal  organization, fer which he designed several buildings mm an architectural) ianguage stll classicist. and traditional (Freiwerf estate at  Marttenz, near Basle, sgig-24). Around 1926 he embraced the Modern Movement’s ration- dlism. In 1y27 he was invited to become a teacher and master at the * Bauhaus in Dessau, where he succeeded *Gropius as Director (ty28 30). He was active in the Soviet Union Russia}, 1930 6. then m *Switverland. and 1939 49 In *Mexico. He adamantly rejected an architecture based on aesthetic formalism. a pesidan which led co conflicts with che other Bauhaus teachers, especially Lasz7lé Moholy- Nagy (Hungarian Activism), the exponent of composiuon based principally on form. Ms Most important work is his competition project for the League of Nations Palace in Geneva fiys6-7, with Hans Wittwer! a comples in an extreme Constructivist vocabulary which M. nonetheless refused to view in formal terms:  “Phis building is neither beautiful ner ugly. It asks to be evaluated as a conseructive invention.”  The Allgemeiner Deutscher Gewerkschatts- bund (United German Workers Union) Build- ing at Bernany near Berlin (1g28 30. also with Witrwerh, ws clegantly adjusted to topegraphi- cal conditions through the use of casily moved pavilions “ GHa  th  VVC ETESY  SUL  cay  Meyer. | cague of Nations Palace, Geneva (project, with Hlans Witewer: ty26 7}  
= Schnaidt, Claude, Hannes Meyer. Bauten, Projekte und Schriften, Teuten 196s,  M.LA.R. (Movimento Italiano per lArchi- tettura Razionale). Itahan *Rationalism first wide attention through the first ‘Esposizione delVarchitettura razionale’ which took place in 1928 in Rome and was organized by Adalberto *Libera and the architectural critic Gaetano Minnucei. In addition to the members of the *Gruppe 7 association, Luciane *Baldessari, Mario *Ridolti and Alberto Sar- toris were also included Gruppo 7 spawned anew movement, M.A. (Movimento Architettura Razionale), which with Libera as its general secretary Tualy’s radonalist. architects and architectural groups in four regional sections. Its most important task was the preparauon of the “Seconda esposizione dellarchitettura nale’. This took place in ty3t. once again in Rome, and was the occasion for publshmg a ‘Manifesto per Varchitettura razionale’, with which Mussohm associated himself oppor- The polemical ‘Tavole degh orrori’, which satirized the works of Armando Brasini, Gustave Gievannom and Mareetlo *Pracentim, among others. led to a scandal: the MILA.R. was forced to adopt a compromive position in the otherwise tense culteral and political aunosphere of Fascism, with its contin ually ambivalent relationship to rauonalist architecture. ln the very same year the muayve=  came to  In the same year.  united allot  raZio-  tunistically.  ment was disbanded \Mt — Gioll, Raffuello. L'arechitertira raztonal. Ban tyz2; Cennamo. Michele. Vatesali per Panalet deli'architettura moderna, Ho MLLAR Naples ovo. Danes. Silvia and Pagetta  Luciano ieds.}. ff razionalisme ¢ Pardniteriera i ftalia durante if fasciune, Venice 1976  Michelucei, Giovanni, b. Pistora iSy1. Serdied at the Accademua delle Belle Artiim Florence He was one of the architects of Santa Mant Novella Staton in Florence ity important building of Italian *Ranonalism. On the one hand way character- teed by its bold. moderut architectural lan  2G}. the mast  large-scale  guage. while on the other - due to it dignitied marble cladding - it relates to the local chosical tradition. In his later works M strongly eclectic experimentation ina quest for the plastic qualites of a sculpturally conceived architecture. The church of San) Giovanni  turned re  Michelucci. Church of San Cnovann Batista. near Florenee f1g60 34  Sole 1460 -T I a neo  Autostrada del (motorway) near Florene  Battista, on the  expressionnt (* Expressionism) collage. reveal-  inga harsh juxcaposition of material and forms Bors. Franco fed, Gievanent Miche Florence ty66, Clemente, Fo. and Log. |  rteci Gioranm Michelucct: I peusiero ¢ Copera, Bole ogna 1966; Naldi. Fabio, Giorann Michelet. Florence (y78.  Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig. > Aachen isan, d. Chicago ry6y. One of the tour most infuen- nal architects of the 2och century — the others being Frank Lloyd * Wright. *Le Corbusier. and Walter *Gropius M2 had na architecture, His iitiaden  formal taining in me building wand the superb crattsnianstup soich his architecture possesses in such a high degree  yifrom het  came nit NOT. a SLOTS and stone-carver. In Aachen. he learned to draws ava daigner for sauce decorinen. In yas he wentte Berl. where he worked brietly tora: architect whe specialized in wooden struc cares pprens Brune Paul leading furmiuiry destaier. he bas. ML qonted Peter * Behrens architect my *Gernnens The three vears that Mo spent with Behrens  fhe better to master this maternal. he  deed Jurmselt for co vears to  et the tinicg the prost prolztic  provided bis moye valtaba mummy. yg sense Behrens’ cares antapares thar or Mac. On the nthe disgener tor dhe Aligememe  ARG  sened not only the Suhdings of che German  ane hand  Elektron at-Gesells. hart Boiron  clesteten combine bute produces as wal  niterpated the ide,  er arebites borhis senerigen,  cherefore, he ww the airehie  fect esa conipechrmasy designer foe te poder 
Mies van der Rohe. Kroller House and gallery  erect Tye  industrial secrets. But Bebreny metory produce Hon represented one aypeet only of hay oeuvre: Heoako brought the *neo-clasacim of Karl Schinkel to his especially to his monumental commissions, although — Schinkelesque catomdly appears ia dhe severe masonry piers  tredrich architecture. and  neo-clasysienin c=  ind simphticd pediment. of same of Behrens”  factories ay well, Do create a modern architec-  ture with woneosclassical severity et means, purity. of form, perfection of proportions, elegance of detail and dignity ofexpression way  so the underlying objcetive of MAS career  Initially. he was mare overtly influenced by the neoschosical rather than by che idustrial ispeets of Behrens werk. in large part perhaps because he had served as the supervisor of) constructuien for ang of Behrens) monumental buildings. the German Parbasy m St Petern= burg  Bebrensin cyt. Mi designed several houses in a  Mow tylt 1a  Tonmrad Teasing neo-Schinkelesgue stvie akin to Behrens’ work, The most potuble superior to the 1  design of the group sand welistenn Of iy mentor: was a protected house wid gallery for Mine Helene Krollerstai 2  sion, M. went to TToloid  bor the Kroller commis There he came to know the work aod philosophy of Hendrik Petrus *Berlage, who 6a. the Dutch counter part to Behrens. Tt concerned with form. Dorlige derived his architectural philosophy froin the ryth-century morahitic theory of the  Helroas was prumurily  ALAC expression ot shich was Gothic Taken to- form. Berhige’s  Structure and materials. rather than classical 1 tnspsration,  gether, Behreny emphasis +  on revealed structure and material, and ther Joint desire for auew architecture were impor- tant mfuenees on M.'s development  Thy romantic neo-classicism continued up to. the end of World War I niodern architecture was abruptly launched ina Series of projects. from ryty to ry24. which They reflected the sense of liberation in. post-war  Now, his career in  were astonishingly varied and original  Berlin which suddenly felt che unpact of native *Eapressionism. of De *Stjl from Holland, of *Constructivisin and * Suprematism from Rus- Mia. Mo was active in chis torment. not only aya designer. but as a propagandist too. He was among the founders of the magazine G (for Gestaltung, creative torce) which was devoted to modem art. He joined the *November- gruppe; tounded in tyts. and named atter the month of the Republican Revolution, this organization, too, publicized the Modern Movement. Mies directed the architectural section from ig2t until igs. It was principally in the annual exbibigens of the Nov gruppe that his carly modern projects tirst appeared. .  In two skyscraper projects, the first (ry fy) of  mber-  crungular formy, the second (£420 1} of cary ed tree forms, M. sought to dramatize the refiec- tive qualities of glass in faceted shapes. In fet, the free-form curvature of the second of these skyscrapers was specifically determined by the shape which produced the greatest play of light over the buildmg. A project for a reintorced~ concrete office building (1g22) was even more prophetic, Cantilevered slabs closed by a para- pet permitted contmuous inset window bands with the lightest of metal mullons. Although not widely known ancl mach later, this project was among the first to feature ribbou windows.  
one of the standard motifs of modernit archi~ tecture. This stage in Mos development: is concluded by avo projects for houses. One. in 1923. for a brick country house, used De Stijl principles. Brick panels in slab, L and T shapes. infilled where necessary with Hoor-to-roof window panels, modulated a spatial continuity through their arrangement ma tense asym metrical equilibrium in space. For the first time an architecture, the wall be its placement and shape actually generated the plan. Although the design was schemane only. tc nevertheless represented ina pure form the first cruly architectural achievement employing De Stijl principles of composition, since carlier ventures had arbitrarily intermixed De Sajl with Cubist elements. The second project, for a concrete structure. Involved a spreading structure in a pinwheel composition around a multi-terraced site. Both the horizontality of the house and the determination of the irregular mass in accor- dance with the major elements of the plan ran  counter to the compact prisme pur enclosure of  space which dominated the *International Style at the time. In chis respeet. May concrete country house looked rather ahead to later developments of the International Style after 1430.  The latter half of the 1y20s saw a tew (very few) executed buildings in M.s modern style. Nouble among them were the Monument co Karl Licbknecht and Rosa Luxemburg in Bere Min (1926; later demolished by the Nazis). A textured brick wall. faceted with berizontal, box-like projecting and receding elements. it was among the few significant’: memorials erected in the 20th century. Two brick houses the Wolf House in Guben (1926) and the Hermann Lange House in Kreteld (1g28)  Mies van der Rohe. Reintorced-concrete otfice building (project, 1922)  Mies van der Rohe. Wolt House. Guben (1y20;  reveal how far Mo had come trom his pre-war neo-Schinkelism, and how much bis carly neo chasicism continued to imtlucnee his work Both poses a solidity and rootednes never assoclited with the International Styde. The Wolf House ts especially fine in the extension of the beautiful precision of the brick walls and in terracing Licbkuecht-Luxem burg  an abstract arrangement of brick reminiscent of dhe Monument.  His work at this time. however, is climaved by two inaer works. One, the Weilenhof- siedlung in Stuttgart (1927), was a large-scale outdoor exhibition of housing of \.rtows types with designs by most of the leading node European architects \ *Deutscher Werkbuad and directed by Mics, this outdoor exhibiuion contained various tem-=  Sponsored by the  porary structures and ne less than twenty-one permanent buildings, nurging trent oue-fhunils villas to Mos dora maung apartment structure  An even more impressivy work qualitatively, and indeed among the masterpieces of modern arebitecture. was ALO. German Poerdion ter the Internado Exbibitien in Barcehuacity2’ 9  Te contmued the Deo Sail experunent of Tis progect for county Howse of tag. buc with a  simplification oF gleaments and a breadgh of  treaunent tar surpassarg: che  comphc ations ot the eaher deaga, Over a portion af a ransed podium, Mo lightly supported a reinforced= concrete shaban chrome-plated steel columns of crossshaped section, He placed vertical sibs of travertine and panels of glass oF vanous Kins well under the spreading slab of the rect Partially cnclowng the rooted area. and partially Sliding toon uander WL these panels in che right  nvinmeoted) aangement loosely. but  angie 
trrmly. ordered the space while preserving its continua... Pwo pook completed the complex: the larger on the open terrace: the smaller at  right-angles to it ae the eppesite end of the  podium. Phe smaller one was enclosed ina senticcourt created by sliding the travertine paneh trom under the slib or the root. “The sculpture of a fentaile figure by Georg Kolbe placed im the water serves as a diserete focal pom within Uuy scrupulously chaste pavilion, atherv ne occupied only by some of M's turmeure. Ee owas in this pavihlon that he dis- played fis Famous ‘Barcelona Chair’. Among the classigs in modern turmetnre design, thiy was the culminating piece in a series of distinguished designs which he realized durmy the late ty2es Although the pas ilion received relatively Jirtlhe nouce durmg the summer of its existence, the published record of the modest structure has sive made at one ef the most intiuencial baddings of the 2oth contary  Immediately after the Barcelona Pavihon. M. designed the mosc important house of his Furopean career. the | conerete-surtaced Hugendhat Howse at  Heyer Built  Brno, Crechoslovakia on a gentle slope. the house presented acloscd Onesstores Erant ta the street. wath two storeys co the rear, Uhe conus space of the ower being Hoor wath its chrome- plated coluinns and frevsscurding panels fone at  Macaussar  rretdnent or the Barcelons Pasihon  semen ot ebony? recalled the Here an even nicher display of M.'s furniture completed airelesatice, every detalof which down tothe  CUrLUD tracks) was custom-designed  Mies van der Rohe. [1 bryates  sondlnit Hotee. Brae  The Tugendhat House was M.'s last impor- tant executed building in Europe. Among the projects of the early and mid-1930s. the designs for bouses within walled courts are the most interesting. Although the surrounding brick walls occasionally opened on to a distant view. for the most part these houses were wholly bounded by their rectangular frame, while in  one mstance terraced houses of various sizes. separated by walls, were enclosed ma single rectilinear overall form. Inside the enclosure there was the usual Miesian spatial continuity, interrupted here and there by carefully placed glass walls and solid panels.  On Gropius’s recommendation, M. suc- ceeded Hannes *Meyer as Director of the *Baubaus in 1y30. By ty32. however. pressure from extreme nght-wing factions caused hin to move the school from Desau to Berlin, where it had a bricf and tenuous existence asa private institute until the Nazis forced its closure in 1933. The hostile political environ ment made it increasingly mipassible to work in Germany and. in the summer of 1937. whea  Just past fifty. Mo cmiyrated to the *USA; there.  in tyg4. he became an American citizen  In toa he had been invited to teach at the (then the Armour Insatute) in Chicago. His first major Amenean commision, a campus plan and buildings for IPL Crom tygo}. immediately established the central theme of his American  fino Institute of “Technology  work: the exposed metal frame as ic reticulated ueutial rectangulu volumes. He viewed the deared site. which consisted of a number of city  Mies van der Rohe, Manerats and Metals Building. IED. Chicage ttyg2t  
Mies van der Rohe. Farnsworth Louse, Fos River. IL (1946-0)  blocks on Chivago’s South Side, as an idealized space, much like the podium of the Barcelona Pavilion, On this he arranged rectangular and slab-shaped blocks in accord with a modular grid for the entire project, such that semi-courts and corridors of space were created in a manner analogous to (but mare formal than) his use of slabs in the conditioning of interior space trom the Barcelona Pavilion onward.  The revealed metal frame in his American buildings jy rarely the structure itself, since fire regulanions demand that most steel must be covered. Hence the visible ‘structure’ is more often symbolic of che reality beneath, much as pilasters symbolized columns in Renaissance buildings - except that M.’s pseudo-structure more convincingly resembles and more inti- mately relates to the real thing within. From the standard alphabet of the steelmaker’s catalogue he welded mouldings as the metallurgical equivalent of the carved mouldings of the past The careful proportioning of Ins frame, the graduation of components from heavy to light,  the fi cleganee or fis profiling and the subtleticy of transimons where corners occu ar  one material butts anocher: this intensity of effort and artyery expended on the miage of the structure bas been unescelled wad all bur un- matched by his numerous tollowers  kven as the first buildings were gomg up on the I) canrpus, ML builta das and meta house for Dr Rdith barnsworth in box River, Imo (yg sol. Three floating slabs and behind a feor and roof slabs from the ground on metal I-beam) supports The welding of the supports to die sides of the Mabs. as though magnensm kept the trante  a terrace slab, are ali litted  intact. enhances the floaty quality of the spreading slabs. Smaller slabs. aho seemingly Hoated, serve wy stars. from the grond to the terrace and front the termive te the entrance poreh of the rectanyular glass-box living area. It isso apparently simple that the subtleties of this extraordinarily elegant frame are readily nussed on castial uiypeetony ay ate the subtleties of composition in which the evident asemmiciry countered by hidden svimmetrics  The basic seherne of the Farnsworth Tose, the open pavihon, was ued by M, on several 
Mies van der Rohe. Crown Hall, HT. Chicage:  lyss ¢  vccastons, axa Crown Hall for the School of  Areincecture and Design ar HT rrgs2-07 Again apparendy doating stars lead co the Aoatng terrace. and tore stairs rise to the flooreslib. which i raised a few fect abowe the ground much asic had been an the Farnowarth House. Despite appearanves. however. the Crown Hall door-slab as convengonally supported fram the basement beneath. Whereas the Farnsword Iv open beneath its foor-  House way comple: sl  Ayam the openness of this space ms enfunced by  ab. the basement af Crown Fall as glazed  the suspended nature of the owe slabs hanging or abutting erather than resting: on cheir sup- ports, Insoraras Mo was concerned with space at allin his Ameriean work, ittended tuwards the centralized box of Crown Hall and noc towards the further desclopment of the subtly modu-  Mies van der Rohe. Cansention Hail, Chicuge Upon bras  bu  wag  Lited spaces of his European work after the Barcelona Pavilion Enlarged again, the pavthon became the  con the Chicago Jake-trone siys3t. The rootislab was  design for a Convention Hall proje  intended to be a three-dimensional structure af) titerwoven trusses built an a cubie module ot goin go ttein cach direction, Mies mtended day heroic structural slab co span tiy-som e730 Toor reughly two city blocks 0 ay co provide a colum-tree interior space fora capas- ity audience of sc.oo0. Diagonal bracing os- cended from che outside edges of che three- dimensional ceiling ruses makes a two-dimen- Monal crus or the exterior wall, This bracing would bring the entre structure down on law remtoreed-concrete columns spaced 36-60 1 120 1h aparc  The culmimanon of the series of pavilion Buildings was the new National Gallery im West  Berhn ytyo2 Si M. drew ona doagn for rhe  admiinistragen buslding for the Bacardr rin int Santiago de Cuba. in which an inimense cor tered ceiling is supported on cight cruciform. 
Mies van der Rohe. New National Gallery, West Berlin (ig6z. s}  section supports, recessed far trom the corners. A deeply recessed glass wall encloses an exhibi- tion space subdivided only by several stage-like movable walls, Services and further exhibition space are housed in the pedestal storey. in front of which a sculpture court is arranged.  As the basic pavilion could be multiplied into aoseries of buildings, so could the skeletal skyscraper. M.'s ewo classic skyscrapers, Lake Shore Prive Aparunents (igso-t) and the Seagramt Building in New York (1ysq 8: with Philip Johnson), are ina sense o> building creating different experiences, much as the Greek Temple of Poseidon at Pagstam and the Parthenon in Athens are at onee the same building and different buildings. Relative to one another, the Pacstum-like severity of the Lake Shore Drive contrasts with the Parthenare refmmement of the Seagram Buildme. In the Lake Shore Drive Aparoments. vertical blocks are sct at right-angles to one another across a  actly the same  narrow interval of space, The complex possesses neither a crue ‘front’ nor a true “back”: the narrow side of ong block iy seen ayainss the broad side of the other ina constandy changing relationship, The Eeheam projections from the walls appear to close over the windows seen obliguely and open over those seen head-on: while moving so as to open those which closed we automatically close chose which were open. The Seagram Building, on the other hand, reconciles the Lake Shore paradox of static  elements in perpetual disequilionum. Phe bronze brilding rises Tike a dense. dark elit behind the absolute void of urs entrance placa Vhe axis of the pla: grandeur of the entrance with ity nwo-storey  tculminates in the formal  stilts cach backed by the pylons of the clevator shaft. Whereas, m the window-grid of the Lake Shore Drive Apartments. horizontals con=  York iste Pliliy Jobson. tas g 84 
suntly challenge the verticals, this tension is reconciled in the Scazram Building by the clear afirmation of verticality. The perpetual tension of the Hirst is reduced to a reconciliation of opposites, As M. extracted architecture from the brick or he [-beanr considered as ultimate ‘things in themselves’. so he developed cle- mental building types to serve different pur- poses. His approach way narrow, but this very narrowness permitted hy passionate integrity ind purifying artistry to come to focus. In his greatest. works, the concept of ‘less is more™ contains the paradoxical fulfilment of an ideal WH ~ Johnson, Philip, Mies var der Rohe, New York 1947 (2nd ed. 1ys3): Hilberseimer, L., Mies van der Rohe, Chicago tos6: Blake, Pete Mies var der Rohe. Architecture and Structure, New York (960; Drexler, Arthur, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, New York 1960; Blaser, Werner, Mies van der Rohe. Die Kunst der Struktur, Zurich and Stuttgart 1963; Glaeser, Ludwig, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe. Drawings fromthe Collection of the Musetun of Modern Art (exhibition cata lugue), New York 1968; Ludwig Mies van der Rohe (exhibition catalogue), Berlin 1y6 Spever, James. and Koeper, Frederick, Mies van der Rohe (exhibition catalogue), Chicago 1968: Glaeser, L., Ludwig Mies van der Rohe. Furniture and Furniture Drawings... Museum of Modern adn, New York (exhibidon catalogue), 1977.  Mills, Edward David. b. rg Studied at Polytechnic School of Architecture, London, In Private practice since 1937: churches, schools, industrial buildings, research centres, Hats and houses. Designed the British Industries Pavilion and the Britannia Inn ac the Brussels Inter- national Exposition, 1ys8  Modernisme arose in Catalonia and extended over a period of some forty years, from the celectic revivals of the 1880s to the advent of ‘Noucentisme’, the cultural revival of Mediter- ranean classicism, just before World War 1. te was composed of two distinct: phenomena: National Romanticism and Progressivism. The former, known as “La Kenaixenga’, coincided with the recovery of the Catalan language atter acentury of repression. The literary and philo- sophical flourishing way . revival of popular rather than academic tracigons, but in its nostalgic backwards glance “La Renaixenga™ was am essentially conservative movement.  x  Progressivism, which provided a balance to this conservatism, was largely the work of a small radical, non-conformist cultural group whe cried to grapple with the realities and conflicts of the Industrial Revolution in *Spain. It assinti- lated many European progressive currents, including Naturalism with its extension into the *Arts and Crafts movement and *Art Nou- veau, as well as the belicf that progress would result from science and technology. Fervent rationalists, the Progressivists sought to politi-~ cize their ambitions for anew society and were subsequently joined by the bourgeoisie who saw economic advantages in a liberal society better adjusted ta modem social conditions and production, ay opposed to the archaic establish- mene which prevailed in Madrid. Thus, unlike either Art Nouvean or the Arty and Crafts movement in England, ‘Modernisme’ lost its élite pedestal and became the instrtument of one of the rare Bourwhings of popular cultural identity, albeit boundaries of the Catalan language.  The essential characteristics of Modernisme’, of which over i000 examples still survive in Catalonia, (1) the persistence of eclectic elements derived trom.  confined to the linguistic  may be summarized as:  the historical styles of the rgth century; (2) an enormous respect. for materials, especially brick, and the exploitation of their constructive qualities as decorative elements; (3) the desire to design everything, from tile patterns and door knobs to lifts and furniture: (4) the use of double (s) the use of applicd decoration either independently of the architecture or as an integral part of it. intended to emphasize either the method of construction or the conceptual design. DM C Bohigas, Oriol, Reseia y cataléigo de ta arquitectura — modvrnista, 1973; Marfany, Joan Lluis, Aspectes del Modernisme, Barcelona 1975  ct as a micro-climatic filter:  fagades to  Barcelona  Modulor. A proportional system relying on the golden section or the Fibonacci series, as the case may be, with the human body as its basis and intended to be used in calculating the proportions of building units. [Cc was developed by *Le Corbusier and his collaborators in 1942- 8. The ideal body height is taken as 183 cm (6 ft), from which the initial dimensions of 226 em (7 ftsin.),i.c. the height ofa man standing upright with his hand raised, and 113 cm (3 ft 83 in.), the distance from the ground to the solar plexus, are  
Le  Modulor. Second version, based on a body height of 183 cm (6 ft)  derived. The measure of 113 cm yields a ‘red  series’ (06 —O-Y — US —2-4- 3-0 - 63 10-2  16°§ 26-7 43:2-G6y8-113-0- 182-9, ete.) and the 226m a ‘blue series’ (1-1 1-8 3-0 - 4-8 — FR - 126 — 10-4 — 33-0 — $34 — 86-3 139-7 -  226-0, etc.). In a first version of the Modulor a body height of 175 cm had been used, but this could not, in contrast to the later version, be converted to a convenient equivalent in the British system using feet and inches. AM O Le Corbusier, Le Moduler, Paris 1o4s (English translation: The Maedulor, London 1984); ——, Moduler 2, Paris 1955 (English translation: Meduler 2, 19 ., London 1958).  Moneo, José Rafael, b. Tudela, Navarra 137. After studies at the Escuela de Arquitectura in Madrid, he entered the office of Jorn *Utzon in Hellebaek, Denmark. Later he spent two years atthe Academia de Espafia in Rome. In 1y65 he established his own practice in Madrid. Since 1971 he has been a professor at the Escuela de Arquiteccura in Barcelona. This combination of. teaching and design Iends a decidedly intellec- tual cast to his architecture. He is also one of the most active and highly regarded architectural critics in Spain. M. believes architecture to be an autonomous discipline sccking to find its legitimization in the classical tradition of pro- portion and composition. In design he com-  bines this formal sense with an aluose puritanical simplicity in the handling of materi- als. Fis preferred material, brick. ts consciously  used to humanize’ his architecture and to sotten  the intellectualized abstraction of the design,  lesson perhaps derived from his Scandinavian experience, although certainly a) well-cstab- fished tradition in Madrid. Fis most notable buildings are: the Diestre factory im Saragossa (1463-7). where the refined profiles of the roof, bays are etched into the brick skin: the Bankinter Building in Madrid (1y7s}. a subtle extension to a small r&th-century palace: and the Town Hall in Logrofie (1978), where his architecture plays an active role in preserving the vitality of the city. DM Ratiel Moneo") Nueva Fonna (Madrid), January 1y75.  FF Jose  Moore, Charles Willard). b. Benton Harbor, Mich. ty25, Studied at the University of Michigan and at Princeton University. In 1962 he formed an association in Berkeley, Cal. with Donlyn Lyndon, William = Turmbull and Richard Whitaker (MLTW), and continued this office, 1965-70, with William Tumbull in New Haven and San Francisco under the nume MLTW /Moore-Turnbull. In 1970 he founded Charles W. Moore Associates in Essex, Conn., which was complemented in 1975 by a parallel working co-operative with Wilham Grover and Robert Harper (Moore Grover Harper) in Essex, as well as a similar arrangement with John Ruble and Robert Yudell in Los Angeles, subsequently enlarged by the addition of the Urban Innovations Group of Los Angeles. He was a professor at the University of California at Berkeley. 1962-5, and at Yale Universiry, 1965-76; since 197s he has caught ac the University of California in Los Angeles. ‘Together with his various partiers, M. has created an extraordinarily diverse and ty pologi- cally complex oeuvre. Among his most impor- tant early buildings are: his own house in Orinda, Cal. (1962), where he demonstrated tor the first time the delimitation of the living zones by acdicule-like baldacchinos of wood: Condo- minium Tac Sea Ranch. Sonoma County. Cal. (1964-5). where this theme was further devel- oped in other forms, and the Athletic Club Tat Sea Ranch (5966), which is presented in essence asa wind-screen that can be traversed. In 1906.8 he realized the Faculty Club of the University of California in Santa Barbara, since much altered,  
whose diderentiited spaces provided the first evidence of theatreal eftcets in his work. In addigon too hirge number of evpologically noteworthy siagke-figaily houses, such as the Klotz House nt Westerly, RAL frg67 70), M.  was tse able guite carly en to build several  house estates which contradicted, in an  abnost paradiganatic way. the thesis that eco- nomneal mass housing nase of necessity be formless and unitorm (Church Street South Moderate Income Housing in New Haven, Conn. 1060 ys Maplewood Purrace Low In- come Housmyg in Middletown. Conn... 1970-1 Whitman Villiage Housing. ins Fluntingron, NY. uth sh In gga g be built Kresge College orthe Gniversity of Cabtormit at Santa Crav. which cited elements of the fora of aneiquiry to create a rural.tcropolis’ (Meare) in its forest setting,  Among the most important works of recent vears are: Se Joseph's Fountain in the Piazza dftalia in New Orleans (1g7s -8). a stage-lik collage of antique set pieces with a strong folklorisue character: and the competition en- uy tor areereition and residential complex ou the shore of Lake Tegel in Berlin (tg8o), in which the spectacularly used steamboat motif ts accompanied by various quotations from Prus- Sian classicisin, glass-and-iron architecture and regional construction.  Ms most important contribunon to con temporary architecture, one which has fallen on  Tyth-century  Moore. Condominium i. Sea Ranch, Cal. (Moore Grover Harper, 1964-5)  230  Moore. Kresge College, Univeraty of California,  Santa Cruz (173 4)  fertile ground m Europe, is his commitment co the adaptation of regiona list traits and the use of) a language of signs that evoke ‘memary”. It is fair to say that in the process bis work is not  endirely tree of eclectic and mannerist elements. His theoretical approach co building for the ‘impressive locality’ touches not only the advo- cates of a regionally determined architecture. but also the current thinking within the school of *Rational architecture. FW Lo Moore, Charles, Allen. Gerald, and Lyndon, Donlyn, The Place of Houses, New York 1974; Futagawa, Yukio (cd.), Houses by MLYTU. Vol. One, 1989-1975, Tokyo 1975: Moore, Charles, and Bloomer, K. C.. Body, Memory and Architecture, New Haven, Conn. 1977; “The Work of Charles W. Moore’, Architecture and Urbanism (Tokyo), special num- ber, May 1978; Allen, Gerald, Charles Moore, New York and London 1g8o.  Morandi, Riccardo, b. Rome lgo2. Pier Luigi *Nervi apart, M. is the most interesting Italian exponent of reinforced-conerete structures. His international reputation is founded especially on: the bridge over the Maracaibo Lagoon in Venezuala (1957); the subterranean automobile showroom in Turin (1959); and the extraordi- nary viaduct at Poleevera, near Genoa (1965).  
Morandi. Subterranean automobile showroom, Turin (1959)  His numerous later works include the terminal buildings at Rome’s Fiumicino Airport (1970) and the bridge at Barranquilla, Colombia (1972). VG 0 Boaga. Giorgio, and Boni, Benito, Riccardo  Morandi, Milan 1962; Masini, Lara Vinca. Riccardo Morandi, Rome 1974. Morris, William, b. Walthamstow. Essex  1834, d. Kelmscott, Oxon. 1896. Studied the- ology; architectural training under the Gothic Revivalist G. E, Street (where he met *Shaw and *Webb). Active as a painter in the Pre- Raphaelite circle around the brothers PD. G. and Michael Rossetti, M. was greatly influenced by the architect A. W. N. Pugin and also by the critic and theorist John Ruskin in his passionate, romantically inspired quest to revive the spiri- tual and aesthetic principles of the Middle Ages. which he developed in opposition to the *eclec~ ticism of his time and which he saw as intima- tely linked with progressive social ideals. For him, socialism was a conscious return to a life- style in which workmen took pleasure in their craft. In formal terms he stressed a need for ‘honesty’, sincerity and quality of craftsman- ship. Although he was not himself responsible  for any buildings, the Red House at Bexley Heath, Kent, which he commissioned from Webb in 1859. was a milestone in the English Domestic Revival. In 1861 M. founded the tirm Morris, Marshall. Faulkner & Company. a production workshop for handicrafts, which was to be a nodal point of the reforming *Arts and Crafts movement. VMI C Morris, May (ed.). The Collected [orks of William Morris (24 vols.), London igto 1s Henderson, Philip, Willian Morris, His Life, Work and Friends, London ty67, Thompson. Paul, The Works of William Morris, London (977.  Moser, Karl, b, Baden, Switzerland 1860, d Zurich 1936. Studied at the Eidgendssiche Technische Hochschule in Zurich and then at the *Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris. He was active as an architect in Karlsruhe, 1887 19 and was a professor at the Eidegenissische Techniche Hochschule in) Zurich, during which time his pupils included many noted Swiss architects of later years. In 1928 he was clected the firse President of *CIAM. Although his work was grounded in a re- strained, classically *historicism (Badischer Railway Station, Basle, rg12 13), M. ercated a pioneering work of modernism in *Switzerlind with bis reinforced-concrete St  ToLs 28,  oriented 
lo26 tT) a refined Notre Dame, Le  Antonius Church in Basle vounteTpart te *Perren’s Ramey. in Prance styce 3 Ricazle. Hertaane, Rorl Moser  Zerh ta3e  1860 1930,  Murphy/Jahn. Architectural practice which Known under  has heen various names in its  neark mfty-seat listers and coday has a total iro individuals; it is ong of the  foading arebates tural firms of Chicago. and has  srt of some  piused. tlirge role m forming the appearance of thaccits ay we Know it today  The only surviving meniber of the office's original founders, C.F. Murphy. began his oan tg architect 1. HL. Burnham. who, along with John W. Root was one of the principal protagonists of the *Chica-  eure under the  eo School and had prepared in ryog a much- acclaimed development plin for Chicago. After Burnbarn’s death ta tgia. Murphy became a perter in the office founded by Burnham's former partner Frese KR. Graham: Graham. Anderson. Probst and White. In ry37 Murphy and wwo other carler partners of this firm, Alfred Shaw office of Shaw, Naess & Murphy, and finally in 198g the office of C.F. Murphy Associates. Helmut Jahn th. Zmdorf, near Nuremberg 1940) entered the oifice im 1967, having studied at the Technische Hochschule in Munich and Rohe at the MMlinois Institute oF Technology. In ty73 be became  and: Sigurd Naess, opened the  under *Miey van der  partner, Vice-President and Director of the Design section: the renaming of the office as Murphy Jahn followed in tg8i  In the 1960. under Jacques Brownson and Gene Summers (who had both studied ac IT), the office created some of the best work in Chicago in the image of the post-war Miesian idiom (Continental Insurance Building, 1y62; O'Hare Internanonal Airport. 1963; Chicago Civic Center. 1968: extension to the First National Bank of Chicago, 1971: exhibition building, McCormick Place 1971).  With Jahn in charge of design, there was an increasing relaxanon ofthe link to the model of Mies van der Rohe (Kemper Arena, Kansas City. 1974; sports hall of St Mary’s Colle Notre Dame, Ind. tg77, Rust-Oleum com- pany headquarters, Vernon Hills, WL, 1978; Xerox Center, Chicago. tyso. State of Ilinois Center, Chicago, under construction): this trend has culminated in a redsscovery of *Art  PL Ls  ve  : _ i -  CaL=.1 as  Murphy. Chicago Civie Center (C Asseciates: 1y6s)  H. Murphy  Deco (extension to the Chicago Board of Trade Building, and One South Wacker Building, Chicago, both under construction). POWs  i Architecture and) Urbanism (Tokyo), July 1y78, “New directions and new designs at C. F. Murphy Associates’, Architectural Record (New York), July 1y79, pp. 98-109; Architecture and Urbarism (Vokyo), April i981. pp. 9-36; Murphyjfain (private publication), Chicago nd  Muthesius, Hermann, b. Grob-Neuhausen p861, d. Berlin 1927. Studied at the Technische Hochschule in Berlin-Charlottenburg: worked in Wallot’s office. Period in Japan in the Tokyo office of Ende & Béckmann: attaché ac the German Embassy in London, 1896-1903, with a brief to study English architecture and design. Founder-member of the *Deutscher Werk- bund in 1y07. His 3-velume study Das englische Haus (Berlin 1y0g-s), by spreading a knowl edge of the works of *Voysey and his contem- poraries, stimulated a renaissance in domestic architecture on the Continent. The Cramer House in Berlin (1911-12) is an independent  
essay. based on impressions of England, in its refined play with symmetry and asymmetry and carefully determined proportions.  CO) Hermann Muthesins, 1861-1927 (exbibition catalogue), Berlin 197  neo-classicism,. Although the word has been used to describe any number of departures in music (Les Six, [gor Stravinsky's compositions of the late ry20s and 1430s), in painting (Pablo Picasso, Giorgio de Chirico in the late 19205, the Novecento movement in Italy). in literature (it has been applied to Paul Valery, T. S. Eliot and Louis Aragon, as well as Jean Cocteau who actually called himself neo-classic). and even in physics (a return to certain forms of Newtonian description), it does not desertbe any clearly defined architectural phenomenon.  The termi ‘classicism’ is taken by art historians to describe the movement towards greater restraint in the arts in the second halfofthe 18th century which was coupled with « renewed interest in antiquity, particularly Greek art. It originated in France and Italy, but soon ex- tended to Britain, Germany and beyond. The unity and coherence of this movement was first challenged by Sigfried Giedion in Spdtharecker und remantischer Klassizismus (1y22), which led to the adoption of the apparently contradictory term ‘romantic classicism’. His analysis, though not timely, was necessary, since a return to a form of classicism characterized the first y the 20th century.  To some extent this neo-classicism  arsof  Tep- resented 2 reaction against a powerful attempt to create for the 20th century an “unhistorical’ style which marked some of the best work done in che lase decade of the 19th, particularly that which goes under the name *Art Nouveau. in fact, he designers who led the reaction, Joseph Maria *Olbrich and Peter * Behrens, had been carly Art Nouveau practitioners. Both of them adopted an increasingly severe style and within two or three years had transformed the flo- reacted and curvilinear manner into a formal and geometrical one. This change happened so tapidly (between 1900 and 1904) that the new manner could only be developed by appeal to historical precedent. Both designers appealed to  neo-classicism. Fxhibition pavihon of the Delmenborster Linoleum Factory. Dresden (106). by Peter Behrens  the German architecture of Napoleonic times This appeal recalled the greatness of the rising Prussian state and its nationalist: reforming Behrens ethas its most effective embodiment in his work for the Allgemeine Elektrivitits-Gesellschatt, (AEG), which included anew type for their public- ity, the design of the manutactured objects, different clectrical appliances and machinery and factory buildings. In this and in other work  energies, gave this  done at this ume, Behrens insistently used deliberate references to classical architecture, as well as a dght proportional system  In Britain motivation was less direct. The rafts freedom and whimsy took the torn: of a ‘vernacular’, which was identitied with 18th- century domestic building. At the same time, public building returned consciously to a re- working of 1&ch-cencary though on a much larger scale, and often with  reaction against *Arts and  return to the  certain themes, large areas of unarticnlated windaw-wall be- tween the base and the crowning Classical top dressing.  This use of textbook classical detail was much influenced by American example. Atter the tceago World's Columbian Exposition of 18g3 (called the "White City’ because of the ame the  mass of classical stucco buildings). it be dominant mode of oficial and prestige building in the United States. The great man of Chicago atthe time was Daniel Burnbam, whose replan-  hing of Washington and megalomaniae layout for Chicago became models of urban plannin Che firm of MeKim, Mead &  fora generation 
neo-classicism. Patt uf the vte of the World's Columbian Expostion, Chicago igeneral plan by DH. Burnham: 1su3  neo-classicism, Penmsvlvama Station, New York figot ic; demolished: by McKim. Mead & White  White, whose production included Boston Public Library (1888—y2}, the Pierpont Morgan Library im New York (1903) and Permsylvania Station in New York (1906-10). provided the main monuments of che new U.S. opulent classicism: which is very different from what goes under the name neo-classic in Europe. Both were. however, dominated by the *Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris, whose leading teacher of theory, Julicn Guadet, published a highly influential manual on architectonic composition m 18y6. He taught a whole gen- eration who passed through the Ecole a doctrine which, he told them. was immemorial and which had been wught with very Let change since it was devised at che Ecole Polytechnique by J. N. L. Durand 4 century earlier. This generation included Auguste *Perret and Tony *Gamnier, In spite of his personal friendship with Guadet. Perret renewed any adherence to the Ecole system. The reply to critics who noted similarities between Perret’s work and French ‘classical’ architecture was that Perret had ‘re- invented’ the classical trabeased system in con- crete using wood prototypes. much as the Greeks had imitated wooden construction in  344  their use of stone. Garnier’s obsession with anuquity concentrated on the unitary order of. the city, which he translated into his highly articulated vision ofa Cité Industriélle, while its basic unit, the house, was consciously modelled on an antique prototype. As in Germany, the movement had begun with the turn of the century, though it became official when Perret wrested the commission for the Théatre des Champs-Elysées from Henry *van de Velde c. 
neo-classicism, Chicas Tribune competition entry (1922) by Adolf Loos  igit, while Garnier began the Abattoirs de la Mouche in Lyons in 1909 -- his first official job. Their new ‘purged’ and ‘modern’ classicism was quite different, sober and rational. as against the inflated academic style which also claimed ‘classical’ (mostly 17th- and :8th- century) precedent.  In Vienna, Josef * Hoffmann and a number of the pupils of Otto *Wagner (notably Josef Pleénik) employed simple. classical sobriety. Adolf *Loos used the classical orders as quota- tons and as a ‘recall to order’ rather than as optional ornamental features. He used marble Tuscan columns on the Goldman & Salatsch store on the Michaelerplatz in Vienna (1y10) and one huge Doric column for the main office building in his design for the Chicago Tribune competition scheme (1922). He was explicitly opposed to the use of ornament and saw the orders as a defence against the ‘ornamentalists’  neo-classicism, Musce des Travaux Publies. Paris 11937). by Auguste Perret  (who for him were Hofmann and van de Velde). Karl Friedrich Schinkel. whom Loos quotes as the last of those wha holkf up the example of antiquity againse the vagaries of  ay an exemplar not only for  Cornamentalists”, w 3 the German-speaking Jands. but for all northern Europe. Hack Kampmann and Carl Petersen in *Denmark, Gunnar *Asplund. Ivar Tengbom and Sigurd *Lewerentz in Sweden, even the early work of Erik *Brygguian aud Alvar * Aalto were all marked by the teaching that went back to the tradition of Schinkel, which had been reoted in Finkind by Carl Ludwig Engel  *Le Corbusier fad spent a short period in Behrens’s office. but ae the crucial time when Behrens way moving towards a strict design method, and had subsequently devised his regulating lines for arriving ata proportional scheme for every project. *Gropins, who re= 
mained longer with Bebrens, and * Mies van der Rohe. who submitted to the same discipline, were individually: infenced by their time in Behrens’s office discipline was coupled with a personal devotion to Schinkel. whose Neue Wache in Berlin he transfornicd intoa World Wart memorial; but also with an almost Ruskinian devotion to the cratts. His pupil Albert *Speer adopted not only Tessenow's lessons. but the rather more osé nodes ef Paul Schultze-Naumburg about the nature of a Teutonic architecture. However. his ow works hardly rate the description ‘neo- classical’ in the sense in which it applies ta Asplund or Loos. Nor does the term really apply to the work of the major inter-war Italian oficial architect. Marcello *Piacentini, whose rather heavy, pscude-antique *eclecticism owes nothing to the shade of Schinkel or of his Italian contemporaries like Giuseppe Valadier or An- tomo Selva Viemese example of Wagner and Hoffmann and even of Loos which worked more strongly onthe most active architects ofnorth Italy in the ty20s and ry3zos. Gio *Pont, Giuseppe De Finettr and Giovanni Muzio are more fitting representatives tendency. Muzio particularly, because of his association with the is most closely related through the periodical Ualori Plastici with de Chirico and some of the Parisian developments of the 1y20s. But the Italian distinction, as between the anti-Fascist De Finetti and the committed Fascist Piacentini may serve as a against any le identification of authoritarianism with classicism; around 1y30, such an identification was all too easy. In 1927. the competition fer the League of Nations Building in Geneva brought the disqualitica- tion of Le Corbusier's (arguably neo-classical) scheme in favour of a fivesome of much more  Hemrich * bessenow’s formal  In face it was the lessons and the  of such a  painter Mario Sironi,  cauuion  neo-classicism. Publi Library, Stockholm (preliminary drawing. 121  ), by Gunnar Asplund  as FV72 om  neo-classicism. Casa della Meridiana, Milan (ty24 9). by Giuseppe de Finetti  explicitly ‘classical’ or ‘academic’ projects which were conflated into a single executed one.  In *Russia, the experimental phase of Soviet construction was terminated by the victory of the vorka group at the June 1931 Communist Party congress when the new tdeological stance of the party on ‘proletarian classicism’ was taken. Its first direct result was the winning of the competition for the new Palace of the Soviets in Moscow by the group led by Boris M. Jofan. This policy led to the employment of Ivan V. Zholtovsky and Ivan A. Fomin on many state projects, particularly the Moscow Metropolitan which became a show- piece of the new style. though its deliberate coarseness hardly puts it in the same class as the more refined neo-classicism of northern Europe.  Throughout the ty30s and tygos (and even the 1rysos and 1960s) the terms ‘academic’ and ‘classical’ were considered virtually synony- mous and tarred with the mark of ‘rhetoric’ which somehow implied a concentration on the frivolous, the inessential, an avoidance of neces  meanwhile,  
sary tasks; in the latter part of the period, this necessity meant post-war reconstruction, and the requirements of mass production. Although several attempts to reconsider the problem of, ornament were made in this context (particu- lanly in the USA), it was taken for granted that any new ornament would be a-historical. How- ever, the more Unportant recall to order was rooted in a new *historicism.  Already in the Igsos, the work of certain historians concerned with primitive architec- ture (notably Sigtried Giedion) led to a rethink- ing of the basis of modernism. Other historians. such as Rudolf Wittkower and his pupil. Colin Rowe, pointed out, first in Britain, chen in the USA, the historical roots of certain ‘modern” manipulations. The value of type and norm was  asserted against those of originality and the total rethinking of every programme which was currentin the Modern Movement. This led tirst toa conflation of Miesiap structural procedures with the atrophied remnants of Beaux-Arts axial planning, as in the work of Edward Durell Stone, Philip *Johnson, and even towards the end, of Mies van der Rohe himself. But this was not differentiated from the old modernity; a more thoroughgoing and consistent reaction is noticeable in the work of Louis *Kahn. repeatable unit is often identified as a type formed so as to carry the maximum of historical reference.  By contrast, a later school of rationalist designers appeared in Italy in the 1y70s (#Ra- tional architecture). Grouped around Aldo *Rossi, it takes che opposite view: types are used Q@whatever their historical reference) because architecture has no relation whatever to ideo- logy, and therefore the type. and in fact the building in which it appears, has no reference outside itself. This tendency was given its canonic showing at the XVth Milan Triennale in 1973. Since chen there have been two notable departures trom the canon, Michael *Graves, an exhibitor at that Triennale, has attempted a fusion of *Art Deco with a kind of neo- primitivise classicism, while Leon *Krier and Maurice Culot have developed a neo-Tesse- nowian appeal to the restoration of the building crafts and the permanence of the historically validated ‘classical’ type. JR 0 Larsson, Lars Olof, ‘Klassizismus in der Architektur des 20. Jahrhunderts’, in: Albert Speer. Architektur. Arbeiten 1933-1942, Frankfurt am Main, Berlin and Vicnna, 1978, pp. 1$1 75.  Kahn's  Neo-plasticism, Movement in) European painting developed above all by Piet Mondriay after torg, When he returned to Holand trom Paris, having been active dhere in the circles of the Cubist painters (*Cubism). Mondrian adopted the name from the philosopher and mathematician M. H. J. Schocnimackers: it refers to his central intention to reduce three- dimensional volumes to plans, which he consid- ered the prumary clements of plastic form. The basic theory of Neo-plasticism was set out in Mondrian’s “De Nicuwe Beelding ur de Schil- derkunst’, published in Iy17 in the first issue of De Saji the group De *Stiyl adapted Mondnian’s aesthetic to architecture. VMI  Nervi, Pier Luigi, b. Sondrio, Lombardy 18yt. id Rome iy7y. Graduated in engineering at Bologna University in 1913. From 1946 te 1y6t he way professor of structural engineering in the Facey of Architecture at Rome Cuiversicy.  This great builder ranked with *Freysinet and *Maillart in his prodigious ability to derive beauty froin the results of precise calculations, and form from the nature of his materiats and techniques, which he made the instruments of his vision, He himself hadi many times postu- lated in his writings the principle that the process of creating forme is identical, whether it is the work of technicians er of artists: the principle, that. whereby the beauty of a structure. tor example. is noc just the outcome of calculations, but of an intuition as to what calculations to use. or with which it is to be identified  The material that N. adopted was reinforced- concrete. His first structures (for a cinema in Naples) date trom sg27. The idea way gaining ground (the source of much subsequent misun- derstanding) that form must follow function, and it was this idea thacbroughe N. dhe engineer into architecture forchwith, His first important work, the Communal Stadium at Florence (1930 2). consisting of nothing bue exposed structural clements, was published straightaway in the most controversial journals as an example of modern architecture. which could be com- pared. ints dramatic exploitation of structure. with certain designs of *Le Corbusier. and which strikingly highlighted the expressive possibilities OF the raw material, conerete  With his designs for an aeroplane hangar at Orvieto (1g38 8) and those at Orbetcllo and Torre del Lage yiago-3}) N. concentrated his 
attentiad cata study ef root built up fram a network of lonieboarmg ronts. These were to prove the abject of constant and ever deeper recarch on his part. i an infinite. varieey prompted by fis taste for creator and experi+ ment Wath the construction of these hangars  now dhetrosed No ehneved a greac seep  forwardam dig proces of lighteming his surue=  ter aesthete as tor technical  rues is te  yeasts About tage he  conduaton He studies sand espermmenes he had  brought ta a successful  boon Garing out te obtum Strength through  tori in burldiags. ie. strength in surfices  wlone: this rs at ene the most techmeddls  interesting and che most aesthetically sacstving  offis achievements. He used this method for the weathailof the Exhibition Buikdinag in burin logs gi Whieh remains ane of his masters preeess although duce toa misunderstanding on the part of those responsible for the secual cemstriecdion aii unportane mternal detul. the  Nervi, Comonuial Stadium, Ploresee ciyge at  form of the apse. was altered. thus depriving the structure of the vigniticance which N.\ overall design had atcained. The enormous building consists in effect of a single roof structure, made up of undulating prefabricated units  A number of smaller buildings followed, based on the same principle of roofing im  reintorced concrete which leaves the space below completely free: some are on a circular plan. such as the Cusine at the Rome Lido (yso) and Bangueong Halh at) Chtanciano Terme (iyso 2). Att carrying, out rescarehs on reinforeed-concrere prefubrieation. small moulds for on-site manutacture, 7 conjunetion with amovable type orstaging thar be patented. This device pernutted a great vartcey of designs ribbed suaking de *Baudors boldest and most uropian designs Another Important mnvention in the technical field was  samc time was  using forro-conerete based ona structure,  new seen capable of realization  “Ssystem for the hydraulig prestresing of  Nervi. Lxdobicen building, Purm crags ur  
reinforced concrete. But none of these re- searches was an end in itself. The ever greater liberty which these technical improvements bestowed, by making work simpler and quicker, led Nervi to deeper researches of a quite different kind, eg. on rhythm as an element of beauty. Examples include the Palaz- zetto dello Sport in Rome (1986 wich Annibale Vitellozzi), and above all the confer- ence hall of the UNESCO Building in Paris (ty33- 7: joindy with Breuer and Zehrftess) Like the Paris building’s conference hall, the  swelled surfaces of which are derived trom mussels, insects or Hower calyxes, the structure of the Pirelli skyscraper in Milan (1yss 8. with Gio Ponti and others) is also derived from nature. This is the prototype of the building's sectional development, with it. four main scanchions growing ever more slender towards the top (in a manner reminiscent of a tree), as might have been scen more clearly if a lighter dd  adding had been used. N."s creative mastery of structure was also evident in’ the Centre National des Industries in Paris (lugs. widh Jeans *Prouve), in the circular exhibition building in Caracas (1956). in the Palazzo del Lavoro, Turin (1961), and the Papal audience chamber in the Vatican (1y71). GV AM (i Nervi. Pier Luigi. Arte a setenze del costruire?, Rome 1954; —. Structires, New York 1954; ——, Aesthetics and fuology in Building, Cambridge, Mass... 1965; Argan. G. C., Pier Luigi Nervi, Milan tgs 5; Jocdicke, Jiirgen, ‘fhe Works of Pier Luigi Nervi, London 1ys7: Huxtable, Ada Louise, Pier Liigt Nervi, New York 1960; Pier Luigi Nervi. Neue Surukturen, Stuttgart 1y62: Pica, Agnoldomenico, Pier Luigi Nervi, Rome 1969.  Netherlands. The reaction against the prevail- ing *historicism and *eclecticism of Toth- century Dutch architecture began ¢ notably with Petrus Josephus Hubertus *Cuypers, architect. of the Rijksmuseum (1877-85) and the Central Station (e881 y) in Amsterdam, inspired by the French architect and theorist Viollet-le-Duc, Cuypers advocated a contemporary building style albeit heavily indebted to Gothic prototypes - and a revival of craft craditions. Many notable architects were trained in his studio, including Hendrikus Theodorus Wijdeveld. Willem Kromhout and Karel Petrus Cornelius de Bazel: later on, each of these architects was to break with revivalist  I8Go,  Nervi. Palazecto dello Sport, Rome ésvich Annibale Vitellozzi: tys6 7)  Nervi. Palazzo del Lavero. Puri (ru6r)  traditions in his own way. Although Caypers paved che way, the real breakehrough to mod- erm architecture is generally considered to he Hendrik Petrus *Berlage’s Stock Bxchunge (i897 1go3) in Amsterdam sophiy various lectures, ardicles. aid atbewe all. by his  Berlage’s philo- the influence of which was spread by hiy steady building prodacdon may be sumuima~ rized as follows: radonality of construction, funetional use or qaaterials and: sunplerey of  design. Hix Exchange syinbolized a new arehi-  tectaral freedoi woud has ideas rapidby tound ample expression bodh in villas and in pubhe housing projects  Soon, however, a younger yenerauion of architects set iWelf against this ‘ragonal’ archi- tecture. |. Mo san der *Mey, Michel de *K Terk  and PoE. *Kraner display  docheir ideas in  
Netherlands. The Scheepvaarthuis, Amsterdam (gt 16} bv dM. van der Mey and others  Netherlands. Vila Hitis ten Bosch, Bosch en Duin Gyts 16) by Robert van't Hott  Amsterdam with the Schcepvaarthuis (tytt- 16): its exterior of exuberandy decorated brick was carried on askeleton of reinforced concrete. The *Expressionist character of this architec- ture - known as che School of *Amsterdam - was widely followed and in the 19205 had a marked impact on the urban development of) Amsterdam, where che socialist municipal council advocated the wtyle’s possibilities to lend dignity to workers’ housing. The influence of the School of Amsterdam spread to towns like Groningen and Utrecht. bor the most part, the style proved to be useful as ragade architecture, for example in the ig2o. a. the Amsterdam South expansion scheme, based on a plan by Berlage. De Klerk and Kramer in particular realized masterpieces in this sts ic: but after de Klerk’s death the style lost much - fits potency.  Anumber of architects followed the rational- ist line ystablished by Berlage, as seen in particular in the early work of Robert van't Hof for instance his Villa Huis cen Bosch in Bosch en Duin, Zeist (1y1 5-16), inspired by the work of Frank Lloyd * Wright. as well as in the early work of Jan Wils. In 1yt7, both archite together with *Rietveld. van *BEesteren, *Oud and others joined De *Stijl,a movement named atter the magazine edited by Theo van *Doesburg which had proclaimed ‘a new aes- thetic consciousness’ and aimed at ‘logical  relations between the consciousness of the age and its realization in everyday life’) These aspirations found expression in) Rietveld’s Schroder House in Gereche (1924) and Oud’s Café de Unie, Rotterdam (1924. 5: destroyed in 1940).  In 1920 Oud and van Eesteren joined a group of progressive architects in Rotterdam, ‘De Opbouw’, which included. among others, Leendert Cornelius van der Viugt. Johannes Bernardus van Loghem, Mart *Stam, Willem van Tijen and Marinus Jan Granpré Moliére. For these architects, in Oud’s words ‘a good [in the sense of purely technological and practical] house is more important than a beautitul house’. Vhey bad an idealistic fuith in new building techniques, preferred to work with the new building materials, steel, concrete and glass, and sincerely believed that their “functional archi- tecture’ (*Functionalisin} would contribute toa better future. Examples of chis functionalist attitude are to be tound especially in Rotter- dam: Oud’s municipal workers” housing De Kiethock (1y25-7), the Bergpolder apartment block (1933-4) by van Tyen, van der Vlugt and *Brinkman, and the Van Nelle Tehacco Factory (1926-30) by Brinkman and van der Vilugt. with Stam as collaborating architect.  In Amsterdam few ‘modem’ designs were built during the 1y20s, partly because the vetting committee favoured the Amsterdam School. In 1927. a number of progressive architects joined together in Amsterdam to form a new group: ‘De 8. They called them- selves non-aesthetic, non-dramatic and non- romantic, and professed a preference for ration- ality of construction. To this group belonged, among others, Benjamin Merkelbach, Charles J. F. Karsten, A. Staal and Johannes *Duiker. Duiker soon received considerable acclaim for his Zonnestraal Sanatorium, Hilversum (1926— 8, with Bernard Bijvoet). and the Open Air  
Netherlands. Open Air School, Amsterdam (1928-30), by Johannes Duiker  School, Amsterdam (1928-30). By 1y30 the two groups, ‘De 8” and ‘Dc Opbouw’, were in close communication, and in 1y32 they joined forces in the publication of the bi-monthly magazine De 8 en Ophouw.  There were frequent international contacts between architects. especially after the found- ing of *C1AM in 1g28. Van Eesteren, who from 1930 served as president of CIAM, was a great promoter of the group's ideas in the Nether- lands. After the *Athens Charter of 1933 bad proposed new: principles of town planning — light, air, interspacing and functional zoning van Eesteren (who meanwhile had become head of the Town-planning Deparement of the City of Amsterdam) conceived the first expan- ston plan for Amsterdam (1934). based on these directives. This project was to serve as a model of modern town planning, although the disrup- tion of World War Ti caused the realization of the greater pare of it to be postponed until the 1950s.  In the 1930s the Modern Movement lost much of its initial impetus. Under the pressure of the economic crisis, there was a revival of traditionalism and a growing desire for spirit- ual, sometimes even religious, values. In 1932.  the “Groep 32' (A. Staaland P. Zanstra, amongst others) broke away from "De & en Ophouw’ and advocated a return to ornamentation in building.  Even stronger opposition te modern archi~ tecture came by the late ry20s from Granpré Moliére, then professor at Deltt Technical College, He sought principles of eternal beauty in architecture and took his inspiration from the maintenance of craft traditions and regional characteristics in Scandinavian and German architecture. He was the focus of the ‘Deltt School’, which also included Johannes Fake Berghoef, Gijsbert Fricdhoff and Samuel Josua van Embden.  The distinctions between the School of Am- sterdam, Modernists and Traditionalists re- ferred principally to the outward appearances of buildings. In the course of time, numerous architects fell under the sway of these various movements, some of whom achieved excellent results, such as Jan Frederick Staal in Amyter- dam, and Willem Marinus *)udok in Ffil- versum, whose most important work is the ‘cubistic’ Town Hall (128-30) at Hilversum,  During World War I building activity practically came to a standsull. After the liber- ation reconstruction was slow to getunder way, andat the outset it was principally the tradinon- alists who were able to put their ideas into practice.  fy the area of Rotterdam devastated by bombing, however, reconstruction was based  ona modernist redevelopment plan, presented  Netherlands. Pown Vall, Elilversum yiges jot  by Willen Marinus Dtidok  
as 1446 by the head of the ‘Town- planning Deparment, Cormelis van Tran A rebuilt city: centre with an enurely new street plan corresponding only occasionally co the prewar laveut way intended to provide a vortemmperary answer to the problems of the  ay carly  goth century: zoning by functions, wide cireu- Jation cerriders and ample open space. “he main feature is the “Lijnbaan’ (1949-53). a shopping centre planned by van Traa. situated ona former residential site and characterized by voning which keeps pedestrian and traffic cireu- lation Largely separate. Van den *Broek and *Bakema were the principal designers.  Inthe rysos, the nflucnee of the traditonal- ists waned and the modernist ideals of the ry 308 again gained the upper hand. These were indeed pre-eminently saited to deal etheiently with the post-war housing shortage. [In addition to Uie extension of existing towns and villages. en tirely new towns arose. notably in the reclaimed  Netherlands. The !ijnbaan shopping centre. Roterndan clas tr bs van den Brock and Bakem  Jand of the former Zuiderzce, The Wieringer- meerpolder had already been reclaimed before the war. but at that time priority had been accorded to the development of separate small villages. After the war the new bousing in the Noordoostpolder (reclaimed in 1942} was con- centrated in fewer and larger towns. Although Emmeloord was bialt in traditional style. Nagele was designed by the group “De 8", then the Dutch representative in CLAM, which had since been joined by Bakema and Aldo van *Eyck.  In the early 1y6os, the authorities decided to stimulate ndustrialization and pretabrication in housing in order te tackle the persistent housing shortage. In Amsterdam this gave rise to the development of the new Bijlmermeer site, intended as the culmination of the CIAM ideas of the 1y30s° high-rise blocks situated amidst green areas, with spacious ground-plans and complete zoning with division of pedestrian areas and traffic routes. When by the end of the 1460s construction was finally begua on the sit  public opimion bad tured against it. Mass media and activist groups in most large cities  
4  . sere ue  (976 8). by Herman Herteberger  vented their opposition to the mpersenal and costly extension plans in general and pleaded bor dre-evaluation of older residential districts: thus the notion of urban renewal was born in Holland.  From the carly tysos. architects within CIAM had been raising sharp criticisms of che Athens Charter’s directives. A group of “angry  young men” protested against the one-sided  analytical character of the congress meetings and in 1953 broke away to torm Team X, aiming to give new meaning to the notion of urban identity. Their search for alternatives was Clearly voiced in the Netherlands when. in 19sy, van Eyck and Bakema (both members of) Team X), with Herman *Hertzberger, became editors of Form. In this magazine they propa- gated their ideas of habitability, identity. con- cern for individual needs, a sensibility to small seale as opposed to large (van Eyck: ‘a house tsa uny city \ ‘ demanded a humanized, more sensitive ap- proach to structural problemy.  and a cit  isa large house’) and  The members of fori were mndividuialsts Van Eyck realized bis ideas in the Amsterdiim Burger ceshuris Orphanage. 1937 fer a large comples structure consiang of a variety of  smalbunits, which carned hun the repucigen of beng the tarber of Durch *Srruetarativn, Bakema. on the other lund. sought to ren CLAM id used a mastare of build fis buildings were still quite large. he  e  al. In his city-planning projects he  heighes. Alrhough  FEC = tuated the capresive qualiaes of concrete: Hertzberger clboraied upon the ade at con structing darge buildings out of snail amity of Shuman scale’ as can be seen tn the Centraal Beheer insurance office is Apeldoorn  tyre and whoo che Vredenboig Mase Congre in Crrecht figcn Se Prer * Bion who red bis ideas an the firs sues oF the ew Pena chlorgedupon Struciuraiism it las awn wt. bs creaung a urban re]l: dw elivaigs raped abo the ground on stilts were to preside the stage  for lite in all “Kasbl ostaute ia Alchough the members ofthe Pern did nos. with t Bakew drei  themmgives, the  Titsaspects. Ate pactiesaple ice  PyOs 73  Hengeie  le esception ut bull inuch  Tupact al ntcas Was 
profound. A generation of younger architects, including Jan Verhoeven, Pictro Paolo Ham- mel and Henk Klunder were inspired by them. The emphasis on “quality rather than quantity" was also adopted un 1948 by che Housing Minister, Wo F. Schut, who decided to grant state subsidies for experiments in housing. The frst realizations were housing projects in Hoe- velaken (Verhoeven, 1968-75), Berkel Roden- rijs (Verhoeven, Hammel and others, 1973) and Spaarndam (Klunder. 1976).  Throughout the Netherlands, the renewal of old town quarters got started in the early 19708; this was a joint action of renovation of old houses, slum clearance and the building of new dwellings, mostly respecting the patterns. In addition, the new houses are gener- ally caretully harmonized with their surround- ings by height restrictions and use of appro- priate building An instructive example is the housing development in Zwolle (1977). built by van Eyck and Theo Bosch.  In the case of urban renewal, there has often been an clement of user’s participation. To be sure, there ty nothing new about this. As carly as ty6} Nicolaas John Habraken had advocated the participation of future users in the building of their dwellings, and as a result the Stichting Architecten Research (SAR) was founded in 5964. The SAR developed a method to permit the tuture occupants 4 say in planning both the floor-plans and in the design of their houses and their colour, and even in deciding the position of such details as windows and doors, all within given limits. An outstanding example of SAR  sting street  materi  Netherlands. Bulmeer Station, Amsterdam fiy37 So}, by Spangberg and van Rije  housing is the site at Papendrecht (Frans van der Werf, 1978).  By 1980 the architecture of the Netherlands was rather diverse. In most new housing sites and also in che completely new town of Almere (Zuidelijke Tjsselmeer Polder) the building practices of the 1y70s have continued: low-rise housing with a variety of ‘individualistic’ styles along winding streets. At the same time, how- ever, many architects — particularly those not involved in the housing sector —- have followed a line of their own. especially since c. 1978, when the architectural debate was given fresh momentum.  The tradition of the 1g20s Moderns is contin- ued in the work of such architects as: Petrus Hendrik van Rhijn and Bernard Antonie Jo- hannes Spangberg, designers of the Amsterdam city railway (1y77 on); and Willem Gerhard Quist, architect of the Berenplaat Waterworks (1960-$) on Beijerland, the Kralingen Water- works near Rotterdam (1473-7) and the exten- sion of the Rijksmuseum Kréller-Miller (i970 7), Otterlo.  Carel Weeber, an influenual architect, has advocated a re-evaluation of the architectural and town-planning discipline, which seems to have been lostin the democratizing wave of the 1960s and ty7os. Examples of his work. such as the Arenaplan housing scheme in Alphen aan den Rijn (1976-80) and the Peperklip develop- ment (syXo-2) in Rotterdam, reveal his predi- lection for (mega-)structures. His dislike of nostalgic clements in housing is shared  b  distinct  y ny of his colleagues.  Since tyko the polennicist/architect) Rem *Koolhaas has exercized a great influence, especially on vounger architects, with his theor-  r  
ics of form and his tocus on the dynamics of  large cities.  A special place is occupied by Dom Hans van der Laan, a Benedictine monk, who bad been a pupil of Granpré Moli¢re in the ty2os. After World War If he set out to research basic architectural principles, and over the years has developed his own system of measurement and a theory of proportions. He set out his id the book Architectural Space (1973). and they are reflected in the design of the conventual church (1960-7) at Lemiers, Vaals. HdHi dil Brock. J. He van den. Gids voor Nederlaridse architecnisrj Guide to Dutch Architecnire, Rotter- dam tosy: Vriend. J. $0 Archtrectuar van de eeuw, Amsterdam tysy. ----. Reflexes, neder- lands bauwen na 1g45 ! building ta the netherlands Parchitecture néerlandaise. Am~ sterdam rgsy: Grinberg, Donald 1. Honsing tt the Netherlands 1ge0-i1gge. Delft ty77: Fanelli. Giovanni. Moderne architectiar in) Nederland 1ge0 1930. °s Gravenhage $978: Boasson. 2, Milosévic. M., Plovy. K and Taverne, Ed. Kijkuit, omjeheen, ‘sy Gravenhage 1y8o: Casciato. M and Polano. S. (eds.), Olanda i8se bis 1930. Citta, casa, architecthura, Milan Tg8o; Haan, Hilde de. and Haagsima, fds. [ie is er bang voor niemvbouw, Confrontatic nit  im  banen tn holland  an der  ~ Panzim. F..  derlandse arciitecten, Amsterdam igh)  Neue Sachlichkeit (New Objectivity). Movement in Furopean painting which, trom ¢. 1920, developed as a reaction to Impression- ism and above all *Expressionismi. [ts critical, socially engaged. realism is based on keen observation, extreme clarity of drawing and a determined ordering of al] objects in a clear. at times stark, compositional frame. The term was coined by the are entic G. F. Hartlaub in 1y24. One year later an exhibition of the “Magical tealists’ was held in Mannheim rubric. Because of formal and ideological atfin- ities the term ‘Neue Sachlichkeit’ soon came to be applied to modernist architecture (*Ration- alism) and in particular to that of *Germany. VML  under this  used in  Neues Bauen. Term coined and widely German-speaking countries to denote ‘avant- garde” architecture of the 1y208 and 14308. As early ay May y20, the exhibition of the *Arbeitsrat fir Kunst bore this name. Hugo *Haring especially used the phrase in conne tion with his ‘organhaftes Bauen’ (*Organic  architecture). The term formation of 4 noun from an infinitive: banew (to build) becomes dus Banen building process over final form: itlater came to be used when referring to new architecture in general wr  with ity granmratical  emphasizes  Neutra, Richard J(osef). b. Viewna isye. d Wuppertal, Germany 1o7a. Received his di- ploma from the Technische Hochschule, Vien- nav in 1y17. He amet Adolf *Loos in iyto and was influenced by the older architect's serictures against the use of ornament in architecture and by his admiradon for American architectural design. In rytt. his interest in Anierican arehic tecture Was broadened through the discovery of the work of Frank Llovd * Wright. which bad just been published in Europe. Many of the motifs that would dominate Ns later architec ture van be traced to this timiliar and influential source  Immediately after World War Lhe worked in Switzerland. gaining expericnee in the fields of landwape and city planning. While cm- Building Office, Luockenwalde. Germany. lg2t. he nigt Erich *Mendehohn. whe was chen buildmyg a har factory there, andin the same vear No moved to Mendelsohn’s office in Berlin. He moved tothe USA in ty23. worked alternately in Chicago. with the large conmmercialtirm of Holabird and Roche. and at Taliesin, Spring Green, Wisconsin, with Frank Lloyd Wright. In ty2s5 he went to Les Angeles. beginning his practice in the office of another Vienna-born architect, Rudolph * Schindler. In  ploved in the Municipal  and for the nest few sears he  Neutra. Lovell House, Los Angeles fay  4g  
Neutra. fosct von Siciberg Howse, Los Angels Hatt  Neutra, Kantiuini House, Palm Sp loge 7  ty27 the two men collaborated ma design project tor the Leagus of Nations competition  In Californian Nos personal stwle rapidly came inte focus, Vie kes work in bis carl  maturity was the nanbling, quasi-picturesque Lovell House, Los Arcics rigs" gn buileon a steep. challenging hilade site. Contemporary with *Le Villa  Garches. Frances and *Muies van der Rohe’s  Corbusie’s nated Stein,  Barcelona Pavilion, N ‘Ss stecl-tramed Lovell House, with its slabs and balconies supported trom above by steel cables. diflers in certain structural details from diese buropern mascer-  works. but is sts Tistically idesgical in termes of ity  sak  thin, weightless forms which only partly en- close a series oF fluidly juxtaposed: interior spaces. In the 1y308 N, pronounced personal idiom, using simple forms  developed a more  thac were often realized in novel or unusual materials (the Josef von Sternberg House. Los  Angeles. 1936). Always interested in larg Plannin: Neutra round a wardime opportunity  J with implications of socisl welfare, yan the Channel Heights Housing Project, San Pedro,  Cal. frog2 4). where out of iceessity redwood was substituted tor the more fanular materials of the mache age  The apogee of Nos career occurs in the Imnicdiate postwar era with the construction of che Kaufmann Desert House, Balad Springs vigg@ 7h and the Trename House, Sante Bare barat tag? St blere the elegant restatements af the by now traditional International Style themes reach a striking degree of elegance and preeimon that as por present in the earlier work. fy ty4y. with an expanding practice, he formed apartersiup with Robert E. Alexander which lasted until ryss ite be follow cd by a parciere ship with his son, Dion Neutra, trom gsi. In the last two decades of his lite N. completed a series oF niaior buildings whose qualicy , how- amily houses. IMJ “Neutra, Re. PM ie bane aertka?, Stuttgart Wy2Ts J Survital dareu)eh Desig, New York lus4: Boosiger. Wo tediy, Richard Newnat: Build- ings aid Projects (3 vols, Zurich 19st. 1ysy. 1yod, MeCoy, Esther, Richard Netra, Ravens- burg 1y6o; Hines, Phomas, Richard Nentra ard the Sear for Modern Avchitcetne, New York Yun Drexier, Arthur. ‘fhe clreitttectre of Rivhand Neutra. Now York Ty82.  ever, fils to mateh that of hts earlier one=  New Brutalism. New Brutalism gave con- scious form to a mood that was widespread among younger architects in the rysos. but im ypite of the fact that it was expressed a sentiment that was felt in most parts of the Westernized world its origins can be pinpointed in space and tine with some precision was wrong in his etymology (Brute 7 Ali- som), he was sight n identifying the Smithson tumily as the source of the term -- cither Alon *Simithson or the Smithsons’ fricnd Guy Oddie (who used to call Peter *Smithson * Brutus’) was the first person co utter the phrase "The New  Although Giedion  Brutalism’, some time in the carly summer of lys4. 
New Brutalism. Hunstanton School, Norfolk f1ogy $4). by Alison and Peter Smithson  The basis was a mood of frustration brought on partly by the difficulties of building, espe- cally in Britain, after World War IL and partly by disgust at the smugness of the compromising elders who were still able to build because they were well placed with the ‘Establishment’. The stylistic preferences of these elders were known as The New Hamanisny’ by the political Lett. ‘The New Empiricism’ by the political Right The New Brutalisim asa phrase was intended as amockery of both, but i drew attention to certain attributes of the architecture admired or designed by the Smithsons and their circle.  They set asa standard the uncompromising ruthlessness of *Mies van der Rohe and *Le Corbusier, their intellectual clarity, their honest Presentation of structure and materials, At the sume time, the younger architects sensed in the work of these masters a continuing tradition, an architecture that lay above and beyond styles and fashions among the work of the past they admired the clarity and formality of Palladio. the heroic seale ofthe Anglo-Baroque architects  Vanbrugh and Hawksioor. and the clear-cut and inassive fornty of early rych-century en- gineering siruecures  Bur the architecture that emerged fram these admirations was. in the begining, purely Mien. No doubrastreak of kaghsh purtan= ism accounts for chs wit selection ofa simple, elegant structural systenr. for it was applied to an absolute horror of any pretence or conceal ment: not only were structure and tittertals honestly expressed, but services as well. In the school at Hunstanton. Norfolk Giagu si. by the Sonithsons the first true Bratatist budding = not only are stecl and brick expressed with an honesty that goes ever beyond the acceptable subtertuges of Mies. but prpe runs, electrical conduit. and other services ure exposed ta view. The austerity or dais design was so. remarkable that it attracted world-wide wten- Gen. amd international comparisons sought. OF these. Louis *Kubi’s Yale Univer- sity Art Gallery, New Haven, Conn. (igst 3 Seas in some ways ore convincing than Mics  were  oxi work, because Kalin seemed equally pres accupied with che raw nature et the materials  and concerned with the expression of the 
New Bratalism. Park Hill, Sheffield signi, by Jack Lynn ard Iver Smith  services, Flowever. the ortgmal puritanical ox= tremtisn of the Enghsh Brutalsts rapidly began tomerge with an incernadonal movement of different origins and only remotely comparable aims. This movement would be characterized by developments as diverse as dhe a-formal painting of Jacksou Pollack and the aformal planning of Le Corbuver’s Chapel at Ron- champ, the art brie of Dubutfet and the béton brut of the Unité d’Habitation at Marseilles. Now, the Brutalism of the uncompromising exhibi- tion of materials became alhed toa Brutalisin of form, the svinmietry of the Hunstanton School and the concealed symune- try of the Yule Art Gallery were abandoned in favour of a ruthless honesty in expressing functional spaces and their incerrelationships Even that adaptable rectangular geometry of *Ractionalism was now cast aside in favour of modes of composition based on the topography  expressed  of che site and che topology of internal circula- gon ay may be seen very clearly in the siting and planning of Park Hill, Sheffield. designed by Jack Lynn and Ivor Sinith.  Once the Brutalism of a complex such as Park Hillis understood it becomes clear that the application of the term to such fashionably sentimental architecture as that of Leonardo Ricci is improper. as is any attempt to make “Brutalises out of say Juan *O'Gorman or Paolo *Soleri: Brutalism implied some sort of) attempt to make manifest the moral impera- aves that were built into modern architecture by the pioncers of the Tyth cencur of shutter-patterned conerete or exposed steel- work was only a symptom of this intention. The fundamental aim of Brutalism at all times way to find a structural, spatial, organizational and material concept that was, in the Smithsons’ . necessary” in this metaphysical sense to some particular building, and then to express it with complete honesty in a form that would be a uniqne and memorable image. In the creation  and the use  
of this definitive image the other plastic arts provided, not an aesthetic. but an exemplar of method or a standard of comparison — thus the admirations of the Brutalists covered subjects as diverse as U.S. car-styting and the Ise shrines in Japan. Neither had any visible influence on Brutalist architecture. but both served as exam- ples of images created out of the kind of necessary conditions the Brutalists believed to be fundamental, also. to the conception of) buildings today. It was this insistence of the primacy of the given and necessary factors in the conception of a building that caused Sir John Summerson to compare the beliefs of the Bru- talists to the Rigorism of Carlo Lodoli and other radical theorists of late Iralian Mluminisn.  On this ground. a typical example of Brutalist building ip Italy is the Istitute Mar- chiondi Spagliardi at Baggio, near Milan (1ys%- 9) by Victoriano Vigand. even though at first sight its departures from the common practices of the Modern Movement appear less extreme than those of the neo-Libertarian sentimental- ists. Stylisnically. the Istituto Spaghardi consciously echoes the ideas of the period of Parchitertura razionalista (* Rational architecture) which provide an image that 1 entirely expressive of the stern reformative necessities that underlie the conception of this building.  Nevertheless, the building draws attention to the relationship of Brucalism to the traditions of architecture. For all its aggressive tone and uncompromising attitudes, Brutalisoy did not represent a radical departure from the tradi- tional conception of architecture  isth-century  Marchiondi  ie Was in ne  New Brutalism. Istituto Marchiond: Spagliards, Baggio, near Milan (1ysX gy), by Vittoriano Vigané  way comparable to the technological extrem= ism of Buckminster *Fuller, nor even to the methods of radical functional analysis devel oped in England by the Nuffield Trust. The most structive comparisons to be made an this subject are with action-painting and: ursngie Acnion-painting abandoned the last vesuges of formal composition but sall accep- ted such “outworn’ traditions ay the use af paint canvas.and a rectangular format tor the picture all of which had been previously rejested: at  concrere  modern  various umes by PAINCETS:  Hirestaytee concere abandoned the polite fictions of the sounds made by artifical musicaliscruments ni favour of recordings of ‘real none’. bac tt abandoned very litte che of what had been lett of the Guditions of music by earlier moderint composers. Similarly the Bratalists, while vban- doning ctitious surface for the ‘reality at sree! and conerete and the concept oF formal conpo- Nition ay necessary to the art of architecture. mvariably practised and theorved within rie base traditions of architecture RE  Banham. Reener, Phe New Britclisir: bli:  or deste. New York 1966. New Objectivity. *Neue Sachhehheit  New York Five. Dcvignation tor a circle at” five urchutects. Peter *bascnaiin. Michael *Graves. Charles *Gasathmes, John *Heidak and Richard *Meier. subject of an eshibinon at the Museum of Modern Art, New York  ofa 1y6g mecang ot the C  whose work was the  held on the ceeasion SF group iConter- ence of Architeess tur the Study of the Eviron- mene. This tormed the basis for the book fure architect: published in ryz2. All the work displayed - wathout exception smylestannly houses and predominandiy of wood. as in the fire American houses of Walter *Gropiun and Marcel * Breuer inssomic casey radical, to the *Tateruational Sovle  represented a fornia return,  of the ry20s and Ty30s. *Le Corbusier was the of departure. bre references to *Rietyehd and te * Lereagnt were  principal point direct  ako evident. Smee the dare tyctes the loose asoctation has progressively disalved as the five architects have pursued increasingly more distinct formal concerns. AM  — Five Arclutects. New York yc  Niemeyer, Oscar. b Graduated in $434 from the Escola Nacional de  Rao de anette. 107 
BelasArtes. Rio de faneire. and at few yours biter stepped into a position oFetfeetive leader= sip when he succeeded | Geto *Costa ay head ot the design teun tor the new Ministry off Edueagon and Health building (1937 43) Novis biself deemivels inthucnced by * Le Corbuster, whom he worked on the design torthe Miniiry of Edacatton and J iealth durmig the master’s short stay in Brazil. in 1936.  wath  Tie began by applying Le Corbusier's basic ideas asin the Day Nursery. Rio de fanvire lait Very soon, however, he began adding teste eas an clement of adaptacion to local conditions. wa imaginative and sometimes ex- sessive. creatiye exuberance  Disregarding the tenets of orthodox mod= emnisin Whenever they seemed co bint to run counter co bis ideal of arebitecture tsa great art af expresston., No ohas consistently striven) for boaaty and harmony, grace and elegance tn an oniiched! formal vocabulary as the legitimmae goal oFarchttccnural creadon in opposer co merely techincal gad tupetional refmenents Unatraid of the curved ling. for which he found good precedentia Brazilian Baroque architce- ture. be ased in with an insemetive Ivrical rough vod an umobhibiced spontaucity throughout his cerest Tree-Howing and secntingly arbitrary in the carter phases. subtly disrlled: and) nor  mitellectually sophisueated ia his later work  The group of buildings im Pampulha fig42 dys famous for its display oF unusual forms, dtferent vet Kindicd. tts emphatic meterplay of ight aid shade and its dehberate integration of architects with pamzing and sculpture. The complex includes the Casino in whieh ani ovoid prisin is well jomed toa emsphy reetangular block: the creuler Restauranc widh its sun root: the Yacht Club with its inverted doubleslope rook and the Sie brancisca Chapel with ars parabolic shells  fia sertes OF progeety N. explored the use of reinforeed-conerete in the development of complex curved surfaces, such as the Duchen bactory (loso. with Tieho Uechoal here a block yOO m (YX4 ft) dong ws dramauzed by a row of double-span curved rigid t (33 1) apart, fn other ouildings he emphasized  anes. spatced ton  the possibilities of long straighe lings. in wide overhangs or in variously designed sloping supports. as inthe Schooiat Diamantina (ryso).  The Parque tbirapucra exhibition batldings for the Fourth Contenniud of the City of Sao Paulo (igst ajo which N. designed in collabo-  ration with other architects, provide a rare Instanee of integrated planning of a group of permanent fair buildings over a wide area. N. united che scheme by an irregular series of clevated pathways linking the various blocks: two low buildings. 140 ur (460 ft) long. the Palace of Nations and the Palace of Srates, with their tlted conerete brackets: the diree-storey Palace of Industry. 250 m (S20 ft) long. with its various interior levels capriciotsly silhouetted by the outline of the mezzanine Mab: and the dome-like Palace of the Arts, with its spectucu-  lar and almost surrealist interior.  No scrowning achievement was the design of all the inain public buildings of Brasilia (1937 cy). In Brasiha he designed mose of the impor- tant baildings: in particular the Supreme Court.  Niemeyer. Yacht Club, Pampulba (iyga 4)  Niemeyer. Palave of Industry exhibition biulding, Sie Paulo up collaboration, 1st 4)  
Niemeyer. Congres Burkhing and Muntrns.  Brasilia (1yss}  che Presidential Palace, the Square of the Three Powers, the Congress Building and the Na- tional Theatre (all tos). Tn these be was able vot only to express the symbolic content of cach job and of the whole, impheit in Litgio Costa's sophisticated general plain, but abso to achieve it within a restrained vocabulary. severely diset- plined so as to lend special signiticance where necessary Co one or another clement ins che general context: for example. the beautiful colonnade of the Palace of Dawn, the starding Hower-hke design tor the Cathedral. the con- cave and conves dome of the Congress Build- ing in contrast to the soaring twin towers wand the horizantal expanse of the base block Already in Brasilia there is evidence of a harking back to an individually expressed *neo-chassi- eism, Which in Nv Liter work. such as the Mondadori Building in Milan (ro68 75). was to be more pronounced. HEM GH O Niemeyer, Oscar, Mina Experiencia en Brasilia, Rio de Jancire 1y61: Papadaki, Stame, ‘The Work of Oscar Niemeyer. New York 19s  Oe Nica yer Works ta Pigtiess. New York tyse 2 Osc Nteeyer Now York 1gho: Spade. Rupert. sea Niven per Lendens and New York. tgtis Sodre. Nelson Wo. dsc Niemeyer. Rie de Panera cts  ovembergruppe. A beuse aissectien of  radically minded artists. founded in  erlin in December ty ts acthe nistig.den ofehe pariters Max Pochsten aid Cesu kK influence of the November coy oluuon. Proni-  aii and under the mene members inchided she paanters Lyoaed Feminger, Wassily Kondinsky. Pant Klee aid irehiteess Oto *Baree  eho *Gagus, He  Ladwig Meidner, che red Gellhorn, ¥ Foring,  Fudwig #1 fbersenner. Phan *Luckhardt. Waseh *luckdrardt Dnich *Men= dehobn, Ludwig *Mies carder Rohe, *Tautand Mas # faut. and the cengposer Hans kisler  Mdougis the Novant  mans merihers withthe * Athos Tue tie Ronse,  ning, ¢ *t  Bris  uppe slured  ab awe. Front che cutset less polawailly ambitious and deted ty radiesiisa ne sc ds artiste temas. Ap ostabicon catilogie ot tyra de=  clined: Phe Novembergruppe ba amen of 
radical radical in che r  previous forms of expresston  ATMS ection of radical in the use of new expressive techniques.”  The group way active in many fields. Be- tween Cyly and 132i exhibited in Berlin on ninercen accavions. In 1y20 an exhibition of wraphics and watercolours was arranged im Rome m connection with Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, and a traveding exhibition visited Moscow and Japan in 1924. Phe group was also acuive in promoting new mausi¢ and in support- ing experimental films.  The Novembergreppe was officially banned by the National Socialist government in Sep- tember 1933. bat had already ceased to be active  THEW Novembergruppe,  some two years previously Kliemann. Helea. Die Burhan ty64, Die Novenmbergruppe texhibiuon  eatdogue), Berlin ry  Noyes, Eliot.) Boston. Mass. gia, d. New Canaan, Conn. 1yt7. Architect and designer Studbed at Harvard Graduate School of Archi- tecture, Jatcetly under *Gropius and *Breuer Much influenced by *Le Corbusier in his ideal of the integration of industrial design. architec- ture, sculpture and painting. Sometime director of the Deparement of International Design at the Museum of Modern Art, New York. His balloon house at Hobe Sound. Florida, was made by spraying concrete on to an immicnse inflated balloon, to produce a hemispherical shell. His houses all feature open plans sub- divided by phicement of turmiture or fireplaces: the use of natoral materials is also characteristic  Ti Noes. Eliot. Organic Design and Home  Furnishing, Now York ryt: The Work of  Eliot Noyes and Associates’, fadustriad Design, June 1966.  O’Gorman, Juan. b. Coyoacin. Mexico 10s, d. Mexico City ro82. Studied architecture at the National University of Mexico, and painting under Antonio Ramon Alba Guedarrama and Dicgo Rivera. He was Direc- tor of the Town Planning Administration of Mexico City (1932-4) and atterwards ran his own practice. From 1y32 to ty4X he was Protessor of Architecture in che Architecture  Ruis,  Secuon - of which he was a co-founder - of the National Polytechnic Institute of Mexico City. With his houses in San Angel. Mexico City (1929 30), he became one of the earliest Mexi- can adherents of the * International Style, from which he distanced himself in a guilt-ridden munitesto during the tgsos. The mosaics on the fagade of the Main Library of the National University of Mexico in the new Universiry City (1952-3). planned in collaboration with Gustavo Saavedra and Juan) Martinez de Velasco, and above all his own house in San Angel (1ys towards an art of individual expression inspired by Mexican tradition. GHa  Smith, Clive B.. Builders in the Sun: Five Mexican Architects, New York 167.  -6) are testaments to his radical shitt  Olbrich, Joseph Maria, b. Troppau 1867, d. Diisseldorf tyoX. Atter attending the Staats- gewerbeschule (State School of Arts and Crafty) m Vienna, where Camillo Sitte was one of his teachers, and several years working in his native town, he studied under Carl von Hasenauer at the Akademie der bildenden Kinste in Vienna, 18903. Ln his third year there he was awarded the Rome Prize. which enabled him to under- take a trip of several months from November 1893 through ftily to Tums before entering Ouo *Wagner’s office. The collaboration with Wagner tasted und 18s and thats fell within the period during which Wagner was working on the buildings of the Vienna Stadtbahn (metropolitan railway), on the design of which QO. had a considerable influence. In t8y7 he was one of the founders of the Wiener Secession, whose exhibition building (1897-8) he de- signed. In 18yy he was summoned to Darmstadt where, through the patronage of Grand Duke Ernst Ludwig of Hesse. he was given the opportunicy of developing a synthesis of the * Arts and Crafts and Garden Cites (*Howard) movements in a great civic Gesamtkunstwerk (total work of art) in the spirit of *Are Nou- veau. The artists’ colony on the Mathildenhohe at Darmstadt (18yy-tyot}, on which other members of the artistic circle m Darmstadt, including *Behrens, also worked, was open to the public upon completion. Asan ‘exhibition’, the buildings and their interior design consti- tuted the exhibies and the ideal of a life-style permeated by art was advocated. In 1907 O. enlarged the colony around the Hochzeitsturm (Wedding Tower), which is one of the most 
Olbrich. Wiener Secession exhibition building. Vienna (1897 8)  Olbrich. Wedding Tower on the Mathildenhohe, Darmstadt (1907)  distinguished examples of civic adornment representative of the new architecture, as well as around the Art Gallery. In the Are Gallery building, as well as in the Tietz Department Store in Disseldort (1yo6), a tendency to more  restrained forms and a shift towards *neo-  classicism miamttest themselves  O.'s influence on later architecture resulted primarily from his Darmstadt buildings. which 0 certain respects anticipated the *Expression- ism of subsequent: years. GHa OU Olbrich, J. M.. deen, Vienna isyg, 2nd ed. Leipzig 1904. ——. Architekttir, 30 portfolios. Berlin rgo1-ig: Lux. Joseph August, foseph Mf. Olbrich, Berlin tory. Joseph MM. Olbrich. 1867- 1908. Das Werk des rehitekten (exhibition catalogue), Darmstadt 1y67, Schreyl. Karl Heinz, Joseph Maria Olbrich: Die Zeichnungen in der Kunstbibliothek Berlin, Berlin 1y72; Latham, lan, foseph Marta Olbrich, London tgso.  organic architecture. As with most concepts used in architecture. the concept ot an corganic™ style is borrowed from other ticlds and reniains difficult to delinut once applied to architeecure and building. Tt subsumes the harmonic rela- tionship berween the whole and the party, burs ako ded co natural proceses such as birth, growth, and death  The analogy between nature and architecture had already been given expression at the made sth century by che Amertead sculptor Horatio Greenough. In hry quest te overcome the aesthetic conceptions of his ane which be rejected as velectic, Greenough turned to mature asa source, for it offered the mest divers. tarnys  without reliance on preeannng mode The correspondenes ot form: and fanedon which he chamed to tecuunize ats conceived oFasa God= given principle, rather than ay the result ot  as would biter be argued  rauonal diovght While Greenongh’s spesulauens re general, Lous *Sulbvan, the most iumportant  arehitest of thy *Chieage Schook sought to  rammed 
Ae prowet. llth  by Huge Hara  exuaet dhe practical application tor building. In anarticie of 2sy6, published under the citle “The tall odice burlding: artistically considered’) he concluded. on the basis of observauion of naire, dat hte is recognized in its expression. function’. From that he  chat it is really the  essences of every prodlem: that ic contains and  ditt fora follows  denved rhe principle suggests the soluaon! Thus farm is noc under- stood as being: desc on previous knowledge or el rorsomething thar already latently present ny Pofthe cask at hand. The analogy of architeetur: gically tand not mechanised y) founded ver= fe would seem critical to object that the interpretiuon of the essence oF  as somethin  emined a pron, butayascareh  the esseie  wid Gacure hus ded to an ontolo= sien of *Funcoonahsin  something is in itself aly ies a subjective dect- Sullivan subjectivity did not deriv c foam the tadividual’y own ideas. but rather resided an the task Frank Lloyd * Wright capeoded the phile- sophy of his ‘licher Meister’. Suilivan. by insisting that form and function must pe ones to  Mion. However. seheved that) chis  convey this idea, he employed the phrase Corgamie architecture’. For him the relationship  of the parts ta the whole way an essential feature every part should bave ity own identity. but ac the same time if should be inseparable from the whole. Vhis was impressively naanifested in his approach to spatial composition, for which the inisteading corm: “How ing space’ way Liter used Apart tram the ebvious tact that space inelt does not move, but rather itis a naatter of man who moves in space. Wright's spaces do not  flow one inte another withouc distinction Rather they are divided one trom another and linked together by small interposed) spatial componcat. For Wright, cach building was viewed ay something special. in relation to the site on which it stood. and as part of the landscape of nacure  Hugo *Hirmg, with whom the concept of ‘organelike architecture’ is inked, would cer- qinly have been m agreement with all chis. What distinguished him trom Wright was not simply the taet that he was born later and dived ina different country, but alse his rejection of) what he described as the fairy-tale aspeer of Wright's work omament. Adolf*Loos’s verdict. “ornament is. crime’. marks the watershed between Haring and Wright. Like Wright, however, Haring was convinced that it was a matter of searching for things and allowing their ewn form to  his preference for detail and 
develop; and. like Wright, he started from the premise that in nature “the formal ordering of many things im space is in relation to a living, development and to the fulfilment of tasks.” “Thus if we want to discover form, we must be in harmony with nature’.  Similar ideas were espoused by two architects as different as) Alvar *Aalto and Hans *Scharoun. It would certainly be incorrect to characterize Scharoun as a pupil of Haring bur. at che level of principles and methods. they certainly had much in common, Haring built relatively Tittle, while Scharoun was able to realize a whole series Of major projects mm the 1960s, including the Philharmonic Hall in Berlin, in which the space is concerved and designed in terms of a HLiringesque view af the programme, or what Scharoun interpreted as the essence of the task. Aalto’s work 1s different in many respects from that of Scharoun, but it too revealy certain: points in common with Hiring’s way of thinking. such ay the rejection of the determination of form by pure geometric volumes, the unorthodox use of natural materi- aly and the careful attention to regional and topographical These moreover. characteristic of the second phase of  considerations. were,  modem architecture which began to develop at the beginning of the 1y3es. Even Louis *Kahn could be cited, for he continually espoused the thesis that the form of a building must be developed from an understanding of the essence of the matter, Admittedly, Kahn saw this through the eyes of the *hcole des Beaux-Arts and hence in his work the principle was reRected in a totally altered form.  Haring’s reference to efheient forms in nature is to be explained by his particular point of view. For bim nature was concerned not only with practical eficiency. ay represented by the body of a greyhound, but also with distinguish- ing features such ay a stag’s anders,  In our day. nature his also served ay at nodel apd an inspiration in other regards, and. pre- cisely where one would have leastexpected ini the area of wide-span constructions, ie. i the field of advanced technology. Here. the prin- ciple discovered in and borrowed from nature was that of achieving the maximum rigidity and endurance with the least amount of ma- terial. Already in the 1920s, with the reinforeed= concrete shell structures of Franz Dischinger and Walter Bauersteld. the comparnen to an egg shell was evoked. By means of a double  curvature in form and the ase ofa material of greater teusile and compressive strengil. tt as possible to achieve great spans combined with an exceptional thinness of comstrucuon. May: recently ithas been Prer *Otto in Germany who developed new comtructions by abalogs with natural models r Greenough, Horatio, Form and: Bian tien Remarks on Art, Design and Architect fod Harold A. Small}, Berkeley and Loy Angles tag7: Sullivan, Loup. “Che call apices building artistically considered’, rensucd inn Kindergarten Chats and other New York cuagy: Wright, Frank Lloyd. la Organi An hitecrurr  The Architectire of Democracy. Landon pyse: Lauterbach. Heinrich. and. Jocdicke. Jiirgen  teds.). Haye Hartng. Selvifien, Eancurte, Baten, Pp.  writs,  roceedings of  Srartgart 163) Nanette: haeent : the Institut fiir eichte Plichenirtgwerke. HE 2 Sturtgart (y8 1  organic architecture. [he architects own fonse Hehink (gag é by Agta  organic architecture. Tens parslien at che Bundesgartenschau, Cologne tys7s by brea Oty  
Otto, Frei, b. Siegmar, Saxony 1925. Studied ar the Technische Universitat in Berlin. In Tys2 he established a studio in Berlin which was super seded in (g68 by his present studio at Warm- bronn. near Stuttgarc. Throughout his career he has kept his design and academic research activites separate; consequently, in (957 he extablished the Entwicklungsstatee fir den Letehtbau (EL) in Berlin, which was the fore- ronner of the Institue fiir leichte Flachen- tragwerke UL), which he founded in ty64 at the Technische Hochschule in Stuttgart.  O. is a complex and. from some points of view, a somewhat contradictory figure; if at first he appears to be a rationalist in the tradition of the great 2oth-century constructors and a structural determinist in his development of architectural form, this view is far from ade- quate since it ignores his rather typical German romanucism and his identification with nature which represents a further extension of this romanucism, As a tighter pilot in World War fl, he was impressed by lightweight aircraft technology: also influencial, though in a differ- ent way. are the Expressionist fantasies of Bruno.  Otto. Cable-net root at the Olympic Park, Munich (built by Behnisch & Partners: 1967 72)  *Taut, notably his crystalline temples and Alpine Architektur sketches. In a more general vein, he has admired greatly the work of Felix *Candela, R. Buckminster *Fuller and Walter Bird.  The modern tent, as distinct from tensile structures based on  suspension-bridge tech- nology, is largely O.’s creation. Traditional tents, long forgotten or maligned except as an exotic metaphor for the tabernacle or Crusader encampments, were revived by ©. as a leading prototype for lightweight adaptable buildings. From the modern tent, with its efficient anti- clastic shape. there stemmed a bewildering variety of structural types such as pre-stressed textile, cable-net and textile, and cable-net pavilions supported on masts or arches, grid shells, retractable or convertible roofs which combine features of both textile and steel-cable construction (the textile roof automatically extends or retracts along stecl-cable supports), and pneumatic structures — in effect, air-sup- ported tents.  The small Bundesgartenschau textile pavil- ions of the Tysos are amongst O."s most lyrical and successtul works — the riverside shelter and dance pavilions at Cologne (957) and the small undulating star pavilions at Hamburg (1963)  
impress by their integrabon of aesthetics and construction, Prior to 1963, his textile pavilions usually consisted of standard membrane cle- nents arranged symmetrically in additive com- positions. It way not until the mud-ty6os, when he began working with Rolf Gutbrod, thar O began to explore picturesque asymmetrical roofseapes divided unevenly by interior low or high points. The Pavilion of the Tederal Re- public of Germany at Expo ‘67 in Montreal (1905 7) is the outstanding example of a treely formed rootScape suggestive of qmountain scenery.  The restaurant pavilions at the Swiss Na- tional Exhibition of 1964 at Lausanne were O's first cablencts. Previously all his roof had been made of cotton canvas with modest spany of from 20 to 30 nm (65 100 ft}. The Lausanne pavilions were transinenal membrane and cable-net constructions leading up to Os first truly large-scale cable-net ref, for the German Pavilion at Expo “67, With the completion of this structure. pre-stressed cable-net reots came ofage. and, for the first ime, die constructional means used matched the structural demands of large-scale pre-stressed surface structures hay ing afreely sculptured terrain, A new identity of form, structure and construction Way now a posibihey. The roofs of the mam sports area 1 the Olympiapark im Munich (ty67 72: built hy Gunter *Behnisch with QO. as a consultant realized a new sealein this type of development and led, moreover, to the pioneering of purely mathematical computer-based procedures for determining the cable-net patwrns.  O. also exploited the inherent Hexibility of textile structures by devising the convertible roof, in which variable geometry permits Uae root mentbrane to be extended or retracted at will A great many such roofs have been constructed in Germany, France and elsewhere, but none is so captivating as the roof for the Open Air Theatre at Bad Hersteld (1y67 -8)  (In the years after 1970 he concentrated his attention an the analysis of biological phenom— cna, developing his exploration and analysis of lightweight structures in nature. Because O. combined research into the optimum shapes tor pre-stressed surface structures with the develop- ment of a new technological means for their realization, his innovations have proved of) oustanding importance: indeed, it is in large part due to his efforts that the successful revival of the tent has come abour, as well as the  Otto, Adaptable roof covery at dae Open Ale  Theatre, Bad Elersteld tryec  vreaden oftnew genre af modern tens’ which exploit the advanced technological resources of the 20th century by  Otro, bo. Srrtettires New Haven. Conn, yor; : Ligduweight Struts, ty6ay Roland. Conrad, Pree Otte: Teneton Stric sires, London and New York tuto: Glasser. Ludwig. Phe Hprk of Pret Otte ieshibirion cautlague). New York ig. Drew. Philip. Bret Oto: borin vad Structure, Boulder, Col  Pradinonal amid Lighe- wrerglts,  1976.  Oud, Jacobus fobannes Pieter, b. Purmerend rsyo. do Wassenaar 1y63. Educated at) the Quellinus School at Arts and Crafts. the State School of Draughtinauship im Amsterdam and Delft Technical College. which awarded him an honorary doctorate after World War IL He worked forjun Stuytand tor BJ. EL *Cuypers. both in Amsterdam Munich, and tor *Dudok in Leiden, betore opening his own offices in Purmerend and Leiden. He was City Architect of Rotterdam. WytS 33, where he was responsible for the  tor Theodor *Fischer in  Spangen and “Tassendijken housing estates Qig20). From ig3a te dys he lad an otfce in Rotterdam: Wansenaar.  Around tyi6, be came inte contact with  Theo van *Doesbury  thereafter he practised in  and was an active men  ber of the new De *Sug) awovemeut. Like most of his generation, O. was a great admirer of *Berlage. as his carly warks clearly show. 
Qud. Housing scheme at, Hook of Holkind (1y24 7)  Oud. Shell Buaktre. Che Hague (gas 43) Berlage’s honest handling of materials and structure was to aiuence O.'s * Neue Sach- lichkeit” approach, despite the obvious formal differences. O. was taved with dhe difficult cask of translating De Sall’s often all too theoretical  ideas to practical buuiding terms. Exaniples of  his De Stijl-type arebitecrure melude: the Cate de Unie in Rotterdan iy24 destroyed fygo). a project for terraced housing on the promenade at Scheveningen (rytz) and a design for a factory at Purmerend (1yty). After afew years, OL broke with van Doesburg, who  Oud. Bio Children’s Convakscent Home. near Arnhem (tys2 60)  laid too much stress on the role of abstract Painting in moder architecture. Phe housing schemes at) Oud-Mathenesse (1y22-4}) and Kicthoek, Rotterdam (tg2s 7). and at Hook of Holland (1924-7) demonstrate the transition to ‘Neue Sachlichkeit’.  From ¢. ty35 onwards QO. began to follow (Shell Building. The Hague, 1938-42). This detection led to rather harsh criticism, whereas in retrospect ~ this change of direction towards amore formalist academic design method seems to have been a harbinger of the mereasing uncertainty that has been evidentin architecture  functionalist principles much more freely  viewed 
in recent years. However, the Bio-Children’s Convalescent Home near Arnhem (1932-60) is clear evidence that the Sheil Building belongs to  an earlier creative phase. JIN. GHa O Oud, J. J.P. Holtindische Architeku (Bauhausbuch 10), Munich 1926. — Mijn  Weg in De Stiff, Rotterdam 1y6t; Hitchcock. Henry-Russell, 2 f- P. Oud. Paris 1931: Veronesi, Giulia, fo J. P. Oud. Milan 1933: Fischer, Wend. Jo f. P. Oud: Bauten 1906-63 {exhibition catalogue), Munich 1965.  Pei, leoh Ming, b. Canton, China 1y17. Stud- ied at the Massachusetts Insutute of Technology and at Harvard University. He was Durector of Architecture at Webb and Knapp. Inc., in New  Pei. East Wing of the National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C. (1971 8)  York, 1948 55, since when he has had lis own office in New York. designing administration buildings. department stores, urban planning projects. The Mile High Center in Denver, Col (1956), dazzles with ity fagade composition of (wo intersecting systems: supports and beams clad in dark cast aluminium. air-conditioning units behind bright enamelled bands. With its emphasis on structural cloments, this building is typical of the *Intemational Style of the ty5 The National Center for Atmoypherte Ree search in Bouider, Col. (1y67). the Everson Museum of Artin Syracuse, N.Y. (1y68). and  toan even greater degree — the East Wing of the National Gallery of Art in Washington. D.C. (1971 8). bear witness toa turnmy cowards J  monumentality of sample stereomerric fornis  “EM. Per & Partners: NCAR & Christan Setenee Chureh Center). Global Arctriteensre (Tokvo}. no. 45. 1yes  Peichl, Gustav, b. Vienna ty28. After ateend- ing the Staatpgewerbeschule in Moding and the Bundesyewerbescbule in Linz.  Vienna-  
Peichl. Scudios for Austrian State Radio (ORF), Salzburg (1g68 72): conteal hall and aerial view  he studied under *Holvmeister atthe Akademie der bildenden Kiinste im Vienna. In 1gs6 he opened his own office in Vienna: he was editor of the magazine Ba, 1y67 70. and since 1973 he has taught at the Akadenne in Vienna. Under the pseudonym ‘Tronimus’ he is also active as a caricaturist. Characteristic of P.’s architecture is  a machine aesthee, which ts expressively han dled in many cases and which derives especially from ship design. This is often paired with a Baroqgue-ispired aviality, asin the Rehabilita- tion Centre for the mentally retarded, Vienna- Meidling (146s. 7). or in the Phosphate Flimin- ation Works in Berlin-Tegel (ig8o 2). His use of a free overall form in which a basic type as adjusted to the particular situation by varying individual clements is scen in the regional studios of the Austrian State Radio (ORP) in Linz. Salzburg, Innsbruck, Dornbima, Graz and Eisenstadt (1y68 81), as well as in the Ground Signal Station at AHenz, which blends into the landscape. AM ce Gustav Peicht Banden, Projekte, Metster- ochide, Vienna and Stuttgart iys  Pelli, Cesar, b. Tucumun, Argentina 1926. Studied at the University in Tucuman and at the University of Ulinois at Urbana. From ys to 1964 he was Eero *Saarinen’s partner, atter- wards he went to Los Angeles where until 1y68 he was chief designer in the firm Daniel, Mann, John & Mendenhall, and subsequently Design Partner in Gruen Associates until 1977. In that year he was appointed Dean of the Architecture School at Yale University in New Haven, 
Conn., and at the same cime opened his own office there. In the buildings which have at- tracted most public attendion - the City Hall in San Bernardino, Cal. (1969) and the Pacific Design Center in Los Angeles (gz) — PL develops the Jace *International Style concept of a container architecture. which *Mies van der Rohe had postulated to the extent that the entire structure was to be sheathed in a skin of transparent and opaque glass with neither  projecting mouldmgs nor any ardculation of the interior spaces or subdivisions. In contrast to the all but shell. homogencous except for reflection eftects and colour (a deep ble in the Pacific Design Center), highly etfective “discarbancey’ of the orthogonal structure of the buildmy are intro- duced by step-backs, broken slopes, sudden protruding round forms nations at the ends of the building. characteristics are still present im more recent projects. which are mostly bound to more traditional architectural concepts, such as the Hermann Park Towers im Houston,  expressionless exterior  and sliced-otF termi-  Vhese  Texas (1979). In 1977 P. designed the tower addition and the rebuilding of the Museum of Modem Arcin New York (1g8o0 4). AM S ‘Cesar Pell, Architecture and Urbanism (1 o- kyo}, March 1971; "Cesar Pell’, op. cit.. No- vember 1976: Pastier, John. Cesar Pelli, New York and London ty8o: Frampton, Kenneth. Cesar PellifGrien Associates, Tokyo tg8t  Peressutti, Enrico, b. Pinzano al Faghamento (Udine) 1908. d. Milan ryz3. Studicd ac the Milan Politeenico, In 1y32 he way one of the founders of the Milan tirm *BBPR  Perret, Auguste. b. Brussely i874. d. Paris 1y54. As anco-classicist neo-classicisna! with a Pronounced sensibility for modern technologi- cal requirements, he belonged to dhat eradition extending from Hennebigue to de *Baudot which fostered significant changes in the meth- ods used m reinforeed-conerete construction P's contribution marked both the endpoint ot that earlier tradition and the beginning of a new one. In his active career spanning nearly fifty years as an architect ‘contractor and in his role as a teacher, he developed a formal language which, for all its variety, retains a strong cohesiveness. This is characterized in equal measure by the introduction of innovative constructional forms and by an allegiance to a  The intuency at both Guadee’s compositional teachings and  cadidienal canen of forms  Choisy’s constructional theories i casily derert ed in Pos awn work, where tradition 1 upheld by inclusion ina new technological context The apartments m the Rue Franklin in Paris (iyo2-si were Pos firstsignificant buildnig atter he deft the *Ecole des Beuus-A the family building enterprise  ris and entered This building, which in ground-plain paved the way for *Le Corbusier's “plan libre’, celebrated an its clewa- tion the possitility of an architectural renewal  through the use of remforced-conerete, The structural skeleton is cniphasized and explored tor external effect. The walls. omamental surfaces, demonstrate clearly this  dissulved mto  distinction between frame and inall, Ornamene derived from: *Are Nouveau lends the infill panels a certain decorauve force. Pos next work, the garage ap the Rue de Ponthicu, is tar . the seructure of che fagade is reduced toa strongh  les dependent on decorative effects, Here  geometrical urrangeuient: an iMMOVACIVE aWatee hess of maternus is softened by a rhythnic sense of fora, Only the portal and the large window above iture treated decorauvels. By contrast. in the Theatre des Chanips-Elyscées in Paris 69 4  Perret. Flats it) the Rue Franklin, Part i tues si  
Perret. Notre Dante. Fe Raiaey. near Paris  a orkgn by Henry van de *Velde. the  strongly arneulared ane  is pl  suuctiral components are not  sometry iv emploved cb otaneans co evoke a classical idiom  The premises of P's pres World War Dw ork  wvere chicky Ove  te elevate the remforcods conerete skeleton te the plane of archtteenire. and te adap. Che Beaux-Arts aesthene to new  pemeiples of fase and infill composition. The et Not Dane atl  Hiyst 3  churel eo Raanes. near Parris  te vontridier tha. Phe outer  walk, compre or protibricated contpenents envelop the mtorr «ith a Gaisparcie nieshi-  work whic er wuthithe veraeal empha-  snambyrs. evoke a Gathie Nove hesss work bears wits  and charity ain wie tis  dl Champs ily sees sit Ty picalor dhe  as of the suppor  cathedral, even his  postwar his pursues of sim pherry  sohonmecot thy neo-  issicbt fenderets Steaca in the Dhéitre des  hatin  logan ste ot these  years are the compe: s for the Palace  ofthe League of Naders ss Geneva rut and for the Palace of the Soot Vloscoww  wwellasthe Hoteldu \:  iysdh. sther National: 134! id the Musée des Tras ox Yubhes oiya7i in Paris.  for World Worl a  POsmost important we  wa cthe reconstruction of Le Flew re. tygs) <4)  model example of 2oth-century neo-classical urban planning. NM ©. Perret, Auguste, Contribution a une théorie de Parchitcemre, Paris tys2s Rogers, Ernesto Nathan, lugeste Perro, Milan) ryss: Cham- pigneulle. Bernard, diagiste Perret, Paris fysg: Colhiny, Peter, Concrete: The Vision of a New Architcemre; lL Stidy ef Augnste Perret and his Ache. |. B. (ed.), Perret » Paris tysy.  partners, London 1ys  texhibition catalogue  Piacentini, Marcello. b. Rome i8si.d. Rome 1960. Studied ar the Accademia di San Luca in Rome, where he was acdve fram 1y00 as an mdependent architect. He was. profesor atthe Senola Superiore di Architettura in’ Rome. Chief cditor of Lo dvehitenmra, 1922-43 Between 910 and ty20 he established his professional reputation with a series of build= ings Which atonee adhered te and surpassed the academic *celecticism of che day. Works such as the Villa Allegri Rome (iyis-ati document. ror all their traditionalism. a cour.  TCOUS INLETESt  mi modernistic experiments and represent. like Hermann *Murhesis’s villas in Berlin, the dircet architectural expression of the cultivated bourgeoiste of the period  With the baseit seizure of power, B. sud- deny  became the Iksding exponent of the  ommous and never clearly defined state archi- weture the sevle of which oscillated between a reduced *neosclasicismt and the Nevecente Itakene. Fis pohoecal opporumisny won him Numerous cominissions, by 1y26 he buile the lic remodelled  Hotel Anibasciatert im Rom the Priget della Virtorit, fys7 actin ty32 he  completed the Via Regma Flena and. in con  Piacentini, Hotei Ammbasciatori, Rome (1926 
junction with Attilio Spacearelli, the not sur- prisingly controversial Via della Consiliazione in Rome. The Citta Universitaria, Rome, was built 1932-5: P. developed its monumentally conceived general plan and built the strongly axial, travertine-clad adiminisera- tion building. The monumental staircase, the pilasters at the entrance rising through several  also im  storeys with neither bases nor capitals, che alist Latin frieze  expressive figurative relief sculpture in ri style,  and the commemorative  inscription are all characteristic features of  Italian neo-classicism of the 1y30s, From 1937 to 1942 Piacentini collaborated with Gineppe Pagano, Luigi Piccmato, Ettore Rossiand Luigi Viettt in the planning of the centre of the satellite town EUR (Esposizione Universale di Roma) near Rome for the proposed inter- national exhibition E42, which never took place because of the escalation of the war. The Via Romain Turin dates from 1938, the Piazza della Vittoria in Genoa from 142i and in 1ysy worked with *Nervi on the Palazzo dello Sport m Rome.  Piano, Centre National d'Art et de Culture Georges Pompidou, Paris (with Richard R wit 7)  Posantluence on 2oth-century Iuahian rchi- tecture Was enormous, not only becate of hos considerable oeuvre, but also through his While nota few of his works embrace the conventional and the commercial, his best works reveal an eleguit synthesis of modernism and: classical features which from a conservative position potat the way to an Italian variant of the *Internadonal Style. VMI “oP: Marcelle. Rome iy30. -— Pica, Agnoldomenico, frafia, Milan tug ts Portoghesi. timo a Rod 18y0° 192.  writings and activity asa teacher.  jacencini. Architeimra fogs, _ Vole di Roma, Rome 194s: Avchiteuuira moderna in Llecler  Paolo, 2. Rame ty6y.  Suudicd at che hinnelf  Piano, Renzo. b. Genoa (437. Milan sequently taught. 196s. 8. He wasin partiership with Richard *Rogers. tu7o 7. since whet he has worked in assocnigon with the engineer Peter Rice. P nid-1g6os, is concerned to achieve a technically determined architecture that is characterized as much by accommodation of the users’ needs ay An example ts the Alessandria: ftg6u). which was erected and altered by the chent  Politeeniva, where he sub-  J Whose first works date front the  by ity aesthetic qualities howe at Garonne, near  Terran iss sabi  ee Be ee  ASS | rel  
binseth P . on the Centre National dart ot de Culture Scultural  collaborated with Rouers, 197  Georges Pompidou. the sixestorey actine sclfeumciousls miserted itt the centre ef Parts Che glassecnelosed mternal spaces are. Chanks coexposed spanning beans 48 m1 (i s7 ft fon. long. cnurels free of suppers. allowing conmplere flexibility. The external appearance oF dhe brniding a created entirely by the steel  skeleton and the various service and vertical Ganspertiuioed clements painted am prinvary colours, Ebay romantic-techmical agsthetic re- calls Antone *Sant’ blia’s sisonary projects, as wcll as the yraphie reveries of Ruastan *Con= structive and of the *Archigram group. le his later work Po cononues die structural exper ments oF the Centre Pompidou purong participatory  continually them at the service of social and spplicadons: experimental resic dendal quarter a: Corciane near Porigia fig? sacwith Peter Rives district Laboratory’ tor the urbatr renewal scheme a Otranta frgts. tse muscum biulding for the Meni ros. thi, VMI LAr datecture dQ agour  wath Rice Collection in Houston. | ext  Prane = Rogers! November Deccmber ToTa pp gs ssc Renzo Prana. Proqets et realis= TUST op ett  Phai Paris: ne  wuens ty no. sty. February  LYS2. PP gs ss  Pietila, Reuna. b. Turku ya. Studied at the Vecbnical Colleges Helsinki. Since ty6o he bas Rail Pietili  fee Paatehunen tm Heelan. He was a profes.  run Jas own ethics. with his wire  sor atthe Chtversity m Qulu, i729. Among the Mostimportane worksor dhe partnership arc the Raleva church an Lampere 1668 and the Dipoli Seadents) Residence tt Otamemi, near Helsinki fiy67 tn the Kaleva chureh the wall shell curves inwards tnd narrow window scrips Gothic’ effect, while at Dipoh the pemerpal theme 1s the  create, With ther veri! emphast,  combination of ong freely formed part con- structed of randoin stone blocks. with another contrasting reenhinear part fo the Suwikumpu residential quarter ui Daprola o1y66 y) lite and rhydam is introduced ita un apartmenc block by the use of varying floor height and fenestra- doa The central buildings of Hervanta New Town, near Tampere bury co the banal housing surrounding them, Even more than in their carlter work. dis project  eTeate Ll Const rast  eaTrigs Meaning of a syinbolic nacure: i the shopping centre by reference to the cavered=  market architecture of the tyth century, in the Comnnunity and Leisure Centre by reference to old masonry and its natural surroundings. As they had always done in their work in Finland. the architects likewise pay great respect to local tradition in the Palace complex (1y70-81) for the Emir of Kuwait, including the Chancellery. Cabinet Office and) Foreign Minisery buildings, vs  Archiectire and Crbanism (Toky 0}, Septem ber 174  Poelzig, Hany. b. Berlin i8oy. d. Berlin 1936. Studied at the Hochschule in Borhin-Charlottenburg. He had his own office mm Breslan. rAgy 1y16, and in addition he taught Ty00 16 at the Kumst- und Kunst- gewerbeschule (after rytr the Akademie fiir Kunst und Kunstgewerbel. of which he was dircetor trom goa. He was Municipal Archi- tectin Dresden. tyi6 20, and a professor at the  Technische  there.  Fechnische Hochschule there. In iy20 he be- cane the head of a studio ac the Prussian Akadenne der Kiinste in Berlin. and in 1923 also Hochschule in Berlin-Charloctenburg: among his pupils in  professor at the Technische Berlin were Bgon *Ferniann, Julius Posener, ludolr *Schwartz and Konrad * Wachsinunn, His otice building ip Breslau (iy ti} anucipates a favourite motif of the 1920s, fenestration in horizontal stripy. The water-tower at Posen ynow Poznan: tyra} wath its undiyguised steel struceure, resembles a hexagonal crystalline form, this was the first a.untestation of P.'s architecture of * Expressionism, His designs just after World War includmg the proreet for the  Poelzig. Grolics Schausprelans, Berlin gis ty?  
Poelzig. 1.6. Farbemmduscrie adminnstraccon building. Frankfurt am Main iry28 30)  Salzburg Festival Theatre (1y20 2) are of) visionary imagination. The rebuilding of che Schumann Circus mto Max Rembhardt’s GroBes Schauspicihaus, Berlm (yts ryt, was based on these designs: the auditorium, a “space  av  * decorated with stalactite-shapes. was ore of the mast notable interiors of the Expresion= ist era, Towards the end of the 1y2o0s, Po went over to buildings of a monumental strught- forwardaess, as ine the LG administration block, Frankfurt am (1928-31).  “. Heuss, Theodor, Hans Poelziy eines deutschen Baumetsters. Tabimgen 1gau and 193: Posener, Julius (ed.). Hats Poclste: Gesan- melte Schriften und Werke. Bertin 1yzo.  Farbenmndustric Mam  Leberishild  Polk, Wallis Jefferson. b. near Frankfort, Ken- tucky 1867, d. San Mateo, Cal. 1g24. Pupil of *Maybeck. The Hallidic Building (San Fran- ciscu, 1g18) by Polk and Co. is one of the first buildings with a fully glazed. non-loadbearing outer wall. It was a forerunner of che buuldings of the Modern Movement on the American West Coast: its filigree Boral decoration, haw= ever, is remaniscent of French *Art Nouveau and of *Sullivan’s ‘organic? ornament.  G Dillis, Ko W.. The Hallidie Building’, Joumal of the Society of Architectural Historians, 20 (1971), pp. 323-9; Longstreth, R. Wo. A Muster of Taste: Willis Polk's Writings an Architecture in the Wave, San Francisco. 1979.  Pollini, Gino, b. Rovereto 1y03. Studied atthe  Politeenico in Milan. He was a founder-  member of *Gruppo 7 He has worked regu larly in collaboration with Luigi *Figisn  Ponti, Giew b. Milan isyr. do tote Studied at the Pohtecnico. Milan. where he Tater taught (ry36-603, Che situagon me whieh he found himsclt at the beginning et his career was characterized by the camtradiction between the  * Rationalism in the circle of the  emerging “Gruppo 7 ifounded iy26: and the ideas of che  Novecento Italiane. largely based en neo-  chisicim and in which *Furturism: was Lirgels  abandoned. P. represented an elegance “Mmodern- influcrived by Oete * Wagner. which united clysical motit\ and rationalise  tue toudenes.  clarity. In contrast to the other archicects of bis generation. awhe rehed on the chissical efteuty derived from the use of arches and columns, Pona adhered in general to the cenets of che rationalist and funcrienalist school  Tn ty2s he tounded the journal Dovits, one of che most intportant Tolan zrchicectural periods icak. which led the way in improvmg the taste  Ponti. Pirelli Lys Ne  Skescraper, Milan ny celuberatian:  
ofthe tralian public an interior deagu. In 1933.  t  betere he dad) discarded his neosclassicise  loan  he was ippomnted to the executive tee ot the Vo Milan Trennale. Its great vas thatat drew the young ‘rationalist’  cont  ment irolatwicts from Milan ito the fed of major international exhibigens  Pos tong series of buildings began mi 1923:  bucuwason an tysn. with the scheme tor the Cathohe Pros bxlubition in the Vatican City. Heo gave up. the  Contentions of ncosclasicism. Also in 1936 he  dhat Auict symmetry and  hee block for the Monte-  designed dhe first of eatin? Conrpans in Milan {the sceond dates trom rysty in which he combined Novecento clements seg. maximuin plastic evidence of volumes. with otbersofthe rauonalist system of yothedes. hi tys6 She redized his masterpiece in the Pirelli Skyscraper im Mulan twith other architeets and with * Nervio as structural engi- neers. With its bold structural skeleton, smooth, regniar Figades and capering sides hike a ship's hows, 1 was one of the first skyscrapers 16  Portman. Hyau Kegenes Hotel, San Prancisen John Portman & Asooates. 174  abandon the rectangutar block form customary up te that point. GV GHa  Ponu, Gio, Amate Parchiteruura, Milan 1987: Plaut. James S.. Espressione di Gie Ponti, Milan 1ys4; Shapira, Nathan H, {ed.j. The Expression of Give Ponti, Minneapolis 1967.  Portman, John (Calvin) b. Walhalla, South Carolina ty24. Studied at the Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta, In tys3 he estab- lished an architectural offiee: the firm of Joha Portaian & Associates was established in ryd8. In many of his projects P. hay also acted as the developer. and this has allowed him to deters mine not only the formal appearance, but also the programme of his buildings. He developed anew. highly successful hotel type. whose  umnistakable trademark is the large interior court with shops, restaurants and) places for strolling: these he has built mostly m depressed Inver-eity areas as ans urban. erystalhzauon point. His best-known works are: the Peachtree Center in Adanta, Ga. with it. various build- y Hore i1y67 -THiand the Peachtree Plaza Hotel (igzey: the Hy ate Regeney Hotels at O'Hare Airport in  ings, including the Hyatt Regeney  
Chicago (1y71) and atthe Embarcadero Center in San Francisco (1974): the Embarcadero Cen- ter ieself (1976): the Bonaventure tote) in Los Angeles (1977); and the Renaissance Cencer in Detroit (1977). AM = Portman, John, and Barnett, Jonathan, Phe Architect as Developer, New York 1976. ‘John Portman. Peachtree Center, Bonaventure Hon tel and Renaissance Center’, Global Urchitcenire (Tokyo), no. s7 (ry81).  Portoghesi, Paolo. b. Rome 1y31. Studicd at the University of Rome; diploma tys7. From 1ysk he had his own office i Rome, and since 1964 has been in parmership with Vitrerio Gigliotti. He was a professor acthe University oF Rome. 1462 6. aud subsequently ac the Politecnico in Milan: since ryN rhe has resumed teaching at the University of Rome. Chict  editor of Conrespazio since 196y and editor of Itdca since 1977.  In the late tysos PL was one of the first architects Co turn away from * Rationalism and co orient himself strongly towards historical Paralleling wridpgs on Guarini and Borromii, he ad- mitted into his own work traditions as diverse ay oriental architecture, the Gothic. the Baroque. *Are Nouveau and * which he combined with modernist farms and composidonal elements to form creations ay  models. his carly architectural  romantic *celeeticism,  Portoghesi. Church of the Sacra Famugita Salerno (with Vittorio Gighotti: 1y68 74)  individnal as they are unmstakable. Thus. th: Casa Baldi near Rome (1ysy) presents a conte dictory synthesis of the Baroque and De *Stul In the Casa Andrens in Scandrighia {ty64 Casa Papanice in Rome (167) and che Churel ll Syme  mithe  ofthe Sacra Pamigha in Salerno (1o6s  based on complex. circular geometries. bohe. historical, mathematical and technologi- cal considerations all contribute toa simulating: tormal solution, At the same dine Po nvest- gated the aesthetic possibilities of expensive prefabricated building (Technical School in L’Aguila, ty6y 78) and daring concrete vault ing structures fIslamig Centre and Mosque in Rome, begin iy76). Through Ins oumerous writings andin bis Prima mostra internazionale diarchitettura’, an exhibinou held at the tus Venice Biennale, he established himself ay a intellectual Modernivin. VMI  leading spokaman of * Post Portoghesi, Paolo, Guarine Guariii, Milan  1ysoy © Borromini ucla cultura curopre. Rome tytg: ——. Le taihizionl delParctitedire modernt. Rome laygi > a cifter Modern Architecture. Bari 1g8a20 Norberg-Schulz, Christian. Ma rivered delfardutetana pentane Le opere Paolo Partoghesi ¢ Vittoria Cie Rome lots: Mosehini. Bo feds). Paale Porragt Progett ¢ discgat 1g40 tg7u. Property aad drariigs  rogo tora, Phorence 1yty.  Post-Modernism. A teri used a miumeronts disciplines to describe a seve or thearede pore Of view opposed to or superseding modermsi Repeatedly critieed as polo utical orim precise. Poste Modernnn bas nevertheless persisted ast Mayer issue in many telds of artistic expression litt most developed definition, the terns may describe a world-view which rejcets all of the Western world’s vorities: cehgiaus, reatonal or hunaise  In architecture this view pount Sas nee  common. bowever uid thus. stiee dhe catne into widespread use in die nidesytes, i has mast commonly becbenaplon cd te describe aa erlectie sty ho that uses clemrestts ofS nrtonts potiods, epecully those at the lasted trae with ironies ment. OMtecrtedl exe  PA ft Building *  dition. often  amples ares the ryt Sn New York by  tts residential des  boson ad Bungee. che var susoor Robot *S urns the Pieced bal in New Orleans by Charles *Afoore dycs Sous the Austraat Prove Buren in Viens by Hans *iolleur tg7sis the And  
CTP MITE  Post-Modernism. AT&T Building.  York (1g78  4). by Johnson and Burgee (model)  Cruelty Society in Chicago by Stanley *Tiger- nian (FySo): and. above all, the Public Services Building (iy80-2) in Porthnd, Oregon, by Michael *Graves. Indeed, the pastel colours and oversized keystones of Graves’s work are the most familiar hallmarks of ‘post-modern’ style.  Increasingly, however. in the early igNos the term “post-modern” has alo been used more profoundly to describe a fundamental shift m asumptions about architecture and society. In this case the moral imperatives of modernism, Le. that a building’s form and appearance should result in some causative and logieal way from che building programme, the nature of the material and construcnional procedures. have been called inte question and, asa result, often discarded.  The principal problem in using the tern: in this sccond sense arises from the fact that it does not resolve the ambiguities which have always beep occasioned by the notion ef ‘modemisny’ iell Indeed. efforts to define modernisin started to proliferate at precisely the moment when a large number of people felt it belonged tothe historical past. Several recent writers have distinguished between ‘modernisny’ in the lary ext sense, referring to the Western Humanist tradition. and Cniodernity’. referring to the  more specific ideals and goals of such avant- garde artits of the carly aoth century as Stravinsky. Pound. Eliot. Picasso and *Le Corbusier. In the first case Post-Modernism would bev reaction to the scenutic. rational. man-centred culture developed in) Western furepe and America over the hist several centuries. In certain respects this position repre~ sents a Jogical extension of 20th-century mod- ernismn, pushing it to the pomt where icealls mite. question the very assumptions on which it imidally rested. Such a radical position a best exemplified in the early work of the composer Jobn Cage and a number of writers and literary crities. In architceture perhaps only the werk of Peter * Eisenman approaches this pointot view  Eisenman’s work is. an extension of modernism. especially abstract painting and sculpture. in that he attempes to create an autonomous architecture. one which docs net derive its rationale and meaning trom anything extemal to usclf. The forms he uses are meant to be devoid of all conventional meanings and are used only as raw nitterials fora set of manipula- tions based on analogies to linguistic structure. Eisenman has described his method as working 
with syntax rather than semantics. that is with the way the words or elements are put together rather than wich their meaning. Although these manipulations are rigidly regu- lated according to rules, the choice of the rules themselves is admittedly arbitrary and thus constitutes a break with modernism. The spe- cific forms may appear to be unchanged. but all notions of social or aesthetic utepianisn are gone. as well as the beliefs in the universality of simple geometry and primary colours and other moralimperatives that had formerly guided the work of the moderniyts  The second alternative, Post-Modernism as an opposition to "Modern Movenient’ or “Mo-  inherent  dernity’, implies a more or less decisive break with the major goals of 2oth-ceutury avant garde, anda re-integration with the ideals of the pre-modernist era. This conception of Post- Modernism, by far the more associated primarily with American architects such as Michael *Graves. Charles *Moore, Robert *Stern and others. Itis usually deseribed by its proponents ay an attempt te restore meaning to architecture by the re-introduction  commion, 1s  of conventional architectural clements, and to be more pluralistic by enlarging the repertory of styles and forms available to the designer However, the break is by  yle, stripped of its underlyin: ideologies, is admitted as one of the historical styles. Critics charge that this stance fostered an architecture devoid of all meaningful rules. one which merely follows fashions and trafies with the mass-market. Proponents, oa the other hand, claim that through historic reference and adaptability they are restoring the continuity of the built environment and reinforcing the sense of specific places which they feel modernists dented or even destroyed. A small bur growing  ho means a clean one  since modernist st  minority of architects, such as Raymond Erith and Quinlan Terry in *Great Britain or Allan Greenberg in the *USA, advocate the usc of classical elements, to be employed in a much more straightforward. literal fashion (*nco- classicism).  Because the term Post-Modernism has only been applied to architecture since the mid-1y70s and since its definition is still greatly contested,  iis dificult to sketch its history. This problem is compounded by the fact that for many post- modernists the very notion of a linear, cause- and-effect history iy suspect. There does, how- ever, seem to be some consensus about some  Post-Modernism. 111774 Valin, New Orleans tuts so}, by Charles Moore  Important ephodes in the development of wide modern and postmodern cheery and practice. Despite the numerous ardtudes ever a long period which may be wolared ay precursors. it was only in the ty6os that an every ano- modernist polemic came to che tare. Que af she carliess and most sustained attacks originated outide the architectural profession in the form of reacvons co che programmes of urban renewal. A clasic example was Jame Jacob's influential Dear aid fate ef Crear Citles (19604,  From wathm the pratesion several Ameri-  Honeri ate  cans established themselves carly on ay crities ot modernist. practice. Charles Moore. in both teaching and a series of architeeninal projeen, sought an architecture based en anthirepo- morphic forms, historical memory and even a degree of whimsy. Philip Johnsan, ma series of widely publicized lectures. undermined some of the most basic assumptions of avant-garde 2oth-centuury architeccure in asserting the pris macy of art. intuition and beauty ever funetion- alt and ragonalist concerns.  Finally, Robert *Vennunt challenged mod- ernist practice and ideas in Complexny: und Contradiction in lrchitectire (ry66), in which he argued for a more complex and sital architec  ture. opemmg the door for the simultaneous use of clements derived from history and from the vernacular, He celebrated ambiguity and irony, qualities not commonly even acknowledged by 
modernists ay elements of architectural expres- Nien. The influence of his wite. the planner Dene Scott Brown. and of the sociologist Herbert Gans was coaspicuous in his second book. Leaeinig front bas Peers (gt). Un this book, the outgrewt of a Yule seminar, the and Steven Tzeneur turned ta the popular even raucous, American landscape for  Vorturis  seurves and focused especially on the comimer- cil roadside ‘strip’. Phey argued thac che large Signs of the Las Vegas casinos were appropriate arehitectural forms for an aucomebile-oriented culture. By extension. they posited the notion that the simple shed widh applied: decorations Way tore reasonable model for many kinds of bunldings than the herore work of the modern- ats who. forbidding decoration. had ren- dered the entire structure decorative. Although the Venturis always considered chempelves modernists, their relnince on taste’ rather than on modernist mora) inperatives allowed their followers to view them wo father figures of Post Modernism In Europe the situation was quite different  For the most part the European avant garde has castigated Post-Modernisnt as Amerigan, con- suiner-oriented kitsch’. Phere does. however. existan importaneantiemodernise strain chat has aomumber of things in common with Post- Modemism, During the cy6os the writings and teaching of Aide * Rossi tint brought co light ideas that have been developed under the *Ratonalist  defia cura  architecture. Ino hiy Rossi against the generation of new farins by che use or functional and argued instead for forias created by analogs with the buildings of the traditional Eurepean city contre, with ity clearly derined public and Private spaces. These tornis he supposed co be based on archetypes latcntan the city dwellers! collective memory  A popularization wind caditicacian of Ratton= alise views. although without Rossi's intensely  banner of  clrchitertuna Ligoot argued  structural necessities and  personal poetry. was provided bs Rob *Kricr ir his Stadtran mt Theorie tid Praxts (ig7s). Uhe European Rationalists, winle definitely anci- modernist, can only with duPiculey be consid= ered Post-Modernists since thes have, for the most part. merely substituted one set of moral imperatives for another. “The new thought has been the left-wing poliseal tra- dinon that earlier had nourished many of the  basis of  modernists. In recent yeary the cross-tertiliza-  tion of American and European ideas has created interesting hybrids. Europeans ke Paolo *Portoghesi have championed American Post-Modernism while Americans such as the group of architects and the Institute for Archi- tecture and Urban Studies in New York have translated and published the writings of the Rationalists. Europeans have undeniably been influenced by American practice. while the Ainericans have appropriated Rationalist forms and used them widely. almost always stripped of their entire theoretical basis. The resule has been a tremendous proliferation of approaches and styles. In the case of the housing projects of Ricardo *Botill ac Sait-Quentin-en-Y velines in France (fyS1) or che works of Arquitectonica in Miami or muny Japanese works, it iy hard to  Iro- most  know whether modern or post-modern,  pean oor American, influences are important  Concurrently with the carly writings of Venturi and Rossi came a number of other events that shook the basis of modernist prac tice, By cuthusiastically accepting elements from: low culaure, Pop artists such as Claes Oldenburg effected a blurring of the traditional disunetion which such modernist crities ay Clement Greenberg had insisted upon as che necessary protection of the avs mass-comumption “kiseh’. Hans *Hollein in Austria and STUE (* Wines} m the USA exem-  plity chiy tendency in architecture. The recent  nt garde trom  growth of research and interest in architectural history has bad a similar effect. By devoting Senuus attendon to previeusly maligned or overlooked figures. for example. *Lutyens or the Gernian Expressiomtsts Expressionism) at the 1y20s, historians documented the diversity of modermsn. By focusing on such subjects as the *Ecole des Beaux-Arts. they tacitly con- doned the original targets of the modernist polemic. Reeent works by Colin Rowe, ne- tably his Collage City Owith Fred Koctler, 1977). and David Watkins’ notable Morality and Avchi- rectre L5Q77) have attempted to expose the contradictions and fallacies of modernist itself,  Th a wider meellectual sphere, semeiology hada profoundly corrosive effect on modernist AssuuMptions, since if increasingly suggested that, far from bemg universal, almost all mean- ings inherent in cultural activities were conven~ tional and culturally bound. Although its impli-  cations for buildings were widely disensed in  the carly 1y7os, Ure direct transter of such ideas 
to architectural practice, for example Peter Eisenman’s attempt co use ideas from the study of language in his work, was problematic.  By the imd-ig7as a spate of popular books, such as Peter Blake's Pernt Follows Fiasea (1977, or Brent Brolin’s Failure of Modern Architecture (ty78), diffused the post-modern critique and announced the death of modernism by cata- loguing all of its alleged crimes. A somewhat later example, Tom Wolfe's from Bauhaus to Our House (iy8o), has found a wide public. Charles Jencks’ Langttage of Post-Modern Archi- fecture (1977) provided the first influential at- tempt to define and codify Post-Modernism. In colourtid and highly polemical prose. Jencks argued that modernists were interested in ‘univalent’, post-modernists in “multi-valent’, or “double-coded’ imagery: modernists In uni- versal truths, post-modernists in history and local context: modernists in technology and structure. post-modernists in the vernacular. the metaphorical and in a new kind of ambigu- ous space. Despite these clear-cut simplifying, definitions, Jencks’ book was little more than a catalogue of stylistic categories.  In the lase few years, a more searching exploration of Post-Modernism has begun, notably in articles by Robert Stern and Jorge Silvetet in the first volume of the Harvard Architectural Review (ty8o}. in the essays in the catalogue of the 1980 Venice Biennale, Arehitee- ture 1980: The Presence of the Past, and in the anthology The Auti-desthetie, Essays on Post- Modern Culture (1983). Recently, several efforts have been made to erect a theory of architecture based an convention and chorce rather dian ou  principle of universal validity. ‘The mast no- table of these is perhaps William) Hubbard’. Complicity and Convention: Steps toward an Architecture of Convention (tg8o). The rise of a younger generation of architects tained by such influential figures as Stern and Graves  suggests the possibility for the creation of asct oF  architectural forms proper te the Post-Modern- ist point of view. Rut TT fencks. C.. The Language of Post-Modern Architecture, Loudon ty77i--. Late-Moders Architecture and Other Exsays. London Harvard Architectural Review, vol. 1, 1g8o: Pommer, R.. ‘Some Architectural Ideologies after che Fall’, Art Journal (New York), ball 1980; Portoghesi, P.. fier Modern Architecture, New York tys2; Foster, Hal (cd.). ‘The Anti- dlesthetic, Exsays on Post-Modern Culture. New  1gSa:  York rua; Klotz. Hemrich ced.), Die Revision der Moderne: Postmoderne clrelitektuir ig6o tyse (exhibition catalogue). Munich 1y84: Klotz. HL. Moderne rod clrehtteknie der Cregenwart 1960 1g8e, Wiesbaden 1g 4.  Postmoderic  Powelland Moya. Sir Philip Powell and Joby Hidalgo Moya studied at the Architectural Association School, London, and im ry46. two years after graduating, founded their partner- ship to carry out the Pimlico Housing Scheme London. which they had won (in compedtion agamst  (ow Churchill Gardens, ogo G2}.  sixty-four other entrants; with a desigie that proved asignifi  samt landmark in the attempt to Their wark includes che vertical Poature (Skylon) at the *Fostival of Britain, London. iysic May ticid Comprehensive School, Putney (oso: subtic. lan Nairnj: Princess Marga- retHlospital. Swindon! ty72h hexagonal theatre  establish a post-war vernacular  elegant. humane’  with arena stage, Chichester (ig6t}) Cripps Buildings. St fobn’s College, (1967), and the Museum of dondon. in che Barbican redevelopement (1976)  Cambridge  Prouveé, Jean. b. tuo Naney. ds tusy Nancy > a0 funder Emile Robert) asain art  Trained ry metal worker in N Victor Prouye, was one of the leading fyures of the local *Arc Nouveau, Barly on, he was giver important furnishing commussieny which sean  nes. where tis futher.  brought him inte contace with the architectural avant garde of *Prouee. Around  replaceable wail components, the test of its  ryso, P. developed a systenr ot kinds as the basis of an easity erected houstug procotype of light-meral construction on stu chions. Through a refined balmy of the requirements of statics. material and produc- tion, he developed a ternal language ptost closely related feven i furniture) to the aute- mobile industry. In all bis designs there ps a cleur dixtinction between supporting od enclosing  elements, He was ane af the first Go make the  principle ofthe curtany walitechmealls teasible Hgzgrand subsequently tpiameen mats practical application (Club House on the Buc attic. wax; architects Ragtne #Betudoum te Marcel bods  The Maser die Peuphe at Chehy erya> 9 architects Beamdouin aid Leds! i one of ie pioneermg works of modern technologies  oriented architecture, with ity progecting: steel 
Prouvé. Spa building. bvian “with Maurice Nova  Bap lyst  Prouvé. Curtai-wall fayade on the Lycée at Baycrols-sur-Cove with Badan and Koux-Dorlac, Lusi  construction, skin of large expanses of glass, and asembly-hne walleunity of sheer metal and integral glazing. In his construction and pros duction workshops at Maxéville near Nancy, which he directed personally until opening his 1os4. PB. introduced insunierable collaborators to. hay work and methods. } ltsself-set programme was to meet the challenge of an architecture based on industrially fabricated components which were lightweight for both easy transport and straightforward on-site erection. he strow create buildings which would give full expres-  own constiag firm in Paris in  to  von to the dynamic and treedom which he felt mast characterize a mass-culture served by machine production  B.'s most convincing constructions consist of several types: roof structures resting on steel supports and asymmetrical ib army stabilized by tensile cables (temporary school building at Villgimit, tys3: Spa building, Evian, 1ys architect Maurice Nowarina}: steel Space-frames s (Congress Hall, Gre Total service stations, 1968); and  for rooting large surf.  noble. ry curtains wall designs dbstinghuished by elegant details. P'S curtain-wall fayades are to be tound on numerous French school buildings, and also onan apartment block in Paris (ys 3; architect Lionel Miraband). on the Institute buildings of the Free University im Berlin-Dahlem (1y63. *Candilis.. *Josic und  Tyr architects  Prouve. Houses at Meudon-Bellevie sig sy  Prouvé. Prefabricated homes iSahara type! under comstrnction (tyss}  
* Woods, together with Mantred Schiedhelm). as wellas on an office tower at La Défense, near Paris (1967: architects Jean de Mailly and J Especially noteworthy are B.'s) prefabricated houses (development at Meudon-Bellevue, 1949: prototype for Abbé Pierre with prefabricated concrete units as the core, 1956; Sabara types. 1958), for their fune- tion and spatial effect are as unified as if taken trom the same mould, while his social vision of a new equitable industrial age is also given convincing form. Mi 2 Jean Prouvé’, cdrehiteerure (Brussels), nos. 11/12. W904. fear Proaré (exhibition catalogue) Paris 1964: Huber, B.. and Steinegger, J. (eds), Jean Prouré. Architektur ans der Fabrik, Zurich ty7t: Clayssen. Domunigue. fea Prouvé: L'idée Constructive, Paris, 1y83.  cques: Depusse).  Purism. ‘The first exhibic of the purist move- ment took place in ty 68 in the Galerie Thomas in Paris. The catalogue contained a manifesto under the revealing tle “Aprés Je cubisme’ (Atter Cubisny’) signed by the pater Amicdée Ozenfant and the painter, sculptor, and archi- tect Charles-Edouard Jeaneret, later known as *Le Corbusier. After brusquely declaring the bankruptcy of *Cubism, they announced a new art, which was to be developed through an economy of means, collaboration with tech- nology, and pure geometry. The impersonal- ness and cool restraint in no way negated the  poetry of their strongly composed pietures of  simple, mechanically built-up — figurative elements. ‘The purist aesthetic which, like that of the *Baubaus. strove for association with  Rainer. City Hall, Bremen (1964)  stundardization and industrial production, was propagated beeen 1920 and (yas in the pages  of the periodical L'hsprit uenrean. In the person of Le Corbusier it was introduced inte archizes-  dure and urban planning. VMI  Rainer, Rolind, b. Klagenfurt gto. Traimed atthe Technische Hochschule in Vienna. Began teaching tys3 class at dhe Akadeniice der bildenden Kiinste, Vienna, He was Planning Director tor the City of Vienna, 1958 63. In conscious opposition to the fortitication-like Apartment blocks of the ty20s. R. strongly advocated the concept of “ardiculated and decentralized” gar- den cities, which he was first able to realize in  trom 19s6 he directed a muster  Viennese  the prefabricated Veitingergase housing estate in Vienna (1933) 4. with Carl AubOck). Further important examples of his influence on town planning are dhe Mauerberg estate im Vienna (1904) and Puchenau garden city, uear Ling (tirse building dity halls of Vienna (iyss). Bremen (igngj and Ludwigaiaen (tg6s) are characterized by  phase 196g, second tg7s). The  strong sculptural effects derived from an adroit manipubigen of construction iGelf. AM TT Goderitz. J. Rainer, Rand Horhnann Th. Die eeefiederte nad anteelockerte Stadt. Tabingen ros7: Rainer, Ro Livable baviron- ments, Zurich ty72: fur cine gerecttcre: Stadt, Vieuma tuts Kamin. Peter. Roland Rainer: Baten. Schriften wad Projekte, Vibingen 1973.  Tebens-  
Rational architecture, Student’ Revdence. Chieti tute. 1ycy 84.0 by Giorgia Grassi and Antonia Monastirels  Rational architecture. Movement in con- architecture launched by Aldo *Rossi, which postulates a rational and ex- ecutable solution of the problems of design grounded on the logical ordering of cities and architectural types.  The concept of Rational architecture, which Rosst had already sketched out in theoretical terms in tyo6 in Liarchiteinera della citta. was explicicly developed in the book Architettura raztonale by Rossi and others, published in 1y73 on the occasion of the NVth Milan Triennale. Rational architecture combines the radonalistic  TUT TTT TTT" PUTT TTT ets  temporary  Rational architecture. An spar the Gallaratese 2 complex, Milan by Aldo Rossi  ent building in lysis 1970 3),  archiceccural theory of the Remussance, En- lightenment classicism and the thought of the rgaes and considers architecture as an indepen- dent science which contains within itself its natural Jaws and thus its formal legitimacy. These natural laws can be reworked through the study of the City of Types. The city is viewed primarily as an historical place and the type asa historically immutable primary cle~ ment of architecture which cannot be further reduced. A theoretically and pobtically con- templated search should overcome the alien- adon of nianand architecture: chus the principle of functionalism is rejected in favour of formial- ism, which sets itself against production by the division of labour in an effort to restore a desired unity, Among the most important buildings of Rational architecture figure Rossi's apartment block in the Gallaratese 2 complex in Milan's Monte Amiata housing estate (196g. 1970-3) and the Students’ Residence in Chieti by *Grassi (1y76. 1979 If).  Architects who share intellectual sympathies with Rational architecture include: Mario *Botta. J. P. *Kieihues, Léon *Krier, Rob *Krier, Bruno Minardi, Franco Purini, Bruno *Reichlin, Fabio *Reinhart, Luigi Snozzi. Sal- vador Turrago y Cid and O. M. *Ungers. VML 2S Rossi, Aldo, L'urchitettura della cit, Padua 1y66 (English ed: The Architecture of the City, Cambridge. Mass. 1y82): Grassi. ¢ costruzione logica delfarchitettura, Venice 1967: Bonfanu, E.. Bonicalzi, R., Braghteri, G Ragyi, F., Rossi, A., Scolari, M,, and Vitale, D.. Architetura razionale, Milan 1973; Rational Architecture) Architecture Rationelle, — Brussels 1978.  tiorgio, La  
Rationalism. Architectural movement of the first half of the zoth century, whoye common intellectual position consisted in the pursuit of the most rational possible solution to design problems. Although it comprised an aspect of *Functionalism, it encompassed wider philo- sophical, political. social, economic. and symbolic questions.  The incellectual principles of Rationalism go back to a tradition which is ay old ay architec- tural theory itself. Vitruvius had already estab- lished in his work De ctrehitectira that architecture iy a science that can be compre- hended rationally up and furcher developed in the architectural treatives of the Renaissance. Progressive art theory of the 18th-century opposed the Ba- rogue beauty of illusionism with che classic beauty of truth and reason. With the works of JON.L. Durand, E. E. Viollet-le-Duc. Gotttricd Semper, Auguste Choisy, and Julien Guadet, the intellectual legacy of this “architecture of the Enlightenment’ was continued throughout che igth century with emphasis and principles.  Twenticth-century Rationalisin derived less from a special, unified theoretical work as from acommon beli¢f that the most varied problems posed by the real world could be resolved by reason. In chat respect it represented! a reaction to *historicism and a contrast to *Art Nouveau and *Expressionism.  Te was not by chance that the ideological superstructure of the new movement extended from the sceptical humanistic socialism of a Ludwig *Mies van der Rohe to the radical communism ofa Hannes *Meyer. The belicfin abetter society ina better world was the driving force underlying the quest for a better architec- ture: this was not to be individualistic, but rather collective; its expression was net co be confined to individual buildings bue rather to multiple architectural and urbanistic agions; it was to be noc only national but mternational (“International Style)  From these premises were derived che five following (here simplified) principles which were characteristic of Rationalism:  () The concept of urban planning, architec ture, and industrial design as the means for fostering social progress and democratic educa- tion. To design was thus no longer viewed as an individual search for form but primarily asa social and ethical activity.  stylistic  This formulation was taken  new  oper-  (3) The maxim of ccononry which was applied ays much to band use as to building scl fie desire to create dwellings ror cveryane led. ot necessity in the economically unseutied trys  and iga0s. ta the ‘apartinent tor the mminial  existence’ (fax madonal ase uf plots.  malized ground-plany. a severe and ornament-  Este Dei aneney  inexpensive building methods. mini tree formal language  The systemane reference to indusirial teeb= nologies, standardization and pretubrieation for all levels of environmental design from city planning to mdustrial destgn. At die same time the parades  industry way not prepared for such «radical  there arose thar the building conversion and continued for che most part with conventional production, Nonetheless. individual objects were so designed that they could be mass-produced. i'one had the ability or en when in reality it did nor  enter the question,  desire to do so, E series production for ies  theory} influenced the formal vocabulary of  Rationalism, which consequently produced metaphors of industrializaion.  4) Priority to be given to urban planning over architecture,  shortage.  In the face of the drastic housing Solutions on a massive scale scemicd more impostane than individual operations hence the P (Siedhungen).  isi The rationality of architectural form. which  flourishing of housmg estates  wasseen asthe methodically developed result of objective social, economic, functional or construcdoual type. Form thus seemed atleast part a logical entity. which would not remain subject  c requirements, above all of a political.  to the whims of individuals but was rather collectively coucrollable. Vhe aesthere question was, at least in theory, pushed into the back- into the  process of formal invention was. im che tirse  ground, research feasibility of che place. founded on ethical considerations firspite of all protest to the contrary, Ragen alism quickly evelved inte a thoroughgoin and uniticd style wath a typical and detmabh: language of forms: and in spite of all protest fa the contrary. at beeame ; It was above all irustic garde ofthe early 2oth century converged ay int  tothe first metaice ac the Want  an artistic Movement * Bauhaus chat the trends of the  crucible and in turn cunched Rationalist archi- tecture, The comparatively new materiak steel. concrete and vlass were composed im buildings  with clear, closed and, for the move part. white- 
Rationalism, ALG Furbine Factory. Berlin (ig08 9) by Behrens  Rationalism. Fayus Pactory, Alteld an der Leine (Gyo 11), by Gropms  painted surtaces. with eriphy-cut openings. expansive glazing, and rectangular volumes:  houses were designed on the basis of hygienic  considerations, ground-plins rationalized and dissolved inte ‘Howing space continua’, and the Separation of interior snd exterior space was toa great extent abolished: . oustructional and fune- vost part made visible, historical elements and de orations were chim- mated, and finally the nosion of the fagade having a privileged appearance gave way toan equal treatment of all parts of the building. Among the earliest works of che 20th- century architectural Rationalism are buildings by Auguste *Perret, especially hts fats in the  Honal parts were for the  Rationalism. Chicago Tribune ‘Vower (competition project. 1922) by Gropius and Meyer  Rue Franklin in Paris (1yo2 3). and Peter * Behrens, such as the AEG Turbine Factory in Berlin (syo8 9). Primacy must. however, be accorded to those hy Adolf *Loos: his Steiner House in Vienna (1y10) constituted an emblem of budding Rationalism that was as revolution- ary as it was Tmpressive. [In addition there were the urbanistic visions of Tony *Gurnier and Antonio *SantElia. Numerous noteworthy contributions were made by Sovict *Construc- tivism) and the Dutch De *Sajl group.  The architecture of the second generation of progressive urchitcets of the Zzoth century — above all *Le Corbusier, *Gropins (who al- ready in Tyto- 11 had created a pioneering work of Rationalism in the Faguts Factory at Alteld an der Leine), Mies van der Rohe and J.J. P. *Oud  
-representsa synthesis of the social and aesthetic advances that were characteristic of the third decade of the century: these had for the most part been given their carliest expression in chiefly unexecuted projects drawn up immedi- ately after World War |. Mics designs for tall buildings of steel and glass (roy and 1y20-1), Gropius’s Chicago Tribune Tower (1g22: with Adolf *Meyer) and that for the ‘redents’. the distantly-spaced skyscrapers on a cruciform ground-plan in Le Corbusier's ‘Ville contemporaine’ project (also 1922), were all much indebted to the earlier architectural achievements of the *Chicago School.  One of the first decisive realizations of the ideals of mature architectural Rationalism was the jewellery shop which Gerrit *Rictveld de- signed in the Kalverstraat in Amsterdam (1921) Parailel to this were Le Corbusier's projects for the Maison Citrohan (ig20-2) and Mies van der Rohe’s designs for a country house in brick {ty22) and an office building in concrete (1923). Larger works of ‘classic’ Rationalism followed: the Bauhaus at Dessau (1925 6) by Gropius. the Maison Cook (1926) and Maison Stein (1927) by Le Corbusier, the housing estate at Hock van Holland (ty24--7) by Oud, the housing estate for the Reichsforschungsgeselischatt (Imperial Research Association) at Dessau-1  van der Rohe’s  centr  rten (1g26—  Rationalism, Maton Stein, Garchey (u2t), by Le Corbusier  7) by Gropius, the Dammerstock quarter in Karkruhe (12 Siemensstadt housmng estate in Berlin (1929-30), Mies van der Rohe’s German Pavilion at the World’s Fair in Barcelona (ig2y). his Tugendhat House im Brie (1y30), as well as the Villa (1y29-31) by Le Corbusier.  Despite Frank Lloyd *Wright’s influence from the begimung of the century onward on  8). the great  Savoye at Poissy  Rationalism. Gerinan Pavilion at the World's Fair. Barcelona (yay), by Mies van der Rohe  
Reieninyr  vounger outade the *USA respectdiy in the * Netherlands and in *Ger- nas the pew style wasot brench, Dutch. and  architevts. even  German origin. Before the end of the 1209 it had scarcely gameda foothold in other Euro- USA. bven tn the original countries it advanced only with ditfi-  porn countres ara che  cudues: continually oppescd by the advocates af tradiuonalisng it achieved only an extremely Gnuted amount of but work. An important stage in the bartle for general recognition was diac architectural avant-garde munitesta, the Weilecnhoficdlung festate} ot ta27. which was builtin Sturrgart on the occasion of an exhibi- ‘Die Wobnung’. prepared by the *Deuascher Werkbund: chiyserved to unity the effore which up ali chen had been essentially disparate and individual, and at the sume tine  ton  demonstrated agreement as to tarmal inten- Phe #CIAM iCongres Internattonaus WArchitecoire Modernel, whieh were to be- come the most uppercut theoretical backbone of the movement. were launched a year later  ao  Thus Rationalism, despite incessant internal and external confrontations, achieved a consid crable expansion in both Europe and the USA in the early ryges. Yet shorty atterwards, the political and cultural situation in Germany, *tealy. and the USSR U*Russiat interrupted its development tn these countries: soon World War I would halt nearly all building activity  After the war che IRarionalist experienced tt return whitch way as quantita-  movement  avely overwhelummg as ih was qualitanvels dubious: the “Gasse™ period tay m the past. Its philosophical. politcal and soctal assumptions were no Jonger valid: ity protagonists. had grown old. Phe few noteworthy buildings which were produced ay stragglers within the ot which the Rohe’s Neue Nauonalgalerie in Beri ciyes 8) remained isolated and balanced. for acsthetic qualities. on the edg or obsolescence. Flaving  original Ragonabse tradigery highpoint is Mies van) der  all their  become entangled in he profound coneradic- don of the ‘economic i itcle” and the “energy daeeted its attention  VMI Parchi-  ceria’ the avant garde nu to new proposals. Guadet, Julien, ttheorte de Cours profess’ a@ Pi ote Nationale et Specle des Beawx-clrty (4 vols. Pari md. Jtyor 4k Gropiuy, Wo. fater csomafe Aredi- tka. Munich ry2s (new impression Mainz }: Hilberseimer, L.. Grofistadticiten, Han-  lement  lecture  1y6  over 1938: . Grofistadtarchiekner, Stutygarc  Ty2si fed. daernationale nene Bunkienst, Stuttgart ju27: Belne. Adolf, Der moderne Zaveekban, Munich i926 (reprinted Berlin,  Frankturt am Main and Vienna 1g64): Mever. Poter, Moderne Architektur wid Tradition, Zurich tga, Plat. Gustav Adolf. Die Baukunse der nenesten Zeit, Berlin. tyat: Moholy-Nagy. L.. The New Visions From Material to clrelnteenre. London 1939: Hilberseimer. L.. Pte New City, Chicago 1944: —. The New Regional Partern, Chicago tygy: Watkin, 1. J. Morality and Irchitecture, Oxtord 1g7y.  Reichlin, Bruno, b. Bellinzona. Switzerland tugt. Studied at the Eidgendssisch Hochschule (ATH) in Zurich He worked under Giovanni Klaus Konig at the University of Horence. 1y6y) Zo. and since 1970  Technische  t diploma 1y67.  has been active asa designer jointly with Fabio *Remhart. Both men worked under Aldo *Rosiatthe ETH in Zurich, ig72 g.in ty7a 4 thes built the Casa Tonini at Torricetla, which alludes to the Palladian villa type. simulta- neously alienating the type and submitring it to reinterpretation. Vhey villa theme in the Casa Sartortat Riveo (lute 7). where quotations of clissieal clements occur in the most extremely reduced form. Their con- ceptof architecture asa graphic system has even tl renovations (Otfice  conanued the  found expression im seve ot the Magntrate in Sornico., 197 gon of the church in San Carlo. ry7s yu}. In ty76 the partnership way expanded to include twe new members: Marie-Claude Bétrix and Eraldo Consolascio. AH  restora  Reichlin. Casa Torun, Vorricella (with Fabio Rembhart, 1973. 4) 
C Steinmann, Martin, and Boga. Thomas (eds.), Tendenzen, Nevere Architektur im Te (exhibition catalogue), Zurich 197s. pp. 41 5. 76. VR0-1: Architecture and Urhanism (Vokyo), Sept. 1976 pp. 38-44: Nicolin, Pierluigi, “Architettura intrinseca. Opere di Bruno Reichhin ¢ Fabio Rembart’, Lotis International (Milan), no. 22 (1970) pp. g4ths Schwer- zerischer Werkbund (ed), Bruno Reichtin, Kuhio Reinhart, Marie-Claude Berrian, Eraldo Consolascie ig70—1979 (portfolio af 22 Tease sheets}, Basle 1979.  yin  Reidy, Affonso Eduardo. b. Paris ryoo, d. Ria de Janeiro 1464. Studied at the Escola Nacional de Belas Artes, Rio de Janeiro, where he later served in 1930 [ay assistant to the Professor of Architectural Design, *Warchavchik. In 1931 he himself became Professor of Architectural Compasition and in rgs4 Professor of Urban Planning at the Federal University in Riu de Janeiro. In tg34@ he jomed the team of young architects responsible (with *Le Corbuster as consulting architect) tor the Ministry of Fduca- tion Building. In che Pedregulho Housing Estate. Rio de Janeiro fryg7 2h with its  Reidy. Pedregulho estate. Rio de Janeiro (rg47 sa}  apartment block, 260m j8so ft) long. tollawing the winding contour of die hilistde. are imeluded aschool, gymnasium, clinic, laundry and shops Access is by bridges to the middle level af the building. The Communal Theatre in Rin de Janeiro (tyso} features a precise and: plowant application of the inverted double-slope root RS most signiticant work, the Museum of Modern Art in Rio de Janeive (rysq-9), com= bines an exhibition building and a f.aco-seat theatre: conerete ribs enclosing and supporting the roor and Hoor slab and for the then novel method employed to combine natural daylight: with artificial lighting.  ROS architecture is characterized by consid- erable formal and structural freedom. but never. ay is somretimes the case in *Nicmever’s  the former is notable for its raves ot  work, oversteps the boundary of ‘art for irs sake” HEM GH L. Prank, Khius. The Works of lHonse Eduarde Reidy. New York 1y6o  Reinhart, Fabio. b. Bellinzone. Switverlind tag2. Studied at the Eidgendssische Technische Hochschule ino Zurich. Since 19to he has Bruno *Reichlin. and like Reichlin was an assistant under "Rossi ar the Zurich school, cy  worked with  
Revell, Ofice butlding. Helsinki iwith Keys Pets iysts  Revell, Viljo (Gabricli, b. Vaasa tyro. Helsinki sgo4. Studied at the Technical College mn Helsinki. Elis Crystal: Palace in) Helsinki (1935, with N. Kokko and H, Rtihimaki), a bazaar building which also incorporated a cinema, wasn the sprit of the early Modern Movement. The Centre for War Invalids in Lipert (i948) borrows from aWright in addition to bearing witness to northern Europein Romanticism of the 1y4os. The office building he designed with Keijo Petijiin Helsinki (iygg. 1yso. 2) was a barbin- ger of the *Interagonal Sele in) Finnish architecture. The Mecilabe state schoo! in Hel- sinki (1ys2 3. with Osmo Sipari) as a study in the composition of treels disposed volumes. [In  Rehabilitation  r9s8 he won, in conienction with Heikki Castren, Bengt Lundsten ard Seppo Valjus, first prize in the competition for a new City Hallin Voronto (completed iyoy. in which two curved office towers embrace a discus-shaped asscinbly ball. la addition to ts activity as an independent architect, R. has pt tant role in the reconstruction programme launched in tyg2 by the Finnish Architects’ Association (until 1949). In that cfort he was  soap impor-  Revell, City Hall. forente iin collaboration: (YS8 64)  especially concerned with questions of radona- lization. standardization and pretabrication. Ps LU Alander, Kyésti (ed.), Viljo Revell, Works and Projects, New York 1966; Hertzen, Heikki von, and Speiregen. Paul D., Building a New Finland's New Garden Cuy, Tapiola, Cambridge. Mass. 173.  Town  Ridolfi, Mario. b. Rome tyo4. Studied at the University of Rome: diploma iy2y. Subse- quently, he workedin collaboration with Adal- berto *Libera. From 1936 he was a member of the *MLLAR. In 1933 he travelled to Ger- many, Where he was strongly influenced by *Gropius, *Mies van der Rohe, *Mendelsohn and Bruno *Taut. After World War UI he worked in collaboration with the engineer W. Frankl R.°s first important building, the Post Office in the Quartere Nomentano in Rome (1932) and *Expressionism and of ‘magical realism’ and thus anticipated the crisis of the reason’. With the Palazzina in the Via di Villa Massimo in Rome (1937). R. adopted a decid- edly rationalise Nonetheless, after 1948 he altered his position fundamentally: in  combed elements of *Rationalism  aesthetic of  position. 
1946 he published, together with G. Car- caprina, that popularly, even  pluralistically inclined Mannale delfarchitetto, which was wo leave such a strong imprint on Roman architec ture ofthe immediate post-war years. In iy so he directed, together with Lodovico Quarom, a group of young architects, including Carlo *Aymonino and Mario Fiorentino, in the planning and execution of the INA-Casa in the Tiburtino quarter of Rome: with ity irregular. ‘spontaneous’ structure and traditionalist build- ings, this was to become an emblem of Italian neo-realism. At about the same ame, 1950-4, he realized the Casa a Torre in the Viale Eniopia, Rome, an example of unequivocally urban and standardized architecture freed from the ro- mantic nostalgia of the Tiburtino project.  R. later found himself increasingly isolated within the development of architectural ideas, not the least because of his stubborn reftsal to follow an a’ socially irrelevant. He concentrated on refining his own architectural language. which was characterized by correctness of construction. emphasis on ‘poor’ materials, extremely coarse (but by no means anti-technological) hand- work, and physical and psychological func- tonality. This introverted approach was very clearly evident in small buildings such ay the Kindergartens for the Canton Veseo neigh- bourhood at Ivrea (1y60) and at Poggibonsi (ty60-1) or the Casa Lina in Terni (ty66), VM = Canella, Guido, and Rossi, Aldo. ‘Archi- teti italiani: M. Raidolfi’, Commira (Milan). no. 41 (ys Cellini, Fo. I Amato, ©.. and Valeriani, E., L’Architettura di Ridolfi ¢ Prank, Rome 1979.  ant garde which seemed to him  Riemerschmid, Richard, b. Munich isos. d. Munich tys7. After seudying pamting, he turned first, under the influence of William *Morrisand the *Artsand Crafts movement. to designing furniture, rugs, fabrics and gla, and finally to architecture ¢. tyoo. He was a founding member of the Munich Vereinigten Werkstatten fiir Kunst and Handwerk (Associ- ated workshops for art and handicraft) mm 14897. and of the *Deutscher Werkbund, of which he way chairman, 1920-6. He was Director of the Kunstgewerbeschule, Munich, ty12-24, and trom 1926 of the Werkschulen in Cologne. His Most Important work is the Chamber Theatre in the Munich Schauspielhauy (1go1, with Max Littmann). R. also drew up the plans for the  Garden City of Hellerau, near Dresden fhegun 1yoy), where he designed the workshops ity to. These bear witness ta a tendency towards a chasically inspired style. AM  Rietveld, Gerrit (Thoriasy, bo Utrecht iss. Utrecht 1964, After appreaticeship from rsyy to ryoé in his father’s joinery shop and work asa draughtsman ina jewellery studio, Re opened his oven cabinet-making business in Cereeliein igtt. In tyi8, chiefly through the agency of Robert vat Hoff he came into contact with the founders of De *Sujl. of which movement he remained a member unol cy3t. and which inspired him in furniture designs which were conecived primarily as. spatial compositions (Red-Blue armchair, ryt8: Berlin armchair, 1923)  In tuat he began a collaboration with che Interior decorator with whom he built the Rigtveld-Schrdder House m Unrecht in 1y24. the progranimatic architectural expression of Dy Sajl, Flere the use of a lightweight steel skeleton made possible a  Fruuy Schroéder-Schrider,  flexible, continuous interior space withour en- closed rooms, and even the boundaries berween inner and outer space are minimized. Also with Pras built houses in the Erasmuslaan in Utrecht (1y34). and the Vreeburg Cinema. Utreeht (1y36}. Ros post-World War U designs inchide: the Nether- lands Pavilion at the Venice Biennale (tys4): the sculpture pavilion in’ the Sonsbeek Park in Arnhem (tys4. re-erected at Otterlo, (yest and  Schréder-Schrider. he terrace  Rietveld. Kictveld-Sehrader Liowe. Utrecht Qvith rons Schroder-Schnider: 124) 
the Rajkymiscum Vineet van Gogh, Amster wath Jovan Dillon and [. van Eniehts WIV GHa Brown, Theodore Mo Phe Tork of Gerrit Rietveld Canbridye and) Utrecht AL Gerur Thomas Rietveld,  dam .1oe3 72,  fovdatert Toss. Burts,  Aimstendiinn cot: Baroni, D., Phe Purvinae of  Gert FP) Riemetd. Woodbury. NOY. 1938.  Ring, Der -Tho Ring. Berlin architectural ascolton founded 1923 4 as *Zehnerring® Rang of Teni.im order to represent the interests of the *Nenes Bauen. The group was renamed “Der Ring’ mi ry20 and expanded: its members were Otto *Bartning, Walter Curt Behrendt, Richard Docker. Walter  Peter *Belirens.  *Gropius, Hugo *Haring (general secretary of  the assockiten}, Orta *Plaester, Ludwig *Hilhorsenner, Artur Korn, Carl Krayl, Hany *Luckharde Wasstli *Luckhardt, Ermst *May. Erich *Mendelsohn, Adolf Meyer. Ludwig * Mics van der Rohe. Bernhard Pankok. Hans *Poclzig. Adolt Rading. Hans *Scbaroun, Walter Schilbach, Karl) Schneider, Hfans Seeder. Bruno *Paut. Max *Taut. Heinrich *Poscnaw and Martin *Wagner, The com- mon wow was to serve dhe international move=  ment which is striving with conscious rejection: of pasteenshrined formy to solve the butlding  problems of our ume with the means of  contemporary technology. and to prepare the  Roche. Oakbind Moscum, Oakland, Cal iRevin Hoovhe Jobo Diaketeo and Asogiites; lug Si  ground for the new architecture of the new scientific and social epoque.” When the involve- ment of the modernist core of the Ring ~ those associated with Mies van der Rohe in the construction of the WeiBenhofsiedlung in Stuttgart (1y27) - gave rise to a dispute with Paul *Bonatz and Paul Schmitthenner, these two representatives of the ‘Seuttgart School’ decided to launch ao traditionally oriented counter-group, the #7 Block’, The King was disbanded in 1433 under the political pressure of National Socialism. VM! Lane. Barbara Miller, Architecture and Poli- nies in Germany, 1918-1948. Cambridge, Mass. 1Q68,  Roche, {Eamonn} Kevin. b. Atter studying at the National University of Ireland in Dublin. he entered the offices of Michacl Seott and Parters in Dublin and then that of Maxwell *Pry and Jane *Drew in London, before going to the *USA in 1948. He entered Eero *Saarinen’s office mm igs, where he became bead partner responsible for design mM 19S4  After Saarmen died in rg61, R. took over the office together with John *Dinkeloo and trans- ferred ifs operations from Bloomticld Hills and Brminghem. Michigan. to Hamden. Conn. From ty66 unal Dinkeloo’s death in 1g8r. the firm operated under the mune Kevin Roche  Dublin ty22.  John Dinkeloo and Associates: i¢ then became  Kevin Roche and Associates. hn their buildings  Roche and Dinkelow combined the abstract 
Roche, Ford Foundation Building, New York (Kevin Roche John Dinkeloo and Associates: 19638)  geometry of *Mies van der Rohe with power- ful structural expression and a pronounced corporeality developed from the specitic situa- bon. Their Oakland Museum in Oakland, Cal. (1961-8), one of their first works after taking over Saarinen’s office. brought them consider- able attention, not only for its success as a museum but also on account of ther extremely skilful creation of public space. Even more highly acclaimed was the Ford Foundation Building in New York (1963 8). with ity greenhouse-like interior court opening up new perspectives for the penetration of interior and  extenior space. Among the most important of  Roche and Dinkeloo’s other works are: the headquarters. of the Kmights. of Cohunbuy  the extension of the Metropoliaan Muscum of Arti New York Qu67 78% the administration buitdang of  (1968 yg} in New Tlaven. Conn:  the Cummins Engine Company in Columbus, Indo ftyt2 gs and the protest faa the buat company headquarters. Purim efor 3? iM  Drow, Philip. Te chaetig means aha ktecmar, New York 197 Cook. J. Woo and Klote. Fh. Cor Indutet. New York tot:  Phen Ceneriten  verano ieith  Putagaw i Yuku  fed. Rene Rocke foto Dintkelos ind dun eates los tars. Tokyo. abourg and Sauggit 197s Rogers, hinest Nathan, & Trigte turn. d  Gardoms. tals pydu. Stuched ait die Pelee in Midan. where be hamsei® taught mont rote (Pont iyogasaproloser. A toundime tember me begs ia Milas et the eee at *BBPR. he  disanguphed Densedf not ents  aot pre using  architects ut rier as a aeebates Gait publicist 
Rogers, Richard. 1 ioyds Buslding. | Guzy S84)  onion  He was a co-editor of Quadrante, 1933-6. and edited Domus, 1946 7 he also edited Cusabella- confimdta, 1953 64. and under his direction it became one of the most important architectural journals in Europe. AM — Rogers, EN. Bb voneuse del architettira, Turin ryss: dite lide architettura, Turin 1Y68.  Rogers, Richard. b. Floreies 1433 (of British parents). Educated ac the Archicecniral Associ- ation School in London and at Yale University, his first experiments in architecrure were made asa member of Team 4 (conprising also  Norman *Foster, Wendy Faster and Su Rog- ers). The Reliance Controls Ltd Factory at Swindon (1967) became well known as an example of industrial architecture which was both a neat package and a structural tour-de- fe The use of external diagonal braces v  AS. the main characteristic of the latter aspect, and it may well be attributed to Rogers, since after splitting wich Foster (who has concentrated on the neat package). R. has become increasingly devoted to the architecture produced by struc- tural tours-de-force. OF these the Centre National d'Art et de Culture Georges Pom- pidou in Paris (1971-7, with Renzo *Piane) js the most famous. The designs for Lloyds in the City of London and that for Inmes at Newport, South Wales, both continue to gain their principal effect from the displa ture and service elements on the exterior. R. like Foster) has therefore become a principal proponent of a ‘true’ functionalist architecture (*Punctionalism), going beyond Louis *K abn in the analysis of form and mechanism, in an attempt to climinace the arbitrary and wilful character of fagade-making. RM ‘2 ‘Richard Rogers: Interview with Dennis Sharp’, Building (London), April 1y79: Richard Rogers aid Partners. An Arehitectural Monograph, London 1983.  Sof struc  Rossi, Aldo. b. Milan 1937. Studied ac the Politecnico in Milan: diploma 1ysy. He worked for Casahella-continititd, 1989-64, and was pro- fessor at the Milan Politecnico, 1969-7. a guest professor at the Eidgendssische Teeh- nische Hochschule at Zurich, 1y72-4. Since 1o74 he has again been professor in Milan and has alo taught at the [stitute Universitario di Architettura in Venice since 1976.  The founder and principal exponent of *Rational architecture, R. developed hiy own architectural position in the circles around Emesto Nathan *Rogers. His first designs dating from ig6o display simultancously the influence of the Modern Movement of the 1y20s and that of the Novecento Italiano, and combine the eclassicist visions of an Etienne- Louis Boullée with the rationally determined rigorism of a *Loos. The 1965 project (in part realized) for the Town Hall Square in Segrate recalls Giorgio de Chirico’s ‘Pirtura metatisica’, with its extreme! tary geometrical shapes, its broad steps and herm-like column stumps. ‘The same meta-  he was  sparse fountains of clemen- 
physical armosphere pervades the tour-storey block of flats of ivery-coloured stuccoed rein- forced conerete which R. built (1y70-3) as part of the Gallaratese 2 residential complex, realized under the direction of Carlo *Aymonine in Milan’s Monte Amiata housing estate. The narrow building, at one point pierced entirely, is freed trom che ground so that a continuous colonnade is established on two levels from one to two storeys in height. The formal language ts radically ascetic in its reduction to a few typical elements. It is derived from a critical-historical involvement with traditional urban architec~ ture which, R. feels, contains the elementary rules that determine all architecture — from the single dwelling 16 large-scale planning. R. himself explains: ‘In imy house designs, [refer to the basic types of living which the architeceure of the city has formed chrough a long process On the basis of this analogy every corridor is a street, every courta city square, and a building reproduces the places of the city.” In 1971 he  Rossi, San Cataldo cemetery, Modena (wath Gianni Braghieri: 1971 6. T9805)  designed, in collaboration with Gianni Braghieri. the project for the new San Cataldo cemetery m Modena, an assal complex com- position formed of repetitive passageways and monumental geometries: the project was re~ designed in 1973 and iy76@. and construction finally began in r98o, Meanwhile, he had designed the school in Falagnane Olana (697 anda project for a house in: Borge ‘Vicine (1973). For the “Prima mostra internazionale di architettura’ at the 1y8o Venice Biennale, Re created the “Teatro del mondo’, a small doaung theatre I the 16th-century  of steel and wood. which recalls  tadinen of ephemeral architecture.  He underpins his work as an architect with a noteworthy theory, the principles of which he formulated m (g66 in Lo Arehitertura della cet That so few of his proje due largely co their subversive power and ther Wcompromising nature. architect in the late 2oth century who hes been  tyhave been realized as There is hardhy an  so controversial and the subject of such iten- sive discussion. VMI ™ Rossi, Aldo, Larchitertou della vita, Padua 1966 (English cdi: he Arcditectre of the City. Cambridge, Mass. 1y82): Sorte sechtt sularchiteruna e¢ fa citta, Milan 1y7s: aot ieufe lntobroeraphy. Cambridue, Matos. 1981 (paperback ed. ty84isAkdo Rass, Avehiteenie aud Urbanism (Tokyo). no. Gs (ryzoh: Mosehini. Francesco (ed.), Aldo Rassi: prejeets and drawings. 1y@2-197y9. New York toty: Braghiert. Gianni, Ade Rossi, Bologna and Barcelona tyst: ib tute for Architecture and Urban Studies, New York. slide Rossi te lenin 1976 to rgcg tewhie bition catalogue), New York tug  Rudolph, Paul, bo Elkton, Kentucky, rots Studied atthe Alabama Polytechnic fnstitate ir Auburn and under *Gropius and * Breuer ac Harvard Gniverstty. Ia rag’ he entered: inte. partnership with Ralph Ewarebell in Sarasota, Blac dn tys2 he opened his own thee. amd was Dean ofthe Yale Schooler Architccture ta Now Haven, Conin. fuss 62. Spice tus he hay lived in Now York  Researhy broldmgs ae boride. wcluding the Healy Guest House chaps ye and the Hook House rigst stoi Sartetas ay well as the Walker Guest House btys20 300 Sanibet Island somewhat later High yius7 8p all bear witness to  and thre Riverview School in Sarasata  the formal wosterits ofthe * Bauhaus, although  
Rudolph. Ar: and Arcbiteccure Building, Yale Uinverseee, New Haven. Conn. toss 647  already softened by an unorthodox delight m expermentation. “The 9 Mary Cooper Jewert Arty Center, Wellesley College. Wellesley, Mas. tgss. Si isthe first anmounce-  CONSEFUCTEY  ment of RAs turning towards a “new freedom” in ity detail. Which harmonize with the sur- rounding collegiate nea-Gothie architecture and especially widh its expressively compored stair hall, This new freedom’ which lett mod- emism behind was a trend that influenced numerous trchiteets Working in America at the ame. including *Breuer, *fohnson, and Eero *Saarinen  A detiniave turning ty an architecture of  forni tor form's sake in manitested most clearly ‘-y), aswell as che Artand Architecoire Building at Yale Gniversity, Now concrete ‘sculpcure’ which evokes remini- scences of * Wright's i arkin Building in Butha- lo. N.Y. (1yog. <° contrast Co its anenyoous surroundings. “The Milam House at Jacksonville, Pla. (1y60-2), recally De *Sajl in the franicwork of its fagade overlooking the beach, The Parking Garage on Temple Street in New Phaen 1ysy -63) stands. apart: here R. succeeded - else = inachieving an intimate usity of function, construction, and sculptural e\pression. The Married Students’ Residence Complex at Yale University (1960-1) displays marked regional-  in the Sarasota High Schootin Florida cigs?  Haven fiys8 oy) oa  wand forms a pravecauve  ts hiardly anywhere  wt tendencies. surprising in B.'s work. The combination of brick wall, and continuous conerete bands reeally *Le Corbusier's Maisons  Jaoul at Neurlly-sur-Seine f1gs2-6), as well as  *Strlmg and Gowan’s houses at Ham) Com- mon {1yss-} of forms. the shadowed. terraced complex. harmonizes entirely with the topographical  i, While the intimate arrangement  conditions.  After the Yale Art and Architecture Building Ros most ambitious building is certainly the State Service Center in the Government Center of Boston (1g62, [y67=72) wings and a strongly articulated tower are  where terraced Hat  arranged around a public square in a composi= tion which pays homage to the Campio in Siena.  Since the mid-iytos R. has distinguished himself mereasingly in urban planning work, such as the projects tor Stafford Harbor. V resorton the Potomac River {1966}, in which the construction accentuates the rolling land- scape. and for the Graphic Arts Center in New York (1967), which is terraced over the Hudson as aseries oF supporting and enclosing towers on which are suspended separate three-dimension- al clements AM “> Moholy-Nagy, Sibyl Tirreduction to the Architecture of Paul Rudolph, New York 197  Rudolph. Graphic Arts Center, New York (project. 1967) 
Spade, Rupert, Pari! Rudolph, London and New York 197t; ‘Paul Rudolph’, Architecture and Urbanism (special number}, Tokyo, July 1977  Russia. Russian architecture of the period around tyoo was characterized by a style allied to the widespread international *Art Nouveau, and known in Russia as “modern style". This modern style bad three principal features: the reworking of elements from the Russian ver- nacular, the stylization of motifs from nature: and the earliest experiments in Russia with the new technology of steel-trame construction, mostly in conjunction with brick. The expo- nents of this style conceived of themselves as the opponents of the *eclecticism of the late iyth century. I general they upheld a common tdeal in the search for the new and beautiful form. especially principal types of decoration were introduced on the one hand, a largely sculptural treatment of the essential structural elements and, on the other, a largely graphic incorporation of paint- ing or majolica panels with no functional rationale, Further characteristics of “modern style’ design were functionally appropriate ground-plans, since buildings were planned trom the inside out, as well as a break with the strict axiality which had predominated in earlier styles. Fedor Osipovich Shekhtel (1859-1926} was the best-known architect working in this style. The majority of buildings of this period, however, took as their proto- types old Russian architecture, that is the native architectural tradition which had been ousted by the introduction of *neo-classicisin at the end of the rth century, The most striking example of this was the Kazan Railway Station in Moscow (1913-41) by Alexei V. Shchusev (1873—1949) — a miniature city within the city. having as its principal accent a cower modelled on one of the towers of the citadel at Kazan.  Although the ‘modern style’ remained aloof from eclecticism, there were affinities between the to approaches, in their emphasis on decoration and in their propensity for styliza- tion and Lyrical interpretation. In opposition to it, a new variant of Russian neo-classicisin developed ¢. 1910; this viewed the “modern style’ as merely the logical consequence of eclecticism, The fundamentally rational posi- tion of nco-classicism in the aesthetic expression of constructive legitimacy, its tendency to clarify, its handsomeness, and its moderate  in fagade composition. In this wo  now  Russia. Building for the newspaper Cte Russi, Moscow (1407). by Fedor O. Shekheel  decoration made it the ideal link between cultural heritage and imedern building: tasks. The key to understanding the subsequent aca damic architecture of Soviet Russia lies in the  period between the abortive revolution of ryos aud the Bolshevik Revolucion of October 1917 The centre of the new neo-classicist movemens was St Petersbur; become firmly established in the earlier neo- 1800. Interest in the city’s own historical forin was aroused by the 2ooth  acity Whose appearance had  classical period. «  anniversary of the foundation of St Petersburg. celebrated in 1y03. and the frst highpoint came in ryrt with the Exhibition of the History of Architecture and the Art and Crafts’ held inthe St Petersburg Academy or Fine Arts, itself an early neo-classical building. Ivan Fomin, who hike most of the  designed the exhibition, was architects who then set the tone in Russia a graduate of the architectural faculty of the 
Academy Ian Zholtavsky. who by this time ready working in Moscow and who wasa  was i littlong admirer and interpreter of Italian Re- natwanee architecture, had alvo studied there. Many of the voung graduates of the St Peters- Actdemy saw cheniselves as the true renewer of Russian architecture in die name of neo-clisichim: but World War I destroyed all hopes tora new flowering of that architecture for which St Petersburg scemed to have been wating for decades  After the October Revolution all art schools im Russia were turned into ‘Free State Art Workshops (the vKHUTEMAS. Which was com- parable to the *Bauhaus in Germany. was launched i Moscow in ryz0). Although new construcdon was out of the question at this time, were held. In the fine arts proponents of *Constructiviym and *Suprematism had in- deed come to the fore, but architecture re-  burg  pumerous architectural competitions  mained dominated by the academicians. Thuy for example, Zholtovsky was appointed direc- ter oof the NARKOMPROS Archiceccural awarded the conmmiisston for reconstructing the new capital city. Moscow (New Moscow’). In Pecrograd. the former St Petersburg. all plan- ning was corordinated by the Director of the Mumtcipal Museum, Lev ing a graduate of the Academy of Fine Art: the chiet considerations were the preservation of the neo-classical basis  architecture secon within  ‘People’s Commissariat for  Science: and) Shchusev was  of the old capital and the restoration of areas destroyed during revolutionary skirmishes Thuis, the revolugonary architecture of Sovict Russia. one takes that to mean the architecture which came ont of the Revolution itself, was an academic architecture. Pom began the devel apmenctothis red Dorie in the competition tor the Palace of dio Workers trgrol a large cultural and sport. centre in Petrograd. and he conunued this style the ry20s. Moreaver. in thisearly post-revoludenars phase the design of communal housing. mausteial complexes and public institutions was onented towards histori cal prototypes. An cx.eption to this was to be tound in’ the fantasty \ SCHIASKUIPLARCH group iGroup for the synthesis of painting, sculpture and architecture) formed around the architect Nikolai A. Ladowky in Moscow  It was only during the peniod of the ‘New “(gat 7)ci which the econ-  aresitectural models  produced by the  Kcoanomie Poli  Russia. Polytcchine Insutute. Ivanovo- Vosnessensk iy27 32h by Ivan Fomin  omy gradually became stabilized, that a mod- ern Soviet architecture was first formulated. In conjunction with the competition tor the Palace of Labour in Moscow (1923), which was never to be realized. the brothers Alexander. Leonid. and Victor Vesnin developed a project for a building in remforced concrete. Konstantin *Melukov’s Soviet Pavilion at the “Exposition internationale des arts décoratits et mdustricls modermes in Paris in ty2s gave the impression tbroad drat his bold design was representative ot Sovict architecture in general. In fact ats influence began to spread only after iyss and then fora short period in which it determined the building styles of the country. Even so, this period way characterized by numerous oppos- ing factions. The 094 (Association of Contem= porary Architects) brought the Constructivists together under Alexander Vesnin and Moisei Ginzburg. who sought a functional justitication in building. The asxova (Union of Modern Archiwets), under Janos Matza and Nikolai Ladowsk y. was most concerned with the effects of architectural form on the human psyche: the Mao (Moscow Architecture Society). under Leonid Vesnin and Alexei Shchusev, was a group of modermist and academic architects: and finally the OACH (Society of Artim-Archi- tects). whose members were the academicians  
of the Academy of Fine Arts in Leningrad (the former Petrograd and St Petersburg) under Leonti Bema. In ry2y there was formed yet another group. vorra (Syndicate of Unions of Proletarian Architcets), led by Janos Matz. and Karo Alabjany this group spoke out strongly against all other associations and finally contributed to their dissolution im 1932 they were replaced by a single Union of Archi- tects of the USSR under the direction of Alabjan. Ginzburg. Zholtovsky. Ladovsky and others.  The period of the first Five-Year Plan (1928 32) coincides wich the heyday of these various factions in modern architecture. which was dominated by the Constructivists planning of the period two concepes vied with one another: on che one hand. the Urbanises proposed the rearrangement of all cities inte. units of so.000 inhabitants cach; on the other hand, the Disurbanists proposed die dissolution of the cities, which would be replaced by long.  when  In urban  interconnected linear settlements. The leading Urbanists were L. Sabsovich and the Vesnin brothers: the major exponents of Disurbani- zanon were M, Okhitovich, Ginzburg and ivan *Leonidoyv. The designs advecated by both groups made little practical sense in this scorns phase of industrializanon, with its urgent de- mands tor the creation of new industrial dis (ricts, and in 1y30 the pragmatic Ernst *Miay and his team in Frankfurt am Main were called to Mascow,  In Moscow, the centre of modern architec= ture. the 1928 competition for the Lenin Stute Library had already broughe the Leningrad academicians Vladimir Gelfreikh and Viadimir A. Shehuko inte rivalry seith the Vesam  brothers. [In the competition for the Palace of)  the Soviets in Moscow. which extended from Ty30 ta 1934. workers’ designs were tho submitted which had nothing to do with Construcavist design and which in their monu- mentality and symbolic content had a decisive effect on architecture in the ensuing years, hrom 1930 onwards, the question of how buildings should look in a socialist society came to be voiced more and more strongly in architectural circles. Soon there was a widespread fevling that a primary fulfilment of function requirements Was not enough: rather, emotive qualities had equally to be taken inty account. The complete break with the architectural values of the past Was interpreted as a typical symptom of the  Mevitable dense of anew obsolere bourgeun culture.  The three principal dictates of socialise reale ism the typical. the spuritot the party. aad the spiriterthe people from the realms of literature aud the tine sts te  were not readily transhited  that of architecture. In broad terms. it mene time and again for arebiteeture wt secrahst content and a nanonalist form, brought to realizagon by the use of the newest building techniques. At the first General Congress of die Union of Soviet Architects in ty37 atl arene tects were enjoined i this regard to take account of local paruculurities in cach building design. to study the riches of vernacuar art sts well as to embrace the chosicwd qualities of clarity and spaphety in compesition. At the congress critics were voiced once again concerming the poverty of Constructivist arebi- tecture and sn the same context the gro wimg celecticism in Sovietarchiteeture was deplored A syntheus of the arts was sought. im which sirchiteets. puters and sculptors would work together on cach prowet. At the sume bing, new rationalized building methods were developed meluding prefubrication. The Moscow Acad- eniy of Architeceure was founded in 1y33 tnd within ifm ryas. a seetion devoted to muonu- macntal pamting. In 1y3s the first general plan for Moscow was approved: this, 1 ats adhercnee to the ning-formi structure of the city. took up once again ideas from the “New project of the curly 1y20s, The largest undertak=  Moscow"  ings of the general plan were the Moycow  Russia, Ciderground station (Mayakovskayar. Moscow frog. by Alexander Dushkis  
err ae ry record’ tg i  underground system and the Moscow-Volga Canal. [In the mdividual Soviet republics arehi- tects sought to unite the use of traditional forms and ornament wich new materials; all these  various attempts were illustrated in one place in the form of pavilions at the Moscow Agri- cultural Exhibition of 1939. With the outbreak of war all building operations were halted in threatened areas, with the exception of the Moscow underground: the Moscow work- shops were dissolved and the architects were evacuated to the Asian regions of the Soviet Union.  Beginning m 1943. the first plans for the reconstruction of destroved cities were pre- pared: in these it was generally proposed to  Russia. Railway station mm Pushkin (1ys0. 2) by Yevgeni Levinson and Igor Fomin  Russia. Apartment building on Smolensk Square, Moscow Uya7 gi. by Ivan Zholtovsky  restore the original aspects of the cities, and to harmonize new buildings old Russian towns © with the existing urban fabric. both in scale and in external appearance. In the large cit . Monumental axial avenues were to be laid out. In Moscow work on the Palace of the Soviets was not resumed after the war, but rather in 1947, on the occasion of the Sooth anniversary of the city's foundation, eight skyscrapers were projected, of which seven were built in the following years. Such tower accents recurred on a smaller Soviet cities, with the exception of Leningrad where the distant view of the old buildings was caretully preserved.  Post-war Soviet architecture set out to re- flect, in its emotional content, the victory over the Fascist aggressors. Late in 1gs4. at an architectural congress in Moscow, Nikita S. Khruschchey criticized high building costs and the search for decoration. In 1yss the Party Congress decided that architectural practices of. past years were to be branded as a distortion of the cultural heritage and chat the comprehen- sive industrialization and mechanization of  - especially those in  . such as  seale in mos  
Russia. Sport Palace. Tbilisi (1y60 3), by V. Meshishvili and ¥. Kazradze  building operations were to be treated ay a national priority. Scicntitic research was to replace traditional architectural composition The second competition for the Palace of the Seviets (1y§7-9) reflected clearly both this rejection of academic styles and die shift to- wards modern architecture: once again, how- ever, the project never came to fruition. In 1938 the Soviet Union chose to be represented at the Brussels World’s Fair by a pavilion of glass and steel. In the next two decades, standardization in housing, using a variety of methods, dominated the scene. In the 1970s architeets resumed their intense collaboration with art and at the same time architectural details of the rgjos made a fresh appearance. In the various Sovict republics, local architectural approaches were developed from the expressive means of national traditions. a Ct Kopp, Anatole, Town and Revolution, New York 1970; Lissitzky, El, Russia: an architecture for world revolution, Cambridge, Mass. 1970; Vogt, Adolf Max, Russische und franzdsische Revolutionsarchitekwur. 1917/1789, Cologne (9743 Senkevitch, A.. Soviet Architecture 1917-1962; a biographical yuide to source material, Charlottes- ville, Va. 1974; DeMichelis, M., and Pasini,  La cittd sovictiea 1925- 1937. Venice 1976; Cohen, J.-L... DeMichelis. Mo and Pafuri. Mo. ORSS  rpep-tesé: ba eitta, Parchitetura. La ville, Parchitecture, | Rome and Paris ty7ur Bomeyriber. C.. lrehirenura accademica in UR SS  1919 1959, Milan 1yXy.  Saarinen, Kero, b. Kirkkonuman, Finland tyio.d. Ann Arbor, Michigan 1961. The son of ‘] *Saarinen, he moved ta the *USA in 1923 with his parents. He studicd sculpaure at the  Académie de la Grande Chaumicre in Paris, Ty29-30, and architecture ar Yale University in New Haven. Conn, 1930. 4. After several srips to Europe he entered bis father’s office in Ann Arbor. Mich., in 1937 (log) 7 in partnership with his father and J. Robert Swanson, from 1y47 with his futher alone). tyso he directed his own office in Birminghant., Mich. under the name Eero Saarinen und Associates  Eero Sa 6. 1938ip collaboration with his tuther, tirse won individual attention in i948 with his comperi- tion design for the Jetfirson Narional Expan- Memorial nea Se Louis, parabolic arch, 192 m (62s fl high, drew  From  tring. whose first works were dane  sion The elegant  
directly on  wy unrealized project by Adalberte *Libera tor the entrance to che “Esposizione Univernale di Rona TEUR bof rgg2. and was finally built in “Gateway Arch’ Together with hay tather and the architectural firm Smith, fHlinchovan and Grvllis, he buile die General Motors Technical Center in, Warren, Mich. 4 compoyition of rectangular stecland= glass buildings renuniscent of *Mies van der  HOR as  Rohe's Hhnois Insvatute of Vechnelagy in Chicago (1yg0 4, but harmoniously arranged around central artificial Like  However, dis geometrical and technological purism was but an eprode in $.7s development, which formed the prelude ta an *eelecticinm as experimental as it was mannerptic. Like Philip *Rudolph. S. curned toa bewildering stylistic pluralism, whose richness  *Jobnson or Paul  of individ) sculptural torn goes back to his carly interest in sculptures “The sculptural con- crete shell of che Kresge Auditorium and the romantic masonry cylinder of che Chapel at the Massachusetts lnsticute of Technology in Caum- bridge were built in Tosa s. [a ryss 60 he architectural group Yorke. Rosenberg and Mardall cn the monu- mental and academic United States Finbassy in London. The organically curved roof structure of de David S. Ingalls Ice Hockey Brak of Yale  collaborated with the  Saarinen, Fere and Ehel, General Motors Feehnical Center, Warren, Mich. fiyah 361  University in New Haven, Conn, was realized m 1ys6 and the {WA Terminal Building at Idewild {today JFK International) Airport, with itsstrongly sculpeural. symbolic-allegorical fe The technologically outspoken John Deere & Co. Administration Center in Moline. (I. was built 1ys7--63 Finally. in iys8 63. came the elegant. expres- sive Terminal Building of Dulles International Airport. near Washington, DC  Phiy conunual striving for new forms, un-  tures, Was binlt tus 62  haupered by ideological convictions, yielded a series of highly subjective creations, for the most part dramatically staged and not mfre- queady displiving $.'s technical virtuosity: the heterogeneity of his work defies any categoriza~ don. This is qqually rue of his work in product design (eg. the plywood chair of 1940, in conjuncdon with Charles *Eames}, An unnter- rupted flirtation with the unusual and the spectacular Was not conducive to forming a school, Nonetheless, such noteworthy archi- tects ay *Pelli, *Roche and *Dinkeloo all had their start in $.°s office VMI >. Temko, Allan, Eero Saarinen, New York and London 1y62; Spade, Rupert, Eero  
Saarinen, Eero TWA Terminal Building. Joho f Kennedy Airport, New York (Eero Suarinen and Associates; Lys 02)  Saarinen, London and New York 1971: Kuhner, Robert A.. ere Saarinen: His Life and Work, Monticello, IL 1975.  Saarinen, (Gottlich) Elie), b. Rantasalnii, Fin= land 1873, d. Bloomfield Hills, Mich. 1yso. fn Helsinki he studied painting and architecture simultaneously, 18y3_ 7, at the University and the Polytechnic, respectively, He was active in independent practice from f8g6 te 1923 (1896 Ty0§ in partnership with Herman Gesellius and Armas Lindgren, 1g0s_ 7 with Gesellius only} In 1923 he emigrated to the *USA, where he  had diy owen office im Evanston, JL. 19230 4. and from ty24 in Ann Arbor, Mich. (1937 4) 10 collaboranon with his son Eero *Saarien: be and hisson were joined by J. Robert Swansen in partership, tygt- 7. after which he agai prac- used with hisson alone}. From ty2g he taught at the Architecture School of the University of Michigan at Aun Arbor, and was its Director. ryss 32 and Presidene, ty 32) so. Frama tygs he was also Director of the Graduate Departement of Architecture and Urban Planning at the Cranbrook Academy of Art in’ Bloomfield ills.  Saarinen, Fliel, Hvittriisk Studio House, Kirkkonummi, near Helsinki (sith Geelltus and Lindgren. 1y02  
POUETEORI CO ae  ry |  Cranorook School for Boss, Mich  Saarinen, thel Bloomtight Hails  lynn yan  Shordy betore the tur of the century, § moved un the Grek of voung Ermnh artists which included the composer foan Sibelius, the painter Akseli Gallon-Kallola and the architcets Herman Gesellius. Armas Lindgren and, some= what apart. Lars Sonck, Ele disduguished him- that) National Romande sede which began to establish itselt)  self in his carhest works 1a in *Pinland asa ‘patties Tmpertalise * on the legacy of the Gothic Revival. the *Arts and Crafty movement and  esque of LL HE Rachardson  reacuon agarase  scuechastepin and drew notably  the Neo-reman- Che Finnish Pavil- postman Cniverselle of 1900,  jon atthe Paris which S. designed in commraction with Gesellius and Lindgren, employ. 4a version of this style enriched by routs. “The Povittrask Studio House at Kirkkonurinit. near ffelsinki (tyo2) also built in collabor ion with Gesellius and) Lindgren, continued mits in chat tradition ind developed a  oriental  extemal appearance style with overtones of *Arc Nouvean. ‘The mntenior represented a new interpretation of  Nen-K allela’s owa studio house in Ruovesi (1893). and was executed to a high standard of craftsmanship. This building marked Finland's entry inte the tield of experimentation in domestic design begun earlier by * Webb and *Shaw in England and continued at chat time by *Hottnann, *Mackintosh and *Wrigh cific sense of national identity was not, how-  Palspes ever, sacrifecd,  Gesell, Lindgren and Sairmen did not sunply build Hoyittrask together, they also lived and worked there. This romantic yl came to a abrupe cnd tn 104g when 8.°s individually prepared design was awarded first: prize in the Helsinki Central Station compeution. His win- ning design would be altered several times before the building was tinally creeted in tyro tg. With ity elegantly articulated imaseury ULisey. its functional organization, its equally  sensitive and expressive use of material, aad its  Streamlined: detailing. dus was to became a miodelaf its Q pe: ity influcnce ts clearly seen in, tmong others, the Stuttgart Central Stanion  tulg 28iby Paul * Bona and Friedrich Eugen Scholer.  The urban scheme which 8. drew up im 1yt6 is for Mankkintemi-l iiga, near Elelsinki, was distinguished tor its care, thoroughness and complexity. Evidence of his continuing in- volvement wath urban problem, which he saw av bemy closely related to architecture. can be seen in his plany tor Budapest. tyra: Canberra, tolty and Greater Helinki, tyr7 08.  With his proyeee hivtorically aware. but by no ancans historicist. for the Chicage “Prune Power ftgiz) S second: prize man international which attracted worldwide attention, and thus became known in the USA. When George and Ellea Seripps Booth founded the Cranbrook Academy of Art m Bloomfield Hills, S. was appointed architect of the entire complex: he built the Cranbrook School tor Boys. tga 30. the Kingswood School tor Gurlx, ty2y-30, and the Insticute oF Science, 1y3t 3: the Library followed in tygo 3. In this task he collaborated with Iny wite. the sculptress and weaver Louise  won compention  Muscum and  Loja) Gesellias, as well ay with the Swedish sculpror Carl Milles. He combined architecture and sculpture with the same cnehusiasm that Wright had shown in his Prairte Houses, vet a new element at Cranbrook was the overriding urbanwac concept which gave rise to a whole and  thar was one of the most) organically 
harmoniousty designed complexes in all 2oth- century architecture. The formal language evolved from a romantic picturesque *eclecti- cism into a dignitied reductivism.  In his rich and varied aruvre S. never re- nounced his own romantic origins: their traces en to be detected in the work he curried out atter 1937 with his son Eero. Progressively.  are ¢  though without ever embracing the radicalism of the avant garde. S. beeame one of the most  important advocates of the Positivist heritage of  the cgth century. a heritage which be intro- duced independently into the architecawre of the 20th VMI Saarinen. Eliel, Phe Cranbrook Development, Bloomticld Hills, Mich. 1y31; » Seurdlt for Form, New York 1939: ~The Cuys tes Growth, Its Decay. fis Punue, New York 1943 Christ-Janer. Albert, £ London and Toronte iygs: Hliausen, Marika, Arkkitcliti  cd Saarinen, Chicago. “Gesellius = Lindgren Saarinen’, (Hebinki), no. g. 1967  Safdie, Moshe. bo Haiti (y38. Studied at McGill University in: Montreal. He worked with van Ginkel and Associates in Montreal and with Louis *Kahn m Philadelphia betore estab- lishing his own practice in Montreal in cofg. In 1975 he became professor and Dircetor of the Desert Architecture and Environment Depart- ment at Ben Gurion University in Beersheva, Isracl, since 1978 he has been a professor at Harvard University. His tirst major work, the ‘Habitat’ at Montreal's Expo °67, brought him instant fame. Although far from being a pioneer work in the ue of prefabricated systems, it succeeded in dramatizing Uhat ap~ proach, and in articulatmy, im appropriate architectural form, that assembly of “building blocks’ which *Gropius had aduobrated, im his own “Baukasten im GroBen', ina theoretical project of 1y23. Lt alse lifted the cancept of the prefabricated concrete-box unit from) a utilirar- tan technique to the level of emotive architec- ture. Iu his later work be went on consistently to  concrete  we technology and geometry not only ay a divcipline, but as a means to transform: prag~ matic purposes to poctic ends, as can be seen especially in two projects in Jerusalem. the Yeshivat) Porat) Yosef Rabbinical Colle (1971 9) and the Mamilla project (1972). ‘These reflect the cubic geometry of the country’s indigenous architecture, but i S.’s hands they acquire a breadth of seale, if not of size. which  Satdie. ‘Habis. kxpo “o-) Monreal gary  tran worans vernacular forms tito amore monu-  mental mould a characteristic which & per  baps the principal: heritage of his earher ayociidon with Kahn tle  Safthe, Moshe, Beyond Hubirat, Cambridye. Mass. 1970: © For Eeeryone a Ganlen  Cambridge, Mass. tapas Drew. Philp. fhe Third Generation: the changing meaning ef arc recnae, New York ty.  Salvisberg, Otto. b. Konz. near Berne 1882. d Aroya 1940. Atter training at dhe Pechmkuni in Bich and workmg under bnednch von Phierck and Karl Ffocheder in Munich, ay well as under Robert Curgel and Karl *Moserim Karksube.S went to Berlin in igs and was active there until  the 1930s  Uhe expressionistically inclined Lindenhaus Gorse og). the picturesquely informal Winkler House (tor2) and the emphatically regular  Salvisberg. Vhe Lory-Spital. Berne (with O Brochbihl: 1y20 1  
bear witless toa phase or st Around ty26 S$ turned to the Modern Movement, to which he fithtal although wath considerable  Noutys House sibo rat  visti searching  rentatned reHlestion. Fle Was responsible for several struc= cturesap thy Lenete don housing estate (1920  yi built under the direction of Bruno *Taut, tid denned the balcony house over the Aroser Atlee cn the “Weile Stadt (White City) in Berlin-Remickendorf (iyzy 30). In ty30 he wos offered a position at the Kidgendssixehe fochnische Hochsebule in Zurich. Phe Lory- spuuitin Berne ftg26 y. with O. Brechhtihl). a horventalty layered building with expansive glass tayade towards the south, recerved almost Instant recognition the University of Berne tig30. hkewise with Brechbihh. repentive rows of fenestration, whose Hac frone  wiser (sya rd long comples with  is given thythin by the bold projection of four carved auditoria. isescmplary oF S."s striving to fnetonalism: wath dramatization ¥  Wertheim. Paul fedo)) Neuere ctrheiten ror OLR. Salvisherg, Berlin tya7: Salvisberg, OL Ra. Zeittragen der Anducckna. Die PEE dem SLA >  suffuse | pure effective  r  Adntinderteas, Zurich yay: Oo OR Salvisherg 1882 1ggo" [Werk trehithese (Niederteuten;, October 1 PR. 3-34.  Samona, Giweppe. b. Palermo rsys, Studied atthe University of Palerme. From iy22he was  active as an architect Messma, and since tgs  in Rome in collaboration with Giuseppina and Alberto Samoua. fle way Director of the Katuto Universitario di Architettura in Venice. Tygs 71. Hits work. without its expressiontstic ments. Early on, diverse formiy and the traditionalist craftsman ship of Frank Lloyd * Wright. without however  for all its rigour. is not and ecteetig mo-  Was oriented towards the  denying its objective-tnenonalist principles. Whilst his Post Office bude fing. built 1433-6in the Quartiere Appio in Raine, was still entirely within the spirit of Italian * Rationalism, the influence of *organic arclatecture was already evident in his project of sy: -40 for a Villa at Baia. near Naples. The bold design proposed for the extension of the Partiasient Building in Rome (1967) wasatonce ahoniige to * Wright, *Le Corbusier and Russian *( onstructivisn In the head office of the Banco dItaha in Padua (968), one oF S.’s most important works,  respect tor the place, historical awareness and  The Institute Building of  Sane Elia. Study (1g artistic individuality are united in a highly distinctive manner. VML Lovero. Pasquale. Giveppe Samona, Lounite arcitettura urbanistica. Serittt ¢ progenti 1920-73, Milan 1y7s: Aymonimo. C., Cineci, Co. F. dal and) Tafa, Mi. Ginseppe  Sumond. Cinguantaini di architettura (exhibition cata- Rome ty  logue),  Sant’Elia, Antonio, b. Como 188s. de Monfaleone tyi6. In igos he received a dip- Joma from the school of architecture in Como; from rytt he studied at the Accademia di Brera in Milan and at the Scuola di Belle Arti in Bologna, where he received his diploma in Tyla.  Strongly influenced by the Stile Liberty architects Raimondo *P’ Aronco and Giuseppe *Sommaruga, as well as by the Viennese Secession group (and especially by J. M. *Olbrich), S. had begun his career m 1ytt with astmall villain *Are Nouveau style near Como, built for the industrialiss Romeo Longaia. In the years unmediately afterwards he worked principally in Milan and took part, tor instance, in the competition for the cemetery in Manza (iyt2) with an exotic-celectic design. He first developed  near  an independent style of bis own 
durmg this period: asin the case of Adolf * Loos, this occurred under the infuence of North American skyscraper cities, but whereas Loos  asa result of his trip to che “USA of nearly  twenty years carlier was indebted above all to  the realistic and rationally determined aspects of  this architectural culture, che young S. was fascinated more by the romantic aspect. In 1913 he began his grand project for the Citui Nuova. He produced siimplitied perspective drawings and visionary sketches for a utopian metropolis of the future: terraced skyscrapers with exposed steel frames at the apper levels and detached lift shafts: grandiose circulation arteries, with lanes  criss-crossing at various levels; slender bridges. of steel or concrete, to link the sbatts, apartment blocks and reads; bold, monumental and ab- supdy crancated building volumes intended as abstract studies in form, without clearly functions. Several of these virtuoso drawings  stated  in no way free from expressionistic moments and still betraying the influence of the Viennese school were exhibited in February ry ty inthe ‘Prima mostra annuale della Pederazione degh architetti italiani’, organized in Milan by the Association of Lombard Architects. Several  months later, also in Milan, a large selection of his drawings was shown in the first eshibition of  the Nuove Tendenze group, a recently formed associaden which counted Mario *Chiatrone and Marcello Nizzoli, as well as S.. among, its members, The catalogue contamed a spirited declaration rejecting the past, honouring the new world of technology and proclaiming a revolutionary architectur Both the drawings and the text attracted much attention, netably that of Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, leader of the then five-year-old Futurist movement (*Faturism): shortly chere- atter S. was recruited, withont resistance, into the ranks of this activist group of artists, and Marinetti edited S.’s earlier declaration for publication im the periodical Lucerba as the manifesto ‘L’Architetuira futurista’ his changes consisting principally of the insertion of che adjective ‘futurist’ at every possible juncture S. did not have much time te contemplate his telationship with Marinetti: with [taly’s entry into the war in tors be found himself in the front line, and he was killed the following year. He left behind nearly 300 drawings of an uncommon visionary power, Litde of this came to fruition, apart trom a few buildings from his Liberty period and the memorial to the war  pit was signed by S  Jannary;Eebruary  dead in Como (this was designed. after ane ol Sos own sketches, by Bntico Prampober and complered im ty33 by Atte and Gioeppe * Verran). However, Sos radical, and there- fore largely isolated, images were escndal im smoothing the way tor *Runonalisn, *le  Corbusier's Ville contemporaine’ of 122. for  istunee. would be unthinkable without die Cini Nuova of 11a tq. ia *ltaly tse So.  work prepared the way for thar mixmre of  classical and rational fechne. which led. on the one hand, to the Novecento Italiane and. on che other, ta “Perragnin im whom his ideas found independent Interpreter vet  their mest virtuasa atid  Argan, Gintio Carla. fl penstero critica di Antonio Sandklia. Ldrre Rome! Seprember 1g 305 Alberto, Saar hlia, Milan ryso. Dottorl, Gherarda, Save iba e he arechitetra, Rome toss: Mariani, Leonardo, inedin di Sant hha’, TL Architermra (Rome). July/August russ and tys6, Apollonio, Umbro. qaronie Sauer Elia, Milan tgs. Caramel, t.. and Dongatt, AL, Antonie Sant Filia (exhibition cata  Sartor, shite. NMord “Divegni  logue). Como ry62; Badaloni. Pier Giorgio, H! fiauvisme: Antonio Sant’ Elia ela nana dimenston tmant, Rome 1930  Sauvage, (brédéric) Henri b. Rouen isc. d Parts tg32. Studied ac the *heole des Beaux- Artsin Paris, He worked in Paris in partnership PNyS 1gla. and trom he taught ar the Beale des Arts Décoradts in Paris, and then, ty2y 3a. at the Feole des Heausx-Arts. After beginning in *Art Nouveau style his Villa Majorelle in Naney (1895) as considered one of the most amportant works of the “Feole de Nancy? S. later af the principal exponents af the early Modern Move-  with Charles: Sarazin,  Hythe ran his own office, In to  evolved into ane  moent in *France. Ty tyo3 he and Sarazin founded the Société Anonyme de bogements Hy Marché, for which S subsequently realized numerous buildings. models of cher kind in terms of hiving standards in tnuduple dwellings. hese included the apart ment blocks i the Rue Vavin ifort and the Rue des Anraus Glaze! both in Part. where he dev eloped the idea of progresively stepped had first sketehod as  sgiéniques A Bon  back terraces, which he carly as tung. Phe Magusiny Deore in Nantes (gu destroyed dirimg World War IL. bore  weithess in ats open display of asteel skeleton and  
Sauvage. Aparsment hinkding i the Rane Yavin, Paris tyes  its complete transparepey and eschewal of all onmament. to oshittin Satanage’s Lite work Coat more radical Modern Movementapproach, AM Henri nyse. Delorme. Jean Claude. and Chair, Philippe. Li kcole de Parts, 10 archutectes ct leurs unnictibles 1yes 1937. Paris dust. pp. 4 60.  Satbage. 8874 Brussels buts:  Scarpa, Carlo. b Venee 1906, d. Tokyo 1y78. Belle Arti in Ventevom which oty he practised wsanindepen= dent architect froin ruse. Ele was Director of the Istiraeo Universitario di Architettura in Venice, 1972 8.  S.. whe remained imdepted to the Gorthie=  Studied ar the Accademia di  Byzantine tradition of Ins nauve city chrough- out his career. Was eqtails intlicnced by Prank Lloyd * Wright and the De *Scglmovemenc. In addition, he never demed his deep. spiritual connection with *Art Nouveik and especially with *Olbrich and *Mackintosh. His tirst work in the late ryzos and early ty ses consisted af clegant interiors and exhibition mscallanons  Major recognition came firstin 1ys 3-4 with the of the Galleria dela Siedia in the Palazzo Abbatellis in Palermo, which ty one 1a series of museum restorations  renowagon Nazionale  which were ay sensitive as they were creagve: Accademia, 3 Museo Venice itys3-60n six rooms in the Uffizi, Tys6. in conjunction with Ignazio *Gardella and Giovanni *Michelucetn the ainexe to the neo-classical  Vemice te Correr.  Florence  Gipsoteca Galleria Querint Stampalia, Venice (iy61-3); and tiny and most noteworthy. the commis: Mon tor the interior design of the Masco Casteiveechio, Verona tru6g). In these works.  Canoviane at Possegno. near Treviso (1ys6  Sv refined mventive power unfurls itself in dramatic settings, bold material juxtapositions, and exquisite. mannered and over-cimphasized details. Thus the dialogue between old and new is founded ay mich on clear legible contrasts as it scan empathetic borrowing and transitions. Likewise in $.’s designs tor new buildings, his sure sense of scale. hus preference tor noble muterials and refined decoration. as well as his commanding precision. are given full expres+ sion. The Villa Zoppay in Coneghiano way built mm 1y4dsthe Oliveto Store in Vernce of trys Precious spacial  ao sensuculy composition around a monumental central pier. ‘The Casa Vertu in Udine (iuss 61) already displays openly S.’y preference for complex volumeune penetrations which reached a highpoint in 1961 in the Padiglione del Veneto atthe ‘Talia “61° exhibition in’ furm  Inscribed within the pertect square or the  achamfered interior is  ground-plan, within which curved elements are embedded. The Brion cemetery at San Vito d Alnvole. near Treviso, was builtin ry7o- subtle composition of heterogeneous, formally luxarous, architectural vhjets treuves ay an aes- theac. sublintated celebration of death. In tg73- s S. realized his last major work building for the Banco Popolare di Verona. Among his best-known (and most signiti-  a  the new  cant) exhibition designs, which in some cases produced new “ways of seeing’ the display. were the Paul Klee exhibition at the y4s Venice Bignnale (S. acted ay an advisor there from iygt on). the Pict Mondrian exhibition i the Galleria d’ Arte Moderna in Rome in 1956. the Frank Lloyd Wright Exhibition atthe X[]th Priennale in Milan (1y60). and the Erich Men- delohn Exhibition at the Venice Biennale of the same year. 
Scarpa. Briow cemeter Treviso (1y70 3)  San Vito WAltvole. near  The importance of S.’s werk tor the architee- tare of the present. century resides in his conservatism. In the rgsos and (y60s a pericd m which technology and progress were gener ally in the forefront - he demonstrated in his quict work a commitment to workmanship, a  respect for the past and an understundmg of  architecture as a sculptural, integral art. His maividualism did not foster a school. but such Independent personalities ax Bruno Morassurty and Gino *Valle were formed in his circle, and his work has evident noteworthy parallel with that of Louis *Kabn and Hans *Hollein, Vi  Po Los. Sergio. Curls Scarpa - Areluretty pec,  Venice 1967: Brusatin, Manlio. “Carlo Sc spa Architetto Veneziano’, Conraspazio {Bari}. nos. 3/4. ty7a: Pozza, Neri ted.). Carle Searpa (exhibition catalogue}. Vicenza ryu74: Kahn. Louis, and Cantacuzino, Sheban. Carle Scarpa {exhibition catalogue), London boty Yokoyama, T., and Poyota, H., ‘Carlo Searpa'. Space Design (Tokyo). June 177, Progressive Architecture, 62 (1y81), no. §, entire suey Carle Searpa et le musée de Vérone (cxhibition cata- logue). Institut Culturel Italien, Paris cy83  Scharoun, Hans. b. Bremen tsy3. de Bertin ruc. Like Hugo *Haring. to whom he fet himself allied, S. advocated in both his architeee  cure and diy writings the tdea of aa “organ-tke building’ organic architecture! which. in che spirit of new beginnings of the 1y20s. represen= ted an alrernatve to * Rationalism as) pro- pounded by #6 Corbusier m particular, But unlike Hiring. whe died in igs, Shad avery setive building carcer im the post-war years, Elis projects and exceuted works reveal a concep= nono building which starts tron che essenes of the programme and seeks to give eAPEOS Ton LO: it in tornial and spatial composition.  After his school yes Brenterhiven, S studied at the Technische dfochsebule in Berlin- Charlouenburg ityts tan bven when he way sal a bigh school student. fs catia dimary nuentasadraughismiin was already evident. An early dhawing of a church ctytee bears tn  inscription. dhe essence oF w hick sould come ty  characterize Tis hater work: An nade perder architect shold set be directed be sensations  but rather by retorts  Tr tyis She was the dveoter et an arcbitees tural adv sor couned comeerned with recone struction an Fast Prussui, and sebsequecncly.  cho worked asau nds pendent arehttect  rghy  
Pst Prosi. He was invelved im Kette. which Breno *Taut had hed) ad trom ogee was tincinber of Der  ra basterbus he *Ghise laun ung. Drow this period date residential build  5 Kime v ken estate near Insterburg. 1926  Quen ences -Fnedrichsaabe office  plock. Borba. tyt2. and ao seres oF utopian  sketches. ich cake up the dominant contem=  wey theme of the communal centre and the  sity crow SStadtkrone’ sind are closely related fo *Pxprestunnsin, Asamemberotthe Ring. § uit me SOU Studiche Akademie fir Kunse und Kunst- gewerbo mm Brestaus tyas- 32. Ele built a resi-  boise tyetean the Weillenbotedlung  He served vy a professor at the  dental hall with comununal services in the basement for the *Dcutscher Werkbund exhi- hoon Wolnung und Werkrauny Living and Work Space  responsible for the  Breslau ag2g;. He way also  general development plan  ror the huge Siemensstadt housing estate 1y2g  the residential development of the Jung-  Scharoun, Kesdental ball at the Deutscher Workbund ostrpition. Breslau ig2y  tembeideweg and the MickeritzstraBe. all in Berlin. Also involved in the execution of the Siemensstadt project’ were Otto *Barming, bred Forbat. Walter *Gropius, Hugo *Hiring and Paul Rudolf Henny.  In che 1930s, during the Nazi regime, S. was restricted to building private houses: the Schminke House in L6bau. Saxony {1y3a3}. a ylass-and-steel construction with extensive ter race, the Mattern House at Bornim, near Potsdam f1yagi: the House for Dr Baensch in Berln-Spandau we and the Moll House in Borlin-Grunew ald / During this period of enforced calin he produced numerous sketch designs and watercolours reflecting ideas that would prove truittul later on.  After the war S. was at first Director of the Building and Housing Department for Greater Berlin itogs 6) and in tog6 he drew up. together with the ‘Plinungskollektiv’ Plane ming Collecdvel work group, a phin for the reconstruction of the devastated city. In the same year he was appointed to a chair in urban plunning at the Technische Universicit in Ber- Im. where he taught until igss and was an  
Scharoun. Schminke House, Lobau 61y331  important influence tor an cnuire gencragen of young architects. He was also Director of the Institut flr Bauwesen of the Deutsche Akademie der Wissenschatt in (East) Berl, 1947 SO.  A series of major projects and prize-winning, competition designs were produced im the 19s0s: for the Liederhalle in Stuttgart (1949); for the Amerika-Gedenkbibliothek (America Memorial Library) Berlin (ys): Convalescent. Home in Berlin- Tiergarten (1952): for the Nationaltheater in Mannhein (1953); and for the Staatstheater in Kassel {tgs3 s). None of these was built, however, not even his proposal for a Volksschule (elementary school) m Darmstadt (1gs1). representing an  for the  entirely new approach to the organization of  educational buildings. What was built in chis period were residential buildings which in layout and design represented alternatives to *Le Corbusier's Unité d’ Habitation: the tower group “Romeo and Juliet” in Seutegart-Zul— fenhausen (1954-9) and the tower block *Salu in Stuttgart-MGhringen (1961-3). as well us the farmstead dwellings of the Charlottenburg- Nord development in Berlin (tys6—61) directly adjacent to the great Siemensstadt estate of three decades earlier. There were abo two school buildings, which took up the theme proposed for Darmstadt of organization by age groups: the Geschwister-! Scholl Gymnasium (secondary  Scharoun. Pbilharmome Hall, Berhn play aad exterior vtew  Hest a3  schools in Linen (1956. 621and the Haupie und Grundschule  Phe most unportant of S.'s late probably the  Gunter school) in Marl froqed.  buildings is  Piilharnuont Hall in Berlin (competition tysé, conipleted 1903). Was endive ened by the tensian af foyers at various lev eds with often surprising vistas, while within che auditorhun: attenqon iy focused on the orches- tra, Prom the idea of ‘music at the centre’ S  aot  developed a stall and easily observed composed space: the determinants of his search for formn were neither aestheue not forma, but rather the Houdn Of mor cient in space, and of  happenmys within space 
Lhe opportunities previously denied to $ duc to adverse poluca conditious presented themselves only in the later stages af his career, rostling in an anpressive series of important buolda yiyte the  gs the Gernuin Embassy in Brasilia German Martine Museum in Bremerhaven -1g7o s): apartment towers m Berlm-Remickendort (1976) and Boéblingen vigil. the Munscipal Theatre mm Wolfsburg fgGs 73h and the Staabbibhothek PreuBischer Kultarbesity in Berlin (1y64. 1907 7k), sited directly adjacent to the Philharmonic Hall and completed after 8.’s death by bis tormer partner Edgar Wisniewski UT  Praokach, Poo ied). Mans Scharoun. Baten, fntwiele. “Poxte. Berlin ryz4. Jones, Peter Blundell, Mans Sifaronn, London and Bedford. 17.  Schindler, Rudolph Michael. bo Vienna do Los Angeles 1953. Studied at the Akademie der bildenden Ktinste in Vienna under Otta * Wagner, whose fate seyle, with its harbingers of Condnental * Rationalism, was to have a lasting effect on him. In 191g he went to Chicago, where he entered * Wright's office in igt7. Sent by Wright in 1920 to supervise construction of the Barnsdall complex near Los  is  Angeles, he opened his own office there in 1y21 and continued in practice there until his death. He had a loose collaboration in Ty2s 6 with *Neutra, whom he had already met asa student in Vienna. S°y most unpartant building ts the Lovell Beach House at Newport Beach, Cal (1928 6), which can be seen as an independent American parallel to De *Stil in its expressive articulation of structure and the play of hori-  zontal and vertical as well as of space and void. McCoy, Esther, Pine California Archit’ New York 1y60. Ro ME Schindfer (exhibition catalogue). Santa Barbara, Cal. 1967; Gebhard, David, Schindler, New York 1y72  Schwarz, Rudolt. b. Strasbourg 1897. d Cologne 1y61. Studied mm Berlin at the Tech- nische Hochschule and. under *Poelzig, at the PreuBische Akademie der Riinste. He successively Director of the Kunstgewerbe- schule in Aachen, 1927-34. Director of Town Planning in Cologne, 1946 Town Planning at the Kunstakademie in Diisseldorf, 1983 61. His cecviostastical build- ings form an important contribucon to Roman Catholic church design in the 21h century: he  was  and Professor of  soughe to bring congregation and altar into a auch stronger reladonship through simple formal means, drawing equally on tradition and on modernist design requirements for large internal spaces, Among his most typical designs are the Franicichnamskirche in Aachen (1y28- 30. with Hans Schwippert), Sc Anna. Diiren Cyst 6). and St Michael, Frankfurt am Main (tys3 4) AM O} Hammand, Peter (ed.). Powards a Church Architecture. London 1962; Schwarz, Maria, and Conrads, Ulrich, Rudolf Schivarz, H'eg- weisinig der Ceclmik und andere Schriften: um uneven Baten, tg2i-1961, Wiesbaden 3y79: Sundermann, Mantred (ed). Rudolf Schwarz (exhibition catalogue). Bonn 181.  Segal, Walter, b. Ascona, Switzerland. 1907. He emigrated to England in 1936 and sub- sequently became a British citizen. His architec- tural education included phases at the Technical College in Deltt and the Technische Hoch- schule in Berlin, as well as at the Eidgendssische Technische Hochschule in Zurich. This back- ground, together with the fact that his scudies vecurred in the years 1927-32. has ensured that he was from the beginning an active member of the Modern Movement, and that his sympa- thies have remained with *Functionalism ever since, His own work, however, has always been marked by an energetic empiricism, with a constant concern for constructional method and cost control, and this has freed it from stylistic crudity and pre-ordained formalism. For the same reason, perhaps, very large com- missions have eluded him, and he typifies the small intensive private practice, which works through personal attention at all levels, and which produces a result closely matched to social need. It is from this basic standpoint that his recent work on ‘Self-build” housing must be  judged. RM TO Segal, Walter, Home and Environment, Lon- don to48: —, ‘An Architect’s Approach to  1977: al, Stuttgart  Architecture’, JRIBA (London), July McKean, John Maule, IWualter S. and Zurich 1g8o.  Seidler, Harry, b. Vienna 1y23. Studied at the University of Manitoba in Winnipeg and at Harvard University under *Gropius and *Breuer. Before settling in 1948 in Sydney, he worked briefly under Breuer tn New York and under *Niemeyer in Rio de Janeiro, His houses  
of the carly 1950s reveal him as a disciple of his teacher Breuver’s ‘lyrical’ rationalism of those same years, Which led away from the *Inter- national Style in its incorporation of natural building materials such as wood and rubble, as well as its adjustment te the nature of the landscape. When S. received his tirst large-scale commissions ¢. 1460, his style began to reflect a classically inspired formal discipline. Exaniples are: the Australia Square Tower in Sydney (1960-7); the Commonwealth Trade Group Office in Barton, Canberra (1970 5): and the Australian Embassy in Paris (1973 7). AM (1 Harry Seidler, 1953/03. Sydney, Paris and Stutrgart 1963; Blake, Peter, The Tork of Harry Seidler, Syducy, New York and Stuttgart 1973  Sert, Josep Lluis. b. Barcelona ryo2. d. Bar- celona 1g83. Studied at the Escuela Superior de Arquitectura in Barcelona, then worked under *Le Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret in Paris. 1929-31. He was im independent practice in Barcelona, 1y2y-37, and there - with Sixt Yilescas -- founded the group GAICPAC im 130, He was in Paris, 1937-G, and emigrated to the *USA in 1939; he was President of *CIAM, 1947-36, S. was Professor of Urban Plaming at Yale University, New Haven, Conn, 1y44-s. and later became Dean of the Graduate School of Design at Harvard University, Cambridge. Mass., 1ys3-6y, His design for the Spanish  Pavilion at the Paris Exposition Universelle of  1937 revealed him as an advocate of che *International. Style. His designs for che Fondation Maeght in Saint-Paul-de-Vence (1y$9-64) and the Fundacion Joan Mird in Barcelona (1972-5) manifest a more plastic and spatially enriched architecture, the meridional tendency to utilize the play of light and shade being expressed in a personal manner GHa oO Borras, Maria Lluisa (ed.}, Sert: Mediterra- nean Architecture, Boston 1975.  Shaw, Richard Norman, b. Edinburgh 1831, d. London 1yt2. Studied under William Burn and at the Royal Academy in London before entering the offices of Anthony Salvin and then of G. E. Street, where he succeeded Philip *Webb. His early work was in the neo-Gothic style (church at Bingley, Yorks.. 1864-8), which he increasingly simplified and refined; he had a strong influence on the entire *Arts and Crafts movement. His house architecture in the ‘Old English Manorial’ and ‘Queen Anne”  Sert. Fondation Macht, Saint-Paul-de-Vence (tysy 64)  styles had a formative effect on English and Ameri design and *Muthesius was later much appreciated. in  an domestic through  Germany. Among the most important build- ings of his mature period are New Zealand Chambers in the City of London (185 ished), Lowther Lodge in Kensington (1873: today Royal Geographical Society), ay well as the extremely clegant Old Swan House in  ydemol-  Chelsea (1873). Contemporary with Old Swan House are his designs for the first English garden suburb, Bedtord Park. Middlesex. London. In the lase decade of the rath century, he turned to a powertul *neo-chassicistn (Ches-  west of  ters. Northumberland, rsyi: Piccadilly Hocel,  London, ryos). He did not shy trom  away exploiung new material disercetiy and to advantage: indeed, behind tty classical fagade Portland Lfouse. London (igo? 8), represents one of ihe first major uses of reinforced concrete in Enghsh architecture, VM1 BB  i Samet. A. Rican? Norman Shaw. London 1y76; Girousrd., Murk. Stweeertess gad Light London 1977 
Sheppard, Kichard Jferbert. b. cyto. Studied at ti Ad School of Architecture, Dondons i private practice since  huesurtl Assocition  mags. Taceriv un partnership with Geottrey Robson and others, Wide maige of buildings. pecs educatonal ones; awarded RIBA Brooze Mea Hareld Hal.  Fronted comipetitnan  ar Harrow field Bows’ School, tiysgh Wanner or the tor Charchill  bysew College, TUsud aturing courts grouped imormally round 4  Cambridge with a design  bwenty ubrary and clerestoryclir reading room in the ventre, Stadents” ball of residence, Imperial College. London: pithead. Dudley Colliery. orthumberland  “The Work of Richard Sheppard, Robson  Lrcintecunal Design, uly 19st  ind Partners  Shinohara, Kazuo. b. ty2s Numazu, Japan Arter graduation fron the Tokyo Institute of Technology. he taught there. and has heen a profesar since lute. His earlier works were marked by a concent for ‘Japanese character’. However. thiy was expressed nat by sndividual Shapes but by amore basic form of spatial composition which resulted in intensive expres= ston of sytbolte objects. as way represented by the freestanding column i the Hlouse in White in Tokyo. 1 ye  This approach towards svn- bole form was made more abstract and geo in che  metric lytA. a process in which his  buildings largely lost their Japanese aseciatons  in termn of appearance. Phe Untinished House in Tokyo rtytes could be considered a typical The house in Uehara  f1y7s} was dpother turning point. in which &  product of this pericd  applied wore coulis anda greater degree OF expression HY Do Razno Shitohane 16 [otises and An fitte tural Theory, Tokyo qurts Kasne Shanedara EE ort Houses and Arctitesinai Theory. Lokye. 176: “Kazuo Shinohary’ SD) Lokyor, January ty7y Sirén, Heikki b. Helwaks yes, Atter studying atthe Technical College in] felsinki. he jomed the practice of brs father Jobano Sigtnd Sirén. before opening his ows otice m Helsinki in ty48 in partnership with his wite Radja *Sirén. Their buildings are among a specific Scandinavian niodemssin which had its origans in the 1y30s and essed much to the  he best examples of  formal issues of the preceding cco-classical style nco-chasicim). Charactertic are a grand simpheity in spatial arrangement and an em=  Johann Sigtrid) Siren. completed in  Shinohara. Howse in Uehara siycsi  oS. Otimen  Sirén. Chapel of the Technical Colley Haye  phaue restramt in formal development, as exemphiticd in the Parliament Building by Ty3t Among the most important works of the Siréns are the Chapel of the Technical College at Otamenn j1ys7). the Otsonpesa terrace-hous- ing development in Tapiola (1os9) and the Brucknerhaus (concert hall} in Linz (1974). AM — Katja + Heikki Siren, Avctitekten, Helsimki and Scattgart 197  
Sirén, Kaya. b. Kotka, Finland 1920. Studied at the Technical College in Helsinki. Since ty48 she has worked in partnership with her husband Heikki *Sirén.  SITE. Multi-disciplinary group ~ an organiza~ tion launched in 1969 by James * Wines.  Siza (Vicira), Alvaro (Joaquim de Melo). b 1933 Matosinhas, near Oporto, Portugal. Stud- ied at the Escola Superior de Belay-Artes do Porto. He worked with Fernando Tavora, founder of the ‘Oporto School’, before scarting, his own practice in Tosk. Most af tis modest early commissions were designed for the cou munity of Matasinhos and were works which came to realization with characteristic slowness —as much due to the building capacity of the region as to the personality of the architect. Tis unusual sensitivity towards both the existing  local topography and the temporality of the work was manifest from the outset trom his Boa  Nova seaside restaurant (TysN-O3) to the two swimming pools he built in Matosinhos and Lega da Palmeira, erected between ry ss and 1966. This degree of sensitivity to the genite log also characterized a serics of houses he built between 1967 and 1977. above all the Aleine Cardoso House in Moledo do Minho {1g711 and the Beires House in Povoa do Varzim (1973-6). These residences embody characterts- dic features of his style, the former showing how new elements may be introduced inte the site ay though they were parts ofa pre-existing scheme. the latter displaying a delicacy of detailing  which is at once modern and traditional. S.'s affinity for Alvar *Aalto’y hetcroclitic  method is perhaps most evident in the branch of  the Pinto ¢ Sotto Maior Bank in Oliveira de Azemets (1971-4). although here, as in his other  organic compositions, the plastic irregularity ot)  the volume and mass is always tempered by symmetrical components drawn trom the tra- dition of Italian Rationalism,  S.y career as a public architect: has been clovely linked to the chequered fortunes of the Portuguese Revolution of April 1y74. This is most clearly manifest in the Bouga (1973. 7} and Sao Victor (1974-7) housing complexes in Oporto, both built as urban infill under the auspices of the residential housing, associations which were set up by the state and bore the acronym SAAL, as an integral part of the Portuguese ‘new deal’. Despite the lniited  Siza. Sio Victor hous. Oporto stat 4 7)  success of these collective cndeavours, Sis continuing iniportuice in the current archigee= tural debate derives tram bis ability to dem- onstrate. through the extraordinary vitality of his art, the validity of critical regionalsin in poinong the way toa cultural approach. kE “Alvaro Siva. projets et realisations, (yt SOUL’ Archttectire Punjound had (Parisi, no. 211 (October tysoi: “Alvare Siza’, Urbanism {Pokvo;. December tyso.  Arehitecttire and  Skidmore, Owings & Merrill (SQM). In 1936 Louts Skidmore (18g7 0 tyG2)and Nathan- ie] Owings 11903) 84) founded a joint office in Chicage, to which was added a second office in New York one year Tatery in 1939 Jolin Merril (i8y6 ty7s! jomed the partnership  From the beginning. the office was organized on novel principles taken ever from che artice organization of the Asuerican bustiess world leamwork and maividual responsibility dong with appropriace moecyagen of enrpleyvees an the one hand were combined with anons uty ofthe individual anda strethy conponte work-  ing method on che orber. While the ¢  Voyeurs were largely caken up with the establishment of the firny’s scrucaue and ats further branch offices. the breakthrough to mtersational rec= oynition tsar architectural practice camte with Lever House. New York (iu) odes building. which unttied an entire series of  Thus 2 1-storey  new compositional clenients inte asmyte solu tion, way te seta trend an North American 
Skidmore, Owings & Merrill, Connecticut General Lite Insurance Co. adauinitranen: budding, Bloomright Coan, tys7  architecture, Noteworthy is the organizacen ot the building masses as a base and a distinet. cubic. rectangular tower siab with a light. largely transparent. outer stim. An entire series of similar projeets by SOM tollow cd. through-  out America. in which the trehiteets’ responses brilliant time especially well-adapted co cach chent’s functional requirements well above the mayority of their countess imitators,  SOM not only took up influenees trom the *International Sevle. *Mes van der Rohe and the early *Le Corbusier. bri hay also decisively influenced the architecture of the *USA since the Tysos in its own right. 1p was SOM who developed the new building cype of the com- pany headquarters as a flat building complex is a park-like landscape setting. iad brought it  -undoctrinaire, but tormail datrhe  Iitted these buildings  to ity masterful perfection. Exwuples are the  administration buildmg of the Connecticut General Life Insurance Company in Bloom field, Conn. (i937). the Upjohn Company in Kalamazoo, Mich. ftgi). the United Airlines Building in Des Plaines. U1. (1963). the Ameri- can Can Co. in Greenwich, Conn. (ig70}. as well as the Weycrhacuser Company in Taco- ma, Wash. (1971).  The Chicago office took up the tradition of architecture determined by construction which had Sourished in that city (*Chicago School). In the Inland Steel Co. Building in Chicago (iyss} SOM interpreted this tradition with an  independent handwriting that also showed the influence of Mies van der Rohe’s tirst Chicago works. But. while Mies soon developed a method in which the structural frame was kept behind the fagade articulanon, SOM exposed the structure and gave it full expression, devel- oping a whole series of new treatments tor tagades, This must also be attributed to the fact that from the beginning engineers — such as Myron Goldsmith and Fazlur Khan — were included in the design teams and were repre-  
sented as partners. The archetype of the skelecon construction Was realized in the office building of the Business Men's Assurance Co. of Amer- ica in Kansas City, Mo. (1963). [t Was also in the Chicago office that the building originally developed which first made build- ings of great height economically feasible. The ‘tube construction’, worked our by Fazlur Khan. in which the external supporting conipe- nents of a skyscraper constituted a selfsupport- ing cubework, led — in such reinforced-concrete constructions as the Brunswick Building in Chi- cago (1905) and the One Shell Plaza Building in Houston (1970). as well as in such steel-frame John Hancock Center (1970) and the 450m high (1,500 tt} Sears Power (1974). both in to highly impressive technical and formal results. The Hancock Center was also the first large-scale muld- functional complex. atype Which incorporated  systems were  constructions as the  ieago  residences, offices and shops ina single building. In the carly 1960s, Walter Netseh in Chicago developed what be named the ‘field theory’ design systema. which was espectally applicable to university buildings and hospitals, The field theory was an early attempt to break away front aostnict recolinear design schema by strong differentiation in plan and elevation. Ir was a logical and consistent system. Since its opening, the San Francisco office hay pursued in many of its works formally diverse compositional solu- tions developed from the interior spaces OUut- ward. In these the latent regionalism: of the American West Coast is given reflection. The recently founded capital, Houston, has seen a very dynamic develop- ment, like the city itself Whose skyling is today largely dominated by various SOM buildings Inspired by *Roche and *Dinkeloo’s Ford Foundation Building in New York, SOM has. in the lase few years, designed a number of buildings with atrium interior hails in the form of covered spaces with plantings and public facilities. These have given a new dimension to othee building in America. Examples are the Fourth Financial Center in Wichita, Kan. (1974), the First Wisconsin Plaza Building in Madison, Wis. (also 1y74), and the 33. W Monroe Building in Chicago (tySo). SOM has also been responsible for a series of large building complexes outside the USA. especially in Islamic countries. Among then. the National Commercial Bank Building in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia (1982), established a new  office in the oil  St  =).  sist AME meetin Hn ea Hints ae ri ae ae  Skidmore, Owings & Merrill. Nation Commercial Bank, Teddah (182i scale for office towers ir hot climate zones. ana the Haj Terminal at King Abdul Aviv biter- national Airport ac Jeddah is che largest cen root construction in the world  SOM s strength has always been che cepacics tor original, but trend-setting and) formally brilhantscluions. In the process cinonumental note hay often arisen which wo obvious uid convincing since itis stamped with a belter as  the fundamental value ind dynamism of American tradition  Supported by its pre-eminent ory SOM hay successtully created for inet bya considerable margin} a leading positions vane  sock  Wazaon  the architecture and engineering unice the USA and throughout the werd: in tas  the value of SOM’. commissions reached tis  level of Sys millon, oF Which saute + cent related Co adinutsteacion wed eo sasnicr tel  buildings In the same veur die fen comprised  piace irebeiets acid  2.063 employees, micbadit 363 cnyinvers. The nigority ot che test yicat generated afarciieets tid ensinesis ESCM  Gordon Bunshariand Rox Allen New Yors Moret Galdsici§ aid Wal Bassotti San  Bruce Graban Neteh te (htoages. were in reteset by rie  J dssard Brancisce: Panes Linge number er sormger tiers sured phic in all of SOM.  sears. seo hab cormatics und  However have nal ue  offices aver Cay 
Smithson. [eenomer Building. Londen ry6gs  Smithson. Robi Hood Gordons estate, Ponder lytat  identity of che organization are certain to be maintained, OWG C7 Danz. Ernst, Architecture of Skidmore, Owings & Merrill igsa 1962, New York 1962 and London 1963: Drexler, A.. and Menges, A., Architecture of Skidmore, Ouwings & Merrill 1963- 1973. New York 1974; Bush-Brown, Albert, Architecture of Skidmore, Owings & Merrill: Architecture and Urbanism 1973-1983, London and New York 1y84: Woodward, Christopher. Skidmore, Owings & Merrill, London and New York, tg7o; Owings, No A. The Spaces in Benvecu, an Arcditect’s Journey, Boston 1y73.  Smithson, Alison. b. Shetiehl 128. After studying at the University of Durham, in 1yso she opened. together with her husband Peter *Smithsan. an othce in London. She was a member of the Independent Group, whose discussions af the dependeney of art on modern technology and che subculture of the masses played an important partin the development of Pop Art. She was also a member of the radical Team X within *CEAM.  The Simithsons’ importance in post-war architecture derives equally from their build- ings and their formulation of che theoretical principles of *New Brutalism. The building which launched this movement. the Hunstanton School in Nortolk (tygo-s4). a steel skeleton with glassand-brick infill is allied with the work of *Mies van der Rohe i 
its formal strength and its emphasis oP construc- tion, but rejects the classical proportions and perfectionistic details of his work. Other signifi- cant buildings by the Smithsons are the E mist Building in London (1964), whose spatial composition creates ap urban setting of singular quality: and the Robin Hood Gardens housing estate in London (1972). where they sought. by building corridor-streets above ground le and including two-storey dwellings, to retain for the intended vecupants something of the familiar atmosphere of the streets of terraced houses which they had previously occupied. AM [1 Smithson, A. and P. 1y60 (revised ed: Urban Structuring, London and New York 1967): «Without Rhetoric: An Architectural Avsthetic, London and Cam- bridge. Mass. 1973: Smithson, A. (cd.}. Pea X Primer, London 1y65. McKean. John M.. “The Smithsons: A Profile’, Building Design, May 1977.  ono-  rel  Uppercase, London  Smithson, Peter (Denham), b. Stock ton-on- Tees, Co. Durhani 1923. Studied ac the Guiver- sity of Durham and the Royal Academy Schools in London, Since 190 he has worked in partnership with his wife Alison *Simthson. He also was a member of the Independent Group and of Teams & (*CIAM)  {2 See preceding entry.  Soleri, Paolo, b. Turin tyty. After completing his studies at che Politecnico in Turin, he joined Frank Lloyd * Wright at Taliesin West, tyg7 8 In 1949 he collaborated with Mark Mills on the Dome House in Cave Creek, Arizona, which is roofed by two intersecting domes. Fle returned to Italy, 1950s, where he built the expressive and bizarre Ceramica Artistica Solimene fac- tory ac Vietri sul Mare, near Salerno (1983). Since 1955 he has been invelved almost exclu- sively with the design of alternative urban planning models and in 1gs6 founded the Cosanti Foundation in Scottsdale, Arizona, to pursue that end. By 1970 he had designed thirty “Arcologies’ (a term coined trom architecture  and ecology) a series of high-density, fantusti- cally unreal megastructures for up to six million inhabitants, conceived as the antithesis to the dissolving metropolis of the automobile era The thirteenth of these Arcologies, Arcosani. originally projected for 1,500 inhabitants, has been under construction since £970 in the desert some 125 kim (Xo mules) north of Scottsdale, AM  Soleri. Dome House, Cave Creck. Arizona iwith Mark Mills: tuguy  2) Soleri, Paolo, strealogy: Phe City inthe Inage of Man, Cambridge, Mass.. and London tyoy: >. The Sketchbooks of Paolo Soleri, Came bridge, Mass. ryzi: Pavlo Soleris Architectural Dranvings (exinbinon catalogue}, New York gst  SOM. *Skidmere, Owings & Merrill.  Sommaruga, Giuseppe. b. Milan coz. d. Milan ryi7. Studied architecture at the Acca deniia di Brera, Milan. Hie way the main exponent of Italian *Art Nouveau, together with *1¥Aronco, * Basile and Pietro Fenoglio, He employed foral Art Nouveau details, pare ticularly in his decorative friezes, which con- trast with the bare masonry. Notable works inchide che Palazzo Casdigtioni, Milan {1yoo 3}. and the Mausoleum Faccanoni, Sarnico  £1yo7)}  £ Villard. Ugo Monneret de, Liarchitemuna di Gitiseppe Sommuariga, Milan 1908 Pevsner. Nu. and Richards}. M. (eds.). Che did Rurionalists London 1y73.  Sostres (Maiuquer}. Josep Maru. bo La Seu WUrgell, Spaint tots. Becaue of a previcus childhood ines. he could net complete bis architectural studies at the Escuela Superior de Arquitcetura in Barcelona unal he was thirty vous old. Uhis delay provided an opportunity te widen his studies and interests to include architectural history. poetry. and) parting as well. ll of which made his an architecture of the broadest cultural scope at precisely chat 
bement shen, wider the France dickuorship,  Spanble uvchitecture found tyelf at in execep=  cemally los ebl scomtbat Hus situation S wbdostill groep or unditset ub Bareelona  fonmaPGrtp Rin tus terevuve the ideals and  purposes ot thy carly Modern Moseutenr, stich bed tiles etint ta the asad wu S. was Te neerieal spokosmuin of the group. In  ton. us aiterestam history spurred Iam to  benot the sronp ‘Amigos de Gaudi? long  bowie Mts sechicceture bed received wae recognition, He has heen teaching architectural Iecrony ot the Pseucls Superior de Arquiteetura in Bareclonisnive fys7 Te priv.ite practice since toate S. has bude btde: yet. with ao tine sensibility and dirougl: Jus svathesis of the secubulory of the Moder Mosement. he hes been chormotsty utiventail, Among his most miyportint works are: the Cast Augustin Sitges tosses the Casa ME MET  the Hotel Mana Vietora i Puigeerda (igs7 odthe?  my mm  mm Barcelous fuss}:  Nortdere Cntrersal Newspaper Build Barcciona rigéss which revalls the dikaphie of Ginseppe *Lerragnt and as out standing mits shew abrespeet tor die contextat the street Mt y Marat Sostres’, May 1yt4gs losep  fa Conacdetd  Domencen, Lum. ‘le  Liygieetinas tie Bareclona Maria Sostres’, ¢ ‘Barcelona.  Clon suavern afi  Mutust gos  South Africa. [he tour proves that were jomnmed together in rate ce dorm the Cnion of South Africa dad duttrig: colonial bisteries and. im consequence. btiercat patie af archi tectural developutent the ork one at nate being that of the Cape or Good Flose where a Dutch vermaculir was cuits sted ue the sth and iyth centuries, with some shaper  OPepres:  geo lM  Mion provided by die Lrench ret Phibaule (1730 EST S1 further expanded and enn hed at chy end of the  Thats boul traditian woes  conuury with the arrivabot Herbert Baker «he was to build Groot Scbitur. Coeil ihodes otticial residence. and liter the Kinodes Mem-=- onal. both near Cape Lown focus of all architectural acute, was in the  Vhereatter, the ‘Tramswaul province, in Preroris where Baker was to build the Union Bunkdaes. ind inest notably in Johannesburg, wher. Baker and dus pupik]. M: Salomon and Gorde: set the tone in the years that te fos cd for all public and private building of an On the rocky ridge to the north of  raclowere te  “htineuon, ees utping  town Baker and bis followers sect up an array of noteworthy howues composed with random rubble and contrasting white-washed walls and classical elements that introduced an fttalianate style altogether appropriate to the setting and climate. Sir kdwin *Lutyens, too, contributed wo the establishment of this casy and expansive clasicism, designing the World War EP imem- oriad (inthe 700) and the art gallery awkwardly sited ana railway curdng and incorrectly orientated), both in Johannesburg. With the advent of modernism, however. this earlier tradition was to be rudely rejected  The tntreduction ofmodernisin was brought about. virtually unaided. by Rex Muarticnsscn, who travelled to Europe. tint im ig2s and thereafter on repeated occasions, making direct  contact with *Le Corbusier and Fernand Léger and returning with pamtings tnd drawings by them. fo ty3t. Martionssen jotaed the stat of the School of Architecture ot the University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg. and became joint editor of the Seah pivan Record. both of which he now uscd most deter- nuinedy and brilliantly to further his propagan- dams, Between 1932 and 1939 4 handful of  drchtteeneral  houses ina Corbusian idions of an cxtriordi+ nary fesse were erected in Johannesburg by Marhenssen and his associates, notably Norman Vanson, Gordon Mcintosh and John bassler (an eather enthinnist of Cape Dutch architecture who was later to attempe an Augupte *Perret Other European brought te bear on this development. notably by Kurt Jonas, who bad studied Lie in Berlin, and was concerned with collective rather than individual expression, and Gordon Pabst. also  revival infucneess were  from Berlin, «he pursued a singularly individ- ualistic Utrimatels, thac all these men were cultivating was found toe harsh and uncongenial and atier World War LE (Marticnssen having died of Hu in ty42 while on a military training course) it was Americanism, both in the form of Brazilian modernism and the sprawling Calitormian ranch-house style, that came te dominate archi- rectal design. Even *Bauhaus graduates such as Stefin Ahrendts succumbed coimpletely to : developments the model  course though, the style  this vogue. Por otic was provided abo by America, by the work of *Skidmore, Owings & Merrill. This change to amore relaxed and celectic modernism had to a  certain extent been anticipated by one of the earlier exponents of European modernism, 
Douglass Cowin, born in South Africa, but tained at Liverpool University, where Ameri- can inspiration had long been cultivated. Cow, though a designer of no great distme- don, set the style for textured and coloured bricks contrasted with white- or creani-paimted frames and panels of plaster that dominated during the 1ysos. The ubiquitous exponent of this fashion was Harold Le Roith, responsible for a number of apartment blocks in Johannes- burg. Since then the evolution ofarchitecture in South Africa has follawed, quite faithfully, international trends. with only one touch of individualism, that displayed by Guedes, a graduate of the University of the Wiewatersrand and Protessor of Architecture there since 197s, bur mose at whose work iy to be found in Mozambique. RM  Amancio  Spain. Modern architecture in Spam may be dated to the appearance of *Modernisnig. a uniquely Catalan phenomenon. which was tore than simply the local version of *Art Nouveau. as it has often Nonetheless, it was. like it. counterparts in  been considered. other countries, an outgrowth of mid-ryth- century Romanticisnr and the nostalgic revival culeure, The Catakins considered that the roots of their cultural and national identity lay in the Middle Ages. At the same time arevival of the national language. Canela. helped spread this movement toa wide popu- lace. Thus, although Modernisme was related to the English *Arts and Crafts movement of William *Morris, known through trade con- nections with Great Britain, the Catalans did not find their efforts restricted to a culture of the élite, One cause was the relaciv  of medieval  v ace develop- ment of the Industrial Revolution in Spain. which was Hnanced by commercial exploita- dou of Cuba. The Victorian-minded bourgeai- sie was especially eager to catch up with and to surpass their European rivals in scientific and. cultural endeavours as well. In addition. the fecling, of a Catalan “Renaixenga’ made it imperative that the initia- tive be populist. which indeed it was. This served the interests of the newly enriched ¢Lpses well, for by casting social problems in medieval terms the workers’ attention was essentially  national rebirth or  directed away from revolutionary notions and towards patriotism. ‘Thus *Modernisine’ was one of those rare moments When high and low culture coincide ina tree popular style under-  stood and enjoyed by all. Phis accounts for the styles extraordinary dynamism and: it. geo- graphic and temporal expansion, "“Mademismc was practised by a great number of artists and nuunifested not only in architecture but alse in decoration. crafty, miupic, pauating and liter ture as well.  During its years of tormmarion “Moderne Reclectin cis), and even its mature monuments de not Shed this character. asin Antonio *Gandi’s first  im architecture was highly celeerie  building, the Casa Vicens (187s 8a), or in Josep: Vilascea’s Taller Vidal fi8tg 84) and Triume phal Arch (18881, all in Barcelona. Three major creative strands, cach associated with an eure stranding architect. may be distinguished in Caan “Modernisme”, Gaudi’s mature work is the clearest expression of the rch experiment ton with Baroque spat and surface effects, devorative images drawn trom tacure. and the almost abusive manipulation of structure to achieve these ends. In the nest works. such as the chapel of the Colonia Guell in Santa Colonia de Cervello (sys -1gigd. Gaudi aba doned the detailed carly style ofthe Palau Gicit in Barcelona (i883 OQ) for a more inipassioncd and totally Berenguer. Joan Rubié and Josep Maria Juio!  sculptural expression. Francess  (church in Vistabella, Larragona.igiS 23) alse represent this tendency. Lluis Domenech 1 Montaner pursued a more rational approach, probing the real necessities of cach progranme  and producing buildings of real brillunee it the  Spain. alan de li Mision Barcelona cigeg § Lluis Domenes bi Monian  
Valen che da Marsie Sant Pars eet lero Granell and Antoni Gallissa  setgeg Shand che Hospital de Sana Cruz iige2 10), both in Barechoria contd be clissiticd as belonging to this more Tittonaist sean however, Domenech’ influ- cree das dessin fay work per se than im the ore Mica process ot his design and his organiza- toncl abili. to work with teams. Together woth Ins ceschtng. this teamwork prepared the rationalist  was for the undercurrent of  Noucentsme’ in the 1g20. and for rationalist medernisni iselfin the ry30s. The chird strain was cpitomzed by Josep Puig t Cadatalch. who based fis architecture on his own historical rocarches, Although his work bas ascrong air of gothic revivalism. he was able to transform this hustorteal vocabnlary inte something of great personal and domestic charm (bunldings for the Casarumons factory tn Barcelowa. cyr2i. It is mteretng to nate tha *Gropiuy met Par m Barceloniain the carly vears of the first decade of this century and confessed to being strongly influenced by Prng’s msistence on the necessity of reviving dhe arty umd crafty by means of Unlike Witham cepted  hastis of  schools of industrad design Morns, which *Moderanine”  industry, Catalan onwards the fre  however. Puig. ac  Was, of course,  Prom rg.  ipspiranon of “Modernisme) based on nature and gothic fimetionalisny receded and gave Way to the classical order of ¢ Mediterranean urban- ity. This Moeutornn between the archeological approach (church of Montserrat by Nicolau Rubio. finished by  Raimon Dura, 120-40. both of whom alse  sun clasmenan was divided  designed modernist buildings! and the early Rationalism of Francesco Folguera and. the brothers Ramon and Antonio Pure Gairalt In Madrid the cele. tic arclucectural tradition ofthe ryth century contmoned undisturbed well into the 20h, althouesn becoming increasmy]y more regional in crs ter ‘  ind historically informed. A certain | -st-olled monumental ism was introduced by © tani Palacios iCen- teal Post OfRce in Madr) eo 3- via the traditional regior revival of inherent archite eventually to be manifestes sentative was Antonio Flore, io Sonbined the severity of *Schinkel (Coi sueArcnal School in Madrid. 1923-9) with boo pres= Sion of funcdons and materials wit + historic cal vocabulary drawn in’ part t: ti *Richardson (Menéndez y Pelay  bucit was - of brick that a | qualities was  senool,  Spain. Casa del Barco, Madrid (1433 6), by Ratucl Berganiin  123-4, and students’ residence in the Calle del Pinar, tgtt 13, both in Madrid), Florez was tollowed by Fernando Garcia Mereadal who, after a) four-year tour throughout Europe (1923 7), returned to Spam and gaye a major impetus to the Modern Movement with his “‘Rincdn de Goya’ stroyed). Others were also feeling their way tentatively to a modernist approach, inchiding Secundine Zuazo (Casa de las Flores apartment building. 1y30- 2, and the Fronton Recoletos, 1y3s. with the engimeer Eduardo *Torroja. both in Madrid); Ratacl Bergamin (house for the Margués de Villora, 1927-S. and nurses” residence, 1933. both in Madrid): and Castro Fernandez Shaw Madrid, 1927), whose projects were closer to * Art Deco and Streamlined Modern than to the purity of the Modern Movement pioncers Che International Exhibition im Barcelona in 1y2y, although famous especially for the Ger- man Pavilion by *Mies van der Rohe, retlected for the most part the monumental pomposity of the dictatorsup of José Antonio Primo de Rasera. Also notable. however, were the Art Deco fountains by Carlos Buigas, the gardens by the French architect Jean Forestier and the reconstructed vernacular buildings. brillisntly laid out ain the village “El Pueblo Espanol’ by Francesco Folgucra and Ramon Raventas (with the painter Xavier Nogues and the writer Miguel Utrillo). It was one of the purest responses co Camillo Sitte’s City Planning accord= ing to artistic principles. In 1y30 Josep Lluis *Sert and Sixt Yilescas founded in  m Saragossa (Ty27. de-  (petrol service station in  Barcelona the 
carceac (Grup Artistes | Téentes Catalans per el Progrés de T Arquitectura Contemporinea) In the same year an “FE” was substiquted for °c. whereby GaTepac became the Spanish section of cinrac (Comité International pour la Reso- lution des Problémes de TArchitecture Con- temporaine) at a omeeung in Saragosse (*CIAM): Garivac organized exhibitions and lectures; and at the 1932 meeting Of CIRPAC in Barcelona a pre-draft of the famous *Athens Charter was drawn up. The group also edited the magazine AC. which published articles on rationalist architecture and. together with *Le Corbusier, it produced the famous Plan Macia (1932-4) for che urban reform of Barcelona Notable buildings of that time are the Nautical Club in San Sebastian (1930) by José Manuel de Aizptrua and Joaquin Labayen, and the Dis- pensari Antituberculoso im Barcelona (1934 6) by *Sert, Juan Bautista Subirana and Josep Torres Clave.  The Civil War (1y36-y) put an end to Modern Movement architecture, but a slow  revival began in the Eysos. Under the auspices of the Nacional de Colomzacian whole new villages were built: in these, tra-  Institute  dition inspired some very picturesque solutions, as at Esquivel, Seville (1948) by Alejandro de la Sota and Vegaviana. and Caceres (1ys4-8} by José Luis Fernandez del Amo. In 1gs2 José Antonio Coderch and Manuel Valls designed their ‘Casa Ugalde” in Caldes de Estrac, Barce- Jona, where surrealist formal effects were delib- erately soughe ina desperate rejection of the social and cultural realities of the moment. In order to come co terms with these realities. a group of architects in Barcelona formed in tys2 “Grup RY, which went back to the point where GatTePac had begun twenty years carlier. On the one hand there was an admitted inthenee from Italian neo-realism: and Briush *New Bruralism Qworkers’ housing development in Calle Pallars in Barcelona by Josep *Murtorell and Oriol *Bohigas. 1960), while on the other hand there existed a yennine intention fo revive the traditions of the early Modern Moxement. which had been so violently obliterated in Spain by the Fascist regime. Josep Maria *Sostres experimented with the forms of De *Stijl in his Casa M.M.1. in Barcelona (1ys8). Antoni Moragas with the Nordic architecture ot *Aalto im his Cinema Fémina in Barcelona (ryso-2), Joseph Antonio Coderch with the elegant “Intemational Style of *Neutra ui his  many villas. and Gaillermia Girdles. Pedi Lopez and Javier Subias with the severity of Rohe om their Law Building ip Barcelona (ryssy Madrid architects were influenced either bs American architecture’s geometrical play of  *Mies van der Faculry  forms, asin die work of Jose Antonio Corrales and Ramon Vazquez Moleztin {School in Herrera de Pisuerga, Palencia cuss Pavilion at the World's Fair, Brussels. ryst 8), and Javier Carvajal and Jose Marta Garcia de Paredas (Church in Vitor  Spanish  2198S gioor in the held ofhousing, by the approach ofthe [ondon County Cound) (*Great Britaing. as i the work of José Luis Romany, Francnvo Siaen? de Oiaa and Manuel Sierra (Batan neighbour hood, Madrid. russ 61) oF that of Jase Lun de Iniguez Onvono and Antonia Vazquez de Castre (Canorrete neighbourhood. Madrid, 1yst yi  In the ryfes architects found that. wirh che ceonomic boom, their ntluence had, wirh a few notable exceptions, be  come almost negligible The “Grup RO dwindled, to be replaced by the more academic “Pequeiio. Congreso’. which was active throughout the whole country and under whose auspices SINtY OT sev eR EV archiweets met ina ditferent place every six months to discuss buildings, projects und relared: themes  Meanwhile. clear regional ditferences began to  Spain. House in the Calle Pallars, Bureehona Hiya}, by Martoreil and: Bobigas  
become evident fi ibe Basgue country Lua Voli simuewized i has domestic buildings the robiiecttial socabulary without. jewveyer, tenotmenig the Modern Movement. ly Curcloiia, Mua roreit, Bobigas and *Mackay,  Cadiaeral |  Cletes and Fusquers *Studia PERG as well as *Botll P  Soclorisine  locked hack co die resources of  and re-unterpreted its design Geren in. appropruite linggage. Madrid, as swith novelty and with big  pestis. which produced one of dhe mose  io capital. simige  cutstanding burldings im Senz de Orvza’s Porres Blancas vtoet Si. Although the subtleties of dose Ratuel Moneo (Diese taetory: in Sarge sand Fedenco Correa and Alton- Barcelona, 1963) 43  SENSE 10d se Mila Muntesa faetory, scomed to vgnal architectural stability tor the Tyco, this was roc fortheommg  The counomie collapse ef dhe 1976s dimin- nhod burkding opportumees and encouraged  Spain. Pho Parris Gandi quarter, Reus. Tirragona + Callec de Araniecmine: ryt  Spain. Lorres Blancas, Madrid iit: Si by Saenz de Oza  irchiectural theorizing. Even those buildings which were realized were largely pmportant for their Georgina in Liotrin, Gerona, 1y72. by Cloter and Tusquets; Walden 7 in Sant Just Desvern. Barcelona, tyzo s. by Botil]). Following the death of Franco, the advent of a fragde demo-  theoretical oo stumificanece (Belvedere  eracy hus seen the prerogadve in architecture being switched from the private to the public sector. A representative of this tendency is Luis Pena who. in addition to other works. has created some very remarkable public squares in his Basque homeland. uM  Flores. Carlos. Argiftectira esparioka con- tempordnea, Madrid 161: Bohigas, Oriol. La wrquttectura espatinda de da Segunda Repribtica, Barcelona tyzs.  Speer, Albert. b. Mannheim tgos. d. London TyXt. Studied ar the Technische Hochschule firstin Munich and then in Berlin, and served as 
assistant under his Berlin teacher *Tesenow uadl 1931. He gained Hitler's attention with the redecoration of the NSDAP Headquarters im Berlin (1932) and was given an official posidon  under the Third Reich, After the completion of  his colossal plans for the Zeppelin field and parade grounds at Nuremberg (1934. 7). he was  promoted to Generalbauinspekror (Head of  architectural works) for the capital city, Berlin. There, he built the new Chancellery (1938 9) and plinned, among other unrealized: state buildings, the Great Assembly Halt (Grobe Halle: 1938) and the Fiihrerpalais (1934), ay well as the "North-South Axis’ (1936-7) which was to connect the Great Hall in the Viergarten toa new projected Southern Railway Studien. Lu- pressed by 8.°5 organizational talents, Hider  appointed bin in 1942 Minister for Armaments and Munitions (from 1943 Minister for Mobsli- zation and War Production); after the war S served a twenty-year tery in the Allied prison, Spandau, in Berlin  S. cultivated a dry reductivist *neo-classi-  cism, which increasingly sacrificed any ideas  of quality to an ever-growing megalonsinia manifested in projects on a Vast scale, Ay amore or less apolitical show man, he quickly fell under the spell engendered by the seemingly Tinitless possibihties of his official position and increas ingly lost his grasp on reality. i Speer. Albert, duside the Third Retli: Mem- airs, New York 1y7o: —-. Spandai: The Secret Diaries, New York 170: 2 Futiltrarion, New York ry8is Larson. Lars Olof Die Neugestalnag der Reichshaupistads, Uibert Speers Generalbebannagsplan fiir Berlin, Suriegart 1y7X: Albert: Speer Architekmer., Arhetten iga3 tage Frankfurt wm Main. Berlin and Vienna iyts  Spence, Sir Basil (Urwin}, bo Bombay fot English parents) 1907, d. Eye. Suffolk, 1y76. Seudied architecture in Edinburgh and London, worked under *Lurvens and Rowland Ander- sen before forming a partnership with Partner and Kimnenmouth in Edinburgh. Moved to London, and there established Sir Basil Spence and Partners. S. isno doubt best known for the rebuilding of Coventry Cathedral (rus4 62), Won in competition in ryso: he also designed the Sea and Ships Pavilion tor the *Fesaval of Britain (ros). He subsequently had an ex- tremely active carcer in housing and universiiy buildings. His latter work. such as the British Embassy in Rome (1971) and the Knight—  Speer. Grolle Hille. Berlin sproqece. 038  Spence, Goventrs Cathedral igs4 62  
bride Karracas., London igtey, contmucd to dispiis that monuntentil approach to architec= ture wherted ulonsately trom Luryeny, which  considerable  hope his work she centre ot  Stam, Martconus Admanusi, ho Purmerend. Higlhad. (Suu. Phroughout most of bis career heoworked ta collaboration with other archi- tects. such as *Pocleig and Max *Taut (1y22). *Grokman and van der Viuge igts 8}. and Prost *May .ig3 42 On the initiqave of Hannes *Meyer. he was invited to teach at the *Barhaus me Dessau in igs gy. Atter World Wor Ihe served briefly asa professor atthe Art Academies mt Dresden and East Berlin. In the the leading members ar the lett wing of the avant garde  tyaos and ty30s he was among  Which strove to create a socralist society, and, with other hke-minded colleagues, he offered his servives to the recently established Soviet Union i* Russias  actives Mays assttantam city plinning mare  where he way primarily  ters. Elis radical politcal engagement was an eapression or his reyes tron of the role of artistic mtMcen in architectural creation as advocated by the group De *Suil. as well ay the emphasis on seientiie-anals tical es pormmcntation as pro= pounded by Hames Meyer, Working with El *Lisatzky. So was meolved in one of the most *Comstructivism, the “Cloud Props’ project (rgs4 si Several vears later he collaborated with Brinkinan and van der Viugt on the design of the Van Nelle Tobacco Fuvtors in Rotterdam  Iniportant works of  tglth 3ehoa  Stam. Terrace hones at the Wertienhotstedlists, Stuttgart "1y27  tag  Pioneering work of modernist industrial archi- tecture. Among S.’s independent designs are the tubular stech chair for the Thonet company (1926) and his terrace houses at the Weiben- hofMicdlung in Stuttgart (1y27) AM Dorthuys, G.. Mart Stam. London tg7o.  Steffann, Emil. b. Bethel (Bielefeld) r&yg, d. Mehlem Rhine 1g68. After a private appren- uceship under Professor Manch of the Bau- gewerkschule in Liibeck and volunteer work under the Mumcipal Building Director of Lubeck. Pieper. and met Rudolf *Schwarz. with whom he formed a lasting friendship. In 1941S. was part of a team responsible for the reconstruction of  ~ built bis first modest houses  villages m Lorraine, and built, among others, the emergency church (disguised as a commu- nal barn) at Bust. He was im charge of housing projects for the Archdiocese of Cologne. 1947 g. and his work as an independent architect began with the reconstruction of the Franciscan monastery in Cologne (iyse). Subsequently he deayned over forty ecclesiastical buildings. includmg the St Elizabeth parish centre in Oplanden (tys2-8} and the Carthusian monas- tery of Maricnau, near Seibranz (1962-4. with Casberth Hiilmann}. He culcivated the clear expressive strength of simple, naturally occur rmg materials, sensible coustruction, and an elementary. casily perceived spatial organ- iation Fl  ‘Erinnerung an Emil Steffann. Von einer Buravelt (Berlin), Fo. no. ty. 18 May 1979. pp. 760-87:  mneren Organisation der Rauime’.  Steffann, The Carthosian Marienau monastery near Setbraag iwath Gasberth Hidsmiann. 16s 4)  
Stern. Ehrman House. Armonk, N.Y. tiyrsi  Halsmann, G., Sundermann, M.. and Weisner. U., Emil Steffan (exhibition catalogue). Bicle- feld tg8o; ‘Emil Steffann 189g) 1y6s", Banen + Wohnen (Manich), 36 (y8 1). no. 16. pp. y 16  Stern, Robert A. M..b. New York ty3y. Alter study at Columbia University. New York, and at Yale University. he worked bricHy in Richard *Meier’s office. He was subsequently active as a planner for New York City until 196y when he opened an office i assaciation with John S$. Hagmann. Since 1y77 he has directed his own office in New York and been a  professor at Columbia University. 8. is one of  the leading figures of *Poxt-Modemism. to  which be his abe contributed esertad theorct= cal scarements. begmming with the ste g feof the Yale architectural journal Perspect igas which be ediied and whieh comsututes one ot the frsc inamitestos of Post-Modernian. da oppostaon co the abstr tran and technologie onentation whieh he eritiizes in che *hnater= that  national Side, S.advouites in urchitect  is tssoviational, ‘perceptionul ant ‘grounded ir eultnee’ Ths is tobe aclueved by a return te history and: through a comseroushy cele tn collage and stiperimposmon of established formas whieh are cide wed wich new meaning, Phy beste known works ay an architect elude HeOT 4h 1Q7 Sik  the Tans House at Woshimgtan, Conn the Ehinsar House inn Armonk. NLY  the project for the Roosevelt island develap- 
trent courpebuod cacy. dots t hand dhe project  the retath stores chain Best  urbdertasen fn  Produ ius AM Stern Hobart AL MLL Nene Directors te  Pista fe ci. New York ty6g. “Lhe  Work al Roberto ALM. Stern and John S Tidite tee ad (phat CPok vor, Ovivber favs. Rebs Seon London ight Arpell, Perr and Biektard, led teds.i, Rohere i ME Stee. Bathing and Projets 196s tose, New York pust  Steen uy  Stijl, De. Lhe group of urtits known as ‘De Soil was formed ne Lesden ta burt around the niagaine OF the Its founding inembers Were: dre painter and wrehitect Thea van *Doeosburg: the wrchuteets facobus fohannes Pieter *Qud, fan Waly and Robert waar Hark the poet Antony Nok: the pamters Bart van der Look. Pret Mondrnon, Vilios Huszar ind Ginw  sume Taine.  Sevenm and dhe sculptor Georges Vanton- setloo. Vin der Peek dott the group very carly  Stijl De. The Thats ter Horde, near Utrecht hoagé: bs ebert sau t flat  on, followed by van't Hoff in igig. Also in tyty, the architect Gerrit *Rictweld joined the group.  Suongly influenced by *Cubism, the new group developed a much more radical position than it prototype. In the light of the philo- sophical background of Dutch Calvinism. at subscribed to such ethical principles as cruch, objecavity. order, clarity and simpheitys it was opposed to tradidon, and beeame closely in- volved wath the sectal and economic conditions of the Gme. De Sul rejected an individual, in: favour of an obj universalist, view of the world. Lt abstract formal language, treed en- Grely from: natural models. was taken over direetly trom) *Neo-plasticism: straighe lines and immaculate surfaces whieh niet and inter-  euve  scoted at right-angles: the use) of priniary  colours red. blue and yellow: - contrasted with white. blick and grey: the pare cube. treated not as a static or closed form, but radher dynanieally de-composed. free of boundaries. and expressed asa part of continuous space. De Sails involvement with architecture way  considerable from the outset. The group was  
under the direct influence of *Berlage, who served as a link to one of the multifarious sources of the name they had adopted: it was Berlage’s customary abbrevianion for Gotrtried *Semper’s materialist architectural treatise Der Stitin den technischen und tektonischen Kunsten ot 1860. Ie was alvo through Berlage that De Sryl’s members came to admire the work of Trak Lloyd * Wright. Paradoxically, they shared this interest (ay well as the link to Berlage) with their most ardent opponents, the School of * Amster- dam. to whose quaint: expressiveness they reacted with the most rigid asceticiym  With its first manifesto of tyi8. De Stil formulated for the first ume a consistent artistic theory. Among the earliest concrete architee tural works in the De Stijl circle were the houses which van't Hoff built between 1y14 and tyt6 at Huis ter Heide, near Utrecht. with strong and direct borrowings from) Wright, as well as Oud’s tg1y project for a distillery at) Pur- merend. In addition there were Rictveld’s furniture designs, which reached a program matic and aesthetic highpoint with his Red- Blue armchair of 1g18  A new phase of De Snjl began. 1y2t. Kok Oud. Vantongerloo, and Wils lett the group te follow their own artistic pursuits. Their places were subsequently filled by the painter and film-maker Hans Richter, the architcets Cor van *Eesteren and Frederick *Kiesler, the painter and architect El *Lissitzky. the painter César Domela, the poct Hugo Ball, and the sculptor, painter and poet Hans Arp. It was through Richter's agency thar van Doesburg travelled to Germany, a trip which resulted in his being invited to the *Bauhauy by Walter *Gropius. His brief stay there in 1g21 was to have profound consequences for the future orientation of the school. Through Lissitzky. who two years earlier had collaborated closely  Seijl, De. Disallers ac Purmsrend sprapeet. tutus by Oud. amd chefaws asormeretne studies fer at house ciy2g: by Thee tan Dogsburg wid Cor san hestercu  Daa 
with Kaanur *Malesich. the influence of *Supreninso and of Russian * Constructivism was especie strong within De Styl Friprosed: by Lassizky’s “Prout” composi~ aeons, van Doesburg and van Eesteren devel- opedio tyes chen own avonumecric studies for neoeplasticny houses, which were exhibited thy sung year: Pans at the Galerie “1 Effore Moderne  Tansisted v.01 Doesburg’s theses of “For een  Tinineutatels afterwards Raictveld beeidends architectuur G1y24) ate the realiey othe Schrsider House, Ctreeht, which he buile incoliaboracion with, and for, Truus Schroder Schrader Tt way the single most spectacular iulding of De Sul  Van Doesbure’s intraducnon of the diagonal ia his pamengs and the subsequent dispute wich Mondrian. who deft the group an ro2s. intros duced the third wud last phase of De Sal. In the ineantine, Van Doesburg and van Besteren had come under the wey of Lissitzhy's technolo cal and socal interes: thes formulated: ther ideas taanessay of ry2g. Vers une construction collecave’ Jighpome in the Care Lo Aubette a Strasbourg  Blas phase had igs architectural  i1g26 Se which Van Doeshurg renovated in Arp and Sophic Tacuber-Arp. ere the diagonal was the formal  collaboraten wth bbans  determine, Ta may ease the cake was to be the  Jat neo-plasticasc work oFiny significance: in subsequent vets De Sagl came tmereasingly under the influence of *Neue Sachbehkeit and the Modern Moversat iva Doeburg’s own house at Meudon-Wal-Fleurs. Pranee, tg2y 30). Wath van Doosburg’s death mi ygza. the group dost it neanscav and consequently dis banded: in the following vear publicagen af its journal ceased  The De Sajbntevemient Listed scarcely four teen years and rehed chetly on three personal ities: van Doesburg. Mondria: and Rietveld Yer tes innovanve potonmal was so reat that ait influenced many Lise sechiteenrral develop- ments in the 26th century: trom Cudwag *Mies van der Rohe to tr opposed in the contemporary architectural Peter Paolo *Portoghest. VMI Lo De Suyl, Maandhlad reer Nienwe Kunst, Wetensciap on Rift, Lerden tgige3hs De Sapl (exhibitioy catalogue), Am- sterdam oigst. Zevi, Brana. Poerica dell’ architetura neoplastica, Mabie 1gs3. jaftc, FELL... De Stijl rgiz-rg3t. dire Dutch Conti  ures os diverse and oven  spectrum as *liscnmun and  Internationa!  bution to Modern Art, Amsterdam 1y56: Overy, Paul, De Sajl London 1y6y: De Sajl: tgiz-gr. Fistor of Ctopia (exhibition catalogue). New York rys2.  Stirling, James. b. Glasgow 1926. Seudied architecture at Liverpool University. Elis father Was d marine engineer and this might account tor his love of tight. ship-shape modem design: while the presence of Colin Rowe as a tellow- student may help to explain the classical and humamse tendencies seem in his later work.  In 1ys3 S. began to work for *Lyons, Israel and Elliv in London, where he met James Gowan, They commenced practice together in tys6 and soon became known for a series of buildings which. though oncompromisingls modern, owed litle co the then predominant *Tacernagonal Sele. The principal works of the partnership were: houses ac Han Common (i9ss 8} competition for Churchill College. Cambridge ftyss) proieet for Selwyn College, Cambridge cysy}: and Leicester University Building — (rgsy -63). achieved world-wide fame both for its dramatic  Engmecring which contrast oF red bricks and greenhouse glazing and for the audacity of ats formal precision From 1963 te 1y7t Stirlmg practised alone. Vo thiy period belong many original designs.  Stirling. Flas ac Ham Common ¢Surling and Croawan Tass Ni  
Stirling. Leicester University Tagincering Building (Stirling and Gowan: ys 63  including the Cambridge Unversity History Faculty Building (14640 7). residential units tor students at St Andrews Cniversity (huey Si the Projects for Dorman Long Headquarters 1m Middlesbrough (105) the Florey Building tor Queen's College. Oxtord (1y6o 7  housing  tre  La  tor Rancorn New Vow fiye7 can the One vert Traming Schoolat Plaslemete ntyjoy oo ind projects for Siemens AG in Mameh igs and for Derby Cre Conte stuccs Indie ave last progeets Peon *Rrer Wats assistant, and his and may be detected in drawangs made bee fween Eb08 and ryce. Admmost ten vears wer ca  fas before So again received an riper tant  Brush commussion for the extenstan of die  Tate Gallery nr bendon stys : new uader construcnons  yt Surhny was ut partnerstup wide fis associate Michael Wolrord. Lhe Important work meludes: projects tur the Oli- vetti headquarters at Milton Reenes aut te and for an Arty Contre at St Andrews Caversity vompetinon designs for the Runsi+ sammmlung Nordrheim-= Westfalen in Diiseldort und the WalbliRichar Muscum mn Cologne tboth iyts extensions to the Staatse.tleric Seutty opened finiding for the Wurtteimbergscbes Staats= in Structure  bron  more  hryct  tySge anid a new  art nye  theate  After taking partan i competigen tor bower Manhattan im cgaS and serving as a vistas: eritieand professor at Yale Caiversity Sehoul ot Architectiry front fyb. S hinawn on the LSA. As a result he received meludi Architesturs. Rive  heeame well-  DUIICTOUS Comm ssTons sy ON Ten  School ot  Sion ta the  Stirling. Housag si Kaneors Now bess hiya th  
Ciscoe Heusen tycy Sin the new Nong ofr Fagg Art Mascum. Harvard Loenis © apibridge. Mass. figtgh and the  Costin Deparcment, Columbia University. Now Yorn os  Soa crits hove seen Strling’s work after MtaINg nh an inereasinghy formalist sides Warks stich ay the Scaapyalerie Seutt-  and the Tate Gallery extensions have been  fored to ay “post-modern” /*Post-Modern- sie. Close cxamanadon will. however, show Che underlang unity ot Wl his work. although chere & certunly an important shift, somewhat analagous to the shift in *Le Corbusier's late work with Ronchamp. im that. compared with his carher buildings. a reer reins given to expresve gestures, Soo always consciously experimental am his use equally of eclectic reference and tornzal structures, In freely admit- ung the wiltul nature of all arnstic ereagon, he  rilse determina  has hberaced himself trom the which plagued so much architectural produc- ton atter iygs his work tee less selfeconscioas and walfull than  Vhe clement of “historicity” im  was the clement af tmodermey) in his early work [tis dus candour and lack of preconcep~ non which makes his work so unportant: the unpredictability ofS.’s response te the demands of cach commussion ensures. contmuation of intereston the partot the younger generacton in any new work by hin. RM ~ Sarl. 1. farves Brikdigs and Projects 1980-74. London and New York 17s: Arnel, Peter. and Bicktird. Pod veds.1, Jamey Stirling. Buridines aid Projects igse 82. New York rys3  Surfing  Structuralism, Term mtroduced by the archi- tectural cride Arnulf Liichinger for the new Dutch architecture which centred on Aldo van *Evek and the magazine Fornm, which van Evek edited 1ysy-63. together with *Bakema, *Hertzberger and others. The term suggests a historical as weil as doctrinal relationship to the researches of the ethnological structuralist Claude Lévi-Strauss. who in the 1960. postu- lated a-historical basic structures underlying alfcultural pracesses. and sought to establish such primordial models of relationships. Seructu- ralist architecture tikewise proceeds trom a base of underlying ‘objective’ formal structures; these 'Archeformy determine the entire history of architecture. In this sense. design is nothing but the creative search for archetypal solutions: The structuralist architects opposed both the  Stracturalism, Decal of layout for seudent restdences iprojeet, Ty28) bY Le Corbusier  Structuralism, Municipal Orphanage. Amsterdam ‘iys7 6a, by Aldo van Evck  per  PARE SS ge ~ 
neurrality of the Modern Movement. as it allowed a much too undefined and sterile treedom of choice to users, and the formal richness of *Expressionism, which was seen as being too emotionally charged and subjective Asan alternative, they proposed a multifarious order. a ‘labyrinthine clarie’: within a disc plined. non-hierarchical, but nonetheless simu lating) architectural framework, would be accorded an individual choice.  each user  The architectural principles of Structuralym can be traced to several carly designs by *Le Corbusier, such as his 1925 proj residences composed like a carpet onan orderly and regular circulation network. Such ideas also appeared in several of Louis *Kahn’s works, ay well as in those af Alison and Peter *Smithson: Scructuraliyn as a movement, however, grew directly out of the debate between *CIAM and Team X. Among its most important advocates, in addition to tan Eyck (Municipal Orphanage in Amsterdam, tgs7-60), are Herman Hertz- (Administration Building of the Cencraal Beheer Insurance Company in Apel- 1y7o-2) and Piet *Blom) (Kasbah? housing estace in Hengelo, 1965 73). VME O Eyck. Aldo van, ‘CIAM 6, Bridgwater: Statement agaist Raconalism, 19477. 1p Giedion, Sigfried, 4 Decade of Modern Architee- ture, Zurich tys4: Liichinger, Arnulf. “Seruh- turalismus - eine neue Strémung in der Architektur’, Bawen + UW ofnes (Munich). 21 (1976). no. T.pp. 5 40:  Strukturatismis int Architektur und Stidtehaw, Scattgart tySo.  set for student  berger  doorn,  Stubbins, Hugh. b. Powderly, Ala, 1yt2 Became *Gropius’ assistant at Harvard Gradu- ate School of Design in 1g3y. Private houses. schools, office blocks, churches. The stage of the Loeb Theatre at Harvard (1gs7--60) can be  changed from a proscenium type te an arcs  The Congress Hallin Berlin, which was erected tor the Interbau Exhibition of 1937, comprises auditorium, conference rooms, exhibition hall and theatre. Its saddle-shaped roof, whose weight is partly carried by walls and imterpal  columns, partly by two anchors, isa bold teat of  engincering. More recendy much acclaimed tor his Citicorp Building in New York City  Studio PER. Umbrella parmership  estab- lished in Barcelona in ryés and comprising wo distinct and separate architectural practices Lluis Clocet (b. Barcelona yg) and Oscar  Fusquets (b, Barcelona i942) ferntene pravnss. while Pep Bonet tb tugty and Christian Cirict (b. Barcelona tyg1y form the other. What is common to both practices is  Barcelona  bellicose attinide towards established pormys, which thes express both in ermical texts and im architecture, “Chis aggressiveness is matched. however, by a menculons cue in detailmg éwhich all four learned from Pederice Corres: their often exquisitely designed buildings. Borh practices favour a nnnimal architeccure in which effect is derived froin simplicity  Cloter and Tusquety are the nore proliti., with several oustanding buildings already te their credit. aneluding the Casa  Cardedeu (1y68), which challenged estabbshed  Perma in  atutudes towards the suburban house by its triangular plan and excavated enclaves for privacy house an Ulofrin fryyas. as an ironic  Phe Belvedere ‘Georgina’. a weekend “Paste Moder’ OPost-Modernism) garden pavihon inthe torm ota temple to Ue very motor car which makes the modern weekend possible, while the Casa Vittoria mm Pantellena, Italy (rosa). re-inrerprets the spatial role of the colunin in detining the adjacent external spaces Bonet restrained in their architecture. which empl  In contrast, and Ciriei are mare  Sives foo a greater extent the constructional process. Often exploited to achieve poetic in- terior spatial effects. Their best works are: the Pronto, turaiture factory an Polinya Ceycvah. notable for iy radical handing oF volumes: the Tokve housing block in Barcelona siyy4s. wath ies *Aalto-inspared detailing. and Bonet’s own a}. evoking industrial cORSETUCTIONS Wat 2 Studio PERT. dreditecnire amd (Tokyo). ne. 4. 1977  house at Vilamagor (1¢  Crhanisni  Sullivan, Louis (Henri. bo Boston oss6. d Chicuee tutg. His traning was) brief and  unsystennitie. At sixteen he began has studies tt  the Massachusetts Invatute of Pevhnologs an Cambridge, but leftatter ony one sear he then spent.tbricf period in the Paiadelphia office of Prank Purness and soon thereatter tollowed his parents to Chicuge. Phere, he sverked) for several nionths an the ofbee ot Williaa be Baron Jonmey. the mestampertant architect ot the time im the cry eC hroage School. Tn sz 4 he seent te the #Reade des Beaux-Arts ur Paris, but remrned te Chisago mn e876, dhs conch mig bis ternitl ermtig 
Jin racy S. began hus collaboration with the seer Dankimar * Adler and in e881 became  is partner. Tn their rset years together. bath tnduiged an the sante decarative *ecleeteism thats practised by most of their colleagues. [t was under the infuence of the buildings of TTL Richardson, especially the Marshal Field W hrodesale Store in Chicago (i885 7). chat their architecture tuok anew direcuon Examples are the Selz. Schwab & Co. Factory (18 for the sumpheios of its brickwork, and dhe  snotble  Strong reminiscences of oman: architecture evident in the freestone-clad Walker Ware- house S808 bothan Chicage. In the latrer S united several) storeys by continues pilasters a mont whieh be was subscquently co use i nearly all bis nulti-  combined widh round arches  storey bindings  In assy Sand Adler completed the Audito- runt Budding in Chicago. les various functions iutheacre te scat more than 4.000 people, a hotel dnd orice burlding? and tes complexiey were a challenge both to Adler's technteal-scientitic  talents and to S."s architectonic-artistic skills. In spite of mgenious technical details and a decora- ton as rich as it was fantastic, the building als the excessive demands of the pro- gramme, especially in the lack of unity in its ine  re  ade, whose numerous compositional motifs  were not adequate to express the overwhelming volumes, S. was miuch more successful in his tollowing works. in which he way able to tind forms better suited to the unusual proportions of new skeletal constructions. He abandoned the classical horizontal division of the fagade, and expressed the stack of identical, and for the most part functionally neutral, doors by meany ofa verticalarticudation (Wainwright Building, St Loni, i8g0 Schiller Building. Chicago. 1892; Stock Exchange, Chicago, t8a4; Guaran- ty Building. Butfilo, is8ys). In the place of historicist reminiscences he employed - when- an orna-  ever the clicnt’s budget permitted  Sullivan. Auditorium Building, Chicago (with Adler: 1887 ut  
ment based on plane forms either contined to single members or extending over the whole fagade  Atter the split with Adler, S.°s commissions increased considerably, despite personal prob- lems which in the ev architectural quality. In r8yg and 1903-4 he built his most important work. the Schlesinger and Mayer (today Carson Pirie Scott & Co. Department Store in Chicago. Instead of accen- tuating the vertical constructional elements, he now took the skeleton-determined floor heights and upright supports as che basis of his composition. While he emphasized this system in the upper storeys by means of a cladding of white terracotta and deeply recessed windows, he overlaid the two lower storeys with a rich, energetic ornamental pattern.  S. varied the formal possibilides of represent- ing the type of construction in twe conms-  nt were to enhance their  sions to design fagades for existing buildings, chat of the Bayard Building in New York (isy8) and the Gage Building in Chicago  Sullivan. Guaranty Building. Buffalo. N.Y. (1894-5)  io in pk  ran ibe  Sullivan. The former Schleanyer amd Mayer department store 1Carson Pirie Seow & Chicago orgy tgogi. nats origmal form  INQS-y), Untorcunately, the lined nature of  his later commissions provided hind with no opportunity to pursue further the radical ten- deney of the tagade of his Chicago departmient store, Buildings like the National Farmers Bank in Onvatonna, Minn. tryed S) are rendered  Impressive by thar umity of vohung and form and through the strength of their detal and orbament  The long pach from the first skeleton build- ings clad with hitoriciing Myades te these buildings i which ‘the structural dimensions provide the real basis for the arusce form adon of the exterior words which could just as easily have been uttered by *Mies wan der Kudie  is a reflection of Ss conviction that art must be founded on sstenttic method, No building of che qyth century reflected this thought as early as did his Schlesinger and Mayer Denart- ment Store. Opposed te thiy is thy concepaon ot Sasa protigount of *organte architecture, Bue 
his aspect anthe sense ot form derived  ror of his buddings way contined to whose extraordinary rich- les many cases seems a disconcerting contra  of the  stiPice ornament  diet at che aesthetic objectiviey sruecural requirements. His art-eited: and oft- mitscnderstecd masun that form should follow function was mot scen by So as the point of deparsure for an organic architecture in the nummer of Frank Lloyd "Wright or Hugo *Haring. It derived much more from an em-  phane roiecction af any autonomous form in  building which failed to take account of func- tion and construction. POvS  Sprague. Paul. The Drnviays ot Lewis Henry Sullivan. Prinecton, Nu. 199 Superstudio. architectural group founded  1yn6 by Adolfo Natalint and  Expernmencal  Crsuane Porude di Pramcia: later Gero Fras- sinelh jomed the group. as did Alesandroe and Roberta, Magri, and Alessandra Pali way with tyro 2. The group was disolyed ain igcs, Tt members were active ds Coachers from ryt zs principally atthe Unnorsry im Harence  associated Superstudio.  Supersiudio weatmonee in the late 6960s with promeets thar hdl between architecture and tine  art ina manner similar te Hans *Hollem's work, They deliberately contrast negative’ utopian - as nitellesnuily provocative. funds  mentally lyrical metaphors with Marxist cast  with the hollow functionalist * Functional ism) practice of the post-war vears and with the ses and overly-contident and opti Misae acti at such technologically avant- g Phe project “1 Monumente conaece af cyhy conse OF an  overly-ze garde groups as *Archierun  endless framewerk which expands over the earth’y entire surfice area and represents a cynical critique of contemporary abstrace plan- ning cuphona. “Lhe proposal to submerge all ot Florence by blocking the Arno and leaving only the dome of the cathedral to emerge slightly as an attraction far aguite tourists (1ys ly Was an Save the Historic  ironic commentary on tine Centres’ campaign  The exhibition “brigments from a personal museun’ (1973) sagged nihilisue alternative models for a *radical wr hitecture’ by means of enigniatic surrealistic gr ponies  In 1g78) Superstudic subversively intended erin gue of capitalistic feet and  cogmized that ity  architecture was having 1 henee  Superstudio. Design fora buiiny on the Romerherg, Franklire an Man projece by Adolro Natalim: 17u  abandoned collaborative production. The deti- ant symbolism of the disbanded group has continued to have echoes in Adolfo Natalini’s projects leg. for a building on the Romerberg in Frankfurt am Main, 1979) VMI — Superstudio, “Drei Warnungen vor einer miysdschen Wiedergeburt des Urkanismus’, Archithese (Niederteutent. no. 1 (iy72): Thalia vostra, Salvaiaget di centri storwi, Florence tyta: Masini. Lara Vines (edi). Topologia ec mortogenest,  Chopia ee rrisi Monwenti delle intenziont architetonische in Halia, Venice 1978  delPantinatiura  Suprematism. A term comed by Kasimir *Malevich tor a purely abstract art of che type first seen in his canvay Black Synure on White Grouad (igt3}. For Malevich, Suprematism meant the “supremacy of pure sensation im the fine arts’. The simple formal elements in his paunanys were later also applied to abstract architectonic compositions. which have consid- erable affinities with the contemporary werk of the De *Srjl group.  Sweden. In 1yoo Sweden was aamuainly agrar-  ian country with a population of « s million. Although industrialization was imminent. only 
around a quarter of the population were em- ployed in industry (including mining and for- estry). Not und) ¢ 1930 did the urban population surpass the rural one.  The transition of the dominant roles in society from othcialdom and the aristocracy co the liberal/middle classes created new tasks for architects. The private sphere now became important. The painter Car] Larsson (The House inthe Sur) played a leading role in this domestic followed by a burgeoning architectural profession engaged in  movement and was widely  designing both private homes and buildings for this new economic sphere. Meanwhile, the style of public buildings maintained old traditions  Two attempts to create a more deliberately ‘contemporary style stand) out. general, more or less eclectic. production of the firse decade of the century. One trend was modernist, taking inspiration trom: the schools of Vienna (* Wagner) and *Chicago and mani- festing igelf especially in) bank and) othce buildings as well as schools in central Stock: holm and a tew other places. Notable architects Ernst Stenbammmar, Wickman, Georg Nilsson and Carl Bergsten. This dev el- opment came to an end towards 1y12.  The tendency. realise’ on character, was inspired by the English *Arts and  amidst the  were Gustat  other “national Crafts movement, but also involved a continu- ation of themes already established in Sweden i the carly 18yos by architects such as Ferdinand Bobery, whose massive four-square architec ture was inspired by H. HM. Richardson. The preference for the massive block was now combined with a strong interest in craft tech- niques aad what were pointedly called *genu- ine’ materials. Attention was increasingly focused on the Swedish vernacular tradition asa source for architectural Spear- headed by a group of leading architcets. nrostly living in Stockholm, this trend had as its leading, exponents such men as Carl Westman and Ragnar Ostberg (villas, official buildings). Erik Lallerstedt (railway stations, churches, houses). and Lars [srac] Wahbnan (Engelbreke church in Stockholm). Stockholm’s City Hall by Ostberg (1915-23) is generally regarded as the belated culmination of this epoch, although it is primar- ily a very personal work, even heralding the *neo-classicism of the following years tn its spatial crearment  The first modern attempt to apply principles of architectural design to the industrial enviren-  inspiration  Sweden. Elementary School. Ekye iryos te, bs Georg Nilwon  Sweden. Galerie Lijevalch, Stockholin Carl Bergsten  nytt, by  ment was the seate-buiit hydro-clectre power station and accompanying canals and locks. built ac Troliiiteur to Erik Tosephson’s designs in 1yoe in of Viste considerable  As municipal architcet for che town Crik Habr  avchama for lus  peop che iy bos ind fy2us. won Sensitive redevelopment of a medieval tow consisting of timbered buildings into a modern industrial town. while preserving  with che past  sbsenye oF continuity Uho model sndustriad setcic mene of Bergslugspyar ac Boriinge. boiltan iuis tr by *Almasis:, Pay mond Giawin’s pluamiag principles. Nearby. at  reflects the intiuence ot Jorshosudtors. Almavist buakt che first af his  fumes hvdrosvlectnie power stitions s192T which signalied adeparture from the vernacular  tradition 
Sweden. [haem in Gotherbure sivas yi by Arad Fare  $n the first decade of the century. Per Olor Hallbnanan Stockholm and Albert Lilignberg in Gothenburg designed muuerouy residential quarters much atlueneed by Camilla: Sutte’s principles, At the sume time the concept of the aparcment building formng 4 peripheral cnelo- sure toa lirge verdant contra court brought an importance reform of the closed urban black structure. Amony the finest examples are those by Arvid Fulre. built my Gothenburg in the 1208  Neo-chissieal condeneies first appeared soo after 1yoo aud predonmuated ache iytos. This neo-clasichi way primarily a Scandmayian and Norther European style, distinct from the *Reole des Beaux-Are. Its products were frequently on a small scale,  tradition of the  reflecting an interest an rationalizing dhe small house through a combinanen of intellectual analysis and an increwed sensibility to) the handling of space and intterials, Together with the preceding “national rey an artistic highpoint in cho quabicy of design in doth-century Swedish arc mmportant architects were: 1s Lengbhom (whe worked mainly for large buses concerns - Headquarters of the Stockh: Ii Private Bank tyts: and of the Swedish Minch Company, iyas); Gunnar *Asplund, ci: whose formal language was > tely: imitated: and his more intellectual, receslise friend Sigurd *Lewerentz. Asplund att Lowerentz collaborated on the winning cores: tition de- sign (gg) for the Stockholm Sout: > emetery, tor which cach man would: late  list’ stage. it marked  The most  ecture  ota leader,  build a  noteworthy chapel in the ry20s. Elsewhere in the country, fine neo-classicist designs were realized in Gothenburg and by such niunicipal architects ay Gunnar Leche in Uppsala and Gunnar Wetterling in Givle.  Striving towards a rationaliss mastery of design problems, Almgyvist gained the distine- don of becoming the ‘first Swedish functional- ist’ by the mid-1y2o0s, achieving international recognition with hiy hydro-electric power sta- tions near Hammarfors and near Krangfors ftyzs 8). It fell co Asplund. in his brilliant designs tor the 1y30 Stockholm Exhibition, to open symbolically the “New Era’ in a distin= guished and convincing manner, and he re~ mamned the artistic leader ane’ his death in 1940.  The work of the Co-operative Society's architects’ otfice (founded 1924) under Eskil Sundahl was, however. much more typical of Swedish architecture of die togos and Ty gos. an era of sociabdemocratic rule and of ambigous and progressive public building policies — inhib- ated. however. by Hunted resources. Character- whe were new building types such as co eperadve retail stores and) inexpensive res- taurants, tournt hotels in mountain and island resorts, and low-rise apartment houses, free sainding im green surroundings. Untouched by World War IL. Swedish architecture enjoyed an uninterrupted development in which small-  scale projects, a social awareness and careful design combined to yield one of the most convincing manifestations of the new architec= ture’ anywhere  During the tygos the somewhat schematic character of carly Swedish modernism was  Sweden. Rasta esute, Orebro (rugs sh by Sven Backstrom and Leit Reinius  
Sweden. Villingby. near Stockholm (1953) 1. by Swen Backstrim and Leif Reinius  softened by the influx of Anglo-Saxon ideas with sociological overtones. Ins an cfore to foster community groups, “neighbourhood umes’ were incorporated in town-planning schemes. Often, architects returned to the courtyard-type housing of the Ty20s, though it was now inore loosely composed to suit suburban settings. An important variation of the tall apartment block, a type which had been first introduced in Stockholm c. 1ygo (Sven *Markelius was Director of the City Planning office, 1944-84). was the ‘star-house” pioneered by Sven Backstrém and Leif Remius. both leading housing architects ( Stockholm, rygési. and Rosta Orebro. 1948 52). Classicizing tendeneres were kept alive throughout the 1940. in the work of the Nils Ahrbom and Helge Zimdal and the Nils Tesch and L. M. Giertz partnerships. The traditional basis of architecture under- went a significant change ¢. Ty6o, thanks to the effects of economic recovery and prosperity  rOndal estate in estate 1b  an Wcredse in the nuniber of motor veliicles. a restructuring of retail trade, and the widespread use of prefabrication in construction. The archic rectural profession responded to these new socloseconomiic forces with “production-adapt ed design’ and comprehensive planning. The result Wan, however an nereasing professional uncertamey, as trachtonal building: skills and Knowledge were negtected and the lavt vestiges of classicist architecture, sal kepralive by a fow of the elder generition of municipal architects. were wweptaway. or a while, church architee= ture offered a sanctuary where creative desige Most ren  muirkable perhaps was the date law ering ot die  expericnced a St: Maron's suminer  elderly Lewercnez in his chnrches at Skarpnack  Gg6ol and Kippan ¢iv66s. Peter Ching « yy20) was almost alone among the younger generation i cmploving the “grand manner an  ) Valbnhy.  his carchetectare  fehurches at Culrural: Contre  Gothenburg. Uppsate ete. with tunporary Pariniment Buiidmg, Stock= holm;  Archit cial activity in the decade foes 75 way dominated by the government's housing 
j which called for one million new dwelling units to be constructed in ten years Vihiough this was a grearachievement in terms et quanugs. che designs did not establish a high suindard of quality. The established techniques of dic Modern Movement were merely applied on ceoiesal scale which none of the architects tully mastered: rather, crudely structured pat- ters were imply multiplied to accommodate che great number of units required. By the carly  Programe  Fgces many units remained unoccupied and the cinphasis was rapidly switched to the produc- gon af small houses, which bad nec been builtin Sweden for many years. Again, however. the micthod was mere repetition ofa simple pattern  The popular reaction to this wholesale restructuring OF the chvironment was a ree  nowed interest in the nation’s historical heritage which was being so rapidly sacrificed. Simulta- neously, the posiion of the architectural pro- weakened. with huilding regulations affecting a number of  fesstan was alse stricter practical design: Castors: however, numerous urban Archi-  tects had merewing]y fess control over the  other aspects of devgn. notably the environment, remained uncontalled  coosenie tion indastes and witnessed an increase in the nonearchitcet-designed building market. Swedish wrehitecture, which — despite the ab- sence of Outstanding achievements had been  by a generally high stand.urd  characterized during the year of the country’s “middle way’ (1y3os to carly  between capitalism: and soguiisma). vow plu  lgsos steering tiddle course:  meted to a point of nearenadir, Only a few  Sweden. The Nva Brisket estate. Sandviken. cear Givle (1972 Soi by Ralph Peskine  architects maintained a distinguished level. no- tably the English-born Ralph *Erskine, who more than any other architect remained true ro the social approach of the 194os. gradually achieving international fame for his housing schemes (Nya Bruket at Sandviken and, in England, Byker at Neweastle-upon-Tyne). Another very competent designer was Carl Nyrén who, in banks and churches. showed! a consistent: skill in his handling of scale and materials.  The situation of Swedish architecture by the early rySos was rather unsettled. The role of the architect im the overall building market was on the dechne. Although conscious of the unre- solved problems posed by a rapidly maturing industrial society, they had failed to achieve a renewal of either architectural theory or prac- tice. The especially strong rationalist tradition in Sweden had resuleed in a pregnability in the face of post-war innovations abroad, but it has abo engendered a sort of “Oedipus complex’ among younger architects. Although the situation is in a state of flux. a lively debate hay arisen in recent years: the chief concerns are to persuade the country of the absolute need notjust for good architecture, but also for the development of the means to bring, it to realizanon, BL Ahlberg. Hakon, Swedish Architecture of the ‘Teenticth Comiry, London tyzs: Svenska Arkitekters RiksfOrbund SAR (ed). New Swedish Architecnere, Stockholm 1y3y. ——. Swedish Housing of the "Forties, Stockholm 1y 50: Hulten, B.. Building Modern Siweden. Har- mondsworth tryst: SAR (ed.). New Architectire in Sweden, Stockbolm 1g61; Kidder Smith. G. E.. Siveden Builds, New York 1ys7: Raberg, Per G.. Punktionalistisht genombrott, Stockholm 1972.  certain um  Switzerland. The adoption of a new constitu- tion in September 1848, which provided tor a central federal govenment and local control of the various cantons, raised the question of a pohtical and cultural national identity for the first time. A new national spirit sought to establish as valid prototypes for a ‘Swiss archi- tecture’ the country’s farming villages and small towns. Asa result, numerous regional buildings were designed in a sel traditional style. These inchided local railway stations, post offices, kiosks, inus, banqueting halls and exhibition pavilions. The “Swiss vil-  consciously  native,  
Switzerland. Freidorf estate. Muttenz, near Basle fyty 24). by Hannes Meyer  lages’ at the federal exhibitions of 1883 and 18y6 were typical expressions of this folklorism. The larger cities and their public buildings remained untouched by this late romantic patriocsin, further averted by che growing influence of the rauonal and internationally inclined professors at che Eidgendssisches Polytechmkum, founded in Zurich in 1X55.  Between this native romanticism: and the academic approach favoured hy Gotttried Semper at the *Bauschule’ of the Polytech- nikum, there was po place for a local *Art Nouveau at the cura of the century, In Switver- land that style appeared only in conjunction with an existing *historicism: or in very much altered variations. In spite of its adherence to historical forms, Swiss architecture of the  rs 1goo-14 did not reject an involvement with the constructive possibilities and) functional re- quirements of the period. The Oscar Weber  Department Store (ry) in Zurich by Orta PHeghard and Max Hacteli developed the neo- Gothic in a very manner. which re  tions widely used by contetppurary Likewise. che northern Renaissance style employed in the Peterhor nice Building, Zurich (ry13 4 gi bs Otto wid Werner Piister ompbastzed the verte  mivendyve apd iniluential ally che skeletal prer construc  Germ  deparanent store architects  cality of the ferre-conerete skeleton. fy das Badischer Railway Seaton in Bale git 43 Karl *Moser surpassed the histormesny of the roth century in die terse composition of Tis building masses and his syathesi of Secosount Austria) and neoschistea) torts The Architects Schwerer Architektent, founded in aes. was represented atthe Swoss Provinces Esbibigen held as tytg un Bicdermeiee neo-classical sey le anspired by Ger  imon oat  Swiss iBand  Berne bya paviton an a  tran raodeb: Aneo-clissicisar was reduced toa  bowers seal Versailles und the  ora “Compromise betwee  Cun!  Garden Uteques 
Switzerland. Hens Sohn  vliasdn beats. Recher raat by  wad Pael Actua  Gubler The nrle ot Paid Mebes’ book (i 18e0 Around psc’) tyas: provided an oft-cited motte for this harking back te the ewely rgth eonturys bx this was ineant pac just a fermal principle, but also a social atritude, In igi the Basle architects: Huns Bernoull reeurned from Berlin tohisnatisecity. Dirmg an earlier mp to England he led svtstted Hampstead) Garden Suburb and wots now Hraly couvinced that the small terrace house wan the best housing type. In tytgoon the eve of Warld War i, be built the first estate of nmeteen terrace hatses mm Basle, Although neutral Sworzerland was not directly lack of building commissions was sui b thechy the end of the war  there way a severe Lousnig: shortage. Most  affected by the wat. the  architects Joined Bernoull ny arguing fora standardized small deous  The first large under kirg of the sort was the Preidort estate at Mut. 24). by Hannes *Meyer commune’ for 150 famiti types with good bourgeor proportions’ (Mey- er}. Between ig2g and ry estates were built in Basle, ¢ including ‘im Vo. bemg by Bernoulh. The bu  na Basle Gigig Hs way a willagestike sth ditterent house  ecoral communal Tost mportant hang’ (1y24)  tas respected  of these  traditional types e.g. in their axial svinmetry and small windows and were constructed by small firms. Early modernism im Swos housing  formal  was mamtested nat mois technical aspect. but its socio-political implications. New possibilities first opened up i the sceond halfor the iy2os with the development of the building industry, ft was a decisive factor m the penetration of che * Neues Bauen’. The mim influences came not from *Germany, whose contemporary Expressionism: did not elicit the interest of Swiss architects, but rather from Holland (Netherlands). The mitial inter- est was notin formal, but rather in technical problems: in 1y2g Mart *Stam, Hany Schmidt and El *Lissitzky founded the journal ABC, which appeared atirregular intervals until 128. Its ‘Contribunions to Building’ were the most radical manifestos of a rational. and thus indus- wialized. architecture, to date. The carhiest example of “Neues Bauen” in Switzerland was Rudolf Steiger’s Sandreuter house at Richen, near Basle (1y24}, Which as indebted to the carly houses of Frank Lloyd * Wright in its combina- tion of a wooden frame construction with reinforced-concrete and brick, as well as in its shed roof. Subsequendy sistendy employing the new formal language were constructed in and around Basle in 1928 y, including the Colnaghi House at Richen  numerous houses con~  
chmide ~ the and, by the  (1927) by Paul Artaria and Hany $ first steel-skeleton construction  same architects, a residence for single women in Basle (1929). In and around Zurich it was expecially Max Ernst Hacteli who broke away from traditional housing types, asin the model houses in the Wasserwerkstrasse built for the exhibition “das neue hein’ (1y28). The first modern ecelesiastic building in Switzerland was reahzed in ry26 7 by Karl *Movser: the church of St Antonius m Basle, with side-arsles 1 exposed concrete, Whose cubic masses abandon *Perret’s classicist reminiscences at Le Rainey The ‘Congres Internationausy d’Architectare Moderne’ (*CEAM) were founded in ry28 at fa Sarraz, where * Le Corbusier's programme for first assessment of the position of modern architecture was attempted. Some twenty-five  architects from cight countries accepted the invitation. Although the attempt to create an influential international mstitution did rot suc- ceed, this first congress held in’ Swirzerland benefited from the contribution made by local architects and bad the groundwork for the discussions in subsequent years.  The Weibenhoticdlung (1y27) in Stuttgart. planned by the *Deurseher Werkbund. was  Switzerland. Church of St Antonius, Bast (1926 7). by Karl Moser  eo wesnen. Baste  Switzerland, Rowlence for sm, tiygus. by Paul Artaria and Hans Schmadt  followed with especial comrsdely meerest by the allied Swiss Werkbund.  were involved ju the interior desigiy of several  Swiss architects model houses and Altred Roth was the site architeet For the awe houses by Le Corbusier, fy 1yao the Swiss Werkbund organized die Erste Schaveizerische Basel’ an which thirteen architects: from) throughout Switverland were involved: in building the  Wohnausteltung  inode] housing estite. Ebanks to the use at  Standardized building parts and industria) a= semblage, the uixty terrace hones were qaick ly qnd cheaply erected. The WOBA’ was the first social housing estate realized by Ge ans biteets at the “Neves Bauer’ in Swatverbind. [he Werk- bund’s Neubiifl estate m Zurich followed wath SoG units, Whose ning varied types Were cone veived with higher aspirations: wlthotah stan- dardized clemenrs were alse used ber. the prefabrication aspect was less comprehensiye Paul Arturta and Hans Schovidt, Vlas bras Tloetel, Carl Hubschers Rudeli Steiger. Werner Mo Moser. Fond oth. tage 2 About th time modermiyi bad suecesstalls made ats urrk. not beast thamks toa maiber ot buildings whose nioderite approach miide the movement retdily teceptable. TOwaisne comer dence that Oite Redolh *Sabashers returned trem Bethan in ig2u Ge take up a  who  protosenhip atthe Frdgenossiche Lechinsche Hochschule Zurich. ws ne adherene of thy if  mifitunt wvani garde, Qn the conus. he  Chomproncd aimodern esther ob arehitecture  His most important brildings the Lory pital 
Switzerland. The Werkbund’s Neubiibl estate . Zurich-Wollshofen #1930. 2:  m Berne q1g26 yi. the Eltenau mothers and intinty home in Berne (rg2y gop and the oftice bodlding tor )fotfinanneLa Roche AG in Basle (1y3Q@ gu) witness to Salviynerg’s search for style through their calm objectivity (antte San flichkeit: Julius Poscner}  German and Tnilan cotalttartinisim was ex  reveal an elegance which bears  perionced net only as political Gut also as a Maui  resint it by a return to regionalism: a problem  cultural pressure believed they could atic attemp: to combine native Gadiuon and modernisin led to the so-called “Tfeimiarsul” Monumentalizing torms. as in the concrete neorelasicnm of the Universicy of bribourg Gugih by  Durand, remained the excepdion. In contrast te  Doms Honegyer and) Bernand Genuany. the condi of Neues Bauer’ was Switverland: examples are buildings of Alfred Roth, Oreo HL Senn and Hermann Bauer. such ts) Bauer's primary Bruderholy in Basle  (1938-9), 4 typological proncer that was the first  never cnurely nterrupted in  school on chy school te employ the pasiton sestem, Shortage of macemaly amd reduced) man- power severely restricted binlding activity during World War  several wooden built:  Especially notable are ye Which are free of all  nostalgic vernacularisin the Gwad housing estate near Woidenswil (ivy? and single-family houses 9) Paul Artaria, Man *Bill, and Frost Egeler.  Tinmediately after the war. in an improved  many buildings  geby 1 Lans Fisehhi.  coonomic climate, were  designed ay responses to a philosophy of con- structional economy and functionalism. ‘The architects who distinguished themselves were those who tried to develop classic modernism further: Werner M. Moser, Roth. Seni and Rudolf Steiger  However, the influences of a younger gen- Ernsc 3s) was the rst of ap important series of cultural buildings, schools, churehes and houses by an architect with an individual sty le, uncomunitted to any established movement.  Architects sought to clothe the countryside in new-style terraced estates clinging to the land- scape. The best-known was the Halen estate near Berne, built nn 19s9-61 by *Arelier s. Phe concrete architecture of Atelier § comes close to the style of * Now Bruculisn, Swiss architecture of the Tyo. was played out beaween the ovo extreme posidony represented by Atelier ss Boiler Factory in Thun (igs yg) and Franz Higgs Metal Workshops in Klemlitzel. Fticg belonged, with Alfons Barth, Fritz *Flaller, Max Sehlup and Thins Zaugg. to the so-called) “Solothurner  eration of architects was soon to be felt *Gisel’s Park Theatre in Grenechen (tyga  contemporary Coustrucdon  School. whose approach was nearest te that of *Mics van der Rohe, without being directly dependent on his work. The idea ofan architec- ture which unites the puritan aesthene with tive validity underlies the strong orthogonal couposition, modulu arganization  claims to obje  and erystalline (ransparcney, as wellas the most extreme reduction to essentuah allied to techni- cal perfection seen in their works. Fxamples are che church in Megeen by Fieg (166) and the  Switzerland. Higher Technical Training Centre, Bragg-Windisch (1y61 4), by brit? Haller 
Higher Technical Training Centre in Brugg- Windisch by Haller (1961 6).  Walter Moria * posite point of view in bis advocacy of architey- individual artisue creation, His buildings are expressive. sculptural fornis trom the Commercial High School in Se Gallen (1957-63) to the Church Cente in Heéremence (1963-71), which formed the highpoit of his plastic treatment of space. Claude Parllard’s Saatlen church in’ Zurich-Schwamendingen (1961-4) is composed of closed cubic forms, while his Municipal Theatre in St Gallen (1ytig 8) consists of a Baroque effects are achieved in the curved. intersecting spatial boundarics of the colle: church it Sarnen (1964. 4) by Joachim Nacfand Ernst and Gottheb Studer. Expermiental ideas  derer represented an op-  tre ay an  series af stepped prisms. Openly  Lute  in the handhng of space were especially evident in the new churches of this period. notably in the numerous works of Justuy Dahinden (for example the Herz~Jesu-Kirche in Buchs. 1963 5). Restrictive building codes provided the impetus for the pyramidal form of Dahinden’s Administration Building for Ferrolegeringar AG in Zurich (1967 70).  The optimistic building boom of the ty6os was succeeded by a reflective critique, orginat- ing surprisingly in the Ticino region. Several younger architects reacted against the spread of characterless commercial buildings within the confines of a small country hike Switzerland. From the outset, the School’ represented no single direction: what united its members was a radical rejection of current orthodoxy, die reconsideration of clas- Me modernism, and a heightened historical awareness. Early on, Aurelio Galfetti adapted Le Corbusier’s ideas to Ticinese topography (Casa R otalingy, Bellinzona, 1y61): Vita Carlon Incorporated elements from factory buildings in his school at Stabin (ry68—74): Luigi Snuz7 united the repertoire of classical Rationalisns with that of traditional Ticinese houses (Casa Cavalli in Verscio, 1976); Mario * Botta’s build- ings stood out in strong conerast with) the surrounding banal architecture (Casa Bianchi in Riva San Vitale. 1y7t- 2; School in Moric Inferiore,1y72-7): through their elemental forms and relationship to the landscape they succeeded in creating a sense of “place”. Livio Vacchini’s schools in Losone (1973 7) and Locarno (1972 9) also constitute focal points in otherwise formless built environments. Bruno  “Lieme  Switzerland. Comimenaai V4 Scheel Se Caden  eiust fg.bx Walter Maru borderen sith Boalt Georg Otus vind Hans Zw impter  Switzerland. © na C auch. Versa Pies rote, by Lange Sung,  *Roecblio and babi *Rembards Casa Toatar in Torricelli igo giand Casa Sartori Riveo titukde the problens at the villa type Salladiamasnr san han *Ratienal  yLoth ast acertnealhy reworked  theories of  afining to the architecture is uimistakable 
Poca northor chs Alps dns condency Gur soil bs Lote  hte thre un Alder sryct gt by Noetnd dens: and Gottheb Studer ts vedtwed to car clementary  Ps oScing stoceammciny. whose fornty have  dest canvinemgly om the  Hetesss abhi indo cg. the tna  Seedumcat moti in the cormdars or thy line Fasmgdows ona columnar portico. A  cyonk windos os stmikody cauployed an dhe Sets tbe wil  with Provte de  moat «lich distances the buildmg  yo sa by Prcques Elerzog Moron is an Cautononiaas choose fromotscmurenment, The oufranee wing ot the Mipecuny et Contentperin Artin Baste ru76 yobs Waltred and Kashar Stetb ras a pronounced angular wih sets oF frony dhe adic  Most recently  wilder str Gires, sexend aitchiiccts lave come fe prouneence wath baddies dha are son  scrouisls restricted ass thar use af elemeries  considered Cesual’ ai domes designe thes  pospecr ro gral taats sorous rensiaing. mera Thins wondows and dives. tor  sromts. reads.  MStaN es re Broorspie ious i ther samplers. ind suapic corsti ue tier: cakes qd rats ise ot crusted decal mranenals. Yeo thas anchater ture is wavtoing boo a disphes or pramiiisnm Michael Alder’. Zicten  Radetdert tute, Geapeni. pata ane.  vestdential desigas Lytg The  we then studied ner anny state ob asaunspect and  semeef hong tun tesel phce te live i feane  Gaimolis Dien buikhags | Nowuzzage  fyta gi ich Sar Pro pac Sec atse rethet similar iepres Lbs house estates bv the Metron group Ci hye scar Appenzell, roca ay Bruges Wondtsth cues and rast are  iho oxaraples of con dsnaphoaes. which  mothe fue wl pis  probloans sects  acerca apprep sr AH  Bill, Mas. Vfoae be te tite bas rags. Basle rygus Kies Soo Ge Do Suettca jad builds. New Yor ho Leiden post Volhart. Plans. Solires cs htktien Ruverse burg fusts Altherr Ai Nae Sidineerzer Tritekerae Teuton ent ostungeirt tates. Bachman}. ind von Ve SNe Dagon Sais dr Anwar. border cee Buc Kharde Fucus id Annemarie. ats rch. Dacger Miuhorwe drehutektu in ders seHe PQer, Wonterdiar taog: Birkner. Os. son Bane +  Hochuon arden Scurers i8ae rye. Sorel tuts:  Gatiber fas ques, Nanonaliame eters aitioanalismn  thais Pardutectire moderne de da Suisse. Lausanne Stommumn. Mand Boga. T femdenzon, Neuere  ry (eds.1.  Irehitektuar i Pessin (exhibi- trom catalogue, Zurich tots: Adler, Fo CGursberger. He and Riese. O.. drefute hinetilyee Zurich yes. Blhoser. Wemer. Swusctand fexhibirion  Scuniz. snd ed beditetire to Se ur Boston, Mass.  catilogue’. Basle, and Stuugart  ys  TAC motogs. | ACs an architectural assoctader: nm  Phe Architects Collaborative: bounded  which Walter *Gropmis joined wath architects of the younger generauon (Norman Fletcher, John Harkness, Sarah Harkness. Me Millan. MoMillen. tad  Thompson, Gropius here realized bis concep  Robert Pours Benpuniin tion of Creamwork by individtalise in such large TAC schemes as the Harvard Graduate  Maus. otugys. the US tyse:, the Johns-Mativille Co. World Headquarters ut Jefferson Conney, shad  Center. € ombridge.  Pinbassy in Athens  Col rigc6n aud the Untversiey  Vite Li ditests  proteer tor 1,  Collaharatire rays 1008  Touten 1ase: PAC rags tate. Barcelona rye ‘Che Architects Collaborative. Recent Werks. Tokyor Tuty recs  Ve dites tere aad Corbaniser  Osaka where he served ats an  Tange, Keno. b Studhed at lokva Isbenite profesor. 1ug6 @3.and then as profes. sorandl sacs. After gradpagen fie teamed the of ot Rue * Mavekaw  or tbe Corbuster’s staff bor Lobe Corbusier's  113 Covering.  Vtormier member  exceptionally poot: expression was someshing mote char mere artiethition of the *lnter- national Stvle. During the war, when 1. was Giktie part uid raduace programe  Pokve University. attr  Mavens office  having resigned from he owen frst prize tn twa, sepeieate compennons, one fora Montnient on Mount Pop tagt and die other tora Cultural Centre in Bangkok. fn these compettions he demonstrated an extroordinary capacity te  seale Cown-phanining  combine dynamin hirg: methods with esphere sombolie forms, which dormved tron: traditional Japanese architee= tural styles  
Tange. Peace Centre, Hiroshima (iggy $0): Community Centre and Museum  In the period immediately after the war, T, concentrated on city planning. In 194g be won first prize in the competition for the Hiroshima Peace Centre, which was conceived as the new city core after the city had been largely dewastat- ed by the acomic bomb. Aside from a few previously constructed temporary structures, this project was T.’s first major building, and he was invited to present it to the *CIAM of 1951 in relation to ity theme “The Core of the Cit  This presentation virtually served as T.’s international debut. However, in addition to the universality of the design’s general concep- tion, it is possible to find in this project the same tendency which had formed the basi  sof his unrealized competitions during the war. Although the overt nationalistic elements pre- sent in the earlier competition designs  were no longer present, the two buildings of the Peace Centre clearly demonstrate how his sensibility inspired by traditional Japanese architecture, was incorporated into the dynamic urban com- position. In the following years, T. designed a number of public buildings which showed the same characteristics. He also developed the full potential of structural form based on the mast modern technology, thus establishing himself both as a leading figure in the Modern Move- ment and as the prime mover in the search for a new Japanese national architecture. In fact. in the controversy over what form a national architecture should take in the post-war Japa- nese democracy, T. maintained that the new style should synthesize the wo opposite poles of ancient art and civilization in Japan: the Yayoi  culture (in a sense similar to Nigtesche’s concept of Apollo in the Greek tragedy) and the Jomon culture (Nietzsche's Dionysius). The Kagawa Prefectural Office Building (ross 8) and the Tokyo Metropolitan Hall (1952 7) were repre- sented in the spirit of Yayoi tradition and the Sogetsu Kaikan Hall in Tokyo (1936-8, demol- ished) and the Sports Arena in Takamatsu (1962-4) in the spirit of the Jomon tradition, In the ry6os T. produced quite dynamic images in the design of public buildings and also in his  urban design projects. These projects were again based on the syntheses of extraordmarily symbolic forms, i a manner which testifies to Tesrevubion agamse toring madern architec- ture’ (he even reversed the aston: of *Punction-  alism. by stating chat only the beauutil can be  fanctional}, and on the systematic method of composition as represented by urban core= gystenty and the concept of components (*Me- tabolism). The Tokve National Gynimasion  (1964) and the Yamanashi Press & Broadcasung 
Sibel ae  Tange. Kagawa Pretectural Orfee Building. Takamatsu {toss 8}  Centre (1966) are among the most notable products of this period.  In the Tate ry6os he drew up numerous proposals for projects overseas, and he contin- ued to make these overtures during the 1970s, a period in which architectural activity in his homeland had suffered a decline. However, in these international projects, the Japanese sen- sibility which characterized his former works  Tange. Tokyo National Gymnasium (1964)  had virtually faded away, and his work is now approaching the language of the so-called ‘late modern’ architecture in the USA = and Europe. HY CG Boyd, Robin, Kenzo Tange, New York 1962; Altheri, Alfred, Three Japanese Architects, Teufen 1968; Kultermann, Udo, Kenze Tange 1946-69. New York 1970; “Kenzo Tange and URTEC, Urbanists and Architects’, The Japan Architect (Tokyo), 234, vol. 51 (1976), nos. 8/g.  Tatlin, Vladimir £., b. Kharkov 1885, d. Moscow 1953. Studied art in Mascow, ryog- 11. Under the influence of *Cubism and *Futurism, he beame one of the leading advo- cates of *Constructivism in *Russia after 1913. Following abstract compositions in glass, metal and wood, he designed a project tor a gigantic Monument to the Third International (1920): within a steel construction 300 m (1,300 ft) high were to be suspended transparent glass assembly halls which would express their various political functions through the speed of their revolu- tions. He termed such syntheses of steel frame and electrification ‘political sculpture’, and saw it asa celebration of the Socialism of the fucure. In the ry20s he designed furniture and other household objects which reveal a greater con- cern for everyday reality. GHa C Andersen, Troels, bladimir Tatlin (exhibi- tion catalogue), Stockholm 1968; Milner, John, Vadimir Tatlin and the Russian Avant-Garde, New Haven, Conn. 1983.  Taut, Bruno, b. Kénigsberg 1880, d. Istanbul 1938. Tramed at the Baugewerksschule in  
Taut, Bruno. The Hufcisensicdlung (Horseshoe! estate), Berlin-Neukélln (with Martin Wagner: 1925 -30)  Kénigsberg. Worked in the office of Bruno Mohring in Berlin in 1y03 and 1go4 8 with Theodor *Fischer in Stutegart. From tyoy he was in practice in parmership with Franz Hoffmann, and 1914-31 with his brother Max *Taut in Berlin, Early works included a turbine house at Wetter/Ruhr (1908), a convalescent home in Bad Harzburg (1909-10). and several apartment houses in Berlin. In ryg12 he was appointed advisory architect to the Deutsche Gartenstadtgesellschaft and designed garden suburbs in Magdeburg (1913-14 and 1g21) and in Falkenburg, near Berlin (1913-14). His Monument des Eisens at the Internationale Bau- fachausstellung of 1913 in Leipzig and the Glashaus at the Werkbund-Ausstellung of 1914 in Cologne both brought him considerable critical notice, and the latter brought him into contact with the glass fantasist Paul Scheerbart. whose ideas influenced him strongly.  A committed pacifist, he worked during World War 1 on his polemical tracts, later published as Die Stadtkrone and Alpine Archi- tektur, In) November 1g18 he signed the pro- gramme of the Politischer Rat geistiger Arbeiter and was a founder-member of the *Acbeitsrat fiir Kunst and of the *November- gruppe. In the immediate post-war years he was the undisputed leader of the utopian tendency in German architecture of *Expressionism and exerted great influence through the Arbeitsrat far Kunst, the *Glaserne Kette. and the maya- zine Frihlicht. The utopian phase was short- lived, however, and a growing commitment to *Rationalism developed after 1920.  He was city architect m Magdeburg. 1921 3. and introduced a controversial programmic of coloured fagade restoration; [y24- architectural adviser to GEHAG ( Heimstatten-, Spar- und Bau-Akticugesell- schaft) and was responsible for many large-scale estates in Berlin. This gave him the opportunity to apply his theories on functional and Jabour- saving design, which were modelled on the Taylor system. The results count among the century's most: important: achievements in mass housing. Typical housmg estates include the ‘Hufeisensiedlung’ (19. Wagner) and the ‘Unele Tom's Cabi’ scheme (1926-31). T. was professor of architecture at the Technische Hochschule in Berlin, 1936-2. and wasclected to the Prussian Academy of Arts in 1gal. In 1932-3 he made a working visit to the USSR.  After his enforced emigration in 1933. be lived for three years in Japan, was employed by the Crafts Research Institute in Sendai, and wrote on Japanese are and culture. In 1936 he was appointed professor at the Academy of Arts in Istanbul. He designed schools in Ankara, famir and Trabzon, and university buildings in Ankara. as well as his own house in Ortakéy. IBW 4 Taut, Bruno, Die Sradtkrone, Jena tyry: ——. Alpine Architekmr, Hagen tyig. - —. Die Auflosung der Stidte, Hagen 1930: -~~ ~. Die nene TWVohnung., Leipzig. 1924. ——, Die neue Batkunst in Europa und Amerika, Stuttgart (y2y: Archttektarlehre. [stanbul 937: Jung- hanns, Kurt. Brine Tart 188e-1938, Berlin (East) 1970; Brine Taut 188e i936 (exhibition cata- logue), Berlin 1y80; Whyte, lam Boyd, Brine Taunt and the Architecture of Activism, Cambridge 1g82  2 he was  semeinntitzige  o, with Martin  Taut, Mas, b. Konigsberg i8s4,d. Berlin 1967 Trained at the Baugewerksschule im Kénigs- berg. and was employed. 1yo6 11. in the office of Hermann Billy in Karlsruhe. From ont he had his own practice in Berlin Gn partnershup with Frang Hotfmann, igig so. and wath. his brother Brune *Taut. igt4 31). Prier to World War 1, Tos) commissions included schools at Tinsterwalde (1git £2) and Nauen (1913 15), the Koswig) texnle factory at Finsterwalde (1903), and a prize-winning pavil-  ton at the Internationale Bautachausstelluny of 1y13.1n Lerpvig. fn ryt he became a tounder- member of the *Arbeitsrat fiir Kunst, the 
*Novemberuroppe. and subscquendy of the *Ring Although he was a member of the a*Gkiscrne Kute group, his drawings trom this  period shunned the extrentes of fantasy and  retheeted InteTest ie conerete Construction whirl bad already appeared in his pre-war work, Pwooarice blocks in’ Berlin, tor the  Allgemeines Deutscher Gewerkschaftsbund yeaund for the Verband der Deutschen Buchdrucker piy22 -s. with Mart *Stam), were  ploneering examples of conerete-frame con-  struction amd seminal buildings in the develop- meat of the *Neue Sachhichkeit movement in architecture. Unable to practice in the y 1933 4s. T. re-emerged in ry4s as a leading figure i Wese German architecture. He was a professor at the Hochychule fiir bildende Kitnste in West Berlin, ty45 $4. His principal late work was in housing. Major works include: the Reuter-Siedlung in Bonn (1949-52); exten- sion of his brother's “Hufeiscnsiedlung’ in Ber- lin-Neukalln (tys4j: and the August-Thyssen- Siedlung, Duisburg (1955-64) IBY “) ‘Tant. Max. Banter und Phine, Berlin 1927; » Berlin tin Aufbau, Berlin 1y46, Max Paut (exhibition catalogue), Berlin 1964.  Tecton. Group of architects founded in Lon- don in 1932 by *Lubetkin together with Anthony Chitty (left 1936), Lindsey Drake, Michael Dugdale theft rya4}, Valentine Har- ding (lett 1436), GodiFrey Samuel (lett 1935) and  Frances Skinner. In cy46. Denys *Lasdun be-  Tecton. Finsbury Heslth Centre, London (1igas 8)  came a partner. The group, which way the most important representative of the *International Style in *Great Britain, was disbanded in 1948. Tt became known especially for its fantastically shaped buildings for the London Zoo (1932-7) which recall the Russian Constructivist sculp- tures of Naum Gabo and Antoine Pevsner; the Highpoint] (1933-5) and Highpoinc ll (1936-8) flats at Highgate in London; and the Finsbury  Health Centre in London (1935-8). AM { Coe. Peter, and Reading. Malcolm.  Lubetkin and Teeton. Architecture and Social Com- nuitment, London and Bristol 1y8t.  Terragni, Giuseppe. b. Meda near Milan tyo4. d. Como tygt. Attended the technical school in Coma, 1917-21, then studied at Milan Poli- tecnico, 1921-6; ran his own office (together with his brother Attilio), 1927-39.  He was one of the most important and independent protagonists of Italian *Ration- alism, in which he played a decisive role from the beginning. His work is emblematic of the contradictory process by which the architecture of the early 20th century in *Italy freed itselt” from provincial *eclecticism and attached itself to the European modernist movement without abandoning the strong imprint of classical principle: ate Zone, between revolutionary renewal and conserva- tive tradition  The first work which brought the young architect to notice was a project for a gasworks, which he designed in 927 and exhibited in the same year at the Monza Biennale. Several months earlier, TY. had been one of the seven founding members of *Gruppo 7. Phus he already found himself immersed in the polemic which was unleashed around Italian Kation- alism. The confrontation was especially piquant as both the young rationalist challengers (who banded together in 1930 in the *M.LA.R.), as well as the established academic opposition (under the spiritual Ieadership of Marcello *Piacentini), were supporters of Fascism and both strove to win Mussolini's favour.  In 1927-8, against bitter opposition, T. built the five-storey block of flats ‘Novecomuny’ in Como. Both its provocative sleekness and its bold corner solution wich the dramatic super- imposition of a semicircular glazed part com- bined with a fully rectilinear volume led to heated discussions. Although the building  in tact it developed in an intermedi- as fascinating as it was precarious,  
Terragni. Novocomum flats, Como (1y27-8) already clearly shows T.’s hand, it is, like his carlier projects, by no means free of dependence on Russian *Constructivism. His masterpiece 1s the Casa del Fascio in Como (1932-6); this administration building, which had as one of its primary aims its function as an clegant set-piece for Fascist mass rallies. is a lightly modified classical palazzo type centred on a ylass-rooted interior court. The building forms a harmoni- cally proportioned, white marble-clad cube completely devoid of ornament; it reveals in part its stmilarly-clad ~ and thus dematerialized — constructional skeleton. Solid and void. which complement each other in terms of hight and shade, are markedly and effectively con- trasted in the four differently-handled fagades.  In 1933 he contributed the Artist’s House ona Lake at the First Milan Triennale (in collabora- tion with other architects). In 1936-7 the Casa Bianca, which shows the influence of *Mics van der Rohe, was built in Seveso. Also dating from 1937 are two stylistically diverse works evidence of T.’s creative complexity: the project for the Danteum in Rome (with Pictro Lingeri), 4 profoundly intellectual, metaphysi- cal creation, and the Antonio Sant’ Elia kinder- garten in Como, an elegant building in the style of international Rationalism. The Casa del Fascio in Lissone was built in collaboration with Antonio Carminati in 1938-9, and in 1939-40 he realized his last important work, the Casa Giuliani Frigerio in Como.  T.’s independent ceuvre, which absorbed the best aspects of the poctry of the Novecento Italiano, as well as of Giorgio de Chirico’s  Terragni. Casa del Kascio, Como (1932 6)  *Pitrura metafisica’, and reworked them ito an uncommonly consistent ‘third way! between academic *neo-classicism and orthodox Rationalisin, represents a highpoint within the development of Italy's modern architecure. In that respect. T. can be compared with *Sant Elia. His crystalline architectural Iin- guage. full of hidden semantic implications, his obsessive concern with “form as form’ and its geometrical legitimacies, as well ay his respect for the historic tradition of architecture - characteristic of [Italian Rationalism — would find their continuation in the tgdos in the *Rauional architecture developed by Aldo *Rossi. In addition, his ceuvre was to have a significant influence on the work of the *New York Five, and above all on that of Peter *Fisenman, VML “J Labio. Mario, Giweppe Terragni, Milan 1473 Giulia, Diffeolta  politiche detfarchitettuira in tala 1920 1940, Milan 195 ‘Omaggio a Giuseppe Terragni’, L'Architettura — eronache ¢ storia (Milan), no. 152. July 1g6k: Mantero, E.. Giuseppe Terragnt ¢ ta citta def razionalismo italiane, Bari tg6y, Zevi, Bruno (ed.). Ginseppe Terragti, Bologna tyko. Schu- macher, Thomas. ‘From Gruppo 7 to the Danteum: A Critical Introduction to Terragni’s Rehizione sul Dante’, Oppositions, y. pp. 89 107.  Veronesi,  Tessenow, Heinrich, b. Rostock 1! d. Berlin ryso. Attended the Suidtische Bauschule in Neustadt (Mecklenburg), 1806, aid) the Royal Saxon Baugewerkschule in Leipzig.  q4l 
Tessenow, Trammy Centre for rhythmic gviimuastics (lacques-Daleroze-Institue), Hellerau.  near Dresden (ly!o 60}  studied under Karl Hocheder and Fricdrich von Thiersch ac the Hochschule in Munich, 1yo1-2. He taught at the Stidtische Baugewerkschule in Sternberg, 1y02-3, and chat in Liichow: in 1yo04 he taught under Paul Schultze-Naumburg at the Kunseschule in Saaleck, and was Director of the Baugewerkschule in Trier, 1905 -y. From 1910 he was active in Hellerau without an official position, then became a professor at the K.K. Kunstgewerheschule in Vienna, 1913-18. From 1918 he way again in Hellerau, before becoming head of the section of the Akademie der bildenden Kiinsee in Vienna, 1y20-6. From 1g26te rogt and again from 1946 he was protessor at che Technische Hochschule in Berlin. T.'s carly work still bears watniess in its  ISQT: Technische  architecture  Tessenow. Heinrich-Schiity Schoul, Kassel (1927-30)  incellectual foundations to the *Arts and Crafts movement, but already from Lyos an increasing striving for simplicity is evident (single-family terrace houses for the Neu-DGlau development near Halle an der Saale). Formal elements which would come to typify his later work surfaced here: prismatically carved house forms, smooth surfaces, pitched roofs, terraced treeless and semi-open areas leading to the entrances, and delicately mutlioned windows.  The first houses were erected in rg0y-11 in Hellerau) Garden City, where in addition *Ricmerschmid, *Fischer, *Muthesius and Schumacher also worked. At the same time T. also buile the Training Centre for rhythmic gymnastics — (Jacques-Daleroze-Institut) in Hellerau - an axial, symmetrical layout on a nearly square ground-plan, whose rigorous, classically inspired formal language forgoes all solemnity. In 1y2§- 7 he collaborated with Oskar Kramer on the Sichsische Landesschule in the Dresden suburb of Klotzsche, a strongly articulated complex which derives its expres~ sive effects trom a rhythmic placing of similar.  
economical architectural elements. In the Heinrich-Schiitz School in Kassel and the covered swimming pool in the GartenstraBe in Berlin (both 1927-30), T. moved closer to comtemporary *Rationalism.,  The elegant remodelling of Schinkel’s Neue Wache (Guardhouse) in Berlin as a memorial to victims of World War I dates from ty30-1. After 1933 T.’s success was hindered by the rise of National Socialism; his former pupil *Speer did not even once manage to procure a commis- sion for him.  T. was somewhat of an outsider in the architecture of the first half of che century, already so hard to classify. His conscious tradi- donalism was never without regional and classicist traits and, both in his care to unite his buildings with the terrain and in his attention to human scale, he had much in common with *Hiring’s ‘organic architecture’, All avant- garde experimentation is foreign to his work; but so too is all popularizing nostalgia. His influence, exercised both through buildings and by his simple theoretic writings, was at once unspectacular and wide-ranging. Among those  Tigerman, Daisy House, Porter, Ind. (Stanley Tigerman and Associates: 1977)  he influenced was *Le Corbusier, when he way in contact with the cirele of the *Deutscher Werkbund: Le Corbusier’s Villa Jeanneret, buile cwo years lacer in La Chaux-de-Fonds. bears witness to this influence. T's pupils, properly speaking, include the Austrian Franz Schuster, who built a multi-family dwelling in Ernst *May’s Rémerstade in Frankfurt am Main in 1927; finally, his sedate and strong architectural spirit has been kept alive in che werk of such protagonists of *Rational architecture as Giorgio *Grassi. VML M1 Tessenow. H., Zimmermannsarbeiten, Frei- burg 1907: -— , Haushau and dergleichen, Berlin 1gi6, —-—, Handwerk uid Kleinstad?, Berlin tty: Grassi, G.. ‘Architettura come mesticre’ (foreword to Tessenow, H., Os. costriire), Milan 1974, Wangerin, Gerda, and Weiss. Gerhard, Heinrich Tessertour. Ein Baumeister 1876-1950. Leben, Lehre, Werk, Essen 1976  rrvaziont sul  The Architects Collaborative. *TAC  Tigerman, Stanley, b. Chicago 1930. Studied at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, at the Institute of Design in Chicago, and — interrupted by a break of several  343 
years which included a period working in the office of *Skidmore, Owings & Mernill — at Yale University (under *Rudolph). He was head designer, 1961-2, under Harry M. Weese in Chicago, where he subsequently encered into partnership with Norman Koglin. Finally in ty64 he opened. in Chicago, his present office:  Stanley Tigerman and Associates. He was professor at the University of Mlinois at Chicago Circle, ry6s 71. In the ty6o0s he designed  frames,  limmense nh such as Instant City (1908), which bears witness to the influence of *Mies van der Rohe in its crystalline sharpness, as well as to that of Walter Netsch, his former superior at SOM. The rationalise style tending to abstraction is also prominent in the vacation house constructed in a former barn in Burlington, Wis. (1y70-3),  astructures of steel spac  which is one of the most ingenious examples of  the adaptation of an old building to new uses. T.’s most recent works are expressions of the attempt, na partly ironic and shocking way, to explore the metaphorical possibilities of archi- tecture (*Post-Modernisim), which can be seen in the Daisy House at Porter, Ind. (1977), buile for the proprietor of a strip- tease club; this house, with its phallic overtones, is reminiscent of Ledoux’s project for an Oikema. AM O Tigerman, Stanley, Versus. An American Architect's Alternatives, New York 1o8t; Seven Chicago Architects (exhibition catalogue), Chi- cago 1976.  Torroja (y Mirct), Eduardo, b. Madrid r8yg, d. Madrid 1961. Studied civil engineering in Madrid until 1923, whes he began his own practice. He was director of the Instituto Técnico de la Construccion y del Cemento (now Institute Eduardo ‘Torroja). which is  an example of  Torroja. Grandstands at the Zarzuela racecourse, near Madrid (1935)  today one of the leading test laboratories for building construction methods,  His first major work was the Tempul aque- duct over the river Guadalete, where the longitudinal girders were pee-stressed. He be- came known internationally through his roof for Algeciras Market Hall (1933); here the concrete shell roof, resting on cight external supports, has a diameter of 47-50 m (156 ft), For the Zarzucla racecourse near Madrid (1935) he designed a system of fluted grandstand roofs with a very extensive cantilever, counter- balanced by vertical tie rods behind the stan- chions. In the same year he built the shell roof of the Frontén Recoletos (destroyed in the Span- ish Civil War), whose form derived from the penetration of cwo barrel vaults of different nensions running parallel to cach other. An example of T.’s ingenious treatment of steel asa structural material is the roof of the Las Corts football stadium in Barcelona (1943); pro- jecting 25 m (82 ft), the roof features a sinuous outline.  T. stands out as one of the great creators of architectural form in the 20th century. As his many works built in Europe, Africa and Amer- ica strikingly demonstrate, he possessed great imaginative powers, capable of pasing unusual problems and devising unexpected solutions for them, together with an immense technical capacity for putting them into practice. In contrast to the usual mathematically minded type of engineer, he asserted from the outset the rights of the imagination, For him calculations only served to show whether an idea would in fact work in practice. AC-¥)GHa {] Torroja, Eduardo, Philosophy af Structure,  
Berkeley, Cal. 1ys8: - Eduardo Torraja, New York tys8; Cassinello, Fernando, ‘Eduardo Torroja’, Cuadernos de Arquitectura (Barcelona), August 161.  U  Ungers, Oswald Mathias, b. Kaiseresch, Eifel. 1926. Studied under Egon *Eiermann at the Technische Hochschule in Karlsruhe. In rysohe opened his own office in Cologne. He was a professor at the Technische Universitit in Berlin, 1963-8, and since 196g has caught at Cornell University. After completing a signifi- cant number of residential projects, including his own house in Cologne (1959) and apartment blocks in the Markisches Viertel of Berlin (1964-6), U."s building activity came to an abrupt halt in the mid-1g60s. His subsequent involvement with architecture was for a time exclusively on paper, and included a great number of important competition projects (Stadents’ Residence Hall in Enschede, 1964; Staatliche Museen in the ‘Tiergarten, Berlin, 1965; reorganization scheme for the Tiergarten, 1973; Wallraf-Richartz Museum in Cologne, 1975; residential development in the Ritter- straBe, Marburg, 1976).  Towards the end of the 1970s, U. - who had in the meantime achieved an international reputation — once again had opportunities to build (residence on the Goethepark in Berlin, 1980-2; Frankfurt Cangress Hall, 1gko  : Badische Landesbibliothek, Karlsruhe, 197y- }. With *Kleihues, he is one of the most important German practitioners of a new. rationalistic architecture (Rational architecture), in which he undertakes radical typological experiments. in line with those carried on for many years by Aldo *Rossi, but also combined with romantic conceptions in part inspired by Karl Friedrich Schinkel. FW O Ungers, O. M. and L., Kenmunen in der Neuen Welt 1740-1971, Cologne 1972; Gregotti, Vittorio, ‘Oswald Mathias Ungers’, Lotus (Milan), nos. 11/12 (1976), pp. 14-415 ‘Ungers’, Das Kunstwerk (Stuttgart), 32 (1979), nos. 2/3, PP. 132-415; ‘Architckt O. M. Ungers’, Deutsche Bauzeitung (Stuttgart), no. 10 (1979), pp. 15-445 Frampton, Kenneth (ed.), O. VM. Ungers: Works in Progress (cxhibition catalogue), New York  > The Stretures of  Dangers. The architect's own home, KiIn- Mungendoct (1959)  Ungers. Bachische Landesbibhothek, Karlsruhe  1ySt: Ungers. O. Ma Milan rg82.  irchitecture as Theme,  USA. For a long time after the discovery of the ‘new world’ by Europeans. North American architecture was directly shaped by Europe in movements and tendencies. During the colonial period che major influences were at first Datch and then above all English (Georgian scyle). With the Declaration at Independence of the  345 
USA, Pierpont Morgan Library, New York (iyo 3), by MeKim. Mead & White  United States of America (1776) and the victory over the British, the Greck Revival style began to gain favour, and henee French neo-classical (neo-classicism) influences in particular be- came important. During the ryth century neo- classical and neo-Gothic developed simulcaneously: among the most important architects of the period were Benja- min Latrobe, Thomas Jetferson, Robert Mills, Alexander Jackson Davis, James Renwick and Richard Upjohn. Towards nid-century, under the influence of the English *Arts and Crafts movement, the neo-medicsal tendency was strengthened (Victorian style}  While the USA bad up to that poine played a subordinate, even passive role im architecture, this situation was to change dramatically in the last thirt appearance of an outstanding personality: H. Richardson. Even though be absorbed impulses from European architecct sal experiences (he studied at the *Ecole dey 'oauy-Arty in Paris and was influenced by Joseph-Auguste Vaud- remer’s tempered use of Romunesque torms), he reworked them into a uly independent style. which was subsequent): 2a 3¢ influential in Europe (especially in Seances ia). His ma sive, closed neo-Romanesque ~nildings unite historicise and rationalist traits + th a discipline as powerful as it was stringent.  romantic styles  pars of the cach century, with the  » influence is  felt in, among others, the Shingle Style, which was used for country houses between 1870 and 180. The smoothness and free ground-plans of these houses also reflect the reform ideas of R.N. *Shaw, but the external walls were not clad, as in Shaw’s work. in clay tiles but rather in wooden shingles.  Richardson's influence was to prove far more extensive, however, notably on the clear formal language developed in the buildings of the *Chicago School (and thereby on the works of Dankmar * Adler, Daniel Hudson Burnham, John Wellborn Root, William Holabird and Martin Roache, and Richard E. Schmidt), and was particularly important for — Louis *Sullivan’s development. In this regard, Rich- ardson can be considered at once the father figure of American *organic architecture and of American modernism.  Around the turn of the century, architecture in the USA was divided tito two principal trends. On the one hand, the neo-classical tradition enjoyed an extensive ‘come-back* having been given prominence in the academi: cally composed ‘White City’ of the “World's Columbian Exposition’ in Chicago (1893, gen- eral plan by 1). H. Burnham). This represented a reaction to the individualist designs of the carly rationalist Chicago School. An especial flourishing of this style was scen in the numerous elegant buildings of the East Coast firm of *McKim, Mead & White, who were principally active in New York and designed  
numerous buildings in which they employed the Italian Renaissance, Neo-Palladian, Beaux- Arts and Colonial Revival modes.On the other hand, a romantic position — whose develop- ment reached back, via Sullivan and the strongly expressive ‘heresies’ of Frank Furness, to the American version of the Gothic Revival ~ developed with much vigour. On the West Coast the organic ideal survived with particular strength, as did the moral reforming of the Arts and Crafts and the tradition of exquisite cratts- manship associated with *Art Nouveau in the sublimely refined c@uvre of the brothers *Greene as well as in the robust, exotically effervescent early Bay Region Style of Bernard *Maybeck.  The figure of Frank Lloyd * Wright towers above all others, A pupil of Sullivan, he adopted, after uncertain beginnings, a decid- edly anti-classical approach, although the best of his work never denies the rational discipline he had imbibed from his ‘licber Meister’. The revolutionary concept of his Prairie Houses, which he built between 1894 and tyog in the Chicago suburbs, quickly became known in Europe, thanks to * Berlage and to two publica- tions of Wright’s work (1910, 191) by Wasmuth, the Berlin architectural publisher. They were to exercise an influence on nascent  24 Lik med  USA. Palace of Fine Arts. San Francisco (yt. hy Bernard Maybeck  USA. Robie House, Chicago £1yos: 9). by Frank Lloyd Wright  
*Ratiottadin and above alion the Dutch group  Do *8cal Butesen the School or * Anisterdam, the Duteh school largely influenced by *Ex- prosienisna, was to exptoit the horizontal  overhangs. the flow of internal spaces and the expresvive usc obmaaterials in Wright's work. In che USA. however, Wright at first, like the late Nillivan National farmers Bank in Owatonna, Mtn von. At the same time, within the two major  yor sig received relatively litde atcen-  movemeus of neo-elassicism and neo-Roman- fiepm, appeared the largely independent works or Henry Bacon, Cass Gilbert, Irving *Gall, Bertram Goodhue, George *Howe. Richard Mortis Hunt and Jamey Gamble Rogers. The contribution of Albert *Kahn stood apart from these conventional architeetural practices. His firm rapidly specialized in large-scale industrial buildings, and continued the trend of large  USA. Pauly New: Building, New York (1924 30) by Raymond Hood  American architectural offices, like McKim, Mead & White, but with some novel character- istics: his utilitartan, rough buildings are for practical purposes unwitting predecessors of modernism.  But the breakthrough for Rationalism in America was still several years off. While the 1920s representa highpoint for the architectural avant garde in Europe, American political isolationism left the country all buc untouched by these dramatic cultural developments. The most nnportant international competition of the period, that for the Chicago Tribune Tower (1922) was not won by one of the modernist submitted from Europe (Bernard Byvoet and Johannes *Duiker, *Gropius and Adolf Meyer, Ludwig *Hilberscimer, Clemens *Holzmeister, Adolf *Loos, Bruno *Taut and Max *Taut all entered}, but rather by the reduced neo-Gothie design of Raymond *Hood and John Mead Howells. Eliel *Saarinen was awarded second prize for a moderately traditionalist design: a year later, he settled in the USA and thus contributed to that series of successful emigrations from Europe which was to inerease significantly in the 1930s. Richard *Neutra emigrated in the same year, ten years after his compatriot and fellow- student. Rudolph *Schindler. Their early works, in which the influence of Wright was combined with that of Otto *Wagner and Adolf Loos, were the first in the late 1920s to introduce the *International Style to the USA.  In the meantime, the modernist aesthetic had gained ground on the East Coast and above all in New York. The *Art Deco style, thanks to its restrained modernism and its talent for unprob- lematic mediation between various artistic posi- tions, was fashioned into an independent architectural position, Within the ‘New York School’ arose the fundamentally symbolic aspi- rations of Harvey Wiley Corbett. Jacques André Fouilhoux, Jacques Ely-Kahn and Wil- liam Van Alen. They were still trivolously celebrating the light-hearted ‘jazz age’ on the eve of the Great Depression of 1929, while Hugh Ferriss produced shadowy expressionist visions in his renderings. The immanent frivel- ity of the new ‘fashion’ made it easy for an architect such as Raymond *Hood to make the transition in seven years from the elegant *historicism of 1922 to a sheer, expressive modernism in the Daily News Building, New York (1929-30).  entries  
In the 1y30s the impact of European (and particularly German) immigrants favoured the final ciumph of the International Style, which had already passed an important milestone with the PSFS (Philadelphia Saving Fund Society) Building in Philadelphia (1929-32) by George Howe and William *Lescaze. In 1937 Gropius, *Mies van der Rohe, and Marcel *Breuer arrived in the USA, in 1938 Martin *Wagner, and three years later Erich *Mendelsohn. At Harvard University Gropius continued his teaching activity (begun at the *Bauhaus), and he was soon followed by Wagner and Breuer: Mies van der Rohe played an analogous role at the Armour Institute of Technology (later Mlmois Instituce of Technology) in Chicago. Their influence on the East Coast was decisive and to some extent reached the proportions of a cultural imperialism. Its first manifestation was seen in the single-family houses that Gropius and Breuer built in the Boston region. Later, with their cool. perfect, autonomous sterco- metry, Mics van der Rohe’s buildings were to become the prototype of a new American architecture. The cultural invasion was so strong that even Wright, for all his independent and anti-European feclings, could not avoid responding in his own work: he buile the Kaufmann House (‘Fallingwater’) in 1936-9 near Mill Run, Pa., as a creative synthesis of organic and European rationalist architectural elements.  The West Coast saw a quicter and more continuous development. Here William Wil-  USA. The Nauonal Gallery of Art, Washington, B.C. (1937 40). by John Ruel! Pope  son *Wurster, Harwell Hamilton Harris and John Yeon continued to pursue independently the heritage of Maybeck and thus introduced a new era of the Bay Region Style, characterized by elegance and restraint. At the same time, Schindler and Neutra refined their version of the International Style, while Wright. after the apotheosis of Fallingwater. turned to new experiments with fortress-like closed houses. in which Richardson's original forms were given new lite.  Amidst all this, tradition persisted without interruption. It was, above all John Russell Pope who preserved it in notable for its  of course, the classicist  a new version purity and orthodox Konrad *Wachsmann arrived in) North  America in ig4t. where his radical technologi- cally oriented experiments were in line with those which R. Buckminster *Fuller had pur- sucd as early asthe 1920s and which were to lead in the 1ysos and ry6os to large geodesic dome constructions. Immediately atter World War ll, especially in the work of Mics van der Rohe and Philip *Johuson, a synthesis of neo-classicism and the International Style was achieved; in this the teek cra was put to the service of a "new classicisin” (Farnsworth House, Plano, Tl. 1948- $0; John- son House, New Canaan, Conn. 1947 9). The straccural perfection and tectonic cleganee of  nology and acsthetic of the industrial  
these hotises had thon goumterpart on the other  side ot sounens i the retired structures of Charles thanses aad. slightly later. of Craig fiw  Tho vconsnvist chains of the work of Mies te der Kobe cand “shioson was casy Go imitate ratio caps bs uidistriized methods. yo that il sapidis des loped tata a fashion, especially for wid dustrial buildings. The archi- wevturad tri of *Skidipore, Owings & Merrill SOM successors to the high-quality eco- nore potential of McKim, Mead & White and ot Albert: Rabn’s utilitarianism  adapted thy formula and  utheritars metal-and-giass played out ins multitarious possibilities in count= les buildings. Various other large architectural offices pursued asimilar pach, meluding those of Wallace K  TM. *Per. Finnish archiceetural pioneers. fn sharp contrast rods geometric discipline, Wright work  * Harrison and Max *Abramovitz, and Eero *Saarinen fon of the  in his late resorted tot confusion of fornis beyond measure, this taste tor the bizaere and che exotic was to live on jn the work of Bruce *Goff and Paolo *Soleri  The exhaustion of the creative potential of the restricted language of the late Intemational Style was predictable: had begun already in the mid-tyses expression led to a spirit of ready es perimenta- tion and celectic mannerim which investigated and employed classical forms side by side with the romantic overtones drat Alvar * Aalto had once again brought into prominence in the dramatically curved slab of his Senior Scudenes’ Dormitory (Baker House! at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology i Cambridge (a47 8). This supernicial play wath transient “cos- tumes’ which were subject to rapid change, in accordance with the bins of advertising, was soon embraced and adapred by Here Saarinen, among others.  Saarinen announced a yculptural’ style to succeed the purist approach and, moreover, did not shy away from naive Eeurauye metaphors Edward Durell Stone reratroduced decorative perforated walls of brica: aad ashlar or metal gratings, while Minoru *Y c+ paki mdulged in a luxurious and brittle hist seni with a neo Gothic slant. Finally, ever aul *Rudolph, albeit with restraint. revea: Ins inclination towards the use of heterogencous and rich idioms (the new freedont’). Pi hip fohnson had been, anyway, one of the first. thandon the  The search for new means of  USA. The architect's own house. New York 1ys6}. by Edward Durell Stone  type of asceticism imported trom Europe in favour of a new and unorthodox historicism. Even at SOM there was a clearly heard reaction to thiy shift i taste, to the extent that the tihgree-like curtain-wall fagades. which had almost become a trademark of the tirm, were abandoned in favour of a heavy classicist monumentality. Meanwhile, the later Ameri- can works of Mies van der Rohe. as well as *Le Corbusier's Carpenter Center for the Visual Are in Cambridge, Mass. {tg61-4), remained in their unshakable consistency untouched by the feverish searching after novelty for its own sake.  The reaction to the ever-expanding ram- blings through the realm of possible architec- tural forms, as ephemeral as it was arbitrary, was led by a personality who, like Richardson in his time, was trained within the Beaux-Arts tra- dition: Louis I. *Kahn. Now, however. he extended these lessons in so single-minded a manner that his influence spread far beyond America’s borders — to Europe itself, Kahn took as his starting point Mies's aesthetic, but he interpreted it much more in terins of handicraft and roughness. In his architectural stance he combined fundamental beliefs of Richardson, Sullivan and Wright. and realized a sort of  
‘fulfilment’ of the previous hundred years of North American architecture. His craving for the solid, ordering principles of a powertul tradition led him to an with historical models and archetypes. which he combined into elegant, festive compositions in which a strong sense of geometric discipline is recained,  Kahn’s work, as consistent as it was ploneer- ing, remained largely isolated and decidedly atypical in the context of American architec- ture; yet che 1y60s brought — not lease through his slogan “back to order’ a generalized calming down. Eero Saarinen tumed im his late work to a measured technological expression- ism; and Kevin *Roche and John *Dinkeloo, who took over his office, continued — ina more disciplined way — this tradition. Their experi- ments in the field of large glazed halls (Ford Foundation Building, New York, 1y63-8) were taken up by John *Portman and translated into an urban scale. At SOM, Walter Netsch introduced, with his “field theory’. an attempt to move away from strictly rectilinear design Jebnson continued with the production of classical monumental architecture, but now endowed with far greater ceremonial character and fortress-like articulation. Atthe same time, on the West Coast, Charles W. *Moore,  involvement  USA. National Football Foundation Hall of hame, New Brunswick, NJ. (project. 1966), by Venturi and Rauch  nes Lata treet ae | RRS | Ree  CANS  SAARC SAAS  USA. Yale University Art Gallery, New Haven Conn. (tysi gn by Louis Kahn  together with Donlyn Lyndon, Witham Turn- bull and Richard Whitaker. continued im the unbroken tradition of the Bay Region Style with simple. bigh-qualiey buildings wholly alien to the coue of the East Coast.  In another direction. the work of Robert *Vencuri aimed, in the wake of the Pop Art of the Ty60s, to make che aesthetic potential of American everyday culture useful to architce- ture. In the contest of an anti-classical and anti- European polemic parallels to thac begun sixty years earlier by Wright maxim of the unity of interior and exterior, ot form and function. of beauty and uscfulpess, which he mockingly compared with the Duck” (in reference to a duck Island). Instead he advovated the “decorated shed’ design principle, which considered the separation of function and decoration. In his buildings, which are so designed ay to he distinguished only with difficuley trom the usual type of American commercial architee-  which was not without  Venturi abandoned the modernist  shaped caté on Long  sure. he realized the theoretical postulates thar ne had summarized and published in ty66 under the tide Contradiction in Avchitesturi  Displaying an cqually strong inceltectual stamp were the roughly contemporary ides developed by che *New York Five | Peter ¥ Eisenman. Michael *Graves, Charies *Gwath- tev, Johu *Hejduk and Richard *Meier but these were totally meampatible with dhe views acid by Veraurl’s circle, While Venturi strove for a Cnon-struighttorward: architeerure’. che  Complexity and  Five advocated metaphysiod clarity: iC was pot by chance chat they concentrated them efforts  on the claborauon of the formal language of Le  
Their any more than  Corbuster ad at Guneppe *Terragat purtsne das hardly expressed did Ventur’’s preference tor the hybrid and mmpise a satal Hinetional, or technological obligation Rather, im the tirst instance it was an exten cult of form te which they paid  homage in an uneonmmonts elegant series ot  maldings, almost without cxeepuien with 2 snow hits exterior  Fhe contrast between the ‘Whites’ and the Greys. between the classically oriented new ~New York School’ and che romange “Philadel phit School’. sharpened increasingly during the the circle around Venturi, to which Moore grew closer and which was joined by Robert AJM. *Stern. John S. Hagmann, Stanley *Tigerman and James *Wines and the SITE group. turned ever more decisively to a  tytas  radical eclectic, which was unified under the rubric of * Post-Modernisna”. Frank Q. *Gehry asumied a special position in that group with his collages of discard material, which evoked memories of hippie setdements. The cirele around the New York Five, to which Raimund Abraham was dinked by poetic visions, held fst to it pursm, Only Graves would gradually abandon the position of the Whites and slide towards the Greys’ position. Simultaneously at SOM, at first undisturbed by such controntauons, bold structural experi- mentadon contnucd. culminating in ry74 in the Sears Building ~ 480m (1.500 tt) high — in Chicago. Johnson, who in the meantime had begun working again mm the glass-and-steel tradition, was the firs¢ of the great ‘estab- lishment’ figures to react to the romanticism of the Greys and translate their post-modern formal language into the scale of the super- skyscraper. SOM and even ©. 1. Murphy Associates (renamed *MurphysJahn in 181), who had still cured on the technological aesthetic of Mies van der ty6os, followed suit Finally, there are snany architects on the contemporary scene whe piay a fairly indepen- dent role, separate frou the debate between Whites and Greys. They include: Diana Agrest and Mario Gandelsonay, » he. under the influ- ence of Rem *Koolhaas. lave been chiefly concerned with a new ev. ation of the sky- scraper type: Emilio Amba who practises a ‘hidden’ and background ar.ritecture by the use of a few basic compou.sty; Romaldo Giurgola, who employs symbor: monumental  Rohe's work in the  USA, Pacitte Design Center, Los Angeles, Cal (ryzi). by Cesar Pelli and Gruen Associates  USA. Sears Tower, Chicago. UL (1g72-4). By Skidmore, Owings & Merrill  forms in a self-effacing manner; Hugh Hardy. whose vocabulary ranges from technological expressiveness to restrained traditionalism: Daniel Libeskind, who — in his drawings, using the formal language of the avant garde of the 1920s — recreates the chaos of Piranesi’s vision- ary works: and finally Cesar *Pelli, who has made a name through his novel use of glazed outer skins. VML C Tallmadge, Thomas E., ‘The Story of -Archi- tecture in America, New York 1927. rev. ed.  
1936, Kimball. Fiske, American Architecture, New York 1928: Mock, E. Bo. Baile i USA 1932-44. New York 1944: Fitch. James Marston, American building. The historical forces that shaped it, Boston and london 1947. rev. ed. 1y66; Hitchcock. Henry-Russell, and Drexler, Ar- thur. Bul in (S.A: Postwar archuectire. New York tys2: Mumford, Lew. Roots of Conten- porary American Arclitectire, New York and London tys2; MecCalhnin, dan. Arehitecnire USA, London and New York rosy: Americ” Zodiac (Milan), no. & (1960): Burchard, John.  Utzon, Sydney Opera House tiga: Tab extertor and Tongitudinal clevanon  and Bush-Brown, Albert. Phe dvelitecrin ot America, A Soriat & Culniral History. Boston and Toronto 161: Stern, Robert Ao Mi, Naw New York Ere yelopedia at York  dinectrons in American Arduteciire, rg6y. Hart, Wilham Dudiev dimerican  Ancditecture, New Diamonstem, Barbaruee. luertoae lechectinc Now. New York puso. Whitten, ©. Marets, and Koeper, American Avcdateaten toer rg7é. Canitbridge, Mass. rg 81  ns Fredenck  Urzon, Jorn. b Copenhagen 1018. Phe mene  original architectural talent in Dinas modera architecture. G. showed early on an attraction for the *orgaue architcerure of Prank [lovd  *Wreht and Alvar *Aalto. The miucnee of  [ij re  fl  
Aalto svas strenachened subsequentls hy a period ofseveribniondis working in his Helsin- ha studies tn page  Atte: saadyn  ny Copenhagen  icles Academy of Fine Arts where Kay *Fisker iad Steen Pela Lasmussen were his teachers. U  137 4s.  Nerked for three yours nnder *Asplund: in Stockholm  fie iss he btult his own house in Helleback Phe open ground-plin and tree arrangement of space wast chat point something entirely new at Danish architecture. Shorty thereafter. in tys2 3. be built a house tn Halte i which a conerete construction elevates the dimber-clad budding one starey above the yround  In tys@ he won first prize ip ap international sempeddon for the new Opera tfowse im Sydney which was baile on a mole jutting inte the city’s barbour. Phe Opera Pfotse, Concert Plalland bovers. wath their shell roots up to 60 moftyt tty hag artificial platform: whieh om tare serves ay the  Stand above an extensive  cover for the lower levels with experimental theatre, access for vehicles ind auxiary roams, The shells were ereeted ona daring and original by Ulm collaboranon with Ove *Arop, Untorcmely. LU. was not able to stanip the interiors with his personal styles well he found finned forced in  comtractive priiciple develope  1966, after repeated interference with his work, to eave the completion to ethers  In anumber of projects dating trom rys8 onwards, Le varied the idea of raised phittorns or bastions Secondary) school ae Helingar, 1ys8, Pavilion comples for the Copenhagen World's Fair Thettre in Zurich, tg 4! Contemporancously with these dyvuaimic and Tmaginative proyee’, to restdential complexes were builtin North Zecland: the Ringe Houses in Hebingor (lyse oo: and the houses m  rasg  Fredemsborg (1962 3. In bot eases he come posed ‘chains’ of housing vores grouped around central courts, with dre eisidual chains tole lowing the contours of the sate  The Sydney Opera jious ded Gs to an intensive study of the probienis atindestrialized building. in which he ytrove caved die usual clichés. He has worked with sae prinerples at any additive architecture comsistin,. esuniy oF con erete prefabricated componers. which yield richly interchangeable compost ces, Examples are the projects for the town conse ar Farum £1966) and for aschool centre in} he ois frye),  ax well as the “Expansiva’ building system  tee  (196g). Among his most visionary works is his project for a Museum in Silkeborg (1903), which goes back to a suggestion made by the painter Asger Jorn. The majer part of the sculptural building complex was te be sunken so that.a hollow space would be created in the conue, thereby offering visitors a highly diver- Mitied spatial experience. The chureh in Bags- verd. near Copenhagen (completed 1976), haya high interior which is lit by skylights arranged along the external walls. U.’s most recent work is the Parliament Building in Kuwait. for which he submitted the winning deagn in an inter- national competition. TF — Utzon. forn, “Additive Architecture’, Arki- tekn (Copenhagen), 14 (1970), no. 1. Drew, Philip. The Third Generation the changing mew pre of architecture. New York 1y72  Vago, Pierre. b. Budapest syto. At the age of eighteen he came to Paris to study ander Auguste *Perret at the Eeole Speciale d’Archi- tecture. While sala student, in 1432. he became editor-in-chief of the journal f Archttectire daqourd had. In private practice trom 1934. he designed a prefabricated all-metal house, exhib- ited at the Exposition de (Habitation of that Town plinning, school, housing (in Berlin tos. with apartment-unity one-and-a- half storeys high), churches (Basilica of St Pius XN oat Lourdes. with engineer}  year,  Tyas. *Trevasinet as  Valle, Gino. bo Udine 1y23. Studied at the Isertuta Universitario di Architettura in Venice ahd ac Harvard University. ln 1948 he cutered the office of his tather Provino Valle in Udine, which he later took over with his brother Nani. Since 1977 he has been a professor at the school of architecture in Venice. He secks to invest his buildings with herghtened significance through asmict fulfilment of finctional requirement. A typical example trem bis main field of activity. industrial buildings. is the Zanussi administra- tion building in Pordenone (1961). While he has shown himself to be a consistent adherent ef *Rationalism, this building is also related to *New Brutalism. In buildings of other types. he has at times had recourse to regional traditions. 
as is clearly manitested in the double house in Udine (196s 6). AM DO ‘Gino Valle’, Zodiac (Milan), no. 20 (1970),  pp. 82-115  Van de Velde, Henry, b. Antwerp 1863, d Zurich 1957. The apostle in theory wid practice of functional aesthetics and ‘pure form’, be tween 1900 and ty25 he exerted a decisiv influence on architecture and the applicd ares, particularly in *Germany. He had been ate tracted to music, literature and painting before turning to architecture. In r8S8i he became a student at the Académie des Beaux-Arts att Antwerp, where he attended the painting classes; he continued his studies with Carolus Duran in Paris, 884-3. He made contact with the [mpressionist painters and Svuibolist poet. and was particularly impressed by Georges Seurat, whose pointillistey technique seemed to embady a spatial concept capable of opening up New prospects in architecture. Returning to Antwerp, he took part (1886) in founding the cultural circle named “Als tk Kan’ (after van Eyck’s motto) and. a vear later, “L’art indépen- dant’, an association of young neo-fnpression- ist painters. From r&Sg ony the international activities of the fumous avant- gardist Brussels group known as “Les Vingt’ where he became interested m the synthereal art and flowing hand of Gauguin, the English *Arts and Crafts movement, and the socilly oriented work of William *Morris, About tsyo he became associated with the journal (a Nie cn Straks, for which he devised a revolutionary layout. new typography and woodeut orna- ments ina style derived from Gauguin.  In PSys (two years after *Horta’y Hotel Tassel), be built his own home, ‘Blocmenwert”. at Uccle near Brussels. It as designed as an orgamic whole and completely fitted out Goinery, hardware, furniture. carpets, curtains dinner service. glasses, silver) ina uniform style reflecting, English inspiration. Characteristic features include a return to a rational style that  ards he took part us  ‘frankly and proudly’ displays the processes of  manufacture in all fields, an uncompromising logic in the use of materials, and a rejection of all ornament inspired by nature and all historic detailing. But his renewed awareness of siruc- tural function still retained sentimental over- tones, His thinking was influenced by German romanticism. “Whether it was a matter of the works of German, Austrian or Dutch artists’, he  wrote Later, ‘we were lll more attached than we thought to a kind of romanticisa which would not allow uy to consider forns “without orn ment. we Were tou much painters. tao much wedded to literature, to glimpse the necessiny oF abandoning ornament and decorauon the temptations and subconscious insinuations of romunticisi prom pted us to bend and twist our structural schemes and present them as ora ments acting as) structural clemteno. or as structures imbued wath the rhvthar of a ear omament.”  The fact reniains thar ¥ ommanient, of Che undubitng lise, was strenyth=  socult: of dinear  ened by his enthusiasue adherence to the neo- romanti¢ theory of empathy. formulated by Vheodor Lipps im tyo3. The onginality of bis designs soon caught the attention of the art historsan Julius Meter-Gracte and the wart dealer Samuel Bing international popularity. ia ¢Sos Bing mvited Vote fit out four rooms of a shop he was  who helped to ensure. their  opemig in Paris umder the name of “bh Adt Nouveat’. Pls robust and curvilmear furniture aroused much enthuse ar che Dresden bxhie bition of Apphed Arts in tsyy  Fleneeforth, art he would  VON path was ol make his career in Germany. Before he lett Belgium (sgy}. Meier-Gracke commissioned how ta de the meerior decoration of the M.usor Modeme he had founded im Paris. and tarre duced hin to the group in Berlin asoouted  with the newspaper Pat “There he also won  an de Velde. School ot Applied Arts, ® enna Llgctr  WS 
many contmisions Hohenzollern Craftw ork  Shop. dou: TLabs’s barber shop. tuo: premises  forthe AGinteret iyae the undertook a lecture tourin  ina Fobacce Co., ty99, During the  Gernians. dure wintelt he explained his artise de principles ithese were published in Leipaig in  Aieireweblife Later predigtea, At che qustanee or Karl brust Osthaus. be undertook the witcrior der oration  tyes under the  of the bolkweang Museum at Phigen figeo 2 Tbe strong mmoedelling and curved ornamenta- donot des building are typical Art Nouveau, and mark the colmimcig point of the first phase of VOX career, which closes with the retuing room be dk  igned tor the Dresden Exhibition of Appliad Arts an tyon  The second phase. trant tga te ty. ts opened by the foundanon and building of the Weimar School of Apphed Arts. thamks ta V's influence with die Grand Duke of Saxe Wer mar, to Whose court he had beew attacbed since  fyolas artistic counsellor, charged with rast  the level of deagn in local industry, Here he found an ideal Held for exerebing his vocation as a teacher. He introduced a pew system of instruction based on the dex clopment of spon- taneous feeling and consent recourse to each saident’s powers of un chiton. avoiding the use of models trom the past and the study of historic sales. These methods gus e rive to new forms, which German industry was noc slow to adopt  The design of the W clearly expresses the development of V.'s archi-+ tecrural chought. Although traditanal building inethods are employed. a snigy scrse of space  mia school buildings  and volume is evinced. Place expression is  Van de Velde. Werkband Pheatre. Cologne iyiges veneral view and detal of entruice with decorate bs bE Obrixt  emphasized, just ay it way a teature of the heavy roof, with its ornganal protilmg, of the Werk- bond Theatre m Cologne (ince destroyed) Built for the Werkband Exhibition of ryrg. it was Taid out on a symmetrical plan, with a heavy tradiuonal shell appearance, embodied numerous innovations that provided a brilliant answer to the require- ments of the dramatic art of 1G dav: auditorium  Although of orginal  in the shape of an amphitheatre. independent prescentum, circular horizon, and, in particu- lar. a tripartite stage. Vo. who was friendly with Gordon Craig and Max Reimhardt, had already in igio ft drawn up the first plans tor the Théitre des Champs-Elysées, Paris; this theatre was subsequently realized, in an altered form, by Auguste *Perret.  He moved to Switzerland m iytz. and in tg2t he went te Holland. where he was commissioned by the Krdller-Maller family to 
design a museum, which he ulumacely buile, to a modified plan, at Otterlo (1937 54). This building is a work of great simplicity and harmony, free of all rhetorical effects, it is perfectly adapted to its site and function (one level throughout, main and secondary circula- tion, top lighting, etc.).  V. returned to Belgium in ty2s. With the support of the Minister C. Huysmans, he was given the opportunity once more of carrying out the experiments he had conducted at Weimar: in 1926 he founded the Institute des Arts Décoratits. He was the principal of this school until ty35; in addition, he occupied the chair of architecture at the University of Ghent from 1926 to 1936. RLY CJ van de Velde, H., Déblaicment d'art, Brussels  1894; » Aperqus en vue d'une synthése dart, Brussels 1893, ———, Vom neuen Stil, Leipzig 1907; --—, Geschichte meines Lebens, Munich  1962; Mesnil, J.. Heary van de Velde et te Thédtre des Champs-Flysées, Brussels tgtg. Osthaus, Karl Ernst, Henry van de Velde. Lehen und Schaffen des Kiinstlers, Hagen 1920; Casteels, Maurice, Henry van de Velde, Brussels 1932 ‘Henry van de Velde’, special issue of La C (Brussels), 1933, nos. 5/6; Teirlinck, Herman, Henry van de Velde, Brussels 1959; Hammacher, A.M., Die Welt Henry van de Veldes, Cologne 1967; Hiiter, K.-H., Henry van de Velde. Sein Werk bis zum Ende seiner Tatigkeit in Deutschland, Berlin (East) 1967.  Venturi, Robert, b. Philadelphia 1y25. Stud- ted at Princeton University. He worked in various offices, including those of Eero *Saarinen and Lonis 1. *Kahn until 1gs8. in which year he established his own architectural firm with several partners in Philadelphia. In 1964 he formed a partnership with John Rauch, which was expanded in 1967 to include Denise Scott Brown (Venturi’s wife). Currently, Ste- ven Izenour and David Vaughan are also associated with the firm. Over the years they have realized such paradigmatic buildings as: the Guild House Retirement Home, Philadel- phia (1960-3); the Vanna Venturi House, Chestnut Hill, Pa. (1962); the Humanities Building of the State University of New York at Purchase (1968-73); the Dixwell Fire Station in New Haven, Conn. (1970-4); the Peter Brant House, Greenwich, Conn. (1971-3); Franklin Court in Philadelphia (1972-5); the addition to the Allen Art Museum of Oberlin College.  Venturi. Guild Flouse Retirement Home, Philadelphia, Pu. (rg60. 3)  Oberlin, Ohio (1973. 6); the Faculey Club of the Pennsylvania Seate University (1974)c and che Basco Showroom on the oucskirts of Philadel- phia (1y7y}. All of these illustrate. in’ often highly diverse statements. V."s determination to translate into architectural terms such elements of perceptive psychology as ambiguity, mem- ory. and contradictoriness.  V. came to worldwide attention less through bis built oeuvre. however. than through his writings on architectural theory. In 1y66 he published Complexity and) Contradiction in Architecture. in which he analyzed, in most original way tiple meanings and contradictions in the history of Western architecture. In 1972 he published, together with Denise Scott Brown and Steven Izenour. the book Learning from Las Vegas, Here he made it clear that it was no longer a matter of denying formal qualities in the supposed ugh- ness of the American everyday environment.  vs. the continuous play with mul-  Instead he proposed to acknowledge them as artistic stimuli in architectural design (*Post- Modernism). PW T] Venturi, R., Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture, New York 1y66 and London 1977; Venturi, R., Scott Brown, 1.. Izenour, S.. Leaming from Las Vegas, Cam- bridge, Mass. 1972: Maxwell, Robert, and Stern, Robert A. M., Vennert and Rauch. Lon- don 1978 Moos. Stanislaus von, and Weinberg-Staber, M. (eds.), Architekne in Alltag Amerikas. Venturi und Ranch. Zurich 1979.  and  Villagran Garcia, José. b. Mexico City 1yot. Studied at the Architecture School of the Academia de San Carlos in Mexico City (today  3  > 
the Arclitecuae Sheol ot the National Cnisersin er Mostoo Pe himself taught there For more than at quater Ghat century and thus  ysehoscboa pronewiged iufuence over die  Vouneer irchiectural generation in Mexico. Taspust bs *le Corbusier and *Gropius. he became aie ae tnost iinpertant proponencs Woche Moder Movement in his country,  hoscev er, he advocated more convince cls in bis tecehing than un bis own architec  (are. Anmone other works. he designed: the  Archisceture School and the Art Muscum ofthe National Unitversins Caverine City tiyst. wish Alfonse biceaga tnd Navier Garcia Lascuraimy AM  Villagran Garcia. Jose. Problems ou fa fornia eon ded gratrete, Mosca City igege Jose Vili Mexican City. September 1ys6  ar Mesico ur the new  eran Correia’. rgeiteerinnd  Villanueva, Carlos Radl bo Croydon, Eng- lund tycs. Studied at the theale des Bosse Pp.  opened his owen ot  suou. d Caracas  rosam Pars. and in 1yag  Teen Caracas. From ty2g co as areluteet to the Venezuelan Ministry or Publi Works. and trom ago te  Tygy he serve  ight he was comsuiting architees to the Banco  Obrero it Caracas. In tugg he founded the  Geuley of vrehieesture at the University of Veneeneli in Caracas, ap which hesubscquenily minght.  Ax was typical among architects of” his generation. throughout Carin Ameria Vos eatly work was an ittempe to renew the tradidons of local colonial architecture. Quite soon, however. be came co a deep understand jng of the mew ways of Chought mn architecture and devoted fimsclt with a oisstonars zeal co  ecture ni his awit  the spread af madermst arch land. “Vo the inspuration received from the great masters af his gure he added characteristic personal elements. a danse and spontaneous quality mi structurad desig. forcefully expressed in exposed conereter a cadioliwity of taste reflected in extensive coilaberanon with many painters and sculptors. i velba in a daring use of polychramy: and a tee for large-scale  composition. OF Vs mestnnparcint work, de  . Cin of Caracas, he Stadium (igso 2). wahoo darnigdy candle- vered marquees, built tn sbell concrete, with exposed ribs, and the Auditorium (Aula Mag  naj and the Covered Plazs Plaza Cubtertal of rys2 are the best known. The Aula Magna hast  buildings for the Unnvcrst  clean white curved ceiling against which float a large number of variously coloured and shaped panels designed by Alexander Calder (with Robert Newman as acoustics specialist): these have a awotold function, aesthene and acoustic. The austerity of the exterior, emphatically expressing the structural framework, is com~ pensated by the lightness and airiness of the Plaza Cubierta, the large semi-enclosed foyer, highlighted by a décor conceived by Arp. Léger. Vasarely and others,  Of Vos buge housing projects. necessitated by the rapid growth of Caracas, at least pve must be mentioned as examples: the “Dos de Diciembre’ estate (1943) si. with 2.266 dwel- lings for 12.700 people designed in callabora- tion with José Manuel Mijares, José Hofman and Carlos Branco: and the “El Parainn’ (1gs4) complex. with duplex unitsinatour-storey anda vixteen-storey building. The frank expression of the struccure distinguishes these buildings. ike most of bis work, from the mamstream ot) the *International Style and lends his wuvre an  HEM GEta © Ebtcheack. Henry-Russell, Latin dinertcan Architecture ime tog New York 195 Moholy-Nagy. Sibyl Carlos Rail New York loog  uncompromising. dynamic ypirit  Ubmuera,  Voysey, Charles Francis Annesley. b. Hessle, Yorkshire 1837. d. Winchester ogi. Warked Thomas Seddon and in collaboration with George Devey before opening his own architectural office in 1882. Under the influence of the *Arts and Cratiy mosement and expe- cially of *Morrix, ¥  important Hgures of the English Domest  under  beeame one of the most  Voysey. Broadleys, Windermere itsus yi  
My  Wachsmann. Cellular construction system (1980-3)  Revival. Above all, he designed country houses which drew on the rural architectural traditions of the Tudor and Stuart periods, but which adopted a new free ordering of internal spaces (Perrycroft ac Coewall, t8y3: Norney at Shackleford, 1897: The Orchard at Chorley Wood, Herts.. rXyy). His elegant interiors were influenced by Arthur Mackmurdo and rivalled those of C. R. *Mackintosh, V.’s undoctrinatre response to functional requirements and his simple formal language contributed to opening the way for the early phase of modernism in England. VMI O Voysey, C.F. A. Reason as the Basis of Art, London 1906, Gebhard. David, Charles PA. Voysey. Architect, Los Angeles 1975: Brandon- Jones, John, BoA, Voysey, Architect and Designer, 1887-1948, London 197  W  Wachsmann, Konrad, b. Frankfurt an der Oder 1901, d. Los Angeles Ty8t. Wachsmann was a pioneer of industrialized building im theory, practice and teaching. He always advo- cated that the scientific and technical resources of mass production should be applied to the processes of building, and he held a correspond- ing structural and aesthetic conception of archi- tecture. He came straight from building in timber to the problems of prefabrication Trained as joiner and carpenter, W. way a student at the Academies of Art at Dresden (under Heinrich *Tessenow) and Berlin (under  carepta idl Boa Haus *Poelzig). From i926 to ty29 he worked ay chief architect for the tirm of Christoph &  Unmuack. the largest manutaecurers of umber buildings in Europe at the me. In ry32 he was awarded the Rome Prize by the German Academy in Rome. In the years following, which he spent in Rome, he was occupied vith building blocks of flats in reinforced conerete,  Finigrating to the United States, he founded a partnership with Walter *Gropius, which lasted from fygt to ry4g8: from it emerged the General Panel Corporation, the first: fully- automated factory for the production of pre- fibricated building components. In rosa. he was appoimted Professor of Design at the Hho Institute of Technology in Chicago and diree- tor of the Department of Advanced Building Research  His the character of universal clomenty in) buildmg  research concentrated on basic construction which can be mays produced. His ‘modular  which governed the relationship of the various  surting pot was co-ordination building components to each other, These components should be as simple as possible and capable of ay many different combinations as possible, A cuniversal module’. identical with the ‘planning module’ comprised all the modu- Jar categories (material, performance. construe= tion. installation. ete}.  M  above all in the General Panel System. which was made up of prefabricated timber units  ‘S research found a practical application  fryg3 s). Inthe rygos he was commissioned by die CLS. Air boree to develop the “Mobiar for the construcuen of aircraft hangars to any required size by the He  special study ef che nature of the commeecrions  Strucuire’. a system  addition of tubular steel struts made a  and joints of ecHular structures such as Buck- 
Ininster *Eullers geodeste domes or Le Recolan’s spavesssuetures, built up from similar  vigtient  Wows sencermed equally wath a technical  wed soenuas binlding procedure that uclized vuen qacthods and with a corres  Thass=prog showhne underssanding of struccure im archi- recare Pring aud oie aga, hiy apparencdy Biophur projects anticipared titure realines. and Seinuited divusion beyond the linuts of ofsptniual problems in a techno- logical ay MS GH Wachsmann, K., dspekve. Wiesbaden 1y6t:  Phe Turing Poot in Building. New York  wr biteccure  fyol  Wagner, Martin. b Kanigsherg 1885. d. Cam= bridge, Mass. last. Scudied at the Technische Hochschule. first in Berlin-Charlottenburg and chen in Dresden. Momiber of the architectural group Der *Ring. Ele was Municipal Architect in Berlin, 1y26- 33: chere he collaborated closely with *Gropius, * firing, *Mies van der Rohe, *Poclzig. and *Scharoun. He emigrated to Turkey m 1y3s. and trons thereto the *USA:he taaghe at Larvard University, 1935-50 Under the Weimar Republic, be was one of the most pmpartane advocates of a state archi-  tecrural policy shat would seck to unite socialist ideals. with Vhe Lindenhof housing estate, built to his plans m= Berlin-  post-war reality Schénebers, Gigih 213, ancicipates the most Importance clement Hf has urban planning of later years: bustdings on the periphery that were closed on the screet side, Broad courtyards, 4 centre as tineeting place and untticd composi- don of buildings. This way a concept that the subsequently claboraced with Bruno *Taut in the large Bray housing estace (Hufeisen= siedlung’. or ‘Horseshoe estate’b in) Berlin= Neukélln (1925-30;  Wagner, Otto. b. Penving. near Vienna 184s. d. Vienna 1y1k precursor of 2oth-century architecture and town pianning, he was the founder of the “Vienna School’. the mest notable members of whch were *Loos, * Hot mann and *Olbrich, W. played a role in *Austria equivalent to char of * Sullivan in che United States, *van de Sele in Belgium and *Berlage in the Netherrinds. Perhaps more than that of any other architect. his work reflects the great changes i taste that were taking place at the turn of the century.  He began his studies m 1857 at the Technische Hochschule in Vienna. He spent some time in 1860 at the Berlin Bauakademie and completed his training at the school of architecture of the Akademie der bildenden Kiinste. Vienna 1N6t~-3. The first phase of his career is marked by a hiscoricist approach to design. He adopted a form of classicism derived from the Tuscan and Florenane High Renaissance: closed plans that were lucid. logical and severely geometrical. His work earned him such a reputation that he was commissioned in fXyo to draw up a scheme for the complete replanming of the City of Vienna, Of this, the only proposal to be realized was the construction (1894-7) of the Stadtbahn, or metropolitan railway necwork.  In 1894 he was appointed head of a special class in architecture at the Vienna Akademie. This vear also marked the opening of a second phase in che development of his work (1804 1yot), characterized simultaneously by a ration= alist conception of architecture and a delight in the floral ornament of contemporary *Art Nouveau, While van de Velde was opening his famous campaign in Brussels to purify the formal language of architecture (Déblaiement art, 18y4). W. put forward in his inaugural lecture at the Vienna Akademie a doctrine that has become famous under the title of Moderme clrehttektur, In his view, the new architecture must take the requirements of modern life as its point of deparcure, and find adequate forms to express them. Two years after Sullivan's plea (Omamene it Architecture. 1892), and three years before the first statements of Loos, W. was extolling horizontal lines, flat roofs, and a reductivist style that would draw its powers of  expression from a strict respect for structural principles and the ‘truthful’ use of materials.  The Stadtbahn station in the Karlsplatz (I888-y) is cypical of chis transitional period. The use of a steel frame. in accordance with French models, would in keeping with W.’s own theoretical requirements — have demanded the abandonment of all purely decorative fea- tures; in the event, however, the building is embellished with floral ornamentation. He thus sought a compromise between doctrinal de- mands and aesthetic form.  W. went on to adopt a more radical attitude in full conformity with the principles he de- fended. The Post Office Savings Bank in Viena (1904-6) dominates the third and last phase of his career; the economy of its trape- 
Wagner, Otto. Post Otfice Savings Bank, Vienna (1904 6): fagade and banking hall  zoidal plan, developing harmoniously around a central hall, the feeling for monumentality. the flexible handling of space, the complete os chewal of ornament and the perfect integration of steel and glass combine to make this building an unmistakable landmark in the history of moder architecture. RID S Wagner, Octo, Moderne Architektur, Viewna 1896 (4th ed.: Die Baukunst unserer Zeit, Vienna 914); Lux, Joseph August, Otto Wagner, Mu- nich 1914; Tietze, Hans, Otte Wagner, Vienna 1922; Otto Wagner. Das Werk des Archuvkien (exhibition catalogue), Vienna 1963; Gerets- egger. H.. and Peintner, M., Otto Wagner, 1841 - 1918. The Expanding City and the Beginning of Modern Architecture, New York 1979.  Warchavehik, Gregori, b. Odessa 1896, d. Sao Paulo 1972. After studying at the University in Odessa and at the Istituto Reale Superiore de Belle Arti in Rome, he worked for several years under Marcello *Piacentini. fn 1923 he went to  Janeiro. His °M  Brazil. where he at first practised in Sado Paulo. and then, 1931 3. with Lacie *Costa in Rao de Janeiro. Finally, after ty34. he settled in Sic Paulo. From tyar he was a profesor at the  Belas Ria de anifesto on Modem Architee-  Escola Nacional de Artes in  ture’, published in tg25. served as the point of departure for the Modern Movementin Brazil  ahd 
Peowen dietuse te Soe Pace pTQa7 Sh. verth its satis SUP BOG Se brea compesition, of  © Qt Dove design: the houses he buile  eis  she pronverng works of  pablo  ritinal Stscen Lawn Aimeriea. Gregori. “Acetea de arqni+ Vo Coren de Viuwii tRio de me Neserber ine Ware Df es tipreon catalogue, Sie Paulo 197s.  Gregert  Webb, Vluhp Sposkmant b. Oxtord syed Worth, Stpsea. yt s, He was at first an assistant mr F  * Morris. closely. notably ay a designer for the firm of Merrs. M Faulkner &  Canrpany, founded an rant. WL built town and counery  howwes. is which medieval stylists elements are  Soeets office, where be met Willian  with whom he later collaborated  rshall,  merged wath Sth-contary reminivcenees in nnconventional compositions. His early Red issy . butt for Morris at Bexley Heath,  wath its Free. asstametrical ground=  House Kent. ay plana unig. of meron and exterior and its ed brick first atempts ata renewal of damesuc design within the Gothi Revival  Lethaby. WL ROL Mlinip EP obb aad firs Work, Ostord “Philip Webb) in borriday. Peter cod. Ptctersae lrefae Tondon tyeg: Macleod, Robert. Styte iety. London ry  uppretentions hytdes ot one of the  tagsy Brandon-dones. ohn  fecture  aud §  Williams, Sir (Evan) Owen, b. Tottenham. London tsye. d. London ty6y. Atter studying at the Universiwy of London, he worked in mally as an engineer and constructor: in the Toios he created some of the most significant buildings of modern architecture in *Great  Britain through his use of new construction techniques. The Boots’ Factory at Beeston, Notts, (1930 in which the mushroom: pier support system developed by Robert *Maillare way used for the firse tune in Britain - and the Pioneer Health Centre in Peckham, London {1034 6). are noteworthy examples of an engi- neers architecture which ts both construc-  tionally and formally successful  Gold. Michael. Sir, Owen Wilhams, K. BLES. Zodiae (Milan}. no. t8 (1g68}. pp. rt go: Rosenberg, S.. Chalk. W.. and Mullin, S., “Sir Owen Willtamts’, dreditertural Desig. July ighy.  Wines, James. b. Oak Park, Minor, 1y32. He worked first tor more than adecade as asculptor  before Launching the multi-disciplinary organi- zation SITE (Sculpture im the Environment) in New York in tyoy. In tg73 he took en Alisen Sky. Eimiho Sousa and Michelle Stone as partners. Since to75 he hay been a professor at the New Jersey School of Architecture. New-  Wines. Tilt Showroom, Towson, Mado rigce 87  
ark. The SITE group seeks a union of are ond architecture which will direct architecrure away from orthodox “*Functionalisar’. a pro- gramme characterized by Wo himself as ‘De-  *. They are especially Known for  architecture’. their work for the retail stores cham Best Produets, including the Peelin Richmond. Va Fagade in Houston (1974-3) and the Tilt Shaw- roam in Towson, Md. (ty76 8). allot whieh the observer is meant to be shocked by some eccentric detail. AM Tl OSITELSEPE Projects and Theories. Bart vy 7S:  WSPTE, Architecture as Art, London 1ysc  Project am  (ytt 2h the Indeterminate  Woods, Shadrach. b. Yonkers. N.Y New York ty73. Alter studies in cngineering in New York and literature m Dublin, he entered *Le Corbusier's office in Paris in 194. There he met Georges *Candilis, with whom he culla- borated until ry6t: tram ryst to iyss as his partner in the African office of ATBAT (Atclicr des Batisseurs) in Casablanca; from tgss to 163 m Paris where, jomed by Alesis *Joste. they opened the office of Candilis Josie Woods: aid after 1963 again with Candilis alone. hy rns he  ty2ad  became a professor at Harvard University. and from 1970 he had his own office in New York Like Candilix and Josie, hiy reputation rests principally upon the group's collaborative planning of the new town Toulouse le Miral (competition 1y62. realized 1964 77). AM = Woods, Shadrach, Stadiphaning geht unc alk an, Stuttgart TyOX. sce  also under Candilis  Wright, Frank Llovd. b. Richland Center. Wisconsin 1867. d. Phoenix, Arizona iysy Seudied engineering (88s5_ 7 atthe Univ Wisconsin in Madison and worked at the same ume for Allen D. Conover. Subsequently he practised for a short time in the saudio of Jobo Lyman Silsbee. who introduced hint to the principles of the Shingle Style. In addition co these brief professional experiences. visits to his grandfather's farm near Spring Green. Wis. were influential in his early years in stimulating a special love of nature.  In 1888 W. entered the office ef Louis *Sullivan and Dankmar *Adler, where he played a Jarge role in the design of honses (Chamley House, Chicago, t8y2). At the saine ume he absorbed many principles trom the teaching of his ‘Lieber Meister’, as he called Sullivan: the naive philosophy of the American  rity or  formal A Elomie ne Prarie Lowe  ‘founding fathers’. the ultrasindividoslins af David Phomas Jeferson. He demsed  the writer Henry Thorcau and the naturalisn: of further theoretic mypiraden front bis reading at Ruskin (* Arts and Cratts; and Vietlerle-d us *hrancer He found archicectura models in the worky ofthe Bast Coastimasters HEL Richard- son. Bruce Prive, as well as *MeKim, Mead & White.  Three other formative tiflucnces deserse mention: the fasemauon and pociry of wdditree md interlockmg formes aroused by childhood acquumtanes with Procbel kindergarten toys the ateracdon of the open groundeplias snd crattedl tintsh of Shingle Style houses: wd the esoticiaa of tradidonal Japanese ar biter tate as represented oy the reconstrucuon of the Ho-c- den “Eemtple ay the Japanese Pavihon at the World's Columbian Exposition bel in Chica HOME ING  Phe result of W's Jove of mature was hay deeton to vbandon the big city in favour ofthe suburbs. In Quk Pars m the suburbs of ©  ny upper-class green vosts  riage. be estubhshed a studio mt fSsy. fy bis first commissions he pad Family house asthe basof  homage te the smyde- anew. indivicualisge dentocracy tor die “Flape py few Bowus-Arts *heole des Beauss Arte: stele dee sign forthe Milyyaukee Library, esyth he opted  Atter hovitant attempts co adtiust to che  defimtys ely for. wn ant-classiea) aid and Puro-  pean approach and followed instead the ‘org tC ideadaya sigh of American cultural indepen= nicarchitecuure:, He lett Sublivan  dence *org and Adler in rsg3 and entered inte partiership wid) Cecil Corson: dhree years Tater he setup an Phe Wins-  ean bears  independent practice i Oak Park low House in River borest, HL ctsyy weintess to the classical residue of bis dependence on Sullivan, bur already the ty proud characterts= ties ot W  ovarbungmg roofs, the emphasis pliccd on  sown candy seve are iuitestedd: the  horvontus. and die asymmetrically reselved biniaing composition, Ths was fami hed dat  series of Prairie Phouses what would reverve ity  definiase formal tanga: publishedin bebruary tyet ua dhe fades’ Efoane A Soll  House sath Lot ot Room an te fp was an  ME Tak preeets  independent ty pe of snighe-Lanily house secan grecn surroundings, which was arented to- wards the North American farmbouse in as noble simpheity ats avondunee oF purely repre=  scntational and nomeranctional space. tnd its 
reagan ofthe mrmhoeuse tradigoa. For the turther elegant Gesiatinarsticerk, Wo lways soughc ont a quali-  Tree  developrient or this  tied tea or arase and technteians. The Willits Hause Highland Park. ML was cypicd of the Prauiric Houses. The  nyo round-plan is cruciforn:, designed around: a ve anternal divit midivadually shaped bur dose freely one into  nn! chines:  2 spaces are  wtather. The symmecieal wings of che brild- my reach out the arnix and unite house and nature ou ideal axes  [nthe Martins otse in Buflilo. N.Y. gos. Woontrednecd a forerunner of the horizontal bands of windows which became a promment feature in his Tater houses, He used them asa domunant formal elementin the Tomek House fa Raverside. HE tgo7 The Coonley: House  Wright. Larkin Building, b> Jo, N.Y. (1905. 5)  Wright. Wilhery House, Highland Park, [Ib  Iga)  (tgot- 11 jcalsoin Riverside. isa complex image in which the ceilings of the rooms are inclined, matching the shallow slope of the roof.  The Robie House in Chicago (1907-9) marks the climax and tinale of the series of Prairie Houses. As it was no longer a case of a building set in an open site. buc rather of a city house (albeit with a large garden tor the ame), the ax of the ground-plan, composed with grandeur, follows that of the adjacent street. Che aesthetic cHeet derives principally from the play between the axially composed building volumes with two bay windows on the street figade and the appended side wings which challenge this svmimeiry.  During the same period as the Prairie Houses: were built. W. realized the Larkin Building in Buffalo, NvY. (igog s: demolished ry4o}. In the city, that contact with nature which only seemed feasible in an open site was abandoned the office building was instead oriented inward. A central space, lit from above by a skylight, was surrounded by four-storey galleries. The wa  cubig exterior was articulated simply purisdc, monumental block, w which four projecting and completely closed corner towers housing the staircases were appended. The towers also served as ventilation shafts for the extraction of cool or stale airs the Larkin Building was one of the first office buildings equipped with climatic control. The Unitarian Church in Oak Park, Ill, (1908-7). is a rein- forced-concrete building in a heavy. monu- mental manner, somewhat Egyptianizing in its expressive language.  In rgoy W.. who had moved his office bac to Chicago in 1897, conceded that the dream of a democracy based on individual dwellings in the romanticized indigence of the suburbs could notbe realized. He left his wife and six children  
and travelled to Europe with Mrs Cheney (the wife of a former client) as his mistresy. There. they stayed principally at Fiesole in Italy. In 1910, a majorexhibition ofhis work was held in Berlin. and in iytoand tytt the publisher Ernst Wasmuth published two porttolos which. along with che carly propagandistie activity of HP. *Berlag “uropean architecture, Chis intlu- ence can even be detected in the work of such mdependently *Gropius whose model factory at the Co- logne Werkbund exbibition of igiy reveals dearly a direct dependence on the Park hin Hotel in Mason City. fowa tigoy to; and even *Miey van der Rohe, whose tg23 design  were to exercise a decisive  influence on  minded personalities ay  for a brick house was a paritied form of the Prairie House type. Atter his return to the US W. founded in tgit the Spring Green Cos operative in the solitude of Wisconsin. in order to make oa fresh start, he began with the construction of hiv own house. Taliesin, it  name being adopted from the eponymous Druidic bard (1913) bore withess to an almost expressionistic  Midway Gardens mm Chicage  search to discover the vartous possibilines of forms and building materials. Tas open-air restaurant and pleasure ground. which. rat sculptural décor, anucipared Art Devo. was demolished in ty2y durmy the Probibition cra  In rong Mry Cheney fwho had reverted ta her maiden name of Borthwick) died tragically ina fire at Taliesin; shaken and isolated, We now. devoted himselfentirely to the rebuilding of his house. The tinancial difficulties invelved in this provoked him co undertake the Imperial Hotel in Tokvo (191s 22, with Antonin Rasmend:, which was to be especially acclaimed for its technical refinements and its carthquake-proot, supporting stritcture (attributed co the enginees Paul Mueller). W."s stay im Japan g mterrupdions, ax years combined with his personal crisis resulted ina decisive shift in terms of his architectural style  This shift was already evident in the Barns- dall House in Los Angeles (1gi7 20). which turned the experience of the Prairie House on  Jascng. with  end: here, massive, closed building volumes. set under a heavy roof slab and decorated with motifs from = Mayan art. compactly grouped around an inner courtyard  derived were This fortress-like. introverted complex anned toestablish a clear break with the natural seeing and to dominate the surrouding landscape. The  Wrighe. Wiis Church. Quk Park. fi  Wright. Millard Horse Cabciyst k  hoa Muaacure 1%  Millard Hlouse La Monatund builtin ty2t 3 in Pasadena on similar prriciples, was the tarst textile Block) at technique be bad himtself mvented. ‘The premab-  mastanees of WSS use of the  rete components, either solid or  ricated us perforated. were empfoved ina uiaaner that  denied any difterentiagen bet cen mterior and exterior and allowed for covery af vines ot other climbing plants on che surtaces  Labesm burned down for a seeand tare in ry2sand agam in 1927. Wo valmily rebuilt it and gathered around bir a niysucally mspired sect In ig2s he bole the Ocatillo Desert Cunp tes porary sculement.a  Chandler. Arizona. ay at  base from w hich te penetrate subsequently even turther inte the desert which he realized a  creative synthesis of orgame architecture and  Ws masterpiece. in  Ths 
vant Hotise  Wright. kau Mill Run, Pa  Balbagwater near  Cubist aid rarrosahse intinguces. was the Kaute near Mill Run,  Stodous building is set on  man Howse halle. cer  Pacstyas a. Vs and over rstrem atthe pome where it breaks inte w watertill Tae focal pomt ot the arrange= ments. asi the Prame Houses, the chimney and hearth: built tne sobd rock they are hke all the building  made of free ron  ssertialsupporang elements  Ateiched te this plane are  orthogonally» parallel surfiiccs on extend into netiew id scent almost to brig the small valles comple phy of interlocking spate! po sccuuions is developed. which makes radn . reintorced conerety rior space and the hin js: subtle transition pain his umque poctry.  IP Fallmgwater repro 5 W for lite in nature, one | ier he began the administration building fie chemical com- pany S.C. Johnson & & wi Wacine, Wis.  mnipescd horantal levels. wb concrete, whieh  facly  felectie berween mnte- resolved through  “s ideal solution  of che posubilities of  (1936 9} which was to give form to his notion ot work in the city. Once again asin all of his urban projects - it provided an inward-turned Image. with no visual connection to the ex- terior: the comples is lit by skylights and strips of glass tubes set high in the wall. Fre  sanding, mushroom-shaped  remtforced-con- crete supports, which are set on joints and resolved as huge circular plates ac cetling level. subdivide the vast office space. The Later labora- tory tower (Tyg4 $0) stoad out above this strongly composed complex  From 1y37 on, W. built Tahesin West. his winter residence m the desert region of Paradise Valley. near Scottsdale, Arizona An araficial picce of nature is created in the obliquely angled  geometric Composition of limestone and wood thered on the site, a technique already tested in the Ocatille Desert Camp ‘desert concrete’ walls. the open tinber-tramed structure and the tentlike roofing serve to unite surroundings and house as well ay interior and exterior. The whole complex hay remained a permanent building site, based on the concept architecture in a constant: state of “becoming”.  The massive  of an 
In the meantime, W. had begun, with the Willey House in Minneapolis (1934), his series of Usonian Houses: small, free-standing smygle houses for ‘true Usonians’ (Americans), often with walls of clapboards and flat roofs covered with wooden slats — a building type which proved startlingly various and imaginative in form, despite its low costs. Times had changed since the Prairie Houses. W. held fast to the ovo. central principles: “fer every individual an individual style’ and ‘for every place an appro- priate formal language’, but he abandoned the cruciform grouping of spaces around the hearth in favour of a freer and more cconomic plan- ning, He replaced the usual closed kitchen with working zones attached to the living spaces and generally skylit, and incorporated all the rooms, including the bedrooms, into the continuum of the house. The Usonian Houses developed from strongly orthogonal ground-plans via various geometric structures and finally to 4 confusion beyond measure of united, tter- penetrating and sliding forms: W. used them as  Wright. Valicsin West. near Scottdale, Anz. (1937)  Wright, S.C. Johnson & Son, Racine. Wis. intenor of administration building (193 uj. uid general view of the comples showing the later laboratory tower (1944 50)  
Wright, Sciemien Ro Gugeenhenn Mascun. New Verk nah Go bist y  vinediun for cormalexperunentaden, Among fhe amost insportunt are the facobs House m Madison crug6s the Sturges House in Brent=  wood Hoh. Cal tagged the Miller  House mm Clare Cis. lana tyge  Pho spiral meted | werk ui} Strong Ploansteruny on Sigur Fou! Mounton, Marts dand mtonded ta serve asa pile worshippers. lathe Solomon R. Gug Miusenii an New York 1g4g3 6. theme which he bad claborated many years  dotirst appeared in his  san the proqeet for che Gurdon  aosore Sen ces fe Hlon  nggurat riage Ste for n.tcare  conhicim  foso gi the  earlier was tinal  » fwilized. Ets prinerpal teature wsawallers washin a shite. spiral-formed and sendy Gapermng furl 4 isitors are carried to thy top bs Ist snd can them descend the internal spiral ramp on toot in order to view the pictures displayed on the wails  The Pree Tower ir Bartlesville. OKLiL, was  built nm ross 6. cay nimergen-storey tower of offices and apartnignts barks back to earlier projects for tall Puildigs (Buildings for the National Insure. Company in” Chicago.  rorg. St Mark's Jin  strives for a new  » New York, 1y2y) and forma definition of the skyseraper. In adden to various projects in which the ageing architcet inereasingly in- dulged his fascination vith the extra the exotic (including tho Marin County Civic Center in San Rafael Cal. 1937 66). he built the Beth Sholom Svnacegue m Elkins Park, Pain rysk-y. Over agro and-y ofa triangle expanded 7+  gancand  anin the form  hexagon rises a  Wright. Price Tower, Bartlesville, OR rrys3 68  sharply angled “tent of steel glass, and plastic. Which evokes vssociatons with Indian wigs wams and reflects the colour of the sky Despite his unyielding mervidualism, in his work Wo did notcontine hinnelto the angle er tothe individual architectural composition, but concerned himself as well with urbanistic visions, When he ded the CSA in ryoy, he had already experienced the misery of an over- crowded capitalise metropolis such as Chicago (where one sells everything and above all sells  one’s self} as well ay that of the iselared surrogate for nature as represented by the most elegant suburbs. The alternatives which be sought were expressed in his 932 proiect for Broadacre City, which went back to a tts suggestion (Model Development for Chicago) and was to receive its definitive statement in 19s8 ay Living City. in which Ebenezer *Howard’s Garden yo was united with a Utopia. This was rooted in the ideas of Joan-  
Wright. Marin County Civic Center, San Ratagl, Cal. (1987 60)  Wright. Beth Sholom Synagogue, Elkins Park. Pa. (1ysé 9)  Jacques Rousseau, as well as in early anarchism  and acquired the seale of a vast landscape: an area of four square miles (over 1,000 hectares} was to be urbanized, with at least 4.000 m7? of land allocated to each family. The develop- ment, which w: based on the grid principl  s enclosed by a street network  ~ Was planned ac- cording to contemporary needs and financial requirements. The industrial sector lay in the outer zone, directly adjacent to the railway. Living City, which W. worked out in abstrac- don trom the actual urban planing problems of the America of the Roosevelt era, is an architectural expression of his personal craving for a liberal and egalitarian community. Phe place of freedom and social harmony coincided thus with the greatest possible mobility: the automobile would be the tool and the symbol of individual freedom and would thus inform the structure of the development.  Although W. himself believed in the chimera of his horizontal. freely extended. ‘landscape city’, he also followed the opposite concept of locating housing in concentrated clusters sur- rounded by expansive undisturbed green zones In 1936 he came to the vision of ‘[linois’ for Chicago. Stimulated by the first successes in the production of atomic energy, he designed a  harrow. towering, variously articulated, mile- Ingh skyscraper tor 130,000 inhabitanw, its s28 Soars were to be served by s6 atamic-powered lifts and countless escalators.  In an active career spanning mare than sixty years. W. developed a hitherto unknown diver- sity of architectural forms and ideas rounding capacity for selrenewal had, how-  Hix as-  ever. nothing in common with  capricious eclecticnsm: just as Mies van der Rohe em- bodied the European myth of the Enlighten ment, so W. developed an his tireless search for  forms “the American myth of the pioncer. whe mast always seek the new in order to tind changed relationships in himscl”  Wowas too stuaped by his own individuality in his architvetural language to serve directly as the inspiration for a school of disciples, Els stimulus was mare truittil however im the most vaned architectural movements (from *Expresionian ta *Rationalism), the most 
diverse groups (from the School of *Amyter- dam to De *Styl) and the most varied architects. This resulted trom the face chat he conducted, alongside bis intensive building activity, an equally intensive activity as a publicist. He gave councless Icetures, confided his thoughts on architecture in many books with considerable emphasis, and published the better part of his work. In addition. his pupils have spread the ideas of organic architcecure throughout the world VML = Gutheim, Frederick fed.j. Frank Lloyd Wright on Archaeenire: Selected Writings 1894- 1940. Hitchcock. Henry-Russell. fa the Nature of Materials, 887-1gg1: The Buildings of Frank Lloyd Wright, New York 1yg2. Zevi, Bruno, Frank Lloyd Wright. Milan 1g47: Scully, Vin- cent, Frank Lloyd Wright, New York and London ry6o: Storrer, William) Allin. The Archtrecture of Frank Lloyd Wright: A Complete Catalog, Cambridge. Mass. 1yt4; Gutheim, Frederick (ed.). fn the Canse of Architecture: Essays by Frank Lloyd Woriehe for the Architectural Review 1ges-19s2, New York 1975 Robert L.. Prank Lloyd U right: dn Annotated Bibliography, Los Angeles 1y7s; Twombly, Robert C., frank Lloyd Wright: His Life and clrehitecrure, New York ra7y.  . Sweeney,  Wurster, William Wilson, b. Stockron, Cal. 18gs. do 1y72. Studied at che University of California. In independen: pracuce from 1926; in 1945 be jotned Theodore Bernardi and Donn Emmons, in Influenced by May beck, We. was an exponent of the “Bay Region Style’, che Caternian variant of Re- gionalisnr, He became kvesvn for his town and houses, which oe distinguished by their modesty, adaptatian co eavironment and consideration of locally prevailing social, eco- nomic and climatic condiuons. An carly example of this ‘everydas -architecture’, which is more concerned with fencaon than form, ts the Gregory Farmhouse, ear Santa Cruz, Cal. (1927), and a characterist - later example the Reynolds House in San .ancisco (1946), an unpretentious, elongated vooden building, freely articulated and with cently sloping hip root.  Ci “Profilo di un architetc imericand: Wile liam Wilson Wurster’, Arcstcuura (Rome), May 1987; Peters, Richard + *‘L’architetto Wilham Wilson Wurster’, Cuscbella (Milan), April 1960.  partnership.  country  Y  Yamasaki, Minoru. b. Seattle 1912. Studied at the Universities of Washington (Seattle) and New York. Worked in the offices of the Empire State Building architects Shreve, Lamb and Harmon; with *Harrison, Fouilhoux and *Abramovitz: and with the stream-line de- signer Raymond Loewy. He achieved inter- national notice, together with George Hellmuth and Joseph Leinweber, his parmers at the time, for the Lambert Airport at St Louis, Mao. (1953-6), whose reception halls consist ofa series of intersecting barrel vaults.  A characteristic feature of his style is the dissolution of the wall into an apparently textile-like fabric, which serves to disguise the structural members: umbrella walls made of profilated blocks, as at the American Concrete Institute (1y58) in Detroit, metal grilles in the Reynolds Metals Regional Sales Office at Southfields, Mich. (1ysy). The impression of contrived elegance which is typical of Y.’s later designs is most strikingly evident in the World Trade Center, New York (1966--73, with Em- ery Roth & Sons), where che fagades are dissolved by a superimposed linearity, of neo- Gothic inspiration, which disguises the shape and mass of the twin towers.  (1 Yamasaki, M.. 4 Life in Architecture, New York 1979.  Yorke, Francis Reginald Stevens, b. 1g06. d. 1962. Studied at Birmmgham University School of Architecture. Founder-member of the MARS Group (British section of *CIAM) and pioneer of madernism in *Great Brita, with his reinforced-concrete houses at Gidea Park, Essex (1933. with W. *Holford. G. Stephenson and A. Adam) and house at Nast Hyde, Hatfield (1935). In partnership with Marcel *Breuer, 1935-7. and from 1944 with Eugene Rosenberg and Cyril Mardall, which firm was responsible for many important pro- jects, including schools at Stevenage (1947-9). Oldbury, and Pool Hitl, Salop. (1955-7); aca- demic buildings in London, Merthyr Tydfil and Leeds; housing at Stevenage, Harlow and in the Hansa district of Berlin; hospitals in Lon- donderry, Crawley and Hull; a department  
Yamasaki. Reynolds Metals Regional Sales Office, Southtield, Mich. (igsy)  store in Sheffield, and Gatwick Airport. Sussex. He was the editor of che annual volume Specification from 1935 to the time of Ins death, and was the author of standard works on modern houses and (with Sir Frederick *Gibberd) modern flats. HM  Yoshizaka, Takamasa, b. Tokyo iyi7. d Tokyo 1y80. Studied ac Waseda University in Tokyo, where he was active as a teacher until his death. As the son of a diplomat, he expericneed early exposure to foreign cultures. and this enabled him to develop a cosmopolitan world- view. His experience in Europe in his youth and his study of *Le Corbusier’s work (he worked in his studio in Paris 1950-2) were later com- bined in unique fashion with his heritage of pan- Asian thought. He was not only an architect and  regional planner but also an organizer of many private insticutions and the author of many tine essays. The influence of Le Corbusier was reflected quite clearly in his architectural works, but this influence came exclusively fron: che brutalistic (*New Brutalism} and vernacular- oriented period of his former teacher's later work. Among Y.’s most representative works are the Villa Coucou in Tokyo fiy57) and the Gozu Hall (1961). HY — *Takamasa Yoshizaka 1gi7 -1yst, Kenchiku Bunka (Tokyo), May 19k.  Z  Zanuso, Marco, b. Milan 1916. Studied at the Milan Politecnico: diploma 1434. His buildings moelude the Olivetti Factory in Sao Paulo. Brazil (1ys6 8). ascheme consisting of “honey-comb’ cells covered with a roof of thin shell vaules  Zehrfuss, Bernard (Louis), b. Angers 1ytt Studied at the *Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris He worked in Tunisia, 1943 and from 1y4x had his own office in Paris. His buildings include: the Renault Factory at Flins (iys2} the UNESCO Building in Paris Giys3-S. with * Breuer and *Nervi): the Centre National des Tndustries ct Techmques, Paris (ross, with Robert Camelot and Jean de Mailly): and the Musée de la Civilisation Gallo-Romaine in Lyons (1y73).  