BOOK Henry R Hitchcock and Philip Johnson The International Style.pdf
THE INTERNATIONAL STYLE 
|  INTRODUGTIAN The Idea of Style  Te light and airy systems of construction of the Gothic cathedrals, the freedom and slenderness of their supporting skeleton, afford, as it were, a presage of a style that began to develop in the nineteenth century, that of metallic architecture. With the use of metal, and of concrete reinforced by metal bars, madern builders could equal the most daring feats of Gothic architects without endangering the solidity of the structure. In the conflict that obtains between the two elements of construction, solidity and open space, everything seems to show that the principle of free spaces will prevail, that the palaces and houses of the future will be flooded with air and light. Thus the formula popularized by Gothic architecture has a great future before it. Following on the revival of Greeco-Roman architecture which prevailed from the sixteenth century to our own day, we shall see, with the 
(full application of different materials, a yet more enduring rebirth of the Gothic style. Lo ,  Sic the middle of the eighteenth century there have been recurrent attempts to achieve and to impose a controlling style in architecture such as existed in the earlier epochs of the past, The two chief of these attempts were the Classical Revival and the. Medizval Revival. Out of the compromises between these twe— opposing schools and the difficulties of reconciling either sort of revivalism with the new needs and the new methods of constnic- tion of the day grew the stylistic confusion of the last hundred years. .  The nineteenth century failed to create a style of architecture because it was unable to achieve a general discipline of structure and of design in the terms of the day. The revived “styles” were but. a decorative garment to architecture, not the interior princi- ples according to which it lived and grew. On the whole the de- velopment of engineering in building went on regardless of the. Classical or Medieval architectural forms which were borrowed from the past. Thus the chaos of eclecticism served to give the very idea of style a bad name in the estimation of the first modern architects of the end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth century. |  In the nineteenth century there was always not one style, but “styles,” and the idea of “styles” implied a choice. The individu- alistic revolt of the first modern architects destroyed the prestige of the “styles,” but it did not remove the implication that there was a possibility of choice between one zsthetic conception of . design and another. In their reaction against revivalism these men sought rather to explore a great variety of free possibilities. 
The result, on the whole, added to the confusion of continuing eclecticism, although the new work possessed a general vitality which the later revivalists had quite lost. The revolt from stylistic discipline to extreme individualism at the beginning of the twen- tieth century was justified as the surest issue from an impasse of imitation and sterility. The individualists decried submission to fixed esthetic principles as the imposition of a dead hand upon the living material of architecture, holding up the failure of the revivals as a proof that the very idea of style was an unhealthy Today the strict issue of reviving the styles of the distant past is no longer one of serious consequence. But the peculiar tradi- tions of imitation and modification of the styles of the past, which eclecticism inherited from the earlier Classical and Medieval Revivals, have net been easily forgotten. The influence of the past still most to be feared is that of the nineteenth century with its cheapening of the very idea of style. Modern architecture has nothing but the healthiest lessons to learn from the art of the fur- ther past, if that art be studied scientifically and not in a spirit of imitation. Now that it is possible to emulate the great styles of the past in their essence without imitating their surface, the problem of establishing one dominant style, which the nineteenth century set itself in terms of alternative revivals, is coming to a solution. The idea of style, which began to degenerate when the revivals destroyed the disciplines-of the Baroque, has become real and fertile again. Today a single new style has come into existence. The zsthetic conceptions on which its disciplines are based de- rive from the experimentation of the individualists. They and not the révivalists were the immediate masters of those who have created the new style. This contemporary style, which exists throughout the world, is unified and inclusive, not fragmentary and contradictory like so much of the production of the first gen- 
eration of modern architects. In thelast decade it has produced N |  sufficient monuments of distinction to display, its validity and its vitality. It may fairly be compared in significance with the styles of the past. In the handling of the problems of structure it is re- lated to the Gothic, in the handling of the problems of design it is more akin to the Classical. In the preéminence given to the han- dling of function it is distinguished from both.  The unconscious and halting architectural developments of the nineteenth century, the confused and contradictory experi- mentation of the beginning of the twentieth, have been suc- ceeded by a directed evolution. There is now a single body of discipline, fixed enough to integrate contemporary style as a re- ality and yet elastic enough to permit individual interpretation and to encourage general growth.  The idea of style as the frame of potential growth, rather than _as a fixed and crushing mould, has developed with the recogni- tion of underlying principles such as archeologists discern in the great styles of the past. The principles are few and broad. They are not mere formulas of proportion such as distinguish the Doric from the Ionic order; they are fundamental, like the organic verti- cality of the Gothic or the rhythmical symmetry of the Baroque. There is, first, a new conception of architecture as volume rather than as mass. Secondly, regularity rather than axial symmetry serves as the chief means of ordering design. These two princi- ples, with a third proscribing arbitrary applied decoration, mark the productions of the international style. This new style is not international in the sense that the production of one country is just like that of another. Nor is it so rigid that the work of various leaders is not clearly distinguishable. The international style has become evident and definable only gradually as different innova-. tors throughout the world have successfully carried out parallel  experiments. 
In stating the general principles of the contemporary style, in analysing their derivation from structure and their modification by function, the appearance of a certain dogmatism can hardly be avoided. In opposition to those who claim that a new style of ar- chitecture is impossible or undesirable, it is necessary to stress the coherence of the results obtained within the range of possi- bilities thus far explored. For the international style already ex- ists in the present; it is not merely something the future may hold in-store. Architecture is always a set of actual monuments, not a vague corpus of theory. 
I  HISTORY  i style of the twelfth and thirteenth century was the last before our own day to be created on the basis of a new type of construction. The break away from the High Gothic in the later Middle Ages was an sesthetic break without significant structural development. The Renaissance was a surface change of style generally coupled with actual regression in terms of structure. The Baroque and a fortiori the Romantic Age. concerned them- selves all but exclusively with problems of design. When a cen- tury age new structural developments in the use of metal made - their appearance they remained outside the ait of architecture. The Crystal Palace at the London Exposition of 1851, Paxten’s 
magnificent iron and glass construction, has far more in common with the architecture of our day than with that of its own. Fer- roconcrete, to which the contemporary style owes so much, was invented in 1849. Yet it was at least fifty years before it first began to play a considerable part in architectural construction.  Metal had begun to be used incidentally in architecture before the end of the eighteenth century. Thenceforth it achieved a place of increasing importance, even in buildings of the most tra- ditional design. Finally in the eighties it made possible the first skyscrapers. But on the whole the “arcades,” the train sheds, the conservatories and the exhibition halls, of which the London Crystal Palace was the earliest and the finest, were adjuncts to, or substitutes for, conventional masonry buildings.  Behind the conventional story of nineteenth century revivals and eclecticism there are two further histories of architecture. One deals with the science of building alone. It traces the devel- opment of new engineering methods of construction and the gradual replacement of traditional masonry structure by succes- sive innovations. The other history deals with the development of the art of architectural design regardless of specific imitations. Design was freed here and there from the control of the past: Some architects even sought novel forms and many aimed at a more direct expression of the new methods of construction. A new art of proportioning plane surfaces, a free study of silhou- ette, even a frank use of metal appear in the work of most of the leading nineteenth century architects. Soane in England, Schin- kel and his followers in Germany, and Labrouste in France, were among these early precursors of modern architecture.  Within the Classical Revival there developed a new sense of design, purer and more rational than that of the Renaissance or the Baroque, yet not restricted merely to the purity and rational-  _ism of the Greeks. Within the Medizval Revival there grew up a 
body of doctrine, based on the practice of the builders of the  Middle Ages, which foreshadowed the theories of our own day.  There is not much to change today in the passage that has been  quoted from Salomon Reinach’s Apollo. As late as 1904 it was  possible to conceive of modem architecture chiefly as a sort of  renaissance of the Gothic. Yet it should be stressed that the rela-  tion of the modern style to the Gothic is ideological rather than  visual, a matter of principle rather than a matter of practice. In  design, indeed, the leading modern architects aim at Greek se-_ renity rather than Gothic aspiration.  In writing on modern architecture some few years ago it was possible to accept that the individualists of the end of the nine- teenth century and the beginning of the twentieth, who first broke consciously with the nominal discipline of the revivals, estab- lishéd tentatively a New Tradition. It appeared then as a sort of style in which the greatest common denominator of the various revivals was preserved and fused with the new science of build- ing. Today it seems more accurate to describe the work of the older generation of architects as half-modern. Each architect broke in his own way with the immediate past, each sought in his own direction the positive elements which have been combined in the last decade. But there was no real stylistic integration until. after the War.  The industrial architecture of Peter Behrens in Germany in the years before the War was already extremely simplified and regular. The effect of volume began to replace the traditional ef- fect of mass. Otto Wagner, a decade earlier in Vienna, cultivated qualities of lightness and developed the plane surfaces of hig ar- chitecture for their own sake. The Belgian Van de Velde experi- mented with continuity of surface, making much use of curves. - Berlage at Amsterdam based his compositions on geometry and handled both old and new materials with unusual straightfor- 
‘wardness, In the constructions of Perret in France the use of fer- roconcrete led to a visible articulation of the supporting skeleton with the walls treated as mere screens between the posts. Thus in the different countries of Europe before the War the conceptions of the international style had come independently into existence. It remained for the younger generation to combine and crystallize the various esthetic and technical results of the experimentation of their elders.  But it was in America that the promise of a new style appeared first and, up to the War, advanced most rapidly. Richardson in the seventies and eighties often went as far as did the next gener- ation on the Continent in simplification of design and in direct expression of structure. Following him, Root and Sullivan de- duced from steel skyscraper construction principles which have been modified but not essentially changed by later generations. Their work of the eighties and nineties in Chicago is still too little known. We have in America only a few commercial buildings of 1900 to compare with the radical steel and glass department stores of Europe; but these few are more notable than all the sky- scrapers of the following twenty-five years.  In the first decades of the new century Frank Lloyd Wright continued brilliantly the work of the Chicago school in other fields of architecture. He introduced many innovations, particu- larly in domestic building, quite as important as those of the Art Nouveau and Jugendstil in France and Germany. His open plan- ning broke the mould of the traditional house, to which Europe clung down to the War. He also was the first to conceive of ar- chitectural design in terms of planes existing freely in three di- mensions rather than in terms of enclosed blocks. Wagner, Behr- ens and Perret lightened the solid massiveness of traditional architecture; Wright dynamited it. :  While much of the innovation in Europe merely consisted in 
expressing more frankly new metheds of construction within a framework of design still essentially Cladsical or Medieval, Wright from the beginning was radical in his zsthetic experi- mentation, One may regret the lack of continuity in his develop- ment and his unwillingness to absorb the innovations. of his con- temporaries and his juniors in Europe. But one cannot deny that among the architects of the older generation Wright made more contributions than any other. His consciously novel ornament may appear to lack even the vitality of the semi-traditional erna- ment of the first quarter of the century in Europe. Perret was,’ perhaps, a more important innovator in construction; Van de. Velde showed a greater consistency and a purer taste in his wsthetic experiments. But Wright preserved better the balance between the mere expression of structure and the achievement of positive form.  _ There is, however, a definite breach between Wright and the younger architects who created the contemporary style after the War. Ever since the days when he was Sullivan’s disciple, Wright has remained an individualist. A rebel by temperament, he has refused even the disciplines of his own theories. Instead of developing some one of the manners which he has initiated, he has begun again and again with a different material or a different problem and arrived at a quite new manner. The new manner often enough contradicts some of the essential qualities of his previous work, qualities which European followers have emu- lated with distinction and used as the basis of further advance. In his refusal of the shackles of a fixed style he has created the illu- sion of infinite possible styles, like the mathematicians who have invented non-Euclidean geometries, His eternally young spirit — rebels against the new style as vigorously as he rebelled against the “styles” of the nineteenth century. 
Wright belongs to the international style no more than Behr- ens or Perret or Van de Velde. Some of these men have been ready to learn from their juniors. They have submitted in part to the disciplines of the international style. But their work is still marked by traces of the individualistic manners they achieved in their prime. Without their work the style could hardly have come into being. Yet their individualism and their relation to the past, for all its tenuousness, makes of them not so much the creators of a new style as the last representatives of Romanticism. They are more akin to the men of a hundred years ago than to the genera- tion which has come to the fore since the War.  The continued existence of Romantic individualism is not a question of architecture alone. There is a dichotomy of the spirit more profound than any mere style can ever resolve. The case against individualism in architecture lies in the fact that Wright has been almost alone in America in achieving a distinguished architecture; while in Europe, and indeed in other parts of the world as well, an increasingly large group of architects work suc- cessfully within the disciplines of the new style.  There is a basic cleavage between the international style and the half-modem architecture of the beginning of the present cen- tury. We must not forget the debt that Le Corbusier, Gropius, Miés van der Rohe, Oud and the rest owe to the older men with whom they studied. We must not forget such exceptional monu- meénts-of the nineteenth century as the Crystal Palace. We must not dismiss as lacking historical significance the fine sense of proportion and the vigorous purity of the Classical Revival, or the splendid theories and the stupid practice of the Gothic Revival. Even the absurdities of Romantic artificial ruins and the linear and naturalistic ornament of 1900 have a place in the pedigree of the contemporary style. But the new style after ten years of exis- 
tence and growth may now be studied for itself without continual reference to the immediate past.  There are certain times when a new period truly begins de- spite all the preparation that may be traced behind the event. Such a time came immediately after the War, when the interna- tional style came into being in France, in Holland, and in Ger- many. Indeed, if we follow the projects of the War years made by the Austrian Loos and the Italian Sant’ Elia, it may appear that the new style was preparing on an even broader front. While the innovations of the half-moderns were individual and indepen- dent to the point of divergence, the innovations-of their juniors were parallel and complementary, already informed by the co- herent spirit of a style in the making.  It is particularly in the early work of three. men, Walter Gropius in Germany, Oud in Holland, and Le Corbusier in France, that the various steps in the inception of the new style must be sought. These three with Mies van der Rohe in Germany remain the great leaders of modern architecture.  Gropius’ factory at Alfeld, built just before the War, came nearer to an integration of the new style than any other edifice built before 1922. In industrial architecture the tradition of the styles of the past was not repressive, as many factories of the nineteenth century well illustrate. The need for using modern construction throughout and for serving function directly was pe- culiarly evident. Hence it was easier for Gropius to advance in this field beyond his master, Behrens, than it would have been in any other. The walls of the Alfeld factory are screens of glass with spandrels of metal at the floor levels. The crowning band of brickwork does not project beyond these screens. The purely me- chanical elements are frankly handled and give interest-to a de- | sign fundamentally so regular as to approach monotony. There is 
no applied ornamental decoration except the lettering. The orga- nization of the parts of the complex structure is ordered by logic and consistency rather than by axial symmetry. | Yet there are traces still of the conceptions of traditional ar- chitecture. The glass screens are treated like projecting bays be- tween the visible supports. These supports are sheathed with brick so that they appear like the last fragments of the solid ma- sonry wall of the past. The entrance is symmetrical and heavy. For all its simplicity it is treated with a decorative emphasis. Gropius was not destined to achieve again so fine and so coher- ent a production in the contemporary style before the Bauhaus in 1926. There he profited from the intervening ssthetic experi- mentation of the Dutch Neoplasticists. The Bauhaus is some- thing more than a mere development from the technical triumph of the Alfeld factory. (See illustrations .on pages 150 ff.) - During the years of the War, Oud in Holland came into con- tact with the group of Dutch cubist painters led by Mondriaan and Van Doesburg, who called themselves Neoplasticists. Their positive influence on his work at first. was negligible. Oud re- mained for a time still a disciple of Berlage, whose half-modern manner he had previously followed rather closely. He profited also by his study of the innovations of Wright, whose work was already better known in Europe than in America. Then he sought consciously to achieve a Neoplasticist architecture and, from 1917 on, the influence of Berlage and Wright began to diminish. At the same time he found in concrete an adequate material for the. expression of new conceptions. of form. Oud’s projects were increasingly simple, vigorous and geometrical. On the analogy of abstract painting he came to realize the ssthetic potentialities of planes in three dimensions with which Wright had already ex- perimented. He reacted sharply against the picturesqueness of 
the other followers of Berlage and squght with almost Greek fer- vor to arrive at a scheme of proportions ever" purer and more reg- ular.  In his first housing projects carried out for the city of Rotter- dam in 1918 and 1919 he did not advance as far as in his unex- ecuted projects. But at Qud-Mathenesse in 1921-22, although he was required to build the whole village in traditional materials and to continue the use of conventional roofs, the new style promised in his projects came into being. The avoidance of pic- turesqueness, the severe horizontality of the composition, the " perfect simplicity and consistency which he achieved in execut- ing a very complex project, all announced the conscious creation of a body of esthetic disciplines.  Oud-Mathenesse exceeded Gropius’ Alfeld factory in signifi- cance if not in impressiveness. Gropius made his innovations primarily in technies, Oud in design. He undoubtedly owed the initial impetus to the Neoplasticists, but his personal manner had freed itself from dependence on painting. The models Van Doesburg made of houses in the early twenties, in collaboration with other Neoplasticists, with their abstract play of volumesand bright colors, had their own direct influence in Germany.  But the man who first made the world aware that a new style was being born was Le Corbusier. As late as 1916, well after his technical and sociological theorizing had begun, his conceptions of design were still strongly marked by the Classical symmetry of his master Perret. His plans, however, were even more open than those of Wright. In his housing projects of the next few years he. passed rapidly beyond his master Perret and beyond Behrens and Loos, with whom he had also come in contact. His Citrohan house model of 1921 was the thorough expression of a concep- _ tion of architecture as radical technically as Gropius’ factory and as novel esthetically as Oud’s village. The enormous window 
area and the terraces made possible by the use of ferroconcrete, together with the asymmetry of the composition, undoubtedly produced a design more thoroughly infused with a new spirit, more completely freed from the conventions of the past than any thus far projected.  The influence of Le Corbusier was the greater, the appearance of a new style the more remarked, because of the vehement prop- aganda which he contributed to the magazine L'Esprit Nouveau, 1920-1925. Since then, moreover, he has written a series of hooks effectively propagandizing his technical and esthetic theories. In this way his name has become almost synonymous with the new architecture and it has been praised or condemned very largely in his person. But he was not, as we have seen, the only innovator nor was the style as it came generally into being after 1922 peculiarly his. He crystallized; he dramatized; but he. was not alone in creating.  When in 1922 he built at Vaucresson: his first house in the new style, he failed to equal the purity of design and the boldness of construction of the Citrohan project. But the houses that im- mediately followed this, one for the painter Ozenfant, and an- other for his parents outside Vevey, passed further beyond the transitional stage than anything that Oud or Gropius were to build for several more years. Ozenfant’s sort of cubism, called Purism, had perhaps inspired Le Corbusier in his search for sources of formal inspiration fora new architecture. But on the whole Le Corbusier in these early years turned for precedent rather to steamships than to painting. Some of his early houses, such as that for the sculptor Miestchaninoff at, Boulogne-sur- Seine, were definitely naval in feeling. But this marine phase was soon over like Oud’s strictly Neoplasticist phase, or the Expres- sionist period in the work of the young architects of Germany. Various external influences helped to free architecture from the 
last remnants of a lingering traditionalism. The new style dis- played its force in the rapidity with which it transmuted them beyond recognition.  Miés van der Rohe advanced toward the new style less rapidly at first than Gropius. Before the War he had simplified, clarified, and lightened the domestic style of Behrens to a point that sug- gests conscious inspiration from Schinkel and Persius. After the War in two projects for skyscrapers entirely of metal and glass he carried technical innovation even further than Gropius, further indeed than anyone has yet gone in practice. These buildings’ would have been pure volume, glazed cages supported -from within, on a scale such as not even Paxton in the nineteenth cen- tury would have dreamed possible. However, in their form, with  plans based on clustered circles or sharp angles, they were. ex- travagantly Romantic and strongly marked by the contemporary wave of Expressionism in Germany.  It was in Miés’ projects of 1922 that his true significance as an aesthetic innovator first appeared. In a design for a country house he broke with the conception of the wall as-a continuous plane surrounding the plan and built up his composition of sections of intersecting planes. Thus he achieved, still with the use of sup- porting walls, a greater openness even than Le Corbusier with his ferroconcrete skeleton construction. Miés’ sense of proportions remained as serene as before the War and even more pure. This project and the constructions of Oud and Le Corbusier in this year emphasize that it is just a decade ago that the new style came into existence.  The four leaders of modern architecture aré Le Corbusier, Oud, Gropius arid Miés van der Rohe. But others as well.as they, — Rietveld in Holland, Lurgat in France, even Mendelsohn in Ger- | many, for all his lingering dalliance with Expressionism, took parallel steps of nearly equal importance in the years just after 
the War. The style did not spring from a single source but came into being generally. The writing of Gud and Gropius, and to a greater degree that of Le Corbusier, with the frequent publication of their projects of these years, carried the principles of the new style abroad. These projects have indeed become more famous than many executed buildings.  From the first there were also critics, who were not architects, to serve as publicists. Everyone who was interested in the cre- ation of a modern architecture had to come to terms with the nas- cent style. The principles of the style that appeared already plainly by 1922 in the projects and the executed buildings of the leaders, still control today an ever increasing group of architects throughout the world. | 
il  FUNCTIONALISM™M  L, part the principles of the international. style were from the first voiced in the manifestoes which were the order of the day, In part they have remained unconscious, so that even now it is far simpler to sense them than to explain them or to state them categorically. Many who appear to follow them, indeed, refuse to admit their validity. Some modern critics and groups: of ar- chitects both in Europe and in America deny that the esthetic element in architecture is important, or even that it exists. All zsthetic principles of style are to them meaningless and unreal. This new conception, that building is science and not art, devel- oped as an exaggeration of the idea of functionalism. 
In its most generally accepted form the idea of functionalism is sufficiently elastic. It derives its sanctions from both Greek and Gothic architecture, for in the temple as well as in the cathe- dra! the zsthetic expression is based on structure and function. In all the original styles. of the past the esthetic is related to, even dependent on, the technical. The supporters of both the Classical Revival and the Medieval Revival in the nineteenth century were ready to defend much of their practice by function- alist arguments, The so-called rationalism of architects like Schinkel and Labrouste was a type of functionalism. It is vigor- ously advocated, moreover, in the archzological criticism of Vi- ollet-le-Duc and the ethical criticism of Pugin and Ruskin. Mor- ris and his disciples brought this sort of functionalist theory down to our own day.  The doctrine of the contemporary anti-zsthetic functionalists is much more stringent. Its basis is economic rather than ethical or archzological. Leading European critics, particularly Sieg- fried Giedion, claim with some justice that architecture has such immense practical problems to deal with in the modern world that zsthetic questions must take a secondary place in architec- tural criticism. Architects like Hannes Meyer go further. They claim that interest in proportions or in problems of design for their own sake is still an unfortunate remnant of nineteenth cen- tury ideology. For these men it is an absurdity to talk about the modem style in terms of zesthetics at all. If a building provides adequately, completely, and without compromise for its purpose, it is to them a good building, regardless of its appearance. Mod- eri construction receives from them a straightforward expres- sion; they use standardized parts whenever possible and they avoid ornament or unnecessary detail. Any elaboration of design, any unnecessary use of specially made parts, any applied deco- 
ration would add to the cost of the building. It is, however, nearly impossible to organize and execute a complitated building with- out making some choices not wholly determined by technics and economics. One may therefore refuse to admit that intentionally functionalist building is quite without a potential esthetic ele- ment. Consciously or unconsciously the architect must make free choices before his design is completed. In these choices the European functionalists follow, rather than go against, the prin- ciples of the general contemporary style. Whether they ‘admit it  or not is beside the point.  In America also there are both architects and critics who con- sider architecture not an art, as it has been in the past, but merely a subordinate technic of industrial civilization, Aisthetic criticism of building appears to them nearly as meaningless as esthetic criticism of road building. Their attitude has been to some extent a beneficial one in its effect on American building, even from the esthetic point of view. Most European erities feel rightly that American engineers have always been far more suc- cessful with their technics than American architects with their zesthetics.  But to the American functionalists, unfortunately, design is a commodity like ornament. If the client insists, they still try to provide it in addition to the more tangible commodities which they believe rightly should come first. But they find one sort of design little better thai another and are usually as ready to provide zigzag trimmings as rhythmical fenestration. For orna- ment can be added after the work is done and comes into no di- rect relation with the handling of function and structure. Amer- ican modernism in design is usually as superficial as the revivalism which preceded it. Most American architects would regret the loss of applied ornament and imitative design. Such 
things serve to obscure the essential emptiness of skyscraper composition, .  The European functionalists are primarily builders, and ar- chitects only unconsciously. This has its advantages even for ar- chitecture as an art. Critics should be articulate about problems of design; but architects whose training is more technical than intellectual, can afford to be unconscious of the sesthetic effects they produce. So, it may be assumed, were many of the great builders of the past. Since the works of the European functional- ists usually fall within the limits of the international style, they may be claimed among its representatives. (Page 223 f.) Natu- rally these doctrinaires achieve works of zesthetic distinction less often than some others who practice the art of architecture as as- siduously as they pursue the science of building.  The American functionalists claim to be builders first. They are surely seldom architects in the fullest sense of the word, They are ready, as the European functionalists are not, to deface their building with bad architectural design if the client demands it. Nor can they claim for their skyscrapers and apartment houses the broad sociological justification that exists for the workers’ housing, the schools and hospitals of Europe. On the whole, American factories, where the client expects no money to be spent on design, are better buildings and at least negatively purer in design than those constructions in which the architect is forced by circumstances to be more than an engineer. Technical developments, moreover, are rapidly forcing almost all commer- cial and industrial building into the mould of the international stylé.  Tt is not necessary to accept the contentions of the functional- ists that there is no new style or even to consider their own work still another kind of architecture. While the older generation has 
continued faithful to individualism, a set of general esthetic principles has come into use. While the furictionalists. continue to deny that the xsthetic element. in architecture is important, more and more buildings are produced in which these principles are wisely and effectively followed without sacrifice of functional virtues. 
IV  A FIRST PRINCIPLE  Architecture as Volume  C entemporary methods of construction provide a cage or skeleton of supports. This skeleton as it appears before the build- ing is enclosed is familiar to everyone. Whether the supports are of metal or of reinforced concrete, the effect from a distance is of a grille of verticals and horizontals. For protection against the weather it is necessary that this skeleton should be in some way enclosed by walls. In traditional masonry construction the walls were themselves the supports. Now the walls are merely subordi- nate elements fitted like screens between the supports or carried like a shell outside of them. Thus the building is like a boat or an umbrella with strong internal support and a continuous outside 
covering. In the buildings of the past, support and protection were both provided by the same masonry wall. It is true that sup- porting wall sections are still sometimes used in combination with skeleton construction. (Pages 133 and 217,) Isolated sup- ports, piers of metal or reinforced concrete, are, however, normal and typical.  Plans may be worked out with far greater freedom than in the past. The piers of modern construction are so slight in section that they create no serious obstruction. If in given cases they might interfere, occasional supports may be omitted and their © burden carried by cantilevering. Entire facades are frequently cantilevered and the screen walls set some distance outside the supports. (Pages 118 and 172.) Symbolically the indication of modern plans is reduced to points representing support and lines representing separation and protection from the weather. No lon- ger do we find the solid blocks of bearing walls and piers of ma- sonry. The plan can be composed almost entirely in terms of the neéds it must provide for, with only minimal concessions to the inescapable needs of sound construction.  The effect of mass, of static solidity, hitherto the prime quality of architecture, has all but disappeared; in its place there is an effect of volume, or more accurately, of plane surfaces bounding a volume. The prime architectural symbol is no longer the dense brick but the open box. Indeed, the great majority of buildings are in reality, as well as in effect, mere planes surrounding a vol- ume. With skeleton construction enveloped only by a protective screen, the architect can hardly avoid achieving this effect of surface of volume unless, in deference to traditional design in terms of mass, he goes out of his way to obtain the contrary effect.  The European functionalists conform unconsciously to this _ principle of the international style without accepting its validity as an eesthetic discipline, The American functionalists, however, 
often load their surfaces, thus obscuring with an effect of solidity and weight the non-supporting character of their wall screens. If they design at all—and except in factories the client usually de- mands some sort of applied design—they design still in mass. A striking contrast is familiar to everyone as it appears in buildings under construction: the strong light cage of steel, and the heavy solid-appearing walls with which it is gradually covered. The greater simplicity of the newer skyscrapers, the increase in the window area and the growing awareness of the international style are reducing little by little this superficial heaviness. But thus far the more expensive the building, the more surely is there a con- flict between its true character as an enclosed steel cage and the apparent mass of its vertical buttressing and its pyramidal com- position.  Of course this pyramidal composition is required in high buildings by the zoning laws. Present American zoning laws are at best pseudo-functional. They attempt merely to ameliorate the sociological and technical difficulties inherent in crowding tall buildings together on narrow streets. Proper zoning laws would require the spacing of skyscrapers far enough apart so that they might rise straight to the top without setbacks. Set- backs complicate the structure and provide relatively little ter- race space, nor do they adequately protect the light and air of neighboring buildings. The criticism that accepts the present zoning laws as beneficent is mistaken. If that criticism is wsthetic, it rests on the false assumption that skyscrapers are mere enlargements of the masonry towers of the past. If the criticism is functional, it has failed to go to the root of the urban problem, Skyscrapers have their proper place in the modern city, but they must be so widely spaced that they re- lieve congestion rather than aggravate it. |  The MeGraw-Hill Building (Page 163) comes nearest to 
achieving esthetically the expression of the enclosed steel cage, but it is still partially distorted into the old silhouette of the mas- sive tower. The setbacks are, of course, required by the zoning law, but they are arranged without subtlety. The unnecessary py- ramidal feature which crowns the structure is inexcusably heavy. Yet the architect, Raymond Hood, in the Daily News Building of the previous year, which is in other ways less pure in expression, handled the setbacks so that they did not suggest steps and brought his building to a clear stop without decorative or termi-— nal features. This has also been justly criticised by those func- tionalists whose ideology is more European. For the water-tanks and elevator machinery which have to find a place on top of a large building are there, hidden within the shell of the main structure. “  These various objections, which place both of these buildings. as something less than distinguished architecture, are implicit in American conditions. Only the acceptance of a thoroughgoing esthetic discipline by our architects would make it possible for our skyscrapers to be finer than our factories. For our factories, unless the client has called for embellishment, are like the con- structions of the European functionalists. They exist clearly and effectively as the surfaces of volumes, even though the architect has never accepted the zsthetic principle that they should do so.  In the past the great styles became something more than a cer- tain sort of construction, or a certain repertory of ornament. Post and lintel construction was used in Egyptian architecture as well as Greek. Romanesque churches achieved nearly as great a sci- ence and elaboration of vaulting as did the later ones of the Gothic age. The Gothic architects emphasized the impression of height and of orderly multiplicity of organically related parts; the - Greek architects so adjusted their design as to give their build- ings the plastic. somatic character of their sculpture. Style is 
character, style is expression; but even character must he dis- played and expression may be conscious and clear, or muddled and deceptive. The architect who builds in the international style seeks to display the true character of his construction and to ex- press clearly his provision for function. He prefers such an orga- nization of his general composition, such a use of available sur- face materials, and such a handling of detail as will increase rather than contradict the prime effect of surface of volume.  In giving this effect the flat roofs normal with modern methods of construction have an essential zsthetic significance. Roofs with a single slant, however, have occasionally been used with success. For they are less massive and simpler than the gabled roofs usual on the buildings of the past. Flat roofs are so much more useful that slanting or rounded roofs are only exceptionally justified.  The clarity of the impression of volume is diminished by any sort of complication. Volume is felt as imnzaterial and weightless, a geometrically bounded space. Subsidiary projecting parts of a building are likely to appear solid. Hence a compact and unified solution of a complex problem will be best zsthetically as well as economically. The massiveness of the architecture of the past was felt as gravitational, with surface and content one. Being heavy, massive architecture demanded the appearance of sup- port such as could be given by a piling up of the parts. This sort of stability, like that of a wood pile, our tenuous cage construc- tion does not give. The sense of internal support is, on the other hand, increased by the avoidance of subsidiary parts and by the achievement as far as possible of the effect of a single volume with continuous surfaces.  Thus as a corollary of the principle of surface of volume there is the further requirement that the surfaces shall be unbroken in  effect, like a skin tightly stretched over the supporting skeleton. 
The apparent tensions of a masonry wall are directly gravita- tional, although they are actually modified more or leas by the use of lintels and arches. The apparent tensions of screen walls are not thus polarized in a vertical direction, but are felt to exist in all directions, as in a stretched textile. Hence the breaking of the wall surface by placing windows at the inner instead of at the outer edge of the wall is a serious fault of design. (Pages 159 and 232.) For the glass of the windows is now an integral part of the enclosing screen rather than a hole in the wall as it was in ma- sonry construction. .  Where the roof is supported on sections-of wall rather than on isolated posts, only the non-supporting sections are really screens. Yet the discipline of the general style ig better served if the contrast between the supporting wall surfaces and the non- supporting surfaces is not over-emphasized. Such construction with a reinforced concrete roof slab is still more. like the normal modern cage construction than like traditional masonry con- struction. (Page 133.) This is a special case which demands on the part of the designer unusual tact and sense of the atyle. Such exceptions must always be borne in mind by the eritic. Their suc- cessful incorporation in the style according to the spirit, if not the letter, of the fundamental disciplines makes the existence of a contemporary style difficult to dispute.  The ordering of the openings in the wall surface is quite as important as the avoidance of apparent reveals in the preserva- tion of the integrity of the wall plane. But questions of order fall more logically in a later section of this discussion. Needless to say, the more consistently a surface is arranged, the more con- | spicuous will be its character as a surface. Contemporary: build- ings often have entire walls of transparent glass constituting one . enormous window, The frames of the paries in auch walls must be light enough to be distinguished from true supports. (Pages. 156 
and 191.) Otherwise these subordinate divisions will so break up the surface into panels that its continuous character is confused. Even though the independent supporting skeleton is perfectly clearly seen behind, such a panelled treatment appears to have weight if not mass. Such altogether transparent walls are not by any means the easiest for the architect to handle effectively. They no longer appear the extreme toward which the develop- ment of the contemporary style inevitably leads. Indeed, as the Crystal Palace of the last century and the steel and glass depart- ment stores of 1900 suggest, such maximal fenestration was a preparation for the development of a more general principle of modern design: that of emphasizing the surfaces whether they ‘are opaque or transparent.  Windows constitute a more important element in modern ar- chitecture than they have in any architecture since that of the Gothic cathedrals. They are the most conspicuous features of modern exterior design. Their handling is therefore an sesthetic problem of the greatest importance. The very effect of volume that is sought in choosing surfacing materials can easily be diluted or contradicted by bad fenestration. _  Window frames unavoidably break the general wall surface and if they are heavy tend to make the window a mere hole in the wall quite as much as do reveals. (Pages 139 and 179.) Light simple frames, preferably of durable non-corroding metal in standardized units, are to be desired as much esthetically as practically. (Pages 155 and 173.) Non-corroding metals are still rather expensive. Moreover standardized metal frames have not yet come into use everywhere. But the general development in this direction is undeniable and one of happy augury for the con- temporary style.  Wooden window frames are becoming a makeshift. Yet many  atchitects have heen able to make them appear hardly heavier 
than metal ones. Some of the finest examples of fenestration in modern architecture are executed in wood. (Pages 113 and 127.) Of course the elegance which is obtained by light frames and muntins goes for nothing if the windows are badly subdivided and badly placed in the general design.  The spirit of the principle of surface covers many exceptions  to its letter. The type of construction represented by Miés van der Rohe’s Barcelona pavilion, (Page 187), as well as that repre- sented in Le Corbusier’s house at Le Pradet, (Page 133), leads to a treatment of surfaces sensibly different from that which has been primarily stressed here. These works, nevertheless, testify that their designers are extending the possibilities of the contem- potary style. In each of these buildings the surfaces are empha- sized and their continuity made evident although their relation to the supporting construction is less simple than in most buildings. _ Inthe Barcelona pavilion the walls are screens but they do not define a fixed yolume. The volume beneath the post-supported slab roof is in a sense bounded by imaginary planes. The walls are independent screens set up within this total volume, having each a separate existence and creating subordinate volumes. The design is unified by the slab roof on its regular supports, not by the usual continuous exterior screen wall.  In the Le Pradet house by Le Corbusier sections of rubble ma- sonry wall provide the main support and isolated piers are. used only subordinately. These supporting sections are unbroken by windows and widely separated by wall areas entirely of glass, As in the Barcelona pavilion the enclosing volume is defined by the continuous slab roof. The exterior surfaces are not continuous because they are of two sorts, unbroken masonry walls and inter- vening glass screens. But the two sorts of surfaces are both . treated in a way to emphasize their specific characters. The sup- porting walls are rough and solid in appearance; the intermediate 
screens, light, smooth and transparent. The two sorts are care- fully related in proportion. The use of a special type of construc- tion suited to the particular problem of a Riviera country house has led to a special type of design. The expression is related to the general principle of surface of volume but not restricted by it. Thus the prime principles of the great styles of the past were ap- plied in exceptional cases. This special type of design has its place in the general contemporary style as much as astylar build- ings in Greek architecture or unvaulted construction in the  The principle of surface of volume intelligently understood will always lead to special applications where the construction is not the typical cage or skeleton of supports surrounded by a pro- tecting sereen. The apparent exception may not prove the valid- ity of the general principle, but it undoubtedly indicates its elas- ticity. Rigid rules of design are easily broken once and for all; elastic principles of architecture grow and flourish. Forgetting neither the origins in a certain type of construction nor the possi- bilities which lie always ahead, architects should find in such principles as that of surface of volume a sure and continuing guidance as the international style develops. 
V  SuRFACING MATERIAL  ~  Th. character of surface of volume is not expressed merely by the general design of a modern building; the actual materials of the surface itself are of the utmost importance. The whiquitous stucco, which still serves as the hall-mark of the contemporary style, has the esthetic advantage of forming a continuous even covering, But if the stucco is rough, the sharpness of the design, which facilitates apprehension of the building’s volume, is blunted. (Page 155.) Rough stucco, because of its texture and — because it recalls the stucco-covered buildings of the past, is. likely to suggest mass. All stucco, rough or smooth, is subject to cracking and streaking; if painted, it is even less likely to pre- 
serve its original surface and color. Stucco, like exposed con- crete, must be considered inferior to more solid sheathing except where the large scale of the construction makes the flaws that come with time relatively inconspicuous. A material like stucco but elastic and with a wide color range, which could be laid over various bases, would be ideal.  Wooden sheathing is admirable in the special case of modern construction in wood. It is not as durable as stone or brick, yet as we are aware in Amenica, it can well outlast a century if it is kept painted. Smooth matchboarding is desirable because overlap- ping or stripped joints mar the surface, particularly in small- scale construction. (Page 227.) In interiors and on temporary buildings, plywood panels are excellent since they are large in area and smooth. (Page 119.) They may be painted or left to show the grain. Any enframement suggesting panelling seriously breaks the continuity of surface and should be avoided.  As in the architecture of the past, the finest materials for wall surfacing are stones, granites and marbles. (Pages 135 and 187 f.) Unless they are large in area, however, the separate units are likely to appear like the faces of blocks of masonry, suggesting weight and mass. As in Byzantine architecture it is possible to use plates so that their true character as sheathing is evident. Rich natural materials are expensive and hence more suitable in construction of a monumental or luxurious character than in or- dinary buildings, Artificial plaques of various sorts and metal plates exposed or painted have similar advantages and will doubtless be increasingly used. (Pages 113 and 169.) In any sort of plate covering it is important that the plates be so joined that the surface is as little broken as possible. Graining, moreover, should be so disposed as to emphasize the continuity of the whole wall and net, as in the past, to produce symmetrical pat- terns. It is also important that the surface remain a plane without 
convexities and concavities. Otherwise the effect becomes pic- turesque and the sense of equal tension in all directions is de- stroyed.  Plate sheathing has the distinct advantage of similarity in tex- ture and scale to the glass panes of the windows. The massive- ness of the walls of the past was emphasized by the contrast be- tween the wall surfaces and the windows. The walls.appeared the more solid for being visibly penetrated by infrequent holes. Today the general consistency of the design and the senge of con- tinuous surface is emphasized by reducing the contrast between the transparent and the opaque sections of the bounding walls. Windows should be independent in character but not a breach in the general coherence of the surface.  Burned clay products are more frequently uged than plate sheathing. Brick is from the practical point of view the most sat-  isfactory inexpensive surfacing material in general use. It may be  eqiially. well used for screen walls and for sections of supporting wall where they supplement skeleton construction. Yet from an aesthetic point of view, brick is undoubtedly less satisfactory than other materials, including stucco. Indeed, brick is often covered with stucco even by architects who claim to be unin- fluenced by sesthetic considerations. (Page 219.) This conces- sion to the principle of achieving a smooth continuous surface is an important instance of the exaggeration of the functionalists’ anti-sesthetic claims.  Brick, when laid conventionally, suggests a solid supporting wall even where that does not exist. Even a screen wall of brick appears to retain something of the. mass and the dead weight of the architecture of the past. The use of brick tends-to give a pie- turesqueness which is at variance with the fundamental charac-. ter of the modern style. Bricks are more or less rough in texture, 
often irregular in color, and quite unrelated in scale to the panes of the windows. (Page 217.)  Nevertheless, much can be done to emphasize continuity of suttace. If the color of the mortar be near that of the brick, and the bricks relatively even in value and texture, the bonding pat- tern need not be strikingly evident. The actual material of a wall surface of considerable area is then relatively inconspicuous. (Pages 167 and 183.) On the whole, the cheapest, the most com- mon types of brick and the most straightforward method of laying have fortunately proved best. Since brick is permanent in color and not subject to cracking and streaking, it is in the long run actually superior xsthetically to stucco for large-scale construc- tions: (Pages 189 and 151.)  A different shape of brick and a different method of laying might be developed which would be more satisfactory astheti- cally as well as practically than present types and methods. In- crease in size would be only a disadvantage since it would make the individual unit more conspicuous. Indeed, the finest surfaces from the point of view of the contemporary style are those at- tained in eighteenth century Holland with very small smooth bricks and thin joints.  Ordinary terra cotta blocks or concrete blocks of the cheapest sort are less satisfactory in appearance and more suggestive of traditional masonry than even the commonest brickwork. Con- crete slabs even though they may attain the scale of plate sheath- ing are also too irregular in texture and variable in color to be acceptable except at the economic minimum.  In the range of constructions of medium cost and medium size glazed tile laid with continuous vertical as well as horizontal joints provides a material that vies in esthetic effectiveness with plate sheathing. (Page 175.) The shape of the units may be such 
that all suggestion of the traditional masonry block is lost. The texture is smooth and permanent; the color possibilities are wide. The small scale of the individual tiles is less harmonious with the panes of the windows than are large plaques, but the individual tiles are. less independently assertive. An adjustment of the minor thythm of the individual tiles to the rhythm of the windows and the structural elements is a possible refinement. Tiles prop- erly laid give even more surely than bricks a continuous surface pattern like the texture of a fabric. They also quite avoid the sug- gestion of a supporting masonry wall. Their pattern is more regu- lar than the graining of natural materials used in sheathing plates. Marble or granite plates are certainly richer; tile, haw- ever, fulfills better the rigid letter of the principle of surface.  Glass bricks and translucent glass plates are types of surfac- ing materials which may occasionally take the place of true win-  _dows. (Pages 172 and 193.) In certain buildings various panes of transparent, translucent, and opaque glass have been combined together for entire walls. The effect is rich and harmonious but perhaps too fragile for permanent architecture. Glass bricks pro- vide a means of carrying light through the wall without a windew frame. When they are of the same or related scale they combine best esthetically with other unitary coverings such as brick and tile. (Page 147.)  In the choice of surfacing materials the architect is far from free. Factories will hardly have marble sheathing; yet. because they have very large wall areas, the surfacing material itself is | less noticeable, Brick appears the best material for large and inexpensive construction, tile in the middle range and plate sheathing for exceptional buildings. In the last the architect has the opportunity to seek to the full the possibilities of richness. and individual distinction which the contemporary style affords quite as much as the styles of the past. 
VI  A SECOND PRINCIPLE  Concerning Regularity  ‘T.. patterns of Gothie fenestration were ordered according to definite conceptions of design derived from structure and leading more and more to arbitrary decoration. Today the pat- terns of windows, the composition of the parts of contemporary architecture, must also be ordered according to an esthetic prin- ciple if a. contemporary style exist. The functionalists claim that they order their designs according to practical ‘considerations alone. Yet even they, because of the economic force of standard- ization, accept a discipline of design not dissimilar to that found in the work of contemporary architects who grant the importance  of esthetic considerations. Beside the principle of surface of vol- 
ume already discussed there is a second controlling principle, evident in the productions of the international style including the work of the European functionalists.  This. second principle of contemporary style in architecture has to do with regularity, The supports in skeleton construction are normally and typically spaced at equal distances in order that strains may be equalized. (Pages 117 and 149.) Thus most buildings have an underlying regular rhythm which is clearly seett before the outside surfaces are applied. Moreover, eco- nomic considerations favor the use of standardized parts throughout. Good modern architecture expresses in its design this characteristic orderliness of structure and this similarity of parts by an esthetic ordering which emphasizes the underlying regularity. Bad modern design contradicts this regularity. Regu- Jarity is, however, relative and not absolute in architecture.  The varied purposes which most buildings serve cannot be completely regularized. A loft building in a city may be, and often is, regular throughout except for the entrances and the elevators. (Page 162.) The many purposes which each floor serves are so neatly alike that the same plan and elevation may be used throughout. Few buildings, however, are so simple, In most cases, within a structure as regular as possible and using similar parts the architect must provide for many varying func- tions related in various different ways to one another. In a hotel, for example, although the suites considered as units repeat them- selves, the lobbies, dining rooms and kitchens serve the whole building and are on an entirely different scale. Within an indi- vidual dwelling house it is obvious that there are relatively fewer interchangeable elements. The functional requirements of the — different rooms are even more varied. The bathroom, for exam-- ple, makes far more elaborate specific demands than the living room, but it is possible to take care of them in much less space. 
Thus technically the prime architectural problem of distribution is to adjust the irregular and unequal demands of function to reg- ular construction and the use of standardized parts.  Just as the zesthetic principle of surface of volume has been derived from the fact that architecture no longer has solid sup- porting walls, the second principle, that of regularity, depends on the regularity typical of the underlying skeleton of modern con- struction. This second principle is expressed in an ordering of design more consistent than would result merely from the sesthetically unconscious use of regular structure and standard- ized parts for varying and complicated functions. Thus the ex- pression receives a visible regularity and consistency. This is the symbol of the underlying technics, which in the completed build- ing are known rather than seen. (Pages 149 and 161.)  It must be remembered that the nearer approaches to absolute regularity are also approaches to monotony, as the earlier refer- ence to the loft building will have suggested. The principle of regularity refers to a means of organization, a way of giving defi- nite form to an architectural design, rather than to an end which is sought for itself. As an end, regularity is modified by the equal necessity, understood in all esthetic organization, of achieving a proper degree of interest. What constitutes a proper degree of interest is hardly to be determined in theory.  Many critics, more familiar with the architecture of the past than with that of the present, claim that the international style seldom if ever achieves a proper degree of interest. They miss the interest arising from the normally irregular construction of much of the architecture af the past. They fail to comprehend the new and possibly more subile sorts of interest which derive from the principle of surface of volume or which lie in the positive appli- cation of the principle of regularity itself. The same critics, pre- ferring the picturesqueness of less rigorous styles, are equally 
likely to find an insufficient amount of interest in Greek archi- tecture and in the work of those architects who attempted to re- vive the Greek style a hundred years ago. It is undoubtedly true that much minor architecture of the.Greek Revival was monoto- nous and it is equally true of much of the building in the contem- porary style. Even this monotony, arising from the too rigid appli- cation of the principle of regularity may, however, be preferred to the confused vagaries of the intervening period, when the princi- ple of regularity was largely abjured. Within the field of a given style, however, what constitutes a proper degree of interest is in practice sufficiently clear: the Parthenon would not be improved by being as complicated as the Propylea or the Erechtheum. The great modern architects have known how to achieve interest in their compositions while exercising a truly classit restraint. In the various styles of the past a principle of axial symmetry ‘controlled design rather than a principle of regularity aa that is understood here. The Greek meaning of symmetry, “a due pro- portion of the several parts,” was nearly equivalent to this special meaning of regularity. But Greek symmetry was usually bilateral as well as regular. Axial symmetry has generally been used to achieve the ordering of irregularity, as in Baroque architecture, dominating and relating the confusion of independent features and elaborate detail. Modern standardization gives automatically a high degree of consistency in the parts. Hence modem ar- chitects have no need of the discipline of bilateral or axial sym- metry to achieve ssthetic order. Asymmetrical schemes of de- sign ate actually preferable zsthetically as well as technically. For asymmetry certainly heightens the general interest of the composition. (Pages 175 and 207.) Function in most types of contemporary building is more directly expressed in asymietri-- cal form. Sometimes asymmetry will be strong and positive, marked by 
emphasis on a real axis well off the center. (Page 151.) In other eases the general effect may suggest syrmmetry, but there will be no stronger emphasis at the center than at some other point. (Page 141.) But in any case the avoidance of symmetry should not be arbitrary or distorted,  The mark of the had modern architect is the positive cultiva- tion of asymmetry for decorative reasons. For that can only be done in the majority of cases at the expense of common consist- ency and common sense. The mark of the good modern architect, on the other hand, is that the regularity of his designs approaches bilateral symmetry. (Page 127.) Occasionally, indeed, he even reaches it. (Pages 200 and 215.) Bilateral or axial symmetry is, however, more usually the mark of the architect newly converted to the contemporary style. Such men tend to retain it as an irrevo- cable traditional discipline, failing to apprehend the full impli- cation of the new discipline of regularity which has replaced it.  Structure today is usually highly regular for economic reasons which either did not apply to masonry structure or were given less emphasis in the architecture of the past. Most functions are not regular in the sense of being similar to one another. Hence the natural expression of the various functions grouped in one building is not symmetrical. The difficulties inherent in fitting the various functions of the modern dwelling house into an eigh- teenth century shell, which is both relatively regular and rigidly symmetrical, make this clearly evident. The international style does not attempt to force irregular functions into a symmetrical shell. It does aim to. adjust rationally the provision for irregular functions to regular structure and to express this adjustment in a clear and consistent design. Fortunately, economic considera- tions offer the advantage to regularity over irregularity in the ar- rangement of the parts and in detail quite as much as in the gen-  eral structure. (Pages 163 and 183.) The functionalists often 
seem to follow here exactly the same principle of regularity as those who are conscious of a formal esthetic discipline. (Page 219.)  Complete provision for function might seem to demand, for ex-  ample, that each function receive unique treatment: that every window be of different shape and size, placed without formal geo- metrical relation to the others. Working on the principle of regu- larity, the ingenious architect is able to provide for all the varied functions which windows serve by means of windows of the same size, or at least built up of related units. (Page 212.) In placing them he achieves a pattern, adapted to the regularity of the un- derlying structure, which is both ordered and expressive. Only seldom can this pattern be absolutely regular without interfering with the provision for function. But always it may be relatively regular and composed according to a definite scheme. _ Analogous to, but separate from, the hidden structural skele- _ ton, a scheme of proportions integrates and informs a thoroughly designed modern building. A geometrical web of imaginary lines on plan and in elevation composes the diverse parts and harmo- nizes the various elements into a single whole. (Pages 125 and 133.) Proportions, which according to the theories of the extreme functionalists are but a relic of the nineteenth century, are still the esthetic touchstone of the best modern design.  It is in the field of proportions and in the applications of the principle of regularity that modern architects differ most from one another. Some strive to arrange all the elements of their de- sign within a single bounding shape, thus emphasizing to the ut- most the unity of volume of the given building. (Page 127.) Oth- ers prefer a more extended articulation with more emphasis on the organic relation between the parts. (Page 149.) Architects . differ greatly also in their handling of those parts of a building where, as in a wind shelter on a roof, the needs of function are. 
very easily satisfied. Often such features are entirely uncon- nected with the general structure of the building and have only themselves to support. The principle of regularity does not lead to an exact solution of such a problem in adjusting function to structure, since both are too readily adaptable. For the architect who seeks only to follow the rules, or for the functionalist who has no positive interest in esthetic creation, it is safest to do that which will be least startling. But for the great architect there is the opportunity for personal lyric expression.  At times, indeed, for the architect who is quite sure of himself and who is instinctively permeated with the spirit of the esthetic disciplines of the contemporary style, this individual lyricism may go further. It may modify, as a positive force, the restricting discipline of regularity, composing and adjusting the necessities of function and structure without breaking with the spirit of the principle. It is the condition of the existence of a true style, the price of an architecture generally high in level, that esthetic dis- ciplines should be rigid, but it is the privilege of genius to inter- pret these disciplines, even here and there to discard them alto- gether. The functionalists cannot admit such a conception. Their disciplines are not in intention sesthetic and they protest most, vehemently against just this sort of lyricism.and personal expres- sion. Up to a certain point they are right. Sound buildings of dull design are better than monuments of architecture whose appar- ent brilliance of design is paid for by inadequate provision for function and by distortion of structure. But if architecture is still to be an art, great architects must be free to go forth upon new paths of design.  It is in relation to regularity that architects are exploring the elasticity of the current disciplines. The critic may not determine in advance how far, or even in what direction, the creative inter- pretation of the architect may go. He may, however, judge of the 
results and distinguish after the fact what liberties have been those of real and what of spurious genius. He.can also determine what breaches of the principle of regularity are merely irrational and careless faults. The work of some architects merely fails to achieve common consistency. The work of the best functionalists is never thus slipshod; but it seldom passes beyond the attain- ment of common consistency. The great architects, who still con- sciously practice architecture as an art, add a more interésting and usually a more personal expression to the simplification and unity of design, which even the functionalists achieve.  This development of the esthetic possibilities of the contem- porary style is well illustrated in the use of oblique and rounded forms in plan and elevation. (Pages 174 and 199 ff.) Such excep- tions to general rectangularity are only occasionally demanded by function and they may introduce complications in the regular  _skeleton of the structure. They are, of course, a definite breach of rigid regularity. Yet sometimes as in-stair wells and water-tanks, function is not best served by rectangular shapes, Curved and eblique interior partitions, moreover, often make possible the more complete adjustment of available space to function, without interfering with the regular spacing of the isolated supports. (Pages 124 and 190.)  Non-rectangular shapes, particularly if they occur infre- quently, introduce an zsthetic element of the highest positive in- terest. To them the architect of courage turns from time ti time, realizing that he must employ them chiefly with the sanctions of  genius and in definite opposition to the discipline of regularity. They need seldom occur in ordinary building, but in monuments where the architect feels justified in seeking for a strongly per- — sonal expression, curves will be among the elements which give. most surely extreme positive or negative esthetic value. Curved and oblique forms seldom find a place in the cheapest solution of 
a given problem. But if they can be afforded, they succeed, as they fail, on esthetic grounds alone.  The functionalists, and those who are too timid to break with rigid regularity, fall rather into the esthetic danger of repeating the commonplaces of the style. Ranges of equal-sized windows, set in an unbroken pattern, fagades where ribbon of glass alter- nates with ribbon of stucco, broken only by an occasional stair window, are already frequent enough in Europe to have lost the interest of mere novelty. The most determined defender of the international style must admit that the too rigid application of the principle of regularity, the unimaginative repetition of the most obvious schemes of composition, has produced much very dull building, But such work is nevertheless preferable to the build- ing of the careless modern architects who have failed even to ap- prehend the existence of a principle of regularity. Those who try to follow the new style without understanding it produce work which is not only dull but irritating. They abuse corner windows; they fail to avoid the visibly gabled roof; they pile up blocks as if they were still dealing with the massive architecture of the past. In designing facades they dispose the elements with an obvious and gratuitous asymmetry and they arrange their fenestration ac- cording to no discoverable principle of order, aesthetic or techni- cal. For them the new style that they parody is merely the archi- tecture of the half-mederns with the decoration omitted, a makeshift product of apologetic individualism.  The American functionalists are of this order although they are less given to parodying the surface of the new style. Where they do not hide their dullness under cheap cosmetics in defer- ence to the esthetic desires of the client, they prefer rather to group their windows in vertical bands. This gives a traditional buttress effect quite without relation to modern methods of steel  cage construction. The resultant verticality of design is still ad- 
mired in America, chiefly because it recalls the aspiring quality of the Gothic towers of the past. Even in buildings with predomi- nantly horizontal window arrangement, groups of buttresses in the center or at the corners of the building are added as a conces- sion to the client. For horizontality, which is the most conspicu- ous characteristic of the international style as judged in terms of effect, is still unacceptable zsthetically to the average American client.  Yet its logic is unescapable, Storeyed construction naturally produces horizontality. Most functions, moreover, require. ex- tended development in the horizontal plane—in plan, that is, rather than in elevation. Rooms are usually broader than they are high, and are most evenly illuminated by windows of the same proportion. Structural and functional horizontality is naturally expressed in facade design by architects who seek to obtain con- sistency to the principle of regularity. It appears quite as clearly in the work of the European functionalists who apply no ssthetic criteria, for it is the obvious and the most straightforward result of striving to provide for function with the means of modern con- struction. (Page 219.)  The verticality of the skyscrapers of the American functional- ists is obtained by reducing the window area and increasing the weight of the screen wall. It also contradicts the storeyed charac- ter of the construction and destroys the human scale of the de- sign. In the early evening, when the lights come. on, the solid towerlike quality of the skyscraper disappears. Then, at least, it is seen as one volume divided up into horizontal storeys. Only on rear elevations, or on facades where the architect has been severely restricted by economy, is the underlying horizontality of the American commercial building visible in the daytime,  This artificial impression of solidity, this applied verticality, undoubtedly increases the visual congestion of the modem city. 
The continual appeal of vertical lines tires the eyes. Even the most commereial buildings of the nineteenth century provided the. reposing horizontal of an approximately even cornice line. The verticality of the skyscraper is meaningless and anarchical. Yet because the skyscraper is an American development and the international style has developed in Europe, some nationalist critics would protect our functionalist architects from the inva- sion of a horizontal esthetic. If our builders might be engineers only, protected from all zsthetics, the skyscraper would neces- sarily he horizontal in design. For its verticality is merely an imi- tative garment of pseudo-style.  Horizontality is not in itself, however, a principle of the inter- national style. Where function demands a vertical element, that also receives expression. (Pages 159 and 237.) The principle of regularity tends to increase the effect of general horizontality at the. expense of the vertical elements which play but a subordi- nate part in most buildings. It is only the weak and imitative ar- chitect who seeks horizontality for its own sake. One of the chief vices of contemporary architecture, which has superseded. in Europe the emulation of the verticality of the American sky- scraper, is what may be called “fake banding,” a purely decora- tive scheme of tying windows together in a horizontal row. Excep- tionally, where the distance between separate windows is very slight, the space between may be treated as an exposed pier by rounding it or sheathing it with the material of the window frame. (Pages 163 and 207.) But ordinarily what is not window is wall and should receive the same treatment as the rest of the wall of which it is a part. (Pages 161 and 185.)  Only great artists are capable of achieving brilliant effects with the limited means. Architects are no exception. But it is the ) privilege of great architects to interpret the esthetic discipline of the style according to the spirit rather than the letter. Anyone 
who follows the rules, who accepts the implications of an archi- tecture that is not mass but volume, and who conforms to the principle of regularity can produce buildings which are at least zsthetically sound. (Page 167.) If these principles seem more negative than positive, it is because architecture has suffered chiefly in the last century and a half from the extension of the sanctions of genius to all who have called themselves architects.  It were better that the world build only according to the rigid anti-gesthetic theories of the extreme European functionalists than that nineteenth century debauchery of design should con- tinue. The individualists of the éarly twentieth century reacted against that debauchery with its extravagance of applied orna- ment. But their reaction created no fixed standards. They were neither consistent in their aims nor critical enough of the results. The-ornament of the half-moderns has failed to stand the test of time even as well as: that of the more cultured revivalists. The continuance of this superficially novel decoration which the half- modems originated most effectually distinguishes the mass of American modern architecture from that of Europe. 
A THIRDS PRINCIPLE The Avoidance of Applied Decoration  A seen of ornament serves as much as regular horizontality to differentiate superficially the current style from the styles of the past and from the various manners of the last century and a half. Applied ornament may not have been significant or impor- tant in the architecture of the past, but it certainly existed. It is easier to defend the claim that the finest buildings built since 1800 were those least ornamented. The failure of revivalism probably lay quite as much in the inability to recreate the condi- tions of craftmanship which once made applied omament  zesthetically valid, as in the impossibility of adapting the spirit of old styles to new methods of construction. 
It would be ridiculous to state categorically that there will never be successful applied ornament in architecture again. It is nevertheless clear that conditions are today even less propitious for the production of ornament than they were during the last century. Since the middle of the eighteenth century the quality of the execution of ornament has steadily declined. Even the ren- aissance of craftsmanship sponsored by the Medizevalists failed to turn the tide, On the whole each generation of traditionalists has been worse served in this respect than its predecessor.  Architecture, however, has never been without other elemenits of decoration. For decoration may be considered to include not only applied ornament, but all the incidental features of design which give interest and variety to the whole. Architectural detail, which is required as much by modern structure ag by the struc- ture of the past, provides the decoration of contemporary archi- tecture. Indeed, detail actually required by structure or symbolic of the underlying structure provided most of the decoration of the purer styles of the past.  The fact that there is so little detail today increases the deco- rative effect of what there is. Its ordering is one of the chief means by which consistency is achieved in the parts of a design. As has already been suggested in discussing window frames, the quality of the detail has very considerable importance in sup- porting the effect of surface of volume. It is not in contemporary architecture alone that the details of fenestration are thus impor- tant. In any simple architecture where the windows are conspicu- ous these decorative elements are vital to the total effect. It is easy to recall innumerable buildings of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries of which the scale and harmony of the de- siga has been destroyed by the introduction of large panes of _ glass and thin muntins at some later date. One of the surest signs 
of the real existence of a style of architecture is the creation of a  The development of simple forms of standardized detail suit- able to mechanical production is thus an esthetic as well as an economic desideratum. The absence of contemporary style in inexpensive American house building is as much due to the stan- dardization of modern window frames after eighteenth century models as to any more positive vices of design. The comparative excellence of American factory building is largely that of its metal sashes.  Important as windows have come to be in contemporary de- sign, there are other elements of architectural detail besides. Many of these elements do not, like windows, lend themselves to complete standardization. Of these the capping of walls is of major importance. Those who employ roof projections in normal construction indicate a definite lack of feeling for contemporary style; such relics of the cornice are required only in exceptional cases. Where such projections constitute merely an unnecessary complication of the wall surface their effect is positively bad. (Page 155.) On the other hand, where more of the roof plane is visible than merely the band projecting beyond the wall, as in various types of pavilion construction, there is no such objection. Instead, the roof plane exists, like the ceiling of an interior, as the bounding surface of a volume. (Pages 187 f. and 238.) Such capping as ordinary walls require for protection against the weather is best made-as inconspicuous as possible and patently no more than a seal to the wall itself. (Pages 207 and 227.)  The handling of isolated supports like the handling of wall capping is incidental rather than fundamental. The best ar- chitects, however, have shown in this a finesse equal to that of ~ the Greek and Gothic builders. Where isolated supports pass up 
into a closed construction most architects indicate the coherence of the posts with the skeleton of the construction above and not with its covering surfaces. (Pages 123 and 169.) In ferroconcrete construction rounded forms are xsthetically, and usually techni- cally, superior since they remain visually quite separate from the wall surface. The rounded form in interiors interferes lees with vision and circulation than a square or oblong pier. Where fire laws do not require more complete insulation, the actual metal pier is exceedingly light and elegant. (Page 194.) In this way sig- nificance and independence can be given again to visible sup- ports. This they had in the great styles of the past and lost only when they came to serve as a sort of applied ornament. In some cases colursns may require something corresponding to the capi- tals of the past. In most types. of construction such bracing will disappear in the supported slab, (Page 188.) In any case such subsidiary detail should follow as directly as possible the actual streases of the construction, avoiding the symmetrical cushion shape of traditional capitals. (Page 107.)  Parapets and railings have an importance in contemporary at- chitecture as great as that of balustrades in the architecture. of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. In many cases the parapet is. properly treated as a continuation of the wall surface, since it encloses the roof terrace just as the wall encloses the interior room space below. (Page 141.) Where open railings are used, it is important that they should be in scale not merely with the terrace they enclose, but with the structure asa whole. More- over, the relation of the uprights and the horizontals, forming like the muntins of the windews a grille pattern, requires careful han- dling. A careful adjustment of the open patterned surface to the solid unpatterned surface. of the walls is a mark of distinguished _ design. (Pages 128 and 145.)  The best architects give particular thought to matters of detail. 
Although they are incidentals, they require more than incidental attention, Fine details decorate a modem design just as did the functional columns and mouldings of Greek and Gothic architec- ture. If there truly be 4 contemporary style of architecture, it must eontrol these as well as larger matters. Careless architects leave details to chance, thus marring creditable work. Those who claim that architecture ig merely science are usually conscien- tious enough technologists to handle with competence,.if not with brilliance, such matters of detail.  Besides architectural detail, related subordinate works of sculpture and painting have on occasion been successfully used to decorate contemporary buildings without degenerating into mere applied omament. Mural painting should not break the wall surface unnecessarily. Yet it should remain an independent en- tity without the addition of borders or panelling to fuse it with the architecture. Baumeister and Qzenfant, among others, have done work of this order. But there is no reason why painting less ab- stract should not find its place quite as satisfactorily on the walls of contemporary buildings: It is most importarit that mural paint- ing should be intrinsically excellent; otherwise a plain wall is better. It need not be related, except in scale and shape, to the. wall on which it is placed. Contemporary architecture cannot ex- pect to dictate the evolution of contemporary painting, but it of- fers fields more considerable than the framed canvas panel.  Seulpture also ought not to be combined or merged with archi- tecture. It should retain its own character quite. separate from that of its background. This was true of the best Greek sculpture and often of that of other periods. It is particularly important today that sculpture should be isolated; for if it is actually ap- _ plied, its suggestion of solid mass is carried over to the wall sur- face it decorates. Thus far contemporary architecture has served  rather as an admirable background for wholly separate units. of 
painting and sculpture not designed for their specific location. (Page 188.) But there is an opportunity here for collaboration which may well in the future lead to brilliant results.  Whether from these two different forms of decoration—ar- chitectural detail and related works of painting and sculpture— the contemporary style will in time develop an ornament of its own as did the styles of the past, no one can say. The supposedly novel ornament from which architecture is now freeing itself has put us on our guard against innovations which are merely decora- tive. The force of all self-conscious theory tends to deny the ne- cessity for ornament as such. Some critics would even explain all the ornament on the fine architecture of the past as but an exten- sion of free sculpture or as a continuance of inherited detail which originally had structural meaning.  Lettering is the nearest approach to arbitrary ornament used by the architects of the international style. It has, of course, a real’functional purpose in advertising and in indicating the use of different parts of a large building. Clear unseriffed letter forms are most legible at a good scale and conform most harmoniously to the geometrical character of contemporary design. Letters set forward from the wall surface or in silhouette above a roof deco- rate a building without breaking up the wall surfaces. (Pages 119 and 215.)  In the choice of letter forms, in the spacing of letters and words, in the use of color and lighting and handsome materials, and above all in the relation of the scale of the inscription to the scale of the building there are immense possibilities for subtlety. The principle of regularity must be respected. In architectural lettering, as in printing, legibility is a prime consideration. Script forms and fantastic placing may be justified for their effective-_ ness in advertising, but they are on the whole unarchitectural and best avoided. (Page 173.) Like other sorts of decoration in 
contemporary architecture, lettering can easily be abused.  The current style sets a high but not impossible standard for decoration: better none at all unless it be good. The principle is aristocratic rather than puritanical. It aims as much at making monstrosities impossible, at which the nineteenth century so sig- nally failed, as at assuring masterpieces, at which the nineteenth century had no very extraordinary success.  Also in the use of color the general rule is restraint. In the earliest days of the contemporary.style white stucco was ubiqui- tous. Little thought was given to color at a time when architects were preoccupied with more essential matters. Then followed a period when the use of color began to receive considerable atten- tion. In Holland and Germany small areas of bright elementary colors were used; in France, large areas of more neutral color. The two practices were in large part due to the influence of two different schools of abstract painting, as represented on the one hand by Mondriaan and on the other by Ozenfant. In both cases colors were artificially applied and the majority of wall surfaces remained white. (Page 123.)  At present applied color is used less. The color of natural sur- facing materials and the natural metal color of detail is definitely preferred. (Page 137.) Where the metal is painted, a dark neutral tone minimizes the apparent weight of the window frame (Pages 171 and 175.) In surfaces of stucco, white or off-white, even where it is obtained with paint, is felt to constitute the natural color. The earlier use of bright color had value in attracting at- tention to the new style, but it could not long remain pleasing. It ceased to startle and began to bore; its mechanical sharpness and freshness became rapidly tawdry. If architecture is not to resem- ble billboards, color should be both technically and psychologi- - eally permanent. -  Patently artificial color, moreover, makes too sharp a contrast 
with natural surroundings. Light and neutral tones not unduly conflicting with those of nature are more satisfactory (Page 139.) In cities, however, small areas of brilliant color may be effec- tively contrasted with large areas of more or neutral color. (Page 175.)  In the use of different colors on different walls much ingenuity has been expended. Structure, function and regularity provide little excuse in principle for this use of color. It is perhaps better avoided, although it has occasionally been the means of eminent success, It emphasizes strongly the effect of surface, but it breaks up the unity of volume. This way of painting interior walls to aid reflection and light distribution has been particularly abused. The use of natural materials and of such contrasts be- tween different walls as structure and function easily provide is more satisfactory. There is no better decoration for a room than a wall of book-filled shelves. (Page 195.) .  Trees and vines are a further decoration for modern architec- ture. Natural surroundings are at once a contrast and a back- ground emphasizing the artificial values created by architects. Choice of site, and the arrangement of buildings upon the site: these are the prime problems of the international style in relation to natural surroundings. As far as possible the original beauties of the site should be preserved. Mere open spaces are not enough for repose; something of the ease and grace of untouched nature is needed as well.  Terraces may extend the house outside its own boundaries, but beyond the terraces the reign of nature should clearly begin. The elaborate formal garden has no place in connection with the international style. An esthetic of right angles derived from ar- chitecture cannot be generally applied to landscape design with- . out diminishing the reposeful contrast of the natural background. Additional planting needed for protection or shelter, however, 
should usually keep to straight lines and avoid the imitation of natural irregularity. Roads and paths should be laid out for effi- cient communication, not with picturesque curves. The function of grounds for games and of plots for vegetables and flowers usu- ally requires a simple geometric plan.  Furthermore, small gardens in cities, or directly attached to individual houses, may often be treated as part of the architec- ture. (Pages 135 and 189.) Pergolas and protective walls or hedges transform these gardens into outdoor living rooms. Of such outdoor living rooms, roof terraces are the most conspicu- ous examples, (Pages 123 and 128.) 
Vul  ARCHITECTURE AND BUILDING ~  ‘ie far in this discussion architecture has been considered as inclusive of all forms of building, Although there is no sharp break between what is in the fullest sense architecture and what is not, there is a broad differentiation between architecture and building. There exists a range, or hierarchy, of ssthetic signifi- cance. The degree to which an edifice represents consciously or unconsciously the result of an esthetic, as well as of a technical, effort of creation determines its place in the hierarchy. The wider _ the opportunity for the architect within the limitations of struc-- ture.and function to make judgments determined by his taste arid not merely by economics, the more fully architectural will be the 
resultant construction. There is no rigid classification, building, quite devoid of the possibility of sesthetic organization. Yet buildings built at minimal cost with practical considerations dominant throughout may be held to be less fully architectural than those on which the architect has more freedom of choice in the use of materials and the distribution of the parts.  Under whatever conditions buildings are built, they tend to be more architectural as they serve more complicated functions. The more specialized the combination of functions served by a building, the more opportunity there is for the architect to achieve a design controlled by zsthetic as well as practical con- siderations. The more simple and repetitious the functions of a building and the more it resembles in purpose other buildings, the less likely is the architect to reach a solution of his problems formed by his own taste. American factories admirably illustrate hew building is becoming more and more impersonal and scien- tific. The best European factories illustrate, however, that in the field of industrial construction there are real architectural possi- bilities. (Pages 117, 167 and 183.) A large house offers relatively more possibilities of architectural development, but even a loft building can be made architecture.  Building quite devoid of architectural character would be sesthetically neutral no matter how good it was merely as a build- ing, Yet at the present time the majority of building is so bad technically, so much worse than neutral zsthetically, that any good building appears to have positive aesthetic value. So bad in every way have been the facades of most American commercial edifices that their rear elevations, which are at best merely sound building, seem by contrast to possess architectural quality. For  in contrast to the general low level of building, the European - functionalists usually reach the level of architecture, despite their refusal to aim consciously at achieving zsthetic value. Un- 
less one is very optimistic, it seems probable that the general level of building will always be low, that bad building will always predominate. Building that is merely good, then, may be ex- pected to continue in effect to be better than neutral eesthetically. On the whole, whether one examine contemporary architecture in terms of the international style or not, the creation of a stan- dard of good building has been an unmixed gain. This has been due as much to the functionalists as to those who still believe in the possibility of architecture as an art. The nineteenth century produced a great deal of bad architecture and very little good building, as the functionalists delight in pointing out.  But we still have architecture: that is, edifices consciously raised above the level of mere building. Architecture is seldom merely neutral zsthetically. It is good architecture or it is bad. When it is bad, the extreme contentions of the functionalists seem justified. But when it is good, such negative contentions appear an essential denial of the important spiritual function which all art serves. Good modem architecture may be-as richly and coherently imbued with the style of our day as were the great edifices of the past with that of theirs.  The functionalists, approaching architecture from the materi- alistic point of view of sociology, go behind the problems that are offered to the architect and refuse their sanctien to those which demand a fully architectural solution. In their estimation the modern world has neither the time nor the money required to raise building to the level of architecture. Although they are usu- ally ready to recognize and distinguish the esthetically good and the aesthetically bad, they deny that such a distinction has sig- nificance at a time when the world has such positive need merely of good building. The question passes outside the field of archi- . tecture into the field of politics and economics. The arguments of the functionalists are not based on the actual situation in the 
wn  contemporary world outside Russia. Whether they ought to or not, many elients can still afford architecture in addition to  A millennium of good building is as far away as any other, and it is a worthy aspiration to lay plans for it. In such a millennium, moreover, there should still be a place for architecture. Good ar- chitecture demands intelligence and taste more than money. Today architecture and building remain closely related, shading subtly one into the other. Whether or not the contemporary style should produce architecture as well as building, it certainly does so, Indeed many developments in structure and in articulation of function now incorporated in minimal building were first evolved in expensive constructions. All the leading modem architects of the intemational style have been technical as well as xsthetic innovators. The European functionalists who now disown Le Cor- busier, and Oud, and Gropius and Miés van der Rohe first learned the science of building from them. Most American func- tionalists have much to learn from the leaders of the international style, even if they cannot accept sincerely the esthetic discipline those leaders have brought into being.  On the other hand, this xsthetic discipline was derived in. considerable part from an appreciative study of industrial build- ing. It is in the plain building of the nineteenth century rather than in its elaborate architecture that the principles of the inter- national style were foreshadowed. The most significant work of Gropius and Oud, among the leaders of modern architecture, has been in the field of inexpensive building, which they have raised to the level of real architecture.  The idea of permanence has always been associated with ar-  chiteeture. Many problems of building are best solved temporar-  ily. But temporary constructions are seldom as architectural in  character as. those built to endure. The international style is so 
dependent on new methods of construction that it might seem that its principles could only apply to the most advanced known construction. Functionalists, indeed, often deny that building can be sound unless it is radical in its technics. Arguments of economics and questions of durability are often disregarded or disputed when critics discuss the continued use of wood or ma- sonry.  In many regions wood, for example, is economically the most satisfactory material. For certain types of building its relative im- permanence is not a disadvantage. Nor is there anything in wooden construction which makes it unsuitable to the zsthetic or the functional disciplines of the contemporary style. Wooden construction, as much as construction in steel or ferroconcrete, is a cage with a protective sheathing rather than a supporting wall. Thus the principle of architectural expression as surface of vol-  ume applies to it. Indeed, wood lends itself particularly well to the production of fine surfaces. Wooden construction is, algo, normally regular. The principle of avoidance of ornament holds regardless of materials. (Pages 119 and 225.)  Wood does not permit all the technical audacities of steel and concrete, but within a certain range it is unusually elastic and responsive. In the past wooden construction was often called upon to imitate styles developed in masonry. Yet many half-tim- ber houses with their great ranges of windows are surprisingly modern in conception. Today the skeleton is no longer exposed. The lighter framing used today is better protected by a continu-  ous outside covering such as has always been used in America. (Page 227.)  The steeply slanting roofs of the Middle Ages were already — replaced in the nineteenth century by roofs with an inconspicw-. ous slant on many wooden houses. Today the heavy pyramidal effect that tall roofs produce can be successfully avoided. The 
weightlessness and the consistency of modern design need no longer be contradicted by so definitely traditional a feature. Skil- ful architects, both in Europe and America, have even succeeded in using roofs of a single slant which avoid the traditional gable and give no impression of mass. Others have used terrace roofs just as they would on houses of steel and concrete.  Wood is admirable for building in certain special conditions but it is hardly suitable in others where the fire hazard is great, or fer monumental architecture. If, however, wooden construction is to be controlled by zsthetic principles, it certainly lends itself to . those of the international style.  The same is not so true of solid masonry. The character of ma- sonry is in direct opposition to the character of contemporary methods of construction. Masonry, either of stone or brick, can hardly avoid offering an effect of mass and weight. Nor can it provide for large openings without the use of arches or of steel or ferroconcrete beams, Masonry structure used consistently throughout a building remains traditional both technically and esthetically. Yet in monumental edifices which have only the most elementary functional requirements and demand the assur- ance of Egyptian permanence, masonry wall construction might . appropriately be used. An exceptional monument of solid granite or marble of the order of the Temple of the Sphinx might be re- lated to the international style by an imitative application of its sesthetie principles. The surface might be continuous, the detail minimal; but the effect of mass could hardly be honestly avoided. 
IX  PLANS  ii far there has been only incidental mention of the plan in contemporary architecture. Modern methods of skeleton con- struction have freed planning from conforming to the rigid lines of masonry structure. Isolated supports interfere hardly at all with free space and circulation. Interior partitions, like exterior walls, are mere screens, Thus planning has become absolutely pliant to the needs of function. New study of function, moreover, has broken down most of the conventions of planning inherited | from the past, quite as rapidly as structural advance has made. radical changes in plan possible.  The functionalists make. a particular fetish of planni  . They 
sometimes claim that they have never studied or composed their exteriors, but have merely allowed them to grow as the unavoida- ble clothing of the plan. It is true that the full application of the principle of regularity to the plans and the sections induces con- sistency in the elevations. It does not, however, lead automati- cally to good proportions in the fagades. Architects who aim at achieving the fullest architectural character in their buildings must still study elevations alone quite as much as plans and sec- tions,  The essence of architecture lies in the relation of the various sorts of geometrical projections. The realities of function influ- ence chiefly the plan, but the expression of function must appear in the elevations. Eveh the functionalists who deny the necessity for esthetic expression must admit that the essential character of the plan is generally apprehended from the exterior of the build- ing. The contemporary exaggeration of the importance of the plan is primarily an architect’s game. The game was well played at the Ecole des Beaux Arts long before modern architecture came into existence. It led to 2 very one-sided architecture since most of its interest and beauty could only be appreciated on paper.  The innovations in plan of the international style have led to. much that is valuable both from the functional and from the esthetic point of view. Even the functionalists have profited by the innovations of architects interested in the zsthetics of inte- rior space. Today there are three types of interiors: first, the in- side of the volume of the building, consisting of the entire con- tent of the building or of a considerable part of it (Pages 109 and 220); second, interiors which open up into one another without definite circumscribing partitions (Page 190); and finally, the or- dinary enclosed room.  The first sort of interior, which is not essentially different from the monumental interiors in the churches and theatres of the 
past, is of the scale of exterior architecture. Its walls are usually the interior surface of the same protecting screen which consti- tutes the exterior surface of the architectural volume. They re- quire, therefore, a similar treatment, although naturally the de- mands of durability in the materials are much less stringent. In such interiors the supports will often stand isolated, making the character of the construction perfectly clear. These supports re- quire different treatment, so that the lack of connection with the wall screens will be evident. They give scale to the created space. (Pages 109 and 220.) Therefore, they should be sharply defined and elegant in profile. Like the supports which are visi- ble outside they are best if rounded in section.  The second sort of interiors is the particular invention of the international style. (Pages 146 and 194.) In conteast to the com- pletely enclosed rooms of the past they stress the unity and conti-  _nuity of the whole volume inside a building. The independence of the dividing screens and their variation in size and placing contrast with the regularity of the isolated supports. The flow of function and the relation of one function to another can be clearly expressed. The different screens serving different purposes may well be of different materials provided always their thinness and freedom from structural duty is stressed. While the visible sup- ports give an underlying rhythm, the variety of the screens pro- duce, as it were, a melody which may be restrained or lyric-as the architect wishes. (Pages 122 and 186.)  The development of free planning, particularly with the use of curved and oblique screens, has been carried furthest in con- structions of definitely architectural character. It gives to modern interiors a new kind of abstract space design unknown in the ar- chitecture of the past. But it is one of the elements of modern. architecture which is easily abused, both practically and zsthetically, 
Enclosed rooms of ordinary size, the third sort of interior, sel- dom have definite architectural character. They depend for their interest on theit proportions and on their contents. (Page 208 f.}  Something has been said of the use of color in interiors, a mat- ter subject far more to passing fashion than is color in exterior architecture. Screen walls should be, if possible, of natural mate- tials in their own colors. If they are of plaster and painted, they should generally be white or neutral. Thin white curtains to mod- erate the light and heavier curtains of dark plain materials are harmonious and dignified, When drawn they cover the glass of _ the window wall with a temporary screen of fabric. In small en- closed rooms more use of artificial color is justifiable to give in- terest and variety; even, perhaps, different colors on different walls. But growing plants and fine pictures are the best means of giving life to interiors. The absence of all other decoration only gives them added emphasis and increases the importance of placing them properly in relation to the general design. The de- tails of interior treatment will undoubtedly vary with the years far more than the general principles of the style. 
X  THE SfifEDLUNG'  T.. development of modern city planning has brought an in- creasing intervention of the political authorities in architecture. In some cases the sesthetic effect of this intervention has. been for the good, substituting harmony for anarchical diversity, as in the buildings of Haussman’s day which line the Paris boulevards. In | other cases it is unfortunate, as in the case of the New York zon- ing law requiring the setback treatment of tall buildings; or in the case of the Baupolizei (building-police) in German. cities, who  1The German word, Siedlung, serves more convéniently and specifically to denominate: - modem community housing projects than “garden suburb” or “residence subdivision.” 
force later builders on a street to continue the steep roofs used on the first houses.  But the state is more than a supervisor of architecture. It has itself become a patron of architecture in fields previously left to the individual. The state no longer erects only post-offices, schools and administration buildings. All over Europe public and semi-public agencies are concerning themselves with inex- pensive housing. In America the patronage of housing develop- ments by the state or by philanthropists, who so often carry on activities which are left to the government abroad, is only begin- ning.  Despite the development of group planning along modern lines in America the style of the individual houses in our “garden suburbs” remains traditional. Eyen where modem construction has been introduced, the sponsors have been loath to provide moder design. Hence our Siedlungen are sometimes excellent illustrations of sociological theory, but they are seldom examples ef sound modern building and never works of architectural dis- tinction. .  Yet even housing at minimal cost is potentially architecture. The individual minima! dwellings provide for a function so sim-. ple and so little specialized that they are well within the realm of building and quite capable of standardization. But a project de- veloped as a whole constitutes a complex problem offering so many opportunities for arbitrary choice that it may become archi- tecture. American builders have standardized Tudor or Georgian forms and have produced extremely bad architecture, as cheap and meretricious as our modernistic skyscrapers. We may in the future standardize more fully and more logically by following the practice.of European architects.  In the better Siedlungen, cotirdination offers a breadth of pos- sibilities such as the mere repetition of similar buildings cannot 
give. The principle of regularity imposes a general order while the provisions for the different private and public functions of a complete Siedlung give variety and emphasis. The relation of the repeated units of actual housing to the special units serving the whole community is analogous to the relation in a hotel of the single guest rooms to the public rooms.  Gratuitous cultivation of asymmetry in the Siedlung is an of- fense against the principle of regularity. On the other hand, axial symmetry will seldom be possible throughout because of the necessities of proper orientation. (Page 158.) But the imposition of the same esthetic disciplines on repeated units of housing and on special buildings will naturally give consistency to the whole composition.  Theatres, cafés, churches and schools will stand out. Because of their greater scale it is possible to give them a more architec-  tural character than the ordinary surrounding buildings. Empha- sized by the idiosyncrasies of their function, they symbolize group activities. Because they break the particular system of reg- ularity of the surrounding housing, they constitute points of cli- mactic interest. (Page 224.)  The Siedlungen of the European functionalists generally reach the neutral esthetic level of good building, while the work of those who apply more consciously the disciplines of the con- temporary style often rises to the level of architecture. The Sied- lungen. of the latter are not less practical. We must not be misled by the idealism of the European functionalists. Functionalism is absolute as an idea rather than as a reality. As an idea it must come to terms with other ideas such as that of zesthetic organiza~ tion.  The modern Siedlung raises the question of what is meant by. function in architecture more pertinently than dees any other  type of building. The general function is clear both in Europe 
and in America: to provide a large number of dwellings outside the city but still not too distant from the place of work of the in- habitants. Problems of communication, of retail merchandising and of entertainment are various, but they offer no field for ar- chitectural controversy. The more of such communal functions that can be incorporated in the same general plan, the more in- teresting and architectural will be the resultant Siedlung.  In the single residence units themselves the present and the future come to grips. In the case of a house built for a definite client and standing in its own grounds—still a very important - architectural problem in every country of the world except Russia—the functions of the house as a place to live in must be worked out by the architect with the client. The man who is about to build a house knows his needs or can be forced to discover them by analysis. Indeed, satisfying the particular client is one important function of architecture that the European functional- ists usually avoid. For them such work is without sociological significance.  The Siedlung implies preparation not for a given family but for a typical family. This statistical monster, the typical family, has no personal existence and cannot defend itself against the socio- | logical theories of the architects. The European functionalists in their annual conferences set up standards for ideal minimal dwellings. These standards often have little relation to the actual way of living of those who are to inhabit them. Yet such theoriz- ing has value as an instrument of social progress. Architects in private, as well as in public, practice must suggest and provide for the amelioration and development of the functions of living. They are specialists who can translate vague desires into reali- ties. But there should be a balance between evolving ideal houses for scientific living and providing comfortable houses for 
Too often in European Siedlungen. the functionalists build for some proletarian superman of the future. Yet in most buildings the expressed desires of a given client are the most explicit and difficult functions. Architects whose discipline is wsthetic as well as functional are usually readier to provide what is actually needed, Their idealism is satisfied by raising their Siedlungen. to the level of architecture by effective general planning and dis- tinctive composition. The idealism of the functionalists too often demands that they provide what ought to be needed, even at the expense of what is actually needed. Instead of facing the difficul- ties of the present, they rush on to face the uncertain future.  There is a reverse side to this question of function in housing projects. It is frequently demanded by local critics that ar- chitects should cater to peculiar wants unknown in other commu- nities. Windows arranged for strange forms of ventilation, or so . subdivided that they may be opened without disarranging flower pots on the sill, rooms catering to special methods of drying clothes indoors, solid shutters on upper storeys to which no bur- glar could climb, certainly are needless unless local traditions insist upon them. In America, local traditions are further compli- cated by an excessive sentimentality about the “homes” of the past. |  The architect has a right to distinguish functions which are major and general from those which are minor and local. In soci- ological building he ought certainly to stress the universal at the expense of the particular. He may even, for economic reasons and for the sake of general architectural style, disregard entirely the peculiarities of local tradition unless these are soundly based on local weather conditions. His aim is to approach an ideal stan- dard. But houses should not be functionally so advanced that they are lived in under protest. 
Whether the architects’ work be a single elaborate country house, a public edifice, or a residence colony of apartments or small dwellings, the application of esthetic principles of order, the formal simplification of complexity, will raise a good work of building to a fine monument of architecture. Whether the design be for a single filling station or for a whole city quarter, quality of architectural thought will count more than money spent on sites or on fine materials. If there be a choice of site, if there be money for chrome and marble, the beauty of natural surroundings. and the beauty of rich smooth surfaces can only enhance the quality . of architecture. An architecture, aristocratic rather than puritanical, may rise sometimes on an Acropolis in all the luxury of Pentelic marble and yet will grace with distinction the factory and the Siedlung.  Buildings will continue to be looked at as well as used. It is sutely one function of architecture to provide for sesthetic appre- ciation, Fortunately the functionalists have riot altogether failed to do so, Their achievements form an important part of the pro- ductions of the international style.  Within this style there are no subsidiary manners which are ecclesiastical or domestic or industrial. The symbolic expression | of function by allusion to the past, which the half-modern ar- chitects at the beginning of the century developed, has ceased to be necessary. Where function is straightforwardly expressed, one type of building will not be confounded with another. Nor need that individuality break the premises of the style. The interna- tional style is broad and elastic enough for many varying talents and for many decades of development.  We have, as the Egyptians had or the Chinese, as the Greeks and our own ancestors in the Middle Ages before us, a style which orders the visible manifestation of a certain close relation- 
ship between structure and function. Regardless of specific types of structure or of function, the style has ‘a.definable seathetic. That zsthetic, like modern technics, will develop and change; it will hardly cease to exist. It is found in the humblest buildings, as well as in monuments, fully architectural. Those. who have _ buried architecture, whether from a thwarted desire to continue the past or from an over-anxiety te modify and hurry on the fu- ture, have been premature: We have an architecture. still.  An appendix by Henry-Russell Hitchcock entitled “The Interna. tional Style Twenty Years After” begins on page 239 followin, the plates. 
Abvar Aalto: Turun Sanomat Building, Abo, Finland. 1930 Newspaper Presses INDUSTRIAL BUILDING. RAIBED TO THE LEVEL OF ARCHITECTURE BY FINE FROPORTIONS, SMOOTH SURFACES AND-CAREFULLY STUDIED FORMA, THE SHAPE OF THE CONCRETE  EUPPORTE EXPRESSES FRANKLY THE STRUCTURAL STRESSES. 
HH STEISRS Eta  Uno Ahren: Flamman Soundfilm Theatre, Stockholm, 1929 ACOUSTICAL CONSIDERATIONS DETERMINE THE SHAPE OF THE INTERIOR. THE PoOaTSs  APPEAR AS MERE LINES OF SUPPORT. LIGHTING FIXTURES ALONE DECORATE. 
Josef Albers: Living Reom in the Berlin Building Exposition. 1931  WODDEN CHAIRS DESIGNED WITHOUT REFERENCE TO TRADIRA NM, THE Hoaior.  THROUGHONLT if THAT OF THE NATURAL MATERIALS. 
Marcel Breuer: Apartment Bedroom, Berlin. 1931  lll 
E.G, Asplund: Pavilions at the Stockhobn Exposition, 1930  ASBESTOS SHEATHING AND LARGE WINDOWS IN LIGHT FRAMES PRODUGE AN EXCELLENT  SURFACE FOR WOOD CONSTRUCTION. OFF-WHITE WALLS OF SIDE PAVILIONE CONTRAST WITH GREEN OF GENTER PAVILION. SKILFUL DECORATIVE USE OF LETTERING AND  QBOLORED FLAGS.  | 112 
Hans Borkowsky: Dapolin Filling Station, Kassel, Germany. 1930 DOMINATING ROOF PLANE OVER TRANSPARENT SGREEN WALL. COLORS: BRILLIANT RED AND WHITE FOR ADVERTIGEMENT. A DESIGN EASY TO STANDARDIZE. COMPARE WITH  GTANDARCIZED AMERICAN STATION ON PAGE 121. 
Brinkman & Van Der Viugt: Van Nelle Tobacco, Tea & Coffee Factory, Rotterdam. 1928~30 AN INPYSBTRIAL BUILOING ADMIRABLY COMPOSED OF THREE SECTIONS, EACH DEVOTED  TO A BEPARATE FUNCTION BUT WITH THE SAME BTRUCTURAL REGULARITY THROUGHOUT. 
Erik Bryggman: Finnish Pavilion at the Antwerp Exposition. 1930 RIcH SURFACES OF VARNISHED PLYWOOD. LETTERING USED EFFECTIVELY IN  GILHOUETTE. 
To Fuses  T t }  THE STANDARDIZED PLAN  IM THE ILLUSTRATED STATION THE PLAN IS REVERSED AND SLIGHTLY MODIFIED.  x 2 ~ 2 a  Th pustes  J 
Clauss & Daub: Filling Station, Standard Oil Company of Ohio, Cleveland. 1931  RED, WHITE AND BLUE QOLOR DICTATED BY ADVERTISING. WHITE BAND UNDULY HEAVY.  GA0D LETTERING. ONE OF A SERIES OF FORTY STATIONS. ASYMMETRICAL PLACING OF GCOOR ANG SHOP WINDOW AB SHOWN IN PLAN IS SUPERIOR TO THE ARRANGEMENT IN  THIS STATION. 
PLANS OF THE DOUBLE HOUSE  n AP IEO UN AH ENE ES  GROUND FLOOR. MAIN FLOOR  Le Corbusier & Pierre Jeanneret: Single House and Double House at the Weissenhof- siedlung, Stuttgart. 1927  THE SINGLE HOUSE DERIVES FROM THE ''CITROHAN" PROUJECT OF 19231. THE SGUSLE  HOUSE If AN EXTREME EXAMPLE OF OPEN INTERIOR PLANNING. PROJECTING REAR WINGS DISTINGUISHED BY BEING PAINTED PALE GREEN. WINDOW ARRANGEMENT fa  BRILLIANT AND DIEGIFLINEDS. 
Le Corbusier & Pierre Jeanneret: Stein House, (Les Terrasses) Garches, Near St, Cloud. 1928  GBVERED TERRACES, WHICH ARE INCLUDED IN THE SIMPLE RECTILINEAR VOLUME OF THE BUILDING, PRODUGE AN 4SYMMETRIGAL COMPOSITION. THE PREVAILING COLOR 15 CREAM-WHITE. AT THE SACK OF THE TERRACES ONE WALL IS GREY AND ONE GREEN TO EMPHABIZE THE PLANES. 
Le Corbusier & Pierre Jeanneret: Savoye House, Poissy-eur-Seine. 1930  TRE WHITE SEGOND STOREY APPEARS WEIGHTLESS ON ITS ROUND POSTS. ITS SEVERE |  SYMMETRY 1S 4A FOIL TO THE GRILLIANT STUDY IN ABETRACT FORM, UNRESTRIETED BY STRUCTURE, OF THE BLUE AND ROSE WINDSHELTER ABOVE. THE SECOND STOREY, AG SHOWN BY THE PLAN, INCLUDES THE OPEN TERRACE WITHIN THE GENERAL VOLUME. THUS THE SINGLE SQUARE OF THE PLAN CONTAINS ALL THE V4RIED LIVING NEEDS OF A  COUNTRY HOUSE. 
Le Corbusier & Pierre Jeanneret: Savoye House, Poissy-Sur-Seine. 1931. Living Room and Terrace  ONLY A SLICING BLASS WALL BEPARATES THE LIVING ROOM FROM THE TERRACE. Ramp AND CIRCULAR STAIRGASE, WITH THE RELATED PATTERNS OF WINDOW MUNTING ANE  RAILING, ARE SKILFULLY COMPOSED. 
“=  Le Corbusier & Pierre Jeatineret: Savoye House, Poissy-Sur-Seine. 1930. Hall ARCHITECTURAL DETAIL ESPECIALLY FINE: THE RELATION OF ROUND PIER TO  SUPPORTED BEAM, THE CURVED PLANES OF THE STAIR, THE PLACING OF THE DOOR AND ITS. LIGHT ENFRAMEMENT. 
Le Corbusier & Pierre Jeanneret: Lodge at Savoye House, Poissy-Sur-Seine. 1930  THE SMALL LODGE IS CONSISTENT IN DESIGN WITH THE MAIN HOUSE SHOWN ON THE  PREVIOUS PAGE. IT MIGHT WELL SERVE AS A UNIT OWELLING IN A HOUSING PROJEET. 
Le Corbusier & Pierre Jeanneret: De Mandrot Villa, Le Pradet, Near Hyeres, 1931. Sourn WALL OF TRANSPARENT, TRANELUCENT AND OPAQUE PANELS, CEILING OF  PLYWOOD IN NATURAL COLOR AND FLOGR OF LOCAL TILES. FURNITURE GY RENE Hereet AnD Héiéne DE MANDROT. 
Le Corbusier & Pierre Jeanneret: De Mandrot Villa, Le Pradet, Near Hyeres. 1931 COMBINATION OF MASONRY AND ISGLATED POST CONSTRUCTION. NON-SUPPORTING  WALL SEOQTIONS ARE OF STUCCO OR GiAass. BADLY PLACED WOODEN FLY-SCREEN FRAMES MAR THE FENESTRATION. 
Le Corbusier & Pierre Jeanneret: De Beistegui Pent House, Champs-Elysées, Paris. 1931. Garden -  S)MPLe COMPOSITION OF RECTANGULAR FORMS AND OVAL STAIR TOWER. FHE HEDGES AND: THE TREE MAKE 4 ETRIEFING CONTRAST WITH THE WHITE MARBLE, THE HEDGES 4RE SET IN SLIDING BUXES OPERATED ELECTRICALLY. THUS EITHER COMPLETE PRIVACY OR A MAGNIFICENT VIEW TOWARD THE CENTER OF THE CITY MAY BE ENJOYED. THE UPPER.  ENCLOSED AREA, A SUN BATH, HAS A FLOOR OF GRABS AND WALLS OF PALE SKY-BLUE. 
Eisenlohr & Pfennig: Breuninger Department Store, Stuttgart. 1931  THE- WINDOW FRAMES ARE BRONZE AND THE WALLS ARE SURFACED WITH STONE PLAQUES. THE GET-BACK IS BETTER HANOLED HERE THAN IN THE DEPARTMENT STORE ON PAGE 185, CURVED CORNER AND LETTERING BREAK THE MONOTONY. THE DESIGN 18  DISCIPLINED BUT LACKS [NDOIVIDUAL DISTINCTION. 
Otte Eisler: Double House, Brno, Czechoslovakia. 1926  EFFECTIVE ASYMMETRICAL COMPOSITION. THERE IS TOO MUGH VARIETY IN THE SIZE 4ND  SPACING OF THE FIRST FLOOR WINDOWS IN AN ATTEMPT TO ACHIEVE A PROGRESSIVE RHYTHM. THE THIEK WINDOW FRAMES APPEAR EVEN HEAVIER SECAUSE THEY ARE LI@HT-COLORED INSTEAD OF DARK.  139 
Otto Eisler: Hause for Two Brothers, Brno, Czechoslovakia, 1931  EXTREME REGULARITY RELIEVED BY THE ABYMMETRIOAL SHELTER ON THE ROOF AND BY THE LARGE WINGOW ON THE GROUND FLGOR. THE PROPORTIONS ARE RATHER HEAVY BLT THE GENERAL EFFECT Ie LIGHTENED BY THE BALCONY RAILING. SURFACED WITH RED  ARTIFICIAL STONE.  IAT 
Joseph Emberton: Royal Corinthian Yacht Club, Burnham-on-Crouch, England. 1931  THE LARGE GLASS AREA !8 PARTICULARLY SUITABLE IN & DULL, FOGGY CLIMATE. GOMPARE THE HOTEL IN CORSICA, PAGE 181, WHICH HAS SMALL WINDOWS TO KEEP  THE INTERIOR COOL AND DARK.  | vas 
L. Figind and G. Pollini: Electrical House at the Monza Exposition, Italy. 1930 THE BAME UNIT OF MEASURE IN WINDOW MUNTINGS AND RAILINGS PRODUCES A  SUBSIDIARY RHYTHM. |  145 
Le Corbusier & Pierre Jeanneret: Annex. to Church Villa, Ville D’Avray, 1929. Living Room  PLACING OF FIREPLACE AND CHIMNEY AWAY FROM THE WALL AVOIDS THE TRADITIONAL  MASSIVE EFFECT. STARTLING USE OF DIRCULAR SKYLIGHT. FURNITURE By Le CORAUSIER AND GH4SRLOTTE PERRIAND.  oe a 
Bohuslav Fuchs: Pavilion of the City of Brno at the Brno Exposition, Czechoslovakia, 1928  Piers AND LINTELS OF THE SUBSTRUCTURE ARE UNDULY HEAVY. THE CIRCULAR STAIRCASE 13 GOOD DECORATION THOUGH ITS UTILITY IS DOUBTFUL. THE WINDOWS ADJACENT TO THE STAIRGASE ARE OF GLASS TILES WHICH HARMONIZE IN SIZE WITH THE  HANDSOME ORANGE RED TILE OF THE WALL SURFACE. 
Walter Gropius: Bauhaus School, Dessau, Germany. 1926, Living Quarters, Adminis-  THE SEPARATE WINGE, EACH WITH A DIFFERENT FUNCTION—LIVING QUARTERS,  BLASS ROOME, WORKSHOPS—ARE SKILFULLY COMPOSED, THE CHECKERBOARD WINDOW ARRANGEMENT OF THE LIVING QUARTERS CONTRASTS WITH THE RIBBON WINDOWS OF THE CLASSROOMS AND ADMINISTRATIVE SECTION. AN EXAMPLE OF DIFFERENT FUNCTIONS EMPHASIZED BY A DIFFERENT HANDLING OF REGULARITY. THE SUPPORTS  OF THE GENTER SECTION ARE AWKWARD IN SHAPE.  149 
Walter Gropius: City Employment Office, Dessau, Germany. 1928 BRIRK AS 4 WALL SURFACE USED SUSCESSFULLY WITHOUT TRADITIONAL FEELING, ARCHITECTURAL DISTINCTION GIVEN TO 4 BUILDING OF MODERATE Coast. SkKILFUL  ASYMMETRIGAL PLACING OF THE STAIR TOWER AND VERTICAL WINDOW, 
Waker Gropius: Siedlung Térten, Dessau, Germany. 1928. Coéperative Store & SHARP FUNCTIONAL CONTRAST BETWEEN HORIZONTAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE STORES AND VERTICAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE APARTMENT HOUSE. LETTERING, CIRDULAR WINDOWS AND FLAGPOLE ARE DEGORATIVE ELEMENTS. THE TOP BALCONY 18  UNNECESSARILY HEAVY. 
Max. Ernst Haefeli: Apartment House, Ziirich., 1929 PRONOUNCED WALL CAPPING AND ROUGH STUCCO GREAK THE EFFECT OF SURFACE.  ’ ALUMINUM WINDOW FRAMES ARE LIGHT AND WELL GROUPED. THE ENTRANCE 6RIDGES MAKE GOOD DECORATION. 
THE WORKSHOPS HAVE ENTIRELY TRANSPARENT WALLS. A GOOD ILLUBTRANON  BL4E6 PANES AS A SURFACING MATERIAL, THE PROJECTION @F THE ROOF CAP 1S UNFORTUNATE, ESPECIALLY OVER THE ENTRANCE AT LEFT. 
Otte Haesler: Kursag Warehouse and Offices, Brunswick, Germany. 1930 THOROUGH APPLICATION DF THE PRINGIPLES OF CONTEMPORARY DESIGN. THE  SYMMETRY 15 FUINGTIONALLY JUSTIFIAGLE SINCE THE STAIRWELL SERVES CENTRAL 
Otto Haesler: Siedlung Rothenberg, Kassel, Germany. 1930  THE LONG BANDE OF WINDOWS ARE MADE POSSIBLE BY STEEL CONSTRUCTION. THE INSET BALCONIES AND THE THICK CAPPING OF THE STAIRWELLS BREAK THE REGULAR FENEBTRATION OISAGREEABLY, THE STEPPING OF THE ROOF LINE, ON THE OTHER HAND,  GIVES AN INTERESTING VARIETY TO THE GENERAL SYSTEM OF REGULARITY. 
Otte Haesler and Karl Valker: Old People’s Home, Kassel, Germany. 1931  THE TALL SECTIONS ARE BUILT UP OF REPEATED UNITS OF LIVING QUARTERG. THE Low  SECTION tN THE CENTER CONTAING THE COMMON ROOMS; THE LOW SECTION TO THE RIGHT, THE SERVICE QUARTERS. THESE VARIOUS DIVISIONS, EACH RETAINING ITS FASTINGTIVE GHARACTER, ARE BROUGHT INTO AN ORDERLY COMPOSITION. THE bccssIONAL VERTIGAL® OF THE BTAIRWELLS CONTRAST WITH THE GENERAL  HORIZONTALITY. 
LOAD PLATFORM ee  HturiG ROOM  Loca.  TYPICAL FLOGR  GROUND FLOOR  Hood & Fouilhoux: McGraw-Hill Building, West 42nd Street, New York. 1931  THE LIGHTNESS, SIMPLICITY AND LAGK OF APPLIEO VERTICALION MARK THIS EKYSCRAPER AB AN ADVANGE OVER OTHER NEW YORK SKYSCRAPERS AND BRING IT WITHIN THE LIMITE OF THE INTERNATIONAL STYLE. THE SPANDRELS ARE SHEATHED WITH BLUE-GREEN TILES. THE METAL GOVERING OF THE SUPPORTS 18 PAINTED DARK GREEN. THE BET-BASKA ARE HANDLED MORE FRANKLY THAN IN OTHER SKYSCRAPERS, THOUGH STILL REMINIBEENT OF THE PYRAMIDAL SHAPE OF TRADITIONAL TOWERE. THE REGULARITY APPROACHES MONOTONY EXCEPT FOR THESE SET-SACKS, WHICH ARE DETERMINED BY LEGAL REQUIREMENTS RATHER THAN SY CONSIDERATIONS OF DESIGN. THE HEAVY ORNAMENTAL EROWN 18 AN ILLOGIGAL AND UNHAPPY SREAK IN THE  GENERAL SYBTEM OF REGULARITY AND WEIGHTS COWN THE WHOLE DESIGN. 
~ . 1  BANK FLQOR . TYPICAL OFFICE FLOOR  Howe & Lescase: Philadelphia Saving Fund Society, Market Street, Philadelphia. 1931  THE BUILDING WILL NOT BE COMPLETED UNTIL THE SUMMER OF 1922. THE ENTIRE FRONT !& CANTILEVERED. THE RELATION OF THE BASE WITH ITS CURVED CORNER TO THE TOWER IS AWKWARD. THE DIFFERENT PARTS OF THE BUILDING ARE DISTINGUISHED BY DIFFERENT SURFACING MATERIALS: THE BASE, HOUSING THE BANK, OF GRANITE SLABS:  TWO INTERMEDIATE STOREYS. OF LIMESTONE; THE BPANDRELS OF THE TOWER OF BRICK. 
Kellermiiller & Hofmann: Jakob Kolb Soap Factory, Ziirich. 1930 A LOW-COST BUILDING GIVEN ARCHITECTURAL CHARACTER BY THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE SECTIONS AND THE SPACING OF THE STANDARDIZED WINQOWS. THE DOORS ARE  UNFORTUNATELY NOT COMPOGSED OF THE SAME UNITS AS THE WINDOWS. 
A. Lawrence Kocher & Albert Frey: Harrison House, Syosset, Long Island. 1931 AN EXPERIMENTAL HOUSE WITH A SKELETON OF ALUMINUM AND WITH WALLS THINNER  THAN ARE PERMITTED BY URBAN SUILOING LAWS. CORRUGATED ALUMINUM SHEATHING REFLECTS THE BURROUNDINGS AGREEABLY. 
FIRST FLOOR BECOND FLOOR  H. LE. de Koninck: Lenglet House, Uccle, Near Brussels. 1926 THE PLANE OF THE WALL IS UNGROKEN EITHER BY WINDOW REVEALS OR WALL  BAPPFING. 
Josef Krans: Café Era, Brno, Czechoslovakia. 1929 SKILFUL BROUPING OF WINDOWS WITH THE OIFFERENT FUNCTIONS DOF VENTILATION, VIEW AND LIBHTING. LIGHT IS PROVIDED IN THE BTAIRWELL BY THE ist OF  TRANSLUCENT GLASS BRICKS. THE GENERAL GOMPOSITION IS OVERCOMPLIDATED. 
Ludvik Kysela: Bata Shoe Store, Prague, Czechoslovakia. 1929 THE WINDOW FRAMES ARE LIGHT; THE APANDRELS UNUSUALLY THIN. THE LETTERING IS  SOTH UNARCHITEGTURAL IN CHARACTER AND INHARMONIDUBS IN SCALE. 
a  i tJ  ag qs  el oe  Labayen & Aizpurua: Clubhouse, San Sebastian, Spain. 1929  THE MARINE CHARACTER OF THE DESIGN IS JUBTIFIED BY SITE AND PURPOSE, THE  PROJECTION OF THE TERRACE ROOF ADDE 4N UNNEGESSARY COMPLICATION, COMPARE  EMBERTON'S SIMPLER TREATMENT OF THE SAME PROBLEM ON PAGE 746. 
J. W. Lehr: Volkastimme Building, Frankfort, Germany. 1929 Gaon USE OF GLAZED TILE LAIO VERTICALLY. THE WALLA ARE OFF-WHITE. PROJECTING  SHELTER FOR NEWSPAPER NOTICES 18 GREY WITH A SRILLIANT ORANGE POST. 
André Lurgat: Hotel Nord-Sud, Calvi, Corsica. 1931 SMALL WINDOWS KEEP THE INTERIOR COOL in A SEMI-FTROPFICAL SUMMER. THE  PREVECTIONG BETWEEN THE SALCONIES ISOLATE THE GEPARATE STUDIO APARTMENTS.  | yon 
Sven Markelius & Uno Ahren: Students’ Clubhouse, Stockholm, 1930. Roof Terrace SUCCESSFUL DESIGN SAVE FOR THE THICKNESS OF THE WOODEN WINDOWS AND WALL  CAPPING. 
Erich Mendelsohn: Schocken Department Store, Chemnitz, Germany. 1928-1930  STARTLING RIBBON WINDCWS MADE POSSIBLE BY CANTILEVER CONETRUCTION. WALL  SURFACED WITH STONE PLAQUES. THE BET-BACKS REQUIRED €Y BUILDING LAWS GIVE  AN UNFORTUNATE STEPPED EFFECT, Ad IN NEW YORK SKYSCRAPERS. 
Erich Mendelsohn & R. W. Reichel: German Metal Workers’ Union Building, Berlin. 1929-1930. Court :  THE PHOTOGRAPH TAKEN THROUGH 4 WINDOW LIKE THOSE ACROSS THE COLIRT SHOWS  THE EXTREME LIGHTNESS OF THE FRAMES. THE STAIR TOWER 1S UNSATISFACTORY IN PLACING AND PROPORTION. 
-  Theodor Merrill: Kinigagrube Mine Works, Bochum, Germany. 1930 AN EXAMPLE OF REVEALED FRAMEWORK WHIGH EXCEPT AT GREAT BCALE (8 LESS  SATISFACTORY THAN THE USUAL METHOD OF SHEATHING THE FRAME. 
Miés van der Rohe: Apartment House, Weissenhofsiediung, Stuttgart. 1927 ALTHOUGH SYMMETRIGAL, THE COMPOSITION DEPENDS FOR [TS EFFECT ON GENERAL REGULARITY, NOT ON AXIAL EMPHASIS. SUPPORTS GETWEEN WINDOWS TREATED Ag PART GF THE WALL SURFACE. DESPITE SEVERE REGULARITY DF CONSTRUOTION THERE  '@ GREAT VARIETY IN THE PLANNING OF THE iINOIVIDUAL APARTMENTS. 
Mids van der Rohe: German Pavilion at the Barcelona Exposition, Spain. 1929  AS THIG WAS A PAVILION AT AN EXPOSITION, £2GTHETIC RATHER THAN FUNCTIGNAL  CONSIDERATIONS DETERMINED THE PLAN. THE WALLS ARE INDEPENDENT PLANES UNDER A CONTINUDUS SLAB ROOF, WHICH 1S SUPPORTED ON LIGHT METAL FOSTS. THE ABEOLUTE REGLILARITY IN THE SPACING OF THE SUPPORTS DOES NOT PREVENT WIDE VARIETY IN THE PLACING OF WALL SGREENES TO FORM SEPARATE ROOMS. RICH MATERIALS! TRAVERTINE, VARIOUS MARBLES, CHROME STEEL, GREY, SLACK, AND  TRANSPARENT PLATE GLAGE. 
Miés van der Rohe: German Pavilion at the Barcelona Exposition, Spain. 1929. Inner Pool |  BECAUSE OF DIBTINGTIVE MATERIALS, THE PLANES RETAIN THEIR INDEPENDENCE. ASA  RESULT THE GOMPOSITION (8 GF APPARENTLY INTERSEGTING, RATHER THAN MERELY ENGLOSING, PLANES. THE DIFFERENT TEXTURES, INGLUDING THAT OF THE WATER, PROVIDE DECORATION. THE KOLBE STATUE HAS A MAGHIFICENT BACKGROUND 4ND  THOUGH ISOLATED 15 AN IMPORTANT PART OF THE DESIGN. 
Mids van der Rehe: Lange House, Krefeld, Germany. 1928  UNUSUAL ANG SUCCESSFUL USE OF BRICK IN A BUILDING WELL ABOVE AVERAGE COST.  THE TERRACE, LAID GUT GEOMETRICALLY, CONTRASTS WITH THE GROUNDS WHIGH ARE PLANTED NATURALISTICALLY. 
Miéa van der Rohe: Tagendhat House, Brno, Czechoslovakia. 1930. Garden r CANTILEVERED PARAPET ONE HUNORED FEET LONG ABOVE 4 WALL OF GLASS IB THE BASIS OF THE DESIGN. THE HOUBE 19 TIEG TO ITA SETTING BY 4 MONUMENTAL FLIGHT  OF STEPA. 
Miés van der Rohe: Tugendhat House, Brno, Czechoslovakia. 1930. Street Facade  THE HOUSE (1S SO PLACED ON A &LOPING SITE THAT THE ENTRANGE 1& ON THE SEGOND FLOOR. A SLAG ROOF ACROSS THE ENTRANCE JOING THE GARAGE TO THE HOUSE. THE  CHIMNEY 18 4 STRONG VERTICAL ACCENT IN AN ALMOST WINDOWLESS FAGADE.. 
Miés van der Rohe: Tugendhat House, Brno, Czechoslovakia. 1930. Entrance A WALL OF FROSTED GLASS CURVED ARGQUND THE STAIRWELL LIGHTS THE ENTRANGE  HALL. SIMPLE BUT LUXURIOUS ELEMENTS OF DECORATION: THE ISOLATED BRONZE POBT, BRONZE WINDOW FRAMES, REFLECTING SURFACE OF GLASS, THE PATTERN OF  TRAVERTINE PAVING, THIN ROOF CAPPING, THE GRACEFUL RAILING 4ND GROWING PLANTS. 
Miés van der Rohe: Tugendhat House, Brno, Czechoslovakia, 1930. Room  AN ONYX SPUR WALL SEPARATES THE LIGRARY ON THE LEFT FROM THE DRAWING. ROOM ON THE RIGHT, BUT ODES NOT INTERFERE WITH THE OPEN FEELING OF ONE LARGE ROOM. BLACK OR WHITE VELVET CURTAINS ON CHROME RAILB CAN SEPARATE THE ROOMS MORE COMPLETELY: CURTAINS GAN ALSO BE CRAWN ACROSS THE GLASS WALLS. THE SUBDUED COLOR SCHEME—TAN, BEIGE, GREEN, PEARL GREY, WHITE AND BLACK—EMPHASIZES THE RICHNESS OF THE ONYX AND MACASESAR WOOD, THE BRILLIANSE OF THE CHROME POSTS AND PLATE GLASE. 
Miés van der Rohe: Apartment Study, New York. 1930 VARIETY OF SURFACES—WINDOW WALL COVERED SY BLUE RAW SILK SURTAIN, A WALL OF ‘BOOKS DN PALISSANDER SHELVES, WHITE PLASTER CEILING, AND STRAW MATTING ON  THE FLOOR. CHAIR OF WHITE VELLUM, DESK OF BLACK LEATHER. ALL SUPPORTS OF CHROME STEEL. 
Richard J. Neutra: Levell House, Los Angeles. 1929  THE CES:IGN, THOUGH CQMPLICATED BY THE VARIOUS FROJESTIONS AND THE  CONFUSING UBE OF METAL AND STUCCO SPANORELS, IS BABED ON A VISIBLE  REGULARITY OF STRUCTURE, 
J. J. P. Oud: Workers’ Houses, Hook of Holland. 1924-1927 THE CONTINUOUS BALGONY CARRIED ARQUND THE GUAVED SHOPS UNDERLINES THE SIMPLE RHYTHM OF THE WINDOWS. THE DOWNWARD CURVE OF THE GHELTER  PROVJECTION AND THE ADDEG WALL CAPPING DOVER THE SHOPS ARE PURELY OECORATIVE. 
J.J. P. Gud: Workers’ Houses, Hook of Holland. 1924-1927. Shep  A SUBTLE. COMPOSITION OF SIX CONGENTRIC GYLINDRIDAL BANDS. THE THIK BIBK oF  THE SHELTER, REPEATED IN THE DISK OF THE PAVEMENT BELOW, TERMINATES THE BLASS WALL WITHOUT APPEARING TO WEIGH IT DOWN. 
J.J. P. Oud: Row of Small Houses at the Weissenhofsiedlung, Stuttgart. 1927  THE PROJECTING BALCONIES AND THE SCREENS FOR VINES SEPARATING THE HOUSES  LIGHTEN THE CESIGN AND GIVE INTEREST TO THE REGULAR SCHEME. THE HOUSES ARE STEPPED TO CONFORM TO THE GROUND SLOPE. 
J.J. P. Oud: Siedlung Kiefhoek, Rotterdam. 1928-1930, Shops  EXTREME REGULARITY GIVEN INTEREST BY THE CURVES WHICH ALBO GONTINUE THE  WALL BURFAGE AROUND THE CORNER, THICK WOODEN WINDOW FRAMES ARE NECESSITATED BY INEXPENSIVE CONSTRUOTION. THEIR UNFORTUNATE HEAVINESS 18  MIRUMBEDS BY THE TREATMENT OF THE WIMPOWS AS A CONTINUOUB BAND OR SECOND STOREY WALL SCREEN. - 
Jj. J. P. Oud: Siedlung Kiefhoek, Rotterdam. , 1928-1930. Church.  A&A COMMUNITY BUILDING OF SPECIALIZED FUNCTION WHICH FORMS THE HIGH POINT CF. INTEREST IW A SONBIDERASLE 4REA OF STANDARDIZED BUILDING. (GEE GENERAL PLAN ON PAGE 208.) THE SUBORDINATE ROOMS AND THE ROUNDED CHIMNEY SERVE AS  ACCENTS TO THE SIMPLE RECTANGULAR BLOCK OF THE AUDITORIUM. LETTERING POOR AND BADLY PLACED. 
Lilly Reich: Bedroom in the Berlin Building Exposition. 1931  LUXURIOUS AND FEMININE GHARACTER ACHIEVED BY COMBINATION OF WHITE  MATERIALS OF VARIOUS TEXTURES. 
. Jan Ruhtenberg: Apartment Living Room, Berlin: 1930  
Hans Scharoun: Apartment House, Siedlung Siemensstadt, Berlin. 1930  THE GURVER END WITH ITS BALCONIES GIVES DISTINCTION TO THE WHOLE DESIGN. THE  FENESTRATION (8 ARBITRARY ANO COMPLICATED. 
Hans Sehmidi  idt (Artaria & Schmidt): Profeasional Women’s Residence, Basle, Switser- land THE RIBBON WINDOWS OF THE CORRIDORS ARE WELL ARRANGED. THE DODRE ARE  ADJUSTED TO THE WINDOW RHYTHM, EACH APARTMENT OF TRIS GROUP DWELLING HAG ITS BALCONY, AS SEEN AT THE LEFT. 
Hans Schmidt (Artaria & Schunidt): Waldner House, Near Basle, Switzerland. 1930  CLEAR DESIGN MARREO BY BAD WINDOW DETAIL. COLOR IG CORAL RED. 
Karl Schneider: Kunstverein, Hamburg, Germany. 1930 A NINETEENTH CENTURY CITY HOUSE REMODELLED. THE BYMMETRICAL SOLUTION 15  HERE THE MOST FUNCTIONAL. THE LONG BAND OF RAISED LETTERING IB WELL USED FOR DECORATION. 
Karl Schneider: Werner House, Near Hamburg, Germany, 1930 BRICKS WHEN LAID TRADITIONALLY SUGGEST MASONRY CONSTRUCTION, PARTICULARLY ON 20 SMALL A BUILDING. THE WINDOW FRAMES, INSET AT THE CORNERS, GREAK THE  VERTICAL EDGES. 
Stam & Moser: Budge Home for the Aged, Frankfort, Germany. 1929-1930 COMMON ROOMS CONNECT TWO WINGS OF CONE-ROOM APARTMENTS ORIENTED TO THE SOUTH. THOUGH BUILT BY ARCHITESTS WHO CLAIM TO BE GUIDED SCLELY BY COMSIDERATIONS OF ECONOMY ANC FUNCTION, THE BUILOING HAG REAL 2STHETIC  MERIT AS WELL. 
Stam & Moser: Budge Home for the Aged, Frankfort, Germany, 1929—1 930. Lebby.  WALL ABOVE BALCONY !& PALE BLUE AND THAT BELOW, BRIGHT REG. OTHER WALLS AND  POSTE ARE WHITE. THE ROUNDED CORNERS ON THE PIERS ARE AN EXCELLENT REFINEMENT. 
Mamoru Yamada: Electrical Laboratory, Ministry of Public Works, Tokio. 1929  A STRAIGHTFORWARD BUILDING WITHOUT MUGH REFINEMENT. THE ROUNDED ECGER  BLUR THE EFFECT UF VOLUME.  - - 
Steger & Egender: Bathing Beach, Kiisnacht, Near Ziirich. 1928  THE RESTAURANT WITH ITS LONG THIN ROOF SLAB CONTINUES AS A TERRACE  BVERLOOKING THE WATER. 
Eskil Sundahl: Siedlung of the Swedish Coéperatine Seciety, Hastholmen, Near Stock- helm, 1930  ROWS OF WOODEN HOUSES FACING SOUTH ON A HILLSIDE. THE ROOFEG ARE NOT FLAT  BUT THE PITCH 1S MADE SLIGHT TO AVOIC A GABLED EFFECT. 
Tucker & Howell; Oscar Stonorov, Consultant: Biological Laboratory of the High- lands Museum, Highlands, N. C. 1931  PAINTED MATCH-BOARDING ADMIRABLY USED ON WOOD CONSTRUCTION. PIPE BUFPPORT 18 INCDNGRUOUG AND APPEARS TOD FRAIL. WALLA ARE PALE LEMON YELLOW: BASE AND ENTRANCE ARE MAHOGANY RED. 
Lais Welszenbacher: Schuls House, Westphalia, Germany. 1928  UNFORTUNATE CONTRAST OF VERTICAL AND HORIZONTAL GRICK COURSES. INSTEAD OF  ‘WINDOWS, THE LIVING ROOM HAS A WALL OF BLASS. 
Lois Welzenbacher: Apartment House, Innebruck, Austria. 1930 THE CURVED CORNER CANNOT 82 JUBTIFIED @Y FUNCTION NOR DOES IT APPEAR  NECESBARY TO THE DESIGN. 
Essen, Office of the City Architect: Children’s Clinic. 1930 THE PROJECTING WING TO THE LEFT PROVIDES A UNIFYING FRAME FOR THE  COMPLICATION OF THE GET-GACK SUN TERRACEG. 
Frankfort, Germany; Office of the City Architect (Ernst May): Friedrich Ebert School. 1931  ADJUSTMENT TO SITE GIVES LIGHT TO EACH ROW OF CLASSROOMS WITH THEIR GARDEN. 
Mannheim, Germany; Office of the City Architect (Zizler & Miiller): Exposition Build- ings. 1930 ,  SLANTED ROOF '@ INGENIOUBLY, IF NOT HONESTLY, TREATED. GROUNBS AND  BUILOINGS SHOW THE INFLUENCE OF TRADITIONAL PLANNING ON SYMMETRICAL AXES. 
Kassel, Germany: Office of the City Architect (Jobst), Savings Bank. 1921  A MUNICIPAL BUILDING, BOUND SUT NOT BRILLIANT IN DESIGN. LOWER LETTERING  BETTER PLACED THAN SILHOUETTED LETTERING ABOVE. 
U. S. 5. R., Government Architects (Nicolaiev & Fissenko): Electro-Physical Labora-  tory, Lefortovo, Moscow. 1927 VERTICAL AND CURVED ELEMENTS USED WITH FUNCTIONAL JLISTIFIGATION AND  SOTHETIC SUCCESS. 
Stuttgart, Architect of Postal Administration: Antomatic Pest Office. 1931  AN ADDITION, WITHDUT STYLISTIC COMPROMISE, TO AN OLD BUILDING. THE LINE OF THE  ROOF SLAG iS UNNECESSARILY GOMPLIGATED BY THE JOG AND THE CURVING GORNERS. 
A PPEN DI X  T2 following article was written by H. R. Hitchcock for the August, 1951, Architectural Record. In form it is a series of quotations from the original 1932 text with comments made in the light of developments in modern architecture over the ensuing twenty years. Typographic differentiation indicates which are the quoted passages from the book—prepared in 1931, though published only the following year—and which are the comments of 1951.  The International Style Twenty Years After  The International Style was prefaced by a statement by Alfred Barr, the Director of the Museum of Modern Art. In his first para- 
graph he made a claim which the authors themselves might well have considered immodest:  ... They have proven beyond any reasonable doubt, I believe, that there exists today a modern style as original, as consistent, as logical, and as widely distributed as any in the past. The authors have called it the International Style.  To many this assertion of a new style will seem arbitrary and dogmatic ..  And how! A quarter century after Gropius’s Bauhaus at Des- sau and Le Corbusier’s Pavilion de I’Esprit Nouveau at the Paris Exposition of Decorative Arts of 1925 first made evident that something like a concerted program for a new architecture ex- isted, it is still by no means necessary to conclude that the “In- ternational Style” (which they and other European architects were’then maturing) should be considered the only proper pat- tern or program for modern architecture.  The work of many architects of distinction such as Frank Lloyd Wright, who make no bones about their opposition to the supposed tenets of an International Style, certainly belongs to modern architecture as much as does the work of Gropius and Le Corbusier. Yet the particular concepts of a new modern style which date from the Twenties do conveniently define that crys- tallization—that convergence of long immanent ideas—which then took place in France and Germany and Holland, and which a quarter century later has spread throughout the civilized world. | (Only, I believe, in Russia are the forms of the International Style unpopular—to put outright official proscription rather mildly!)  In general, it has been the concept of “style” itself,.as imply- ing restraint or discipline according to a priori rules of one sort or 
another, which has been hardest for architects, as distinguished from critics and writers, to accept. The introduction of the 1932 book was therefore devoted to defending “The Idea of Style” and this defense is still relevant—even if its validity is also still de- batable—today:  The chaos of eclecticism served to give the very idea of style a bad name in the estimation of the first modern architects of the end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth century.  The most distinguished older modem architects, notably Wright and Gropius, are still perhaps the most perturbed by the idea that anything that can properly be called a style, in the his- toric sense of that werd, can have any worthwhile part to play in the architecture of the 20th century. Yet Wright himself obvi- ously has a highly individualistic style—several, for that mat- ter—and it is also obvious that that personal style (or those styles) of his could be utilized as a framework of architectural advance, if his precepts for “Organic Architecture” were widely accepted and conscientiously followed.  Gropius is proud of the fact that it is difficult to tell the work of one of his pupils from that of another—a difficulty that he in fact rather exaggerates. (For the work of Paul Rudolph, for example, differs a great deal from that of the members of what might be called the Boston Suburban School.) But what is this anonymity that the Chairman of the Harvard Department of Architecture ad- mires in his pupils’ work but a common style? It is not the “Gropius” or the “Bauhaus” style, moreover, but merely an im- portant part of the broader International Style, as that is prac- - ticed by the third generation of modern architects in the North Eastern United States, 
The individualistic revolt of the first modern architects de- stroyed the prestige of the (historic] “styles,” but it did not re- move the implication that there was a possibility of choice be- tween one zsthetic conception of design and another.  To refuse a comparable liberty of choice today, merely be- cause 25 years ago the development of modern architecture began to be notably convergent, is. certainly a form of academi- cism. This is already only too evident in just the places one would expect to find it, that is, in prominent architectural schools — and in large highly institutionalized offices. Modern architecture in the 1950s should have room again for a range of effects as diverse, if not as divergent, as Victor Horta’s Maison du Peuple in Brussels of 1897, an early modern building largely of metal and glass that is too often forgotten now, and Wright’s River For- est Golf Club (as first built in 1898), of ordinary wooden-frame construction, in which most of the concepts of his now “classic” prairie houses of the next decade were already almost fully ma- ture,  The individualists decried submission to fixed esthetic prin- ciples as the imposition of a dead hand upon the living material of architecture, holding the failure of the [stylistic] revivals [of the 19th century] as a proof that the very idea of style was an unhealthy delusion.  Much of what Dean Wurster has called “Drugstore Modern” suggests that the “individualists” were less completely in the wrong than we admitted 20 years ago. Certainly too rigid a con- cept of what is stylistically “permissible” is always stultifying. But throughout most of the intervening period our contention  that: 
The idea of style, which began to degenerate when the revivals destroyed the disciplines of the Baroque, has become real and fertile again.  has been supported by what has occurred.  The idea of modern style should remain, as it presently is in fact, somewhat loose rather than too closely defined. There will, however, always be some sort of style in the arts of self-conscious periods, whether it is so recognized, and so called, or not. Since it is impossible to return, under the circumstances of advanced civilization, to the unselfconscious production of supposedly styleless “folk arts,” it is well to be aware that there is a problem of style, To attempt to dismiss style altogether is culturally ingen- uous; it is also Utopian, or more accurately, millennial (in one sense at least, there were no “styles” in the Garden of Eden!).  The unconscious and halting architectural developments of the nineteenth century, the confused and contradictory experi- mentation of the beginning of the twentieth, have been succeeded by a directed evolution. There is now a single body of discipline, fixed enough to integrate contemporary style as a reality and yet . elastic enough to permit individual interpretation and to encour- age peneral growth.  Today that “fixing” is resented, just because it has been so successful. Yet the establishment of a fixed body of discipline in architecture is probably the major achievement of the 20th cen- tury, not any technical developments in building production that _ have become universally accepted; modem technical develop- -ments have recurrently disappointed the optimists and they have failed, perhaps even more conspicuously, to live up to the bolder  prophecies of 19th century critics. 
After 25 years, it is the “elasticity?” and the possibility of “gen- eral growth” within the International Style which should be em- phasized. That was already beginning to be evident to Philip Johnson and myself 20 years ago. Few of our readers, alas, seem to have given us credit for what were then readily dismissed as mere “escape-clauses.”  The idea of style as the frame of potential growth, rather than as a fixed and crushing mould, has developed with the recogni- tion of underlying principles such as archaeologists. discern in the great styles of the past. The principles are few and broad,  Too few and too narrow, I would say in 1951 of the principles that were enunciated so firmly in 1932: ~  There is, first, a new conception of architecture as volume rather than as mass. Secondly, regularity rather than axial sym- metry serves as the chief means of ordering design. These two principles, with a third proscribing arbitrary applied decoration, mark the productions of the international style.  Today I should certainly add articulation of structure, proba- bly making it the third principle; and 1 would also omit the refer- ence to omament, which is a matter of taste rather than of princi- ple. The concept of regularity is obviously too negative to explain very much about the best contemporary design; but I can still find no phrase that explains in an all-inclusive way the more pes- itive qualities of modern design.  In opposition te those who claim that a new style of atchitec- ture is impossible or undesirable, it is necessary to stress the. co- herence of the results obtained within the range of possibilities 
thus far explored, For the international style already exists in the present; it is not merely something the future holds in store. Ar- chitecture is always a set of actual monuments, not a vague cor- pus of theory,  After twenty years there are many, many more “actual monu- ments” in existence; the results are still coherent, but the “cor- " pus of theory” is both firmer and broader, if also harder to define. The mistake made by many readers of “The International Style” was—and if any one reads the book now, instead of depending on his memory or on second-hand reports of its contents, still is I fear—to assume that what the authors offered as a diagnosis and 4 prognosis was intended to be used as an academic rulebook.  it is an old story now, on the other hand, that Wright came very close indeed to the International Style in certain projects of the late 1920s, such as that for an apartment house for Elizabeth Noble in Los Angeles, and that many of his most famous later works, such as Falling Water, seem to include definitely “inter- national” ideas: The architects of the San Francisco Bay Region, whom some critics have wished to build up as the protagonists of a mote humanistic school opposed to the International Style, have also frequently followed its principles almost to the point of parody—although admittedly not in their best and most charac- teristic country-house work. Between these extremies of loose in- terpretation by one of the original definers of the International Style and of partial, or even at times complete, acceptance of its tenets by those theoretically most opposed to it, lies the great bulk of current architectural production,  Following the section devoted to “The Idea of Style” in the 1932 book came one on the “History” of modern architecture. We said then (rather condescendingly) of the architects active  from 1890 to 1920: 
Today it seems more accurate to describe the work of the older generation as half- modern. eo  In 195] there seems no reason at all not to claim that the work of the older generation of modern architects was “early modern,” not “half-modem.” The achievements of the earlier men seem much greater today in retrospect, moreover, than they did 20 years ago. Without Wright’s work of the last 20 years, it is hard to believe now that the full scope of his greatness could have been | appreciated as it certainly had been in 1932 by many architects and critics for almost a generation. Yet it still seems a true enough historical statement to say that:  There was no real stylistic integration until aftet the war {of 1914-18].  The crystallization of what will perhaps in historical terms some day be called the “high” phase of modern architecture came in the 1920s. Now I suspect we are entering the “late” phase. Leaving that prognosis aside, much of what we wrote twenty years ago about the “early modern” architects still seems true.  Wright was the first to conceive of architectural design in terms of planes existing freely in three dimensions rather than in terms of enclosed blocks. Wagner, Behrens and Perret lightened the solid massiveness of traditional architecture, Wright dyna- mited it.  Such things as the interior of Otto Wagner’s Postal Savings — Bank in Vienna, of [1904-06], or Behrens’s German General Electric turbine factory in Berlin, of [1909-10], appear today 
more extraordinary, in relation to what had preceded them in the previous century, than they did then.  Wright from the beginning was radical in his aesthetic experi- mentation,  Wright’s Yahara Boat Club [Project], [for] Madison, Wiscon- sin, prefigured, well before Cubism reached maturity, most of the plastic innovations that contact with abstract painting and sculp- ture were to suggest, [many] years later, to the young European architects who initiated the International Style. The plan Wright prepared for a house to be built for himself in 1903, incorporat- ing all the living areas except the kitchen in one articulated flow, is obviously an early prototype of the one-room houses that are frequently supposed to be a post-war development of the last five  Perret was, perhaps, a more important innovator in construc- tion.  Perret’s church at LeRaincy outside Paris, of 1923, remains more striking than much of the shell-concrete construction of the last decade. But Perret’s later work has seemed less. bold, both structurally and aesthetically, and he belongs in the main to the early 20th century. Wright’s Johnson Wax Building in Racine, of [1937-39], particularly with the addition of the new laboratory tower completed last year, reveals on the other hand that the American architect’s feats as an innovator in construction had not even reached their peak in 1932. If such buildings as Notre - Dame du Raincy and the Racine structures are not prime exam- ples of modern architecture, the word “modern” has no meaning. On the other hand, they certainly do not fit conveniently into the 
frame of the International Style as it was envisaged between 1922 and 1932. ~  With regard to the moment of stylistic crystallization in the 1920s I think it is still true to say, as we wrote in 1931:  ... the man who first made the world aware that a new style was being born was Le Corbusier.  Furthermore, no one has done more than Le Corbusier ever since to extend and loosen the sanctions of the International | Style. That was already apparent in 1932 in his house for Mme. de Mandrot at Le Pradet, of 1931, and in his Errazuris house of the same date in Chile. It is in some respects perhaps less evi- dent today, at least in New York, since the UN office building (in whose design he played some part) may be considered “early” Le Corbusier—like his Paris projects of the Twenties—rather than post-War Le Corbusier, at least in the form in which it has been  executed.  In [Le Corbusier’s] Citrohan house models of [1919-] 1921 .. the enormous window area and the terraces made. possible by the use of ferro-concrete, together with the asymmetry of the com- position, undoubtedly produced a design more thoroughly in- fused with new spirit, more completely freed from the conven- tions of the past, than any thus far projected.  It is interesting to compare the Citrohan house with Wright's Millard house in Pasadena, designed a year [or two] later. Note the similarity of the volume-concept of the interior, with the two- story living-area in front opening on a balcony, and the bedrooms _ and services on two levels behind. In 1931 it was hard to appre- ciate the originality in concept and in structure of the Millard 
house, because the patterned surface produced with the concrete blocks was so different from the smooth rendered surfaces which were still the sign-manual of the International Style, particularly as illustrated in the work of the Le Corbusier before 1930. Now, I think it is evident that such surface-patterning is a perfectly le- gitimate expression of the casting process by which Wright's blocks were made. Above all, 30 years have proved that pat- terned concrete surfaces, like Wright’s of the 1920s, generally weather rather agreeably. The rendered surfaces of the early “In- ternational” buildings of the same period too often cracked and grew stained, thus losing all that quality of platonic abstraction which made them so striking.  [Le Corbusier] was not the only innovator nor was the style as it came generally into being after 1922 peculiarly his own. He erystallized; he dramatized; but he was not alone in creating.  Le Corbusier was certainly a good deal responsible for there being a recognizable international style. Yet Gropius’s work and the work of his pupils is doubtless more typical of the style; and he has always been an equally effective proponent, even if he does continue to disown the idea of style at every opportunity.  It was in Mies’s projects of 1922 that his true significance as an aesthetic innovator first appeared. In a design for a country house he broke with the conception of the wall as a continuous plane surrounding the plan and built up his composition of inter- secting planes. Thus he achieved, still with the use of supporting walls, a greater openness even than Le Corbusier with his ferro- concrete skeleton construction.  Mies’s country-house project of 1922, with its bearing walls of brick and its van Doesburg-like plan, seems even more signifi- 
cant today than it did twenty years ago. It very evidently does not fit either the principle of enclosed volume or the principle of reg- ularity. (This serious critical dilemma seems hardly to have been noted in 1931.)  The next section of the book was concerned with “Functional- ism.” For in 1932 The International Style was conceived as a counterblast to functionalism, at least as we then understood that term.  Some modem critics and groups of architects both in Europe and in America deny that the aesthetic element in architecture is important, or even that it exists. All aesthetic principles of style are to them meaningless and unreal.  There are still those who insist that architecture ought to be entirely a matter of technics and that architects should therefore hand over the whole field of building to engineers. But the glorification of engineering is a less popular critical gambit than it was earlier. (Then it will perhaps be recalled there was even a “Great Engineer” in the White House!) Yet, looking back over the building production of the last two generations, it is evident that the really great engineers have frequently built edifices which were more monumental and in many ways more visually effective than what most architects were able to achieve. The grain elevators of the Great Lakes ports stimulated Le Cor- busier’s ideas of what the new architecture might be like quite as much as did the “Tubism” of his friend the painter Léger. The engineer Freyssinet’s hangar at Orly, of [1916], is still something that architeets have been unable to rival for grandeur and clarity of form. The Goodyear Airship Dock at Akron is almost as im- - pressive. What this really means is that some engineers: are very good architects! 
. . « {It is] nearly impossible to organize and execute a compli- eated. building without making some choices not wholly deter- mined by technics and economics. . . . Consciously or uncon- sciously the designer must make free choices before his design is completed.  Some sort of architectural style inevitably arises from the characteristic ways in which those free choices are made. Thus functionalism, even in the drastic terms of the Twenties, could have turned into a style, and to some Europeans it seems to have become one—the International Style, in fact! It is not necessary, of course, that engineers, or those architects who prefer to think of themselves as “pure” functionalists, should be able to explain in words their principles of design. (Some engineers at least, such as Arup and Samuely in England, can do so, however, and - often very ably.) ] |  ... Critics should be articulate about problems of design; but architects, whose training is more technical than intellectual, can afford to be unconscious of the effects they produce. So, it may be assumed, were many of the great builders of the past.  As I have already noted, Mr. Johnson has given the most effec- tive evidence of his own broad interpretation of the International Style in the buildings he has designed, rather than in writing. My own writing of the last 20 years, and perhaps particularly. the book on Frank Lloyd Wright, In the Nature of Materials (1942), indicates—sometimes implicitly, sometimes explicitly—how my own ideas have been modified. It is worthwhile, none the less, to consider here a particular principle of the International Style as we saw it in 1932, notably the one concerning “Architecture as Volume.” That was at best an ambiguous phrase, since volume is 
properly “contained space,” while we were then chiefly con- cerned with the avoidance of effects of mass in the. treatment of the exteriors of buildings.  Contemporary methods of construction provide a cage or skel- eton of supports. Now the walls are merely subordinate elements fitted like screens between the supports or carried like a shell outside them.  The particular relationship of skeleton and shell which we — then considered most characteristic of the International Style can best be illustrated, paradoxically, by the plan of a building that has never been accepted as representative of the style, Per- ret’s church at LeRaincy, of 1923. ~  It is true that supporting wall sections are still sometimes used in combination with skeleton structure.  An early example of this, by one of the recognized leaders of the International Style, is illustrated in the plan of Le Corbusier's de Mandrot house of 1931. We considered that rather an excep- tion. But today a very large number of modern American houses include (often quite arbitrarily it would seem) sections of sup- porting masonry, sometimes of brick, sometimes of rustic stene- work, and very frequently of cinder or other concrete blocks. in- troduced for effects of contrast and also because of their suitability in certain functional and structural situations. The — idea may be abused but it can no longer be considered excep- tional or reactionary.  The effect of mass, of static solidity, hitherto the prime quality of architecture, has all but disappeared; in its place there is an 
effect of volume, or more accurately, of surface planes bounding a volume. The prime architectural symbol is no longer the dense brick but the open box.  Certainly this statement is even truer, in a general way, than it was twenty years ago. Yet my fellow-author, Mr. Johnson, not only used a tower-like cylinder inside his house of glass in New Canaan, but contrasted the ultimate openness of the main house with a guest house of brick, almost as solid in appearance as if it had no interior whatsoever!  The most dramatic illustrations of the various methods of ex- pressing interior skeletons still remain the American skyscrap- ers; but there are now rather more of them than there were in 1932, so that the character of their construction is better under- stood by the general public.  The McGraw-Hill Building comes nearest to achieving aes- thestically the expression of the enclosed steel cage, but it is still partially distorted into the old silhouette of a massive tower. . . . Yet the architect, Raymond Hood, in the Daily News Building which is in other ways less pure in expression, handled the set-. backs so that they did not-suggest steps and brought his building to a clean stop without decorative or terminal features.  It has too often been forgotten—and apparently was by us when writing in 193]—+that long before Raymond Hood’s day the Bayard or Conduit Building, of 1897, in New York, by Louis Sul- livan, or better still his Gage Building, of the next year, at 18 South Michigan Avenue in Chicago, illustrated more clearly than - Hood’s skyscrapers, then newly completed, the proper architec- tural expression of steel-skeleton construction in the external  cladding of a tall edifice. The later New York skyscrapers (and 
particularly those since the War that seem most literally to follow the precepts of the International Style in their design) are cer- tainly not more expressive than these 50-year-old buildings. It is also interesting to note that Mies van der Rohe, in his Chicago apartment houses of the last few years, has moved closer and closer to Sullivan in the exterior treatment, whether the skeleton inside be of ferro-concrete or of steel. Even 20 years ago it was very difficult, apparently, to see the grandeur of the Sullivanian forest through the lush foliage of the ornament.  Style is character, style is expression; but even character must be displayed, and expression may be conscious and clear or mud- died and deceptive. The architect who builds in the international style seeks to display the true character of his construction and to express clearly his provision for function. He prefers such an or- ganization of his general composition, such a use of available sur- face materials, and such a handling of detail as will increase rather than contradict the prime effect of surface of volume.  The articulation of visible supports should also have been mentioned, whether isolated {as for example in the Johnson glass house or Mies’s Farnsworth house on the Des Plaines river near Chicago) or actual sections of bearing wall (as in Le Corbusier’s Le Pradet house or his [project for] Chile). A very striking exam- ple of vigorous articulation, in a quite sculptural way, of interior supports was in fact illustrated in the book—Aalto’s Turun Sano- mat Building at [Turku] in Finland, of 1930.  The flat reof was almost the sign-manual of the International Style in the early days. A loophole which proved very prophetic - was left (fortunately) in the text on this subject: 
Roofs with a single slant, however, have occasionally been used with success. Flat roofs are so much more useful that slant- ing or rounded roofs are only exceptionally justified.  The last sentence certainly represented a puristic and also a pseudofunctional position. But roofs are certainly of great impor- tance in determining the character of the architecture of any pe- riod, particularly as regards small structures such as houses. Many architects have now swung so far from the belief that roofs raust he flat that there is a tendency to over-exploit elaboration of the skyplane.  Since the roof was expected 20 years ago to be invisible, a great deal of space was given to the surfacing of exterior walls in the 1932 book.  The spirit of the principle of [continuous] surface covers many exceptions to its letter. The type of construction represented by Mies van der Rohe’s Barcelona pavilion, as well as that repre- sented in Le Corbusier's house at Le Pradet, leads to a treatment of surfaces sensibly different from that which has been primarily stressed here. .  Obviously these exceptions should have been a warning that the aesthetic “necessity” for the treatment of exterior walls as continuous surface was being much exaggerated. Curiously enough, California architects, working mostly with wood, have of late years been more faithful to the principle of continuity of sur- face than the European architects who were originally the most devoted to rendered and painted surfaces of cement.  The general statement with which this section concluded had its sound paints: 
The principle of surface of volume intelligently understood will always lead to special applications where the construction is not the typical cage or skeleton of supports surrounded by a pro- tecting screen. The apparent exception may not prove the validity of the general principle, but it undoubtedly indicates its elastic- ity. Rigid rules of design are easily broken once and for all; elas- tic principles of architecture grow and flourish.  Rather than proceed with so detailed a commentary, it may be . well to lead into a conclusion to this article by quoting a few of the more general remarks of 20 years ago which seem to remain  valid still.  The second principle of contemporary style in architecture has to do with regularity. The supports in skeleton construction are normally and typically spaced at equal distances. Thus most. buildings have an underlying regular rhythm which is clearly seen before the outside surfaces are applied. Moreover, economic considerations tend to favor the use of standardized parts throughout. Good modern architecture expresses in its design this characteristic orderliness of structure and this similarity of parts by an aesthetic ordering which emphasizes the underlying regularity. Bad modem design contradicts this regularity. Regu- larity is, however, relative and not absolute in architecture.  . . the nearer approaches to absolute regularity are also ap- proaches to monotony. . . . The principle of regularity refers toa means of organization, a way of giving definite form to an ar- chitectural design, rather than to an end which is sought for itself.  . The avoidance of symmetry should not be arbitrary or dis- torted.  .-+ The mark of the bad modern architect is the positive cultiva- 
tion of asymmetry for decorative reasons. For that can only be done in the majority of cases at the expense of common consist- ency and common sense. The mark of the good modem architect, on the other hand, is that the regularity of his designs approaches hilateral. symmetry. .  Exceptions to general rectangularity are only occasionally de- manded by function and they may introduce complications in the regular skeleton of the structure. Non-rectangular shapes, partic- ularly if they occur infrequently, introduce an aesthetic element of the highest positive interest... . They need seldom occur in ordinary building, but in monuments where the architect feels justified in seeking for a strongly personal expression, curves will be among the elements which give most surely extreme positive or negative aesthetic value. Curved and oblique forms seldom find a place in the cheapest solution of a given problem. But, if they can be afferded, they succeed, as they fail, on aesthetic grounds alone. a  Aalto’s Senior House at the Massachusetts Institute of Tech- nology, of 1948, is obviously the most striking illustration of the inereased use of curved and oblique forms. Whether most people approve of this prominent: building or not, they tend to assume that Aalto was here consciously breaking with the rigidities of the International Style. Actually, as the paragraph above makes evident, even this notable post-War structure, though it may be at the extreme limit of the Intemational Style as we understood it 20 years ago, is still in actual opposition to its sanctions only in the expressive irregularity of the plan and a few rather minor de- tails, such as the willful roughness of the brickwork and the ex- ’ cessive clumsiness of some of the membering. Aalto was really reacting here, not against the International Style, but against that 
vulgar parodying of its more obvious aspects—the “Drugstore Modern”—which had become ubiquitous jn the previous. dec- ade. ae  It was naturally to be expected, as the International Style be- came more widely accepted, that more and more weak and imita- tive architects would attempt to exploit its characteristic fea- tures. In 1932 we were amazingly optimistic and full of faith, We wrote:  Anyone who follows the rules, who accepts the implications of an architecture that is not mass but volume, and who conforms to the principle of regularity can produce buildings which are at least aesthetically sound, If these principles seem more negative than positive, it is because architecture has suffered chiefly in the last century and a half from the extension of the sanctions of genius to all who have called themselves architects.  But it has not, of course, worked out that way. Many docile architects, and even builders outside the profession, have fol- lowed the rules dutifully enough, but their buildings can hardly be considered aesthetically sound. Doubtless the principles educed twenty years ago were too negative, and now we are ready, probably too ready, to extend the sanctions of genius very widely once more. If my tentative prognosis be correct, that we stand now at another change of phase in modern architecture be- tween a “high” and a “late” period, we must expect many vagar- ies in reaction against the too literal interpretation of the Interna- tional Style. We may also expect—and indeed.already have with us—an academic current which is encouraging the repetition of established formulas without creative modulation. If the next 25 years are less disturbed by depressions and wars than the last have been, I suspect that our architecture will grow more diverse 
in kind. But I doubt if we will, for the next generation or more, lose contact altogether with the International Style, if that be in- terpreted as broadly as it was meant to be in 1932.  The International Style was not presented, in the 1932 book which first gave currency to the phrase, as a closed system; nor was it intended to be the whole of modern architecture, past, pre- sent, and future. Perhaps it has become convenient now to use the phrase chiefly to condemn the literal and unimaginative ap- plication of the design clichés of 25 years ago; if that is really the case, the term had better be forgotten. The “traditional architec- ture,” which still bulked so large in 1932, is all but dead by now. The living architecture of the twentieth century may well be called merely “modern.” 