BOOK Harry Francis Mallgrave TwentiethCentury Architecture.pdf
Introaquction  The Project and Projects of Modern Architecture  David Leatherbarrow  What is modern architecture?’ Strange as it may seem to ask this question today, after more than a century of answers by the movement's protagonists, apologists, and historians, the need to rethink this body of work is no less pressing in our time than it was in the past. No doubt there exists some consensus about which projects were especially important and influential; this volume presents 50 that will, we trust, seem sensible choices to most readers, more or less. But the basis for that consensus, the reasons why some, and not other projects, have been judged to be especially, if variously, modern are not self-evident. The date of construction or of conception is not enough, for not everything that was built or designed in the twentieth century expressed the modernity of the time. Nor were the buildings that were said to be modern consistently so, for formal elements and kinds of artic- ulation that appeared to observers as novel often concealed techniques of construc- tion that had been used for centuries. One should not say that adherence to pre- modern ways of building occurred by accident, or that it was a result of a desire to deceive on the part of designers or critics; some measure of continuity is inescap- able in the sorts of historical change that affect the material and spatial domains o: culture: cities, gardens, buildings, or rooms. Techniques, for example, accumulate in the history of building construction, new methods cooperate with old. Factory- made elements manufactured with the newest (today, digital) methods are stil assembled on structural foundations built into sites according to long-standing methods. Likewise, modern arrangements of inhabitable settings, in houses or libraries, for example, do not erase; they transform, alter, or modify earlier pat- terns. The history of cities shows something similar, for their cultural and historica. richness gives them the capacity to absorb even the most unprecedented o insertions — and be better for it. All of this is to say that even the most strident proposals are never closed in on themselves. Modern architecture was not “spoken into the void,” even if Adolf Loos, who published essays under this title, said things and invented configurations that had not been said or seen before.” Only by accepting the idea that modern projects adhered to inherited conditions as much as they rejected them can we understand why Loos admitted, “I am a modern architect because I build in the manner of the ancient Viennese.”  
While many modernists would have rejected Loos’ statement, even a little his- torical study shows that no surpassing is ever complete, or desired. Advances always depend on “conversations” with predecessors. Rarely are they viva voce, of course; they are instead asymmetrical, because the past, having passed, cannot answer back. Yet silence does not prevent significance. For architects with non- dogmatic minds it seems to have invited unending inquiry. Who, among the mod- erns we still study, did not say both yes and no to work from the past? Because not one of the conversations between modernists and their predecessors was limited by or concluded in the twentieth century — not Tadao Ando’s with Louis I. Kahn, Kahn’s with Le Corbusier, or Le Corbusier’s with the ancient Greeks and Romans — we should not be surprised that still today we find it hard to “sum up” what modern architecture was or is all about.  Modernity, and by implication modern architecture, has been famously described as “an incomplete project.”* Rightly celebrated and often cited, this only reverses the direction of the observation we have just made: twentieth century modernism reaches forward into our present just as it extended itself backward into its past.  Nor was there only one new architecture: first there was the modernism of the “pioneers”; after this came the translations of formerly new vocabularies into local dialects; next followed the modernism of those who built in different regions throughout the world; and then still another modern tradition emerged as a result of the critical assessments that called for a renewal of early impulses. The history of modern architecture is less a line of development than a field of sequential begin- nings and returnings, including false starts, real initiatives, and renewals, each ela- borating new possibilities that appeared thanks to changed conditions.  There is, as a result, a history of the histories of modern architecture. Through- out much of the twentieth century, reports on the new architecture insisted on the novelty and progressive character of its exemplary projects. The Latin stem modo can be translated as “just now.” For the early historians of the movement an acute sense of the unprecedented character of conditions just now meant stopping the clock of earlier ages and starting another one for the new time. According to this premise, historical change is not transitional but successive, distinct ages precede and follow one another; the Gothic, mannerist and baroque periods occurred in blocks or chunks of time, hewn out of the landscape of the past by historical science in order to be viewed independently, as separate and sequential architectural approaches.  Two histories of the 1920s that were particularly emphatic about the epoch- making advances of modern works were Adolf Behne’s The Modern Functional Building (1923) and Walter-Curt Behrendt’s The Victory of the New Building Style (1927). To some degree these books were both histories of the movement and pro- posals for it, simultaneously retrospective, as Behrendt announced that a victory had been won; and prospective, because his “history” set forth an agenda. No less progressive were Henry-Russell Hitchcock’s Modern Architecture: Romanticism and 
Reintegration (1929) and Alberto Sartoris’ Gli elementi dell’architettura (Elements of Functionalism, 1932), even if they had sharply different interpretations of what was essential about the movement. Two other texts, both published in 1936, like- wise accented the unprecedented character of avant-garde architecture: Nikolaus Pevsner’s Pioneers of the Modern Movement from William Morris to Walter Gropius and George Nelson’s Building a New Europe: Portraits of Modern Architects. But per- haps the most influential and widely read account of this epochal type was Sigfried Giedion’s Space, Time and Architecture: The Growth of a New Tradition (1941).  In the postwar decades, however, as the work of the modernists was coming under the tough criticism of a younger generation of modernists, the progress of the movement was reassessed. To some degree Giedion’s use of the term “new tradition” suggested or anticipated this turn, by placing the modern period among traditions that had come before. Without disavowing the linearity of devel- opments, later historians offered what might be termed “regional” accounts, in both the geographic and disciplinary senses of the term: the world-wide locations of the new architecture were described and interpreted and the themes or topics of modern innovations came under closer review — the expressive, technological, political, or environmental characteristics of the new ways of building. Historical works in this second group included Bruno Zevi’s Storia dell’architettura moderna (1950), Reyner Banham’s Theory and Design in the First Machine Age (1960), Leo- nardo Benevolo’s History of Modern Architecture (1960), Kenneth Frampton’s Modern Architecture: A Critical History (1980), Manfredo Tafuri’s The Sphere and the Labyrinth: Avant-Gardes from Piranesi to the 1970s (1980), and William Curtis’ Modern Architecture since 1900 (1982). Two more recent histories show the full complexity of the inheritance: Alan Colquhoun’s Modern Architecture (2002) reaffirms the pro- gressive character of modern architecture’s several movements in their nuanced variation, and Jean-Louis Cohen’s The Future of Architecture since 1889 (2012) shows the amplitude and richness of its geographical and cultural diffusion.  Additionally, in recent decades much historiographic work has focused on single figures, limited time frames, and under-studied territories. The result is an abun- dance of material that complicates the story of modernism. Partly because of this richness, few today are willing to accept epic narratives of the whole period. Addi- tionally, there is considerable doubt about the value and methodological assump- tions of such accounts. The ambition seems to have run its course. But the difficulty of the task and hesitations about method cannot free us from the basic task of all history writing: to tell a story, about architecture and for it; and also about the worlds it builds. For such a story to be told, selections must be made — for wholly inclusive tabulations of events still want an explanation — meaning that choices must be made. These must be guided by the double requirement for utmost plausibility (approximating objectivity) and intelligibility.” For this second requirement to be  fulfilled, imagination is required, for historical traces are always incomplete, terms are often used with ill-defined meanings, and the protagonists generally remain silent on their primary motivations. The historian’s imagination, of course, limits 
the account’s objectivity. One nevertheless attempts to reconstruct a sequence that rectifies all available data, seeking a rendition that is inferior to none other in like- lihood. An intelligible narrative also requires judgments about importance that in turn invoke the historian’s sense of what indeed is architectural. None of this can be avoided if the desire for both explanation and understanding is acknowledged. It is not only the breadth and systematic unity of the report that is important, but also the depth and singularity of the understanding the story creates.  Accordingly, the historian’s task today is to describe avenues of design practice hat were opened, pursued, and then abandoned, ways of working and of thinking hat initially built upon earlier achievements but later diverged, found their footing in the particularity of a given historical moment, but then sought to recall topics that have always defined the discipline. Concern for “classical,” “primitive,” and “vernacular” traditions, for example, went hand in hand with the celebration of contemporary possibilities. To see the historical depth of progressive propositions, we need to look beyond the claims of unprecedented novelty by the protagonists or their apologists. Consider this example from Le Corbusier: “T wish it were possible for the reader, by an effort of imagination, to conceive of what such a vertical city [the Voisin City] would be like; imagine all this junk, which till now has lain spread out over the soil like a dry crust, cleaned off and carted away and replaced by immense clear crystals of glass...”° Despite what seems a rather thoroughgoing erasure, the clearing recommended in this transformation allowed the city’s axes to stay where they were, along with what Le Corbusier called the great creations of the past: Invalides, Tuileries, Place de la Concorde, Camp de Mars, and the Etoile. One does not have to accept his preference for monuments over fabric to see his desire to assimilate the new into the old.  A clear rendering of this assimilation emerges when we take a close reading of the full spectrum of architectural tasks: the work of intervening in a given site, of interpreting a program of uses, of selecting materials (many of which were familiar but used in unfamiliar ways), and of detailing construction. What might be called the different times of architectural work — the prehistory, current expectations, and future possibilities of the site, program, materials, and labor practices — were folded in on themselves, as if the past had been nothing more than a recent present and the future a present yet to come. It is precisely this interlapsing that is the subject matter of histories that seek to catch the growth and continuity of the modern tradition at its source: the actual practices of design and construction, which is to say project making.  The basic premise of this book’s structure is that a particularly good way of understanding the history of modern architecture (including the modern architec- ture of our time) is by looking again at the tradition’s key projects. We would like this term to describe works that were not only built and persist to our time, even if altered, but also those we can no longer see because they were destroyed or intended to be temporary, or even only drawn or modeled. A history of projects can address and explain the themes that persist through a work’s several stages and  t t  
alterations, as well as the concrete and limited conditions that allowed and expressed those changes.  Given the weight of our historiographic tradition and of our naturalized sense of distinct ages succeeding one another in time, coming to grips with the interlapsing just mentioned means looking again at buildings and designs we thought we knew perfectly well. Each of the 50 chapters of this volume is an exercise in that task. When a built project is not the topic of study it is the idea of one, as represented in drawings or models. In some cases works that were built decades ago remain standing today. Other significant projects were destroyed or modified beyond recognition. Still others were meant to be temporary. Another set of projects that have been impor- tant in this history were never built at all. Regardless of the current state of a partic- ular work, its projective dimensions are the essential subject matter of the 50 chapters that follow. Although different interpretative instruments and proce- dures are required for the different embodiments of a project (built, altered, tempo- rary, or unbuilt), there seems to be no good reason to rank one kind of materialization over another. As shown in the chapters that follow, architectural pro- jects have the capacity to absorb and integrate ideas, material facts, cultural norms, and possibilities, as well as questions internal to the discipline of architecture. Because it refuses any categorical separation of fact and idea, of any discrete condi- tion and recurring theme, there is perhaps no better medium of architectural history than the project. A new story of the modern tradition unfolds as a result of this focus, even though the characters who play leading roles have names we have heard before.  The projects presented in the book have been grouped into six chronologically structured sections, the subtitles of which introduce the term world. Our basic premise is that the modern architectural project is an instrument of world building. The book’s sections show, however, that different understandings of the architec- tural project corresponded to different senses of the worlds that would result. We distinguish the ways projects were alternately anticipatory, imaginative, construc- tive, recursive, interrogative, and engaging. The story that results is thus an account of the modern period as well as an elaboration of the different aspects or dimensions of project making in these years. The ways of doing architecture and of world building that emerge in this story are modern architecture’s gift to the present, representing at once an inheritance and a set of tasks.  Notes  1. This question was used as the title of the Museum of Modern Art’s first volume in its Introductory Series to the Modern Arts: What is Modern Architecture? (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1942). That was not the first time it had been asked, nor would it be the last.  2. Spoken into the Void is the title of a collection of short texts by Loos originally published under the title Ins Leeve Gesprochen (Paris: Georges Crés, 1921). His regret was that the audience he addressed seemed unable to understand or even to hear what he had to say. 
PART |  The Early Twentieth Century 
Introauction ANTICIPATING MODERN WORLDS  Alexander Eisenschmidt  The progressive movements from the turn of the nineteenth century to the dawn of World War I largely preconditioned the modern avant-gardes that followed. All the buildings studied in the chapters of this section were designed by architects who were born at the end of the nineteenth century and practiced at the beginning of the twentieth century. They were part of a generation that witnessed unparalleled modernization first hand, an experience that deeply influenced the way they thought architecture had to engage the world. While the concept of the “modern” had been long in the making — from the seventeenth century quarrel against the supremacy of the ancients to the Enlightenment ideas of critical reason — industri- alization brought about an unprecedented world, so radically transformed that its inhabitants struggled to recognize it. Modern life was catapulted into existence through urban developments that took place at a record pace, changing the world more rapidly and dramatically than ever before.  The industrial city witnessed an extreme urbanization, no longer composed of familiar expressions of communal intimacy, torn by political turmoil, and increasingly questioning established traditions and patterns of behavior. Modernization was inti- mately linked to the modern city, where the industrial environment with its factories, credit networks, new institutional systems, and communication and information tech- nologies drew an unmatched number of workers to urban areas. The flow of migra- tion into cities between 1800 and 1900 was dramatic and drastically changed urban- rural relationships. In Europe, London’s population increased from 1.2 to 4.5 million, and Berlin’s from 172,000 to 1.9 million. Cities in the United States surpassed these statistics, with New York growing from 60,000 to 3.5 million and Chicago developing from a settler’s village around 1800 to a metropolis with 1.7 million inhabitants. This rapid growth in population did not match the construction efforts, resulting in den- sities that in many cities reached its all-time high by the end of the nineteenth century.  Observing an environment that sharply contrasted with the previously known world, Friedrich Engels wrote: “[the modern city is an] urban mess ... and the result of a gigantic accident.”’ The poor working, living, and urban conditions of cities, were for Engels conditioned by modern industrial capitalism, giving  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
way to an “accidental” urban development, often at the expense of previous urban orders. This notion of the city was passed on throughout the nineteenth century, and found one of the most outspoken opponents of the metropolis in Friedrich Nietzsche, who encouraged his Zarathustra to “spit on the great city.”* Driven by economic demands and new urban forms of living, mobility, and work required anew understanding of this recently transformed metropolitan space. The conver- gence of the desire to order the urban ground, the increasing rationalization of the city and of life, and the subsequent aesthetization of modern rational forms and life, marked the birthplace of an era in its anticipation of a new world. An industrial metropolis was born that was contingent on imperial models and colonial influ- ences — a new kind of international scene with a more cosmopolitan understanding motivated by far-reaching communication and news outlets, and disciplines such as sociology and city planning determined to understand the urban world by relying heavily on new methods of information mining, such as statistics.  These changes in the urban topography had a fundamental impact on architecture. In cities affected by the Industrial Revolution — and with it the implementation of new policies — the erosion of traditional urban and architectural forms and norms not only transformed existing typologies, such as prisons and schools, but introduced a multitude of new programs. Urbanization, economic development, and expansion simultaneously provoked and demanded a new make-up of the city. The exceptional rise of the railroad for example — which in the United States largely conditioned monopolistic capitalism and the exploitation of the frontier—not only shifted regional time and space ratios by bringing territories closer together but also demanded new building types in the form of the urban and suburban train station. Similarly, new manufacturing techniques and procedures required more and differently equipped factories, while new product lines and an ever-enlarging consumer culture carved new spaces of commerce into the city. The expansion of the latter proceeded during the nineteenth century from single stores along sidewalks to a collection of stores under colonnades, and the excavation of the urban block through arcades, only to culminate toward the end of the century in the “house of goods” — the department store — from the rue de Colonnes (1793) via the passage Delorme (1808) to Bon Marché (1887). At a national and, increasingly, international scale, new communica- tion networks enabled global trade and facilitated unprecedented organizational and bureaucratic structures. Different companies would congregate in buildings equipped with the newest technologies and devoted entirely to office space.  It is, therefore, no coincidence that Louis H. Sullivan’s famous — famously mis- understood and notoriously overused — dictum “form ever follows function” appears in his essay “The Tall Office Building Artistically Considered.”* As Joanna Merwood-Salisbury shows in her chapter, the Carson Pirie Scott building by Sullivan quickly became a symbol of “the rational and universal expression of social progress achieved through technology,” which Sullivan himself complicates through his selective use of ornamentation. The buildings of the Chicago School grew ever larger and taller by the end of the nineteenth century, effectively  
superseding conventional brick masonry construction, rapidly introducing the steel frame, and rethinking established methods, proportions, and materialities. Archi- tects had to come to terms with a new lightness, structural exuberance, material transparency, and prefabrication efficiency that engineers already utilized. Con- structs such as the poignantly named Crystal Palace by Joseph Paxton (1851) in London and the iron lattice tower by Gustave Eiffel (1889) in Paris are only two of the legendary products of modern technology that challenged architectural thinking and forever transformed the city. Not only were these new constructs utterly different, even alien, to the neighborhoods they occupied but they also seemed to transform their surroundings. Modernist painters such as Robert Delaunay depicted the buildings adjacent to the Eiffel Tower fractured and reflected into a cacophony of forms, and photographers were equally mesmerized by the tower's lightweight member through which the city was newly seen. Both works hinted at a new spatial condition that questioned the solidity of architecture and the opposition between interior and exterior. Sigfried Giedion, empowered by hindsight, would later lobby that “in the air-flooded stairs of the Eiffel Tower,” one experienced a new aesthetic, where “through the delicate iron net suspended in midair stream things, ships, sea, houses, masts, landscape and harbor.”* Here, mod- ern forms not only conditioned the modern city but assembled a new world from the fragments of the old.  The kaleidoscopic capacities of the glass and iron structures of the nineteenth century were the precursors to the expressionist imagery of Paul Scheerbart, ulti- mately culminating in the urban scenarios and architectural experiments of Bruno Taut. Often, these explorations were supported by the use of materials that only slowly found their way from engineering into architecture. Markus Breitschmid’s chapter, for example, begins by pointing out that concrete was the material that made Bruno Taut’s Glass House possible; a structure, as Breitschmid later emphasizes, that simultaneously harvested “technological pos- sibilities ... and a new and necessarily metaphysical foundation.” Viollet-le-Duc had already argued for the power of new industrial materials; against the stylistic assemblage of historicism, he advocated for architecture as a logical system born from within contemporary functional and material rules: “if we would invent that architecture of our own times ... we must certainly seek it no longer by mingling all the styles of the past, but by relying on novel principles of structure.”” For him, the rational structuring of iron trusses was the logical outcome of industrial pro- duction and current technological advancements. Viollet-le-Duc induced archi- tecture with the ambition toward a rational and “true” process of form-finding within the present, a dramatic shift in architectural thinking that was echoed by the coming generation and reinterpreted by associates in Art Nouveau, Jugendstil, Stile Liberty, and Secession. Designers in these groups no longer applied these new aesthetic principles to single elements alone but to interiors as a whole (from furniture to the dress). Here, families of forms created a “thick- ened interior” of a new parallel world of seeming fluidity and structural alliance,  
or what Amy Kulper in her chapter on the House for an Art Lover by Charles Rennie Mackintosh calls “a radicalized interior.”  Shortly after, however, these formal escalations were placed into perspective by considerations relating to the city, often by the very same protagonists. August Endell, an eccentric German architect who before 1900 deployed “free form” to provoke emotional responses, by 1908 sought to find aesthetic potential in the visual effects of the metropolis. Otto Wagner’s Postal Savings Bank constituted a new urban archi- tecture, a vision that was followed by his proposal for a new metropolis of infinite growth. Similarly, Peter Behrens called for simplified architectural uniformity that responded to the increasing speed of the city.° In his chapter on the Postal Savings Bank, Béla Kerékgyarté argues that one can identify the developments that Wagner made toward a rational approach, while Gabriele H. Bryant’s chapter on the AEG Turbine Factory points at Behrens’ intense search for an “architecture of our time.” Behrens stipulated that architectural details had to be suppressed once the tempo of vehicular traffic allowed one to see only silhouettes of buildings passing by. This was only one year after Filippo Tommaso Marinetti had described in detail a car race that prematurely ended in a disastrous crash while singing to the “multicolored and pol- yphonic tides of revolution.”” By 1914, Umberto Boccioni, followed by Antonio Sant’Elia, supplied Futurism with an architecture that spoke to the dynamism of the industrial city and wholeheartedly committed to and even accelerated the infra- structural and technologically saturated metropolis. Here, architectural form as enor- mous machine had become a fully immersed urban construct, linking all aspects of urban movement and vertically erupting at transportation nodes. Only after the tech- nological and strategic mechanization of World War I caused an unprecedented num- ber of casualties, including many Futurists, a reassessment of some of their fundamentals took place. Michelangelo Sabatini’s chapter contrasts the fast-paced urbanism of Sant’Elia’s Citta Nuova to what he calls a “slow Futurism” that developed by the early 1920s, captivated by “the dramatic qualities of the rugged landscape” on the island of Capri.  Just before and immediately after 1900, architecture had tested disciplinary boundaries, deployed new materials (or utilized old ones in new dimensions), and advanced techniques in its search for an expression of the historical moment. This search can be read as an attempt to catch up to a world it no longer under- stood, and much less had sway over. As a result, these two decades constitute one of the most contested eras in architectural history. To give only three exam- ples in a long list of books that struggled with the historical significance of this period: Nikolaus Pevsner’s Pioneers of the Modern Movement (1936) aimed to dem- onstrate how this timeframe was a “historical unit” that fully formed the “legit- imate style of our century”; Reyner Banham, on the other hand, saw the first machine age as erupting around 1912 and argued that “we are still the children of that turbulent generation”; and Manfredo Tafuri and Franceso Dal Co unhinged the master narratives of the time and understood the period as a “final flare-up of romantic Sehnsucht.”* More recently, writings by historians such as  
the late Detlef Mertins have expanded and opened up new insights in familiar territories by, for example, relating theories of glass to a much wider realm of influence.” As much as these interpretations differ, all concur on the period’s transformative capacities from nineteenth century aspirations to twentieth cen- tury formulations.  Marshall Berman went so far as to identify a shift from an open-ended and dynamic engagement with modernity during the late-nineteenth century toward a more hermetic understanding of modernism in the following decades. He saw a polarization at the beginning of the twentieth century, when “[ojpen visions of modern life have been supplanted by close ones, Both/ And by Either/Or.”"° For Berman, the struggle with modernity by the “first modernists,” as he calls them, presented not only problems but also revelations, where “their self-ironies and inner tensions were a primary source of their creative power.” As such, these early projects of the late nineteenth and very early twentieth century hold a unique place in the history of modernity — one of dualisms and twilights but, most of all, animated by an openness toward the modern world, which the Futurists were about to polarize between embrace and resistance. The few projects presented here as part of a much larger catalogue of works are not only vital to an understanding of the modernisms that followed but, to paraphrase Berman, may hold opportunities to better understand the modernities of today. While seemingly far-fetched, taking clues from the resourcefulness of these early modernists may just give us the right dose of foresight to engage the city of today, to detect openings in the immediate future, and to anticipate another world.  Notes  1. Friedrich Engels, “Die Lage,” Saturday Review (1856): 48.  2. Friedrich Nietzsche, Also Sprach Zarathustra [1883], (Leipzig: Druck und Verlag von C. G. Naumann, 1896), 258.  3. Louis Sullivan, “The Tall Office Building Artistically Considered,” Lippincott’s Magazine (March 1896). Here quoted from Louis Sullivan, Kindergarten Chats [1901], (New York: Dover, 1980), 208.  4. Sigfried Giedion, Building in France, Building in Iron, Building in Ferroconcrete, trans. J. Duncan Berry (Santa Monica: Getty Center for the History of Art and the Huma- nities, 1995), 91. Translated from Bauen in Frankreich, Bauen in Eisen, Bauen in Eisenbeton (1928).  5. Eugéne-Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc, Lectures on Architecture, vol. 2 [1872], (New York: Dover, 1987), 59.  6. Peter Behrens, “Kunst und Technik,” Elektrotechnische Zeitschrift, no. 22 June 2, 1910): 554: “Wenn wir im iiberschnellen Gefahrt durch die Strahen unserer Grobstadt jagen, k6nnen wir nicht mehr die Details der Gebaude gewahren.” See also Peter Behrens, “Einfluss von Zeit- und Raumausnutzung auf moderne Formentwicklung,” in Jahrbuch des Deutschen Werkbundes: Der Verkehr (Jena: Eugen Diederich, 1914), 7-10. 
1 SCHLESINGER  AND MAYER DEPARTMENT STORE/ CARSON PIRIE SCOTT  Louis Sullivan  Joanna Merwood-Salisbury  Louis Sullivan, Schlesinger and Mayer Department Store (Carson Pirie Scott), Chicago, 1903.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
In his 1892 essay, “Ornament in Architecture,” Louis Sullivan summarized the aesthetic implications of the steel frame: if the structure of a building and its exte- rior walls are now separate systems, what is the relationship between the two? The essay features his suggestion that “it would be greatly for our aesthetic good if we would refrain entirely from the use of ornament for a period of years, in order that our thought might concentrate acutely upon the perfection of build- ings well formed and comely in the nude.”’ For much of the twentieth century, Sullivan’s Schlesinger and Mayer department store, later known as Carson Pirie Scott (1899-1903), was regarded as the physical manifestation of that impulse, a building in which ornament had been stripped away from all but the base and attic, revealing the naked form of the frame underneath. In this way it seemed to herald a new aesthetic in which the representation of technology replaced con- ventional forms of ornament. Considered in the urban and social context of late nineteenth-century Chicago, the Schlesinger and Mayer building illustrates Sul- livan’s belief in the ongoing viability of architectural ornament, in particular as a representation of American democracy. This contextual reading suggests an alternative narrative of architectural modernism, one in which the curtain wall, so long understood as a form of structural expressionism, is also recognized for its decorative function.  A State Street Department Store  In 1891 the Schlesinger and Mayer Company consulted architects Adler and Sul- livan about giving a unified architectural expression to their department store, then located in a series of adjoining buildings in the block bounded by State, Mad- ison, Wabash, and Monroe Streets in downtown Chicago. The partners had achieved success with a series of projects combining technological innovation with decorative creativity, including the Schiller Theater (1886-92) and the Chicago Auditorium (1886-90). These projects dealt with complex functional requirements, including the need for large, well-lit interior spaces, as well as the desire for the expression of a civic and cultural identity suitable to a city of recent immigrants, many newly wealthy. While the department store commis- sion came to nothing, in 1898, after his partnership with Adler was dissolved, Sul- livan was commissioned to design a new 12-story flagship building for the company, replacing the existing one. The new building was constructed in two stages: a nine-story, three-bay building facing Madison Street, completed in 1899, and the main 12-story corner block with three bays on Madison and seven on State, completed in 1903. In 1904, the rival Carson Pirie Scott Company took control of the business and the building, gradually extending it southwards with a five bay extension by D.H. Burnham and Co. in 1906, and a three-bay section by 
Holabird and Roche in 1961. Both these additions mimicked the style of Sullivan’s original building.  One of a series of department stores built along State Street, the Schlesinger and Mayer Company sold mass-market luxury goods to middle-class customers, predom- inantly women. State Street itself was the vision of dry goods magnate Potter Palmer who had it widened and developed as the city’s premiere commercial boulevard in the 1860s. Along with his early partners, Marshall Fields and Levi Leiter, Palmer was responsible for the first commercial “palaces” built there, all influenced by the great Parisian department stores: Blondel’s Grand Magasin du Louvre (1866); Laplanche and Boileau’s Bon Marché (1869-76); and Paul Sedille’s Au Printemps (1883). Each of these buildings exploited an iron structure to create huge, open shopping floors illuminated with copious natural light. In Chicago the architect William Le Baron Jenney, one of Sullivan’s early employers, established a new precedent for buildings of this type with the second Leiter building and the Fair stores (both 1891). Though these were considerably plainer than their French counterparts, they were unprec- edented in their enormous size. With these buildings, eight and eleven stories high respectively, Jenney inaugurated the hybrid skyscraper-department store type.  The skyscraper appeared in the early 1880s when, in the middle of a real estate boom, property owners began using a method known locally as the “Chicago con- struction” to build 12-, 16-, and even 20-story buildings. This method was made up of a series of related technologies including an internal metal structure, elevators, electric lighting, steam heating, and so-called curtain walls: lightweight assemblies of brick, terracotta tile, and plate glass connected to the frame with anchors and brackets. Faster to erect than masonry, this method allowed the construction of tall buildings with large volumes that produced significantly increased rental revenue for their owners. For architects, the method presented an accompanying aesthetic problem: what should the Chicago construction look like? In early experi- ments, such as Holabird and Roche’s Tacoma building (1889), the inner frame was expressed on the exterior via an undulating wall of unusually large windows. While the Tacoma mimicked the brown color of masonry buildings, Daniel Burnham and Charles Atwood offered a radical new aesthetic in their design for the Reliance building (1895). The original home of the Carson Pirie Scott company, the Reliance presented an obviously non-load-bearing curtain wall of cream-colored glazed ter- racotta tile inset with unusually large panes of plate glass. This wall of windows was folded into a series of bays projecting out over dark brown granite and bronze framed display windows at the street level.  With its large windows and dramatic chromatic distinction between base and upper stories, the Reliance was a precedent for the Schlesinger and Mayer building. In its design Sullivan drew on the formula he had established for tall office buildings in the early 1890s: a single block divided into three horizontal layers, with a two- story “mercantile base” decorated in a “sumptuous” way in order to “attract the eye”; above this, an indefinite number of office tiers; and finally a decorative attic  
that signified the vertical termination of the building.” Adler and Sullivan’s Wain- wright (1891) and Guaranty (1895) buildings exemplify this approach. In most buildings of this type the dimensions of the individual office units dictated the width of the structural bays. In the case of the skyscraper department store, how- ever, the structural bays were wider, designed to maximize open floor area for the display of merchandise and allow the large windows necessary to light it. The wider spacing of the bays may explain why, in contrast to the Wainwright and the Guaranty, Sullivan gave the windows of the Schlesinger and Mayer store a hor- izontal orientation.  Even more significant than the wider bays, the “mercantile base” was given spe- cial prominence. Unlike other commercial buildings, where the street level occu- pants were tenants, here it was the owner of the building and the expression of the Schlesinger and Mayer Company’s identity was of primary importance. Working with his assistant, Grant Elmslie, Sullivan developed a distinctive dark green metallic frame for the street-level display windows. The design of these windows was part of a larger effort to brand the store with a specific visual identity. Beautiful and intri- cate, the foliated decorative motif contained within the geometric frames was repeated in the store’s interior in the form of sawn mahogany panels, ornamental plasterwork capitals, and bronze-plated lighting fixtures. This motif even influenced the graphic design of Schlesinger and Mayer’s newspaper advertising. With its sty- lized natural forms, this ormamental scheme echoed the art nouveau style popular in France, for example Frantz Jourdain’s Samaritaine department store (1905), which included decorative ironwork and polychromatic terracotta tile with a floral motif.  The most obvious feature of the Schlesinger and Mayer building is the dramatic contrast between the base and the facade above. Clad in a pale cream-colored terracotta tile, this facade is unornamented except for the inset borders of the win- dow frames. Above this an unbroken cornice appears to float above deeply recessed windows at the attic level. Connecting these horizontal layers, a rounded tower unites the State and Madison facades and acts as the main entrance to the store. Though it echoed the grid, Sullivan’s design for the upper facade stood apart from the bulk of the building behind it. He employed no rhythm of vertical projecting bays, as in the Tacoma and Reliance, merely the simple repetition of cell-like windows. He chose not to follow the convention by which the  interior structure was expressed on the exterior as a series of pronounced vertical piers mimicking the classical orders. Instead the pale-colored screen appears to stretch tightly across the surface from one edge of the building to the other like a thin veil. This veiling effect is particularly pronounced because the horizontal spandrels are deeper than the vertical mullions. Sullivan raised these mullions from the surface of the wall only on the tower where they are grouped close together, enhancing the appearance of a single surface wrapping around the corner, at which point it is puckered, or folded. It was this aspect of the building that would attract the attention of the architects and critics of the early twentieth-century avant-garde. 
The Articulated Frame  By the late 1920s, the construction of the Schlesinger and Mayer building, or Carson Pirie Scott as it was now known, was considered a crucial moment in the evolution of the modern style, the first overt expression of the curtain wall. Now the building was thought of primarily as a skyscraper and its function as a department store was given secondary importance. Attention was focused on the upper levels of the facade, and the ornamented base and cornice were treated as vestigial, a nineteenth-century relic. In 1924 the American critic Lewis Mumford described such ornament as the “last gesture of traditional architecture,” clinging to the highest and lowest stories of the “draped cube.”’ In 1939 the Museum of Mod- ern Art in New York claimed Carson Pirie Scott as a native precursor to the Inter- national Style. Because of this “one great and prophetic building,” which “frankly exhibits its cage-like steel skeleton, sheathed only in terracotta,” the Museum declared, Sullivan “may claim his place with contemporary European pioneers of the Modern Movement, [Adolf] Loos, [Otto] Wagner, [Hendrik] Berlage, and [Henry] Van de Velde.”* In this way the International Style was understood as a spontaneous movement arising not in the context of Europe alone, but also in the United States. The Swiss critic and historian Sigfried Giedion cemented this view in his canonical Space, Time and Architecture (1941), where Carson Pirie Scott figures as a forebear to the steel and glass facades of Walter Gropius’ Fagus Factory (1913) and Gropius’ entry to the Chicago Tribune Tower competition (1923).  In this historiographic framework, Carson Pirie Scott was one of a series of piv- otal buildings that launched a global modern style, one in which the thick masonry wall was transformed into an “articulated frame.” For high modernists, the internal  steel frame and the external curtain wall were conceptually interchangeable and universally applicable. This idea was to find its highest expression in the work of German émigré Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, who inaugurated the “Second Chicago School of architecture” in the mid-twentieth century. Mies believed that great architecture was the aesthetic fulfillment of technology: “Construction not only determines form, but is form itself,” he wrote.’ In buildings such as the Lake Shore Drive apartments (1948-51) and the Seagram building (1954-58), metal and glass skins evoke the steel structure underneath. For Mies and other modernists, technology was a metaphor for the rational and efficient organization of modern  society irrespective of national or cultural differences. In such a society, good archi- tecture was the aesthetic expression of technology. “The revitalization of the build- ing art can only come from construction and not by means of arbitrarily assembled motifs,” he claimed.®  The privileging of technological expression (which was thought to further the progress of modern society) over the application of historicist ornament (which was thought to retard it), dates to a turn-of-the-century discourse about the place of ornament in architecture and design. At a time when traditional social bound- aries were less and less meaningful, the florid ornament of the Victorian era was 
damningly associated with the bourgeois, or middle class. No longer an expression of social status, ornamented goods now signified a lack of taste. The Austrian archi- tect and critic Adolf Loos famously derided efforts to invent a modern form of orna- ment, arguing that conventional decoration appealed only to the culturally backward, to criminals and primitive peoples. The German sociologist Werner Sombart linked the problem of contemporary design (its debasement through the proliferation of cheap, industrially-produced goods) to the rise of capitalism. Prompted by the need to increase both production and consumption, he argued, the market preyed on the base urge of consumers, particularly women, for the lat- est fashion. Around the same time, the Chicago economist Thorstein Veblen coined the term “conspicuous consumption,” meaning lavish spending on clothing, jewelry and extravagant houses in order to demonstrate one’s wealth. In this sense, aesthetes believed, the system of ornament had been corrupted by consumerism: the social status it once conferred could now be bought and sold. Veblen identified department stores in particular as an essential part of the “propaganda of culture,” inculcating the lower classes with a taste for fashionable rather than functional goods. In these terms the highly decorated base of Carson Pirie Scott was doubly problematic. Not only a throwback to an outmoded ornamental tradition, it was also designed specifically to promote the consumption of cheaply made, mass- produced goods.  Organic Architecture and the Textile Wall  Since the 1960s, the rise of post-modernism has bought a renewed appreciation of Sullivan’s ornament. Historians have focused in particular on his drawing and writ- ing in order to understand how and why he produced such complex decorative facades, as well his intellectual influences and the social context in which he worked. This scholarship has shown that while Sullivan utilized innovative archi- tectural technologies, he also regarded ornament as a viable form of modern expression, one that made manifest not universal social progress but the particular benefits of American democracy. Like many of his contemporaries in Europe and the United States, Sullivan rejected the thoughtless replication of historical prece- dent in favor of a philosophy of “organic” architecture. The definition of organic architecture varied greatly. Broadly speaking it meant architectural form derived from the inner function of a building, whether structural or programmatic, and not from the imitation of existing examples. Sullivan summarized this idea in his famous and frequently misunderstood aphorism: “form ever follows function.”” The adoption of this principle implied no particular style: quite the opposite, the outward appearance of a building depended entirely on its situation. Classical or Gothic styles could be appropriate, depending on the manner in which they were used. In Chicago, “organic” architecture came to mean the “evolution” of Euro- pean styles into a new American one as they were transplanted into the American 
“west” (as Illinois and the Midwestern states were then considered). Beginning in the mid-nineteenth century, architects in Chicago adopted a simplified version of the fashionable neo-Gothic style for their commercial structures. By the mid-1880s, influenced by the French architect Eugéne Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc, they began to think of the Gothic as a constructive system, one adaptable to modern functions and materials.  In these terms the steel frame rendered conventional forms of architectural expression derived from load-bearing tectonic systems (such as the classical orders) obsolete. Architectural historian Mark Wigley has suggested that, in their efforts to legitimate the curtain wall, Sullivan and his colleagues were influenced by the German architect Gottfried Semper’s “principle of cladding”: the idea that the origins of architecture lay not in post and beam construction but in the textile cov- ering used to enclose space in early human societies.* Semper’s theory was derived from the archetype of a “Caribbean hut” (a reproduction of which he saw at the Great Exhibition in London in 1851) in which the lightweight wall was a separate system from the masonry base and hearth. This idea was attractive to the Amer- icans because it implied that the curtain wall might represent not a deviation from architectural tradition, but a return to its origins: that to dress a steel-framed build- ing in a textile-like fagade, what Sullivan called the “product of loom and mine,” might be entirely appropriate.” Certainly many of his designs evoked textiles, especially his polychromatic Transportation Building at the World’s Columbian Exposition (1893), which he compared to an oriental rug.  This leaves the question of what Sullivan was trying to express with his una- shamedly draped surfaces. His method of dividing the facades of his tall buildings into three horizontal zones followed the organic principle of “form follows function,” at least in an abstract sense. But though he was well aware of what he called the “social conditions” that produced the new building type — real estate conventions, structural technology, interior program — he had no interest in expres- sing them directly. Rather, he shared with the American transcendentalist move- ment the belief that the role of art was to make visible the invisible spiritual world behind the material one. In this sense ornament was the highest form of architec- ture, the emotional expression of the inner “life” of a building. In the case of his own practice this meant making manifest the energy he saw inherent in the urban landscape of Chicago, a city he described as crude and raw but full of “big things to be done.”?® Just as Jenney and Adler utilized the steel frame to construct buildings suited to those big deeds, Sullivan experimented with cast-iron, plate glass and ter- racotta tile to render them visible in decorative form. His ornamental plant motifs were above all a metaphor for growth: the fertility of the natural landscape sym- bolized for him the social and economic potential of the American Midwest. In this sense he sought to naturalize the capitalist processes that produced the department store and the skyscraper in two distinct ways, linking their invention to the biolog- ical process of evolution and their appearance to organic forms found in the surrounding landscape.  
While the ornamented Carson Pirie Scott building undoubtedly had a com- mercial function — to draw attention to the store and to establish an image for the company as a purveyor of affordable luxury — Sullivan sublimated that prag- matic function into a broader, social one. Together with his protégé Frank Lloyd Wright, he linked organic architecture to the concept of democracy, which he understood not as a formal system of government but as a philosophy of individual freedom and self-reliance particular to the United States. The tall office building symbolized the power of the American businessman to achieve great things via sheer will. Architectural historian Joseph Siry sees the department store as a related, but different form of democratic institution.’ For department store owners, shopping was more than a leisure activity; it was also an aid to assimilation, a means for personal self-improvement if not reinvention. In an era of great social instability, it played an important role in the fashioning of new Americans: here the immigrant from Ireland, Ger- many, or Bohemia could learn how to dress, behave, and ultimately succeed. In this context architectural ornament derived from the plant life of the Midwest was not the expression of individual social status, either inherited or bought, but of the new society being forged there.  Though Sullivan became increasingly pessimistic about the future of American society in the later years of his life, his Prairie School followers carried his par- ticular vision of American modernism into the twentieth century. For Wright, it was the single family house rather than the tall commercial building that best represented organic architecture. Opposing both the aesthetic and political bases of European functionalism, he continued to experiment with abstracted natural forms, not only as ornament, as in his turn-of-the-century Prairie Houses, but also as the basis for planning in his idealized Broadacre City (1932-35) and later Uso- nian Houses. In the same tradition, Sullivan’s friend, the Rochester architect Claude Bragdon, created a system of “projective ornament”: geometric motifs designed to replace traditional forms of decoration. He realized these most suc- cessfully in a series of sound and light displays during the 1910s. Designed to accompany community singing concerts, they were intended to foster both musi- cal and political harmony.  The early twentieth-century critique of ornament in design was that it was obsolete, no longer a meaningful form of aesthetic expression in modern soci- ety. Corrupted by the rise of capitalism, it served only as an indicator of wealth, not social position or even taste. In its place, modernist architects forged an aes- thetic of technology, one in which decoration was supposedly abandoned in favor of the sober representation of the “facts” of a building: its function and method of construction. In this understanding, the curtain wall was the rational and universal expression of social progress achieved through technology. Sulli- van’s Schlesinger and Mayer/Carson Pirie Scott served as a symbol of the birth of this idea, its plain upper stories presenting a stark contrast to the ornamented display windows below. But Sullivan himself did not see architecture in these 
terms. Part of a group of Chicago-based architects searching for the appropriate expression of the steel-framed skyscraper, he argued that, judiciously applied, ornament was necessary in order for a building to exceed the realization of mere pragmatic need. Ornament, he claimed, had an ongoing role as the expression not of social status or technological progress, but of the potential of an entire nation.  Notes  * Sullivaniana Collection, Ryerson and Burnham Archives, The Art Institute of Chicago. Digital File #19101.080609-09. Image credit: © The Art Institute of Chicago.  1. Louis Sullivan, “Ornament in Architecture” [1892], in Kindergarten Chats and Other Writings, ed. Louis Sullivan [1918] (New York: Dover, 1979), 187.  2. Louis Sullivan, “The Tall Office Building Artistically Considered” [1896], in Kindergar- ten Chats and Other Writings, ed. Louis Sullivan [1918] (New York: Dover, 1979), 205.  3. Lewis Mumford, Sticks and Stones: A Study of American Architecture and Civilization [1924] (New York: Dover, 1955), 78.  4. Museum of Modern Art, “Architecture in the United States,” The Bulletin of the Museum of Modem Art 6, nos. 1 and 2 (February 1939): 8.  5. Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, “Notes for unpublished lecture circa 1950,” in The Artless World: Mies van der Rohe on the Building Art, ed. Fritz Neumeyer (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991), 325.  6. Ibid.  7. Sullivan, “The Tall Office Building,” 208.  8. Mark Wigley, White Walls, Designer Dresses. The Fashioning of Modern Architecture (Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 1995).  9. Sullivan, “Ornament in Architecture,” 187.  10. Louis Sullivan, Autobiography of an Idea |1924| (New York: Peter Smith, 1949), 200. 1L. Joseph Siry, Carson Pirie Scott: Louis Sullivan and the Chicago Department Store (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012).  Bibliography  Condit, Carl. The Chicago School of Architecture: A History of Commercial and Public Buildings in the Chicago Area, 1875-1925. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1964.  de Wit, Wim Ed. Louis Sullivan: The Function of Ornament. New York: W.W. Norton, 1996.  Giedion, Sigfried, Space, Time and Architecture. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1941.  Mumford, Lewis. Sticks and Stones: A Study of American Architecture and Civilization [1924]. New York: Dover, 1955.  Siry, Joseph. Carson Pirie Scott: Louis Sullivan and the Chicago Department Store. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012. 
HOUSE FOR AN ART LOVER  Charles Rennie Mackintosh  Amy Kulper  Charles Rennie Mackintosh, Music Room, House for an Art Lover, Glasgow,  Scotland, 1901.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
REVERBERATING ECHOES  Echoes are a genus of soundbite related to diminuendo, where some syllables fall away and others assume a surpassing resilience. Echo-effects exaggerated the temperamental timeliness of echoes, repeating and recombining end-syllables into remonstrance, irony, or affirmation while prodding monologue into dialogue.'  ...resonating from self to self, in itself and for itself, at once the same and the other than itself, one in the echo of the other, and this echo is like the very sound of its  2 sense.  Hermann Muthesius, a contemporary of Charles Rennie Mackintosh, once observed about his domestic interiors that they evoked a “fairy-tale world” in which “a book in an unsuitable binding would disturb the atmosphere simply by lying on the table.”* Hermetic and tightly composed, detailed and aesthetically complete, inward and palpably exclusive — how best to describe and interpret Mackintosh’s domestic interiors that are paradoxically both stylistically singular, yet sufficiently abstract and autonomous to be ubiquitous? This chapter will focus on a single interior, the music room in the House for an Art Lover (1901). The radicalized interiority of Mackintosh’s domestic architecture will find its corollary in the emancipated reverberations of the acoustic echo, resonating through four interpretive readings. This sonorous analogy will facilitate the articulation of four claims about Mackintosh’s domestic architecture: it aspires to a dialogical relation- ship with its situation; it conceptually eschews verbatim mimicry and exact copying in favor of re-presenting domestic habits and practices; it has the capacity to express meaning while subverting disciplinary categories from within; and it is atmos- pheric, explicating architecture’s spatial and temporal roles in the preservation of culture.  Echo Location: Between Seemliness and Seaminess  In 1901, the Journal for Interior Decoration (Zeitschrift fiir Innendekoration) launched a competition for the design of a House for an Art Lover (Haus eines Kunstfreundes). Since none of the entries precisely followed the rules of the Darmstadt competi- tion, no first prize was awarded. While second prize went to Baillie Scott, it was Mackintosh’s design (disqualified for its insufficient number of interior per- spectives) that piqued the most international interest and generated heated disci- plinary debate. One year later, Alexander Koch, a wallpaper manufacturer and the organizer of the Darmstadt competition, published the three best proposals in a portfolio provocatively titled Meister der Innenkunst (Masters of Interior Art.) 
In the same year, 1902, Mackintosh delivered a lecture to an audience of fellow artists and teachers, entitled “Seemliness.”* Mackintosh began his lecture with the following admission: “I have chosen as my theme ‘Seemliness’ but the theme will often be lost in my wanderings, will sometimes be only faintly heard in the ”> Brom the beginning, the operations of the echo, only faintly heard in the conceptual variations and faintly manifested in the architectural variations, is apparent. In advocating for seemliness, Mackintosh searches for an ideal that might guide all artists, and finds it in the situated variation:  variations.  What one misses in most of the work I refer to is — the large rhythm that undulates through that of the great masters antient |sic] and modern — the sustained note of informing purpose — the deep vibration of some unifying undertone /now rising to accent and emphasis — now sounding faintly, beneath the multifariousness of accompanying motives — but always visible to an attentive sense as — the basis if not the burden of the theme with variations — the ensamble [sic] which every artists [sic] work — no matter how trivial, should constitute. Reason informed by emotion — expressed in beauty — and elevated by earnestness — lightened by humour — the is the ideal that should guide all artists.°  In his search for architectural seemliness, for spatial decorum, for constructed character, Mackintosh deploys the language of the echo, with its rhythm and undu- lations, sustained notes, deep vibrations, and unifying undertone. In fact, the orig- inal manuscript for the lecture utilizes gaps and dashes of various sizes, as if the author is ascribing notations to a resonating and diminishing sound.’ If this paean to seemliness is predicated upon the notion of appropriate beauty, and if for Mack- intosh this is found in specific spatial situations in which both aesthetic and utili- tarian concerns are met, then surely his use of auditory tropes and notational language suggest an awareness that acoustic events must be experienced from within. For as Peter Sloterdijk so poignantly observes in his essay, Wo sind wir, wenn wir Musik héren? (Where Are We When We Listen to Music?), auditory experiences are always situated events — the act of listening, deprived of the priv- ilege of distance granted to vision, is immersed in the specifics of a spatial setting.*  How can we locate this architectural aspiration for seemliness in the actual music room of the House for an Art Lover? In his lecture, Mackintosh emphasized that the operations of seemliness reside in the clothing of invention — architects must “attempt the task of clothing in grace and beauty the new forms and condi- tions that modern developments of life — social - commercial and religious insist upon...”” Echoing this sentiment in his seminal Stilarchitektur und Baukunst (Style- Architecture and Building-Art) published in the same year (1902 first edition, 1903 second edition), Hermann Muthesius writes: “For the new cannot arise in such outward appearances; architecture, like every other expression, presumes a vital presence. We expect new ideas, not commonplaces clothed in new 
words. Architecture ... must seek its essence in content to which the external appearance must adapt.” These allusions to the clothing of new inventions are not coincidental; rather they implicate architectural involvement in an emerging culture of abstraction epitomized by the embrace of whiteness. Just as Mackintosh embraced the abstractness of the white page of his lecture to disperse his words across the page as a composer might disseminate musical notations, so too does his architecture articulate an abstract language of spatial detailing predicated upon the whiteness of his interiors. This pursuit of an abstract, linear language of the architectural interior allows for the subtle transition from the ethical pursuit of seemliness in his writings to the architectural construction of seaminess in his domestic projects.  In the music room of the House for an Art Lover such seaminess is evident in the insistent and visually dominant wainscoating, mullioning, and columnating of the space. Here, the clothing of invention echoes through the iterative details of the architecture: beginning with the elaborately encased piano, the central focus of the space, and reverberating outward through linear vertical motives that ulti- mately give shape to two flanking muse-like murals. The room is south facing, and architectural echoes also emanate from the 10 reed thin columns flanking and separating six sets of French doors that open out onto the adjacent outdoor terrace. On the terrace, Mackintosh positions five planters containing thin orna- mental trees, recalling his earlier description of an echo “faintly heard in the varia- tions.” As the sun tracks across this southern facade, long thin shadows are cast back into the music room, their systematic spacing resonating in the decorative engaged columns of the opposite wall. Similarly, the murals bordering the piano on each side are echoed in the reverberations of Margaret Macdonald’s so-called “linen ladies” — textiles representing elongated female forms — sentinels marking the transition from interiority to exteriority. Finally, ensconced within the baldac- chino-like structure that houses the piano are two highly stylized roses, resonating from this musical source, and reappearing in two elongated floor vases across the room.  How, then, can this dialogue between seemliness and seaminess in Mackin- tosh’s domestic interiors be interpreted? The exchange is not unlike the conver- sation between the mythological figures of Echo and Narcissus. Though the many literary accounts and paintings that re-tell this story set the stage for a dia- logue, the reality of the narrative is that Echo is condemned by Hera to only ever repeat the words she hears, and Narcissus is too captivated by his own image to participate in a genuine dialogue. Latent within the figure of Echo is “the prospect of sound displaced — uprooted, multiple, abbreviated, translocated,” and yet, anticipated in this displacement is the fact of this conversation’s original situa- tion." In this sense, Echo is at once a withered “genius loci,” simultaneously “scat- tered so widely that she expands into the spirit of every place, pure and singing.”'* If the aspiration for the Darmstadt competition was for the design of a house for an art lover that was itself work of art (as the subsequent portfolio  
title, Masters of Interior Art, suggests), then this dialogue between seemliness and seaminess is a manifestation of the tension between lived and aesthetic experi- ence in this domestic interior. If the mythological figure of Echo is transformed from the “old me of ancient Echo” described as a “nymph out-of-doors,” to the “hold me of early modern Echo” who was a “figure of interiors,” then this displace- ment of echoes from an exterior condition to the interior suggests the complicity of the natural world rendered immanent in the transition from echoes that are site-specific to echoes that are ubiquitous.'? In the threshold between park and terrace, and then again between terrace and music room, the domestication, interiorization, and abstraction of the natural world into the immanence of archi- tectural motives reverberates like a displaced echo. Echoes are, in a sense, inte- gral to the construction of modern privacy, “heard not as a noise but as the sounding of a proper distance, a distance that made for domestic and other har- monies.”"* In this example of “echo location,” there is no genuine dialogue between seemliness and seaminess in Mackintosh’s projects, rather, aesthetic experience supplants lived experience in a displacement of the domestic interior from an ethical realm to a realm of abstraction and autonomy.  Asimilar gravitation toward the realms of abstraction and autonomy is evident in the work of Mackintosh’s Belgian contemporary, Henry van de Velde, specif- ically in his design for the Nietzsche Archive between 1901 and 1903. Ina paralle demonstration of seaminess, van de Velde inserts what architectural historian Ole W. Fischer describes as a “studiolo” into the existing Villa Silberblick to house the philosopher’s archive.’’ Fischer argues that this addition epitomizes van de Velde’s aspiration for “ornamental transcription,” or program art. Originated by composers Richard Wagner and Franz Liszt, program art provided music and architecture with a vehicle to shuttle non-figurative content and meaning into the highly abstract realms of music and architecture. Program music utilized a title, a parallel theoretical or philosophic text, and the arrangement of music into themes, or leitmotifs, and this appealed to van de Velde for its “rejection of mimicry and imitation ... providing an abstract object with philosophica meaning beyond the application of symbolic ornament or classical tectonic lan- guage.”'® Quite literally, in van de Velde’s studiolo, the echoes of Wagner and Liszt and their quest for the manifestation of philosophical meaning in the abstraction of architecture and music are evident. The seaminess of van de Velde’s archive resides in vertical ribs that appear to be simultaneously structural, spatial dividers, bookshelf armatures, and decorative support for the white pla- fond above. If Mackintosh’s music room utilizes the title of a House for an Art Lover, the theoretical text of his lecture on “Seemliness,’ and the thematic arrangement of interiorized and domesticated natural motives, then, van de Velde similarly deploys the title - Nietzsche-Archiv — engraved above the villa’s main entrance, the theoretical work of Wagner and Liszt’s framing of program music, and the leitmotif of Nietzsche’s reformulation of the natural into “an organic unity of spirit and matter.”’” Here, Mackintosh’s music room and van  
de Velde’s Nietzsche archive embody echoes of distant mythological figures and contemporary musical figures. These architectural ensembles raise questions about the possibility of importing content and meaning in the context of abstrac- tion, where the desire for seemliness and spatial decorum yields to an expression of seaminess or spatial synthesis through composition and detailing.  Echo Replications and Echo Re-Presentations  In 1901, the same year in which he executed the design of the House for an Art Lover, Mackintosh contributed to a Viennese book on artistic lettering, Beispiele kunstlerischer Schrift, deploying a font of his own making to inscribe a quotation by J.D. Sedding.’* Though he never designed an alphabet, the distinctive lettering of Mackintosh’s drawings — attenuated, stylized, ornamental, and uniquely his own — became reified in his contribution to this publication. Today, the CRM Font Company sells nine variations of Mackintosh’s stylized typography, each modifica- tion named after a specific place, as with the “Glasgow Font,” or a specific project, as with the “Artlover Font.”’? Although these fonts preserve a residual reference to the place of their invention, in philosopher of communication theory Marshall McLuhan’s sense they are autoamputations — echoing technological extensions of Mackintosh himself, creating a closed system of reference — a culture of copies that induces narcosis.”” In fact, the terminology of typography preserves something of this numbing effect in the word that describes a stereotype block intended to perpetuate phrases without change, the cliché. Though this argument refers specif: ically to Mackintosh’s practice of typography, a similar case can be made for his repetitive use of ornamental motives — ubiquitous stylistic echoes more or less indifferent to the architectural settings in which they are deployed.  If McLuhan’s reading of Narcissus proffers an interpretive framework through which to understand the culture of replication and reproduction surrounding Mackintosh’s oeuvre, then it is Athanasius Kircher’s conceptualization of the echo in his seminal Musurgia Universalis (1650) that will contribute to an understanding of the re-presentational capacities of the term.”” What Kircher so beautifully evokes in this illustration of an echo is its nascent capacity for polysemy, the possibility that each one of the iterations might somehow re-present the original linguistic utter- ance. How does Mackintosh accommodate such polysemy in his domestic projects? How is the spatial utterance transformed in his work into manifold architectural  expressions and meanings? To answer these questions it is critical to examine the operations of whiteness in his work.  As an architect, Mackintosh’s style evolves between 1893 and 1904, but there is a period of marked productivity and growth between 1900 and 1901, a juncture that is often described as his white period. Mackintosh’s first white room was a bed- room designed for the publisher Robert Maclehose at Westdel in Glasgow in 
1898. The insertion of this single white room into a domestic setting was followed by a number of such discrete, white interventions: the director's room at the Glasgow School of Art (1899); the six rooms of Mackintosh’s own flat at Mains Street (1900-06); and a series of tearoom projects for Miss Cranston, culminating in a complete white interior on Ingram Street (1900). Elements from these early white projects were then combined into a showcase room for the Vienna Secession Exhibition in 1900.7  All of the white projects leading up to the House for an Art Lover can be char- acterized as insertions: the insertion of a room (Westdel); the insertion of a sequence of spaces in a pre-existing structure (Mains Street and Miss Cranston’s Tearooms); the insertion of a room within a larger exhibition space (the Secession Exhibition and later, the Universal Exposition of Turin in 1902). The role of white- ness within this strategic spatial insertion resides in the production of a harmonious and atmospheric space that is both radically interiorized and conceptually whole. Mackintosh’s use of whiteness connotes interiority by rendering the interior a rep- resentational domain in which the materiality of the natural world is translated and domesticated. By producing a spatial monochrome, Mackintosh achieves a visual synthesis of the elements — a spatial ensemble merging architecture, furnishings, fittings, and details into a novel stylistic whole. A simple comparison of Mackintosh’s scheme for the House for an Art Lover with the second-place entry by Baillie Scott, demonstrates the degree to which whiteness allowed Mackintosh to eschew historical reference, and to some extent, materiality. And yet, in all of Mackintosh’s white projects, even the Director’s Office at the Glasgow School and the tearooms for Miss Cranston, the whiteness establishes a horizon of domesticity, operating at the level of spatial manicure or refinement to produce a hermetic domestic sanctuary. In an untitled paper on architecture dating back to 1892, Mack- intosh associates the use of white paint with an aspiration for comfort: “Paint I say is no deception, for in wood, iron, plaster & sometimes even stone it is necessary for comfort....””? Here, white paint provides a context that allows echoes of Mackin- tosh’s domestic projects and the comfort they invoke, to bleach dimensions of his public projects, coating them in whiteness and infusing them with the coziness of home. Paradoxically, the whiteness of Mackintosh’s domestic projects shares affi- nities with the whiteness of the exhibition space, especially those of the Vienna Secession in 1900, and the Universal Exposition held in Turin in 1902. In both, Mackintosh exhibited white rooms, embraced for their purity, “so straightforward that they look as innocent and serious as young girls about to receive Holy Communion,” and yet critiqued for their blanched emptiness: “there was scarcely anything in these rooms except two upright chairs, with backs as tall as man, which stood on white carpet, looking at each other over a slender table, silently like ghosts.”** By the time Mackintosh designs the House for an Art Lover, the white- ness that was formerly a strategy for discrete spatial insertion has become ubiqui- tous and pervasive, as evidenced by the subtle exterior massing of the white  
volumes of the house. This is the whiteness of abstraction, the whiteness that facil- itates the smooth importation of natural motives into the interior of the music room, the whiteness that Mackintosh posits as a blank canvas for the expression of cultural ideas. In his untitled paper on architecture of 1892, Mackintosh articu- lates the primary role of the artist and architect as that of giving “expression to the ideas of the general cultured mind,” and the role of architecture to offer “pleasure to the mind” and “comfort and protection to the body.””’ Thus, across the white gesso of the murals, the white linen of the wall hangings, the white paint of the architectural details, and the white fibers of the carpet, Mackintosh offers a blank canvas, sending echoes and reverberations throughout the European architectural community, promoting a novel white architecture that is interiorized, ahistorical, domesticated, exhibitionist, and abstract.  Polysemous Echoes: Subverting Disciplinary Categories  Though the mythological figure of Echo is often interpreted benignly as a figure who can only reiterate, it would be misguided to interpret the echoes of Mackintosh’s music room in the House for an Art Lover as pale imitations lacking agency. In fact, it is possible to “retrieve the nymph Echo who shows that iter- ation can explode a category from within, and that language’s parrotings some- times do have salutary agency.”*° But how is this categorical dismantling accomplished? In what way does the repetition of an utterance achieve salutary agency? “Echo does re-present, literally so. But what she presents back is no longer the original utterance. The word, now as thing, is wrenched into a novel sense or a nonsense, made stranger by the brute fact of its re-presentation alone or because its context has been lopped off.””” The echo emanates from a place, but the more distance that is accrued between the echo and the initial utterance, the greater the potential for de-contextualization. This capacity of the echo to de- contextualize is readily apparent in Mackintosh’s work — the coat of whiteness he utilizes in projects between 1900 and 1901 is just one manifestation of this ten- dency. However, in order to identify echoes within his work that not only re- present but also have the capacity to unmake disciplinary categories, we must look to Mackintosh’s furniture design, and specifically to the so-called “high- back.” Near the piano in the music room of the House for an Art Lover sits a simple table surrounded by three high-backs; a fourth sits flush against the solid wall, a tacit reminder of the spatial agency of these furnishings. For the high-back is not simply a chair in its typical sense; rather it is charged with the difficult task of producing an alternative interior that is at once more private and more exclu- sive than its original context. Echoes of this strategy of territorializing space through the deployment of room-like furniture also appear in the architecture of Frank Lloyd Wright, perhaps most notably in the dining-room chairs of his  
Robie House (1908 to 1910). Why, then, does Mackintosh make the curious choice of locating the fourth high-back against the wall, rather than fully enclos- ing this nascent room within a room? This high-back’s language of slim repeti- tious verticals resonates with the numerous iterations of thin vertical elements in the room — mullions, columns, even the rhythm of slim wires suspending the light fixtures from the ceiling. Here, in an interesting inversion of Robin Evans’ argument about the developed surface of the eighteenth-century domestic interior, rather than the interior elevation preserving all of the evidence of the objects that will ultimately populate the room, Mackintosh’s high-backs function as a sort of “lopped off” context, with the capacity to generate a domestic interior in their next setting.”* The high-backs are complicit both in the completion of the room within a room, and in the anticipation of possible future interiorities.  The earliest versions of the high-backs were designed by Mackintosh for the inte- rior of Miss Cranston’s Argyle Street Tearoom in 1898, executed in dark stained oak and topped with oval ornaments, likened by some observers to a “human head atop an androgynous body.”” Within the context of the tearoom, the chairs were designed to create a domestic intimacy within a public venue, but their capacity to generate their own context is also noted: “When these chairs are placed at a table, the anthropomorphic references intensify; even with no one sitting in them the chairs appear peopled.”*° Once again, as an ensemble, the high-backs have the capacity to recreate the context of intimate conversation, with or without occu- pants. While this echo of Mackintosh’s work compellingly dismantles the category “chair” by allowing the ensemble of high-backs to “lop off’ the context and gen- erate some version of it in their subsequent settings, the status of the high-back changed radically in 1973 when facsimiles were produced for the Triennale in Milan by Cassina. At precisely the moment in which the facsimile is produced, Mackintosh’s high-backs become reified as iconic objects, as authored chairs, as his- torical reproductions, relinquishing their capacity to generate context, to sponsor privacy, and to proffer alternative interiorities. Ironically, in a Sotheby’s auction just two years later, a Mackintosh high-back from the drawing room of the Hill House (1904) was sold for a record-breaking sum for twentieth-century decorative art objects at auction. As one observer remarked: “Despite the efforts of scholars and others seeking to establish Mackintosh’s place in history ... it was in fact the sale of a single chair that, through the activities of the commercial world, made Mackintosh a household name.”*’ At this moment of the turn of the century, the role played by furniture in the definition or in-definition of space is critical. This is a moment of equipoise that marks the transition from the raumplan and its com- plicity with furnishings in the act of room making, and the free plan whose only concession to furniture is to provide an open floor plate upon which emancipated objects can be positioned. Equally, echoes of this moment can be found in the Werkbund debates of 1914, in which Muthesius and van de Velde debated the vir- tues of individually designed furnishings and objects (van de Velde) versus standar- dized and industrially produced goods (Muthesius.) 
Conclusion: Atmospheric Echoes Over Time  There is an intangible that remains to be addressed in this account of the figurative echoes of Charles Rennie Mackintosh’s music room, and we must return to Hermann Muthesius’ characterization of Mackintosh’s domestic interiors to retrieve it. What lies behind Muthesius’ observation that a book in an unsuitable binding would disturb the atmosphere of one of Mackintosh’s domestic interiors? Harry Mal- lgrave sheds light on this question, when he identifies a text written by Richard Strei- ter in 1896 as a theoretical influence on Muthesius’ work. In the text, Streiter argues:  Just as realism in poetry views as one of its central tasks the delineation of character in relation to its milieu, so the parallel program in architecture sees as its most desirable goal of artistic truth the development of the character of a building not only out of the determination of its needs but also from the milieu — from the qualities of local mate- rials and from the environmentally and historically conditioned atmosphere of the place [Stimmung der Ortlichkeit.  Somewhere between Mackintosh’s first white ensemble in the Westdel bed- room and the production of facsimile chairs that made the architect a household name, lurks this question of character, seemliness, or environmentally and histor- ically conditioned atmosphere. For, as everyone knows, a critical component of any echo is the atmosphere in which it is immersed, the milieu through which it reso- nates. If an echo is the “sounding of a proper distance” that occasions domestic harmony, then in the work of Charles Rennie Mackintosh one understands that when this distance is not in the service of architectural character, or environmen- tally and historically conditioned atmospheres, it can become the springboard for architectural styles, motives and objects, reified and fully emancipated from their respective contexts — displaced interiors, both literally and figuratively.  In 1960, Mackintosh’s home at 78 Southpark Avenue in Glasgow, where he lived from 1906 to 1914, was demolished. In 1981, the Hunterian Art Gallery recon- structed the hall, the dining room, the studio, the drawing room, and the principal bedroom, within the museum, calling the exhibit “The Mackintosh House.” And though the House for an Art Lover was a hypothetical proposal for an architectural competition in 1901, the project was fully realized in Glasgow’s Bellahouston Parkin 1996. The renovated structure boasts a Mackintosh exhibition, a heritage center, art studios and classes, the Art Lover’s Shop selling countless Mackintosh facsimiles and reproductions, and the Art Lover's Café; and it is one of the premier venues for wed- dings in Glasgow. The same conditions that rendered the music room of Mackintosh’s House for an Art Lover an environmentally and historically condi- tioned atmosphere, imbued each of its ingredients with the dual capacities of reification and emancipation. Beneath the seemliness of appropriate beauty resides the seaminess of emancipated styles and motives; beneath the atmosphere of 
whiteness that fosters a dialogue between constituent parts, resides a coat of white paint — the sign for radical interiorization and absolute autonomy; and beneath the capacity of the high-back to produce a room within a room, undermining shifting disciplinary categories, resides the Mackintosh Chair, a facsimile that reifies the orig- inal, pushing it squarely back into the well-worn category of “chair.” Many echoes resonate from the source of Mackintosh’s music room: echoes in the practice of architectural monochromy and in the aspirations of the Vienna Secession; echoes of a movement away from period styles and toward the white abstraction of early modernism; and echoes of the contemporary discourse on World Heritage Sites, historic preservation, and curatorial practices with their attendant cultures of facsi- miles and reproductions. Amidst these echoes, reverberations, and resonances, Mackintosh’s aspiration for seemliness is displaced, both within the work itself and within the history of architecture. The hollow drumming of museum interiors and facile facsimiles supplants his desire for environmentally and historically condi- tioned atmospheres. The competition for the House for an Art Lover is the ultimate inducement for Mackintosh, an invitation to aestheticize experience through design, to create a house that is a work of art. The ambition of the music room, then, is not to function as a space for making music, but rather to show itselfas a room that is simul- taneously a work of art. Beneath the detritus of preservation, restoration, and repro- duction lurks the “large rhythm,” the “sustained note,” and the “deep vibration” of appropriate beauty, awaiting a context through which it can once again echo.  Notes  * Image credit: © The Hunterian Art Gallery, University of Glasgow, 2014.  ** The author would like to thank David Leatherbarrow for his thoughtful editorial feed- back, and for being a wonderful friend and mentor over the years.  1. Hillel Schwartz, Making Noise: From Babel to the Big Bang & Beyond (New York: Zone  Books, 2011). . Jean Luc Nancy, Listening, trans. Charlotte Mandell (New York: Fordham University Press, 2007).  . Alan Crawford, Charles Rennie Mackintosh (London: Thames & Hudson, 1995), 72.  4. Pamela Robertson, ed., Charles Rennie Mackintosh: The Architectural Papers (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1990), 213. Though the precise audience for this lecture is unknown, an essay by Robert MacLeod introducing Mackintosh’s lecture surmises that John Archer's suggestion that it was a lecture to the Northern Art Workers’ Guild in  N  we  Manchester is accurate. 5. Charles Rennie Mackintosh, “Seemliness (1902),” in Robertson, Charles Rennie Mackin- tosh, 220. . Ibid., 224. Italics are mine. 7. bid., 220. Editor Pamela Robertson, the Curator of the Hunterian Museum in Glasgow,  an  notes about the graphic appearance of Mackintosh’s manuscript: “he has made 
3 POSTAL SAVINGS BANK  Otto Wagner  Béla Kerékgyarté  “2 ——™ SX  Otto Wagner, Postal Savings Bank, Vienna, Austria, 1906.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
TIMELESS MODERNITY  But the task of art, and therefore also of modern art, has remained what it has been in all times. Modern art must offer us modern forms that are created by us and that express our abilities and actions.’  The Postal Savings Bank in Vienna was built in two phases from 1904 to 1906 and from 1910 to 1912. Its architect, Otto Wagner, was over 60 years old at the time, and perhaps the most influential architect in Vienna. He was also a highly controversial figure. Shortly after he was appointed professor at the Academy of Fine Arts he published his lectures, which were both a summary of his professional credo and a militant manifesto. This work, entitled Modern Architecture, demanded that architecture would no longer imitate past forms but become an up-to-date building art. Wagner's efforts were aided by a lucky coincidence of internal and external factors. In the 1890s a fundamental change in art and culture had swept through both Vienna and the rest of Europe. The break with historicism (referred to as revivalism) came along with a turn toward the new instead of the old, toward the creative rather than the receptive. These were widespread themes around 1890 and the revolutionary changes in art and architecture were only part of these pro- cesses.” For Wagner this tendency was not without inner contradictions, as his ear- lier works seemed to relate him to a “free renaissance style.” The turn toward an ideological radicalism preceded visible changes in his practice.’ A paradoxical — or according to his admirers tragic — aspect of his career was that although he took part in many international and local competitions and developed, exhibited, and pub- lished many progressive and inventive projects, he received hardly any public com- missions until the mid-1890s. Most of his works were apartment buildings of mixed function, among them several important and spectacular houses in downtown Vienna. His big commission in the mid-1890s to design the station buildings and other structures and amenities of the Stadtbahn (urban railway) was to shape definitively the face of the modern metropolis. However, Wagner later complained of not having received the type of monumental commissions with which he could have demonstrated the superiority of the modern architectural principles he espoused. He initiated conceptual plans for buildings such as a modern church and a variety of museum types. His “agitation project” for the city museum (1900) was an attempt to pre-empt the announcement of a public competition in order to be awarded the commission directly. Although he did indeed win the competition, which was announced shortly after his action, he was not able to realize his plans even after a long and eventful battle. Nevertheless, he went on to build two monumental buildings at the beginning of the twentieth century, which were to be his major works: a church for the psychiatric hospital complex at 
Steinhof on the outskirts of Vienna (1902-04) and the Postal Savings Bank (1903-12). Both are manifestations of his mature approach while naturally differing greatly in purpose and type. Whereas in the case of the church the aim was a mod- ern reformulation of a traditional type — he had referred to it as the most interesting task for an architect — the Postal Savings Bank was a prototype of an institution characteristic of modern mass society.  Planning the Institution: “The Modern Building Method”  Throughout Europe, Postal Savings Banks were new institutions based on the infrastructural and communication possibilities of the network of post offices. The Postal Savings Bank in Vienna was founded as a state institution in 1883. Its aim was to encourage thrift in wider and poorer circles of society and, at the same time, to collect and use these savings for the economic benefit of the state, which was to compete with the monopoly of the big private banks. The Postal Sav- ings Bank was a dynamic and extensive institution. The organization of work was strict, resembling a factory more than an office, with a 14-hour work day and poor conditions. The spaces in the Postal Savings Banks were very tight and considered unhealthy (due to the lack of ventilation and proper sanitation). As a consequence of these problems and the repeated protests of the employees about them, along with further plans for development, the government decided to support the erec- tion of a new building.“  An open competition was announced, which was unusual for state buildings in Vienna in this period. The relatively rare state commissions were usually given immediately to the officials of the government building departments. Architects repeatedly protested against this practice and demanded open competitions. The one for the Postal Savings Bank perhaps reflected the prestige of this new insti- tution, as the competition brief meticulously described the practical demands for light, healthy and hygienic workplaces, and sanitary equipment. As far as the building was concerned, the brief stipulated “simple and dignified appointments” and that “an emphasis should be laid on durability and low maintenance.”” Two banking halls were to be developed: a larger, dignified one in a covered court- yard for checking transactions, and a smaller one for savings transactions. Prio- rities were given to pragmatic factors such as general appropriateness for business, sufficient usable space, and a well-functioning system of communica- tion, in addition to the feasibility of construction. Aesthetics were mentioned only among the lower priorities. Of the 32 participating architects, the projects varied from historicist to modern solutions but most stayed within the compe- tition brief and planned a functional building with relatively simple facades and ornamentation. Five prizes were awarded, together with Wagner’s winning commission. 
Wagner was already familiar with the problems of the Postal Savings Bank as well as the conditions of the site. After winning a joint first prize with his city expan- sion plan in 1893, he was commissioned to elaborate on a plan for regulating the part of the Ringstrafe where the bank was to be located (the Stubenring). On the site of the huge military barracks, which were to be demolished, Wagner proposed a new central post office and the Postal Savings Bank nearby. Later, most of the plot was bought for the erection of the new bank building. Although the irregular, trap- ezoid plot was not directly a showpiece on the boulevard, it had immediate spatial and visual contact with the Ringstrafe because one plot between the Ring and the new bank building was left open for a small urban square and a forecourt to the building. The huge bank and office building was constructed in two phases. The first part, closer to the Ringstrafe, was erected between 1904 and 1906, and the second part was built in simplified form between 1909 and 1912.  The building, which according to Wagner is an exemplary case of a modern building type, namely the office building (Amtshaus), is horizontal in character with a prominent middle part, long wings at the sides and a vast building mass. His design efforts were directed to fulfill the functional needs of the building and at the same time to express its overall character: “The equivalent office rooms of the individual floors, the extension of the units for operative functions refer already in outlook to a certain uniformity.”* The proportion of walls and windows, the varying heights of floors and the functional ornament brought some diversity to the uniformity of the huge building mass. As one of the main goals of the planning was to create healthy and hygienic working conditions, Wagner planned “unusu- ally” large windows in order to let more light in.” The demand for more available space in the building required relatively low floor heights, which Wagner justified by referring to practicalities.  He employed a hybrid construction with concrete floors and load-bearing walls made of brick. The brick walls are covered by a facade, which Wagner had already alluded to in his theory of a modern building method in the first edition of Modern Architecture, where he sought to demonstrate the superiority of modern construc- tion to the so-called Renaissance method. His example of the latter was Semper and Hasenauer’s Burgtheater (1871-88) with its heavy and expensive materials and labor-intensive construction. In contrast, modern construction was cheaper and fas- ter: “For the exterior cladding of a building ... a panel system will be used on the planar surfaces. Since these panels can be assumed to have significantly less cubic volume, they can be designed for a nobler material. ... They are to be fastened with bronze bolts (rosettes).”*  Wagner made use of a sophisticated stone cladding system for the facade. In ear- lier versions, he chose majolica and even the type of ornamentation recalled in its motifs the Secession, with its quasi-organic forms. In the final version, one can dis- cern different versions of the veneered patterns. The rusticated base is “curved at the bottom to create a shadow line and increase the visual height,”” but reveals at the corners and through the fixing bolts that it is not solid masonry. In the middle  
part, Wagner combined bonded and gridded configurations. The former was char- acteristic of the traditional building method; the latter emphasized the veneered nature of masonry. This duality expresses the difference between heavy and light structure, which recalls the classical order, where “this facade becomes a columned portico between two towers.”’° The ornamentation reinforces this reading as the ornaments at the bottom and upper part of the facade can be understood as the base and capital of columns.'?  The different versions of the plan trace the evolution of Wagner’s stylistic devel- opment from the use of explicitly historicist elements through the influences of the Secession to a rational, functionalist approach. At the same time, Wagner distanced himself more and more from tradition or the idea of continuity. He stated that art and architecture should always express their own time. Given the new materials, methods of construction, demands, and lifestyle, these should become the starting point for artistic creation. In the final phase of this evolution, Wagner arrived at a severe form of economic expression, where, as Otto Antonia Graf outlines, “all the concepts and realized constructions result from the character and purpose of the building.”’* This did not entail a ban on tradition, which is present in a clear but more indirect, allusive way.  Wagner emphasized two main functions on the facade: first, the position of the directorate on the piano nobile, expressing hierarchy and distinction; and second, the entrance with five doors and a canopy above them, which underscored the bustling public circulation. This construction is kept apart from the main body of the build- ing. It has a roof of glass on a metal frame supported by thin aluminum columns. Wagner, thus, created a number of transitions from the outer to the inner public space. First, the urban square functions as an anteroom to the stairs with the can- opy. In the building itself we enter an imposing, elegant vestibule with a broad, marble staircase, which leads up to a connecting passage that opens onto the hall. This ceremonial introduction heightens the effect of the main hall in the heart of the building.  The Heart of the Building: The Counter Hall  Counter halls with a public function have always formed the central part of modern bank buildings, beginning with Soane’s spectacular Bank of England (1788-1834). Wagner's counter hall is a building within a building, a light iron and glass structure that contrasts with the stone clad exterior. From the very beginning Wagner placed the vestibule and the main hall in the center of a symmetric composition. Despite the explicit demand of the competition brief to allocate the counters for checking and savings activities in different rooms, he concentrated all of them in the main hall and situated the processing administration vertically in the floors on both sides of the courtyard. The individual floors were arranged flexibly. The safes and safety deposit boxes were placed below the courtyard along with a large mail room, 
which was connected by lifts to the counters and the administrative offices for checking and savings, in order to provide an effective network of communication. However, compositional considerations were of equal importance to practical ones for Wagner. He divided the almost regular quadrilateral courtyard into three parts in order to achieve the desirable elongated form of the hall. This resulted in a basil- ica-like space with three naves, a higher one in the middle section and two lower aisles on each side.  Perhaps the most effective and influential feature of the counter hall is the juxtaposition of a sacral type of space with industrial materials and structures. Iron glass constructions had been a novelty yielding great acclaim in public buildings since the middle of the nineteenth century. Examples of such anon- ymous, transitory spaces of the modern metropolis can be found in exhibition, trade, and commercial halls, as well as in department stores. However, the vis- ible use of iron structures and their aesthetic value sparked fierce debates in architectural theory and criticism. Until the last decade of the nineteenth cen- tury, the majority of architects and critics were rather skeptical about their artistic merits. Wagner expressed great interest in new materials and technol- ogies: he considered iron, and later also concrete, to be the most promising of the new materials and hoped to make fitting use of them as modern architec- ture advanced.  Wagner had already used an iron-glass roof in his Landerbank 20 years earlier, but had combined it with traditional or conventional historicist architectural ele- ments. The same can be observed in the designs for the Stadtbahn stations. In the Postal Savings Bank, however, Wagner avoided any direct allusion to historical forms, and consciously used industrial structures without any traditional ornamen- tation. At the same time, he wanted to avoid the “ignoble” appearance of the iron trusses caused by the usual industrial green paint and, therefore, devised a method to ennoble the iron structure, as he described it: “The naturally very precisely exe- cuted work will be transposed and then repeatedly painted white and the paint itself polished.”’* Next, he combined the iron with different cladding materials: “After all the construction workers have finished their works and left the site, the greatest part of the iron surfaces thus treated would be embellished with adorn- ments in aluminum and golden bronze screwed onto the columns as diverse smal- ler parts. ...white as primary color remains partly visible and together with the similarly white toned decor of the room, it surely elicits a very noble impression. It is proper to maintain that the result is an effect not yet achieved elsewhere. A decor like this will, I hope, make the iron acceptable with the further highly val- uable advantage of easy cleaning.”"*  Besides the de-materialized iron, glass is the ultimate material of the hall. The covering uses translucent industrial glass, which lets light in and allows the support- ing structure to glitter through the roof. Wagner wanted to build a second protec- tive glass roof at the top of the building but due to the wishes of the client had to lower it immediately above the visible membrane roof of the hall. Wagner was  
afraid of the unpleasant effects of these changes, in consequence of which he had “to lower and simplify the profiles of the side aisles, to thicken the iron trusses in order to be able to carry the second roof which will take away the ... lightness and daintiness of the banking hall.”’* On both sides of the central nave, five columns bear the double-skin structure, running through the lower membrane of the roof. Not only the roof but also the floor is made of glass, which is surprising at first sight. Perhaps because of the unusual application of glass bricks, this is the only point where Wagner refers to spectacular examples from abroad. It is no accident that these examples are from Paris, which was for Wagner the center of modern life.'® The pragmatic argument for the use of the glass bricks was their translucency, which allowed the workplaces below the hall to receive natural light. Nevertheless, the compositional role and aesthetic effects were at least as important, or even more so. The field of glass bricks is ordered in a raster of a thin solid framework made of white granite with black frames and stripes indicating the main direction. The conception seems to be similar to the description of carpets in Modern Archi- tecture. Within an elongated, bigger field, the bricks are always ordered in units of four pieces, with two different prismatic patterns. The thick translucent material refracts light and produces spectacular effects.  Wagner also used glass for cladding the walls. Together with the marble panels below and the artificial marble plaster above, the glass panels create a sleek com- posite surface. The rationale is again functional: the cladding served to protect the walls from the doodles of the public or clerks who might be tempted to scribble their calculations on them. However, the intentions of the composition seem to go beyond these practicalities as the combined effect of the different kinds and uses of glass and their harmony with other materials and structures result in complex aes- thetic effects.  Wagner was even keen on the newest, rarely used materials such as aluminum, which he sought to use abundantly for both functional and aesthetic purposes. Its silver-like, glittering appearance, together with its ease of cleaning and non-fading nature, made it suitable for noble and elegant features both outside and inside the building. Aluminum columns by the entrance support the canopy, which acts as a kind of prelude to the banking hall, signaling the difference between the building’s solid structure and the modern iron-glass construction inside. The iron columns of the hall are clad in aluminum with geometric ornamentation. Wagner also used aluminum for the design of the ventilation and heating pipes, which number among the most original and inventive elements of the interior. Another new material was linoleum, invented in the middle of the nineteenth century, an inexpensive material for high use areas. He carefully focused on the protection of the heavily used parts of the floor. To avoid buckling and the danger of stumbling, the linoleum is inverted into the floor and, with the other materials, creates an even surface. Each material and form is repeated, transformed, connected, and contrasted with others.  Wagner consciously avoided the use of vivid colors in his design. The colors in both public counter hall and work places is a combination of white, gray, silver, 
and black, expressing the economic, hygienic, and impersonal character of the institution and the Grofstadt. Nevertheless, in the central hall the palate is nobler, while in the workplaces it is much simpler — an assembly of a kind of “colorless colors.”’” The glass floor and roof, the combination of glittering marble and glass panels on the walls, as well as the added marble plaster above them — all add to the effects of light. In addition, the exterior walls in the courtyard above the hall are plastered in white majolica, the brightness of which further amplifies the reflections and demonstrates the conscious manner in which Wagner made his choice of materials and effects. Whereas from a functional point of view cleanness and clearness are the keywords, the harmony of materials and effects, of transparency and reflections and the rich modulations of light result in a sort of “industrial sublime” and monumentality. The banking hall seems to be float- ing in light, strengthened and contrasted even by the artificial light of the pure electric bulbs.  Wagner designed the Postal Savings Bank as a Gesamtkunstwerk, an integral work of art encompassing both the building and its furniture from the smallest detail to the whole. The functional aspects, the employment of objects and rooms and their ease of care and durability were expressed by Wagner in the different forms of covering, cladding and fixings. Not only the marble plates but also the glass panels are fixed to  the walls with bolts. The feet and other heavily used parts of the furniture are cov- ered with aluminum. The use of fixed bolts and heads as structural ornaments can be observed in various forms and at different scales, from the furniture and the inner walls to the facade. There is a certain duality or even ambiguity in this use of “bolts” or rivets, which partly act as real structural joints and partly as ornaments.  The Synthesis  Wagner's original intention was that a final integration of the solid and the ethereal, the outer and inner construction, would be achieved with an iron and glass dome on the top of the building above the courtyard. While this was rejected by the direc- tor because of economic and practical reasons, Wagner insisted on the “absolutely necessary crowning” element and formulated a new version as a pierced structure at the attic. It is set back from the facade line in a way that can be seen only froma certain distance.’* Wagner called this solution “Scheinarchitektur” (illusionary archi- tecture) because it lost the immediate connection with the inner iron and glass structure and, therefore, the chance to clearly stress the modem, integrative char- acter of the building; that is, the structural and compositional unity of the exterior and interior. However, it can be argued that the final version is in line with Wagner's efforts to use “high expressions of artistic feeling and monumental exal- 19 and with the deletion of almost any explicit historical or Secessionist elements during the planning process. Instead of a group of figures a la baroque and Secession, there is only a pair of  tation ... only with absolute justification and sparingly 
Byzantine angels holding up symbolic wreaths, which are then repeated on the piers and at the corners of the building. In its universality and conventionality, the Semperian wreath as the “ultimate textile object” and “the archetypical work  of art  29 can be interpreted as a sign of the victory of art and the success of human  efforts, which instead of static monumentality and power refer back to the process of the building’s production and express the ultimate principles of modern urban culture: rationality, anonymity, and thrift.  Notes  Image credit: Béla Kerékgyarto.  . Otto Wagner, Modern Architecture: A Guidebook for his Students to this Field of Art [1902],  ed. and trans. Harry Francis Mallgrave (Santa Monica: The Getty Center for the His- tory of Art and the Humanities, 1988), 75  . Johannes Heinssen, Historismus und Kulturkritik: Studien zur Deutschen Geschichtskultur  im spdten 19. Jahrhundert (Gottingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 2003).  . In parallel with Modern Architecture, a second volume of Wagner’s Some Sketches, Pro-  jects and Realized Buildings was published in 1897, which entailed mostly projects designed in the manner of historicism.  . For a detailed history of the bank, see Michael Wagner and Peter Tomanek, Bankiers  und Beamte: Hundert Jahre Osterreichische Postsparkasse (Vienna: Osterreichische Post- sparkasse, 1983).  . “‘Bauprogramm zur Wettbewerb-Ausschreibung fiir den Neubau eines Amtsge-  baudes der Postsparkasse.’ The citation of the document from the Postal Savings Bank Archive,” in Leslie Topp, Architecture and Truth in Fin-de-Siecle Vienna (New York: Cam- bridge University Press, 2004), 107.  6. Otto Antonia Graf, Otte Wagner (Vienna: H. Bohlau, 1985), 431. 7. “The relation of windows to wall partitions (piers) resulting from the purpose of the  edifice give it the imprint of a modern office building and forms its character in a sig- nificant way” (Graf, Otto Wagner, 430).  . Wagner, Modern Architecture, 96.  9. Edward R. Ford, The Details of Modern Architecture (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,  10. lL.  12. 13. 14.  1990), 221.  Ibid.  A profound analysis of the structural details in: Ford, 1990, 203-23, esp. 219-23. The observation about the classical organization of the facade of the Postal Savings Bank was originally made by Franco Borsi, Wiener Bauten der Jahrhundertwend (Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlags-Anstalt, 1985) 59. This reading is further justified by the hospital building that Wagner planned and realized in 1908-09, where he explicitly marked the capitals on the similarly organized facade, in simplified form. See Graf, Otto Wagner, 579.  Graf, Otto Wagner, 431.  Graf, Otto Wagner, 394.  Ibid. 
AEG TURBINE FACTORY  Peter Behrens  Gabriele H. Bryant  Peter Behrens, AEG Turbine Factory, Berlin, 1909.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
It lies in the hands of industry to create culture by bringing together art and technology.’  The AEG Turbine Factory in Berlin, designed by the architect Peter Behrens (1868-1940) in collaboration with the building engineer Karl Bernhard (1859-1937), represents a milestone in the development of modern industrial archi- tecture. Built in just a few months in 1909 in glass, iron,’ and concrete as an enor- mous modern industrial production space — the largest iron construction in Berlin at the time, with an enclosed volume of around 150,000 cubic meters uninterrupted by internal supports — today, more than a hundred years later, it still fulfills its orig- inal function, the assembly of large industrial turbines.’ The Turbine Factory has long been hailed as representing the integration of industrial building types and modern construction methods and materials into the tradition of architecture, and an artistic elevation of the modern workplace and the world of industry into the realm of culture. The Turbine Factory constitutes an attempt at reconciling the modern disciplines of architecture and engineering — or, as Behrens would put it, creating a new unity between art and technology — and one of its historical achieve- ments is that it marks a new beginning in artists’ and architects’ engagement with the sites and products of modern industry in the early twentieth century.“  The iconic status of the AEG Turbine Factory in the history of modern architec- ture is based to a large extent on the combined effect ofa seemingly open display of modern constructive principles in the 127 meter street front along Berlichingenstrafe, and the image ofits unadorned yet monumental main facade toward Huttenstrage. It simultaneously provides the public face ofa giant modern factory and represents the power of modern industry. Its earliest commentators recognized in this facade a fusion of the motifs of an upright hammer standing on its handle’ anda stylized tem- ple-front, soon earning the Turbine Factory the critical epithet of a “temple of work.”® And indeed, the historical reinterpretation of architectural prototypes and their symbolic transference to modern functional buildings, or, to put it differ- ently, the integration of new building types and industrial products into the time- honored tradition of art, is a recurring theme in the oeuvre of Peter Behrens. The design of modern monuments that go beyond being purely functional buildings, but which contribute to the symbolic expression as well as the very creation of cul- tural values, remained a lasting concern for this seminal early twentieth-century architect, who also became a kind of artistic father figure for some of the most impor- tant proponents of the modern movement in architecture. Behrens’ quest to give artistic form to the driving forces of his own time without uncritically embracing technological progress as an end in itself, and to engage with architectural tradition without succumbing to formal historicism — that is, his ambition to achieve a balance between the demands of modern “civilization” and the desire for its artistic elevation to the level of “culture”” — informs the design of the AEG Turbine Factory and accounts for its key role in the history of (not just industrial) modern architecture.  
The Architect Peter Behrens  The artistic development of the painter, architect, and designer Peter Behrens is representative of many of the paramount concerns of artists and architects at the beginning of the twentieth century. His career reflects the move of many artists at the turn of the century away from a concern with “high art” to an engagement with Lebensreform (life reform)* and the idea of a reconciliation of Life and Art via a synthesis of the arts, an all-encompassing new design on the basis of architecture, to eventually transfer these concerns into the realm of industry. Further, his artistic activity was accompanied by theoretical reflection, in which the complex relation- ship between art and technology, as well as the role of architecture as the founda- tion of a modern Gesamtkunstwerk (total work of art) was debated. Behrens embraced the Romantic-idealist quest for a total work of art as an agent of socio-cultural change, an ideal force in the creation of a new culture.° A great admirer of the philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche since the early stages of his career, Behrens adhered throughout his life to a strong faith in the artist’s role— and power — to embody the spiritual forces of his time and to create new values, as “the ref- ormation of the world, in order to be able to bear living in it, is the driving force.”'®  Peter Behrens started his career as a painter before turning to the “applied arts,” became a major influence in the theatre as well as the garden reform movement, and, though never formally trained, would eventually be one of the most promi- nent architects of his time in Germany. The different phases of Peter Behrens’ work have variously been characterized as belonging to Jugendstil (art nouveau), geomet-  ric abstraction, Sachlichkeit (objectivity), neoclassicism, and expressionism, but while there has been an overemphasis on the changes in Behrens’ work on such stylistic grounds, it is the conceptual continuities that run through the seemingly disparate periods of Behrens’ oeuvre over four decades that need to be stressed."" Behrens’ artistic creed in the creation of a unity of art and life, the fusion of the world of spirit and matter by means of artistic form creation, is apparent from his early experiments in creating a spiritually uplifting environment as a member of the Darmstadt artists’ colony of 1901, where he designed his first house, ” to his engagement with geometric abstraction as head of the Diisseldorf Kunstgewer- beschule (Academy of Arts and Crafts) from 1903 to 1907,'? and, most prominently, his later work for industry, both before and after the First World War."* Behrens received some of the most prestigious architectural commissions of his time, from private villas and an embassy building to major factory complexes and modern company headquarters, but he is still most widely known for his work as artistic consultant for the Allgemeine Elektricitéts-Gesellschaft (AEG) in Berlin from 1907 to 1914, described by art historian Tilmann Buddensieg as “probably the wid- est-ranging commission of modern times.”’* Behrens’ artistic task was gradually extended to designing everything from letterheads and advertising posters to electrical appliances, factory buildings and workers’ housing. In “symbolic 
objectivity,” '6 considered the new classicism of the twentieth century, Behrens rede- signed the insignia of the corporation, suggestive of technological progress and smooth efficiency. In his work for the AEG, Behrens created a total new corporate image for this general electrical concern, which was one of the most powerful indus- trial corporations in Germany at the beginning of the twentieth century. Andithas to be emphasized that the role of artistic design in the creation of a corporate identity, the function of a building like the Turbine Factory beyond its practical purpose to serve as a piece of advertising architecture, with the much-reproduced image of the Turbine Factory facade itself advancing to the level of a new logo for the AEG company, was to be expressive not just of economic superiority, but of the role of industry as a national force and driver of socio-political change. As Schwartz notes in this context: “In the years before World War I, the trademark arose in Germany as a symbol of redemption.”’” Soon Behrens’ work for the AEG was recognized as an embodiment of the ideals of the German Werkbund, which was founded in the same year, and whose agenda is summarized in the famous slogan to design everything “from sofa cushions to town planning””* to such an extent that the architectural his- torian Julius Posener even referred to Behrens as “Mister Werkbund.”'”  Architecture and Industry in the Early Twentieth Century  The question of how to negotiate the demands of art and industry was at the fore- front of architectural debates in the early twentieth century. While the English Arts and Crafts Movement was regarded as largely negative in its attitude toward mod- em machine-production and technology, in Germany, the critical discussions before World War I turned toward the integration of modern technology into the realm of artistic activity. Concerned not so much with the work’s actual mode of production, but rather questions of “good form,” the German debates centered on the problem of how to arrive at a new style that was expressive of its time,”° while satisfying the demands of the artist and the industrialist — and their respective clients. Behrens’ AEG Turbine Factory is regularly presented as the epitome of such a successful union as well as an “icon of modernism.” However, the AEG Turbine Factory can also serve as an illustration of some of the inherent ambigu- ities that characterize Behrens’ approach.  The first building Behrens designed for the AEG was a small octagonal pavilion for the first German Shipbuilding Exhibition in Berlin (1908). This was an austere, two-story construction of 20 meters height and 18 meters diameter, in which mod- erm machines were displayed like religious artifacts or beautiful sculptures, thus forming part of an aesthetic advertising strategy that famously requested that “an engine must look like a birthday present.”’ The temporary nature of the exhi- bition pavilion makes considerations of structural durability of secondary impor- tance here, and it can serve instead as a model in which an architectural idea is 
given form, with the building itself becoming an exhibit, a piece of advertising art that combines aesthetic and economic interests, as well as providing an artistic manifesto that can throw some light on Behrens’ larger ambitions as an architect for industry. Housing some of the most modern and technologically advanced pro- ducts of its time, the design of Behrens’ AEG pavilion, the iconographic program of the architecture, and its interior, hardly suggests a “prosaic” presentation of these emblems of a new spirit of “objectivity.” If the transference of religious prototypes for the exhibition of art had become culturally acceptable in the nineteenth cen- tury, Behrens now uses one of the great European prototypes of religious architec-  ture, aform reminiscent of, for example, the Baptistery in Florence, for the purpose of displaying industrial goods. In the Berlin exhibition, the octagon — the eight refer- ring symbolically to the beginning of a new cycle, resurrection, a new life, unity, and eternity — was oriented westward toward the main exhibition halls, which at night were illuminated by an arcade of thousands of electrical light bulbs. Behrens defined the combination of art and industry as the source of a new culture.”” In the “AEG baptistery,” water as the traditional symbol of a new life is replaced by the new power of electricity, and a large, octagonal, electrical chandelier surmounts the space in which the products are laid out, with the memorial address to the firm’s 25th anniversary designed and exhibited like a medieval illuminated manu- script. On the exterior, the pavilion bears the new logo that Behrens designed for the company: the hexagonal pattern with the trinity of the letters A E G in a hon- eycomb arrangement, which later also features prominently in the gable on the facade of the Turbine Factory. A contemporary critic wrote: “One calls for the Art- ist, so that out of the noise of work he can extract the great rhythms, so that he can seize the hidden organ tones and amplify them toward hymns, toward the conse- cration of the house,””’ and this hymn to the house, to the AEG, became the eulogy of industrial culture in the monumental Turbine Factory.  The AEG Turbine Factory is situated at the south-east corner of the old AEG factory site in the Moabit district of Berlin, at the corner of Huttenstrafe and Berlichingenstrage. Its monumental ochre-yellow facade with green iron bands accentuating the corners and a large central iron-glass window construction underneath a massive gable or pediment — with the inscription “Turbinenhalle” and the hexagonal AEG logo in the tympanon — still dominates the street-view.”* The enormous dimensions required for this modern factory hall and the specific technical requirements for a light and spacious, efficient, and highly durable mod- ern production space, which had to accommodate a complex arrangement of large movable cranes with a lifting capacity of 100 tons, led to a collaboration of Behrens with the experienced engineer Karl Bernhard.”” While Bernhard’s expertise was to make up for Behrens’ lack of technical and engineering training and experience, it was Behrens who clearly dominated in decisions concerning the overall design and its symbolic program.*° The Turbine Factory consists of the main hall with a projected length of 207 meters (127 meters were realized in the first stage in 1909),”” approximately 25 meters high and 25.60 meters wide, 
with a long pitched skylight for light and ventilation on the roof, and a smaller flanking two-story side-hall with a basement to accommodate storage and sec- ondary manufacturing operations, which is also slightly set back from Huttenstrafe to give maximum impact to the main facade.  Karl Bernhard’s structural design for the main hall was based ona series of asym- metrical three-hinged arches with tie-rods,’* and the way the structural elements are given artistic form on the outside of the building reveals the creative differences between the artist and the engineer: the constructive rationality of the side of the lower hall toward the factory yard — which has also been linked to Mies van der Rohe, who worked in Behrens’ office at this time?’ — stands in marked contrast to the street-front toward Berlichingenstrafe with its symbolic emphasis of the hall’s constructive principles. The tectonic display of structural elements is intensified here by an aesthetic enhancement of the vertical metal members on the outside, lending them a greater visual solidity and mass, to create a dynamic “image” of a modern load-carrying structure. This effect is further enhanced by the 14.40 meter- high tinted glass walls, which alternate with the green iron trusses and incline toward the top so that the “roof” overhangs them by nearly two meters, resulting  in a strong relief-like effect with the beam at the cornice suggestive of a classical entablature. The vertical iron members thus appear in a rhythmic sequence at 9.22-meter intervals as abstract, inverted classical columns or pillars which narrow toward the base and “resolve” in the striking detail of the lower hinges just above the concrete pedestal. The total visual impact of these features creates for Behrens the desired effect of a new, de-historicized classicism that is expressive of the essence of the modern machine-age.*°  Poetry and Truth in Modern Architecture  As a straightforward formal exposure of a modern factory construction in glass and iron was out of the question for Behrens, because he aspired to an elevation of these materials and new forms into the tradition of architecture, he repeatedly emphasized the aesthetic need to achieve a sense of corporeality for the building, which is to act as a spatial enclosure, not its unveiling.”’ This ambition comes most fully to the fore in the design of the main facade, with its 14.40 meter-high vertical plane of the iron-glass window in the center and the giant polygonal gable, but particularly its most strongly debated aspect: the visually massive rounded corners or pylons, which are executed in a thin layer of concrete and accentuated with hor- izontal iron bands. This corner treatment does not just lend a much-debated heavy monumentality and association with Egyptian temples to the building’s public face, it has also given rise to fierce controversy over the “aesthetic honesty” of a design that has the appearance of a load-bearing masonry construction when in fact it is mere concrete infill.** It was not just the engineer Bernhard who voiced his dis- pleasure with this artistic solution;®* the tenor of the critique can be summed 
up in Mies van der Rohe’s later notebook entry that “people who build factories like temples lie.”** The question of what constitutes artistic honesty is, of course, as central to the architectural debates of the time as it is complex. Behrens’ artistic maxim from his early involvement with the artists’ colony in Darmstadt had been that “we want to be elevated, not deceived,””’ that is, he proposed a view of art as providing a beautiful illusion that contains its own (higher) truth. For Behrens, an “aesthetic lie” might thus have consisted in not attempting to give the building a representative form that takes it beyond the display of constructive rationality, which would instead be seen as an all too literal and narrow, if not to say naive or even primitive notion of truth.  Behrens explicitly rejected as a “pseudo-aesthetic” the idea of a beautiful form that arises directly from the laws of mechanical construction, for “just as nature is not culture, the mere fulfillment of purpose and material intentions cannot create it either,” and he repeatedly emphasized that genuine artistic form can only be derived from an orientation toward psychological or spiritual, not just material pur- poses and functions.”° If even the Berlichingenstrafe front of the AEG Turbine Fac- tory has to be understood as a direct display of both constructive principles and their aesthetic elevation, then its temple-like main facade most clearly demonstrates the primacy of artistic form over the logic of construction. Far from exhibiting a modernist will to “functional directness” or espousing a narrow echnical — and in any case highly mythical — functionalist ethos, it was precisely he desire to negotiate the technical demands of a modern industrial production space with the representative function of the factory building as a monument of its time that proved to be Behrens’ guiding concern. While it is clearly true that a formal allusion to classical temple fronts is intended, Behrens can hardly be accused of mere historicist disguise in this facade. Comparing the reduced formal- ism of Behrens’ Turbine Factory with most older factory buildings makes it clear that he goes beyond both the historicist facade treatments of earlier architect- designed examples, as well as the engineer-designed solutions to industrial produc- tion sites that aim to follow only the dictates of technical functionality.  The artist whose work became more closely identified with the creation ofa new Industriekultur (industrial culture) than any other in his time, whose work was iden- tified with the AEG to such an extent that Behrens’ style and the AEG’s style became synonymous, fervently rejected any mere Verkunstung (artistic surface dec- oration) of the products of industry. At the same time, he never dispensed with the idealist agenda of an architecture as Denkmal (monument). Behrens is an architect who frequently appears to subordinate function, material, and technique in his buildings for the sake of the expression of what he sees as a higher historical truth. In the famous Turbine Factory facade, ideas concerning form and symbolism over- whelmingly dictate the physical solution. Behrens’ inversion of classical form for this show-front of the AEG factory complex marks a new — though perhaps not altogether whole-hearted — endorsement of the power of modern industrial civili- zation. “The evolution of monumental art has always been an expression of the  t t  
concentration of power: if one can speak of the art of the Church in the Middle Ages; in the Baroque era of the art of the kings; of bourgeois art in the styles around 1800; then I believe that today our flourishing industry again forms a concentration of power which cannot remain without influence on the development of culture,” states the most sought-after German architect of his time.”” It is Behrens’ determi- nation to go beyond utility in his will to monumentalize his culture’s driving forces that subsequent generations have come to regard as both the strength and weak- ness of this building and its design ethos. Behrens’ solution can be seen as an attempt at mediation — to lend dignity and meaning to the products of our material culture in an age of rapidly changing technological and socio-political conditions, without succumbing either to cultural pessimism or the uncritical embrace of tech- nological progress — and the facade of the AEG Turbine Factory remains a mon- ument to such an attempt at “historical synthesis,” an enlightened vision that occupies a splendid and sometimes slippery middle ground between formal and ideological extremes.  Behrens has been lauded as one of the earliest exponents of industrial design and one of the first artists to engage in creating what is now called “corporate identity” by means of a unified design program. However, Behrens also holds the curious position of being “the first artist to devote special care to the beauty of form of peculiarly modern industrial products in terms of some larger cultural conception external to the immediate processes of production and use.”** Even during his AEG period, it has been argued, Behrens’ call for a unity of art and technology never meant identification or equality, but always a spiritual elevation of technology (the factory) to the level of art (the temple).”” Behrens takes the idea of the Gesamt- kunstwerk from the nineteenth-century theater to the turn-of-the-century villa and then to the modern factory as cult building. The program for a spiritual elevation of man through the contemplation of ideal form is transferred from the idealist “thea- tre as moral institution” (Friedrich Schiller), which had already informed the aes- thetic program of Behrens’ much-admired artistic forbear, the great nineteenth- century Prussian architect Karl Friedrich Schinkel (1781-1841) and his artistic pro- gram for a transformation of the modern city into a Kulturlandschaft, to the show front of the new power of industry. The facade of the Turbine Factory, proudly orientated toward the south-east, the center of Berlin, elevates the industrial eve- ryday into a meaningful manifestation of the “spirit of the age,” an expression of the Kunstwollen®® of the modern era, while expanding the notion of culture into the realm of modern production.  But there is an even greater subtlety in the design of Behrens’ monumental Turbine Factory facade than it has yet been given credit for, and what is usually read as a straightforward elevation of the factory to the level of the temple is perhaps still more ambiguous than it seems. Friedrich Nietzsche had described his own philosophy as “inverted Platonism, the appearance, the illusion, is the aim,”“* and we might also recognize this sentiment in the AEG Turbine Factory facade. The ambivalence here lies in Behrens putting forward a design that does  
not so much imitate a temple front but instead inverts its very principles: the pro- truding gable is supported by the central window opening, while the seemingly load-bearing elements, the gently inclined concrete pylons at the corner, serve a purely aesthetic purpose.” The Nietzsche-inspired architect Behrens, it seems, had absorbed and applied the lessons of the master’s observations concerning “Truth and lie in the extra-moral sense: [that all] truths are illusions that have been forgotten as suc ”° A Nietzschean contention that all truth is created, that there is no one truth but only a multitude of different perspectives, can also be observed in the artistic treatment of the different sides of the Turbine Factory, culminating in its famous main facade, which presents an architecture of the “asif.”** Instead of either celebrating the Turbine Factory as a “temple of work,” or condemning the design by perpetuating a moralistic reading of it as a structurally dishonest and/or ideologically questionable attermpt to make a fac- tory look like a sacred building, perhaps we should interpret Behrens’ AEG Tur- bine Factory design as an expression of a new and altogether different historical truth: that “the truth” is not what it seems; that a “revaluation of all values,” a Copernican turn has taken place; and that the modern world and industrial reality are turning classical culture on its head.  The influence of Behrens and his oeuvre on the younger generation of architects we associate with the modern movement is unquestionable. Even where they con- ceived of their creations as antidotes to the precedents set by Behrens - whom they credited with having brought the industrial building into the realm of art, but cri- ticized for not having gone far enough in exploring the creative potential of the new materials and constructive principles — a building like the AEG Turbine Factory set the standard and became the critical reference-point for subsequent architect- designed industrial buildings. This is clearly the case with the famous Fagus shoe-last factory of 1911 by Walter Gropius and Adolf Meyer in Alfeld, another seminal modern industrial building of the pre-war period in Germany. It has been convincingly argued by Posener that the main building of the Fagus factory can be read as an architectural counter-demonstration or revision of Behrens’ AEG Tur- bine Factory, with Gropius and Meyer, who had both worked in the office of Beh- rens at the time of the Turbine Factory design, taking an “antithetically dependent” stand here against Behrens.” Gropius and Meyer, suggests Posener, “corrected” Behrens’ design by inversion: where Behrens had created solid and accentuated corner sections, to give but one example, Gropius and Meyer designed fully glazed corners without visible supports, although they were, it has to be emphasized, no more “structurally true” than Behrens’ solution.** However, where Behrens was seen by critics as putting too much emphasis on weight, mass, pathos, and mon- umentality, the main Fagus building was characterized by a visual lightness that avoided overtly symbolic gestures, making it one of the key buildings of the Inter- national Style.  Anderson’s critical assessment that with the “interestingly problematic” Peter  Behrens, “architecture answered to “The Time’, not the people,”*” remains a 
challenging contention. But it is also the deep seriousness of his very attempt to negotiate between the demands of “the time” and “the people” that made Behrens’ work both an inspiration and challenge for successive generations of architects. Where Mies van der Rohe later credited Behrens with having taught him “the great form,” he also carried on his quest for a gestaltend engagement with the essence of his time.** The continuity of the idealist tradition in the mod- erm notion of Formgestaltung for the protagonists of the Neues Bauen is further attested in, for example, Walter Curt Behrendt’s The Victory of the New Building Style (1927). In the early twentieth century, Formgestaltung assumes the status of a quasi-metaphysical activity, and whether they embrace or reject the idealist notions of “art” and “style,” the quest for the right Form and Gestaltung becomes the driving force even for those modernists who criticized the particular formal solutions in Behrens’ work. And while we have rightly become wary of the Hege- lian teleological conception of history and its notion of Zeitgeist, suspicious of promises — or even offers — of cultural redemption through art and/or technol- ogy, the legacy of the artistic struggles and achievements of early twentieth- century architecture, of which the AEG Turbine Factory by Peter Behrens is a prime example, continues to inform the debate and serve as a point of departure in the search for an “architecture of our time.”*°  Notes  Image credit: Tony Bryant, 2014.  1. Peter Behrens, “Kunst und Technik” (“Art and Technology”) [1910], reprinted in Indus- triekultur: Peter Behrens und die AEG 1907-1914, ed. Tilmann Buddensieg and Henning Rogge (Berlin: Mann, 1980), D278-D285.  2. The building is variously referred to as an iron or steel structure in the extensive literature on the subject. We use the term “iron” here in accordance with Behrens’ and Bernhard’s own use, as well as the general terminology of the time, for as Prokop has pointed out, even though the material Flufeisen is similar in its physical properties to modem steels, in the German-speaking world it was referred to as iron until about 1925, while in the rest of Europe and America the term steel was in use earlier. Cp. Ines Prokop, Vom Eisenban zum Stahlbau: Tragwerke und ihre Protagonisten in Berlin 1850-1925 (Berlin: mbv, 2012), 8, 26 ff.  3. The Turbine Factory now belongs to the Siemens Corporation and is used for the pro- duction of gas turbines.  4. Comparing the AEG Turbine Factory with earlier architects’ work on industrial build- ings, one notes that these often display a Romantic-historicist formal leaning toward, for example, brick-clad medieval fortifications, and that, generally speaking, an artistic dec- oration of the body of the building seems to be aimed at, instead of a derivation of the form from the building’s use. See the chapter “Architekturasthetik und Stilbildung,” in Miron Mislin, Industriearchitektur in Berlin 1840-1910 (Berlin: Wasmuth, 2002), 229-56.  5. Franz Mannheimer, “Fabrikenkunst” [1910], reprinted in Buddensieg and Rogge, Indus-  trickultur, D301-D304. 
GLASS HOUSE AT COLOGNE  Bruno Taut  Markus Breitschmid  Bruno Taut, Glass House at Cologne, 1914.  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Das Glashaus hat keinen anderen Zweck, als schén zu sein.’  Part of the prestige of the Glass House rests upon the renown of the man who designed it, Bruno Taut (1880-1938), an architect with a particularly ambitious vision for the future of architecture. Yet Taut’s reputation derives in no small degree from the Glass House itself — an early work of his career — and the high place it continues to hold in the history of modern architecture.  The most obvious and exceptional fact about the Glass House is implied in its seemingly lapidary name. The Glass House is the first among the many buildings known simply by the material with which it was built, an attribute also given, for example, to houses by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe and Philip Johnson. This is even more noteworthy as considerable parts of what made Taut’s Glass House buildable were not actually made of glass, a fact keenly emphasized by the architect himself, who called it “my ‘Glass House,’ the lightest possible concrete structure.”” While the building’s reinforced concrete construction, particularly its highly complex  polyhedral lamellar dome structure, was a technical masterpiece in and of itself, and in respect to its engineering ingenuity more than equal to the application of the various kinds of glass,’ it is nonetheless the use of glass that led to this building becoming one of the most iconic structures of twentieth-century modernism. Self- aware of its importance, one of the mottoes Taut incised into the concrete of the Glass House was “Das Glas bringt uns die neue Zeit - Backsteinkultur tut uns nur leid.” He had invited the poet Paul Scheerbart to provide aphorisms to be incor- porated into the building and Scheerbart supplied Taut with 16, of which six were eventually used.*  A Strange Building at the Werkbund Exhibition  The Glass House was part of the first Deutsche Werkbund-Ausstellung held in Cologne in 1914. The Deutscher Werkbund, a German association of artists, archi- tects, designers, and industrialists, organized the exhibition in Cologne with the initial purpose of establishing a partnership between product manufacturers and design professionals that would improve the competitiveness of German compa- nies on the global market. As Frederic Schwartz explains in his work on the Werk- bund, the organization was formed around 1907 to facilitate cooperation between producers, tradesmen, and art professionals. Schwarz writes: “It drew support from groups within and outside of government who saw the artistic reform of German production and trade as a source of national prestige and economic prosperity; and it spoke also to the many groups, so characteristic of Wilhelmine Germany, who furthered cultural reform of all kinds.”* Thus, the Werkbund was as much an art and manufacturing collaborative as a state-sponsored program intended to inte- grate traditional crafts and industrial mass-production techniques, in order to put Germany on a competitive footing with Great Britain and the United States. 
The exhibition was held at the Rheinpark, a large open green area opposite Cologne’s city center. The Hohenzollernbriicke, crossing the Rhine, essentially connected the famed Gothic Cathedral located in the old town with the entrance to the exhibition situated on the other side of the river. The exhibition had come to the city mainly due to the initiative of Konrad Adenauer, later the German Chan- cellor, but by 1914 a 36-year-old aspiring inventor, Werkbund member, and local politician. The luxurious sum of five million Goldmarks was spent on the event.° Planning began in earnest in 1912, but construction work started only in early 1914. The exhibition was opened to the public on May 15, 1914, with the construction of the Glass House still incomplete. Scheduled to last until the end of October, the exhibition was prematurely shut down on August 5, in reaction to the outbreak of World War I a day earlier.’  The encounter with the Glass House must have been strange for visitors to the exhibition grounds. It was as if the earth had miraculously opened, releasing a building’s base made of concrete that arched upward with a soft curvature in a shape not unlike the utopian and enormous mega-structure rising out of the Alps that Taut later drew in Alpine Architecture.” Obviously the Cologne site was not Alpine, yet a row of large mirrored glass spheres suggested that these spheres, too, were brought up from the underworld to the light; that an eruption had come to an inadvertent stop where the globes found their ultimate position — all of this the result of mighty geological forces at play.  Rising immediately from the bulge-like concrete ring was a tambour frame, sup- ported by slim concrete pillars, with partial glass insets in the configuration of a 14- sided prism. A gently curved and slightly pinnacled rhomboid cupola was built on top of the tambour. The glass facets of the cupola, with their mirroring surface, took on a greenish-yellowish coloration in bad weather. Somewhat unhappily, this appearance gave rise to one of the building’s nicknames, Spargelkopf, meaning asparagus tip. In clear weather, though, the glass facets mirrored the crystalline transparency of ether, as well as the lively movements of clouds, the play of the wind with the leaves of the adjacent trees, and, sometimes, the fleeting reflection ofan airplane. At night-time, the body of the building — illuminated with thousands of watts from the interior — was transformed into a sparkling and radiating jewel —a designation one assumes Taut would have preferred.”  The circumstances of how the Glass House became a part of the Werkbund exhibition are unclear. It was not part of the original building program for the exhibition. As a consequence, Taut did not receive an actual building commission from the exhibition’s board of directors but was assigned a specific location on the terrain of the exhibition area, not unlike other manufacturer-sponsored pavilions. This meant also that the office of the exhibition organizers did not carry the build- ing cost. Rather, what became the Glass House was given a small financial allow- ance that covered only a fraction of the expenses. Despite the meager support, Taut valued these concessions because they afforded him a venue for his Glass House, a building he had drawn up previously, long before he hoped for  
participation in the exhibition. While Taut did not yet have the renommée to be awarded an outright commission for one of the major exhibition buildings, he did receive support from Karl Ernst Osthaus, a vehement but isolated advocate of the most recent artistic avant-garde movements among the board of directors of the exhibition. Taut also received backing from his former professor, Theodor Fischer, the architect of the main hall of the exhibition. Taut’s reputation among leading architects had grown on the basis of two noted exhibition pavilions he had built: the Trager-Verkaufskontor in Berlin (1910) and his Monument des Eisens in Leipzig (1913)."°  The Glass House was not, however, a typical fit in the ensemble of manufacturer-sponsored pavilions. There was no single company or industrial association — for example, the association for glass manufacturers — that commissioned the building as its exhibition pavilion. Rather, Taut himself acted as owner, with all the associated risks and obligations that came with ownership. The requisition for in-kind donations for materials and other services, as well as partial financial support for the Glass House, was Taut’s responsibility. Because he was only modestly successful on these fronts, Taut faced the painful conse- quences of being the work’s main sponsor: 20,000 Goldmarks out of his own pocket. Therefore, the Glass House was partly a Werkbund building, partly an advertisement pavilion for the glass manufacturing industry, and, largely, Taut’s very own house in glass.'' Ownership — and all that it cost — was the price to be paid for the absolute artistic liberty that Taut enjoyed. However, paying for his own building would not be the last insult that Taut had to endure for his archi- tectural vision. In July of 1916, in the middle of World War I, he received a letter from the Cologne City Administration demanding that he, the building’s owner, take responsibility for the demolition of the remaining concrete skeleton, now a relic of the former jewel of the exhibition, at an estimated cost of a further 5,000 Reichsmark. Osthaus’ unconventional proposal to use the Glass House as a training object for test blasting techniques by the engineering battalion that now occupied the former exhibition area was denied by the commanding officer and Taut was stuck with the financial obligations for the demolition of his own masterpiece.’  While the architectural merit of Taut’s building was recognized even before the construction was finished, the ownership status and the subsequent financial diffi- culties caused the Glass House to be incorporated into the planning of the exhibi- tion at a very late date. Approval for the project was secured only four months before the planned opening of the exhibition. Construction began around mid-Feb- ruary. According to Taut’s own report, the complex concrete structure was erected in a mere five weeks in March. Despite the swift speed of construction, the Glass House was not on course to be completed for the official exhibition opening.’ Paul Westheim reported in a preview published in the Kélner Tagblatt four weeks before the opening date of the exhibition that one of the “artistically very interesting” buildings, referring to Taut’s Glass House, was unfortunately not completed 
beyond the “early stages.”'* It was only during the first week of July, for the event of the 7 Annual Convention of the Werkbund held in Cologne, that the Glass House was fully realized.’” As the war began on August 4 and the exhibition closed prematurely the next day, we can surmise that the Glass House was on display for no more than one month.  Given the project’s late entry into the exhibition planning process, it is no sur- prise that the site on which the building came to stand was also peculiar. The core area of the exhibition, which included the Haupthalle by Theodor Fischer, the Fest- halle by Peter Behrens, the so-called Osterreichisches Haus by Josef Hoffmann, the Werkbund theater by Henry van de Velde, the model factory and office building by Walter Gropius and Adolf Meyer, and an exhibition building devoted to paint by Hermann Muthesius, was about 600 meters or more than a third of a mile away from the site of the Glass House.  While it stood far away from the main buildings, Taut’s pavilion did, however, receive a constant flow of pedestrians and visitors because it was situated imme- diately behind the entrance gate and main ticket stand. The visitors arrived either by the public light rail lines, for which a station was built at the entrance gate of the exhibition, or by other vehicular means. Once there, they would pass the entrance gate and see the Glass House as the exhibition’s very first building. It stood at the beginning of a slightly bent, elongated approach of about 300 meters, which led toward the portal building that served as the ceremonial entrance to the core of the exhibition. The result of the building’s position was that visitors were able to see, and most likely visit, what became one of the main attractions of the entire exhibition, the Glass House, long before they approached the central build- ings. While the Glass House was one of the earliest impressions of any visitor to the exhibition, it also stood at the margins of the exhibition, which was further emphasized by the fact that the ground on which the visitors would have walked toward and around the Glass House was muddy on rainy days and dusty on sunny days."  Another ultimately telling peculiarity of the site was the fact that the Glass House stood close to the new amusement park. The Werkbund was forced to  accept the presence of an amusement park on the grounds of its exhibition because of the financial benefits it would bring to the entire endeavor.’” Its proximity to the Glass House is noteworthy, for Taut’s pavilion was the only one in the exhibition that seemed to embrace themes of movement and dynamism, topics that were viv- idly on display in the amusement park. These themes had, of course, already pene- trated the discourse of modern architecture, particularly the artistic and architectural circles of the Italian Futurists, for whom movement, and its engine, modern technology, were keys to the modern world. It was not only Filippo Tom- maso Marinetti, however, who pointed to the increasing mechanization of modern life. In fact, the electrification and automation of daily life was well underway by this time. Venues such as the world’s fairs in Paris (1900) and St. Louis (1904) had made ample use of these new possibilities. Yet, little of this existed on the Cologne 
site. One sharp-tongued critic described the Werkbund exhibition as “nearly offi- ciated boredom” and “well-mannered yawning caused by these ephemeral crea- tions.”'* Such criticism would have been understood as an evaluation of the architectural quality of most of the buildings. Yet, it could have been equally appli- cable to the exhibition’s apparent indifference to technological innovation, as there was no manifestation of the sought-after Qualitétsarbeit, no elevators, escalators, electric conveyer belts, or other mechanized innovations to be seen there. One would not have guessed that the organizers were members of an association of industrial manufacturers. Even the machines in Gropius’ model factory were never in motion because the architect objected to the noise such practical demonstrations would cause. While the amusement park did not contain anything that could not be enjoyed at the Berlin Lunapark or at Coney Island in New York, there was an electrical escalator, from which visitors could appreciate the new potentials for movement and dynamism.’” The Glass House embraced these technological pos- sibilities, but in its own way. The peculiar location on the exhibition grounds was, perhaps, not that unsuitable after all.  An “Overwhelmingly Beautiful” House  Despite the fact that the Glass House was accessible to the public for a mere month, the building is well documented and allows for detailed descriptions.” Given its pivotal position in architecture history, many historians have weighed in. Ian Boyd Whyte described the interior of the pavilion as follows:  The lower floor housed a water cascade while the upper level depended for its effect on the “Luxfer” prisms and coloured glass which made up the inner layer of the glaz- ing. The natural effects of light on glass were heightened by the inclusion of a mechanical kaleidoscope, built in to the back of the pavilion.7!  Dennis Sharp describes it thus:  The total effect was by all accounts startling both from the outside, which shone at night like a jewel, and from the inside where the effect was heightened by the play of coloured light from the mechanical kaleidoscope. In a sense Taut’s Glass House was an early prototype of the multi-media — or psychedelic — pavilions that are now commonly found at international exhibitions. ... The main space of the exhibition pavilion rose through two floors and the lower part, in which the water basin was situated, contained a number of glass mosaics and cartoons let into the glass wall surfaces.””  In comparison to these elaborate accounts, the architect's own assessment is use- ful, and even surprising. In his influential Modern Architecture of 1929, Taut aimed 
not so much for a detailed description but to present it as a key building in the development and possibilities of modern architecture:  Two other protagonists of the next generation gave proof of the new art of architec- ture at this [the Cologne] exhibition. One was the “Industry” building by Walter Gro- pius and Adolf Meyer ... The other was perhaps my “Glass House,” the lightest possible concrete structure, destined to demonstrate the use of glass in all its varied aesthetic charm, the variegated shining glass prisms ofits glass envelopments, its glass ceilings, glass floors, glass tiles, and the cascade, lit up from beneath, and a giant kalei- doscope, which was intended to illustrate by its illumination at night all that glass might achieve towards the heightening of intensity in our lives. The dome was of network construction without draw-beams — a forerunner of the post-war wood, and the recent steel and concrete — further improved upon “Lamellen” construction.”  The dramaturgy of the spatial sequences is equally revealing. As Angelika Thiekétter suggests: “Alles flieBt, alles bewegt sich” “(Everything flows, everything is in motion),” and there was more than one way that fluid movements brought the building to life and, ultimately, characterized it.7* Taut’s architectural choreogra- phy did not allow for a visitor to freely ramble through the building’s several set- tings; instead, movement was precisely directed with regard to what visitors were able to see, hear, and touch at any given moment. The influence of late-baroque architecture, particularly of Balthasar Neumann's magnificent stairs in the corps de logis at the castle in Bruchsal, has been noted as a possible point of reference.”* Buta walk through the Glass House could also be compared to a ride on one of the then- popular ghost trains, with the important difference that the sequence of rooms was to evoke more elevated thoughts and feelings.  The three-sided concrete entrance staircase welcomed its visitors with seven steps before the stair narrowed to one flight of 12 more steps, buttressed by two sturdy concrete half walls on each side that led visitors to the entrance plat- form, where tickets were sold. On that platform, the entry forked. To the right and left were narrow curved flights of stairs that led up one more level to the cupola room. These stairs were pressed between the slim concrete pillars of the outer 14-sided prism and a second concentric inner cylinder. The staircase, follow- ing the curvature of the tambour, remained open toward the outside, as the infill  between the pillars was left open above the steps, exposed to the hustling and bus- tling panorama outside.  Gradually the view closed and the visitor entered into a glassy and otherworldly cupola room — rather like plunging into a body of water. Contemporary reports described the view that emerged as “overwhelmingly beautiful.”** The domed  and double-layered glazed cupola did not allow for a view to the outside but trans- formed the entering daylight into a soft and hazy transparency, devoid of shadows. Seven large spherical lamps made of milky glass were suspended in a concentric configuration. In the center, suspended lower than the other seven lamps, hung 
another large and vertically elongated light fixture that conveyed colored light and filled the cupola room with a warm and fairytale-like Stimmung, a spatial mood as far removed from the everyday world as possible. Taut’s dramaturgic principle moved from the exterior to the interior, from the noisy and busy locomotion of everyday life to a dreamlike seclusion of the interior spaces. This turn toward a physical and mental interiority was heightened by the room’s inaccessible and empty center, a round opening in the floor beneath the cupola. Through that opening the reflecting water surface of the fountain on the lower floor became visible, including the glittering play of what seemed to be colorful glass beads lying on the ground of the fountain, all illuminated by the suspended central light fixture. Thus, the cupola room assumed a temple-like character. Next, two narrow, curved, and light-penetrated staircases, fully encased with glass stone blocks — having been imbued with a strange sense of weightlessness — led the visitors downstairs to the cascade room. Here, once again, the atmospheric disposition changed dramatically. The soft, ether-like light of the cupola room gave way to the colorful shine of glass and ceramic ornaments on ceilings, walls, and floors. Further, the concentric disposition of the cupola room upstairs was transfig- ured into an axial spatial organization. Moreover, a sense of solemnity was meta-  morphosed into experiences of sound and movement. The round opening of the floor of the cupola room appeared above, as an eye in the shallow dome — Pan- theon-like — pointing upward to the pinnacle of the rhomboid cupola. The basin that had appeared as an enclosed circle now turned out to be the spring of a new kind of movement: waters streamed downward on the shimmering seven-step cascade into a lower basin, flanked by shallow staircases on each side that allowed visitors to fol- low the flow of the water. The cascade’s glowing waters gave the room a rich spec- trum of light, sound, and motion, which infused the visitor’s senses.  One more spectacle was to come: extending the length of the cascade’s axis was a dark recessed alcove into which the variegated patterns of a mechanical kaleido- scope were projected. The endless, rhythmic change of abstract images was the final bewitching act before visitors exited the building through one of the two side doors and faced the everyday world again.””  Matter-of-Fact Objectivity and Quixotic Utopianism  Despite the brevity of its public existence, the Glass House made an indelible impression on the world of architecture. Today it still serves as a masterly attempt at the total dissolution of the existing foundations of architecture with respect to the ways it occupies its location, acknowledges its programmatic functions, articu- lates its expressions, and deploys its materials and construction techniques. The Glass House also largely defined the perception of its architect as perhaps the most important exponent of architectural expressionism. However, Bruno Taut’s 
influence reaches well beyond his pivotal role for expressionism. He sought noth- ing less than the “cosmic character of architecture.””*  The Glass House embodied a distinct duality that is the hallmark of Taut’s entire body of work. Its aesthetic characteristics consisted of both a matter-of-fact objec- tivity (the embrace of the newest and most advanced technical possibilities) and a quixotic utopianism (the projection of an otherworldly and fantastic spatial temper- ament). It embraced all that modernity promised to offer — a potential for objec- tivity, efficient organization, rationalized ordering systems, clarity, and honesty — but also embodied the side of the modern world that presented the coalescing power necessary for the realization of the sought-after new world — the mystery and almost demonic allure of the intangible.” Taut’s cosmology, his vision of a unified totality, provided the entire modernist project with not only a harvest of technological possibilities but also a new and necessarily metaphysical founda- tion.’° Although these two seemingly opposed potentials of the time were apparent to Taut early on in his life, his Glass House was a first masterful expression of his vision of a new, and newly unified modern world.  Notes  1. Bruno Taut, Glashaus — Bauprospekt (Cologne: 1914). The translation reads: “The Glass House has no other purpose than to be beautiful.” Taut repeated this statement in his text “Haus des Himmels” (House of Heaven), published in the pamphlet Frihlicht, ed. Bruno Taut (1920). The first four sentences of the text read: “A house should be nothing other than beautiful. It should fulfill no other purpose than to be empty, as Meister Eckhart put it: ‘I never want to ask God to be with me. I want to ask him that he makes me empty and pure; because if I were to be empty and pure, God would come to me, as it is his nature to be with me and in me.’ The visitor will be filled with the joy of archi- tecture, which will cleanse all human elements from his soul and make it a receptacle for the divine.”  2. Bruno Taut, Modern Architecture (London: The Studio Ltd., 1929), 56.  3. See Joachim Krausse, “Kosmisches Haus in Lichtbauweise. Bruno Tauts Glasbaukuppel,” in Kristallisationen, Splitterungen: Bruno Tauts Glashaus, ed. Angelika Thiekétter (Basel: Birkhauser, 1993), 95-106.  4. Another aphorism, for example, was “Gliick ohne Glas — Wie dumm ist das!” (Happiness without glass — how stupid is that!). The translation of the phrase quoted in the main text reads: “Glass brings us a new age — the tradition of brick buildings we are sorry about.” See: Thiekétter, Kristallisationen, Splitterungen, 167, 170.  5. Frederic J. Schwartz, The Werkbund (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1996), 9.  6. See “ “Wie ein verhaltenes Gahnen...’ — Die Kélner Werkbund-Ausstellung,” in Thiekotter, Kristallisationen, Splitterungen, 13.  7. See Bettina Held, “Kleine Glashaus-Chronologie,” in Thiekétter, Kristallisationen, Splitterungen, 168-72.  
CITTA NUOVA  Antonio Sant'Elia  Michelangelo Sabatino  »  Antonio Sant’Elia, La Citta Nuova: Stazione d’aeroplani e treni, circa 1914.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
FAST AND SLOW FUTURISM  Airplanes and trains have a key role in setting the tumultuous pace of Antonio Sant’Elia’s Cittd Nuova (circa 1914). His one-point perspective drawing, entitled “Stazione d’aeroplani e treni ferroviari” (Station for Airplanes and Trains), executed on the eve of the First World War, puts the viewer in the air, with a bird’s-eye view of a hybrid railroad station and airport of some imagined city of the future.’ Although commercial air travel was still in the process of becoming reality at the time, rail travel had already collapsed the distance between countryside and city with the introduction of transportation networks that facilitated the exchange of ideas, people, and products. Automobiles, too, were gradually replacing horse- drawn carriages and streetcars. The phenomenon of speed and movement were as essential to futurist painters such as Umberto Boccioni as they were “constructive elements” for Sant’Elia’s vision of the world to come.  Writing in his Manifesto dell’architettura futurista (1914), Sant’Elia states: “We must invent and rebuild the Futurist city: it must be like an immense and tumul- tuous shipyard, agile, mobile and dynamic in every detail; and the Futurist house must be like a gigantic machine.”” The exhilarated and combative tone of the man- ifesto owes as much to the new style of “telegraphic” communication as it does to the context in which Sant’Elia was writing. During the first decades of the twentieth century, Italy was still primarily an agrarian nation that had only begun to awaken to the stimuli of the industrial revolution. Throughout its countryside and cities, Italy had been shaped over the centuries by layers of historical architectures that were a cumulative presence to be reckoned with. Sant’Elia was well aware of this challenge, and his bold schemes paralleled Filippo Tommaso Marinetti’s threat to “free this land [Italy] from its smelly gangrene of professors, archaeologists, ciceroni, and antiquarians.”*  It is not a coincidence that the Station for Airplanes and Trains drawing (and the rest of the Citté Nuova drawing portfolio for that matter) provides little or no indi- cation of a “real” city in which Sant’Elia might have been planning to realize his monumental transportation nodes and housing towers. Buildings adjacent to the airplane and railroad station are mere outlines, “projections” of a city in fieri. The fact that Sant’Elia provides only perspectival drawings, not plans, in the port- folio for the Citta Nuova is an indication of the “utopian” nature of his endeavor. Whether he conceived the project as a transformative addition to a real city or asa catalyst for the founding of a new city is of little importance. It is the speculative quality of Sant’Elia’s drawings that excited the imagination of successive genera- tions of architects and city planners from the 1920s well into the 1960s, from Le Corbusier’s Contemporary City (Ville contemporaine) (1922) and Norman Bel Geddes Futurama (1939), to Yona Friedman's Spatial City (Ville spatiale) (circa 1962) and  
Archigram’s (Peter Cook) Plug-in-City (circa 1963) — all of these urban projections owe some debt to Sant’Elia’s “expressionist” visions in which he conflated art, engi- neering, architecture, and urbanism. Even today, his drawings remain at the center  of discussions about the future of the city.“  Capri as Epicentre of “Slow” Futurism  Although the natural and built landscape of the island of Capri off the coast of taly, south of Naples, shares little with the soaring verticality of Antonio Sant’ Elia’s Citta Nuova, or the dynamism of Virgilio Marchi’s Citta fantastica (circa 1919-20), its remoteness from the industrialized urban realm paradoxically fueled the creative impulses of a new generation of Futurists.” To be sure, theirs was a Futurism at odds with the contemporary obsession with velocity, invoked, for example, in one of the last images of Le Corbusier’s Vers une architecture (1923), in which automobiles were seen driving around the rooftop of the Fiat Lingotto Factory in Turin, a building designed by the engineer Giacomo Matté-Trucco (1915-26). Nonetheless, by the early 1920s, Capri and southern taly, where industrialization had been least felt, became an epicenter and pilgrim- age site for Italian Futurists who were strongly attracted to the strikingly simple vernacular structures typical of this part of the country, as well as the dramatic qualities of the rugged landscape and the slow pace of life and artisanal industry. Capri’s insularity, far removed as it was from the metropolis celebrated by first- generation Futurists working in Milan, coupled with the conspicuous absence of any trace of modernity’s fascination with speed (the automobile, the train, the airplane), appealed to these Futurists as much as it did the pleasure-seeking bour- geoisie who frequented the island.°  After the First World War, due to the efforts of charismatic mayor Edwin Cerio, himself an engineer-turned-politician, the island evolved into a haven for interna- tional artists, architects, intellectuals, and preservationists. First and second gener- ation Futurists such as Fortunato Depero, Virgilio Marchi, Marinetti, and Enrico Prampolini visited Capri on a regular basis during those years.” In an address deliv- ered to the 1922 Convegno del Paesaggio (Symposium on Landscape) staged on the island, Marinetti praised its vernacular buildings because of their rational and non- picturesque qualities:  I believe that this is a Futuristic island; I feel that it is full of infinite originality as if it had been sculpted by Futurist architects like Sant’Elia, Virgilio Marchi, painted by Balla, Depero, Russolo, Prampolini, and sung and made musical by Francesco Cangiullo and Casella!*  More than a decade after Marinetti’s attack on Italy’s cult of the past in his leg- endary Founding and Manifesto of Futurism (1909), he exonerated vernacular 
buildings, sparing them his anti-historicist wrath and proclaiming them exempt from the flux of academic styles conjured up by art historians. Marinetti saw beauty and freedom in the dramatic and unpredictably varied landscape of Capri because it rejected, as he put it, “any kind of order reminiscent of classicism.”® Although the interest in primitivism that surfaced in the 1920s among Futurists shared something with the pursuit of the archaic that was typical of the Valori Plastici milieu, it remained a fundamentally anti-classical impulse. The rediscov- ery and appropriation of the vernacular did not imply an end to the avant-garde, but rather reframed its objectives in the context of fascist Italy, in which artists and architects began to engage simultaneously with issues of national identity and modernism.  In 1922, the year that Benito Mussolini led the March on Rome to illegally seize political power, Virgilio Marchi (1895-1960), Futurist architect and set designer, praised the vernacular buildings of Capri and the Amalfi coast as a source of formal inspiration for contemporary designers. He published his “Primitivismi capresi,” a short illustrated essay, in Anton Giulio Bragaglia’s Rome-based avant-garde jour- nal, Cronache d’attualita.’° Two years later, in his Architettura futurista (1924), Marchi valorized the “innate virtue of primitive builders,” and elaborated on the relationship between the vernacular tradition and contemporary design. On the book’s cover he reproduced one of his drawings for a hydroelectric plant, one of the most modern of twentieth-century architectural types. This project echoed the sculptural, stereotomic qualities of the vernacular building types of Capri, and more broadly, the Amalfi coast, which he had recorded a few years earlier in a drawing of the Hotel Luna in Amalfi and published in Cronache d’attualita. In this book, as well as in his successive book entitled Italia nuova architettura nuova of 1931, Marchi expressed admiration for the “ingenious spontaneity” of the architec- ture of Capri. With Architettura futurista (1924) and Italia nuova architettura nuova (1931), he tried to position himself as the heir to Sant’Elia, and as the champion of Futurist architecture after the latter’s death in 1916. Yet Marchi’s drawings for Citta fantastica (circa 1919-20) reject the linearity of Sant’Elia’s Citta Nuova (circa 1914) in favor of an expressionist quality akin to Bruno Taut’s visionary drawings for Alpine Architektur (1919). Most of all, Marchi’s spiraling fantasy city of the future recalls the dramatic topography of Capri.  As a prefiguration of Marchi’s interest in primitivism and the vernacular, it is worth recalling the debate between Giulio Ulisse Arata, one of the founding mem- bers of the Nuove Tendenze group established in Milan in 1914, shortly before the outbreak of the First World War, and Marinetti. Arata was initially supportive of Sant’ Elia, whom he described as a “young artist of great genius,” encouraging him to participate in the group’s first exhibition and to write a preface for the catalogue. But Arata later condemned Sant’Elia’s manifesto on Futurist Architecture (his orig- inal Messaggio touched-up and radicalized by Marinetti), which was published in the August 1914 issue of Lacerba. He argued that architecture was intimately related to ethnography and geology, and therefore could not break completely  
with tradition for a “fresh start” as Sant’Elia advocated: “Architecture now makes a break with tradition. It must perforce make a fresh start.”"”  The 1911 Mostra di Etnografia Italiana (Italian Ethnography Exhibition) gave new visibility to “primitive” vernacular architecture and the arts of Italy’s different regions, which emerged as an alternative to more traditional expressions of Italian identity based on classicism. The divisionist artist, Giacomo Balla (who would later become a Futurist), displayed his relief painting Contadina davanti a due capanne (Peasant woman in front of two huts, 1910) with others of a series of 12 in Duilio Cambellotti’s monumental reed hut where the Mostra dell’Agro Romano (Exhibition of the Roman Territory) was installed.'? This exhibition promoted the efforts of reform-minded intellectuals such as Giovanni Cena and Alessandro Marcucci, who befriended many socially-minded artists. They were seeking to improve the squalid living conditions (and high illiteracy rate) of the Italian peasantry by supporting education and building schools in the countryside. Along with advan- cing this socio-political agenda, the organizers of the exhibition sought to draw attention to the “dark beauty” of peasant dwellings and arts.  Balla’s emphasis on the grace and humility of a female peasant against the back- drop of coarse reed huts (he had added coarse sand to the oil paint to enhance through granularity their tactile quality) suggests his solidarity with the peasantry who lived outside the cities and towns.'? Among the 12 works in the series was Balla’s portrait of Leo Tolstoy, whose seminal What is Art? (1897) had been trans- lated into Italian in 1902. Cambellotti’s socialist-minded circle in Rome, frequented by Balla and many others, sought to broaden the traditional boundaries of art.'*  With much less emphasis on the political dimension of the vernacular tradition, the artist, artisan, and stage-set designer, Fortunato Depero, also took inspiration from Capri and Italy’s Mezzogiorno in paintings of the peasantry and their built envi- rons in his Portatrice caprese (1917), Tarantella (1918-20), and Paese di tarantelle (1918), which challenged modern Italian artists to engage simultaneously with fig- uration and abstraction. Depero’s enthusiasm for “primordial machines” and peas- ant vitality extended to such folk customs as the tarantella, a lively dance typical of southern Italian villages and towns. Describing his travels to the “paradise of Capri” and the Amalfi coast in 1917, Depero wrote:  After four hours of sailing from Capri we landed in Positano on the Amalfi Coast. ... On one side of this small port we noticed a simple windmill that was inactive for many years and that was transformed into a home. ... It looked like a primordial machine made of wood built with peasant ingenuity.’”  When he set up his professional practice in Rovereto in the Alto Adige region, Depero brought to his playful Cubo-Futurist reading of the northern Italian ver- nacular landscape the bold colors and visual excitement he had experienced in Capri. Depero’s depictions of mountain towns to the east of Rovereto, including Serrada (1920) and Lizzana (1923), show his interest in the organic relationship 
between vernacular architecture and the natural landscape. This dialectical rela- tionship is manifested in his faceted one-story Bestetti Treves Tuminelli book pavil- ion, built for the third Monza Biennale (1927)."° In many ways, its stereotomic mass recalls the sculptural qualities of the layered, interlocking stone masonry of the southern Italian vernacular buildings anchored to the earth from which they rise. Like Marchi’s visionary drawings for the Citta fantastica (circa 1919-20), this build- ing evokes solid masses in contradistinction to the pursuit of transparency and dematerialization that had come to characterize much of the avant-garde glass architecture of the same period in Germany and Holland.  Depero was an artist who visualized the future without ignoring the past. His modernism extended beyond painting to the applied arts. His so-called Casa del Mago (House of the Magician) in Rovereto was a workshop in which local artisans, mainly women, produced handicrafts of vernacular inspiration such as tapestries, ceramics, and furniture, often manufactured with basic materials and technologies. Instead of working in such new materials as glass and steel, Depero employed pre- industrial materials and techniques such as wood, ceramics, and weaving to forge a novel synthesis of modernism and primitivism.  Depero’s Cubo-Futurist portrayals of Italy’s rural landscapes and peasant life are indebted to the figurative tradition and single-point perspective. He was captivated by pre-industrial farm equipment like the boldly painted horse-drawn carts typical of rural communities of southern Italy. Depero’s framing and use of color paral- leled the brilliantly hued geometric ornament typical of Sicilian and Neapolitan carts and fishermen’s vessels. His painting Carretto napoletano (1918), contemporary with Paese delle tarantelle, celebrates the peasant cart as an ancient ancestor of mod- erm machines.  Another prominent Futurist painter and aspiring architect, Enrico Prampolini’s painting Architettura cromatica di Capri (1921) offers a synthetic Cubo-Futurist read- ing in which he depicts the intrinsic relationship between vernacular buildings and the landscape of Capri. Throughout his life, Prampolini looked to the landscape, light, and water of Capri as a source of artistic inspiration, and in 1935 he went so far as to design a villa (never built) for Marinetti. His multi-story, multi-faceted Futurist “pavilion as landscape” in Turin (1927) draws on the sculptural and laby- rinthine landscape of Capri, echoing the paintings and prints produced during those years by the Danish artist Maurits Cornelis Escher, who also drew attention to sites in the Campania such as the Amalfi coast. Between 1922 and 1935, M. C. Escher combed central and southern Italy, and made drawings of the architecture he dis- covered in towns and villages along the coast of the Tyrhennian Sea, like Atrani and Amalfi. The extraordinary degree to which these vernacular buildings were coher- ent with the landscape in which they were sited would continue to inform his idi- osyncratic interpretations of space throughout his life.  The pre-industrial and remote character of Capri, both associated with the pre- industrial world of southern Italy, posed a challenge to Futurist artists and archi- tects like Depero, Marchi, and Prampolini, who were in thrall to an identity  
politics tainted by nationalism under fascism. Insofar as it was devoid of the mechanized symbols of progress (the car, the train, the airplane), the island forced artists and architects to think in terms of a modernity of the spirit. It is not by coincidence that the most celebrated example of Futurist and rationalist Italian architectural modernism, the Casa Malaparte (1938-42), designed for himself by the writer Kurt Erich Sukert (aka Curzio Malaparte) in collaboration with the architect Adalberto Libera and the mason-builder Adolfo Amitrano, was com- pleted after Futurism had been marginalized by the fascist regime. Given its dra- matic site on a remote outcropping on the rocky coast of Capri, its stone construction, flat roof, and Pompeian red stucco cladding, the Casa Malaparte recalls the primitive vernacular buildings celebrated by Marchi and the likes of Depero more than two decades earlier. In effect, it rejects facile allusions to mechanized modernism typical of banal Futurism, instead celebrating the power of cultural and physical rootedness.  Notes  Pinacoteca Civica Como, with permission by Musei Civici, Como.  1. For a detailed bibliography on this well-known drawing, see Luciano Caramel and Alberto Longatti, Antonio Sant’Elia: Vopera completa (Milan: Mondadori, 1987), 288; Antonio Sant Elia: Varchitettura disegnata (Venice: Marsilio, 1991), 240.  2. Republished in Umbro Apollonio, ed., Futurist Manifestos (New York: The Viking Press, 1973), 160-72. See also Ulrich Conrads, Programs and Manifestoes on 20'"-Century Archi- tecture (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1970), 34-8. Sant’Elia first elaborated his ideas on Futurist architecture in his Messaggio published as the preface to the catalogue of the Nuove Tendenze exhibition held in Milan in 1914. Subsequently, a longer and more trenchant version of this Messaggio was published as the Manifesto of Futurist Architecture in Lacerba (Florence) on March 15 and April 1, 1914. This final version was most likely modified by Filippo Tommaso Marinetti.  3. Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, “The Founding and Manifesto of Futurism,” in Futurist Manifestoes, ed. Umbro Apollonio (New York: The Viking Press, 1973), 19-24.  4. Marco de Michelis, ed. La Citta Nuova Oltre Sant’Elia—1913 Cento Anni di Visioni Urbane 1913-2013 (Milan: Silvana Editoriale, 2013).  5. For an in-depth account of Futurist artists, architects, and Capri see Michelangelo Saba- tino, Pride in Modesty: Modernist Architecture and the Vernacular Tradition in Italy (Toronto- Buffalo: University of Toronto Press, 2010) and M. Sabatino, “Capri as Epicentre of ‘Slow’ Futurism,” in Italian Futurism 1909-1944; Reconstructing the Universe, Exhibition Catalogue, Guggenheim Museum (New York: The Solomon R. Guggenheim Founda- tion, 2014), 220-3. See also Lea Vergine, ed. Capri 1905-1940: frammenti postumi (Milan: Skira, 2000).  6. For an overview of Futurist architecture see lain Boyd Whyte, “The Architecture of  Futurism,” in International Futurism in Arts and Literature, ed. Ginter Berghaus  (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 2000), 353-72. In Italian, see Ezio Godoli, I! futurismo 
PART Il  The Modern Project 
INnNtroauction IMAGINING NEW WORLDS  David Leatherbarrow  The ideas of modernity and project making that were developed in early twentieth- century architecture reinforced one another. Proponents of the new architecture had no doubt that the new century was a time of profound historical change. They were also confident about the role to be played by their designs: the new epoch would result from the work of imaginations attuned to the new age. This was espe- cially true in the first few decades of the century, when the projects studied in the chapters that follow were imagined, proposed, and sometimes built.  Although today, nearly a century later, little of this seems surprising, defining an architectural project in this way — a freely imagined instrument of radical cultural change — was relatively new to architecture. The same is true of the associated idea of “the modern,” the notion that ages, like styles, succeed one another. Difference more than distance was stressed, hence the common use of words that indicated overturning or turning against to describe the modernization process: revolt, not reform, not even renewal, exactly the opposite of restoration. Le Corbusier's his- torical assessment was as follows: “We do not appreciate sufficiently the deep chasm between our own epoch and earlier periods.” Others felt similarly. At the First International Dada Fair in Berlin George Grosz and John Heartfield pro- claimed: “Art is dead; long live Tatlin’s machine-art.”  But as I have already observed, the expectations for difference expressed by these conceptions of the modern are historically specific. Generally speaking, before the early twentieth century, project making and historical change allowed adaptation and continuity — together with difference. Because these alternative con- ceptions have resurfaced in contemporary historiography we can no longer simply accept the self-proclaimed progressivism of the early moderns, nor its reappearance in subsequent avant-gardes, particularly those of our time.  Leaving aside for a moment the ideas of history and project making that were advanced in 1920s and early 1930s, one can observe that project making had been seen previously as a prefiguration of a possible outcome, less certain of its results than a modernist design, making no promises about its effects on society and culture.’  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
It was not that the project’s anticipatory character was denied, rather that its contingency was accepted. The difference between a proposal and promise was apparent every time a design was transformed into a built work, when an idea was subjected to the availability or scarcity of materials, the skills and mistakes of builders, the opportunities and constraints of an actual site, the interests and complaints of a client, legal conditions, and so on.  If one accepts at face value what they wrote, the architects studied in the chapters that follow — Poelzig, Tatlin, Mies van der Rohe, van Doesburg, Asplund, and Le Corbusier — would seem to have overlooked limitations of this kind when making promises or predictions about the societal outcomes of their designs. They seem to have assumed that the future could be drawn back into the present, that project making was same as production, that it could advance locomotively toward a destination known in advance.  But surely this conception abbreviates the architectural project’s historical real- ity. Before it can anticipate anything final, let alone achieve it, a proposal must define its relationships to what exists, partly tearing itself away from the present, because its provisions no longer suit current needs, partly remaining there, for that is where changes must be made and where their effect will be seen. A complete break is refused and adhesions are required, notwithstanding the opportunities of the historical moment and the need for change.  Contrary to some of the claims of this story’s protagonists, modernity’s forward march was similar, similarly contingent and similarly incomplete, as Jiirgen Habermas famously observed.’ I say “some of the claims” because these architects also argued for continuity. The contradiction cannot be denied. With frequency that is often surprising, they identified themselves and explained their works with direct reference to historical examples, arguing for linkages with the past, despite their professed need for a radical break with the historical inheritance. Admittedly, models from the recent past were rarely cited, though Le Corbusier did republish drawings from Auguste Choisy’s Histoire de Varchitecture (1899) in his Vers une architecture, and built his early vision of the modern city out of arguments formu- lated by Camillo Sitte in Der Stddtebau nach seinen kiinstlerischen Grundsdtzen (1889). In most cases the historical turn was toward rather more distant times: ancient Greece and Rome for Le Corbusier; Gothic Germany for Mies; the medieval (not the Gothic) period for Poelzig; and ancient Scandinavia for Asplund.  If we are to grasp the particularity of their work, especially their built work, we need to consider their modernity within the traditions they tried to renew, even though they also argued against tradition. A common mistake of older histories of the modern movement is that they accepted the self-identification of the moder- nists as modernists at face value, neglecting clear evidences of historical continuity in their built work and the historical dimension the discipline they sought to renew. The choice suggested by the last chapter of Vers une architecture — architecture or revolution — posed an alternative between the time of the discipline and of that of the historical moment. With the whole of the book in mind, to say nothing of 
his projects, and those of the 1920s and 1930s more generally, could not be seen as works of architecture; which is to say, entitled to their own standing among the build- ings and cities of the Greeks and Romans, Bramante and Michelangelo, and so on.  Of course, these architects had no doubt that the world could be remade, and that their instructions would guide the hands that poured the concrete and welded the steel. Nineteenth-century transformations in both rural and urban regions had made the possibility of “world-making” exceedingly plain. The rail lines that reor- ganized the countryside offered clear evidence of the power of modern industry, as did the growth and increased density of cities. Change was not only given a prec- edent but warranted. Accordingly, projects were to disclose entirely new possibi- lities, even possible realities. World making — the unmaking and remaking of cities, neighborhoods, buildings, and interiors — was understood to be the archi- tect’s proper remit. The visions described in the chapters that follow elaborate a number of these “possible realities.”  Despite their shared sense of a new epoch, the architects and artists of these years generally saw themselves as members of movements that were distinct from one another, as if each circle had its own insight into the spirit of the times. The number of influential groups in these years is not great, but their importance can- not be denied, for they provided a context for the debates, disagreements, and dis- coveries that allowed the progressive ideas to develop. Each architect was, of course, an individual, but not in our contemporary sense, not a “star architect” pro- moting a unique brand. Consider Mies van der Rohe. He relied on Friihlich, the short-lived journal of Bruno Taut’s circle, for the publication of his glass skyscraper designs. In his chapter on the Friedrichstraffe project, Ufuk Ersoy explains that Mies used the journal even though he did not share the utopian dimensions of Taut’s “glass culture,” nor the ideas that were widely shared among the “crystal chain” artists and architects. It was not only publications that served the dissemination of ideas; exhibitions did so too, as did less formal meetings in cafés, clubs, and pri- vate houses. Although the movements of the 1920s and 1920s — expressionism, con- structivism, Futurism, De Stijl, Poetism, and Purism — were generally country- or language-based (Germany, Russia, Italy, Holland, Czech Republic, or France, for those just listed), these differences did not prevent single individuals from circulat- ing from one group to another. Theo van Doesburg, for example, migrated between different circles, as did Karel Tiege. Why did groups of this kind provide fertile soil for the development of projects that proposed radically new possibilities? It seems that thought and works that were free from the constraints of actual sites, ways of building, and budgets were particularly free for the formulation of new worlds. What is most striking about the projects of this time is that the designers convinced themselves that the architecture that emerged from their discussions would be richer than the world in which it was to find its place.  The projective thinking of these years also shared ground with concurrent art prac- tices. In one sense this is obvious because a number of the protagonists were both artists and architects. Vladimir Tatlin, for example, was mainly a painter. Richard  
anarchitectural project, was envisaged asa synthesis of the arts. Le Corbusier admitted that his painting studio was a laboratory for the discovery of architectural ideas. While Mies van der Rohe was no painter, his dedication to the art of building did not prevent him from adopting new art techniques, such as montage, for the representation and dissemination of his ideas. Moreover, as George Dodds shows, the relatively high degree of abstraction of Mies’ Brick Country House drawings allowed — encouraged? — comparisons with contemporary painting, particularly when Mies’ plan was viewed without its perspective rendering, rotated 90° on the page, and placed alongside Theo van Doesburg’s Rhythms of Russian Dance. Van Doesburg, for his part, was as much a painter as an architect. His Café de Aubette in Strasbourg can be seen as a three- dimensional translation of one of his Contra-Compositions, as described in Hilary Bryon. Van Doesburg described it as the realization of “unbridled imagination.” As with Tatlin’s experimental work, in this case the alliance between artistic and archi- tectural practices proposed a “total work of art.” For the progressive artist-architects of the 1920s and 1930s, actual buildings did not reveal new possibilities as vividly as draw- ings, photographs, models, installations, temporary constructions, and writings.  Of course many radical proposals named a location for the projects. Yet, the exact site of Tatlin’s Monument, for example, is very difficult if not impossible to determine. In most of Mies’ renditions of his skyscraper projects, the identifying attributes of the location have been suppressed, giving the project greater prom- inence. Dodds describes the Brick Country House project as a Landhaus without Land because all that can be said about a (possible) site must be inferred, as no top- ographical details were added to the lines, angles, thicknesses, and distances shown on the plan. Michael Andersen, in his chapter on the Stockholm Public Library, explains that Asplund backed away from reshaping the building’s immediate vicin- ity — the transformation of which he had sketched out in an early version of the project — in order to achieve greater complementarity between its rawness and the building’s simplicity. Flora Samuel shows that Le Corbusier’s Voisin Plan was clearly sited in the center of Paris. But, while some remnants of pre-existing  conditions were meant to survive the insertion, the relationships between the orders of the new and old were never articulated and are hard to imagine. Construction materials also played important roles in these proposals for the new architecture. Much has been written about the forward-looking character of glass and steel (ferro-vitreous) construction. These materials were often described as “modern.” They are still seen in this way today. But two facts make the claim uncon- vincing: materials like steel and glass were used before this period; and other mate-  rials, such as brick, were also used in forward-looking designs. Yes, Mies did design a concrete version of his country house; but his sense of “the modern” did not prevent him from developing a brick variant too. The conclusion this example suggests is that materials themselves are neither modern nor traditional; what makes them indicative of new thinking is the way they are used, the dimensions of the steel col- ummns, the expanse of glass panes, the ways pieces are joined together (to give the impression of uninterrupted planarity), their positions with respect to one another, 
these buildings is that new uses — modern uses — were key, and that new applications were made possible by what today is often called “research” on materials.  A common way research of this kind was undertaken in the architecture of the 1920s and 1930s was by utilizing — as much as possible — a single material for the whole of the building. Bruno Taut’s Glass Pavilion at the Cologne Exhibition is an obvious case in point. The projects by Mies already mentioned also isolate and explore the possibilities of one or two materials: glass and steel in the skyscraper projects, concrete and brick in the country houses. Ersoy argues that Mies (re)dis- covered the “liquid” character of glass in the FriedrichstraBe project. Similarly, the first real building undertaken by Bauhaus teachers and students was a study in tim- ber construction, the Sommerfeld House (1920-21): timber cladding, structure, fur- nishings, and ornament. Tatlin’s Monument to the Third International was a study in the frank (unpainted and unclad) use of steel. In many early modern projects (constructivist, expressionist, and De Stijl designs) materials were not specified. But this did not mean the topic was neglected. The forms and geometries of van Doesburg’s Contra Compositions were expected to “react dialectically” with the materials of construction once the labors of building commenced. This, too, would be a time when unforeseen possibilities could be discovered. But again, the use, not the material itself was modern. Unprecedented applications disclosed new possibilities, sometimes for their own sake, sometimes to represent new ways of inhabiting rooms, buildings, or urban settings.  In the chapters that follow, a basic question arises in different forms: what is the relationship between the “possible realities” imagined in early modern projects and the “real possibilities” of the modern world? Flora Samuel’s account of Le Corbu- sier’s Voisin Plan shows that the design not only proposed the reorganization of a large section of the city but also allowed for new architecture, furniture, art works, emotions, and therefore new ways of living. Modern forms were meant to be “orthopedic,” Le Corbusier said, which is to say corrective.° Ufuk Ersoy explains that Mies van der Rohe imagined not only a new architecture but also anew human subject. Life was the target of this re-ordering as much as architecture. The same can be seen in the writings and designs of Poelzig, Tatlin, van Doesburg, and Asplund. The fact that the various realizations of this ambition — the creation of a new type of person — were challenged by cultural and historical conditions out- side the scope of the projects does not diminish their potency and continued rel- evance; all it means is that better understanding their historical reality requires that we insist on the difference between a proposal and a promise.  Notes  1. Le Corbusier, Towards an Architecture [1924], trans. John Goodman (Los Angeles: Getty Research Institute, 2007), 251. 2. The obvious exceptions to this are the “utopian” (often utopian socialist) programs of the 
MONUMENT TO THE THIRD INTERNATIONAL  Vladimir Tatlin  Richard Anderson  Vladimir Tatlin, Model for the Monument to the Third International, Petrograd, 1920.  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Conceived in 1919, Vladimir Tatlin’s Monument to the Third International remains a powerful and enigmatic icon of the artistic and architectural innova- tions that followed the October Revolution. The project was at once central to architecture’s development in the post-revolutionary period, but Tatlin oper- ated only on the periphery of the productive experiments undertaken by the Soviet architectural vanguard during the 1920s and early 1930s. His Monument to the Third International was widely recognized as having initiated a new approach both to the monument as a building type and to architecture as such. To some, this project for a towering skeleton of steel appeared as a logical con- sequence of Tatlin’s exploration of material properties; to others it was a design overburdened with symbolism.  Origins of the Monument  The Monument was Tatlin’s first work on an architectural scale. He started his career as a painter; having studied at both the Moscow School of Painting, Sculp- ture, and Architecture and the Penza Art School, he established himself as a leading figure in the art worlds of Moscow and St. Petersburg before the Revolution of 1917. His works on canvas demonstrated his sensitivity to the formal and material traditions of Russian icon painting. Equally important to Tatlin’s development was his engagement with advanced artistic practices in Russia and Western Europe. He viewed the work of Picasso in both the Shchukin and Morozov collections in Mos- cow and during a trip to Paris in 1914. At the time, Picasso was exploring the pos- sibilities of work in three dimensions and producing sculptures such as his Guitar of early 1913. Tatlin saw this work during a visit to Picasso’s Paris studio, and this experience, together with Tatlin’s interest in the tactile qualities of materials, led him to produce a series of “painterly reliefs” and “counter-reliefs” in 1914 and 1915.  Tatlin exhibited his “counter-reliefs” at the legendary 0.10 exhibition in Petro- grad in late 1915, where they formed a materialist counterpoint to Kazimir Male- vich’s ethereal Suprematist paintings. With his “counter-reliefs,” Tatlin introduced several interests that would inform his conception of the Monument: the frank use of materials, the interpenetration of spaces, suspension as structural device, and the appearance of dynamic movement. The Corner Counter-Reliefs he installed in the galleries of the 0.10 exhibition were composed of a variety of hitherto “non-artistic” materials such as rope, sheet metal, scrap wood, and wire. Installation photographs show Tatlin’s works in taut suspension, pulling away from the gallery walls and occupying three-dimensional space.  Late in life, Tatlin wrote that “to accept or not to accept the October Revolution, that wasn’t a question for me.”’ His assumption of several positions within the growing cultural bureaucracy of the young Soviet state attests to the truth of  
Tatlin’s statement. His most important role was in the Department of Fine Arts (IZO) of the People’s Commissariat of Enlightenment (Narkompros), which was directed by the Marxist philosopher and critic Anatoly Lunacharsky. IZO organized decorations for mass demonstrations and public festivals, and it facilitated the exe- cution of the “Plan for Monumental Propaganda,” a campaign initiated by Lenin for the construction of monuments to revolutionary philosophers and activists. The plan removed many existing monuments from Moscow’s landscape, but the realist mode of the works intended to replace the monuments of the Tsars disheartened advanced artists like Tatlin. Exploiting his position as president of the IZO Colle- gium, Tatlin issued a memorandum on the plan in which he wrote that “the state as it now is cannot and must not be the initiator of bad taste.””  Tatlin responded to the “Plan for Monumental Propaganda” through his friend and interpreter Nikolai Punin, an art critic and historian. Punin’s essay, “On Monuments,” which was published in March 1919, outlined Tatlin’s concept for a monument that would both synthesize the arts of painting, sculpture, and archi- tecture and serve as a center for the dissemination of information through radio, film, and other media.’ Tatlin’s interest in artistic synthesis was shared by other representatives of the Soviet vanguard, most importantly the circle gathered around the sculptor Boris Korolev and the architect Nikolai Ladovskii and their group SINSKUL’PTARKh (Synthesis of Sculpture and Architecture).4 When Punin’s article was published, Tatlin’s Monument was still dedicated to the “Great Russian Revolution” and the structure’s form was only roughly defined. It was to be composed of cubes, cylinders, cones, semi-circles, and their combinations; the ascending double-spiral of the Monument’s final form was not yet developed. At this early stage Tatlin envisioned large geometrical volumes as habitable, dynamic spaces. They were to house auditoria, halls for gymnastics, and halls for meetings. He rejected the idea of including a museum or library in the Monument and insisted on the necessity of an agitation center, which could produce pamphlets and brochures, present cultural news on a giant screen, host a radio station with a global reach, project slogans and headlines on the clouds, and accommodate a fleet of motorcycles that would serve as a mobile extension of the Monument’s functions. The program of Tatlin’s Monument, as initially conceived, combined the facilities found in a workers’ club with a garage and broadcast center. At its inception, Tatlin’s Monument represented a flexible and innovative building type; only later, during its development, was it assigned the functions of a government ministry.  In September 1919 Tatlin moved to Petrograd, where he took up a teaching posi- tion at the Petrograd Free Art Studios (SVOMAS) and further developed his con- cept for a monument. When Tatlin arrived in the city, it was still suffering from the aftermath of the Revolution and the ensuing civil war. As buildings were torn down for firewood, Viktor Shklovskii, the literary critic, wrote that “the city slowly began to transform itself into an engraving by Piranesi.”’ But as Tatlin arrived,  
municipal authorities were staging the reconstruction of the city through several high-profile architectural competitions, most notably the competition for a new crematorium. Ivan Fomin, the best-known architect to participate in the competi- tion, submitted a project characterized by a multi-tiered tower that rises from a compact base. A crematorium project by one of Fomin’s students, Aleksandr Gegello, also adopted a vertical composition, but he articulated his principal vol- ume as an ascending spiral staircase. These projects were important elements of the architectural context in which Tatlin found himself in Petrograd, and they would have been very much in the public eye as he joined SVOMAS in the building of the former Academy of Fine Arts — the building where Fomin and his colleagues worked and the place where Tatlin and his assistants would later build and exhibit the model of the Monument.  By December 1919, Tatlin had a version of his Monument that was refined enough for him to seek technical expertise.° He had indicated that the structure was to be 400 m tall, and had prepared several drawings of the project.” Presumably the documentation Tatlin submitted for examination consisted of the two elevation drawings that Punin published in his pamphlet on the Monument and perhaps other drawings as well.* The elevation drawings depict a structure composed of two nested, ascending spirals that are supported by an inclined girder. Four volumes are suspended from this skeletal system: a cube, a pyramid, a cylinder, and a hemisphere. Arranged in diminishing scale from bottom to top, the volumes do not share a central axis; instead, they appear to hover in tense juxtaposition. The scale and site of the proposed building is difficult to discern from the surviving drawings. In one, the Monument appears to rise above a crudely drawn, uniden- tifiable cityscape. In the other, the building appears as a solitary figure against an undifferentiated background. Anatolii Strigalev has pointed out that these two drawings do not meet the standards of rigorous architectural delineation: they offer not two projections of the same form, but rather two slightly different variations on the form of the monument.” Nevertheless, when Tatlin submitted his project for expert review, the panel, which was composed of an architect and an engineer, both unnamed, wrote that “contemporary technology fully permits the possibility of constructing such a building.”’°  Over the course of eight months, from March to November 1920, Tatlin con- structed a model of his Monument in the former mosaics workshop of the Academy of Fine Arts. He was assisted by the artist Sofia Dymshits-Tolstaia and the students Joseph Meerzon, Tevel Shapiro, and Pavel Vinogradov.’ The model was con- structed from materials similar to those Tatlin had used in his “counter-reliefs”: wood, cardboard, paper, wire, and metal. Although estimations of the height of the model have varied widely — some observers have said it rose 25 m — the super- structure was only about 5 m tall, while its base, which was intended to accommo- date mechanisms for the rotating bodies, was about 1-1%m tall.’” Shapiro, who supplied several statements about the model in the 1960s and 1970s, reported that the project was completed without the use of detailed working drawings. 
Shapiro also noted that because metal was so scarce, Tatlin and his assistants carved nearly two thousand wooden pegs by hand in order to hold the structure together’? The principal elements of the model were “L’-shaped legs, which were arranged as radii around a central point and stacked in tiers. Tatlin and his team were unable to motorize the rotation of the internal volumes in their original model; Shapiro claimed that a young boy turned the volumes while it was on display in Moscow.'*  During the construction of the model, the Monument was rededicated to the Third International, or Comintern, on the occasion of the organization’s second congress, which took place in July and August 1920 in Moscow and Petrograd.” At this time Tatlin proposed the staging of a mass spectacle in Petrograd devoted to the construction of the Monument, but this concept proved to be short-lived. The period of the model’s construction also saw the publication of Punin’s pamphlet on the Monument, which contains the most detailed description of the project.'® Punin claimed that the project was commissioned by IZO Narkompros. Although Tatlin had been president of the Moscow IZO Collegium and had worked on the plan for monumental propaganda, this was an exaggeration of the degree of gov- ernmental approval for Tatlin’s project. Punin’s pamphlet recalls his earlier essay, “On Monuments,” but his later text offers a more concrete description of Tatlin’s project. Its origins lay in the desire to combine “a purely artistic form with a util- itarian one.” This rationale was already present in Tatlin’s earlier statement on monuments, but he now assigned a more definite program to the structure: the volumes suspended from its spiral-shaped armature were to house the legislative, executive, and propaganda arms of the Comintern. Inexplicably, Punin’s text dis- cusses only three volumes (the cube, pyramid, and cylinder), neglecting the hem- isphere that is clearly visible in the uppermost section of the model and elevation drawings. The cube, the lowest volume, was designed for conferences of the Com- intern and was to revolve around its axis once per year. The pyramid was for the executive committee and secretariat and was to revolve once per month. The cyl- inder was to be an international information center that would rotate once per day. Film projectors were to be mounted on the uppermost diaphragm of the spiral structure. Radio antennas crown the monument, enabling it to disseminate “infor- mation to the world proletariat.” Punin described how the Monument was to “share in the social and public life of the city,” but he did not indicate a proposed site for the structure — a telling and perhaps strategic omission.  Tatlin’s model was first exhibited in the studio where he and his assistants had constructed it. Photographs of this exhibition, which ran from November 8 to December 1, 1920, provide the most detailed records of the model. In one image, Tatlin stands in front of his model, while a banner with the slogan “Long Live the Third International!” hangs above. After this event, Tatlin’s model was disas- sembled and shipped to Moscow, where it would be displayed at two separate events in the House of Trade Unions, which stands in the center of Moscow.’” The first event was a trade fair that was organized to accompany the Eighth  
Congress of Soviets. Here, Tatlin’s model was exhibited in the section of the Soviet press agency, underlining the importance of information to the program of Tatlin’s Monument. In the Berlin-based journal, Veshch’, El Lissitzky described how Tatlin and his assistants “explained the purpose and meaning of the tower-like monument to delegates from Siberia, Turkestan, Crimea, and the Ukraine.”’* The exhibition also provided an opportunity for Tatlin and his assistants to issue a statement on the value of the Monument in their well-known text, “The Work Ahead of Us.” In this manifesto they linked the work at “laboratory scale” that Tatlin had undertaken before the October Revolution to the work on the Monument, calling the latter a model that stimulates “us to inventions in our work of creating a new world, and which call[s] upon the producers to exercise control over the forms encoun- tered in our new everyday life.”?? As Maria Gough has recently shown, Tatlin’s model was displayed a second time in the House of Trade Unions in summer 1921, this time at a trade fair held in conjunction with a meeting of the international delegates of the Third Congress of the Comintern. At this event the model was presented along with a multilingual selection of books and a radio transmitter. The model seems to have stood in the House of Trade Unions through early 1922, when Lunacharsky criticized it in a statement on the relationship between art and the Soviet state.*° After this date, the fate of the original model is difficult to trace, though Tatlin did exhibit at least one elevation drawing of the Monument in 1923, at the “Exhibition of Artists of All Directions” in Petrograd.”*  Reception of the Monument  Tatlin’s project for the Monument found immediate resonance both within Soviet Russia and abroad. In January 1921 Shklovskii praised the project, writing that “the Monument is made of glass, iron, and Revolution.””* In 1923 the poet Vladimir Mayakovsky counted Tatlin’s Monument among the “first art objects of the post-October epoch.””’ Tatlin’s work also attracted the attention of the Soviet lead- ership, notably Leon Trotsky. In his Literature and Revolution, which was first pub- lished in 1923, Trotsky wrote that Tatlin was “undoubtedly right” in discarding historical styles in his Monument and in “attempting to subordinate the entire design to a correct constructive use of material.””“ He nevertheless expressed skep- ticism at the proposal to hold meetings of the Comintern in rotating glass volumes.  Tatlin’s Monument had a broad impact on the international scene. Reports on Tatlin’s concept for a new type of monument spread to Germany through the writ- ing of Konstantin Umanskii. His essays in the arts periodical Der Ararat, which were published before Tatlin had completed his model, inspired the memorable slogan that George Grosz and John Heartfield presented in Berlin at the First International Dada Fair: “Art is dead; long live Tatlin’s machine-art.””” The writer Il’ia Ehren- burg further popularized Tatlin’s work in his book, A vse-taki ona vertitsia (Eppur si muove), as well as in articles in the journals L’Esprit Nouveau and Frihlicht.”* Lajos 
Kassak and Laszl6 Moholy-Nagy published a photograph of Tatlin’s model in their Buch neuer Kiinstler (Book of New Artists), and E] Lissitzky published an elevation drawing of the Monument in the Basel-based publication ABC.”” Louis Lozowick’s essay in Broom of 1922 was perhaps the first English-language publication on the project.”* Tatlin’s Monument also circulated in sculptural form: two distinct sim- plified models of the tower were exhibited in 1925: one in a workers’ parade in Leningrad; the other at the International Exposition of Decorative Arts in Paris. While Tatlin’s Monument circulated through the vectors of an emerging inter- national art world, Soviet architects responded to the complex spatial and program- matic propositions Tatlin had put forward. Lissitzky captured the paradoxical role of Tatlin’s Monument in the development of Soviet architecture with great clarity. nhis lecture “On New Russian Art” of 1922, Lissitzky noted that “within the sphere of architecture proper, the most important work was accomplished only on theo-  retical territory, in consequence of the absolute paralysis of building.” He counted Tatlin’s Monument as one of the few “architectural manifestations of recent years.” But, as Lissitzky never tired of pointing out, Tatlin’s Monument was not the achievement of an architect but the work of a painter. Tatlin, unlike Lissitzky, had no architectural training. Lissitzky nevertheless described the Monument as “the first work of the new generation, which is demanding of itself invention, ele- mentary design, clear construction and mastery of material.””° Eight years later, in his book Russland (1930), Lissitzky modified his interpretation of Tatlin’s tower. With a hint of disdain, Lissitzky recalled how Tatlin “assumed ... that the intuitive and artistic mastery of materials would lead to inventions on the basis of which objects could be constructed.”*° Lissitzky identified Tatlin’s work as a landmark in architectural constructivism, but he nevertheless offered the disparaging sugges-  tion that Tatlin’s Monument revived spatial concepts found in the pyramid of Sar- gon II at Khorsabad.  Tatlin’s relationship to architectural constructivism was complex. With few exceptions, constructivist architects rarely claimed Tatlin’s legacy as their own. Moisei Ginzburg hardly mentioned Tatlin in his 1924 book Stil i epokha (Style and Epoch). This text was a first attempt to identify the sources of what Ginzburg called Gn purely Wolfflinian fashion) “the characteristic aspects of the new style.” Ginzburg illustrated Tatlin’s Monument in the book’s crucial chapter on construc- tivism in architecture, but he did not discuss it in his text.’’ Six years later, Ginzburg would level a harsh critique at Tatlin in the pages of Sovremennaia arkhitektura (Contemporary Architecture). Here, in 1928, Ginzburg described Tatlin’s “engi- neering compositions” as demonstrations that he was fully alienated from both social and technical reality.’”  Despite Ginzburg’s reservations about Tatlin’s relationship to architectural constructivism, there was a direct and strong link between Tatlin and Aleksandr Vesnin. Perhaps more than anyone else, Vesnin was responsible for bringing the principles of constructivism to architecture. He was present during the crucial debates of 1921 at Moscow’s Institute of Artistic Culture where constructivism was 
first defined, and he worked very closely with Liubov’ Popova on a number of pro- jects in the early 1920s. Vesnin also claimed to have worked with Tatlin.  Tatlin’s influence is evident in a project Vesnin and Popova produced for the meeting of the delegates of the Third International in 1921. Vesnin and Popova devised a mass spectacle that was to take place during the event in Moscow. It was to be a theatrical contest between the “citadel of Capital” and the Socialist city of the future. The socialist city is made up of lattice-like trusses, and the entire scene appears to be bound together by high-tension cables. There is certainly a formal resemblance to the open-work structure that Tatlin devised for his Monument, but the very concept of the event is more significant, for it recalls Tatlin’s interest in staging a spectacle on the construction of the Monument in Petrograd.  Vesnin and Popova’s project resembles a stage design, and it was on the stage that constructivist architecture found its first realizations. Vesnin’s set for Alek- sandr Tairov’s production of G. K. Chesterton’s The Man who was Thursday, which ran in the 1922-23 season at the Kammernyi Theater in Moscow, was a major achievement. The overall conception develops the openwork forms employed in his project with Popova. He also made use of curved ramps, and the set incor- porated moving platforms and crane-like arms. Lissitzky recognized the novelty of Vesnin’s work. In his lecture “On New Russian Art” of 1922, he noted that the set allows one to “trace how the principles of the Tatlin tower have been applied to the theater.”*’ Lissitzky’s remark is especially significant, for it is only a short move from Vesnin’s stage set to the project for the Palace of Labor (1923) that he completed with his brothers — the project that represents the first mature state- ment of architectural constructivism. Their Palace of Labor emphasizes the build- ing’s reinforced concrete frame through the rhythmic articulation of austere structural members — a quality that links it to Tatlin’s interest in the culture of materials.  Konstantin Melnikov translated Tatlin’s dynamism into concrete architectural projects. His entry to the competition of 1924 for the Moscow headquarters of the newspaper Leningradskaia Pravda made dynamism a basic operating principle. His building’s four upper floors were to be anchored to a central, cylindrical core, which would act as the pivot around which each floor could rotate freely. The movement of the floors would not only alter the building in plan; it would also lend the building a constantly changing silhouette. Melnikov’s project represents a reinterpretation and extroversion of the internal, rotating forms of Tatlin’s tower.  The dynamism of Tatlin’s tower would also find its detractors; Lissitzky would ultimately be among them. While he noted the innovative qualities of Tatlin’s work in his lecture on Russian art of 1922, Lissitzky also wrote that “this group reached a kind of material-fetishism and forgot the necessity of creating a new plan. At times this reminds one of building a concrete railway-station from a Gothic design.”** In place of this alleged material fetishism and overt dynamism, Lissitzky emphasized the importance of what he called spatial equilibrium. To establish this condition was one of the fundamental aims of his Wolkenbiigel project (1923-25). 
Here vertical pillars counteract horizontal floors, producing an asymmetrical balance. In contrast to the revolving shapes of Tatlin’s tower, Lissitzky ensured that his series of skyscrapers for Moscow would become stable points of orientation within the city’s expanding urban scale.  A fourth vector of Tatlin’s architectural legacy concerns electromagnetic waves. A radio station, telegraph cabins, telephone centers, and great projectors that could display movies and messages on the clouds were all integral parts of Tatlin’s Monument. As Punin wrote, “radio, screen, and cables are elements of the Mon- ument, and they can also be elements of form.”?” Tatlin’s interest in these media technologies had a strong spatial dimension: the radio station was to be equipped with an antenna capable of reaching the entire world, thus suggesting that he con- ceived the scope of the Monument on a global scale.  In a series of understudied projects, Ivan Leonidov explored the relationship between architecture and broadcast media that Tatlin outlined. This is evident in Leonidov’s project for a monument to Christopher Columbus (1929), which was to be located in Santiago, Chile. The aim of Leonidov’s Monument was the “condensation of all the achievements of world progress.”*° The center of the Mon- ument was a “radio-port” composed of two 300 m-tall pylons. He imagined that on the open squares of cities around the world, screens would be installed that would receive “radio-images” of the story of Christopher Columbus and other accounts of social and technological progress. In Leonidov’s remarkable Monument we find a direct response to the most expansive, if least visible, ambitions of Tatlin’s Mon- ument to the Third International.  By the early 1930s, the reception of Tatlin’s Monument in the Soviet Union adopted a new character. In his book, Puti arkhitekturnoi mysli, 1917-1932 (Paths of Architectural Thought, 1917-1932), Roman Khiger described Tatlin’s project as a “typical product of the chaotic aesthetic reflexes of revolution” and noted that it represented a “primitive desire to embody the dynamism of revolution” in archi- tectural form.*” Tatlin’s Monument received little attention from Soviet critics during the following decades. In his book, Vyvoj sovetské architektury (The Devel- opment of Soviet Architecture) of 1936, the Czech critic Karel Teige drew a parallel between Tatlin’s tower and the project for the Palace of the Soviets by Boris lofan, Vladimir Shchuko, and Vladimir Gel’freikh. While noting that Tatlin’s tower was an early attempt to apply constructivist principles, Teige nevertheless dismissed the project as “purely formalist, metaphysical, and idealistic” because it had allegedly been conceived as a symbol, not designed according to functional methods.** After World War II, in the final years of Stalin’s reign, Mikhail Tsapenko described Tatlin’s tower as an “absurd formalist exercise” in a doctrinaire book on the “realist foundations” of Soviet architecture.”  Only in the 1960s would architects and historians revive serious interest in Tatlin’s Monument and its conceptual underpinning.” The first review of Tatlin’s work to appear in the Soviet Union following his death in 1953, was published in Dekorativnoe iskusstvo in 1966, on what would have been the artist’s 80th birthday.”  
In Western Europe Tatlin’s legacy was celebrated slightly earlier. Two important publications that addressed Tatin’s Monument appeared in 1962: Camilla Gray’s The Great Experiment: Russian Art, 1863-1922 and an extraordinary issue of Casabella Continuita devoted to the USSR. Vittorio De Feo’s landmark URSS architettura, 1917-1936 followed in 1963; Anatole Kopp discussed Tatlin’s Monument at length in Ville et révolution of 1967; and Troels Andersen organized the first major retro- spective of Tatlin’s work at the Moderna Museet in Stockholm in 1968.7 These publications and events marked the beginning of several decades of detailed schol- arly study of Tatlin’s contribution to art and architecture. The editorial that Ernesto Rogers contributed to the Soviet issue of Casabella Continuita conveyed the impetus behind the revival of interest in Tatlin’s work since the 1960s. Rogers counted Tatlin’s Monument to the Third International among the documents of construc- tivism that “aside from their historical interest, arouse great excitement in art circles,’ and concluded that “there is still something to be learned from those projects.”  Notes  1. Larissa Zhadova, ed., Tatlin (New York: Rizzoli, 1988), 320.  2. Vladimir Tatlin, “Memorandum of the Moscow Artistic Collegium... on the Erection in Moscow of 50 Monuments... [1918],” in Tatlin, ed. Larissa Zhadova (New York: Riz- zoli, 1988), 185.  3. Punin’s essay was originally published in Iskusstvo kommuny, no. 14 (March 9, 1919): 2-3. Republished in Nikolai N. Punin, “O pamiatnikakh,” in O Tatline, ed. Vasili Rakitin (Moscow: Literaturno-khudozh. agentstvo “RA,” 1994) 14-17.  4. On SINSKUL’PTARKH and its later transformation into, ZhIVSKUL’PTARKh (Synthesis of Painting, Sculpture and Architecture) see Selim O. Khan-Magomedov, Ratsionalizm: vatsio-arkhitektura: “formalizm” (Moscow: “Arkhitektura-S,” 2007).  5. Viktor Borisovich Shklovskii, Knight’s Move, trans. Richard Sheldon (Normal: Dalkey Archive Press, 2005), 13.  6. Anatolii A. Strigalev, “O proekte ‘Pamiatnik III internatsionala’ khudozhnika V. Tatlina,” in Voprosy sovetskogo izobrazitel’nogo iskusstva i arkhitektury, ed. Vigdariia E. Khazanova (Moscow: Sov. Khudozhnik, 1973) 416.  7. Strigalev cites an article from Zhizn’ iskusstva of October, 1919 as the first mention of the height of Tatlin’s tower; ibid., 416.  8. In the list of Tatlin’s works included in his book Tatlin (Protiv kubizma) | Tatlin (Against Cubism)] of 1921, Punin noted the existence of several types of drawing: risunki, chertezhi, and model’ pamiatnika (drawings, designs, and model of the Monument). See Nikolai N. Punin, O Tatline, ed. Vasili Rakitin, Arkhiv russkogo avangarda (Moscow: Literaturno-khudozh. agentstvo “RA,” 1994), 114.  9. Strigalev, “O proekte”, 434-5.  10. This report initially appeared in the journal Zhizn’ iskusstva in December 1919, cited in ibid., 416. 
FRIEDRICHSTRABE SKYSCRAPER  Mies van der Rohe  Ufuk Ersoy  Sains od Sink ne Si  4  -S A RRA Tb te eT DRA A  Mies van der Rohe, Friedrichstrake Skyscraper, Presentation Perspective, Berlin, 1921.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
TRANSFIGURATION THROUGH GLASS, OR VERTICAL AND HORIZONTAL TRANSPARENCIES  Water intrinsically belongs to glass architecture because of its capacity to reflect; neither is separable from the other...!  Mies van der Rohe’s entry for the FriedrichstraBe Skyscraper Competition of 1921, a project he named the “Wabe” (Honeycomb) construction, not only epitomized the polemics then current about the renovation of Berlin as a modern metropolis, but also represented a radical shift in the architect’s own viewpoint — his views of modern life, modern construction, and modern mate- rials, particularly glass.  The year before the competition the 34-year-old architect, then called Ludwig Mies, decided to distance himself from his family. He moved to his atelier at Am Karlsbad 24, where he would fully commit himself to his search for the truth of architecture. Having practiced for more than a decade in the offices of two well- known Berlin architects, Bruno Paul and Peter Behrens, Mies was ready to reorient his thinking and practice. Although the residences he had built on his own at the outskirts of the city allowed him to implement and experiment with what he had learned, he had convinced himself that the time had come to discover the real pos- sibilities for architecture embedded in the period’s specific — and specifically modern — conditions. The glass skyscraper project, which seems to have received  its impetus from his observations on contemporary technology, vividly expressed the architecture he sought. And the project heralded new beginnings in another sense: by combining his mother’s and father’s names, he gave himself a new name: Mies van der Rohe.  In the monograph accompanying the Mies van der Rohe exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art in 1947, Philip Johnson described the Friedrichstrabe Skyscraper project as the point of departure for the architect’s “visionary /experimen- tal” projects; that is, designs in which he explored the “genuine” elements of building art.” Through careful observation of Mies’ works, however, it is possible to see that the skyscraper project extended earlier developments. If there were heralds of the principles and elements that would give shape to his later buildings, including the Barcelona Pavilion (1929-30) and the Tugendhat House (1928-30), they were his early country villas and houses. Nevertheless, the glass skyscraper did signal a transition in the history of Mies’ formal expression. In the 1920s, making use of modern building techniques and materials, Mies successfully paraphrased what he had expressed in his earlier works but with more mature, “artless” words.’ 
The questions this chapter* will address are: how did modern materials, pattic- ularly glass, contribute to Mies’ search for expressive silence; and, more directly, how did glass act on his architectural imagination and alter his understanding and practice of architectural expression? While the competition entry will be my point of focus, I will also consider the work of a few of his contemporaries, in order to indicate what is unique and significant about this design.  Mies’ revolutionary proposal for the FriedrichstraBbe Skyscraper failed to receive an award. Even worse, it was even excluded from the pamphlet of the competition results. The evaluation was harsh: the judges thought it was a fantasy that could never be built. Even so, Mies continued working on his drawings and developed a second glass skyscraper project, Hochhaus (High Rise), intended to give visual man- ifestation to ideas he developed in a text on glazed high-rise buildings. That short article, which broke his reticence in architectural media, appeared in the fourth and last issue of Friihlicht, the journal edited by Bruno Taut.”  Mies’ preference for Taut’s journal was hardly coincidental. After designing the Glass Pavilion for the Werkbund Exhibition at Cologne (1914), in collaboration with the poet Paul Scheerbart, Taut took on the mission of encouraging architects to make use of glass as often and in as many ways as possible. During the turmoil following the First World War, Taut’s utopian vision appealed to the young gen- eration of artists and architects, and brought many of them together in the Arbeits- vat fiir Kunst Workers’ Council for Art) and Gléserne Kette (Crystal Chain) circles he led. Friihlicht served as the forum of radical thought, where the limits of possible reality were questioned. Although Mies did not share the utopian vision of all of the journal’s contributors, and never joined the art and architecture circles around Taut, he knew very well that Friihlicht was the only professional publication that would publicize his glass skyscraper projects.° And the two shared basic ideas: both Taut and Mies believed that technology was the formative agent of modern cul- ture, and identified glass as the prospective element of modern architecture, with which architects had to experiment.  In the architectural discourse of the second half of the twentieth century and up until today, glass architecture has been widely seen in technical terms, obvious in its properties, selfevidently useful, and plainly modern. From this vantage point, the approaches taken by Taut and Mies may well seem surprising, as if they sought not to use but to fetishize an industrial product and the techniques of its use. From their vantage point, however, glass was neither an icon of industrialization nor an obsession of bourgeois culture. Nor were its properties obvious. Even if it had not yet been architectonically mastered, it was a material that could redefine the nature of architectural space. As Arthur Korn wrote in Glas im Bau und als Gebrauchsgegen- stand (1929): “[glass] can enclose and open up spaces in more than one direction. Its peculiar advantage is in the diversity of the impressions it creates.””  When these two architects are viewed together, Korn seems to have been correct, for both Taut and Mies used glass to open interior space in multiple directions. Yet, their approaches also differed, at least in Korn’s view. Believing  
that the order of modern architecture and of modern culture more generally was based on the rational and objective laws of building art, Korn presented Mies’ perspective as the opening page of his book. Taut’s Glashaus, by contrast, was ignored. The term objectivity (Sachlichkeit) referred to a norm used to measure the appropriateness of architecture to contemporary life conditions and was generally used to invoke “a straightforward attention to needs” miss- ing in the world of daily life.* Yet, the range of needs that architecture addressed were phenomena open to interpretations that could be poles apart, as will be clear in what follows.  Glass Architecture  At the dawn of the twentieth century, glass was a material that had not yet been architectonically mastered, especially when it was used in sheets of large dimen- sions. This lack of mastery did not prevent it from performing splendidly in the literature of the time, however. Paul Scheerbart’s sense of the possibilities of glass emerged in criticism of its use in the late nineteenth century. He had observed that the misuse of industrial materials had mechanized the interiors both of buildings and of the individuals who inhabited them.® In reaction, he attempted to redefine their use, to imagine expressions and meanings that were radically alternative. Scheerbart’s most significant and typical literary tactic was “fictional estrangement.”'° Through a series of metaphorical utterances, he cre- ated semantic ambiguities that destabilized postulations that had mostly been taken for granted by the general population. The aim was not destabilization for its own sake, but to stimulate his readers’ imaginations. One of the most effective ways by which Scheerbart attempted to loosen the link between words and world was with the use of glass. For the poet, glass, specifically colored glass, could serve as a metaphoric tool to deform what one perceived. His aim was to free the mind from habitual images in memory. To this end glass became an instrument of imaginative freedom, capable of engendering possible, if unknown environments.  In 1914, after learning about Taut’s engagement in the Glass House project, and in the hope of extending the imaginative abilities of architects, Scheerbart attempted to translate his ideas into architecture. The result was his widely known manifesto, Glasarchitektur.'! In the first and strongest chapter of the text he invited architects to break open the closed character of the rooms in which modern men had been constrained to live. He intentionally juxtaposed architecture with glass to separate buildings from their ordinary, pragmatic definition.  Taut’s Glashaus was designed with a similar intent, exploiting glass’s fictional and estranging potential. In Taut’s view, what distinguished glass from other materials 
was its fictive character. Although it “emanated” from the earth, it could act as if it were intangible. By virtue of its changeable nature, submissive one might say to external or ambient influences, it could mimic “air, water, fire,” and overcome the heaviness of the earth.'* This meant that glass could help the architect elevate the materials of construction toward the immaterial. Furthermore, glass was not only to chronicle substantial transformations of the earth surface, but also to carry “subtle” values and feelings that would stimulate the human psyche. Through col- orful luminous surfaces in constant flux, Taut created perceptual ambiguity, which encouraged the impression of an architecture without earthly limitations, agitating the visitors’ sense of horizon. After visitors entered the glass hall their contact with mundane reality was suspended.  From a distance the Glashaus looked like a gemstone, one that crystalized sub- surface potentials. Coming closer, one would notice a substantial transformation from the bottom upward. Emerging from a sculpted, organically shaped concrete base, the building ended in the crystalline geometry of the polyhedral cupola, which was composed of rhomboids.  The art critic Adolf Behne, who hoped that the renewal of arts would generate a spiritual revolution and change the modern individual, appreciated the Glashaus for having given shape to nothing other than its “inner-artistic” purpose.’ Taut’s building was a purpose-free — zweckfrei — work that freed technology from its pragmatic concerns. Taut had accomplished this by returning to “the primal ele- ments of building.” The wall and the opening exposed the “reality of arts.” The primal elements were enlivened through “pure” artistic means of color, line, and light. Leaving aside all derivative elements, Taut invented his own modern orna- ment, which was stripped of all excess and was purely expressive. In Behne’s view, Taut subdued construction techniques to artistic expression and converted the art of building (Baukunst) into a primitive, cosmic ur-force, capable of trans- forming the world. For Behne, the Glashaus stood as a prototype that allowed him to reconcile artistic creativity with matter-of-factness and construe the principle of Sachlichkeit as a synthesis of reason and vision — sachliche Kunst. It provided the concrete model of a new kind of architecture closer to crystalline, abstract, non-historical forms, distinct from what he judged to be the pseudo-symbolic buildings of technology, such as Peter Behrens’ well-known AEG Turbine Fac- tory (1908-09).  Reflections  The rejection Mies received in his entry in the 1919 Ausstellung fiir unbekannte Archi- tekten (Exhibition of Unknown Architects) provoked him to reconsider his design strategies."* He became increasingly engaged in theoretical discussions, question- ing the fundamentals of artistic form-giving (Gestaltung), with the hope of more 
fully understanding what constituted architecture as a work of art. The same year, after the exhibition closed its doors and Taut’s Alpine Architecture was already in the hands of its readers,”* Ludwig Hilberseimer warned his colleagues against the sort of misapplications of Scheerbart’s glass architecture that had already become com- mon. According to Hilberseimer, Taut and his circle misread Scheerbart by closing their eyes to existing conditions. They sacrificed the essential “constructive prem- ises” of architecture for the sake of their fantasies.'* Taut’s over-exaggerated spec- ulations about achieving a faultless world and society by simply adorning the Alps with crystalline glass buildings denoted an escapist attitude that gave in to the dif- ficulty of offering concrete alternatives to the present conditions. Years later, Taut admitted with regret that the freedom of work on paper led him to easily overlook the given reality of the material world in which he lived, and ended in an unachiev- able abstraction.’”  Hilberseimer’s criticism was an open call for a glass architecture based on amore realist and practical understanding of Sachlichkeit. Mies would seem to have responded to this call in the Friedrichstrake competition. For him, the demand for Sachlichkeit meant the end of art in architecture. Nevertheless, pure expression was a goal common to both Mies and Taut. To attain an elementary but more real- ist language, Mies focused on building technology. Explicitly industrial materials and construction techniques came before purely artistic means, as a precondition for architectural design. The basic concern was to conceive the primitive and eter- nal urform immanent in modern technology, even if it had been intentionally ignored or masked by the previous generation. In the first paragraph of his man- ifesto in Friihlicht, Mies clarified that “the bold constructive thoughts” that give skyscrapers their strong impression were only visible on buildings “under construc- tion.””* Traditional walls concealing steel skeletons completely killed this impres- sion. Technology was important, but no more so than the impression it was capable of creating.  Mies had no doubt that the non-load-bearing glass walls would best represent the constructive principle he saw as the possibility and sign of the times. Even so, he did not forget that glass itself required a unique formal approach, pertinent to its par- ticular characteristics. Otherwise, large glass panes hung on steel frames would kill the facade. “To avoid the danger of lifelessness,” Mies imagined a stereometric mass composed of three polygonal towers. None of the “facade fronts” of the polygonal structure was parallel to the outlines of its triangular site. He pro- posed angled glazed facades not for the effect of light and shadow but for “a rich interplay of light reflections.”’? Because he said little more, the precise dis- tinction between his sense of “interplay” and Taut’s dematerialization remains unclear — yet they may have been more like one another than either of their designers cared to admit.  Although the large-format image rendered in charcoal initially brings to mind the technique of chiaroscuro, it derived from a series of photomontages.”° Mies consciously drew on the technique of montage to determine how his glass  
skyscraper would look in its urban context. At the outset, he inserted a rough out- line of his building into the enlarged eye-level photograph looking north along the Friedrichstrafe. Then, he cleaned the scene from all distractions of metropolitan life by darkening the surroundings. Finally, to expose the skyscraper, he cropped the frame and meticulously articulated the reflections on its glazed surface. Later in his career, he frequently used the same technique to control and manipulate the set- tings and optic qualities of his buildings in ways that denied their palpable reality.” In the FriedrichstraBe project, however, his intention was not to create a photo- realistic simulation. By superimposing, dissolving, and cropping he abstracted the existing conditions and located his building on the FriedrichstraBe that he ima- gined. He made use of these techniques, as the filmmaker Lev Kuleshov has sug- gested, “to create a new earthly terrain that did not exist anywhere.””” Obviously, in the drawing the skyscraper stands out as the most active figure while the city is largely suppressed into a mute background. It is only the building — not the urban context — that communicates an architectural intention. Its glazed surfaces both reflect the sunlight and pick up on the shadows of surrounding buildings, together with those of the interior. Though dark shadows on the surface give clues about vertical volumetric recesses and the slabs behind the glass, the luminous reflections that Mies highlighted obscure any real sense of what exists beneath the surface within the interiors.  In contrast to the edges that sharply define the skyscraper’s geometry, the depth of the glazed surface remains elusive. This perceptual instability imbues the glass and the building with a sense of mystery. As his term “reflection” implies, Mies used glass to liquefy the surface. He exploited the technique of chiaroscuro to emphasize its receptive character, as if it were similar to water. The liquid sur- face was offered as a cure for modern eyes, tired of looking at congested opaque walls. It was to give depth to pure vision by approaching the limits of sensual experience.  The polygonal shape of Mies’ 20-floor glass building made critics like Carl Gottfried think ofa “tower-like gothic force,” and compare it with Hans Scharoun’s crystalline towers in watercolor.” The idea that the glass skyscraper aimed to embody the crown of the city (Stadtkrone) that Taut advocated has merit, yet only with some qualifications, for Mies was interested neither in colored light nor in any formal distortions that challenged the perspective. Glass, for Mies, was cold and colorless. Nevertheless, the glazed facades of the skyscraper, like the walls of the Glashaus, presented themselves as if in flux. What set the facades in motion, however, was not the colored prismatic structure of glass that transformed sunlight into a shadow-less colored light, but the reflective patina that liquefied the surface. Mies’ scrutiny of reflective, watery surfaces reached its peak in his Barcelona Pavil- ion, which marked the end of the period of experimentation that had started with the FriedrichstraBe project.  Similar to the glazed surfaces of the skyscraper, the reflective walls in the Barcelona Pavilion rendered prospects unclear in both profile and position. Along  
with the labyrinthine layout of the building, polished glass and marble surfaces transmuted the rational structure into a perceptually ambiguous space. In Glass in Architecture and Decoration (1936), Raymond McGrath maintained that Mies polished glass was a “modern counterpart, on a larger scale, to the Claude Lorraine glasses,” in order to create a stereoscopic effect.”* Similar to the eighteenth-century glasses that transformed landscapes into picturesque images, the optics of the pavilion visually dislocated surfaces and figures. Superimposed reflections on the marble and glass relocated elements in a fictive landscape. Robin Evans described his experience in the reconstructed pavilion as a “dreamy disorienta- tion.””* By virtue of their anamorphic quality, reflective surfaces simultaneously created an aesthetic distance between the pavilion and its observers and intensified the sense of the wider horizon by visually extending the platforms and walls that ostensibly defined the building. The polished, reflective surface was a dream device that opened Mies’ building to imagination. But, unlike the hermetic microcosm of Taut, the self-discovery it promoted was not only from within but also in relation to the milieu.”°  Material Cause  As a substance on the threshold between materiality and immateriality, glass seemed to signify for both Taut and Mies a repository of profound expressions — even if it was also a material of building construction. Under Scheerbart’s influence, both saw glass as a contemplative substance, one that would give rise to psychic aspira- tions by engaging the imagination. Read through the philosopher Gaston Bachelard’s outlook, they were after a poetry of materials that science had destroyed and, corre- spondingly, engineers could not read. The imaginary aura of glass made it exceptional among other materials and keptit outside the cognitive order. The potential of glass to actin the subjunctive mode of “as if” and to suspend material reality invited both archi- tects to use it as a metaphor that opened the doors of the poetic reality. This common attribute of the Glashaus and the Barcelona Pavilion makes it possible to set up affi- nities between these two buildings and Symbolist, expressionist, Dadaist, surrealist, or even existentialist approaches.  For both Mies and Taut, buildings ought to signify more than a simple technical phenomenon (to which they were and still are typically reduced). Their search for pure expression did not intend to purify space of content and context, nor of mean- ing. They were interested in an iconoclasm that would initiate a search for the images hidden behind or within visible phenomena. To this end they replaced tra- ditional stone with glass. But again, they explored different ways of engaging the  world. Taut was interested in the vertical axis. He employed glass to elevate his buildings, as if they embodied an inexhaustible force. His aim was to cause a psychic excitement of airiness that would evoke the dreams of flight or fall. Mies, on the other hand, sought the liquidity of glass, allowing or imagining a later spread of  
effects, reflections, or mirrorings. He used glass to give depth to walls — even ifit was an exceedingly shallow depth — and to make them, thereby, unfathomable, like a mystery. The eyes that dived into Mies’ walls were to look for pale and vague images of the selfon a far horizon. Mies’ portrait as the rational architect has been built upon his apparent apathy toward emotional content. But, using glass he disclosed the material cause to be one that arose from feelings. Hidden behind the veil of reason, glass was the perfect vehicle that allowed Mies, as Evans has explained, to force sen- sation into the foreground and to push consciousness into apperception.””  To conclude, it is worth noting that Scheerbart’s aim in writing Glasarchitektur was to create a Traumkunst, not a Raumkunst. He believed that in the twentieth century neither reason nor faith would break the eternal silence of infinite space, only dream. With a similarly optimist view, Bachelard suggested a return to the cosmology of dreams, covert in the primitive zone of “material reveries that pre- cede contemplation.””* This seems to recall an observation of ancient Empedocles: “Tt is through the earth that is in us that we know the earth, water through water, through our air the air divine, and through our fire devouring fire.”??  Notes  Image credit: © ARS, NY. Charcoal and graphite on brown paper, mounted on board,  68'4 x 48". The Mies van der Rohe Archive, Museum of Modern Art, New York. Gift  of the Architect. Digital Image © The Museum of Modern Art/Licensed by SCALA/ Art  Resource, NY.  1. Paul Scheerbart, Bruno Taut, and Dennis Sharp, ed., Glass Architecture by Paul Scheerbart and Alpine Architecture by Bruno Taut, trans. James Palmes and Shirley Palmer (New York, NY: Praeger Publishers, 1972), 14.  2. The series of projects Johnson mentioned were the Friedrichstrabe Skyscraper, the Glass Skyscraper, the Concrete Country House, the Concrete Office Building, and the Brick Country House. See Terence Riley, “Making History: Mies van der Rohe and The Museum of Modern Art,” in Mies in Berlin, ed. Barry Bergdoll and Terence Riley (New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 2001), 17.  3. Fritz Neumeyer, The Artless Word: Mies Van Der Rohe on the Building Avt, trans. Mark Jarzombek (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991), 46.  4. An earlier version of this chapter was published in Matthew Mindrup, ed., The Material Imagination: Reveries on Architecture and Matter (Farnham, Surrey: Ashgate, 2015) 155-68, under the title “Glass as Light as Air, as Deep as Water.”  5. Mies, untitled, in Frihlicht 1, no 4 (1922): 122-4, translated in Neumeyer, The Artless Word, 240.  6. Mies was probably aware that, in the previous issue of Frihlicht, Behrens’, Mendel-  sohn’s, Scharoun’s, and Taut’s entries for the Friedrichstrabe Competition had been  published. At the time that Mies submitted his text, Taut was about to draft the sketches of his glass skyscraper project for the Chicago Tribune Competition. 
BRICK COUNTRY HOUSE PROJECT  Mies van der Rohe  George Dodds  Mies van der Rohe, Brick Country House, circa 1924.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
At times, the image of a building attains a status above and beyond the physical artifact represented, wherein the depiction of what could have been is given equa status to or privileged over what was built. Ludwig Mies van der Rohe’s oeuvre is chockablock with such instances — both intentional and not. The canonical Berliner Bild-Bericht photographs of his German Pavilion for the Barcelona Internationa Exposition (1928-29) are the most celebrated of these, while the drawings of his “Project for a Brick Country House” are arguably the most influential of his early Weimar experiments (1921-25).' Yet, typical of the uncertainty that surrounds much of Mies’ avant-garde work of the 1920s, little is known with certainty o the genesis of the brick villa project: not its client, if there was one; not its site, if there was one; not even the year in which the drawings were made. Moreover, while they have influenced generations of architects, their resonance in Mies’ own architectural production is relatively limited, and short-lived.  Only two drawings attributable to Mies’ Berlin office describe the project: a spare plan, largely absent annotations, and a perspective. Neither existed for very long; no one seems to know what became of them. It is equally unclear how many of those who have written about them since the 1920s have done so from first-hand inspection. No one living today has laid eyes on them. Further complicating the matter, the perspective (which does not appear to have been drawn by Mies) seems to have been generated from a different plan. Once there may have been a pair of drawings that aligned better; we will never know. Wolf Tegethoff has carefully parsed this lack of internal coherence, one that has troubled far fewer authors than it ought.” Yet, even the exacting Tegethoff wanders into the tall grass on more than one occasion as he attempts to will these drawings into the coherent form of a proj- ect with both a site and client.’ In a more recent commentary, Dietrich Neumann includes a description of the second floor, down to the number of bedrooms.* As there has apparently never been a plan of an upper level, or a section, and as the outside depicted in the perspective does not align with the inside delineated in the plan, this ought to make one wonder.* Describing an interior, which is immeasur- able, based on the relation of a plan to a perspective, which do not agree in ways that are clearly measurable, is a dicey proposition. Yet, this is simply one of the several “phantasies and unconscious logic” projected onto these relatively mute and absent documents.®  There are, however, a few critical moments in the history of the Berlin drawings of the Brick Country House Project that one can point to with varying degrees of certainty. It seems more than likely that Mies created the drawings specifically for The Great Berlin Art Exhibition of 1924. It is certain that they were hung in the show well after the exhibit opened. The timing of the late entry has led to specu- lation that Mies made the drawings partly in response to what was already on dis- play.” Adding to the historical uncertainty, two additional versions of the plan were produced in Mies’ Chicago office in the mid-1960s, ostensibly with his imprimatur, and specifically for Werner Blaser’s Mies van der Rohe: The Art of Structure (1965),  
wherein each brick of every wythe is visible.* Blaser’s crisp and clear “reconstruc- tions” (1964 and 1965) only confound the matter; although they were created from Mies’ photograph of the drawings exhibited in the Berlin exhibition, they differ from “the original” in terms of enclosure and construction.”  That the status of the missing drawings has troubled few who have written about them is illustrative of a cultural phenomenon that is commonplace.'” This gap between what was and what may have been, however, is a telling characteristic of architectural discourse on Mies van der Rohe’s oeuvre in particular. At the Museum of Modern Art’s (MoMA) Mies in Berlin exhibition une 21 — September 11, 2001), for example, the large format photographic print of the drawings were hung alongside Mies’ original architectural drawings, montages, and photographs of his built works — on equal terms, as if they were all originals. The aura of an authentic work notwithstanding, there is simply far more to be learned from an original drawing than there is from the finest reproduction: the substrate and graphic medium, traces of the drawing’s construction, the maker’s pentimenti, marginal notes, not to mention the obverse side on which one may find revealing graphic and textual notations.'' None of these are available in the case of Mies’ Brick Country House drawings; that path is closed.  The open path is limited to photographic reproductions of varying quality. And while we can learn nothing from the original drawings, there is much to be learned from the manner in which they have been reproduced. Hans Soeder’s 1924 article published in Der Neubau seems to be the first publication of the two brick villa draw- ings exhibited at the Great Berlin Art Exhibition.’” The following year Hans Rich- ter and Paul Westheim each published the Der Neubau drawings in articles.'? The caption in the Westheim article, published in Das Kunstblatt, refers to the project as “a house for the architect.”'* The combined effect of Westheim’s caption, an anno- tation of “Neubabelsberg” on the plan, and a brief comment by Mies in a contem- poraneous letter in which he evinced an interest in a parcel of land, prompted Tegethoff to conclude that the drawings were originally made for a client with a site in mind, suggesting that only later did Mies decide to develop the project for himself.’*  But the most important publication of Mies’ brick villa may have been in Alfred Barr's pioneering Cubism and Abstract Art (1936). Barr, the founding director of MoMA in New York, included the Der Neubau plan, oriented vertically, alongside a reproduction of Theo van Doesburg’s Rhythms of Russian Dance (1918). Barr asserts:  Mies van der Rohe’s plan for a country house...done in 1922 [sic], a year after Doesburg’s arrival in Berlin, may be compared with Doesburg’s painting Russian dance |sic|...of 1918. The resemblance is obvious and by no means superficial. The broken, asymmetrical, orthogonal character of the plan was a direct result of Doesburg’s sojourn in Berlin in 1921 and ’22, at which time he publicized not merely the paintings of the Stijl but the work of its architects as well.’® 
Barr concludes: “In the history of art there are few more entertaining sequences than the influence by way of Holland of the painting of a Spaniard [Picasso] living in Paris upon the plans of a German architect in Berlin — and all within twelve years.”’” The pairing of these two figures, Mies and van Doesburg (and connecting Mies with Picasso), establishes the legitimacy of Mies as an avant-garde artist of international renown far beyond what he was able to achieve, up to that point, from his short-lived association with the G Group, his directorship of the Bauhaus during its declining years in Dessau and Berlin, or his selfpromotion.'* More importantly, the pairing of these two graphic works, each emerging from funda- mentally different programs, relegitimizes for a new generation the old model of the spatial, figural, and emotive qualities of two-dimensional artwork as the experimental basis for new directions in architectural production: specifically, the lawfulness of equating the qualities of the two-dimensional canvas art of ana- lytical and synthetic cubism onto the architect’s productive task. Perhaps most influential of all, largely through the strategic use of black-and-white photographic reproduction with the intimation of a scientific method through comparative anal- ysis, Barr directs the reader to apprehend a painting and an architectural plan on equal terms; they are different only in degree, not in kind.  Two years after Barr's MoMA exhibition and publication, Siegfried Giedion delivered his Norton Lectures at Harvard, published as Space, Time, and Architecture (1941), in which he leaned heavily on Barr to bolster his characterization of analyt- ical cubism and its relation to architectural production.'” No doubt emboldened by Barr’s comparative technique, Giedion constructed several now-famous graphic juxtapositions in Space, Time, and Architecture, among them the comparison of the Piazza del Popolo in Rome (as seen from the Pincio) to van Doesburg’s Relation of Horizontal and Vertical Planes (1920), and of Picasso’s L’Arlésienne (1911) to a pho- tograph of a corner of Gropius’ Dessau Bauhaus building (1926).”°  By the time Giedion was delivering the bulk of his lectures and preparing his text for publication, Mies had immigrated to the United States, relocated his practice to Chicago, and was installed as the director of the architecture program at the newly formed Armour Institute of Technology, soon to be IIT. Nonetheless, Mies’ entire career is largely absent from Giedion’s epoch-defining book; the Brick Country House Project appears as a fragmented footnote.”’ By the third edition (1954), how- ever, no longer able to elide Mies’ growing oeuvre and reputation, Giedion created a new section for the book, “Mies van der Rohe and the Integrity of Form,” which included several richly illustrated pages devoted to the brick and concrete villa pro- jects; these he valorized as “of inestimable importance for the development of mod- ern architecture.” For the Giedion of the third edition, these projects are not grounded in the analytic cubism of L’Arlésienne, but rather in the synthetic cubism of postwar Europe: “cubism’s happiest [period].””” Advancing the book’s subtitle, “The Growth of a New Tradition,” Giedion posits: “Cubism originated among artists belonging to the oldest cultures of the western world.”” Listing the key figures — Le Corbusier and Ozenfant, Malewitsch [Malevich], Moholy-Nagy,  
Mondrian, and van Doesburg — Giedion asserts: “More and more clearly it appears that this new conception of space was nourished by the elements of bygone per- iods.”** these architects and artists were exploring ways to make cubism, and its several derivations, operational. “The analytical spirit of Theo van Doesburg had enabled Mies] to show by means of his transparent architectural drawings that the concep- tion of the house as a self-contained cube had lost its meaning. In [the concrete and brick country villa] studies, Mies van der Rohe gives this conception a clear and concentrated artistic expression.””? projects are perhaps the clearest demonstrations of the avant-garde operationa- ized, albeit unrealized.  Another overlooked yet potent aspect of Barr’s reproduction of the Der Neubau plan in Cubism and Abstract Art relates back to its cardinal orientation. By rotating the plan 90°, Barr not only underscores the visual correspondence between Mies’  Having established its place in an unbroken lineage, Giedion explains how  For Giedion, Mies’ experimental country house  plan and the van Doesburg painting, but no less importantly, by redacting the per- spective, he frees the plan from the literalness of a projected architectural form. What once signified the architect’s intension to extend the horizontal plane of the dwelling out beyond the normative boundaries of an intimated interior to an as yet undefined exterior world, is reduced to a graphic diagram of dark and light marks, absent scale or any suggestion of dwelling. Abstraction is, after all, Barr’s main concern. The architectural plan of neo-plastic origin, reoriented much like Marcel Duchamp’s “Fountain,” or Meret Opperheim’s “Fur Lined Tea Cup,” is de-familiarized and reinvented into a highly plastic icon, readily reproduced in any number of contexts, ready to accrete new meanings and associations.  Barr’s rhetorical and graphic technique immediately resonated with a wide range of artists and designers, including a small but influential core of young land- scape architects. The year Giedion delivered his Norton Lectures, James C. Rose re- published the van Doesburg painting alongside the Der Neubau plan (again rotated 90°) in his groundbreaking article, “Freedom in the Garden,””° only this time it was the van Doesburg painting that was laid on its side, to render a more “landscape” orientation, while the Der Neubau plan was reproduced according to its original datum, albeit with the perspective once again deleted. Rose made no reference to the plan in his text, however, citing instead Brancusi’s sculpture as the model for his newly found freedom. Expelled from Harvard the previous year, the recently freed Rose argued that to be unfettered by outdated Beaux Arts practices (read Harvard's landscape program), contemporary landscape architecture must be reconceived as “outdoor sculpture, not to be looked at as an object, but designed to surround us in a pleasant sense of space relations.””” Rose was not unique, but he was one of the first to build upon the order of things according to Barr; most of the illustrations in the Rose article were lifted from Bart’s book.”* By the end of the next half-century, when museums and historians were celebrating Mies van der  Rohe’s centenary, the number of similarly artful provocations, ingenious associa- tions, and erroneous attributions, became legion. 
As we cannot study the Brick Country House directly, and as virtually all we  know about the project is limited to its p’ texts, it seems fitting to register the magi  hotographic reproduction and a few scant nitude of its reception indirectly, vis-a-vis  compendiums used in standard survey courses, wherein students of architecture encounter it as a copy, copied. Three such surveys, separated by decade-long pub-  lication intervals, help illustrate the rete Kenneth Frampton, in Modern Architect Brick Country House only in passing, as  of Wright's “pinwheel plan,” reworked tl A redrawn and simplified version of the  ling of the Brick Country House story.  ture: A Critical History (1992), refers to the a demonstration of Mies’ reinterpretation hrough “the sensibility of the G group.” Der Neubau plan, absent the perspective,  illustrates his text. Frampton concludes: “As Alfred Barr observed, the load-bearing walls of Mies’ brick country house were disposed in a pinwheel fashion like the clustering elements of Van Doesburg’s painting of 1917 [sic], Rhythms of Russian Dance.”*°  Alan Colquhoun, in Modern Architecture (2002), adds a new term (and period) to the already crowded Mies lexicon: for Colquhoun, the brick and concrete villas are part of Mies’ “Constructivist projects.”*? Colquhoun illustrates his argument with a redrawn and diagrammatic Der Neubau plan, which is now part of a tripartite com- parison of two other simplified plans of unbuilt projects: Mies’ Concrete Country House (1923), and the Lessing House (1923). In a relatively brief passage, Colqu- houn conflates a diagram of an unrealized plan with an actual building, while dis- closing that in order to equate an architectural experience with a two-dimensional representation, one must first reduce the architecture to little more than a graphic “pattern.”*”  In The Future of Architecture since 1889 (2012), Jean-Louis Cohen groups the coun- try house projects alongside Mies’ other important works of the early 1920s, several of which were actually built, under the heading, “Mies van der Rohe’s Theoretical Projects.””* Following Barr, Cohen illustrates his text with the Der Neubau plan alone, absent the perspective. For Cohen, the import of the brick villa, which he considers “more provocative” than its earlier concrete counterpart, is the role it played in Mies’ much later design for the German Pavilion in Barcelona: “The latent fluidity of his Brick Country House began to be palpable in [the German Pavilion’s] sequence of open rooms.” Yet, neither the Barcelona Pavilion, nor Mies’ brick villa, are known for their “rooms.”  The varied re-presentations of the Brick Country House story and its drawings notwithstanding, these graphic documents — photographically copied, rotated, edi- ted, and redrawn — continue to incite the imaginations of scholars and practitioners alike, most recently evinced in Shigeru Ban’s realized country house in Sagaponac, Long Island (2006), consciously based on Mies’ brick villa drawings. While the role the brick villa project played in Mies’ later projects for Barcelona and Brno remains unclear, that of its photographic reproduction, variously registered in twentieth- century modernism, does not.  
The brick villa project occupied the center of five years of fundamental exper- imentation in Mies’ career, beginning in 1921, a watershed year for the architect. Substantial changes in his private life — not least of which was his separation from his wife Ada and his two children — set the stage for him to reinvent his public image and private practice (or at least part of it). An important part of this reinven- tion (one of several in a long and varied life) was signified by the addition of “van der Rohe,” in 1921, to his family name.’ Well-equipped to live a highly compart- mentalized life, in relatively short order he emerged as one of the leaders of the European avant-garde, as he maintained a practice producing relatively conven- tional domestic designs for his upper-middle class clients. Following his project for the Friedrichstrahe competition (1921), he became the director of exhibitions for the Novembergruppe. During this relatively narrow window of opportunity, in addition to the Friedrichstrabe project and the two country house studies, he produced an extraordinary group of projects: the curvaceous Glass Skyscraper Proj- ect (1922); a Concrete Office Building (1923); the Lessing House (1923); and a Traf- fic Tower (1924) — all unbuilt. Among his more adventurous realized works from this period were his Monument to the November Revolution (1925-26) and the remarkable Wolf House (1925-27), both built in brick but neither of which sur- vived the war. Apparently, neither did the Der Neubau drawings of the brick villa. The question remains: what do the Der Neubau reproductions of the brick villa drawings represent and what can we learn from them? What do they document, and what do they depict? For Barry Bergdoll, they document how thoroughly Mies had engaged the Wohnreform, or “Residential Reform” movement in Germany.*° Simultaneously with the Wohnreform, Hermann Muthesius mounted his campaign through the publication of Stilarchitektur und Baukunst (1902), in which he opened a window onto a new culture — its arts, crafts, and architecture — one that embraced mechanization as the gateway to anew and modern Germany, a new way of living inanew century.” In contrast to Ruskin and Morris in England, Muthesius argued in Stilarchitektur und Baukunst that machines could be extensions of the hand. They were not the end of hand craft; they empowered it. Mechanization posed no threat to the cozy tranquility upon which German domestic life was founded. Part of Muthesius’ brilliance resided in his recognition that this quest must begin, not in city plans, office towers, department stores, or cafés, but in the home. As Peter Collins outlined in Changing Ideals in Modern Architecture (1750-1950):  |The] villa...once it was adopted as the favourite type of dwelling for the newly enriched merchants and industrialists...became a medium for expressing architectur- ally many of the most powerful aspiration of the age.... Not only at the beginning of the modern era, but throughout the whole period from 1750-1950, architectural the- ory was dominated by factors more strictly appropriate only to domestic architecture; and it is by no means coincidental that the most influential architectural pioneers of the present century, such as Wright, Gropius, Mies van der Rohe, and Le Corbusier, 
originally gave expression to their theories by building either villas for wealthy connois- seurs or, after the 1918 war, modest dwellings for artisans and impecunious artists. The romantic suburban villa was not so much a minor building-type characteristic of the early nineteenth century, as a paradigm for the architecture of a whole age.”  Once mechanized craft is welcomed into the home, other doors soon open. In Landhaus und Garten (1907/1910), Muthesius envisioned a new German domestic life in which discrete interior life directly extended into corresponding exterior spaces: “If the house belongs to architecture, the garden must also.”*” The walls of the home did not dictate the limits of domesticity. Rather, they facilitated the extension of the private and precisely coded interior living space into the garden. Mies’ Riehl house ostensibly demonstrated this so well that Muthesius included it in the second edition of Landhaus und Garten.*° But, in the Der Neubau plan of the brick villa, discrete reciprocity between explicitly coded interiors and geometri- cized exterior spaces is effaced. For Peter Behrens, the garden of the Landhaus, defined by hedgerows and pergolas that enclosed room-like terraces, “is as an essential part of a dwelling as a bathroom is.” This “spiritually purifying union with nature ... has been given form by our desires ... that leads to inner harmony.”*" In the Der Neubau plan, this “union with nature” is moot. For Behrens and Muthesius, the relation of the domestic interior and exterior garden was essential, but inside and outside remained different in kind. In the brick villa drawings, the difference is one of degree: a carefully crafted ambiguity. The disposition of spaces in the brick villa is generic, even vague, absent any semblance of the “coziness” Muthesius recognized as central to the German domestic culture. One is left to imagine how, and even where, one would dwell. Mies’ response to the need for craft and the comfort of home was limited to his choice of materials. The concrete villa was cold and empty; the brick villa is empty but warm, or at least warmer. Part of the genius of the brick villa is that it was imagined in brick: a retardataire material (for the avant-garde) put to work to advance a radically new vision of domesticity.  The precise relation of interior to exterior is anyone’s guess. The drawings for the brick villa represent an inside with no outside. Nonetheless, Bergdoll observes of the villa project: “famous for its abolition of roomlike enclosures ... [t]his vocab- ulary continues outside the house to create a series of outdoor ‘rooms’ of unprec- edented grandeur and openness to the landscape.”*” Later in the same essay: “The line of the garden wall in the foreground of the perspective view of the Brick Coun- try House severs any continuity between our space and the representational space of the image, even as it draws a boundary between the garden and the broader landscape.”** In addition to descriptions of non-existent terraces and gardens, and their relation to an unknowable “landscape,” Bergdoll describes how the villa’s glazed openings, from the interior, “selectively frame the landscape, not creating a seamless relation to the outdoors but pictorializing key views.”** Yet, this Landhaus is absent a specific site, cardinal orientation, or any specificity of the ground plane  
with a material surface (interior or exterior), not to mention “key views.” In short, this Landhaus has no land. In both plan and perspective, the exterior is effaced.  The scholarship on Mies amassed during the last two decades reverberates with the Giedion-like premise that for Mies to have envisioned a new architecture, it must have been a “New Tradition,” — an outgrowth of long-held values from the “oldest cultures of the western world,” and “bygone periods.””” There is com- fort in the idea of Mies’ work being an extension of a nineteenth-century agenda, one that begins with Schinkel, is reconfigured by, among others, Muthesius and Behrens, and is subsequently reimagined in Mies’ avant-garde work. Mies offers us no comfort, however in his new domestic visions, projected or constructed. In stark contrast to Muthesius and Behrens, and Schinkel before them, Mies’ image of domesticity does not accommodate the exigencies of dwelling; it offers no pro- tection. It does not quarter: it challenges.  As an inside with no outside, the brick villa is one of many Mies projects and buildings that have a dubious relationship with their site, imagined or physical. It has been argued of late that the “received view” of Mies’ architecture as largely autonomous of its site can be traced to misguided or ideologically driven agitprop in which the garden exteriors (or context) of his projects were purposely deleted.*° In these recent revisions, such iconic works as the New National Gallery in Berlin (1962-68) is argued to be not only highly site-specific, but also unjustly character- ized as inhospitable to the display of art.*” That successful exhibitions have been mounted in the gallery, however, is hardly a cogent argument that the gallery is particularly well suited to display art.  The same site-specific argument has been made for Mies’ German Pavilion for Barcelona. In the end, however, it was not the building that appeared to fuse with its site, as Wolf Tegethoff argued, but the black-and-white abstract tonal patterns of the pavilion’s marble perimeter wall and the coniferous trees beyond, depicted in the canonical Berliner Bild-Bericht prints.**  In most of the scholarship on Mies’ brick villa project, since his centenary, there is a clear tendency to site it on a parcel of land in Potsdam, to make it into a “real” rather than a hypothetical project. This desire speaks volumes about the traditions upon which much of the recent literature on Mies is based. Just as many who inter- pret Mies’ later work seem compelled to imbue it with a conceptual richness often difficult to find in the built artifact, these same interlocutors seem compelled to retroactively transform scant drawings, photographs, and models, through com- pound and complex hypotheticals, as if to elevate “merely” provocative specula- tions into intended realizations. In part, this desire is fueled by a certain view of Mies as master builder — even the Mies of the early 1920s who had built relatively little and nothing approaching the exhilarating country house cousins. That Mies’ most influential works are arguably those produced during his G Group years, along with unbuilt projects or realized works that no longer survive, does little to deter an argument that remains central to much of the Mies literature. 
What then is to be learned from the remaining photo-fragments of Mies’ brick villa, saturated as they are “with meaning, along with their phantasies and uncon- scious logic”? Since Alfred Barr redacted, reconfigured, and represented the Brick Country House project to an American audience in 1936, it has become part of “an anthropological dream ... existing ... above and beyond ... symbolic exchange.” A kind of “hyperreality,” to borrow another of Baudrillard’s concepts, has long permeated the literature on Mies van der Rohe, particularly since his cen- tenary. The Der Neubau drawings for the Brick Country House, saturated as they have been with ever-altering meanings, help us better understand the nature of the anthropological dream they represent. Akin to the photographic space depicted in the Berliner Bild-Bericht prints of the Barcelona Pavilion, the Der Neubau drawings are the most curious kind of simulacrum — one for which there is no original. As Shigeru Ban demonstrates in his country house in Sagaponac, there seems no limit to where they can take one, or what one can attribute to them. Their continued power to incite “phantasies and unconscious logic” resides less in what they docu- ment, than in what they depict. The photographs of Mies’ drawings for a Brick Coun- try House tell us more about what we want them to be, than what they were to have been. They tell us less about the world made than they do about the world we would make.  Notes  * With kind permission from Stadtische Kunsthalle Mannheim.  1. See George Dodds, Building Desire: On the Barcelona Pavilion (London: Routledge, 2005): passim. Also see George Dodds, “The Body in Pieces: Desiring the Barcelona Pavilion,” RES, Journal of Anthropology and Aesthetics 39 (Spring 2001): 168-91.  2. See Wolf Tegethoff, Mies van der Rohe: The Villas and Country Houses (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1985): 37-41.  3. Tegethoff argues that the Brick Country House project, along with Mies’ earlier project for a concrete country house, can no longer be considered theoretical or utopian, but “real.” He bases his argument on three main points: 1) there may have been a client, owing in part to a letter from Mies in the MoMA architectural archive, which has led Tegethoff (and since then many others) to speculate that Mies himself may have been the client; 2) an inscription of a location on the drawing that Mies apparently knew quite well; 3) the specificity of the concrete project and the similarities between the brick and concrete versions, suggesting that they were both for the same project and that it was far too developed to be merely theoretical; Tegethoff, Mies van der Rohe, 15-51. This is dis- cussed later in this chapter. Also see Wolf Tegethoff, “From Obscurity to Maturity: Mies van der Rohe’s Breakthrough to Modernism,” in Mies van der Rohe: Critical Essays, ed. Franz Schulze (New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 1989): 90, n. 78. For example, Detlef Mertins begins his essay, “Ester and Lange Houses: New Language” simply stat-  ing: “Long believed to have been a theoretical exercise, without a client or specific site, [the Project for a Brick Country House] now appears to have been another project for 
CONTRA- CONSTRUCTION  Hilary Bryon  Oblique projection drawing from the De Stijl Exhibition at the Rosenberg Gallery, Paris, 1923 and identified at the time as Maison Particuliére: Construction de la Couleur. Theo van Doesburg and Cornelius van Eesteren, Contra-Construction Project, Axonometric, 1923.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
THEO VAN DOESBURG'S OBLIQUE VIEW OF MODERN ARCHITECTURE  Theo van Doesburg’s Contra-Construction is one of modern architecture’s iconic pictorial representations. Embedded in its traces are early modernism’s regard for universality and infinite space, and by extension spatial simultaneity and formal abstraction. The drawing’s convention itself, parallel projection, is inherently based on the concept of infinity. Unlike perspective, pictorial depth is indicated objectively via parallel projectors extending infinitely. As well, the Contra-Construction is an oblique parallel projection drawing and thus has coexisting two-dimensional and three-dimensional spatial aspects. Of course, parallel projection techniques had been representational tools with varied ends for engineers, architects, and artists for cen- turies, but van Doesburg’s drawing immerses the representation in its projective essence. For perhaps the first time, the visual expression of a conceptual proposition exactly coincided with this means of architectural representation.  De Stijl  In 1917, near the end of the tumultuous First World War, a collective of Dutch artists and architects formed the De Stijl, or the Style, group to promote painting, sculpture, and architecture as cooperative artistic endeavors with a common aim of advancing a new, unified order to be shared by the arts, life, and culture. In varied ways, the artistic movement coalesced as a response to cubism and perhaps to counter other contemporaneous movements, such as (Italian) Futurism, (German) expressionism, and (Russian) suprematism. In 1918, in the newly launched journal De Stijl, primary protagonist, editor, and painter Theo van Does- burg, along with painters Piet Mondrian and Vilmos Huszar, sculptor Georges Vantongerloo, and architects Robert Van’t Hoff and Jan Wils, signed their first manifesto, positioning their ideas as particularly reflective of and appropriate to a “new consciousness of time,” and its universal values.’ The publication remained akey outlet for advancing theoretical deliberations and debates through 1932; how- ever, it was through art, be it painting or architecture, that the group probed new, plastic modes of expression, or in other words, the non-mimetic embodiment of nature’s underlying laws or principles particular to each art form.  Theory of Neoplasticism in Painting  Mondrian’s early ideas and work featured largely in De Stijl’s initial neoplastic tenets. From about 1918 onward, Mondrian tested not only abstraction in 
painting but also its transcendence by engaging how one could use the universa. means of painting itself to convey directly, or plastically, the absolute relations o the world.” This approach, and indeed many of De Stijl’s formal principles, ema- nated in part from the theories of Mondrian’s friend and philosopher, Mathieu H. J. Schoenmaekers.* Schoenmaekers, a theosophist and Neoplatonist, advanced that plastic mathematics, or positive mysticism, was a means of contemplation on the eternal laws of cosmic creation because it “penetrate[s] nature in such a way that the inner construction of reality is revealed to us.”* Schoenmaekers’ writings ruminated directly on what would become De Stijl’s geometric and color principles. Within his theory of contraries, or mystical dialectics, Schoen- maekers laid out the fundamental, qualitative differences, yet necessary balance, between the vertical and the horizontal.’ He explained, “the two fundamental, complete contraries which shape our earth and all that is of the earth, are: the horizontal line of power, that is the course of the earth around the sun and the vertical, profoundly spatial movement of rays that originates in the center of the sun.”® Following this line of reasoning, the horizontal line, the vertical ray, their perpendicular intersection, and thus a principle of the right angle were established as the absolute fundamentals of natural construction that must be put into equilibrium.’ Color was similarly configured: “The three principal colors are essentially yellow, blue, and red. They are the only colors existing ... Yellow is the movement of the ray ... Blue is the contrasting color to yellow ... Asa color, blue is the firmament, it is line, horizontality. Red is the mating of yellow and blue ... red ‘floats.””* Mondrian subsequently synthesized these ideas for painting, writ- ing in De Stijl: “Neoplastic painting remains pure painting: the plastic means remain form and color-interiorized to the extreme; straight line and plane color remain the pure pictorial means.””  Architectonic Plasticism  Architecture’s neoplastic means were also discussed in the pages of De Stijl. Between 1917 and 1920, the De Stijl architects reviewed the plastic approaches of others as well as presenting their own designs.'° Later, Van Doesburg used their plastic forms to identify the principles of architectonic plasticism.’’ He noted a house by Van’t Hoff, observing that its external features result from its internal features, every spatial unit can be perceived from the outside, and its ideal form transcends nature.” Also, note the reinforced concrete house had a flat roof and large areas of glass enclosed voids defined by smooth orthogonal volumes and articulated with cantilevered overhangs. A hotel by Wils was referenced for its vertical, planar chimney that operates as the axis to an asymmetrical whole and with varied cubic masses that give rhythm to space.’* Both buildings reflect ideas and some latent formal properties evidenced in Frank Lloyd Wright’s Prairie Houses from the 1910s and adopted by his early Dutch admirer, Hendrik Petrus 
Berlage (1856-1934), such as cornices and banding emphasizing the horizontal and an exterior form of aggregated volumes extending from an interior core element or volume.'* Van Doesburg applauded the early plastic works of the De Stijl architects and conceded that architecture’s “plasticism will evolve from the functional needs which determine the division of space,” but he added that in order to achieve a truly monumental art, the problem of “color and space is the most important.”1*  Painting and Architecture  The fundamental association of architecture and color had been laid out in De Stijl’s first issue by the painter Bart van der Leck. In his essay, “The Place of Modern Painting in Architecture,” Van der Leck explained that because architecture is con- structional, closed, and colorless, with planar surfaces and space-restricting flatness, it must be contrasted and harmonized through modern painting’s destructional character due to its direct plastic expression of light via color and its multiplicity of spatial relationships via direct relationship.'® Van Doesburg reiterated this dia- lectical argument a year later, writing, “Architecture produces construction, that is closed, relief. In this respect it is neutral in relation to painting, which gives open relief by means of flat color plasticism. Architecture joins together, binds. Painting loosens, unbinds. The very fact that they have to fulfill essentially different func- tions makes possible a harmonious combination. The latter arises, not from similar characteristics, but precisely from opposite characteristics. In this opposition, in this complementary relationship of architecture and painting, plastic form and flat color, pure monumental art finds its basis.”’”  Whereas Mondrian focused primarily on developing neoplastic ideas in his paintings, the other affiliates of De Stijl endeavored to manifest the theory in artistic expression both from within and between the arts. Van Doesburg was particularly active and vocal with this mission. Throughout his short life, he remained commit- ted to evolving a plastic approach in painting, but equally and directly, to sculpture, architecture, typography, and text, as well. While not signing the first manifesto, the architects J. J. P. Oud and Gerrit Rietveld were also part of the group and, with Wils, Van’t Hoff, and C. R. de Boer, early collaborators with the painter. But, even though most members of De Stijl supported the unity of painting and architecture, as well as unified collaborations between painters and architects, Van Doesburg’s contributions were typically limited to adding decorative treatments, such as brick mosaics, stained-glass, tiled floors, harmonized paint-colored surfaces, and pat- terned borders, to an already established architectural schema. Furthermore, let- ters from Van Doesburg to Oud during construction of the De Vonk holiday home in 1918 reveal the latent friction in collaboration. One reads, “It’s a shame that so little unanimity appears possible,”"* and another, “I just want to remind you that the hall doors (upstairs and downstairs) should either be executed precisely accord- ing to my designs or not at all.”"? Van Doesburg sought a more substantive  
collaboration in the development of an architectural project to fully test De Stijl’s premises, yet the secondary nature of his engagement continued in the same vein for the next few years. In May 1922, while living in Weimar with the aim of influ- encing the Bauhaus with De Stijl’s agenda, Van Doesburg met and persuaded a young Dutch student architect, Cornelis van Eesteren, to collaborate. Their future alliance on four projects for the 1923 De Stijl Exhibition in Paris would display inci- dences of mutual contribution and at least one unified work of art in which paint- erly and architectural means were plastically synthesized.  Paris, 1923: The Architecture of the De Stijl Group  At the invitation of art historian and collector Léonce Rosenberg, members of the De Stijl Group exhibited architectural work at his Galerie de l’Effort Moderne in Paris from October to November 1923. There were no paintings or sculptures, only architectural projects as a “total art.” Exhibitors included Van Eesteren and Van Doesburg, J. J. P. Oud, Vilmos Huszar, Jan Wils, Gerrit Rietveld, and Mies van der Rohe. Moreover, a fifth De Stijl manifesto, Vers une Construction Collective, signed by Van Eesteren, Rietveld, and Van Doesburg, was distributed at the expo- sition.”° Its eight points laid out the critical relationships for the (new) style of archi- tecture. It stated that to achieve a collective unification of all the arts, architecture must challenge the articulation of and the relationships between space, color, time, dimension, proportion, materials, and inside and outside.”’ It is through a synthesis of these concerns that Van Doesburg’s “Contra-Construction” drawing was gener- ated for the exhibition.  The development of the drawing identified here as the “Contra-Construction” emanates from one of Van Doesburg’s, and De Stijl’s, primary beliefs — the neces- sary opposition and reconciliation of painting and architecture. For the exhibition, Van Doesburg collaborated with the De Stijl novitiate Cornelis van Eesteren on four architectural projects: the University Hall, a country house for Rosenberg (Hétel Particulier), a private house (Maison Particuliére), and a house for an artist (Maison d’ Artiste). From June to October 1923, they worked together in Van Does- burg’s Paris studio to develop projects for exhibition. The nature and significance of the individual contributions to the exhibited works and subsequent publications were contested by the authors themselves and consequently has been debated by others. Undoubtedly, the University Hall originated in Van Eesteren’s 1921 win- ning Prix de Rome entry for a Royal Institute of Sciences, Literature, and Fine Arts; however, he made spatial, tectonic, and organizational adjustments to the scheme in response to Van Doesburg’s interior color design. It appears as well that the main responsibility of the Hétel Particulier was conveyed to Van Eesteren after Oud pulled out “sometime during 1922” and its model was constructed by Rietveld.”* However, there is little question that the two Maisons were undertaken collabora- tively and concurrently in the Paris studio and the resultant complexity in their 
designs and their representations reveal an achievement attained through the more intimately collective effort of the generative design process. The Private House was the most comprehensively demonstrated of the four projects and the works devoted to its development alone filled one room of the gallery. As might be expected, the exhibited representations of the Maison Particuliére span and blur the boundaries of architectural convention and painterly abstraction.  Oscillations between Architecture and Painting: Maison Particuliére  Room two of the Rosenberg Gallery was exclusively devoted to the Maison Particuliére and didactically labeled: “Development of an Architecture demonstrated by a Private House.””’ The house centers itself around two vertical rectangular vol- umetric masses that extend from ground to roof and are set at 90° to each other so as to articulate a generally square central core volume. The plan is loosely cross-shaped as defined by cubic room volumes that centrifugally but orthogonally extend and slightly overlap floor to floor. Thus, while the smaller volumes are generally cubic, the overall building volume is broken up, which is especially noticeable at the cor- ners. The expression of aggregated volumes and voids is further enhanced by hor- izontal, cantilevered planes that often operate as terraces and window overhangs. The horizontal and vertical shifting of the building leads to volumes in space that appear to defy gravity. Furthermore, the plastic form of the architecture is disrupted through the painted application of colored planes. This architectural assembly was portrayed through an array of drawings and a model, each enumerated.  It is likely that the line drawings of the plans, elevations, and parallel projections were from Van Eesteren’s hand, while the model, Analysis of Architecture, the Construction(s) of Color, and all applied color were by Van Doesburg.”* While individual attributions remain debatable, the work reflects the providential out- come of collaboration between the unique contributions of discipline specific knowledge. A harmonically balanced union of architectural demonstration and painterly expression is evident in the scale model of different materials and color (no. 28: “maquette”), a set of colored orthographic views of the four elevations (no. 24: “Détermination des différents plans de Varchitecture par la couleur’), and three poly-  chromed, oblique parallel projections of the architecture: one, as seen from a bird’s- eye view and two, from a worm’s-eye view (nos. 25-27: “architecture”). In these blended representations, it is possible to perceive the complementary approach as described by Van Doesburg: “I myself endeavored to use color as a reinforcing element in the plastic treatment of architectural space. There was no question of any ‘artistic compositional tendency’ in my approach. Each of the space-defining surfaces was accentuated by color according to its place in that space. Height, depth, and width were accentuated by red, blue, and yellow, the volumes being painted gray, black, or white. This enlivened the effect of the room’s dimensions. 
In this manner it was possible to use color as an architectural element without sug- gesting an aesthetic effect.”** The combinatory plastic effects of the architecture and painting are clearly balanced in these representations; however, other repre- sentations in the exhibit are adjusted for more architectural or more painterly abstraction.  Specialized architectural knowledge and its drawing conventions not only reg- ulate the scaled plans of the Private House’s three floors (nos. 13-15), but also a series of four bird’s-eye view oblique parallel projection drawings of the architec- ture’s exterior form (nos. 16-19: “Schema de V’architecture”).”® The series of drawings are plan oblique, equally oriented at 45° to horizontal, and the view rotates to each corner in four 90° intervals. All the parallel projection drawings in the exhibit were similar plan-based oblique projections. In this type of drawing, the horizontal face of the building is parallel to the picture plane and the projectors are oblique to the plane of projection. In the Western world, parallel projection drawings were devel- oped for their functional capacity, concurrently conveying a pictorial view and maintaining measured precision.” Up to the eighteenth century, oblique projec- tion drawings delineated most practical and technical views, when in the nine- teenth century the technique of parallel projection was differentiated and divided into oblique projection and orthographic axonometric projection. Since then, all such parallel views, and the Contra-Construction itself, are often impre- cisely identified as axonometric, but the fundamental trait that overtly delineates the oblique from the axonometric is critical in the ideas of De Stijl.” Oblique par- allel projection drawings have concurrent two-dimensional and three-dimensional space attributes. Two-dimensional geometric purity resides in the plane parallel to the picture plane, thus rectangles look like rectangles and squares look like squares. The inherent spatial multi-dimensionality in Van Eesteren’s plan oblique parallel projections of the Maison Particuliére clearly became a compelling device for the artist Van Doesburg. Thus, we find that the four rotated, bird’s-eye view oblique parallel projection drawings of the Private House’s architectural scheme (nos. 16-19) are balanced in the exhibit with corresponding abstractions achieved through literally tracing them (nos. 20-23, respectively). In Van Doesburg’s traces, the architectural facts of the originating, objective representation are eliminated in order to distill other aspects, such as colored plasticity, volumetric simultaneity, material ambiguity, and multi-dimensional spatiality. The drawing identified here as the “Contra-Construction” is one of these drawings (no. 21); however, during the time of its generation it was not regarded under this nomenclature.  Contra-Construction: From Construction of Color to Construction of Space-Time  Three of the four abstractions traced from the series of oblique projection drawings of the architectural scheme have now achieved iconic status as the 
Contra-Construction drawings. However, these drawings were initially identified as Construction of Color (nos. 21-23: “construction de la couleur’).”? This descrip- tion, as well as the drawing convention itself, indicates that the three drawings were intended to not only validate the plastic nature of color, but establish it as equal to the constructed nature of architecture. The Construction of Color drawings, as seen in Figure 1 on p 133, reduce the external surface boundaries of the correspond- ing projection drawing to vertical and horizontal planar volumes of varying dimen- sions and thicknesses with color (red, yellow, blue, black, white, or gray) which is variously applied to each rectangular prism’s three visible surface planes.*° The col- ored planes and volumes are aligned and held aloft by the x,y,z axes of parallel projection’s infinite space, and thus take on the appearance of a three-dimensional assembly despite the fact that they are limited to the architecture’s perimeter boundaries. Concurrently, the spatially synthetic nature of the plan oblique allows its undistorted orthographic plane to demonstrate the pure plastic relations of painting alone — geometrically pure, flat rectangles of color orthogonally set into relation with one another. In essence, this horizontal plane parallels Mondrian and Van Doesburg’s painted compositions. It was soon after the exhibition that the identification of these drawings transitioned to “Contra-Construction,” but during the exhibition that designation was applied to the fourth of Van Doesburg’s dia- grammatic abstractions paired to the oblique projection drawing series. This dia- grammatic trace is labeled an Analysis of Architecture (Contra-Construction) (no. 20: “Analyse de Varchitecture (contre-construction)’).  The Analysis of Architecture delineation is similar to, but distinct from, the Con- struction of Color diagrams. The external boundaries of the architecture’s form are outlined and reduced to transparent, overlapping vertical and horizontal planes of varying dimensions and thicknesses. The planar depths of some of the rectangular prisms are filled, giving a pronounced and concurrent presence of line to plane. Despite the architectural premise, the “analytic” diagram does not contain the architectonic elements essential to the formation of this work of architecture, such as the two central, rectangular, vertical cores or the ground floor columns; nor does it convey spatial order, such as the centrifugal grouping of functional spaces extend- ing from the core. Rather, the architecture is abstracted to a collection of its orthog- onally oriented planar boundaries, and their horizontal and vertical edge lines, floating in anti-gravity space. This drawing captures Van Doesburg’s general con- ception of plastic architecture: “The subdivision of the functional spaces is strictly determined by rectangular planes, which possess no individual forms in themselves since, although they are limited (the one plane by the other), they can be imagined as extended into infinity, thereby forming a system of coordinates, the different points of which would correspond to an equal number of points in universal, open space.”*’ Undoubtedly, Van Doesburg’s regard of the means to architecture led both to its appropriate representation in parallel projection and to its parenthetical identification as counter to construction, or Contra-Construction. Moreover, the transfer of this term to the Construction of Color drawings is a logical shift because  
it more fully reflects Van Doesburg’s, and De Stijl’s, stated relation of painting to architecture — that is, plastic color is the primary means by which to provoke the normative facts of architecture’s construction, thus the construction of its color must be the counter to its construction, or Contra-Construction.  It should be noted that the Contra-Construction typology undergoes two more transitions between the 1923 exhibit and 1925.*” In this period, Van Doesburg returned to and redrew the Contra-Construction drawings — twice. Both circum- stances involve minimal adjustments but nevertheless disclose critical questions as to how the iconic Contra-Construction might be understood.  The first adjustment to the notion of Contra-Construction straddles 1923-24. Van Doesburg literally copied the three exhibition drawings formerly called Constructions of Color. The first copy (of no. 21) is without title; however, the other two (of nos. 22-23) take on a new persona, Construction of Space-Time (II and Ill, respectively).’’ There is no significant difference between either repro- duction and its original manifestation; however, the change in taxonomy coincides with and reflects Van Doesburg’s concurrent reconsideration of space, relative to time. Like other artists in the early twentieth century, Van Doesburg’s thoughts had been provoked by hyperspace philosophy and its speculation on fourth- dimensional space, or n-dimensional geometry that emerged at the turn of the century.** In 1912, Cubist painter Albert Gleizes explained their Synthetic approach: “Beyond the three dimensions of Euclid we have added another, the fourth dimension, which is to say, the figuration of space, the measure of the infi- nite.”?’ During the course of the 1910s, the idea of a fourth dimension in the arts evolved as a compelling spatio-geometric question, but this was challenged in the early 1920s when the Theory of Relativity posited time as the fourth dimension in the space-time continuum. In 1922, Van Doesburg recognized the issue, writing in De Stijl, “a new and important problem has arisen in painting and sculpture beside the problem of space, and that is the problem of time.”**  By 1923, Van Doesburg related both space and time to the exhibited architecture; the accompanying Manifesto noted: “We have studied the relationship between space and time and have found that the plastic expression of these two elements through color gives a new dimension.”*” One infers here that the fourth dimension is engaged through color. Yet, it was not until 1928 that Van Doesburg explained how space and time were purposely and plastically expressed through color in architecture.** His argument sets out that neoplastic, two-dimensional paintings not only established a new relationship to space, but by consequence to man, the static viewer. In this case, man is metaphorically moved by color’s plastic space and from “this relationship of ‘dynamic man’ to space, a new notion was established to architecture, the notion of time.” In architecture, man’s actual movement in space would allow man not only to engage color as in the painting, but also to engage color in time. Thus, color’s role expands in architecture as “space-time painting.”’” Put simply, color engaged dynam- ically is a fourth dimensional “space-time” effect. With this understanding, Van Does- burg’s last variation on the Contra-Construction drawing can be clearly conveyed.  
In 1925, Van Doesburg followed the Construction of Space-Time iterations with one last set.“° Only one of these drawings was given an inscription: Construction of Color in the Fourth Dimension of Space-Time.”’ As before, the drawings are literal copies of the originals, but this time they are placed on a square field that is rotated obliquely by 45°. It appears that Van Doesburg introduces the new oblique field in order to bring dynamic movement and thus “space-time” into the representation. Given Van Doesburg’s ongoing reconsideration of what the Contra-Construction meant to architecture, it should come as no surprise that his discoveries would inform his paintings. Subsequent to 1925, Van Doesburg brought obliquity to his painted Compositions. The 45° diagonal compositions were soon entitled, Contra-Compositions.  Contra-Construction and its Space in Architectural Representation  In the hundred years between axonometry’s origination as isometry in the 1820s and the De Stijl exhibition in 1923, parallel projection drawings were most often employed for the measured transmission of architecture’s objective nature and tectonic forma- tion. Over the second half of the nineteenth century, engineers Robert Willis (1800-75) and Auguste Choisy (1841-1909) documented the history of architecture’s construc- tion through compelling oblique and axonometric parallel projections.** Choisy’s graphic experiments with the spatial capacity of this pictorial form of architectural rep- resentation brought about the worm’s-eye view, in which each individual image, working from the inside out, simultaneously builds in three dimensions, montaging the plan, the section, and the elevation. Often, the building’s plan is highly differen- tiated to ensure a reading of solid and void, order and rhythm, element and structure, mass and space. Choisy himself noted that “in this system, one sole image, moving and animated like the building itself, takes the place of abstract figuration.”  In 1920, three years before the De Stijl exhibition, Choisy’s parallel projections were adopted by Le Corbusier for the pages of the L’esprit nouveau. The drawings were used to remind architects that “volume and surface are determined by the plan.”** a clear rhythm of the parts, render just proportions to both masses and spaces, and thus transmit a coordinated sensation and spirit, thereby making architecture.  Le Corbusier asserts that plans should formally fix the volumes, express  In this spirit, the infinite space of parallel projection conveys the space and the structure of architecture as necessary reciprocal constructs and so analogues to modern architecture. During the twentieth century, parallel projections continue to be used for such syntactic simultaneity.  Van Doesburg’s Contra-Construction functions in a very different way. It does not model architecture and its space; rather it is a conceptualized symbol of dynamic, modern space itself. In fact, when Van Doesburg reflected directly on parallel projection as an explicit form of architectural representation, he presented 
that echoes Choisy. Van Doesburg counseled that when architecture is conceptua- lized as a spatial-functional construct, “axonometries” properly correspond to the construction. The representation aligns “better to the requirement of perceiving the house spatially from all sides, even from above and from below, in its true proportions, that is to say without perspective vanishing points. The structure is immediately surveyed in its cubic content, instead of in its surface ... Clearly ‘axonometries’ will need to be detailed, from the foundation to the roof.”””  The Architecture of Contra-Construction  Ultimately, the impact of De Stijl was not achieved through the production of the “monumental work of art.” As is often observed, Gerrit Rietveld’s 1924 Schroeder house stands alone as a total manifestation of neoplastic principles in a complete work. Instead, De Stijl’s contribution to architecture lies in its provocations through publi- cation and exhibition. Through these modes of communication — word, model, pho- tograph, and drawing — De Stijl played a more noteworthy role in architecture’s modern development. The Contra-Construction stands as an embodiment of both its influence and its ideals.  Notes  * Gouache on lithograph, 22 1/2 x 22 1/2” (57.2 x 57.2 cm). Gift of Edgar Kaufmann, Jr., 1947. Digital Image. Image credit: © The Museum of Modern Art/Licensed by SCALA/Art Resource, NY.  1. Ad Petersen, ed., De Stijl [reprint of 1917-1932] (Amsterdam: Athenaeum, 1968) 238. “Manifest 1 of “The Style’ 1918,” De Stijl 2, no. 1 (Nov. 1918), 4.  2. Neoplasticism asserted that an idea’s appearance is rendered through new plastic means and purely or directly expresses itself — the expression is non-representational, thus it is not an abstraction or a naturalistic representation.  3. Mathieu Hubertus Josephus Schoenmaekers, Het nieuwe wereldbeeld (The New Images of the World) (1915), and Mathieu Hubertus Josephus Schoenmaekers, Beginselen der beeldende wiskunde (Principles of Plastic Mathematics) (1916).  4. Hans L. C. Jaffé, De Stijl 1917-1931: The Dutch Contribution to Modern Art (Cambridge,  MA: Belknap, 1986), 57.  . Ibid., 53-62.  . Ibid., 58-9.  . Ibid., 58-9.  . Ibid., 60.  . Hans L. C. Jaffé, De Stijl (New York: Abrams, 1967), 38. Mondrian, “Neoplasticism in  painting,” in Peterson, De Stijl, 1917-18. 10. For instance, in Peterson, De Stijl: Oud on Wright’s Robie House, I, 4, 1918; Van’t Hoff on Wright’s Unity Temple, II, 4, 1919; Van’t Hoff on Sant’ Elia, II 10, 1919; Oud on Futurists Sant’ Elia and Chiattone, III, 3, 1920.  COMN AM  
PLAN VOISIN  Le Corbusier  Flora Samuel  Le Corbusier, Plan Voisin, Paris, 1925. Copyright FLC/ADAGP Paris and DACS London, 2016.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
THE FUNCTIONAL CITY  The city plans of the Franco-Swiss architect Le Corbusier changed the face of town planning in the postwar era. The three best known are the Ville contemporaine (1922, also known as the City of Three Million), the Plan Voisin (1925), the focus of this chapter, and the Radiant City (1933). The Plan Voisin, developed together with his cousin Pierre Jeanneret, was particularly controversial as it was here, for the first time, that Le Corbusier translated the brittle assertions of his canonical books, Toward an Architecture (1923), The City of Tomorrow (1924) and The Decorative Art of Today (1925) to a real site — Paris.  At the core of this discussion is the definition of the “functional city,” in Le Corbusier's terms, a city that provided the body with emotional as well as physical sustenance: “A form of town planning which ... attempted to create happiness and expel misery would be a noble service in this age of confusion.”’ I will draw on Le Corbusier's fondness for dualistic thinking to differentiate bodily needs in terms of the poetic (emotional) and the utilitarian (the ingress and egress of provisions and waste).” Having illustrated how these two needs were to be addressed by the Plan Voisin and one of its “cells,” the Esprit Nouveau Pavilion, I will discuss the reasons for what I believe to be a distortion of his ideas toward the utilitarian, leading to the subsequent neglect of the poetic body in many of the “Le Corbusier inspired” city plans of the 1950s and 1960s.  It is my intention to focus on the motivations and methodology beneath the Plan Voisin in order to tease out its importance for the development of architectural culture. To do this I will need to set Le Corbusier's work within its cultural con- text.’ Close examination of Le Corbusier’s work often reveals that it was not so * “Thus does architecture become a mirror of the times,” he wrote.” Specifically, it was Tony Garnier’s extraordinarily revo- tionary but Arcadian Cité industrielle scheme published in 1917 that paved the way for the Voisin plan,” part of a long tradition of urbanism in France and a vision that,  original as we might at first suppose:  ike Le Corbusier's, was strongly influenced by the socialist utopianism of Charles Fourier.”  No other architect has received as much attention as Le Corbusier. His upbring- ing (as Charles Edouard Jeanneret) and self-education through books and travel have been studied in minute detail by scholars from a variety of angles, though much still remains obscure.* Le Corbusier was a connoisseur, a collector of objects and ideas. His work, both at large and small scale, was an exercise in curatorship and ordering. Deeply troubled by what he saw as the chaos of the world around him, he sought “a new age of discipline, wisdom and unanimity.” Spirituality played a vexed role in all this. Having been quick to depart from the religion within which he was raised, he spent much of his life looking for a system of belief that  
made sense of the world around him, a journey that led him to nature,'° to science, and eventually to an Orphic vision of the world as a system of mathematical rela- tionships charged with energy and indeed love. His more arcane ideas are couched cryptically within his writings, left obscure for fear of ridicule in an architectural milieu that increasingly favored the rational, a key factor in the misinterpretation of his work."*  As a young man Le Corbusier described his city plans as “technical,” apparently because he wanted to get away from accusations of political bias.'” Politics are, however, central to the making of a city. The source of the word politics is ancient Greek. Aristotle’s Politics focused on the political life of the city, the polis. Although well versed in Aristotle, Le Corbusier was very careful to side-step such issues, which are nevertheless absolutely integral to an accurate understanding of his moti- vations. His refusal to take a political stance added to the uncertainty of what he really meant by his city schemes, which, at first glance, appear to favor the utilitarian.  Whatever his protestations to the contrary, the Plan Voisin was deeply political. During the 1920s Le Corbusier spent a great deal of effort trying to persuade capi- talists, car manufacturing magnates such as Citroen, Peugeot, and Voisin, to sup- port his grandiose schemes, at this stage in his career believing them capable of realizing his audacious vision of cheap, factory-built, standardized homes for the masses.'* Clearly he felt that car manufacturers had much to gain from his car- friendly plans, his avant garde reputation — the inhabitant of the “light, flexible and strong” Maison Voisin would be animated by the “new spirit’’* — and his increasing ability to attract publicity.'* Gabriel Voisin, who had started life as an aviator and plane manufacturer before moving to automobile production in 1919, helped to finance not only the Plan but also the Esprit Nouveau Pavilion within which it was displayed.’* Tag Gronberg notes that Voisin’s cars were known for “their luxury and artisanal manufacture,” rendering it slightly ironic that his name was given to a plan that was such a celebration of standardization.’” It is my suggestion, however, that, for Le Corbusier, standardization and pleasure were not mutually exclusive. The Plan Voisin and the Esprit Nouveau Pavilion were designed to open the mind of the public to the possibilities of the future city, min- imalist pleasures set in opposition to the decorative excesses of the rest of the exhibition.’*  Le Corbusier’s interest in the persuasive power of rhetoric and advertising is now well documented." The origins of the promenades of “cultural propaganda” that were to characterize Le Corbusier’s exhibition designs can clearly be seen in the Esprit Nouveau Pavilion in the 1925 International Exposition of Modern Decorative and Industrial Arts in Paris where the Voisin plan was first exhibited.”° In Le Corbusier’s words, 1925 was “a time pregnant with grandiose and dangerous activities.” “MM Loucheur and Bonnevay” had recently asked “the chamber for a law decreeing the building of 500,000 low-cost housing units,” providing what Le  
Corbusier saw as an exceptional opportunity for the construction industry.” It is always instructive to turn to the pages of Le Corbusier’s Oeuvre complete, the seven self-curated volumes that chart his career, to see how he wanted the projects to be presented. Here, in the 1919-29 volume, a discussion of Le Corbusier, Amédée Ozenfant and Paul Dermée’s journal L’Esprit nouveau,”’ moves on to the Ville con- temporaine, the Plan Voisin and thence to the Esprit Nouveau Pavilion itself. They are intimately connected.  L'Esprit nouveau took its title from Guillaume Apollinaire’s lecture, “L’Esprit nouveau et les poétes” of 1917.74 Le Corbusier, like many other architects of his time, adhered to the idea that it was the task of the enlightened artist/poet to unite both art and science, in other words the poetic and utilitarian body, to bring about the eponymous spirit.” The subject matter of the journal was extremely diverse, ranging from biology, astronomy, physics, medicine, and engineering to psychoanalysis, sexuality, history, literature, art, and town planning. It was clearly an attempt to find commonality across a range of fields, some certitude in an extraordinarily diverse world. Contemporary with the Pavilion, Le Corbusier planned issue 29 to be devoted to the subject of architecture.”* Purism, the art movement instigated by Le Corbusier and Ozenfant around “the organisation of raw sensations,””” was conceived through its pages. “PURISM DOES NOT AIM TO BE A SCIENTIFIC ART, WHICH WOULD HAVE NO MEANING” they stated with categorical finality." It was conceived with the poetic body firmly in mind.  The Esprit Nouveau Pavil reinforced concrete, was a ful of natural law — a vision of life nning making a Unity.””” This  han, “not to say Citroén ... in other words a house like an automobile  Monel Housing units (original  ion, a 300-meter square, two-story building of ly fitted show home designed on Purist principles within the Plan Voisin, “architecture and town pla- “immeuble villa” descended from the Maison Citro- 3° and the ly exhibited alongside the Ville contemporaine in  1922) would evolve quickly into the Unité cell, a staple of Le Corbusier’s late career, repeated for example in the Unité Marseille and the monastery at La Tourette. Indeed an illustration in The Decorative Art of Today shows the cell set into a 1925 version of the Unité d’habitation in one of its earliest manifestations.”  On display within the Pavilion was a radical new way of life played out through its fittings, the latest in “equipment,” Le Corbusier’s new term for furniture.” By dispensing with the word mobilier, his aim was to eradicate a particular way of life or “usage” and to usher in “a new era in domestic organization,”** an existence without clutter, leaving the inhabitants of his buildings better able to know how to live, savoir habiter. Here the furnishings become “human limb objects,” exten- sions of the body.*4 The idea of these “auxiliary limbs” reinforces the message that furniture should be as efficient as any of the organisms of nature.”” Thus, “these objects are in proportion to our limbs, are adapted to our gestures. They have a common scale, they fit into a module.”*° Orthopedic, they become the logical extension of clothing. His furniture designs evolved with Charlotte Perriand are  
closely linked to his interest in fashion and women’s role in bringing about the new age that he so desired.*’ At the Esprit Nouveau Pavilion, seating was organized for practicality, not etiquette, a subject of which Le Corbusier was not overly fond.”* “The house will no longer be an archaic entity ... to which the cult of family, blood- line, etc. has so long been devoted.”*? It would be a place of freedom, individuation within the defined order of his overall vision.  “This new domestic equipment, which is no longer of wood but of metal, is made in the factories that used to manufacture office-furnishing.”*° Le Corbusier himself wrote of the limitations of wood as a material for chairs, believing that metal construction lent itself to new ways of sitting.*' With both utilitarian and functional bodies firmly in mind, Le Corbusier, together with Charlotte Perriand, conceived four different modes of emancipated sitting, each leading to a particular chair design. Other furniture such as the English club armchair and the Thonet bentwood chair were object types, specimens of the highest level of “equipment” evolution. The space itself including the casier storage boxes were designed with Purist concern for geometry, harmonious color, and spatial effect, all part of the geometrical logic of the Plan Voisin.” Light, cleanliness, and the sheen of smooth surfaces would make “you want to be precise, to be accurate, to think clearly.” The hanging garden or terrace space of the Pavilion was built around an existing tree. Its leaves gave a dappled light to the space so evocatively captured in an illus- tration in the Oeuvre complete, encouraging a state of reverie.** The lifestyle on offer was relaxed, yet orderly, and at one with nature.  In a rotunda attached to the “cell unit” was an exhibition containing two dior- amas facing one another, one of the Ville contemporaine (originally exhibited at the Salon d’automne in 1922) and one of the Plan Voisin, displayed as though seen through a window of one of the blocks, the aim being “to objectify for the eyes that innovation for which our spirit is not prepared.”*’ Here, carefully framed views were set against walls covered in “methodically worked out plans for cruci- form skyscrapers, housing colonies with staggered layouts, and a whole range of types new to architecture that were the fruit of a mind preoccupied with the problems of the future.”*°  The Plan Voisin  The diorama of the Plan Voisin revealed 18 cruciform towers of the business dis- trict, bisected by an enormous raised superhighway, that were essentially the same as that of the Ville contemporaine ordered on a large geometric grid.*” Le Corbusier did not just choose any site; he chose one of the most charged sites possible, believing that the congested Right Bank business district opposite the Cité of Paris, an area roughly two miles square, was ripe for demolition. Only a few fragments of the city would be left behind like follies in an “English Garden,”** the character of which was demonstrated by Le Corbusier in The City 
of Tomorrow and its Planning in the form of a postcard of the Parc Monceau.*” An illustration in L’Esprit nouveau shows “Nature” as a naked woman strumming a lute against a background of greenery: peaceful, delightful, gendered, and ordered. Le Corbusier’s city vision would exclude “antagonistic natural phenom- ena, giving us, we men, our human milieu.””°  In this section I will explore the assumptions that lay behind Le Corbusier’s uto- pian vision for the Plan Voisin, asserted so authoritatively through plans, diagrams, and numbers in the Esprit Nouveau Pavilion, and their relationship with bodily need. Despite Le Corbusier’s assertion that the principles behind his city plans remained the same throughout his career’! they are quite fragmentary and incon- sistent, with certain “elements” being prioritized and then shrinking into the back- ground in the next book or project.  An assumption fundamental to Le Corbusier’s work is the need for classifica- tion and order, hence his fascination with filing cabinets so amply illustrated in The Decorative Art of Today.”” It has been seen that one of the central aims of the journal L’Esprit nouveau was to make sense of the disparate advances that Le Cor- busier saw around him, to bring them into some kind of family. This preoccu- pation, so central to architectural culture, translated itself to the city in terms of the zoning of particular activities. Le Corbusier was so obsessed with this sub- ject that he named Chapters V and VI of The City of Tomorrow and its Planning: “Classification and Choice (A Survey)” and “Classification and Choice (Timely Decisions)”:** “A city is a whirlpool; let us classify the impression it gives rise to, inquire into our sensations arising therefore and choose among the methods which may relieve or effect a cure.” His method was to “deal first with the eye” and then “afterwards we can consider the ear, the lungs, and our legs,” the order of proceedings foregrounding the aesthetic experience of space.”* He placed great importance on the realm of “feelings ... emotions ... and sensibilities,”** “the soul of the city” being for Le Corbusier, “more important than the mechanism of the  city.”°6  Feelings, Emotions and Sensibilities - Addressing the Needs of the Poetic Body  Le Corbusier saw a need to create “a common human measure and a proportional ‘mean’ between the fact ‘man’ and the fact ‘nature.’”"” He reminisced that before the advent of the train, motorcar, and airplane, “the speed of life was 3% miles per hour: the pace of man, of his ox, his horse or his ass. An authentic harmony lived enshrined in those settlements, maintained in such intimacy as the human body and mind.”** The layout of the house, the road and the city was proportioned to the heartbeat pace of the human foot. Further, “in the same way as the palate enjoys the variety of a well-arranged meal, so our eyes are ready for ordered 
delights.”*” The text of The City of Tomorrow and its Planning is illustrated amply with historical examples from Le Corbusier’s travel sketchbooks: “In old cities famous for their beauty we walk among shapes which are coordinated, designed around a center or along an axis.”°° Yet the axes of the Plan Voisin bear little rela- tion to those of his favorite cities or the Parthenon, so celebrated in the pages of Toward an Architecture.”  The geometry of space experienced on foot was vital: “These rhythms are at the root of human activity. They resound in man through an organic inevitability, the same inevitability that inscribes the golden section in children, in the elderly, in savages, in the educated.” These ideas were based on an unquestioning belief in the innate bodily appeal of Platonic solids such as the cone or the cube. “The forms we are discussing are the eternal forms of pure geometry and these will enshrine in a rhythm which will in the end be our own.” This idea was aug- mented with a theory Le Corbusier based on air resistance of particular forms from nature to suggest a way in which a route might be crafted using forms of little resist- ance.’ The message is that the Platonic forms of an ordered city appeal to an inner order innate within each of us. Such an order could be achieved through the use of a system of “regulating lines” giving geometric order to space and form. Such ideas would eventually evolve into his theory of the Modulor.°’ Underpinning all this is the belief, again inspired by Plato, that if it is possible to change the way people feel it is possible to change the way they think.  “Unity in detail; a magnificent ‘tumult’ in the whole” would be achieved through the use of an underpinning geometry common to both the order of the city and the wilderness of the park.®° Le Corbusier believed it was necessary to bring in “a pro- portional mean” that would prevent too great a disparity between the scale of man and his environment — the blocks of the Plan Voisin.” This would take the form of  trees, “a common architectural measure” that would “in any case” help “our phys- 268  ical and spiritual wellbeing.  The idea of the unified grouping is one that goes back to Le Corbusier’s days as an interior designer and the evolution of what he called his “technique of group- ing.”” This at first seems to have focused on geometry, color and material before becoming increasingly symbolic in scope.”” “Town planning demands uniformity in detail and a sense of movement in the general layout,” he wrote.’’ He enthused about “groupings of a rare quality,” such as the rue de Rivoli, place des Vosges and the place Vendéme in Paris,” where “the methods of construction were  uniform,”’” the result being that “every house was of the same tribe.” Once there was more unity in material, “ideas of planning on a noble scale can then make themselves heard”; in other words, geometry and rhythm innately appealing to the poetic body.”* The “new weapon” in this battle was, for Le Corbusier, rein- forced concrete and the potential of factory-built mass-produced houses.”  Mass production was the vital next step in Le Corbusier’s vision. The industri- alization of the builder’s yard would bring about the uniformity and quality he so 
desired. In the chapter “Mass Production Houses” in Toward an Architecture he drew connections between the production of cars and the production of houses. The airplane, the automobile, and the Parthenon were all examples of the potential of evolutionary endeavor. The house should become “a machine for living,” the best it could possibly be, not just in terms of function but also in terms of emotion. It should be an extension of the body, a prosthetic limb, like the furnishings of the Esprit Nouveau show home.  If we wrest from our hearts and minds static conceptions of the house and consider the question from a critical and objective point of view, we will come to the house-tool, the mass-production house that is healthy (morally too) and beautiful from the aesthetic of the work tools that accompany our existence. Beau- tiful too from all the life that the artistic sense can bring to these strict and pure organs.”  In emphasizing the “house tool,” Le Corbusier addressed the needs of the utilitarian body. In emphasizing beauty, the emotions of the poetic body come to the fore. This balance could only be achieved by the most delicate synthesis.  Addressing the Needs of the Utilitarian Body  There are moments in Le Corbusier's narrative when the needs of the poetic body recede into the background, bringing function to the fore. These moments, which are few, seem to have been those with the greatest impact as they discuss tangible things, incitements to action that can be measured. “The city is a whirl- pool, yet it is none the less a body with definitely placed organs, and it has a shape ... the analysis of a city belongs to the realm of scientific investigation.”””  “Cancer” had set in and “surgery” was needed to make it healthy once more.” The urban body becomes at once one of function, illustrated with images of the heart and lungs, input and output. “The condition of the whole city lies in the con- dition of each of its cells...”””  In line with this quasi-scientific view, a picture of the city could be developed through the power of information. “By its geographical and topographical situa- tion, from the political, economic, and social part, played by it, the line of its evolution can be followed ... Statistics, graphs, are the a, b, c, and so on of an equa- tion whose x and y can be calculated in advance with a certain approximation.”*° How such measurements, well known for flattening out the subjective, tally with his poetic world view is a moot point.  Le Corbusier’s fascination with order led him inevitably to the concept of zoning. All his city plans are zoned with areas devoted to industry, housing, and so on. The passage of people, cars, and other forms of transport would be 
similarly segregated. “The motor has killed the great city. The motor must save the great city,” wrote Le Corbusier.*” In his opinion, “the ‘corridor-street’ between its two pavements, stifled between tall houses, must disappear.”** It was chaotic, dark and unhealthy. Inspired, in part, by the Garden City ideal of Raymond Unwin, he proposed instead a series of aerial arteries devoted to vehicular traffic, leaving the verdant ground plane free for pedestrians who would move through the city on a series of platforms and what have come to be known as “streets in the sky,” perhaps his most infamous legacy.  Legacy of Voisin  Although he continued to search for a higher authority with the vision of Colbert or Louis XIV, Le Corbusier was soon to be disabused of his delusion that capitalism would bring about the city that he so desired. The assumptions behind the Plan Voisin were that that zoning was desirable, that the use of geometry could be used to make a link between the city and the poetic body (with quasi-scientific results), and that mass production would provide the key to creating the unity in detail nec- essary for a visually ordered city. The garden that formed its backdrop would be a pleasant place affirming the links between nature and mankind, again addressing poetic needs; and further, and most importantly, that the needs of the poetic and utilitarian body must be addressed in tandem. For Le Corbusier the term “func- tional” encompassed emotional and sensory needs, a fact that escaped the majority of commentators, notably the eminent historian Nikolaus Pevsner, who wrote the history of modernism for generations of architects with the utilitarian body very much in mind.*? Le Corbusier himself came to detest the word functional, which in the hands of Hannes Meyer and others became increasingly bogus in its pursuit of objectivity, denying the “magical” qualities of architecture that he felt to be so important. Le Corbusier raged at the misrepresentation of his ideas, but in leaving his work so ambiguous and open for interpretation, he was often his own worst enemy.** The primary organ for spreading “the functional city’ were the meetings of CIAM, the Congrés internationaux d’architecture moderne founded in Switzerland in 1928.7 After World War II, local authorities all over Europe, tasked with the swift reconstruction of their cities, were quick to understand the cost-saving poten- tial of Le Corbusier's urban vision. Architects, such as those of London County Council, were happy to deliver homes to people who did not always accept the complete vision (a requisite of its success), with few communal facilities and min- imal maintenance budgets. Many architects adopted Le Corbusier’s geometric principles but ignored their philosophical grounding. The utilitarian body might just have shelter, but the non-fungible needs of the poetic body lost out in the bar- gain. Industry is only now, nearly 100 years later, gearing up to the reality of fac- tory-built, mass-production homes. Zoning was quickly discredited by Jane Jacobs’  
1961 book, The Death and Life of Great American Cities as it gave rise to empty, un- policed, and frightening city space of indeterminate ownership. The rejection of CIAM functionalism was finally completed with the Commission of European Communities’ 1990 Green Paper on the Urban Environment, which stressed the importance of a “mixing of urban uses” taking “the old traditional life of the Euro- pean city” as its model.*°  Writing in the early 1990s Robert Fishman stated, “the Plan Voisin still arouses the same horror as it did at its original showing,” I suspect because of its seemingly wanton destruction of a large swathe of Paris.°” Many would say it is just as well that the Plan Voisin has never been tested in its entirety, the postwar experiments in city planning being too far from Le Corbusier’s original conception to count in my opinion. Ultimately the potential benefit of Le Corbusier's city vision for a will- ing populace, under the right political conditions, has yet to be properly tested — only his Unité d’habitation in Marseille (started 1947) giving some sense of what might be possible.**  Conclusion  Much of the blame for the misinterpretation of Le Corbusier’s theories must lie with Le Corbusier himself. The Plan Voisin was an attempt to create a universal city for an individual place while addressing a generalized vision of bodily need. His knowledge of history had taught Le Corbusier that such a solution needed to be slippery in its semantics offering multiple possible interpretations if it was to stand any chance of success over time. It is for this reason that Charles Jencks was partly correct to identify Le Corbusier as the first Post Modern architect.  That Le Corbusier came to understand that there are no universal solutions can be seen from a sketch that he made of himself as Don Quixote tilting at the windmills of his own ideals (dated 6 October 1953), a drawing that offers much to the profession even today. Le Corbusier's early career was spent constructing a vision of world order, but it was filled with contradiction and empty assertions. He was not immune to the pressures caused by finance, politics, and fashion. During his late career he came to understand the futility of pursuing his early vision, but the importance of pursuing it anyway. The decisive clash of real and ideal that is the Plan Voisin exem- plifies this conundrum perhaps more than any other Le Corbusier scheme.  Notes  * Image credit: © FLC/ ADAGP, Paris; DACS, London; and ARS, New York, 2014. Repro- duced with permission from FLC.  1. Le Corbusier, The City of Tomorrow and its Planning, trans. Frederick Etchells (London: Architectural Press, 1947), 75. First published in French 1924 as Urbanisme. 
STOCKHOLM PUBLIC LIBRARY  Erik Gunnar Asplund Michael Asgaard Andersen  Erik Gunnar Asplund, Stockholm Public Library, Stockholm, Sweden, 1928.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Gently take hold of the legs and pull them toward you in a long, sweeping motion, then step inside and ascend into the large, encircling interior. That is roughly how a first encounter with Stockholm Public Library would have been — a sensual expe- rience leading from the busy urban space into the quiet world of books. As for the legs, they belonged to sculptures of Eve and Adam that once served as door handles on the entrances.  Stockholm Public Library, which opened on March 31, 1928, was in many ways an innovation in the Nordic countries. Most striking was the fact that lenders could now take books off the shelves themselves, but the central placement of the lending room and the secondary placement of the reading rooms also indicated a new way to organize libraries. The thoughts embodied in the building became a model for many later libraries.  The building is not only testimony to an important period of Nordic architec- tural history and a recognized masterpiece by the Swedish architect Erik Gunnar Asplund (1885-1940), it is also part of the history of the Nordic social model that was taking shape in the interwar years. Because of its function as a public institution and its unique architectural qualities, Stockholm Public Library today stands as an early manifestation of Nordic welfare building.  Building in the City  Like many other European cities, Stockholm underwent great changes in the early twentieth century and Asplund, a writer, editor, and practicing architect, took an active part in that development. In a lecture, published in the journal Arkitektur, he discussed the city’s monumentality and voiced his skepticism about the expressive design of housing facades at the time, which, to his mind, attracted way too much attention in the cityscape:  A city gets its charm from the rhythmic alternation between simple, modest apart- ment buildings and monumental public buildings. As in the other arts, where, for instance, a decorative or sculptural ornament requires a calm, neutral background to be displayed to its best advantage, this simple and familiar rule also applies to  the art of city building |... the effect of a cityscape with a monumental building will depend on both its placement in the city plan and its architectural design.’  In the years around 1920 Asplund’s interest in the city’s development was embo- died in his design of the Sédermalm housing development and his competition entries for Gétaplatsen, Gustav Adolf Square, and the Royal Chancellery (with Ture Ryberg). In fall 1918, Asplund was appointed to a committee, made possible by a grant from the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation, that would develop the groundwork for a public library in Stockholm. Later that year, he wrote 
another polemical article arguing for more thoughtfulness and more comprehen- sive solutions in Swedish urban planning. As a positive example, he held up Swe- den’s second largest city, Gothenburg, which had organized several competitions involving the city’s most important streets, squares, and neighborhoods. Criticizing the lack of planning in Stockholm, he mentioned the eastern part of Observator- ielunden as one of several sites that were important to the city’s future develop- ment.” This was where the library would eventually be located.  Asplund’s work on the project over the next decade not only shows the great care with which he made the building, but also indicates the changes and new direc- tions in his architecture in the period. The hill, with its observatory, towers over the roofs of the city. It is cut offby two busy thoroughfares, Sveavagen to the north- east and Odengatan to the northwest. In his early sketches, Asplund was working with a site plan in which a continuous volume along Sveavagen would contain a number of different institutions. These did not correspond to the municipal land- use plan, which accentuated the corner of the site with a monumental square framed by buildings. This plan was published in the journal Byggmdstaren, together with three of Asplund’s subsequent proposals, in which the library is a separate building with a circle-in-a-square floor plan.’ The site plan for the three proposals shows how he first located the building on Sveavagen and then moved it to the street corner, before finally placing it on Odengatan with a new orientation of the main entrance.  In the studies of the library’s placement and orientation, the surrounding obser- vation hill is likewise shaped in different ways. In the first of the three site plans, the landscape is subordinated to an idealized geometry, in which the irregular hill would be straightened out into a terraced, rectilinear park with regularly spaced vegetation and large staircases. The landscape was made an object of the will to organize and rule. In the last of the site plans (and partially in the second), the hill’s steep cliffs were left in their natural state, while the north-south axis of the observ- atory still contrasted with the symmetrical and rectangular geometry of a park, corresponding to the street grid. The areas along the roads on both sides of the library would be turned into parkland, and Asplund later won the competition to design them, though only the reflecting pond alongside Sveavagen was ever rea- lized. Leaving the cliffs as they are creates a unity that equates landscape and build- ings in a mutual relationship and to this day contributes to the impression of Stockholm as a green city.  In the subsequent adjustment of the site plan, the building’s square volume, which on some schemes was U-shaped in plan, was slightly rotated in relation to the orthogonal street grid and thus was geometrically emancipated from the surrounding residential and commercial buildings. It was also moved forward toward Sveavagen, locating the center of the cylindrical volume, which rises over the rest of the building and can be seen from a greater distance, on the observa- tory’s north-south axis. This volume is the same all the way around and thus is  
perceived as frontal no matter from where it is viewed, giving it the character of a fulcrum in the urban structure.  With historical counterparts in the Rotonde de la Villette by Claude-Nicolas Ledoux, the Villa Rotonda by Andrea Palladio, the Castel Sant’Angelo in Rome, and the Lanterna del Faro in Messina, among others, the basic geometric shapes of the library lend a forceful impression that, despite their modest size, is capable of holding its own against the weight of the hill and the mass of the neighboring building blocks. In its urban context, the advanced position and the rotation, as Johan Martelius has argued, can be seen as an attempt to establish an extended axis, through Adolf Fredrik’s church and Strémgatan’s square, to the Royal Palace.* The library’s square and cylindrical volumes sit behind a platform on which shops with large glass sections to the street contribute to an inviting and well-defined streetscape.  The ability to design a building based on a multifaceted and complex under- standing of the city is manifested in many other projects as well. As Colin St. John Wilson explains, “the spirit that informed Asplund’s approach was grounded in a rigorous and sensitive interpretation of context. The way in which the strands ofa formidable orchestrated order are woven from the grain of the surrounding fabric is truly remarkable.”* For Asplund, the act of designing was an extended and exploratory process in which the different scales and levels of meaning of the con- text were analyzed and gradually worked in, so that the projects were integrated into, while simultaneously changing, the context.  In Collage City, Colin Rowe and Fred Koetter compare Asplund’s competition entry for the Royal Chancellery to Le Corbusier’s Plan Voisin. In their view, the Chancellery expresses a profound understanding of the city’s historical continu- ity and a remarkable sense of its specific details. This is manifested in many of Asplund’s works, which Rowe and Koetter consider as having “the most elabo- rate use of multiple design strategies.”® These strategies are put into play not only in the design of the city, which is their primary interest, but also in how Asplund’s projects relate to a great number of other architectural and societal conditions.  The Library’s Gestalt  Stockholm Public Library came into being out of a desire to create a democratic place where anyone could come, regardless of background. It was intended not just to inspire and invite those who were already well versed in literature, but also, in the words of chief librarian Fredrik Hjelmqvist, to “awaken an interest in those who are still slumbering, and it will ease the way into the world of books for all of those for whom that road presents difficulties.”” Among its most important innovations, Hjelmqvist emphasized the library’s open shelves and card catalogue, its openness to users, its separate children’s and youth departments, and the clear 
The axial progression of spaces is familiar from many other building cultures. Working from Oswald Spengler’s Untergang des Abendlandes, Asplund discussed this in his professorial inaugural lecture at the KTH Royal Institute of Technology in 1931: “In Egyptian culture space was seen as a direction, a path, best illustrated, according to Spengler, by the temples with their unending narrowing, majestic routes between rows of sphinxes, through pillared champers, courtyards and pas- sages towards the goal.”’* The desire to allude to Egyptian architecture is not lim- ited to this. It is also, more literally, expressed in the exterior frieze and in the entrance portals of the three almost identical facades.  The progression of spaces at the Public Library is characterized not only by an axial composition, but also by contrasts between the size and proportions of the rooms, the colors and textures of materials, and the direction and intensity of the lighting. Contrasts of big and small, hard and soft, and light and dark create a forceful transition from the spectacle of the street to the calmness of the interior, presenting a wealth of varied and content-rich experiences. The artistic ornamen-  tation is an integrated part of the spatial progression, from the exterior frieze with its subjects from different cultures, to the door handles with Old Testament figures, and the interior reliefs, with stories from Homer's Hiad. The aforementioned proj- ect entry similarly proposed to feature the Greek inscription FNWOI LAYTON (Know thyself) on the floor of the lobby. Asplund had observed the statement in a building in Rome on his grand tour of France and Italy in 1913-14."*  In his analysis of Asplund’s architecture, Robert Venturi zeroes in on the ornamentation: “Much of the early work of Gunnar Asplund and some other early twentieth-century architects espoused a non-literal historicism that was expressed through representational ornament.”’” It is a telling statement of how Asplund’s work was viewed by many in the 1970s and 1980s, who considered it a precursor to the stylistic escapades of postmodernism. The myriad narratives of the ornamen- tation have fostered many and highly varied interpretations of their meaning. Aside from this, they tell parts of the stories that can be borrowed as books in the library, potentially arousing curiosity and a desire to learn.  The exterior of the library is as simple and moderate as its interior is rich in texture and detail. The large, serene, plastered volumes with their simple window openings tone down the middle scale, and the building assumes the character of an abstract, almost alienated object. The Danish architect Steen Eiler Rasmussen described how the simple look induces a figure-ground reading emphasizing the building’s lines over its forms.'® The abstract and alienated are counterbalanced not only by the building’s integrated placement on the site but also by the colored plastering of the facade, which is common in Stockholm and thus, in a very uncom- plicated way, ties in to the surroundings, including the observatory.  The ornamentation on Asplund’s buildings was in part influenced by a way of thinking that came from the Romantic period, when artistic motifs from different epochs were rather freely used and combined. Though it can justifiably be regarded as a potpourri of styles, it also serves spatial and organizing purposes  
in the Public Library. The ornamentation helps to differentiate the importance of the spaces and underscore the lines of the building. Asplund had earlier proclaimed that “now, more than anything, it seems to be about employing the currently mod- ern type of architecture, regardless of environment and tradition, and above all not falling behind in the ‘architectural race.’ People forget that it is more important to follow the style of the site rather than of the times.”'” In other words, he was arguing in favor of anchoring architecture in its context. He also distanced himself from the tendency to hopelessly pursue the whims of fashion and blindly follow the styles of the changing times, not least historicism.  Asplund was very aware of the relationship between the different scales of a building and their contextual cohesion. In his review of the Gothenburg Tercen- tennial Jubilee Exposition, he formulated this in an architectural ideal: “Today’s architectural desire, at its best, inclines toward a subordination of detail, a coordi- nation of all heterogeneous needs and requirements and dimensions under a strong architectural idea. Around a central concept. It strives for order and character.”"* The notion of having a simple and strong architectural idea for a building was not only essential in Asplund’s work; it was also an indispensable principle for many other Nordic architects of the twentieth century.  The above two quotations about the style of the site and architectural desire indicate the artistic tensions and paradoxes that marked Asplund and his times. Like the rest of Europe, the Nordic countries had contrasting cultural currents and sig- nificant social challenges. The downgrading of styles and the subordination of detail likewise signaled the impending breakthrough of modernism, which would catch up with the library before it had even been completed. Eva Eriksson has aptly described how “Nordic 1920s-Classicism can be seen as an heroic attempt to employ the knowledge and experience of history, without directly borrowing its finished dress, to design the modern city.”??  Eriksson pinpoints the start of Nordic 1920s classicism to a 1911 Copenhagen exhi- bition of works by C.F. Hansen, and she considers Carl Petersen’s Faborg Museum from 1915 to be the breakthrough work of the period.”” Henrik O. Andersson and Kenneth Frampton argue in a catalogue for a retrospective exhibition in 1982 that the currents in architecture and other arts in the rest of Europe and the United States helped to lay a foundation for the significant blossoming of classicism in Nordic archi- tecture.”" Moreover, there was considerable exchange in the field of architecture among the Nordic countries in the period, not least due to their closely related lan- guages, geographical proximity, and shared cultural heritage. For example, Danish architect Kay Fisker wrote about new Swedish architecture in the Danish journal Arkitekten, after working for Asplund and Lewerentz for a time.” Conversely, Asplund reviewed a Danish book about the old manor house of Liselund that had served as an important source of inspiration for his Woodland chapel. The book included measured drawings by Kay Fisker, Aage Refn, and others, and was reviewed in the Swedish journal Arkitektur.”* These are just some of the countless examples of the exchanges between architects in the Nordic countries.  
In the exhibition catalogue, Frampton further describes how this period of Nor- dic architecture was characterized by a Doric sensibility that “intended a return to an accessible culture of building; to an expression which, despite its modesty, aspired to a certain restrained monumentality and generally employed a sparse but nonetheless direct iconography.” In this sensibility, Frampton says, classical and vernacular architecture could be combined into new architectural expressions. Relating the architecture to a sensibility, rather than a stylistic preference, allows the identification of common traits across its highly varied buildings. The exhibi- tion catalogue features works by the most important architects, including, in addi- tion to Asplund, Carl G. Bergsten, Sigurd Lewerentz, and Ivar Tengbom of Sweden; Gudolf Blakstad, Herman Munthe-Kaas, and Lorentz Ree of Norway; Alvar Aalto, Erik Bryggman, and Johan Sigfrid Sirén of Finland; and Hack Kamp- mann, Carl Petersen, and Edvard Thomsen of Denmark, along with many others from each of the Nordic countries.  Swedish architecture of the first half of the interwar years received some inter- national attention, among other ways with Bergsten’s pavilion at the 1925 Paris Exposition Internationale des Arts Décoratifs et Industriels Modernes. The exposition also introduced Nordic architects to the burgeoning European modernism embo- died in Le Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret’s Esprit Nouveau pavilion. Architects who were unable to see the pavilion for themselves could read about it and the most recent trends in architecture later that year in Uno Ahrén’s seminal article, “Taming Points.””’ Swedish architecture of the 1920s also became known by the term “Swedish Grace,” coined by Morton Shand in a discussion of European architecture and decorative arts.”°  Beginning a New Era  “The Public Library now stands as the termination and peak of a period, as the City Hall does of the preceding. Neo-Classicism is over,””” Ahrén wrote in his 1928 review of Asplund’s building. Continuing his critique of the library and other build- ings of the 1920s, Ahrén argued, “Swedish architecture of this period was driven by a longing to find clear expressions for the architectural functions, but this striving was hard to reconcile with, and thus was counteracted by, an oddly powerful a priori view of how architecture should look.” In his review, he focused on the building’s style more than its functions — despite an aim for “a radical functional outlook” — and found the ornamentation particularly problematic.”* As on previous occasions, he made himself a spokesman for modernism, and in that regard he considered the library hopelessly outdated.  Eva Eriksson has argued that Stockholm Public Library, in terms of architectural history, can be read in three different ways: as a masterpiece of the period before the breakthrough of modernism, as a heterogeneous work balancing between tradition and modernity, or as an unresolved and conflicting work stretched  
between two radically different world views. The latter is grounded in Ahrén’s criticism, which concluded with this verdict: “This building does not stand on the boundary between two minor fashion trends in Swedish architecture, as some may contend, but between two phases of profound differences in mentality.””?  Two drawings of the library, which were used to illustrate Hjelmqvist’s article in Ord och Bild and Ahrén’s article in Byggmdstaren, respectively, show the change that Asplund’s architecture was going through when the building opened. Drawn from approximately the same angle, the first drawing represents the building in a wealth of details and with surrounding vegetation, while the second is highly simplified, emphasizing the building’s horizontal lines. The latter, in other words, shows a quasi-modernist building. The platform, which was not built until after the library had opened, in its transparency, light color, and absence of ornament, expresses the change that was underway, and as such is closer to the stylistic ideal that would dominate in the years to follow.  Only two years after the completion of the Public Library, the Stockholm Exhi- bition opened in 1930, with Asplund as chief architect. Though hardly the first modernist work, the exhibition came to stand as the introduction of modernism in the Nordic countries. More than anything, the exhibition was a popular and pro- fessional success that helped modernist buildings become widely accepted among the populace. Employing a vocabulary of large glass sections, steel beams and gir- ders, white-plastered surfaces, and colorful banners, the architecture heralded a new age to visitors. It was supplemented by an abundance of exhibited applied- art objects and industrial products. The new vocabulary notwithstanding, Asplund and many of the other exhibition’s architects showcased a unique sense of propor- tion, form, and composition, based on their experiences from the 1910s and 1920s. As in other periods of major transition, Nordic architecture was characterized by continuity rather than distinct breaks.  Next to the Public Library, the Stockholm Exhibition represents an uncom- monly quick and quite significant change of architectural expression for Asplund. Most obvious are the rejection of traditional decorative elements and the use of glass, steel, and concrete instead, which were considered the most important materials of the day. More striking, however, is the change from a predominantly stereometric to an explicitly tectonic approach. This change of  vocabulary for Asplund not only expressed an authentic interest in the new pos- sibilities but also a persistent striving to explore the recurring challenges of archi- tectural gestalt.  The exhibition attracted a lot of attention beyond Sweden. In the Danish journal Arkitekten, Aage Refn, who co-designed the Copenhagen Police Headquarters, dis- cussed the exhibition in relation to Asplund’s other works and described it as “fes- tive, light, and elegant.”*° Like Morton Shand in Architectural Review, the editors of the Norwegian journal Byggekunst were far less positive in their review,”’ while in Finland, Alvar Aalto, who had been strongly inspired by Asplund in the previous 
decade and had closely followed the genesis of the exhibition, related his experi- ence as follows:  The exhibition speaks out for joyful and spontaneous everyday life. It consistently propagates a healthy and unpretentious lifestyle based on economical realities. [...] The Stockholm Exhibition proclaims the contemporary artist's determination to create objects for present-day needs and acceptable values, making use of the achievements of Swedish society.””  Aalto goes on to say that Sigfried Giedion, comparing the Stockholm Exhibition to Mies van der Rohe’s Weissenhof Exhibition in Stuttgart, reportedly described it “as a concerted effort, no other exhibition can compete with this.”’’ It was one of the few Nordic projects that made it into Henry-Russell Hitchcock and Philip John- son’s exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art in New York and the subsequent book The International Style. The other Nordic buildings were Aalto’s Turun Sano- mat, Ahrén’s Flamman Theatre and Students’ Clubhouse (with Sven Markelius), and Eskil Sundahl’s Cooperative Society Siedlung.**  The following year, it was also Asplund, Ahrén, Markelius, and Sundahl who, with chief curator of the Stockholm Exhibition, Gregor Paulsson, and the architect, Wolter Gahn, published acceptera, which is considered Sweden’s most important architectural manifesto. The book opens with the words: “accept the reality that exists — only in that way have we any prospect of mastering it, taking it in hand, and altering it to create culture that offers an adaptable tool for life.”*” The six wri- ters contend that architecture should play a central role in that development, as had also been expressed in the exhibition. In chapters on culture, society, homes, stand- ardization, and so on, they discuss a long list of contemporaneous issues. Although the book points in many directions, they share a common goal:  The organization of the world’s resources and the improvement and stabilization of the living conditions of individuals are what we are working toward. But these are merely means to enable richer lives to be led. If that end is distant, we have to make even greater endeavors to perfect the means.”  The development toward modernism was not without conflict and was far from desirable for all Nordic architects. Apart from Ahrén’s 1925 article, the Norwegian architect Johan Ellefsen, in his essay, “What is Contemporary Architecture?” and the Danish architect Poul Henningsen, in his essay, “Tradition and Modernism,” both from 1927, contributed to the debate in their respective homelands on the side of the new architecture.’’ In Sweden, part of the debate came to be fought between so-called traditionalists and functionalists. The latter designation, shortened to “Funkis,” was later applied to Nordic modernism of the second half of the interwar years.  Rather than just seeing Stockholm Public Library as a masterpiece preceding the breakthrough of modernism, a work straddling tradition and modernity, or one 
falling between two different world views, the building should be seen as the begin- ning of a new era of Nordic architecture. From the 1920s onward, a new social structure was emerging. Known as the Nordic model, it became extremely impor- tant to the development of architecture and the built environment. A significant aspect of this development was the role played by the governments of the Nordic countries as initiators and clients of public institutions in the making of a welfare system. Through large investments in buildings for these institutions, the govern- ments managed to serve as a model for the rest of society, or as Aalto put it, “one of the most important functions of public architecture is to set an example.”** In the Nordic countries it was broadly accepted that investments in buildings for the wel- fare system was for the common good.  Apart from public libraries, the welfare system included a number of other pub- lic institutions, such as hospitals, senior and childcare facilities, schools and univer- sities, and houses of art and culture. While in other Western countries it had been left to private initiative to build and operate some of these institutions, in the Nor- dic countries this was considered a job for the government. There has been a high degree of societal consensus on this issue, which has aided the political and eco- nomical continuity in the Nordic countries.  With the exception of Bredenberg department store, a project raised on pillars and featuring horizontal bands of windows, Asplund himself did not dwell long upon the new architectural vocabulary he had so powerfully showcased with the Stockholm Exhibition. In the following decade he was mainly occupied with his projects for the Gothenburg Courthouse, which he had won in 1913, and the Woodland Crematorium at the Woodland Cemetery, which he had won (with Lewerentz) in 1915. The working process and final form of these two lifelong pro- jects show how he continued to explore new paths. In 1940, Asplund put the fin- ishing touches to the Chapel of the Holy Cross at the Woodland Crematorium, where his funeral was held later that year.  Notes  * Reproduced by permission of RIBA Library Photographs Collection.  1. Erik Gunnar Asplund, “Aktuella arkitektoniska faror for Stockholm, Hyreshusen,” Arkitektur (1916): 130.  2. Erik Gunnar Asplund, “Planmissigheten i Stadsbyggandet i Géteborg och i Stockholm,” Arkitektur 8 (1918): 109-10.  3. Carl G. Bergsten, “Stockholms Stadsbiblioteks Férlaggning,” Byggmdstaren 24 (1923): 305-8.  4. Johan Martelius, “Langs bokens rygg,” Arkitektur 4 (2006): 18.  5. Colin St. John Wilson, Architectural Reflections: Studies in the Philosophy and Practice of Architecture (Oxford: Butterworth Architecture, 1992), 141.  6. Colin Rowe and Fred Koetter, Collage City (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1978), 72.  7. Fredrik Hjelmqvist, “Stockholms Stadsbibliotek,” Ord och Bild 22 (1928): 344.  8. Ibid., 347.  
PART Ill  Revising the Modern Project 
INnNtroauction CONSTRUCTING NEW WORLDS  David Leatherbarrow  The optimism and ambition that defined the project(s) of early modern architec- ture were not abandoned in the late 1920s and 1930s, only revised. New worlds resulting from projects attuned to modern realities were still envisaged, but they were no longer imagined to be wholly new, or the responsibility of single designers. Adhesions to pre-existing conditions came to be seen as inevitable when actual sites, programs, materials, and builders were used as instruments of project realization. Furthermore, just as projects could not free themselves from inherited culture, they were rarely, if ever, realized in full. Non-finality came to be seen as the norm rather than the exception. Acceptance of this double contingency — of histor- ical continuity and shared authority — marked a significant shift in the understand- ing of an architectural project; the work of design and construction came to be seen as less emancipated, more engaged. Was the new attitude defeatist? From a stri- dently avant-garde stance, acceptance of a project’s “practical” conditions might seem so. But given the beauty, intelligence, and cultural richness of these buildings, such an assessment makes little sense. We need to ask how a project’s circum- stances not only conditioned but enriched its development.  Decades ago interpreters of modern architecture observed a “turn toward the organic” in the buildings of the late 1920s and 1930s, and also a “return to order.” Yet, more recent studies, including those in earlier chapters in this book, have shown that architectures of the preceding two decades were also concerned with the “organic” or natural world — less its appearance, however, than its processes and structure — and that there was no absence of thinking about architectural order before the “heroic” period, even if conceptions of order were often reduced to tech- niques of ordering. The “organic” and the “mechanic” aspects of early modern buildings were not seen as categorically distinct,’ and there was hardly a return to order when many architects sought nothing so intently. How, then, did the designs of the next decades differ? In short, the building’s place, program, materials, and modes of production came to be seen as conditions that would strengthen its development, despite the fact that they also complicated its idea. The key point is  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
that order was discovered in the world, not only in the project. The passage from imagining to constructing also meant revising the architect’s sense of the project’s autonomy. What had been independent became involved. Insofar as projects were co- determined by conditions the architect could not control the results were hybrid, jointly-authored, and often unfinished; if less pure they were also often more rel- evant; if compromised technically, they expressed great ingenuity, and they were good to look at, move through, and think about.  To introduce the productive role of the project’s place, program, and construc- tion let me outline some of the ways this period’s key buildings benefited from their encounter with conditions outside their designers’ control.  The coordination between a project and its location took a number of forms in the built work of these years. The most obvious sort of connection was visual: the site presented itself through a series of views, around the building and from within it. The heated debates about the “pros and cons” of the horizontal window, for example, took for granted the importance of the landscape or urban prospect.” Le Corbusier argued for the first sort of view, Auguste Perret the second. Similarly, a chief function of a ribbon, sash, or “French” window was to frame a view. Perhaps the most famous instance of the aperture’s framing function is the “window” that concludes the Villa Savoye’s promenade architecturale. Window walls, by contrast, opened entire panoramas. No less common than discussions of framing were the many accounts of “merging” or “connecting” interiors to their surroundings for the sake of views. In all of these examples the wider context was understood as a pic- ture. But that was not the only sense of the site at this time.  The project’s location was also understood dynamically, which is to say as a play of environmental forces; particularly, light, wind, and temperature. Design and construction now entered into this play, into its sequences, transformations, and variations. Patterns could be discerned — days and seasons, for example — but the key principle was alteration, the outcome of which was development or dete- rioration. Let me explain this more fully by citing a few examples that are studied in the chapters that follow.  Buckminster Fuller is known to have viewed the natural and built worlds very  widely — unusually so, one could say. Distances and dimensions were taken to be significant, but also the movements and energies at play in the great expanse. Fuller characterized the ambient landscape as a “field of forces” or animated context that not only posed the problem but also determined the success of any built work. He focused on the selection and sizing of construction materials, particularly new and lightweight materials, as AnnMarie Brennan shows. Even the term he used for his best known inventions, dymaxion, points in this direction: it couples maximum yield with the dynamism of elements. The energies of the work were to harmonize with those of the world.  Something less than a planetary horizon could also allow the building site to be understood as an interaction of natural forces. Approaching the topic more locally — and with both industrial and vernacular construction materials — Frank Lloyd 
in his study of Fallingwater. There is no question that the views from the house were breathtaking, as was the prospect of it from the lower level of the falls. But the process-character of the place was equally important. Levine shows that Wright’s concern for the site’s temporality led him to synchronize the times of occupation with those of the daily cycles, adjusting the geometry of the plan to the path of the sun, lines on the ground with those in the sky. Wright had, of course, been working with diagonal composition for years; it was one of the outcomes of “breaking the box” (of enclosed orthogonality). But in this and other projects of the time, ideas for spatial layout developed in dialogue with conditions he had not designed but was compelled to work with — natural conditions. Later he described the principle that regulated this cooperative effort as the “organic ground motive.”  Once the project’s location was understood as both a set of views and play of forces a number of basic tasks presented themselves, the first of which was orien- tation. Randall Ott explains that the buildings sited near the Goetheneum were carefully positioned with respect to one another, each in its own spot, but also fac- ing the “gravitational center” of the constellation. Because the main building occu- pied the hilltop, the ensemble’s overall layout was thus co-determined by pre- existing topography, institutional requirements being the other determining factor.  The role of topography in the configuration and detailed articulation of a single building can be seen clearly in Eileen Gray’s layout of E.1027, as described by Caroline Constant. She explains that while Gray conceived the house from inside to outside, opportunities of the location were used as counterparts to interior spe- cifications and qualification — the seaside site partly determined qualities of light, temperature, and air in the house’s several settings, as well as their degrees of inti- macy or openness. The living room, for example, enjoyed southern exposure; the bedrooms, on the other hand, were greeted by the morning sun. Views of the ocean were also important, of course. But while the apertures were designed to respond to opportunities of prospect, they also had to protect the interiors against  glare and winds, allowing some and resisting others. In his account of Villa Savoye, Richard Wesley explains that the building’s dif-  ferent framing instruments variously targeted the wide panorama and axes of view, even if the terminal point (a historic monument) framed by the famous solarium window could rarely, if ever, be seen. But the screen wall performed environmen- tally, too; it sheltered plants and people against the wind, while it partially enclosed open-air rooms. A viewing frame also opened the wall that enclosed the roof deck of Adolf Loos’ Miiller Villa. Christopher Long explains that it framed a prospect of Hradéany that included Prague Castle. The enclosing wall opposite this one sup- ported an open-air shower, presumably for use after sunbathing. The attractions of a closer vista, however, help explain why Loos reversed the typical orientation of the house, shifting the main salon from the entry front to the opposite side, where its windows and balcony could open onto the descending terraces of the villa’s gar- den in the foreground, a thoroughfare in the lower, middle distance, and a land-  scape garden beyond. In fact, each of the four facades was distinct, precisely rr: sb : es es Ce Ce a ee © i oe  ae 
relative privacy, and so on. Nothing could be further from the truth than the old idea that this building was disengaged from its location. Care for ambient views was coupled with attention to patterns of use and environmental change. In the buildings of Le Corbusier, Gray, Loos, and Wright, “rituals of living” were coordinated with the cycles of daily and seasonal change in the natural environment.  Engagement such as this did not restrict invention. Reversals of typical patterns of site development discovered unforeseen possibilities in the project’s location. A case in point is Richard Neutra’s siting of the VDL house. Edward Ford explains that Neutra broke from the habit of placing the house in the middle of its lot, where front, side, and rear yards had similar dimensions and character. By pushing the plan close to two of the boundaries he was able to develop an elaborate layout of courts and gardens that extended interiors into complimentary outdoor settings. Insofar as the “flow of space” from inside to outside was virtually uninterrupted, the interiors were largely qualified by site conditions (of light, air, plantings, and so on). The same sort of thing happened in urban settings in the work of other archi- tects. Grace Ong explains that the street front of the PSFS building enclosed public spaces at several levels -subway, sidewalk, and mezzanine — all public and all inter- connected. Although there was no precedent for stratification such as this in Philadelphia, the discovery of these new possibilities made the proposal attractive to clients, who saw its commercial advantages. But with respect to the history of urban architecture, this manner of engaging and developing the vicinity also allowed the solution to serve as a model for later projects in this and other American cities. And the innovations at the lower levels were complemented by new solutions above, for the large sign was designed by Howe and Lescaze to be seen from blocks away (along a cross-city avenue on one side and from a bridge on the other). Here, as before, the actual site provided architects with “un- designed” conditions that served as the grounds for project development. Projects in these years, one can say, developed eccentrically; a work’s source of order was outside its proper limits, the margins shaped and qualified the center.  The more we learn about the actual construction of the buildings of the “heroic” period of modern architecture the more we see that later historians have been more dogmatic about materials and methods of construction than the architects themselves. No doubt the architects initiated the familiar — if now discredited — story about “modern” materials (steel, concrete, and glass) and “modern” means of construction (standardization, prefabrication, and dry assembly) determining the “evolution” of modernism. Yet, the apologists went much further than the designers, in some cases to the point of obscuring the subject matter of their descriptions — the buildings themselves. Richard Wesley explains how Sigfried Giedion, for example, rewrote and reduced Le Corbusier’s Five (or Six) Points for a New Architecture so that they would express more forcefully his notion of building technology as the engine that powered the modern movement. Le Corbusier was far less dogmatic. The “points,” such as they were, only  
and its outer surface was stucco. No less hybrid was the most representative work of his former teacher, Adolf Loos’ Villa Miiller in Prague. Loos did not share Neutra’s dedication to the newest products, but he was equally willing to integrate ways of building we tend to see as categorically distinct. The structure of the Miller Villa combined perimeter brickwork with cast-in-place concrete columns toward the cen- ter, a so-called “half-box” system with outside load-bearing walls and two longitu- dinal frames inside the plan (the Hennebique system). A spatial idea — the Raumplan, which allowed varying floor and ceiling heights — required the insertion of the different means of support where level changes were desired. Loos feltnoneed to “reveal” or “express” the structure; more important was the accommodation and representation of the building’s use program. A mixture of building materials and techniques was the result, nevertheless. A simple, pure, or self-evidently modern way of building was far less important than careful attunement to ways of living — patterns that were, of course, of their time.  The buildings studied in the chapters that follow were designed to accommodate and express ways of living that were partly modern and partly traditional. Possibi- lities were projected, of course, patterns of life that might be present and may have occurred in the past; but ways of living nonetheless. One cannot overlook the impracticality of many of these buildings, even those that are most well known. If the Villa Savoye is to be seen as a machine for living, the term should be under- stood theatrically not mechanistically. Richard Wesley describes it as a “contriv- ance for producing the effect of dwelling.” But the tension between expression and accommodation is one of degree. Caroline Constant describes Eileen Gray’s focus on quotidian comfort and sensuality. This concentration resulted from her desire to overcome the dehumanizing qualities of architecture based on abstrac- tion. The alternative represented by E.1027 was care for human needs and the exi- gencies of life, a concern for intimacy that did not prevent enjoyment of the natural world. For Loos, the concern with inhabitation led to specific structural solutions that allowed for great differentiation of settings. The floors of the Miiller Villa can best be seen, Christopher Long argues, as stacked, rotating platforms; props to be elaborated and qualified by materials, dimensions, and furnishings that would suit intended purposes. His idea of each setting having its own character or mood is close to the argument put forth by Alvar and Aino Aalto at Villa Mairea, for there the modern way of building was not an exercise in standardized construction per se but in the formation of “character, identity, and milieu.” Scott Poole shows that the Villa was, indeed, innovative; not in the sense of earlier experiments with form and  geometry but rather in its ever more precise attunements to the habits of the human body, resting and moving within the building’s several settings.  Richard Neutra took a different approach to the task of accommodating prac- tical purposes. Edward Ford shows that the plans and sections of the VDL House did not specify the functions of rooms. Neutra thought of purposes and settings rather more “elastically.” But corresponding to this sense of spatial generality was a highly analytical — Neutra once criticized himself for being overly fond of 
“systematic consistency”* — sense of bodily movements, postures, perceptions, and emotions. One can certainly identify typical forms and geometries in his work, but he maintained that his chief goal was responsiveness to sensory motor conditions. A similarly generalized sense of rooms can be seen in Le Corbusier’s work, particularly Villa Savoye. Richard Wesley alludes to this in his comments on that building’s “free plan,” which could be described as a configuration that was free-from fully defined enclosures so that it would be free-for rather more idealized patterns, those of an artistic type of person, for whom creativity and modernity would be realized though mediated, conditioned, and engaged ways of making and living.  The fact that these buildings acknowledged the continuity of ways of living, the hybridity of building practices, and the dependence of interior on site conditions suggests that another sense of the architectural project had force in these years: inventive because involved.  Notes  1. The historical use of these terms, the near sameness and reversals of meanings, has been set out clearly by Joseph Rykwert in “Organic and Mechanical,” Res: A Journal of Anthro- pology and Aesthetics, no. 22 (Autumn 1992): 11-18.  2. This debate is presented in Bruno Reichlin, “The Pros and Cons of the Horizontal Window,” Daidalos 13 (1984): 65-79.  3. The term appears in Frank Lloyd Wright, The Living City (New York: Bramhall House, 1958), 113. Earlier usage expressed the same idea.  4. Richard Neutra, “Prefabrication and Personality,” in Nature Near (Santa Barbara: Capra Press, 1989), 144-57.  5. Richard Neutra, “‘Scientism’ and Art in a Social Architecture,” in Architecture of Social Concern (S40 Paulo: Gerth Todtmann, 1948), 217.  Bibliography  Lloyd Wright, Frank. The Living City. New York: Bramhall House, 1958.  Neutra, Richard. “‘Scientism’ and Art in a Social Architecture.” In Architecture of Social Concern. Sdo Paulo: Gerth Todtmann, 1948.  “Prefabrication and Personality.” In Nature Near. Santa Barbara: Capra Press, 1989.  Reichlin, Bruno. “The Pros and Cons of the Horizontal Window.” Daidalos 13 (1984): 65-79.  Rykwert, Joseph. “Organic and Mechanical.” Res: A Journal of Anthropology and Aesthetics, no. 22, (Autumn 1992): 11-18.  
GOETHEANUM  Rudolf Steiner Randall Ott  Rudolph Steiner, Second Goetheanum, Dornach, Switzerland, 1928.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
A first glimpse of Rudolf Steiner’s existing concrete Goetheanum near Basel still causes awe nearly a century after its inception. Resting with imposing bulk upon its hilltop, this organically sculptural monolith seems not so much dormant as quietly brooding. Nature itself here appears to ripple its musculature and consider rising up, yet instead settles back into a foreboding posture of watching and wait- ing. We sense a cryptic messenger of profound yet still untimely import — a gray gargoyle lodged in its aerie, holding a societal key for which the day-to-day world remains unready.  Steiner was a philosopher who also produced — like Ludwig Wittgenstein — a salient architectural act. Understanding such a building first necessitates that the intellectual stage be set. Today the Goetheanum serves as an active cultural center for, and the eminent physical expression of, Steiner’s guiding creed — anthroposo- phy. A knowledge of this underlying movement is essential in order to grasp what is effectively a cult building manifesting Steiner’s desire to remake society in his  own compelling image.  As well as being a philosopher, Steiner was a scientist, spiritualist, Goethe scholar, and one of the twentieth century’s most controversial and passionate reformers. Few aspects of human endeavor escaped this consummate polymath’s active study, mastery, and reconceptualization. A modern Uomo Universale, he examined medi- cine, organic farming, education, physical and mental therapy, banking, and social activism.’ Often he loosely attached the word “scientific” to his theories; he chal- lenged his listeners to verify empirically his suggestions.” Many of his progressive projects remain active today, particularly in schooling and in homes for children  and adults with developmental disabilities.* His missionary zeal to improve human- ity led to the founding of anthroposophy, an early twentieth-century offshoot of the wider late nineteenth-century esoteric movement of theosophy.  A phenomenally prolific author and speaker, Steiner’s collected writings run to several hundred volumes and his known lectures into the thousands. Eventually he expanded his horizons far beyond bookish or technical pursuits and directly embraced the arts, which were necessary to any totalizing, humanistic system and could help attract converts. Dramas of his own creation — mystery plays — became crucial to the early anthroposophical rite. Over time, he began working directly in other performance and visual modes: music, dance, verse, sculpture,  and painting. While lecturing, he often created astonishing blackboard drawings of colored chalk; many were preserved and now are considered worthy of exhibi- tion and monographic treatment in their own right.*  Of all the visual arts, architecture rose to become central; while not a profession- ally trained architect, Steiner developed considerable skill in design and awarded architecture pride of place in his aesthetics.” The Goetheanum enshrines his belief that buildings can heal and morally benefit humans.° Yet the world is perhaps even less ready for Steiner’s proposed transformation today than it was in his time. So, the weighty Goetheanum continues to sit above us in silent witness, a prophetic 
work now rendered a tourist destination yet still vaguely worrisome — rather like Paolo Soleri’s “Arcosanti” in the Arizona desert half a century later.”  Steiner's Path toward Anthroposophy  Born in 1861, in Kraljevic, Austria (now Croatia), Steiner was an early intellectual prodigy. At the Vienna Institute of Technology, he studied mathematics, physics, chemistry, botany, and biology, but also showed interest in the more humanistic realms of literature and philosophy. At the tender age of 21, on the recommenda- tion of a professor, Steiner was named natural sciences editor of a new edition of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe’s collected works in 1882. Goethe thus gave Steiner’s journey first focus. In 1888, Steiner was invited to Weimar’s Goethe archive, remaining there until 1896. While in residence, Steiner produced additional com- mentaries about Goethe’s scientific ideas and began writing books about Goethe’s wider philosophy. One of these, Steiner’s The Theory of Knowledge Implicit in Goethe’s World-Conception (1886), set out the epistemological foundation of Steiner’s mature thinking.  Goethe’s seminal study, The Metamorphosis of Plants (1790), had a particularly strong impact on Steiner. Here, Goethe searched for biological archetypes — core forms (Urpflanze) that metamorphose into the diversity of organic life. Goethe described how homologous plant organs evolve from cotyledon, to photosynthetic leaf, to a flower’s petals. Sequential growth became a key concept for Steiner, pro- voking a lifelong interest in movement, sculptural form, and metamorphosis.* Steiner came to see buildings as analogous to living organisms.” Such ideas were then in currency, as shown by “empathy theory” (Einfiihlungstheorie), which suggested that a building’s spatial movement can mimic and also directly affect people’s physical and psychic states and perceptions.’” Goethe had other diverse impacts on Steiner, his theory of color, for instance. Steiner, like Goethe, felt that color imparts inherent movement to static forms, causing them to approach or recede.’ But perhaps most importantly, Steiner came to share Goethe’s beliefin the physical and spiritual duality of nature; gradually he began to develop a holistic “cosmology” based on this prem- ise.'* Steiner began to perceive a grand synthesis of science and mysticism, which eventually he would term “spiritual science.” Through this he sought to provide a connection between the cognitive path of Western philosophical sciences and the inner, spiritual needs of the individual human being. While Steiner was still at the Goethe archive, the core tenets of what would become anthroposophy came for- ward in his book, The Philosophy of Freedom (1894), which focused upon paths toward achieving complete ethical and spiritual independence. The Goetheanum would eventually become that vision’s architectural manifestation.  Goethe was not a lone influence. Steiner edited a 12-volume edition of Arthur Schopenhauer. Contemporaneously he engaged in philosophical disputes over  
monism with the eminent biologist Ernst Haeckel.’? Steiner encountered Nietzsche while that philosopher was still living (though essentially catatonic) and published a penetrating book about Nietzsche’s struggles against his own times and on the concept of the Ubermensch.'* In 1897, Steiner moved to Berlin. The rapidly growing Theosophical Society there invited him to lecture on Nietzsche in 1900. This was a fortuitous interaction; Steiner encountered another influence as large as these German philosophers and scientists, though now from a religious perspective.  Late nineteenth-century theosophy as conceived by Madame Blavatsky attracted Steiner, with its emphasis on individuals and on how hidden knowledge or wisdom offers enlightenment and salvation. The theosophists’ esoteric belief in “corre- spondence” (that everything in nature is a sign that can be read), their stress upon the interplay of microcosm and macrocosm, their holding of all nature as alive, and their surety that nature best reveals the divine, all inspired him. By 1902, Steiner had become affiliated and taken up the post of General Secretary of the Society’s “German Section.”  From the outset, Steiner rather freely interpreted theosophy’s creed, inserting his own terminology for Blavatsky’s. Ever restive, by 1907 he began to pull subtly away and in 1909 his first lectures on overtly anthroposophical subjects com- menced. Steiner’s perception that the official theosophists were making a turn more toward Eastern spirituality generated the 1912 definitive break, for Steiner himself favored the “Christian-Rosicrucian” path within theosophy that drew from occidental esotericism more than eastern mysticism.’’ In 1913, the Anthroposoph- ical Society was founded in Berlin. Still an occult sect, it leaned more upon non- denominational Christian teachings.  Anthroposophy’s name derives literally from joining the Greek words for man — Anthyopos — and wisdom — Sophos.'® Within it, humankind and its perceptions are the center of all purpose. Humanity gives to nature self-consciousness. This reflects Goethe’s thoughts that by making humanity, God created the means to experience Himself in the beauty, fullness, and perfection of His own creation. Humanity becomes “the alpha and omega of existence.” Anthroposophy’s core goal is to dem- onstrate that human knowledge has no essential limits. Emphasis is given to per- sonal meditation, sentiments, and emotions. Humans must become spiritually free beings in order to develop their individuality. Steiner had long advocated a form of ethical individualism, but after his exposure to theosophy this now became explic- itly spiritual. He had little regard for established hierarchies of power. As one scholar notes: “In general terms, anthroposophy can be said to regard the history of the human race as the history of its liberation from spiritual and religious autho- rities on the one hand and from secular and political ones on the other,” adding, “The aim of development is liberation or freedom, so that each individual’s creative resources, individuality, autonomy and relationship to the cosmos can evolve.”””  Steiner’s diverse mental journey over these decades offered him glimmers of what the touchstones for an anthroposophical architecture might be:  
metamorphosis, organicism, empathy, sequential development, a fusion of all human skills, and a drive always toward individuality. It is no surprise that Steiner “railed against the degeneracy of most nineteenth-century architecture, with its eclectic plagiarism of former styles.”’* Upon turning toward housing his own movement, he sought a modern, synthetic statement as unique as his philosophy.  Germany was restive in the decade both before and after World War I and possessed a wealth of competing architectural trends; Steiner’s embracing of indi- viduality actually made him rather typical. Extreme diversity of aesthetic experi- mentation was heralded in a context full of conflict and visionary pronouncements. Closest to Steiner’s taste was German expressionism. Evolving out of National Romanticism and the Jugendstil (German art nouveau), expression- ism’s vocabulary affected architecture like all the arts. Peter Behrens’ own 1901 flowing house in Darmstadt, Hans Poelzig’s 1911 crystalline Water Tower and Exhibition Building in Posen, and Max Berg’s 1912-13 curvaceous and swelling concrete Centenary Hall in Breslau show the multiplicity of gestural attitudes in play. Utopian fantasies, like Bruno Taut’s Crystal Chain correspondences, were common and suddenly entered reality — as Taut’s faceted, organically-evolving 1914 Glass Pavilion in Cologne shows. Steiner’s desire to remake an “expressive” architecture was far from unique.  Steiner travelled in these artistic circles. His interests and interactions across Europe were broad; he had, for example, substantive links with Mondrian and neo- plasticism.'? He enjoyed many direct ties with German expressionism, such as with Paul Scheerbart, for whom he expressed great affection.*° A number of Steiner's thoughts directly paralleled Wassily Kandinsky’s — particularly the need to sense the spiritual in the material and the abstract.”’ Like expressionism, anthroposophy became inculcated with the drive toward creating a total aesthetic and social envi- ronment, following upon the nineteenth-century Romantics’ desire for architec- ture to lead the way toward a Gesamtkunstwerk.’? The Dornach realization programmatically resembled other early twentieth-century German examples like Joseph Olbrich’s 1899-1905 Mathildenhshe colony at Darmstadt.  Precursors and the Development of the First Goetheanum  The current, wholly concrete Goetheanum is the second to occupy the site.”’ It succeeds one of wood, which itself was derived from a prior headquarters scheme intended for elsewhere. Steiner began to design architecturally while still affiliated with theosophy, redecorating the interior of a Munich hall for a 1907 federation meeting. A faux painted “serial metamorphosis of seven column capitals” appeared there, a motif that would recur.”* Also, prior to splitting with theosophy, Steiner oversaw the realization of several ellipsoidal, inward-focusing shrines — a 1908 min- iature interior by E. A. Karl Stockmeyer in Malsch, Germany and a larger 1911-12 
crypt-like meeting hall in a Stuttgart cellar (ow destroyed) by Carl Schmid-Curtius.”’ Both illustrate how, throughout his career, Steiner worked col- laboratively using a cadré of trained architects.*° A columnar ambulatory sur- rounded a dome in each. A substantial program of drawn astral symbols decorated the Stuttgart dome — an early glimpse of the later drive at Dornach toward artistic fusion. Following these modest early constructions, the German theosophists realized that building numerous regional bases could delay the crea- tion of a true headquarters for the German Section.  Plans first emerged for just such a structure in central Munich in 1911, signed by Schmid-Curtius. Following the break and anthroposophy’s founding, efforts to build the proposed headquarters on behalf of the new creed commenced instead. Projected to occupy nearly an entire block, the complex had a central, double- domed hall surrounded on many sides by street-fronting wings containing support- ing functions. Steiner’s mystery plays required a raked auditorium and raised stage (the initial scheme was named the Johannesbau after a character in one of Steiner’s dramas).”” The hall was “scarab shaped,” composed by slicing off and interpene- trating two equal, half-spherical cupolas, one for seating and the other for perfor- mance.” The seam served as proscenium. Seven columns undergoing transformation again provided an ambulatory on each side around the auditorium portion and expanded its base. The mass’s axial character followed the trend of blending centralized and longitudinal aspects seen in the prior elliptical interiors. The surrounding rectangular structures gave urban privacy to the more sacral, cur- vaceous form, both protecting it from the uninitiated’s eyes and hoping to defuse a nearby Catholic congregation’s objections to the “potentially offensive” space.”” Widespread community opposition eventually prevented construction in Munich anyway.  An alternate site was quickly offered by a supporter in German-speaking Switzerland, at Dornach in the Birs Valley of the Jura Mountain foothills. Steiner accepted the Swiss offer and transferred the scheme’s core there. The rural hilltop location meant the urban wrapper could be peeled away and the ancillary services placed in a wide podium, lifting the hall even higher. In line with expressionist fash- ion, the central cult building became the looming, central Stadtkrone of a utopian garden colony. The hall now stood fully visible as an axial, creature-like mass on a modest acropolis overlooking the rolling landscape. Steiner felt such a visible axis, or spine, was the method of growth shown in all higher organisms, as opposed to expansion from a single center as with lower organisms.*° Construction began in September of 1913, with substantial exterior completion achieved a year later. Volunteers’ handcrafted, artisanal efforts were crucial. World War I greatly delayed the interior, but by 1920 the hall had opened and anthroposophical perfor- mances and rites had begun.  This first Dornach version relied on monolithic heavy timber for its main, lofty, double-domed hall and concrete for the low podium. The podium provided an entrance, with internal stairs leading upward. Despite the differences of  
constructional technique, Steiner integrated the levels by using similar, expres- sively flowing forms ultimately of art nouveau derivation (strong formal, ornamen- tal, and functional resemblances exist, for example, with Henry van de Velde’s realized theater at Cologne’s Werkbund Exhibition of 1914, the design of which was proceeding contemporaneously in 1913).’) Steiner envisioned architecture through direct sculpting: huge, hollow, papier maché-like models were constructed that allowed him great freedom plastically. Since anthroposophy was growing, the seating expanded and the two domes diverged in size.’* The larger swelled to 110 feet — four feet wider than St. Peter’s (the overall podium was 272 x 243 feet). For Steiner, the larger dome now represented the physical world, the smaller the spiritual — joint expressions of the “lower” versus “higher” self.”’  By now, Steiner was achieving quasi-mythical status within anthroposophy and, while still supported by Schmid-Curtius and others, began assuming wide latitude as an architect, artist, and client/patron.** He orchestrated all artistic aspects per- sonally; through sheer will, he forged a “total” environment. Steiner wed sinuously carved details, colored glass windows, diaphanous ceiling murals, lava-like flows of stairs, helmet-shaped drooping eaves, and sculpted wood column capitals expres- sing serial metamorphosis, which all came together into a startling unity of met- aphysical symbolism.” A 30-foot high wood figural group sculpted by Steiner himself and expressing the rite’s core tenets culminated the axis at the end of the stage’s circle. The rich interior truly became an anthroposophical temple of learning. Various harmonic ratios and geometrical systems (pentagrams and so forth) offered an underlying level of more abstract, formal control.** The building’s complex exterior form — varying domes, transept-like side wings, and podium — directly expressed the differing functions within, yet achieved an overall sense of an organized, bilaterally symmetrical, organic whole. Forms not only fulfilled function but imaged function — an “organic functionalism” in one scholar’s terms.”  Such visible, coordinated functionalism was intended to overcome any sense of alienation between user and environment. In line with this premise, after the build- ing’s completion Steiner suggested replacing the name Johannesbau with “Goetheanum,” honoring Goethe’s theory of how a coordinated metamorphosis of forms underlies natural creation.  The Second, Existing Goetheanum  After only several years of use, tragedy struck: a fire (likely arson) on New Year's Eve 1922 consumed everything but the concrete podium. Devastated, Steiner announced immediate reconstruction, but this time in concrete throughout. After initial plans to reuse the first Goetheanum’s scorched but surviving base, this was demolished and an entirely new beginning made. Steiner explained, “you cannot build in 1924 as you did in 1913 or 1914.”** Anthroposophy had evolved in the intervening years and so would its architecture. In line with 
Goethe, Steiner aimed not for repetition but for continual transformation and progression.””  Clues toward a new architectural conception came from several surrounding colony structures erected in the interim under Steiner’s influence.*” More than a dozen subsidiary buildings had appeared, clustering about the first Goetheanum and oriented toward it, rather like minor mosques magnetically focusing their axes toward a nearby Mecca. An approach avenue led out axially several hundred feet from the first Goetheanum’s entrance, but this remained largely an honorific path and ended simply in a view station. Access actually looped up from one side.*! The colony evolved in a loose ring in relation to the terrain sloping down from the first Goetheanum. Steiner exerted considerable architectural control over these second- ary buildings, wishing the colony to expressively form a “connected whole.”*” Most significant about them was the predominant use of exposed concrete. Steiner had taken to sculpting formal suggestions for these structures in plasticine, generating ever more aggressively expressionistic masses. The colony’s 1913-15 “Boiler House” was itself revolutionary; this was Steiner’s first purely concrete construc- tion.*? A pair of round domes in front formed coal-bunkers, while a tall stack erupted sculpturally between them with protuberances suggesting billowing smoke. Profoundly organic, it resembled “a resting stag with antlers.”*4 Numerous houses followed. Of these, the 1915-16 Haus Duldek most vividly anticipates Steiner’s second Goetheanum. Also of concrete, this “viscous mass” assumed a crouching, expressive power, with its angularly folded roof surfaces tensely sug- gesting imminent motion.””” Influence from Antoni Guadi’s 1906-10 ashlar Casa Mila in Barcelona is often suggested, though unproved. Links to Josef Chochol’s 1912-13 cubist, stucco-rendered Villa Kovarovic in Prague are likelier, as Steiner was well aware of Czech Cubism. *° Closest in affect is Erich Mendelsohn’s slightly later 1917-21 Einstein Tower near Potsdam, which shares Haus Duldek’s literally animalian curves, ground hugging posture and pronounced bilateral axis.*” Such resemblances suggest at least Steiner's cognizance of and responsiveness to works of his times.  The second, existing Goetheanum was begun in 1924 and daringly fused such ideas into one of modernism’s most evocatively personal and photogenic perfor- mances. If the initial building’s uniqueness relied on interior exoticism, the second was energized through its exterior muscularity.** Concrete’s greater plasticity over wood let Steiner sculpt a turbulent yet still symmetrical massing, which projected organic references, but also in its stark axiality generated more eerie readings such as a “grey sphinx” or “bald death’s head.”*? A remarkable changeability of profile and mien suffused its rigid posturing.”° Steiner stressed how such dynamic tensions or atectonic effects resulted not from any literal borrowings from nature but rather — again in concert with Goethe — from a deeper understanding of nature’s abiding theme of metamorphosis and growth.”? Steiner did, however, acknowledge direct inspiration from the mountainous countryside.’ For the second Goetheanum Steiner consciously sought greater harmony with the site, quite literally reflecting  
the Gempen Ridge of the Jura Mountains in the immediate background.” Locally the structure has become known as the rock face (“Fluh”).”*  A gigantic, exterior, plasticine model became the definitive statement of Steiner’s intentions.” Illness gradually weakened and overtook him; his involve- ment grew sporadic and ended with his untimely death in 1925, in the construction shed adjacent to the Dornach worksite. Perhaps had he lived longer the existing Goetheanum’s interiors may have equaled the first’s elaboration. Instead he left behind an awesome shell, which finally opened in 1928 (others fitted it out exten- sively over subsequent decades and transformed it, a process that continues to this day).*° Contemporaneous reactions were mixed. Coming a decade after expres- sionism’s apogee, this heavily earthbound, elephant-toned, atavistic mass con- trasted with canonical functionalism’s newly emerging trends toward lightness, whiteness, abstraction, mechanical repetition, and industry. By the time it was fin- ished, it spoke more of the “other” within modernism, something quite different from what would become the prevailing International Style.””  If anything, in moving toward greater plastic unity the new massing conceals functionality.** Steiner’s main auditorium and stage are subsumed within a 50% larger bulk that houses enhanced ancillary spaces. The side wings rise higher, fus- ing with the upper eaves. A continuously folding and bulging roof covers all, itself coated with diminutive slate tiles resembling a faintly granulated layer of protective dust that some temperamental pachyderm has thrown up upon its back to defend against the sun’s rays. Gestural motion is greatest toward the front entrance, with its protruding “jaw,” and gradually lessens toward the rear administrative and sup- port zones.”  Reflecting Steiner's increasing emphasis on larger-scale theatrics, an expressively “stage-like, set-like” character now becomes pervasive — one that may formally reflect contemporaneous theatrical and movie developments in Germany like the expressionist designs for the 1920 film The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari.© After the first Goetheanum was realized, anthroposophy’s focus on mystery plays was sup- plemented with the development of “eurythmy” — an expressive dance having aspects of performance art and movement therapy.*' This drastically altered the stage’s operations, shifting the emphasis more toward a traditional layout with wings and fully functional stage machinery. Since the original domed and rounded stage had poorly accommodated this, the new stage became rectangular. The audi- torium also now became trapezoidal, though in contrast to normal theatrical prac- tice it was oriented with the broad side of the seating’s wedge facing toward the stage. Longstanding acoustical problems resulted. Some suggest that the reversed trapezoidal form was chosen so that “each person experiences an increased sense of being a part of what is happening on stage.” But this choice also likely derived, once again, from Steiner's study of van de Velde’s work.” Another change from the first Goetheanum was the inclusion of a second podium level. Anthroposophy’s popularity had resulted in constant tours, which interrupted auditorium rehearsals; a true practice stage was necessary. This filled out an additional lower floor. 
Visitors now had to climb several sets of stairs to reach the auditorium. Steiner sculpted this into a Piranesian interior flow worthy of Garnier’s Paris Opéra.” Overall, the second Goetheanum’s effect is much less directly cabalistic about the symbols of anthroposophy’s core rites than the earlier version and more expres- sive of a deeper drive toward plastic unity of volumetric organization. Claims exist that the basic forms both in section and plan are still geometrically derived from a circle, yet the perceptual results now seem far removed from such coolly abstract intents.°°  For a decade Steiner had sought a fusion of the artistic and the scientific; the second Goetheanum achieved this. Once again, he enjoyed strong technical help. Ernst Aisenpries served as principle architectural collaborator and the structural engineer was Olé-Falk Ebbell. Both participated in the first building.” The chal- lenge of moving from plasticine maquette to full-scale concrete realization was enormous — complex static equations were necessary and the working drawings of the reinforced concrete and forming were themselves expressive masterpieces of depiction.“ Wood scaffolding and shuttering of extraordinary convolution were required on site; great care was taken as the exposed concrete would forever directly express the timber’s marks.” Thin laths were bent when wet over doubly curving forms (precisely due to this process’s difficulties and enormous costs, Men- delsohn’s Einstein Tower was actually built traditionally of brick, covered over later with concrete render). The second Goetheanum gave concrete’s sculptural potential its first full realization, a significant technical achievement in and of itself beyond the aesthetic rewards.”° In essence, a wood construction of equal complex- ity to the original Goetheanum had to be erected once more, only then to be shorn away. The first building was realized from the inside out, the second from the out- side in. The second’s elaborate wood cocoon was the work of master carpentry foreman Heinrich Liedvogel, who also was skilled from his participation in the con- struction of the first building.”’ The lack of regularity anywhere was revolutionary. Submerged within, discrete concrete trusses do span the wide hall and land on major pillars, but the reading is of a radically continuous, undulating mass. The progressiveness of the attempt (and the faulty mixing of some concrete) still results in the need for constant patches and repairs today.” A monumentally cohesive if differentiated entity replaces any sense of an assembled construction.  This drive toward the monolithic reflected Steiner’s desire now to go beyond mere functional accommodation in architectural expression and achieve a deeper resonance with the very processes of life itself. The second Goetheanum became an obsessive portrayal of his notion of the “living wall.””’ Walls were not to be mere barriers or acts of enclosure. One scholar notes how when seen from the inside, “The [Goetheanum’s] doubly curved surface embodied for Steiner both the con- vexity produced by peripheral, ‘cosmic’ formative forces of nature working inward and the concavity resulting from the polar centrifugal forces working outward.””* This represented the basic, foundational Urphdnomen of life, as detailed by Goethe. The molding of one form from another fascinated Steiner. He spoke of “eversion”  
(Umstiilpung), the turning inside out of a form as a cosmic principle; the relation ofa concrete construction’s cavity-like formwork to the eventual poured mass reflected such dialectics. Hints of continual metamorphosis infused all the Goetheanum’s elements; Steiner felt the designer must cajole discrete architectural forms into a flux of gradual transformation, as in music. Architecturally, load and loaded fused. Discrete members did emerge (such as in the two colossal, free-standing columns flanking the front of the entrance) but then melted back into the surrounding matrix.”” This expressed the drama of our own muscular struggle with gravity. Windows (some, here again, with colored glass) were never allowed to stand in repetitive arrays, but instead became groupings of irregularly shaped openings involving rather gratuitous slants and tucks — Steiner’s way of instilling life and movement through “the inclining gesture.””°  Impacts and Progeny  Much contentiousness attends any attempt to ascribe the second Goetheanum to German Expressionism.” Steiner’s most committed followers react negatively to suggestions that outside formal influences or conceptual constellations affected him at all, and prefer to discuss his work in isolation as purely reverential hagiog- raphy.”* Even independent architectural historians who place the second version firmly within expressionism maintain that it had no sources or progeny.” Yet any belief that Steiner achieved his architecture autonomously simply detracts from his real achievement: his fusion of diverse influences into a personal and, ulti- mately, seminal statement. These influences far transcended the formal. It is a les- son to all architects to see how the comprehensiveness of his intellectual inquiries did not divert but rather fed his aesthetics. What really separated Steiner from other German expressionist architects was the systematic depth and breadth of his learning and societal vision, and how this attracted a broad enough range of fervent supporters to allow his design actual realization and testing.  Eventual progeny were numerous, though this had to wait several decades for mid-twentieth-century International Style Modernism’s force to wind down. Hugo Haring held theoretical positions that seem indebted to Steiner, and the two were linked through common anthroposoph friends.” Walter Gropius’ 1927 Total The- ater project approximates aspects of the first Goetheanum’s plan. A young Le Cor- busier visited the second Goetheanum in 1926, and was said to be impressed.*' The much later expressive plasticity and béton brut of Corbusier's nearby 1954 Notre Dame du Haut at Ronchamp likely has some root there. Hans Sharoun once described the second Goetheanum as the most significant building of the first half of the twentieth century, and its influences upon his own masterwork, the 1956-63 Berlin Philharmonie, seem compelling.*” Further relations could be argued regarding Dominikus Béhm’s more crystalline 1963-73 Pilgrimage Church of Mary, Queen of Peace, in Neviges Velbert. Distant comparisons have even been made to 
Frank Gehry. Some who acknowledge such links nonetheless dismiss them as merely “formal,” without stating how that undermines these relations’ importance.”  An interesting distinction from many such examples is the direct, expressed axi- ality of Steiner's work.** The Philharmonie’s ground plan, in comparison, has a carefully cloaked axis: Scharoun’s performance hall for acoustic reasons is rigor- ously symmetrical within, yet smaller, appended masses of fire stairs and other ser- vices are used consciously to mask this fact from the exterior.*’ Scharoun goes to great effort to maintain a studied asymmetry of external impact. The same could be said of Alvar Aalto’s many auditoria, where the sensibility toward an overall asym- metry of form dominates, despite the occasional sculptural resemblances to Stei- ner’s work. Steiner, different from these later modernists, wanted to express literally an axial spine within the creatures he created. A closer resemblance to his attitude is shown perhaps in the symmetrical, animal-like character of Eero Saarinen’s 1962 TWA Terminal in New York City.*°  Within the contemporary anthroposophical movement, Steiner's architecture remains a force. The Swede Erik Asmussen with great sensitivity translates aspects of Steiner’s work into the Swedish wood building tradition.*” An entire anthropo- sophical colony by this architect’s hand has sprung up in Jarna, near Stockholm.* Many related cases exist elsewhere across the globe.*” Outside the anthroposoph- ical movement, other architects today also still acknowledge direct inspiration from Steiner, such as Hungary’s Imre Makovecz.””  Notes  * Wladyslaw |FAL., GFDL, (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html) or CC-BY-SA-3.0 (creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/)], via Wikimedia Commons.  1. Dennis Sharp, Modern Architecture and Expressionism (New York: George Braziller, 1966), 145. Steiner developed a method of “ethical banking” and set up anthroposophical social and finance institutions.  2. Steiner founded, for example, a “School of Spiritual Science” intended to research and study anthroposophy itself.  3. Some would ascribe contemporary approaches to “biodynamic” architecture to Steiner. The Waldorf system of schooling later evolved into a worldwide, prominent network in education. The homes for the disabled include those of the Camphill Movement.  4. Rudolf Steiner and Walter Kugler, ed., and Johanna Collis, trans., Blackboard Drawings 1919-1924 (London: Rudolph Steiner Pr., 2003).  5. Steiner wrote: “Architecture stands on the earth in a central position. ‘A spiritual being’ on one hand, inspiring mankind; on the other a solid structure of brick or concrete serv- ing a sensible earthly purpose.” Sharp, Modern Architecture, 148.  6. Gary J. Coates, Erik Asmussen, Architect (Stockholm: Byggférlaget, 1997), 161.  7. Like Steiner, Soleri developed in the 1960s a holistic theory of how humans should live. The Arcosanti project provides a “demonstration model” of how this concept of “arcology” — a mixture of architecture and ecology — works. 
1 SCHOCKEN DEPARTMENT STORE  Erich Mendelsohn  Kathleen James-Chakraborty  —_—e a ry  Erich Mendelsohn, Schocken Department Store, Berlin, 1926.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt.  schmi © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
“THE ART OF A MASTER”  It was a late spring or early summer day in 1926 when the architect Erich Mendelsohn, almost certainly with the music of Johann Sebastian Bach playing in the background, made this series of sketches for the facade of a department store in the southern German city of Stuttgart." Mendelsohn, who shared a birthday with Bach and was married to a talented cellist, made at least one sketch for the store on the back of a program for a concert of Bach’s music in which his wife performed.” He often sketched while listening to music on the gramophone, and preferred the Renaissance and baroque technique of counterpoint to Romantic harmony.’ Show- ing the building from four different points of view, and also including locations for two flights of stairs within one corner tower, the sheet illustrates the degree to which the architect conceived of it in the round. He drew three of the perspectives in black charcoal; the fourth and largest one, however, is executed largely in red, with black used only to underline the bands of the stair tower. This corresponded more closely with the color of the brick, out of which the steel-framed building, which was completed in 1928, was eventually faced.  Quickly and skillfully drawn, the sheet stands at the center of interconnected stories about the Neues Bauen (New Building), as the commercial and residential architecture erected in a bold and inexpensive new style was termed in Germany during the 1920s and early 1930s; about Erich Mendelsohn, who was one of its most famous and fashionable practitioners; and about the impact that industrialization has had on consumerism and thus in turn upon architectural and urban space.‘ Because both Mendelsohn and his client, Salman Schocken, were politically pro- gressive Zionists who would emigrate to Jerusalem and the United States, this is also a story about the role that German Jews played in the creation of both modernity and modernism.’  The physical evidence offered here also complicates received wisdom about the modern movement in architecture in crucial ways. It demonstrates the importance of individual creativity within an approach toward architecture that has often been understood to be objective and functional. Furthermore, although the urban con- text is implied rather than shown, it proves how seriously Mendelsohn took a very specific site in a very specific city. This is a welcome reminder of how attuned to the existing urban fabric Neues Bauen almost always was.  The Drawing  In this drawing the balance of pragmatism and imagination, which Mendelsohn would have phrased in terms of functionalism and dynamism, that characterized 
Neues Bauen during the brief German economic boom of 1924 to 1929 as well as its immediate aftermath, are both clearly on display. The tension between the volumes is indicative of this larger tension, as well as of the contrapuntal compo- sition techniques Mendelsohn admired in both baroque music and contemporary art and architecture.  What exactly are we looking at? The top sketch shows the Eberhardt- and Steinstrafe facades of the building. Lined by streetcar tracks, the Eberhardtstrape front was the most important. Furthermore the curves of the street and the intersections that framed the full block site ensured that the two most prominent corners, each of which could be glimpsed at a considerable distance, were located at either end of this facade. In this sketch Mendelsohn contrasts the curved stair tower anchoring the far facade with the sharp corner with Steinstrafle and the second, taller, and more enclosed rectangular tower that punctuated the transition from the high front and lower rear stories of the block. In the next, much smaller sketch, Mendelsohn envisions the building from the corner of Stein- and Breitestrafe. Par- adoxically Breite or “Broad” street was in fact the much narrower rear facade of the building. Only at its far end does the height of the building begin once again to step up. By the third, also relatively small sketch, Mendelsohn’s design strategy is appar- ent. He is wrapping a single facade treatment around each corner, in this case of Breite- and Hirschstrafe. This one, however, is the least developed of the four; it remains the single aspect of the building least documented in the surviving photo- graphs. In the fourth drawing he returns to the key Eberhardtstrafe facade, now viewed from the crucial corner with Hirschstrafe. Befitting its key role in the design, this is the largest sketch; the red color of most of the drawing adds additional visual prominence.  The following year Mendelsohn wrote of the importance of such sketches to his design process:  I see the site, the surface area, the space above it. Generally, the architectural idea already appears spontaneously at this moment. | fix it in the form of a sketch. This means that the knowledge, the exact information about the actual requirements enters one’s subconscious; the surface area comes to life as a ground plan, the empty space as a spatial shape, a two- and three-dimensional experience at the same time.  keep this first sketch. For, as an experience, as a vision, it has concentrated reality, plan, and structure into one architectonic organism. An inspiration, an action of creation.®  Although the subject of the drawing is immediately identifiable to anyone famil- iar with photographs of the realized building, the two smaller sketches of the plan of the curvilinear stair tower remind us that Mendelsohn had not yet in fact fina- lized all the details of his design. In the end he nestled the flights of stairs within the curve of the tower, rather than back from it as shown here. In fact, this is not the only way in which these sketches differ from the final result. The sense of certainty 
conveyed through the rapid movement of the charcoal over the paper is in this sense an illusion. Published plans reveal that the corner on Breite- and Hirschstrape never projected forward in the way shown here; the half-dozen bands of windows in the cylindrical stair tower grew to 16 in the final scheme, where, except on the ground level, they no longer corresponded in any way to the number of stories behind them. Nor are the sketches detailed enough to show the considerable atten- tion Mendelsohn eventually paid the glazing of each corner treatment, the alternat- ing stripes of brick and local stone that tied the two stair towers together, or the way in which he punctuated the Eberhardtstrafe facade with bold letters spelling out the Schocken name. These were illuminated from within in the dematerialized night view that was as central to the building’s impact as its more sedate daytime appearance. Finally, the sketches give no sense of the way in which Mendelsohn sensitively addressed the slope of the site, which fell a full story along the length of the Hirschstrafe facade. As was characteristic for him, Mendelsohn resolved many of these details through the less glamorous means of a model, although even after this was built he and his client battled over whether to add a single recessed story, as Mendelsohn favored, or further bulk, as Schocken desired.  The Building  The pair of speeches that architect and client gave in October 1926 at the opening of an earlier Schocken store in Nuremberg demonstrated the degree to which each nonetheless understood the goals of the other. Schocken declared in words that were undoubtedly inspired by his appreciation of Mendelsohn’s sketches, “The art of a matter shows itself in the ability for selection and reduction, in the ability to refrain from the inessential, to restrict material, to recognize the supporting col- umns, to shape what is needed with a few strong lines.”” Mendelsohn in turn defined the spirit of the age in terms of “Bare knees and a sporty ‘do/Radio and film/Automobile and aeroplane, specialty shops and department stores.” It demanded, he concluded, buildings designed in the same spirit. “You do demand sincerity? From your friends, from everyone? But you want to be tricked by the things around you, by your house, your builders? Are those somehow things that do not belong to you — your electric stove and razor? So efficient, so simple, so obvious ... Only one who has no rhythm in the body — do not think of jazz, be serious — does not understand the metallic swing of the machine, the humming of propellers, the enormous new vitality that stimulates, blesses, and makes us creative.”*  Mendelsohn achieved this rhythm in Stuttgart through the skillful way in which he exploited the dynamic potential of the functional steel frame. In addition to allowing the complete glazing of the corner stair tower, this also permitted him to cantilever the shop windows along Eberhardtstrafe forward of the supporting col- umns. This in turn created a band of shop windows interrupted only by an 
entrance, to connect the two stair towers at ground level. The effect was especially impressive at night, when the carefully conceived figure ground relationship of the day view was reversed and the building appears to sit atop an illuminated void.  Little of this architectural excitement permeated the straightforward display of goods on the building’s interior, however. Most earlier department stores were arranged around atria, which announced the existence of multiple floors of goods and helped illuminate deep spaces. Mendelsohn eliminated this feature, tucking only a small light court — insisted upon by the building authorities — into the rear of the building. Instead he relied heavily upon electric light. He canted the column grid, which featured four rows parallel to Eberhardtstrage and a further three parallel to Breitestrafe. The existence of this grid, around which he wrapped many of the sales counters, was later given as an excuse to replace the building with a more up- to-date one featuring clear spans. At the time, however, the quasi-industrial char- acter of the interiors contributed to the chain’s image of no-frills goods and prices. Nonetheless, the fittings for Stuttgart were the most detailed Mendelsohn designed for Schocken. They included a prow-like mezzanine from which managers could observe the sales force, an element that he accentuated by ringing the ceiling above it with exposed light bulbs.  The Architect  The Stuttgart design emerged from a process that was characteristic of Mendel- sohn. More than any of his contemporaries allied with either Neues Bauen or the broader Modern Movement of which it was a part, despite having lost on eye to cancer in 1921 Mendelsohn relied on the perspective sketch as the crucial stage in his design process. Beginning in 1914 the architect, who was born in Allenstein in 1887 and had been educated in Berlin and Munich, began to draw visions of a new industrial architecture, whose boldly sculptured forms were inspired in part by his admiration of the increasingly abstract paintings of Wassily Kandinsky and other painters associated with the Blue Rider group.’ Although he did not contribute to the Arbeitsrat fir Kunst’s exhibition of unknown architects, held in Berlin in 1919, and did not join the Crystal Chain, initiated the same year, Mendelsohn shared with many expressionist contemporaries a predilection for curves that could be labeled organic.’ Mendelsohn’s drawings also fostered the sense of drama that, while based in part upon his interest in experimental theater, was extremely effec- tive commercially. No one realized this better than Schocken, who proved to be Mendelsohn’s most sage, if also his most consistently demanding client, and who saw the sketches when they were first put on public display in Berlin in 1919. By this time Mendelsohn had already received the commission for what became his breakthrough building, the Einstein Tower in Potsd am."  Mendelsohn’s only attempt to build in the highly expressionist style of drawings that originally had no relationship to function and little to structure, the Einstein  
Tower was largely complete by the late summer of 1921, although the economic crisis delayed the installation of its interior furnishings and scientific equipment. The building, whose eccentric shape was intended to be a monument to the con- troversial new theory of relativity, and to express the possible conversion of mass into energy postulated by it, also housed a highly pragmatic observatory and lab- oratory for relativity-related research. Erected in part out of brick covered with stucco, rather than entirely out of reinforced concrete as its architect had originally intended, its eccentric forms were also inspired by art nouveau and Futurist sculpture.  The publication of the Einstein Tower in the popular press made Mendelsohn one of the most famous, if not infamous, of the new generation of German archi- tects, which also included Walter Gropius, Ernst May, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, and Bruno Taut. Especially after the Bauhaus exhibition of 1923 and the stabiliza- tion of the German economy the following year, thanks to the implementation of the Dawes Plan, these architects abandoned their earlier, often utopian experi- ments, in favor of a more sober or objective approach, which featured low-cost construction infused with industrial imagery and inspired as well by De Stijl and constructivism. Where most adherents of Neues Bauen focused on the design of housing estates on the suburban fringes of Berlin and Frankfurt in particular, Mendelsohn’s early fame generated a slew of commercial commissions. These came almost exclusively from Jewish businessmen like Schocken and the publisher and real-estate developer Hans Lachmann-Mosse, the father of the renowned his- torian George Mosse.’* Such men recognized the advertising merits of Mendelsohn’s architectural flair and were also proud of his association with Ein- stein, the most celebrated member of their community.  They also appreciated the first-hand familiarity with the latest international architecture that informed Mendelsohn’s designs. He found that the composition of baroque music, one of Germany’s most venerated cultural traditions, correlated almost exactly with the art and architecture he had seen in the Netherlands in 1921 and again in 1923, and in the Soviet Union in 1925 and twice in 1926. Here he made contact with architects, who excelled at juxtaposing abstract rectangular forms. These included J. J. P. Oud, already a proponent of De Stijl geometries, and the constructivists, E] Lissitzky, Konstantin Melnikov, and the Vesnin brothers.'? This was not the only fruit of these trips. Somewhat paradoxically, Mendelsohn’s cap- italist graphics were undoubtedly inspired in part by Soviet political propaganda, especially as integrated by the Vesnin brothers into their 1924 project for the Len- ingrad headquarters of the Soviet newspaper, Pravda.  Even more crucial to the respect accorded to the architect by his commercial clients was the trip he made to the United States in 1924 and the book he published about it two years later, Amerika: Bilderbuch eines Architekten (America: Picturebook of an Architect). Mendelsohn’s itinerary, which took him from Manhattan to four Mid-Western cities, adhered to that of the German businessmen who sailed across the Atlantic to observe first-hand the factories, department stores, and office 
buildings, which were bigger and bolder than their European counterparts.’* He made a pilgrimage to Taliesin to meet Frank Lloyd Wright. Mendelsohn was scarcely the only German cultural figure of the day to advance his standing at home this way; he sailed over with Fritz Lang, the director of Metropolis. Mendel- sohn was awed by the speed of American traffic, the brightness of the night light- ing, the height of the skyscrapers, and the bare volumes of the industrial vernacular. He was appalled, however, by the historicist veneers that fronted the towers he photographed, and dreamed of a more straightforward expression of their most modern qualities.  The commercial function and downtown location of the Schocken store, and Mendelsohn’s other department stores, office buildings, and single cinema set them slightly apart from the other most celebrated examples of Neues Bauen, even as they established new prototypes for these building types that would be influential for decades around the world. The Stuttgart store bears comparison with the Weissen- hof Housing Estate erected in 1927 on a suburban hillside only a few miles away by an international who’s who of avant-garde architects led by Mies van der Rohe, with whom Mendelsohn had had a falling out and whose invitation to participate he consequently refused.’* As befits its suburban setting, the Weissenhof buildings, which were open to the public as an exhibition before the civil servants they were built to house moved in, are arrayed in a manner influenced by the garden city movement, with considerably more space between them than was available to Mendelsohn. Another significant difference was the choice of exterior materials. Although some of the contributions to the Weissenhof were also steel-framed, they were all clad in stucco, whereas Mendelsohn chose more durable brick and stone, just as he eschewed the fashionable tubular metal furnishing on view throughout the Weissenhof. Only Hans Scharoun’s contribution to the Weissenhof shared Mendelsohn’s dynamism. The composition of the contributions to the housing exhibition were either more subtle or, in some cases, simply more banal.  The Client  The balance of pragmatism and panache that made the Schocken store such a com- pelling addition to the Stuttgart cityscape was greatly appreciated by the building’s client. A decade older than his architect, Schocken and his brother Simon owned a chain of department stores that during the second half of the 1920s expanded from its original base in Saxony across southern Germany.’® Acutely aware of the role played by publicity, Schocken employed Mendelsohn for only the most visible of the new stores: an expansion of an existing building in Nuremberg, which opened in 1926; the building in Stuttgart; and another in Chemnitz, which was completed in 1930. Smaller stores in cities like Cottbus featured novel architecture but were consigned to local architects, whose work was less likely to be featured in trade journals and architecture magazines.’” 
Few building types were more modern than the department stores that, begin- ning in the middle of the nineteenth century, anchored new entirely commercial districts, first in New York and Paris, and eventually in cities around the world. Here for the first time the fruits of the industrial revolution, as well as of countless sweatshops and seamstresses working at home, were made available at fixed prices to an anonymous public, who did not need to avail of a long standing relationship with the shopkeeper to see what was on offer or find themselves a bargain. More than the factories in which many of their wares were made, department stores were the place where middle-class consumers were introduced to new technology, whether that of elevators and escalators, or new goods, such as radios and gramo- phones, not to mention the latest fashions.’*  One of the most modern aspects of department stores was the degree to which they were run, staffed, and frequented by women. For a decade after the death in 1877 of her husband Aristide, Marguerite Boucicaut ran Bon Marché in Paris.'? Although the leading administrative positions were more often reserved for men, many staff were women, not least because it was presumed that their attentiveness to fashion would help win sales from female customers.”° Sales girls, like stenographers and telephone operators, numbered prominently among the New Women of the Weimar Republic, who challenged established social norms, most famously by bobbing their hair and shortening their skirts, but also by earning independent incomes, taking unprecedented control over their romantic lives, and constituting a large part of the audience for a novel new form of entertainment, the cinema.”? Many department stores catered to women by offering them respectable places to lunch and take tea, as well as clean public toilets.  Department stores arrived relatively late in Germany; the big chains such as Kar- stadt, Tietze, and Wertheim began to flourish only at the end of the nineteenth century. With the exception of Karstadt, most German department stores were founded by Jewish families. From the beginning they attracted opposition — much of it frankly anti-Semitic — for the way in which they undercut smaller, established businesses.” In part to demonstrate their respectability, in part because fashion was a crucial part of their business, by the 1890s German departments store owners were paying careful attention to architecture. Bernhard Sehring’s Hermann Tietz store in Berlin of 1899-1900, which featured the city’s first curtain wall facade, Alfred Messel’s Wertheim store on the same city’s Leipzigerplatz, erected in stages between 1896 and 1906, and Joseph Maria Olbrich’s Leonard Tietz store in Dus- seldorf, completed in 1909, were among the most innovative and admired build- ings of their day.  Schocken’s business model was to keep prices low and quality high, and to focus on supplying staples to the broadest possible array of consumers. He paid rigorous attention to the bottom line, turning to Mendelsohn and Neues Bauen because he realized how much less expensive this industrially-oriented architecture would be than its overtly palatial predecessors. No one would have more appreciated the 
degree to which Mendelsohn based the Eberhardtstraffe facade on the reinforced concrete framed factories by Albert Kahn in which Model T Fords were being pro- duced with celebrated efficiency, which he had visited in 1924. At the dedication of the Stuttgart store Schocken declared in words that showed his appreciation of the latest art and architecture, “We are building from the point of view of the Neue Sachlichkeit [new objectivity or sobriety, a term often used to describe contempo- rary German painting]. Architecture is a purely economic affair; all technical per- fections are exploited in the examination of the beauty of the whole, which results technically from the new means [of production].””?  The Schocken chain was “Arianized” in 1938; only in 1949 was it returned to Schocken. Like his architect, he had lived in exile in Jerusalem, where Mendelsohn built him a house and library, and in the United States. Both Mendelsohn and Schocken renounced the creation of the commercial spectacle at which they had so excelled and turned much of their attention to sustaining the endangered com- munity to which they so proudly belonged. For Schocken, the department store business proved only a way-station to a career of even greater importance. In 1930, he founded the Schocken Press, which published the complete works of Kafka, and bought the Israeli newspaper Haaretz seven years later. He supported Jewish writers, including the poet Else Lasker-Schiiler, the Nobel prizewinner Shmuel Yosef Agnon, and the philosopher Gerschom Scholem, and hired Hannah Arendt as an editor.* Mendelsohn specialized in the last years of his life in the design of modernist synagogues, establishing the prototypes for the plethora of Jewish houses of worship doubling as community centers that were erected in sub- urbs across the United States in the first decades after World War I.”’ The store on which they had collaborated so successfully was demolished in 1960. Labeled as outmoded by the new owners who had purchased the business from Schocken in 1953, four years after it was returned to him, it was immediately replaced with a building designed by Egon Eiermann.”°  Notes  * Courtesy of Staatliche Museen zu Berlin — Preufiischer Kulturbesitz.  1. [thank the Irish Research Council for the Humanities and Social Science for funding this research. The drawings related to this commission can be found in the Mendelsohn Archive in the Kunstbibliothek in Berlin; much of the correspondence related is pre- served in the Salman Schocken Archives, Schocken Library, Jerusalem. They are repro- duced in Bruno Zevi, Erich Mendelsohn: The Complete Works (Basel: Birkhauser, 1999), 142-5. The key contemporary publications were Karl Konrad Diissel, “Drei Kaufhauser Schocken in Niirnberg, Stuttgart, und Chemnitz von Erich Mendelsohn,” Moderne Bau- formen 11 (1930): 480-2, and Erich Mendelsohn, Das Gesamtschaffen des Architektens (Berlin: Rudolf Mosse Verlag, 1930), 150-66. The English edition of the latter is Erich Mendelsohn: The Complete Works (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1992). The 
E.1027  Eileen Gray  Caroline Constant  Eileen Gray, E.1027 living room, Roquebrune-Cap Martin, France, 1929.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
THE ART OF DIALOGUE  During the 1920s, Anglo-Irish designer Eileen Gray and Romanian architect Jean Badovici, editor of the French avant-garde periodical L’Architecture Vivante, wrote a series of essays in dialogue form.’ These constitute an alternative to the mani- festo, the principle literary means by which Modern Movement architects attempted to argue for the “universal” validity of their approach. The most signif- icant of Gray’s architectural collaborations with Badovici, the house E.1027 in Roquebrune-Cap Martin, France (1926-29), operates in dialogue with Le Corbu- sier’s “Five Points of a New Architecture,” an early version of which Badovici published in L’Architecture Vivante.’  Working in Dialogue  Whereas Eileen Gray’s early lacquer work and interiors were motivated by the sensual luxury associated with the French decorative arts, she derived the non- heroic aspects of her subsequent architectural production from a critical engage- ment with the work of her avant-garde contemporaries. While challenging aspects of Le Corbusier’s theoretical approach to the modern dwelling, she simul- taneously distilled ideas from Adolf Loos and the advocates of De Stijl, among others. Rather than reflecting the limitations of Gray’s a-theoretical stance, this reliance on certain leaders of the architectural avant-garde was a necessary corol- lary to her own creative act. By working within the framework of particular Mod- erm Movement spatial devices in her early buildings and projects, Gray sought to overcome the dehumanizing qualities associated with abstraction by prioritizing the subjective qualities of experience. Rather than begin her designs from a set of theoretical precepts declared in a manifesto — the approach favored by her heroic counterparts — Gray challenged the totalizing aims of such examples of contem- porary theorizing by working within and expanding upon selective aspects of Modern Movement spatial principles to engage issues of quotidian comfort and sensuality.  Dialogue differs from manifesto, the unequivocal statement of architectural principles that was the preferred form of written exposition for the architectural avant-garde. Manifestos are written, not to interpret the world, but to change it. In the architectural manifesto the form of the built environment is interpreted anew. Although written to shock —to endorse change — manifestos ultimately encourage conformity and orthodoxy through their exhortative tone. A prominent example is Le Corbusier’s Vers une architecture (1923), structured around a dialectic between the engineer’s aesthetic and architecture. 
Gray and Badovici were inspired to engage in dialogue by Paul Valéry’s “Epautinos ou UVarchitecte” of 1921.° Unlike the dialectic method instituted by the ancient Greeks, which involved a debate between two opposing points of view to attain a superior form of knowledge, Valéry’s twentieth-century dialogue is a mode of exchange that is infinite in tone, scope, and number of variables. Whereas the aim of dialectic reasoning is a higher truth achieved via a synthesis of opposing concepts, a dialogue elaborates the ever-shifting relationship between ideas, a gen- erative exchange that is never resolved but perpetually in flux. Gray and Badovici used this literary genre to voice alternate points of view, one more rational and scientific and the other motivated primarily by human sensibility, reflecting differ- ences between the assertive terms of avant-garde rhetoric and the more subtle arguments espoused by Gray. Their dialogues transcend the singularity of polem- ical assertions about the Modern Movement to elaborate their nuances and internal contradictions, thus revealing the movement’s complex character.  Gray represents the most substantive voice in these dialogues. While Badovici introduced themes associated with avant-garde theory, such as geometry, abstrac- tion, hygiene, mechanization, functionalism, and the avant-garde, Gray opened them up to a relational logic that contrasts the manifesto’s assertive tone. She exploited dialogue for its capacity to expand upon certain dichotomies prevalent in Modern Movement discourse: body and spirit; reason and intuition; order and flux; science and art; individual and collective; particular and universal. Rather than view such categorical distinctions as mutually exclusive, she sought their points of convergence and overlap.  Gray occasionally wrote in prose, using that form to engage Le Corbusier’s writ- ings in dialogue. Ina description of E.1027, the house that she built both for and with Badovici on a remote site overlooking the Mediterranean in 1927-29, she qualified certain statements from Vers une architecture. Responding to Le Corbusier's asser- tion: “Architecture is the masterly, correct and magnificent play of masses brought together in light,” Gray focused on generating architecture from the life of the inte- rior: “Iflyricism can be dedicated to the play of masses brought together in daylight, the interior should respond to human needs and the exigencies of individual life, and it should ensure calm and intimacy.” She countered his often-repeated assertion, “The plan is the generator,” by declaring her priority for human values: “The thing constructed is more important than the way it is constructed, and the process is sub- ordinate to the plan, not the plan to the process. It is not only a matter of construct- ing beautiful arrangements of lines, but above all, dwellings for people.”*  To Gray, a house was not an object to be apprehended through intellectual detachment, but a flexible structure whose occupants would invest it with life,  as she argued: “External architecture seems to have absorbed avant-garde archi- tects at the expense of the interior, as if a house should be conceived for the pleas- ure of the eye more than for the well-being of its inhabitants.” Linking her critique of the building as object with her a-theoretical stance, she concluded: “Theory is insufficient for life and does not respond to all its requirements.”* While resisting 
the lure of architectural theory, she recognized the need to transcend the intuitive limits of her work and ground it in the intellect — in a fertile combination of the sensual and the commonsensical. The title of the dialogue published in the issue of L’Architecture vivante devoted to E.1027, “From Eclecticism to Doubt,” is itself dialogic; it reflects the uncertainty that accompanied the early twentieth-century rejection of historic styles and the resulting quest for rigorous and logical bases for architectural form, often grounded in issues of use.  The design of E.1027 makes explicit reference to Le Corbusier's “ New Architecture.” Such reliance on Corbusian formulas served as a corollary to  Five Points of a  Gray’s own creative act. By challenging and/or working within the framework of such Modern Movement spatial devices, she sought to overcome the supposedly cold and inhuman qualities associated with abstract forms by engaging the subjec- tive qualities of experience. Opposing the formulaic aspects of the architectural manifesto, she argued: “Formulas are nothing, life is everything. And life is simul- taneously mind and heart.” Rather than reject such formulas outright, however, Gray sought to challenge their limits and “push them to the point where they rees- tablish contact with life, to incorporate reality within their abstraction.”° She con- ceived of E.1027 from the interior outward, from a reconsideration of the modern individual’s need for an interior life and a place of retreat. “The interior plan should not be the incidental result of the facade,” she argued in reaction to certain of Le Corbusier's built works; “It should live a complete, harmonious and logical life.” She sought a more integrated conception, an interior that “as in Gothic times [was] a homogenous whole built for man, to the human scale and balanced in all its  parts.””  Architecture as Dialogue: E.1027  On an exhibition placard associated with E.1027, Gray articulated her objectives: “House envisaged from a social point of view: minimum of space, maximum of comfort.” Toward this end she adopted certain ordering principles that she fol- owed throughout her career: orienting the main living space to the southern expo- sure and view, and bedrooms to the rising sun; segregating private areas from the more public zones; isolating service spaces. The spatial hierarchy of E.1027 reflects Badovici’s penchant for entertaining: an open living/dining room capable of accommodating extra guests and a discrete zone for sleeping, dressing, and work on the main level; an independent kitchen adjoining an outdoor cooking space near the main entry; a guest room and minimal housekeeper’s quarters on the ower level.  By integrating furniture and architecture, Gray facilitated multiple uses in each space. She conceived of the living room opening onto a narrow balcony as a loggia, equipped with screen-like vertical windows capable of opening fully to admit sun-  ight and view. A sleeping alcove and adjoining shower/ dressing area off the far 
corner of the room and a dining alcove near the stair contribute to the room’s plu- rality of use. To invoke a more remote locale, Gray incorporated a nautical chart of the Caribbean in her design. Overlaid with the inscriptions “invitation au voyage,” *Beaux temps,” and “vas-y-totor” (the name she gave her automobile), the collage is an inducement to travel farther afield, both luring the imagination and under- scoring the limited temporality of modern conditions of dwelling. Affixed to the wall by a tubular light fixture and folding shelves, this collage exemplified an important principle for Gray: the inseparability of art and architecture — a view she shared with the early adherents of De Stijl. She treated the floors in a manner consistent with the interrelationship of furniture and walls, overlapping rugs on a carpetlike pattern of black-and-white floor tiles. The adaptable furnishings and fittings enable the house to accommodate shifting individual requirements while enhancing its function as a sanctuary from the vicissitudes of contemporary urban life.  In Le Corbusier's related reinterpretation of the bourgeois dwelling — the Pavil- lon de VEsprit Nouveau (1925) — he included conventional gendered spaces: a study adjoining the dining space and a boudoir off the master bedroom. To eliminate gender associations from comparable spaces at E.1027, Gray inverted their relative positions, placing a bed alcove off the living room and her own workspace off the principal bedroom. She termed her workroom a “boudoir-studio,” merging the historically gendered spaces of boudoir and study into a single entity.  While treating E.1027 as a site of selective liberation for its occupants, Gray pro- vided them with a concomitant sense of anchorage by drawing on their physical presence. Her elaboration of the strip window manifests the potential for these apparently divergent qualities to coexist. The strip window was a primary element in Le Corbusier's domestic ensemble; he termed it “the primordial element or agent of the house.”* In contrast to Le Corbusier’s sharp delineation of the strip window, Gray articulated hers as a layered membrane. Its outer zone of sliding shutters with segments that pivot vertically contributes to interior comfort and pri- vacy by limiting solar penetration and views from the outside while admitting ven- tilation. She based her pivoting shutters on a traditional Mediterranean form, which she adapted to a horizontal format, arguing: “a window without shutters is an eye without eyelids.”” By equipping the windows with vertical panes of glass that are proportioned to the human body, she suggested the possibility of embracing Mod- erm Movement principles without suffering the loss of anthropomorphic reference inherent to traditional windows. These panes and the doors opening onto the ter- race pivot and slide, much like draperies, to facilitate an uninterrupted expanse; the interior can thus open directly to garden and sea. In these terms Gray’s strip win- dow merges two seemingly disparate objectives: opening the private recesses of the interior to the outer world, and affording the body a sense of protection. In making exposure to the outer world a matter of choice, she fulfilled the premise of the modern dwelling as a volume reaching for light, while maintaining privacy in the interior. 
Gray extended her critique of Corbusian principles to the building’s exterior. The terraced site posed a challenge to Le Corbusier’s twin postulates of pilotis and roof garden, with their hypothetical reliance on a flat ground plane. In response to the existing fieldstone walls and layered ground, Gray made the relationship between building and site physical and tangible rather than abstract and theoretical. Counter- ing Le Corbusier’s use of pilotis to isolate dwelling from ground, she developed the space within the pilotis as an outdoor living room, engaging the fieldstone walls to give it privacy. She subtly depressed this external volume into the earth to affirm the dwell- ing’s grounded essence. Such co-optation of the ground plane made the roof terrace functionally redundant, a quality Gray reinforced by omitting rooftop parapets.  Both the interior and exterior of E.1027 are characterized by a new interdepend- ence of parts. Architectural components and furnishings are rarely perceived as bounded or distinct; rather, their value is understood in relation to adjoining ele- ments. Gray’s fascination with opacity and indecipherability led her to focus on the surface of elements, their colors, textures, and reflective qualities, rather than on their profile, modeling, or position in a legible space. She never isolated the indi- vidual element or made it represent the ensemble as a whole. The boundaries of elements are no longer frontiers, but extend into the lines of the adjoining walls. Badovici described the resulting visual mélange as “a richly realized totality of space.”?°  By emphasizing bodily experience, with its meaning-laden immersion of the viewer in the flesh of the world, Gray challenged Le Corbusier’s Cartesian privile- ging of cerebral understanding at the cost of the actual senses. She invoked the senses directly and indirectly in both architecture and furnishings: in the tile floor- ing underfoot that radiates heat from the sun or the cork-covered tea and dining tables that muffle sound. Where Le Corbusier used curved forms to represent the body, Gray relied on materials to engage qualities of bodily contact, from chro- mium handrails to fur bed-throws. Furthermore, her furniture invokes analogies with the mechanics of the body: in the flexible table that extends to meet the occu- pant of the bed, the drawers that pivot horizontally, or the hinged mirror that affords oblique views of the head.  In those areas of the house where contact with the body is most intimate — the bedroom and bathroom — Gray strove to heighten bodily awareness. The profu- sion of shimmering materials in the bathroom, for example, includes tiled walls, a folding mirror, a porcelain sink, and a polished aluminum tub enclosure. Their cool surfaces provide a soothing respite from the relentless Mediterranean sun. Such material palpability invokes a sense of the erotic; the house is marked by the experience of a sensual being. “The poverty of modern architecture,” Gray wrote during the 1940s in an explicit challenge to Le Corbusier, “stems from the atrophy of sensuality. Everything is dominated by reason in order to create amazement without proper research. The art of the engineer is not enough if it is not guided by the primitive needs of men. Reason without instinct. We must mistrust merely pictorial elements if they are not assimilated by instinct.””?  
Whereas Le Corbusier used a mechanistic logic in asserting that, “a house is a machine for living in,” Gray privileged qualitative aspects of habitation over quantitative criteria, arguing: “The art of the engineer is not sufficient, unless it is guided by human needs.” Responding to Le Corbusier’s well-known maxim, she concluded: “A house is not a machine to live in. It is the shell of man, his extension, his release, his spiritual emanation. Not only its visual harmony but its entire organization, all the terms of the work, combine to render it human in the most profound sense.”'? Much like the imaginary country that Charles Baudelaire conjured up in his prose poem, “L’invitation au voyage” (1869), an inspiration for the mural in the E.1027 salon, one could say of Gray’s architecture: “It is there we must go to breathe, to dream, and to prolong the hours in an infin- ity of sensations.” ””  Although Gray remained a silent partner in Badovici’s early writings, the art of dialogue informed her architecture on several levels. Rather than begin her designs from a set of theoretical precepts declared in a manifesto, Gray challenged the all- encompassing claims of such examples of contemporary theorizing by questioning, adapting, and/or expanding upon them, thereby engaging them in dialogue. Through this critical process she sought to enhance the human potential of modern architecture, overcoming its supposed alienating qualities by reinstating fundamen- tal physical, psychological, and spiritual needs as primary. A dialogue is open ended; it does not seek to prove a point, but leads its readers to draw their own conclusions. This approach led Gray to design buildings that have the same effect — with respect to both the experiences of their occupants and the designs of her “heroic” counterparts.  Le Corbusier: In Response  Gray’s architectural dialogue with Le Corbusier took on new dimensions in 1938/ 39, when the Swiss architect painted a series of murals on the walls of E.1027. In light of Badovici’s complicity in the production of these pictorial interventions, the circumstances surrounding their creation merit scrutiny. In 1935 Le Corbusier painted his first mural in the living room of Badovici’s house in Vézelay, a pair of small stone structures that Badovici renovated in 1927-31 according to plans drawn up by Gray. To the rear of the house was a small garden court, set into the steep hillside. As both its shallow depth and the height of its rear wall reinforced the dwelling’s limited volume, Badovici invited Fernand Léger to paint a mural on the courtyard wall in 1934. Prose poet Jean Follain remarked on the result:  I met Léger in Vézelay, at the house of the architect Badovici, who asked him to come paint a wall, a wall without life, which blocked all views and closed off a small courtyard. Léger came and he destroyed the wall, pulverizing it under a burst of red color, and, in the play of tonal values, several simple and graceful objects remained in 
place, expressing all the power of their magical volume, their belonging to the uni- verse and, at the same time, their magnificent isolation.’*  Inspired by Léger’s example, Le Corbusier painted his first mural on an upper surface of Badovici’s Vézelay living room. On the basis of these interventions, Badovici claimed that he, Léger and Le Corbusier rediscovered the great pictorial tradition of spatial painting, as “assembled before the courtyard wall ... an idea occurred to us all: THAT OF THE DESTRUCTION OF WALLS BY PAINTING, ”} ‘This statement opposes Gray's position on painting and architecture expressed in one of Badovici’s early dialo- gues: “Painting must not ... oppose itself to the construction, but on the contrary it must emphasize its character, accentuate its rhythms.”’° His eagerness to comply with Corbusian polemics apparently led Badovici to ignore any incongruities between this pictorial dissolution of the wall and Gray’s more constructive integra- tion of architecture and the decorative arts.  As with the Vézelay murals, Badovici not only sanctioned, but encouraged Le Corbusier's pictorial interventions at E.1027. However, contrary to Gray’s architec- tural intentions, these murals brought Badovici considerable pleasure, as he recounted to Le Corbusier after surveying the damage they sustained under the Ital- ian bombardment during World War II: “Your frescoes more luminous and beau- tiful than ever.”’” Yet even Léger found the Roquebrune murals too intrusive, as he commented to Le Corbusier, “don’t you think that you have gone too far with color for an interior?”’*  Whereas the words that Gray inscribed on the walls of E.1027 using Corbusian stencils — “overcoats and umbrellas,” “pillows,” “shoes,” “little things,” “teeth,” “no laughing” (on a partition in the entry hall) — comprise a wry commentary on functionalist logic, those upon which Le Corbusier superimposed his mural ” “enter slowly” — constitute a more overt provoca-  crowning, above all, the architecture to come.  by the front door — “one way, tion. His suggestion that Badovici remove the hallway partition, which inhibited views into the living room, is a revealing indicator of their differences. Gray sought to transcend the reductive nature of the total view. Affording limited glimpses of the salon between the partition’s coat closet and its stand for depositing umbrellas, she called upon the imagination to draw one into the experience while kinesthe- tically engaging the body in rituals of entry.  While Gray may have considered Le Corbusier's pictorial interventions at E.1027 “an act of vandalism,” she deemed his published remarks about the murals’ role in the architecture a more problematic provocation:  The walls chosen to receive nine large paintings were the most colorless and insig- nificant. In this way the beautiful walls have remained and the indifferent ones have become very interesting... One must recognize above all that the proprietor and I had witnessed the nourishment and development of a spatial phenomenon — as, little by little, the paintings emerged under the brush. An immense transformation. A spiritual value introduced throughout. 
Apparently aware of the controversy his paintings aroused, Le Corbusier concluded:  It is not for me to decide whether this value is, here, pleasing or the contrary. When one opens one’s doors to an artist, one gives him speech. When he speaks, one lis- tens... Hence the great risk one runs in having his walls painted.’”  In a letter that Gray encouraged him to write, Badovici issued a sharp rebuttal to Le Corbusier’s published comments:  What a narrow prison you have built for me over a number of years, particularly this year through your vanity... My hut served |you] as a testing ground by sacrificing the profound direction of an attitude that formally banished painting. As purely func- tional architecture, that was its strength for such a long time: 1925. And you have denied its absolute character with such harshness in your writings, disseminating them through your worldwide authority. You lack any generosity toward me. A correction from you seems necessary; if not, | will be forced to do it myself, thus to reestablish the original spirit of the house by the sea.”°  Despite the acerbic tone of this exchange, Gray’s admiration for Le Corbusier’s architecture was undiminished. She continued to take active interest in his work and use it in counterpoint to her own ideas. She took pride in the note that Le Corbusier sent her from E.1027 in 1938, in which he expressed his admiration for the “rare spirit” of the house:  genuinely regret having arrived here too late to have been able to spend some time with you ... | hope that you will give us the pleasure of paying us a visit in Paris. would be delighted to relate how much those few days spent in your house have made me appreciate the rare spirit that dictates all of its organization, both inside and outside, and has given the modern furniture and equipment a form that is so digni- fied, so charming and full of wit.?!  On visiting Le Corbusier’s exhibition at the Musée d’Art Moderne in Paris in 1953, which included numerous examples of his paintings, Gray noted: “I was much impressed, this man has a genius for presentation or whatever you call it; the whole place, so banal generally, was changed.””” In response to Colin Rowe’s  commentary on Le Corbusier’s monastery of La Tourette in The Architectural Review, she proclaimed:  Was fascinated by the Photos and account of Corbu’s monastery, the first photos I have seen. No one has seen it as yet in Paris. What a vitality in that man and how much he has learnt from working in India.”  Le Corbusier reciprocated this appreciation in the holiday cabin that he built for himself next to the property adjoining E.1027 in 1952. Although Gray professed 
that she did not understand how Le Corbusier could have built himself “just a wooden shack,” several aspects of his design reflect her concern for the nuances of vision and visibility.** A narrow corridor at the entry blocks views of the modest room from visitors’ prying eyes, despite both his repudiation of that idea at E.1027 and the cabin’s diminutive size. He used the walls of this narrow passage to con- tinue his experiments into the pictorial dissolution of the wall. By limiting mural painting to this entry passage, he ensured that such images would not intrude on the domestic milieu within, where bi-fold wooden shutters attached to the inside of the windows include both painted and mirrored segments. The mirrors enabled him to manipulate views of mountains and sea and to achieve certain visual effects of the strip window from square apertures. This recalls Gray’s account of her win- dows at E.1027:  When the seas are rough and the horizon gloomy, it suffices to close the large south- ern windows, draw the curtains and open the small northern window that overlooks the garden of lemon trees and the old village to seek a new and different horizon, where the masses of greenery replace the expanses of blue and gray.””  In addition, Le Corbusier’s custom-made built-ins and hidden storage compart- ments accommodate multiple functions in the restricted volume. Such details attest to his open attitude toward architectural form and his willingness to engage her work in dialogue, as well as his enduring esteem for Gray’s accomplishment.  Notes  With kind permission of the National Museum of Ireland.  1. Jean Badovici used dialogue form in: Intérieurs de Siie et Mare (Paris: Albert Morancé, 1924), “Harmonies” Intérieurs de Ruhlmann (Paris: Albert Morancé, 1924); Intérieurs fran- gais (Paris: Albert Morancé, 1925); La Maison d’Aujourd’hui (Paris: Albert Morancé, 1925), “La maison d’aujourd’hui,” Cahiers d’art 1, no. 1 January 1926): 12-3; “L’architecture utilitaire,” L’Architecture vivante (Winter 1926): 17-24; and “De l’éclecticisme au Doute” [From Eclecticism to Doubt], L’Architecture vivante (Winter 1929): 17-21, for which he cited Gray as co-author.  2. Le Corbusier, “Ou en est l’architecture?” L’Architecture vivante (Fall 1927): 12-8.  3. Paul Valéry, “Eupalinos ou l’architecte,” in Architectures, ed. Louis Siie and André Mare (Paris: Editions de le Nouvelle Revue Francaise, 1921).  4. Le Corbusier, Towards a New Architecture, trans. Frederick Etchells (New York: Payson and Clarke Ltd., 1927), 29, 47; Gray and Badovici, “De l’éclecticisme au doute,” 23.  5. Hileen Gray and Jean Badovici, “Description |of E.1027],” L’Architecture vivante (Winter 1929): 3.  6. Gray and Badovici, “De l’éclecticisme au doute,” 19.  7. Gray and Badovici, “Description,” 25/29. 
VILLA SAVOYE  Le Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret  Richard Wesley  Le Corbusier, Villa Savoye, view from the south-west, Poissy, France, 1929.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
BUILDING ON A CLEAR HORIZON  al  “The horizons must be re-disclosed.  The Villa Savoye was designed by the artist-architect, Le Corbusier, in collabo- ration with another architect, his cousin Pierre Jeanneret. In this case the artist- architect was a painter educated to observe and admire nature by another artist, Charles L’Eplattenier, who painted vibrant landscapes.” Not surprisingly the house frames a number of views of the surrounding landscape, sometimes between col- umns, sometimes through openings in walls, and sometimes through windows. In one instance on the second level a view is framed from a roof-garden into the living room through a mur de verre coulissant — a floor-to-ceiling sliding glass wall — and then out again on the opposite wall through a long, horizontal window — a fenétre en longueur. In most instances one is allowed to move freely through the house posi- tioning oneself in various relationships to these framed views; but this is not the case moving up the central ramp to the third level where the orientation and direc- tion of movement are predetermined and the ultimate view is framed on an axis with the ramp and in a frontal relationship to the line of travel. Surprisingly, the view offered at the destination of the ramp is framed by a relatively small, window- less opening in a windscreen wall. This opening limits the prospect of the horizon more than any other view-frame in the house. Perhaps this is what the designers of the villa meant when they described the house as “a veritable architectural prom- enade, offering constantly varied aspects, unexpected, sometimes surprising.”  That a house by two architects, one of whom was also a painter, was conceived as sequential tableaux should not be surprising; but it is a surprise to find the degree to which the automobile was incorporated into the view sequence. Driving onto the property from the rue de Villiers formerly the chemin des Migneaux) past the gardener’s lodge on the right, one turns left onto a lane pre-existing the villa (visible in the photograph on p. 233) that runs at an angle neither parallel to the road nor perpendicular to the house. Turning right from this lane onto the driveway the automobile is shifted into a frontal relationship to the house — not centered on the facade, but aligned with the bay of covered space on the right defined by the recessed walls of the house on the left and free standing posts or stilts, pilotis, on the right. Much like the destination at the top of the ramp, the orientation and direction at the beginning of the movement sequence are precisely determined. The driveway penetrates the house beneath the second level, circles around the supposed back of the house, where the main entry is located, and returns to the lane at the apparent front of the house. This U-shaped space carved out of three sides of the first level of the house (visible in the photograph on p. 233) is a hybrid form of an ancient loggia and a contemporary porte-cochére. On one set of drawings 
this hybridized space is labeled “abri,” implying a naturally sheltered space typically found on the side of a hill beneath overhanging rock. Such a label by the architects might express an aspiration that both an ancient and a modern space type have connections to a spatial archetype found in nature. In the Villa Savoye the abri is defined beneath the second level of the house between the walls on its inner edge and a line of pilotis along its outer edge. These pilotis act to frame views of the immediate landscape from the abri in the direction of travel and along the periphery on the right. With its wide-open horizontal views the roofed and compressed space of the abri on the first level appears as an inverted prefiguration of the roofless solar- ium on the third level with its relatively small opening punched through the wind- screen wall. The sill of this opening extends inward providing a built-in table. Here, the table top, an important image in Purist painting, extends from the opening in the windscreen wall as both a locus of domestic dwelling and a definitive plane along which the view to the distant horizon of nature is progressively redisclosed as one moves up the ramp.  Orienting and Structuring the Villa  The Villa Savoye is located in Poissy, a commune in the suburbs of Paris approx- imately 24 kilometers north-west of the city center. At the time it was constructed the villa was located south-east of the village center. The village has since expanded and now encroaches on the original site of the house. An axial line projected through the center of the house — through the center of the U-shaped abri and entry — intersects the far bank of the Seine River approximately 825 meters, or half a mile, away where, surprisingly, an axial line projected through the center of the nearby Chateau de Villiers, built in the mid-nineteenth century, also converges. So important to the architects of the villa was the precise angle of the view that the living room on the second level of the house is oriented toward the north-west, a less than ideal orientation with regard to the sun since it provides little or no sun- light during most times of the day and year and brutal late-afternoon sunlight dur- ing others. The villa is oriented neither with respect to the angles of the existing road and lane, nor with respect to optimum sunlight conditions. Instead, the house is oriented on the ordinal directions on an axis running from the south-east to the north-west toward a distant location along the Seine River. It isn’t surprising that the designers of the villa chose not to orient the house in relation to an existing road or lane, but instead toward a view, even though the view may have been more generalized and ideal than specific and real; but it is surprising that the north-west orientation of the house is in direct opposition to the principles of orientation according to an axe heliothermique — a heliothermic axis, a term made renowned in an exhibition at the 1930 International Congresses of Modern Architecture (CIAM) by one of the villa’s architects, Charles-Edouard Jeanneret-Gris, also known as Le Corbusier.* A floor-to-ceiling and wall-to-wall mur de verre coulissant  
(sliding glass wall) on the south-east side of the living room facing the roof-garden compensates for the lack of sunlight through the living room’s north-west view window, the architects’ solution to a situation where “Vorientation du soleil est oppo- sée a celle de vue.”*  The programmatic requirements for the villa were simple: a weekend house for a married couple with one child, where the family could enjoy the rustic surround- ings of Poissy, a rural village in the late 1920s.° Although the open land surrounding the house is approximately one acre today, the original property consisted of 7 hec- tares, or about 17 acres. As constructed the villa included a main house, a garden- er’s lodge, and an orchard. The house contained a three-car garage, an entrance hall, a laundry, two maid’s rooms, and a chauffeur’s apartment on the first level. The main living areas of the house were located on the second level and included a roof-garden, a combined living-dining room, a kitchen, a master bedroom suite with a boudoir and bathroom, a child’s bedroom with bathroom, and a guest room with bathroom.’ Although in an earlier design a solarium and boudoir were located on the third level, the boudoir was moved to the second level and connected to the master bedroom suite when the design was revised for budgetary reasons.* The house also included a partial basement. With the exception of the columns, ramp, and stair, the interior partitions on the second level of the house are “free” from the levels above or below. An interior ramp in the center of the house connects the first level to a second level free plan, le plan libre, with access to living room, bedrooms, baths, and kitchen, as well as to the roof-garden. An exterior ramp (visible in the photograph on p. 233) connects the roof-garden on the second level to the solarium on the third level. An internal spiral stair connects all levels of the house from the solarium down to the basement. The shape and form of these vertical elements, the ramp and the stair, are given figural significance and, at least in the case of the ramp, compositional importance. Neither the ramp nor the stair seems to be “free” of the structure. The stair is connected to one of the columns and the ramp fits precisely within the space defined by six columns. As for the rooms on the first and second levels, other than certain functional relationships with regard to proximity, privacy gradient, and access to windows for light and air, the architects appear to have been indifferent to their form or configuration. On the second level, the main living level of the house, the rooms are rectangular in shape and dense-packed next to each other with respect to the windows and column location along traditional hallways for circulation. None of these rooms for day-to-day activities, including the living- dining room, seems to have any connection to the promenade as it passes up the ramp from the entry hall to the opening in the windscreen wall. One travels from the first level to the third without going through any of the rooms on the second level, with the exception of a small corner of the hall. The promenade does incor- porate the roof-garden on the second level at the point of transition from the inte- rior ramp to the exterior ramp. The true spatial sequence of the Villa Savoye (abri— entry hall — ramp — roof-garden — solarium) bypasses all of the rooms on the second level, which, along with the configuration and lack of composition of the rooms,  
suggests that the house was intentionally designed with two orders: a ceremonial one for the promenade and a mundane one for everything else.  The roof and floors of the house are constructed with a “lost tile” system of poured-in-place concrete. The minor reinforced concrete beams formed between the hollow tiles are supported by girders below the slabs running from the front to the back of the house.” Although Le Corbusier wrote that “the simple columns of the ground floor, by their suitable plan, frame the landscape with a regularity that suppresses all notions of ‘front’ or ‘back’ or ‘side’ of the house,”’® the cantilevered second level differentiates the south-east and north-west front and back from the sides and gives the house a definite front-back orientation, even if there is ambigu- ity as to which is front and which is back. This uncertainty is caused by the location of the main entrance door on the apparent back of the house, the north-west facade opposite the road frontage; but the slots of space defined between the pilotis and the edges of the overhangs create thick implied thresholds and clearly delineate the front and back of the house from the sides. The girders run front-to-back and are supported on cast-in-place reinforced concrete columns arrayed on a four- by-four grid of 4.75-meter bays. The selection of an even number of structural bays rather than an odd number places a line of columns through the center of house running from front to back. This decision by the architects has the effect of denying any possibility of an axis of entry or vision through the center of the front of the house and reinforces through negation the significance of the peripheral penetra- tion of the front of the house. From the apparent back of the house, however, entry is through the center on an axis with the ramp.  A Contrivance for the Effect of Dwelling  To accommodate the ramp an additional half-bay is inserted into the central struc- tural line of girders, creating an A-A-B-A-A rhythm of five bays from side to side of the house. Perhaps the insertion of the ramp at such an obviously difficult and illog- ical location relative to the structural bays was done to reinforce the primary idea of the house as a vertical journey. That one winds back and forth four times on the ramp, going around and around the centerline of the house, reinforces through repetition the concept of the ramp as the most significant figural element in the Villa Savoye. The stair was seen by the architects as being another kind of spiraling vertical figure penetrating the horizontal floor levels. “This spiral, a pure vertical organ,” wrote Le Corbusier, “is inserted freely into the horizontal composition.”"*  Evident in Le Corbusier’s description of the Villa Savoye in Precisions is the sig- nificance of the vertical movement through the horizontal layers of the house, as well as the hierarchical differentiation between the use of the ramp for ascent and the spiral stair for descent. “From inside the entrance, a ramp leads easily, hardly noticed, up to the first floor (second level}, where the life of the inhabitants goes on ... Receiving views and light from around the periphery of the box, the different 
rooms center on a hanging garden ... From the hanging garden, the ramp, now on the outside, leads to the solarium on the roof ... This is connected by a spiral stair- case three stories high down to the cellar dug in the earth under the pilotis.””” Much like an ancient Pompeian house structured around a hierarchical and dynamic sequence of fauces-atrium-tablinium-peristylum-hortus, the Villa Savoye is structured around a similar dynamic sequence beginning with an aediculalike entry hall on the first level marked with four columns; a deep and narrow fau- ces-like ramp leads from the entry hall to a roof-garden open to the sky, much like asky-lit central atrium; and a salle, or living room, with its front opening to the roof- garden and its back overlooking a hortus, in this case an orchard.” In the Villa Savoye the final destination is the solarium on the third level above the living- dining room. Perhaps this is what Le Corbusier meant by a machine a habiter, less an “appliance for environmental control” and more a “contrivance for the produc- tion of effects of dwelling,” much like a Pompeian house. Such an interpretation would rely on the less common meaning of the French word machine as a “theat- rical-like device”; but despite similarities between the Pompeian house and the Villa Savoye, there is an undisputable and significant difference: while the ritualized salutatio in the first is absolutely horizontal, the promenade in the second inclines vertically.  The exterior walls of the Villa Savoye were constructed of two layers of hollow concrete masonry with an air space between them. The concrete masonry was cov- ered with “jurassite” plaster, a Swiss version of “ciment-piere” in which Jurassic lime- stone was used.'* Although the original exterior colors are yet to be verified, sufficient evidence exists to assume that the walls on the first level were dark green, to reinforce the sense of a recess in shadow beneath the floating white rectangular solid of the second level.’* The walls of the solarium on the third level were light pastel colors, described in The International Style as a “white second story ... weight- less on its round posts. Its severe symmetry is a foil to the brilliant study of abstract form, unrestricted by structure, of the blue and rose windshelter above.”'!* The interior walls throughout the house were constructed of hollow clay masonry of various thicknesses depending on location, covered with plaster, and painted. The treatment of the color of material surfaces in the house follows the hierarchical goals of a “work of art” established by Le Corbusier and the painter Amedée Ozen- fant in “Le Purisme,” published in the fourth issue of L’Esprit Nouveau, 1920.' “The work of art is an artificial object which permits the creator to place the spectator in the state he wishes.”’* In the case of Purism, the goal of art was “to put the spec- tator in a state of a mathematical quality, that is a state of an elevated order” through the compositional means of “choice of surface, division of surface, co-mod- ulation, relationships of density, color scheme.””° Color is not only the last and least significant of the five compositional devices, but Ozenfant and Le Corbusier warn of its potential to destroy other primary compositional means since “color has prop- erties of shock (sensory order) which strike the eye before form (which is a creation already cerebral in part).” Throughout “Le Purisme” the authors, one an artist and  
one an artist-architect, established implicit connections between a work of architec- ture and painting. This is especially evident in their description of “surface,” the first of the Purist compositional devices. “Space is needed for architectural compo- sition; space means three dimensions. Therefore we think of the painting not as  21 surface, but as a space.  In the Vi  la Savoye, as well as the other houses designed  by Le Corbusier and Jeanneret between 1922 and 1928, the Purist dictum, “a paint-  ing is an association of purified, related, and architectured elements, reversed as “a work of architecture erly surfaces.” In the case of the Vi  the house incorporating the natur rience of sequential tableaux; and Purist composition, a division and as space, but as a surface includin,  Though rendered as painterly s  their weight, along with the weig| umns, the exterior walls were designers of the house exploited  22  might be is an association of purified, related, and paint- la Savoye the painterly surfaces extend beyond surroundings as re-revealed through the expe- the house itself becomes part of a much larger co-modulation of an “architectured” setting, not g the field, trees, and sky.  urfaces, the walls of the house had weight. Since ht of the roof and floors, were supported by col- berated from any load-bearing function. The the possibilities of view and daylight implicit in  ‘a.  a free facade — a facade libre — by creating a continuous horizontal opening from corner to corner on all four of the exterior walls enclosing the second level. Le Corbusier described the Villa Savoye as “a box raised above the ground, the center of fields,” “perforated all around, without interruption, by a long hor- izontal window ... overlooking orchards.””? Windows were installed in the entire horizontal openings on the south-east (front) and north-west (back) facades. Most of the horizontal opening on the north-east facade received windows, with the exception of a small terrace adjacent to the kitchen; but along the south-east facade (visible in the photograph), the majority of the horizontal opening was unglazed along the roof-garden with the only exception being the narrow end of the living room. Windows on all four sides of the house were either fixed sashes, identifiable by their narrow mullions, or operable windows with sliding sashes, identifiable by  in  their wider mullions. Sliding, as an operation of opening, brought the concept of horizontal orientation of the windows to the level of a detail.  Although the Villa Savoye is often referenced as the ultimate manifestation of the “five points of a new architecture,” a theoretical conclusion of successive experiments first drafted by Le Corbusier and Jeanneret in the late 1920s, a com- parison of the house with the much earlier theoretical model of the 1914 “maison dom-ino” may be more productive in an attempt to understand the true formative principles of the house.”* The obvious understanding of the word “dom-ino” refers to the similarity in the pattern of freestanding columns — called “poteaux,” “posts,” not pilotis, by Le Corbusier — in the plan of a prototypical house with a domino. While the term “dom-ino” refers to the possibility of a game-like combination and recombination of a modern prototypical house structure, its hyphen suggests associations with other meanings. The hyphenated word “dom-ino” has possible connections to other ancient Latin terms derived from dom such as in domus, a 
household or home, and domi, to be at home. In this sense maison dom-ino might be understood as a “maison domus,” a “house-home,” or “maison-domi,” a “house to be at home in.” In either case a modern French word for “house” is being combined with an ancient Latin term for “home.” The maison dom-ino is a theoretical model of a “house-home” without walls, windows or doors, and like the Villa Savoye it also implies thresholds of space along its front and back faces. These slots of space are formed between the columns and the edges of the horizontal floor and roof slabs and act as thickened thresholds. Like the Villa Savoye there is no center depicted in the maison dom-ino. Similar to the Villa Savoye, the maison dom-ino has an even num- ber of structural bays blocking any possibility of a central spatial axis without mod- ification to the structural grid. In the maison dom-ino the stair is positioned outside of the enclosed space as a figural projection of the rectangular form. The intention of the maison dom-ino is obvious: one is meant to enter off-center through an implied threshold and climb the stair to the roof. As such, the maison dom-ino is the theo- retical model for the idea of a machine a habiter, a vertical journey in a “contrivance for the effect of dwelling.” The first house designed by Le Corbusier and Jeanneret to fully embody the maison dom-ino was not the Villa Savoye but the Hatel Parti-  culier A Boulogne-sur-Seine, also known as the Maison Cook, constructed in 1926. Le Corbusier was well aware of the revolutionary nature of the reversal of the sequential journey from an ancient horizontal one to a modern vertical one. “The classic pattern is reversed,” he wrote of the Maison Cook, “The reception is at the top of the house. We come directly to a roof-garden dominated by the vast forests of the Bois du Boulogne; we are no longer in Paris, we are in the countryside.””’  A Few Points about the “Five Points”  Between the completion of construction of the Maison Cook in 1926 and the begin- ning of the design of the Villa Savoye in 1928, Le Corbusier had engaged in an active campaign to formulate and defend the principles of modern architecture. The rejection in 1927 of a modern building for the League of Nations headquarters in Geneva, designed by Le Corbusier and Jeanneret, in favor of a traditional Beaux- Arts design, sparked the establishment of the International Congresses of Modern Architecture (CIAM). Although there was no unanimity among the international attendees of the first CIAM meeting held at La Sarraz, Switzerland, on June 28, 1928, a common platform emerged for a new architecture based on the logic of contemporary construction. Promoted at the CIAM meeting by two fellow Swiss, Le Corbusier and Sigfried Giedion, an architectural historian and the first secretary- general of CIAM, the platform proposed the functional independence of the struc- tural skeleton from the exterior wall. Made possible by contemporary techniques of steel and reinforced concrete construction, the independence of skeleton and wall found expression in Le Corbusier’s “five points for a new architecture.” 
According to Werner Oechslin, Les cing points d’une architecture nouvelle had first been articulated in writing by Le Corbusier and Jeanneret in a letter to Alfred Roth dated July 24, 1927 for translation into German by Roth and publication in Zwei Wohnhduser von Le Corbusier und Pierre feanneret: Fiinf Punkte zu einer neuen Architek- tur.”° In the 1927 letter, the five points were listed in the following order: les pilotis (stilts or posts); les toits jardins (roof-gardens); le plan libre (free plan); la fenétre en longueur (ong or horizontal window); and la facade libre (free facade). Le Corbusier did discuss these same five terms in “Ou en est Varchitecture?” published in L’Arch- itecture vivante in 1927, but placed them in a different order and added a sixth term as follows: theorie du toit-jardin; la masion sur pilotis; la fenétre en longeur; le plan libre; la facade libre; and the sixth, la suppression de la corniche.”’ The article in L’Architecture vivante ends with plans, sections, and elevations of the Maison Cook. The five points, not six, were published again in the Oeuvre compléte, 1929-34, using the same terms and in the same order as in the letter to Roth, followed by six pages of photographs and drawings of the Maison Cook.”* Drawings of the pre-final design of the Villa Savoye appear in the same volume, followed by sketches of the “four house-types” first published in “The Plan of the Modern House,” a lecture delivered by Le Corbusier in Buenos Aires in 1929, the same year that construction began on the Villa Savoye. The house was described in the lecture as the fourth of “four house types,” attaining “on the outside, the pure form of the second type,” the Villa at Garches, “which shows the compression of organs within a rigid envelope, absolutely pure.” On the inside the Villa Savoye house type had “the advantages, the characteristics of the first type,” Maison La Roche, with “each organ rising up next to its neighbor in accordance with an organic reasoning,” as well as the characteristics of the third type, the Villa at Carthage, with its “visible framework (skeleton structure), a simple envelope, clear, transparent as a  network,” allowing “useful volumes of rooms different on each floor in form and quantity.””?  There is no specific reference to the five — or six — points in the text describing the Villa Savoye in the Oeuvre complete, 1929-34. The piloitis and the roof-garden, described as a jardin suspendu (hanging garden), and labeled on the plans as a jardin terrasse, are included in the written description of the house. Perhaps the indifference of Le Corbusier and Jeanneret to the number of points and their ranking in the various publications of the five points suggests that they were less a manifesto of modern architecture and more a result of logical thinking about the results of a process over time, much like their analysis leading to the four house types. As Le Corbusier had written in 1929, “we, Pierre Jeanneret and I, have built quite a lot of houses. Studying our production I manage to discern  the general intention that determined the tendency of our work ... up to now we have worked on four distinct types of plans, each expressing characteristic intel- lectual preoccupations.”*’ In both lists of points produced by Le Corbusier and Jeanneret, pilotis and roof-garden are ranked at the top suggesting the essential role played by an abri on the ground level and its inverted counterpart, a roof- 
garden, in the new architecture. If this is true, then the form of the Villa Savoye has less to do with the manifesto of the static five points or the classification of the four house types, and more to do with the concept of the machine 4 habiter as a “contrivance for the effect of dwelling,” and its dynamic theoretical model, the maison dom-ino.  In 1928 Giedion had published some of Le Corbusier’s work in Building in France, Building in Iron, Building in Ferroconcrete,”’ an early history of modern architecture that Reyner Banham claimed “had a wide and curious influence on the Modern Movement’s view of its own history.” According to Banham the book “helped to give the International Style a sense of international ancestry but it did so in a biased manner.””” Giedion’s biased view of modern architecture as an outgrowth of nineteenth-century engineering construction advanced into the early twentieth century is no more evident than in his reinterpretation of Le Corbusier and Jeanneret’s original five points and in his promotion of the Villa Savoye as the epit- ome of the embodiment of these principles in modern architecture. Giedion gradually transformed the “five points” from a logical conclusion made by Le Cor- busier and Jeanneret resulting from the observation of the design of a sequence of houses into a manifesto-like set of design principles based on contemporary con- struction techniques. In the preface to the second volume of the Oeuvre complete, 1929-34, Giedion edited the original five points, deleting the original point four — horizontal window — and adding a new point, “functional independence of struc- tural skeleton and wall.” He rearranged the order of the points, keeping pilotis in the first position but adding the new point, “functional independence of structural skeleton and wall,” in the second position. Following the new second point he wrote the phrase, “This results in:” after which he listed the remaining points: free plan, free facade, and in the last position, roof-garden, designating them as subser- vient results of the “functional independence of structural skeleton and wall.” Finally, he renamed the “five points of a new architecture” as the “five points of liaison between modern architecture and technological progress.” Having deleted, added, rearranged, and renamed the five points, Giedion declared the Villa Savoye as “the purest and clearest example” of these principles.’’ Seven years later in 1941, in a chapter on “Le Corbusier and the Means of Architectonic Expression,” in Space, Time and Architecture: The Growth of a New Tradition, Giedion published the five points with additional revisions along with extracts from his essay on the Villa Savoye originally published in Cahiers d’art in 1930, written just as construction on the house was nearing completion.”* In the 1941 version of the five points, Gie- dion kept the same reordering of the points from his 1934 preface in the Oeuvre complete, but changed the first point, “les pilotis,” to “the pillar,” which he declared “leads directly to Le Corbusier’s second principle ... the functional independence of skeleton and wall.” He then explained the “free plan’ and “free facade” as conse- quences of skeleton construction, and described the roof-garden as a surface that “can be looked at from above,” and “used for many different intentions.” Finally, he renamed the five points for a second time as the “five points of liaison between 
contemporary architecture and contemporary construction.””’ Giedion’s revisions of the five points, both in 1934 and 1941, demonstrated a determined intention to transform them from a loose list of ambiguous terms into an organized manifesto of architecture based on technological principles.  Houses can Die as well as Men  At about the same time that Giedion was championing the Villa Savoye as “the purest and clearest example” of the principles of the five points, the house was being pro- moted by Henry-Russell Hitchcock and Philip Johnson as an example of the Inter- national Style in the first exhibition of architecture at the Museum of Modern Art in 1932, as well as in the concurrent publication of The International Style: Architecture Since 1922. Even today the Villa Savoye is cited in many academic and professional circles as the pre-eminent example of both an expression of the International Style and a manifestation of the five points. It is ironic, however, that concurrent with the rise of the Villa Savoye to a canonical status in modern architecture, the house was being declared to be uninhabitable by its owners. According to Kevin D. Murphy, “as early as 1930 Emilie Savoye began a correspondence with Le Corbusier that contin- ued through 1937 and in which she documented the many defects of her house.”** These defects, including coldness and dampness due to an insufficient heating system and extensive roof leaks, caused the owners to stop living in the house in 1938. Emilie Savoye wrote to Le Corbusier in 1937, “After innumerable demands you have finally accepted that this house which you built in 1929 is uninhabitable. Your ten-year responsibility is at stake and I have no need to foot the bill. Please render it inhab- itable immediately. I sincerely hope that I will not have to take recourse to legal action.”*” Looking back in 1960, Reyner Banham juxtaposed photographs of the Villa Savoye, which he labeled “the summation of the Latin stream in the International style — a post-Futurist villa,’ with Buckminster Fuller’s Dymaxion House, 1927-30, “conceived at the time that the International style was crystallizing into a set of forms symbolizing the Machine Age,” a project for a house that “established a radical technological criticism of the International style as mechanically inade- quate.”** The Villa Savoye was indefinitely abandoned by the Savoye family in 1940 and subsequently occupied by German and American troops during the war. The house was used as a barn during the period when Emilie Savoye farmed the surrounding land. In 1959 Time reported “the machine for living became a machine for farming,” and Historic Preservation magazine verified the need for the restoration of the building following damage by troops and neglect by the owner. That same year the town of Poissy began the process to appropriate the 7 hectares of the Villa Savoye for the construction of a new school, and even before the legal transaction was finalized the house had been altered for use as a youth center. Despite its original technical problems and its poor condition due to disuse and neglect, Emilie Savoye took an active interest in the preservation of the house and  
conveyed to Le Corbusier the news of the appropriation of the villa. On the same day that he received the news from her, Le Corbusier sent a series of telegrams, including one to Giedion and José Luis Sert: “URGENCY. SEND FINANCIAL PROPOSITIONS. SAVOYE HOUSE.” Giedion, who had a major interest in a house that had become a well-known monument of modern architecture in part through his historical writing, joined with Sert to launch a rigorous campaign to “save Savoye.” Through the efforts of André Malraux, the French Minister of Cul- ture, and the support of others around the world, the building was named a bdti- ment civil in 1963; but this had little real effect on the restoration of the house. For restoration to be fully supported by the French government, the house would need to have been designated as a “historic monument,” and under French law this was only possible for buildings whose architects were deceased. “Houses can die as well as men,” said Le Corbusier in a 1959 Time magazine article, “but if there’s a way of saving them, so much the better.””? But Le Corbusier couldn’t be saved. He died on August 27, 1965 at Roquebrune-Cap Martin, France, near his summer home while swimming in the Mediterranean Sea. His death allowed the Villa Savoye to be saved. The building was officially declared an “historic monument” on December 16, 1965 and two years later, when the French Ministry of Cultural Affairs officially took control of the house, restoration work began and continued into the late 1990s.  Much has been written since 1930 about the Villa Savoye, a house designed by a painter-architect in association with another architect. Perhaps only Robert Slutzsky, another painter, got it right: “This house is a machine for viewing. The curved forms on the roof further evoke the metaphor, suggesting a roll of film stretched around two spools, with the center portion cut out like a cam- era aperture, framing first the sky and then the arcadian landscape as one pro- gresses up the internal circulation ramp.”*° Despite a biased interpretation of the “five points” as technical achievements, Giedion, too, had also once gotten the essence of the new architecture “right.” In his 1928 description of the housing at Pessac in Building in France, Building in Iron, Building in Ferroconcrete, Giedion wrote: “The flat contours of Pessac merge with the sky: the suspended canopies over the roof gardens form the transition. The color scheme is taken from Jean- neret’s (Le Corbuiser’s) paintings: ethereal sky blue and light green, a more intense brown. The interplay of the units can be judged neither spatially nor plas- tically. Only relations count ... Still photography does not capture them clearly. One would have to accompany the eye as it moves: only film can make the new architecture intelligible!”*? But Giedion also got it right in the still photograph from the south-west (see p. 233 above), published in his 1930 essay in Cahiers dart. Conceived in the years of 1928-29, between the end and beginning of two cataclysmic wars — the second one a global, machine-based blitzkrieg marking the end of the “machine aesthetic’ and the beginning of post-war empiricism and brutalism — the house appears as an architectural culmination of Purism, a move- ment born in reaction to the decorative patterns of cubist paintings and the chaos  
of the earlier Great War. Pure and clear, this “machine for viewing” stands as an objectification of horizons re-disclosed, connecting the flat horizon of the fore- ground of approaching earth to the figural horizon of the treetops against the background of a receding sky. Seemingly timeless within the ever-changing qua- lities of these surfaces of nature, the Villa Savoye appears as a still image, one frame of a film capturing for the imagination of a new epoch, if only for a brief moment of time, les heures claires.  Notes  lL. 12. 13.  14.  Reproduced by permission of FLC (L2-17-8). Image credit: © 2014 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York/ADAGP, Paris/F.L.C.  . First published by Sigfried Gideon in “Le Corbusier et l’'architecture contemporaine,”  Cahiers d’art, 1930. Corbusier and Francois de Pierrefeu, The Home of Man (London: Architectural Press, 1948), 86. If “disclosure” refers to how things become intelligible by virtue of being part of an ontology, i.e. a pre-existing structured background of meaning, “re-disclosure” would be the re-revealing of those meanings, in this case through architecture. See Nikolas Kompridis, “On World Disclosure: Heidegger, Habermas and Dewey,” Thesis Eleven 37 (1994): 29-45.  . See Charles L’Eplattenier (1874-1946), “Au sommet” [At the Summit] |1904], in Jean-  Louis Cohen, ed., Le Corbusier: Atlas of Modern Landscapes (New York: Museum of Mod- ern Art, 2013), 53.  . Willy Boesiger and Oscar Stonorov, Le Corbusier et Pierre Jeanneret: Oeuvre complete de  1929-1934 (Zurich: Les Editions d’architecture, 1964), 24.  . Le Corbusier, Radiant City: Elements of a Doctrine of Urbanism to be Used as the Basis of Our  Machine-age Civilization, trans. Pamela Knight, Eleanor Levieux, and Derek Coltman (New York: Orion Press, 1967), 160.  . Boesiger and Stonorov, Le Corbusier et Pierre Jeanneret, 187. . “Les heures claires” (The Clear Hours) was the name given to the villa by its original  owners, Pierre and Emilie Savoye.  . Jacques Sbriglio, Le Corbusier: The Villa Savoye (Basel: Birkhauser, 1999), 182. . Tim Benton, The Villas of Le Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret, 1920-1930, (Basel: Birkhauser,  2007), 191.  . Edward R. Ford, The Details of Modern Avchitecture (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 241. 10.  Le Corbusier, “The Plan of the Modern House,” Precisions on the Present State of Architecture and City Planning, trans. Edith Schreiber Aujame (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991), 139. Le Corbusier, Precisions, 136  Ibid.  For a full explanation of the spatial sequence in a Pompeian house, see John R. Clarke in “Space and Ritual in Domus, Villa, and Insula, 100 B.C.—A.D. 250,” in The Houses of Roman Italy, 100 B.C.-A.D. 250: Ritual, Space, and Decoration (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991), 1-29.  Sbriglio, Le Corbusier, 134. 
VILLA MULLER  Adolf Loos  Christopher Long  Adolf Loos, Villa Miiller, view from the living room toward the dining area and stair, Prague, Czech Republic, 1930.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
BUILDING PHILOSOPHY  The Villa Miller, completed in Prague in 1930, is among Adolf Loos’ signature works and one of the epochal buildings of the modern movement. With its tight, interlocking volumes positioned on multiple levels, the house remains perhaps the best illustration of Loos’ Raumplan, or space-plan, conception. It is a tour de force of modern space-making, an essay on how to foster complex volumes and how to connect them. It is the key building of Loos’ later years, a summation of all he sought to achieve as an architect and a précis of his idiosyncratic ideas of form and living. It has become one of the most oft-studied and discussed buildings of those years, an object lesson in three-dimensional design.  The Making of the Villa Muller  Loos received the commission in late October 1928. The clients, Frantisek Miiller and his wife, Milada Miillerova, were acquaintances of Loos’ from Pilsen, in west- ern Bohemia, where Loos had numerous clients. Miiller and another Pilsen native, Lumir Kapsa, were partners in a large construction company, Miiller & Kapsa, which their fathers had founded in Pilsen before the turn of the century. The Miillers had moved to Prague only a short time before, and in September they purchased a large, hilly lot in the StfeSovice district (at Nad Hradnim vodojemem 642/14) above Prague Castle and the central city.”  The genesis of the commission, however, remains unclear. Franti8ek Miiller evi- dently first approached Czech architect Karel Lhota, a professor of architecture at the building trades school in Pilsen, and Loos’ local partner there. Lhota, in turn, asked Loos to participate in the project — an arrangement that Miiller seems to have intended from the outset.” Both architects signed a contract with FrantiSek Miiller on October 30, 1928.  Lhota, it seems, made the initial drawings for the house, probably with Loos’ input, though it is possible that Miller intended for Loos to design only the inter- iors. But Loos soon became fully involved in the project, apparently modifying the structural system and spatial plan that Lhota had made, which, in turn, necessitated numerous changes to the facade.’ The first extensive drawings date to November 1928. Loos and Lhota worked swiftly, and by late December the basic set of plans was complete and submitted to the Prague 6 municipal offices for a building per- mit.* The city authorities, however, rejected the design because both its footprint and its height exceeded what was permitted for the area. Many of the neighbors also complained that the large, flat-roofed house was decidedly out of character for the area, which was made up of mostly smaller, conventional, pitched-roof 
structures. Miiller was forced to resubmit the project twice more, each time with slightly altered plans. The final design was not approved until late June, after the Provincial President had issued an override of the authorities’ decision.  By then, construction on the house, which was carried out by the Kapsa & Miiller Company, was well underway. Although Miiller had not received permis- sion from the municipal building office to begin work, he fast-tracked the construc- tion process. The walls and roof were completed by mid-July 1929, and the electrical work and exterior stuccowork were finished by the end of September. Work on the interiors began in October, and the Miillers and their four-year- old daughter Eva moved into the house in the spring of 1930, although the final occupancy permit was not issued until July of that year.”  The relatively quick progress of the construction, however, belied numerous pro- blems during the design process. Local architect Willy Hofmann wrote in the Prager Tagblatt not long after the house’s completion that the authorities had rejected the house “on ten occasions” for “aesthetic reasons.”® In truth, records show that there were far fewer rejections, probably no more than five in all, and most of the objec- tions had to do with the building’s siting and scale (although one of the position papers from the zoning office closed with the remark, “besides, the proposed facade is tasteless”).” Miiller, who was intimately familiar with the permitting process in Prague, used his knowledge and connections to push the project through, even though it manifestly did not comply with local ordinances.  The larger problems had to do with a lack of coordination between Loos, who was the building’s actual designer, Lhota, who was to prepare the final plans, and Pilsen contractor Bofivoj Kriegerbeck, who served as the site manager. Loos and Lhota split the 50,000 crown commission, but Lhota’s construction drawings, based on Loos’ verbal instructions and incomplete sketches, were so riddled with errors that, as Kriegerbeck later described, Loos was forced to step in and oversee the process, working closely with Kriegerbeck to ensure its completion.* Heinrich Kulka, one of Loos’ former pupils who served as Loos’ assistant in Vienna, was so employed, starting in December 1929, to aid in the completion of final details, while the immediate supervision for the Miiller & Kapsa Company was left to yet another assistant, Rudolf Volesky.  The work went far from smoothly. Loos, who was nearly deaf by that time and in health, was often absent during the weeks the final decisions were being made about the house’s disposition and detailing. Loos also had an unusual working method, typically relying to a large extent on his associates. Lhota recalled afterward: “[Loos] maintains that he is not an architect but a building philosopher. Of course, this attitude also stems from his aversion to drawing: he positively hates architectural draftsmanship. His projects consist of a sequence of logically fluent ideas, he practices written — not drafted — architecture; if there is no one at hand capable of understand- ing Loos, no blueprints are produced. Yet ‘this someone’ is always found.”  In the case of the Villa Miiller it was Lhota and Kriegerbeck who mostly per- formed the work of “translating” Loos’ ideas. But as Kriegerbeck remembered  ry  
years afterward, Loos could be highly unreliable: “At first, Loos worked with gusto but pretty soon his verve waned, he could not persevere. No wonder: he was a delicate little wisp, his illness had progressed, he did not take good care of himself, and he loved parties. Never before did he have so much work to do at one time.””° At one point, Loos, flush with money from the Miller commission, went off to Paris for a month without informing his co-workers and, characteristically, having spent all of his available funds there, wired Miiller asking for money to return. Miiller refused but eventually sent money to Loos’ office in Vienna to pay the fare of one of his assistants to go to Paris and bring Loos back with him. Many of the final decisions and much of the detailing in this period thus were left to Kriegerbeck and Kulka.'' Miiller also intervened in the design process, altering some of the  details, especially on the facades. Despite his considerable wealth, he vetoed some  of Loos’ suggestions for more expensive detailing and for the preparation of a more  detailed set of plans.’* Loos also refined the plans a number of times during the course of construction or, in a few instances, changed them entirely.  Because Loos was only infrequently on site while construction was ongoing, some of the work was executed contrary to his instructions, and this created further problems. Claire Beck Loos, Loos’ wife at the time, later remembered one incident: “Loos orders an overhang of half a centimeter on the house. He drives away. When he returns, the overhang measures an entire centimeter instead of only a half. Loos is beside himself and has the extra half a centimeter taken off all the way around the house.””?  The House and its Interiors  Despite the myriad issues, the house that emerged over the early months of 1930 is one of the extraordinary modernist works of that era. The massive white cubic structure is set near the edge of the upper portion of the steeply sloping lot, imme- diately adjacent to Nad Hradnim vodojemem Street. The north facade, which is set back some distance from StieSovicka Street (the principal thoroughfare in the area) and featuring a large balcony and windows, has the appearance of the building’s main or front facade. But the entry is, in fact, on the other, or south, side, which has much smaller windows and is largely unarticulated. The east and west facades are also differentiated, the west facade only with smaller and unaligned windows, the east sporting a large oriel. All of the facades, despite their differences, share the same understated look. Loos explained to Kriegerbeck why he had placed so little emphasis on them: “I do not play with the facade, I do not live there. Take a chair, sit in the rain in the middle of the street and look at the facade. If1 do a facade in the street, I doa nice ground floor, sometimes cladding the first floor in marble. Above the first floor I leave it uncovered, I can’t see that far.”"*  The matter-of-factness of the building’s exterior cloaks the richness and com- plexity of its interior spaces. The south entry, which is set in a shallow recess below  
street level, leads past a travertine door surround and bench (a late addition to the design) and into a narrow, emerald-green corridor. Just beyond is a vestibule, orig- inally painted white, with a dark blue ceiling and yellow curtains. From there a right-angled stair leads to the double-height living room. This space is unusually large, measuring 11 x 5.6 meters (36 x 18 feet), and 4.3 meters (14 feet) high. On one side of the hall are massive windows and a door to the north balcony; on the other is a long, green-gray Cippolino marble wall, which conceals two stair- ways, one to the boudoir and library (or gentleman’s study), the other to the dining room and the upper floors. The dining room is situated just above the hall, in a lower, more intimate space, overlooking the hall. On the other side of the same intermediate floor, or entresol, are the split-level boudoir, the study, and, con- cealed from public view, the kitchen and pantry. Above, on the next floor, are the bedrooms, bathrooms, and a children’s playroom; and on the topmost floor are a storage space and a summer breakfast or tearoom, which gives out onto another terrace.  Heinrich Kulka, in his monograph on Loos published a year after the villa’s com- pletion, described the experience of walking into and through it:  Through a weather-covered entrance, a wind porch, and a small vestibule, by climb- ing several winding stairs, we enter the hall, which surprises us by its beauty... The hall, the dining room, and the staircase produce an all-embracing spatial effect of unparalleled harmony. The columns and the stepped bannisters of the staircase ascending to the dining room are lined with sublime greenish marble (Cippolino de Salon, Valley of the Rhéne), displaying reddish blue and yellow veins. The dining room and study are made from mahogany, the lady’s boudoir is from lemon wood."”  This description, however, hardly does justice to the richness and complexity of the interiors. They are made up of a succession of highly varied spaces, with het- erogeneous forms of cladding or surfaces. The house is effectively divided into three zones. One, a service zone, includes the garage and laundry on the lowermost floor, the kitchen and pantry on the main floor, a rear service stair, and a maid’s room on the upper level. The second zone is made up of the principal living and entertaining spaces on the lower floors. And the third includes the more private realm: the bedrooms and children’s playroom on what is essentially the third floor and the breakfast or tearoom on the fourth. The house is also subdivided into two spatial spheres: the upper portion, the top two levels, which preserve the conven- tional horizontal layering of floors, and the lower floors in which the Raumplan idea is fully developed.  The functional and spatial partitioning is possible because of the house’s unusual structural system. The exterior walls are conventional load-bearing block construc-  tion, but the interior supports consist of four reinforced concrete columns that carry the horizontal beams. By moving the beams, which extend from the walls to the columns, up or down in relation to each other, Loos was able to vary 
the heights of the different rooms. The four columns, which form a rectangle in the building’s center, also support the upper stairway, which wraps around their edges, leaving an open well and, in conjunction with a rooftop skylight, permit light to enter into the interior. The effect, then, in the lower part of the house is a series of stacked and rotating platforms, which resolve in the upper stories into a sort of perimeter plan with an open stair at the center.  Space and Meaning  It is this spatial play, the product of the Raumplan, to which the Villa Miiller owes its notoriety. But while Loos is now justly famous for his idea, he had curiously little to say about it during his lifetime. He had begun to experiment with the Raumplan concept early on, first in his Goldman & Salatsch Building on Michae- lerplatz in Vienna (1909-11), and later, during and after World War I, in a series of commissions for single-family houses. Throughout the last decade and a half of his career, he investigated and reinvestigated strategies of spatial manipulation, experi- menting with various means to foster pleasing, affective, and functional volumes. His few specific spoken or written references to the Raumplan came late, starting only in 1929, at the time he was already at work on the Villa Miiller. In a footnote to an essay penned after the death of his favorite cabinetmaker, Joseph Veillich, Loos exclaimed that his new approach was the “greatest revolution in architecture”:  Before Immanuel Kant humanity could not yet think in space and architects were compelled to make the toilet as high as the hall. Only by dividing everything in two could they obtain lower rooms. As man will one day succeed in playing chess on a three-dimensional board, so, too, other architects will find spatial solutions for the ground plan.’°  Kulka, writing two years later, employed the term Raumplan for the first time in print (Loos never used it in any of his writings), arguing that Loos had “introduced a fundamentally new and higher spatial concept: thinking in space, the planning of rooms of differing heights, composing these with interlocking volumes to create a harmonious, inseparable unit that formed a single spatially economical whole.”’” Loos’ most complete statement, however, can be found in Lhota’s transcript of a conversation he had with Loos in Pilsen in 1930; “My architecture,” he quotes Loos  as saying:  is not conceived in plans, but in spaces (cubes). I do not design floor plans, facades, sections. I design spaces. For me, there is no ground floor, first floor, etc...For me, there are only contiguous, continual spaces, rooms, anterooms, terraces, ete. Stories merge and spaces relate to each other. Every space requires a different height: the dining room is surely higher than the pantry — thus the ceilings are set at different 
levels. To join these spaces in such a way that the rise and fall are not only unobserv- able but also practical, in this I see what is for others the great secret, although it is for me a great matter of course...It is just this spatial interaction and spatial austerity that  thus far I have best been able to realize in Dr. Miiller’s house.”®  Loos’ allusion to austerity here highlights one of his rationales for introducing the Raumplan — to utilize space more economically. Space taken away from less important rooms, he claimed, could be added to other, more significant areas. Yet Loos also had other motives. Chief among them was to use the ideas of spatial play to enhance — to vitalize — the rituals of daily life. To move through the Villa Miiller is to engage the architecture both physically (through the act of climbing or walking or touching) and psychologically (by experiencing the dramatic alterations in space, texture, color, and light). Everywhere in the house one is confronted with different architectural effects and architectural realities; living in and moving through it necessitates a high level of mental and physical activity.  The Millers lived in the villa during the 1930s, and they continued to inhabit it throughout the German occupation and the early postwar years. But after the Communist seizure of power in Czechoslovakia in 1948, the house was converted into an “apartment villa,” and the Miillers were forced to move into a few rooms. FrantiSek Miiller died in 1951, and the house was “nationalized” in 1955. Milada Miillerova occupied the several rooms that had been allotted to the couple — after 1962, it was only the former servants’ quarters — until her death in 1968. In 1972, the villa was put at the disposal of the Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the Central Committee of the Czechoslovak Communist Party, and it was not until 1989, after the Velvet Revolution, that it was returned to Eva Miillerova. In 1995, the city of Prague purchased the house and assigned it to the City Museum of Prague. From 1998 to 2000, it underwent extensive restoration and is now accessible to the public.”  In architectural circles, the Villa Miiller almost immediately became a revered object. Loos himself believed it to be one of his most important works. On the occasion of his 60th birthday party, held at the house on December 10, 1930, Loos wrote in the Miiller’s guest book that it was his “most beautiful house!” (He added that Frantisek Miller was “the most intelligent client I have ever had,” and “This is the entire secret of architecture.””°) Shortly after the house’s com- pletion, Robert Scheu, a protégé of Loos, wrote fawningly: “Now we know the beauty of reason. The glory of the modern age incarnated in the splendor of space. Modern humankind has its home.””’ And Kulka, also hardly an objective observer, described the villa as the most complete expression of Loos’ conception of architecture.”  But the verdict from others was equally glowing. The Czech art historian Antonin Matéjéek, for example, gushed (though not entirely accurately): “Having found an ideal investor in Dr. F. Miller, A. Loos was able to incorporate his artistic creed in this house to a hitherto unattained perfection. In all previous cases, he had  
to fight obstacles interfering with the purity of his idea; anywhere else, he had to accommodate the wishes of the client beyond the acceptable measure.””’  The more thoughtful discussions of the house that appeared in later years emphasized its remarkably plain exterior and the sophisticated spatial play of the interior. Gustav Kiinstler, who along with Ludwig Miinz produced the first complete monograph on Loos’ works in 1964, rendered a typical assessment:  Nothing on the |house’s] exterior...betrays the truly novel conception, the product of a genial design ability, of a complete and wholly unordinary idea of available living space and its organization. The usual scheme of the single-family house — living rooms on the ground floor, bedrooms on the second floor, connected by a stair, which is to say two wholly independent spatial groupings, on different levels and independent of each other — has been rearranged to form a convincing...and harmo- nious sequencing of rooms of different sizes and heights, which through the course of a gradual climb from the entry to the main living floor...fuse the house into an extraordinary whole.”  Some later commentators, however, had difficultly reconciling Loos’ plain facades (which seemingly offer evidence of his anti-ornament pronouncements) and his remarkably prescient spatial ideas with the villa’s sumptuous, and in many respects traditional, furnishings and finishes. Nikolaus Pevsner, Vincent Scully, and Kenneth Frampton, among others, all dealt with this issue effectively by pointing to what was modern and ignoring what seemed not to be. But other historians and critics were able to bring together the varied faces of the villa. Yehuda Safran and Wilftied Wang, writing in 1985, argued that Loos’ design had “preserved a ‘desire for habitability,’ in terms not of function but of the shape of the interior space.” The colors, surfaces, and textures all operated to normalize the spaces, making them livable:  Against such conceptual rigor, the green Cipollino marble mounted in panels creates with its pattern of veining a ready-made design over the entire wall of the staircase. The block of stone stands out against the white walls, allowing one to perceive the interior at a glance. The extreme variety of colour — yellow curtains and red brick fireplace, green curtains and granite slab used as a dining room table — intensify the links effected by contrasts and similarities.”  The Italian historian Benedetto Gravagnuolo similarly maintained that Loos’ stress on color and comfort were evidence of his intention to heighten the livability of the house — something that had been at the center of Loos’ ambitions from the start of his career — and that the villa “synthesizes many of the ideas of design that had emerged in [Loos’] previous works.””° Giovanni Denti, professor at the Poli- tecnico in Milan, echoed the assessment: “The silence of the exterior protects the interior, which is an ensemble of places offering hospitality to different moments 
of family life ... In the Miiller house every place has its own character, its own aspect, determined by materials and Raumplan.”””  Leslie van Duzer and Kent Kleinman, who wrote one of the best books on the house, Villa Muller: A Work of Adolf Loos, also underscored the importance of the interior finishes:  Each room. ..is not only distinctively formed, but also uniquely clad. Despite the den- sity and opacity of the construction, one experiences the interior of the building as a sequence of linings. Like slipping in and out of fine dinner jackets, lining succeeds lining. The entry sequence, for example, is composed of four discrete spaces and four discrete wrappers.”  Van Duzer and Kleinman have suggested, however, that a person’s experience of the house can differ greatly, depending on whether he or she is actively moving — “roving” — through the house or passively seated. The “roving subject ... is further privileged by the freedom to gaze and peer across boundaries,” permitted even “visual access to the landscape beyond the shell of the building,” whereas anyone stationary within has a far more limited experience because the rooms are often bounded in ways that reduce or eliminate such visual connectivity.”  Beatriz Colomina has drawn a related comparison, emphasizing the tension between elements of theatricality and intimacy in the house:  In the Miiller House...the sequence of spaces, articulated around the staircase, fol- lows an increasing sense of privacy from the drawing room to the dining room and study to the “lady’s room” (Zimmer der Dame) with its raised sitting area, which occu- pies the center or “heart” of the house. But the window of this space looks onto the living space...|TJhe most intimate room is like a theater box, placed just over the entrance to the social spaces in this house, so that any intruder could easily be seen. Likewise, the view of the exterior, toward the city, from this “theater box” is con- tained within a view of the interior. Suspended in the middle of the house, this space assumes the character both of a “sacred” space and a point of control. Comfort is produced by two seemingly opposing conditions, intimacy and control.”°  Precisely how much of any of this Loos intended, we have no way of knowing. He left few clues to his objectives in designing the spaces and even fewer about how he thought his clients should live there. The little remaining evidence suggests that he thought simply about providing his inhabitants a full and rich environment, one that was intimate, secure, and comfortable, one that allowed a certain flexibil- ity for conducting the rituals of daily life. If the paths through the house describe a distinctive journey and a very specific set of spatial experiences (from closed to open, from darker to lighter, etc.), they are also part of a narrative of dwelling. One enters, one removes one’s outer clothing in the cloakroom and then ascends to the living room. There one might relax or entertain. The room is both public and 
private. The dining room, poised just above, is about an even more intimate form of interaction. Whether the Millers were dining alone or with guests, the space, with its lower ceiling and cozy scale, offered a field for close conversation.  Like almost all grand Central European houses of the time, the villa is also metic- ulously segmented: there are the servants’ spaces, always concealed, and spaces for the Miillers and their guests. The divisions between public and private are similarly fully drawn. The public spaces — and the public portion of the promenade through the house — end at the dining room. What lies beyond, the boudoir, Frantisek Miiller’s study, and the bedrooms and breakfast room above, are all screened away. To enter this zone is to be admitted to a different and far more personal realm.  Beyond that, Loos appears to have given his clients the latitude — literally and figuratively, the space — to shape their own lives. The furnishings and finishes, which meld the traditional and the modern, are about expressing the Miiller’s life- style, much less about assembling it. Because the interiors are not stylistically con- sistent, they can admit new pieces and new forms. Loos’ only stipulations here — as in all of his interiors — is that they should be of high quality (and therefore durable) and that they stand outside the cycles of fashion, which would prevent their rapid obsolescence. But since the house was not conceived with the purifying rigor that characterized much of modernism, it falls into another category, a deeply personal one. Lhota’s comment, that Loos was “not an architect but a building philosopher,” rings true here. The Villa Miller is perhaps less a modernist architectural object than a specific statement about the experience of modernity and modern living.  Notes  Courtesy of Wolfgang Thaler Photographer.  1. Petr Domanicky and Petr Jindra, Loos-Plzef -Souvislosti/Loos-Pilsen-Conncetions (Pilsen: Zapadoteska galerie v Plzni, 2001), 162-7.  2. Lhota had first worked with Loos on the renovation of the Brummel House in Pilsen. Domanicky and Jindra, Loos-Plzeft-Souvislosti/Loos-Pilsen-Conncetions, 165-6.  3. Ibid.  4. The most authoritative account of the house’s genesis and construction is Karel Ksandr, ed., Villa Miiller (Prague: Argo Publishers, 2000). See especially the essay by Pavel Zah- radnik, “History of the Villa until the End of 1994,” 26-101. See also Burkhardt Ruksch- cio and Roland Schachel, Adolf Loos: Leben und Werk, 2nd ed. (Salzburg: Residenz Verlag, 1987), 610-11; Leslie van Duzer and Kent Kleinman, Villa Miiller: A Work of Adolf Loos (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1994), 24-8; Giovanni Denti, Adolf Loos: Villa Miiller/Casa Miiller a Praga (Florence: Alinea Editrice, 1999).  5. Van Duzer and Kleinman, Villa Miiller, 32.  6. Willy Hofmann, “Eine Villa von Adolf Loos,” Prager Tagblatt (22 February 1930): 3.  7. Quoted in Pavel Zahradnik, “History of the Villa until the End of 1994,” in Ksandr, Villa Miiller, 52.  8. Zahradnik, “History of the Villa,” 56. 
DYMAXION HOUSE  R. Buckminster Fuller  AnnMarie Brennan  Buckminster Fuller, Photograph of Dymaxion Dwelling Machine Wichita House with steel  tube “packaging” overlaid with drawing submitted to the U.S. Patent Office, filed March 26, 1946.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
SHIP SHAPE  In January 1975, the American designer and inventor R. Buckminster Fuller (1895-1983) gave a series of 12 continuous lectures lasting 42 hours. In the lectures, simply titled “Everything I Know,” Fuller spoke on a broad range of topics that included his personal history, inventions, and the seemingly esoteric vignettes that illuminated his thinking. At one point he spoke admiringly of the indigenous Polynesian people of New Zealand, the Maori. Initially classified as “ignorant” by European settlers because they could only count to two, Fuller claimed that the Maori were in fact quite advanced since they had already discovered the advantages of binary systems, anticipating the emerging world of computers.  Fuller continued to note that these “water people” who ruled the South Pacific seas, despite not having literature or written language, did not possess charts or maps for navigation. They lived their lives without very much need for clothing, and therefore the Maori seamen did not have pockets in which to carry devices such as compasses. However, they did have very long ear lobes embedded with large discs fashioned out of bone or ivory, which, according to Fuller, signaled the cardinal points of a type of corporal compass. Fuller admired the Maori and considered their novel method of navigation as “a very mature, very economic, very efficient kind of information controlling device.”! Not only could the Maori navigate the open seas of the South Pacific with their “information controlling devices,” but the constantly changing forces of weather, tides, and currents necessitated that their rings merge within the extraneous skin, thereby transform- ing the surface of the body into a site of performance. This small passage demon- strates Fuller’s appreciation for other skilled “water people,” but more importantly it illustrates his approach to design centered upon the very same appreciation of performance, and underlines his understanding of the built envi- ronment as being formed by undulating flows, forces, and turbulences of a non- Cartesian, smooth space reminiscent of the sea.  The concept of dynamic forces shaping form in order to increase performance was the foundation of Fuller’s most noted project, the Dymaxion House. While Fuller is best known for his dome structures, the Dymaxion House is perhaps the most important failed architecture project of the twentieth century. It can be considered a failure because the project never achieved its primary goal of being a mass-produced house that would be transported directly to its customers across the United States at an affordable price. The house’s significance, however, lies in the fact that Fuller reimagined the way people would live in the future, and introduced to the architectural profession new criteria by which to judge and assess housing design, which was according to a standard of improved performance, not unlike the 
manufacturing and performance benchmarks of industrially-designed objects such as boats, cars, and airplanes. His insight into this advanced approach was derived through his ability to transfer knowledge from his experience in manufacturing and the U.S. military to the field of design.  The design and redesign of the house spanned the entirety of Fuller’s early career from 1927 to 1946, undergoing many name changes; from the initial 4D Lightful Houses of 1927, to the Fuller or Dymaxion House, to the Dymaxion Dwelling Unit or Machine, to the last version, the 1946 Wichita House. It served as the catalyst for many auxiliary projects that were guided by Fuller’s principle of the Dymaxion creed, which included the Dymaxion bathroom unit, the Dymaxion car, and Dymaxion deployment units.  The house design developed through many iterations over a period of almost 20 years; therefore, when speaking of the Dymaxion House, it is a reference to a specific design vision that proposed the application of scientific methods of industrial assembly to construction processes, rather than simply the design of one type of futuristic-looking house. A constant theme defining all of Fuller’s projects during this time was the concept of the Dymaxion creed. The term “Dymaxion” is the combination of the words “dynamic” and “maximum,” where the “maximum gain of advantage [is derived from] the minimal energy input.”?  Industry: Housing Design Based on Performance  As a young adult, Fuller was twice dismissed from Harvard University, and each time this happened his mother would send him to work in factories. His first job was an apprenticeship to a machine installer at a cotton mill in Quebec, his second was with the Armour Meat Company where he was fascinated by the rapid, com- plex, and semi-automated methods of the meatpacking process. Although his time on the factory floor was brief, Fuller was able to observe and comprehend the important principles that determined success in industry. He too witnessed first- hand how a factory operated and the manner in which the machine tools func- tioned, and most importantly he gained insight into the ways in which value was created. He would later claim that a significant corollary of mass production was that it was premised upon a process of “constantly improving performance,” dependent upon perpetually improving the technology for manufacturing pro- ducts of “increasingly improved and measurable performance.”’ This crucial aspect of successful industry was one that Fuller did not see happening within the con- struction of American housing.  Therefore it was through the design and production of the Dymaxion House that Fuller sought to establish a new housing industry by treating houses like indus- trially-designed products engineered to be mass produced within a factory using 
the latest in material technology and adhering to advanced performance standards. He conceded that engineered building products, such as elevators, lighting, and heating systems were products of industry; however, the house, in its entirety, was not conceived with the same drive toward constantly improved innovation and increased performance.  Adhering to his Dymaxion creed, Fuller’s house was to be produced mostly from the lightweight material of aluminum, manufactured in a factory, and then shipped in a reusable stainless steel tube to any location within the United States along with trained service crews who would immediately set upon the task of assembling the house. A large crane would suspend a central aluminum mast, the house’s main structure, while other parts, such as the main ground floor platform, and interior and exterior walls, were to be constructed by connecting them to the central mast  by a universal joint. This central column, or mast, would also perform as the mechanical core, containing all of the plumbing, electrical, and ventilation systems. Once the assembly was completed, and state-of-the-art appliances and pre- fabricated bathrooms installed, the house would be lowered onto the ground and “anchored.”*  U.S. Navy: Dealing with Dynamic Forces  Fuller was introduced to sailing and navigation as a young boy growing up ona small island in Penobscot Bay, Maine. After his university misadventures, he enlisted in the U.S. Navy, a move that fostered his childhood interests of sailing, navigation, and boats. Fuller thrived in the disciplined environment of the Navy where he was exposed to the logistics of Atlantic transport operations and the organized movement of supplies moved over large expanses of geographical ter- ritory. His responsibilities as U.S naval officer required the ability to understand statistical methods (and early versions of operations research), map projection, and chart making.  John McHale noted that the atmosphere of the Navy exposed Fuller to “precise mathematical reckoning, advanced communications and the technical know-how involved in the logistics of mass tonnage movements, ballistics and navigation;” influences that ultimately led to his concept of comprehensive total environmental design and pre-planning.’ His exposure to the inner workings of manufacturing coupled with the logistical prowess of the Navy provided Fuller with the conclu- sion that the key element to success in industry was to understand it as a constantly mobile entity of fluid systems. Fuller explained that by 1927, he understood that innovation for house manufacturing was not to be found in the automobile indus- try, but in shipbuilding and the aeronautical world, which was based on the prin- cipal of measuring performance per pound of weight.  In order to illustrate the amount of advanced engineering and technology that went into shipbuilding compared to architecture, Fuller often made the 
comparison between the Mauretania ocean liner and the Hotel Belmont in New York City.° The hotel, Fuller noted, received its electricity from the city infrastruc- ture and received its food twice a day from local suppliers, since its refrigeration storage capacity was very small. However the ocean liner was required to carry its own power and provisions for 1,500 people for a total of 30 days. Based on a per guest basis, the Mauretania weighed one-fifteenth of the Belmont, proving that weight does not equal stability. The Mauretania could withstand the motion of open sea, whereas the Hotel Belmont would collapse under the same conditions. Fuller concluded by pointing out the fact that if the Mauretania weighed as much as the Belmont Hotel per unit of performance the boat would quickly sink.  4D Lightful Houses  Fuller’s first iteration of the Dymaxion House, called the 4D Lightful House, was based on a hexagonal plan created through the geometry of triangles. The primary problem with existing housing stock for Fuller was the heavy, load-bearing walls of traditional construction. To alleviate this issue, Fuller set out to design a house made of lightweight yet strong modern materials that made up most ship and air- plane construction.  The Dymaxion House was designed according to its performance in fuel con- sumption, water requirements, actual production of individual parts, wind and other weather conditions, and the ease of construction and delivery of materials to the site. Unlike the existing housing stock in the United States at this time, Fuller imagined a new type of house as well as a novel means of constructing it. In addi- tion, he proposed a method of distributing the houses as rentable, exchangeable, and replaceable units, just as the telephone company would rent or lease a phone to its customers, and then provide the necessary logistics and infrastructure for the distribution of telephone services.  The 4D Houses, soon to be renamed Dymaxion Houses, would remain as a scaled model, nevertheless the project was essential in establishing Fuller's theory of “ephemeralization.” In Nine Chains to the Moon, Fuller defined ephemeralization as advanced technology’s innate ability to do more with less material, and thereby continually improve the quality of life while using less energy and natural resources.”  Dymaxion Bathroom  The 4D House included a prefabricated bathroom unit installed much like a corner cabinet. The first prototype, consisting of a continuous surface of welded copper, was commissioned by the American Standard Heating and Plumbing Company in 
1930. An additional 12 prototypes were developed in 1936 for the Phelps Dodge Copper Company. The innovative aspect of this bathroom design was that it was a compact, self-contained, structural unit that included a shower, bathtub, soap holder, toilet, walls, floor, and washbasin shaped from one continuous surface. At first the material was die-cut from a sheet of copper; this proved to be too heavy, however, and subsequently stainless steel was specified, and later fiberglass. The design was the culmination of considerations regarding performance, supported by the inherent properties of the material selected, using the most advanced indus- trial methods of manufacture.  Sigfried Giedion, in his concluding chapter on the mechanized bathroom in Mechanization Takes Command, was the first historian to take serious note of Fuller’s Dymaxion bathroom unit, and claimed that the central mechanical core of the Dymaxion House was a harbinger of postwar housing design. He glow- ingly described how the Dymaxion bathroom was easily and efficiently manufactured:  All the components are pressed simultaneously with the metal skin, their hollows sometimes helping to give the system additional rigidity. |EJvery square inch was worked out, so that the dies would have the highest industrial efficiency, and the bathrooms could be stamped out by the million at minimal cost.*  Despite his initial praise, Giedion would conclude that the bathroom unit fell short in terms of comfort; its dimensions were not unlike those found on a boat or submarine and therefore too small and rigid for any house design with a flexible ground plan.”  Dymaxion Car  Since the Dymaxion Dwelling Machine was conceived as a house that could be built in any location without roads or other infrastructure, Fuller devised a mode of transport as an accessory to the Dymaxion House: “I decided to try to develop an omni-medium transport vehicle to function in the sky, on negotiable terrain, or on water — to be securely landable anywhere, like an eagle.” *° The Dymaxion Trans- port Unit was initially designed as a “hoverable-type jet stilt ‘flying bedstead.’ However, these plans were modified to create a state-of-the-art, streamlined car, engineered with the assistance of famed yacht designer Starling Burgess.  Burgess assisted in translating Fuller’s concept into an aerodynamic automobile. He was best known for his design of the Enterprise, the 1930 America’s Cup winner. Not unlike the duralumin mast of Fuller’s Dymaxion House, Burgess’ innovative yacht design was the first to use duralumin masts and winches, reducing the work required of 20 sailors down to four. A 1933 article in Fortune magazine claimed that Burgess, a “fine mathematician,” was known to rise at 4 am to complete a series of 
calculus problems, and noted that his experience in designing streamlined yachts was “tremendously helpful in designing the [Dymaxion] car.”’?  Shaped into the streamlined form of a teardrop, the 11-passenger, three-wheeled car was easily maneuverable since its rear wheel acted as a boat rudder steering the direction of the vehicle. The front wheels, providing traction, were powered by an eight-cylinder Ford motor concealed within a custom built chassis and bodywork made of duralumin, weighing about 1,700 pounds compared to the Ford Sedan at 2,700 pounds.’’ Despite the advanced technology and streamlined, futuristic aes- thetic, the Dymaxion car would be yet another shelved project, as an unfortunate accident involving the car at the 1933 World Fair killed the driver and injured two other passengers. The cause of the accident was not entirely known; however, it was rumored to be a problem with the steering, prompting investors to abandon the project.  Dymaxion Dwelling Machine, or Wichita House  By 1944, Fuller was re-enlisted in the military and serving as an officer in the Eco- nomic Warfare Division when union leaders in Washington, D.C., who remem- bered the 1927 mass-produced Dymaxion House, contacted him. As the end of World War II approached, the U.S. Department of Labor, along with the Aeronau- tical Production Division of the War Production Board, were trying to find a solu- tion to a series of anticipated problems that would plague the country at war’s end; a shortage of laborers wanting to work in Mid-Western armament and airplane factories, a surplus of materials, specifically aluminum, and a shortage of appropri- ate housing for the general civilian population. It appeared that the production of a redesigned Dymaxion House could resolve all of these problems, while achieving Fuller’s goal of transforming house construction from a craft-based trade to an industrialized system.  The major difference between the 1927 version of the Dymaxion House and the 1946 Wichita model was that Fuller re-engineered the exterior skin according to the improved tensile strength of aluminum and incorporated the most-advanced knowledge of aircraft construction since it was to be produced at the B-29 bomber Beech Aircraft plant in Wichita, Kansas. The original hexagon shape changed to a streamlined circular plan, and the roof was a smooth, curved surface compared to the previous angular form. The aluminum monocoque roof was self-supporting, and the curved exterior walls were tied back to the central mast through tension members enveloped within the roof. With the mast in compression and the roof and walls in tension due to the double curvature shape, the structure, modeled upon the idea of a Chinese lantern, was substantially rigid and did not require addi- tional bracing, columns, or trusses for support. The increased performance in struc- ture can be found in what Fuller described as shape factors. When Fuller placed the Dymaxion prototype in a wind tunnel, he discovered that heat loss occurred in 
direct proportion to drag, revealing that heat loss could be reduced if the house shape took on an aerodynamic form.’* The air quality and comfort was further assured through a ventilator located on the roof, which would change the air in the house up to ten times per hour.  The redesign enabled Fuller to realize an actual prototype that manifested his theory of ephemeralization with a house encompassing 800 square feet of floor space and weighing a total of 4 tons; demonstrating a 98% reduction in weight from a traditionally built home. Despite these technological innovations and a willing pool of 3,000 customers placing orders, the Wichita House would not be mass pro- duced. Investors were unwilling to contribute the required $10 million to re-tool the aircraft plant since the project did not have any marketing, distribution, and installation strategies.  Dymaxion Legacy  The greatest legacy of the Dymaxion House was the manner in which Fuller’s design approach influenced generations of future architects and historians. Interest- ingly enough, it seems that Fuller received more acknowledgment and apprecia- tion for his work by British architects, historians, and designers than American ones. Alison and Peter Smithson were inspired by the continuous structural surface of the Dymaxion bathroom unit for their 1956 House of the Future. Within the same U.K. design circles, the Dymaxion House served as a demonstration of port- ability for the architecture group Archigram.’? While these young designers attempted to imitate the technical and mechanical imagery of Fuller’s designs, and the kit-of-parts aspect of the Dymaxion House appealed to the new postwar sensibility for mobility, Archigram was not interested in the performative nature of the house. As Hadas Steiner noted, Archigram wanted to create a type of mobile architecture that “violated the principle of firmitas” and the Dymaxion House served as an applicable precedent.’® Fuller's house actualized this new postwar urge for freedom and the ability to roam, and it was this secondary dynamic aspect — the house’s ability to be located anywhere without the reliance of infrastructure — that inspired Archigram.  The next generation influenced by Fuller’s concepts includes the group of archi- tects characterized as High-Tech, such as Norman Foster, Nicholas Grimshaw, and Richard Rogers. The Dymaxion House demonstrated a new set of design values that placed research, the development of technology regarding energy, perfor- mance, and the transfer of knowledge from other industries above any outmoded notion of (postmodern) style. Foster claimed that Fuller had a “profound influence on my own work and thinking. Inevitably, I also gained an insight into his philos- ophy and achievements.”’” During the last decade of Fuller's life, Foster established a relationship with the inventor /architect, and his admiration for his work included financing a built replication of Fuller’s Dymaxion car. 
Although not acknowledged as an important influence, the work of contempo- rary American architect Greg Lynn seems to revisit problems similar to the ones Fuller addressed almost 80 years ago. Not unlike the “dynamic” in Fuller’s Dymax- ion creed, Lynn’s design strategy is one based on the concept of “animation.” In his 1999 book, Animate Form, Lynn proposed a new architecture that was not animate itself, but was in fact formed by moving, fluid forces acting upon it. By adopting this approach to architecture, traditional notions of statics and structure were replaced by a “more advanced system of dynamic organizations.” !*  To illustrate his concept, Lynn often cites the designing of a boat hull, where naval architects are required to factor in mobile forces such as flow, wind, turbu- lence, and viscosity, in both upwind and downwind performance. However, the actual boat hull is static in its final form; “While physical form can be defined in terms of static coordinates, the virtual force of the environment in which it is designed contributes to its shape.”"® The design of the boat hull negotiates these shaping forces by engineering curves and inflection to modulate and respond, but the actual surface of the hull does not move.  Since the publication of Animate Form, Lynn has in fact entered into a new design realm that includes both moving and non-moving parts called “projectiles.” Like Fuller, one of Lynn’s first projects was to design a factory-produced house called the Embryological House (2000). Using an iterative process of digital animation pro- grams borrowed from film and aerospace industries, Lynn set up a series of control curves and shape grammars within a matrix that determined the way each form would interact with others, and then established a set of expressions dictating how the geometry defined structure, cladding, and apertures.”° This process, an early attempt at mass customization, created a series of 50,000 varied house designs which did not require adding or subtracting structure or cladding to create this formal difference.  Paralleling Fuller’s interest in everything related to boats and sailing, Lynn estab- lished a company with a naval architect, and now designs seafaring vessels such as the GF42 Trimaran. The process of designing these boats includes the application of fluid dynamics, which calculates both the force of wind and the dynamics of water within a single model. A basic, instinctual geometry of the hull, rig, and sails is created, and then these shapes are sent to a computer with massive processing power, to calculate all of the data. It is through this iterative process — the analysis of the flow and motion across surfaces, together with a graphical response — that the final design is selected.  For Lynn, the most innovative aspect in the boating construction industry is the simple fabrication of materials for the hull and sails consisting solely of layers of fibers and resin rather than a frame structure with cladding fastened to it; a con- figuration that occurs in most traditionally conceived architectural works. Consid- erably less expensive than Fuller’s process of constructing with panels of die-cut aluminum panels for the Dymaxion House, these vessels are made from 100% car- bon fibers strategically placed along load paths and then molded together with glue 
and heated into a strong composite material.”! Fuller and Lynn discovered the per- formative advantages of shape factors and the collapsing of both envelope and structure into one smooth continuous surface.  Conclusion  In his 1969 book, Architecture of the Well-tempered Environment, the British architec- tural historian Reyner Banham, in reference to Fuller’s Dymaxion approach of “ephemeralization,” recalled Paul Valery’s book Eupalinos, the Architect. He explained how Eupalinos was primarily concerned with applying accepted meth- ods to complete specific tasks, and, according to the tradition of the architectural profession, discovered a theoretical problem embedded within every pragmatic decision. However, Tridon, the shipbuilder, attempted to resolve the problem at hand in the most direct and efficient manner, whether it was part of the ship- building tradition or not, and considered philosophical theories as additional guid- ance toward achieving the most direct solution. Banham continued the analogy by pointing out that contemporary architectural education was comparable to a “sophisticated yacht with glass-fiber hull and aluminum mast” and other advanced materials. However, in terms of performance, the architecture produced by these elite institutions still required “an onboard motor to be used (under conditions of great embarrassment) in emergencies.””” He concluded by noting that arguments that defend the use of traditional methods in architecture often ignore the fact that outside the “protected circle” of academia and the staged discourse of architectural media, “there has been for almost a century a tide of innovation in environmental management fully comparable with that in nautical design.””?  These insights begin to explain the unsuccessful acceptance of Fuller’s Dymaxion House. A 1947 Fortune article referred to prefabricated housing as “the industry that capitalism forgot,” noting that an entire generation of architects dismissed the possibil- ity of prefabricated housing because they could not foresee how it could work within contemporary political and financial structures, as is still the case today.’* Nevertheless, Fuller’s concept of performance transferred from the sphere of industrial design and manufacture to architecture is a noble goal with continuing resonance in contemporary architectural practices that currently explore the increased possibilities ofnew advances in digital software and custom fabrication technologies. It becomes clear that the pro- fession now needs to find a solution to overcome the same political and economic bar- riers that thwarted Fuller’s best efforts.  Notes  * Courtesy Carl Solway Gallery, Cincinnati, Ohio, and The Estate of R. Buckminster Fuller.  1. R. Buckminster Fuller, “Everything I Know,” transcript, Session 4, Part 8. (Jan. 1975), httn:/ /bfi ore /about-fuller/resources/evervthine-i-know /session-4#partg 
VDL RESEARCH HOUSE  Richard Neutra Edward R. Ford  Richard Neutra, VDL Research House II, Los Angeles, California, 1966 [1933, 39, 44] rebuilt after 1963 fire.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
The genesis of the VDL Research house was a meeting in Basel in 1930 between its architect, Richard Neutra, and the man for whom it is named, C. H. van der Leeuw. It was a critical moment in the lives of both men. Neutra was on an around-the-world promotional tour following the completion of the Lovell house in Los Angeles in 1929, an event that had quickly established his international reputation. For Neutra, then 38, it was the end of a long apprenticeship, educa- tion in his native Vienna and office work in Germany and America, which included short stays with Erich Mendelsohn and Frank Lloyd Wright. In 1926 Neutra moved to Los Angeles at the urging of his former classmate, Rudolph Schindler, and the Lovell commission followed soon after. Van der Leeuw, the director of the van Nelle coffee, tea, and tobacco company, had recently com- missioned two pivotal International Style buildings — his own house and the Van Nelle factory — both in Rotterdam, both the work of Brinkman é& Van der Vlugt. One year later, soon after Neutra visited Rotterdam, van der Leeuw visited Neu- tra in Los Angeles. Neutra relates that when van der Leeuw asked him why he had not built his own house, he replied that he lacked sufficient capital. Van der Leeuw asked how much he needed and gave him a check on the spot. Through- out his life Neutra always referred to it as the VDL research house, even after its rebuilding, and always insisted that the house was not merely an architect’s home but a scientific experiment, that van der Leeuw’s gift made possible a radical rethinking of the American house, revolutionizing the form of building, the proc- ess of construction and the science of design.  The True Importance of the House  This is the canonical history of the VDL house and, like many canonical histories, it contains some hyperbole and some inaccuracies. As a result the house and its importance have often been misunderstood, most importantly the degree, or more accurately the way, in which it was constructionally experimental. While it employed a variety of new materials and processes, it did not represent a radical break with the past in its basic construction; it was more evolutionary than revo- lutionary in its innovations. It is more of a prototypical system than a prototypical form, as there is much about the house that is particular to its program and its site. Nevertheless the VDL house remains a canonical work. Neutra’s intent was to redefine three aspects of American building culture — to transform the typical site plan of the single family house, to transform the process of single family house construction into an industrialized system, and to establish a scientific methodol- ogy for determining a sympathetic relationship between an architectural space and its occupants, using the newly acquired tools of psychology. All three ideas were central to much of 1930s modernism, but Neutra’s take on all, particularly the last two, was his own. 
Neutra’s first assault on the status quo was the site plan. He wished to rein- vent the typical American model of the isolated house sandwiched between a front lawn and back yard. The result would be a cell that could multiply itself into a high-density settlement pattern. The result, he predicted, would be a Los Angeles 40% the size with half the traffic. His task, as he described it, was to make density beguiling or, more specifically, to place three families on a 60 x 70 foot lot.' Neutra’s solution to the problems high density created was both real and psychological. Space would be both physically and psychologically expanded.  This translated into a plan of buildings that were pushed to the property bound- aries with courtyards between and accessed by multiple entries. This plan took some time to achieve realization. The first phase was a 24x 70 foot block built in 1933, a large, two-story building along Silver Lake Boulevard facing the Silver Lake reservoir, containing the major living space on the second floor, with a view of the lake, and Neutra’s office below. The office was accessed off the major street, the residence from the rear by an elevated stairway. In 1939 the second phase was added to the rear, a T-shaped wing that created an H-shaped complex with two courtyards. It included a garage and two rental apartments, one for a bachelor and one for a couple, to help with the financing. A smaller rooftop addition was made to the older wing in 1944.  Making Houses like Cars  The second of Neutra’s revolutions was to be constructional; in short, to make houses like cars. Neutra said it was the very idea of industrialization that brought him to America. Harwell Hamilton Harris, who worked for Neutra from 1928 to 1932, said, more specifically, that it was the ideas of Henry Ford.” Ford saw rigid standardization as the key to the economies of mass production and Neutra, along with Le Corbusier and Gropius, agreed. But an equally important influence on Neutra’s constructional conceptions was his work for Holabird & Roche on the documentation and construction of the Palmer House Hotel in Chicago. Among the many European architects who admired American construction, as opposed to American architecture, Neutra was one of the few to experience the former under construction first-hand. In terms of formal and constructional consequences these experiences were manifested in two ways. The first, derived from Ford, was the idea of standardized components but of a relatively small scale. These consisted of a minimum number of components that were to be applied in a maximum number of functional conditions. The second construc- tional principal, growing out of his Chicago experience, was that modern con- struction, regardless of program or scale, “consist[s] of skeleton construction clad with lightweight materials.” The Palmer House Hotel was to Neutra a 
strange hybrid, a heavy masonry envelope hung on a light steel frame. He wished to hang a light envelope on a light frame.  The ideas of the rigidly standardized part and a skin and frame construction had achieved their most doctrinaire expression in Neutra’s Lovell house of 1929. Its standardized module consisted of a series of 4-inch steel H columns spaced at a ittle over 5 feet with standardized steel units of out-swinging casement windows between. The opaque portions of the wall were gunite (sprayed-on concrete). oints were bolted or welded, not nailed; the structure was steel, not wood, and there was, in theory, minimal on-site labor. This facade pattern was nearly univer- sally applied. The same structural bay and the same window unit enclose library, bedroom, and bathroom, and, with variations in the height of the windows, are placed on the north, south, east, and west elevations. There were of course open- ings, erosions, and protrusions in this envelope, but the idea of the rigid module, made of rigidly standardized units, and hung on a rigidly standardized industria- ized frame, was pervasive. There was an absolute clarity of what was structural frame and what was not.  If Neutra was to adopt the Lovell house system or another one like it to the VDL house he had to face some economic realities. The Lovell house is twice the size of VDL and cost $12 a square foot. The 2000-square foot VDL house was eventually built for $4 a square foot. If the VDL house was to be a prototype on the order of the Lovell, Neutra would have to do so at one-third of the cost. Van der Leeuw’s check was for $3000; the eventual cost of the house was $10,000 and the check was an interest free loan, not a gift. Neutra never used the gunite-sprayed, steel-framed assembly of the Lovell house again, probably because subsequent commissions had less generous budgets. The VDL house, built three years after Lovell, is far less dogmatic in its application of the ideas of standards and industrialized systems and is perhaps the richer for it.  Neutra’s solution, at least in theory, was simple. If he could not afford a steel frame he would build a wooden frame that looked like steel. From a distance the facades of the VDL house seem similar to those of the Lovell. Columns tightly spaced at four feet are infilled with standardized window units of two steel case- ment windows. Closer inspection reveals far more crucial differences. The first floor level is supported by precast concrete beams, but the house above is wood columns and wood joists. The walls are stucco, not gunite. The VDL structure is best understood as a modification of the traditional balloon frame. The members of the typical balloon frame are 2 x 4 wood studs spaced at 16 inches supporting floors of joists, usually 2 x 8s or 2 x 10s, also spaced at 16 inches. In the VDL system the studs are larger and more widely spaced, 4 x 4s at 4 feet, while the floor and roof joist sizes and spacing remains the same. The long ribbons of standardized steel casement windows used at Lovell remain, and with them the large number of wall openings required. This degree of openness is less easily accommodated in wood than in steel. A balloon frame is structurally dependent on the wood sheathing of its exterior wall for lateral stability. Despite its name, it is far more of a wall system  
than a frame. In the VDL house diagonal bracing is added at every bay to provide additional lateral stability, making the whole system far more ofa structural hybrid, not purely a frame but not really a wall diaphragm. Neutra argued that the wood frame provided greater elasticity in earthquakes. He was careful not to say greater than what. So from a technological standpoint the VDL house is a much less a pure industrial product, much less like a car, than its predecessor. Despite the long list of innovative products the house contains, it is far more a hybrid of old and new technology.  In a 1935 article Neutra wrote that his office had “endeavored to give many indi- vidual jobs entrusted to us a character which would easily lend itself to series pro- duction.”* Later he called his early buildings “templates ... for the imaginative appropriation of our advancing industrial methods.”* What is implied by this is obvious: that there is little real prefabrication in the VDL house except for the steel windows. The rigid module probably accomplished little in terms of real economy. Harris wrote that Neutra saw himself as preparing the public — “education” he called it — so that when industrialization finally came the public would be ready. A dubious aspect of this “education” was painting all the exterior wood with alu- minum paint, implying that it was metal, but again, Neutra argued that he was preparing the public for the technical revolution that was to follow.®  Rooms with No Names  This standardized wall system is applied on all facades and all types of space. Neu- tra, writing in 1947, described the modern dwelling as consisting of spaces that, while by no means universal, could accommodate a variety of functions. He said, “In our house rooms have no names such as living room, dining room, bedroom ... Rooms are portions of our great living space and pragmatically elastic.”” This was particularly true of the VDL house, and helps to explain some of the odd moments in the plan — small rooms for major functions such as the dining room and kitchen, odd juxtapositions of space such as the intersection where the corridor connecting  the kitchen and dining crosses the public entry to the main living space.  The idea ofa standardized module consisting ofa structural bay and window was not new in 1933 or even 1927. Le Corbusier's villa at Garches used repetitive struc- tural bays of 2.5 and 5 meters with standardized 2.5-meter-wide windows between them; and the villas at Carthage, the Weisenhofsiedlung, and the original plan for the Villa Savoye do the same. The Corbusian facades of the 1920s also appear, at times, indifferent to program. The front of Garches has one row of standard window units and the rear has two, both enclosing a complex interior spatial layout. In this regard it has much in common with the first phase of the VDL house, which had one row of standard windows on the east side and two on the west, also only loosely related to the interior disposition of space, and both houses have a living space on the second floor with a external stair access. But while the VDL house owes a formal debt to Le 
Corbusier it also owes a technical debt to Frank Lloyd Wright. In 1911-17 Wright had developed the Ready-Cut prefabricated housing system. It used widely spaced 4 x 4 wood columns along with ribbons of casement windows in an arrangement identical to the VDL but about half the width.  Neutra convinced material suppliers to donate products to the house with the promise of publicity — glass and aluminum sandwich panels, Masonite walls, cork flooring, precast concrete floor joists, and blue enameled metal wall panels. Few if any were used for the first time here, but many were new on the market. Yet, excepting the precast joists used for the ground floor, most of the new products were finish materials, not structural, and created the appearance of a building gen- erated by new building products rather than the essence of one. Neutra’s intentions here, however, went well beyond simple economics. He frequently acknowledged the influence and mentorship of Adolf Loos, who planted in Neutra a fascination with the simple products of American industrial culture. To Loos, the true American art was the vernacular products of American industry that remained uncorrupted by “designers” (the oak toilet seat was a particular Loos favorite.) This suggested a second model of the industrialized house, one that Neutra was partic- ularly fond of, not the house made from prototypical custom components but the house made from ready-made available objects, the house bought from the cata- logue and ordered over the phone. Harris said that Neutra saw Sweets Catalogue, the necessary instrument for such an activity, as his bible.®  The Question of Light  There are a variety of exceptions to this rigid system of standards, most conspic- uously the second floor living room, which became the focus of Neutra’s second obsession — light, reflection, transparency, and permeability. The structure and facade follow the same basic module of the remainder of the house but there are crucial additions and deletions. The casement windows of the typical module are gone, replaced by large, single sheets of polished plate glass. On its most simple level Neutra wished to expand the space both in fact and in perception, and to establish a connection to the “natural” environment beyond, particularly the lake. In its most literal form this expression included folding glazed steel doors that erase the boundary between living room and terrace. Other effects are more subtle and virtual. The roof projects beyond the exterior wall and contains a continuous recessed lighting strip so that at night more light comes in than goes out. This reverses the typical condition where, after sunset, glass walls become black mirrors to the interior space, and thus maintains the transparency of the interior/exterior connection. From the exterior this is reversed. The light makes the glass reflective at night, increasing privacy. Thus the living room is more connected to the outside by greater transparency but at the same time more removed because of the absence of direct, operable openings to the landscape. The living/family room of the  
ground floor apartment has a similar connection to nature, with sliding doors that open along more than half of the long wall surface to the adjacent courtyard, allow- ing for direct access and connection to the constructed, but natural landscape.  While the living room was about light it was about a great deal more. Neutra said of the room in 1962, “Providing light for reading the newspaper was not the primary purpose of this illumination. Rather I saw in it an emotive stimulant, chan- ging endocrinal discharges and biochemistry.”” Neutra believed for most of his life that the human response to architecture could be scientifically understood. Biore- alism was his own term for this study, and its underlying principle was that our response to the physical environment is based on genetic impulses, but overlaid with a kind of prenatal conditioning. Neutra agreed with Freud that the house is the successor to the womb. Neutra had known Freud in Vienna, but the primary influence on Neutra’s thinking seems to have been Wilhelm Wundt, one of the founders of experimental psychology.’ To Neutra the crucial stimuli of a response to architecture included sound, touch, even taste, and the crucial necessities were the connection to nature, the need for privacy within density, and the need for nat- ural light, and with it radiation. Neutra’s client, Philip Lovell, was a medical jour- nalist and an advocate of massive exposure to natural sunlight, and his focus on the physiology of architecture certainly contributed to Neutra’s own ideas. Some of Neutra’s design decisions that appear largely aesthetic were to him the product of scientific analysis. The large, transparent, operable surfaces established a connec- tion between the body and nature — the lake and garden. The reflective surfaces of the glass, mirrors, and water altered perception, expanding small rooms in a dense urban environment; and the exterior soffit lighting, through reflection, rendered all these transparent spaces private.  Neutra’s interest in light extended beyond the visible spectrum. The reflective qualities of one of the donated materials, a sandwich panel of plate glass and alu- minum, was used to form reflective spandrels and retain the heat generated by the shower in the bathroom. At a time when the walls of a number of modernist build- ings were built of uninsulated solid masonry, Neutra was experimenting with reflective insulation within the hollow walls of the VDL house. The active material here was reflective foil. Since reflective surfaces greatly reduce heat transfer by radiation, a wall cavity lined on one face with a reflective surface will retard heat transfer, and thus heat loss, through radiation. Obviously at different times of the year the heat may be moving in or out of the building. Neutra experimented with various locations for the foil; on the north wall it is placed on the inside face of the exterior plaster, on the south wall on the inside face of the wall cavity, and in another portion of the south wall it is placed on the inside face of the exterior layer but the cavity is filled with Rockwool insulation.  Neutra’s concern with natural light and the transparency of the space may have led to some ill-advised decisions. Both the Lovell house and the VDL house have the facades with maximum glazing facing west. In both houses this was the best view, and in both houses the living room is located on the second floor to accommodate it,  
but Neutra did little to ameliorate the large quantities of afternoon sun, which caused serious problems at Lovell. Gregory Ain, who worked for Neutra from 1930 to 1935, said that the living room of the Lovell house was often uninhabitable for this reason. At the VDL house the overhanging roof gave some relief, but as the western sun is low, the roof’s helpfulness as a sunshade recedes in late summer after- noons. Neutra argued that this problem was solved by “fast growing trees.”  Rebuilding from the Ashes  In 1963, while Neutra was away, most of the VDL house burned down to its foun- dations. The concrete substructure, basement, subfloor, and part of the guest wing survived, and the decision was made to rebuild it to the extents of the previous envelope, employing the previous layout. Most of the day-to-day documentation and implementation was handled by Neutra’s son, Dion. Neutra provided instruc- tions in the form of annotated tracing paper overlays to photographs of the original, but some design decisions were made by Dion, not all of them to Neutra’s liking.”! While the spatial layout is roughly the same as the old, its character was trans- formed, incorporating a number of changes that reflected the evolution of Neutra’s thought. Those aspects of the house that were the manifestation of its “industria- lized” character — prefabrication and standardization — are eliminated or subdued. Those that were the product of Neutra’s interest in biorealism — light, heat and the physiology of architecture — are heightened or expanded.  The most dramatic changes were to the most public facade, the west. The new design is decidedly less modular and more varied in its divisions and composition. Its “industrialized” structure became a faint background pattern. The rigid module of 4-foot column and casement window unit is simplified. Here the double casement window modules were replaced by single panes of fixed glass. Neutra said this was because of increased noise on Silver Lake Boulevard, which it faced. Problems of excess solar radiation were ameliorated with the addition of two-story louvers. More substantially, the nature and quantity of transparency, translucency, mutabil- ity, and reflective surfaces were greatly increased. Mirrors were added. Solid walls were glazed. Shallow pools of water were placed on the all of the roofs. Reflective glass appeared in certain locations. While all these elements created a highly dra- matic and photogenic imagery of transparent and reflective surfaces, Neutra again described these changes in scientific terms. The water on the roof, he explained, acted to cool the house through evaporation and reestablish the connection to the lake beyond, the water’s edge having receded over the years. At least one author has argued that the rebuilding transformed a highly original work of the 1930s into  an accumulation of 1950s clichés — structural outriggers, suspended stairs, and reflective pools.” This is a bit unfair, as many of these elements, clichés or not, were  pioneered by Neutra in previous work. Reyner Banham thought the new house bet- 313  ter, writing that it was “much closer to [Neutra’s] own dreams and heart's desires. 
As to the legacy of Neutra’s triad of intentions for the VDL house and the ques- tions they raised, one might say they are still unanswered. Neutra used high- density site plans in other projects, but the bulk of Los Angeles, which includes a great many Neutra houses, is obviously characterized by freestanding houses in the middle of suburban lots. Between 1948 and 1961 he designed a small, nine-house community in Silver Lake, the “Silver Lake Colony,” but at a lower density than the VDL prototype implied. In the end he was absorbed by the system he wanted to change.  Neutra’s Legacy  Neutra’s legacy as a technical innovator, like that of many modernists, falls outside the mainstream of the evolution of the construction industry. It is perhaps because of its impurity that the VDL construction system was far more often replicated than his steel prototypes, certainly in Neutra’s own work. While he experimented with more radically alternative building systems — all-steel construction in real projects like the Beard and Von Sternberg houses, diatomaceous earth panels in theoretical projects like the Diatom house — the VDL system became the standard Neutra res- idential building system, used in the Strathmore and Kelton apartments, the Brown, Kun, Barsha, and Hofmann houses, and even in portions of buildings like the Moore house of 1950, whose aesthetic seems far away from its 1933 predeces- sor. It is replicated in spirit in some 1950s work by others. It is hard to imagine that Craig Ellwood’s Broughton or Hale houses would have been built the way they were if the VDL house had not come first. The “house ordered from a catalogue” saw its ultimate realization, at least in theory, in the Eames house. Writing late in his career, Neutra said that the industrialization of the housing industry had not failed; it had never been tried.“  The industrialization of building remains a topical issue, but the conventional wisdom as to its nature has precisely reversed itself since 1933, proclaiming that the nature of digital fabrication and production is the absence of a need for rigid standardization. Contemporary industrialization, in theory, is rather about infinite variety.  Neutra’s fascination with biorealism and the psychology of architecture would seem to anticipate current trends such as biophilia, particularly in its emphasis on the need for our connection to nature, but the basic premises differ. Biophilia empha- sizes its origins in genetics. Neutra felt that those impulses acquired prenatally were of equal importance. In any case it cannot be said that Neutra left behind a methodology for responding to psychological factors, but rather a style that was to its author a man- ifestation of that study, and it is that style, rather than the ideology that produced it, that has become his enduring legacy. There is an image common to many of Neutra’s later houses, including the rebuilt VDL house; that of elemental planes of water inter- secting planes of transparent or translucent glass and opaque surfaces of wood or  
plaster. Allinterpenetrate, overlap, and slide by one another, and a projecting piece of structure usually confirms the absence of a visible barrier between interior and exte- rior, or at least confuses us as to its location. It was the photographer Julius Shulman who codified this image and it is no accident that Neutra’s career as an architect is so closely associated with Shulman’s career as an architectural photographer. The typical Shulman photograph of the typical Neutra space has become a trademark for both. The legacy of the science of biorealism, strangely, is a set of aesthetic devices — extended structure, glass and water, reflection and transparency.  Critical opinion of the historical importance of VDL house has risen and fallen over time with Neutra’s own reputation. In 1946 Edgar Kaufmann, who had selected Frank Lloyd Wright to design Fallingwater, selected Neutra to design his house in Palm Springs. In 1949, Neutra was on the cover of Time magazine. But by the time Reyner Banham wrote Los Angeles: The Architecture of Four Ecologies in 1971, the year after Neutra’s death, his reputation had declined considerably. Banham described much of Neutra’s work, particularly the larger buildings, as “good-average” and made it clear that he preferred the work of Neutra’s one time partner, Schindler.'” The absoluteness and clarity of Neutra’s ideas on industrial- ization that had made him the man of the hour in the 1930s seemed a liability in Banham’s relativist, post-International Style, modernist world. But Neutra’s repu- tation slowly rebounded, and when in 1980 Neutra’s widow donated the VDL house to California State Polytechnic University at Pomona, the house began its slow rise to international prominence.  Notes * Photo by Julius Shulman. Image credit: © J. Paul Getty Trust. Used with permission. Julius Shulman Photography Archive. Research Library at the Getty Research Institute  (2004.R.10).  1. Richard Neutra, Nature Near (Santa Barbara, CA: Capra Press, 1989), 80.  2. Esther McCoy, Vienna to Los Angeles: Two Journeys (Santa Monica, CA: Arts and Archi- tecture 8, 1979).  3. Dione Neutra, ed., Richard Neutra: Promise and Fulfillment, 1919-1932; Selections from the Letters and Diaries of Richard and Dione Neutra (Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois Uni- versity Press, 1986), 211.  4. Richard Neutra, “Problems of Prefabrication,” American Architect 123 (December,  1935): 33.  . Neutra, Nature Near, 149.  . McCoy, Vienna to Los Angeles, 8.  . Richard Neutra, “The Changing House,” Los Angeles Times (June 22, 1947): E6.  . McCoy, Vienna to Los Angeles, 8.  . Richard Neutra, Life and Shape (Appleton-Century-Crofts: Meredith Press, 1962), 268.  10. Sylvia Lavin, Form Follows Libido: Architecture and Richard Neutra in a Psychoanalytic Cul-  ture (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004), 35.  COwMN Aw 
PSFS BUILDING  George Howe and William Lescaze  Grace Ong Yan  The PSFS Building’s east fagade orients squarely with Market Street but its iconic rooftop sign was angled toward the Benjamin Franklin bridge across town, ostensibly linking Philadelphia to a network of urban centers. Howe & Lescaze, Philadelphia Saving Fund Society, Twelfth & Market Streets, Philadelphia, 1932.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
MODERN ARCHITECTURE FOR THE CORPORATE CLIENT  By the late 1950s, modern architecture had become the expected vocabulary for American corporate headquarters. Decades earlier, this had not been the case. Corporations were considered unreliable patrons for modern architecture by tastemakers like the curators of the Museum of Modern Art in New York. In the book, The International Style: Architecture Since 1922, published following the famous “Modern Architecture” exhibition of 1932, Alfred Barr, Jr. expostulated, “we are asked to take seriously the architectural tastes of real estate speculators, renting agents, and mortgage brokers!”’ “It is, then, from the commercially successful modernistic architects,” he continued, “that we may expect the strongest opposition to the Style.”* Yet the PSES Building stands as one of the most significant modern American buildings, precisely because of the commercial influences of its business client. The context from which it emerged was not the imported Interna- tional Style, but instead a modernism that developed in parallel, out of commercial interests in the urban environment. In fact, the business-minded clients had a depth of influence over the building’s design, the most important of which was a concern with advertising the company through its architecture and its red neon sign. The building is an asymmetrical composition of two vertically oriented rectilin- ear volumes that were notched at their bottoms into a horizontal curved volume that floated above the street level. At the top of building stood four, 27 foot-high white letters: P $ F S. Two sets of the initials, one facing directly west and another facing north-east, advertised the client’s business to the city. From dusk to dawn, the letters glowed red from neon-tube lighting. Though “PSFS” would not be used regularly in the savings fund’s advertising until almost two decades later, the acro- nym ’s association with the institution began with the building sign.  The Philadelphia Saving Fund Society (PSFS) building was conceived as the new face of the oldest savings fund in America as it reinvented itself in the complex cir- cumstances of the twentieth century.” As such, the PSFS Building alloyed architec- ture and business. The design and construction of the PSFS Building, which occurred between 1929 and 1932, emerged out of many struggles: the Great Depression; the conflicts between the architects George Howe and William Les- caze, and the client, the Philadelphia Saving Fund Society Building Committee, led by its president, John M. Willcox; and the struggle to define the building’s own modernism in relation to the constant undercurrent of commercialism. While the building has attributes commonly associated with the International Style, and has even been described as the first International Style skyscraper in America,” its varied and expressive hybrid forms complicate this straightforward interpretation and point toward a more nuanced reading.  
Function  The world of the 1920s and 1930s, which defined the personalities of George Howe and William Lescaze, was turbulent, marked by the heights of economic prosperity and depths of worldwide depression that followed. Yet the times were also enli- vened by an American idealism that could be witnessed in commercial and tech- nological vitality. The careers of Howe and Lescaze embodied the grand transformations occurring during this tumultuous era. Architect William Lescaze had been influenced by the rational expressionist strain of European modernism, which he demonstrated in his designs for commercial interiors in New York imme- diately prior to his work on PSFS. Howe had nurtured a late-blooming passion for modern architecture. He had become interested in German modernism while studying a classical approach to architecture at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts from 1907 to 1912. In addition to bringing his enthusiasm for modern architecture to the project, Howe also provided the client. During his prior partnership with Arthur Mellor and Walter Meigs, in the firm Mellor, Meigs, and Howe, he designed four branch banks in the early 1920s for the Philadelphia Saving Fund Society, whose president was James M. Willcox. When he terminated his partnership with Mellor and Meigs, Howe started his own practice and took with him one of the firm’s most substantial clients, the Philadelphia Saving Fund Society. His prior part- nership and professional connections, in addition to his refined American upbring-  ing, made him perfectly suited to successfully deal with a wealthy and conservative clientele.  When they came together as partners in 1929, both architects were struggling to define a “functional” modern architecture, informed by their individual experi- ences variously studying and practicing classicism, art deco, and expressionism. As partners, they believed that functionalism, a highly debated term from its incep- tion, was the basis of their common understanding of modern architecture. They would describe the PSFS Building’s “functional”’ forms as “growing out of the requirements of our civilization and the modern technique of building...”* Indeed, throughout the process the client had described the 33-story skyscraper as a collec- tion of distinct building programs, “Office, Bank & Store,” a description that even- tually would become a reality as the tall, rectilinear volume was devoted to rental offices and mechanical services, while the curved volume held the banking hall and the store. The contrast between straight and curved forms was highlighted through different materials that sheathed the building’s forms and, in turn, its functions. The service core was clad in black brick, the bank and store — both commercial spaces — in polished granite, and the office tower in an envelope of brick spandrels  and piers clad in limestone and marble. The play of reflective and matte surfaces on the exterior massing echoed that inside the banking hall. The material claddings did not simply express interior function, however, but instead added to the dynamism of the volumes through surface effects.  
The PSFS Building further demonstrated “functional” principles by creating important links to the surrounding urban site. While the building’s modern expres- sion was strikingly unlike Philadelphia’s classically derived architecture, there were aspects of the building design that accommodated the neighborhood. The ground and underground levels of the PSFS Building allowed the city’s infrastructure to integrate with the architecture, as shopping and public transportation became part of the building. The neighborhood was a lively area, full of moderately priced retail outlets, with the Reading Railroad terminal across the street. As the building owner, Philadelphia Saving Fund Society leased store space located at the corner street level to its very first tenant, a women’s clothier called Lerner Shops, and this blended easily into the retail street environment. An A & P grocery market was another retail tenant in the building. Two underground levels accommodated a connection to the Market Street subway stop and a stair to the subway concourse was located on the street level between the banking hall and store entrance.  Expressive of its functions, the PSFS Building was conspicuously modern, an example of which that was rarely seen in America at the time. Certainly, modern architecture of a different evolution was prominent in Philadelphia’s buildings. In the first decades of the twentieth century, Philadelphia’s modern architecture was exemplified by the pared-down classicism of the Philadelphia Art Museum and the City Beautiful movement, out of which the Benjamin Franklin Parkway had been created. The modern architecture of the PSFS Building, however, was based on entirely different sources.  In the pre-World War I period, both Howe and Lescaze were earnest students of new developments in architecture. Repercussions of these early influences can be witnessed in Lescaze’s sketches for the base of the PSFS Building, which dis- played the dynamism and exuberance that had only been seen in works by J.J. P. Oud, such as Hoek van Holland (1924-27) and Erich Mendelsohn’s buildings of the Tageblatt Headquarters, known as Mossehaus, in Berlin (1921-23) and the Schocken department store in Stuttgart (1926-28). Oud’s poetic and Mendel- sohn’s dynamic functionalism can both be read in the PSFS Building.” Lescaze had studied J. J. P. Oud’s building, as one of the projects included in his proposed book comparing European and American modern architecture suggests. He believed that Oud’s Hoek van Holland housing for workers was a model for European modern architecture. Like the PSFS Building, Oud’s scheme was designed for multiple uses. It contained 41 dwellings, four shops, four ware- houses, and a public library. Both buildings were designed as self-contained com- positions in which the individual functions were transformed into a single building by the use of repetition. Oud situated four curved storefronts at the ends of linear rows of houses and his curved plate glass facades undoubtedly influ- enced Lescaze’s curved ground floor storefront, which prominently displayed retail merchandise through a large, continuous glass window at the PSFS Build- ing. For Oud as well as for Lescaze, the curved element was seen as a symbol of the modern machine, emulating its circular movements.  
Lescaze had also visited Berlin, at least twice in the 1920s, once in 1922-23 and again in 1926. Though not documented in Lescaze’s archive, it is highly likely that he saw first-hand the strikingly modern renovation of the Mossehaus, the most prominent feature in Berlin during those particular years. The emphasis on curved horizontality in Mossehaus’ corner facade is unmistakably similar to Lescaze’s sketch and the subsequent design of PSFS’s corner banking hall facade. Mendelsohn believed that horizontality best expressed the modern con- struction of reinforced concrete, as well as the velocity of modern urban street life. Furthermore, for Mendelsohn horizontality would provide a much-needed stabilizing force that would alleviate the stress of modern life. And on an expe- riential level, the blurring of verticals and the extension of horizontals reflected the way automobile passengers traveling at high speeds perceived buildings as they drove past.*  Echoing Mendelsohn’s Mossehaus, the bold 1929 rendering by Lescaze showed a similar horizontally curving facade and windows. The sketch dramatizes the play of receding surfaces, one recessed at the street level and another implied by a dark shadow at the second story banking hall level. In addition, Mossehaus’ appearance, prominent location, and publicity-minded patron also made it similar to the PSFS Building. Like the individualistic modernism of Oud and Mendelsohn, the PSFS Building design would take shape from the dynamic sketches of one of its designers.  Business  It was just this kind of architectural individualism that translated well into the business culture of PSFS’s clients. Throughout the design process, James Willcox and the PSFS Building Committee judged its architecture by how it would dis- tinguish itself through its functional characteristics and its aesthetic appearance and, specifically, how these attributes would affect their business. While the Building Committee did not have a particular aesthetic in mind, its criterion for the architecture was that it be a sound business investment. Upon seeing Howe and Lescaze’s proposed modern design, one consulting rental agent stated, “the architecture, while novel, is striking and mod ern,”” while another one noted: “Opinions will undoubtedly vary regarding its architecture, but the building is sure to be talked about.”!° J. M. Willcox was ultimately concerned with how his new building would bolster the saving fund’s larger business strategy to create a competitive advantage. Originality, or the quality of being remarkable, served as an advertising strategy and was ultimately one of the aspects that convinced Willcox to accept the modern design.  But even in 1930, during the design process, the Building Committee was still not convinced of the modern design. It also had been presented with a more tra- ditional, Beaux-Arts scheme, in 1926, designed by Howe’s former practice, Mellor,  
Meigs, and Howe. This caused Howe to write a letter on July 30, 1930 to his client, Willcox, in which he argued for his modern design in bankers’ language. In pecu- niary terms, Howe compared the modern and traditional schemes by their cost effectiveness. He presented a graph that showed the gross area and cost saving that the society would gain by building the modern scheme instead of the traditional one. While the modern scheme would cost more, the society would get more for its money. “In other words, for $930,000 or about 20% more than the cost of the 1926 building, your institution obtains more than 200,000 square feet or over 60% additional floor area. Furthermore, the 1930 building is more completely equipped mechanically than the 1926 building.”'’ Here, Howe used business criteria (price per square foot) to cast modern architecture as a good business investment.  The discussion over the design’s “modernism” also continued as the client worried that it might not appeal to potential tenants. Because modern architecture was predominately linked to industrial rather than commercial buildings, Willcox informed Howe that, “We must recognize the fact that there is something in your design which requires explanation. The first impulse of everyone I have shown it to is [to turn] away from it.”’? Yet Willcox was open-minded about modern design, as long as it would help his profits. “I don’t think that there is anything in your design which would decide a prospective tenant against taking space in the building if the matter were properly presented. It is impossible to take the architect along every time a prospect is to be interviewed.”'* Willcox thought through the myriad of possibilities and conclusions that would color his decision-making and finally con- cluded, “On the other hand, its uniqueness — at least in Philadelphia — gives it an advertising value that is worth something.”"4 Here, architecture served as adver- tisement, giving the city a brand identity and an architectural image of the Phila- delphia Saving Fund Society. Willcox’s assessment would come true: there was no other comparable architecture in height, size, or expression. Strikingly unlike its urban context of commercial buildings in the early 1930s, the PSFS Building would define modern architecture in Philadelphia.’”  Advertising  The modernity of an electric sign for the PSFS Building was foundational for the design. The idea for such a sign was raised by the client himself, and in a letter to Willcox on May 26, 1930, Howe noted, “You are aware that ever since you first asked me to design a branch bank around an electric sign I have been looking for a means of architectural expression which would not be in conflict with any form of modern activity outside the field of architecture.”’* If the idea for the elec- tric sign originated with Willcox, Howe viewed the suggestion as an opportunity to design a modern building. The awkwardness of the electric sign designs on the 1926 branch banks showed that a modern direction for placing advertising on 
the PSFS bank was needed. Here, lettering was permissible as modern ornament because it possessed “functional purpose in advertising and in indicating the use o: different parts of a building.”’” In fact, in The International Style: Architecture Since 1922, Hitchcock and Johnson stated, “Lettering is the nearest approach to arbitrary ornament used by the architects of the international style.”!* The development o the red neon P § F S$ sign has been largely overlooked, with the exception of David Leatherbarrow’s insightful discussion of the urban implications of the sign.’* The sign had many variations between July 1930 and the summer of 1932, when it was finally constructed. The architects and clients grappled with three aspects o the sign design. First, whether the Society’s whole name or its abbreviation should be used. Second, whether the sign would be mounted on the side of the building or on top. Third, whether the sign’s orientation would be north, south or east. These details occupied the architects and clients throughout the design process and were not mere minutiae; for these decisions signaled modernity on many levels.  Legibility became an important deciding factor as the architects and clients chose between displaying the whole name versus the initials. The discussion highlighted the sign’s function as a medium for mass advertising. Publicity was at the forefront in the minds of the clients and the use of initials was not only a matter of legibility; it also signaled the modernization of the Philadelphia Saving Fund Society as a com- pany, recasting its image and establishing a visual standard. The wish to modernize was contested by the Society’s hesitation to fully to embrace a modern image, as the oldest savings fund in America was just starting to grow into a modern business through the diversification of real-estate ventures and expansion through branch banks. These difficulties to wholeheartedly accepting modernity was not surprising at a time when modern life in America was itself still in transition.  Advertising value figured largely in the decision to use initials for the sign and to orient it toward the north-east transportation corridor. Earle Bolton, staff architect for Howe and Lescaze, who attended most of the design meetings, reported the clients’ desire for advertising value as the reason they eventually approved the initi- als for the sign.”° One of the vice-presidents of the construction company, Fuller and Company, asked Willcox if he had ever seen a large electric sign reading “PON” visible from the Pennsylvania Railroad as one came into Newark. Willcox had noticed the sign, which led him to inquire for what the initials stood for. The Fuller and Company vice-president voiced his enthusiasm for using initials: “Let’s make everyone curious about PSFS.””"  At a special roof sign meeting in late April 1932, full-scaled letter samples were viewed: one at the size of the PSFS initial design and another at the size for the full- name version. A hotel room at a high floor was rented several miles away to judge visibility of the letters atop the actual, nearly finished PSFS Building. A single letter S was first hoisted into place. Its simple sans serif typeface with an 18-inch stroke, proved extremely legible. However, the full name size was constructed at a dimen- sioned stroke that was considered illegible. The legible initials version was clearly  
preferable: “great size ... takes less concentration to assimilate.””” By late spring of 1932, the final sign design would show the PSES initials.  While the architect’s first sign design depicted it on top of the building, it was followed by a number of studies that took advantage of the blank south facade that covered the elevators and service equipment. PSFS’s sign design on the facade reflected commercial signage practices of the time. By the 1910s and 1920s in Amer- ica, billposting on building facades had become a prevalent way of advertising. At the same time, there was also influence from a more rarified source. Both George Howe and William Lescaze visited the 1925 Exposition des arts décoratifs in Paris, and had seen Le Corbusier's Pavilion de Esprit Nouveau.’ The abbreviated letters “E N” composed an emblazoned sign on the entrance facade. Le Corbusier's sign not only reinforced the custom of billposting but also the use of abbreviation. Despite these illuminating studies, the sign was finally positioned, not on the side of the building, but on top of it— an example of skyline lettering. One precedent for the PSFS sign position was the Van Nelle Factory in Rotterdam by J. A. Brinkman and L. C. van der Vlugt, built between 1925 and 1931, which also used sans serif lettering. The two buildings shared many similarities as modern architecture for business clients, including angling of the sign toward key sight lines, and function- alist design principles of clear legibility and use of electric lighting.  The sign atop the building also coincided with a decision to provide air condi- tioning to the whole building. The Building Committee had originally decided to air-condition only the banking floors but a particularly stifling summer convinced the business savvy client that office space would be infinitely more desirable if “manufactured air” (air conditioning) were installed throughout the entire office tower. Now, the PSFS Building was the second in the nation to have this luxury and the sign would hide the gigantic cooling towers of the air conditioning. This necessitated a wall-like barrier to hide the service equipment, upon which the let- ters would be mounted — essentially a billboard. As such, the sign would be under- stood not simply as a display for a name, but as more conventional outdoor advertising with automobile travel figuring largely in the final decisions.  In the early design schemes, the sign was oriented to the north and south, which seemed to align with what was considered the front door on Market Street. How- ever, in a variation of seven schemes presented on November 1930, the architects included one version that showed an east-facing sign. This particular sign foresha- dowed the final orientation and hinted at its urban impact, where the eastern face addressed the Delaware River Bridge (named the Benjamin Franklin Bridge since 1956), which linked Philadelphia to a network of urban centers connected by high- ways.” After abandoning the idea of a sign on the south facade, the architects designed a dual-faced sign directed toward the east and west. Finally, in 1932, after the long debate, the PSFS sign was constructed on top of the 32nd floor of the sky- scraper. Each letter was 27 feet tall, 18 feet wide, and 9 inches deep, constructed of steel and painted white. Supported by steel brackets in front of a solid steel bill- board of deep cobalt blue, the sign measured 28 feet tall and 120 feet long. The  
framework was riveted and cross-braced to the building’s steel structure and could withstand a 200-mile wind.”’ Between the two billboard sign surfaces was a resid- ual space to house the air conditioning compressors.  The sign would now greet automobile commuters, who utilized a mode of transportation that was quickly becoming dominant in the late 1920s. Eventually, to the clients, the rooftop sign’s legibility from the Delaware River Bridge, where tens of thousands of New Jersey commuters entered into Philadelphia, was one of the most important factors of the building design. The large number of travelers became public in a 1931 study by the Delaware River Joint Commission of Penn- sylvania and New Jersey, which counted 62,126 people crossing the Delaware River Bridge daily.“° These were 70% of the total commuters by various means of travel, including ferries, from Camden to Philadelphia — commuters who could not miss the four large letters on the building’s rooftop as they approached the city.  The PSFS sign had much in common with outdoor billboards. Instead of compli- cated designs that would take too long to read, billboard designs were deliberately abstract and simplified. Their design spoke concisely yet read loudly to meet the modern tempo of life created by highway travel. As part of this new aesthetic, twen- tieth-century advertisers refined their use of trademarks, logos, and slogans to create massed images that gave a quick impression. An aesthetics of speed was required, which could deliver messages in a state of unblinking recognition. A logo was the ideal form of communication for mobile audiences. The rooftop letters, “PSFS,” while not officially registered until the 1970s, were ostensibly such a trademark.  Economics  In the decades after its opening, the PSFS Building enjoyed steady occupancy, per- severing through the Great Depression. While modern architecture was not the explicit choice of the client, it turned out to serve the institution well. The Architec- tural Forum promoted business patronage of modern architecture in an article from September 1943, entitled, “Does Modern Architecture Pay?” The inquiry of whether modern architecture was profitable for business clients tapped into a con- temporary concern. The editors asserted, “It should at the very least bring into ques- tion the notion that investment return and resale value are answered only when a building turns its face to the past.” The journal had sent a questionnaire to business clients of modern architecture (including PSFS), and then printed a selection of the responses together with 25 important modern buildings and their clients’ com- ments. The article observed that while modern architecture in America predomi- nated in the commercial and industrial fields, in others — including banks, insurance companies, and government agencies — modern architecture was hardly represented. The editors believed this was due to the unwillingness of investors to put funds into something that may not pay off and, in turn, argued that “[iJn com- mercial buildings, design is as much a competitive element as merchandising itself. 
There is no better indication of the soundness of the modern approach than its rapid »?8 Here, modern architecture became a form of merchandise, which would promote a business’s goods. The Philadelphia Saving Fund Society’s modern design stood as a bold exam- ple against the status quo of other banks that did not patronize modernism.  In the reply to the Architectural Forum’s questionnaire, Willcox offered enthusi- astic support for the PSES Building design.”” “The type of architecture adopted has proved most successful, and has resulted in a building better adapted for the pur- pose than would have been possible had the style been conventional.”*° But while Willcox was satisfied with the design of PSFS, he did not embrace it as modern architecture per se, but instead called the design “ultra-practical.” On his first and only patronage of modern architecture, Willcox wrote: “I am tempted to haz- ard a forecast and say that there will be but few large office buildings erected in the future designed along conventional lines.”*' He supported his statement with his  acceptance by the people who have to examine it most critically.  building’s excellent renting record, which despite the Depression was 92.8% occu- pied, as well as the quick occupation of the ground floor store and restaurant space. He attributed these positive results to “the orderliness and clean-cut arrangement of space, typical of this type of architecture, we believe is in large part responsible for our satisfactory rental experience.”*” When the Society examined the balance sheet of their revenue-generating building, they estimated the total cost to have been $12,360,942.37, which showed that the construction cost had actually come in under its initial estimation of $12,500,000.”  According to the PSFS, modern architecture provided business advantage against their competitors. However, it did so not through conforming to the orthodoxy of the International Style, but instead through a combination of poetic and dynamic functionalism in alignment with modern architecture’s advertising and branding potential, including not least of all, its iconic rooftop sign. The design was largely the result of a fruitful collaboration between client and architect, exemplifying the larger cooperation between business and archi- tecture in the twentieth century. The PSFS Building stands as a testament to American modernism with the rise of corporations, the growth of media, and a burgeoning consumer culture.  Notes  Credit: Photography: Jack E Boucher, 1985/Library of Congress Prints and Photographs  Division Washington, D.C. 20540 USA http:/ /loc.gov/ pictures /item/pal1068/.  1. Henry-Russell Hitchcock and Philip Johnson, The International Style: Architecture Since 1922 (New York: W.W. Norton & Company, Inc., 1932), 14.  2. Ibid.  3. The company’s name from its inception was the Philadelphia Saving Fund Society. After  merging with the Western Savings Fund Society in 1982, the new company underwent a 
FALLINGWATER Frank Lloyd Wright  Neil Levine  Frank Lloyd Wright, Fallingwater, 1934-37.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Fallingwater is the name Frank Lloyd Wright gave to the country house he designed for Edgar Kaufmann and his wife, Liliane, in 1934-35, and built over a waterfall in 1936-37 in the foothills of the Allegheny Mountains, about 65 miles south of Pittsburgh. It is one of the most extraordinary and celebrated works of twentieth-century architecture. Recognized as such even before it was inhabited, Fallingwater stands out as a singular expression of integrating architecture with its natural environment and creating out of that interrelationship a synergy that has become definitive of the modern concept of site-specificity. The experience of it in space and time is a multisensory one involving the kinesthetic and the aural in addi- tion to the more usual visual mode of perception of buildings.’  As its name implies, Fallingwater is about movement and change and the con- tinuous effects and action of time. It incorporates and represents these phenomena in its forms. There is no one point of view, no privileged spot for the gaze to alight upon —no single moment in time that becomes the representative, pregnant one. In part, this is a function of the medium of architecture, which generally presents itself as a three-dimensional sequence of spaces to be traversed and experienced in time. Philip Johnson called this the “processional element in architecture.”” But there is more to it than that, for Fallingwater exploits this normal characteristic of the medium to produce an architectural condition where time is understood not merely in the literal terms of one’s movement through space in real time but also as a more profound sensation of the virtual time of duration.  That dual experience of time in Fallingwater was recognized and highlighted as soon as the building was completed in the exhibition devoted to it by the Museum of Modern Art in New York in early 1938. For the museum’s first major one- building exhibition, John McAndrew, the curator of Architecture and Industrial Art, produced a catalogue including plans, an explanatory text by the architect, and photographs of the structure taken mainly by Bill Hedrich, of the well-known Chicago firm of Hedrich-Blessing, and Luke Swank, a family friend of the Kauf- manns.’ The arrangement and layout of the photographs stressed the temporal experience of the visitor in the perception of the house.  Beginning with the title page, the sequence of views starts at the bridge leading to the structure. Following the text by Wright and a double-page spread of plans, an extended series of two-page spreads takes the visitor around and through the building, focusing on its multiple aspects.* To illustrate the course of movement  and allow the reader to follow it in his or her mind’s eye, there is a diagrarmmatic plan beneath each photograph with a small eye drawn to indicate the physical point of view. These spreads are interrupted once, in the middle, with a pair of dramatically opposing views of the house, both by Luke Swank and both lacking the situational ocular index.  More significantly, and much more unusually, the processional sequence culmi-  nates on the final page of the catalogue in a collage of two photographs, one above the other, both taken by Hedrich and both showing the house from precisely the 
same point of view. The only difference is that the upper photograph was shot in the daytime and the lower one at night.’ The final two images go beyond an acknowledgment of the literal time it takes to see the house and reveal a sense of the building’s durational aspect. The highly unusual juxtaposition of two views of the same building at different moments in the diurnal cycle leads one to contem- plate the fact that Fallingwater is not only about one’s passage through time but, even more importantly, about the expression of the passage of time itself, a virtual time made manifest in the building’s interaction with its ever-changing landscape.  The exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art, accompanied by a cover story in Time magazine and a multipage section of the January 1938 issue of Architectural Forum, devoted to Wright, made Fallingwater instantaneously famous.* In 1963, less than ten years after Edgar Kaufmann died (Liliane died in 1952), their only son, Edgar Jr., donated the house to the Western Pennsylvania Conservancy to become one of the first and most visited modern house museums. Indeed, despite its remote location in rural Pennsylvania, close to the West Virginia line, and the fact that it was until recently only open part of the year, it has attracted more than five million visitors since 1964 and now averages more than 150,000 a year. Along with Le Corbusier's Villa Savoye (1928-31) and Mies van der Rohe’s Tugendhat (1928-30) and Farnsworth (1945-51) houses, Fallingwater is one of the first half of the twentieth century’s iconic modern houses.  Client, Site, Materials, and Design  When he commissioned the house, Edgar Kaufmann was the owner and president of Pittsburgh’s largest department store as well as a leading citizen of a city made famous for its industrial might and engagement in the arts and culture by such fig- ures as Henry Frick, Andrew Carnegie, H. J. Heinz, and the Mellons. Kaufmann was active in civic affairs at the highest levels and took a special interest in archi- tecture and city planning. In the fall of 1934 he contacted Wright regarding the design of a planetarium and parking facility for a vacant lot next to his downtown department store, as well as a job as adviser to the recently established Allegheny County Authority, which was in charge of overseeing the construction of certain major, federally-funded Public Works Administration projects, including several bridges, highways, a tunnel, and riverfront improvements. Nothing came of either of these initiatives, but it was on Wright’s visit to the city to discuss the urban pro- jects that Kaufmann commissioned the country house.  The extensive property the Kaufmanns owned in the southwestern corner of Pennsylvania follows the winding and precipitous course ofa mountain stream, Bear Run, which works its way down through the sandstone cliffs of an old glacial ravine, falling nearly 1,500 feet in four miles before emptying into the Youghiogheny River. About halfa mile before it reaches the river, it drops in a series of dramatic falls over 
large boulders strewn in its bed. This is the place Edgar Kaufmann had in mind for the house, and it is where he took his architect near the end of 1934. According to reports, he had thought Wright would site the structure on the flat, lower bank of the stream, facing the waterfalls. To his client’s surprise, and later consternation, Wright decided to locate the house over the water by cantilevering it from the opposite cliff and balancing the structure on the existing boulders in the streambed. Wright wrote to Kaufmann in late December, immediately after returning home, that “the visit to the waterfall in the woods stays with me and a domicile has taken vague shape in my mind to the music of the stream.”” He later described his idea for the design as “an extension of the cliff beside a mountain stream.” More importantly, he explained that the house was conceived for someone “who liked to listen to the waterfall” and for this reason was designed as a “living space over and above the stream.”*  Fallingwater’s design combines a seemingly accidental naturalness with a subtle though no less powerful geometric order and structural logic, all characteristic of  the architect’s work since the 1911 design of his own country estate of Taliesin in Wyoming Township, Wisconsin, but never before resolved in such a dramatic  way. A binary opposition of stone and concrete expresses the conjunction on a basic, material level. The stone, quarried less than 500 feet from the actual site, was reserved for all vertical, load-bearing piers and walls; reinforced concrete was used to create the stack of horizontal balconies, or trays, cantilevered from the rock ledge over the bed of the stream.” Bounded by curved parapets, the trays weave through the vertical stone structure to provide the house’s living spaces. These are continuous inside and out. Where one tray overlaps another, doors and windows of plate glass in steel sash are inserted to mark the distinction between interior room and outdoor terrace. The lowest tray forms the main floor of the house and contains a single open space combining the functions of living, dining, reception, and library. The middle tray, with its main terrace forming the roof of the living room, contains the two master bedrooms plus a smaller guest room, each with its adjacent terrace. The top tray, roofing over the second-floor bedrooms and forming an aerie within the overarching branches of the tall oak trees, became the bedroom suite of Edgar jr?  The site on the north bank of Bear Run is a narrow shelf making an almost perfect 30°/60° triangle defined by a group of large boulders that follow the line of the ledge determining the upper of the two falls. The nearly 15-foot cantilever of the living-room floor is partly supported by three “bolsters,” as Wright called them, that angle up from the rock ledge. The even greater cantilever of the sec- ond-floor terrace is partly supported by the two free-standing piers in the living room; the weight of the enclosed section of the second floor, along with that of the entire upper story (all of which is contained within the angle of the chimney mass and the north wall of the house), serves to counterbalance the effect of the cantilever. Visually, the composition is stabilized by the trellis of reinforced- concrete beams that continues the slab of the second-floor tray through the rear wall of the house and ties the floating layers of living space into the face of the 
cliff. As a result, the tunnel-like driveway beneath becomes a fully integrated part of the design.  The orthogonal geometry adopted for the plan contrasts with the triangular shape of the shelf on which the house is superposed. The interaction of the two geometries is reflected in the pivoting of the plan and the resulting diagonal axes that govern its spatial form. The east-west path of the existing road, which was reused as the driveway, served as the datum line from which Wright angled the house in a southeasterly direction so that the leading edge of the cantilevered trays would parallel the course of the stream beneath them and the diagonal axis defined by that line would become the axis of the house’s main space. As “an extension of the cliffbeside a mountain stream,” the house swings with the glen to align with the stream, thus incorporating within its space the direction and sense of motion of the body of water it overhangs. Within the space of the house, the dynamic quality of this representation is perceived kinesthetically as an experience of virtual  movement.  The spatial definition of the interior of Fallingwater depends on lines generated by implied diagonal axes. The main floor, entered at ground level, is approximately 48 feet deep by 38 feet wide. Its flexible, open plan is loosely organized around a central atrium-like space, illuminated from above by a large, nearly square, recessed ceiling panel, which is supported at its four corners by stone piers. The various functions are zoned into pockets of space that pinwheel around this open core, sometimes overlapping and sometimes projecting from it. Just to the left of the entrance is a seat with a built-in phonograph next to it. Beyond that is the sky-lit area of the study, or library. Projecting between the two piers at the far side of the room is a family sitting area that opens to the left and right onto outdoor terraces overlooking the stream. And just to the left of the fireplace is another built-in seat, under the window, forming a more cozy sitting area next to the fire. To the right of the fireplace and set back into the rear stone wall of the house is the dining area. On one side it opens to the kitchen, and on the other to the stairway leading to the upper-floor bedrooms.  The materials used inside are the same as those outside, an identity that is rein- forced in two key places by the actual intrusion of an element from outside. The walls and piers are stone; the ceiling, forming the underside of the upper slab, is plastered and painted the same color as the parapets. The main, living-room floor is covered in flagstones, similar in color and texture to the stones in the bed of the stream. They are waxed, except for a single boulder that projects above floor level to become the hearth of the fireplace. The visible surface is actually part of the living rock of the streambed, the top of the easternmost boulder used in the foun- dations of the house. As it emerges in its raw, natural state to form the base of the living-room fireplace, its role in anchoring the composition is transformed from a literal to a figurative one.  Diagonally opposite the fireplace, behind the library pier, is a second element that works with the fireplace to determine the spatial shape and meaning of the  
room by relating it directly to the natural world outside. This is a glass hatch, con- tained by an external semicircular parapet under a trellis-skylight, that opens through the floor and connects to a suspended stairway leading directly down to the stream. Wright had thought that he could “deepen the stream for a swim- ming pool” at this point. When that proved impossible, and a separate plunge pool was created nearer to the road, the architect insisted on retaining the hatch and stairs, admitting the originally intended use was perhaps only a pretext: “We got down into the glen to associate directly with the stream and planned the house for that association. Hence the steps from living room to stream.” “This feature,” he told Kaufmann, was absolutely “necessary from every standpoint” and had to be preserved no matter how or even if it was actually to be used."! Fireplace and hatch each reveals, within the space of the living room, the direct association of the house with its site. Taken together, as they were meant to be, they describe a cross-axial diagonal line that traces the underlying geometric relation between building and site.  The most dramatic, memorable, and well-known image of Fallingwater is the view from the southwest, just below the first falls, where the house seems to rise from the stream and float effortlessly over it. It is the view Wright chose for the perspective he drew for Kaufmann as most fully representing the total effect of the house in its site, as well as the one most often reproduced in photographs.” But, as a representative image, it can be very deceptive, because this view does not actually reveal itself until after one has seen the house, experienced its interior space, and gone outside to look back at it. Like an inverted, baroque vol d’oiseau, the perspec- tive is ideal and recapitulative, collapsing the disparate perceptions of experience into one. To understand the house, then, one should not start with it, but end with it, building toward it step by step.  Fallingwater as an Experience in Time and of Time  Fallingwater is approached from a bridge that crosses the stream just above the two falls. From it one can hear the sound of the falls but cannot see them. One senses a drop-off beyond the house, but only the height of the trees and the depth of the sky suggest this. The bridge abutments, which are constructed of the same thin ledges of quarried stone as the house, blend into the stratified, natural stone walls of the stream. Joining the house’s lower walls on the downstream side, they form a seam- less transition between architecture and nature. The concrete span of the bridge, on the other hand, is like the cantilevered trays of the house. Its softly rounded para- pets effect a fluid connection between the stone piers of the banks, suggesting an allusion to moving water. This dual reference was pointed out by the architectural critic Lewis Mumford shortly after the house was completed. “The stones repre- sent, as it were, the earth theme,” he wrote, “the concrete slabs are the water theme.” 
Beyond the bridge, the drive bends around the rear of the house and cuts between it and the cliff, The horizontal lines of the building’s stone walls, which are extended left and right into space by concrete beams and slabs, echo the strata of stone ledges in the walls of the glen, while the rippling effect of the cliff is picked up by the staggered vertical slots in the house’s rear wall. The passageway under- neath the transverse beams that tie the house back into the cliff gives the impres- sion of a natural cut shaded by an arbor-like trellis. Water can be seen seeping out of the cliff face on the right. It also streams from a spout, in the pier next to the entrance, into a small basin that functioned as a footbath. As you pass between the stone walls of the loggia into the deep recess of the entry area, you hear the water and feel its moisture. The transition from outside to inside is so orchestrated as to seem like a gradual change in atmosphere rather than a change of place.  The gray-blue flagstone paving of the bridge and loggia continues into the house to become the living-room floor. The only difference is that the flagstones inside are waxed and polished to give them a shiny, reflective appearance. This causes the eye to skim the surface quickly, following the line of the diagonal axis across the room toward the light at the far side, which comes through the band of windows and doors opening onto a terrace projecting over the ravine. The shiny surface of the flagstone floor has a slippery look and feel that suggest the instability of the moving water underfoot.'*  The reference to the stream below the floor is not merely metaphorical. It is made real by the living rock of the boulder projecting through the floor as the fire- place hearth and by the hatch that opens to reveal not only a view of the stream but also the sound, smell, and moisture of the water rushing over the stream’s stone  bed. The visible water’s reflective surface reads as continuous in color, texture, and substance with the waxed flagstone floor. The cool, damp air coming off the stream is funneled through the hatch, while the steady burble resonates in the external concrete wall of the chamber, which echoes, in its curve, the semi-cylindrical hol- low of the fireplace.  The stream is brought into direct apposition with the living-room floor along the room’s main diagonal axis, which, as already noted, parallels the ledge of the falls. The polished flagstones reconstitute its rocky bed. Their uneven surface reflects the constantly changing light that filters into the room through the trees. The irregular outline of their raised joints recreates the stream’s swirling movement as it rounds the bend before meeting the ledge. The connection to the stream is not a disem- bodied, optical one. It is felt underfoot, through the body, and through all the senses. The waxed floor imparts a sense of fluid motion to the body and suggests the suspended animation of the drop of the waterfall from one level to the next. Walking across the imaginary line connecting the projecting stone of the hearth to the opening of the hatch, one is made aware of the changes in level that determine the direction and flow of the water, and is thus subliminally induced to project one’s thoughts beyond the space of the room. As the floor continues through the plate-glass doors onto the southwest terrace, the dark flagstone plane turns  
up into a rounded concrete parapet. In its light, airborne mass, this shape echoes the color, texture, and trajectory of the cascade of white foam spilling over the rock ledge just below it. One is left to imagine that the virtual pressure of water welling up in the terrace is released in the overflow of the cantilever.  This returns us to Mumford’s perception of the concrete slabs and parapets as representing the “water theme,” a perception that should be taken all the more seriously given the critic’s acute understanding of Wright’s work and close per- sonal relationship with him at the time. All the stone in the house, except for the thin, waxed flagstones of the living-room floor, is treated as an inert, static material, acting in compression — the “earth theme,” as Mumford noted. In vivid contrast, the concrete is treated as fluid and dynamic, acting in tension. While the deeply raked and randomly laid stone literally reproduces the eroded appearance of the rear cliff face, the two terraces cantilevered over the falls, being broader in scale and smoother in treatment than the stone walls, at first appear to echo the large boulders in the streambed. But that is only an initial and partial impression. Their rounded, fluid contours and light, insubstantial surfaces relate more to water than to stone — not to a thin film of water as in the waxed flagstones, but to water aerated and transformed into foam. The different directions in which these two main can- tilevered terraces point correspond almost exactly with the relative disposition of the two falls beneath them. Appearing to spill out from the stone masses to either side of them like the falls between the banks of the stream, the two seemingly air- borne trays effect changes in level that echo those in the stream. In its representa- tion of the falling water, the house itself thus becomes a natural step in the descent of Bear Run to the river.  Wright intended Fallingwater to represent nature in flux, to suggest the phenomenon of change over time. The architect’s decision to site the house over the waterfall rather than facing it was critical and determined everything about the perception and meaning of the house. It meant that the house, “designed to the music of the stream” for “one who liked to listen to the waterfall,” would offer an aural rather than a primarily visual experience of the falling water, an expe- rience that, by its very nature, would be more time-consuming than instantaneous. Wright privileged the aural over the visual and thereby gave precedence to the continual over the momentary. Hearing takes time and gives to time a depth that vision lacks. Where looking focuses on that which is present to the eye, listening relies on expectation and is amplified through deferral. Hearing also blurs bound- aries and distinctions and renders them fluid in contrast to vision, which specifies, clarifies, and reduces the flux of nature to discrete, controllable, knowable entities. It is thus not by chance but rather by design that the visitor to Fallingwater readily conflates the concrete with water and the living-room floor with the streambed beneath, just as it is by design that the view of the waterfalls is deferred until one leaves the house to reflect back on it.  In the end it is the prolonged timeframe of listening and hearing that is the most unusual and meaningful aspect of one’s experience of Fallingwater. The sound of  
the rushing water and falls becomes perceptible as soon as one reaches the bridge leading to the house. It does not stop when one enters the house. It underscores the waxed flagstones of the floor to cause the element of moving water to pervade the space of the living room. The echo chamber-like semicircular backing of the hatch amplifies the sound as it makes it literally part of the room.’’ Hearing the water constantly rushing underneath extends the kinesthetic experience of the con- structed interior space into a temporal dimension that includes the entire physical environment of which that space is a part. Through hearing, one imagines what one might see, and it is this that gives Fallingwater a valence beyond the momen- tary and the purely visual. Inside the space of the room, one already senses the continuous and unending cycle of nature — of growth, movement, and change — that the view of the house from below the falls ultimately confirms in the retro- spective view it affords of the house’s place in the overall environment of Bear Run.  As an integral part of its natural environment, Fallingwater appears as mutable as the landscape. It registers its effects and continually changes with the seasons. In the fall, the autumn leaves bring out a burnished quality in the originally light ochre color of the painted concrete, while the falls slowly diminish to a mere trickle as winter comes along. In winter, when the ice takes over, the house itself seems to become frozen in time, only to return to life, with a vengeance, with the early spring rains. Such an engagement on the part of architecture with the elements of nature is extraordinary and sets Fallingwater apart. To animate, activate, and  give life to buildings, architects have often used water in the form of fountains.  But while the water itself may be natural, the shape and movement imparted to it are artificial and controlled. The liveliness is merely an illusion. More to the point, the illusion, like that of a play, only lasts for a limited amount of time. Even- tually, the fountain is turned off and all becomes static once again. As in the theater, when the play ends and the lights come back on, the audience is made aware of the gulf between art and reality — which is to say, art and life.  The extraordinary thing about Fallingwater is that the illusion, the spectacle, the movement of water never stops. This may sound simplistic, but it is profound. Once it gets dark, and especially after the lights in the house have been turned off, one naturally expects the falls to be turned off as well — but they cannot be. Fallingwater is continuous with the stream and waterfalls that preceded it and with the entire nat- ural system that has grown up around them and takes its life from them. The expe- rience of the house is an experience of time as duration. Wright liked to say that in his own house, Taliesin, you could not easily “tell where pavements and walls left off and ground began.”’° In Fallingwater, by contrast, you do not ask where the house ends and the natural environment begins. Instead, you ask when — and the answer is never. This finally is what gives the building its magic, its uniqueness, and its lasting significance. The house is, as the architect Paul Rudolph once wrote, a “realized dream.””” It is a palpable mental space where time both expands and contracts inde- pendent of one’s volition and not always fully comprehensible to the conscious mind, though always and inevitably in tune with natural laws. 
DANTEUM  Giuseppe Terragni  Jonathan Mekinda  Giuseppe Terragni, Danteum Paradiso, 1938. L’architettura 153 (July 1968): 251.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
The Danteum is one of the most enigmatic projects by one of the most enigmatic architects of the twentieth century: Giuseppe Terragni.’ An organization dedicated to encouraging the study of Dante and promoting his work, the Danteum was the idea of Rino Valdameri, the director of the Brera Academy of Fine Arts in Milan and a leading literary and cultural figure in Italy during the 1930s. An ardent fascist and a passionate champion of the poet, Valdameri conceived the new organization in 1938; with the financial and political support of the Milanese industrial magnate Count Alessandro Poss, he then approached Mussolini to secure official state approval for the organization and support for the construction of its headquarters in Rome. This effort was at first successful, and the two men met with Mussolini in Rome on November 10, 1938 to discuss the project in more detail. After the meet- ing, however, Valdameri struggled to sustain Mussolini’s interest in the project, and with the start of the war in the fall of 1939 the plans for the Danteum were officially put on hold. Valdameri’s untimely death in June 1943 brought an end to the project.  Also in attendance at the meeting with Mussolini were the two architects that Valdameri had commissioned to design the Danteum, Giuseppe Terragni and Pie- tro Lingeri.” Terragni and Lingeri had a longstanding relationship with Valdameri and a well-established professional partnership — together they had designed sev- eral highly regarded buildings and participated in numerous state-sponsored com- petitions.’ Likely the most important factor in their selection, however, was Terragni’s leading position among Italian modernist architects.* Terragni’s prom- inence was largely due to his passionate efforts to synthesize the principles of inter- national modernism with the traditions and needs of fascist Italy, in particular the demand for new forms of architectural expression that would effectively engage the cultural ideology of Mussolini’s regime. Terragni was certainly not alone among Italian modernists in devoting energy to this question, but with his Casa del Fascio in Como, completed in 1936, he achieved a degree of renown that few equaled. The Danteum was an ideal project for such an architect, and Valda- meri commissioned Terragni and Lingeri well before the November meeting with Mussolini, where the two architects presented a series of evocative drawings, many with water-color washes.’ After the meeting, Terragni and Lingeri continued to work on the project, producing additional drawings as well as a model and a writ- ten “report” on their design, the “Relazione sul Danteum.”° The Danteum is known today through that model and approximately 40 drawings and two albums of photographs of drawings that are held in various archives; substantial portions of the “Relazione sul Danteum” also remain.’  History  In the statutes that he drafted for it, Valdameri explained the functions that the Danteum was to perform: “A ‘Danteum’ is to be created in Rome: A National 
Organization that proposes to erect, on the via dell’Impero, in this epoch, in which the will and the genius of the Duce have realized the Imperial dream of Dante, a Temple to the greatest of Italian poets. The Danteum is proposed to: carry out the celebration of the words of Dante, considered a primary source for Mussolini’s  : 28 creations...  As these lines make clear, Valdameri conceived the Danteum to pro- mote an understanding of the poet and his works that would emphasize their direct and vital connection to the fascist present. In this view, Dante’s significance rested not only on the beauty of his poetry, but also on his vision of Italian uni- fication and imperial expansion rooted in Catholicism, a vision that was widely understood during the fascist era as foretelling Mussolini's rise to power. This con- ception of Dante as an avant-garde prophet of fascism, at once temporally distant and spiritually intimate to the present, was also shared by Terragni and Lingeri. Indeed, the two architects explicitly designed the Danteum both to commemorate the poet and to illuminate the significance of his work as a prophecy of the fascist empire.  The site in Rome chosen for the Danteum was an irregular trapezoid set in the acute comer of the intersection of the Via Cavour and what is now the Via dei Fori Imperiali. The longest side of the site fronted on to what was then the recently constructed Via dell’Impero (Street of Empire). This broad avenue had been built to link the Piazza Venezia with the Colosseum and to reveal the remnants of var- ious ancient fora, which had been almost completely built over during the centu- ries since their construction. The Via dell’Impero is one of the most striking examples of the policy of sventramento (clearing out) implemented under Mussolini that demolished large swaths of the modern city in order to uncover remnants of the ancient city. In its willful destruction of anonymous medieval structures to reveal more fully antique monuments and inscribe into the fabric of the city more direct relationships between those monuments and the centers of fascist power, this policy demonstrates the same attitude to history that inspired the Danteum. In the view of Valdameri and other fascists, the value of the past was determined primarily by the present to which it led, and that value was only made visible — literally “abstracted” from history — with the passage of time.’ Terragni and Lingeri evoked this attitude in their description of the ancient monuments crowded around the site of the Danteum:  But here is the great revelation: The contingent pretext that, when they were built, seemed the only reason and the only justification for their need (because it was the most obvious) has disappeared, and what remains standing, with terrible mutilations, are stone blocks in which monumentality resides, transformed, through the funda- mental laws of numerical or geometric harmony that bind spaces and volumes, solids and voids, materials and colors.’°  Terragni and Lingeri were intensely interested in this rich context, which they already knew well from their participation in the competition for the Palazzo del 
Littorio in 1934. Planned as a new national headquarters for the fascist party, the Palazzo del Littorio was conceived as a massive structure that would have fully occupied the triangular site delineated by the Via Cavour, the Via dell’Impero, and the Via del Colosseo, including the area later chosen for the Danteum. For that competition, Terragni and Lingeri joined a larger team of artists and architects, including Marcello Nizzoli and Mario Sironi, that produced two entries as the Gruppo Milanese.'’ Their work on this project provided Terragni and Lingeri the opportunity not only to study this section of Rome closely, but also to develop a method of site analysis that embodied the fascist vision of history in its identifi- cation and assertion of direct connections between ancient ruins, existing struc- tures, and future programs. But while the 1934 competition yielded a  remarkable range of entries, the program was eventually moved to another site and the lot on the Via dell’Impero was left vacant.  Building on their experience with the Palazzo Littorio, Terragni and Lingeri pre- pared a site plan, drawn at a scale of 1:2500, to situate the Danteum more precisely within its context. Notably, and against convention, Terragni and Lingeri did not depict existing structures on this plan. Instead, they included plans of the recently uncovered fora and other ancient structures in the area, including the Basilica of Maxentius and the Baths of Trajan, as well as other, more recent monuments such as Michelangelo’s Campidoglio in order to illustrate what they described as an “experimental field of eight centuries of concrete and documented architecture.” Heightening the oddity of this quasi-archaeological plan, which shows the contem- porary street grid blending into the field of ancient structures, are two aerial photo- graphs of the Via dell’Impero arrayed on the periphery of the sheet alongside two illustrations of the Palace of King Sargon in Persia and the Temple Complex at Kar- nak in Egypt. Together with the plan, these illustrations present an overview of the site and reveal how the design of the Danteum was conceived in concert with his- tory in order to establish connections across time and space that would not simply legitimize the present, but power it toward a better future.’’  Rooms  From the extant materials, it is possible to construct a view, albeit partial, of the complex that Terragni and Lingeri designed. The proposed building is essentially a golden-section rectangle in plan, oriented longitudinally east-to-west on its site and with the primary facade facing south onto the Via dell’Impero. Upon closer inspection, it becomes clear that the plan also comprises two equal but slightly overlapping and offset squares, which largely define the interior spaces within the primary rectangle. As Thomas Schumacher has noted, Le Corbusier's Villa Stein at Garche of 1927 was likely a model for this “slipped rectangle” configura- tion, but the architects identified the Basilica of Maxentius as the fundamental inspiration for their design.’* Standing directly across the Via dell’Impero and 
rectangular in plan, with an apse on its northern side, the Basilica not only embo- dies the golden ratio that Terragni and Lingeri adopted for the Danteum, but the length of its short ends determined the length of the long sides of the Danteum."? In addition, the interior divisions of the Basilica demarcate two overlapping squares as well as a series of smaller golden-section rectangles, motifs that also play a funda- mental role in the organization of the Danteum.  For the architects, the adoption of the golden ratio and slipped-rectangle config- uration was motivated by their rejection of symbolism and representation as the means with which to “celebrate the words of Dante.” Instead, Terragni and Lingeri deployed geometry and numerical logic to construct a sympathetic and harmoni- ous resonance between the building and the ideas of the poet:  In our case the architecture could adhere to the literary work only through an exam- ination of the admirable structure of the Divine Poem, itself faithful to a criterion of division and interpretation through certain symbolic numbers: 1, 3, 7, 10 and their combinations, which happily can be synthesized into one and three (unity and trinity). Now, there is only one rectangle that clearly expresses the harmonic law of unity in trinity, and this is the rectangle known historically as the “golden”: the rectangle, that is, whose sides are in the golden ratio (the short side is to the long side as the long side is to the sum of the two sides). One is the rectangle, three are the segments that deter- mine the golden ratio.'®  Embracing the interplay between the perimeter rectangle and the two interlock- ing squares, Terragni and Lingeri conceived the interior of the Danteum as four primary spaces, with additional spaces interspersed uniformly between them. All of these primary spaces are either squares or golden-section rectangles in plan, and though in most cases these geometries would not have been visible to visitors, Terragni and Lingeri felt that they would have been perceptible as pure, abstract forms.’” Despite this regular arrangement, the interior is not divided into simple uniform quadrants as the architects also took full advantage of the height of the building to arrange the primary spaces in a sequence that varies both their horizon- tal and vertical position with respect to one another.'* The result is a series of inter- locking and interpenetrating spaces that articulate an ascending spiral through the complex, echoing Dante’s own journey in The Divine Comedy.  After passing through the narrow entryway on the main facade, visitors would enter a square, open courtyard occupying the south-west corner of the complex. Across this courtyard, they would see an enclosed array of 100 densely-packed col- umns, filling the north-west quadrant. (Some drawings for the project also show a regular grid of thin members mounted in front of the columns as a display system.) To enter the interior, visitors would pass through the columns and move into a narrow corridor running laterally through the center of the complex.'” From this corridor they could enter the library and study center, set slightly below the main level in the north-east corner of the building, or move along its length back toward 
the front facade in order to enter the room of Inferno in the south-east corner.”° The room of Inferno contains seven columns, each a different diameter ranging from 2.78 m to 0.48 m, arranged in a spiraling pattern determined by a series of seven squares ranging in size from 17 m to 0.7 m on a side, inscribed on the floor. The largest square, located next to the entry, was derived directly from the golden- section rectangle that is the plan of the room, and the remaining squares follow this logic, each derived from the next largest. The columns are positioned at the center of these squares and support an identical arrangement of squares inscribed into the ceiling, which was also to be incised so as to admit a dim light to the room. Oppres- sive and heavy in its affect, the room deploys numerical logic, geometry, and scale to evoke the descent into hell.  To enter the next room, Purgatory, visitors would cross the room of Inferno and ascend a long, narrow staircase with three groups of three stairs squeezed into the gap between the room of Inferno and the eastern exterior wall. The room of Pur- gatory echoes the room of Inferno: a spiraling arrangement of seven squares would lead visitors across the room and back toward the center of the complex. Unlike Inferno, however, Purgatory contains no columns and the squares are not inscribed in a level floor but rather rise toward the exit, each square set slightly above the larger square preceding it. Through this gentle ascent, the viewer would slowly rise toward the passage to Paradise, located, as in the room of Inferno, across from the entrance and in another gap between the overlapping and offset squares governing the plan. Also like the room of Inferno, the room of Purgatory was to be lit from above, but rather than narrow slits emitting a dim light the ceiling in Purgatory is pierced with wide openings to allow sunlight to flood into the space. After the heavy darkness of Inferno, the passage through Purgatory would lift the visitor with its light-filled and dematerialized architecture.  The rooms of Inferno and Purgatory show most clearly how Terragni and Lingeri synthesized the architectural elements of geometry and scale with numer-  ical logic to establish abstract harmonies between two distinct “structures,” Dante’s Divine Comedy and the Danteum itself. Unlike the rooms of Inferno and Purgatory, the room of Paradise is not described in much detail in the existing portions of the “Relazione”; the few extant drawings and plans, however, offer a captivating glimpse of the architects’ vision for the space. The passage to Paradise consists of another staircase with three flights of three stairs each, but shorter and narrower than the passage from Inferno to Purgatory. At the top of the stairs, visitors would find an open space, or antechamber, equal in size and orientation to the entry cor- ridor on the main floor. Across this space, a square, gridded array of 33 glass col- ummns demarcates Paradise. The use of glass produces shimmering columns of breathtaking lightness, light-filled and light-weight. The sensation of lightness is further emphasized by the thin trellis above, opening the room almost completely to the sky, as well as the arrangement of the columns: 24 of the 33 columns demar- cate three sides of square, while the remaining nine define another square at its center. (The fourth side of the larger square is formed by the rear wall of the 
complex.) Continuing their trajectory of dematerialization, Terragni and Lingeri constructed in the room of Paradise an otherworldly environment in which sub- stance and matter — the fundamental elements of architecture and of the world — have been abandoned almost entirely.  As in the other major rooms of the Danteum, visitors would cross the room of Paradise in order to exit it. There is an alternative, however: the room of Empire. Stretching eastward from the antechamber before Paradise, the room of Empire occupies the narrow slot between the golden-section rectangles of Inferno and Pur- gatory below. For the architects, the room of Empire was the physical and spiritual heart of the Danteum, the “germ of the architectural whole as the conclusion of the experience of the spaces traversed.””' The design of the room embodies its impor- tance: a row of 12 paired piers, with a single pier at its end, stretches down the center of the room, leading to a monumental statue of an eagle (depicted with only a rough sketch in the sole remaining drawing of the room). This is the only room in the complex without a clear, direct path from entrance to exit and the visitor would follow the piers to the monumental eagle and then double back in order to exit the building. This pathway sets the room of Empire as the culmination of the visitor’s spiraling journey, thereby proclaiming Dante’s stature as a prophet of Mussolini’s rise and the formation of the fascist empire under his rule.””  The merging of Dante’s ideas and contemporary politics in the room of Empire confirms the Danteum’s function as an indoctrination “machine.” For Terragni, Lingeri, and Valdameri, the purpose of the Danteum was not only to encourage the study of the poet through its library and study center, but also to promote an understanding of Dante that celebrated his vital and still constructive contribu- tion to present-day life. Wielding the fundamental elements of architecture and poetry, Terragni and Lingeri designed a complex that would literally carry visitors through Dante’s vision to the culmination of history: the fascist empire. In the Dan- teum, history is deployed alongside architecture and poetry as an abstract material, stripped of its particularities and transformed into an “eternal” substance that bears meaning only for the present that it helps to construct.  Walls  For all of the richness of its interior, the Danteum would have revealed little to passers-by on the Via dell’Impero. This aspect of the design is not only in keeping with the architects’ rejection of symbolism and representation, but also reflects their appreciation for the surrounding ruins and remnants, which they saw trans- formed by the passage of time into pure, powerful forms. The most prominent exterior element of the Danteum is a monumental wall of marble blocks that the architects arranged in front of the facade, parallel to the Via dell’Impero. Stand- ing approximately 16 m tall and stretching almost the entirely length of the build- ing, the wall would have separated the Danteum from the adjacent street and 
obscured the main entryway. (A single pier of equal height to the wall stands slightly apart at the western end, directly in front of the stairs leading down from the exit from Paradise.) The wall was designed to act in several capacities: first, as a counterpoint and equal to the massive wall of the Basilica of Maxentius, just across the Via dell’Impero; second, as a plane to demarcate the view along the street toward the monuments at either end; and third, as a mounting surface for a series of shallow, sculptural panels, illustrating the cantos of The Divine Comedy.” Based on the remaining drawings, the exterior of the Danteum was to be as flat and opaque as the ante-wall, serving primarily to demarcate and protect the care- fully calibrated ambience of the interior. (While the southern wall of the courtyard is regularly punctuated by tall, narrow slits, all the other walls of the complex are free of windows; light in the primary interior spaces was to be provided exclusively by openings in the ceiling.) The walls themselves were to be constructed of stone laid in a precise sequence that continued the numerical logic governing the interior  plan: three courses of regular stones with equal height would be followed by a string course, and each string course would in turn correspond to an interior level (either floor or ceiling). Through this masonry pattern, the architects aimed to transform the numerical structure of The Divine Comedy into physical form once again and literally “cement” it into the physical structure of the Danteum. Beyond the reliefs on the ante-wall and the regular masonry pattern of the main block, the Danteum is devoid of ornament and decoration. As a result, the building appears in the drawings as a solid, massive block, equal in stature and substance to the remnants of the ancient empire that surround it. While the bulk of the Danteum sits comfortably within that context, when considered in light of Terragni’s other work, the solidity and weightiness of the design is striking. Terragni was an ardent fascist who devoted substantial energy to understanding the philosophical structure of the revolutionary movement that he proclaimed.”* As numerous scholars have pointed out, this engagement profoundly shaped Terragni’s design of the Casa del Fascio in Como. Known chiefly for its open, transparent facade and rich use of materials to generate visual and spatial effects that evoke core tenets of fascism, the Casa del Fascio is a remarkable work that demonstrates the deep intertwining of the tenets of international modernism with t  he ideals of fascism at the core of Italian rationalism.”  As different as it is from the Casa del Fascio, the Danteum is a more powerful example of rationalist architecture; indeed, it highlights some of the most distinc- tive elements of Italian modernism, which are effaced at the Casa del Fascio pre- cisely because that building so neatly deploys the most familiar tropes of modernist architecture. The synthesis of architecture, poetry, and history at the Danteum was fundamentally rooted in the way in which modern architects in Italy conceived the possibilities of modernism. Terragni and Lingeri saw the abstract purity of geom- etry and structure, matter and material as the foundation of all powerful architec- ture and they recognized this lesson in the ancient ruins and monuments that surrounded them. Furthermore, with the Danteum, the architects aimed explicitly  
to rectify the failure of international modern architecture to articulate a new approach to monumentality, an essential program for the fascist regime. The spare, unbroken walls of the Danteum, towering over the Via dell’Impero, offer a pow- erful vision for a modern monumentality that synthesizes abstraction and history, modernism and fascism.  Notes  * Image courtesy of the Ryerson and Burnham Libraries, Art Institute of Chicago.  1. Ironically, much of the confusion about Terragni is the result of various campaigns to celebrate his work. The effort of contemporary figures such as Peter Eisenman and Daniel Libeskind to separate his architecture entirely from its context is just one exam- ple, and Italian scholars such as Bruno Zevi, looking to cleanse modernism in Italy of the taint of fascism, have also done much to complicate Terragni’s significance.  2. The exact nature of the partnership between Terragni and Lingeri on the Danteum proj- ect is still debated by architectural historians. The two architects had a longstanding partnership and a substantial portion of the extant archival material relating to the proj- ect is held by the Lingeri family; nonetheless, the project is typically described as Terragni’s alone. For two different treatments of the issue see Thomas L. Schumacher, Terragni’s Danteum, 2nd ed. (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1996) and the catalogue entry on the Danteum in Giorgio Ciucci, ed., Giuseppe Terragni: Opera Com- pleta (Milan: Electa, 1996).  3. Lingeri had studied under Valdameri at the Brera academy during the 1920s, and both architects worked with him on a number of projects, including a never realized proposal to renovate the Brera Academy, before the Danteum.  4. Terragni had been a member of the Gruppo Sette (Group of Seven), which in 1926 and 1927 issued the first calls for Italian architects to align themselves with the growing international modern movement in architecture. In the years following, he contributed to numerous conferences, exhibitions, and competitions within Italy and without, realized several notable projects, including the Casa del Fascio in Como, and established himself as a leading advocate for an intimate relationship between fas- cism and modernism. The literature on Terragni is vast, but a good starting point is Ciucci, Giuseppe Terragni.  5. The letter that Valdameri sent to Mussolini’s secretary in October 1938 requesting a meeting implies that the selection of Terragni and Lingeri for the Danteum had already been approved by Mussolini. See Schumacher, Terragni’s Danteum, 154  6. Giuseppe Terragni is widely accepted as the sole author of the “Relazione sul Danteum,” the extant portions of which have been analyzed and translated by Thomas Schumacher in Giuseppe Terragni, “Relazione sul Danteum,” in Schumacher, Terragni’s Danteum, 127-49.  7. The bulk of material is held at the Centro Studi Giuseppe Terragni in Como and the Lingeri archive in Milan.  8. Schumacher, Terragni’s Danteum, 153. 
MAISON DU PEUPLE  Jean Prouvé  Anne Beim  Jean Prouvé, Eugéne Beaudoin, Marcel Lods, and Vladimir Bodianski, Maison du Peuple, Clichy, France, 1939.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt.  © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
THE CRAFT OF INDUSTRIALIZED CONSTRUCTION  Steel sheet, aluminum sheet ... will make for lighter construction, and this results in economy as well as speed for execution and installation, quality in terms of the equip- ment used, economy in terms of mass production, and a new dawn for the new archi- tecture that will characterize our times.’  In light of Jean Prouvé’s vivid proclamation — although it was written 15 years later than the progressive time period to which it refers — one might anticipate a striking technological achievement when one searches for Maison du Peuple in the streets of Clichy, a working-class district in the north-west of Paris. Yet, what is portrayed in most general histories of architecture is something less inspiring: black-and-white photographs portray the building during its period of construction from 1935 to 1939, or immediately after its completion, when it was not yet in use and the streets were still free of the commotion caused by today’s endless small Parisian cars.” These images show what appears to be a pragmatic, grave, and opaque structure made of steel and glass that is characterized by its limited number of different material components and its blunt design features.  Viewed again and more closely, the building is striking. Remarkable glass awn- ings that mime outstretched wings cover the wide sidewalks and divide the build- ing horizontally into two halves: an elevated upper part primarily covered with glass panels held by slender vertical mullions that reach from the level of the awn- ings to the roof edge — emphasizing the grand height of the upper floor of the building — and a lower part at ground level that is accessible directly from the street, offering market activities the ability to spread across the edges of the building struc- ture. But the images do not leave a clear sense ofa public building complex that was meant to serve social gatherings and cultural events. The main impression is a con- spicuous structure stripped bare, to its very essence one might say. It has the appearance of a rather rational and functionally optimized shelter for large group activities, expressing a “machine aesthetics.” All of this is emphasized by the indus- trialized components of the construction.  Yet, when the Maison du Peuple de Clichy is approached from Boulevard du Général Leclere (former Rue de Lorraine) one finds a building structure that — despite its clear-cut box shape of roughly three to four stories — appears surprisingly delicate, due to its relatively small size in terms of scale and the clarity of the detail- ing. The Maison du Peuple de Clichy has an elegant simplicity that results from the soft, monotone reflection of the light-gray sheet metal, the steady repetition of the slender mullions, and the elongated glass panels of the upper floor that mir- ror the neighboring buildings. A balanced mix of refined details and crude struc- tural elements, in particular the significant slanting glass awnings that are mounted on all sides, provide the building with a combined sense of materialized lightness 
and blunt appearance. In addition to this, you might see groups of people who have casually set up a small, spontaneous flea market in one of the corners of the build- ing. The double-leaf glass doors to the present food market may have been pushed open, as an invitation to passing pedestrians to enter or walk through the covered market. Today the entrance to the community hall is blocked due to ongoing res- toration and posters have been stuck on the glass doors declaring that the building is now listed as a “monument historique.”’ A lengthy text explains that the final part of the restoration is still to be carried out on the interior, including mechanical parti- tions and movable floor elements, as well as the roof construction, and that further funding is needed for this.  In the study that follows, both cultural concerns and technical matters of con- struction will be kept in view. This double focus follows the arguments set forth in Prouvé’s paper, “Sheet metals and welding,” presented to the Société des ingé- nieurs soudeurs on January 19, 1950.* Prouvé’s arguments will not only help me explain the Maison du Peuple de Clichy’s founding ideas, but also its construction and inspiring outcome. Yet my basic aim is to elucidate how human aspirations are fulfilled when rare qualities of craftsmanship are transformed into a refined culture of industrialized production. I believe this is what happened in the work of the arti- san, constructeur,’ and manufacturer, Jean Prouvé.  Building for the People  In the period between 1930 and 1935...architecture was not very exciting. It was no longer in tune with everything else in life. It was meeting with bold architects who were just as committed and concerned in their research as we were in ours, that resulted in the first designs...entirely built in the factory using sheet steel. Shortly thereafter, we designed and built the covered market at Clichy.®  Maison du Peuple was designed and built for the municipality of Clichy-la- Garenne on the initiative of the Mayor Charles Auffray (1887-1957), a left-wing politician and member of Front Populaire. The building was the outcome of a call to design a modern administration building for the city council combined with a covering roof for an existing open-air market located in the heart of Clichy.”  The area was dominated by industry at the time, and the Citroen foundry® —a huge, widespread manufacturing complex — was a close neighbor to the market site. Here, primarily motor parts were produced inter alia for the “peoples car,” the sparse, utilitarian and affordable 2CV, conceived in 1936. The Bic factory was also located in the area, producing ballpoints and pocket lighters that were efficient substitutes for the fountain pens and matchboxes of former times. These manufacturing units mass produced useful commodities for daily life that also evoked the spirit of modern living — expressions of the desire for convenience, 
consumerism, and prosperity. Naturally, these industries left a mark on the urban fabric, but it also influenced the demographic structure of this part of the city where a growing population of well-paid industrial workers wanted facilities that offered social and cultural activities.  The designers who collaborated on the building — architects Eugéne Beaudoin (1898-1983) and Marcel Lods (1891-1978), engineer Vladimir Bodianski (1894-1966), and constructeur Jean Prouvé — read this particular cultural setting clearly and put forward an innovative idea: making maximum use of the site by adding more functional elements than conceived in the original program by the municipality and by proposing a large-span, flexible steel structure.’ The design proposal offered a multi-purpose spatial frame, which could serve as a cultural cen- ter that included a market (preferably larger than the existing one), a film theatre seating roughly 700 people, a community hall spread across several floors and capa- ble of accommodating 1,500-2,000 people, and a number of offices for the local city council and labor unions.'° It was conceived as a genuine “House for the People” — a tribute to the collective spirit of ordinary men, demonstrating the most advanced technical solutions to be applied in construction, based on the rationale of “up-to- date industrialized production.”  Yet, it grew out of an already well-established institution of Maisons du Peuple, which had been fostered by a self-confident growing workers’ movement, and houses for these organizations had been designed and built around the turn of the twentieth century in a number of European cities. The Maisons du Peuple were initially meant to host community activities associated with the labor unions and their political groupings; in the course of time, however, these cultural envir- onments for the common man were influenced by left-wing intellectuals and artists, in particular members of the art nouveau movement,'’ who were attracted to the idea of the enlightened worker and the authenticity found in crafts done by hand.”  Well-known examples are the Maison du Peuple de Bruxelles, built in 1896-99 and demolished in 1965, designed by the Belgian architect Victor Horta (1861-1947), and the Maison du Peuple de Nancy, built in 1902 and designed by the French architects Paul Charbonnier (1865-1953) and Eugéne Vallin (1856-1922). The design of the latter included contributions from the sculptor and painter Victor Prouvé (1858-1944), the father of Jean Prouvé. For this building he had sculptured the decorations of the stone facades. Yet, in Nancy, Victor Prouvé was better known for his affiliation with the Ecole de Nancy’’ out of which the art nouveau movement grew. Being a central figure, he was a vital agitator of the linkage between the making of artwork and industrial production.’*  Two basic architectural ideas guided the development of these early Maisons du Peuple: the means by which industrial manufacture could aid the progress of skillful craftsmanship, and the ways buildings could be enriched by established fine arts traditions in order to reach a contemporary architectural expression that cherished both structural expression and ornament. The ideas that had force in 
the design of the Maison du Peuple de Clichy were related but different. First, there was a serious concern for the deeds of ordinary people, their everyday con- cerns and practical lives. Second, there was the conversion of deep-rooted craft traditions into industrialized manufacture. These two ideas matured into expres- sions of the essentials of modern industrialized culture. Evidence of this type of expression — unlike anything found in the earlier Maisons — is the subtle use of the colors red and yellow for selected building elements, which could supplement the metal gray of the bare metal. Recent commentators have suggested refer- ences to the color schemes of the Russian constructivists and the workers’ movement.'”  In sum, several factors determined the uniqueness of this solution to the “Peo- ple’s House” design problem: the integration of various programmatic aspects that acknowledged social, cultural, and political activities, the flexibility of the spatial arrangement and adaptable construction features, and finally the preference for unconventional materials such as steel plate and glass (mostly used in industrial architecture). When finished in 1940 it was the first of a new kind of Maisons du Peuple.  Structural Ambitions, Playful Mechanics and Honest Functioning  For the architects and for us, it [the factory built design of sheet metal] was an oppor- tunity to apply our ideas in an absolute sense, without the least restriction, especially in terms of shape. With a new technique, new way of modeling; no camouflage, no lies, no deception.'*  The site meant for the Maison du Peuple de Clichy-la-Garenne was relatively small compared to the ambitions of the extended program. It measured 40 x 50 meters, and the proposed building structure was designed in such a way that the street market could keep its original size, filling out the space located between four streets: Rue Martissot, Rue Morilion, Rue Kloch, and Boulevard de Lorraine (now Boulevard du Général Leclerc). In the new scheme the market area still had priority and was planned to be accessible from all sides of the building. Each of the four facades was designed with a number of centered, wide, double-leaf glass doors that corresponded to the layout of the opposite facade. In each corner of the build- ing, wide stairways were placed to serve the community hall and the offices. Although the architectural design did not tend to celebrate one facade over the other, the main entrance to the covered market and the community hall faced the main street Boulevard de Lorraine. Above this hung a wide balcony that was cleverly integrated in the construction features of the awning. It offered visitors the opportunity to step out to enjoy some fresh air during intermissions, or to fol- low the activities of local festivals or political gatherings in the streets. Opposite the 
main entrance the office spaces were placed in a taller, closed part of the four-story building. It looked like a “backrest,” shaped like an elevated box, allowing free access to the covered market but also offering a view across the building’s roo  scape and a glance down into the cinema hall when the huge skylights were rolled aside. Due to the need for large spans, in order to keep the floors free of too many load  bearing columns or walls, the main supporting structure was conceived as a mod ular frame system. This type of structure allowed for sizeable parts of the interior walls and the exterior envelope to remain unobstructed and to be used for movable  partition walls, fenestration, or door openings. The structural principle was non.  load-bearing facades hung on a load-bearing structural frame — a true curtain-wall system — which incorporated panels with and without windows, the great glazed facades and the awnings. Even though curtain-wall construction was known as early as the late nineteenth century, used, for example in the Reliance Building in Chicago,’” and Jean Prouvé previously had designed a prefabricated building system based on similar principles for the Aéro-Club Roland-Garros at Buc in 1935,'* the curtain-wall construction of Maison du Peuple de Clichy was the first of its kind in France.’”  In the first design proposals Jean Prouvé suggested a modular system of folded steel sheets for the entire building, which also included the load-bearing structure. The idea was to minimize the number of parts and different materials, and to sim- plify and thereby optimize the construction procedure in order to keep to a small budget.” However, for reasons of safety, in the final project the chief engineer Bodiansky, altered the load-bearing structure of folded steel sheets into Vierendeel trusses of rolled steel.”"  The heavy load-bearing structure, the mobile slab, and roof elements were designed by Bodiansky and fabricated by the firm Schwartz-Haumont. All the other construction features — the facade panel systems, staircases, sanitary units, move-  able and operable partitions, and furniture — were designed and manufactured by Jean Prouvé in his workshop.” According to Prouvé, he and his employees  designed most of the building and were responsible also for the execution of the construction and the mechanical features, yet he always named Beaudoin and Lods as the architects of the building.”’  Asa structural typology, the Maison du Peuple de Clichy can be compared to the covered markets built in European cities through the nineteenth century. In par- ticular there are parallels to the original central market of Paris, Les Halles, con- structed in the 1850s,’* which consisted of spacious, open frame structures made of cast iron columns and girders with a majority of glass infill and wooden elements.” Lightweight awnings of stretched canvas were mounted along the facades of Les Halles to offer the traders shelter from the weather. Similar to the glass awnings of the Maison du Peuple de Clichy, they give the advantage of scaling down the appearance of the building, and more importantly they create a smooth transition between the interior space and the outdoor areas around the 
building, in terms of both extending the market space and how the urban context is met.  Since street markets traditionally take place in the morning, and meetings, dance, and film-shows in the evening, the Maison du Peuple de Clichy was required to fulfill different programmatic purposes at different times of the day. The market activities could spread out on the covered sidewalks and up stairs to the first floor galleries, which spatially could be connected to the market area by opening the center part of the deck. This was made of modular floor elements extending side by side from the wall of the Boulevard de Lorraine frontage to the very back of the building. With the push of a button, seven movable floor elements, each measuring 17.5 x 5.4 meters and weighing 16 tons with fixed rows of chairs, would slip aside toward the back of the room where they were elevated and stacked above the stage. The two handrails along the edge of the longitudinal galleries were hidden inside the floor construction.”®  When another button is pressed, two large skylights, made of two bays of metal trusses covered with textured cathedral glass, were pushed aside and pro- vided access to fresh air and a view of the sky. When the community hall was needed for gatherings or film-shows the deck was restored, creating a more or less box-shaped hall 40 meters long with the option of having the roof closed or opened for ventilation. The mechanical maneuvers for changing this setting would take about 45 minutes altogether. The third movable or mechanical fea- ture was a suspended wall system, which could close off part of the community hall from the surrounding galleries and thereby provide an enclosed space for the film theatre. This modular wall system comprised a total of 60 panes. The panes measured approximately 1 x 7 meters and were made of thin metal frames clad with sheet metal at the bottom (up to 2 meters). Above they were covered with stretched raphan fabric and filled with mineral wool for acoustical reasons.”” The fixed ceiling panels were similarly designed to hold additional performative properties and had incorporated an advanced steam heating sys-  tem that was intended to provide a moderate temperature by heat radiation from the panes.  Jean Prouvé was particularly concerned with the operable partitions, which had “flexible and articulated joints” that gave a delicate finish to the partition wall. n 1931 his workshop already had patented movable metal partitions. By 1933 they designed and manufactured operable partitions for the town hall of Boulogne-Billancourt. In the Maison du Peuple de Clichy, however, numerous design proposals and the testing of prototypes allowed the technical accuracy and the elegance of the detailing to mature.** The way in which the structural principles, the spatial (thereby programmatic) flexibility offered by movable construction systems, and the performative aspects in terms of accessibility,  ventilation, acoustics, and heating were conceived as integrated and realized by inventive skill can be seen as the great tectonic achievement of the Maison du Peuple de Clichy. 
Material Nature and Craftsmanship — A Credo of Industrialized Construction  ...it seemed to me that the possibilities afforded by steel sheet were limitless: after cutting, it could be formed, rolled, beaten to create profiles, each perfectly adapted to whatever use, from the rectilinear to the most elaborately shaped and curved. Adopt- ing this technique, it resulted in an abundance of ideas, designs, constructions, mod- els, prototypes, structures or coachwork for airplane wings in all varieties of steel, including stainless steel.”  Prouvé was brought up in an environment permeated by craft traditions and art, and throughout his life he spent most of his time in the workshop surrounded by workmen, and with metal, tools, and machines in his hands. Trained as a black- smith and wrought iron craftsman, he was extremely experienced in the material properties of metals, and he continued studying by experimenting with the latest technology, tools, and ways to use them in his lifelong dedicated work to pushing the limits of construction technologies. For these reasons Prouvé was naturally interested in the design and technologies that evolved in other fields, such as the aerospace and the car industry; they were, he thought, similar ways of thinking about efficiency, lightweight structures, and prefabricated systems based on kits of parts.  He was also inspired and influenced by the people with whom he worked, from the skilled craftsman in his workshop to visionary architects or clients. Prouvé often spoke about the need for sharing the same ideas when working on a project and the importance of collaborative work, and how architecture in particular was depend- ent on this understanding. He saw the Maison du Peuple de Clichy as proof of this collective spirit where men with different skills and expertise were all equal’’ and shared the same goals.”?  Prouvé recognized that the new types of methods for steel construction pro- vided the buildings with a distinct architectural character of their own; they were elegant and dynamic, and presented the true characteristics of industrialized con- struction. Yet, he was concerned about avoiding depersonalization provided by technology and he brought a human dimension into his designs through the con- sideration of scale and detailing. Prouvé presented this understanding in a conver- sation with Jean-Marie Helwig in 1982 about the Maison du Peuple de Clichy. He explained how critical attention to the properties of the steel material, technical ingenuity, and understanding of execution was embedded in the design of the cur- tain-wall panels:  This panel was put in place by a single man, was hung on like hanging an overcoat on a coat-peg... The hanging systems had a device for adjusting the vertical hang of the joints... This alignment was achieved by an adjustment device on each panel hook. It worked down to the last millimeter, micrometer you might say, so the result was 
perfect... The section of the joint was very carefully worked. It seems quite simple but needed a lot of thought. You can see on the outside the panels are not joined, there is a gap between the two panels. The reason for the gap: maintenance. ..It was also necessary to consider the expansion of these panels, which are independent of each other. At 4m high and 1m wide, they change in the heat or the cold. It’s impos- sible to imagine a joint that could survive such alteration in size. So this was the trick: by folding we made a rebate which is a hollow grove, at the bottom of which we fixed between the two panels a strip of asphalt... Then we decided that it was absolutely necessary to find a flexible joint that stays compressed in all weathers... You can see the purity we achieved by using a sheet of metal. There was a real possibility of large- scale serial industrial production, components that would have made possible the construction of very varied buildings.”  It is evident that Prouvé’s commitment to evolve architectural form both from systems of fabrication and from the expression of construction principles placed him in a structural-_rationalist linage running back to Viollet-le-Duc. In Viollet- le-Due’s lecture XIII, concerning “The Construction of Buildings,” Viollet offered the following proclamation (referring to the use of cast iron in construction): “Forms proper to the nature of the materials employed may not have been discov- ered in a single day, or by a single artist, even though a man of genius; but it is desirable to begin. For in architecture a true and rational form reveals itself only after a series of efforts and trials methodically conducted.””’  Furthermore, Prouvé had an artisanal side to his work, which he obviously had inherited from growing up in an art environment influenced by the ideas of art nouveau. The glass awnings of the Maison du Peuple de Clichy may serve as an illustration. Although the awnings were conceived as functional and rational building elements without any superfluous ornamental features, they hold similar tectonic principles to the elaborate glass-covered entrances of the Parisian Métro designed by the art nouveau architect Hector Guimard (1867-1942). Guimard’s Métro entrances, designed and built from 1902 to 1913, were the outcome of a mass-produced building system. Forged iron was used to create various kinds of arches and furnishings in nature-inspired forms. The roofed entrances, known as édicules,’* of which Porte Dauphine is one of the finest examples, included prominent, fan-shaped, frosted glass awnings, much smaller but comparable to the glass awnings of the Maison du Peuple de Clichy. Despite the ornate character, these forms were also tightly constrained by functional discipline and by a ration- alist tendency to express material properties through structural details.””  Prouvé’s pioneering work of the 1930s, which included furniture, metal struc- tures, cladding systems,”° and service units, culminated in the various building components and prefabricated prototype systems developed for the Maison du Peuple de Clichy. After World War II, Prouvé continued to design and manufac- ture numerous prototypes for the mass production of everyday objects and build- ing constructions.*”” These products and systems were first executed in his own factory in Maxville** and later as a consultant for Compagnie industrielle de material 
de transport (CIMT), which was known for the fabrication of trains. In his position as chair at Conservatoire national des arts et métiers (CNAM) in Paris, Prouvé had great influence on a generation of architects and engineers, who studied and cultivated the opportunities rooted in technology. Moreover, as head of the jury for the com- petition of the Pompidou Centre in 1971, Prouvé was the driving force behind the decision of appointing the young architects, Renzo Piano and Richard Rogers. This project, as a contemporary “House of the People” with its machine aesthetics, showed a similar desire to integrate the urban environment, social life, and the new technology. The construction was particularly interesting because it presented the first metal structures made of cast steel; a sort of metal that unites the strength of the steel with the formability of the cast iron. Curtain-wall construction was also developed further by placing the load-bearing superstructure outside the cladding, leaving space for stairs, lifts, and services within the external structure.”?  Ata time when Le Corbusier’s dense, sculptural buildings in reinforced concrete were dominating another side of French architecture, Prouvé offered an alternative route of exclusive metal carpentry and a true industrialized construction that served architecture.*° The effect of this lingered on and manifested itself in the steel and glass architecture of the 1980s in France.*' Similar ideas can be seen in contem- porary work by Lacaton & Vassal, who use industrialized systems off the shelves to create quality space, despite low budgets.  In the development of the architectural design, construction, and manufacturing of the Maison du Peuple de Clichy, Prouvé was far ahead of his time. Similar to contemporary industrialized construction, which through computerized design and manufacture seeks to overcome the limitations of mechanized fabrication and rigid standardization, he anticipated a post-Fordian industry that can be char- acterized as third-generation industrialization. However, his practical experiments were based on the intelligence of the worker and the culture of enterprise, and not on removing skill from the work force.*” He believed in an industry of the work  collective instead of piecemeal work, and tailor-made production instead of simple 43  serial reproduction.  All in all, the Maison du Peuple de Clichy shows genuine architectural invention rooted in a craft tradition that embraces unbiased inspiration provided by the opportunities offered by new materials, investigation into manufacturing pro- cesses, and, not least, a critical, humanistic reading of technology.  Notes  * Image credit: Anne Beim.  1. Jean Prouvé (1959/2007), “Sheet metals and welding,” Paper presented to the Société des ingénieurs soudeurs, January 19, 1950. Text published in Soudure et Techniques Connexes 718 (July-August 1950): 141— 8, in Jean Prouvé: The Poetics of the Technical Object, ed. Alexander von Vegesack (Weil am Rhein: VITRA Design Museum, 2004) 130-1. 
VILLA MAIREA  Alvar Aalto  Scott Poole  Alvar and Aino Aalto, Villa Mairea, living room with Aino Aalto and Maire Gullichsen, Noormarkku, Finland, 1939.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
As late as 1927, at a time when modernism was making bold advances in the centers of European culture, Alvar and Aino Aalto were designing neoclassical buildings and handcrafted furniture in an array of historical styles in Jyvaskyla.’ A small city in the countryside of central Finland, Jyvaskyla was far from Turku and Helsinki, the cultural centers of a country that was already on the periphery of European civilization. There was little out of the ordinary in the Aaltos’ work.” It was com- petent, conventional in its style and appropriate for its place. Looking forward from this point in time, the prospect that a modern masterpiece would emerge from their office seemed unlikely, let alone inevitable.’ Yet, looking back from 1939, the year the Villa Mairea was completed, the trajectory seems clearer. In fact, by early 1938, Alvar Aalto’s exhibit at the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) in New York was announced in a press release: “The Exhibition of Furniture and Architecture by Alvar Aalto presents the first American survey of the work of the Finnish architect, who is recognized as one of the most important and original modern architects and furniture designers of the past decade.”*  In retrospect, from 1938, one sees how this improbable outcome was forged by a number of factors: A resolute artistic will, an uncanny ability to win competitions, and a propensity to attract highly influential, like-minded clients.” In addition, Alvar Aalto had developed, in a small number of brief but surprisingly mature writings, a thoughtful approach to some of the most pressing architectural issues of his time, including questions concerning form and content, national character, international influence, the right relation of the avant-garde to the authority of the past, the sig- nificance of emotional content, the importance of social equity, and the potential impact of industrialized manufacturing on the everyday life of the common man.° Moreover, his emergence was serendipitous: The groundwork for modernism had already been prepared abroad; he and his partner Aino were professionally aligned with an industry that continued to provide work during the bleak years of the world economic depression; and their commissions varied in range and scale, pro- viding the opportunity to test innovative ideas.”  A New Cosmopolitan Outlook  As modernists, Alvar Aalto and Aino Aalto may have been late to arrive, but once they did, they advanced quickly. In mid-1927, the Aaltos, with their baby daughter, moved to the port city of Turku, taking advantage of the cultural, social, and eco- nomic opportunities offered by Finland’s gateway to western Europe.* More broadly, the atmosphere was right for modernism to thrive in northern Europe. That same year, in Stuttgart, more than 500,000 visitors toured the Weissenhofseidlung housing exposition where they encountered a new domestic culture for modern city dwellers, characterized by, among other qualities, flat roofs, taut and unornamented volumes, flexible open plans, and terraces linking interior rooms to abundant light and fresh air. Just three years later, across the 
Finnish archipelago at the Stockholm Exhibition, the dream of better living through modern architecture and industrial production would draw nearly four million visitors.”  During this three-year interval, the Aaltos jettisoned neoclassicism and began assimilating the culturally progressive architecture emerging from mainland Europe. In this short span of time, the Aalto firm won major architectural competi- tions, designed and realized the construction for one of Finland’s first internation- ally recognized modern buildings, forged a pivotal relationship with the technical director of a well established furniture manufacturer, and encountered leading fig- ures of the modern movement at International Congresses of Modern Architecture (CIAM) conferences in Frankfurt and Brussels, making lasting friendships that would have a major impact, particularly on Alvar Aalto’s career.'°  One of those colleagues, Uno Ahrén, introduced Aalto’s work to Philip Johnson, leading to the inclusion of Aalto’s first large-scale modern building in Hitchcock and Johnson’s influential book, The International Style: Architecture Since 1922 (1932), as well as MoMA’s first exhibit of modern architecture installed that same year." Like other work, included in the book and exhibit, the Turun Sanomat newspaper plant and office building (1928-29) were characterized by a clear expres- sion of volume, structured by reinforced concrete columns, a dynamically balanced asymmetrical composition, and an absence of ornament, features clearly identify- ing it with other modern buildings of its type over the specificity of its place.” In this sense, Aalto’s first international style building in the city of Turku would have been equally out of context in Prague, Paris, or Amsterdam.  Alvar Aalto’s ascendency as a leading figure of the modern movement was based on more than the force of an engaging personality. Without doubt, charisma allowed him to establish relationships quickly among key figures within modern architecture’s vanguard. The major breakthrough, however, came in his own coun- try, where he began to win important architectural competitions and receive com- missions from industry, leading to the opportunity to build at a scale that allowed him to experiment, make discoveries, and innovate at a level that would begin to substantiate his unique direction within the modern movement.'’  Shaping the Values of a New Society  When the design of Villa Mairea was first discussed in autumn 1936, Alvar Aalto was 38 years old and Aino, 42. Their clients and close friends, Harry and Maire (née Ahlstrom) Gullichsen, son and daughter of prominent industrialists, were even younger at the time of the commission; Harry was 34, and Maire was 29.\* The Gullichsens, like the architects of their home, were keen advocates for modern cul- ture and shared their architects’ ideological interest in shaping, through architec- ture and design, the values of Finland’s rapidly developing, increasingly urban and industrialized society.”” 
In 1935, Alvar and Aino Aalto, together with Maire Gullichsen and Nils-Gustav Hahl, had already formed the Artek Company with the intention of selling the line of modern bent wood furniture and fittings the Aaltos had been designing since the late 1920s. The purpose of the company was more than a commercial enterprise; it was, among other objectives, an extension of their mutual interest in promoting social and cultural progress. *°  By means of affordable, well-made things, realized through serial industrial pro- duction, the company could, through the quality of the Aalto’s furnishings and a limited number of other products, reinforce traditional Finnish values of simplicity and functionality, elevate the aesthetic judgment of Finland’s emerging middle class, and advance their society’s acceptance of a new modern outlook.” By chan- ging the public perception of standardized products, Artek could contribute to the day-to-day physical and emotional well-being of modern families and play a mean- ingful part in the aesthetic and ethical development of a new egalitarian society.”*  Two years before founding Artek, the Aaltos had moved from Turku to Helsinki where the reality of rapid urbanization was an integral part of everyday life. In Helsinki and throughout Europe, workers were crowding into cities and relocating to the districts surrounding factories. Housing was an urgent issue, and its place in urban and regional planning was compelling to both Aalto and the CIAM-centered vanguard of the modern movement. Advances in the quantity, quality, and costs of housing made possible by new materials, standardized mass production, a focus on public health, and the new practice of functional zoning dominated the discourse of the time, underscoring the modern movement's progressive ideals as well as heigh- tened expectations of an architect’s social responsibility.  An Ethical Dilemma  In this context, Mairea, a private country villa for a wealthy art patron and a captain of industry seems an unusual development for architects whose foundation as modernists was substantially influenced, less than a decade earlier, by the practical difficulties of the Minimum House.’* The Aaltos addressed this ethical dilemma in their description of the project where they advanced the thought that the villa could be conceived as an opportunity for experiment and innovation.” In this sense, any architectural assignment: a house, hospital, library, factory — could pro- vide an opportunity for discoveries that had general implications for architecture beyond the specifics of a particular program. The Aaltos explained: “The individual architectural assignment can be treated as a laboratory experiment of sorts, in which things can be done that would be impossible with present-day mass produc- tion and those experiments can spread further and eventually become available to one and all as production methods advance.””? Alvar Aalto elaborated on the idea of a luxury villa as an experimental laboratory in a lecture at Yale University on May 9, 1939: “[W]e may use the house as a laboratory to tackle some of the central 
problems in architecture today ... [YJou use this house to work out those things especially, and the solutions you discover in this building can later be applied in connection with larger buildings and under different conditions. ...””*  The utopian idea that technological progress would give designers and manu- facturers the capacity to bring good, high-quality, mass-produced objects to the general public had already been realized in the Aaltos’ domestic objects — furniture, 23 It  was not unrealistic, therefore, to believe that innovations made in a large villa for  glassware, fabrics, and lighting fixtures — in production since the early 1930s.  private clients, could translate to conventional housing and, later, industrially man- ufactured dwellings and public buildings.”*  Expanding the Concept of Rationalism  But Alvar Aalto was struggling with modernism’s orthodox formalism and had largely withdrawn from the idea that an objective approach, driven by science, technology, and the logic of construction, would inevitably resolve the fundamen- tally human purpose at the core of architecture.” He did not dismiss the idea of highly analytical working methods; he simply believed that the architecture of the time, as it developed in the direction of “functional and constructive necessity,” and “the new aesthetic of mechanized life,” had excluded too many critical issues to remain relevant.”°  Hence, experiments carried out in the villa were not in the areas of standardized construction or technical innovation but rather primarily in the realms of character, identity, and milieu. In particular, their focus was the distinctiveness of the epoch, the specificity of the place, and a fitting domestic atmosphere for a modern family. Apart from the Aaltos’ own industrially manufactured furnishings, the relationship  between the art of building and technological production was typically down- played. In fact, only one standardized element, a white, off-the-shelf, circular metal staircase, was employed in the villa.””  Indeed, Aalto worked to conceal industrially produced items, deferring to an overall ambience of intimacy, warmth, and welcome rather than specific demon- strations of technical logic. The steel columns in the main living spaces, for exam- ple, are finished with a soft black gloss and wrapped in twisted rattan, transforming a cold, hard material that embodies strength and durability, into one that exudes warmth, delicacy, and an irresistible invitation to touch. Simi- larly, steel beams that support the prominent stair that separates the main living area from the private family rooms above, are painted white, and almost com- pletely hidden by the thickness, length, and breadth of the wooden stair treads. The structure is further concealed by numerous wooden poles that run floor to ceiling on either side, and by a low wall in the entry hall, partially obstructing a view of the underside of the stair landing, where the steel structure would be most evident. 
Masterful Coherence  judging from photographs of the villa, there seems to be too much there; too many unusual details and contrasts, too much accommodation of circumstance, too many motifs, materials and textures — simply too much to control.”* Added to this multitude are numerous disjunctions in time and place. In the courtyard, for exam- ple, there are free-standing elements; a traditional sod-roofed sauna, an archaic gar- den gate, and a thick stone wall forming the outer boundary at the edge of the forest — that appear much older than the new villa, as if the house itself were sited to form a counterpoint to a place already inhabited long ago. Particular aspects of Finnish farms and lakeside retreats are combined with features from Swiss Alpine villages and traditional Japanese gardens to evoke an informal, even rustic atmos- phere. This curious amalgam hangs together through a common thread of associ- ation: The straightforward simplicity and down-to-earth utility of vernacular forms. Under the entry canopy, for example, vernacular details seeming to belong to both  Finnish and Japanese traditional architecture, merge with surprising ease, as if they always belonged together.”  Here, and throughout the villa, Aalto employs the integrity, utility, and time- tested veracity of vernacular elements as a complement to the progressive archi- tecture of the epoch. The constant interchange of polarities, between the timeless authority of the vernacular and the unproven character of the new, is one of the principal artistic devices employed to unify the villa. One encounters, throughout the villa, oppositions of handcraft and industrial manufacture, austerity and embel- ishment, hard edge and soft contour, nature and culture.*® But the manner in which Aalto plays with time — with the backward and forward reach of key ele- ments at pivotal moments — is the villa’s dominant motif.  On the surface, the Villa Mairea gives the impression of being improvisational. But what may appear to be a series of idiosyncratic, one-of-a-kind experiments is, more typically, iterative versions of elements, motifs, and techniques that Aalto had previously tested in other works. What makes the Villa Mairea one of the marvels of modern architecture is the masterful coherence of those artistic forces: Their wholeness, internal consistency, and seeming inevitability.  Orchestrating Time and Perception  The choreography of the architectural encounter with the villa is distinguished by tempo, by the gradual unfolding of a relaxed domestic atmosphere.” The approach to the villa is oblique, coursing through a winding gravel drive that begins at the edge of the forest. At first, the home is not visible. Gradually, glimpses of the villa framed between tall pines reveal key features: White ren- dered brick walls, wood cladding, an unusual entry canopy, and several unortho- dox windows on an upper floor. The disclosure is purposely slow and 
indistinct.” At a sharp curve in the entrance drive, after passing much of the south-eastern facade, the front corner of the villa and the prominent entry por- tico are fully revealed. The gradual build-up becomes a sudden unveiling. But the calming effect of the leisurely approach remains, prolonging the subtle awak- ening of the senses set in motion by the slow approach through the forest.’ While the villa is now in the foreground, it continues to be inseparable from the presence of the forest and its profound quietude — a theme Aalto will continues to reinforce throughout the villa. In the approach, there is then no long view; no place to distantly analyze the villa. Not only is the forest drawn close, but also the villa itself is presented, for the first time, from a relatively short distance, prompting a visceral response.”** Contrasting dark wooden features are visually balanced yet set in sharp contrast to the primary structure, a crisp white volume characteristic of orthodox moder- nity. While the dark wood and light stucco are visibly balanced, the wood features dominate one’s inward experience of the villa, drawing attention to the earthiness of texture and patina: engaging the sense of touch through the eye.” While these wood forms are new, their earthy ambience appears historically backward looking, even primitive, appealing to what Alvar Aalto, in an essay from 1922, described as the subconscious content associated with old architecture. “The emotions it arouses,” he wrote, “are so elevated, even intoxicating, that we usually pay no attention at all to details — if there are any.”*°  Just ahead, under the entry portico, however, it is precisely the discrete details —  twisted rattan joinery, tiny geometric steel feet that transition between wood and stone, and an unusual cast bronze door pull — that captivate attention, keeping one fully engaged in the present moment. Again, time is drawn-out, as it was in a literal sense, by the length of the route to the front door, then by memory through asso- ciation with times past at the southernmost corner of the facade, and finally, under the portico, by the strangeness of small individual features and the curiosity they arouse.””  Likewise, inside the front door of the villa, the architects skillfully control the visitor’s tempo. After a brief pause in a small, sky-lit antechamber, one arrives at an entry hall defined by the low angled wall that directs the visitor away from a formal dining area straight ahead and within view. The contrast between the una- dorned emptiness of the antechamber and the rich abundance of forms, textures, and subdued colors immediately visible from the entry hall, is stunning.”* The vis- ual impact of the interior’s spatial flux is augmented by the sounds of floor surfaces that alternate between hard and soft, tile and wood, defining key moments of tran- sition. An upholstered settee, designed by Aino, follows the contour of the vesti- bule wall inviting the visitor to sit, relax, and be at home.” Similarly, beyond the vestibule near the hearth, a cozy sitting area defined by a rug and furnished with comfortable chairs further encourages the visitor to feel at home. Here, and throughout the villa’s interior, an atmosphere of domestic intimacy, warmth, and solicitude is pervasive.”° 
Architecture and Landscape  It is at this point, between the vestibule and the sitting area near the hearth, that Aalto situates the principal place of arrival. Passing screens of wooden poles that define the end of the vestibule wall and then encase the open stair to the second floor, the visitor reaches the view of the garden courtyard, the sauna, and the vast forest beyond. From this standpoint, in one of the best-known architectural photo- graphs of the period, Eino Makinen captured Maire Gullichsen and Aino Aalto. They are at the edge of the villa’s living room looking outward, transfixed, in a scene reminiscent of the archetypal aura of I.K. Inha’s nineteenth-century photo- graphs of Finland’s forests, or the unsettling solitude that Edward Hopper depicted in his paintings of the time.*’ The focused view, framed by a floor-to-ceiling sliding glass window, is an archetypal image laden with the memories of generations of Finns who built with wood at the edge of the forest.*” Signs of domesticity dom- inate the photograph’s foreground. Freshly cut flowers, an indoor plant, and the informal arrangement of the Aaltos’ furnishings lend a sense of calm and tranquility to the scene. The distinctive aroma of crisp Nordic summer air mingled with earth and pines is almost palpable. The wooden poles screening the living room stair, the thick wood mullions of the expansive window, and the steel columns supporting the second floor mirror the trees in the forest. A small rise near the garden gate, evocative of a mound in a Japanese garden, a hillock in the woods, or a miniatur- ized knoll, links rather than divides, forest and courtyard.”  By bringing the outside in and projecting the inside out, Aalto underscores the fact that the cultivated landscape within the courtyard, and the forest beyond, are all part of the Villa Mairea’s composition, all part of one whole thing.** This idea is reinforced from the opposite perspective; looking back at the villa and its courtyard facades from the forest. From this vantage point, wood window mullions begin to soften the great expanse of white rendered brick that clads the second-floor bed- rooms. Moreover, on the walls and roof of the first floor, wood veneers, numerous wood mullions, stripped sapling rails, and sod roofing continue the theme of con- trast. Likewise, the hard edge of the southwest corner of the second-floor guest bedroom wing is visually dominated by its opposite, the curvilinear wooden tower of Maire Gullichsen’s painting studio, on the other southwest corner. These fea- tures, combined with tall pines in the background and lush creepers in the fore- ground, nullify the severity of the modernist treatment of the courtyard facades, further unifying the architecture and landscape.  Cosmopolitan Localism”  The expansive artistic scope of the villa, in particular its sense of place, could not have been realized without the complex integration of architecture, landscape architecture, interior design, and industrial design. It would be difficult, for 
example, to imagine the villa on another site.“ The nearby sites of Isotalo (1884) and Havulinna (1901), Maire Gullichsen’s grandfather’s and father’s homes, are located within view of cultivated clearings — a universal sign of human civiliza- tion.*” Aalto, by contrast, locates the granddaughter’s house apart from the Ahlstrom estate’s fields and at the periphery of the forest.  A compelling photo, taken by Heikki Havas, from the entry door, looks out at a stand of carefully pruned pine trees fronted by a modest area of cropped grass and plantings in the foreground. Acres of cultivated fields are nearby, but not within view. From here, the house merges with the landscape. Even the irregular stones that comprise the floor under the entry canopy are separated, allowing earth and grass to identify with the nearby garden and the floor of the forest. Here, again, anachronistic wooden canopy supports and numerous slender sap- lings screen the portico, visually intertwining it with the forest, dominating the single modern element, a concrete column, and effectively obscuring its tec- tonic logic.  Likewise, the villa’s interior furnishings — the birch furniture in particular — aug- ment the interior’s unity and breadth, contributing to its sense of place. The mate- rials, labor, and technology to fabricate Aalto’s bent wood furniture were all locally sourced. Birch is Finland’s national tree and the most abundant deciduous wood in the country and skilled craftsmen and unskilled workers were also abundant fol- lowing the rural migration to Finland’s cities. Moreover, the high quality machine craft employed to fabricate Aalto’s bent wood furniture helped advance Finland’s evolving national identity by promoting the idea that this new nation was progres- sive and forward thinking, yet ethnographically linked to the archaic realm of the forest.”  By linking the vernacular, the familiar language of ordinary people, with the strangeness of the new, Aalto created a work with broad appeal. Whereas the com- positional, constructive and functional priorities of many examples of early mod- ernist housing created distance from geographic and historical contexts in an effort to be universal, the Villa Mairea emphasized features particular to Finland — the regional economy, local materials, available labor, and established traditions — to create a place with which Finns could identify and in which they could recognize themselves.” In doing so, Aalto created a safe middle ground between tradition and modernity, between the security of a familiar past and the promise of an exhil- arating future, a place where everyday people could engage the new forms of modernity from a frame of reference they were familiar with — from the mirror of history, their history.  What gives the Villa Mairea its distinctive place in the history of architecture is not only a skillful play with contrasting forms or a mastery of time and tempo, scale and density, politics and geography but also how prescient it was and how relevant it remains.*° Questions of national identity and international influence, the right- balance between the newness of the present and the aura of the past, the integra- tion of architecture and its natural site, and the role that new technologies play in 
making a better life for the common man, are recurring difficulties brought into sharp focus in the villa.”  Looking forward, Aalto’s brilliant resolution to these issues prefigures one of the daunting challenges of the twenty-first century: Being rooted in a specific place, its local economy, and its indigenous traditions, while at the same time being globally intertwined with the larger world and its fluid movement of ideas, forms, and tech- nical innovations.” It is here, in this fertile middle ground, that Aalto created a house with lasting global significance.  Notes  * Image credit: Eino Makinen. Reproduced by permission of Alvar Aalto Museum.  1. “Perhaps the most surprising discovery consisted of the files from the 1920s stored in the attic of the Aalto home on Riihitie. Aalto had systematically suppressed his entire Neo- Classical period after his ‘conversion’ to Rationalism in 1927.” Géran Schildt, introduction to The Architectural Drawings of Alvar Aalto, 1917-39 (New York: Garland Publishing, Inc., 1994), xi.  2. Alvar Aalto opened his architectural office in Jvaskyla in 1923. Aino Marsio began work- ing in Aalto’s office in spring 1924, and they were married later the same year. Aino’s role in the work of the Aalto office is difficult to determine precisely, in part due to the fact that it was not until 1929, when the Finnish Marriage Act was passed, that equality between spouses was realized. Nevertheless, a strong collaborative relationship was already established from the beginning of their work together, and both partners often signed drawings. See: Arne Heporauta, “On Aino Marsio-Aalto,” in Aino Aalto, ed. Ulla Kinnunen (Helsinki: Alvar Aalto Foundation, Alvar Aalto Museum, 2004). In the realm of product design, and in certain competitions, the attribution of works by Aino or Alvar is relatively clear. It is difficult, however, to establish an accurate account of the role Aino Marsio-Aalto had in many of the office’s architectural projects. This was complicated by the fact that Aino temporarily withdrew from the office in the 1930s when their children were young and by her leading role as Director of Artek, the furnishings firm the Aaltos established with Maire Gullichsen and Nils-Gustav Hahl in 1935. While Aino had a sig- nificant role in the office’s product, landscape, interior, and exhibit design, her role in the conception, development, and execution of architectural projects, particularly after the mid-1930s, is less clearly established. Where attribution has been established Aino is  the Aalto office,” or “Aalto”  mentioned specifically; otherwise the terms “the Aaltos, are used throughout this chapter. Likewise, the role of the assistants in the office’s work (there were ten at the time of the Villa Mairea), as is the case in most architectural offices, is even less clear.  3. To better understand the significance of the Villa Mairea it would be useful to reflect on the social turbulence that existed in Finland at the time that Alvar Aalto and Aino Marsio were studying at the Helsinki University of Technology. When they began their studies, Finland was a Grand Duchy of the Russian Empire. It became an independent nation in 
PART IV  Postwar Trends 
Introauction  BEGINNING AGAIN, BUT NOT AT THE BEGINNING  David Leatherbarrow  Houses chopped by bombs while ladies were still sitting on the lavatory, the rest of the house gone but the wallpaper and the fires still burning in the grate. Who can hold a candle to that kind of real life Surrealism?  Nigel Henderson  Buildings and cities designed and constructed in the late 1940s and 50s through- out the world were deeply affected by the fact that a terrible — and terribly wide- spread — war had taken place. Although a “world war,” different locations suffered its consequences in dissimilar ways. Stylistic categories for the architecture of this period should therefore be used with caution. A case in point is the use of the term “brutalist” to characterize postwar buildings in Britain and Brazil. Postwar con- struction sites in these countries had little in common. London locations, for exam- ple, often presented a blistered earth and ruins of bombing. The site of Brasilia, by contrast, was an open and verdant savannah. “Brutalist” meant something very dif- ferent in each location, likewise for sites in the United States and Japan. Similar contrasts among works grouped under similar headings could be easily adduced. Within each of the movements that emerged in the decades just after the war — brutalism, the new empiricism, metabolism, and so on — there were different responses to a single catastrophe; admittedly, a very great one.  Nevertheless, with this stipulation in mind one can still say that the architects considered in the following chapters shared a number of responses to the war, regardless of where their buildings were built or urban settlements laid out. The first of these was that this was not a time for the speculations of disengaged intellectuals or detached visionaries. Concrete action was the order of the day. Nor did it make sense to uncritically follow any form of party doctrine, right or left, despite the current growth of cold war rhetoric. Architects felt summoned to respond to locally specific material consequences of the war. They also saw the  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
need to take a stand against the ideas (ideologies) that were believed to have prompted and sustained the fighting, for the conceptions and institutions of order that had preceded the conflict did not lose their force after the truce; ideas of the nation-state, for example, but also more deeply rooted institutions of nationalistic culture, starting with language and extending into the fabric of cities. More basi- cally, the existence of evil was not something to discuss idly or theorize, but to live with. It was, indeed, a time of recovery and rebuilding. But the war’s end did not eliminate aggression and inhumanity; it only signaled the end of open conflict. Mil- itarization took on different forms. Forces no less threatening extended their effects  in these years: the hyper-rationalized, technocratic, and universalizing dimensions of modern civilization. Many believed these were the very same forces that had formed the “spiritual substance” of the war itself. New proposals for “habitat,” “community,” and “urban reality” can only be understood against the background of the war had taken place and the dehumanizing mechanisms that continued to operate. The same background set the stage for the reorientation of architectural design toward the actual conditions of human existence; more importantly, of coexistence.  Although each of them posed the problem in their own way, all of the architects studied in the chapters that follow took a stand against the narrow sort of “ration- alism” that was said to have dominated the thought and action of the preceding years. Their texts and public statements attest to deep unease with the anonymity, isolation, and dehumanization of life in industrial society, and even more so with its manifestation in patterns of urbanization. The problem was neither the impulse nor the aesthetics of early and high modernism, but the reduced and extrapolated versions that had become more widespread than their source.  In Chile, for example, Alberto Cruz argued against modernist functionalism and the reductions it represented. Le Corbusier was not the target of his criticism, but his epigones who had not seen his built works, only read his books and taken their polemics at face value. As Rodrigo Pérez d’Arce observes in his chapter, Cruz’s alternative was an architecture that embraced ritual and historically constituted social practices. The geometry and physical body of Cruz’s Pajaritos Chapel also indicated a conviction about the preeminence of direct observation and experience. Posture and procession were key. What wine is to a glass, embodied action was to geometry.  Cruz’s project was designed in 1952. Three years later the construction of the Amsterdam Orphanage broke ground. In his chapter, Nathaniel Coleman shows that Aldo van Eyck was similarly critical of the narrowed version of “functionalism” at the root of the rapidly built settlements at the outskirts of the city. Again, it was not the leaders of the modern movement who posed the problem but the bureau- cratic professionals who operated with less imagination, reduced budgets, greater speed, and the sort of self-confidence that accompanies a restricted view of the world. Already by 1953, the year of the CIAM 9 conference at Aix-en-Provence, van Eyck, together with others there, had concluded that an approach to “habitat” 
that captured only those aspects of dwelling that could be analyzed functionally (elsewhere called “rationally” and “mechanistically”) would fail to grasp what was essential about architectural and urban reality.  On the face of it, the approach to design taken by Eladio Dieste would seem to be wholly different, insofar as he worked as an engineer as much as an architect. Yet, Stanford Anderson explains in his chapter that Dieste saw industrialism as a very mixed blessing. “What we see around us,” Dieste wrote, “is not acceptable .. The industrial revolution took place with such great injustice that the repercus- sions from the fierce indignation that its inequities produced in mankind are the reason for the destructive madness that has spread throughout the world.” His alternative, Anderson explains, was to combine art and science to produce an archi- tecture that would reclaim “the home of mankind.” One suspects that he would have agreed with the observation made by the Spanish philosopher José Ortega y Gasset in a text from 1939 called “Man the Technician”: “to be an engineer it is not enough to be an engineer.”*  Reactions to Walter Gropius’ presentation at the end of the CIAM 9 confer- ence just mentioned provide vivid evidence of growing unease with any nar- rowly defined technocratic approach to architecture and city building. Having been absent for the preceding speeches that argued for a change of direction in modern architecture, Gropius argued for teamwork, industrial production, standardization, and system building. To many in the audience it sounded like a repudiation of all that the younger generation had proposed in the preceding days.  Peter and Alison Smithson must have been at least ambivalent, in not indig- nant, for their proposal, illustrated with photographs of street life by Nigel Hen- derson, argued for the re-identification of man with his house, community, and city in opposition to “the functional hierarchy of the Charte d’Athens.” Perhaps the most emphatic rejection of what they saw as the hyper-rationalized approach to architecture and urbanism of the postwar years was offered by Guy Debord and Asger Jorn. Simon Sadler in his chapter renders the conflict bluntly: if the Ville Radieuse was a provocation, The Naked City was a response. Clearly, the full amplitude of Le Corbusier’s work and writing was abbreviated in this compar- ison. Nevertheless, the rationalizing dimensions of Corbusian urbanism provided situationalist critics with an easy target: the Radiant City was seen as an exercise in planning and the Naked City the outcome of art practices that verged on anar- chy. Both projects addressed the city, of course, then seen by many as the most sophisticated, eloquent, and challenging articulation and embodiment of human culture.  If the city was understood as the fundamental frame of reference for architec- ture, was it also seen as the subject matter of project making? To some degree the answer must be yes, for not only were urban scale projects designed at this time, Tokyo Bay, for example, but entire cities were planned; Chandigarh and Brasilia are perhaps the most obvious cases in point. A tough question presents itself,  
then: Is the design of a building the same sort of task as the design of a city? Can single individuals, which is to say individual architects, be responsible for both? Do entire settlements and buildings require the same set of skills and kinds of knowledge? With Aldo van Eyck’s often repeated analogy between the house and the city in mind, the answer would seem to be yes. Speaking of the Amster- dam Orphanage, and with reference to the axiom set forth by Leon Battista Alberti in the Renaissance and Plato in antiquity, van Eyck observed: “a house must be like a small city it it’s to be a real house; [and] a city must be like a large house if it is to be a real city.” Modularity was a key in the Orphanage, for it allowed extension (through additions and varying combinations) and invited movement through different layers of space, as Coleman shows. Van Eyck was not alone in holding on to the city-as-house premise. Still, one suspects an essential difference between the two scales because of the typical shift in vocab- ulary: then as now it was common to talk of designing buildings and planning cities. This distinction recognizes the temporal, financial, and cognitive challenges of “inventing” something as large and complex as an urban settlement. Single buildings are difficult enough.  Nevertheless, Brasilia was designed and then built, largely according to Lucio Costa’s plan, as Carlos Eduardo Comas indicates in his chapter. Costa’s plan won the competition because it was compact, cohesive, and contemporary. For Comas it was also timeless, pragmatic, and emblematic. Clear signs of this were its car-oriented efficiency on the one hand and its monumentality on the other. Reduced to a useful pairing, these qualities suggested a plan that promised an “effi- cient urbs and proud civitas.” Yet, different conceptions of urban and architectural work were inscribed into the plan. Costa made a distinction between the architec- ture of the monumental center and of the ordinary city at its margins; the first was comparatively stable, the second transitory, fugitive, and contingent. This suggests that different skills and kinds of knowledge were required for the design of build- ings and planning of cities.  Different methods for different scales are less in evidence in Kenzo Tange’s Tokyo Bay Plan. Zhongjie Lin explains that two kinds or degrees of permanence were envisaged by Tange: those of infrastructure and housing. Change, to which I will refer again shortly, was obviously important for someone who played a key role in the emergence of the Metabolist Group; but the repetitive forms and inter- vals of the (megastructural) circulation framework indicate that stability and per- mianence were topics of equal importance. In this case, as with Brasilia, the project was not developed in response to war damage in cities. Decisive instead were the momentum of Tokyo’s urban growth and need for housing. The increasing use of automobiles was one part of the problem, another was land shortage and specu- lation. Continued dedication to the urban core would not provide the answer, Tange thought; instead, a linear configuration, centered on the spine of the trans- portation system. His system of routes established sites for housing and public insti- tutions, suggesting that the design of urban scale settlements was essentially the 
same kind of work as the design of individual buildings. In coming years this prac- tice would come to be called urban design.  Alison and Peter Smithson’s Golden Lane project was also envisaged as an expansive urban pattern. As with Tange’s superstructure over the bay, this design proposed a network of routes and accommodations built above an unstable sub- strate; a bombed remnant, Eric Mumford explains in his chapter, of pre-existing urban structure. Had the site not included ruins, increased automobile traffic would still have “invalidated” traditional configurations. “Streets in the air” were proposed as the preferred alternative to traditional urban elements. The promise was for human association — hardly new to cities — and contemporary kinds of urban experience. Meant to be no less innovative than early modern proposals, the design was also supposed to elaborate “found” conditions, hence the inclusion of Henderson’s ethnographic photography in the Smithsons’ CIAM presentation. No sharp distinction between the design of buildings and urban areas was allowed. The same would be true for the configurations they envisaged in subsequent pro- jects: networks, webs, mat buildings, and so on.  From the very start of their arguments in support of The Naked City, Asger Jorn and Guy Debord assumed the wider urban landscape to be design’s proper frame of reference. Unlike Tokyo Bay and Brasilia, though, it was not city form imagined by architects, but a pre-existing ensemble. The Naked City collage, like their thinking more generally, argued for the intensification of already-existing situations. The aim of this intensification would be a unitary urbanism. The city was understood as a work of art and a domain of experience. As a work it included buildings of course, but also, more importantly, events. Paris in particular, but cities in general, were understood as totalities (even if they could only be per- ceived in fragments), complete ensembles of human relations. The street was the locus of popular culture, which in turn served as the subject matter of build- ing design.  In The Naked City and a number of the other projects studied in this volume, works of art disclosed the urban reality architects imagined their projects would embody. Art and architectural subject matter was often described as discovered — because it had been either lost or overlooked until then — but conditions that were said to be found were often invented. Beauty, such as it could exist in art and archi- tecture, was to be recognized in the world, even if was both unfamiliar and inex- plicable. Striking as it may appear, the art movement that seems to have had an especially strong influence on projects seen in this way was surrealism.  While there are very few examples of what might be called “surrealist architecture,” the ways of working associated with the movement can be seen in many of the projects of these years. An obvious case in point is the work of Frie- drich Kiesler; his shop window designs, for example, but even more so his Endless House. William Braham’s chapter provides a concise account of Kiesler’s involve- ment with European and American surrealists, involvement that did not prevent him from associating with members of the De Stijl group or becoming one of  
Buckminster Fuller’s Structural Studies Associates. Yet, through his friendship with Marcel Duchamp and Peggy Guggenheim he was seen (in New York at least) as the architect of the surrealists.  Aldo van Eyck’s frequent allusions to van Doesburg’s work might suggest dis- tance between him and a figure like André Breton. Yet, as a collector of works by Tanguy, Klee, Dali, and Ernst, a reader of Breton, Aragon, Crevel, and Minotaure — the pages of which seem to have kindled his interest in Africa — it is plain that van Eyck, too, saw surrealism as one of the keys to reality. After all, Breton himself had said that the basic intention of the movement was the mutual interpenetration of “interior and exterior reality.”  No less obvious are the connections between surrealism and Debord and Jorn’s Naked City, for the dérive that opened the richness and mysteries of Paris closely followed the format and “method” of Louis Aragon’s Paris Peasant, Louis Sou- pault’s Last Nights in Paris, and André Breton’s Nadja, all of which gained narrative momentum from the “chance encounters” that resulted from errance in the city.  And finally, the close association between the Smithsons and members of the Independent Group, particularly Eduardo Paolozzi, show that projects like Golden Lane had roots in surrealist art practices as well. Nigel Henderson had been intro- duced to Duchamp, Ernst, and Tanguy by Peggy Guggenheim. Translating a key surrealist idea, he linked “selective accidents” to both “found” phenomena and “recognition.” If the city was the subject matter of creative thinking about archi- tecture in these years, then the urban reality disclosed in surrealist art was deci- sively important.  Other art movements were, of course, also influential. Simon Sadler explains the importance of collage in the conception of the city Debord and Jorn developed. Its origins are found in Dada and cubist art. Kiesler’s involvement in the De Stijl movement has been mentioned. De Stijl architecture was of course interconnected with neoplasticism in art, particularly that of Piet Mondian, to whom Aldo van Eyck frequently referred. The artists and works associated with these movements did not provide the architects with solutions to the problems they encountered in building and city design, but some of their ways of working were adapted to proj- ect making, as was their focus on the situations, patterns, and institutions of urban life.  The research into the urban conditions of architectural order undertaken by the architects of this period can be likened to archaeology or anthropology insofar as the possibilities of creative work were discovered beneath the surface or within the depth of social and cultural norms. One of the most heated debates of the entire history of CIAM arose over interpretations of what Ernesto Rogers called “pre- existing conditions” (preesistenze ambientali). He had published his famous paper on the subject in 1955. We need not side with either Rogers or Peter Smithson to say that many, though certainly not all of the architects of the time felt that the urban order their designs would shape and give substance to conditions that pre-dated their projects. Tange was one of those who did not hold this position.  
Nevertheless, the meaning of the term “conditions” was interpreted very widely. Did “ambient” mean the vicinity of the site, something like “neighborhood”? In some cases, yes; but it was also taken to mean elsewhere in the same city, at the time of the project, of course, but also in some distant period of its historical development. “Parallel worlds,” as van Eyck described a project’s pre-existing frame of reference, could be exceedingly remote, on another continent in fact; Africa or America, for example. For connections that distant to be maintained, a premise (an ontology) of basic human commonality had to be assumed; the idea — so difficult for us to accept today — that cultural differences do not prohibit simila- rities between oneself and others. Perhaps this was less a premise than a promise: that the project would set the stage for the renewal of “human association.”  What non-European sites were for van Eyck, working class neighborhoods were for the Smithsons. Eric Mumford explains that the grille they presented at the 1953 CIAM conference “implicitly questioned the uniform rationality of the grid pres- entation by placing on theirs a series of photographs by Nigel Henderson that showed street children playing in the Bethnal Green district of London’s East End.” The Hendersons had moved to that part of the city the year the war ended. It was a part of London unknown to them, a borough that had been bombed and was suffering extreme poverty, overcrowding, and poor sewerage. Vibrant life was apparent nonetheless. Behaviors that Henderson likened to “living theater” seemed to follow “a pre-determined script ... rituals [that were] formal, very strong and coercive to me [and] because of their unfamiliarity exotic.” Citing George Bra- que’s comments on the importance of limitations in creative work, he also observed a “poetic homogeneity in the patient tired faces of people and houses and pavements; a savage humility begotten of limited means.” Cultural norms interested him especially, as they were evident in public life; but the culture to which he, and then later the Smithsons, referred was surprisingly foreign. The same “strangeness of the everyday” is evident in the writings of Aragon, Soupault, and Breton on the neighborhoods of Paris. When Debord and Jorn advocated for “drifting” through the city, their observations were not meant to be as “documen- tary” as Henderson’s, but they were no less open to the ways the city’s uncanny and marvelous situations could provoke a “derangement of the senses.”  As was observed earlier, ritualized patterns were also recognized as important in the ideas and projects of Alberto Cruz. There is no sense in suggesting that he found these kinds of conduct either foreign or unfamiliar. Yet, they were not mun- dane or prosaic either. His critique of functional thinking was strengthened by his reference to ritual because the latter offered an extraordinary alternative that was, nevertheless, a dimension of contemporary existence. That patterns of behavior established in the past interested Cruz should not be surprising, for in his text on the chapel he described cities as “frames of retention.” Each city, he said, “lives in the nostalgia of another city retaining it,” cities within cities, circling in on their antecedent forms, the origin of which is unknown. Different scales do not prevent analogous structures: “a church,” Cruz wrote, “brings a city with it” Obviously,  
the “city” to which he referred was to be implicitly present in the church, which is to say, strangely familiar.  Carlos Eduardo Comas makes a comparable observation about the vast open spaces of Brasilia. Lucio Costa intended the square and esplanade of the monumen- tal quarter to be “purposefully empty most of the time, waiting to burst with extraordinary and massive civic joy, anger, or grief.” That city spaces were designed to wait is an instructive point, but the occasional and atypical or disruptive character of the events that fill them is what I want to stress. Brasilia’s monumental public spaces anticipated what could not be foreseen; the life they accommodated was allowed to exceed what had been imagined. The thesis here is that the least memorable event is the one that goes according to plan. Project making is, thus, something besides the shaping and sizing of anticipated behaviors; it is also a way of allowing for occurrences that are too improbable to be planned.  The design topic that was addressed in each of the projects studied in the chap- ters that follow is movement. As with their interpretations of “rationalism,” “the city,” “art,” and “parallel worlds,” however, movement was understood in very different ways in each of these cases. For Dieste, the accent was not on the person but on the metaphorical movement of the building’s “dynamic” forms. Obvi- ously, the roof and walls were not supposed to move, only seem to, and the seeming is what mattered in perceptual experience. When Kiesler described the “flow of space” in his Endless House he alluded to a comparable dynamism of the building’s body, but also to the capacity of its smooth and continuous sur- faces to adapt to the circumstances of life, and to do so continually. The notions of movement set forth in the Japanese texts that argued for a “Metabolist” con- ception of buildings and cites were many. Generally speaking, organic rather than mechanic movements were preferred; yet, for these architects the most vivid and insistent expression of change was the vehicular route. Transportation was the key to Tokyo Bay’s organization and operation. Brasilia, too, was a cat-oriented city, but the several sorts of pedestrian passage Costa imagined, attuned to the city’s distinctly monumental, gregarious, and bucolic settings, were no less impor- tant. Circulation was also decisive in the layout of the Smithsons’ Golden Lane project, along the run of its “streets in the air,” at different speeds, within eddies and flows of movement on a single deck, or from one block to the next. The pace of passage envisaged by Aldo van Eyck was not only slower, but allowed — even invited — delays and interruptions. Hesitations and divergences gave perceptual depth and variety to what he called “labyrinthine clarity.” Perhaps the most extreme form of unprescribed passage is the dérive intended for The Naked City. The meander or wander through the streets, courts, alleys, and gardens of the city presented perception with changing prospects that would not only alter one’s sense of the several places, but also the city’s history and the person’s subjectivity. Remaking was intended in this and the other projects; and also reconstruction, of the city first and foremost, but also of the culture that architectural design intended to renew. 
GOLDEN LANE  Alison and Peter Smithson  Eric Mumford  Alison and Peter Smithson, Golden Lane Housing Project, London, 1952. Emphasis on site, circulation, habitation, and human presence. 34.7 x 24.8 cm. Inv.: AM1993-1-699.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
THE DESIGN AND URBANISM OF MEGASTRUCTURES  At the ninth International Congresses for Modern Architecture (CIAM), held in Aix-en-Provence, France in 1953, the young British architects Alison and Peter Smithson presented a recent urban housing competition project that put forward a new sensibility about the potential for architecture to shape urban life. Although never built, as it was an unplaced design in a competition for rebuilding a war- damaged area of the City of London known as Golden Lane, their well-known set of drawings and photographs for this project, a series of linked 16-story high-rise slab buildings connected by “streets in the air,” altered the postwar history of modern architecture and urbanism.*  This project was exhibited at CIAM 9 in the same late-CIAM context where some of the members of what would become Team 10 in 1954 first met, and it was soon followed by other works by the Smithsons, Candilis-Josic- Woods, Kenzo Tange, and others that developed and extended its influential challenge to the mid- century urbanistic certainties of CIAM. These designs were premised on the con- cept of continuous pedestrian circulation systems as generators of human associ- ation and urban social identity, and they profoundly shifted the focus of the field away from its more traditional concerns with creating monumental urban pedestrian spaces linked to political discourse and official social representations.” Instead, Golden Lane and its successors — which included the Smithsons’ Berlin Hauptstadt competition entry and Kenzo Tange’s Tokyo Bay project, as well as the numerous built mass housing, campus, and airport projects that these inspired — sought to generate and shape pedestrian activity to create and celebrate new kinds of urban experiences. By the mid-1970s these efforts themselves were begin- ning to be criticized in terms often borrowed from Team 10’s own earlier attacks on CIAM functionalism, but the urban sensibility that they celebrated has remained central to the field since then.  In 1952, the year of the Golden Lane competition,’ the Smithsons had already become famous in Britain for winning a competition for the Hunstanton Secondary Modern School in East Anglia (1949-54). This built project combined the minimal- ism of Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, then becoming the mainstream icon of mod- ernism in the United States, with a tough, industrial-era sensibility about exposed materials that would develop into what they and their colleague, the critic Reyner Banham, would term “the new Brutalism.”* The Smithsons’ work and bohemian persona, which involved many links through the London Independent Group (IG) to artists like Eduardo Paolozzi and critic-historians like Banham, as well as more distantly to Le Corbusier, was intentionally provocative. Inspired by their membership in the IG, their goal was to create conceptual projects in archi- tecture, urbanism, and exhibition and graphic design that both continued the  
innovations of prewar modernists and, at the same time, challenged their postwar institutionalization. The Smithsons insisted that their work and activities could lead a younger generation of architects to recover the lost energy and social relevance of the modernism of the 1920s by overturning the bland official acceptance of mod- ernism in Europe after the war.’  The Smithsons’ design work reflected their working class backgrounds far from London, and like other young British architects of their generation, they were angrily contemptuous of the paternalistic and perhaps sometimes patronizing efforts of mainstream British architects and artists to adapt modernism to the more egalitarian postwar British society, which was largely the creation from 1945 to 1951 of the socialist Labour Party.° For the Smithsons and the generation that fol- lowed them, those well-meaning official efforts did not go nearly far enough, and  they saw the New Towns and the Festival of Britain (1951) whose design was over- seen by the MARS group member Jane Drew, as lacking both the rough authen- ticity that they found in British working class urban life and in the cultural and urban vitality that they saw in continental Europe and in the cities of North Africa.  The Golden Lane project reflects this moment clearly: the Smithsons’ “urban re- identification” CIAM grid for CIAM 9 in 1953 was structured to intentionally sub- vert the grid’s rationalistic intentions and provoke new ways of thinking about urbanism.’ Instead of the highly systematic format based on the CIAM “four func- tions” of dwelling, work, transportation, and circulation, much of it quite influen- tial in postwar planning internationally, at CIAM 9 the Smithsons instead suggested reorganizing the CIAM grid with their new categories of “house, street, district, and city.” They also implicitly questioned the uniform rationality of the grid pres- entation by placing on theirs a series of photographs by Nigel Henderson that showed street children playing in the Bethnal Green district of London’s East End. As their activities as youth members in CIAM would soon make clear, the Smithsons wanted to overturn the postwar consensus in CIAM about the validity of the four functions and the authority of Le Corbusier’s The Athens Charter (1943), a widely used codification of the results of the 1933 CIAM 4 conference on “The Functional City.” They also sought to disrupt what they saw as the overly pater- nalistic and officially apolitical workings of CIAM itself, controlled by a handful of figures around Le Corbusier, such as its President from 1947 to 1956, Josep Lluis Sert, and one of its Vice-Presidents, Walter Gropius, Chair of Architecture at the Harvard Graduate School of Design from 1937 to 1951.°  Golden Lane and Team 10  The Golden Lane project was one of the first projects of the group that became Team 10, some of whose antecedents could be found in the Sigtuna, Sweden CIAM meeting of 1952. There, Jacob Bakema (Holland), Aldo van Eyck (Holland), William Howell (Britain), and Georges Candilis (France and Morocco), had begun 
discussing the future of CIAM in light of postwar concerns about the “human hab- itat” generally. At CIAM 9 in 1953, these men, joined by Shadrach Woods, found that they shared some dissatisfactions with CIAM as it then existed with the young British MARS group members John Voelcker and the Smithsons, who were invited to CIAM 9 by Howell at the last minute. At that event, van Eyck vehemently opposed Walter Gropius’ technocratic, American-based postwar architectural views centered on prefabrication in CIAM. At the same time, the Moroccan hous- ing work of Candilis and Woods exhibited there sharply raised the issue in CIAM of design for what their ATBAT-Afrique associate Vladimir Bodiansky called “the greater number,” the rapidly growing populations in industrial cities outside of Europe.” Energized by a common sense of discontent with CLAM, this group then began to meet as Team 10, and with some changes in membership issued the “Doorn Manifesto” in 1954.'° They subsequently became famous in the 1960s after the publication of Alison Smithson’s Team 10 Primer and the teaching of Team 10 members in architecture schools worldwide." In contrast to the aspirations of the older generation of CIAM to systematically shape postwar urban development through legislation, pedagogy, and the exhibi- tion of model projects, the new youth-oriented sensibility of the Smithsons and Team 10 was more elusive. Disseminated in art exhibitions and events, publica- tions, and charismatic design studio teaching, the irrational, surrealist-inspired qua- lities of their work resonated widely in architecture in the late 1950s and early 1960s, in an era of worldwide popularity for Hollywood films, rock and roll, Coca-Cola, cigarettes, and other products of American consumer capitalism. Alison Smithson praised American advertising in avant-garde London journals, particu- larly the 1954 Cadillac advertising campaign,” and a photo cut-out of French movie star Gerard Philippe appears in the Golden Lane photomontage where a prewar worker might have been expected to stand. In another perspective of the project, magazine cut-outs of movie star Marilyn Monroe and baseball star Joe Dimaggio interact along the Corbusian pedestrian street deck.’* At the same time, the Smith- sons claimed that the Golden Lane project would recover the structure of London working-class urban living. Its streets in the air would retain a “vital relationship” between the house (recast as two-story Corbusian flats with outdoor open spaces) and the street, allowing residents to feel a sense of ownership of more than just their individual apartments.’ At the same time, in their many publications about the project, the Smithsons noted how the plan of the Golden Lane project evoked the loose, “all-over” quality of Jackson Pollack’s recent drip paintings, which they much admired, as well as how its non-orthogonal and open-ended structure of “streets in the air” was like that of the London sewer and drainage system. Using the concept of tall slab build- ings linked by open pedestrian decks — already present in some of Le Corbusier's earlier unbuilt urban projects’’ — the Smithsons suggested with the Golden Lane project that war-destroyed European cities could be rebuilt as continuously linked activity zones, where modernist housing units would add up to form larger urban  
districts of pedestrian social vitality. These zones would encourage “human asso- ciation” and would provide a sense of “identity” for the residents — key concepts that the Smithsons introduced to architectural discourse with the Golden Lane project.’®  Many of the other basic premises of the Golden Lane project were not new. Most European cities were then rapidly constructing a new, modernist-inspired urban social environment centered on mass housing and based (in Western Europe at least) on the values of the democratic socialist welfare state, of which Sweden was then the prime example. While prewar debates in European and American cities still continued after the war about the virtues — social or eco- nomic — of high-rise versus low-rise housing, until the 1960s there was extensive international agreement about the general applicability of the urban strategies of modem architecture. At CIAM 9, the Smithsons’ Golden Lane project was pre- sented in the context of four other grids by older MARS (British CIAM) group members for urban housing projects, including Chamberlin, Powell, and Bon’s winning scheme for the Golden Lane site, a series of mid-rise housing blocks with one high-rise, all facing a series of courtyards, and each provided with a local community center.'? Another MARS project shown at CIAM 9 was the more directly Le Corbusier-inspired slabs of the redevelopment project for the Alton Estate, Roehampton, by a London County Council (LCC) Architects’ team led by J. Leslie Martin, who in 1956 would be appointed Professor of Architecture at Cambridge University. In the design of the Alton Estate the LCC Architects had divided into two factions, one favoring the Swedish modern direction (called “new empiricism” by the editor of the Architectural Review, J. M. Richards), which used brick and pitched roofs, and sometimes vaguely evoked other traditional forms, while the other LCC group advocated Corbusian- inspired concrete slab blocks, like Le Corbusier’s own recently completed Unité d’Habitation in Marseille (1945-52). This second LCC Architects faction was less overtly political — the new empiricism was then associated in Britain with left- wing socialism — and it included William Howell, Colin St. John Wilson, and Alan Colquhoun, whose Corbusian leanings would soon make them interested in, if not always fully convinced by, the urban ideas of the Smithsons and Team 10.  The Smithsons’ Golden Lane project differed from these four built London high- rise slum clearance housing projects in its novel presentation techniques, which spurned the precise social and technical data on which CIAM had attempted to base its work in favor of what Banham described as an “aformal” engagement with art and popular culture. It also went beyond those projects in linking Corbusian high- rise housing slabs into a large urban network of pedestrian circulation. This was well before Fumihiko Maki would coin the term “megastructure” to describe such projects a decade later, a term that Banham would then popularize in the 1970s.'* Although they themselves were unable to construct any such projects until 1966, the Smithsons had made further elaborations of the idea in unbuilt competition  
entries for Sheffield University (1953)'° and in their entry to the Berlin Hauptstadt (Capital City) competition in 1957-58, designed with a German associate, Peter Sigmond.”° Although their team was awarded only third place in that competition, their well-publicized project was intended to suggest a new urban structure that would “give the motorist and the pedestrian equal rights to freedom of move- ment.” This echoed the demand in postwar West Berlin for a rebuilt city that “does justice to the car,” and in their Berlin Hauptstadt project the Smithsons elaborated their concept of continuous pedestrian street decks, suggesting that these be built over what remained of the street grid of the heavily bombed central city. Their project indicated that these streets should be the channels for auto traffic and casual parking, while various new and existing cultural institutions would be accessed by continuously running escalators to the upper level pedestrian deck 30 meters above.”  Pedestrian Urbanism and Modern Architecture  This new focus on urban pedestrian experience and mixed use activity in urban centers was not in itself introduced into modern urbanism by the Smithsons and Team 10, though they often presented it that way in their many publications. Like some other revisionist modern urban proposals of the same time, such as Edmund Bacon and Louis Kahn’s proposals for Center City Philadelphia, which began with Kahn’s Triangle District project of 1946-48, or Victor Gruen’s influen- tial downtown pedestrianization proposal, A Greater Fort Worth Tomorrow (1956), the Smithsons’ projects also rejected prewar modern urban functionalism, which typically denigrated existing pedestrian streets and the mixing of functions. All these proposals were similar in attempting to bring suburban residents back to pedestrian center city areas, assuming that most pedestrians would no longer live nearby but would arrive by train or car from the new suburbs. At the same time, their Berlin Hauptstadt project made it clear that the Smithsons had a radically dif- ferent attitude than Sert, Gropius, Kahn, or Gruen about how urban pedestrian experience should be shaped. In the Smithsons’ Berlin project, the raised street decks suggest a new pedestrian world of changing views and multiple new experi- ences, and it and Golden Lane became the source for many such projects then actu- ally constructed by others. These included many British urban and university projects designed along sim- ilar lines, including the Park Hill public housing project in Sheffield (1957-61), a direct and successful application of the Golden Lane concept by the Sheffield City Architects Department J. Lewis Womersley, Jack Lynn, and Ivor Smith),”’ and Denys Lasdun’s University of East Anglia, Norwich (1963-66),”* a classic example of the Smithsons’ megastructural campus idea that would also be widely imitated in North America in the 1960s. Lasdun’s work, a departure from his earlier CIAM- inspired slab housing with detached public facilities, was praised by the Smithsons,  
indicating the complete triumph of the ideas first put forward in their Golden Lane project over the earlier CIAM planning concepts favored by the older generation of MARS group members.”  The Smithsons’ Berlin Hauptstadt proposal appeared just after Sert had launched the new design discipline at the First Harvard Urban Design conference in 1956, which included presentations by Gruen of his Fort Worth proposal and by Bacon of Kahn’s Mill Creek public housing redevelopment in West Philadelphia. At this event Sert advocated adapting Corbusian high-density urbanism to create islands of pedestrian activity at the heart of American cities, accepting that cars were becom- ing the normative form of postwar middle-class transportation, but also advocating the retention of urban pedestrian vitality in that era of massive, Federally-funded decentralization. While Sert and the Smithsons were profoundly opposed to each other in the context of late CIAM, as the Golden Lane project demonstrated, both shared an interest in proposing projects that attempted to adapt or extend Corbu- sian urbanism to create more vital urban environments, evident in Sert’s choice of a perspective of Le Corbusier’s Antwerp project (1934) as the first image in the pub- lication of the First Harvard Urban Design conference.”*  At the same time, the Smithsons and their fellow CIAM youth members who formed Team 10 in 1954 realized that North American and European urban condi- tions were developing in sharply differing ways. Team 10 sought to suggest urban approaches that engaged what they saw as the more nuanced and complex Western European and North African situation, and for the most part they disregarded Sert’s and other North American efforts to encourage university and government spon- sored responses to the changing conditions of postwar central cities. With the excep- tion of Louis Kahn’s mostly unbuilt urban ideas for Center City Philadelphia, which were admired by both Sert and Team 10, the Smithsons and their Team 10 collea- gues ignored the emergence of Sert’s new discipline of urban design, leaving con- siderable historical confusion even today about the many ideals that they shared.  Instead of Sert’s urban design approach, easily dismissed by more radical young architects at the time as the product of elite master planners and powerful centra- lized American business interests, the Smithsons sought to develop a more vernac- ular-based direction, inspired to some extent by their awareness of architectural debates in postwar Japan. In 1955 in “The New Brutalism,” Architectural Design’s editors had called attention to how the Smithsons had sought the “harmony between buildings and man” often found in traditional Japanese architecture, by looking to “peasant dwelling forms,” which had “a poetry without rhetoric.”?” The New Brutalism soon resonated in Japan, where a politically charged cultural debate (prompted by the Paris-trained painter Taro Okamoto) opposed the ancient Japanese cultures of the traditional Yayoi and the earlier hunter-gather Jomon. Under Okamoto’s influence, the Japanese CIAM member Kenzo Tange, whose Hiroshima Peace Center was the first work by a “non-Western” architect to be exhibited in CIAM (at CIAM 8 in 1951), made a widely publicized effort to reconcile these two directions. Yayoi at the time became strongly identified with the Western 
enthusiasm (exemplified by Frank Lloyd Wright’s early work) for traditional Jap- anese culture, with its architecture of spatial openness and modulor platform based structures, but by the mid-1950s Yayoi had also become suggestive to many Japa- nese of the cultural strategies of the American military occupation (1945-52). A critical reaction emerged that evoked the more marginal ancient JOmon culture, which was identified with early pit dwellings and decorative ceramic pottery, and it acquired an aura of cultural resistance, especially among students.”  Tange himself remained somewhat tied to the Yayoi direction, especially in his Hiroshima project, but in 1960, just as CIAM was being supplanted by Team 10, Tange began to suggest that a synthesis of Yayoi and Jomon might best exemplify post- war Japanese modern architecture. After being an invited participant at the Tear 10- organized CIAM’59 in Otterlo event and a visiting critic at MIT in 1959, Tange played a leading role in the 1960 Tokyo World Design Conference. For this event he pre- sented on Japanese network television his ambitious, 30 km-long megastructural pro- posal for new mixed-use development over Tokyo Bay, a response to the rapid overdevelopment of central Tokyo.” The project was a further development of the megastructures of his Boston MIT studio project, and was meant as a serious response to Tokyo development pressures in the rapidly expanding Japanese cities. Returning to its earlier importance as commercial and administrative center after the massive destructions of the 1923 earthquake and the wartime fire bombings, by 1960 Toyko had surpassed New York City as the world’s largest city, and corporate and government figures there were highly receptive to Tange’s new urban concepts.””  Tange also instigated the formation of the group of younger architects known as the Metabolists, who included the architects Kiyonori Kikutake and Kisho Kuro- kawa, the graphic designer Kiyoshi Awazu, and the critic Noboru Kawazoe; these figures were soon joined by Fumihiko Maki, a Toyko architect and Harvard stu- dent of Sert then teaching at Washington University in St. Louis. Tange and the Metabolists further extended in varying ways the concepts already evident in the urban structuring work of the Smithsons, Bakema, and Candilis-Josic- Woods, further emphasizing the idea of the plant-like urban growth and the need to design for change in urban environments over time. In all their work, relatively perma- nent urban elements like highways, rail lines, and elevator shafts were seen as similar to the trunks or spines of plants, trees, and other organisms, while the indi- vidual housing units and commercial and office uses attached to them were designed to be easily changed or replaced as necessary.  The World Design Conference was also attended by many invited Western architects, who included Alison and Peter Smithson, Louis Kahn, Paul Rudolph, Minoru Yamasaki, and Jean Prouvé. Immediately afterward, Candilis invited Maki to the first Team 10 meeting after CIAM ’59, held near a Candilis-Josic-woods hous- ing project at Bagnols-sur-Céze, France, in 1960. Soon after, Maki coined the term “megastructure” to describe urban projects like those of Tange and the Smithsons. Maki and his collaborator Masao Otaka (a design associate of Japanese CIAM mem- ber Kunio Maekawa from 1947 to 1961) began to generate a variant of Metabolism  
that they called “group form,” which was less reliant on heavy interconnecting infra- structure and based on the use of repetitive, often traditional and vernacular, ele- ments to generate and maintain a consistent overall urban image, like that of a Greek island village.” Team 10 continued to explore and debate such urban struc- turing concepts in its subsequent meetings, including the one held at Abbaye Roy- aumont near Paris in 1962, where James Stirling presented his Archigram-influenced Leicester Engineering Building and Kisho Kurokawa his idea of a “capsule tower.” The Smithsons and Candilis-Josic-Woods continued to advocate large urban mega- structural urban projects of the kind that the French Team 10 firm was then actually building, at Toulouse-le-Mirail and elsewhere, based on ideas of pedestrian “stems” organized into large “webs” of housing, commerce, and social services.”  The Royaumont Team 10 meeting also caused a rupture between the Smithsons and Aldo van Eyck and his student Piet Blom. Among the many presentations of new urban concepts at that meeting, van Eyck offered Blom’s “Noah’s Ark” proj-  ect, a proposal for large scale development near Amsterdam that consisted entirely of low-rise, complexly interwoven urban uses and circulation inspired by the “lab- ytinthine clarity” of North African urban Kasbahs. The Smithsons were dismissive of the project, suggesting that its tightly woven urban design was too controlling and “completely fascist.” Although this ended Blom’s involvement with Team 10, his Noah’s Ark project inspired Le Corbusier’s design associate Guillermo Jullien de la Fuente, who was also present at Royaumont, to use a similar approach in the Le Corbusier office’s Venice Hospital project (1963), and Blom’s ideas also seem to have affinities with Candilis-Josic- Woods’ Frankfurt-R6merburg competition proj- ect (1963), the first use of the “mat building” concept that they would then build at the Berlin Free University campus (1965).7  By that point many of the directions in modern architecture that had begun with the Golden Lane project had transformed urban thinking in the field. Sert himself seemed to acknowledge this with his invitation to Maki and Shadrach Woods to teach in the Harvard Urban Design program in the mid-1960s, with Woods making an important speech on architects’ responsibilities to design and think globally at the Twelfth Harvard Urban Design conference in 1968.°* Within Team 10 itself, the Anglo-Swedish architect Ralph Erskine extended and improved the Smithsons’ Golden Lane concept at his Byker redevelopment project in Newcastle, continuing its emphasis on continuous pedestrian circulation and vernacular expression in both its curving slab blocks and a variety of low-rise housing types.””  After the Master Plan  Yet the triumph of Team 10 urban concepts in the 1960s also began to shift the focus of the field away from specific urban design concepts toward broader political and cultural concerns about the urban environment. As early as 1959, Reyner Banham had introduced concepts from the situationist group into urbanism, questioning the 
postwar CIAM emphasis on compactly designed urban cores, which he described as being like an “egg.” Inspired by the situationist idea of “psycho-geographical drift,” the experiencing of the urban environment as a series of mental states, in 1959 Banham advocated instead the idea of “The City as Scrambled Egg.” He suggested that a complete transformation of architects’ core and periphery urban model was then emerging in auto-based American metropolitan areas like Los Angeles, with their dispersed new popular centers such as drive-in cinemas, shopping malls, and suburban schools.”* By the 1960s, Team 10 and its successor groups like Archigram could argue that their urban concepts could be seen as vital pedestrian elements within this pattern, concepts that often took the form of new campus environments in the higher education boom of those years. Large regional airports also began to be reshaped along similar lines, though, even then, these were more controlled envir- onments than what Team 10 and the Metabolists has envisioned. Nonetheless they used many of these urban structuring concepts, notably at Gyo Obata’s pioneering Dallas-Fort Worth Regional Airport (DFW), designed in 1965 with his St. Louis based firm of HOK,’’ which was subsequently widely imitated elsewhere.  Enthusiasm among architects for these Golden Lane inspired directions began to wane by the 1970s, in many cases because of the opposition of local residents and an emerging dissatisfaction with large government initiatives generally. In response architects began to transpose some of the goals the Smithsons had written on their large sectional drawing of the Golden Lane project — “site, circulation, habitation, human presence” — into less architectonic and perhaps more realizable efforts for neighbor- hood development, community design, and historic preservation, often in existing urban neighborhoods. An ironic outcome of this changed atmosphere was that when the Smithsons were finally able to build a scaled-down version of the Golden Lane con- cept as their Robin Hood Gardens housing project in London (1966-72),** centered on a green mound made of the rubble from demolished buildings on the site, it seemed to many architects as simply another brutalist Corbusian high-rise slab project.  Notes  * Emphasid on site, circulation, habitation, and human presence. 34.7 x [multiplication sign] 24.8 cm. Inv.: AM1993-1-699. Image credit: Jean-Claude Planchet/G. Meguerditch- ian. © CNAC/MNAM/ Dist. RMN-Grand Palais/ Art Resource, NY. Image reproduced by permission of The Smithson Family Collection.  1. Alison Smithson and Peter Smithson, “Urban Re-identification Grid, 1953,” in Max Ris- selada and Dirk van den Heuvel, Team 10: In Search of a Utopia of the Present, 1953-81 (Rotterdam: NAi Publishers, 2004), 30-42. For the text of the grid only, with a brief inter- pretive note, see Harry Mallgrave and Christina Contandriopoulos, ed., Architectural The- ory, Volume I, An Anthology from 1871-2005 (Oxford: Blackwell, 2008), 322-3. For a detailed history of CIAM, including the early years of Team 10, see Eric Mumford, The CIAM Discourse on Urbanism, 1928-1960 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000).  
“The making of this church entailed covering extensive ground ... how should that (ground) form be, within which one prays?” So asked Alberto Cruz in his 1954 introduction to the presentation of this little chapel designed between 1952 and 1953.’ Although it was never built, the scheme stands as a key example of modern architecture in Chile, and was arguably a source of inspiration for Martin and Guar- da’s 1961-64 Benedictine chapel in Santiago, which is generally recognized as a highlight of the modern period.”  The project was conceived almost in parallel with the urban scheme for Achu- pallas Vifia del Mar (1953), where Cruz was exploring a significant urban strategy for 50,000 inhabitants as a fully integrated district — an alternative to the requested satellite workers housing concept. These projects therefore covered the full profes- sional spectrum, one at the lesser scale of building and the other at the geographical  scale of urban infrastructures. Coincidentally, they also shared a distinct geometric emphasis and a formal economy that rendered them easily memorable. A cubic system made the chapel, whereas a straight axis with the status and quality of an urban sign became the fulcrum of the Achupallas urban scheme, somewhat recalling Le Corbusier’s viaducts for Rio de Janeiro.  The Valparaiso School of Architecture  These schemes, together with the architect’s own statement, became something of a manifesto for the Valparaiso School of Architecture where Alberto Cruz was lead- ing a highly innovative program of studies that had just been initiated in 1952.’ This institution was being conceived along unusual lines for an architectural school. Firmly committed to the modern project, it was nevertheless cautious about its functionalist bias, and outright critical about the idea of a “modern style.” Their attitude was characterized by an interest in ritual and social practices (rather than program or function), a conviction about the preeminence of direct observation, and a commitment to the creation of a new architecture. Later, these commitments lead the Valparaiso group on to the design of several churches and religious insti- tutions, notably the 1960 master plan for the Benedictine Monastery in Santiago (unrealized) and a handful of churches erected in Southern Chile as a contribution to the reconstruction efforts that followed a devastating earthquake in the same year." The articulation of professional and school activities became an objective, and it is within that context that the arguments and presentations of the Pajaritos Chapel were delivered to the school. This presentation also honored the group’s professed conviction about the essential public-ness of the architect’s métier. Further reinforcing their status as guiding models of a committed design prac- tice, Pajaritos and Achupallas were compiled together with other selected projects and studies in a volume produced for the school that was significantly entitled Foun- dations (Fundamentos de la Escuela de Arquitectura, 1971). Here were not only the chapel, the Achupallas urban scheme, and a collective scheme for Valparaiso’s 
waterfront, but also studies on the Pacific Ocean and the southern fiords that char- tered historical voyages and contemporary traffic patterns. The volume also included the school’s 1967 proclamation for the reform of the university that pre- ceded the revolutionary events of 1968 in Paris and elsewhere, denouncing the authorities and the servility to imported models, and calling for the free contem- plation and study of the Latin American reality.  Located on farmland on the outskirts of Santiago (the area is now fully urba- nized), the chapel was placed within the luscious irrigated plains that characterize the valley and its temperate climate. Facing forking country roads, it stood against a background of trees, silos, workshops, and stables. It was raised six steps above the dirt road and preceded by a podium that acted as its atrium. This raised platform solved the symbolic and actual distinction between the secular space of agrarian labors and the sacred ground. It was a modest scheme: the interior only measured 106.7 square meters.  Always bathed in sunlight, its main front was oriented due north-west and slightly  askew as regards the shaded main road, where the trees and towering silos rose way above the chapel’s height of 8.85 meters. The cube — its primary feature — was artic- ulated at different scales. First was the chapel proper, measuring 10.5 x9 x 8.85 meters, with the podium extending forward another 10 meters and its flanks strictly aligned to it. On axes to the entrance, a 1.9-meter cubic niche resting on a square base and slightly raised from the podium sheltered a devotional image of the Virgin. The 3.5-meter sac- risty cube was located to the left; with its independent entrance, the sacristy offered a secondary access. Perched upon the main cornice and coinciding with the cube’s apex, there was a cubic belfry, 1.75 meters on each side, its metal lattices drawing eight empty cubes against the background of the sky. As all the main elements conformed to a strict orthogonal matrix, every contour was sharp and rectilinear. Despite its undeniable simplicity the project embodies a certain density of thought about modern architecture, its potentials, and the possibility of its realiza- tion within any given environment, program, or budget. A particular consciousness about place, ambiances, and ritual also characterized it, as became explicit in the extensive written commentaries that were to follow. These considerations ranged from the phenomenal to the symbolic and prosaic. Any effort to disentangle its various levels of definition becomes futile, for all of them concur in a single syn- thetic whole.  Light as a Prime Material  The manipulation of daylight within became fundamental to the creation of its appropriate ambiance. To this end, clerestory lights were arranged all around the perimeter, while ceiling contours supplied light deflectors so as to avoid direct sun- light. Even though light was to be a prime material, care was taken to de-dramatize its effect; efforts were made to create a propitious atmosphere rather than the 
theatricality that was sought in so many contemporary churches. Wall surfaces would have been bathed in a soft and rather homogenous light. Cruz also observed in traditional farmhouse interiors how, given the harshness and intensity of natural ight (located in latitude 33.27 south, Santiago, would coincide with Casablanca, Morocco 33.32 north), small crevices between slightly open shutters sufficed to sup- ply a subtle and agreeable twilight. Consequently, the main reinforced concrete doors were also conceived as light diffusers. Small doors inscribed within the large ones could calibrate the light’s quality and intensity. The homogeneity of door and wall materials reinforced the monolithic cubic quality, although slight differences in hue and texture were induced through finishes: white concrete for interior renders in walls and doors, white paint for exterior renders, oil paint for all metal elements. Finishes were to be tested on-site for possible adjustments.  Acoustic considerations combined with geometric and perceptual concerns in the definition of the precise outlines that at one stage included consultations about the type of optical correctives usually discussed for Greek temples.  Against this seemingly purist agenda, Cruz evinced a relaxed attitude as regards significant elements such as the icons and the altar, which were to be supplied by the client. Overcoming stylistic anxieties, and despite their heterogeneity or potential  discordance with accepted “modern” canons, these were to be simply incorporated. What mattered was not so much stylistic consistency but the consistency of the prop- osition as a setting ready to articulate diverse devotional expressions. Hence the ico- nography of the chapel did not — as would have been the common expectation — become specially commissioned for the occasion. Other “as found” parts comprised  wooden steps and some recycled materials such as the stone that was to cover the floors. Geometric precision did not preclude diverse devotional expressions.  A Background for Outdoor Ceremonies  The chapel’s reduced scale guaranteed the required intimacy of an interior that was usually to be devoted to solitary prayer and meditation. Articulating this interior domain with the open atrium, the large doors folded outward so that, embracing the atrium, the chapel became the backdrop for large outdoor ceremonies in a man- ner not unlike the tradition of Spanish colonial open-air chapels.  Consisting of a rough brick masonry framed in reinforced concrete pillars and beams, the main structure conformed to low-cost structural anti-seismic conven- tional practice. Resting upon steel girders, simple beams, their timbers salvaged from older constructions, made the roof structure. The copping detail allowed for on-site adjustment if required for a final tuning of the proportions. The design was conceived for realization by non-specialized labor.  The practice of observation included formal, tectonic, behavioral, and ritual issues. Drawing from his concerns about ritual, Cruz had already decided that in this chapel the position of the official was to be face-to-face with the assembly; 
this was some time in advance of the II Vatican Council (1962-65) where this prin- ciple was endorsed together with the adoption of vernacular language and various levels of liturgical renovation.’  Pondering the issues involved in making the chapel, Cruz made reference to Notre Dame in Paris where the simultaneous presence of diverse interior elements seemed to concur in inducing a corporeal and spiritual mood that was particularly apt for prayer. Reflecting upon this observation, he stated that the orchestration of those interior conditions operated in a manner that was analogous to the way we experience the beach, where the surfaces of sand place us — body and mind — in an expectant relationship to the sea. Criticizing the extensive deployment of design features and theatrical effects that were common to the average modern church project, he set himself the task of achieving that mood with a handful of materials and a precise deployment of form, divesting his design of any excess.  The chapel was never realized. It stands as a highlight of the first period of activ- ities of the Valparaiso Group. In addition to the strictly academic occupations involved in devising new study methods and the school curricula, several profes- sional projects were pursued in this early period, thus relating teaching and prac- tice; but very few could be realized. A second period of activities was inaugurated with the creation of the “Open City” in 1970, a sort of experimental ground that was established on an extra-urban tract of land fronting the Pacific Ocean that com- prised 270 hectares of land. Here the relationship between living, working, and teaching would become even more intense, as most building activity summoned the efforts of students and tutors alike. Within the Open City every construction would be a special product of research.®  The relationship between extreme formal rigor and elementary building meth- ods was pursued in some of these buildings, notably in the Music House, an inward-looking room lit through a single light column placed somewhat off center. Light ambiance rather than spectacular views (the Music House stands near the shoreline) was a prime subject. The enclosure was devised to keep the roar of waves away while fostering the right mood for experiencing musical performances. As in Pajaritos, the simple interior accommodates different modes of use while the scale is such as to preclude a sense of solitude.  Distancing himself from the idea of totality implied in the Gesamtkunstwork, Cruz welcomed constraints and contributions. Likewise, the urban conception of the Achupallas scheme hinged upon the correct delineation of an urban avenue that maintained a steady incline in its transit from hill to seashore. Its flanking system of terraces organized the topography, solving all transverse links and transactions. There was no prescription about style for the buildings to be erected, simply an acceptance of things as they are, and a conviction about the value of its inscription within the acci- dental terrain, its declared linkage to the Pacific shore and its urban status.  As we have seen, in Pajaritos there was no anxiety about the nature and quality of devotional elements: it was the strength of the atmosphere that would keep this intimate world infused with the mood of prayer.  
THE NAKED CITY  Guy Debord and Asger Jorn  Simon Sadler  THE NAKED CITY  ILLUSTRATION DE LKYPOTHESE DES PLAGLES TOURNANTES EN PSYCHIGEGGRAPHIUE ™ 2k EEE  Guy E. Debord, The Naked City: illustration de hypothése des plagues tournantes enpsychogéographique, 1957.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
WHY PUT A COLLAGE IN A BOOK ON MODERN ARCHITECTURE?  Why discuss a collage in a book on modern architecture? This chapter seeks to account for the ingress of The Naked City, a 1957 print, into architecture culture. Has any other particular work of art held quite such a sway for quite so long in the neighboring medium of architecture?  Works of art do have a talismanic effect for architects. Cubist works, for instance, had a long and profound impact on architecture (and can be sensed too in The Naked City). In the same decade as The Naked City’s creation, Jackson Pollock showed architects an “aleatory” aesthetic; art brut’s exponents, like Jean Dubuftet, suggested textures for architectural brutalism; pop art pointed forward to postmod- ern collage. The grid — a motif from the Italian Renaissance depiction of The Ideal City (1480-84, attributed to Fra Carnevale) to the abstract paintings of Piet Mon- drian — was fundamental to the modern spirit in architecture exemplified, say, in Le Corbusier's Ville Radieuse (1924).  The Ville Radieuse is a good place to pause this brief inventory, though, because it was exactly its rationalist mathematical repetition that The Naked City opposed. The Ville Radieuse was a provocation; The Naked City was a response. The former intrigued postwar planners, and the latter intrigues their successors. In the couple of decades following the Second World War, grids extended like carpets and cur- tains across the plans and elevations of reconstructed and redeveloped buildings and cities. The grids of postwar urbanism were calm and clinical in a way which defied that cubist vigor revived in the 1950s by The Naked City, art brut, abstract expressionism, and pop, whose virtual spaces were not those of the grid’s linear and orthogonal and repetitive relation, but of seeming overlap and contingency: vanguard art in the 1950s was strenuously of the moment, as though unfolding in time. This admitted the possibility of change, of history, otherwise seemingly come to an “end” in some Hegelian grand resolution of all art and all buildings and all cities subjected to the grid. History is still propelled, in The Naked City as in abstract expressionism and art brut and pop, by a human subjectivity with its unruly desires that only pretend to conform to the iron law of grids and their reason. Spatially, temporally, cognitively, postwar aesthetics suggested the rein- vention of architectural epistemology.  That said, features particular to The Naked City were at best only implicit in the postwar avant-garde at large. The first was The Naked City’s topic: the city. Here, perhaps for the first time since the postwar triumph of the grid, an artistic intelli- gentsia was rethinking the city as an experience and as a work of art whose affect was not simply of built forms (buildings) but of events (the life of citizens). The Naked City simply collaged an existing street atlas, as though assigning to its cit- izen-observers (who may or may not be trained in the arts of government and  
architecture) the task of making the city of the future. The invitation was literally anarchic, a memorandum about the greater possibilities of modernity. And addres- sing as it does the city — the largest material artifact of human culture — The Naked City is about the totality of lived human relations.  It was, then, a manifesto for intervention in the city — intervention led by the vanguard intelligentsia who created The Naked City in accordance with a revolu- tionary avant-garde program. The radicalism of early twentieth-century avant- gardism had been mostly succeeded by the progressive reformism of the economic, governmental, and creative coalitions imposing the grid. The Naked City, by con- trast, was a Marxist-anarchist manifesto in visual form. It purportedly addressed the working class as the revolutionary force of history, a class whose freedoms were being “exchanged” for participation in a burgeoning postwar consumer economy, and whose organizations were being “bought out” by the promise of physical and social mobility.  The aspiration to a new revolution in Paris, the city depicted in The Naked City, peaked in the May Events of 1968. One might then expect The Naked City to be little more than an avant-garde souvenir. But The Naked City has joined other van- guard icons (like those of interwar Soviet constructivism and assorted postwar countercultures) that help us contemplate design’s largest purposes. It remains a memorandum to activists insistent that politics and aesthetics are intertwined. Some of those activists teach and practice architecture. Not that the meanings of The Naked City are solely radical, either: its central insight that a plan is indef- inite, that history moves, and that the human aspires to a more than functional existence has been learned by postmodern urbanism, too.  The Context of The Naked City  Between the world wars, surrealists wondered about the fate of class, intervention, desire, and history in the wake of Europe’s rationalization by science, industrial capitalism, and the state. Rationalization had been inscribed in the very body of Paris through Haussmannisation, brilliantly and poetically surveyed in surrealist circles by Louis Aragon and Walter Benjamin. The makers of The Naked City found each other through the tiny network of Dadaist and surrealist legatees of the 1950s. The Naked City (the best-known of a series of maps)’ served as one of the formative documents of the Situationist International, which was constituted in one form or another from 1957 to 1972. It allied two groups, the International Movement for an Imaginist Bauhaus and the Lettrist International. The Lettrist International (1952-57), dominated by one of The Naked City’s two creators, film- maker and philosopher Guy Debord, was inclined toward the minimal and concep- tual rather than the visual. In contrast, the founder of the Imaginist Bauhaus (1954-57), artist Asger Jorn, who was the second of The Naked City’s two creators, preferred a hands-on, expressionist approach to the production of art. 
The Situationist International was overtly politicized at a time when the intelli- gentsia at large was downplaying class conflict. By the late 1950s in France there were more white-collar than blue-collar workers, the average worker's purchasing power for consumer goods and leisure increasing through an economic expansion sponsored by the United States’ “golden era” of capitalism. But the result was an increase in a standard of living only narrowly defined, argued the situationists, who promised to divert this era of material and technological plenty to the collective transformation of human existence. This new leftist politics demanded not mere workplace equality, but the supersession of the workplace. This Freudian-Marxist politics of desire was a riposte to the dead weight of the state and its aspirant polit- ical parties (including the Communist Party) on both sides of the Iron Curtain.  Situationists believed that the city was the front line for the next revolution, just as it had been for past political revolutions. As France shifted its economy from an agrarian to an industrial and commercial base, urban redevelopment and housing were the most visible reminders of the presence and power of a welfare—capitalist state anxious to secure domestic consensus at the violent twilight of its imperial era. Perhaps a third of the old Ville de Paris was demolished between the mid-1950s and mid-1970s, during which its working-class population fell by more than 40%. The Parisian built environment had not encountered a stylistic revolution as authorita- tive as rationalism since the Renaissance, and the scale of postwar redevelopment planned for Paris in the 1950s and 1960s was unprecedented since Haussmann. It was epitomized by its servility to the private automobile. Debord’s 1959 “Situation- ist Theses on Traffic” satirized the strict zoning and ease of traffic circulation called for in the 1933 Athens Charter, which had been issued by the representative body of modernist architecture, the Congrés internationaux d’architecture moderne, under the influence of Le Corbusier, who revised the Charter in 1943 as ratification of his Radiant City program. “The mistake made by all urbanists is to consider the private automobile ... essentially as a means of transportation,’ Debord laconically observed. “We must replace travel as an adjunct to work with travel as pleasure,” he recommended, turning on “those who believe that the particulars of the problem are permanent” but who “want in fact to believe in the permanence of the present society” that encouraged the “circulation of things and of human beings trapped in a world of things.”” Urbanism offered an “official,” homogenizing representation of the state and capital — an orchestrated “spectacle,” as the situa- tionists called the ascent of bourgeois visual culture across all media, from archi- tecture to cinema to advertising.  The situationists discarded the awe in modernity exhibited by earlier vanguards (the impressionists and futurists, for instance) to scrutinize modernity for seeds of authentic, open-ended living. Situationism was not quite alone in its thoroughgo- ing reassessment of modernity and rationalist modernism. Even Le Corbusier's postwar work was marked by growing informality. The American urban historian Lewis Mumford, increasingly skeptical of urban technological culture, influenced the situationists, though his admiration for Garden City principles were of little  
relevance to them. Structuralist philosophy and anthropology eroded and claim of modernity’s absolute novelty when it discovered common cultural structures underlying all eras. The dominant mode of thought in postwar France, existential- ism, assigned priority to subjectivity over objectivity. The Critique of Everyday Life, published in 1946 by the Marxist philosopher, Henri Lefebvre, joined a growing book list on the role of play, festivity and carnivalization in human culture authored by Mikhail Bakhtin, Johan Huizinga, and Roger Caillois. Against this background, situationism offered a framework by which to invert every assumption of contem- porary urbanism and the life it inscribed.  The Naked City as a Guide to Paris, Urbanism, and Life  In the later 1950s, members of the formative Situationist International, who in the early part of the decade could still take the remarkable social and architectural une- venness of Paris for granted, began to map the disappearing city using “psychogeo- graphic drift.” This was their practice of explorative urban wandering, following individual and collective instinct and desire. “In a dérive [drift],’ Debord explained in his 1958 “Theory of the Dérive,” “one or more persons during a certain period drop their usual motives for movement and action, their relations, their work and leisure activities, and let themselves be drawn by the attractions of the terrain and the encounters they find there.” Journeying usually on foot, the situationist drifter was the new fldneur, the wandering spectator of the modernizing urban scene that had emerged in the early nineteenth century and was later celebrated in the writ- ings of Charles Baudelaire. Unlike the fléneur, though, the drifter was repelled by homogenizing modernization and was instead propelled along her or his unplanned journey by the complex geography and aesthetics of social and architec- tural history. Drift helped situationists identify those urban qualities worthy of “diversion” into the “constructed situations” of a “unitary urbanism.”  Although some ambition for a coherent urbanist program may have existed among situationists in the late 1950s, none really formed. Our understandings of its key concepts like psychogeography and unitary urbanism must therefore remain as manifold as the urbanism and lived totality that it addressed. We might nonetheless summarize unitary urbanism as the situationist dream city, conjec- tured as a future construction or experienced in the present through drift — an envi- ronment in which collective and individual life is truly fulfilled because all separation, all alienation, has ceased. Art would be indistinguishable from life, work indistinguishable from pleasure, need from want, self from species. Such compartmentalization that survived would be through the intensification of the differing ambiances of the city’s units, ambiances of the sort discovered by psycho- geographic drift in Paris’s old quartiers. Gathered together in the grand “unity” of the city, the future city quarters of unitary urbanism would serve every emotional, intellectual, and corporeal need of the new citizen. The reconstituted city, for 
which The Naked City might have been a preliminary mental or psychogeographic survey, would emancipate its occupants from the alienation of life under rational- ism, functionalism, and capitalism. The Naked City was therefore inherently crit- ical of Paris and all cities that adhered to redevelopment programs that did not make the subjective and collective experience of humanity the beginning and end of design.  Borrowing its title from a 1948 drama-documentary film of detectives at work in New York, The Naked City recorded investigative work into those areas of the Ville de Paris so far by-passed by the grands boulevards of traffic and retail but threa- tened by redevelopment. One example was the slum of the Marais, the early seventeenth-century centerpiece of Henri IV’s Paris that briefly offered refuge to situationists Guy Debord and Michele Bernstein. It appeared as chunks floating in the north-east corners of the map. The very fact that the Marais was generally recognized as worthy of conservation, its fate debated within the Conseil municipal de Paris, threatened to make it a part of the state’s official, “spectacular” heritage. This was indeed its destiny — at the time of writing, one of the mansions of the Place des Vosges is swathed in a photographic reproduction of the building underneath, the gauze sponsored by the corporate computer giant Apple, which is subsidizing the restoration. Situationists complained of the tendency “to restore a few old urban spots as sights of touristic spectacle, a simple extension of the principle of  the classical museum by means of which an entire neighborhood can become a monument.” In the 1950s no such official patronage extended to the Marais’ neighbors, though — the decrepit Beaubourg and the marketplace of Les Halles, placed at the very center of The Naked City. These were still working-class areas — not to say areas of the lumpen proletariat and vice — where pedestrians rather than motorized traffic had priority on the streets, and where commercial exchange still took place over transitory market stalls, or in small stores, rather than in the bou- tiques or department stores a little further north and west. But its market halls were ignominiously demolished in 1971 to make way for the RER train interchange, a sunken shopping and entertainments center, and the Pompidou Center — the epit- ome, argued many critics, of the “spectacle” of Parisian culture — which opened in 1977.  Beyond the record of preservation and destruction it offered, The Naked City was an epistemological device. The fact that it clearly was not a regular map  implied a new understanding of geography and cartography.° Debord was intri- gued, for example, by the urban social geography of Paul-Henri Chombart de Lauwe, which heightened awareness of the complex social structuring of the city ordinarily invisible on political maps. By contrast, rationalist urban planning reduced the intricacy of city life to fallaciously simplistic levels. The disturbed grid- lines of the Guide Taride de Paris, sliced to make The Naked City, emphasized the incompatibility of Cartesian logic with the lived reality of the city. Debord and Jorn pasted down the chunks of map at some odd angles, as much as 45° from the mean,  
suggesting the pivoting, pinball trajectory of drifting pedestrians following their own desire lines. The situationist map described a drifting urban navigational sys- tem operating independently of Paris’s dominant patterns of circulation. The vary- ing weights of the map’s arrows suggested the strength of psychogeographic passages.  Purely “objective” geographical analysis, in other words, was placed by The Naked City in a dialectical tension with the subjective geography of experience and occupation. This is critically important for the activist politics of the map, and also for the culture of architecture into which the map would be imported, since architecture, too, holds the objective and subjective in tension. On the one hand the self could not be divorced from the urban environment; on the other hand, psychogeography had to pertain to more than just the psyche of the individ- ual if it was to be useful in the collective rethinking of the city. Psychogeography directed its practitioners to obscure places in the built environment, in community life, and in the mind simultaneously. With this, the situationists hoped, unitary urbanism would begin.  The promise of this new epistemology wasn’t academic, then; it was of urban reoccupation, of the critical deconstruction of political economy, of the restoration of the street as locus of popular culture, and of the diversion of quartiers of existing Paris into a more intensely lived life, the city a giant revolutionary festival. This future has not yet come to pass. To understand why, we would need another sort of essay that discusses revolutionary organization and the endurance of late capi- talism. Instead we will conclude by tracing The Naked City’s integration into archi- tecture culture, where it is safely contained as a contributor to postmodern urbanism, but where it is also cared for as an incomplete project. The Naked City reminds designers to pay attention to the qualities of the city beyond positivist urbanism.  The Assimilation of The Naked City into Architecture Culture  The Naked City aimed to transcend disciplinary art and architecture, yet archi- tecture as a discipline assimilated and attempted to learn from situationism. Architecture has a remarkable capacity to digest its anarchic and indeterminate Others — the vernacular, for instance, or popular culture, or ecology, or the long revolution in communications that would seem to obviate the need for buildings and cities. Situationism meanwhile did not develop entirely autonomously, but in contact with a vanguard common culture of which architecture was a part. Lettr- ism and situationism caught the attention of the architectural discipline’s van- guard almost immediately, and assimilation was assured after 1968, the high watermark of radical questioning about all relations to capitalism, architecture, and urbanism. 
This integration was eased by the fact that situationism was already related to a wider post-Athens Charter network around the Team 10 group in architecture and to the intertwined avant-garde scene of the Independent Group at the Institute of Contemporary Arts in London. For the Situationist International, Team 10 and Independent Group alike, rationalism’s pretensions to represent universal truth were obsolete. A rallying cry like that delivered by architect Aldo van Eyck to Team 10 in 1959 — “Instead of the inconvenience of filth and confusion, we have now got the boredom of hygiene ... mile upon mile of organised nowhere”’ — echoed the sentiments of the situationists. Van Eyck proposed that buildings and cities be designed not around strict hierarchies but according to a “labyrinthine clarity” granting users a relative freedom of choice in the use and discovery of its spaces and places. He eventually published an article on the subject in a 1963 edition of the Situationist Times.” Van Eyck had worked on an installation at the Stedelijk Museum in 1953 with the artist Constant (Nieuwenhuys), a founder of the Situa- tionist International whose design for a situationist city of the future, which he called New Babylon, drew on the complex, multi-layered spatial planning of van Eyck and his Team 10 colleagues, Alison and Peter Smithson. Borrowing lib- erally from situationist unitary urbanism in 1959, meanwhile, the Independent Group architectural historian Reyner Banham proposed the “city as scrambled egg,” as a mixed cultural field rather than a compartmentalized functional machine. Illustrating his article with the 1956 Guide Psychogéographique de Paris — which was Debord and Jorn’s precursor to 1957’s The Naked City — Banham was able to strip situationist unitary urbanism of its politics and append it to planning discourse.  But an insurmountable ideological difference between militant anarchism and liberal leftism separated situationism from other vanguard tendencies. Yes, the situationists looked forward to pleasurable speed and mobility through the city at large, but not to its degeneration into autopia (Banham loved Los Angeles as  well as Paris). Yes, they wanted, in Banham’s phrase, “a whole lot of special interest belts overlapping and colliding, to their mutual benefit,” but not so as to attract the troupes of “brainstormers” that Banham considered essential to the life of the urban core, “the cool jazz connection, action painters, documentary camera crews, [and]  advertising copy-writers.”” This was the professional creative class, invested in con- sumer society, within which Britain’s Archigram group (working close to Banham) also wanted to position architecture. In a sense, the gulf between situationism and architectural vanguardism was never more graphic than when Archigram incorpo- rated ideas of “Situation” into its seminal 1963 Institute of Contemporary Arts show, “Living City,” which again featured Debord and Jorn’s Guide Psychogéogra- phique de Paris.  This consumption of the city as an urban theme park, its psychogeography hypostatized as a post-industrial product, has of course accelerated in postmodern urbanism since the 1960s, as a flurry of sociological and journalistic attacks on urban planning (notably led by Jane Jacobs) prompted strict urban zoning to lose favor to mixed use, while many “post-industrial” city centers in Europe and the 
United States — their industries evacuated to the exurbs or to Asia — became domi- nated by leisure use. Situationism was destined then to haunt the conventional wis- dom of postmodernism. Architectural epistemology was markedly affected by poststructuralism and the turn to history, both somewhat anticipated in situation- ism — recall the “poststructural” fragmentation of The Naked City, and its concern for the city’s disappearing “history.”  Poststructuralism in effect found that the creation of meaning through cinema, literature, the city and everyday life is as “decentered” as the geographical reading of Paris by psychogeographic drift. But this in turn undermined the potential for the co-ordinated collective action sought by situationism; poststructural theorists became suspicious of 1968’s broad front of action, which, they argued, homoge- nized heterogeneous revolutionary desire. Hereon the city would nurture the inter- play of multiple desires and identities. Urbanism’s historical turn, meanwhile, was captured for example in 1978 by historian Anthony Vidler’s argument that cities are a consistent background to human affairs, furnishing a “third typology” (following the first two typologies of nature and machines from which modernism aimed to birth a new society).'° The third typology of the city contained architectural ele- ments that could be reused according to their past use and meaning and their capac- ity to be put to new uses. This third typology suggested the uncanny qualities of The Naked City, in which the city was at once familiar yet unfamiliar, and was at once as reassuring and as disconcerting as the past itself.  Further to these epistemological turns, The Naked City’s fragmented Dadaist and surreal collage, which implied “deterritorialized,” “nomadic” struggle, sug- gested a method by which to design the poststructural, postmodern city. Announced in Colin Rowe’s Collage City of 1978, a certain fantasy of designed disorder fasci- nated a generation of architects. As a master-planner, Rem Koolhaas in effect recon- stituted unitary urbanism as a way of reconciling his loyalties both to populism and to the role of the architect as heroic master of ceremonies.'' Likewise Bernard Tschumi, a contemporary of Koolhaas’ at the Architectural Association in London in the early 1970s, has written that “the insertion of the terms event and move- ment” into urbanism “was influenced by situationist discourse and by the *68 era,” when “the unlikely combination of events and spaces was charged with sub- versive capabilities.”’” Tschumi’s student group at the Architectural Association in the 1970s, which included Nigel Coates, pursued ethereal investigations of the experience of space and the imagination. And New York’s High Line park (Field Operations, Diller Scofidio + Renfro, Piet Oudolf, Buro Happold, 2008) — arguably the quintessence of contemporary urbanism — has about it that situationist quality of urban history and infrastructural use made strange.  Although income is not an absolute determinant of the ability to walk the High Line, however, it certainly is a determinant of the ability to inhabit an apartment alongside it. Not only has the gentrification prefigured by the postwar city to which The Naked City bore witness accelerated wildly, but urban fragmentation has also coalesced with spectacle culture. And a new myth of societal selforganization —  
abetted by poststructuralism, accelerated capital flows, information technology, and neo-Darwinian theory — has since the 1960s assumed the mantle earlier filled by the anarchism of situationism. The myth is claimed by left and right — to the right, the behemoth of capital accumulation, now in its neoliberal phase, and to the left, the vibrant networked opposition to globalized capital accumulation, Lil- liputian but capable of surprise in the venerable manner of the situationists and other avant-gardes.  Both coalitions compete for occupation of the city, and both are represented within the schools and offices of architecture. To be candid, architecture’s default role is to service capital while trying to extract from it some surplus aesthetic or public value. But architects were reportedly active in Occupy, for example — that resurgence of radicalism in the United States around 2011 which part reprieved some of the “spirit” of situationism and its lineage to the communards of 1968 and the Parisian communards of 1871. The architectural discipline thus serves as a repository of politico-aesthetic devices available for reuse, and we can make a safe bet that the new politico-aesthetic devices of Occupy will reappear in archi- tecture in coming decades: watch for some architectural version of the “mic check” technique for collective discussion to appear in due course.  Coincidentally, then, The Naked City’s resonance with recent architectural design helps us understand how architecture looks, learns, formalizes, interjects. The Naked City suggested that fragments of culture and place benefit by inter- meshing and surrendering their separate currencies. It depicted an evolving, trans- formative matrix. It questioned our need for the new when the possibilities of the past are yet to be discovered. It presented a procedure without instructions, an invi- tation to agency, and a transformed future. These processes of creativity are well known to architects and became the better known to them as their discipline turned, in the late twentieth century, away from strict rationalism.  Notes  * Beinecke Rare Book & Manuscript Library, Yale University.  1. Tom McDonough (consulting Ralph Rumney, Le Consul (Paris: Editions Allia, 1999), 47-53), counts a total of five maps. See Tom McDonough, “Delirious Paris; Mapping as a Paranoiac-Critical Activity,” Grey Room 19 (Spring 2005): 6-21. For more of McDonough’s detailed readings of situationist urbanism, see for instance his important early paper “Situationist Space,” October 67 (Winter 1994), and his thorough orientation to translated source texts on the subject, The Situationists and the City: A Reader (London: Verso, 2010). For more discussion on the themes of this chapter, see for instance my own The Situationist City (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998), among a number of works now available on the topic.  2. Guy-Emest Debord, “Positions situationnistes sur la circulation,” Internationale situation- niste 3 (December 1959): 36-7, trans. “Situationist Theses on Traffic,” in Situationist Inter- national Anthology, ed. Ken Knabb (Berkeley: Bureau of Public Secrets, 1981), 56-9. 
BRASILIA  Lucio Costa  Carlos Eduardo Comas  Lucio Costa, Brasilia Pilot Plan, Brazil, 1957.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
THE PILOT PLAN AND ITS MONUMENTS  Cities are not built in a single day. Brasilia was the name suggested for a new capital in the hinterland when Brazil became an independent empire (1822). The idea was written into the country’s first republican constitution (1891), and land surveys in the central plateau subtropical savanna followed (1892-93); after that, nothing much happened before the end of World War II. When President Juscelino Kubitschek was inaugurated in January 1956, a federal district had been demarcated and a plan had been drawn up by José de Oliveira Reis, Raul Penna Firme, and Roberto Lacombe (1955).' They recommended damming the Paranoé River to cre- ate a lake and consequently reduce the aridity of the climate. Called Vera Cruz, the new capital would stand on a triangular site extending and rising dome-like to the west between two branches of the lake.”  Building the new capital became a priority in Kubitschek’s ambitious development program for a democratic Brazil, which included establishing an auto industry with the participation of foreign investment. His slogan was “Fifty years in five.” The “march toward the west” started when Congress approved the creation of a devel- opment agency, NOVACAP (1956). Oscar Niemeyer, Director of its Department of Urbanism and Architecture, supported a national competition for the pilot plan for Brasilia, the definitive name of the city. The Vera Cruz plan was shelved. Nonethe- less, Niemeyer co-authored the competition brief with Penna Firme and Lacombe.’  Competitors had to present a schematic plan and a report. Data included the location of two Niemeyer designs beside the Paranoa Lake, the presidential resi- dence (Palacio da Alvorada), and a hotel. There were only a few programmatic specifications. Brasilia was conceived as a company city whose industry was gov- ernment, so the city would be an administrative one accommodating 500,000 peo- ple, presumed to consist mostly of middle class politicians, lawyers, diplomats, military personnel, civil servants, lobbyists, and their families. An implicit but cru- cial requirement was the possibility of implementing the pilot plan in three years, so that Kubitschek could inaugurate the city before leaving the presidency on Jan- uary 1961.  In all, 26 plans were submitted. Led by Niemeyer, the jury analyzed their adap- tation to topography, their extension in relation to population density, and the articulation of their urban elements and regional connections, while also looking for a modern architectural statement communicating the city’s role as national capital. Historicism was out of the question. Lucio Costa’s entry was considered the best, given its compactness, cohesiveness, coherence, and character. It was at once contemporary and timeless, pragmatic and emblematic, befitting both an efficient urbs and a proud civitas.* Knowingly or not, it improved on the Vera Cruz plan. 
Two grade-separated axes crossed at the center of the checkerboard layout of  Vera Cruz, making up the bulky arm of the T-shaped scheme. Commerce Avenue ran north-south, and Independence Avenue ran east-west on the ridge of the site. The former widened south of the crossing into a square bounded by a cultural and entertainment complex, the town hall, and the cathedral. The latter widened west of the crossing into the U-shaped national government center, with longer sides perpendicular to that square, the short western end enclosed by the capitol at mid- point. The capitol defined a triangle with the presidential palace and the supreme court of justice, each heading a row of ministries perpendicular to the intermediary mall. Embassies stood in a garden neighborhood behind the capitol. Independence Avenue bifurcated at the checkerboard’s eastern boundary. The forks led to the university campus and public parks at the lakeshore and defined a prominent tri- angle inscribed in the short, slender stem of the plan. Bilateral symmetry made sense in terms of topography and drainage, construction and performance. Emphasizing the singularity of each axis made even more sense. Costa bent the north-south axis. Instead of a commercial boulevard, he devised a sunken highway between two arterials bordered by rows of trees and apartment buildings. Thanks to the excavated material, the eastern half of the straight axis turned into a raised platform; the natural slope of its western half went largely undis- turbed. As if streamlining the Vera Cruz layout, Costa placed Brasilia’s key civic buildings on a single strip, those of national scope upon the platform and those of local interest upon the slope; squares set off both ends of this monumental axis.  The platform comprised two pieces, like Independence Avenue, but both advanced into the savanna. The capitol was the common central element to the triangular Plaza of the Three Powers at the end of the platform and the rectangular Esplanade of the Ministries opposite, including the cathedral in front of one of its two rows. The town hall and the railway station graced the western end of the slope. Counterpart to the capitol, a telecommunications tower rose halfway up the slope’s highest point. Unlike Vera Cruz, the heart of Costa’s Brasilia was a void: a multilevel bus station occupied the crossing of the axes. The cultural and enter- tainment sectors adjoined it respectively to the east and west, integrating into both the highway-residential axis and the monumental axis. The entertainment sector bridged the business districts in front of the residential wings, comprising retail stores to the west and office buildings to the east. Hotels rose between the shop- ping areas and the entertainment sector. Sports facilities were dispersed along the green slope. Embassies and campus were envisaged between the superblocks, the platform, and the lake.  Costa proposed an efficient, car-oriented city with no grade crossings and no traffic lights. Its linearity facilitated the provision of bus services. Its monumentality was structural. Costa abhorred the confusion of monumentality with grandilo- quence. He understood “monumentality” in its strict sense as the quality of a mon- ument, by definition a structure acting as a commemoration device, a machine for  remembrance, and therefore required to appear as a memorable object in itself. For 
him, both urbs and civitas were worthy of commemoration. The whole was to be as memorable as the part.  Grade separation and bending updated the cross as a planning tool, with no loss of its elementary formal vigor. Costa’s pilot plan’s resemblance to a bird, airplane, or bow and arrow reinforced popular associations of the city with movement and development. Stylized figuration alluding to nature or machine was not new in Costa’s and Niemeyer’s work, as demonstrated by the Ministry of Education head- quarters in Rio or the Pampulha Chapel.’ It recalled the traditional association of columns with trees and human bodies, or temples with arks, and employed the formal strategies of caricature, a flourishing art in Brazil since the mid-nineteenth century. In the context of the Cold War, it suggested an abstract modern answer to the precepts of social realism. Costa avoided political statements, but was con- cerned about communicating with the common man. He shared this desire with Niemeyer, a Communist Party member who loathed Stalinist architecture.  The differentiation of the monumental sector from the natural setting added to the movement-related imagery. Built like a road, its platform would rise above the surrounding savanna like a cruise-ship or pier. The Square of the Three Powers at the tip was at once stern and quay, ship and harbor. The metaphor was based on geometry — their horizontality — as much as literature; the transformation of the north-eastern savanna into a seashore was prophesied by messianic leader Antonio Conselheiro, according to Euclides da Cunha in Os sertées (1902).° A latter day obe- lisk, the telecommunications tower followed the lead of the Eiffel Tower and reaf- firmed the alliance of the city with technical progress and the media.  The differentiation of the monumental sector proper from the ordinary urban fabric suggested institutional stability. Thus, the depiction of the body politic was quite literal. Costa put government at the head of the city, as Le Corbusier had done in Chandigarh, giving it greater visibility with no loss of connectivity, thanks to the cruciform layout and its central void. The equivalence of the three govern- ment branches was conveyed in an elementary and effective way. If their seats made up a head, the ministries were their arms. Most occupied standard slab build- ings; proximity and distinctive physiognomies should signal the special links between the executive branch and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the legislative branch and the Ministry of Justice.  Assertions of typological continuity amid political change were not absent. The Square of the Three Powers had buildings on three sides, as did Praca XV de Novembro in Rio or Praca do Comércio in Lisbon. The former related to Brazilian emperors and Guanabara Bay, the latter to Portuguese kings and the Tagus River. Known first as Terreiro do Paco (Square of the Palace), both were relevant histor- ical examples of marginal centralities. French urbanist Alfred Agache had remem- bered this in his plan for Rio de Janeiro (1930), by proposing a square opening on one side to Guanabara Bay as the Parliament's lobby.” As for the Esplanade of the Ministries, it recalled the Washington Mall reformed by Beaux-Arts-trained Burn- ham and McKim (1901) in another city designed from scratch, the capital of the first  
independent American country. Both the square and the esplanade were vast stages, purposefully empty most of the time, waiting to burst with extraordinary and massive civic joy, anger, or grief.  Costa’s own work was also a reference, for Vera Cruz as well as Brasilia, despite the stripped down academic classicism of the buildings illustrating the earlier plan, which were no different from those illustrating the Agache plan. Designed with similar elements and a divergent parti to replace an earlier proposal by Le Corbusier, the University of Brazil campus project (1936) featured an entrance plaza with three main elements including a tower, schools in rows of slab buildings perpendicular to the ceremonial axis, and another square at the latter’s opposite end.*  The “man in the street” did not need to be literate to understand Brasilia as the hub of a vast and mostly unsettled nation on the move, proud of its brand new automobile industry and eager to increase its air routes, marching to the west with a new-found enthusiasm for democracy, but mindful of its complex heritage. This heritage was not confined to parochial precedents, and the duality of the endeavor could also be conveyed in more esoteric disciplinary terms. The counterbalance of  dynamism that came from the emphasis on focal objects and stable compositions was achieved by aptly intersecting the Linear City of Spanish and Russian lineage with the City Beautiful of French pedigree in the light of the Corbusian Radiant City and ancient Chang’an, the former capital of China planned in the sixth century with the Imperial Palace as its head. Beaux-Arts-trained Costa would have assumed that the Roman Campidoglio, another relevant palace square open on one side, was hardly worth a comment, but his memoirs disclose an infatuation with the Chinese tradition of man-made terraces, platforms, and embankments at that time.?  As if paraphrasing Baudelaire, International Congresses of Modern Architecture (CIAM) member Costa treated the ordinary city as the transitory, fugitive, contin- gent half of modernity, while the monumental sector, the sunken highway, and the central void pointed to the eternal and immovable other half, the world of unchanging forms valid for all time’® — arguably the abstract world of architectural types and archetypes, such as crossroads and nodes, or squares open on one side, not their concrete instances.  The bus station at that central void did not mirror the airport of Le Corbusier's Contemporary City (1922), an offspring by subtraction of the train station-cum- airport by Sant’Elia (1914), in turn an offspring by the addition of the nine- teenth-century train terminal. Although all could be described as transportation nodes at a central crossroads, the Brasilia bus station was earthbound like older train terminals and more plausible if less glamorous than the airports. Like the Square of the Three Powers and the Esplanade of Ministries, it shows how double-edged referencing can be. As long as the reiteration involved is partial, it announces change as well as continuity, criticism as well as endorsement, maybe improvement, maybe adaptation. It places even the recent past at a distance. The same applies when referencing is multiple and combines manifold sources, 
typological variation giving way to compositional development within the modern architectural tradition of urban planning. Stressing evolution, Costa reasserted the vitality of that tradition under attack by a younger generation since CIAM 8 at Aix- la-Provence (1953).""  The scale was unprecedented, but Costa’s monumental axis reflected an early and longstanding concern with spaces of public assembly shared by Niemeyer and other Brazilian architects, as the University of Brazil project shows. Their port- folio included settings for human association of varying size and character. For Costa, the core of a modern capital city required spaces and structures belonging to three scales: the monumental, the gregarious, and the bucolic. He contrasted the formal grandeur of the civic sector and the green expansiveness around the sports facilities with the intricacy of the intermediary entertainment center, envisioned as a mix of Piccadilly Circus, Times Square, the Champs Elysées, Carioca travessas, Venetian calli, and arcaded streets. Liveliness around the clock would follow from the juxtaposition of areas for different, complementary uses instead of fine-grain, mixed-use patterns. The concentration of hotels bordering the shopping areas and the entertainment center added a residential component to the city center. An ele- vated walkway with restaurants and services crossing each row of ministries added vertical layering to the juxtaposition of with different activities. Shopping areas included offices in the upper floors. The expanded bases of office buildings included shops and services.  No permanent dwellings showed in the business districts of Costa’s ordinary city, so it might be said that it combined the Linear City with CIAM’s Functional City-in-the-park. Brasilia was a green, car-oriented capital with a government, cul- ture, and entertainment core adjoined by business, administration, shopping, and temporary housing, in turn extended by the residential wings, plus special sectors for warehouses, workshops, barracks, and so on. Zoning sensibly recognized the pressures toward both mixing and separating uses in the city, along with the advan- tages of typological specialization regarding speed of implementation. Costa’s design criticized the existing Brazilian city, subject to a process of uncoordinated vertical and horizontal expansion within narrow plots and street networks. At the same time, it rationalized the Rio de Janeiro situation. The distinction between the core and the residential areas was becoming sharper in the old capital. Few people still lived downtown, and the best residential areas succeeded each other along the sea, apartment buildings being the prevalent housing type.  Costa’s residential city was made up of superquadras, 240 x 240 meter superb- locks in single or double rows, with four superblocks corresponding to a neighbor- hood unit. Each superblock, surrounded by a 20 meter-wide, tree-lined walk, hada single entry point for vehicles. Inside, vehicular and pedestrian traffic were segre- gated through design. A dozen 80 meter-long slab buildings with six floors of apart- ments and a ground floor pilotis accommodated 2,500 people. Internal facilities comprised a primary school and a convenience newsstand store. Distribution of population by income could be done by assigning greater value to certain groups  
of superblocks — such as the single row alongside the embassies or those closest to downtown — and then offering apartments of varying size, layout, materials, and finishes. Whatever the case, the land between buildings remained in public own- ership. The interquadras, 80 meter-wide strips between superblocks, alternately accommodated one- to two-story shops and neighborhood facilities (secondary school, community center, movie theater, and church) at walking distance from the adjoining superblocks; in the second row, shops succeeding neighborhood facil- ities, and vice-versa, furthered alternation and added diversity.  Endowed with both local and citywide accessibility, these strips retained a degree of independence in terms of change over time. It was another instance of juxtaposing uses — dwelling, shopping, or services — amounting to a coarse, mixed-use pattern. Concurrently, Costa provided opportunities for projects of a gregarious or bucolic character along with projects that might be monumental in terms of form but low-key in terms of size, such as the interquadra church. Some traditional attributes of the street-corridor were retained on occasion. Acting alone or together, topography, landscaping, and the block-like length of certain structures with arcades could insinuate enclosure, continuity, and alignment, as in the high- way-residential axis, the entertainment center, the local shopping areas, or the walks surrounding superblocks.  Inauguration  The jury praised Costa’s design, but had some reservations. There was too much indeterminate land between the platform and the lake, the airport was too close, there was no single-family housing along the lake as there should have been, and the regional road pattern was not shown, especially in relation to eventual satellite cities. As a result, the whole city was moved toward the lake. A band of row houses was added to the west for NOVACAP lower-rank employees, the service road along the outer row of superblocks became a commercial thoroughfare, and a row of superblocks was added to the east, originally for cheaper three-story high apartment buildings with no ground floor pilotis. The eastern bank of the lake was subdivided into large lots for upscale single-family houses. The entertainment cen- ter bridging the business districts gave way to a pair of shopping centers. The ordi- nary city thickened and got a sharper curvature; the width of the highway residential axis was reduced.  Niemeyer then widened the monumental axis, adding to Costa’s rhetoric the representation of the capitol as balance. Instead of a single dome signaling the National Congress, as suggested by Costa, a dome for the Senate and a bowl for the Chamber of Deputies evidenced the duality of the Congress; twin office towers acted as a pivot. Customary elements of monumental architecture distin- guished his palaces: domes as much as colonnades, arcades, symmetries, sweeping prospects, elaborate landscaping and works of art, marbles, mirrors. More often 
than not, their unconventional aspect implied change as well as continuity. Pecu- liarly shaped peristyles contributed to the lightness and transparency of the palaces against the enclosure provided by the hills surrounding the city and the ever-pres- ent, ever-moving clouds.’* As Norma Evenson remarked, “they did not convey a secure sense of possessing the land” but awareness of the ephemeral, “a melan- choly and sophisticated perception of how tenuous is man’s grasp of earth and how transient are his works.”’? Abhorring grandiloquence as much as Costa, Niemeyer invented a wholly memorable, thoroughly modern, anti-monumental monumentality.  The esoteric typological variation was not missing. Costa and Niemeyer had shown explicit interest in drawing a modern parallel to the classical orders. Costa contrasted the Doric severity of the Ministry of Education with the Ionian elegance of the Brazilian Pavilion at the New York World’s Fair of 1939.'* Niemeyer evoked Corinthian luxury at the Pampulha Casino and took archaizing to another level with the Ibirapuera Park pavilions’ tree-like columns. Stamo Papadaki had good reason to compare the Alvorada external columns to caryatids: bulging, bellied, folding, static figures contrasting with their counterparts at the Palacio do Planalto, the presidential workplace, and the Supreme Court.’? The Alvorada external col- umns develop both sculpturally and lengthwise in a matronly way, as befits the conventions of domesticity. The Planalto and Supreme Court external columns develop crosswise and almost flat, recalling a plate cut along two opposed arcs. All of them are colossal and barely touch the ground, but the Planalto and Supreme Court columns are lean and taut like a Minoan dancer, graceful Atlantes working hard. The Planalto collonades define ground floor galleries with a virtual vaulted ceiling, reinforcing the reference to government palaces facing a square, like Palladio’s Basilica in Vicenza. The colonnades at the Supreme Court mask an under- ground basement, and evoke Laugier’s primitive hut, archetype of the temple. The executive branch has bourgeois republican overtones; at the legislative branch, law is seen to be rooted in nature and, maybe, religion. Neoclassical Brazilian plantation houses with freestanding chapels inform the Alvorada composition.  Binary oppositions and similarities highlight the programmatic complementari- ness of the Alvorada and the Planalto, as well as the situational complementariness of the Planalto and the Supreme Court. The suppression of the intermediate sector of the frontal longitudinal colonnade, almost surreally, signals the entrance at the Planalto and the Alvorada; it contrasts with the plain Supreme Court entrance on the frontal short side devoid of intermediate columns, contributing to lightness and recalling the porosity of earlier Brazilian modern masterpieces. Projecting entrance ramps strengthen the institutional character of the Planalto and the Supreme Court, while no obstacle interferes with the gaze at the residential Alvor- ada. The gendered connotations of protuberances and cavities combine with those of columnar rotundity and sharpness, as well as those of standing up and lying down; at the National Congress, the phallic overtones of the twin towers contrast with the feminine aura of the two domes, the depression in front of the access and 
the horizontal spread of the roof-terrace. Costa emphasized the expression of foun- dation. Fecundation — and fecundity — was Niemeyer’s forte since Pampulha.’°  Binary oppositions and similarities reappear at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Justice, squarish two-story buildings surrounded by reflecting pools. The former displays round sculptural arcades in all sides, recalling the old neoclas- sical Foreign Office in Rio. The latter displays flat round arcades in a Romanesque spirit at the front and rear, contrasting with irregularly spaced pillars in the side ele- vations, a muscular version of the Corbusian ondulatoires. Here, water falls noisily from giant gargoyles; there, the upper floor verandah does not disturb the prevail- ing serenity. Gendered connotations return as harsh law and suave diplomacy face and complement each other. Double coding gains a twist, as the easy appreciation of one building gives the clues for understanding its esoteric counterpart.  The same applies in a more complex way to the cathedral and the National Theater. Built with exo-skeletons, endowed respectively with a receptive and a protruding ramp, both display the frame of a tent on a cave-like basement. The sanctuary is a circular hyperboloid rising on a platform shared with the egg-shaped, womb-like baptistery and menorah-like bell tower. The compact, angular theater presses down, a truncated pyramid on a grassy sloping ground. Glazed surfaces extend between the curved and sculptural ribs of the sanctuary and the plain oblique ribs in the short sides of the theater, over the foyers. The affinity between religious ritual and stage performance validate the insinuation of a Theater of Faith and a Temple of Spectacle, both exemplifying elaborate compositional development.  Believers enter after going down a ramp and wandering through spaces remi- niscent of catacombs. They may not know that in the Treasury of Atreus an exposed entry ramp leads to an underground parabolic dome, the largest space without supports before the Pantheon, or that the additive composition points to the Campo Santo in Pisa, and the sanctuary counterpoints Le Corbusier's assem- bly hall in Chandigarh. ’” Yet, going from darkness to light, they would remember the Passion, death, and resurrection of Christ as well as the Roman and Jewish ori- gins of their faith, hopefully recognizing the Church’s claim to be His bride and the mother of the Catholic Apostolic Christendom, as well as the Mycenaean origins of monumental domed architecture. Spectators must also go down to reach their seat at one of the two auditoria flanking the same scenic box. They may not know that Niemeyer bowed to Mies’ Mannheim project,’* or that he hid the fly-tower to fash- ion a modern mastaba, the house for the dead that replicated the house of the living in ancient Egypt. Yet going from light to darkness they would remember the Greek origins of the fan-shaped auditoria, ifnot the Dyonisian cult at the root of the scenic art or the Egyptian origins of monumental trabeated architecture.  Like Costa’s pilot plan, Niemeyer’s palaces contributed to the longstanding debate about democratic monumentality, now unfolding in the Cold War con- text. Their peristyles and exoskeletons reasserted the vitality of the modern tra- dition. Subtler in the expression of tectonics than the Glass House, the Crown 
Hall, and the American Embassy in India, or the Lincoln Center and the National Gallery in Berlin, they frankly disclosed Niemeyer’s rejection of Chandigarh’s brutalism. They had modest company too, in Niemeyer’s tent-like Nossa Senhora de Fatima Chapel gracing SQS 308, Costa’s model superquadra, complete with progressive Park School.  Reappraisal  The monumental sector was completed according to the inauguration plan by 1970, along with the cathedral, the theater and a tourist information center adjoin- ing the bus station. Criticism had started even before the inauguration in 1960. Peo- ple like Zevi said that democracy had no use for monumentality.'” Others thought that Brasilia lacked solemnity and paled in comparison to Chandigarh; it was not monumental enough.” Then came the criticism of zoning, comprehensive pla- nning, and the functionalist ideology behind them, followed by the criticism of modernism and its architectural and urban typologies. Order, progress, and pla- nning themselves became suspect. Small was beautiful, and spontaneity idolized to the left and to the right. The spaces and structures of green, car-oriented, bureau- cratic Brasilia appeared too vast, too restrictive, wasteful, improvident, perverse, and inhuman. Brasilia was increasingly seen as the late manifestation of a demo- cratic utopia that turned out to be simple-minded, elitist, and authoritarian — and exclusionary too, unable or unwilling to fight the spread of satellite cities and favelas housing the poor. The fact that the country had been taken over by a military dictatorship did not help. Well-meaning First World intellectuals were quick to malign the efforts of “underdeveloped colonials,” and the symbolic coup hurt. Brazil was no longer pioneering and daring; it had reverted to being retarded and peripheral.”' It was no comfort to realize that Brasilia was being made the scapegoat for the perceived sins of the car-oriented American city of the 1950s while the virtues of the rail-oriented European city of the 1850s, so maligned during the 1920s and 1930s, were being reappraised.  All the same, Kubitschek’s decision to build Brasilia’s key infrastructure from the outset had been sound, because it made the city irreversible. Brasilia did not cease to grow, even if this was disorderly, and “new town blues” gave way to consider- able contentment with the quality of life in the pilot plan; many satellite cities became enriched, diversifying their population composition and diminishing their dependency on government jobs. Brazil became democratic again in the late 1980s, and prospered. Modern architecture was rehabilitated. As of 2013 the federal dis- trict population is 2.5 million, of which 380,000 live in the pilot plan area. It is the country’s fourth largest metropolitan area. Although social inequality still ranks high, income per capita is highest of all Brazilian cities.” The march toward the west was rather successful. The vitality of the pilot plan shows in the number of cars using the city’s roads and parking areas. The city was not made for either  
the tourist or Baudelaire’s flaneur. Yet, contrary to expectations, the vitality of the pilot plan also shows in the number of people walking its central areas and residen- tial wings. So the demonization of Brasilia seems to be coming to an end and a less sectarian reappraisal is under way.  Oddly enough, from the architect’s standpoint, it is the lack and not the excess of planning that appears most problematic. Uncoordinated public and private planning decisions regarding the federal district contributed to the prevention of adequate evaluation of their systemic implications, such as the increase in public transportation costs brought about by excessive distances between settlements in the metropolitan region. In that sense, the pilot plan was being undermined from without, even before its inauguration. Erosion from within is more recent and insidious. Occupation of its sectors is now intensive, and the new visual density is not unlike any other Brazilian city. The exceptionality of the monumental sector has been reinforced. By and large, the general formal characteristics that Costa pro- posed for each sector have been respected. Unlike any other Brazilian city, there is no single-family house cheek by jowl with a high-rise building. Arguably, this for- mal order is more important than what goes on within the buildings, as the same typology may shelter different functions. Given this relative autonomy, zoning can be considered more a legal than a design issue, and its specifications far from irreversible. After all, simplicity precedes complexity. Incidentally, many people, including Europeans, do like the separation of dwelling from workplace, and it does not offend reason to prioritize motorized movement in the main circulation network ofa city, buses and taxis included. However, emptiness within sectors was replaced by confusion. The distribution of buildings and open spaces feels arbitrary or random, and is not redeemed by the open ground floor, as in the superblocks. The basic but efficient logic of the street-corridor is missing, and there is no alter- nate order on view.  It is a design challenge, and an opportunity to turn clay into marble, as Augustus did with Rome. But then, Venetians took 300 years to complete Piazza San Marco. By that yardstick, Brasilia has not even reached adolescence, and the present situ- ation is far from hopeless.  Notes  * Arquivo Publiuco do Distito Federal - ArPDF.  1. José de Oliveira Reis was the director of Rio’s Departamento de Urbanismo. Penna Firme was the architect of Agulhas Negras Military Academy (1938-44). Lacombe was the architect of the Brazilian Pavilion at the Exposition of the Portuguese World, Lisbon 1940.  2. The Vera Cruz plan was published in José Pessoa Cavalcanti de Albuquerque, Nova met- ropole do Brasil: relatorio geral de sua localizagdo, (Rio de Janeiro: Imprensa do Exército, 1958), 364-5. 
ENDLESS HOUSE  Friedrich Kiesler  William W. Braham  Friedrich Kiesler, Endless House, 1959. Credit: Irving Penn. Reproduced by permission of Condé Nast and the Austrian Friedrich and Lillian Kiesler Private Foundation.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
As Frederick (born Friedrich) Kiesler (1890-1965) explained, “it is called the end- less house because all the areas can be opened up into one continuous flow of space, but they can also be separated for privacy and seclusion.”’ In specific terms, the endless house is a building Kiesler designed in the late 1950s, which had been commissioned by Arthur Drexler, Director of the Department of Archi- tecture and Design at the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA), for construction in the museum’s garden. It consists of four interpenetrating ovoid volumes that sit on somewhat awkward hollow piers, which in the best photographs are con- cealed in shadow, allowing the organic forms to float freely in space. More gen- erally, the endless house was a concept that Kiesler began exploring in the late 1940s, published initially as a single ellipsoid in 1950, and then elaborated in a variety of forms, for a variety of clients, galleries, and exhibitions, until his death in 1965. He ultimately claimed that the “endless” was his one “basic creative idea,” which he had first conceived in the early 1920s and explored for more than 40 years.  A full-sized endless house was never built in the MoMA garden, or anywhere else, though a large, 8 foot model of concrete on a wire-mesh frame was prepared for MoMA’s “Visionary Architecture” exhibition in 1960, which featured more than 30 projects “considered too revolutionary to build.”” Philip Johnson called Kiesler, “the best-known non-building architect of our time,” and through this period, one prospective client after another declined to actually build an endless house.’ Nev- ertheless, the project received a decade of commentary and discussion, even includ- ing a CBS television special in 1960, after which Ada Louise Huxtable, the architecture critic of the New York Times, observed that Kiesler’s “theory has become an almost legendary canon of progressive thought among professionals.”* The particular appeal of the endless house was its radical formal difference from the high-modernist buildings of the postwar period, combined with Kiesler’s sophisti- cated architectural theories, and his decades of careful positioning with the avant-garde.  Kiesler’s endless house project stands as a precursor, if not a progenitor, of the biomorphic buildings of the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries, and o: the successes and challenges they have encountered. It also exemplifies the full emergence of what Detlef Mertins called the “architecture industry,” the paralle world of architectural manifestos, publications, galleries, and exhibitions that mir- ror the social and economic arrangements of the artistic avant-garde. Kiesler’s career was almost entirely conducted within that economy — only a few buildings were ever completed — but it allowed him to explore and refine his theories o space, continuity, correalism, biotechnique, universality, and even health, which sought to capture the living “nucleus of the ‘dwelling universe’: the nervous system of the house.”* The inability of the different manifestations of the “endless” to fulfil the promise of these theories exemplifies the dilemma of any project that offers endless transformation and adaptation with a specific, fixed form. Kiesler seems  
to have recognized the dilemma himself, and shortly after the successes of the end- less house began to advocate a fully “process architecture”:  If we could convert our static functions of design into design-flows of life forces and thus replace defunct functional architecture with: Process Aychitecture we will have done our share as social beings and conceded our conceit as pseudo functionalists.°  Always Avant-Garde  By all accounts, Kiesler was charming, persuasive, and talented. Like other early architectural émigrés — Richard Neutra, Richard Schindler, and William Lescaze — he traveled to America in the 1920s, in his case from Austria, carrying the messages of the European avant-garde. He never ceased joining groups and adapting to new movements, shuttling between architecture and the fine arts, and working concur- rently in product, furniture, display, and theatrical design. He was the youngest member of De Stijl, helped found the American Union of Decorative Artists and Craftsmen, joined Buckminster Fuller’s Structural Studies Associates, the the- ater faculty at Julliard, and formed the Laboratory of Design Correlation at Colum- bia University. Through his friendship with Marcel Duchamp and the exiled Parisian art community, he became the “official” architect of the surrealists and was commissioned by Peggy Guggenheim to design the Art of the Century gallery. He frequented the Cedar Tavern in Greenwich Village, befriending de Kooning and the New York School of artists, just as the center of the art world was shifting from Paris to New York, and even helped a young Andy Warhol get his start. Kiesler counted himself as belonging to the third generation of Viennese modern architects: “[Otto] Wagner (1841-1918) was the first generation. Then came Adolf Loos (1870-1933) and Josef Hoffmann (1870-1956). I was the third generation. And  there is a fourth generation continuing.”” He had been born in Czernowitz, now  part of the Ukraine, and studied painting and printmaking in Vienna just before the First World War in the final years of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. He is reported to have worked briefly for Adolf Loos, but found his place in the avant-garde through theatrical design. He was inducted into De Stijl in 1923, when Theo van Doesburg saw his “electro-mechanical” staging for Karel Carpek’s play, “R. U.R.,” in Berlin. In 1924 he prepared an “International Exhibition of New Theater Techniques” for the Music and Theater Festival of Vienna, using an explicitly De Stijllike “L + T” mounting arrangement, which firmly established him within the group. The exhibition also featured his Space Stage, an elevated circular stage, sur- rounded by two interlocking circular ramps, which he subsequently developed into an ellipsoidal configuration that he called the “endless theater” and later cited as the beginning of his obsession. 
In 1925 he was invited by Josef Hoffman to prepare a theater display for the Aus- trian section of the Exposition Internationale des Arts Décoratifs et Industriels Modernes in Paris. He configured the exhibition design as a utopian “City in Space,” using the characteristic elements and colors of De-Stijl in a massive con- struction suspended from the ceiling. Le Corbusier (whose |’Esprit Nouveau pavil- ion was also in the exposition) asked, “Do you intend to hang the houses from Zeppelins?” to which Kiesler replied enigmatically, “by suspension in tension,” and his manifesto detailed the utopian principles that prefigured many of the ambi- tions of the endless house:*  Transformation of the surrounding area of space into cities.  Liberation from the ground, abolition of the static axis.  No walls, no foundations.  A system of spans (tension) in free SPACE  Creation of new kinds of living, and, through them, the demands which will remold society.”  VR ON  It was the success of the theater exposition that brought Kiesler to the United States in 1926, specifically to mount a version of the show under the sponsorship of Jane Heap, editor of the Little Review. But despite the acclaim with which he had arrived, he struggled for professional success in New York for more than 20 years, until the postwar period, when his ideas for the endless house began to attract attention. Though he prepared many design proposals, the one building of signif- icance that he completed in that period was the Film Guild Cinema of 1928, whose facade followed De Stijl compositional principles, though the theater itself was a dramatically spare, rectilinear “megaphone,” focused on a transformable “screen-o-scope.”'°  To make ends meet, he began designing display windows for Saks Fifth Ave- nue, leading to a fascinating book, Contemporary Art Applied to the Store and Its Dis- play, as well as a variety of events, including the exposition of the American Union of Decorative Artists and Craftsmen in 1930, which featured an elegant Flying Desk, illustrating his continued fascination with liberation from the ground.” Though his projects in this period included designs for a Performing Arts Center for Brooklyn Heights, and The Universal, a winning entry for a theater competi- tion for Woodstock, New York, he only returned to stage design in 1933 with his appointment as scenic designer for the opera department at Julliard, a position he held until 1957.  Ultimately it was through his publication in architectural journals through the 1930s and 1940s that Kiesler established his own identify as an architect, distinct from De Stijl. Beginning with his explanation of the “Space House” exhibition in 1934, then his “Design Correlation” series of 1937, and his most challenging piece, “On Correalism and Biotechnique” of 1939, Kiesler’s articles in the Architec- tural Record were a polemical combination of his developing theory of “correality” 
and his fascination with “continuous construction.”’” Kiesler’s theory of technol- ogy, and the evolution of tools, was clearly influenced by his experience with Buck- minster Fuller and the Structural Studies Associates (SSA), a group Fuller founded in 1932 to provide an architectural response to the Committee on Technocracy and which briefly transformed the staid T-Square Journal into Shelter, one of the most radical journals of the era.’* In 1940, Kiesler even presented a resolution, “Archi- tecture as Biotechnique,” at the Ann Arbor Design Conference, which was “unan- imously endorsed by the participants, including Walter Gropius, Frank Lloyd Wright, and Eero Saarinen.” *  Through the 1940s he worked more closely with the surrealists, especially Duch- amp and Max Ernst. Starting with the Art of this Century gallery in 1942, he designed a number of surrealist exhibitions in Paris and New York, published pieces in VVV Almanac, the surrealist journal, and even participated in Duchamp’s “Imagery of Chess” event at the Levy Gallery in 1945.’* In 1949 Kiesler published a translation and expansion of the Record article on Correalism in L’Architecture d’au- jourdhui; subtitled “Les Etats unis de l'art plastique,” which collaged fragments of the 1939 article with his sculptures and surrealist gallery designs of the intervening decade. At some point in this period, he began exploring the “endless” more directly, mentioning it in the VVV article and preparing sketches titled “Paris End- less” while he was designing the Salle de Superstition at the Gallerie Maeght in 1947.  The first public appearance of an endless house was in an exhibition, “The Muralist and the Modern Architect,” at the Koontz Gallery in 1950, which was con- ceived to feature collaborations between artists and architects. Invited by the sculp- tor, David Hare, who had contributed a sculpture to the exhibition at Gallerie Maeght, Kiesler prepared a small, ellipsoid model “about a foot long, and eight or nine inches wide and seven or eight inches high,” for which Hare designed a stair/pedestal.'® Philip Johnson immediately acquired Kiesler’s model for the MoMA collection, and Arthur Drexler, then the editor of Interiors magazine, wrote a long article on the project and its “psychological lighting,” which led to the com- mission for the MoMA garden a few years later.’”  This abbreviated biography makes visible the degree to which Kiesler’s career, and the endless house itself, were made possible by the social and economic arrangements of the architectural (and artistic) avant-garde. Very much like the growth and commercialization of the art world through the nineteenth and twen- tieth centuries, the mutually supporting and evolving interests of architectural jour- nals, museums, galleries, and schools supported a world of activities increasingly independent from the immediate service industry of architectural design and con- struction. Architects have competed for the patronage of clients since Vitruvius crafted his treatise for the emperor Augustus, but the steadily increasing numbers of architects, building projects, and building types only intensified the competition. The growing wealth and population of industrialized countries and the further spe- cialization of the professions involved in design and construction provided the 
grounds for the emergence of an almost autonomous system of evaluating and ranking designers and their ideas.  It has become common in recent years to complain about the positioning of “starchitects,” but in a period of dramatic economic growth, with an abundance of construction, the sorting mechanisms and status of the “A-list” takes on real value. It is a thoroughly rational form of ranking and stratification, with archi- tects ascending through the stages from local, to national, to international acclaim, and also serves as a sorting process for ideas and priorities within disciplines.  In the competition within (and among) European capitals through the nine- teenth century, the early forms of the process were bound up with university pro- fessorships and institutional exhibitions, often state sponsored, and they provided both a stamp of authority and access to commissions. Rebellions such as the staging of the Salon des Refusés in 1863 or against Viollet le Duc’s teaching at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in 1864 (both of which occurred just as the population of Paris reached two million) signal the existence of a sufficient population of artists, architects, stu- dents, professors, galleries, and commentators to form opposing groups, and a pub- lic with enough leisure to care.  The original patrimony described by Kiesler — Wagner, Hoffman, Loos — also involved the emergence ofa distinct class of artists and architects, vying for position and recognition in Vienna at the turn of the century. Kiesler even drew a diagram of the Karlsplatz to explain the ferment of the time and compared it to exchanges in the Cedar Tavern of the New York School.’* It was these worlds of ideas and debate that Kiesler loved, and it helps explain his movement from De Stijl to the SSA, AUDAC, the surrealists, and the New York School, allowing him to stay always avant-garde, contributing new ideas to the discipline rather than serving clients. Arthur Drexler may have described it most cogently in the press release for the “Visionary Architecture” exhibition:  Architecture too has an existence prior to its becoming real, and there is a second history of architecture that parallels the real one. It is the history of an architecture unhampered by technical details and uncompromised by the whims of patrons, or the exigencies of finance, politics, and custom.  The true visionary project usually combines a criticism of society with a strong per- sonal preference for certain forms. In the past such projects were unbuildable for one or both of two reasons: they may have been technically impossible to execute at the time they were designed; or society could find neither the justification nor the money for their construction. Today virtually nothing an architect can think of is technically  impossible to realize. Social usage, which includes economics, determines what is visionary and what is not.’”  Kiesler’s restless navigation of the avant-garde provided him with the support to develop his ideas of the endless, but he was also acutely aware of the distortions of 
that cultural echo-chamber, and with each transformation in his affiliation — from De Stijl to SSA to Surrealist — he sought his own, more fundamental insight. His criticisms of functionalism and the International Style could as easily be applied to his own early work and must have driven him on his search: “Modern functional- ism in architecture has its roots far more in contemporary abstract painting than in the ‘functionalism of living.’””°  Stages for Living  Kiesler provided so many explanations, justifications, and illustrations for the end- less house, and its underlying theories of correalism, biotechnique, and continuous construction, that it can be difficult to discern his intentions. In 1961, he even linked it to the space age — “let’s be honest; the satellites, the rockets, the flying dogs and monkeys have taken us by surprise, and now everyone is concerned with continu- ity” — which perplexed the interviewer who recorded the observation and who had initially thought the “endless” was part of the “New Sensualism.””’ But for all the twists and turns, for all his adaptations to the fashionable forms or topics of the moment, he had a fundamental insight at some point early in his career and wrestled with its architectural consequences ever after.  It is not accidental that the first example of an “endless” construction, the ellipsoi- dal endless theater of 1926, was configured to house a continuous and adaptable arrangement of staging without a stage. Kiesler was a man of the theater first, and his deepest insight was that architecture provides a kind of stage for living, for accommodating the entrances and exits of its players and the changes in scenery, lighting, and mood that they require.” That view certainly fits comfortably in the Viennese architectural milieu from which Kiesler emerged, particularly within the many interpretations of Gottfried Semper’s principle of Bekleidung, or dressing, developed in his culminating work, Der Stil (1860), and which even inspired the nam- ing of De Stijl. Semper’s frank embrace of artifice and his careful analysis of technique set the terms of debate for the generations that followed — Wagner, Loos, Hoffman, Riegl, Fiedler, even Schmarsow — and helps explain the roots of Kiesler’s dilemma:”  I think that dressing and the mask are as old as human civilization, and the joy in both is identical with the joy in those things that drove men to be sculptors, painters, archi- tects, poets, musicians, dramatists, in short, artists. Every artistic creation, every artis-  tic pleasure presupposes a certain carnival spirit, or to express myself in a modern way — the haze of carnival candles is the true atmosphere of art.”  From the Endless Theater, to the Space House, to “Correalism and Biotechnique,” to the Salle de Superstition, Kiesler sought to understand fully the complex “functionalism of living” and to imagine an architecture adequate to its mystery and vitality.  
His first sustained effort was the Space House of 1933, which was the center- piece of a furniture exhibition assembled in the Modernage showroom in New York. He described it as a “proportional substitute” for a single-family house on four connected levels with movable and flexible partitions. Architectural Record published it in a continuous 18-page photographic spread of which only the first three or four images actually disclose any spatial features. There are no plans or diagrams, and while the first pages include a few establishing shots, the compo- sition of the last 12 pages follows a precise format that pairs portrait and detail photographs of the materials. The role of each material detail is also subtly explained by the insertion of a hand, the toe of a shoe, a product label, or a silhouette of scissors.  The final image of the Space House article shows a ferninine hand presenting a twine curtain with a knot held between the thumb and forefinger, the knot used to make the house’s fishnet curtains. It is an ancient knot, known as both the fisher- man’s and the weaver’s knot, which does not easily unravel and in a network allows for ready splicing and repair. Semper cited precisely this knot in Der Stil as the “old- est technical symbol” and illustrated it twice in a similar fashion. He explained the knotted network first as a principle of construction, then as a decorative tradition in fabric and, most importantly, as it was translated into tectonic materials, “dressing” the surface of walls.”” The knot is part of his extended demonstration that textiles and architecture arose together from the principle of Bekleidung; what first appears as a textile enclosure later becomes a mask concealing and representing the mys- teries of architecture.  In a subsequent article on the Space House in Hound and Horn, Kiesler outlined the theory of the house using the stilted language of the SSA into which he had recently been inducted: “The Space-House at Modernage represents two modern architectural principles, besides its solution as a One-Family-Shelter: (a) the Time- Space-Concept of architecture; (b) the Shell-Construction in continuous ten- sion.””° The complex arrangement of rooms, levels, and spaces has a filial relation to the Raumplan of Loos; it also established the need for the fabric curtains and flexible partitions to accommodate the changing needs of the (imagined) occu- pants. Kiesler opposed this time-space-concept to the “esthetic or techno-func- tional” approach of “Le Corbusier, Mies, Oud, and others,” referring obliquely to the International Style show then on tour, and claimed for his work a “unified architectural dogma.”  The “dogma” was evidently in transition from “time-space” to “correlation,” a term developed within the SSA and used prominently by Buckminster Fuller in Shelter (1932). The altered spelling of Kiesler’s neologism, “correalism,” signals a further transformation from co-relation to co-reality, which he claimed as his own. Fuller and the SSA used the term quite variously to describe mutual relations between events or conditions, but Kiesler put it in designer’s terms: “A bench is restful, a rocking chair is more, but correlated to a desk, a straight chair is better.”””  
Correalism  “On Correalism and Biotechnique” of 1939 was the mature explanation of Kiesler’s theory: “the term ‘Correalism’ expresses the dynamics of continual interaction between man and his natural and technological environments.””* This definition drew on the evolutionary view of tools and society developed by the sociolo- gist/planner Patrick Geddes and applied by Lewis Mumford in Technics and Civi- lization of 1934. Aspects of Kiesler’s previous work, particularly the “Morphology- Chart of Architecture” from the Hound and Horn article, show a kinship with the gridded “thinking machines” prepared by Geddes. With Kiesler’s talent for graphic means, the charts and diagrams in “On Correalism” achieve a particular elegance. He summarized the three relationships of correality in a tripartite diagram illustrat- ing the co-evolution of nature, technology, and society, with man at the center. He subsumed tools and machines under the concept of the technological environment (from “shirts to shelter”) and traced the stages of transformation. Dismissing the idea that technology is simply produced by scientific advance, he observed, instead, that “the technological environment is produced by human needs,” which led him to a critical set of questions about functional design:  What is a need? How do needs arise? Are they natural or artificial? Are they static or in evolution? A definition of needs has today become of prime importance to the designer of technological environment. Investigations on this crucial point cannot be based upon the study of architecture but must be based on upon the study of man.”  Shifting the focus onto man and his needs led to the key insight of On Correal- ism: “Needs are not static: they evolve.” Only a few of these needs are “natural” — hunger, thirst, and so on — and even these are culturally conditioned. The needs by which most technologies are shaped have progressed step-by-step with the devices meant to accommodate their demands. The aspirations or even luxuries of one generation become the needs of the next and so drive the progressive advance of innovation and of fashion. This well exceeds the structural argument of conti- nuity, pointing to the “endless” construction of human identity and its mirroring in architectural constructions.  The mechanistic logic of functionalism rests on the identification of stable needs that can be satisfied by design. The emerging paradigm of the 1930s drew on the formulations of ecology in the late nineteenth century and developed in the full flowering of systems-theory in the mid-twentieth. The reach of the paradigm into which Kiesler’s theory fits was described by Mumford in Technics and Civilization:  The humane arts of the physician and the psychologist and the architect, the hygien- ist and the community planner, have begun during the last few decades to displace 
the mechanical arts from their hitherto central position in our economy and our life. Form, pattern, configuration, organism, historical filiation, ecological relationship are concepts that work up and down the ladder of the sciences: the esthetic structure and the social relations are as real as the primary physical qualities and the sciences were once content to isolate. This conceptual change, then, is a widespread movement that is going on in every part of society: in part it arises out of the general resurgence of life — the care of children, the culture of sex, the return to wild nature and the renewed worship of the sun — and in turn it gives intellectual re-enforcement to these spontaneous movements and activities.*°  Ecology was initially formulated to account for the changes in the “environ- ment” that directed the incremental evolution of species, and those ideas had been extended to tools and technologies within the first years after Darwin’s Origin of Species was published. Kiesler’s ambition was to explain the genesis and evolution of buildings over time, and with his students in at Columbia, he designed and built an example that helps illustrate the process he imagined. They designed and built a “Mobile Home-Library” — a bookcase — not only based on a conventional analysis of ergonomics and material constraints, but also to accommodate anticipated changes in the capacity and usage of the library, and the progressive evolution of the media  of information storage. He claimed it as a “nucleus of possibilities which will be developed through coordination with other elements,” though the same could be said of any artifact.”’ The resulting bookcase was both banal and elegant, and illustrates Kiesler’s dilemma: designing discrete objects within a comprehen- sive theory of evolution and adaptation over generations. From the perspective of evolutionary theory, every object is just another experiment.  After his decade with the surrealists, Kiesler re-presented his theory of correalism in 1949, reviewing the stages of its development from Space House to Home-Library to the Salle de Superstition, and concluded with a restated Manifeste du Corréalisme:  When a constructed space is conceived as a unified ensemble, that is to say, as a con- tinuum of colors, forms, and mechanical structures, there must be an essential, inter- nal force that holds the structure together in a state of coordination. This force is the specific ideology and represents the atom of the field of architecture.”  Kiesler’s dilemma becomes visible when he argues that the smooth walls of the endless house represent that unified ensemble, that the continuity of surface or structure somehow translates to a state of continuous coordination with the forces that engender buildings. He restates his aspirations for “spherical space” and “houses without walls,” but concludes with a prediction of a kind of an autono- mous, architecture without architects”: “by itself, gradually and naturally, Folk- Architecture will develop ... For the nature of Folk-Architecture is found in its will- ingness to adapt to the circumstances of life, to the laws of society, and to assume responsibility for their creation as well as their transformation.” 
The endless house was both a simulation of that Folk-Architecture and an orig- inal, sculptural exploration by Kiesler, which prefigures both the formal qualities of the biomorphic buildings of recent years and the theories with which they are pre- sented. Although Greg Lynn, for example, questioned the rigor of Kiesler’s topo- logical techniques, it is hard not to see the connection of Kiesler’s “essential, internal force” and “unified ensemble” with the “abstract machine” and “assem- blage” of Deleuze that guided the experiments of the 1990s. And the dilemma has been nearly identical. As Michael Speaks asked in 1998, “when it becomes form, the audience asks, when it becomes architecture, does it remain dynamic?” Kies- ler’s answer, and Lynn’s as well, was to move more away from claims about a total architecture and to attend to the artistic qualities of the objects he had made, to retreat into the freedoms of the art-world.  Kiesler’s endless house stands as an important precursor of the digitally- enabled experiments with non-orthogonal form. And to give him his full credit, he even speculated about the possibility: “I cannot understand why ... none of the industries has closed a pact with IBM to produce machines for the planning and redesign of architecture.”** But even as he speculated about the variables that would have to be included, he returned to the biological inspiration that underwrites so much of twentieth century architectural thought, seeking to describe the “single germ cell which contained the whole.” It is the image of that single cell, full of abstract potentials and that owes “its origin to the erotic and creative instinct,” that might best explain the simple ellipsoids of the endless theater and first endless house. They are eggs, after all, and what could be more endless?  Notes  Reproduced by permission of Condé Nast and the Austrian Friedrich and Lillian Kiesler  Private foundation. Image credit: © Condé Nast, 1961.  1. Interview. Thomas P. Creighton, “Kiesler’s Pursuit of an Idea,” Progressive Architecture July 1961): 104-23.  2. Museum of Modern Art (MoMA), Visionary Architecture, Press Release no. 108 (1960).  3. Philip Johnson, “Three Architects,“ Art in America (Spring 1960).  4. Ada Louise Huxtable, “Architecture on TV: Greatest Non-Building Architect of our Time Expounds his Ideas,“ New York Times (March 27, 1960).  5. Frederick Kiesler, “Pseudo-Functionalism,” The Partisan Review 16 (July 1949): 733-42.  6. Friedrich Kiesler, Inside the Endless House: Art, People, and Architecture: A Journal (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1966), 383.  7. Creighton, “Kiesler’s Pursuit of an Idea,” 105.  8. Ibid, 123.  9. Friedrich Kiesler, “Manifest: Vitalbau, Raumstadt, Funktionnelle, Architektur,” De Stijl  6 (1925): 141-6. 
CHURCH OF CHRIST THE WORKER  Eladio Dieste  Stanford Anderson  Eladio Dieste, Church of Christ the Worker, interior, Atlantida, Uruguay, 1958-60.*  Eladio Dieste, Church of Christ the Worker, exterior, Atlantida, Uruguay, 1958-60.**  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt.  ee med ated oe Bt a dd pane Loo pd srry  
Overture  In a Uruguayan village inhabited by farmers and laborers one finds a singular church, traditional in its material but radical in form. This is not a story of enlight- ened patronage on the part of a community or a wealthy individual. It is the story of aremarkable engineer who, asked to make a modest work with his proven capacity in economical building, chose rather to challenge himself in realizing an unprece- dented work that would come to be recognized as an outstanding architec- tural work.  The Church of Christ the Worker in Atlantida, with its bold curving forms, stands proud in its featureless context, accompanied by its brick campanile. The energetic brick walls of the church embrace an open-air narthex or porch that gives access to a space, complexly configured, yet also providing direct, intimate relation between the parishioner and the sanctuary. Though there is no immediately evi- dent source of light, this is a luminous interior possessed of a radiance that elevates both the humble material of its construction and the sensibility of its viewers.  The visitor is readily drawn into the experiential wealth of this place. The designer of the church provides a vivid account of what supports this experience: “A lightness, a mysterious ease, a concise simplicity, something like dance without effort or fatigue,” are the words Eladio Dieste used to describe the goals for his work.’ Such were the necessary conditions, he argued, for a convinced acceptance of a building by its users.  Dieste wrote those words out of the specific concern that his work should com- municate with ordinary people. In the same essay, “Art, People, Technocracy,” he tells of his experience of a humble woman with coarse shoes covered in mud at the Church of Christ the Worker: “The itinerary that she followed, the places where she paused, the things that she said with complete simplicity and without acco- lades: these were the things that made me realize she was really seeing it.” Dieste assures us this was not a singular experience. He was certain that people are not moved when a difficulty is resolved by brute force. On the contrary, they want to perceive a problem resolved with the effortlessness of a hawk soaring in the sky ora flower unfolding in the sun. It is one thing to have such an ethereal ambition and quite another to realize it. Yet that is what Dieste achieved in his buildings. It is no accident that the phrase “light as a brick” was invented for his work.” The buildings of this master and innovator of reinforced brick construction address us so effortlessly, and yet forcefully, that a brief first exposure suffices to assure a deep engagement.  Eladio Dieste was born in 1917 in Artigas in northern Uruguay, near the border with Brazil. He was educated in structural engineering at the University of the Republic in the capital city of Montevideo, graduating in 1943. He lived and pre- dominantly built in his South American homeland, a small country of high educa- tional and cultural levels but not of generous resources. In 1956 Dieste joined with  
Eugenio Montaiiez, a fellow graduate of the university, in founding a practice, Dieste y Montafiez, which has continued since the death of the master in 2000.’  With the Church of Christ the Worker in Atlantida, 1958-60 early in his career, Dieste courageously disciplined himself, his client, and his collaborators to achieve a work that went far beyond its initial program and established Dieste as an architec- tural force. I see in a later church, San Pedro in the provincial town of Durazno, an intellectual as well as spiritual power, a refinement in both thought and execution, that make it, I argue, one of the major architectural achievements of the second half of the twentieth century.* Dieste recognized that he had achieved architectural works of excellence, even if he was loath to title himself an architect.  Dieste’s Reinforced Ceramic Vaults  Strong claims such as these raise questions about the what and how of Dieste’s achievements.  Dieste made himself a master of construction in reinforced ceramics, advancing that technology far beyond its primitive roots. It was virtually the only mode in which he built. The vast majority ofhis structures serve everyday purposes of work and storage. He invented two distinctive forms of reinforced brick vaulting that were instrumental in winning the economic competition to receive the commis- sions for such utilitarian structures. Serving pragmatic purposes and doing so eco- nomically, in terms of both time and cost, was the fundamental business model of the design/build engineering firm of Dieste y Montafiez. It is not despite these con- straints but largely because of them that Dieste’s buildings rise above their quotid- ian settings and achieve an ennobling architectural presence.  Of Dieste’s two major innovations in structural types in reinforced brick masonry, consider first what he termed “self-carrying vaults.” These are barrel vaults with none of the usual conditions of support for such a vault: no continuous side-wall supports or buttresses, no tympanum or arch under the vault at its ends. Dieste’s vaults rest on columns — or even a single column, as in the tour-de-force of the four-direction cantilever vault of the “Sea Gull” in Salto.  Less demonstrative but equally impressive are the true self-carrying vaults whose basic variants are well illustrated by the warehouses for Massaro Agroin- dustries, north of Montevideo. The main storage area is formed by a set of five parallel barrel vaults carried on a sparse grid of columns, with a cantilever of 54 feet at one end. Freely sliding under that cantilever are three still more astound- ing vaults with 43 foot cantilevers in both directions, carried on a single row of four columns.  Such minimal support is only possible if the vault, unlike traditional masonry vaults, can resist bending forces.’ This Dieste accomplished by introducing pre- stressing steel that pre-compresses the vault. In cross section, the vaults are given 
the most effective structural form — a catenary. This, together with ordinary rein- forcing bars between the rows of bricks, yields a thin and light vault. This lightness reduces the lateral forces but, of course, there are forces to be counteracted. Dieste’s characteristic elegant solution is a horizontal edge beam at the outer limit of any group of vaults — a beam that collects the lateral forces and brings them back to point supports. In the long direction of a barrel vault supported on columns, the vault acts as a beam. In these self-carrying vaults, the few and distant points of sup- port and the thin, unsupported ends of the vaults directly convey the seemingly effortless lightness of these constructions.  Dieste’s second major structural innovation was in what he termed “Gaus- sian” double-curvature vaults. Barrel vaults rise high in relation to their trans- verse span and thus are not well suited to broad spans. However, a thin vault of long span and low rise is susceptible to buckling and thus not sound structur- ally. Dieste would not give strength to such vaults by making them more mas- sive (a solution through brute force that he naturally resisted). He developed strength in the section through shape, through double curvature. There are the catenary curves of the transverse section of the vault, but also the S-shaped curves of varying amplitude in the longitudinal section of the covered space. Typically Dieste made these roofs with successive narrow vaults, with the S-curves of neighboring vaults varied so as to be discontinuous — and thus sources of light within the structure.°  The Church of Christ the Worker, Atlantida  It is Gaussian vaults that cover the space of the Atlantida church. However, here, in a church, Dieste sought not the equally distributed light of his utilitarian buildings, but a differentiated, controlled light. The S-curves of the longitudinal section of the vaults become a continuous sin-curve of generous amplitude at the centerline — thus strong and lightless. The S-curves diminish in both directions laterally, becom- ing flat as they come to rest on the level tops of the enclosing walls. The amply curved walls are generated by ruled surfaces — that is, every vertical section of the curved wall is a simple straight line, tilting successively at gradually changing angles. What is already implicit in this description nevertheless deserves emphasis: the curves of the walls and the curves of the vault meet in a level surface. Equally impressive: the low points of the S-curves yield a straight line at the level of the meeting of vault and wall — a limit of the transverse catenary curves. Aside from the geometrical elegance of this organization, it is also this that allowed Dieste to resolve, so elegantly, the lateral forces of the vault. The tie-rods that are usually necessary to counteract the lateral forces of a Gaussian vault, that are then a visual distraction below the masonry vault, a condition that Dieste himself deplored, can here be obscured with the tie-rod enclosed in the level bottom surface of the vault.  
The forces resisted by the tie-rods must be resolved in the strength of the wall. This Dieste achieves with flat edge beams at the top of the walls, themselves strength- ened by the curvature of the walls. If this lightly technical account of the structure of the church seems dry, it is nevertheless the direct exposition of this structure that provides the experientially rich immediate impressions one receives upon approaching the building. The tech- nically generated but enticing image of the church of Christ the Worker surely accounts for the fact that the appreciation of Dieste’s work long rested on this sin- gular work. Upon approaching the church, the strong impression of the curving walls is matched by the open-air projection of the vault, sliced at the line of its greatest amplitude. Walls and vault are statically balanced and self-sufficient; the recessed facade of the church is an infill structure, as is emphasized by the reciprocating curves and voids of the lower wall, and still more by the folded plates and the inde- pendence of the upper part of the facade from the enclosing structural walls. Entering the church, the visitor is already prepared for the drama of the walls and vaults.” The first impression is a still stronger one of the whole of the church space, the warm brick surfaces radiant — from unknown sources of light. Despite the dynamic forms, the space is simple. The space of the congregation and that of the clergy is intimate and with a minimal sense of hierarchy. There is a full satis- faction in the quality of a space that is rich both aesthetically and spiritually. Movement toward the altar reveals a significant, though not the most important, source of light. The vault in front of the altar is perforated to give a beam of light in the sanctuary. The terminating rear wall, with close-spaced bricks laid diagonally, yields a fabric-like surface suggesting its non-structural, merely enclosing role.* Turning, looking laterally, one is impressed anew by the precision with which the ruled-surface wall meets the Gaussian vault. In this church, as in that of Dur- azno, the brickwork is exquisite. As a design/build firm, Dieste y Montafiez closely controlled the construction and, when necessary, employed adept masons working evotedly within the ambitions of the firm.  Also apparent as one turns within the space, the principal source of light is revealed: groups of small, freely composed rectangular openings, high on the reverse side of the curving walls, glazed with some colored but dominantly clear glass. Dieste was a cultured man; he could not have failed to know of Le Corbusier’s renowned pilgrimage chapel in Ronchamp, France, with its demonstra- tive use of varied light openings in a thick wall. Dieste’s use of this device is modest by comparison, but of maximum effectiveness through this restraint. The struc- tural discipline of Dieste’s church contrasts markedly with that of Ronchamp.  Turning further, the final source of light is seen to be the alabaster infill between the non-structural plates of the entrance facade. That the entrance wall is non- bearing is still more evident as a band of light maintains its independence from the bearing walls of the church.  a 
Brick constitutes the whole of the Atlantida church. Observing the interior entrance area of the church, it is not only the choir loft that is sustained by brick; the stair, too, and even the open-work of the balustrades, are in brick.  Brick  Brick was the focus of all that Dieste built. It set him apart from other great engi- neers of his time who worked in the presumptively “modern” materials of concrete and steel — Felix Candela, Eduardo Torroja, Robert Maillart, and Pier Luigi Nervi are examples.” It can well be assumed that the comparative neglect of Dieste’s accomplishments is due to a modern architectural historiography that insisted on the pre-eminence of works in concrete and steel.  Brick is one of the most ancient, even primitive, materials. Brick is the enduring common, environmentally defining material of great cities like London or Hamburg or Boston. Dieste’s devotion to brick, however, stems nei- ther from those historic associations nor from any nostalgia for traditional materials.  Dieste saw a number of advantages in the use of brick, the central one being an economy of construction that allowed his firm to underbid those using “modern” materials. First, brick was a locally available, inexpensive material. Still more important were economies of construction. Gaussian vaults were repetitive. A movable formwork could be used for the entire building; so much would be true for a similar construction in reinforced concrete. But consider a group of facts of construction: brick is a dry material; in his utilitarian buildings, Dieste used unskilled laborers to place bricks at designated places on the formwork; reinforcing was laid between the bricks; steel mesh and/or pre-stressed steel, depending on the type of vault, was laid over the vault; and a thin parging protected the steel and completed the roof. Because there was so little liquid cement, in such small volumes, Dieste could strike the forms in as little as a day — and move on to the next bay. Mortar at the joints could still be tooled, enabling the fine finish of Dieste’s brick vaults. A concrete vault of similar form might require a week for the concrete to cure. While Dieste’s innovative brick structures grew out of precedents and practice in reinforced concrete, he quite reasonably argued that  new materials do not necessarily displace earlier materials of demonstrated effectiveness.  Dieste found compelling reasons for the use of ceramic materials in the margin- alized economy of Uruguay. However, he also supported brick construction for reasons that rely only partially on that local condition. He claimed advantages for brick over concrete, including relative strength for weight, better resistance to temperature changes and aging, better acoustic and environmental qualities, and, in comparable quality, lower cost.'° In this Dieste provided good, hardheaded reasons for preferring to work in brick. Further, he believed that the tectonic sense 
of a durable material with agreeable qualities of color and texture, worked with sound craftsmanship, had a general appeal.  Feedback Process of a Design/Build Enterprise  There are still more fundamental advantages that flowed from Dieste’s practice asa design/build engineer, particularly an immediate feedback from the experience of each project that formed Dieste’s ability, constantly and assuredly, to increase the daring of his structural work.  I was not the first person to be impressed by the daring of Dieste’s structures. I was unusually fortunate, however, that after my first day in Uruguay, after my first surprisingly substantive tour of works by Dieste, I was taken by a mutual friend to meet Dieste in his home. I quickly revealed, in effect, my own conviction about Dieste’s work as a “dance without effort or fatigue” — though I had not yet had occasion to learn these words. As genuine and motivated as were my first words to Dieste, I was too enthusiastic in my appreciation. Though suffering the effects of a degenerative disease, Dieste, with a friendly, knowing sparkle in his eyes, calmed me with the words: “I too obey the laws of physics!”  In the presence of Dieste’s buildings, one may sometimes wonder if he truly obeyed those laws. But, yes, he was a rigorous engineer, and there the buildings stand. The laws of physics are satisfied. Nonetheless, we must also observe that there is all the difference in the world between engineering work that follows the laws of physics while safely controlled within the conventions of ordinary prac- tice as compared to work that challenges what is physically viable. Dieste imagined new possibilities and then, yes, observed only the laws of physics, not cautious standard practice or rules of thumb. In consequence, one can follow in Dieste’s work his own maturation both in theory and technique.  Dieste and Architecture  The taut brick surfaces of Dieste’s buildings convey a clear sense of an economy of means that is much more than a mere material matter. Also in the utilitarian build- ings, Dieste performed a “dance without effort or fatigue.” He explained:  The resistant virtues of the structures that we are searching for depend on their form. It is through their form that they are stable, not because of an awkward accumulation of matter...there is nothing more noble and elegant from an intellectual viewpoint  than this resistance through form.'*  We know there are buildings that are technically sound without becoming archi- tecture. And there are buildings of widely recognized architectural standing that are open to technical and tectonic criticism. There remains a special place for 
technically sound buildings that achieve high tectonic standards and thus deserve to be recognized as architecture. This is all the more true when the designers of these buildings also ran the risks inherent in technical and tectonic innovation. Dieste successfully took such risks. His are works that do not indulge the arbitrary, but in which the form of the structure is also the form of the building and the delimiter of space. Dieste stated this more strictly:  A building cannot be profound as a work of art unless it has an earnest and subtle fidelity to the laws of matter. Only the reverence that this fidelity requires can make our buildings serious, lasting, and worthy parmers in our contemplative journey.’*  The utter directness of Dieste’s work — its “earnest and subtle fidelity to the laws of matter” — moves us. It is obvious that Dieste’s innovations are not in the pursuit of novelty. They are the result of a continuous quest, a reasoned approach to building well, addressing the pragmatic problems at hand but also satisfying his own profound demands, aesthetic, ethical, and spiritual, that lay behind his dance.’’  Dieste, Man of Ethics and Culture  Dieste was still more than an engineer and architect; he was a man with deep eth- ical concerns and broad intellectual interests. In his two churches he sought to unify the congregation and the priest and liturgy for the well-being of people, especially those who labored or were dispossessed. At Atlantida, Dieste had fulfilled this ideal prior to the dictates handed down by the Second Vatican Council. He was a reli- gious man; a crucifix hung on the wall of his study. But his concerns were not framed by the Church or even by religion more generally. His was a concern for humanity, expressed in both political and ethical terms:  I think that we would reach a wide consensus if we proposed as a common aim the fulfillment and happiness of mankind. This is an aim that would certainly produce different principles in accordance with each individual’s philosophy of life and his religion...what we see around us is not acceptable... The industrial revolution took place with such great injustice that the repercussions from the fierce indignation that its inequities produced in mankind are the reason for the destructive madness that has spread throughout the world."  Deeply concerned for the inequities suffered by the majority of the world pop- ulation, and committed to the maintenance of well-being in countries like his own that were buffeted both by local constraints and the harms of international devel- opment activities, Dieste did not lose sight of the higher goals of humankind. In his essay “Technology and Underdevelopment,” he maintained: 
Efforts that are put to good use are efforts that help man to be happier, to be more himself. Efforts dedicated to science, art, health care, and efforts to make the earth, our countryside and cities, the true home of mankind, are efforts that are put to good use. If we understand development in this way, then it is both good and desirable.”  Embracing this general position, Dieste’s own efforts were conducted as both science and art, and were directed to the home of mankind as well as to our edi- fication. Recognizing that calls for simplicity usually entail unjustified simplifica- tion and those for economy address merely money and its movement, Dieste advanced a much larger cause:  “The things that we build must have something that we could call a cosmic economy, that is, to be in accord with the profound order of the world. Only then can our work  have the authority that so surprises us in the great works of the past.”'®  While here Dieste refers to structures, we should see his notion of “cosmic econ- omy” in terms of that “profound order of the world.” The inexplicable harmonies of Dieste’s churches are the fundamentals of his cosmic economy, but so too are his understandings of how his country should conduct itself within a world of disparate opportunities, and how genuine goods must reach equitable distribution.  Dieste’s thought and work are undeniably metaphysical. Yet he rejects any tel- eology and his ambitions are always grounded:  Ic is not easy to have a clear image of the goal. On the other hand, it is much easier to have a clear image of the foundations and principles that will shape that goal. This is why the idea that “the ends justify the means” is a drastic mistake. We do not know what the end will be. We have an image of our goals, but these will never be realized if in our actions we betray the principles that will shape and form these goals. We cannot postpone for the future city the beauty and dignity that we need so badly to endure the severities of life. We cannot postpone them as principles even though we might have to compromise in practice. When we have no other choice, we will have to compromise, but we should always continue to try to achieve the principles that will shape the goal, our future.'”  With this confrontation of principles and reality, it is tempting to recall Dieste’s story of one of his professors, who, hearing the word “theoretical” used with disdain, retorted, “Theoretical, theoretical, the theoretical that fails in real- ity, fails because it isn’t theoretical enough!”'* Dieste’s thought, his search for “cosmic economy,” took him readily to large and small issues in quite different domains, but there remained a selective and rational mind behind these ambitions. 
Dieste’s achievement has a strong moral and intellectual basis. It offers funda-  mental lessons. Within a period marked by naive modernist determinisms and conservative resistances, Dieste provided an unusual and strong counter-exam- ple. He was an engineer working rationally from first principles, but he was also a pragmatic humanist who chose his course in accord with both limiting condi- tions and social ideals. He knew how to make his situation work for him and others.  Notes  * Image credit: Yoshihara Asado. ** Image credit: Matias Blas Imbern.  1.  Eladio Dieste, “Arte, pueblo, tecnocracia,” in Eladio Dieste: La estructura ceramic, Colec- cin Somosur, ed. Galaor Carbonell (Bogota, Colombia: Escala, 1987); Mercedes Daguerre, ed. Eladio Dieste (1917-2000) (Milan: Electa, 2003), and as “Art, People, Technocracy,” in Eladio Dieste; Innovation in Structural Art, ed. Stanford Anderson, and ed. (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2012), 194-7.  . Juan Martin Piaggio, Leggero come un mattone: Architettura de Eladio Dieste (Parma, Italy:  Industria Laterizi Giavarini S.p.A, 1997).  . Detailed discussion of the work of Dieste and extensive illustration of all works men-  tioned in this chapter are available in Anderson, Eladio Dieste; Galaor Carbonell, ed., Ela- dio Dieste; La estructura ceramic, Colecci6n Somosur (Bogota, Colombia: Escala, 1987); Daguerre, Eladio; and Antonio Jiménez Torrecillas, ed., Eladio Dieste; 1943-1996 (Seville: Consejeria de Obras Publicas y Transportes, 1996) (in Spanish and English), and with a supplementary technical volume.  . Stanford Anderson, “Eladio Dieste; A Principled Builder,” in Felix Candela Lectures on  Structural Engineering 1998-2005, ed. Guy Nordenson, ed., (New York: Museum of Mod- ern Art, 2004), 42.  . That Dieste’s structures incorporate tensile forces is what sets his vaults apart from the  compressive structures of traditional Catalan vaulting and its culmination in the works of Antonio Gaudi in Barcelona and the Guastavino family in America. See John Ochsen- dorf, Guastavino Vaulting: The Art of Structural Tile (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2010).  . The most detailed discussion of Dieste’s structural innovations appears in Torrecillas,  Eladio Dieste, complemented by Rainer Barthel, Eladio Dieste: Form und Konstruktion (Munich: Lehrstuhl fiir Hochbaustatik und Tragwerksplanung, Technische Universitat Miinchen, 2001).  . Dieste intended there to be an alternative entrance to the church — indeed, a symbolic  entrance to the church. In front of and toward the side of the church is an angled brick housing of a stair descending to a circular baptismal chapel. From there the participants in the baptism could ascend another stair into the church. Technical problems with the subterranean space led to its disuse.  . It is not established but may yet be the case that Dieste knew of Gottfried Semper’s  theory of Bekleidung, the origin of the wall in fabric-like enclosures of primitive buildings. 
BURGERWEESHUIS ORPHANAGE  Aldo van Eyck  Nathaniel Coleman  Aldo van Eyck, Amsterdam Municipal Orphanage, former Staff Residence Wing, 1955-60.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
A CITY-LIKE HOUSE  A New Reality  The terrifying nature of human uncertainty, according to Aldo van Eyck (1918-99), becomes less frightening when opposites are reconsidered as parts of complex wholes. Multiple languages and rituals harbor clues as to how complexity can be given a place in rooms, buildings, and cities capable of assuaging intense emo- tions. The project of collapsing rigid oppositions, which dualistic thinking presents as final, and which van Eyck was certain contributed to the uncertainty and anxiety of modern life, could be advanced through a complex understanding of relative patterns of relations — revealed in the parallel realities of diverse architectures and cultures. It is precisely the creation of a setting that was rich and complex enough to receive the full range of haman emotion — in particular ambivalence — that van Eyck attempted to achieve in the Amsterdam Municipal Orphanage (hereafter the Amsterdam Orphanage, or the orphanage), Amstelveenseweg (1955-60).*  The Amsterdam Orphanage was van Eyck’s first major independent commission and brought him international acclaim. As such, it was the crowning achievement of his early career and remains his best known building. The orphanage’s antece- dents can be traced back to van Eyck’s trips to Africa during the late 1940s and into the 1950s, where he developed his interest in how the discoveries of anthropology could enrich modern architecture. He was certain that an anthropological approach could furnish modern architecture with sorely needed depth and breadth, in much the same way that many of the greatest innovators of twentieth-century art, includ- ing Picasso (1881-1973) and Paul Klee (1879-1940), sought inspiration from Africa and other non-Western traditions. During his journeys to Africa, van Eyck col- lected artifacts, complementing his collection of modern art (which had been influ- enced by his contact with Carola Giedion-Welcker (1893-1979), who introduced him to modern art, and her husband, Sigfried Giedion (1881-1968), who had been a founding member of CIAM, and its secretary from its inception until 1956.7  Just as modern art expressed a new reality for van Eyck, he likewise observed a distinct and unified cosmology in the ethnographic materials he collected from the African villages he visited. For him, these artifacts expressed the interrelationship of each thing that makes life possible and comprehensible, to all of the other things that contribute to this, across the full range of scales, from the smallest object to the largeness of the world. He was especially impressed by the Dogon people of sub- Saharan Africa, who wove a rich web of orienting relations at all scales from the elements of their daily life, including baskets, homes, and the arrangement of their villages. Drawing on this experience, van Eyck attempted to translate such 
configurative arrangements into a modern Western form, most prominently at the orphanage. This is achieved in the overall planning of the building through the use of a basic modular unit, which in turn is made out of the specific elements that form it. The configuration of these elements creates a discernible overall form that is varied enough to accommodate a full range of uses, both planned for and unantic- ipated. The contact with the rich cosmological patterns of village life that van Eyck encountered with the Dogon — persisting parallel to the diagrammatic settings of affluent industrial societies — not only revealed the limitations of narrow function- alism, particularly its fundamental inability to provide an adequate home for West- em men and women, but also suggested how just these limitations might be overcome. Of particular interest are the ways in which van Eyck attempted to give form to emotional functionalism as a topic of postwar architecture.  An Enriched Modern Architecture  Most of van Eyck’s key concerns, in particular his conviction that parallel traditions distant in both space and time, and close at hand, offer— when considered together — amore complete perspective on reality, are depicted in his Otterlo Circles emblem, the first version of which was presented at the 11th and final CIAM congress, in Otterlo, the Netherlands, in 1959. However, the description here relates to a later version of the Circles. The dissolution of CIAM was organized by a grouping of architects, including van Eyck, the Smithsons, Giancarlo De Carlo, and Jacob Bakema, who banded together at CIAM X for this very purpose. Team X, named in honor of the CIAM congress at which the group formed, could be seen as the first decisively postmodern movement in architecture.’ Nevertheless, van Eyck’s aim at Otterlo was progressive rather than destructive. While van Eyck’s Otterlo Circles are worth considering in detail because they represent the main themes of his work, they also reveal the debt of his thinking (writing and buildings as well) to American linguist Benjamin Lee Whorf’s (1897-1941) ideas on linguistic relativity, which van Eyck attempted to translate to architecture and urbanism.“ As the clear- est expression of this, the Otterlo Circles also offer insights into the Amsterdam Orphanage. If the Otterlo Circles are a translation of Whorf’s conception of linguis- tic relativity for architecture, in the form of a textual and visual manifesto, the orphanage demonstrates the efficacy of these ideas in the invention of an enriched modern architecture. In this sense, the orphanage is a verification of Whorf’s theory (translated to architecture) by design. Ultimately, if the Otterlo Circles introduce van Eyck’s complex mode of thinking about architecture and the human habitat more generally, he attempted to give it a tangible and testable form in the orphanage.”  Asa distillation of Aldo van Eyck’s psychosocial and anthropological approach to architecture, informed by his understanding of Whorf’s linguistic relativity, the Otterlo Circles record his understanding of “relativity” as revealing parallel  
traditions (no matter how distant in space or time) as equally valid and thus rele- vant to the invention of an enriched modern architecture capable of receiving the full spectrum of human emotion, and inhabitation. Every element of the Otterlo Circles — visual and textual — has a correlate in the Amsterdam Orphanage, struc- turally, symbolically, organizationally, and programmatically. Even the placement of the two circles adjacent to one another, close enough to suggest an association, but far enough apart to maintain their independence, suggests the space in between them, or the in-between realm of human association, so important to van Eyck and evident in almost every corner of the orphanage. The left-hand Circle includes a meditation on the parallel relevance of architectural forms from disparate traditions (in space and time), whereas the right-hand Circle considers community.  The inheritance of classical antiquity (the classical tradition) as depicted by a Greek temple plan, was characterized by van Eyck as embodying “immutability and rest.” The structural system of the orphanage, established out of a basic mod- ular unit made up of a square defined — at least conceptually — by columns in each of  its four corners, traversed in each direction by an architrave, is the most obvious translation of the classical inheritance. The clearly identifiable primary structural element of the orphanage is a trabeated system of construction that emphasizes the symbolic importance of the column as a structural, symbolic, and space- defining element.  The basic structural unit of the orphanage consists of two concrete columns sur- mounted by an architrave, distinguished by a rectangular slot cut into it. In actu- ality, this basic unit is reducible even further to just a single column. Although distinctly modern, this assembly also refers to the Doric order of ancient Greek architecture. As such, the unit forms a threshold by establishing a portal that defines entry points and in-between spaces throughout the orphanage, in the exte- rior and interior alike. The orthogonal extension of these primary elements is made up of multiples of the initial column/architrave unit, each located a uniform dis- tance from the other, spanned by beams resting above the architraves that are a double width apart.  Conceptually and concretely, the four columns and the spatial unit formed by the columns traversed by four architraves form the basic constructive structural unit of the orphanage. It establishes a primary structural element of shelter, com- prehensible as a house-room, referring at once to both Abbe Laugier’s primitive hut and Le Corbusier’s Dom-ino structural system. The initial module, an infinitely extensible cellular unit, is a distinctly modern assembly that also refers to aborigina and classical architecture. The evidence of the extensibility of the initial cellular structural unit out of which the orphanage is assembled remains legible through- out, even where it has been manipulated. As such, it achieves a stable degree o: comprehensibility across a variety of scales, even where the basic elements have been altered. This derives from a very precise articulation of initial elements in both the interior and exterior of the building. The most emphatic representation of both occurs at the roof level, where each house-room is reasserted by the 336 individua  
precast concrete domes, capping each single-story unit with its own roof. It is this assembly that gives the Amsterdam Orphanage its distinctive Kasbah-like roof- scape. The only exceptions to this arrangement are four larger single-story units assembled out of nine initial cellular units, and four larger two-story units, assembled out of nine initial cellular units extended upward by an additional nine units above. Each of these larger units is in turn capped by a larger precast concrete dome, the effect of which is to clearly define them as distinct (a further exception is the building’s administrative block, which is raised up one story on columns). When the orphanage first opened, the children were housed in the eight larger units according to their age group. The four larger single-story units housed the younger children, from infants to ten years old, with living areas and bedrooms on the single level. The four two-story larger units housed the older children from 10 to 20 years old, with living areas on the lower level and the bedrooms above. Although extensible in any direction, including upward, the basic structural unit of the orphanage is sophisticated enough to gain in richness through multiplication rather than be diminished by it. Although standardization was employed in the con- struction of the orphanage as a reality of modern building methods and as an eco- nomic necessity, richness was generated from repetition and layering.  The Greek temple plan in the left Otterlo Circle is followed by an architectural counter-construction by Theo van Doesburg (1883-1931), reminiscent of Gerrit Rietveld’s (1888-1964) Schréder House (Utrecht, 1924), and suggestive of Piet Mondrian’s (1872-1944) painting. All three of these artists shared an effort to intro- duce the fourth dimension of time into art and architecture, which preoccupied van Eyck as well, particularly its association with relativity. In attempting to introduce this aspect to the Amsterdam Orphanage, van Eyck referred to the work of van Doesburg, which for him embodied “change and movement,” a crucial character- istic of modernity in art and architecture in general. It is no surprise that van Does- burg represents the “authentic” tradition of modern architecture for van Eyck, who wished to associate himself with his Dutch origins.  Although experience of the built environment inevitably includes the fourth dimension of time as a consequence of human action, the orphanage embraces this as a worthy topic of investigation. For example, by allowing elements of the build- ing to flow ambiguously into one another, while assuring that the lattice of the structure is nonetheless sensed, a degree of dynamic, perhaps generative, tension is introduced, which calls to mind a kind of push-pull action, analogizing the move- ment encouraged by the arrangement of the building. Through this means the usual oppressive character of institutions is avoided by making the building into a web of small pavilions looking into private courts. Further evidence of van Eyck’s preoccupation with “change and movement” is the meandering street inside the complex, which is convincingly rendered as street-like largely by way of the dura- ble materials used for the wall and floor surfaces, and the furniture as well.  All of the main areas of the orphanage — the children’s housing and the support areas including the infirmary, dining hall, and administrative wing — are threaded  
together by the interior street. The dynamism of the building is further enhanced by subtle shifts of level, changes of material, color, and infill material throughout. Ina move that is at once distinctly modern and traditional, the building is organized according to what van Eyck called “labyrinthine clarity,” suggesting paths enriched by derivations analogous to unfolding experience, which the interior street empha- sizes. This conceptualization of architectural paths is related to what van Eyck called “twin phenomena,” which is the linking of conditions usually separated by strict dualities. In this instance, it is revealed in the building as an arrangement that encourages the possibility of wandering, as analogous to intuition and wonder. Organized in this way, the orphanage also suggests alternatives to the rigidity of diagrammatic planning.  As stated earlier, in contrast to the “immutability and rest” that van Eyck asso- ciated with classical antiquity in the Otterlo Circles, the modern period is one of “change and movement.” Even so, antiquity and modernity are linked for van Eyck as both being “concepts of the mind,” suggesting the value of considering and inte- grating divergent ideas on reality, education, thought, spatial organization, and society.  Continuing to move clockwise around the left of the Otterlo Circle, one arrives at the plan of a Pueblo village in New Mexico, emblematic of what van Eyck is called the “vernacular of the heart,” (the “tradition of spontaneous building”). This suggests there is a depth of understanding available to the developed world from apparent unity of traditional societies, from their social organization to the organ- ization of their villages, including the constant resonance between microcosm and macrocosm that seems to define such societies. Order of this kind stood in sharp contrast to the binary (either/or) worldview of developed societies.  At the Amsterdam Orphanage, “the vernacular of the heart” is discernible in at least three ways: first, the organization of the building derives directly from the organization of the Dogon villages van Eyck had visited; second, the cellular struc- ture of the building is reminiscent of the Pueblo depicted in the left Otterlo Circle; and third, the organization of the building, including the distinctive roofscape, together with its effect on the interior, relates to van Eyck’s belief that a Kasbah organization was better suited to the complexity of human life than typical insti- tutional structures. The orphanage is organized into two wings that slip past each other in a manner reminiscent of the Dogon settlements. The several hundred house-room units extend outward from the entry court, which is the social rather than geometric center of the building, and is terminated at one end by the build- ing’s administrative wing, which is rendered slightly differently from other parts of the building and, as noted earlier, is raised one story above ground on columns to define the unmistakable threshold to the complex. The extension of the cellular units is broken in many places by the introduction of numerous courts, including the entry court, but mainly by much smaller open outdoor spaces, either fully enclosed by the building or partially so. This assemblage is crucial for giving the orphanage its unique village-like character. Although made up of repetitive  
square units, the building is diverse and dynamic, largely resulting from the arrangement of each wing as an opposing stepped diagonal in plan, an organization that would likely never have been possible without the influence of vernacular models, in particular the Dogon villages. Apart from establishing the two main wings of the orphanage, organizing the building in this way made possible the inclusion of the variety of the open-air places described above. In addition, the play between inside and outside is further inflected by loggias in several places. The thoughtful articulation of the building — materially, spatially, and psychologically — has resulted in great social legibility, of the sort van Eyck found in traditional societies.  Although the “vernacular of the heart” is represented in the left Otterlo Circle by a Pueblo village, this should be taken as only one example of a general concept, in the same way that the Greek temple plan and the van Doesburg counter- construction are suggestive rather than definitive. The text that links the Pueblo and the temple, above the former and below the latter — “extensions of collective behavior” — suggests that vernacular, classical, and, one imagines, even the modern are all wrapped around the similar habits of a given culture, though inflected by the specificity of “place and occasion.” The phrase also relates to the desirable possi- bility that architecture can be a counter-form to human being (a frame that contains and is inflected by it), especially ambivalence (the in between).  The three headline mottos in the left of the Otterlo Circle — Immutability and Rest; Change and Movement; and Vernacular of the Heart — are apparently con- tradictory conceptions that nevertheless promise a more complete perspective on reality, which the consideration of parallel traditions offers. Taken together, each of the traditions represented in the left Otterlo Circle, and many more besides, “encompass” according to Frances Strauven, van Eyck’s biographer, “a formal and structural potential sufficiently fertile to produce variable answers to the complex reality of human relationships,” as they did in the past, suggest in the present, and promise for the future.° It matters little that from the perspective of the present, one or another tradition appears to be spent. Silted up within each is an ever-flowing wellspring of possibility, which is precisely what van Eyck sought to confirm in the translation of numerous and varied influences in the Amsterdam Orphanage. It is the degree to which the orphanage derives from a habit of mind that is open to myriad influences that are never redeployed literally but translated, perhaps interpreted, or even more accurately, abstracted to reveal something new and complete in itself, but still associated with its origins, that makes the building a unique and enduring structure.  The right-hand Otterlo Circle summarizes what is for van Eyck the reality of the human condition, made up as it is of complex individual and social relationships. Here, the constant and variable relation between individuals and the society within which they are embedded is symbolized by a high-contrast, black-and-white, three- dimensional image of dancing Brazilian Kayapd people, forming concentric circles.” Arching above this image are the words: “For each man and all men,”  
referring to the necessary mutuality that underpins any society, highlighting the value of both individual and group for the whole, which van Eyck believed ought to find its analogy in architecture. The contents of this Circle clearly sets out van Eyck’s aspirations for the orphanage. He wanted it to be a significant lived-in exam- ple of what he called “built homecoming.” And for the short while that it was inhabited as planned it appears to have been just that: genuinely a home for the most vulnerable children.  The remaining text of the Otterlo Circles is also worth considering, as it has direct relevance not only to an understanding of the motivations of the orphanage but also to what it embodies. The largest text sits above the left Circle and sepa- rately above the right Circle, though in neither case does it sit above the apex of either; rather, text descends to the right above the left Circle, and to the left above the right Circle. “BY US” sits above the left Circle and “FOR US” above the right, which taken together is intended to convey that the origin of architecture is to be found within social life, and as such, its main aim is to be convivial (welcoming). This thesis stands in direct opposition to the excesses of instrumental social science that typified the worst failures of modernist architecture constructed during the two to three decades immediately following World War II. Van Eyck’s ethos also opposes both the facile stylistic postmodernism that emerged during the 1960s, an example of which could be the designs set out Robert Venturi’s (b.1925) Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture (1966), and the dehumanizing tendencies of stylistic deconstructivism in architecture, as outlined in Deconstructivist Architecture (1988), by Philip Johnson and Mark Wigley (though its origins are identifiable in the supposed post-structuralism of American architect Peter Eisenmen (b.1932), from as early as the mid-1960s). The smaller text of the Otterlo Circles further clarifies and emphasizes what makes van Eyck and the Amsterdam Orphanage unique. Each line of text is numbered from 1 to 4, establishing something like the four points of van Eyck’s architectural ethos, interfused with the principles already discussed above.  Point 1 ascends upward from the bottom of the left Circle along its right edge, and asks: “When is Architecture going to bring together opposite qualities and solutions?” Rendered affirmatively the question offers a plea for architects to learn from parallel traditions and contradictory human situations, so that their works will be infused with “relativity,” making it possible, in van Eyck’s words, for buildings to “breathe in and out.” Point 2, which sits to the left of the midpoint below and between both Circles, posits that “To discover anew implies discovering something new.” This premise identifies the value of learning from the great human inherit- ance at our disposal, from all times and places (which raises a challenge to the tabula rasa approach of the worst excesses of modernist architecture and planning, but also to novelty for its own sake, which characterizes much architectural pro- duction since the 1980s). Revisiting what exists already invites interpretation of it; which is to say, opening it up to translations into something new. In this way, van Eyck was an adherent of tradition, but in particular, the etymological origins of the  
word in betrayal, suggesting that working with sources is as much a process of their inheritance being “handed down’ (from one generation to the next, in the conven- tional sense of tradition), as it is a “handing over” of tradition (by surrendering it to the next generation), so that it might be renewed. Point 3, which extends along the bottom arc of the right Circle, implores architects to “Get close to the center — the shifting center — and build,” which introduces the possibility of residing at both the core of tradition and at the core of human experience simultaneously, while recog- nizing the relative instability, or flux, of culture. Point 4, the last, extends under- neath and slightly beyond both Circles, and is laid out as a concave curve, so that it appears to cup the three previous points, and the two Circles and other text above it. The text, “We can discover ourselves everywhere — in all places and ages — doing the same things in a different way, feeling the same differently, reacting differently to the same,” is largely a restatement of all of the ideas laid out by the Otterlo Cir- cles and introduced above. It is as much van Eyck’s motto, as the Otterlo Circles are an emblem for his architecture, especially the orphanage.  A More Complete Perspective  To say that we experience the same things across time and space, just differently, is not so much relativist — in an equivocal sense — as it is a restatement of van Eyck’s debt to Whorf. This thesis also posits the generative potential of the tension resid- ing between the universal and the local, between groups and individuals. In short, if all people do the same things everywhere, only differently, it is reasonable that relativity, which values the validity of each of these responses, offers us a more complete perspective on reality and thus amplifies the potential to build a more comprehensively encompassing environment attuned to human reality by being its counter-form. Important in this as well is the suggested lineage of human bodies that binds all human beings together by way of a shared genetic as well as a physical inheritance: bodies are more the same everywhere than they are different, which is why architecture ignores bodies at its peril. In another sense, this approach suggests that the best forms may already be given, associating van Eyck’s preoccupation with the experience of his buildings by the individuals who would inhabit them, with Adolf Loos’ (1870-1933) conviction that the “the best form is always there already and no one should be afraid of using it, even if the basic idea for it comes from someone else.”* Using chairs as an example, in an attack on the Deutscher Werkbund, Loos argued that “we do not sit in a particular way because a cabinet- maker has made a chair in this or that way, the cabinetmaker makes the chair in a particular way, because that is the way we want to sit”; in short, sitting makes chairs, rather than chairs making sitting.” The uncanny tension between the famil- iar and the alien at the Amsterdam Orphanage, as in much of van Eyck’s work, derives from just such an understanding of architecture’s vocation. Paradoxically, Whorf’s ideas of linguistic relativity encouraged van Eyck’s inquiry into the  
generative potential of valuing parallel traditions in the invention of an architecture — realized in the orphanage — that would be far more comprehensible than much modernist architecture could ever be. In this sense, for van Eyck, an architecture that attempted to embody the extreme rationality of modern techno-science would always tend toward alienation, away from satisfying emotional function. For him, the comprehensibility of the constructed environment would persist as a real possibility so long as its invention and making occurs within a horizon of shared expe- rience graspable by a language capable of giving form to reality and desire.  In short, van Eyck was convinced that modern architecture could offer a richer setting for human reality if architects valued the parallel views of existence acces- sible to them through contact with non-Western cultures. Architecture could become felt meaning — expression rather than representation — if its invention ben- efitted from a fuller comprehension of varied human experience, across time and space, demonstrated when the design of a complex building takes account of the exceedingly complex structure of human existence, in particular in-between con- ditions, which are inevitably varied, contradictory, and filled with ambivalence, only partially understood on a fully conscious level.  In response to the reductive and banalizing tendencies of modern methods and means of construction, van Eyck sought a way to turn the inevitability of modular- ized and assembled construction into an advantage for architectural expression. Viewing modern elements through a lens suggested by ancient Greek, as much as by vernacular and early modernist architecture, van Eyck conceived the elements out of which buildings are assembled as a lexicon. In a manner similar to the design of sentences, van Eyck believed that individual architectural elements could gain in meaning if configured into comprehensible forms by being assembled semantically. Because modern assembled construction, along with gravity, life safety, and matters of practical necessity are inescapable, an architectural syntax is also required.  A Configurative Discipline  Van Eyck’s combinatory scheme is not quite as simple as the traditional notion of “wholes made up of parts,” but takes account of modern construction techniques by recognizing that “a whole is more than the sum of its parts.” In the same way that words gain in meaning through their association with the other words in a sentence, each architectural element is whole in itself and will carry its own asso- ciative charge of meaning. The overall sense of a greater whole can only emerge by fitting the individual elements together, which, by way of the relationships estab- lished among the parts, gains in significance through expanding associations with other equally charged elements of the same size, as well as smaller or larger ones. The configuration of patterns out of meaningful individual parts — whole in themselves — promises to achieve a more complex result than modern building as simple assembly or industrial production ever can. 
When a building’s several elements are brought together in a comprehensible way, as in the orphanage, they hold out the possibility of revealing a pattern that is far denser in expressive potential than any one of the elements could sustain on its own. Assemblage of a whole of this sort, van Eyck believed, could result in a com- prehensible setting able to contain (and sustain) curiosity, improvised inhabitation, and an excess of human emotion. Individual parts retain their distinctness, but are enriched through relations to other equally specific parts. Thus, the configuration of comprehensible places suited to varied occasions depends on developing an understanding of the limitations and possibilities of individual parts, in particular their combinatory potential, out of which the intended overall expression of a built form is construed.’  With this in mind, van Eyck could be considered an adherent of philosophical structuralism, which also explains his rejection of, and by, for example, Peter Eisen- man (b.1932), who characterizes himself as an adherent of philosophical post-struc- turalism, and Dutch architect Rem Koolhaas (b.1944), who is perhaps the purest adherent of neoliberalism in architecture. However, it is worth recollecting that van Eyck’s structuralism has a much longer lineage than do most of the myriad architecture fashions of the past 60 years or so, which, at the very least, lends his work the authority of tradition. In particular, van Eyck’s “configurative discipline,” according to which the Amsterdam Orphanage was conceived, shares much in common with the fifteenth-century Italian architect and theorist, Leon Battista Alberti (1404-72), specifically his concept of concinnitas. According to Alberti, concinnitas is the method by which beauty (as wholeness) emerges out of a consonance among separate parts that together make up a whole:  Itis the task and aim of concinnitas to compose parts that are quite separate from each other by their nature, according to some precise rule, so that they correspond to one another in appearance. |... This is the main object of the art of building, and the source of her dignity, charm, authority, and worth."  Concinnitas effectively sums up much of what van Eyck attempted to achieve with the orphanage. His configurative discipline, akin to Alberti’s concinnitas, conceptualizes the coincidence of parts in buildings as interrelated and interdepend- ent, which has implications for cities as well. As the practice of configuring the com- plex association of all the elements that form a building, or any constructed setting, architecture’s vocation, according to van Eyck, is to provide a holistic human realm.  Notes  * Image credit: Nathaniel Coleman.  1. For more on van Eyck’s theory see Aldo van Eyck, Writings: The Child and the City and the Artist; Collected Articles and Other Writings, 1947-1998, ed. Vincent Ligtelijn and Francis Strauven (Amsterdam: Sun Publishers, 2008); Francis Strauven, Aldo van Eyck: The Shape 
PLAN FOR TOKYO  Kenzo Tange  Zhongyjie Lin  Kenzo Tange, Plan for Tokyo, 1960.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
When Kenzo Tange travelled to Otterlo to attend the last meeting of the Congrés internationaux d’architecture moderne (CIAM) in September 1959, he seemed to be preoccupied by questions of the urban form of the future. Like other participants in this conference, organized by Team 10, that ended with a formal dissolution of CIAM, Tange was asked to present “a project which he considered to express in the best way possible his conception of the task of the architect and urbanist, and his thoughts on how the architect and urbanist might rationalize and harmonize the connections between people and their surroundings.”’ Tange concluded his presentation with two projects by another young Japanese architect, Kiyonori Kikutake, including his own residence, Sky House, and a utopian city design called the Marine City. This became the first exposure of the Metabolism group’s work in an international event. Tange particularly referred to the project of Marine City and claimed: “Tokyo is expanding but there is no more land, and we shall have to expand into the sea.”* This bold statement launched his explo- ration of alternative urban forms for this emerging megacity with a series of visionary projects that culminated with the Plan for Tokyo 1960, also known as the Tokyo Bay Plan.  Kenzo Tange is a landmark figure in Japanese architecture of the twentieth cen- tury. His unrivalled reputation was primarily accomplished through a series of iconic buildings, including the Hiroshima Peace Memorial (1955), Tokyo City Hall (1957), Tokyo National Gymnasium (1964), the master plan and main struc- ture of Osaka World Expositions (1970), and Tokyo Metropolitan Government Tower (1991), through which he led the resurrection of Japanese architectural culture after the Second World War. However, this impressive list represents only part of his prolific and influential career as an architect, urbanist, and edu- cator. Tange’s ideas of urbanism are equally important, even though few of his urban designs were actually carried out. His visionary urban projects, which often came with profound social implications, set up the foundation for Tange’s exper- imentation in architectural forms and tectonics. In turn, each of his architectural designs was often taken as part of an incremental process toward the realization of his urban ideal. Such convergence of architecture and urbanism was the trade- mark of many progressive architect-urbanists in the late 1950s through the early 1970s, when utopia was a universal language — as was argued by Reyner Banham in Megastructure and Manfredo Tafuri and Francesco Dal Co in Architettura contemporanea, both published in 1976 — and Tange’s work represented a prom- inent example.’  In this sense, the Tokyo Bay Plan not only summed up what Tange tried to accomplish as the ideal form of a megacity in the postindustrial age, but also steered his architectural creations for a few decades. It unfolded issues that are essential to a full understanding of postwar Japanese architecture: reinterpretation of the Japanese tradition, transformation of the city, the theory of Metabolism, and the mutual influence between Tange and the Metabolist group. Like most  
Metabolist projects, however, the plan was often reduced to iconic images of megastructure in the historiography of the past, and cut off from its socio- historical and cultural context, in order to be aligned with the work of the West- erm avant-garde. This chapter rebuilds these linkages and addresses these critical issues related to the Tokyo Bay Plan. Tracing Tange’s work in the 1950s and 1960s, it examines what Tange regarded as the essential qualities of the contemporary city, namely, mobility, openness, and adaptability, which dictated his design methodology, as applied to projects at both architectural and urban scales.  Tange’s Early Career  Tange recalled that it was when he concluded his apprenticeship with Kunio Mae- kawa and returned to the University of Tokyo to pursue a graduate degree during wartime that he began to consider “the importance of urban design, not in the sense of mere city planning involving land-use and street-network composition, but three-dimensional urban design.”* He conducted historical surveys of classical public spaces and familiarized himself with modernist planning principles used in cities in Japanese-occupied Manchuria. In 1942, he won first place in the national competition for the Memorial of the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere. This unbuilt scheme organized the complex with a hierarchical layout along a central axis linking major memorial structures, for which Tange was inspired by “the pure image of the Ise Shrine.” this memorial site at the foot of Mount Fuji the nation’s new cultural center and  A broader agenda of this project, however, was to make  link it to Tokyo and Kyoto through a linear highway system forming the nation’s development spine.  Tange became a member of the Governmental Agency for Reconstruction after the war and led the survey team for the rebuilding of Hiroshima. In 1949, he won the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Park competition, a site that was hoped to revital- ize the city center and commemorate victims of the atomic bombing. This memo- rial, built in 1955, was once again based on an axial configuration. The central area of the park followed the Capitoline layout employed in Tange’s 1942 competition project. An Atomic Memorial Museum, resting on 20-foot pilotis, formed the cen- terpiece of the architectural grouping. The building’s extensive horizontality and the lattice pattern on the facade recalled the forms of Japanese traditional architec- ture. The museum was fronted by the memorial’s iconic figure, a fragment from a neoclassical dome that was the only structure to survive the bombing of the city.  Tange presented this project at the CIAM meeting in Hoddesdon, England in 1951, addressing the conference theme of “Urban Core” in a unique way, in that this memorial would trigger the resurrection of the urban core and inspire the reju- venation of Hiroshima. His design successfully devised a new architectural 
language with a recognizable Japanese identity, yet it was modern in every sense, with a minimalist form using concrete and steel frame structure and flat roof. This combination of modernism and tradition provided the city a new sense of order out of the chaotic urban scene of the immediate postwar years, and became a prototype for postwar Japanese architecture.  Rising through the Hiroshima project and several other high-profile buildings including Tokyo City Hall and Kagawa Prefectural Building, Tange advocated a “new tradition” for Japanese architecture.° His designs went beyond the function- alist approach to combine three distinct qualities: the dramatic expression of up-to- date technology, the incorporation of civic spaces, and unmistakable revisions of traditional architectural vocabulary. They exposed raw concrete on surfaces and used concrete structure to present an abstract order of classical composition. The proposal for the “new tradition” was intended to transcend the naive imitation of traditional form in the prewar period, and to focus instead on modern aesthetics or “spirit,” a word he repeatedly employed on different occasions. When he argued with Ernesto Rogers about the relationship between tradition and innovation at the CIAM meeting in 1959, Tange insisted that architects should “inherit spirit, not specific idioms.”” This new tradition became an important part of effort of re-establishing Japan’s cultural identity, a position he made clear in two of his monographs, one on Katsura and the other on Ise.*  After he left Otterlo in 1959 Tange travelled to the United States for a visiting professorship at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he started to develop a new methodology of urban design. For his fifth-year architectural studio he chose a design question called “New Community on the Sea: 25,000 Inhabitants on the Boston Bay.” Tange apparently had in mind the Marine City that he had just presented in Otterlo. The design brief, however, reversed Kikutake’s formula for a more dramatic idea by placing the residential program directly over the water. He picked one of the student projects for which he had provided the primary concept, and presented it at the World Design Conference in 1960 and sent it to journals. This design consisted of two gigantic linear constructions over the bay and linked by an internal highway to the land. The blocks were characterized by an A-frame section, and carried numerous dwelling units arranged upon layers of artificial ground supported by the structure. Extraordinary in both its scale and form, the scheme became Tange’s first attempt at what Fumihiko Maki and Reyner Banham later called megastructure.” Le Corbusier’s 1931 plan for Algiers, which featured a bookshelflike megastructure along the seashore, housing a highway and resi- dences for an entire city, provided a precedent for such a concept. Tange’s A-frame structure, as an improvement of Le Corbusier's mega-form, derived from a mas- sive housing design by Masato Otaka, characterized by enormous structural mem- bers and Corbusian pilotis. The A-frame megastructure was also used in Tange’s 1959 competition entry for the World Health Organization Headquarters — dis- missed as “unbuildable” — and evolved into the residential structures in the Plan for Tokyo, 1960. 
Metabolism  The World Design Conference in Tokyo in 1960 was the highest level interna- tional event for design professions that Japan hosted in the postwar decades. Its own significance in history, however, was outshone by the emergence of Metab- olism at this event. Architects Kiyonori Kikutake, Kisho Kurokawa, Masato Otaka, and Fumihiko Maki, architectural critic Noboru Kawazoe, industrial designer Ekuan Kenji, and graphic designer Kiyoshi Awazu, formed the team preparing the conference programs under the supervision of Tange’s colleague Takashi Asada, and published their manifesto, Metabolism: Proposals for New Urbanism at the conference, calling for a radical and futuristic approach to city design.° They chose the name “Metabolism” for the group to indicate a fundamental idea shared among these architects and designers — an understanding of the “city as an organic process,” in opposition to what they saw as the modernist paradigm of the city as a machinic system. Kurokawa’s Helix City, a scheme featuring gigantic helix mega- structures inspired by DNA’s double helix form as representation of genic repro- duction, as demonstrated by the Metabolists’ fascination for biological metaphor in conceptualizing urban forms.  In their theoretical urban projects, the Metabolists often envisioned the sea and the sky become human habitats of the future, and suggested that a city would grow, trans- form, and die like an organism. In order to accommodate the growth and regenera- tion of the modern city, they called for the establishment of a system of urban design distinguishing elements of different scale and duration, namely, the “permanent element,” such as urban infrastructure, versus the “transient element,” such as indi- vidual houses. Responding to these distinct “metabolic cycles” in the city, the Metabo- list designs often proposed a combination of a megastructure, serving as the permanent base, and numerous individual units attached to the megastructure and subject to more frequent replacement. Kikutake’s Marine City was characterized by standardized housing units clipped onto a few enormous ferroconcrete cylindrical towers. The towers, serving as the main structure of the city, would grow as the pop- ulation increased, and the individual living pods would conduct periodical self- renewal. As a dramatic representation of the concept of “metabolism,” this combina- tion of megastructure and cell became the trademark of their architecture.  The architects dreamed of an alternative social order for the world through these radical schemes for the city. Their design concepts were full of political implica- tions, often based on a modem vision of collective society.’’ Such a utopian notion can be detected in such projects as “City in the Air” by Arata Isozaki, then a grad- uate student at the University of Tokyo under Tange’s supervision and an ally of the Metabolists in many regards.'* The project challenged the status quo of the Japanese city and its social organization by reversing Tokyo’s 31-meter building height limit to erect several clusters in the air. These megastructures, consisted of gigantic vertical cores carrying numerous inhabitable arms stretching far out like canopies over the old city.”’ 
Tange played an important role as mentor of the Metabolists and facilitator of the movement. His Boston Bay project, characterized by a separation of megastruc- ture and minor-structure, inspired the Metabolists’ urban concepts. His appoint- ment of Asada in charge of the preparation of the World Design Conference had led to the foundation of Metabolism. On a theoretical level, Tange’s progres- sive notion of “tradition,” commitment to technological expression, pursuit of articulated monumentality, and comprehensive approach to urban planning freed the young Metabolists from Modernist doctrines and encouraged them to pursue new paradigms.'* The Metabolists continued to explore new concepts of architec- ture and urbanism and established their own identity through biological metaphors and futuristic designs, which in turn inspired the elder master. This reciprocal rela- tionship to a great extent shaped the Metabolist movement.  Plan for Tokyo, 1960  The Tokyo Bay Plan, involving Metabolist architects like Kurokawa and Isozaki, was not only a thorough representation of Tange’s ideal city, but also a sophisti- cated synthesis of the Metabolist concepts on a grander scale. However, unlike most Metabolist schemes, which suggested no specific site, Tange’s plan was based on an extensive analysis of Tokyo. Like many European cities, Tokyo was con- fronted with numerous problems of urban reconstruction after the Second World War. The rapid growth of population, proliferation of automobiles, inadequacy of infrastructure and social services, shortage of land, and scattered private land own- ership led to the city’s fragmental urban landscape and ineffective planning inter- vention. As Tokyo’s population swelled from 2.78 million in 1945 to 8.31 million in 1960 and the population of the metropolitan area reached around 16 million in 1960, there was enormous pressure to redevelop and decentralize the city.’ It became evident that exceptional methods were required to regulate Tokyo’s pat- tern of expansion, and solutions could only be found on a regional scale. The great constructive energy released during the economic miracle and the preparation for the Olympic Games offered fresh opportunities to rethink Tokyo’s urban future and, to a great extent, prompted the emergence of Tange’s plan.  Several ideas had been proposed to reclaim Tokyo Bay for a new city prior to Tange’s plan. In 1958, the year Tokyo Metropolitan Government announced the National Capital Region Development Plan, the president of the Japan Housing Corporation, Hisaki Kano, published his own concept plan of Tokyo. He called for the creation of several artificial islands that would fill about one third of the bay between Tokyo and Chiba with residential areas, an industrial belt, an inter- national airport, and parks surrounding a central island as the city center. A double- loop expressway and a railroad would connect the new city districts with the exist- ing ones.’* Architects were inspired by Kano’s vision and follow up enthusiastically with even bolder concepts. Instead of filling up the bay or building permanent  
supports, Kikutake’s Floating City of Tokyo envisaged an enormous rectangular floating city on Tokyo Bay with communities and factories laid out like a check- erboard. He claimed that this plan would make the city adaptable to the demands arising from the ever-changing uses of the land. Each urban block was detachable from the system and the city could be reconfigured when needed.’”  Building upon Kano’s and the Metabolists’ concepts, Tange’s plan was a sensible progression toward a new Tokyo Bay City, yet far more sophisticated. It combined the regional and local conditions of Tokyo with modern technologies of urban con- struction and struck a balance between two contrasting approaches: the pragma- tism of industrialists and the idealism of utopian architects. It manifested Tange’s position on urbanism that he had made clear at the CIAM meeting in 1959: “We must reject ‘aestheticism’ in town planning. Tradition and regional char- acters should be re-examined with critical eyes and minds. I shall repeat again that all Ihave said above begins with the positive denial of the attempt to make order out of existing reality. Vitalism is always destructive to existing reality, but is very constructive in the building of our future.”’® Tange’s resolution to break away from the “existing reality” to pursue a new paradigm of planning had set the tone for his plan.  The project was completed in Tange’s laboratory at the University of Tokyo with the assistance of five young architects: Keji Kamija, Arata Isozaki, Sadao Watanabe, Kisho Kurokawa, and Heiki Koh. Instead of being disclosed in an architectural publication, it was first presented on Japan’s national television network, NHK, ina special New Year's program of 1961.'” This indicated that, instead of conceiving of it as a purely experimental scheme, Tange intended to bring the project to public attention and influence the authorities, hoping to realize such an idea.  Mobility, Openness, and Adaptability  As rendered on a model of about 10 feet by 10 feet, Tange’s plan envisioned a new Tokyo expanding across the bay to reach the opposite shore in Chiba. The most notable feature was a central spine carrying an elevated highway system, which consisted of a series of interlocking loops and spanned 18 miles over the sea. The spine started with a loop framing the existing city center of Tokyo, then it moved onto the sea. The third, fourth, and fifth loops would accommodate a new civic center and a port. The subsequent links would be occupied by office and public buildings until the spine landed on the shore again. The buildings on the spine took the form of habitable bridge trusses spanning gigantic service towers, which were arranged on a rectangular grid at 200-meter intervals. A number of secondary freeways departed from the central spine at right angles, connecting to clusters of tent-shaped residential structures that spread over the bay. The whole plan was conceived as an enormous megastructure with a hierarchical arrangement of circulations and programs.”° 
In the monograph on this plan, Tange claimed that his concept stemmed from the characteristics of what he called the world’s “pivotal cities,” namely, cities with populations of ten million or more. In his view, such cities, including Tokyo, were in a state of paralysis because their physical structures had “grown too old to cope with the current rate of expansion,” and the only way to save the cities was by a radical transformation.”’ He argued that the transportation system was the foun- dation of a city’s operation, and mobility would bring a city vitality and order. The pursuit of greater mobility underlay all parts of the plan. By projecting the infra- structure of his new city directly onto the water, the highway system was presented with a startling clarity as the dominant element. The great size of this linear system, the perspicuity of its loop and branch road network, and the formal inventiveness of the office buildings that were clipped onto the highway, all combined to make the plan an articulated statement of an urban form generated in the age of automobile.  Tange’s notion of mobility was apparently influenced by his Western predeces- sors and contemporaries, whose work celebrated this fundamental quality of the modern city and used it to construct a hierarchical order by separating automobiles from pedestrians and distinguishing different movements by speed. Le Corbusier's Ville contemporaine, Louis Kahn’s series of plans for Philadelphia, and Alison and Peter Smithson’s Hauptstadt Berlin competition entry were great precedents. Push- ing this concept further, Tange used mobility not only to create order but also as a form giver to provide legibility of the city’s social organization. Besides the unique fishbone-shaped highway system, he developed an urban design strategy called “pilotis and core system,” combining Corbusian concept of pilotis with his favorite uniform shaft of vertical circulation into a three-dimensional modular system. With the “pilotis and core,” architects would not only be able to separate automobile transportation from pedestrians, but also provide a more coherent structure because architecture and infrastructure would be virtually integrated into one sys- tem. The ultimate goal was to substitute the traditional two-dimensional planning method of zoning with this three-dimensional generative system, through which mobility and social interaction could be developed.  Tange declared three objectives for his plan:  1 To shift from a radial centripetal system to a system of linear development  2 To find a means of bringing the city structure, the transportation system, and urban architecture into organic unity  3 To find a new urban spatial order that would reflect the open organization and the spontaneous mobility of contemporary society.”  The first and foremost aim of the plan, was apparently transform Tokyo’s cen- tripetal structure into a linear structure. In 1958, two years before Tange’s project, the Tokyo Metropolitan Government implemented the National Capital Region Development Plan to regulate metropolitan development. This plan was inspired 
by Sir Patrick Abercrombie’s 1944 Greater London Plan and the Garden City idea, and proposed an enlarged centripetal layout with a green belt 16 to 27 kilometers away from the city center to contain the further sprawl of Tokyo’s 23-ward urban core, and a series of new towns beyond this ring to house the growing population and industries.” Tange’s plan was a polemical counterthrust to this governmental plan. He argued that creating satellite cities would not solve Tokyo’s problems because as these satellite cities would also grow and mature, the dispersion of pop- ulation and industries would create more transportation in the center city and sub- centers, and thus would only aggravate Tokyo’s overcrowding and traffic conges- tion. In contrast, a linear city could provide a greater mobility characteristic of the contemporary age. The centripetal form, he contended, represented a “closed” and medieval system, not only outdated but also incompatible with a city of such mag- nitude. The linear city, instead, embodied the very essence of social progress and represented the structure that would lead to an “open society.”  Tange’s argument departed from CIAM’s concept of the “urban core,” which called for city building around an identifiable core modeled after traditional civic centers, an idea he had previously accepted. In the plan for Tokyo he rejected the notion of civic center and turned to the linear form that he called the “civic axis.” Combined with the arterial movement that sustained urban life, the civic axis would serve as the symbol of an “open” modern city, just as a cathedral sitting at the center of a centripetal organization was the symbol of the medieval city.  What distinguished Tange’s civic spine from the precedents of linear cities was an organic idea. In a Metabolist manner, Tange invoked a biological metaphor to defend his linear plan, comparing the transformation of a city from a radial form to a linear form with the evolution of living organisms. He contended that the amoeba and the asteroid have radial centripetal forms, while vertebrates have lin- ear bone structures with parallel radiations because the radial pattern was no longer suitable for complex functions and had to evolve into a linear one. Tange’s “civic spine” was characterized by a sophisticated cyclical system of transportation, which consisted of a double-loop composition in each link for different speeds of automo- bile traffic. He claimed that this cyclical unit would make gradual expansion of the civic axis possible: at each stage of development the system was complete, but it would always be possible to add another unit, thus making the city growth a vital process.  The awareness of urban transformation and the consideration of adaptability not only informed the design of general structure, but were also presented on a local scale. Tange noted that under the regulation of the superstructure, short-term ele- ments, like housing, should be reserved as expressions of individual choice and changing fashion. In the plan for Tokyo, the A-shaped dwelling structures demon- strated the effort to bring the “permanent elements” and the “transient elements” into a harmonious whole. The enormous concrete structures provided artificial grounds made possible by communal investment, upon which individual invest- ments would take place in the form of private constructions that would reflect  
diversity of tastes and needs. Tange expected the longer life cycles of the infrastruc- ture to be organically connected with the shorter life cycles of individual construc- tions to propel the city’s evolution.  Tange’s concept of an open, adaptable linear megacity, however, was not agreed upon by all architectural critics of his time, and some accurately pointed out the uto- pian nature of this project. Christopher Alexander criticized Tange’s fishbone struc- ture as a “tree,” rigidly hierarchical and monotonous, without the flexibility and openness of a real urban society.” Peter Smithson liked the “pyramidal housing units over-the-water’; however, he was unconvinced by the idea of adaptability and noted: “unhappily as in a thousand student projects (from the time of Le Corbusier's Algiers project onwards), the romance of the idea of ‘each man building his own house’ on man-made platforms, stands unsupported by a demonstration of how it is to be done.””’ Even within the circle of Metabolism, there were debates on the criteria of differentiating long-term structures and short-term elements. Fumi- hiko Maki noted that Tange’s mega-form was based on the assumption that designers would be able to ascertain which functions to be dealt with had long cycles of change, and which shorter; however, this might not be the case. He wrote:  Can the designer successfully base his concept on the idea that, to give an example, transportation methods will change less rapidly than the idea of a desirable residence or retail outlet? Sometimes, the impact and momentum of technology become so great that a change occurs in the basic skeleton of social and physical structure. It is difficult to predict to which part of a pond a stone will be thrown and which way the ripples will spread.”°  Thus Maki argued that even though a megastructure allowed for changeable infill, the main structure itself could become obsolete and lead to the failure of the entire system.  An Unfolding Plan  Mobility, openness, and adaptability constitute three pillars of Tange’s plan, repre- sented in a bold vision projecting a future Tokyo based on a linear city principle and integrating infrastructure, urban space, and architecture into a dynamic system. The plan not only imposed a new pattern to regulate the city’s continuing growth, but demanded a complete redefinition of its social system based on these three charac- teristics that Tange deemed essential in contemporary society. He made accurate observations of Japan’s postwar cities, as the country underwent a fundamental reconstruction and pursued economic modernization. Tange approached these issues in a symbolic and utopian manner; however, his proposal encountered tech- nical problems and was also entangled in political and economic constraints. The relationship between order and spontaneity, both critical to a contemporary city, 
was fully represented in the plan but hardly reconciled. Here, the Metabolist notion of change was combined with the pursuit of monumentality, a quality Tange had developed in his earlier work. The result was an ideal city responding to the trans- formation of culture and attempting to provide a new communal symbol.  Although Tange failed to carry out the plan, his concept proved to be one that would profoundly influence Tokyo’s urban development in the following decades. While Tokyo retained its radial urban structure and fragmented urban landscape throughout the rest of the twentieth century, the city has today been brought into a larger linear urban cluster, known as “Tokaido Megalopolis” after Jean Gottmann’s 1961 study.?” By 1970, the linear region between Tokyo and Osaka called Tokaido had linked together a series of big cities and accommodated around 40% of Japan’s total population. The Tokaido high-speed rail line serves as the spine of this meg- alopolis, just as the linear highway system in the 1960 plan was the spine of the new Tokyo. Not long after the publication of Tange’s Plan for Tokyo, the reclamation of Tokyo Bay was also underway, although not in the systematic manner Tange envisioned. Many mega-projects have been built or are under construction on arti- ficial islands in the bay, including some new business districts, such as Tokyo Tel- eport Town and Minato Mirai 21.”  To a great extent, the Plan for Tokyo, 1960 epitomizes Tange’s ideas of archi- tecture and urbanism, which continued to inform his practice. In some cases, a frag- ment of the plan was isolated and applied to a particular building project with a more refined tectonic vocabulary. For instance, Tokyo National Gymnasium with  its tent-shaped structure was reminiscent of the residential megastructure floating on the bay. Shizuoka Press and Broadcasting Center, with several cantilevered office spaces clipped on a singular cylindrical shaft, commemorated the idea of “core.” On other occasions, part of the unfulfilled vision of Tokyo Bay was devel- oped into more a concrete urban design and applied to a particular urban area. For instance, the new headquarters of Dentsu Corporation in Tokyo’s Tsukiji District was conceived as a seed project to develop a central business district based on the “three-dimensional generative network” delineated for the central spine in the Tokyo Bay Plan. The complex was characterized by an enormous space lattice: rectangular cores soaring up and lifting gigantic horizontal trusses carrying inhab- itable spaces that were interconnected in the air, with a tendency to grow into the rest of the city. In a similar manner, a reduced version of the linear mega-form was used in the 1965 plan for the reconstruction of Skopje in Macedonia and in the cen- tral axis of the 1970 World Expositions in Osaka, which were given the metaphoric names of “City Gate” and “Trunk” respectively.  Yamanashi Press and Broadcasting Center, built in the city of Kofu in 1964, exem- plified this cross-scale and coherent approach to architecture and urban design in Tange’s built work. It was conceived as an “open-ended” building and a miniature city based on the “pilotis and core” system. Tange wrote of this project: “The build- ing is at once a single spatial type capable of change and growth, and a space estab- lished within a three-dimensional communications grid. This is a proposal for both a  
single building and for urban design.””? The building took the form of a three- dimensional lattice made up of the vertical cores carrying people, material, energy, and information up and down, the horizontal containers housing various programs, and a few “voids” randomly left on different levels. The capacity for accommodat- ing future growth and change was achieved through the differentiation of structural and non-structural elements. The structural elements, in this case comprising 16 cylindrical towers, were the “vertical streets” of a city, providing the necessary infrastructure for all sorts of developments. As Tange explained, “The result is that the vertical roads are built, but unoccupied voids remain here and there. These will provide the extra space needed for expansion.”*® The project thus reconfirms Tange’s ideal urban form emanating from the Tokyo Bay project, which remains one of the most powerful statements of urbanism addressing the transformation of contemporary culture centered on mobility, openness, and adaptability.  Notes  * Image credit: Akio Kawasumi.  1. Oscar Newman, ed., New Frontiers in Architecture: CIAM 59 in Otterlo (New York: Uni- verse Books, 1961), 7.  2. Ibid, 184.  3. Reyner Banham, Megastructure: Urban Futures of the Recent Past (New York: Harper and  ow, 1976); Manfredo Tafuri and Francesco Dal Co, Architettura contemporanea (Milan:  Mondadori Electa, 1976).  4. Kenzo Tange, “Recollections: Architect Kenzo Tange, 2,” Japan Architect (May 1985): 10.  bid, 12.  6. Tange talked about the issue of “new tradition” when he interviewed Antonin Raymond  ‘or a Japanese radio program broadeast on April 27, 28, and 29, 1960. A partial English  version of this interview was published as “Dialogue: Questions by Mr. Kenzo Tange  and Answers by Mr. Antonin Raymond Broadeast on April 27", 28" and 29", 1960 in  Japanese,” Architectural Design (February 1961): 56-7.  7. Newman, New Frontiers, 184.  8. Kenzo Tange, Katsura: Nihon kenchiku ni okeru dento to sozo |Katsura: Tradition and Cre- ation in Japanese Architecture | (Tokyo: ZOkeisha, 1960). Kenzo Tange, Noboru Kawa- zoe, and Yoshio Watanabe, Ise: Nihon kenchiku no genkei |Ise: Prototype of Japanese Architecture] (Tokyo: Asahi Shinbunsha, 1962). Katsura was a collaborative work with the architectural photographer Yasuiro Ishimoto with an introduction by Walter Gro- pius, who visited Japan on a Rockefeller Foundation grant in 1954 and made a pilgrim- age to Katsura Villa. Ise was co-written with Kawazoe with photography by Yoshio Watanabe and was first published in Japanese in 1962.  9. Fumihiko Maki, Investigations in Collective Form (St. Louis, MO: Washington University Press, 1964); Banham, Megastructure. Maki was the first to use the term “megastructure” in a publication.  
PART V  THE 1960s AND 1970s 
Introauction QUESTIONING MODERN WORLDS  Alexander Eisenschmidt  For architecture, the 1960s and 1970s were framed by the dissolution of CIAM and the First International Architecture Exhibition in Venice. But the mentality of these years might best be described as the time before and after 1968; which is to say, the years between Jerry Lee Lewis’ “Great Balls of Fire” (1957) and the premature dis- solution of the Sex Pistols (1978), years of protest that challenged the status quo. Equally, it was the time of remembering, since forgetting had happened far too quickly after World War II; of re-engaging history (particularly the dramatic parts); and of envisioning another kind of city and architecture for another kind of society. It was also a moment of pause within the path of modernity, when seemingly estab- lished paradigms of modernism were questioned, challenged, and detoured.  In the aftermath of World War II, under the auspices of reconstruction, many modern dreams of the 1920s and 1930s were implemented at a large scale. Massive building ensembles, even entire cities, were to be rebuilt on an unprecedented scale from Japan to Spain, resulting in the wide-reaching implementation of modern set- tlement patterns and construction techniques. While the forces of war had previ- ously accelerated research into and implementation of new material dimensions and assembly techniques, these developments later found their way into post- war mass-production of architecture and urbanism. In addition, the formation of the Eastern and Western Blocs expedited many of the rebuilding efforts on both sides. While modernist principles were prominent forces in postwar reconstruc- tion, the dream of a unified vision (from Le Corbusier via Rudolf Schwarz to Max Bill) never came to pass.  Instead, geographical changes in the constellation of the architectural scene that now included a wider network of protagonists, together with generational conflicts that increasingly questioned modernist agendas and their reliance on technology, motivated a younger generation of architects and urbanists to move new sets of values into the foreground. As the previous chapters have indicated, several influ- ential projects had already announced the shift in attitude by the 1950s. Examples include Oscar Niemeyer’s work in Brazil, from his own private house (Canoas  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
House) in Rio de Janeiro to his collaborations with Lucio Costa (on a much larger scale — Brasilia); the buildings and plans that were implemented in Algiers and Morocco by Fernand Pouillon; the office of Candilis, Josic, and Woods; and projects in Japan and England that were driven by biological processes and sociological stud- ies respectively. One of the most striking demonstrations of diverging ideas during this time was the urban design competition for Berlin in 1958 (“Hauptstadt Berlin’), where rigid modernist schemes were exhibited next to organicist and, occasionally even, playful urbanisms. One year later, the geographic and generational conflicts escalated during the final meeting of CIAM, which sealed the fate of that organization.  Aldo van Eyck charged the older generation with “betray[ing] society in betray- ing the essence of contemporary thought,” and added, “Nobody can really live in what they concoct.”’ In essence, he and his allies questioned what they saw as the universalist approach of CIAM and aimed at shifting emphasis to notions of community, user participation, and social organization. “Modern Architecture,” for the members of Team 10, was “firmly attached to the architec- tural problems of around 1920,”* which since had long been superseded. Team 10’s fascination with human relations and the complex patterns of interaction within the city led to a new understanding of what they called “levels of association,” which ran counter to the programmatically divided Functional City of the Athens Charter. Modern architecture had lost touch with contemporary relationships between house, street, district, and city — a verdict that drew attention to the social realities of present-day life and called on architecture and urbanism to find forms that would be able to represent these new conditions. As Team 10 members generally, and Alison and Peter Smithson especially recognized, the potentials of working-class street life in the existing city could give shape and form to new projects.  By the end of the 1950s, the interest in the current condition combined with dissatisfaction with modernist totalities developed into directions that often seemed diametrically opposed. One of these tendencies was the re-imagination of material properties. The rough textures and raw surfaces in Le Corbusier’s Unité d’Habitation in Marseilles represented not only a departure from the smooth sur- faces of prewar modernism but came to be seen as a way of exposing and expres- sing both the material conditions and mechanical and structural elements of a building; which is to say, as a form of communication. In the work of James Stirling and James Gowan, for example, these material tendencies were combined with an  expressive functionalism, resulting in a deliberate manipulation of the fundamental ideas of modernism.  But Stirling was only able to achieve these new architectural forms, driven by programmatic extrapolations, through a heightened awareness of history, one that utilized precedents not to recap the past but to mold a new present. Unlike early modernism’s intentional leap into the present, without detouring through the recent past, history became a driving force in the form-finding processes of archi- tecture by the 1960s. For some, even the search for transcendent architectural 
values and truths were again made possible through a reevaluation of traditions. While firmly rooted in early modernist ideas and committed to the more recent modernism of a New Monumentality, Louis I. Kahn combated some of its most important tropes (the “free plan” and simplified functionalism) in his search for an “architecture of connection.” In the chapter on the Salk Institute, Daniel Friedman shows that the “type-forms” employed by Kahn were drawn “into a larger picture that both incorporated and transcended the building’s deeply thought pragmatism.” In the work of both Stirling and Kahn, modernism was taken on as a project worth extending, but under new sets of historical references. In terms that could easily be applied to this work, Alan Colquhoun observed that “Modernism was to survive, but only after abandoning its totalizing claims and by a process of self-cancellation.”*  One of the most potent engagements with history came from Italy with the neo- rationalism of the Tendenza movement, which, under the guidance of Aldo Rossi and Giorgio Grassi, sought to recognize and work within the limits of architecture. Troubled by postwar consumerism and its threat to architecture, the discipline was to retreat into its own confines in order to not be overrun by the overpowering forces of the market or other fields. While modernism commonly sought to over- turn current conditions in order to remake the world, Rossi speculated on resisting them through an architecture of relative autonomy. Operating within and through history was a matter of analyzing urban artifacts and morphologies in the history of the city, detecting inherent formal typologies in buildings of the past, and utilizing these formal types as compositional vehicles to contribute monumental buildings toward a collective memory. For the Gallaratese apartment block, completed in 1973, Rossi recalled the traditional Milanese tenement; and in the Teatro del Mondo of 1979 the floating theater evoked the very same typology in the history of Venice. As Mary Lou Lobsinger outlines in her chapter on the latter project, the Teatro would “become part of the city” as it participated in the realities of Venice and the importations and exportations of its image — an analogous architecture that in all its disciplinary focus was acutely linked to the urbanity that surrounded it.  At the time when Rossi’s international status reached new heights in Europe and the United States, other works surfaced from previous obscurity. By 1974 Portugal had emerged as a new democracy after long years under dictatorship, giving expo- sure to the work of Alvaro Siza. Similarly, the work of Carlo Scarpa was only slowly becoming noticed by the late 1970s, toward the end of his life. Michael Cadwell’s detailed chapter on Scarpa’s Brion Cemetery explains how the organization of rela-  tionships between materials, dimensions, craft, and circulation often led to surpris- ing architectural constellations rooted in a “strange sensibility.” While Scarpa’s elaborate, invented details necessitated Venetian craftsmanship, Siza’s projects point toward another kind of contextual link related to site. But as Christian G4nshirt explains in his chapter on the Swimming Pool on the Beach of Lega, contextual relationships were not the “artful idealization of nature ... but the expo- sure and restrained presentation of a primal, wild, inhospitable situation.” This new 
focus on local contexts would also become the point of departure for theories such as Kenneth Frampton’s “critical regionalism,” intended as a form of resistance to cultural homogeneity or “universal civilization” — essentially countering interna- tional modernism.  Alongside those developments, unparalleled projects emerged from many other countries, some of which had only gained independence from colonial rule in the 1940s. Geoffrey Bawa in Sri Lanka, Balkrishna Doshi in India, Hassan Fathy in Egypt, and Glenn Murcutt in Australia all found ways to promote an architecture that engaged local specificities. Kazi Ashraf's chapter identifies Doshi’s work as simultaneously indebted to Le Corbusier and Kahn (with whom Doshi had previ- ously collaborated) and in touch with India’s ancient civilization. Out of this combination of references Doshi attempted to create a new modern Indian architecture. The chapter by Maryam Gusheh and Catherine Lassen highlights Murcutt’s use of local timber and consideration of local climate in his design for the Marie Short House, which according to the authors forms an architecture that combines a local familiarity with material abstraction. Hassan Radoine’s chapter directs attention to the larger repercussions of Fathy’s efforts in the region. With the publication of Architecture for the Poor in 1970,* however, Fathy influenced the discourse far beyond the region by outlining the construction of a new village via the participation of its inhabitants, who used local techniques and materials. The ingenuities of local forces and the inclusion of inhabitants into the design and building process simultaneously foregrounded a new form of populism and con-  tributed to the emerging interest in the existing city.  In the West a similar dualism appeared in the early work of Robert Venturi. Mar- tino Stierli’s chapter on the Vanna Venturi House outlines the expressive registers displayed by the building (classical, vernacular/ popular, and modern) and explains that this “invocation initiated and preluded the classical and vernacular revivals that informed postmodernist architecture in the three subsequent decades.” For Venturi and his later partner, Denise Scott Brown, popular culture — from TV commercials to billboards — rendered previous forms of urban space obsolete and became a source for developing “a changing architectural sensibility”’ that superseded con- ventional aesthetic preferences, functional paradigms, and formal typologies.  The pop consumerism that Venturi and Scott Brown experienced first-hand was in Europe initially seen as exotic and only slowly became a more integrated per- sonal experience. In England, for example, this transition is visible in the depiction of consumer objects by the Independent Group versus the broadcasting of archi- tectural pop by Archigram. The American vernacular — the one that Venturi and Scott Brown in collaboration with Steven Izenour felt architects could “learn from” — became for the members of the Archigram group the vehicle for visualizing anew kind of architecture and a new public entirely; one that would speak “to the cultural imagining of the epoch,” as Sarah Deyong writes in her chapter on Archigram’s pursuit of style. Indeed, by 1971, high-voltage, color-saturated, and slogan-aided architectural drawings (in the style of Archigram) became the basis for a building  
in the center of Paris — only this time, the drawings were not by Archigram mem- bers but the then relatively unknown Renzo Piano and Richard Rogers, whose Centre Pompidou would couple the technological ingenuities of Cedric Price’s Fun Palace with the logics of Archigram’s Instant City. This not only expressed the adaptability that architecture had long sought but, as Hadas Steiner describes in her chapter, the Centre Pompidou’s “attempt to address the idea of culture defined as the dissemination of information” made an important contribution in a time of visual saturation and social connectivity.  The radicalization of contemporary life proposed by these young practitioners resonated in images of the city as decentralized, free, and in motion. Unlike CIAM’s city of the urban core with designated outskirts, the center was now seen to be everywhere. Reyner Banham had already challenged CIAM’s zoned urban- ism in 1959 by combining the situationist psychogeographic drift with his love for Los Angeles. His essay, “City as Scrambled Egg” effectively produced a new urban image and introduced a new outlook on postwar modernization, communication, and leisure.° By 1971 Banham had published his account of Los Angeles as an exhilarating new form of urban ecology. Only one year later, Venturi, Scott Brown, and Izenour published Learning from Las Vegas,’ a book that sought to sus- pend judgment on a popular American city in order to invent new ways of looking at what was commonly regarded as taboo. Here, the increasing suburbanization and decentralization of the existing city that was being propelled by new electronic technologies and mass media was for Venturi and Scott Brown “almost all right” and, after all, inescapable. Joining these explorations was a long list of writings that studied urban life and repositioned architecture’s relationship to the city, includ- ing: Aldo Rossi’s city of urban artifacts (Architecture of the City); the popular city of Venturi, Scott Brown, and Izenour; the traditional city of Robert Krier’s Stadtraum; the Collage City of Colin Rowe and Fred Koetter; the congested city of Rem Koolhaas’ Delirious New York; and the experiential city of Bernard Tschumi’s Manhattan Transcripts.”  This latest focus on the urban condition took the city’s past and present as starting points in a search for new forms of urban architecture. Much of the skepticism toward modernist ideas came from a reevaluation of urban life, which had been substantially affected by the modernization of postwar reconstruction and urban growth. The political and social movements of 1968 had a strong impact on these theories. After all, the student protests, political upheavals, and workers strikes across the world were primarily concerned with policies, decision-making, and urbanity in general. By the mid-1970s, however, architecture’s position within urban culture and its social responsibilities were increasingly questioned. The postmodern turn to historical references (neatly coinciding with the rise of neo-con- servatism, visible in the election of Margaret Thatcher in 1979 and Ronald Reaganin 1980) would eventually revoke architecture’s heightened insecurity but, at its best, only playfully reposition architectural form and ornament. With the legendary La Strada Novissima at the Venice Biennale of 1980, architectural postmodernism 
found its most influential celebration. Among the 20 facades that were staged along the interior street of the Corderie dell’ Arsenale, two contributions set themselves apart: the installations of Rem Koolhaas and Frank Gehry. With their non- conformity in mind, the 1960s and 1970s might best be understood as one of the most contentious and, therefore, productive periods of the twentieth century. For that reason alone these years might hold the key to many of today’s misunder- standings, for going beyond the modern was then as much about a return to the past as about a different conception of the future — the one that we have inherited.  Notes  1. Aldo van Eyck, “Is Architecture Going to Reconcile Basic Values?” in Writings, ed. Vincent Ligteljin and Francis Strauven (Amsterdam: SUN, 2008), 202.  2. Jacob Berend Bakema, “What Became of CLAM?” Architectural Review (April 1961): 226.  3. Alan Colquhoun, Modern Architecture (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002), 254.  4. Hassan Fathy, Construire avec le people: histoire d’un village d’Egypte: Gourna (Paris: Sindbad, 1970). First published as Gourna: A Tale of Two Villages (Cairo: Ministry of Culture, 1969).  5. Denise Scott Brown, “Learning from Pop,” Casabella (December 1971): 359.  6. Reyner Banham, “City as Scrambled Egg,” Cambridge Opinion, no.17 (1959): 18-23, and Los Angeles: The Architecture of Four Ecologies (Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1971).  7. Robert Venturi, Denise Scott Brown, and Steven Izenour, Learning from Las Vegas (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1972).  8. Aldo Rossi, L’architettura della citta (Padova: Marsilio Editori, 1966); Robert Krier, Urban Space/Stadtraum, trans. Christine Czechowski and George Black [1975] (New York: Riz- zoli, 1979); Colin Rowe and Fred Koetter, Collage City (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1978), Rem Koolhaas, Delirious New York: A Retroactive Manifesto for Manhattan (New York: Oxford University Press, 1978); Bernard Tschumi, The Manhattan Tran- scripts (London: Academy Editions, 1981).  Bibliography  Bakema, Jacob Berend. “What Became of CIAM?” Architectural Review (April 1961): 226.  Banham, Reyner. “City as Scrambled Egg.” Cambridge Opinion, no.17 (1959): 18-23.  Los Angeles: The Architecture of Four Ecologies. Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1971.  Brown, Denise Scott. “Learning from Pop.” Casabella (December 1971): 359.  Colquhoun, Alan. Modern Architecture. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002.  Fathy, Hassan. Construire avec le people: histoire d’un village d’Egypte: Gourna. Paris: Sindbad, 1970.  
VANNA VENTURI HOUSE  Robert Venturi  Martino Stierli  Robert Venturi, Vanna Venturi House, Chestnut Hill, Pennsylvania, 1964.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Mother's House  The Vanna Venturi House in Chestnut Hill, Pennsylvania, lovingly known as the “Mother’s House,” was arguably Robert Venturi’s quintessential architectural statement. It was planned and built between 1959 and 1964, a wide time span that is telling of the exceedingly large amount of thought and intellectual work that went into its realization. A house of modest scale, commissioned by the architect’s widow mother, is a typical brief for a young architect’s first commission, for obvi- ous social and economic reasons. In many ways, little houses are a testing ground for the young architect to consider, evaluate, modify, and adjust his/her theoretical conception of space against the reality. Given the special relationship between architect and client, such early projects for a small house typically are more daring and experimental than larger buildings for corporate clients. Ideally, they expand the known limitations of construction, excel on the level of aesthetics, and enhance contemporary discourse by exemplifying the theoretical standpoint of an emerging voice. For these reasons, such houses bear great potential for the discipline of archi- tecture, being capable of transcending current standards and opening up new hor- izons for this specific form of knowledge.’  “The Biggest Small Building”  It is for this reason that, paradoxically, small first houses often reach a celebrity status that transcends by far their initially modest nature. This is certainly the case in the Mother’s House. Deemed by many to be Robert Venturi’s finest achieve- ment in a long and controversial career, it stands handsomely besides his two major theoretical contributions, both of which were pivotal in establishing a paradigm shift in architectural discourse from late modern to postmodern.” The canonical importance of this small house for the architecture of the past 50 years is reflected in the numerous awards it received. The house won instant recognition with the sole honorable mention in the 1965 Art and Architecture Awards competition of the Architectural League of New York, and by being chosen as one of the projects in “40 under 40: Exhibition of young talent in architecture,” in New York in 1966. In the same year the American Builder selected the house as a prototype for future res- idential buildings. In retrospect, it received the American Institute of Architects’ (AIA) Twenty-five Year Award in 1989, preluding Venturi’s selection for the 1991 Pritzker Architecture Prize. In 1992, the Vanna Venturi House was dedicated its own monograph, in which the complex design process is meticulously docu- mented.’ In his essay commemorating the occasion, the eminent architectural his- torian Vincent Scully, author of the introduction to Venturi’s Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture and avid promoter of the Philadelphia-based architect’s work and early career, qualified the house as “the biggest small building of the 
second half of the twentieth century.”* In 2005 it featured among “twelve master-  works of modern American architecture” in a series of postage stamps issued by the US Postal Service. The house received the 2012 AIA Philadelphia Landmark Build- ing Award, and in 2013 was featured as one of “10 Buildings That Changed Amer- ica” in a TV production on the national Public Broadcasting Service (PBS).  The Vanna Venturi House is situated in a suburban setting at 8330 Millman Street in the Philadelphia neighborhood of Chestnut Hill. Set back from the street and connected to it by a subtly angled driveway, it was built on the rear edge of a lot newly acquired by the client. The plans and elevations of the house — whose con- ception coincided with Venturi’s writing of Complexity and Contradiction in Architec- ture — epitomize the architect’s interest in mannerist ambiguity, historical reference, and the layering of space. The front elevation with its characteristic split gabled roof and its large square opening at the center is strictly symmetrical, of “almost Palla- dian rigidity.”” The symmetry is subtly broken and dialectically subverted by the system of window openings, which reflect the interior spatial configuration: The horizontal strip on the right indicates the kitchen behind; it is counterbalanced by a small square opening for the bathroom and the large, almost disproportionate lat- tice window of the guest bedroom. This contradiction confirms the notion funda- mental for Venturi’s architectural thinking that the facade acts as a zone of conflict between the public and domestic domains. Accordingly, it is conceived as a screen that both represents a building’s public face and displays its interior spatial organ- ization; it serves as a stage upon which the drama of this conflict is performed and resolved. Therein, for Venturi, lies precisely architecture’s defining moment. As he states in Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture:  Designing from the outside in, as well as the inside out, creates necessary tensions, which help make architecture. Since the inside is different from the outside, the wall — the point of change — becomes an architectural event. Architecture occurs at the meeting of interior and exterior forces and use of space...Architecture as the wall between the inside and the outside becomes the spatial record of this resolution and its drama.°  Flatness  Besides the troubled symmetry, the ostentatious flatness is the facade’s other strik- ing characteristic, an aspect that is emphasized by the prime medium of contem- porary architectural representation: photography. It seems, as Stanislaus von Moos has pointed out with regard to the other major building of Venturi’s early career, the Guild House in Philadelphia, “intentionally thin and un-tectonic, not much more than the two-dimensional image of a facade.””’ As a matter of fact, both the front and the rear facades make a point in extending horizontally and vertically beyond the building’s margins, thus emphasizing the notion of a screen that is 
merely leaning against the house. As such, it cannot be considered as an extension of the interior but has emancipated itself from it and takes on an autonomous dimen- sion. It serves as amedium between the two spatial realms. Itis this transformation of the facade into a flat surface that has been theorized by Fredric Jameson, among others, as epitomizing postmodernism.* The quasi-civic front of the house is coun- tered by the ducked back elevation and its irregular distribution of openings. Moving around the house is pivotal for understanding and appreciating the complex organ- ization of planes and spaces as well as the contradictory, multiple function of indi- vidual elements. Thus, what appears at the front like a massive, broadly based chimney turns out to be the clerestory of the second-floor studio, which served as Robert Venturi’s private room in the first years after its completion.  At the main facade, the transition between exterior and interior spaces is mediated by one of Venturi’s characteristically ambiguous interstitial spaces clearly cut out at the center, thus lending depth and signaling spatial complexity in an oth- erwise conspicuously flat, screen-like front. The entrance area defined by this con- figuration is lit from above through a vertical channel, which serves at the same time to split the gables in two. Its visual appearance is symbolically reinforced by a horizontal beam and a competing, fragmentary semicircular arch; a conflation of motifs familiar from palimpsest-like brick walls in ancient (European) cities.  Architectural Promenade  While the strictly rectangular ground floor plan preserves the vestiges of a symmet- rical configuration, the architect superimposes a secondary spatial system of diag- onal interior walls, a feature familiar from the Philadelphia School’s buildings of those years, such as, for example, Louis Kahn’s Goldenberg House project (1959). The visitor’s path from the entrance is bent and twisted several times so as to produce a spatially intricate, exciting architectural promenade that opens up to a generous living room, from where the kitchen, the master bedroom, and the guest room can be accessed. Reminiscent of English country houses and of Frank Lloyd Wright’s family residences, the center of the plan and of the main space is taken up by the fireplace and chimney, around which is wrapped the stair that leads up to the second floor. It is not an ordinary stair of common form and proportions, but one that is — again — in ostentatious conflict with the chimney with which it competes: on the ground level, it extends well into the room, serving at the same time as a spatial partition. After a few steps, it is reduced to a narrow passage that allows the visitor only barely to continue further up. Ven- turi’s manifest interest in the stair as a spatial agent is taken up again in the famous little “nowhere-stair” that leads from the second-floor studio to nowhere. Being a quasi-surrealist element seemingly out of a boy’s dream, it was inspired by a small stair that leads to the large tower of the Art and Architecture Library at the Uni- versity of Pennsylvania by Frank Furness (1888-91),” the demolition of which 
Venturi and his future partner Denise Scott Brown successfully opposed in the early 1960s. The interior of the Mother’s House thus contradicts many critics who have seen in Venturi an “imagineer” less interested in issues of space than in visual representation, a verdict not least based on polemical statements against the International Style and its premises by the architect and his partner Scott Brown themselves. In Learning from Las Vegas, they dismissed the notion of architecture as space, suggesting that attention be shifted to its symbolic dimension.’® That this rhetoric does not do justice to the Mother’s House’s interior configuration has been rightly pointed out by David Brownlee: “For all the flatness of the facades, this was an architecture of space.”'*  The Building as Exhibition  The Vanna Venturi House is thus characterized by a dialectic interrelationship between intricate interior spatial organization and two-dimensional flatness on the facade, both of which aspects together synthesize into an idea of a complex and contradictory archi- tecture. But the facade takes on another function that is fundamental for Venturi’s archi- tectural thinking. Not merely confined to the role of an interface between exterior and interior spaces mediating and juxtaposing the two realms, it serves also as ground for an architectural exhibition. As Venturi and Scott Brown have stated with regard to some of their small house projects that followed the Vanna Venturi House:  ...the heuristic use of historical models was important in the development of their designs and therefore helpful in describing them (but not because we think it is nec- essarily the right method for all architects or for seeing all issues and solving all pro-  blems. We unashamedly lift our analogs out of their historical context...”'?  For the architects, referencing the vocabulary of the historical language of archi- tecture is a method for contemporary design. Theirs is a formalistic approach in that an analogy beyond the formal is explicitly not intended. The Vanna Venturi House references three different registers of architectural language, assembling them into an almost encyclopedic display of architectural history: the classical; the vernacular/ popular; and the modern. Their invocation initiated and preluded the classical and vernacular revivals that informed postmodernist architecture in the three subse- quent decades.  Concerning the references to the classical language of architecture, Venturi illuminated this aspect of his design in his 1982 Walter Gropius lecture delivered at the Harvard University Graduate School of Design in a “postscript” on his Mother’s House:  My mother’s house...is an explicitly Classical building in the substance of its plan and form and in the ornament of its elevation. ...But the house, though Classical, is not 
pure. Within the Classical aesthetic it conforms to a Mannerist tradition which admits contradiction within the ideal order and thereby enhances the ideal quality of that order through contrast with it. ...Some Classical and contradictory aspects of my mother’s house are: the plan and the front and back elevations are symmetrical, about a central axis, but within the consistent perimeter of the plan, the extremities vary to accommodate exceptions in the plan; and within the consistent profile of the elevations, the extremities vary to conform the exceptions within. The configuration of windows is asymmetrical, if balanced, for the same reason. The central core of the house is a solid, not the void typical of a Palladian plan. The solid core consists of a fireplace, chimney, and staircase, like that of a New England house of the 17° cen- tury. The central entrance reads on the front elevation as a void, rather big in scale like that ofa porticoed Palladian villa, but it is contradicted by the blank, set-back wall of the solid core which is itself distorted in plan to accommodate circulation around it. Symmetry in plan is therefore modified at the extremities via exceptions, and nearer the centre via distortions.’  Operating within a classical frame of reference, Venturi displays a mannerist sen- sibility, and the buildings he explicitly refers to are often from the pertaining his- torical age.'* In the Vanna Venturi House, Palladio’s and Alessandro Vittoria’s Nymphaeum in the garden of the Villa Barbaro at Maser (circa 1560) served as an explicit reference,” but a number of additional buildings may also be cited as being part of the visual repository of the Mother’s House: Michelangelo’s Porta Pia in Rome (1561-65) for the general layout of the main facade as well as the superimposition of gable and are motifs; the broken gables in the main elevation of Sir John Vanbrugh’s Blenheim Palace (1705-24); and even details of the neo- baroque exuberance of Armando Brasini’s Convento del Buon Pastore near Rome (1929-43) as well as the Italian architect’s use of layered space in the (now demol- ished) Forestry Building at the EUR in Rome from 1942."°  All of these buildings were reproduced in Complexity and Contradiction in Archi- tecture, some of them on the basis of Venturi’s own photographs. The American architect travelled through Great Britain and southern Europe extensively, first on a summer trip as a student in 1948, and then again on the occasion of this fel- lowship at the American Academy in Rome from 1954 to 1956. These travels gave him the opportunity to study historical and contemporary architecture at first hand and on site, much of it under the guidance of or stipulated by art historian Richard Krautheimer.’’ The back elevation of the Vanna Venturi House displays a tripartite thermal window, referencing both Roman architecture as well as its interpretation in the buildings and drawings of Palladio and Venturi’s former mentor Louis Kahn, who had himself studied Roman architecture on site during his tenure at the Amer- ican Academy in Rome in 1950/51.'* Venturi’s use of overhead light may also be a digest of his Roman experience. While Kahn later developed this feature into per- fection in his museum buildings, Venturi’s use of it is most likely based on his own in-situ experience.’ 
Kahn is not the only modern architect Venturi alludes to in his Mother’s House. The broken pediment motif, while also having older predecessors, is clearly inspired by the Roman architect Luigi Moretti’s Casa del Girasole apartment build- ing in Via Parioli in Rome from 1950, a building Venturi once described as “one of the most inspiring buildings of my life.”*° Moretti’s Girasole and his slightly earlier Casa Astrea (1949), also in Rome, equally display the treatment of the facade as a thin, atectomic screen, a feature deemed characteristically postmodern but obvi- ously having its own genealogy that dates back to the immediate Italian postwar period. Other elements in Venturi’s design pay tribute to the vocabulary of the International Style, which in this way becomes historicized as yet another formal repertoire from which a contemporary architect around 1960 can borrow. This applies in particular to the exposed steel column in the living room, which is rem- iniscent of Le Corbusier’s pilotis (such as in the celebrated Villa Savoye in Poissy,  another of Venturi’s favorite buildings), the horizontal strip of windows in the main facade, another characteristically Corbusian feature, and, generally, the open plan of the house.  The exhibition of architectural styles and epochs in the Vanna Venturi House is completed by references to vernacular and popular traditions taken from the archi- tect’s mental musée imaginaire. (Contrary to Venturi’s later emphasis on the “clas- sical” nature of the house, he first published photographs of the completed building in 1965 under the heading of “A Justification of Pop Architecture.”)”’ If the architect had given his Mother's House a dress of cedar shingles in his early drawings (it was eventually built of stuccoed concrete), various reminiscences of the American Shin- gle Style remain in the executed building, most notably the low, near-to-the-ground pediment and the sash windows of McKim, Mead and White’s Low House in Bristol, Rhode Island (1887). Venturi read Vincent Scully’s study on the topic dur- ing his tenure at the American Academy in Rome, and the Vanna Venturi House would later be incorporated into the historian’s essay on the Shingle Style’s con- temporary heritage as a prominent example, another fact telling of the fruitful intel-  ectual exchange between architect and historian.” In this vein may also be mentioned other late nineteenth-century reformist architects and their contribu- tion to a new domestic architecture, most notably Sir Edwin Lutyens, who is fre- quently referred to in Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture and whose Middlefield House (1908) in Stapleford, Cambridgeshire, provided a model for the ostentatiously out-of-scale chimney in Venturi’s Beach House project, a pred- ecessor of his early designs for the Mother’s House (before this element was trans- formed into the more modest version of the executed building).”* Moreover, like tract houses in places like Levittown (which became the object of study in one of Venturi’s and Scott Brown’s co-taught research studios at Yale University in 1970),”* the Vanna Venturi House features a number of decorative ornamentations such as the moldings around the windows, the arch above the entrance, or the cor- nice-like element that girdles the house at the level of the windowsills. Another popular element is the color: originally painted taupe gray (in itself a statement 
for the “grays” as opposed to the “whites” in contemporary architectural discourse),”’ Venturi had the house repainted in green, apparently (and provoca- tively) reacting to a statement by modernist architect Marcel Breuer that this color was to be avoided.”®  These architectural references demonstrate Venturi’s extraordinary erudition as a practitioner of a learned and reflexive architecture. It has been pointed out that his pronounced knowledge of and interest in architectural history must be seen as a consequence of his exposure to the so-called “Princeton System” as an architectural student in the late 1940s and early 1950s. In a then seemingly antiquated educa- tional model, Princeton University’s School of Architecture kept affording the study of art and architectural history substantial attention, making it a singular stronghold among major American educational institutions in the Beaux-Arts tra- dition and against Bauhaus-influx.”” However, the various references to modern architecture and the International Style pointed out earlier also indicate that the prevalent evaluation of postmodern architecture as dogmatically opposing mod- ernism cannot be upheld. As Venturi’s architecture demonstrates, postmodernism should better be understood as a revisionist critique from within the tenets of mod- ernism that a radical break with it. Venturi’s architecture and the Mother’s House borrow from many, historically widely diverging sources. This indicates that the architect is really not interested in favoring a specific historical period or style (which would make him an epigone or a copyist), but rather in certain formal char- acteristics of architectural features from throughout history, including the recent past, that allow for an ambiguous reading.  Media Age Architecture  Ifthe Vanna Venturi House can be seen as an exhibition of architectural styles and histories, it is perhaps less important for the evaluation of its importance to metic- ulously chart the numerous individual sources. Rather, the historical significance of the building and its design method lies in the ready availability of visual historical reference of (almost) any kind. Seen this way, the Vanna Venturi House is a striking example of a media age architecture, a product of the era of reproducibility. Its author received his architectural and aesthetic training through photographic reproductions of buildings, and his own work is a fragmentary but conscious recon- struction based on a selection of these mentally stored images. To a certain degree, the characteristic museification of historical and contemporary architectural fea- tures in Venturi’s building may be compared to examples of historicist architec- ture.” However, if architects of the late nineteenth century had still striven for relative stylistic unity and had remained within an exclusively “high” architecture register, the postmodern practitioner is characteristically liberated from any such constrictions, having potentially at his or her disposal the imagery of the entire — Western, but increasingly global — visual culture. As the Vanna Venturi House 
demonstrates, the architect’s role goes much beyond the mere “select and arrange” of readily available visual elements; his task is to bring them into a meaningful arrangement. Needless to say, practices of citation and borrowing have been pres- ent throughout architectural history, as evidenced, for example, in the use of spoils from antiquity to modernity. Even seemingly iconoclastic modern architects such as Mies van der Rohe or Le Corbusier have been shown to more or less explicitly digest and cannibalize historical references such as Schinkel’s Berlin classicism or Palladio’s mannerism.”? In postwar and postmodern architecture however, this practice becomes a fundamental epistemological operation in that the broken rela- tionship to the past is ostentatiously reflected. Postmodern architecture produces meaning by ambiguously paying tribute and marking irreverence to the — historical or modernist — model at the same time.”°  The allusion to historical and vernacular models allows the architect to give a building architectural as well as cultural meaning. Symbolic meaning in architecture is indeed akey concern in the intellectual and built work of Venturi and Scott Brown, and this aspect can again be traced back to and illustrated in the Mother’s House. Its raison d’étre is, in architectural critic Paul Goldberger’s terms, “to explore the notion of what a house means, both architecturally and culturally, in the society of the pres- ent day.”’? Through the exaggerated scale of architectural elements such as the gable or the chimney discussed, the building evokes a “general domestic symbol- >? and visually plays upon the very — culturally transported — idea of a house. As Venturi explicates in Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture: “The front, in its conventional combinations of door, windows, chimney and gable, creates an almost symbolic image of a house.””’ Scully, among others, rightly pointed to the fact the Vanna Venturi House strongly resembled the “ur-dwelling as a child would draw it,”** an impression that is confirmed not only by the strong visual invocation of the symbolic elements of a house, but also by Venturi’s own drawings.  If the visual rhetoric of the house thus contributes toward a theoretical discourse on the primordial beginnings of architecture in the tradition of Marc-Antoine Laugier and others, in turn the exaggerated scale of various elements in both the exterior and the interior are reminiscent of the technique of blow-up and other strategies of de-familiarization employed by contemporary pop art. These artistic devices aimed at giving fresh and unexpected meaning to ordinary, often over- looked objects.”” As Stanislaus von Moos has pointed out, this strategy leads to a “built gap” in the buildings of Venturi and Scott Brown: the observer is aware of the difference between the historical and vernacular sources on the one hand and their contemporary interpretation on the other. The architects’ stance is not that of simple identification with the past or historicist make-believe, but of ironical distanciation. It is repetition, but with a difference.** This is the meaning and poten- tial of irony in postmodernist architecture: it should not be mistaken as mere for- mal fun in the sense of anything goes, but quite on the contrary be understood as a way to signal that the postmodern condition no longer allows a direct or innocent appropriation of history, modernity, and popular culture. The architect’s and  ism 
artist’s prime cultural and aesthetic task is to visually represent the broken and trou- bled relationship of his/her historical and cultural situation vis-a-vis the past and society at large. The technique of defamiliarization and the ensuing ironical stance may also be seen as an instance of an “allegorical” use of imagery in a postmod-  ernist vein as described by art critic and theorist Craig Owens.”  American Suburbia and Its Discontents  Given that the conspicuously exaggerated architectural elements of the Vanna Venturi House symbolize the very idea of the American dwelling, they also com- ment, whether consciously or not, on the American dream of life in a single-family house. Books like Richard Yates’ Revolutionary Road (1961) had already tarnished this ideal by addressing the stifling conformity this way of life imposed, especially on women. It is therefore not surprising that Vincent Scully, reflecting upon the famous photograph showing Vanna Venturi sitting in the entrance of her house, has inter- preted the building as an “anti-heroic and feminist” gesture against the “macho pre- tensions of architects” prevailing in the 1960s, and even not without pathos, “a harbinger of healthier things to come.”** In a similar vein, Alice T. Friedman has commented on the house as follows:  ...there was something peculiar and unsettling about the look of the oversimplified gable and the flat wall surface with all those architectural spare parts stuck onto it. Such an image of a suburban home — an image simultaneously comforting in its sim- plicity and jarring in its disjunctive complexity — could easily be read as an ironic com- mentary not simply on the traditions and language of architecture, but also on the American dream of life in a suburban, single-family home. ...Thus, while Venturi himself may not have wanted to focus on such a reading, there is no doubt that these themes constituted a significant part of the meaning of his works in their time.””  Seen in this way, the Mother’s House was an architectural swan song to an increas- ingly obsolete way of life, but one with an emancipatory and liberating tune.  From the very beginning, Venturi intended it to be a built manifesto of his archi- tectural theory and thinking. As noted, the house was conceived in parallel to the writing of Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture, where it was not only ana- lyzed in detail in the last chapter of the book (besides other early works and pro- jects). It was also presented as a quintessential object embodying the notion of a complex and contradictory architecture, along with its principle features of “ambiguity,” “both-and,” conventionality (as well as its transgression), or the dia- lectics between inside and outside, while remaining true to the “obligation toward the difficult whole”; a whole generated by the dialectical interrelationship and con- tradictory tension between competing elements. Thus, Venturi describes his early masterpiece as being: 
both complex and simple, open and close, big and little; some of its elements are good on one level and bad on another; its order accommodates the generic elements of the house in general, and the circumstantial elements of a house in particular. It achieves the difficult unite of a medium number of diverse parts rather than the easy unity of few or many motival parts.*°  Significantly, Venturi’s verbal interpretation was at least as important as the building itself for the dissemination of his ideas in contemporary architectural discourse. In fact, architecture and literature, building and text from the beginning formed a complex hybrid, a multimedia hypertext, as it were, and are hardly thinkable without one another. The Vanna Venturi House exists as much in the medium of the text as it does in the form ofa built structure. Venturi’s “text” was potentially “open” in the sense of the Italian semiotician Umberto Eco’s theory of signification in the contemporary work of art, according to which meaning cannot be found in the work itself, but in its “communicative structures,” that is, in the way the viewer or reader is addressed.** In the case of the Vanna Venturi House, its author acted as its prime reader, and through time, supplied a number of competing interpretations. In his first publication of the house in 1965, Venturi stressed its “pop” dimension, emphasizing the conven- tional aspects of the building, and defining the architect’s role as that ofa “combiner of old clichés ... in new contexts.”“” In Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture, he cited it as a model for a “mannerist” architecture. In his 1982 “postscript,” the architect underlined the “classical” dimension of the house. Finally, in his “Mother’s House 25 Years Later,” written on the occasion of the publication of the monograph dedicated to the design of the house, Venturi reread it as a predecessor of postmodernism and focused in particular on the symbolic dimension of his architecture. And he added: “That I saw and explained the house differently then from now is not a bad thing; it means its architecture has dimensions and makes sense from several perspectives.”  To underline the “openness” of a work of art is one thing; but Venturi’s shifting interpretations could also be seen as a strategic move to inscribe his creation with new meaning and signification according to changing moods in architectural dis- course. There is nothing wrong in that: it demonstrates that the modern (and perhaps more so, the postmodern) architect has to be as clever in managing media and publicity as in mastering the art of building or organizing space. Ifthe Vanna Venturi House has become an icon in the history of modern architecture, it is thus both for its indisputable spatial and formal qualities as well as its author’s insight that architecture, in the age of technical reproducibility, has more than ever become a form of discourse.  Notes * Image credit: Rollin LaFrance. Architectural Archives, University of Pennsylvania.  1. See Brett Steele and Francisco Gonzalez de Canales, ed., First Works: Emerging Architec- tural Experimentation of the 1960s e 1970s (London: Architectural Association, 2009). 
SALK INSTITUTE  Louis |. Kahn  Daniel S. Friedman  Louis I. Kahn, drawing, concrete formwork details for the Salk Institute for Biological Studies, January 10, 1963.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
HARD-WON CALM  The feeling that our present-day architecture needs embellishment stems in part from our tendency to fair joints out of existence — in other words, to conceal how parts are put together. If we were to train ourselves to draw as we build, from the bottom up, stopping our pencils at the joints of pouring or erecting, ornament would evolve out of our love for the perfection of construction and we would develop new methods of construction. It would follow that the pasting on of lighting and acoustical material, the burying of tortured unwanted ducts, conduits, and pipe- lines would become intolerable. How it was done, how it works, should filter through the entire process of building, to architect, engineer, builder, and craftsman in the trades.’  Little wonder arguments over Louis I. Kahn collect along the centerline of the Salk Institute, as though debate surrounding his truer intentions might somehow ? “Kahn was involved solely with the physical experience of physical form: with Empathy, though he did not call it that,” Vincent Scully wrote, 12 years after Kahn’s death.’ Kahn’s empathy is rarely contested, though the words he used to express it often are — for example, his famously having asked bricks what they “want to be.”* What scholars seem to disagree about most is the source of Kahn’s empathy — what it meant in practice,  influence the physical sensation of standing in its courtyard.  how it shaped his approach to problems of architectural form, and what those forms contribute to our understanding of modernity and “the haunting sorrows of twentieth century experience.”  For the 50 years since its completion, the Salk Institute has served not only as a  laboratory for the study of biological science, which continues to thrive; it has also served as a laboratory for the study of modern architectural history and theory, which leverages the building’s magnetism in their evolving assessments of form, function, technology, and representation. Yet as well traveled a topic as Salk is, there are many ways of doing it justice.° This chapter will further explore these themes through Kahn’s approach to construction, in particular his use of concrete, which Adrian Forty describes as “a process rather than a material,” a property befit- ting both Salk’s client and its program.”  As always, material specificity presupposes a context. Most architectural his- torians agree that Salk was a significant turning point in Kahn’s practice, if not his first fully mature or even greatest built work.* The Salk commission sprang from his design for the Richards Medical Research Laboratories at the University of Pennsylvania (1957-65). Scully called Richards “one of the greatest buildings of modern times”; he credits Kahn with finally breaking “the mental barrier which the International Modern Style has set up between 
the present and the past.” In 1962, the Museum of Modern Art anointed Kahn  with an exhibition devoted solely to Richards, celebrating a “new synthesis” of modern structure and enclosure that boldly rhymed the composition of its taut brick-clad utility towers with the profile of San Gimignano — neither imi- tating historical form nor even alluding to it so much as expressing its recom- binant potential in a freshly contemporary, situated language.’° Its confident break with ahistorical orthodoxy opened up conceptual space for Salk, which firmly established the modern archaism that distinguishes Kahn’s later projects from all the rest.  Kahn worked on Salk from 1959 to 1965. The laboratories command a vivid, 27- acre coastal site surrounding a deep, T-shaped ravine in the Torrey Pines mesa, high above Black’s Beach.’' In plan, two symmetrical wings delimit a central courtyard, a kind of open-air nave. Serrating the edge of the central space are 10 freestanding four-story towers, five per side, walls splayed west toward the Pacific view. Each wing houses three laboratories, each row of towers houses 18 private studies (four per tower save the easternmost, which house two). Despite the subsequent construction of adjacent institute facilities, the original building continues to hold its own, attracting hundreds of visitors every month.  The world identifies Salk by its central courtyard, which critics variously describe as “sublime,” “iconic,” “rigorist,” even “dangerous.”! The souvenir perspective of this space typically positions viewfinders at a station point near Salk’s east entry, square between the laboratory wings. Sightlines track the water channel, which ribbons down the full length of the courtyard into a reflecting pool on its far western edge, barely visible — beyond that, a stubble of California chaparral; beyond that, the blue Pacific expanse; beyond that, sky.  Jonas Salk was “the most impressive intellectual Kahn ever had as a client. Salk’s inactivated poliovirus vaccine helped to end a terrifying nationwide polio epidemic, and the National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis, sponsor of the March of Dimes, offered to fund an independent lab. Salk called Kahn in December 1959 to seek his advice on the choice of an architect for his new facility.‘ Quickly recog- nizing Kahn’s native hospitality to his own code, Salk issued just two instructions after offering him the commission: first, he needed about 100,000 ft’, roughly the size of Richards; second, he wanted to invite Picasso to the laboratory.”  Salk’s mental picture of the project grew out of his experience at the monastery of St. Francis Assisi, which he visited during a retreat in Italy in the 1950s. Later, Salk and Kahn discussed monastery architecture as a model for the new institute. “I remembered the cloister there and I conveyed to Kahn the idea that this is what I would like — the cloistered garden,” Salk recalled. “It became the court ... The studies then grew, evolved, and developed along the sides of the laboratories, like a necklace strung along a building, and provided the basis for the colonnade.””°  Kahn recorded his interpretation of these preliminary conversations in an early (undated) exploratory drawing, clearly rendering a small but unmistakable sketch of the site elevation of the Basilica of St. Francis, which he annotated with the word  v1  
“Assisi.”’” Opposite this, he drew another tiny sketch of a rectangular courtyard over- looking landscape and horizon, bounded on the right by four arcaded bays reminiscent of the basilica’s cloister; the sheet also clearly adumbrates Kahn’s plan to distribute three discrete elements — a lab with a courtyard, a circular meeting house, and court- yard housing — wrapped around the ravine. Despite these forms, no prior architecture or building type — monastery, cloister, campanile, or piazza — distracted Kahn from what he called “Volume Zero ... a search for the sense of beginning.”’” It was both his habit of mind and his methodology to seek out the beginnings of “laboratory,” which in the case of Salk conflated both religious and secular antecedents.  Kahn regarded programs with disdain. “The program is nothing,” he said; the architect’s “first act” is “to ... change it’.’? Programs hindered the search for a “realm of spaces” that ennobles both human activity and institution, which room schedules, area requirements, and conventional building standards obscure.”° Kahn’s way of engaging type resides nearer to Plato and Quatremére de Quincy than Nicholas Pevsner — he searched for “something fundamental and irreducible,” as Michael Merrill notes, “a germ or starting point” strong enough to drive pragmatic design, yet poetically supple, “vague and uncertain’ enough to invite invention and change.”””  Kahn notoriously expanded programs beyond the client’s budget, which often resulted in incomplete or lost commissions — the Dominican Motherhouse, for example, or the Fort Wayne Fine Arts Center and the campus of the Philadelphia University of the Arts, among other projects.” In the case of Salk, Kahn took his client’s simple instructions — “make me a laboratory congenial to art” — and tripled its scope, adding the aforementioned meeting house and housing for fel- lows. Sometime during the early phase of schematic design, Kahn produced an undated handwritten brief that his office staff transcribed into a double-spaced typewritten draft.”* The buildings “are to serve the science of Biology and men as men aware of their total being,” he wrote, “a place for men in the arts and letters and men in this particular science ... where Question is always pres- ent.”** Salk’s indulgence of Kahn’s expanded brief doubtless reflected their shared vision for an institute that reunified what in 1959 C. P. Snow famously described as the “two cultures” of science and the humanities, cleft by modernity into a “gulf of mutual incomprehension.”””  Less than nine months after the start of the construction of the laboratories, Kahn signed an amendment to his original contract effectively terminating work on housing and the meeting house, one of Kahn’s most celebrated unbuilt works.”* Thereafter these components remained “in statu nascendi,” as Jonas Salk later noted — “neither denied nor dismissed.”*” Whether or not the cessation of work on the meeting house and residences influenced Kahn’s final design for the courtyard remains a matter of speculation. Two years after the start of construction, the cen- tral court contained nothing but “mud pits.””* Apocryphal stories crowd the history of the final design as built. Kahn invited the renowned Mexican modernist Luis Barragan to visit La Jolla and talk with him about the central space, which he 
previously drew and modeled as a garden.”° “I told him at first sight ... ‘not one leaf,” Barragan recalled, “nor plant, nor one flower, nor dirt. Absolutely nothing.””*°  Kahn’s first iteration for the laboratory had been a throwaway, a tower complex featuring gear-shaped ancillary structures, which Salk rejected outright, perhaps because it echoed Richards. The second scheme introduced four, parallel, two-story wings framing two arcaded, poplar-lined courtyards. August Komendant, Kahn’s engineer for Richards, worked with Kahn to design an innovative system of folded plates and box girders that freed the labs of columns. The resulting servant spaces for each lab featured accessible and adaptable story-high mechanical spaces. Salk ini- tially accepted this version and signed a contract for construction, only to abandon the design the next day, fearing its plan would foster competition between “A-court” and “B-court” scientists.’” During this unexpected pause, the contractor tried to per- suade the funders to substitute a less expensive steel-frame structure, but Salk and Kahn resisted.*” With Komendant’s help, Kahn proposed column-free lab space using concrete Vierendeel trusses, which they had successfully employed at Richards. The depth of the Vierendeels provided even greater flexibility for the maintenance and modification of specialized laboratory services — ducts, pipes, vents, valves, and sensors controlling all of the varieties of liquid, gas, water, air, and waste flowing in and out of bench work over the daily course of research. Salk read Kahn’s building design in physiological terms: “The laboratories and studio [carry] the cerebral function; the service spaces [carry] the arteries, veins, and nerv- ous system; the mechanical [spaces act] as the respiratory system ... each integral.”*? Kahn in turn incorporated Salk’s analogy to describe the story-high volume between labs: “It all comes from what Dr. Salk called the mesenchyme space,” he explained; “one serves the body, and one is the body itself.”** Concrete prevailed.  For the third and final version of the laboratories, Kahn modified the four- building design, compressing its program into two, mirrored laboratory wings flanking a single, central garden. He paired labs and mechanical floors and stacked them three high — six stories total — but to preserve the scale of the courtyard he drove the lower two stories below the courtyard level, lighting them with sunken, brick-paved patios open to the sky. This deep, richly layered, shaded arcade lines the north and south edge of the central court, further enriching the spatiality of its edges. He located the studies on the same level as the mechanical floors, preserving the courtyard and upper two laboratory levels for the arcade and open porches. The cantilevered slabs of the middle and upper level mechanical floors supply both circulation and shade to the glass-enclosed labs; open concrete stairways and bridges connect the freestanding studies with laboratory walkways.  All of the building’s paired and overlapping elements — structure, enclosure, cir- culation, view, orientation, even drainage — converge here, in the parallactic voids between the labs and the studies, dilating circulation and layering up space — “fold- ing it, capsizing it, doubling it”? The strong California sun washing Salk’s taut concrete surfaces give these passageways the character of an abstract, syncopated chiaroscuro. Whether in section or plan, twos tumble into threes: two wings  
consist of three laboratories, each with two floors (pipe space over bench space, servant and served); mirror-wise across the building’s centerline, labs adjoin studies adjoining the plaza adjoining studies adjoining labs, A-B-C-B-A.*°  Second only to the central courtyard in significance is Kahn’s mastery of con- crete. “When you look at Salk,” Komendant observed after its completion, “you unhesitatingly answer that it could not have been built in any other material.”’” Although no other major project by Kahn staked so much on concrete, he had worked with it throughout his career.’* During World War II, Kahn proposed con- crete as a suitable material for mass housing, which he revisited after the war in projects designed for the Israeli Housing Survey Committee (1949).”” In the con- crete tetrahedral ceiling for the Yale University Art Gallery (1951-53), Kahn clearly loosened the early binds of his ill-fitting interwar and postwar architectural vocab- ularies, bringing him closer to what his associate Anne Griswold Tyng calls “the realization of [a] more profound truth [in] three dimensional geometry.”*° Yale is “perhaps the first of Kahn’s works,” Joseph Rykwert observes, “in which concrete cast in smooth plywood shuttering becomes the dominant material of the building.”*”  On January 10, 1963, a week before he released the full architectural package to the contractors, Kahn laid of piece of yellow tracing paper over a blueline print of a hardline drawing of the proposed elevation of the easternmost retaining wall, located below grade in Salk’s mechanical room, beneath the entrance garden.” The mechanical room was the first space built, and Kahn and Salk, along with project architect Fred Langford, hoped to use its first wall as a test bed for what Langford described as “print block” formwork, pours that took the shape of a huge running bond brick pattern defined by a specific “imprint.’*’ This wall memorializes Kahn’s experimental joint details, which he later rejected — too big, too inelegant; the wall still bears Kahn’s sketches of alternative solutions, which he drew in red china marker directly on the surface of the concrete.** Jonas Salk was enthusiastic about this record of experimentation and closely inspected the results.*? He recalled having initially disliked the color, whereupon he pressed Kahn to create something “warm and alive ... something that looked like man-made marble.”*° An atypical four-page single-spaced memo from Kahn’s office to Salk’s general contractor, Fervor & Dorland, dated April 5, 1963, captures the intensity of Kahn’s approach to concrete. In this memo, project architect Fred Langford reg- isters urgent concern over the quality and control of the concrete formwork. Langford states that his purpose is to remedy the “contention ... between Builder and Architect in the area of form work design” and “explain the construction process as an architectural expression’; he notes that arguments over the design of the formwork have persisted “since the beginning of this job” and warns that “conventional attitudes will produce a conventional building.”*” However, noth- ing in this careful delineation of process and effect prepares the reader for his concluding paragraph:  
We must make the concrete in this building say “I am expressive of the hands and forms that held me in place until I could grasp my inner steel and gain the strength and power that I now possess; that I must possess to hold back the tremendous earth pressures with my retaining walls, to span the laboratories in a single leap, to lift the studies to the grand view of the sea, and still be friendly enough to touch with human hands.” All this should contribute to the total architecture that we believe will encourage and provide productive research and discovery at the Salk Institute.  “Architects are responsible for mediating concrete to us, for causing it to be seen in one way rather than another,” Adrian Forty writes, which helps explain why in this memo Langford articulates emphatically precise instructions for every detail of the formwork — how and why its polyurethane coated plywood panels, expendable parting strips, hydrostatic relief valves, bleed lines, corners and panel junctures, wall ties, shrinkage joints, and pour line chamfers constitute “a record of the con- struction process” and “produce an architecture where the construction process is expressed honestly.”“* Langford and Kahn tested more than a dozen different con- crete mixtures looking for a precise color, “something warmer, russet ... warm brown tones, not blue or green.”” Kahn later explained, “When you’re making something you must consult nature, like the conversation with the brick. And you can make the same conversation with concrete.””°  Kahn’s January 1963 sketch of formwork provides insight into the nature of this “conversation.” He develops the drawing in graphite on yellow tracing paper, as was his habit. He positions the wall in the space of a gentle single-point perspective, lightly delineates its elevation, and then floats disembodied section cuts of form- work details in the space between the wall and the picture plane. He renders the thickness of concrete in red and yellow colored pencil, reserving yellow for the horizontal slab that divides the two floors depicted in this view, but draws only enough thickness to show the relation between the assembly of the seams of the formwork and the shape and form of the concrete joint. In addition to dimensions and alternative details, Kahn visualizes the problem of the construction not through strictly rational or quantitative analysis, but through a kind of analogical reasoning — reasoning through resemblances — that incorporates the graphic equivalent of figures of speech and tropes including spatial depth, human figures, and shadows.  The theoretical site of this drawing is the union of formwork and concrete. The drawing explores early designs for the construction of the “parting strips” described by Langford in his April 1963 memo to the contractors. Kahn explores a V-shaped joint routed into the wood junctures between panels, and also the formwork detail- ing for an inset marble base he intended to employ in the meeting house. His anal- ysis of this joint documents two interdependent conditions, which he labels “projection” and “indenture,” male and female. His annotation in the lower right hand corner of the drawing documents their interdependency: “the projection as well as the indenture expresses the joint.”*’ He uses both a positive and negative application of the V detail, opposing then coupling protrusion and incision.  
Here we can clearly see Kahn drawing ornament out of the methods of con- struction, “stopping [his] pencil to make a mark at the joints of pouring or erect- ing.””* between cladding and structure, which converge into a surface unity condi-  He intends to leave the concrete exposed, eliminating the distinction  tioned only by internal material properties activated at the point where those properties meet their limit — first in the darkness, against the formwork, then in the sunlight, when the formwork is removed. “The way things are made, the way they are put together, the way one thing comes to the other, is the place where ornament begins,” Kahn says. “It is the glory of the joint which is the beginning of ornament.”’? He uses seams to gather the material of the phenomenon-building and the lineaments of the idea-building into a single detail of construction.”  Like other mid-century modern architects closely scrutinized by Kahn — Mies van der Rohe and especially Le Corbusier — Kahn eschews capriciously additive embellishment. Instead, he works through the process of construction to create surface effects that are simultaneously intrinsic and extrinsic to the body of the wall. The raised single and double fillets order other formwork details in the walls of Salk, which together comprise a deeply-thought surface vocabulary: smooth planarity left by polyurethane-coated plywood panels; thousands of blow holes, the minor “imperfections caused by air bubbles in the liquid concrete”; ”’ slight variations in color; the tie rod holes, precisely spaced and filled with lead plugs; and the spacing and impressions of other formwork elements, where walls end and turn corners and where pouring starts and stops. These raised fillets and the other impressions and marks of construction both finish the wall and brighten it, as though “a form of auxiliary light.””° The raised fillets catch the strong sun and cast a sharp shadow, and by so doing order and delineate both the decorum of the emerging institution and the decorum of modern construction. These surfaces  condition Salk’s luminosity and spatial power: one without the other results in neither.  Although the aggregate effect is, strictly speaking, artificial, chance irregularities are “natural” to poured-in-place concrete and its processes: the size and distribution of air pockets and cavities, say, or the “broken edges [and] abrasive textures” of the protrusions and impressions designed into the formwork — aleatory occurrences, a kind of planned unpredictability."” As Thomas Leslie notes, concrete is “a risky material when exposed, as its ... appearance and finish are dependent on processes  that are irreversible, hidden from view until complete, and sensitive to a range of variables.””* Yet in so consciously seeking to fuse the problem of material and orna- ment into a single act of construction — and so consciously seeking qualities equiv- alent to “man-made marble” — Kahn clearly invests in ways to both reveal and suppress concrete’s “roughness” or “raw truth,” not to mention his willful aban- donment of its historically economic or pragmatic attributes. Here Kahn’s little drawing may help to better distinguish his approach from others who likewise seized on the potential of modern béton brute — Le Corbusier, for example, or Alison 
and Peter Smithson and Paul Rudolph, among many others. As David Leatherbar- row argues, “No material is essentially rough or smooth; these qualities depend as much on the way the material is treated or finished as on its so-called inherent qua- lities. This means that concern for a material’s qualities — let’s say its roughness — is less important than interest in the conditions under which that quality becomes apparent.”””  Kahn seeks and finds convergence between the technical necessities of concrete  construction and the surplus benefits of tectonically derived ornamental lines. In  this respect, his assiduous attention to the design for the concrete walls of Salk cor- relates with A. K. Coomaraswamy’s observation that in traditional culture orna- ment derives not from anything inessential or surplus, but rather from the principle of suitability, sufficiency, and fitness for use.°° Kahn achieves ornament that is inherent in and moreover drawn from the material properties and require- ments of concrete. Ornament, he says, “evolve[s] out of our love for the perfection of construction.”*’ This love finds expression in Kahn’s fidelity to the essence of material — what it “wants to be” — as a means to realize the architectural identity of the Salk Institute, what it wants to be.  Of course, there is more to Kahn’s drawing than a wall. Three analogous bodies populate his analysis of Salk’s formwork: the figure in the foreground, which holds two books; the figure in the middle ground, striding; and, in the background, the wall itself. Insofar as figures such as these do not typically inhabit analyses of con-  struction details, their prominent appearance in Kahn’s drawing suggest an analog- ical and poetic framework for Kahn’s supposition, often repeated, that how-we-are- made and how-to-make-the-wall constitute the same essential question.”  A fourth body inhabits Kahn’s picture: the sun. “The sun never knew how great it was until it struck the side ofa building,” Kahn once said, paraphrasing the Amer- ican poet Wallace Stevens.” Kahn is mindful that his subject is below grade, yet in this rendering he washes it with sunlight. His underground sun casts a shadow off the middle body onto the surface of the wall. This shadow has an odd complexion. Like the shaft of an arrow, it rises out of the vertex of a V-shape formed by the right arm of the foreground figure and the right leg of the background figure, which intersect hand over calf. Kahn relieves his shadow of any obligation to the actual posture and velocity of the body that casts it, giving it a conspicuous uprightness.  As a substance, this shadow-column oscillates between two conditions: light and no light, surface and interior, both phallus and gnomon. Its tumescence supplies what Marco Frascari would call “the index of corporeality.”** This shadow is the central analogy of the drawing: it both doubles and fecundates the composition of the wall. Walls form the way bodies form: “... two touches between boundaries ... [which] are not the same,” in the words of Luce Irigaray: “the touch of one’s body at the threshold; the touch of the contained other ...; the internal touch of the body of the child.” An analogy is an “assimilating influence exerted by one form on another.” The concrete is red, like cut flesh. “Red” alerts us to particular substances and states — blood, fire, and heat. Kahn’s drawing reveals the cardinal 
humor of the concrete. The building is alive, as Salk requested, like a body. It con- sists of joints that demarcate the limits of bodily extension.  Donald Kunze once noted insightfully, “drawing equals whatever gets us from one arrow to another.”®” In this drawing all arrows point to union, to the mystery of the conjunction of three bodily limits. That odd-looking shadow indicates the fusion of body and wall in the union of concrete and wood. Kahn’s drawing of this coupling suggests a union between the constitution of the wall and the knowledge of the wall, that is, knowledge of its means of becoming: light issuing forth from no light. Among twentieth-century architects, we would not be going too far to iden- tify Kahn as a “strong poet,” in the words of the literary critic Harold Bloom. “We can define a strong poet,” Bloom writes, “as one who will not tolerate standing between him and the Muse. But that means the strong poet in effect takes up the stance of the Gnostic, ancestor of all major Western revisionists.”™*  “The novelty of Gnostic knowledge,” Giovanni Filoramo writes, “consists in its need to fuse together not only subject and object, but also the means of [our] knowledge [of them],”” three terms into one. In this remarkable construction drawing for the first wall at Salk, Kahn records the “means of knowledge” not only in his representation of the analogical intertwining of sun, flesh, and wall, but also in his analogous projection of this vision across the whole institutional matrix of Salk — as above, so below. Look at the ground level building in plan and divide it along its centerline reading either left or right from the central runnel: Salk con- sists of three elements — west lab, court, and south lab — within which reside the triadic relationship between the lab, the studies, and the court.  The three primary bodies in this drawing correspond to these three domains. This bookish gentleman in the foreground (who draws us into his speculation with an oddly interrogative tilt of the head), suggests theoretical understanding, a won- dering reflection or contemplation of extramundane principles. If in theory “draw- ing equals whatever gets us from one arrow to another” — if an arrow’s job is to point — then the space of the figure in the foreground points to the space of the courtyard: empty, transcendent, open to the sky.  The middle figure is already underway, like Hermes (a go-between), moving to and from possibilities located beyond the picture plane, translating the language of theory into the language of practice. The space of the figure in the middle corre- sponds to the space of the studies, which Kahn locates between the courtyard and the laboratories.”” The model for the studies came from the Salk’s early references to Assisi: he wanted the secular equivalent of monks’ cells — “thinking cells,” he called them.”’ The activity of the studies is not prayer or meditation so much as disciplined thought, which mediates between reflection and application. The stud- ies house the space of ethics, properly speaking the space of practice, which decides the right course of action for a given set of changing circumstances.  Lastly, beyond this middle figure, we see our telltale wall, in both strength and delineation the analogy or projection of the logic of the bodies that stand in front of it. Kahn’s wall suggests technical understanding — know-how, skill, and fabrication.  
The wall corresponds to the space of the laboratories, where ethical scientists pro- pelled by theoretical insight manipulate and modify the material properties of the world.”” Consciously or unconsciously, the composition of Kahn’s construction drawing is analogous to the composition of the Salk Institute itself.  But perhaps most compelling of all in this context are the floating, vaguely appa- ritional figures of formwork details, which show us how to make the wall so that the wall shows how it was made. To this demonstration of Kahn’s problem-solving process I would adjoin Filoramo’s observation that gnosis is “the intuition of one’s true nature”; gnostic insight “is not pure, disinterested contemplation,” Filoramo notes, “but immersion in the vital, throbbing realities of origins, the ability to tune into the divine energy.”” dimensions and form of the wall — its “character,” which results from the way the formwork design and the hydrostatic properties and admixtures of concrete converge in surface effects and lineaments — and also the way these effects create and embody an analogous transaction between the wall and its perceiving subject, who is likewise constituted both of measurable and unmeasurable qualities. “Dur- ing the time when I was thinking about form and design and making distinctions between the two,” Kahn said, “I thought that the unmeasurable aspects of our exist- ence are the ones that are the most important. Such things as thought, feeling, real- ization are all unmeasurable. It seems that this is also the concern of scientists.””*  There is also a fifth actor in this drawing, and that of course is Kahn himself, by which I mean Kahn in his own body, who by virtue of the face in the foreground insists we fit our gaze into his. We sit looking where Kahn sits drawing. The cone of vision moves both in and out, a converging and inverted double V, back and forth between the gaze of the foreground figure and the gaze of its author, each head curious, each seizing on the other with their distinctively leonine eyes, likewise our eyes. Their reciprocity constitutes what Maurice Merleau-Ponty calls a “the third term” — “always tacitly understood, in the figure-background structure [where] every figure stands out against the double horizon of external and bodily space.””* The drawing affords viewer-participants unusually close proximity to the  Kahn’s drawing simultaneously explores the physical  psychic material of Kahn’s inquiry into construction. The foreground figure gazes out deliberately: he is there to carry us over, the way all metaphors carry qualities across the gap separating unlike entities, such as scientists and monks. He mediates our own body’s encounter with the yellow sheet, one kind of limit, on the way to our encounter with another kind of limit, the wall.  “Every detail in Kahn’s late buildings convinces us that he has thought it through from the beginning, lived his life through it, and finally assembled it with every- thing else into a hard-won calm,” Scully concludes.”® Close to the end of his life, Kahn reflected on the interdependence of idea and phenomenon. “The architect must always ask himself,” he said, “to what ‘dominion’ does this construction belong?””’ In the very structure of this question, he persists in his conviction that the duty of architecture is to use measurable means to put us in touch with our own unmeasurable nature, bodies in touch with soul. 
Manfredo Tafuri is unsparing in his characterization of this pattern in Kahn’s practice. He argues:  “|Kahn sought to open] ineffable spaces for the narration of a nostalgia: nostalgia for a sign that retraces its own adventures in search of the moment, forever lost in the labyrinth of an unspeakable history, in which it loses its own referent; nostalgia for universes of discourse that architecture can no longer frequent without renoun- cing its own presence in the world; nostalgia for a reassuring relationship between norm and deviation, capable of making gush forth, from the alembie through which ruptures and lacerations are distilled, a ‘circularity’ and fullness of the word, the word in its entirety.”  Within the sphere of Tafuri’s assessment, Kahn’s insistence on concrete makes perfect sense. As Forty observes, “Kahn’s buildings, while thoroughly modern in his attention to the structural systems and finish of the concrete, are ancient in the way that the structure seems to exist as something independent of the uses to which it has been put.””  If the construction of Salk is manifestly modern and practical, its modernism and practicality thoroughly avoid contemporary formulas and styles, sui generis. And yet its novel techniques, materials, and systems of composition clearly derive from recombined formal and typological molecules — cloistered seclusion, neoclassical axiality, and a basilican poché achieved in part through the adaptation and close scrutiny of formwork design and concrete construction. Kahn draws these “type-forms” into a larger picture that both incorporates and transcends the build- ing’s deeply thought pragmatism — its “mesenchyme” tissue, its pipe space, its architecture of oak table and rug. The construction of what we see in our minds when we envision Salk belongs neither to the dominion of science nor the domin- ion of art, nor even to the dominion of the twentieth century. Well past the scope and life of its original purpose and program, what makes Salk Salk is the hard-won calm of an inconcrete void, which as both modern architecture and future ruin keeps us freshly awake to questions that lie beyond its frame, cognizant yet empty.  Notes  * Louis I. Kahn Collection, University of Pennsylvania and the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission.  1. Louis I. Kahn, “How to Develop New Methods of Construction,” Architectural Forum (November 1954): 157, in Louis I. Kahn: Writings, Lectures, Interviews, ed. Alessandra Latour (New York: Rizzoli, 1991), 57.  2. On the polarization of scholarship surrounding the question of Kahn’s secular and spiritual orientation, see for example Gavriel D. Rosenfeld, Building After Auschwitz: Jewish Architec- ture and the Memory of the Holocaust (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2011), 380 n12. In 
3 SWIMMING POOL ON THE BEACH AT LECA DE PALMEIRA  Alvaro Siza  Christian Ganshirt  Alvaro Siza, Swimming Pool on the beach at Leca, Leca de Palmeira, 1959-1973.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
THE PRESENCE OF THE ATLANTIC OCEAN  Atlantic waves break against rocky outcroppings of rusty granite. The horizon traces a clear line in the painfully bright light; a sandy breeze from the north-west fills the air with the smell of the sea. It is high summer and despite the wind, the heat of the sun is hard to bear. From the coastal road, little can be seen of the swim- ming pool — gray concrete and a few shallow-pitched roofs covered with tarpaper, punctuating a kilometer-long wall with parked cars in front of it. A few meters below is a landscape of rocks and sand. The view from above encompasses the Atlantic Ocean, two swimming pools, stairs, and concrete walls. To the left is a large beach full of people, bounded in the distance by the harbor pier jutting far out into the sea.  Along the retaining wall, a ramp sinks down into the earth. Below is a small wooden shed, just large enough for the ticket office. The space widens and the con- crete wall becomes an opening, hardly taller than a person. Its long concrete lintel seems to float, suggesting a gentle touch, a sense of closeness, despite the coarse material. In the dressing rooms it is cool and dark — at first almost too dark to see. The booths are fashioned of dark brown wood affixed to crossbeams that vanish into the black ceiling. All is pervaded by an air of simplicity, an almost Far Eastern austerity. From the dressing rooms, the path leads into a long courtyard enclosed by weathered concrete walls. The sun on the visitor’s skin, the smoothness of the con- crete floor under his or her tentative footsteps has a soothing effect. Two attendants take each visitor's clothes. A tall gateway, twice as high as the building, points the way. Above, the lamellae of a roof construction are discernable; below, near the floor, the coarse gray walls become benches. The space widens; you step down, and a view of the sea, the horizon, opens up to the right. Cliffs and sand appear through a narrow aperture in the wall; another step up, and the concrete floor becomes rougher. Slowly, hesitantly, you emerge as from a dream, entering another world.  Street and cars have disappeared; you have become part of a scene you viewed from above only a short time earlier. No paths are visible in this miniature land- scape of rock formations and sand plateaus, but small, geometric constructions point the way through the craggy terrain. Everywhere are children, young people, in the sand, in the water, between the rocks. A small bridge, open on one side with a low railing on the other, suggests an entrance. Below it is a children’s pool with a broadly curving edge. You take your first uncertain steps across the coarse-grained sand toward the swimming pool, feeling lost in a strange landscape. Then a con- crete platform appears between the rocks; from here, you overlook the pool. Steps lead downward, a small landing turns toward the horizon, then three more steps. The water in the white basin sparkles; it is almost as green as the sea. It is cold and salty, but you feel a sense of lightness as you swim. The wind is colder now on your  
wet skin; later, you will find a sheltered place between the rocks, a small room with a warm sand floor, and sleep in the sun.  Design Process  The swimming pool on the beach of Leca de Palmeira was planned and built in small stages over a period of about 14 years.’ Since all the building phases employed the same materials and formal language, the whole is marked by the impression of self-evident coherence. Rough shell concrete was used for walls and floors, dark wood for the roof construction and interior finishing, and tarpaper for the roof covering, which was later replaced by patinated sheet copper. The broad spectrum of the architectural vocabulary, however — expanded continually over the course of the design and construction — produces a sense of uncertainty. The complexity of the structure, as difficult to grasp on location as in the drawings, becomes more easily comprehensible when the individual steps in its development are examined one at a time.  The history of the project begins in November 1959, when the city of Matosinhos — where Alvaro Siza was brought up and to which the district of Leca de Palmeira belongs — commissioned the construction firm Ribeiro da Silva, L* to produce a feasibility study and cost estimate for a swimming pool on the beach of Leca. The original idea was a tide pool that would be supplied with fresh seawater through the flow of the tide. Co-proprietor of the firm, engineer Bernardo Ferr4o, chose a site somewhat to the north of a large sandy beach where the rocks already formed a small pond, at that time used for breeding lobsters.” Here the retaining wall of the coastal road was interrupted by a platform at street level (Meia-Laranja”). Ferraéo proposed replacing the pond with a rectangular swimming pool measuring 20 x 33.33 meters, whose long sides would lie parallel to the retaining wall of the platform.’  In view of the urbanistic implications of the plan, the city followed the suggestion of the engineer and commissioned an architect as well, Alvaro Siza Vieira, whom Ferrao knew from the architecture office of his brother Fernando Tavora.‘ Siza, at that time 26 years old, at first proposed a large lake amid the rocks instead ofa swimming pool.’ When the city rejected this idea, he suggested opening Ferrao’s rectangular basin so that the edge toward the sea would be defined by the existing granite rock formations. In this way, the basin was skillfully integrated into the topographical situation, making it easier and less expensive to construct. The proposal was accepted.  The concept of a tide pool, however, proved unrealizable for both hygienic and topographic reasons. The basin was positioned too high in relation to sea level, and in order to comply with health regulations, the seawater had to be filtered before it was introduced to the pool. Nonetheless, as early as March 15, 1960, Bernardo Ferrao submitted the final drawings for the swimming pool. After the construction  
work had been completed by the firm of Ribeiro da Silva L**, Siza’s proposal to raze the “Meia-Laranja” and expose the rocks beneath was put into action. In this way, additional space was created for the pool’s guests and the site prepared for the con- struction of the dressing rooms.  The second phase of the project commenced in the summer of 1961, when Siza was commissioned to plan the “facilities necessary for the full functioning of the swimming pool.” The commission was awarded by the mayor of Siza’s hometown Matosinhos, Fernando Pinto de Oliveira,” who was to support the construction of the pool for many years to come. Already at that time, the project was integrated into the development plan for the entire coastal area from Leca to Boa Nova, where Siza’s famous restaurant Casa de Cha was currently being built.  The preliminary design, presented by Siza in October 1962,’ called for a building consisting of an access ramp, 24 dressing rooms — 12 each for women and men-—a central check-room, sanitary facilities, and a room for the pumps and filters for pur- ifying the seawater, as well as a partially roofed, wind-protected courtyard as an entrance to the bathing zone. This complex was conceived as a modulation of the kilometer-long retaining wall. In order not to disfigure the view of the horizon from the coastal road, the buildings were inserted into the wall like internal organs. A small restaurant with a fan-shaped plan in front of the wall adjoined the dressing rooms at the northern end, while a children’s pool and a small bridge completed the bathing zone.  In the final drawings for this phase of the design, the restaurant was replaced by a complex rectangular building. This structure was shown only in outline, however, and remained unrealized for lack of funds. The preliminary design was supplemen- ted with steps leading through the rocks to the swimming pool. The construction work was carried out from 1963 to late 1964. In addition, a snack bar and a free- standing WC were incorporated as temporary measures. It proved difficult to obtain clean seawater, as water drawn from between the rocks contained too high a proportion of sand. Accordingly, a spring well was installed in the proximity of the shore wall, drawing water from a subterranean canal extending a hundred meters out into the sea.* By the summer of 1965, the complex was fully functional for the first time and a regular swimming business commenced.  It soon became clear, however, that the facilities were insufficient for the demand. Thus in September 1965, Siza submitted a preliminary design for the “expansion of the swimming pool area, consisting of restaurant, storage spaces, sanitary facilities, bar, and esplanade.”” South of the dressing rooms, he planned a second retaining wall four meters in front of the existing shore wall, ending as aramp leading to the beach of Leca. The space between the two walls was set aside for the sanitary facilities and storage areas. To the north, the provisional snack bar was replaced by a permanent building with a triangular esplanade, protected from the powerful north wind by a concrete wall at a 45-degree angle to the shore wall. This protecting wall was precisely aligned with the north-east corner of the swim- ming pool, finding its continuation in a part of the west edge of the basin. Further to  
the north, additional sanitary facilities were incorporated into the shore wall. Continuing northward another hundred meters, a platform, tapering to produce a perspectival effect, was planned in front of the shore wall to serve as a connection to the future restaurant. The restaurant itself, a structure about 70 meters long, like- wise stood at a 45-degree angle to the shore wall on the ridge of a rock and served as wind protection for the northern part of the beach. From 1993 to 1995 Siza further developed the project of this restaurant, but nothing more has yet been built.  This preliminary design was subdivided into a third phase — consisting of all the expansions with the exception of the restaurant and the platform — and a fourth one, which was set aside for the time being. The working plans for the third phase were submitted in February 1966.'° When difficulties with the building permit arose, Siza and Ferrao once again submitted a comprehensive project description in July 1967, including a “Survey of Development Phases.”*’ Construction itself probably only began the following year.  In the early 1970s, new health regulations necessitated improvements to the snack bar as well as the installation of dressing and sanitary facilities for the person- nel. These and other measures were presented in a design for the “connection of the third and fourth phase,” submitted in April 1973.’? In the corresponding ground plan, the large platform south of the dressing rooms appears for the first time with a stair cut into it at a 45-degree angle, as do the platform and ramp in front of the children’s pool. According to the survey of development phases, however, the ramp appears already to have been realized before 1965. According to the plan, the exterior wall of the men’s dressing area was to be replaced by a diagonal wall, which however was not built. Apart from measures necessary for maintenance, the complex remained unal- tered throughout the following years. In early 1993, Siza revised the design of the restaurant from the fourth phase and by 1995 had produced a complete set of execution drawings. For lack of funds or support, however, the project once again remained unrealized. During the same period, the existing buildings were renovated. Among other measures, the roofs were covered with patinated copper, as already specified in the original plan.  The properties alongside the coastal avenue, which in 1990 were still open green areas, have since been urbanized. Today, large apartment blocks, most of them several stories high, face the avenue. In the first decade of the new millennium, Siza had been commissioned to redesign the whole coastal avenue and public space area, starting from Leca port’s North Mole, all the way up to the Boa Nova site. On May 25, 2011, Siza’s Boa Nova restaurant and the swimming pool on the beach at Leca da Palmeira were the two first modern projects in Portugal to be classified as national monuments.’ At the same time, the coastal area between the swimming pool and the restaurant were declared a “specially protected zone,” in order to “guarantee the continuity of the dialogue between the Casa de Cha da Boa Nova and the Piscinas de Marés, the coastal avenue, the beach area and the sea.”** In spite of this legal protection, in 2012 the local government tolerated the use of the big  
lawn area in front of the Casa de Cha to be used as an uncontrolled parking lot, causing the devastation of almost all vegetation.’”  Nature and Geometry  One of the fundamental themes of the project is its relation to the natural environ- ment: “In these first works, there ripened a definite, undeniable feeling that architecture does not end at a specific point, but extends from object to space and thus — through the relation to space — finds its completion in nature.”'® But what does “nature” mean in this context? Here there is no occasion for Romantic glorification or even the relaxed enjoyment of nature. The site is a wild, inhospi- table one, exposed to the wind and the waves. It lacks the idyllic quality of the Quinta da Conceicdo park, also a part of Leca de Palmeira, where shortly before Siza had realized a smaller swimming pool with white plastered walls and red-tiled roofs in the shadow of old pines. Nor is it as dramatic and picturesque as the rocks of Boa Nova, where Siza’s restaurant was built. Yet it draws its primal power from the presence of the Atlantic Ocean, from the sound of the wind and the breaking waves, from its closeness to the industrial harbor of Matosinhos and the view of a horizon whose infinitely distant yet precise line is echoed in the retaining wall of the coastal road.  The wall, about a kilometer and a half in length and up to ten meters in height, constitutes a powerful, clear boundary separating the cultivated land from the beach and the rugged, inaccessible rocky coast, an area visibly exposed to the assault of the sea. The wall does not appear as an object, but rather forms a kind of base for the land bounded by it. Into this wall is incorporated the architectural complex of the dressing rooms. They represent a modulation of the work of engi- neering that structures the entire coastal area and establishes a connection between Leca and the restaurant of Boa Nova. Despite its modest scale, the architecture is thus effectively incorporated into its landscape context. Seen from the bathing zone, the wall functions as a background before which a dramatic scenery unfolds.  The ideal of a harmonious balance between architecture and the existing land- scape, formulated at that time by Siza’s mentor Fernando Tavora,’” was certainly one of the fundamental principles underlying the project. But how does the struc- ture that was actually built relate to its context? While it may distantly evoke a Japanese stone garden, it in fact represents its exact opposite — not the artful ide- alization of nature in an architectural setting, but the exposure and restrained pres- entation of a primal, wild, inhospitable situation. The design respects the natural setting and the already existing structures, adapting them to the new functional demands with sparing interventions.  Although the strict geometry of the architecture clearly distinguishes it from the rugged, rocky landscape, this approach is not informed by the classical opposition between nature and art. The change of material and the clearly defined forms  
permit the eye to distinguish between the built and the pre-existing; yet both are intensified by the presence of the other. The effect is not that of an isolated object contrasting with the landscape — as is still the case with the restaurant in Boa Nova — but rather of a multiplicity of structures carefully incorporated into the topography and integrally connected to the given situation. Walls find their continuation in stairs and platforms of the same material, which in turn create transitions to areas of rock and sand. Even the texture and color of the rough shell concrete is less of a contrast than a harmonious complement to the existing granite rocks. The material has even taken on something of a brownish patina, which also darkens the granite. At times, the concrete even seems older, more weathered than the rocks — craggy forms that, as if alive, seem to spring up everywhere.  Taking into account that a large part of the rocky topography we perceive as “natural” when we visit the pool area today had been covered by a large platform (in Portuguese called Meja-Laranja) when Siza started the project, it becomes obvi- ous that the “natural” is as much part of his architectural conception as is the “arti- ficial” or “architectural.” The rocks had literally to be discovered by demolishing the existing platform, which at the beginning of the project had even defined the positioning and the alignment of the larger swimming pool. As in a traditional Chi- nese garden, nature is understood as part of, not opposite of the artificial, even if the contrast between the rocks and the geometry of the concrete structures seems to suggest this opposition.  The strategy of interweaving the built and the existing is associated less with the idea of a Gesamtkunstwerk than with the dissolution of architecture into a complex topography. Even the reduction of the materials to concrete and black impregnated wood gives the buildings a sense of the transient, like ruins. The pronounced boundary of the shore wall confronts the boundlessness of the beach; as the years pass, the buildings grow outward along the shore wall. The conceptual boundary of this landscape is established to the south only by the harbor pier, to the north by the rocks and the restaurant of Boa Nova. In this way, there originate perspectival relations whose dimensions recall the scale of baroque landscape design. On the esplanade, bounded by the diagonal wall, a perspectival space is created whose opposite side is formed by the harbor pier — a triangle with kilometer-long sides. Finally, a slit-like window in the bathrooms concealed in the shore wall offers a view of the Atlantic horizon.  And what position is reserved for the visitor to the swimming pool? Carefully, in a complicated ritual, you cross the boundary of the shore wall, the line that divides a landscape cultivated by man from the rocky beach, at the mercy of the powers of the sea. A zigzag parcours along the wall compensates for the narrowness of the site, establishing distance to the mundane world. The access ramp leading northward, the darkness of the dressing rooms, and the longitudinal, southerly courtyard are all stations in a path leading to the narrow, almost hidden aperture in the wall that opens out onto the beach. Only shortly before you viewed the complex from a distance; now, having performed the gestures of “submersion,” “undressing,” 
and “surfacing,” you feel part of a natural landscape into which you have been sub- tly and sensitively introduced. The decisive moment — as you emerge from a court- yard protected by concrete walls into the open landscape — now calls for initiative and active involvement as you begin the exploration of the complex topography.  Architectural References  A number of modern architects have been named as possible influences on the design of the swimming pool in Leca. Alvaro Siza himself repeatedly emphasizes the importance of Frank Lloyd Wright, an influence that probably goes back to travel reports by Fernando Tavora, who visited Taliesin West in 1960. “When I began the project, I bought a publication on Wright’s work, and particular aspects such as the Desert House had a positive influence on my work ... I remember that at the time, Wright was a kind of liberation for me.”* William Curtis describes this influence as follows: “There is a reminiscence of Wright’s Taliesin West of 1937, in which parallel galleries and through-ways also precede a diagonal expansion across water towards a distant view.”!” The stair cut into the southern platform at a 45- degree angle may likewise be interpreted as the negative form of a terrace from Taliesin West. The fan-shaped ground plan of an early version of the restaurant from the second phase, however, also recalls the work of Alvar Aalto. Others have seen references to the longitudinal volumes of Aalto’s university cafeteria in Jyvaskyla, to neo-plasticism, and to the architecture of Mies van der Rohe.”° Finally, Curtis sees the form of the children’s pool as an “reinterpretation of Le Corbusier’s free plan curves,” one that also reminds him of cubist paintings.”’ On the other hand, Le Corbusier’s conception of the promenade architecturale” has obviously been more important for the project than any artwork.  The question arises as to whether these associations truly suffice to explain the motivation for this design. According to Siza, “learning in architecture actually means an expansion of references ... I think it is possible to isolate individual influ- ences in a work, but in a mature work this would be very difficult, for there the references are not one, but many.””’ The identification of models may perhaps serve to build bridges, enabling us to understand an architecture that is “unique” in the best sense of the word and thus also somewhat alienating. Yet while such references help make the work more accessible, they by no means suffice to explain its specific qualities; rather, these are manifested in the very aspects that most clearly differ from their alleged models.  Together with the “Cooperativa Lordelo” built at almost the same time, the design of the swimming pool on the beach of Leca marks a new phase in the devel- opment of Siza’s architecture: “Tt is the first building that no longer makes reference to traditional Portuguese architecture, in terms of either formal language or mate- rials.”** Its language is characterized by a high degree of abstraction and the dom- inance of horizontals; its longitudinal, rectangular volumes of coarse exposed  
concrete are staggered in a number of levels, with no visible openings, doors, or windows in the traditional sense. Siza employed this formal vocabulary only during those years and in only a few of his designs; the street facade of the Alves Santos house is related to it, as is the house of Manuel Magalhies, realized a few years later.  Siza describes the basic idea of the project as a further development of the approach used in his design for the restaurant Boa Nova, created a few years earlier: “I considered that this solution was too direct a translation of the accidents of the landscape. The profile of the restaurant is almost a direct parallel to the profile of the rocks. After I finished, I found it too much dependent on the landscape.””* “[For the swimming pool]! said to myself, this time it has to be two elements, as in many compositions, completely separated, each with its own language, but they have to stand in relation to each other.””°  A comparison of the Leca swimming pool with the pool in the park of Quinta da Conceicao, built by Siza from 1958 to 1965, shows the completely different, even antithetical character of the two projects. The pool in the park represents an almost Mediterranean idyll in the shadow of the pines, its white plastered walls contrasting with the red-tiled roofs and grassy lawns; the pool on the coast, on the other hand, appears gray against gray with no vegetation, more industrial than idyllic. Siza knew not only how to react to the peculiarities of these radically different locations, but also how to transform their qualities into the theme of the architecture. The background for this approach is not least of all a culture of architectural landscape design that has shaped northern Portugal for centuries and whose remnants leave a striking impression even today.  Tender Indifference  My first exposure to this project was through a series of photographs by Giovanni Chiaramonte, published in Quaderni di Lotus in 1986.” They showed gray-blue sky and weathered concrete walls with deep black shadows, empty spaces with no apparent meaning, no visible trace of human life. What were they? An abandoned industrial complex? The remains of a military fortification? The name “swimming pool’ usually evokes a different image. Looking back at these photographs today, we can see the influence of existentialist Italian cinema from the 1950s, in the way Chiaramonte perceives the maze of concrete walls as much as in their austere pres- ence, denying any opening or other way to escape.  My first visits to the site were likewise discomfiting, though in a different way — an experience of confrontation with the elemental forces of nature, the primal power of the Atlantic coast of northern Portugal. The logic of this only seemingly labyrinthine architectural landscape was perceptible from the first visit, although comprehension of at least some of the mechanisms of its fascination was long in coming. It is an architecture that, despite its geometric precision, seems to dissolve 
into the landscape, one whose very radicality enables it to sensitively respond to the needs of the visitors. It is the result of an approach that accepts challenges without acquiescing to aesthetic or ideological formulas. In this way, it is able to react ina very direct, as it were unprejudiced way, with a pragmatism that is not reducible to technical or economical demands, but which acknowledges the totality of human existence as its parameter.  The philosophy of existentialism, with its focus on the human individual and his actions and feelings in the face of an apparently meaningless world, was highly influ- ential in southern Europe when this project was conceived. Yet it would be specu- lation to consider it a main reference. Rather, we may see the way this architecture creates meaning by precisely shaping and positioning its elements in the concrete world as a means to escape the existentialist notion of the absurd. The influence of traditional Chinese and Japanese architecture and gardening seems more evident, primarily in the subtle and austere aesthetics, and the prominent role of context and nature in the project, at the time unobserved in European design practice.  On the beach of Leca de Palmeira, we encounter an essential architecture reduced to only a few elements, one whose harshness is necessary to assert its pres- ence in this place. It is an architecture whose very simplicity — the unaffected wooden construction, the coarsely executed, weathered, and in many places patched concrete walls — evokes the aesthetic of paupertas, of dignified poverty. For precisely this reason, it is capable of providing a foothold for the groundless emotions of Albert Camus’ L’Etranger; it speaks of the “tender indifference of the world. To find it so similar to me, so brotherly in the end, made me feel that I have been happy, and I still am.””*  Notes  * Image credit: Christian Ganshirt.  1. This project has been included in numerous monographs and other publications on Siza’s work. For comprehensive bibliographic information please see Kenneth Framp- ton, Alvaro Siza: Tutte le Opere (Electa: Milan, 1999); English edition: Alvaro Siza: Complete Works (Phaidon: London, 2006). This text was translated from the German by Melissa Thorson-Hause and updated by the author in 2013. The author would like to thank Maria Chaira Porku for the detailed preparation of the archive materials, Beatriz Madur- eira, Antonio Madureira, and Alvaro Siza, who patiently answered his questions, and Birgit Hendrischke and especially Holger Wild for their careful reading of his manu- script. The first German version of this study was first published in Forum der Forschung; Christian Ganshirt “Das Schwimmbad am Strand von Lega de Palmeira: Ein Projekt von Alvaro Siza,” Forum der Forschung No. 11 (Cottbus: Brandenburgische Technische Uni- versitat, 2000): 84-90. A monograph illustrated with many previously unpublished sketches and work drawings by Alvaro Siza was edited in 2004 by Luiz Trigueiros; see Christian Ganshirt, Swimming Pool on the Beach at Lega de Palmeira/Schwimmbad  
BRION CEMETERY  Carlo Scarpa  Michael Cadwell  Carlo Scarpa, Brion Vega Cemetery, San Vito d’Altivole, Italy, 1969-78. View from water pavilion.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
BETWEEN WORLDS  Late in his career, in November of 1976, Carlo Scarpa lectured at the Academy of Fine Arts in Vienna. Entitled “Can Architecture Be Poetry?,” Scarpa’s lecture acknowledged his respect for Oriental architecture as well as that of Hoffmann, Wright, Le Corbusier, and Kahn. Scarpa also defended his project under construc- tion, a private cemetery in honor of the successful industrialist Giuseppe Brion and his wife Onorina Tomasin Brion. Opposition to the project was pronounced, espe- cially within academia, where the extravagance of a memorial to a wealthy patron flew in the face of prevailing egalitarian ideology. During the discussion that fol- owed his presentation, Scarpa bemoaned the graffiti that students had scrawled on the cemetery walls, yet closed with his typical equanimity, “Allow me a small per- sonal idea. A large work of art is always small.”"  Much of Scarpa’s work is small in size. Beginning with his limpid vases and table- ware for the Murano glassworks, through his masterful installations of historical arti- facts at the Museo Correr and modern artwork at Venice Biennales and exhibitions throughout Europe and the Americas, including his subtle restorations and additions at the Palazzo Abatellis, the Canova Museum, the Castelvecchio, and the Querini Stampalia, and extending to his exquisite retail shops for Olivetti and Gavina and renovations of the Banca Popolare, and, finally, the scattering of private houses — Veritti, Benedetti-Bonito, and Ottolenghi — in size, at least, Scarpa’s work is small.  And it was not just in size that Scarpa’s work countered the grand aspirations of his time. Scarpa aligned himself with private mythologies rather than social agen- das; he delighted in historical contexts rather than heroic gestures; he mined the narrative potential of a building’s circulation rather its organizational efficiency; and he exploited the articulation of envelope rather than the manipulation of space. It is not too much to assert that while many of Scarpa’s contemporaries struggled with the collapse of any Enlightenment project, Scarpa followed a Counter- Enlightenment trajectory whereby truths are provisional and created by individual subjects rather than absolutes discovered through objective reason. Interestingly enough, Scarpa’s work would inspire emerging American architects such as Steven Holl, Jorge Silvetti, Billie Tsien, and Michael Rotundi,” and his insistence that archi- tecture was a material practice would presage the work of emerging European architects such as Peter Zumthor, Peter Markli, and Herzog & de Meuron. Scarpa was averse to theoretical proclamations, yet declared his sympathies as Director of the Architecture Institute of Venice University by inscribing a quotation of Giam- battista Vico on the school gate: verum ipsum factum, truth is made.  Scarpa made his truths in architecture’s smallest dimension, its construction details. In part this was afforded by the craft of the Venetian artisans with whom  
he collaborated and the forbearance of clients who indulged cost overruns and prolonged schedules. Yet refinement and expense often accommodate con- ventions rather than challenge them. Craft is necessary but not sufficient to Scarpa’s cultural achievement. The experience of Scarpa’s projects is sensual, yet what is remarkable is how the experience challenges habits and suggests new ways of engaging the world. Scarpa’s native Venice seems to have informed his strange sensibility. In Venice, the ground is constructed against the encroach- ments of the sea rather than assumed as a static given, and the unifying gaze of perspective is thwarted by the maze of streets, the reflections of water, and the shifting effects of sun and fog. Scarpa’s detailing draws us into a world where the ground drifts, solids double and liquefy, and atmospheric conditions trump stable perceptions. Vico may have reinforced Scarpa’s enthusiasm for the Brion project. Certainly, there were the luxuries of Venetian craftsmen, indulgent patronage, and a Veneto site that Scarpa knew and loved. More to the point, the modest program of a family tomb includes the institutions that Vico asserted as the foundation of civilization:  religion, which projects a future through divine providence; burial, which institutes the past through ritual commemoration; and matrimony, which seals the contract between predecessor and progeny.’ Scarpa could not have wished for a larger small commission. The commission grew by degrees. Onorina Brion first approached Scarpa upon the death of Giuseppe Brion in late 1968. At the time, the family owned a rec- tangular site and funeral chapel at the north-east corner of the public cemetery in Giuseppe Brion’s hometown, San Vito d’Altivole. In May of 1969, the family purchased an L-shaped lot of 2,000 m* along the northern and eastern edges of the cemetery. Scarpa located key elements of his proposal in corners of the site. At the western tip, a small cubic funeral chapel rotated 45°, arose from a pool, and connected to the access road through a cypress grove. At the southern tip, a diminutive wood and steel pavilion floated in a larger pool dotted by smaller planted islands. Pinning the joint of the L at the northeast corner, the sarcophagi of Giuseppe and Onorina Brion nested in a circular depression of the extensive lawn, while the sarcophagi’s winged roof, also rotated at 45°, pointed to the fam- ly graves hidden beneath an extension of the north perimeter wall. Burial, reli- gion, and marriage fuse as burying the dead combines the public rituals of the chapel and the private meditations of the pavilion, and both are leavened by the enduring love of the married couple memorialized by the sarcophagi. Indeed, couples animate the scheme — chapel and pavilion, lawn and pool, earth and sky — establishing differences while their effects suggest sympathies. Central to this dynamism is the cemetery’s concrete construction, which plays upon concrete’s duplicity as it shifts between light and heavy, solid and liquid, and time- less and timely.‘ Bodily perceptions are unmoored even as bodily demise is commemorated.  
Propylaeum  The Brion cemetery is approached from the north, following a narrow lane through fields that are often planted with corn. Within this agrarian remove, the complex asserts its boundary with a battered concrete wall. Flanges project from the wall giving measure to its length much as the wall provides a datum for the elements behind: cypress grove, chapel, promenade, and family tombs. Yet, the wall’s base is obscured and the complex seems to drift on a sea of green vegetation.  From a closer oblique view, the wall betrays any stolid role. Especially in sum- mer afternoon light, the battered wall is caught in earthen shadows, while the flanges catch the hot western glare in a silvery sheen that merges with the sky. Lichen and weather staining appear, the concrete participating with nature as well as standing apart from it, registering the passage of time as well as standing against it. The original formwork of horizontal planks registers on the concrete’s rough aggregate, yet the conceit of primitive construction also falls away since the wall’s tilt can only be achieved through the studied insertion of steel reinforcing. Under- cutting any notion of concrete’s stable presence, concrete exchanges with wood as the wall dissolves into stout latticework at its corners.  Continuing to the west, the municipal cemetery comes into view, its conven- tional grid of tombs on graveled ground punctuated by the entry to the Brion com- plex. Scarpa referred to the entry by the Greek term “propylaeum,” and heightened its somber mood by placing a weeping cedar to its right.” Yet, this is no simple threshold. While the concrete’s unsettling effects were glimpsed along the north- ern boundary wall, they are confronted at the propylaeum.  Steps abound. The propylaeum refuses to present a solid front, and defers in a proliferation of small steps as if the entire assembly were a variation on traditional door moldings. Certainly, passage is offered through a kind of wall even if the wall will not locate itself. Yet, moldings vary their dimensions to reinforce a sense of scale and vary their orientation to substantiate an upright stance. There is no var- iation in the dimension of the propylaeum’s steps. That the steps’ dimension matches that of a hand does not help; their proliferation provides rhythm but oblit- erates scale. The stepping also refuses to support an upright stance. To the right of the entry, the stepping runs vertically (confirming the stance), but then folds to the horizontal (denying it). To the left of the entry, the steps engage in an extended horizontal play, receding into the distance as if announcing the opening in a floor rather than a wall.  Walls stabilize within the propylaeum. Concrete work is refined, the pours agi- tated to project a fine slurry that tattoos the veining of the formwork’s wood planks onto the concrete surface. This was a common technique by the time of the Brion’s construction, predated by Le Corbusier’s Unité at Marseille and successive Brutalist buildings, yet the existential drama of man’s will forced on obdurate materials that  
often pervades the earlier work does not prevail at the Brion. Here, the planks’ varied widths and intimate veining seem to memorialize the trees that were har- vested for the walls’ realization. Light adds an elegiac tone to this association, its mood shifting from skeletal grays in the morning to a golden luminosity as the day wanes.  Just ahead is a stair, announced by the walls’ white plaster panels that are accented by muntz buttons in the manner of Roman tombs. The ceiling also receives this honorific treatment, but only belatedly. The lintel’s undercarriage recapitulates the propylaeum’s stepping with a finer corbelling. Location, orienta- tion, and scale shatter with an upward gaze into a mini-sublime of indetermi- nate depth.  If the steps destabilize perception, a second figure lends a kind of coherence. A pair of large interlocking circles appears in the wall ahead, the ring at the right trimmed with blue mosaics and that at the left with red mosaics. Often referred to as vesica piscis, the figure is prominent in early Christian, Byzantine, and Gothic art where the overlapping circles generate an almond frame for the body of Christ or the Virgin Mary.° Scarpa was well versed in art history, yet a singular reading of the Brion circles is misleading.  Associations of the vesica piscis include everything from the female anatomy (the vulva), to wedding ceremonies (the wedding rings), to astronomical movements of  le-  (the solar eclipse), to arcane proportioning systems (particularly Gothic). All these are at play at the Brion: the entry sequence is invaginated; the precinct ce brates a married couple; the siting adheres to cardinal orientations; and Scarpa favored a proportioning system of double numbers.’ However, these associations support the Brion’s shifting effects rather than dictate them. After all, the Brion circles do not fulfill the strict geometries of the vesica piscis whereby the circles  ying on the perimeter of the other, their 8  intersect with the center of each circle intersection stabilized and generating a host of secondary stable geometries. The Brion circles stop short of this intersection and implied unity, as if the circles were moving closer together or drifting further apart. Overlapping rings will appear throughout the cemetery, but they are always physically engaged rather  than read from a safe remove. Scarpa’s in flux, and the physical experience of the insisting on any singular reading.  Here, the circles fulfill a simple arc  circles are multivalent, their relationship m suggests a range of associations without  hitectural role by countering the propy-  laeum’s confusions of location, orientation, and scale. A flat wall finally presents itself, one that can be located in plan and gauged in depth. An upright stance is confirmed by the figure of the almond, and the circle’s diameters match human height. Earth and sky are also reestablished as the concrete boundary wall bisects the circles. A balance is achieved. It is temporary.  The stairs modulate the circle’s equivalences with a leftward bias at the T-junction to the proscenium’s north-south extension.” The hollow echo of the 
concrete planks underfoot announces that the propylaeum is now a kind of bridge. Blackened planks are embalmed in the ceiling, hastening the movement from darkness to light, bridge to ground, constriction to expanse, and concrete to vegetation.  Arcosolium  After a prolonged passage, then, the public cemetery’s urban plate is left behind for a garden’s lush grass, scent of flowers, and gurgle of water. The lawn is three feet above the surrounding fields, the canted boundary wall protecting against views from the outside. Now coming to eye-level within the precinct, the boundary wall eliminates the view of the middle landscape of fields and snaps the transition to the distant town and mountains. There is a sensation of hovering, of being ungrounded and detached.  Closer by, water flows in a narrow concrete channel that extends from the pro- scenium, tapers, and culminates in a pair of small circular pools. The pools bloom into a narrow planter that turns and is terminated with a cruciform planter and its double, a stout column. This last doubling of plant and concrete intersects with the circular steps rippling outward from the sarcophagi of Giuseppe and Oriana, which claim the water’s source and its regenerative capacity.  Scarpa called the concrete construction that shelters the sarcophagi an arcoso- lium, which is an arched cell in a catacomb for the entombment of an early Chris- tian martyr or prominent citizen, the tomb’s lid serving as an altar. Now freestanding, the arch’s plated surface is mated with beams to bridge the depressed circle upon which the sarcophagi rest. Incessant steps articulate an elaborate knuck- ling and then extend horizontally in counterweight. Barely two inches, the steps inflate the scale of the arcosolium, as if it were appended to miniature cities, while oleaster and yew conceal the stainless steel rods that pin the knuckles to founda- tions. Festooned with red roses, the arcosolium seems both heavy and light as its concrete mass hovers above the ground.  The sarcophagi, too, are solidly constructed yet seem weightless. Their regal materiality divides at ground level, white Carrara marble below and purple granite above. Both marble and granite faces are enhanced with miniature step- ping, and their rhomboid profiles lean toward one another in sympathy and point to the arch’s apex, this gentle rocking, it would seem, afforded by the sarcophagi’s curved bases. Scarpa’s preliminary plans show the circular depres- sion filled with water,’® and the blue, turquoise, and gold mosaics that now line the arch’s undercarriage recall the liquid effect. Linked circles reappear, the gentle arch and sloped flooring approximate the almond shape that is explicit in Scarpa’s earlier studies.’’ Thus described, the married couple are not buried but float between sky and ground, an aquatic zone both hallowed and fertile. An invitation is offered to follow the ancient custom and descend to the 
sarcophagi’s polished ebony lids. Wood, too, is revived and bathed in aquatic reflections. The lawn, it is now apparent, gently rolls as if liquid. The view is framed of the funeral chapel to the west and the water pavilion to the south, this combination reinforcing the early Christian theme of a regenerative, numi- nous world.’  The arcosolium’s longitudinal axis suggests a detour to the family tombs. From the lawn, a small four-square stair of cantilevered treads announces the descent to the tomb’s depressed path of porphyry cobblestones.  In contrast to the arcosolium’s gentle curve, aquatic effects, and sympathetic plantings, the family tomb is severe, arid, and barren. The tomb’s roof abstracts the rocky summits of the distant Dolomites, while its heavy toppled form sits hel- met-like on a thick neck. Metal rainspouts protrude from its face as if to underscore concrete’s modern allegiance with fortifications and bomb shelters.'* The entrance is mean, gained by ducking below the lintel to hunker against the canted perimeter wall. Plaster reappears in adamant blue-black tones, its somber mood unrelieved by slashes of southern clerestory light and reinforced by the scattering of memorial stones. Scarpa had intended for one of the stones to collect the steady drip of rain- water from the beam above,'* countering water’s regenerative capacity with its  entropic shadow. Even without this reminder, however, an oppressive gloom per- vades the space. The path continues to the west, but seems to dead-end. The lawn offers a more attractive alternative.  Chapel  While the propylaeum wall facing the garden is horizontal, thin, and masklike, its double leading to the chapel is a thick arcade. Steps reappear to define the wall as a series of pilasters that recede to deeply set glass, and turn at their tops as if to define capitals. These are curious pilasters, irregular in their widths and obeying a synco- pated rhythm rather than a structural logic. Indeed, the pilasters do not support the roof at their capitals but below them, and they lack bases as if erupting from the ground rather than standing upon it. This final intimation is confirmed as the arcade retreats into horizontal steps that descend into the pool from which the chapel rises. Concrete maintains its crisp form, yet it seems caught in a change of state, passing from solid to liquid.  The chapel facade reinforces these ambiguous effects with a return to confusions of location, scale, and orientation. At first glance, the facade seems simple, the cha- pel’s four-square organization called out by the cupola’s taller quadrant, vertical formwork, and cornice. Yet, the chapel is ungrounded, rising from water and doubled in reflection. Tiny windows dot the facade, fitted with alabaster lenses, and coupled with stepped reveals. The windows’ doubles appear at the cornice, erod- ing the wall to the sky. A simple wall flips to a vast disorienting terrain, one mirrored in reflection, animated with ziggurats, and riddled with skyward views.  
The little four-square stair marks the depressed path to the chapel. Concrete’s liquefactions return as the path’s stepped retaining wall becomes the arcade’s defin- ing edge that vanishes into the pool. Footsteps resonate on porphyry cobblestones as the walls press in, the honorific plaster wall to the left and the arcade wall to the right. Glimpses of forsythia, lilacs, and Japanese maples relieve the arcade’s com- pression, somber acoustics, and tattoos of wood. As the arcade turns to meet the chapel’s 45° rotation, the corridor expands to a small triangular vestibule that opens to the funerary way to the left and a view of the arcade’s watery descent to the right.  The wall ahead is actually a double door. Its large screen of stainless steel is inlaid with white concrete panels and swings wide for coffins, while a second smaller wood door set within it pivots for everyday use. Beyond the double door is a sec- ond triangular space that holds an exquisite white marble font. Double circles reap- pear as the holy water’s basin. While the first threshold is a door within a door, the second is a frame within a frame. The defining wall is freestanding, retreating from the larger chapel opening with tiny steps at its sides and sheered free from the ceil- ing. Slicing through it, a large circular portal reveals the wall as a lamination of two thin facings, the infill accented with a royal blue jamb and golden steps. With this proliferation of doubling, the murmurings of water, and the memory of the arcade’s aquatic descent, the suggestion arises that here, too, the double circles might appear, again oriented vertically, the circular portal matched with its virtual double in the water below. Much as the arcosolium mates earth and sky in a buoy- ant aquatic zone, the chapel threshold links sky and water on a consecrated ground upon which the living commemorate the dead.  The chapel space is simple and mated to the body. A person’s height is doubled in elevation, this doubled height turns horizontal as the dimension of a square, and this square, in turn, doubles twice to generate the four-square plan. Golden reflec- tions from the pulpit’s muntz cladding illuminate the white marble that marks the casket’s placement, this placement echoed above by the ceiling’s recapitulation of the propylaeum’s concrete steps. The pulpit is centered within this most sacred quadrant, pinned with a diminutive crucifix. A candelabra drifts to the side, its gen- tle sway accompanied by a soft grinding, while the dark corner behind the pulpit is relieved by the miniature windows glazed with translucent alabaster. Above, the cupola extends as an inverted ziggurat that transforms lifeless concrete into pear- wood’s flesh tones and strips away any scalar reference as it releases to the sky. Below, the quadrant’s defining corner is relieved at the floor with double doors of white concrete marked with blue and pink interlocking rings. This is, no doubt, a space charged with Christian ritual, yet the affect of the upward gaze has more in common with James Turrel’s skyspaces than it does with ecclesiastical architecture, and the downward view is infected with the double circles’ shifting allegiances as the doors open to white water lilies floating on the pool’s unfathomable depths.  It is telling, therefore, that a vertical gaze does not dominate the chapel else- where. By doubling a person’s height, the other three quadrants set eye-level in 
an equivalent position between floor and ceiling and encourage horizontal exten- sion. The diagonal orientation of the space reinforces this bias, as does the black plaster ceiling and daylight’s reflections on the porphyry pavers. Views are directed outward not upward. Especially late in the day, sunlight catches the concrete’s insistent steps at the floor to ceiling windows to the west, alternately dissolving the gray concrete and casting it in deep shadow. The windows offer views to the cypress grove beyond and here, too, the mood shifts with atmospheric effects.  Pavilion  Daylight beckons at the lawn where the arcosolium deflects southward to the water pavilion. Tailored to the human body and comprised of a tripartite system of base, columns, and hood, the pavilion, nevertheless, dodges clear connections. The concrete base is wafer-thin as if it is floating on the pool, and the wood hood drifts casually above. Steel columns accent this disjunction, barely distin- guishable from a distance and deflecting any structural logic by sprouting from the water, staggering at mid height, and pinwheeling about the hood to grab at its sides.  Compounding these unsettling effects, a line of mosaics bisects the tall concrete wall that brackets the pool and pavilion. Set at eye-level, the flickering mosaics forge an equivalence of sky and water, a view unyoked from the ground. Water lilies, roses, cotoneaster, and miniature bamboo animate the pool without resol- ving the confusion, doubled in reflection as they float on water or drift on minia- ture islands. A strange effect permeates the garden: a body and world unmoored.  The arcosolium’s waterway leads back to the propylaeum, where the dark dampness is relieved by sunlight beyond the double circles. Footsteps echo as the concrete planks leave solid ground for bridging. The honorific plastered wall staggers, pressing inward, marking the pool’s edge. Only one person may pass.  A glass door bars the way and dully reflects your image like a shade. Pressed downward, the glass door slices into the water below. You step forward over your image and into daylight, announced by the clanking of counterweights and the whirring of pulleys. You notice that chapel and pavilion complement each other. The pavilion’s wood cladding mimics the chapel’s stepped ceiling in pattern, color, and effect. The hood’s light baffles have a golden sheen that mirrors that of the chapel’s pulpit. The steel columns’ bundling of bar stock is akin to the bundling of the chapel’s candelabra. The pavilion’s foundation, it is now apparent, is also elaborately stepped and concealed beneath the water’s surface. Yet, the pavilion is open and sits more lightly on its pool, which is larger than that of the chapel, more varied in its plantings, and less ominous in its depths. Clearly, too, the cel- ebrant is you (not the priest), your gaze is always horizontal (never vertical), and honorific light is shed on the living (not the dead.)  
You can rest, seated on an extension of a planter that holds a miniature spruce.  The garden presents itself: propylaeum, pool, lawn, arcosolium, and the surprise gift of the boundary wall’s brace of tamarisk. Or you can stand, the hood’s low green skirt limiting your view to the pool’s lush foliations. There are, also, two framed standing views.  Small brass double circles appear at eye-level punctuating the bottom edge of the  north and south faces of the green skirt. Looking through these spectacles, you now wear the hood, majestic and remote. To the north the view is framed of the pool, lawn, arcosolium, and beyond, the town’s rooftops and church bell tower, and the  d  d t C  t  istant mountains. An Edenic dream adrift. To the south is a near view of the boundary wall. Glimmering mosaics nest in  grey veined concrete. Mosaics and concrete shift and flicker as the wall dissolves in  epth. Sometimes there is the stark contrast of light and dark. Sometimes there is he strange sympathy of soft reflections and silvery sheen. Yet, if this final double ircle — our eyes now the circles — suggests a resolution of the Brion’s endless dou-  blings, and perhaps even the ultimate doubling of life and death, we are reminded  hat it is a small thing, a private intimation, and fleeting. Yet, too, it is within these  fl  eeting intimations, these liminal states, where the Brion cemetery resides, just  outside a known world while suggesting another. Scarpa, by his request, is buried nearby in a bend of the propylaeum wall. Neither in the Brion cemetery nor the public cemetery, neither in one world nor another. Somewhere in between.  Notes  mage credit: Abigail Arnold.  iccardo De Cal, Memoriae Causa: Carlo Scarpa ¢ il complesso monumentale Brion (Treviso: Fondazione Benetton Iniziative Culturali, 2007).  . Mildred Friedman, “Scarpa Today,” in Carlo Scarpa Architect, Intervening with History, ed. icholas Olsberg and Mildred Friedman (New York: Monacelli Press, 1999), 240-7. obert Pogue Harrison, The Dominion of the Dead (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005), 81.  . Adrian Forty, Concrete and Culture (London: Reaktion Books, 2012), 7-11.  5. Brion planting has varied over time. Scarpa collaborated with the landscape architect  Pietro Porcinai, and my identifications rely on Seddon’s documentation of this collab- oration. See George Seddon, “The Brion Cemetery, S. Vito, Italy, 1970-72,” Landscape Australia 2 (1991): 147.  . George Dodds, “Desiring landscape/landscapes of desire: scopic and somatic in the Brion Sanctuary,” in Body and Building: Essays on the Changing Relation of Body and Archi- tecture, ed. George Dodds and Robert Tavernor (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002), 241.  . Marco Frascari, “A deciphering of a wonderful cipher: eleven in the architecture of Carlo Scarpa,” Oz 13, (1991): 36-41.  . Guido Pietropoli, “The two intersecting rings and their geometric construction,” in Carlo Scarpa: La tomba Brion, ed. Elia Bresolin (Altivole: Comune di Altivole, 2008), 67-70. 
KHARGA MARKET  Hassan Fathy  Hassan Radoine  Hassan Fathy, Kharga Market inner court, New Baris, Egypt, 1967*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
FROM VERNACULARISM TO REGIONALISM  Unity is in variety and not in uniformity.  The first generation of “modern” architects who practiced between the 1930s and 1970s in the Middle East was deeply influenced by what has been termed “pro- gressive” architectural ideas. Viewed historically, however, their influence may not have resulted in real progress. This generation, mainly graduates of European schools, imported modernist architectural models to the Middle East, regardless of whether they were in harmony with the local climate and culture. This should have been expected, for they had taken the same stance with respect to their own cultural antecedents. Traditional or vernacular architecture was perceived as a con- glomeration of dead archaeological vestiges and obsolete buildings, incongruous with modern times.  With respect to Egyptian architects specifically, Abdelbaki Ibrahim, a former Chairman of the Centre of Planning and Architecture Studies (CPAS) in Cairo, published an article entitled “The Architecture Circus”’ that described the work of architects in some Middle Eastern countries as an attempt to manipulate imported forms and building materials without any relevance to local culture or environment — a circus performance that was obviously more of an entertainment than a solution. Many Egyptian architects performed in this circus, he observed, noting that only a few resented the attitude it expressed and tried to find ways to apply values learned from the ancient soil of their own land. Of major influence in the Middle East region and later worldwide, the prominent architect Hassan Fathy was among this second wave of architects who shifted the paradigm of modernism, and offered a fresh appraisal of regional architecture, discovering in it an internal dynamism and potential for change that would make it relevant for contemporary times.  With Fathy’s project at Kharga as my point of focus, I shall try to show how his work constituted a unique regional critical response to modernism, and how he challenged its subsequent internationalism through a genuine reuse of regional and vernacular Egyptian architecture.  Regionalism and Internationalism in the Middle East  In general terms, internationalism seeks the globalization of modern architecture. In addition to its geographical ambitions, it is a form or aestheticism that transcends the individual and contextual characteristics of particular places. Despite the fact that internationalism so defined seems to bear the seeds of liberty and appears 
to free architecture from some of the negative aspects of power-heritage, it has had an adverse impact on what the philosopher Paul Ricoeur called the “creative nucleus” of cultures and traditions.’  It is often assumed that culture ought to be modernized and therefore globa- lized. However, both terms are antagonistic to critical dimensions of existing con- ditions. Is modernization only a question of change of tools or is it a change of a culture’s “creative nucleus?” If modernization is concerned with standardizing the means of building and patterns of living, which surely provide an improved stand- ard comfort for the global masses, it is far from obvious how particular cultures can meet the requirements of standardization in order to produce modern com- fort at their particular civilizational level. Nor are the forms of modernist archi- tecture — the aestheticism to which I referred already — adequate to the goals of modernization, positive though they may be. The importation of modernist forms rarely escapes the dogma of modernism and ironically fails to achieve the aims of modernization.  Modernist architects often sought to enforce so-called rational rules on regional and vernacular architecture in order to attune it to modern reason. Assumed in this procedure is a judgment that labels pre-modern building practices as primitive or disorderly; in other words, irrational. This assumption is sustained by the neglect of local knowledge — knowledge of considerable complexity and richness that can be grasped through direct contact with the people for whom the work is intended. Often proposed as an alternative to the modernist stance is the regionalist position, which is supposed to remedy the defects of modernism by planting its abstraction in local soil, making the global local. Instead of questioning the reliability of modernism, the place is criticized for not being subservient to it.  Regionalism and modernism are thus two sides of the same coin, even if the  imagery of the first was proposed as a cure for the emptiness of the second. When- ever the genius of a place is revealed in an architectural project, the concept of regionalism is applied to situate it vis-a-vis modernism in conformity with its inter- national minimalist abstraction. The abandonment ofa cultural past only generates chaos in the evolutionary patterns of architecture that are intertwined with embedded social and cultural fabrics. In point of fact, modernism was seldom applied in the Middle East region ide- ologically; rather as an evidence and outcome of a fascination with technology, its tools and new forms. Alan Colquhoun’s comments on the relationships between cultural patterns and technologies remain pertinent. The tensions between traditions and technologies were “to some extent, obscured in the West, because industrialization evolved out of local cultural traditions, and adaptation to a post- industrialized culture was already quite far advanced.”* He added that “the problem is glaring, however, in the East and in Africa because of the friction between two worlds and two times: the agrarian and the industrial. Are cultural patterns absolutely dependent on an industrial base, or can they maintain certain independence? Is an industrialized culture irrevocably Eurocentric?”*  
The gap between imported modernism and local sustainable culture in the Middle East is therefore very wide. To bridge this gap and resolve the paradox it represents, a retrospective measure must be sought. Is architecture in the Middle East trapped between corrective measures of its own tradition and imported rules? What is lost due to modernism? And what is to be gained from sustainable cultures? Unquestionably, the solution is beyond “critical regionalism.”  Kenneth Frampton’s description of the “universal civilization” as a victory over “inflected culture” in order to advocate a “critical regionalism” is, | think, too sub- jective to provide a convincing alternative.° To use Ernesto Nathan Rogers’ term “formalistic aestheticism,” the “freestanding high-rise and the serpentine freeway” are yet to surrender to the pre-existences of their milieu. “The context is the place of these preexistences and anything that did not feel their influence would be vague and indeterminate.”” When Frampton proposes “critical regionalism” as a way to counter-balance “sentimental regionalism,” it seems that he creates a vicious cycle rather than a solution to the dilemma. If regionalism stems from a rectification of modernism, then on what new basis does Frampton suggest the pursuit of this new approach? When referring to Alex Tzonis and Liliane Lefaivre in the “Grid and the Pathway,” (1981) it is essential to state that regionalism has not dominated “archi- tecture in almost all countries at some time during the past two centuries and a half’® but rather it is a specific architecture that has dominated all regions with monotonous aesthetics, widening the time gap between people and their built envi- ronment. When this time gap persists confusion prevails, making a sense of place irrecoverable.  Architecture is among the key vehicles of memory and place that translates communal, spiritual, and environmental elements to living contexts. Hassan Fathy’s legacy is thus pertinent to this discussion, as he attempted to bridge this gap and provide a genuine sense of a communal space. Applying regional materials and forms and activating the dormant memory of know-how, he was able to generate a regional response to imported, international, and abstract architecture that attempted neither to resolve the dichotomy of modern versus regional, nor depend on architectural ideas and techniques alone. His model and contribution to what may be termed a “constructive and intuitive regionalism” grounds archi- tecture in its milieu without positioning it against modern forms. Nor was his work “essentialist.” Fathy’s constructive regionalism went far beyond a simple rejection of modernism or a sheer submission to tradition.  The Birth of a Regional Architect  Hassan Fathy was born in Alexandria in 1900 and died in 1989 in Cairo. He grad- uated as an architect in 1926 from Cairo University, where he also taught (1930-46). He designed around 160 projects. The key project that displayed his painstaking attempt to achieve an affordable and regional architecture was the New Gourna 
design of 1946, which relocated villagers living in dwellings built over tombs to constructions built entirely out of mud.  Fathy felt that during the critical periods of colonization and World War II the architectural crisis in Egypt was due to an extraneous architecture that dictated materials, costs, and politics that were far beyond the capacities of Egyptian resources, builders, and citizens. In response he devoted his whole career to the development of a regional architecture that would derive solutions from affordable vernacular materials and methods. Although the Egyptian government did not recognize his efforts and his New Gourna project faced several issues of implemen- tation, his ideas were well received internationally by the 1970s as one genuine answer to dilemmas of high modernism.  His intuitive regionalism started with a childhood fascination with the country- side and rural areas. The landscape of his youth inspired him to conceive of an architecture suitable to the peasant’s way of life. In The Architecture for the Poor, he wrote, “This ... wish had deep roots, going back to my childhood. I had always had a deep love for the country, but it was a love for an idea, not for something I really knew. The country, the place where the fellaheen [peasants] lived...”” The pursuit of this idea by Fathy was translated later by the term ‘sustainability’ of nature and place. In order to preserve the building tradition and communal living, he vehemently defended the use of local materials and local building typologies. He believed the ancestral crafts are affordable to the peasant and adequate to his natural milieu. Regarding his earthen village, New Gourna, Fathy wrote:  Besides the man-made environment of Gourna, with which the village would have to harmonize, there is the natural environment of landscape, flora, and fauna. A traditional architecture would have accommodated itself to this natural environ- ment, both visually and practically, over many centuries. The new village would have to tone with this environment from the very beginning, and its buildings must look as if they were the product of centuries of tradition...'°  Following this line of constructive regionalism, Christian Norberg-Schulz later argued for the importance of nature and place in the creation of a sustainable sense of belonging, particularly his search for Genius Loci, by referring to local and traditional forms.”? Yet, the position of Fathy vis-a-vis nature and place was more for reestablishing continuity with a lost tradition, as he stated: “The tradition is lost, and we have been cut off from our past ... This gap of continuity in Egyptian tra- dition has been felt by many people and all sorts of remedies have been proposed.”!  In his pursuit of a regional architecture Fathy inclines more toward sustainable technical and practical innovation than the emotional revival of tradition by explor- ing the techniques of construction and generating essential forms. He subsequently created an intrinsic contemporary design through the fertilization of the peasant’s memory of skills. Fathy distanced himself from archaeological mimicry by 
discerning real possibilities within the contemporary world. He nuanced his posi- tion by stating: “We condemn contemporaneity in architecture as decorative archi- tectural details such as mukarnassat, arches, or musharabiat. This is an archaeological view that is very far from the concept of architecture, which is based on the principles of design.”’’ Fathy pushed the dynamic regional design process to explore sustainable elements, as they responded to climate, landscape, local mate- rials, culture, and nature. He consequently challenged the inability of modern architecture as a sophisticated building process to produce a more genuine com- munal physical context. As with the writings of John Ruskin, his position in The Architecture for the Poor is essentially ethical. He attempted to expose the ways that modern and imported practices were isolated from the spirit of people and their place.  It was perhaps for this reason — rather than his specific forms and solutions — that Fathy became very influential both in Egypt and abroad, and that his teachings gen- erated a school of thought that attracted numerous followers in the Middle East, an example of which is Abdel Wahid Wakil in Egypt. He was indeed among the very few regional architects who stirred international interest. J. M. Richards observed that “news of Hassan Fathy’s enterprises and beliefs in Egypt first reached the Western World, perhaps not coincidently, just as concern was becoming wide- spread about the growing gap between what technology claimed to do for human welfare and what it was actually achieving in buildings that answered the needs of ordinary people...”’* Richards added that “Their philosophy [the philosophy of high modernism] required a total break with the past, whereas Fathy has looked always for continuity. The modernists’ break with the past proved disastrous to the relationship between architecture and the public.” Fathy’s purpose as not, however, polemical. He did not waste his time attacking modernists, but  devoted himself to working with his own people, heritage, and environment in order to realize sustainable design solutions. More than ethical, his mission was spiritual:  Ifthe architect does not respect the God-made environment, he commits a sin against God. The God-made environment is the landscape, the atmosphere, the flora, the fauna, and the human beings who live in this environment. In this God-made envi- ronment there is nothing that is inharmonious. If we become one with nature, beauty is defined as it is. Beauty, then is obtained when form considers the forces that are working on it.’”  Despite the criticism that his New Gourna project did not work well because it was difficult to convince tomb dwellers to move there — mainly because it meant ending their trade in stolen treasures — it remains a unique experiment at a time when regionalism was seen as an arriere-garde and modernism as the avant-garde. Far from impeding progressive tendencies, this project inspired several action groups: ADAUA, Craterre, and Development Workshop. 
Kharga Oasis and Bariz village  Kharga is a town in the western desert of Egypt. It contains different villages, including Bariz where the Desert Development Organization (D.D.O) commis- sioned Fathy in 1963 to design a new community village (New Bariz, where Kharga Market is located). It is a rural housing project that aimed at creating a new com- munity around a newly discovered well with a potential of irrigation of 1,000 acres. As stated by Fathy, “this enterprise would need scientific research to be done and pilot projects to be carried out to ensure the success of this most important enter- prise for redressing the ecological balance in the country.”'® Projected to be the core of a new town, the Bariz urban center was designed to serve a population of 5,000 to 10,000 people.  Learning from the mistakes of his Gourna project that he had designed 20 years before, Fathy planned this project from scratch with a totally new population and a new program. Although there was no man-made environment on the site of the project, Fathy recognized that he was “...not freed from the constraints imposed on the designer by respecting the work of this predecessors in the area, and Bariz should be a continuity of human response to the natural environment.”’” Referring to local know-how, Fathy sought the contemporary engineering skills of scientists from Egyptian universities, mainly in soil studies and structural research, in order to evaluate the ancestral techniques to be explored in his new large-scope project. A full understanding of the social and cultural milieu, supported by the technical and engineering expertise, enabled him to create a truly human-scale architecture, and one that answered both traditional and contemporary expectations. Contem- porary public spaces, for example, were accommodated by mud-brick vaults and domes, traditional in form and construction but contemporary in dimension and use.  The layout of the new village of Bariz was inspired from the neighboring old mud settlements that had existed for long periods of time and were able to with- stand the harsh desert climate. Without duplicating verbatim the existing old Kharga fabrics, Fathy resorted to drawing lessons and interpreting techniques of sustaining this context in a contemporary manner. The key factors taken into con- sideration by Fathy according to his accounts’* were:  1 Climate and airflow considerations were crucial in order to protect the site and inhabitants from harsh climate changes as well as to prevent harm to their bodies due to high desert temperatures (that reach 48 °C), exceeding by far the norms of thermal comfort. In the design process Fathy tried to integrate natural cooling and insulation against hot air by exploring traditional methods in a contemporary architectural envelope. His elements included musharabiyat (latticework) and badgeers (wind catchers). In addition to mud and brick walls, the size of shaded areas created a reasonable indoor thermal comfort for inha- bitants in the whole village. 
2 Demographic factors were also important. In contrast to his project at Gourna in Cairo, Fathy did not know his clients and had to design based only on factual and numerical statistics. This challenge made the project an abstract design process of creating a virtual village that never existed. However, Fathy’s con- cern about the human factor was key to designing a settlement for an organic community, based on balancing activities and reaching a certain economic self- sufficiency.  3 Aesthetic factors were also significant. The design of housing units were related to likely users and were not duplicated for the sake of quantity, as family lives were dissimilar in terms of size, wealth, and social status. Neighborhood units encompassed houses of different needs and created a sense of community in one semi-public place.  In addition to these factors, Fathy treated his village as a small urban entity where all urban facilities and amenities were provided in order to encourage new inhabitants to settle and not migrate to more urban centers in Egypt. These facilities, centered in the core area of the village, included schools, a crafts center, a cultural center, a self-sufficient construction center (for the training of local masons), an agricultural co-operation center, a Turkish bath, a grocery center, a hospital, a mosque, and a central market. It was the vibrant heart of the village with services and commerce, planned to engender social interaction at different times of the day, week and year according to secular or spiritual needs.  Among those buildings that deserve close attention is the market. This is a stra- tegic function in the complex of activities that seeks to create the village’s auton- omy in an isolated and harsh desert environment.  Kharga Market  The market of Kharga is located in the western central part of the urban core of Bariz village in a compound of public buildings surrounding a number of large courtyards that bind them all. Except for the building of the mosque, the plan of which is twisted in order to face the orientation of prayer (qibla), all other build- ings including the market are oriented north with regular orthogonal layouts.  In order to understand the architecture of Kharga Market it is critical not to isolate its plan form from the building’s constructional and structural logic and purpose; more specifically, the technology of the building’s envelope and details. The complexity of Fathy’s architecture in the market resides in the fact that the construction and sculpting of the building’s form was based on the craft techniques of mud-brick construction. The structural systems generated essential forms without any camouflage or illusion that would hide the skeleton of construction.  The plan consists of a large central courtyard around which all other spaces are planned. Domes and vaults define the spaces as much as walls. The intriguing 
aspect of this way of building and arranging spaces is that all of them are connected with a circulation circuit that travels throughout the entire ensemble without any sense of rupture. Ease and continuity of passage were considerations in this layout, but so were other kinds of movement as well. Thermal comfort was achieved through the circulation of cooling air along the focal and linear spaces. Structural integrity was achieved through the association of domes and vaults that worked together to form a cohesive structural ensemble.  The functions vary in different parts of the building. They range from a series of linear shops along one covered passage in the northern aisle to a coffee shop in the left side that serves as a large public area for gathering. This covered passage  extends to an outside palm courtyard that orients the walker to the adjacent mos- que ina natural way. It also links the market building, through extending its domed walkway, to the northern administrative building. The southern aisle, on the other hand, is divided into sections, some for food storage and others for related shops. The divisions within this aisle permit the positioning staircases that lead to the sec-  ond floor and upper terraces. The outside passageway on this side of the building is articulated through a series of continuous domes along the outside porticos that engender a special spatial and visual experience for the passerby. The lateral spaces of the building are more for services, enclosed and covered by the same structural elements used elsewhere.  Despite the subdivision of the market building into several functional parts, its massing creates a coherent architectural complex with a clear sense of human scale.  The complex has an aerodynamic outside form due to the curvilinear shapes of long vaults and central domes that are ideal for dispersing strong desert winds as well as sandy storms. A sense of massiveness — that could easily have resulted from the use of thick walls and load-bearing brick work — is avoided because of the ways macro and micro forms are careful handled as structural elements, which in some cases even become ornamental elements. This is obvious mainly in the out- side gates and external facades, whose austerity and simplicity present several arched openings filled with musharabiyyat (lattice work) that have both functional and aesthetic dimensions — controlling the air, presenting geometries, and playing with the light that permeates from outside to inside.  The overall form of the market building grows out of and expresses human  movements and comfort. These expressions are enhanced by the effects of controlled lighting that temper the shaded areas, allowing light to trickle through. Maximum visibility is achieved, without disturbing the interior visual experience, due to the strong desert sunshine.  A combination of traditional and modern methods is also apparent in the build- ing’s structural system. Mud brick construction is in evidence, but so too are large spans and complex configurations. Fathy’s knowledge of craft traditions was formative, but it was augmented by his knowledge of the outcomes of recent research in soil mechanics and building materials, undertaken in the engineering departments of Egyptian universities. New to the landscape — because of its size 
and composition — the market seems, nevertheless, to have arisen from the ground on which it stands, as if it were akin to the buildings from the neighboring desert villages that had inspired the project in the first place.  Conclusion  The architecture of Hassan Fathy presents a unique alternative to abstract modern- ism. He discovered ways to meet the needs and desires of people within a particular region through the modernization of their visual and cultural anchors. Fathy never said that he followed modernism, regionalism, or other contemporary architectural trends. Instead, he explored regional conditions in situ through an intuitive search for an architecture that would be suitable for people living under contemporary conditions. The result cannot easily be canonized though attempts of researchers to locate its vocabulary in the modern era.  However, this work does present a new regional architectural discourse, one that goes beyond the conventional “regionalism” and “critical regionalism,” proposing instead what I have called “constructive regionalism.” It is a way of working that situates the inner forces of a region in order to appreciate its unique- ness, history, culture, heritage, and geography, a constructive regionalism that was germinated out of a place and not dictated by it, generative of its own idioms and not corrective of failed modern ones. Thus, Hassan Fathy provides us with a new way to define the regionalist position, an imperative for appraising the large num- ber of competitions and projects launched under the umbrella of this unfathomed concept in the whole Middle East.  Notes  * Image credit: Roland Unger. CC-BY-SA-3.0-2.5-2.0-1.0, via Wikimedia Commons.  1. Hassan Fathy, “Bariz; A Case Study in Rural Housing, New Valley-Kharga Oasis,” Rural Housing in the Arab Countries, Seminar Proceedings, Cairo (November 6-11, 1977), 14.  2, Abdelbaki Ibrahim, “Contemporary Architecture in Egypt,” in Alam al-Bina, no. 6-8/199 (Cairo: Center for Planning and Architectural Studies, 1998), 5.  3. Paul Ricoeur, “Universal Civilization and National Cultures,” in History and Truth, trans. Charles A. Kelbley (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1965), 278.  4. Alan Colquhoun, “The Concept of Regionalism,” in Postcolonial Spaces, ed. G. Naoban- toglu (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1997), 22.  5. Ibid.  6. “Twenty years ago the dialectical interplay between civilization and culture still afforded the possibility of maintaining some general control over the shape and significance of the urban fabric. The last two decades, however, have radically transformed the metropolitan centers of the developed world. What were still essentially 19"°-Century city’s fabrics in 
WALKING CITY  Archigram  Sarah Deyong  A Ao UY  Archigram, Walking City, 1970.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
infamously described as “stomachs sitting on a plate connected with bits of gristle” in his Reith Lecture for BBC radio.’  According to one eyewitness, Polytechnic alumnus John Outram, Polygon was the progenitor of the Archigram magazine, founded in 1961 by recent graduates Peter Cook, Michael Webb, David Greene, Ron Herron, Warren Chalk, and Dennis Crompton.° In their first issue, they declared that the magazine would be devoted to “the outlook of the new Generation of Architecture” in its quest for “an aesthetic original to the mood.” And in the second (1962), they published their first definitive statement on the question of style as it pertained to popular culture. Cook, for example, claimed that the inspiration behind Bowellism was not the biomorphic architecture of Gaudi, Kiesler, or Mendelsohn, but the psychol- ogy of mass media. “The “Dan Dare’ quality these buildings have,” he wrote, “springs from their common involvement with Dan Dare’s psychology — with that of Superman, Lunar architecture and shredded wheat, and in physical terms, with that of the radiator grille and the launching pad.”” By 1964, they dedicated their fourth issue, “Zoom,” to the space comic, and produced their first iconic projects: Plug-In City, Walking City, and Computer City. These projects evoked visionary cities of the future inspired by popular images of technology, gleaned from the pages of science-fiction comics, Life Magazine, and Paris-Match.*  Besides referencing mass media, classic projects such as Plug-In City also donned  features of anew urban typology called the megastructure: a large framework sup- porting infrastructure and plug-in housing components that could be interchanged as consumer needs changed. Early instances of this postwar typology include Yona Friedman’s Mobile City (1957), Kiyonori Kikutake’s Floating City (1959), and Kenzo Tange’s Tokyo Bay (1961).’ Along with Webb’s Furniture Building, these and other megastructures, which had emerged at the margins of high modernism  in response to the twin specters of world population growth and rapid urbanization appeared in a MoMA exhibition in 1960 on “Visionary Architecture” and in a special issue of L’Architecture d’aujourd’hui (June-July 1962) on “Fantastic Architecture.”'° Archigram further legitimized the movement, publishing their own special issue on the megastructure phenomenon in an attempt to define its formal characteristics. In Archigram 5 on the “Metropolis” (Autumn 1964), Cook classified the megastruc- ture’s “crumbly aesthetic” according to formal attributes such as “crusts,” “molehills,” and “mounds.” He observed that the dominant orientation of multi-level circulation was not the horizontal or vertical but the diagonal.'’ And he compared the mythical and figurative City Study (1962) by newcomers, Hans Hollein and Walter Pichler, with nineteenth-century utopias, specifically Tony Gamnier’s Cité industrielle and Piranesi’s prison studies.  Thus, by 1964 Archigram had sealed their reputation at home and abroad. But despite their fame, few historians saw their contribution to the ongoing problem of style with the same regard they held for the likes of Louis Kahn, Alison and Peter Smithson, or James Stirling. Neither Giedion, nor Pevsner, nor Rowe, for example,  saw much value in either their pop aesthetic or their interest in the megastructure, 
but the exception that proved the rule was Banham, whose definition of style con- fronted what many saw as modernism’s midlife crisis with functionalism. Unlike Pevsner or Rowe, however, Banham ’s thesis did not go against functionalism per se, but more precisely, against an overly narrow definition of it. Indeed, for Banham, what was missing from contemporary practice was modern architecture’s capacity to symbolically express its intimate relation with technology. As he stated in Theory and Design in the First Machine Age (1959): “The true aim of the style [in the 1920s] had clearly been, to quote Gropius’ words about the Bauhaus and its relation to the world of the Machine Age: *...to invent and create forms symbolizing that world.’ And it is in respect of such symbolic forms that its historical justification must lie.”’?  Reyner Banham’s Influence  Banham’s definition of style in terms of symbolic expression certainly corresponded with Archigram’s preoccupation with “an aesthetic original to the mood.””* But a deeper look reveals a key difference between them. While Banham argued for a strong indexical relation between a building’s symbolic expression and its technical performance, Archigram, on the other hand, tended to reify modern technology into an image. As Banham himself stated, “Archigram is short on theory, long on draughtsmanship and craftsmanship. They’re in the image business and they have been blessed with the power to create some of the most compelling images of our time.”"* Notwithstanding this difference, however, Banham’s influence on Archi- gram proved considerable due, in part, to his involvement in the 1950s with the Inde- pendent Group, the so-called “Fathers of Pop.”’’ So when they finally met each other in 1964, he would again profoundly influence Archigram’s pursuit of style.  The Second World War had brought about enormous technological change in the built environment, and cognizant of these transformations, Banham lamented the growing division between form and function: “the idea that architecture belongs in one place and technology in another.”’® Moreover, in his view, the true significance of this shift from “weaponry to livingry,” as Buckminster Fuller famously put it, was that they had broadened the purview of architecture from the simple matter of shelter to environmental control or “the provision of fit envir- onments for human activities.” For Banham this definition meant that the origins of architecture began not with the cave or primitive hut, but with clothing (“the first furs worn by our earliest ancestors”) and the discovery of fire.'’ From a historical perspective, he praised the buildings of Frank Lloyd Wright for inventively incor- porating mechanical services, and saw contemporary relevance in Fuller’s work, particularly his proposal for a “standard-of-living package,” a portable service unit that could be clipped on to any building.  In Banham’s view, then, technologies of environmental control (climatology) had far more implications for modern architecture than traditional design 
principles or even new construction techniques.'* Borrowing Fuller’s idea of a standard-of- living package, he believed that the mechanization of the total environ- ment would revolutionize domesticity, and speculated that one day architecture would no longer need to be fixed, heavy, and permanent, but portable, lightweight, and variable. In his seminal essay, “A Home is not a House,” he described a mobile environment unencumbered by all that is solid and pondered whether we might live in pneumatic bubbles, an idea that came to him at a campus beach in Southern Illinois.’? For Banham, the standard-of living package was the modern equivalent of the campfire, “breathing out warm air..., radiating soft light and Dionne Warwick in heart-warming stereo, with well-aged protein turning in an infra- red glow in the rotisserie, and the ice-maker discreetly coughing cubes into glasses on the swing-out bar.””°  Upon the publication of “A Home is not a House” in 1965, Archigram shifted their attention from the megastructure to the portable environment.”’ This shift is evident in Archigram 6 (1965), which featured pneumatic structures made by American companies for use as warehouses. While the magazine still highlighted the odd megastructure, including one by future High Tech architect, Nicholas Grimshaw, the Archigram group nevertheless questioned the need for fixed struc- tures. In the editorial, Cook asked: “Do we still need houses when we have the ability to evolve the complete environment, completely sustained, and infinite vari- ety within?” This desire for greater portability and flexibility was further under- scored in Archigram 7, which featured a computer motherboard on its cover in homage to electronics and miniaturization. In 1966, Webb proposed his first stand- ard-of-living packages as clothing and rucksack in the Suitaloon and the Cushicle, respectively. And these personalized and deployable environments were followed by a series of nomadic scenarios premised on the idea of open networks: the Moment Village (1968), Instant City (1970) and L.A.W.U.N. (the acronym for “Locally Available Worldwide Unseen Networks,” 1970).  Image versus Sign  Archigram’s pop aesthetic and portable environments gave rise to some of the most compelling images of the day. In Austria, Hollein, Pichler, and Giinther Feuerstein curated their own Archigram-inspired issue of the magazine, Bau (1965), filling its pages with a cornucopia of images from pop art, aerospace technologies, the post- industrial landscape, and visionary projects, including Archigram’s Walking City and Hollein’s collages, aptly called Transformations. Just as Chalk had transformed the Manhattan skyline with his giant, mechanical insects, Hollein metamorphosed an aircraft carrier into a picturesque monument on the Austrian hills. Inspired by Archigram’s example, new groups and little magazines popped up across Europe, and architectural students in Austria, France, and Italy invented their own standard- of-living packages: enviro-helmuts (Coop Himmelblau), simulated environments 
(Hollein), and tropical oases in plastic bubbles (Haus Rticker Co). These counter- environments were not confined to the drawing board, but were built and deployed as installations in galleries or as agitprops in the streets.”  While Hollein and Pichler’s 1962 manifesto, “Absolute Architecture,” spoke of the sublime purposelessness of symbolic expression illustrated by their City Study, Hollein’s 1969 statement, “Everything is Architecture,” echoed Banham’s thesis on environmental control;”* although here it applied to the psychological realm rather than the physical. “From a primitive being, [man] has continually expanded himself by means of media,” wrote Hollein; “new media of environ- mental determination emerge ... Environments of this kind ... are ... the helmets of jet pilots who, through telecommunications, expand their senses.””’ To this end, Hollein proffered that “nonmaterial means (like light, temperature or smell)” will soon replace steel and concrete, and for his design of the Austrian pavilion at the 14th Milan Triennale in 1968, he built a series of parallel passage- ways that simulated different kinds of atmospheres: snowstorm, crowding, iso- lation, and frustration. “[S]paces will more consciously have haptic, optic and acoustic properties, and contain informational effects while directly expressing emotional needs,” he stated.”®  The Italian radicals proposed their own counter-environments, but in so doing, their projects often struck an ironic note. In a 1966 studio project called Luna Park (1966), for example, students at the University of Florence collaged Webb’s Furni- ture Factory into the scene as a single component in their mega-megastructure.”” Led by Leonardo Savioli, the studio spawned the groups Archizoom and Superstu- dio, who had come across their first Archigram issue at a Florentine bookshop in 1966. As latecomers to the megastructure, they pushed the logic of Archigram’s thesis (following Banham) on environmental control to an extreme — to the point of dreamlands or impossible utopias. In No-Stop City, Archizoom presented an ironic image of a nomadic leisure environment in the context of the American supermarket.”* And in “Twelve Cautionary Tales for Christmas,” Superstudio pro- posed ideal cities as both utopia and dystopia, and concluded their visual essay with a witty questionnaire meant to shock the reader out of their dream reality.”” Their older comrade, Ettore Sottsass, told similar tales of a utopian/dystopian world beyond work. In “The Planet as a Festival,” Sottsass contrasted colorful drawings of a domed stadium for rock concerts in the desert and a temple for erotic dancers, with black-and-white drawings of a giant pasta machine rolling out Italian sports cars and the Walking City transformed into a monumental ruin, as if to present the reader with an ambiguous either/or proposition.”°  These delectable parodies register the changing mood at the end of the 1960s from the technological optimism of mass-consumer culture to the critical utopia that challenged the capitalist assumptions on which that optimism was based. They resonated with student protest movements, which spread across Europe after May 68. At the 14th Milan Triennale (1968), for example, students occupied the grounds, holding placards that read: “Designers for Containers of Napalm.”*?  
While the Italian radicals escaped heavy criticism from the Marxist left, Archi- gram fared less well and their magazine survived only one and a half issues after the heady events of 1968. Although they had earlier positioned themselves firmly against the architectural establishment, their critique apparently did not extend far enough to the military industrial complex that had produced the Second Machine Age. Consequently, in a report on student activism at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, Martin Pawley and Bernard Tschumi noted that Archigram’s brand of radicalism paled in comparison to the militant UP6 students “who work on building sites, go to prison for spraying slogans on walls, build community centers for immigrant laborers, float newspapers demanding ‘EVERYTHING’, invade the offices of government ministers, hold lectures in the Louvre, department stores, or the street.”’? Banham, for his part, reacted with indifference, but nevertheless understood the Marxist critique of the fiction of flexibility and individual choice. “When the Left finally began to mount cogent criticism of [the] megastructure,”  he wrote, “it was with arguments that probably derive from the neo-Marxism of Herbert Marcuse, maintaining that the permissive freedoms offered by [the] megastructure’s adaptability and internal transiences were illusory, since all they involved were choices between different products offered by the capitalist system’s supermarkets.””’  This commentary appeared in a historical survey on the megastructure, which Banham wrote in an attempt to comprehend why the visionary projects of the 1960s had passed into oblivion so quickly. In Megastructure, Urban Futures of the Recent Past (1976), he identified their high point with 1964, coinciding with the pub- lication of Archigram’s Plug-in City, but mentioned only briefly the countercultural projects of the Italians. Perhaps one reason for this inattention is that their ironic projects went against his very definition of style and had turned the idea of sym- bolic expression into a mere sign. Ever a critic of postmodernism, Banham  remained true to his convictions before and after May ’68, and never quite forsook the indexical relation between form and function for the ironies of semiology.** This fact is evident in Banham’s well-known admiration for High Tech. For Banham, the true heir of Archigram’s Plug-In City was not so much the coun- ter-environments but the Pompidou Center in Paris by Richard Rogers and Renzo Piano, precisely because it put back together what postmodernism tore apart: style’s intimate relation with technical performance.”’ In his appraisal of modern- ism’s now anachronistic reappearance in High Tech, Banham wrote in 1979:  The collapse of the Modern Movement, when it finally happened, proved not to be as much fun as had been anticipated. The brave new Post-Modern world...coincided with an economic recession that left the new avant/arriére-garde impotent to build. Even so, the most galling aspect of their unrealized millennium must be that “that old Modern Architecture” survived as the dominant element in the new pluralism ... and (High Tech] is building them with its mythologies (social, economic, technological) still intact.” 
MARIE SHORT HOUSE  Glenn Murcutt  Maryam Gusheh and Catherine Lassen  Glenn Murcutt, Marie Short House, Kempsey, Australia, 1975 & 1982.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Glenn Murcutt’s Kempsey farmhouse is a six-hour car journey north from Sydney through towns and state forests. One turns at last from the major highway onto a regional road that is less and less groomed and the final approach is a long bumpy track. Signposts only just mark the slow dusty drive through mature forest where enormous eucalypts suggest the age and locale of this landscape. A gate or two in farm fences at the road’s end reveals almost nothing. It is only by opening a gate and stopping to look closely, that far off a small structure of perhaps two horizontal houses is visible. Through a large paddock one reaches another gate leading directly to a silvered timber building hovering on a lawn. Drawing close, stopping just past the house, arrival is at an open-ended porch.  This unexpectedly refined, abstracted double pavilion floats above a grassy floodplain surveying a lyrical landscape. Under a protective roof of apparently immaterial sheet steel the repetitive horizontal structure mimes surrounding weathered wood fences. Alison Smithson apparently described Murcutt as “the timber and tin Miesian’”* and this work offers an illustration. Both centered enclo- sure and spatial extension associated with mechanical extrusion, the building is an abstract and original reconception of familiar elements such as the pitched roof and entrance porch in local building materials and techniques. It occupies an important position within the pursuit and evolution of modernist architecture in Australia. Designed in 1974-75, the home, interestingly, was purchased by Murcutt in 1980. At that time already the recipient of several distinguished architecture awards, it is now viewed as critical in the evolution of his work.  The project was commissioned by the mother of a previous client, Laurie Short, for whom Murcutt had recently completed a house (1972-73) on the northernmost edge of Sydney, adjacent to Ku-Ring-Gai Chase National Park. Sharply present in that project was the debt to late Mies characteristic of the architect’s work at that time.” The Farnsworth House, in particular, appears a recurrent reference. A photograph of renovations to his early Sydney home,’ his first project as an inde- pendent practitioner, suggests an explicit connection. In that image a white post and beam structure frames a glazed enclosure floating above a “wilderness”* gar- den. Linking the house to the landscape is a parallel, similarly framed, horizontal open platform. The implied pavilion with its low offset stage, screened and bor- dered by delicate tree foliage, presents the suburban home as an open glazed hor- izontal volume within an extended landscape. With a tiled roof and timber boundary fence downplayed in the background, the cropped black and white abstraction bears a surprising resemblance to iconic photographs of Mies’ famous glass house.”  Situated in extensive farmland in Northern Coastal New South Wales, Murcutt’s 1974 proposal for Marie Short was more pragmatically framed. Required was a modest, efficient, economical building as a permanent residence for the client and her family. Two particular client directives were crucial to the construction: to use previously stockpiled local wood and to allow for the potential relocation of the building to a new site. Murcutt developed the project around the precise 
quantity and dimensions of these available timbers,® which included brushbox, coachwood, tallow-wood, and oregon (pine). He broadly drew on farm-shed con- struction traditions and local building expertise to develop an expressed post and beam timber structure in a component-based system that could be pulled apart and reassembled. Invested in the repetitive organization was the further potential for modular adaptation. The proposed house was a double elevated volume as a repeated pitched roof shed.  Disarmingly simple, the resultant plan was two parallel, almost identical, rotated and slipped pavilions, one for sleeping, the other for living. Six 10 foot structural timber bays, the last two treated as an entry porch, formed each 17 foot, 2 inches- wide wing. Between the two, an implied external corridor linked the porches and accommodated rainwater collection via an oversized valley gutter with doubled downpipes at each end. Rendering the wings spatially discrete, it also provided thresholds articulating each entrance from the adjacent pavilion. Murcutt located the building between two large bodies of water, giving each protected open end an outlook. One faced west toward the tidal freshwater river, the other east to a three- hectare lagoon. The selected site on higher ground overlooked the floodplain and the architect has emphasized the practical advantages of further elevating the build- ing where the floating floor assisted in catching summer sea breezes and allowed for visibility of termites and the avoidance of snakes. Repetition as a mechanism was used throughout, extending to the internal organization, where in each pavil- ion service elements were individuated and grouped as a minor cluster of econom- ical units. Basin, toilet, shower, and kitchen compartments formed precisely dimensioned, independently functioning, orthogonal cells. The contrast between these tightly planned functionally driven components and the apparently under- articulated larger zones, manifested in those living areas a heightened spatial gen- erosity and experiential freedom.  A methodological approach to climatic considerations in this largely subtropical humid coastal environment informed the orientation of the house and its detailed resolution. The living pavilion was located on the northern side in order to receive sun for the majority of the day. A skylight in this volume had fixed louvers angled to provide summer shade but allow winter sun. External floor to ceiling retractable metal louvers (one per bay) controlled light and privacy levels, and walls of internal operable glass and metal louvers (four per bay) allowed varying degrees of venti- lation. Fine screen insect mesh between these layers gave a further level of protec- tion to the naturally ventilated spaces and was used independently to completely enclose the western porch. Both louver elements were selected as inexpensive, standardized, off-the-shelf components and the resulting three-part exterior skin suggested a corresponding combined standard cladding solution. The system offered a high degree of individual orchestration to manipulate the building envel- ope for both physical comfort and experiential connection to the landscape.  Climatic performance also informed the details of the double-pitched corrugated metal roof. Overlapped curved corrugated sheets on a three-foot radius formed  
ridge caps just separated by a continuous horizontal slot. The gap provided for nat- ural ventilation to the space beneath, enhanced by the aerofoil shape and resultant wind draft on the leeward side. Doubling the layers gave a sense of immateriality to the edge and presented the roof as a continuous, strikingly delicate, metal mem- brane, its lack of apparent mass made plausible by the naturally ventilated roof space. The repetition and shadowed slot reinforced the horizontality of the build- ing wings and the roof rendered as abstracted planar corrugated sheets powerfully lightened the expected weight of a traditional pitched volume. Suspended machine in a garden, the design was a clear registration of its immediate environmental conditions.  Three substantial monographs on the architect, clearly varied in style and emphases, consistently refer to this project as a key moment in the development of his practice. Beck and Cooper describe the design as “the beginnings of the mature Murcutt. He is relinquishing Mies and establishing his own aesthetic hall- marks — although still incorporating many references ... This is certainly a labora- tory building,”” an emphasis in accord with Francoise Fromonot who notes that “The Kempsey house is, if not a manifesto, a seminal work that explains and sig- nificantly shapes his later development.”* Even Philip Drew’s earlier idiosyncratic Leaves of Iron introduces the project as one “which ushered in a new phase of Murcutt’s architecture and which foreshadows his mature technique. It was a cru- cial building, both personally as well as artistically.”” All three identify the personal significance of the work, an observation underpinned by Murcutt’s later acquisition of the farmhouse and his subsequent architectural adjustment and clarification.  Inventive Acclimatization  Appreciation of the Kempsey home is united via the extent to which the presence of Mies is less insistent than earlier projects yet found on a regional farm in a taut and convincing response to the particular circumstances of realization. Specific cli- ent requirements, conditions of climatic control, on-site water management, and local economies of scale, material, technique, and labor all appear apparently effort- lessly optimized. According to Beck and Cooper, numerous pragmatic criteria and desired experiential outcomes are all addressed “with a high degree of formal abstraction.”'° They note that the “proportioning system of the timber frame recalls late Miesian monumental bay spacing, of course here on a completely domestic scale.”*' Of recurrent critical interest is the perceived absorption of earlier modernist mastery, reinvigorated in an acclimatized, attentive vernacular transla- tion. In a drawing folio on the architect’s work exploring a selection of key projects (2006), Kenneth Frampton suggests that the slipped pavilion plan “may well have been inspired by the subtle displacement of the upper and lower terraces in the Farnsworth House, both of which were also elevated to raise the structure clear of a flood plain.”’* He introduces the building as a reformulation of the traditional 
local woolshed, emphasizing that Murcutt’s adoption of the associated economical corrugated iron roof form was “as technically and tectonically compelling as Mies’ comparable appropriation of the standard steel-frame as a ‘found object’ some fifty years before.””?  Evident in the design for Marie Short is an engagement with mass-produced materials, logically and elegantly assembled. Off-the-shelf systems were here pre- cisely adapted and refined to propose useful inventive combinations that, once tested, became new standard detailed solutions. Rational yet carefully particular- ized thought in construction is present in numerous components and priorities that became preoccupations in subsequent projects, a clear example being the layered exterior operable skin. Frampton comments: “Irrespective of whether ordinary builders were indeed that familiar with Murcutt’s particular combination of lou- vers, mesh and glazing is a moot point, the architect would henceforth employ this tripartite cladding principle, with subtle variations, in one house after another.”"* Corrugated metal roofs are similarly successively employed after this building as elemental explorations conceived in utilitarian terms. Strong, lightweight, and eco- nomical, they are typically reexamined and in some cases further abstracted in later iterations. Practically driven yet expressive water management and downpipe details are also repeated and adapted in new projects. From this moment “the con- ical hopper and downpipe trope”’’ becomes expected in Murcutt’s houses.  This mode of working is underpinned by the desire for an efficient yet flexible set of elements, which can be repeated and continually adapted. The architect’s consistent engagement with standardized building systems, initially well designed, affordable and locally produced, is through a process of integration and attentive adjustment to each new project. It typically consists of reducing the number of parts, simplifying the appearance, minimizing the size of the structural members, and optimizing the number of simultaneous functions each part performs. An ongoing effort to rethink each element occurs from the scale of individual details to larger building components, and occasionally extends to entire building types. Reexamination of first principles allows for a constant commitment to particularize whereby reassembled modules and all their details operate as if they are one shift- ing yet internally coherent framework. One finds a resultant tension in this work between system building, component development, and reuse of the ordinary on one hand and a terse final minimal singularity on the other.  Critical Transformations  Purchasing the Marie-Short farm in 1980 provided Murcutt with a tangible early opportunity to reevaluate the house elements and their broader interconnections. The potential for reuse was architecturally tested and clarified by reframing the original spatial relationships while maintaining the internal systematic order. In this project, adjustment and literal extension were used to demonstrate the potential 
for the repetitive system to adapt; reemployed details and built components were used to reformulate the house as a whole. The development focused both an ele- mental materiality together with a more refined abstraction. Both wings were sub- stantially lengthened in 1981-82 to accommodate the architect’s larger family needs and each pavilion was extended three structural bays to the east; in the proc- ess one veranda was unbolted and moved to its new location. Distinguishing the first and expanded versions of the house suggests a critical agency in the moment of transformation. Rigorous consistencies as well as shifts inherent in the two versions sharply focus the productive tensions that underpin both Murcutt’s working method and his inventive disciplinary contribution.  Comparing the early and later plans implies an almost magical ease with which the systematic built “machine” was extruded, and yet many essential relationships were reconceived. In the new configuration the northern living wing was length- ened with additional service facilities and a two-bay bedroom, while on the south- erm pavilion a three-bay living room with fireplace was inserted between the original bedrooms and relocated end porch. The previous programmatic day- wing/night-wing hierarchy was thus shifted to create independent possibilities for living, sleeping, and bathing in each pavilion, suggesting one “house” for the parents and another for the children. The close proximity of the new living room to the northern kitchen and dining areas amplified internal cross-connections between the north and south wings and offered more possibilities for diverse living arrangements. The resultant plan implied a greater flexibility of use with appar- ently less architectural determination.  Marie Short’s version of the house had five’® entrances. Ceremonial double doors connected the kitchen and dining areas to one porch and the other verandah to a vestibule between the bedrooms. A minor hierarchy to this doubling was sug- gested with an additional layer of entry doors into the northern, screened, other- wise exterior room. Large sliding glass doors allowed both pavilions additionally to be entered from these outside spaces through either the living room or the second bedroom. A final pair of double exterior timber doors in the easternmost face of the northern wing led directly to a toilet, shower, and laundry at the back of the kitchen service facilities. With its flight of steps, minor protective extra roof and close prox- imity to the entry gate, this centralized opening in the gable end implied a strikingly classical, face-like primary entrance, yet its suggested operation was as a service back door.  In Murcutt’s extensions, this entrance and associated centralized facade disap-  peared. Retained laundry and bathing elements were expanded as a much larger core, and a newly blind wood bedroom wall formed a clarified abstracted east end. Inserting the new living room created a more public entry through the eastern porch and sliding glass wall. A 1975 photograph’” of the house shows venetian blinds enclosing that verandah, perhaps in response to the more private bedroom then adjacent. In the alterations the porches were thus focused as entrance voids, clear expansions of their associated public living spaces, yet with 
a cross movement leading from the steps toward the other pavilion. Entrance legibility and implied gridded spatial extension into the landscape was sharpened.  The new southern living room mirrored the dimensions of the existing kitchen and living spaces. Proportionally identical rooms now provided a symbolic center along each pavilion, and the cross-combination of the two spaces precisely regis- tered the house’s physical center. Each space was respectively identified with a sig- nificant function — eating, or gathering around the fire. Multiple possible entrances, combined with these shifting spatial hierarchies, offered freedom of use within a simple order. A clear yet dispersed center was manifest.  In the first house conspicuously thick external doors read as implied pivoting wood walls. Offthe-shelf cladding on a familiar timber frame was used to make these doors as de-familiarized, abstracted pieces of wall. Frampton describes them thus: “hieratic in feeling, perhaps, are the thick pivoting doors, the tongued and grooved timber cladding of which lies flush with the surrounding boarded wall when the doors are closed.”’* As strangely physical edges to the spaces, the pres- ence of these elements was intensified in the alterations. Unchanged in location, one pair was newly employed to internally connect both living rooms. The adjust- ments resituated these external elements at a clearly interior center. Murcutt, in discussing the design of a theoretical future home, alluded to the psychological reassurance provided by their heaviness: “When I eventually get around to design- ing myself a house, I will have a bedroom which has that sort of a Chubb safe qual- ity, enormous security.”’® These unusually thick, apparently exterior doors at the core of the house created an abstract yet uncanny material presence.  The color and specificity of the predominantly timber lined interiors, as experi- enced in the physical and visual weight of these doors, is in productive tension with the mechanical quality in most of the building’s exterior skin. An inventive combi- nation of layers, the apparently extruded wall system is striking for the extent to which it is largely composed of air. Moveable blades of glass and fine metal provide a thickened zone of operability to individuate the degree to which one can experience particular atmospheric aspects, whether breezes, light, or transparency. As with the roof, the floating sheet-like elements are plausible partly because natural climatic effects have been engaged to maintain personal comfort. Airflow, rather than build- ing mass, helps protect the ceiling from heat gain beneath an upper roof metal sheet. In the vertical plane, sheltered warmth or cooling can occur without added wall weight. The movement, temperature, and presence of air are all part of this screen system, with the barest amount of material employed to articulate a subtle, precise separation. Distinct from Miesian transparency, the prosaic glass louvers are more mechanically present and one has individual control over degrees of privacy and con- nection to the landscape. Here minimal expression also offers experiential freedom.  Air as a material seems similarly engaged in the design of the screened northern porch, where a delicate stretched membrane renders just enough edge to delineate a bubble of hazy light. The gauze void offers separation from the landscape yet  
immersion in the environment. Familiar yet elevated, this apparently ordinary entrance is materially present yet highly abstract. Pierre Chareau’s Maison d’Verre, feels present in this building, and particularly here. Murcutt has discussed being moved by that building, as “a confirmation that Modernism could be open-ended” and his reaction is captured by Fromonot: “once enveloped by the abstract atmos- phere of the interior, he experienced an unexpected feeling of security mixed witha sensation of lightness, of floating in light.”° Experienced as an interior, the room renders the particular atmospheric condition of the landscape as a material effect. It is as if the weather is observed and experienced at the same time. Changing pat- terns of light, breeze, and mist become part of the architecture.  Economical Abstraction  Murcutt’s recent reception has largely been framed in terms of environmental con- trol and “green design.” In the introduction to her anthology, Constructing a New Agenda: Architectural Theory 1993-2009, Krista Sykes frames his contribution as a response to current climatic imperatives: “Glenn Murcutt (relies) on combinations of local or salvaged materials, attention to geography, and awareness of proven regional solutions to create sustainable and environmentally responsive architec- ture.”*) The Marie Short Murcutt house is potent within this narrative. Particula- rities of the building locate architectural priorities in this regard, but Murcutt’s precise position and working method remains under-described. Floating, sur- rounded by light on the northern porch, this elevated experience in relation to the landscape, qualitatively captures his ambition. In many ways, the house is more about environmental experience than control. It operates as an instrument to con- tinuously adjust the relationship between architecture and its situation. A broad ethic for living deliberately, modestly, and attentively in a specific place prevails.  In his own description of this project, Glenn Murcutt typically begins with the incidental details of the timber he had to work with. “Marie had just said ... ‘Any- thing that you’ve got left over, I'll take it.’ And every time they had something left over, they'd bring it out, and deliver it and just charge her for a leftover quantity. It was by measuring the materials in the shed that I was able to determine the size of the building.””* Evoked by his account is the value of “making do,” an aspect of Murcutt’s work contextualised by writers such as David Malouf: “materials that had belonged to the world of the make-do and temporary — corrugated iron, reused timber, louvers — became, rather in the manner of the contemporary Italian art movement L’arte povera, the stuff of an architecture whose aim was to turn limi- tation into opportunity, and with what might appear to be the poorest means, the achievement of a definite lightness and permanency.””’ Literally formed from found timber pieces, the Marie Short house is also an early example of Murcutt’s gradual transfiguration of standardised material components. This transformative process lies in the initial conception of the house but more perspicuously in its 
translation: Marie Short’s farmhouse rethought as Murcutt’s home. The highly pre- cise sequence of architectural adjustments and refinements, which constitute this  reconfiguration, are the substance of his economical method. Working in this way,  an unexpectedly familiar yet heightened material abstraction is found.  Notes  Image credit: Anthony Browell.  . Haig Beck and Jackie Cooper, Glenn Murcutt: A Singular Architectural Practice (Mulgrave,  Australia: Images Publishing Group, 2002), 9.  . “This house (Laurie Short), like the earlier two, is also a Miesian exercise, but drawing  from the lessons of late Mies, Chicago Mies: one is reminded of the public buildings and office buildings.” Beck and Cooper, Glenn Murcutt, 43.  - Black and white photograph (circa 1976, not dated), Australian House ex Garden’s Great-  est Houses, (Sydney, Australia: Murray, c. 1976), 34-5. Republished in Philip Drew, Leaves of Iron: Glenn Murcutt; Pioneer of an Australian Architectural Form (Sydney, Aus- tralia: The Law Book Company Ltd, 1985), 27. Also in Kenneth Frampton, “In Search of Glenn Murcutt,” in Glenn Murcutt, Architect, (Sydney, Australia: 01 Editions, 2006), 33.  . A caption to the House and Garden article notes: “While shrubs and ground cover are  being established a thick layer of crushed apricot kernels lends interest to the ‘wilder- ness’ garden” (circa 1976, not dated). Australian House ¢ Garden’s Greatest Houses, 34.  . Reflecting in 1988 on current Australian architecture, Reyner Banham summarized  Mies’ influence on Murcutt thus: “What it reveals ... is the profoundly Miesian roots of Murcutt’s architecture, stemming from his father’s giving him an article on the Farnsworth House when he was a lad of fifteen. [Philip] Drew tries to downplay the idea of direct imitation of Mies, but there are direct quotes in the plans of several houses ... Mies seems to be the underlying discipline that stops his corrugated long houses from being merely galvo-sentimental and connects them to the high architec- ture of the rest of the world.” Reyner Banham, “Toward a modestly Galvo architec- ture?” Design Book Review 14 (1988): 50.  . For some time the client had been collecting and storing in her shed “offcuts and left-  overs” from a local timber mill. Glenn Murcutt in Philip Drew, Touch This Earth Lightly: Glenn Murcutt in his Own Words (Sydney, Australia: Duffy & Snellgrove, 1999), 132.  7. Beck and Cooper, Glenn Murcutt, 48. 8. Francoise Fromonot, Glenn Murcutt: Buildings and Projects (New York: Whitney Library  of Design, 1995), 62.  . Drew, Leaves of Iron, 82. 10. 1l. 12. 13. 14.  Beck and Cooper, Glenn Murcutt, 48.  Ibid.  Frampton, “In Search of Glenn Murcutt,” 51. Ibid., 50-1.  Ibid., 50. 
CENTRE POMPIDOU  Renzo Piano and Richard Rogers  Hadas A. Steiner  i [ae 7  rv & §&  Renzo Piano and Richard Rogers, Centre Nationale d’Art et Culture Georges Pompidou, Paris, France, 1977.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
The Centre Nationale d’Art et Culture Georges Pompidou (1971-77), also known as the Pompidou Center, makes a striking impression even today. From afar, the scale of the inside-out structure with its vast public plaza retains a monumental status within the densely populated medieval quarter from which it differentiates itself. The building takes up half of its site, with the rest given over to a plaza, known as the Plateau Beaubourg, which remains an animated civic space in its own right. In proximity, the skeletal structure of steel columns, trusses, tension rods, and gerberettes that together with the mechanical and circulation systems make up the facades of the building cause the eye to follow the latticework of struc- ture and focus on the connective details. The Pompidou Center continues to pres- ent itself as a vision of technologically enabled adaptability that clearly exhibits what became known in architectural discourse as “High Tech.” Effectively, the building has become “a manifesto of late modernism with its commitment to the public realm, the integration of design and technology, and the unflinching belief in total flexibility.”  Scheme  When Renzo Piano and Richard Rogers won the commission for the Pompidou in 1971, they were both little-known architects who entered into competition with some of the most high-profile architects in France for a complex project in the his- toric center of Paris. Indeed, the competition attracted some 680 entries. The immediate area of Les Halles, which had long accommodated the principle food market for Paris, was in the process of being demolished and its functions trans- ferred to the outskirts. It was also a socially depressed area considered to be in need of revitalization. Georges Pompidou, then president of France, proposed a new center, geared in his mind toward the elevation of the cultural level of the “man in the street,” to stand on the vacant plateau that had once accommodated the delivery trucks for the market as a grand gesture of urban renewal. The pro- gram was to include a large public library, a museum of modern art, a center for industrial design, and a center for music and acoustical research. Other facilities for administration, bookshops, restaurants, cinemas, children’s play, and parking were also required.  France was not prone to holding international design competitions but in this case a famous intercontinental jury, including Oscar Niemeyer, Jean Prouvé, and Philip Johnson, sat as judges. The entry submitted by Piano and Rogers reflected their shared affinity for innovative applications of building technology. Indeed, the two believed that technology released architects from the traditions of the past and allowed for new expressions in architectural form. In this case, the desire for a large open structure with its six extended floor spans — to be exe- cuted with the able assistance of Peter Rice of the Ove Arup engineering firm — 
dictated the nature of the structure needed on the exterior to carry the load. Expo- sure of the vertical structure of the building, and most all of its infrastructure, was intended to maximize the flexibility of the internal space. In turn, each structural member was then highly thought out. As Rice expressed it: “Each piece was sep- arate, an articulated assembly where the members only touched at discrete points. As in music, where the space between the notes defines the quality, here it was the space between the pieces that defined the scale.”” Thus the complexity of the highly visible structure stemmed from the overarching concept of adaptability and change that was vital to the proposal.  Circulation  The flow of people from the open plaza through which one entered the ground floor of the building emphasized the notion of continuous circulation. The effect, both programmatically and theoretically, was a conceptualization of the structure as movement: of people, programs, and services. The idea of passage was further emphasized through one of the most iconic aspects of this building: the painting of the different systems on the exterior of the building in diagrammatic colors: blue, for instance, illustrated ventilation, or air. Electrical elements were picked out in yellow and orange. Plumbing, or water, was demarcated in green. Most of the mechanical services made their debut outside of the glass skin on the eastern, street-side elevation. The transition of people around and through the building was highlighted in red. The best known of these elements continues to be the underside of the glass tubes encapsulating the escalator that steps up the west facade that faces the plaza. The visibility of the movement of visitors through the glass corridors that are clipped to the externalized infrastructure also transforms the people themselves into part of the facade. These corridors are reminiscent of the “streets-in-the-air” concept that Peter and Alison Smithson popularized with their housing projects of the 1950s.’ From inside the glass corridors, one is both contained within the building and, at the same time, connected visually to the out- side world of the plaza and to Paris beyond.  Context  Ina manner familiar from contemporary site planning in England, transported here to densely populated Paris, the building was pushed right to the edge of the site with the side that faces the city encroaching the outside like a protective wall.* Thus the experience of approach from the historic city quarter is one of the color-coded servicing tubes, while the narrowness of the street guarantees fragmented views of the facade. From this vantage point in particular, the Pompidou Center appeared 
not even to have the trappings of a traditional building or urban context. Not only did it stand out in the city fabric and appear to have no architectural referent from the past, the building did not follow in the programmatic footsteps for a museum or cultural center. Indeed, the architects took a stance on the nature of culture in the present age, declaring it to be about the dissemination of information rather than the presentation of art. The library, too, unlike most others in France, was designed so that readers could browse the stacks themselves and have control over access to knowledge.  Nonetheless, the Pompidou had acknowledged roots in the history of structural and infrastructural innovation, at the larger scale the Crystal Palace (1851) by Joseph Paxton and at the domestic one, the Maison de Verre (1932) by Pierre Char- eau. Rogers admired both these examples for their groundbreaking conceptualiza- tion of architecture for a Machine Age that went beyond the aestheticization of technology. The Crystal Palace famously used prefabricated construction and the assembly of parts to make up its structure. The association of these kit-of-parts architectures was clear within architectural culture. In The Language of Post-Modern Architecture (1977), for example, Charles Jencks juxtaposed an image of the brand new Pompidou Center with a text on World’s Fair constructions.’ At the intimate scale, the Maison de Verre was bold in its raw expression of the materiality of steel, glass, and rubber. Moreover, the wires for its utilities ran through tubular metal hannels that were punctuated by power switches and sockets.° Another reference for the overt expression of infrastructure at the scale of an institutional building was the more recent Richards Medical Research Laboratories (1961) by Louis I. Kahn, where the service towers appeared prominently, illustrating that architect’s famous distinction between served and servant spaces.’ In addition, Piano and Rogers made their case for the building by associating it with Buckminster Fuller’s argu- ment for architectural efficiency and flexibility through the application of up-to- date technologies.  fal  Concept  Most overtly, however, the Pompidou Center drew visually and conceptually on the work of the Archigram group from the 1960s. That group — composed of War- ren Chalk, Peter Cook, Dennis Crompton, David Greene, Ron Herron, and Mike Webb — had placed the concept of flexibility of program and structure at the heart of their architecture. Archigram reacted in words and images to what they described as the tedium of the built environment and the outdated notion that a collection of individual monuments was the life-blood of the city. Instead, their projects presented the city as a series of unpredictable events that were to be accommodated by its architecture. Architecture would only remain relevant, they believed, if it was not designed to outlive its relationship to patterns of occupation. The lack of permanent architectural resolution resulted in a new aesthetic that was 
not based on fixed form. In their first common activity, the Living City exhibition of 1963, the Archigram group sought to define urban space as primarily a sphere of interaction. The forms of the city, defined through the transmission of information, were implied by the circulatory structure of movement. The shift was toward a networked conception of circulation that prioritized distribution, flow, and direc- tion, and relied heavily on connection. These qualities are all apparent in the think- ing that generated the design for the Pompidou Center.  When the British architectural critic Reyner Banham spoke of the Pompidou Center, he often cited it as the only realization of an Archigram drawing.* Certainly Archigram’s most enduring legacy for architectural culture has been predicated on the strength of its imagery. Archigram’s projects were presented as colorful adver- tisements for the idea of architectural and urban structure as a scaffold for life’s activities. The sensibility of their drawings transported the “pop” aesthetic into architectural discourse. In the images that the six publicized in the nine issues of their Archigram magazine, as well as on the pages of other publications and through exhibitions, the city was transformed into a place of leisure in which archi- tecture acted as an enabler of social situations. Through the conflation of collage and orthographic drawing, not unlike the one produced by Rogers and Piano for their initial submission for the Pompidou Center, Archigram fabricated a visual language to express the agenda of a reflexive architecture to be populated by peo- ple who participated in the life of street culture. Often the original drawings were highlighted in bright colors, similar in palette to the ones used by Piano and Rogers to diagram the services of the Pompidou Center. The use of ebullient color in archi- tectural drawings was uncommon at the time and Archigram’s embrace of the new tool of Zip-A-Tone and felt-tipped markers to produce these effects was emphatic. Indeed, it could be said that Archigram invented the visual language on which the Center was predicated.  Archigram also used polemical language to make the case for what they argued would be a more relevant kind of architecture. They famously spoke of the need for new technologies to stand along the space capsules and disposable commodities of anew age. Most importantly, however, the role of architecture was to enable the liberties promised by the technologies of contemporary life. The language of the text written by Piano and Rogers to support their submission, with its ideals of social freedom enabled through radical flexibility of structure, was redolent of Archigram-like prose:  It is our belief that buildings should be able to change, not only in plan, but in section and elevation, allowing people the freedom to do their own things, the order and scale and grain coming from a clear understanding and expression of the process of building, and the optimization of each individual element, its system, of manufac- ture, storage, transportation, erection and connection, all within a clearly defined and rational framework. This framework must allow people to perform freely inside and out, to change and adapt, in answer to technical or client needs, this free and  
changing performance becoming an expression of the architecture of the building —a giant Meccano set rather than the traditional static transparent or solid doll’s house. Exciting things happen when a variety of overlapping activities designed for all peo- ple, the old and the young, the blue and white collar workers, locals and visitors all meet, opening up the possibility of interaction outside institutional limits. When this takes place, deprived areas become dynamic places where all can participate, rather than less or more beautiful ghettos.”  The common rhetoric embraced the cause for buildings to be more lightweight and responsive, acknowledging that culture was in the midst of an electronic and computer revolution that would push architecture beyond its old terrain of established answers.'°  The idea of a building as a giant Meccano — or Erector — set was particularly reminiscent of Peter Cook’s Plug-in-City (1964), a megastructural proposal in which all the components had designated lifespans, from the masts, ties, and con- nections of the structure itself, to the clip-on pods that accommodated urban activ- ity. In its understanding of culture as information, the Pompidou Center also harkened back to Archigram’s “Instant City’(1968) project that had as its goal the delivery of information from the city to the farther flung provinces and vice versa. Collage illustrations told the story of how the travelling components of the Instant City would arrive at a “sleeping town” and thoroughly infiltrate the ocale by creating an event through which a network of information and entertain- ment would take over. Thus, cultural activity would be spread far afield from the usual concentrations in major cities. Likewise, on the very first page of the Pompidou Center competition entry Rogers and Piano, too, proposed that the building be “developed as a ‘Live Centre of Information’ covering Paris and beyond. Locally, it was to be a meeting place for the people. The Plateau Beaubourg information centre would be linked up with information dispersal and collection centers, throughout France and beyond; for example, university cen- ters, town halls, etc.”'! Thus, the network of cultural exchange would take over.  The theme of culture presented as the democratization of information and thoroughly linked to structural flexibility was also directly connected to the work of Cedric Price, whom both Archigram and Rogers admired for his commitment to indeterminacy at every stage of the design process. For Price, architecture was always conceived primarily as program, with a result that may or may not turn out to be a building. The Fun Palace (1961-65), in particular, was a source of inspi- ration for the Pompidou Center. This unexecuted project that Price designed as a “people’s theater” for the politically-driven theater company of Joan Littlewood, was, like the Pompidou, conceived of as less of a building and more of an instru- ment of social change Price had an ideal client for this sort of proposal, unlike the governmental agency that Piano and Rogers had to convince about the complex- ities of the cultural notions of leisure at this time. From the start, for example, Price and Littlewood interchangeably used the words “learning” and “fun” to describe  _ 8 Dm  
Littlewood’s ideal theater, improvisation and participation from performers and audience alike would be encouraged by the environmental conditions surrounding the activities. Littlewood wanted a center with no designated program or even a set of fixed activ- ities. Price translated this “brief” into an “anti-building” with no specific form or fixed floor plan.’’ There is no doubt that the vision portrayed by Price in the Fun Palace was more radically flexible than the Pompidou could ever be. While the Pompidou Center deployed tensile and compressive structure in a novel way, Price wanted to do more than reconceive architecture in the light of advanced building technologies. The Fun Palace was essentially a system for moving things around, depending on what the space was being used for at any designated time. With the assistance of the structural engineer Frank Newby, the Fun Palace was designed as a structural grid of towers that contained the circulation and services that allowed for flexibility of program in the bays. The frame was the only permanent part of the structure. Gantry cranes mounted on rails provided the means for redeploying the floor, wall, and ceiling mod- ules and other variable elements within the spaces. There were even moving walk- ways and pivoting escalators. To further increase responsivity, the project drew on the expertise of the cybenetician Gordon Pask, who was well versed in the application of the emerging technologies that Archigram only envisioned. The cybernetic element allowed the input of feedback into the adjustable system to further its responsivity during use. As Price would say about the Fun Palace, it was only meant to be “a kit of parts, not a building. I doubt that it will ever look the same twice.”'*  Banham, who vocally promoted the agendas of Archigram and Price throughout the 1960s, positioned the Pompidou Center in relation to those two practices in his book that were dedicated to what he called the “megastructure idea.”"* Megastruc- ture: Urban Futures of the Recent Past was in fact written at the same time as the build- ing of the Pompidou Center was in progress. The book had a chapter devoted to the work of Archigram and Price under the heading of “Fun and Flexibility.” In this section, the connection of the attitude toward leisure and the structural typology o: the megastructure was cast as a British contribution to the discourse. If the Fun Palace was described as one of the most radically flexible versions of a megastruc- ture, Archigram had served to “create the illusion of the existence of some kind o ‘Megastructure International.””'® Banham then concluded the epilogue for the book with the example of the Pompidou Center, comparing it favorably to the sen- sibility of this British contribution, but adversely to the greater cause of structura flexibility. He found that in the end the Pompidou, as it was being realized, shared perhaps more with the less variable qualities of the ongoing New Babylon project by Constant Nieuwenhuys, included in the book as a megastructure of a less jovial category. That project, too, used scaffolds and the notion of computing technology to imagine a radically flexible world for the homo ludens, or the “archetypal ‘man at play.’””” This reconceptualization of the world as a series of sectors that through space frames provides a “new skin that covers the earth” was meant to “suit the totally different needs of a creative race of homo ludens” by being “flexible, change-  —— IR el ae  
sectors in such a world. With this analysis Banham firmly contextualized the Pom- pidou Center in terms of these kinds of neo-avant-garde practices in his criticism of the 1970s.  The Pompidou Center was certainly far more bound to the conventions of a cul- tural center than any of the unrealized structures by Archigram, Constant, or Price. Nonetheless, the Pompidou was for Banham a monument to the megastructural movement in the sense that it looked like one.'” As Banham reflected, even as a fixed image that was perhaps a necessary outcome of the design process, the significance of the Pompidou Center as a building would be for it to retain the power of that image into the twenty-first century.” Banham concluded: “Whatever the social or anti- ‘ocial, mechanical or functional, civic or environmental, professional, radical or con- ervative meanings that have been demonstrated by or imputed to megastructures, hey are also a body of imagery, carrying the kind of imprecise but intensely emotive ignifications that visual images always do.””’ Indeed, when the Archigram group ogether with Cedric Price took a bus trip to visit the completed Pompidou Center in 1977, they immediately recognized their cartoons in the work.” They were, none- theless, disappointed with the literal application of diagrammatic color to the over- blown external ducts that converted what in the drawings was a metaphor of  tH ane  circulation and exchange into a monumentalization of services. On-camera musings reveal bewilderment at the fundamental lack of dynamism on display. While the frame enabled internal flexibility of arrangement, the core issue of transience, from the structural incorporation of time to the exchanges of technology and consump- tion, was untouched. The consensus was that the Pompidou Center, despite being filtered through the representational lens of Archigram, remained a static building.  Whether the idea of a cultural center that uses technology to enable a flexible and evolving set of programs for the person in the street is a viable one remains an open question. The success of a building that proposes to be a response to the movement of services, people, and information will always leave itself open to question. But static or not, the Pompidou Center maintains its iconic status. Per- haps the most enduring idea captured by the building as an image for the twenty- first century is in its attempt to address the idea of culture defined as the dissem- ination of information. By extending the debate about what a monument can be after modernism to what a cultural center might be in the information age, the Pompidou Centre still raises pertinent questions about the role of architecture in an increasingly visual and connected society.  Notes  * Image credit: Dan Perry.  1. Richard Burdett, “Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris, 1971-77,” in Richard Rogers Partner- ship: Work and Projects, ed. Richard Burdett (New York: Monacelli Press, 1996), 162.  2. Peter Rice, An Engineer Imagines (London: Ellipsis Press, 1993), 34. 
TEATRO DEL MONDO  Aldo Rossi  Mary Louise Lobsinger  Aldo Rossi, Teatro del Mondo, 1980.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
It could be argued that Aldo Rossi’s Teatro del Mondo is the single most memo- rable contribution to the 1980 inaugural Venice Biennale of International Architec- ture. The project was co-sponsored by the Biennale’s theater and architecture sections. Constructed on a barge in the Fusina shipyards, the theater was towed by tugboat to a mooring near the Punta della Dogana, or Custom Point, across the water from the Piazza San Marco. In this location it was first presented to the public in 1979 on November 11 as part of an exhibition dedicated to the theme of “Venezia e lo spazio scenico,” or “Venice and the Space of the Stage.” In the early months of 1980 the Teatro del Mondo served as a performance space for the inau- gural Carnival of the Theater held in Venice from January 28 to February 19. In early August the barge with theater atop traveled across the Adriatic to Dubrovnik to participate in the International Theater Festival. In late August it journeyed back to Venice to participate in the first Biennale dedicated to international architecture. The theater as architectural object was, however transitory, a determined gesture, the image of which has had lasting significance.  In reality, the building on a barge was composed of the simplest of materials and the most basic of geometries: the composition was assembled by a cuboid center piece that housed the stage and seating, appended on two sides by tall rectangular stairwells and topped off with an octagonal roof that terminated in a spire that pierced a sphere and was crowned by a flag. Structurally the theater was composed of metal tubes clad on both sides by vertical wood panels. It stood about 25 m in height above the barge and it had the capacity to seat 250 people. The rooftop of the cuboid volume doubled as an in-the-round viewing platform. The ensemble was painted in gold, and silver, and azure blue.  The Venice Biennale and Architectural Postmodernism  The premiere of the Venice Biennale of International Architecture, which opened on July 27 and closed on October 19, proved to be a polemicizing event. Themat- ically designated by the title “The Presence of the Past” (“La presenza del passato”) and curated by the Italian architect and historian Paolo Portoghesi, the exhibition has been interpreted as the event that confirmed the arrival of architectural post- modernism as a return to history. Recent research on the role of the Biennale in establishing architectural postmodernism has persuasively argued that while mem- bers of the organizational committee were critical of modern architecture there was little consensus about the role history would play.’ A return to historical ref- erence was but one way of making architecture more appealing to a broader public. To mitigate the various contending positions the organizing committee embraced inclusion: the Biennale comprised eight different sections, including individual exhibitions celebrating the achievements of architects Ignazio Gardella, Mario Ridolfi, Philip Johnson, and Ernesto Basile, who was associated with turn-of-the- century Italian neo-liberty style. There was also a special critics’ exhibition curated 
by Alessandro Mendini and Studio Alchimia. All exhibitions were housed within the former Venetian shipyard (Corderie dell’arsenale) along with the exhibition desig- nated as the “Strada novissima.” This main exhibition was installed as an exercise in street facade design. Twenty international architects had been invited to contribute a unique facade that when assembled as a whole created an eclectic interior street. Some of the participants considered the invitation an opportunity to promote ideas about communication through architecture language that references popular ico- nography, and this presumably made for more legible urban expression. For others, participation in the Biennale was an opportunity to lobby for historical ref- erence as a means of deepening architectural expression. In either case, the exhi- bition as street facade presented architecture as a plural, semiotic surface with the intention of enabling meaningful communication. The focus on architecture as communication, on pluralism, and on spectacle, swept up vague discontent with modern architecture, which for most was characterized reductively as functional and abstract. Given this, the Biennale, following close upon the heels of Charles Jencks’ 1977 The Language of Post-Modern Architecture, announced the arrival of var- ied and controversial interpretations of the postmodern in architecture. Rossi was twice represented at the Biennale. His design for the temporary ceremonial entrance gate to the exhibition area of the Arsenale contained formal references and material elements that resonated with his design for the floating theater. In the context of the main exhibition as a series of unrelated facades, the Teatro del Mondo, moored in the waters across from the Piazza San Marco and at some distance from the Arsenale, stood as a singular, spectacular object.  Writing about the Teatro del Mondo  Rossi wrote very little about the Teatro del Mondo. He only briefly mentions it in notebook number 26 of the Quaderni Azzurri, the little notebooks he kept from 1968 until his death. Pasted on the cover of the notebook titled Architettura Ve + Ny. ie. Teatro del Mondo 11 Nov 79 is a small, rectangular, colored drawing of the theater. Inside the cover a closely cropped version of the same illustration appears along with the remains of a complimentary entry ticket dated February 1980. Rossi notes the opening of the theater on November 11, 1979, followed by a loose description: “As the space of imagination and the imagination as an urban intervention where architecture is realized in rapport with reality as an affect. These ideas are over and above a great part of the beauty and fantasy of Venice.” If Rossi’s record seems rather distracted for an event that in retrospect would generate intense interest, his later entries offer some explanation. One entry makes note of a date and place, Sunday November 25 in New York. Another appears to be the draft of a dedication to Peter Eisenman intended for the exhibi- tion catalogue Aldo Rossi in America: 1976-1979. And another entry remarks upon a gift he received from Anthony Vidler, a book titled Theatre of the World. Rossi was 
becoming a famous international architect. The Venice Biennale was but one of several exhibitions of his work that took place in 1979 and 1980. In the autumn of 1979 Rossi had overlapping solo exhibitions in New York, one at the Max Pro- tetch Gallery and the other at the Institute for Architecture and Urban Studies. These exhibitions marked a dramatic shift in the architect’s career, in the reception of his work beyond Italy and Europe and more broadly, in the status of architec- tural drawings within an emerging culture market. If Rossi wrote little about the Teatro del Mondo, others were not restrained in their interpretations. In the January 1980 issue of Domus magazine, Manfredo Tafuri writes that although Rossi’s Teatro del Mondo refers to the sixteenth- century Teatrum Mundi, the reference is purely literary. For Tafuri, the floating theater as a “closed and frozen form, destined to appear temporarily as an object in the polyphonic space of St. Mark’s basin contains in itself a homage to the sense of limit, to the Albertian concept of finitio, which is specifically anti-Venetian.”” From this elevated pronouncement Tafuri proceeds to relate the compositional forms assembled in the Teatro del Mondo to those found in Rossi’s earlier work, not in terms of a banal formalism but explained as a process, a compositional device the architect employed to arrive at ever more precise objects. Rossi repeated the same basic forms, the octagon and the cube, for example, as self-citation. Tafuri claims that with each repetition the assembled parts become more refined. In Lotus 25 of 1979, Francesco Dal Co’s approach to the work borrows from the title of an engraving Rossi made in 1975, “Ora questo é perduto.”* The title evokes nostalgia but Dal Co turns away from the cul-de-sac of memory and decay where so many of the discussions of Rossi’s work from this period lie stranded. He attends to com- position and typology, to Rossi’s preoccupation with significant form, and, impor- tantly, to analogy. In 1982 Tafuri’s and Dal Co’s essays were republished in an anthology of essays dedicated to Rossi’s Teatro del Mondo. Although Rossi’s intro- duction to the anthology is not preoccupied with history or ephemeral theater con- structions of previous eras, the essays and images present the project otherwise. Rather, and retrospectively, it would seem Rossi saw the Teatro del Mondo as emblematic of the condition of urban historical centers in the postwar period. He wrote that, on one hand the project introduced a provocation, something new within an old city, a city subject to age and preservation. On the other hand, the project cast light upon the staid mentalities hampering new thought on the city.” In Rossi’s view, the Teatro del Mondo became part of the city, not as critical intervention inserted by the architect but as a participant in the contemporary real- ity of Venice, a city of tourism, of souvenirs, photographs, and postcards. The observation is not cynical; rather it speaks to the Teatro del Mondo as a spectacular and ephemeral object, that might possibly be progressive and, if only temporarily, transformative within the urban environment.  The Teatro del Mondo registered an important moment in the international reception of Rossi’s career and it signaled a point of resolution within his architec- tural thought. The floating theater was the embodiment of the concept of analogue  
within the city: “In Venice, a city that is itself analogue, I designed ‘analogue’ archi- tecture. In this city linked to both the Orient and Occident, a city that exports and imports its image.”* Rossi’s turn to analogy as the ground for his architectural thought is evident in his introduction to the second Italian edition of L’architettura della citta of 1970 (The Architecture of the City).’ The Architecture of the City, first pub- lished in Italian in 1966 and translated into many languages before the English lan- guage version appeared in 1982, would make popular retrospectively, especially in North America, concepts such as typology, morphology, and the urban artifact. The idea of analogous architecture and the Teatro del Mondo were of a different theoretical and conceptual order than Rossi’s earlier attempt to articulate an urban theory. The lectures Rossi gave at American institutions in the late 1970s are unam- biguous about his shift away from a concept-based scientific urban analysis toward form and the idea of analogy. In fact, Citté Analoga Drawings was the subtitle attached to the “Aldo Rossi in America: 1976-1979” exhibition held at the Institute of Architecture and Urban Studies in the autumn of 1979. In the essay, “My Designs and Analogous Architecture,” published in the exhibition catalogue, Rossi explains that when he designs he repeats himself.* Unlike his earlier, analytical and historical materialist theory, repetition was a mechanism that functioned alongside analogy and, in relation to sight, to empirical evidence as the central experience of reality. Analogy takes place between things. As a concept adapted to architectural thought, Rossi employed analogy to articulate relationships among things, leaving open to interpretation how the analogical might be interpreted within an environment, an interior, a drawing, or a situation. For Rossi, analogy was “already described in things, was an accretion through time; it referred to different times and situa- tions.”” Repetition was central to the analogical mechanism: within the design process, by moving across various expressive media, and in reception, the analogic mechanism triggered memory, and not history or historical reference. Analogy in architecture required precise forms, the use of stripped down familiar forms that could be arranged and rearranged. Against Tafuri’s accusation of a retreat to silence, of playing a game with objects divested of significance, Rossi explained analogy as a way of describing things that referred to different times and places and, as such, annulled historical meaning for an analogic process that might pro- duce temporary meanings.*°  Like much of Rossi’s work from this period, the Teatro del Mondo inspired var- ious interpretations; among the most obvious are as a return to history and histor- icism, the architectural equivalent par excellence of postmodernism, and, more recently, the inauguration of the internationally celebrated architect. Reviews of the exhibitions from the late 1970s tend to reference the cerebral aspects of the archi- tect’s work: Rossi provokes mental processes, he is a poet promoting an “intensely personal analogous architecture.”'’ Most interpretations are receptive if not alto- gether flattering. Writing in Archithese, Rosemarie Haag-Bletter voiced a dissenting point of view, stating that Rossi’s work had become predictable and, verging on nos- talgia, was too personal and nice.’* And the poet John Ashbery remarked in his 
review of the New York exhibitions that “Rossi’s work has engendered a formidable  critical literature, much of it difficult, some of it merely silly...”  The Fortune of il Teatro del Mondo  While attempts by Rossi and his supporters to have the Teatro del Mondo made permanent were unsuccessful, its place in the architect’s oeuvre as well as in archi- tectural history was immediately secured. In autumn of 1981 the Max Protetch Gal- lery held an exhibition titled “Aldo Rossi Projects: The Monuments of Venice,” which featured the Teatro del Mondo repeatedly and in various forms of represen- tation from rigorous plan drawing to pastel and watercolor sketches to spectacular photographs. The photographs of the Teatro del Mondo have always impressed and invited interpretation. Black and white photographs capture the object myste- riously emerging from within a shroud of fog along a sullen river somewhere in north-eastern Italy. These images no doubt contribute to interpretations of Rossi's work from this period as preoccupied with memory, with death and decay, and of an increasingly private or nostalgic poetic connected to a specific geography. The color photographs that capture dazzling sunlit aerial views of the Teatro del Mondo  against a backdrop of azure sky and a glistening Venetian environs invoke vague connections among the historic city, water, history, and ephemeral spectacle. The circulation of such images signaled a defining moment in late twentieth-century architecture where the ambiguous exchange among image, object, and fame pre- figure the unambiguous emergence of a market for spectacular star architecture.  Notes  Image credit: Fondazione La Biennale di Venezia.  1. Léa-Catherine Szacka, “Historicism versus Communication: The Basic Debate of the 1980 Biennale,” Architectural Design (September 2011): 98-105.  2. Aldo Rossi, “Quaderni Azzuri, 26. Architettura Ve + Ny. ie. Teatro del Mondo 11 Nov. 79,” in I quaderni azzurri, ed. Francesco Dal Co (Santa Monica, CA: The Getty Research Institute, 1999), unpaginated.  3. Manfredo Tafuri, “L’éphémére est éternel: Aldo Rossi a Venezia,” Domus 602 (1979): 7.  4. Francesco Dal Co, “Ora questo é perduto: Il Teatro del Mondo di Aldo Rossi di Venezia,” Lotus International 25 (1979): 66-74.  5. Aldo Rossi, “Teatro del Mondo,” in Aldo Rossi Teatro del Mondo, ed. Manlio Brusatin and Alberto Prandi (Venice: Cluva Libreria Editrice, 1982), 13.  6. Léa-Catherine Szacke, “Aldo Rossi. Teatro del Mondo, 1979,” in La Tendenza, Italian Architectures 1965-1985, ed. Frédéric Migayrou (Paris: Centre Pompidou, 2012), 124.  7. Aldo Rossi, L’architettura della citta (Venice: Editori, (1966) 1970).  8. Aldo Rossi, “My Designs and the Analogous City,” in Aldo Rossi in America: 1976-1979,  ed. Kenneth Frampton (New York: Institute for Architecture and Urban Studies, c. 
SANGATH  Balkrishna Doshi Kazi Khaleed Ashraf  Balkrishna Doshi, Sangath, 1981.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Sangath (1979-81) sits between two phases in the oeuvre of the Indian master archi- tect Balkrishna Doshi: a first phase, in which machine-like cubic masses are raised aloft in the landscape; and a second, characterized by crustacean-like creatures lying embedded in the ground. The first includes the Institute of Indology in Ahmedabad (1957-62) and the Indian Institute of Management in Bangalore (1977-85), and the second the eccentric Husain-Doshi Gufa (1992-95) that followed Sangath. Sangath is a key project that takes Doshi from an explicitly rational and objective approach to architecture toward an openly oneiric and mythopoeic way of working.  As a stalwart of the first generation of Indian architects to emerge following national independence in 1947, Doshi took on the enormous task of graduating India into a “brave, new world,” as proposed by the first prime minister Jawaharlal Nehru. Since then, through a powerful body of work, Doshi has been instrumental in framing a modern architectural idiom and ethos for the country. This was made possible through his personal commitment to nation-building and a unique expe- rience, with two of the foremost form-makers of the modern period. Working with Le Corbusier in his Paris studio (1951-57) on his buildings in Chandigarh and Ahmedabad destined Doshi to take on bigger challenges. He set up his practice in Ahmedabad (1958), a city that had already positioned itself, with work by Le Corbusier and later by Louis Kahn (whom Doshi had invited and was involved with  in the Indian Institute of Management project), as a site for demonstrative modern architecture. Doshi also founded an architectural school (1962) that he directed and established as one of the distinguished ones in India.  Besides his intimacy with both the mission and realization of modern architec- ture, Doshi has remained deeply in touch with the ethos of India’s ancient civili- zation. He continues to reflect on and draw inspiration from the vast repertoire of Vedic and Hindu traditions. It is this presence of two civilizational and philosoph- ical strands in Doshi’s work that has always offered new possibilities and excur- sions, as well as debates, in the evolution of modern Indian architecture. What distinguishes Sangath from Doshi’s earlier projects is a more unabashed narrative of the Indian strand as well as a deeply personal mythography.  In line with his expanded commitment to architecture involving professional practice, research, and teaching, Doshi conceived of his design work in wider terms, as a laboratory for the creation of new architectural paradigms. On a parcel of land on the outskirts of Ahmedabad, Doshi designed and created a miniature complex starting in the 1970s that came to reflect his synthetic vision of practice and research. He gave that expanded practice the title of Sangath, or “moving together through participation.” It was to include his architectural office and the Vastushilpa Foundation for Studies and Research in Environmental Design. San- gath was conceived, William Curtis notes, as Doshi’s version of an architectural laboratory in the likeness of Corbusier's atelier at 35, rue de Sevres, or Frank Lloyd Wright’s Taliesin.  In characterizing Sangath as a turning point that marks both a crystallization of earlier experiments and deliberate movement toward a new stage, three principal 
themes stand out: an intimate conversation between architecture and landscape; an architectural formation that acknowledges a climatic narrative; and choreographed movement in a highly structured spatial matrix.  Grounding  What immediately characterizes the physiognomy of Sangath is the proposition of architecture as a topographical manipulation. Producing an ambiguity between building and landscape, the configuration is best understood as some- thing that has evolved out of the ground, or, recognizing the fact that it is an artificial work, sculpted from it. The visual imagery of Sangath is a group of vaulted shapes oriented in one direction that rise from a constructed landscape of planes, terraces, walls, and steps. Water runs along the interstices of the vaults, on channels and troughs, often cascading down, to create a pool. While the interior of the building is a mystery from the exterior, indications of subter- ranean conditions are already indicated in the overall ensemble. The “miniature” drawing series generated by Doshi following the construction shows the site with a veritable catalog of architectural and landscape motifs: wall, steps, ter- races, trees, artifacts, architectural fragments distributed throughout the larger landscape.  While the compact ensemble sits on the site as if it has been there for a very long time, architectural critics have ventured to suggest a range of metaphors: a group of buildings on a hill, a small village, or a traditional building grown from the ground. A reference to traditional Indian architecture invoking either an earth architecture or the profile of domical architecture is only allusive and without any particularity. An Indian context is more compellingly present in the climatic responses and per- ipatetic experience on the site. Some of the textural modulation, although sugges- tive of the work of the Spanish-Catalan architect Josep-Maria Jujol (1879-1949), with whom Doshi has expressed a new kinship, may also be found in unspecific vernacular traditions of India.  Sangath’s figural alignment may be closer to the other repertoire of Le Corbusier, the work that involves a deeply imbricated mutuality between building and land- scape, not the polemical antithesis represented in the Swiss-French master’s cubic projects. Two residences designed at the same time by Le Corbusier for Ahmedabad represent these dual and antagonistic strands: Villa Shodhan, as a tropical reincarnation of the cubic Villa Savoye; and the Sarabhai House as recalling an earth-hugging Mediterranean vernacular ethic. Sarabhai House, especially with its Catalan vaults, structural parallelism, grass-covered roof, and unabashed “merging” with the landscape, exonerated the territorially detached ideology through a “pact with nature.” The grounded physiognomy of Sarabhai House can be traced back to Le Corbusier's other, but consistent attempt at translating vernacular types, works that were kept in the background in the primetime of 
his cubic ideology in the 1920s. The strand of this series of work proceeds from his own Weekend House with the vault and grass roof (1920s) to the radical postwar design of Maison Jaoul (1951).  Sangath, in bringing to the foreground the ancient relational theme of architec- ture and landscape, and challenging the “two-ness” of the two, also remains an homage to the other Le Corbusier.’ Doshi’s desire for collaboration between archi- tecture and landscape, where the continuum of the landform merges with the autonomy of the former, produces what many see as an ambiguity. This interaction may be better described as an affirmation of architecture as a landscape event, aware of the inevitability of the building being sited and emplaced.”  Doshi’s subterranean quest, and a profound mutation of the cubic paradigm inaugurated at Sangath, turns toward the mythological — the realm of ruins and monsters — finding its explicit expression for the gallery designed for the icon- oclast artist M. F. Husain, the Husain-Doshi Gufa at a site not far from Sangath. Starting from Sangath, however, Doshi increasingly seeks mythological verifica- tion in the grounding of architecture, and the valorization of a primordial rela- tionship with the earth. While at Sangath, embedding part of the building into the ground was carried out as a tectonic and climatic strategy, the Husain-Doshi Gufa was conceived as some kind of reptilian creature slithering in the ground. One had to enter that part-reptilian and part-cavelike project through a mouth- like orifice. Doshi himself speaks of dream encounters of divining the site and figuring out the form-shape. The elaboration of a subterranean creature-form is not unlike a resurrection of Vrtra, an aquatic-terrestrial monster in Vedic mythology who was once slayed by the celestial god Indra. Nor is it unlike Pythia, slaughtered by Apollo in Greek imagination to inaugurate a new imperium of the celestial over the terrestrial. Such imagery points to Doshi’s engagement with ancient Vedic and Hindu narratives, and his own deeply personal oneiric imag- ination in form conception. With the deep symbolism of the cave, the Gufa reim- agines architectural origins, or the original conditions of architecture submerged in the onslaught of a marketplace mechanism or displaced sacrality. A disposition toward earthbound construction was also developed in other projects; in fact, whenever an opportunity offered itself. Even in a project with commercial cur- rency, such as the National Institute of Fashion Technology in New Delhi (1997), a project somewhat dressed-up with postmodern paraphernalia, Doshi discov- ered an ancient well that led him to an excavated parti in the courtyard of the project site.  Doshi’s Sangath phase speaks of his attempt to literally dig down into some pri- mordial depth for a new foundational and ontological verification for architecture in India. “T tried to listen to the vibrations and activities that lay deep in her womb,” Doshi confesses. “The earth always rekindles many dormant ideas in me.”* Even though Sangath does not refer directly to any particular architectural tradition of India, it proposes a new mythos: it presents itself as an easy and natural collabo- ration with the site, as if it has been there a long time.  
The “Vault”  Sangath has also a rigorous plan, one that began as a rectilinear parti on a rectan- gular plot constituted by two bays of vaulted space, a part of which gets skewed into a diagonal motif to receive a layered land-form shaped as an amphitheater. The amphitheater serves as the linchpin on the site, around which a circulatory rotation is articulated. An earlier plan shows the site organized through four parallel rows of vaulted spaces alternated by a sliver of “servant space.” Such a plan diagram recalls the intertwined spatial and structural articulation of both Le Corbusier’s Sarabhai House and Kahn’s Kimbell Museum at Fort Worth, Texas, making possible a rich tapestry of layered and overlapped spaces.  The vaulted roofscape is a defining element for Sangath. Although it is essen- tially a structural shell shaped as a vault, the upper enclosure is a carefully wrought iconographic device that complements the landscape narrative, insofar as the natural tendency of a raised vault is to return to the ground. Doshi’s form has a number of possible sources: from the Sarabhai House to Doshi’s early work with brick vaults for the housing for ATIRA (1957-60) and Bhandari House, New Delhi (1966). He talks about appreciating the visual and material economy in roofing an outhouse on the site with bent corrugated sheets. His sketch of a museum in Egypt by Wissa Wassef, an associate of Hasan Fathy, is telling of dis- covering an architectural idiom for a hot and dry milieu (1978).  After the adoption of the vault as a principal structural and spatial organizing element in the design schema, its shape and geometry were studied closely through drawings and various models. While the geometry required a structural and volumetric discipline, the rigor was inflected by a largely irregular distribu- tion of walls and piers from which the vaults emerged. Techniques of vault construction were explored through the participation of native communities. The experiments led to new possibilities, later carried out rather persuasively in the Gufa.  Sangath is also a catalog of environmental cooling practices, in which the vaulted shell structure is a key performer. Doshi realizes the sensibility of locating a habitable space in Ahmedabad’s unforgiving hot and arid climate in a sheltered cocoon. Besides the vaulted canopy, digging into the ground provides another means of finding a cooler environment. Doshi speaks of a suggestion made by the artist M. F. Husain in the early 1970s of going underground for climatic reasons.”  In a climate-centered investigation of this kind the “vault” is conceived as a shell structure created by two thin, hand-layered, ferro-cement layers with hollow ter- racotta tubes in between them. The shell’s hollow layer provides an insular envel- ope for the interior spaces. On its outer surface the shell is layered with a mosaic of white broken china, the intention of which is to reflect the sun. Openings are min- imal and when they do occur, the entry of light and view is highly modulated. Water channels and troughs form a shallow area between the vaults, which in turn 
provides another insular layer to the roofscape. In some instances, the channelized water cascades over a window opening, invoking a vernacular practice of cooling an interior by spreading moistened fabric over a window.  The Itinerary  A choreographed movement is the third distinctive feature of Sangath. Upon arri- val at the entry court that faces the vaulted end of the building-form, one is imme- diately directed toward the left, away from the building, to encounter a series of shifting axes, crossing of thresholds, and panoramic views of the main building. The choreographed journey from the entrance to the inside of the vaulted space couples one’s sense of far and near, surface tactility, and precisely located objects (earthen jars and sculpture) conducted through a promenade architecturale. Along this itinerary one experiences earthen jars as markers, metal sculpture, passages through trees, views from under trees, landscaped grounds, water pools, low walls and layered plinths, pavings with pebble textures, a grass-stepped amphithe- ater, and a canopy under which a conversation can be held. Located like a ittle plaza in a hillside town, the amphitheater is used for meetings and performances.  Axial shifts in movement allow explorations of terrain that has been structured through the techniques of landscape design. Akin to the order of movement in a apanese garden, shifts are accompanied by textural changes and moments of pause and reorientation. The construction of pauses — transitional spaces and thresholds —  in the spatial matrix becomes for Doshi a mark of Indian architectural experience. Describing the spatial quality created at the Indian Institute of Management in Ban- galore (1977-85), where a monolithic block has been disaggregated to create a matrix of spaces and volumes with various degrees of inside and outside, Doshi proposes that “supreme among architectural experiences are ones which occur in spaces which could be characterized as pause or ambiguous, plural spaces.” n terms of a corporeal experience, pauses initiate a breaking down of the scale for a more humanized encounter. Such spaces, Doshi further argues in more mys- tical terms, “activate the human psyche and induce it to sink toward the center, the mythical world of man’s primordial being.”  From one of the farthest points, along a diagonal axis, the building is seen in its skewed disposition, revealing coordinated relationships of things far and near, modulating of landscape and building, anticipating arrival. Through these means the elongated building form is revealed at its fullest. It is almost as if Doshi had crafted that axial turn as the perfect moment to take in the full panorama of Sangath: a visually controlled vantage point that establishes the image of the vaults raised from the ground and modulated by terraces, plinths, walls, and steps, with a grassy surface and water pools in the foreground.  
The final steps toward the building pass through a tight entry, almost an inad- vertent opening in the folds of the building. The itinerary continues into and within the interior landscape, as one proceeds through a maze of layered spaces that often connect the various levels, creating experiences of compactness and openness, giv- ing different heights to the vault, as stairs mysteriously rise and fall, in a tightly- packed spatial drama. The condensed and rich overlay of architectural pieces is a snapshot of some old city in North India. Ultimately the itinerary climaxes toward a long vista along the vaulted studio space where windows are few, but the most prominent ones are those in the half-circle under the vaults that give a glimpse of the Ahmedabad sky, bringing the visitor to the heart of Sangath: the long row of architects’ desks in a kind of near-monastic setting not unlike, for those who know, Le Corbusier's Paris studio.  Sangath, in its several ambiguities — vacillating between urban and un-urban models, paying homage to an old master and attempting to discover something new, offering the experience of a clear structural logic and a dreamlike inner journey — still constitutes a wonderful, and wonderfully dense, example of modern Indian architecture.  Notes  Image credit: © Aga Khan Award for Architecture/Joseph N. St. Anne.  1. Ininterviews, Doshi has likened Sangath to a homage to Le Corbusier, and his later Gufa to Kahn, two architects with whom he worked closely and enjoyed a unique symbiotic relationship; interviews conducted with writer, 1994.  2. The idea of “architecture as landscape event” is discussed in Kazi Ashraf, “Taking Place: Landscape in the Architecture of Louis Kahn,” Journal of Architectural Education 61, no. 2 (November 2007): 48-58.  3. Balkrishna Doshi, “The Revelation,” in James Steele, The Complete Architecture of Balk- rishna Doshi (Mumbai: Super Book House, 1998), 146.  4. Steele, The Complete Architecture, 90.  5. Doshi, “Revelation,” 146.  Bibliography  Ashraf, Kazi. “Taking Place: Landscape in the Architecture of Louis Kahn.” Journal of Archi- tectural Education 61, no. 2 (November 2007): 48-58.  Doshi, Balkrishna. “The Revelation.” In James Steele, The Complete Architecture of Balkrishna Doshi. Mumbai: Super Book House, 1998, 146.  Steele, James. The Complete Architecture of Balkrishna Doshi. Mumbai: Super Book House, 1998. 
PART VI  The Present Generation 
INnNtroauction ENGAGING THE CONTEMPORARY WORLD  Alexander Eisenschmidt  La Strada Novissima at the first official Architectural Biennale in Venice in 1980 not only broadcasted postmodernism to the world but also announced the work of a generation that shortly after was to redirect the discipline of architecture. The con- tributions of Rem Koolhaas and Frank Gehry carried in their DNA approaches to architecture that ultimately were to question the historicism that had become one of the common denominators. By the end of the 1970s and during the 1980s, the architectural soul-searching in which Koolhaas and Gehry participated would largely play out in institutions, schools, journals, and conferences. Different discourses would emerge in various locations, from the Architectural Association (AA) in Lon- don under the leadership of Alvin Boyarsky, to the New York-based Institute for Architecture and Urban Studies (AUS) led by Peter Eisenman; from the journal Oppositions, which was affiliated with the IAUS, to its successor, Assemblage; from the initiation of the International Building Exhibition in Berlin in 1979, to the Archi- tecture New York (ANY) conferences of the 1990s. Architects, historians, and critics sought to work out how architecture could play a role in the larger dynamics of the world while knowing the modernist utopian downfalls far too well and thinking of the possibilities of what would come to be called a “critical practice.”  In these years, architectural theory emerged in the United States as an independent force, which steered many debates. In retrospect, Assemblage, for example, under- stood itself as a “registration plane for a discourse in the process of finding its legs, developing its skills, suffering its growing pains.”' The strength of theory (one indi- cation of which was the founding of a new group of PhD programs in schools of architecture, devising a space for knowledge that was previously occupied by art his-  tory) provoked new engagements with practice. On the one hand, there was an increasing distance as the discipline was seen as limited by existing economic, social, and political realities while the discourse moved beyond these standards. On the other hand, the independence and strength of theory also fostered many exchanges that were documented through a wealth of publications that nourished the life cycle of debates. Many of these exchanges hinted at a reformed relationship between  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
theory and practice that was not always without tension. At one of the later ANY conferences, Koolhaas, for example, would speak of the “Giedion metaphor” in which thinkers adopted “architects as illustrators of their theories” only to realize that their theories were “badly explained or imperfectly illustrated.””  One of the key moments during the reformulation of the discipline was the com- petition for the Parc de la Villette in Paris in 1983. The newly elected French gov- ernment under Francois Mitterrand had a big stake in Grands Projets that were to announce a new beginning, not knowing that a landslide transformation would come only several years later with the fall of the Berlin Wall, the subsequent demise of the Soviet Bloc, and the reinvention of Europe. Bernard Tschumi and the Office for Metropolitan Architecture (OMA, founded by Rem Koolhaas, Madelon Vriesendorp, Elia Zenghelis, and Zoe Zenghelis in 1975) emerged as the two most influential competition entries, with designs that at first sight could not be more different. OMA’s striation of the site into narrow bands organized diverging urban experiences that echoed the section of Manhattan’s skyscrapers studied in Delirious New York, whereas Tschumi’s superimposed ordering systems of surfaces, points, and lines choreographed an elaborate field ready to be inhabited by events he tracked in The Manhattan Transcripts? Tschumi, who won the com- petition, built over the duration of 15 years more than 25 structures, bridges, pro- menades, and gardens. Most prominent are the markings of an expansive grid of red cubes — structures that he understood as empty huts for unprescribed point-like activities, folies in a constructivist red for no specific function but with the spacing for events yet to come. In her chapter on the park, Julia Czerniak points out that Tschumi’s la Villette not only challenged the conventions between form and pro- gram but that the structures were robust enough to accommodate change and were, therefore, most resilient and “likely to survive.”  As the competition brief demanded, Tschumi and Koolhaas — who had both taught at the AA in London — proposed an urban park, responding to the city and reworking the common notions of the nineteenth-century garden. These pro- jects no longer escaped urbanity but instead drew from its culture and contributed to it. Mining the city with the help of situationist techniques, constructivist visuals, and surrealist mentalities led Tschumi to conclude that, just as there is no architec- ture without events, there is also “no architecture without the city, no city without architecture.”* Or, to put it differently, architecture only exists because of the city. The contemporary city became for Tschumi the true inventor of cross-, trans-, and dis-programming and, therefore, remained the constant point of reference. This city of emergent events would not only recast what exists but would also shape a different kind of city, together with its buildings, both constructed by events. More than recasting what the city is, it would suggest what the city could be.  What the urban manifestos of the 1960s and 1970s speculated was tested in the city in the 1980s. Delirious New York, for example, examined the city of flux and congestion and extrapolated lessons as a retroactive manifesto of “Manhattanism” that OMA, in turn, aimed back at the city. Here, selective episodes within 
Manhattan and Coney Island (between 1890 and 1940) were viewed as generators of architectural experiments that had remained unnoticed, waiting to be theorized. Koolhaas drew attention to the divide between the unconscious building of met- ropolitan architecture inflected by the constraints of the city (as in the policies, laws, and economies of New York City) versus the conscious construction of theories without limitations that remain unbuilt (as in the avant-gardes of the 1920s and 1930s). The architectural mutations that the city provoked and Koolhaas excavated were later reassembled through a kind of constructive surgery in the laboratories of OMA. What began as “exquisite corpses” in true surrealist fashion developed into architectures of and for the metropolis by internalizing the city’s delirium. Roberto Gargiani’s chapter on OMA’s Kunsthal, for example, describes how structural “pliable surfaces” were understood as “streets” that simultaneously con- figured the exhibition spaces and connected the building to the avenue and park of the city. By 1989, the project for the Ferry Terminal of Zeebrugge already envi- sioned a space where one would have looked down from the casino, past the hotel and lobby, and into the traffic of the parking garage. As in the Kunsthal, the city was to sponsor architecture, not through a mimicking of images, but through an inha- lation of the city’s pulsations and effects into the building’s interior. One of the first built projects that explored the interiorization of the city in this way was the Check- point Charlie Apartments, located at the most notorious Berlin Wall crossing point and the nucleus of Cold War confrontation. Although it was part of the Interna- tional Building Exhibition (IBA) in Berlin, which from 1977 to 1987 invited interna- tional players under the auspice of “careful urban renewal” and “critical reconstruction,” the location of OMA’s building required a slightly different archi- tectural urbanism. The ground level was devoted to the minutiae of border control and the passage of traffic through the building and into the underground parking, making the structure essentially part of the Berlin Wall that Koolhaas had previously studied. As OMA worked toward completing the building, world-changing events took place almost overnight. They would radically alter the make-up of the globe. The fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 and Nelson Mandela’s release from prison in 1990 changed the constellation and dynamics of the world order in the subsequent phases of these developments. The distinct national colorations and sovereignty of nation-states was increasingly questioned as the large ideological blocs were left behind by a new de-territorialized globalization, which had profound effects on architecture and urbanism.” In the case of the Checkpoint Charlie Apartments, parts of the building became obsolete; in other instances the shifting territorial forces seemed to be given form by architecture. Zaha Hadid’s work was one exam- ple that expressed a territorial destabilization during a time of constant flux. Her  competition win for The Peak in Hong Kong (1982-83), for instance, let the land- scape as well as the building emerge from the vibrations and shifting plains of seem- ingly geological forces. Hadid, who had studied under Koolhaas at London’s AA, generated geomorphic and seductive imagery that spoke vividly to and inhabited a 
world of instability. She embraced these current conditions with the same deter- mination as Koolhaas but with different techniques and formal repertoires. Taking references from earlier constructivist experiments, the distinctions between land and building became blurred.  Frank Gehry had already investigated notions of fragmentation and diversity to form not only a new architectural geometry but also a new context for it in his early buildings in California. According to Richard Sommer’s chapter on the Guggenheim Museum of Bilbao, these experiments had a great influence on his later work in general and the Guggenheim in particular. Gehry’s Bilbao was to uti- lize the capacities of this work and subsequently transform the image of the city in terms of its global perception, from a little known shipbuilding Basque capital into a globally acknowledged cultural destination. The time span from design to con- struction (1991-97) neatly coincided with the commercialization and rapid wide- spread use of the Internet, which brought images of the shimmering surfaces of the museum to computer screens worldwide. But new technology not only made the proliferation of images possible, it also contributed to new architectural forms. The former amplified a desire for photogenic urban objects (such as Bilbao) in poli- ticians and cultural officials, while the latter altered relationships between design (in CAD) and manufacturing (in CAM). Programs such as CATIA, first developed in automobile and aerospace technology, eased the manipulation of surfaces and facilitated the construction of the exuberant and spectacular forms of Bilbao, as well as the repetition of similar forms across the globe.  Repetition of a different kind — the one that interplays with variation in order to develop families of elements and frames no longer bound to common regulations of geometry but ruled by algorithms — projected a new use of computational advancements that gave architects control over highly complex non-standard geo- metries. What was forecasted by Hadid’s vibrating landscapes of forms and tested by Gehry’s intuitive surface modulations was a fascination long in the making, dating at the very least to Erich Mendelsohn’s dynamic surface transitions and Frederick Kiesler’s “polydimensional” spatial trials. These disciplinary ambitions culminated in the mid-1990s in projects such as Toyo Ito’s Sendai Mediatheque and the Yokohama International Ferry Terminal by Foreign Office Architects (FOA). The chapter by Helene Furjan shows how FOA’s winning scheme capita- lized on architectural visualization techniques and programmatic demands. As she writes: “It was not an autonomous entity but a hybrid organization, meshed to its environment, in a constant flux of thermodynamic and socio-political intensities.”  The visualization of complex relationships in a technologically saturated and globally connected world was also on Toyo Ito’s mind when he first thought of “blurring architecture.” Ito imagined an architecture between the visible (pre- dominantly static) world of things and the largely invisible (ever increasing) net- works of information technology. “Can I as an architect provide this ‘invisible other city’ with a visible image?” The Sendai Mediatheque, its transparency and the structural bundles that visibly straddle the different floors, approximate  
Ito’s ambitions. Not only does the mesh of tubular steel structure hold all the stories in place but they also work as circulation routes, light corridors, and ver- tical ducts for all the wiring and HVAC systems of the building. Possibly most important is the spatial delineation fostered by the shifts of these members on the different floors. In his chapter, Ron Witte defines this repositioning as a “fifth plan.” Witte detects unexpected possibilities in this new type of plan, which “employ[s] the seemingly hardened ideologies of its ancestors in surprisingly mal- leable ways,” where free-span is coupled with density, animated form with tech- nological rationalism, and surface conditions turn into volumes and back again. The Mediatheque serves as one example among several buildings that Witte identifies as carriers of this new plan.  What for the Mediatheque seems effortless — namely, architecture’s involve- ment in the world of images, data, and information — becomes in the work of Herzog & de Meuron a relationship with contemporary art and collections respectively. Visual effects on the buildings are art-inspired and materially defined. The Ricola warehouse in Muhlhouse, France, for example, presents a leaf motif that is multiplied across the front and canopy of the building, while the Dominus Winery in California is surrounded with gabion cladding cages filled with stones from the surrounding vineyard. Here, too, works of art such as Non-site: Line of Wreckage (1968) by Robert Smithson come to mind. In both cases, the patterns contextualize and abstract simultaneously. Even in earlier pro- jects, such as the Stone House in Tavole, Italy (1988), the structure was placed in conversation with traditional stone building techniques but quickly developed to other ends. As Philip Ursprung points out in his chapter, the stone walls that appear massive do not carry any structural load while the concrete frame that holds up the building may be understood as a new form of ornament. A similar poetics and sensuality is at work in the buildings of Tadao Ando. The concrete frame that forms a cross in Herzog & de Meuron’s Stone House reappears one year later in the Church of the Light by Ando (1989). This time, the cross is solely formed by light and shadow, through cuts in concrete that form what Jin Baek describes in his chapter as “non-materialistic iconicity.”  For both Ando and Herzog & de Meuron, museum buildings have become cru- cial for their practices to grow and to allow them to experiment with new spatial types. In the last two decades new museum projects have sponsored a large amount of architecture with ever fewer architects designing them. Together, Kazuyo Sejima and Ryue Nishizawa (SANAA) comprise one architect-duo that has used design commissions to productively rethink the institution. Their 21* Century Museum of Contemporary Art in Kanazawa, Japan, assembles a host of individual galleries into a pristine circular plan. Each gallery is shaped differently to accommodate various arts and alternating numbers of visitors, accumulating a collection of individual pavilions that together form an urbanism of the interior, or what Xavier Costa calls in his chapter on the museum “[an] archipelago of box-like galleries.” 
Several of these galleries pierce through the circular roof-line to generate spaces with different heights and to catch sunlight from above. Here, the interior urban- ism of what others termed “mat-building” surfaces on the outside and creates a field of objects in the city. The project reworks the predominantly introverted pro- gram of the museum as well as the interiority of the mat-building by adding to the forms of the city. At the Multimedia Workshop in Gifu, Japan (1996), SANAA had already responded to the city by making the building become part of the daily expe- rience of the town. This time, the roof-line was lowered in one location, altering the room heights in the interior and simultaneously bringing the roof in line with the surrounding terrain. Separating the town from the occupiable roofscape by only one step as interior demands for room height variation are fulfilled, shows how forms of architecture can productively engage current urban realities. Or, bet- ter, that our urban realities can propel new forms of architecture.  In the last decade, architecture as field of cultural production has generated diverging ideas of how to engage the world of today — a world confronted by clash- ing opposites: vast economic surpluses and financial crises, dramatic self-inflicted climate changes and technological advancements that enable us to understand those, massive building endeavors and housing shortages for the poor, disurbani- zation and an unprecedented number of people that now live in cities. While there is no predominant direction, a common denominator and, frankly, reason for hope, is that a new architecture—city relationship seems to emerge in many young practices and a few academies. With a new attitude that goes beyond resistance or embrace, practices increasingly understand today’s urban environment as a con- stantly shifting terrain that can catalyze new forms of engagement to enter and influence the contemporary world. Then, finding potential in the most unlikely places becomes for architecture the prerequisite for articulating alternative prac- tices that productively engage the realities of today. These practices do not resort to mere problem-solving but instead define a new kind of “visionary,” one that is able to project alternative worlds for the immediate future.  Notes  1. Michael Hays and Alicia Kennedy, call for contributions to the final issue of Assemblage, in Assemblage no. 41 (April 2000): 3.  2. Rem Koolhaas, “Discussion 2,” at the Anyhow conference in Rotterdam, 1997, pub- lished in Anyhow, ed. Cynthia C. Davidson (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998), 97.  3. Rem Koolhaas, Delirious New York: A Retroactive Manifesto for Manhattan (New York: Oxford University Press, 1978) and Bernard Tschumi, The Manhattan Transcripts (London: Academy Editions, 1981).  4. Bernard Tschumi, Event-Cities (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 1994, 12.  5. Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, Empire (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2000), XI-X111.  6. Toyo Ito, “Blurring Architecture” in Blurring Architecture (Milan: Charta, 1999), 55. 
PARC DE LA VILLETTE  Bernard Tschumi  Julia Czerniak  Bernard Tschumi, Pare de la Villette, Paris, France, 1982-98.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
THE PROJECT AND ITS AFTERLIFE  Across time and discipline, the Parc de la Villette — the competition for its design, the winning project by Bernard Tschumi, and the built work — has sponsored a vast amount of discourse and debate within architecture, landscape architecture, and urban- ism. Since 1976, when the firstideas competition was held, to the present, its impact and import have seemed wildly diverse depending upon the lens through which it is viewed: the socialist agenda of President Francois Mitterrand’s Grands Projets; the deconstructivist ambitions of architecture at the time; or through its contribution to ongoing discussions about the history, theory, and practice of making urban parks. The aim of this chapter is threefold. The first objective is descriptive: to recount the significance of the competition site, the ambitions of the 1982 design competition brief, and the intent of and physical proposal for the winning scheme. The second is to discuss the impact of the proposed design while the park was being built and its import still unfolding, evidenced in architectural and landscape publications. The last is retrospectively to lookat the built work itselfand think forward about its impact on urbanism and landscape design at the beginning of the twenty-first century. To look again at La Villette in these ways is to see it with renewed clarity. We are reminded of its vibrant life during the time of post-structuralism. We also recog- nize that concerns within landscape and urbanism over the last 20 years allow us to project its afterlife. In other words, if its life in theory is over, then what essential part of its identity — which only time has allowed us to understand — lives on?  Shaping Influence  La Villette is at once associated with a vibrant, evolving district in Paris’ 19th arrondisse- ment, a formative international competition for a twenty-first-century park, and an influential yet controversial urban landscape. Although the plot of land for the com- petition and subsequent park is 135 acres (the largest park built since Baron Haussmann transformed Paris), the project’s area of influence extends well beyond these edges.  The history of the site can be seen as an evolution of well-connected infrastruc- tural improvements. Within the larger landscape, the eighteenth-century suburb of La Villette grew along two arterial roads situated in a plain between the Butte de Montmartre and Buttes-Chaumont.’ A nineteenth-century program of public works continued to transform the site: canals were built to provide drinking water (1812); the ramparts of Thiers were constructed to secure the city (1859); and a centrally combined cattle market and abattoir, linked to a rail network, animated the area’s economy and urban life (1867). These improvements catalyzed La Villette as an important industrial hub and its subsequent annexation to Paris. The abattoir and market were extraordinarily lively, employing more than 3,000 people and supporting them with shops and restaurants.” 
Infrastructural changes transformed the site over time: the rampart was dis- mantled, making way for the Boulevard périphérique; large-scale housing was built on the abattoir’s edges; and in the early 1970s, with the closing of the abattoirs, buildings were abandoned and the district began its decline.’ The plot that was acquired for redevelopment by the state, and subsequently confronted by designers, held significant reminders of the city’s evolution. The Canal de l’Oureq bisects it and the Boulevard périphérique flanks its east side. The Grande Halle, four neoclassical pavilions, a central fountain, and an immense unfinished sales hall remain from its slaughterhouse days; the latter became the Museum of Science and Industry, one of Mitterrand’s Grands Projets.* Through all of these changes to the site, the call of the brief only supported the facts. It already was the city.  The brief for the international design competition for Parc de la Villette was so advanced in its aspirations that it largely anticipated the results. Its ambitions were threefold: to be a new model that rethought how parks would appear and perform in the contemporary city; to provide a complex cultural program; and to act as a catalyst for the redevelopment of the La Villette area.  To set a context for a new park model, the brief included thoughtful criticism of historic French parks. It noted that whereas seventeenth- and eighteenth-century parks offered rich places of diverse social exchange, nineteenth-century terrains offered pleasant spaces to wander away from the discomforts of the industrial city. Parks today — the competitors were told — were “simple, impoverished green spaces” used mostly by the young and old.” Suggesting that “life and the city are elsewhere,”  the organizers asked for the new park to “reveal the riches of urbanism,” “exercise the body and the mind,” and be “a garden of cultural superabundance.””  This call for a park as “cultural instrument” was enabled by a heterogeneous and dense program of both dispersed and concentrated facilities, including kiosks, infor-  mation centers, discovery gardens, thermal baths, a skating rink, playgrounds, res-  taurants, snack bars, picnic areas, a post office, a police station, cycle paths, car parks, and administration offices — a program for which the area of the site could scarcely provide.’ Not only were competitors confronted with accommodating the pro- gram’s variety and day- and year-long use, they were also asked to give the park a new image. As part of French culture, gardens (and by extension parks) reflect a vision of the world.’ The Parc de la Villette competition brief called for innovation not just in terms of use (how the park worked) but also iconography and symbolism (how the park looked) — an important point with respect to its current relevancy.  Finally, the brief expressed political and social aims. Like parks before it, Pare de la Villette was to be a catalyst for the redevelopment of the adjacent city. Its con- nection to transportation infrastructure, to millions of inhabitants, and to housing made the plot of land well suited for this role.’ Aptly put by the organizers, the park was therefore “no longer the lung but the heart of the district,” a powerful analogy that continues to serve park making.’°  Over 470 entries from more than 40 countries were submitted to address these ambitious challenges.'’ In 1983 French-Swiss architect Bernard Tschumi was 
awarded the commission for the initial phase of the park’s construction. Tschumi’s winning response was conceived as a “large metropolitan venture, derived from the disjunctions and disassociations of our time” and subsequently described as “the largest discontinuous building in the world.””” The project cleverly addressed the briefs numerous unknowns — the complexity and changing nature of the pro- gram, anticipated shifts in political structures and social needs, and the chief archi- tect’s role to coordinate the design contributions of others — by advancing an organizing structure that could exist independent of use.’  To this end, Tschumi deployed three organizational systems across the site: points, lines, and surfaces. The points (a system of objects) are 26 10 m-cube folies organized on a 120 m grid. The lines (a system of movement) are a path of thematic gardens, allées of trees, and covered north-south and east-west galleries. The sur- faces (a system of spaces) are large expanses of space for activities such as games and markets.'* Although superimposed, each system has its own logic. The folies produced an imageable park by their accumulation of red color and cubic form, and each could be transformed based on specific programmatic needs (from a work- shop to a café, for instance). Two axial galleries made important urban connections. The north-south gallery, conceived as a public street, connected two metro stops, Porte de Pantin to the south and Porte de la Villette to the north, and linked other park functions.'* The east-west gallery paralleled the Canal de l’Ourcq (which extends from Claude Nicolas Ledoux’s Villa Rotunda to the suburbs) and acted as an elevated viewing platform for the park. The system of surfaces consisted of programmatically determined places with attendant material definition. Tschumi asserted that the “the overlay of systems creates a carefully staged series of tensions that enhances the dynamism of the park,” all the while emphasizing discovery and variety.'°  The resulting park is both formal and conceptual. On the one hand, its organ- izational systems provided a sort of resiliency to its evolution and management. The competition text stated, “It was clear that the elements of the program were interchangeable and that budgets and priorities could be altered.”’” To this end Tschumi’s strategy of substitution was essential. On the other hand, by articulating concepts such as superimposition, architectural combination, and cinematic land- scape, Tschumi’s scheme proposed a new urbanistic strategy that advanced “an organizing structure that could exist independent of use, a structure without center or hierarchy, as structure that would negate the simplistic assumption of a causal relationship between a program and the resulting architecture.”"*  Measuring Impact  The winning scheme generated much discussion and debate in architecture and landscape architecture circles while its design was developed. In architecture, the park fueled a debate between theoretically motivated design agendas and more 
traditional approaches to urban design. For landscape architecture, its reception was mixed. Some welcomed its challenge to the popular understanding of the appearance and performance of contemporary parks. Others were dismayed at its dismissal of a rich and complex tradition of park making.  Tschumi himself published extensively on his competition entry’s contribution to architectural discourse and in so doing articulated two broad ambitions: to desta- bilize architectural conventions and to rewrite the relationship between theory and practice. In his book Cinégramme folie (1987) — which includes the project descrip- tion he submitted to the jury, essays on the competition submission, and references to earlier projects that informed it — Tschumi positioned the project in relation to the literary theory of deconstruction, particularly the thesis that linguistic meaning is both over-determined and indeterminate.’ He explained the design’s aim to use operations such as superimposition and permutation to challenge the convention- ally determined relationship between form and program, reconceptualizing it as “combinatory” event versus designated function.” — “Deconstructing architecture,” he wrote, “involved dismantling its conventions, using concepts derived both from architecture and from elsewhere — from cinema, literary criti- cism and other disciplines.” More specifically, “deconstructing a given program meant showing that the program could challenge the very ideology it implied.””" To this end, Pare de la Villette was intended to produce conflict, fragmentation, and play, and — more broadly — to offer a vision of postmodernity that radically dis- rupted meaning and established the framework for its social production.”  As an outstanding example of these ambitions, the project was one of seven fea- tured in the “Deconstructivist Architecture” show at the Museum of Modern Art (1988), where the curators hailed the projects’ ability to “disturb our thinking about pure form.”” La Villette has always been regarded as a realized example of Tschu- mi’s ongoing critique of modernism’s principles, but it attracted much criticism.”* For instance, historian Robin Evans noted that while Tschumi’s deconstructivist claims were adequately demonstrated in words and pictures, “La Villette is far less transgressive than Haussmann’s planned butchery which it replaces.”””  Evans alluded to another important impact of La Villette. As the editors of The SAGE Handbook of Architectural Theory describe it, the project’s self-conscious the- oretical stance not only launched new discourses through which to critique built work, “but also saw this critique as grounds for an enrichment of the architectural design process itself,” from design operations to representational strategies.”° In other words, the project was a system of representation made up of words, draw- ings, and the built work.  In an interview with architectural educator Alvin Boyarsky in La Case Vide (1985), Tschumi contextualized this point by noting his theoretical thinking behind La Villette and some ambitions for post-1968 architecture.” He described how his earlier competition scheme for Parc de la Villette (1976), disappointing in its tra- ditional approach of restitching the city, led to the start of his drawing series The Manhattan Transcripts, which aimed to produce a new form of architectural 
notation by transcribing relationships (between spaces and use, set and script, type and program, and objects and events).”* In these ways, La Villette’s programmatic deconstruction, experimental representation, and innovative design process chal- lenged the normative distinction between theory and practice.” The project made it more difficult to separate the theory of work — a place in which to develop con- cepts — from the practice of work, where concepts are reified.  Regardless of their theoretical foundation, when T’schumi’s architectural preoc- cupations hit the ground they inevitably became a landscape. As such, they encoun- tered landscape architecture’s typical set of concerns: the role of parks in the city and the pictorial conventions that define their appearance. The program for this park was part of a larger system of cultural efforts under President Mitterrand’s socialist agenda, which aimed not only to reassert the cultural prominence of Paris, but also to produce a new public. In her provocative book on the Grands Projets, architect and critic Annette Fierro explained that significant interventions in the public realm — so important to the Parisian consciousness — illustrate “the state’s responsibility and potential to advance culture over and above that of private enter- prise.”’® The park was no longer a place to disperse and console discontented fac- tory workers, as it was in the nineteenth century, it was to become a place to gather and educate crowds. Tschumi thought similarly: “the park forms part of the vision of the city.”*’ His prose describing his competition submission in fact restates the missive of the competition brief, favoring a new urban park based on “cultural invention, education, and entertainment.”””  Landscape critics received this park variously. Landscape architect James Corner characterized it as the “single most significant project in terms of forging a new architecture of the landscape.”*? Noting its controversy, he still advocates on its behalf for the way it challenged the traditional role of nature in the city, “bringing the density, congestion, and richness of the city to the park.”** In an essay written 10 years after the park competition, landscape architect Christophe Girot expresses less enthusiasm about “dismissing all traditional ideas related to the conventional uses of plants and other natural materials in park design,” but nonetheless recounts the fascination with the project in French landscape architecture circles.*” Perhaps the strongest reactions to La Villette were ignited by Tschumi’s overt simplification of and covert disdain for the rich traditions of park making. To those who appre- ciated the complex history of parks, statements such as “we oppose the notion of Olmsted, widespread throughout the 19% century, that ‘in the park, the city is not supposed to exist” were inflammatory.*°  Landscape historian and theorist Elizabeth K. Meyer challenges this through a careful comparison of Jean-Charles Adolphe Alphand’s Pare des Buttes-Chaumont and La Villette, despite Tschumi’s claim to radically break with tradition. Despite their age difference of more than 100 years, both are characterized by systems of circulation that acknowledge the presence of the city and, Meyer argues, strategies of superimposition — with systems of surfaces, lines, and points. In this way, Meyer says, Alphand’s nineteenth-century park “moves beyond the picturesque by fusing  
its tradition with the facts of modern urban life.”*” She concludes by arguing that La Villette’s radicalism lies in its lack of engagement with the specifics of the site; what she calls a “non-landscape park” that fails to engage the most important system — the landscape itself. Meyer’s text confronts misconceptions that were, and continue to be, prevalent in the discipline of landscape architecture — namely that the city and the park are mutually exclusive. This simplification devalues landscape history and its nuances. Despite her critique, Meyer acknowledged that La Villette is nonethe- less useful for landscape design, a discipline that all too often is “wallowing in kitsch and in the image of the picturesque.”** Indeed, seen as a collection of landscape representations, La Villette’s innovative diagrams and drawings challenged the pic- torial tradition in landscape.”  Projecting Import  On the occasion of La Villette’s 10-year anniversary, the journal Documents’ editor Miwon Kwon referred to it as “not only one of the largest but probably the most talked about, argued over, and publicized urban design project of the late twentieth century.”*° More recently, the editors of The SAGE Handbook of Architectural Theory offered provocative wordplay, suggesting the importance of acquiring new ways to understand it: “With its architectural fabric worn in, there is also an unavoidable sense that Pare de la Villette’s theory has worn thin.”*”  So what of the possibilities of looking back at La Villette now as a way to think forward? How has it informed the development of park design at the turn of this century and, more importantly, beyond?  The organizational frameworks so intrinsic to La Villette’s identity are now thor- oughly absorbed in design culture as a strategy for making parks. Nevertheless, they have been expanded in important ways. The change and complexity these frameworks enabled at La Villette — created in space — are now expanded in time. An example of this expansion is Downsview Park in Toronto. Second, the compe- tition’s preoccupations with a park’s performance attempted to suspend questions ofa landscape’s appearance. La Villette reminds us of important lessons regarding a park’s imageability. Finally, and perhaps most unlikely, the seeds of resilient design — where a park is able to absorb willful and unforeseen change and maintain its identity — were sown in T’schumi’s winning scheme.  Although La Villette and Downsview Park competition schemes were devel- oped almost 20 years apart in vastly different cultural and political milieus, the merit of comparing them is suggested by what appears to be an autobiographical diagram in Tschumi’s scheme for Downsview.” This diagram suggests shifts in his design work, and perhaps landscape work in general, since Parc de la Villette. One important shift is that the Downsview competitors almost universally favored the design of frameworks that organize parks systems over forms that define them.’ These frameworks are both infrastructural and administrative. They appear 
diversely as strategic organizations, dynamic infrastructures, provisional programs, and participatory processes. The organizational frameworks of T'schumi’s scheme — spools (collections of diverse and changing programs), screens (for announcements and scintillating images), and digits (fingers of diverse landscapes) — replace the superimposition of points (follies), lines (galleries), and surfaces (gardens) that organized La Villette. Tschumi’s earlier preoccupation with discontinuity is here updated in a scheme that advances a continuous landscape enabling flows of water, wildlife, and people across it.  The resulting project favors time over space. Its systems enable more contem- porary concerns of ecological emergence and change — concerns that were devel- oped in even more sophisticated ways in other submissions to the competition. Landscape architect James Corner and architect Stan Allen’s proposal, aptly named “Emergent Ecology,” advances a “carefully gauged framework — a matrix of inter- acting systems” of “circuits” (which accommodate activity programs, event spaces, and circulation) and “through flows” (which support all the hydrological and eco- ogical dynamics of the site) — that is both integrative and flexible.** The proposal’s potential for multivalent articulation (flows, for instance, can be a continuous meadow, a drift of lights, a drainage system, or a tree line) hence direct and support a number of potential outcomes. This development of organizational frameworks’ potential continues years later in Corner’s scheme for the Freshkills Landfill to Landscape competition. The “threads,” “islands,” and “mats” that organize the winning scheme can be articulated by multiple material realities — unlike the singularity of Tschumi’s points, lines and surfaces — thus enabling the park’s robust identity despite the radical changes that are an inevitable part of any large, long-term work.  The preoccupation of proposing frameworks over designing form in the Downs- view schemes are invariably linked to designers’ interests in complex processes having to do with “emergence,” “adaptation,” and “unfolding.” The changes over time that these concepts infer are of course integral to landscapes. Finding in La Villette ideas of open-endedness and indeterminacy, Charles Waldheim retrospec- tively builds a case for the park’s nascency as a landscape urbanist pursuit. T’schu- mi’s winning scheme, he argues, “represented a quantum leap in the development of landscape urbanism by formulating landscape as the most suitable medium through which to order programmatic and political change over time.”””  Such preoccupations with a park’s performance — from the scale of the medium to that of the metropolis — raise a compelling question to which, surprisingly, La Villette might offer clues to an answer. Must landscapes that are conceptualized and formed through complex processes rely solely on these processes for their image, or, can performative agendas be reconciled with representational ones? Many of the La Villette competitors’ emphases on infrastructural frameworks and complex processes try to delay, or even suspend, this question. Certainly the growth of habitats within these parks will affect its visual identity, planned and unplanned activities will leave traces on the park’s surfaces, and processes  
of soil remediation might temporarily yield fields of clover and alfalfa. Nonetheless, these effects are subtle and fail to produce strong park identities.  It is not surprising, therefore, that the winning scheme for Downsview Park, Tree City by the Office for Metropolitan Architecture and Bruce Mau, not only promised an ecological design that would emerge over time, but also offered the park organizers and future users an identifiable image. The signature clusters, or dots, that appear in the scheme and its representation are precisely how Tree City was popularly recognized. Just as important, a big green dot, understood as the park’s logo, gave it an immediate and marketable identity that promised to stand for the park during the years of its making. The competition organizers for La Villette asked for a symbol for the park of the twenty-first century. Notwith- standing all of La Villette’s other successes, Tschumi’s scheme advances land- scape’s imaging potential as an asset. The field of red follies is the image of the park in both popular and disciplinary imaginations.  While a discussion of resilience in relation to La Villette might seem too spec- ulative, Tschumi’s winning scheme is an apt example.*° As an ecological concept, resilience is the ability of a system to experience disturbance (such as a fire) and then return to a recognizable steady state. The important measure of an ecosys- tem’s resilience is the amount of disturbance it can absorb while still maintaining its function before instabilities flip the system into another kind of behavior, such as grasslands becoming a shrub-desert. As a tool for conceptualizing, planning, design- ing, and managing parks, it is useful to think of resilience in this sense. A park’s capacity for resilience lies in the strategic design of its organizational systems — whether infrastructural, formal, or operational — that enables it to absorb and facil- itate change yet maintain its design sensibility.  Asan example, I cite Frederick Law Olmsted’s depression of transverse roads and separation of circulation paths in plan and section as design strategies that enable Central Park’s resilience. Despite 150 years of programming and development pres- sures (disturbances) that have transformed many of the park’s green spaces, the key sensibility of the park, the ability for a visitor to flow seamlessly — on foot, on abike, in acar, or ona horse — without interruption, persists. This infrastructural armature for the park thus enables the addition of buildings (such as the Metropolitan Museum of Art), the conversion of space (from the reservoir to the Great Lawn to ball fields), and the shift of management strategies (that allow the Ramble to be a place for either people or birds) without the park’s essential character being destroyed.  La Villette’s superimposed systems (the grid of follies, the ribbon of theme gardens) can be seen in the same way. They enable a robust structure to which changes can be made — from the shifting of folie program to the accommodation of other designers’ work — all the while maintaining the park’s winning identity. The park schemes that are most resilient to change are the most likely to survive, regardless of whether change is initiated through politics, economics, public will, or natural process. To think again about La Villette, more than 30 years after the competition, provides the opportunity to register specific sensibilities of thought and work at the time 
and to track their sophisticated development in the contemporary landscape. The life of the project — as a competition scheme, as a discourse in publication, and on the ground as a lived experience — will no doubt continue to unfold.”  La Villette was designed at a time that did not yet foresee the context of global environmental change in which designers must currently operate. Resilience today, not just at the scale of park design but also at the scale of regions, takes on new meaning. The design community is no longer asking why resilient design matters. The challenge is how we innovatively produce and pay for it. To this end, philanthropic organizations such as the Rockefeller Foundation, within the context of their 100 Resilient Cities Centennial Challenge, offer a contemporary and provoc- ative framework for economic, social, and ecologic resilience. The categories they advance — “safe failure,” “flexibility,” “spare capacity,” “rapid rebound,” and “constant learning” — catalyze this important conversation.  With twenty-first-century events surrounding global warming and sea level rise, designers’ love affair with change has certainly been recontextualized. Resilience is now about the survival of some of our most vital landscapes. The innovative design of parks certainly has a role to play. Notwithstanding all that it is and all that it does, it is hard to now imagine Parc de La Villette as “the park of the twenty-first century.” That project is now our most current and urgent concern.  Notes  Image credit: Julia Czerniak.  1. For an excellent account of the history of the site, its infrastructural development, and its status at the time of the competition, see Lodewijk Baljon, Designing Parks: An Exam- ination of Contemporary Approaches to Design in Landscape Architecture (Amsterdam: Architectura & Natura Press, 1992), 27-32.  2. La Villette (Paris: Centre des monuments nationaux, Monum, Editions du patrimoine, 2004), 16. This small guidebook offers some lovely insights into the life of the abattoir.  3. Ibid.  4. Baljon, Designing Parks, 32-7. Baljon provides an account of a beautiful imaginary walk through the site as the competitors would have found it.  5. Ibid., 38.  6. lbid., 39.  7. Ibid., 42. See also Francoise Choay’s insightful critique of the competition program as “over-inflated,” “over-constraining,” and “contradictory”: Frangoise Choay, “La Vill- ette Park Competition,” in Landscape, Princeton Journal: Thematic Studies in Architecture 2, ed. Raymond Beeler (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1985), 211-13. Thanks to Richard Rosa for pointing this out.  8. Baljon, Designing Parks, 38.  9. Ibid., 25.  10. Ibid., 46. 
STONE HOUSE  Herzog & de Meuron  Philip Ursprung  Herzog & de Meuron, Stone House in Tavole, Italy, 1988.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. 
BETWEEN THE HUMAN AND THE NON-HUMAN  The very first commission of Herzog & de Meuron outside the surroundings of their native city of Basel, where they founded their office in 1978, was a vacation house in the Italian region of Liguria. The project started in 1982 and the building was com- pleted in 1988. The house is located near the village of Tavole, about 10 kilometers from the Mediterranean coast, halfway between Genoa and Nice. Liguria belongs to the south-western extremity of the Alps and is characterized by high mountains, steep valleys, and a combination of Alpine and Mediterranean vegetation. The area near the coastal port towns has been used for the cultivation of olives since antiquity, but in the late twentieth century the hinterland was struck by depopulation and many of the orchards in the old man-made terraces, which structure the landscape, had fallen into decay. When the building was published under the title of Stone House in 1988 its resonance among the architectural community was striking. Together with a handful of other small buildings it triggered Herzog & de Meuron’s international breakthrough. Like the Stone House, they all bear characteristic names, such as the Blue House (1980), the House for a Veterinary Surgeon (1984), the Plywood House (1985), and the House for an Art Collector (1987).  Do these names allow us to look at these buildings from a different angle than merely from an architectural perspective? Should we look at them as works of art, as characters in a play, or as chapters that stand for different architectural themes? If so, what could be the architectural theme evoked by the Stone House? I would argue that the main issue of the project is the complex relationship between the human and the non-human; in other words, the tension between the human scale, its everyday surroundings, activities and dimensions, which go beyond the control and understanding of humans. The key component of the project is obviously the material of stone, both in a literal and a metaphorical sense. After all, the house mainly consists of rubble and artificial stone, namely poured concrete. Its appear- ance, at first sight, is stable. Stones are objects where the man-made and the natural, in other words the human and the non-human, meet. Again, they are the result of geological processes, objects shaped by nature over millions of years, and objects that have been manipulated by humans in order to protect and separate them from the rawness of nature.  The Concrete Skeleton and the Concept of Ornament  How does the Stone House relate to the surrounding landscape, with its stark con- trast of spectacular beauty on the one hand and signs of economic decline on the 
other? The lot is located on a slope overlooking a valley. It contained the ruins ofan older building and the remnants of the terraces once used for olive cultivation. Herzog & de Meuron started with a concrete skeleton, which literally conquers and domesticates the abandoned site. Its modular structure seems to arch over the uneven rocky surface of the terrain and triumph over gravity. The cantilevered terrace does not touch the ground. The skeleton is obviously man-made and could theoretically expand over the entire landscape — not unlike the utopian collages of the Continuous Monument by the Italian group Superstudio in the late 1960s. Its orthogonal structure evokes the human dream to rationalize, survey, and control nature. But the concrete structure not only recalls the age-old aspiration of archi- tects to expand in space and to dominate the land; it also refers to a much more mundane phenomenon, namely, the fact that most new houses on the Italian coun- tryside consist of concrete skeletons, which, as soon as the budget allows, are then gradually completed by adding brick walls. In order to save taxes, many homes are left without plaster, in the state of framing. The presence of seemingly uncom- pleted houses with half-finished brick walls and reinforcement rods sprouting from the roughly cast concrete skeleton is a typical sight in the area. Herzog & de Meuron have repeatedly referred to this everyday phenomenon. In one of the con- ceptual sketches by Jacques Herzog one can read the handwritten note, “concrete skeleton (with structure?) or color.”’ The question “with structure?” in the sketch probably relates to the way the traces and joints of the pouring process remain vis- ible on the surface. In another sketch the details of the cross are colored blue, while at other instances it is proposed to paint them orange-red. The same cross-shaped structure governs the organization of the floor plan.  It is no coincidence that Herzog & de Meuron put so much emphasis on the articulation of the concrete skeleton. In fact, one could read the cross at the Stone House as an ornament, which marks the beginning of Herzog & de Meuron’s engagement with the ornament as architectural trope. It runs through their entire oeuvre and culminated in the Beijing Olympic Stadium, the Bird’s Nest (2008), where structure and shape unite. Unlike most of their predecessors in the twentieth century, and unlike many of their contemporaries, Herzog & de Meuron are open to the concept of ornament. In a recent interview, Jacques Herzog reflects on the way ornament is utilized: “Seemingly paradoxical, the ornament is what unites and brings together the whole. If it reflects or contains the idea, it is an ornamental concept. If it doesn’t then it is a decorative appendix, and we have always been against the notion of the decorative.”  Is it then possible to define the ornament as the mediator between the human and a non-human human scale? Could it be the element that allows an anthropomorphic relationship between the users and the building, the element that facilitates an iden- tification with phenomena with which humans cannot really cope? This anthropo- morphic relationship is what seems to have been what art historian Alina Payne had in mind when she described the role of the ornament in visual culture. She stated that the “tertium comparationis that connects scale and sculpture (small or large, 
architectural or object-based) is the human body, which engages directly, physically, and haptically, the three-dimensional world that surrounds it.”? At the Stone House, the architects articulated — in the guise of the concrete cross — the complex relationship between the everyday economic reality of the home- builder (eager to save on taxes but also participate in the ideologies of growth). As such, the concrete cross symbolizes, like a hieroglyph, the intertwined ideolog- ical and the economic conditions that determine architecture.  The Stone Membranes and the Concept of the Image  The concrete skeleton is filled in with rubble stones, which partially stem from a ruined building on the site. Herzog & de Meuron used the stone walls to produce the impression of a massive protection from the outside, almost like a medieval fortifying — an effect enhanced by the fact that windows and doors recede deeply into the wall and are protected with metal shutters. Inside, there is no servicing space, such as a hallway, staircase, or lobby. There is no hierarchy of organiza- tion, and no primary and secondary spaces; rather there are rooms that appear to be added to and juxtaposed with each other, as in the farmhouses of the Enga- dine, which the architects studied carefully. While the massive, compact appear- ance of the building underlines this organizational logic, the stone walls seem to dematerialize. The absence of mortar makes the individual stones appear free to move and be reassembled in another configuration. The closer one looks the less certain one becomes about the actual dimension — the facade, or rather, the stone membranes of the facade, which are framed by the concrete beams, turn into images.  Herzog & de Meuron had first worked with the concept of the image in the Blue House, where the blue color — a reference to the French artist Yves Klein and his invention of the Yves Klein Blue — makes the tiny building appear larger than it actually is. It was developed further in the facade of Dominus Winery in Yountville, California (1998), where stones appear to be floating in metal gabions. Since the Millennium it has become a common tool in the realm of architecture.‘ The arrangement of stones resembles not so much a stack, but an accumulation of pig- ments on the surface of a canvas or a plaster fresco — and in the end, pigments are nothing more than very finely ground colorful stones. The variety of shapes and colors produces a picturesque effect and the motif of the stone wall evokes various examples from the realm of art. The sculptures of Arte Povera come to mind, where, for instance, the sculptural work of Jannis Kounellis or Mario Merz, popular during the 1970s and 1980s, make use of rubble stones. Another instructive point of reference may be found in Paul Cézanne’s statement in regard to his paintings of the Montagne Saint-Victoire: “nature isn’t at the surface, it’s in depth. Colors are the expression, on the surface, of this depth.”* In addition, Robert Smithson has written, although with much irony and as a critique of contemporary painting, that  
“(tlhe word ‘color’ means at its origin to ‘cover’ or ‘hide.’ Matter eats up light and ‘covers’ it with a confusion of color.”®  The concrete skeleton and the stone infillings are dialectically related. The abstract and universal grid is confronted with a concrete and specific materiality, and the optimistic gesture of expansion is confronted with the more pragmatic, or nostalgic gesture of recycled material from the past. Again, it would be easy to iden- tify a variety of references, such as the existing rubble stones walls in the area or the practice of filling in the skeleton with bricks. But the architects are not so much interested in “context,” or the direct mimesis of found shapes, but are searching for something utterly different. Their project inseparably intertwines the old and the new and transforms it into a phenomenon without precedent. This oper- ation prefigures a theme that they will pursue in projects such as Kiippersmitihle Museum in Duisburg (1999), the Tate Modern (2000), or the CaixaForum Madrid (2008), which all transform existing industrial buildings into art museums. Getting back to my initial hypothesis, I would argue that the potentially dangerous effects of nature are held at bay by the building’s walls, which, on the other hand, frame, absorb, and transform this very nature in an aesthetic phenomenon. The wall with its frame becomes a membrane that mediates between the non-human and the human.  Dealing with Discontinuity  The stone walls do not have to carry the tectonic and structural load of the building. In fact, they question the very existence ofa “wall,” similar to the cistern-like cover of the house. At the same time, the walls do bear much semantic weight. The archi- tects make very clear how crucial the isolation of the house is in their view. In an early sketch it bears the title “Einsames Haus” (lonely house), presumably a title later discarded in favor of “Stein Haus.”’ In the lower part of the building only a few openings pierce the volume, while the upper story has a row of windows that open up to the spectacular view of the surrounds. Herzog & de Meuron have writ- ten about the importance of the house’s exposure to nature. Among the documen- tary images that they selected for the monograph of their oeuvre, one shows a trunk in front of the concrete skeleton with the caption: “Tree trunk and concrete support visually melt into a common supporting structure. The orientation of the concrete skeleton toward the existing natural conditions becomes visible.”* Another photograph shows how the supporting metal beams used during the con- struction process and the surrounding trees overlap. The caption reads: “During the construction phase, nature noticeably invades the shell, as though it could com- press its rooms into a crystal. Trees and pylons commingle in the picture.””  The Stone House is doubly introverted: it closes itself off from the outside and it focuses attention on the joints between the spaces. It deals with autarky and auton- omy, but there is no modernist self-reference or artistic self-reliance. Rather it 
relates to everything else, and triggers chains of associations of real and mental images. The Stone House originated from a close reading of the site; namely, the morphological, geological, geographical, climatic, historical, and economic givens, rather than from the perspective of traditions in architecture. The form of the house does not echo any typology, it does not mimic the shape or materiality of neighboring houses, and nor does it produce an analogy to existing traditions. In an explanatory text published in 1997 Gerhard Mack states: “The seemingly clearly structured classical house is not an object. It opens towards the sky like a rainwater cistern.”'® What the architects in the 1980s were looking for was no less distant from Aldo Rossi’s search for typological anchors, formulated in the 1960s in his book The Architecture of the City (1966), than from Alexander Tzonis and Liane Lefaive’s concept of “critical regionalism,” articulated in the 1970s. Herzog & de Meuron’s aim was not to represent or critically comment on something that is his- torically given, but rather to use architecture as a means to see the environment clearer, to articulate what is there, to give a voice to something that exists latently but remains invisible, or muted. Their attitude is not historicist; in other words, the meaning of their work does not reside in the critical relation to the history of archi- tecture. Rather, their attitude is experimental, in the sense of searching for a specific relationship of architecture anew for each situation.  What could be simpler and more basic than a house of stone, the title seems to ask. But the project is anything but irreducible. It is an architectural experiment. It asks how the building relates to those forces, both natural and economic, that define and shape it. But it is also an architectural statement, a built manifesto that will become operational in later projects. Above all, it tells us the story of a rad- ically discontinuous spatiality and temporality. History, we learn from the com- pilation of stones rearranged as walls, is not a linear evolution of types, shapes, and functions linked together, but a discontinuous accumulation of singularities. Space, we learn from the massive shutters, the contradictory views, is not an empty medium through which images and meaning can be projected and freely shifted. Making connections between the “inside” and the “outside” will always remain a challenge — a challenge that is continuously rehearsed with every open-  ing (be it a window, a door, or the roof). Even the act of placing the house on the ground defies simplicity. The Stone House demonstrates that nothing can be taken for granted. Architecture is not a medium to express what we know but to learn and explore what we don’t know.  Notes  Image credit: Margherita Spiluttini.  1. Gerhard Mack, Herzog ex de Meuron: The Complete Works, vol. 1 (Basel: Birkhauser, 1997), 61, fig. C.  2. Jacques Herzog, interview with Philip Ursprung, Basel, November 26, 2013, translation  by Philip Ursprung. 
CHURCH OF THE LIGHT  Tadao Ando  Jin Baek  Tadao Ando, Church of the Light, Ibaraki, Osaka, Japan, 1989.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
The Church of the Light (1989) in Ibaraki, Japan, by Tadao Ando, is a significant and representative Christian church in postwar religious architecture. One of its notable features is the restrained atmosphere, which envelops the congregation, and the altar positioned at the lowest point of the chapel. Another significant fea- ture is the distinguishing “cross of light.” Despite the restrained design approach that engendered an overall reductive setting, Ando acknowledged the cross, or the universal symbol of Christianity, accepted it as the primary element in the proc- ess of design, and eventually incorporated it into the chapel in such a way that an unprecedented “cross of light” came into being. The Church of the Light can thus be seen as an integration of these two features: the reductive setting, and the dis- tinguishing cross of light. This coupling marks Ando’s strategy in coping with the cultural problem of how to present a cross at a moment when its efficacy has been severely challenged under the dominance of secularized signs and of even senseless signifiers.  Sacred Emptiness  The Church of the Light is not the first to embody a restrained religious spatial atmosphere. As a modern precedent, one can cite Rudolf Schwarz’s (1897-1961) Corpus Christi Roman Catholic Church in Aachen (1930). Schwarz’s church is char- acterized by the sense of “ein Raum” clothed in white thanks to the openness between the congregation and the black marble altar. This church that embodies, according to one critic, a “spiritual conception of space”' was a figuration of Schwarz’s liturgical interpretation of emptiness, an emptiness that he saw as the place where God dwells.” While it is unclear whether Ando was aware of Schwarz’s church at the moment when he was designing the Church of the Light, the two churches share the same ethos called “sacred emptiness.”’ In the case of Ando’s church, the darkness lit by a cross of light grants the numinous to the empty space, enveloping the adjacent modest altar, without any podium, and the body of the congregation.  Within the chapel, the cross is placed not as an additional installation of religious identity in an otherwise universal emptiness but as the central party that rivets one’s attention fully onto itself. The cross takes on shape by excising dramatically the front wall (18 m x 6 mx 6m), and through these four cut pieces of concrete a shaft of light penetrates into the dark and empty space. When devising the cross, Ando was advised by aconsultant to shorten its arms to ensure structural stability of the front wall. How- ever, Ando eventually rejected this recommendation, and suspended the two upper pieces to the ceiling. This denial ofa tectonic logic confirms his intention to present the cross as the primary and central element. Indeed, the entire chapel — a molding of darkness — operates as an optimal setting for an augmented presence of the cross, confirming unequivocally its status as a valid and definitive symbol in Christianity. In comparison with Catholicism, the reductive premise, that eliminates  
anthropomorphic and figurative icons and images from chapels, is well acknowledged in Protestantism. Despite this reductive premise, however, it is still normal in Prot- estant churches to install a cross. This survival of the cross in the process of reduction is due to the fact that the cross is a qualitatively different symbol compared to icons, images, and figures. The cross is neither a human invention nor a figurative imitation of an original in a literal fashion. Rather, it is a symbol of Jesus Christ both in a met- onymic relationship, as it was the locus where Jesus was crucified, and in a figurative similitude to his body that its horizontal and vertical axes arouse, not in a literal imi- tation but in a highly abstracted fashion. In this regard, it is not surprising to find a cross in the Church of the Light that noticeably espouses the reductive premise. In this church, however, the cross has not simply survived. This is because its symbolic status has now been revived and augmented. And, this is so precisely through the reductive premise that operates as a prerequisite for the re-presentation of the cross.  The position of the cross is remarkable. Piercing the front wall, the cross stands between the inside and the outside. Accordingly, the cross operates as a slit for the introduction of light to the chapel. This position of the cross and its role as a vehicle for light are exceptional. It is true that Ando always sought out a special location for the cross throughout his religious or pseudo-religious works. For instance, in the Church on the Water (1988), a wedding hall with intermittent Christian services, the cross was positioned in the middle of an artificial pond. In conjunction with this, he rendered the front to be completely transparent and made the glass operable laterally to dramatize one’s perception of the cross from the interior. This cross, which stands at the outside of the chapel and in the middle of water, demonstrates influence taken from the cross found in Kaija and Heikei Siren’s Technical Univer- sity Chapel (1957) in Otaniemi, Finland. Its reference is also traditional, as it reminds one of the tori of the Itsukushima shrine. However, the cross in the Church of the Light is different. Unlike the cross in the Church on the Water, it stands nei- ther inside nor outside, but in-between. Looking back at the history of Japanese Christian architecture, a similar “in-between” cross can be found in Kenzo Tange’s (1913-2005) St. Mary’s Cathedral (1963) in Tokyo. This monumental church has a slit on the ceiling in the form of the cross, and light thus comes in from above. However, Ando was critical of this cross, claiming that the church was predicated upon Western vertical conception of light. In contrast with Tange’s unambigu- ously vertical light, Ando’s empty cross on the front wall in the Church of the Light invites a penetrating beam of light, a beam that is horizontal or diagonal.  In reference to the chapel’s effect of light created by the cross, the smooth con- crete wall surfaces of the Church of the Light are significant as well. Ando adopted several tactics to formulate a refined surface. Any release agent on the surface of the veneer form boards was forbidden, to prevent disagreeable marks on the surface. Instead, Ando preferred to paint the surface of the boards, and in this fashion he minimized the wooden grain traces on the concrete. The positions of steel bars  were determined as accurately as possible with the aim of securing sufficient cover thickness between the outermost steel bars and the boards. Ando had concrete 
blended, not with rough and crude aggregates but with well-rounded pebbles. When the concrete was poured, Ando dispatched his employees to the construc- tion site to assist in the vibrating process manually. The purpose of this was to remove as many vapors as possible so that a smooth surface of non-porous solidity might come into being. Even when a flaw was discovered after the boards were taken apart, patching it was forbidden in order to keep homogeneity of the surface. It was through these tactics that Ando was able to formulate exquisitely smooth and polished surfaces.  Material Light  Ando explained his reasons for taking these extra measures to formulate smooth- ness from the perspective of the effect of light.* The massive weightiness of the concrete walls is transformed into luminous membranes onto which light, coming in through the cross of light, rushes and collides. The shiny, sensitive, and refrac- tory finish renders the beam of light corporeally present: palpable, tangible, touch- able, and visible. Its effect is strikingly different from the exposed concrete of Le Corbusier (1887-1965), a treatment that was introduced to Japan through Le Corbusier’s National Museum of Western Art (1959) in Tokyo and Tange’s Nichi- nan Cultural Center (1963) in Nichinan, Japan. The minute pockets on the jagged and irregular surface of the beton brut retain the particles of light, rather than reflect- ing and refracting them. In contrast, the smooth wall in the Church of the Light optimizes its reflection back to the chapel. Light requires a smooth wall to get effec- tively refracted and reflected so that its resplendent, corporeal manifestation in the heart of darkness can be realized. At this moment of interaction, the wall appears in its luminosity, for instance, as if gilded. In other words, the wall transcends its literal status as a dreary concrete wall to appear in a fictive fashion that is meaningful in the context of Christian spirituality.  This fictive presence of the wall — it appears as if it were gilded — allows us to compare Ando’s approach to light with a historical case. For instance, Abbot Suger (1081-1151), who administered the erection of a new chevet to replace the aged Carolingian basilica of St.-Denis and opened serendipitously a path to the Gothic, placed gilded objects — if possible, he could have gilded the walls, too — in expec- tation of their interaction with light coming in through clerestories. The glossy objects refract and reflect light, and render it to permeate the surrounding. This palpable and concrete presence of material light was of course an anagogical sym- bol of the eternal and intelligible light. Suger was well aware of the fact that, con- ventionally, light hides itself in the field of the everyday through the very form of abundance. Put differently, its being everywhere is exactly its form of self-seclu-  sion. Ando retained a similar stance, as he wrote that “light does not become objec- tified and is not itself given form until it is isolated and accepted by physical objects.”* Accordingly, in bringing this selfsecluding light to visibility, an 
architect’s task would be to formulate an agency, such as placing costly gilded objects in the case of Suger. In the case of the Church of the Light, the construction budget was modest. Placing gilded objects or gilding the wall, as Suger would have done, was not an option. It is from this angle that one needs to understand Ando’s painstaking efforts to smooth and polish the surface of the concrete wall to the point where it became a kind of depthless mirror. In the church purged of gilded objects, light meets the polished surface of the prosaic concrete walls instead. The effect of the efforts is extraordinary. The dull concrete wall turns into an efficacious agency and produces an effect similar to that accomplished by Suger’s gilded objects or walls. In its fictive performance, refined concrete operates like gold.  Thermal Atmosphere  There is another effect of light: thermal atmosphere. Partially due to the limited construction budget, the church was built without insulation, and it is cold inside the church during the winter days. This coldness, however, is not merely a physical phenomenon. It has a spiritual and cultural significance as well. It keeps the believ- ers awake and alert. It also keeps them from becoming overly ecstatic to the point that the conscious and rational commitment to Jesus is supplanted by overheated and hyperbolic proclamations and ambitions. Indeed, this emphasis on the intellec- tual aspect of belief characterizes Japanese Christianity as the religion of the literate, compared to, for instance, Shintoism, or the religion of the public. In particular, it is well known that the Non-Church Movement, a remarkable indigenous Christian movement established by Uchimura Kanzo (1861-1930), puts emphasis on the rational side of belief. In Ando’s church, the thermal tactility of coldness, which keeps the believers alert, concretizes this emphasis on the rationality of Japanese Christianity. One’s being embraced by coldness as one enters the Church of the Light thus has a ritualistic dimension.  Just as the darkness renders the beam of light more efficacious, so it is with cold- ness. The light that is introduced to the Church of the Light shines through the coldness. Its warmth is augmented thanks to this coldness. Put differently, the pre-presence of coldness enhances the warmth of light. As coldness is not merely a physical fact but a spiritual quality, warmth, also, embodies a spiritual signifi- cance. Warmth analogizes itself with Jesus and his unfathomable love that any rational effort to understand is destined to fail. The inexplicable Kenosis, or the Absolute Irrationality, that a divine being emptied Himself to become like one of His own creatures and to suffer on the cross for the sins of His own creatures, tests any humane, rational approach to apprehend Christianity. In a way, the cou- pling of coldness and warmth in the church is that of the rationality of Japanese intellectuals who reason the cause of Christianity on the one hand, and the irra- tional, unfathomable warmth of the divine love on the other. Ando’s church is thus where two different corporeal engagements — one breathing cold air and the other  
feeling warmth — are collated to connote spirituality. Upon the moment when one is corporeally drawn to warmth on account of pre-given coldness, one spiritually renounces rationality in favor of an ultimate unconditional acceptance of the incomprehensible divine love.  As these observations imply, the spatial emptiness of the chapel in the Church of the Light is not a geometrically defined, neutral setting but one that is imbued with atmospheric qualities such as darkness and coldness. These qualities in turn oper- ate as a prerequisite for the re-presentation of the cross with equally atmospheric qualities such as brightness and warmth. In other words, Ando’s church utilizes the dark and cold emptiness to re-present the cross that is bright and warm. It is a re-presentation of the cross in and through a dialectical setting where contradictory and compensatory qualities are brought toward each other. Such an approach entails a criticism of the degraded status of symbols and icons into hackneyed and prosaic kitsch in contemporary culture. In contemporary Japan, the perception of the cross is never free from romanticism. A good testament to this is the post- war surge of cross-bearing wedding chapels built exclusively for commercial pur- poses. Regardless of religious orientation, young couples marry in such places partially because they regard the wedding style as fancy. Interestingly, Ando is not exempt from this secularized perception of the cross. He himself also designed several wedding chapels, including the Church on the Water and the Church on Mt. Rokko (1986). The cross here merely becomes a sign of Christianity in a coun- try called the “empire of signs,” to borrow Roland Barthes’ (1915-80) characteri- zation, where empty, referent-free signifiers float around aimlessly to form a spectacle.  Blankness  What is also important in understanding the status of the cross in Japan is the way it is viewed by Zen Buddhism. Even when the cross could successfully convey the suffering of Jesus, it was often considered as an emblem of inhumanity. The char- acterization made by Daisetz T. Suzuki (1894-1966), the most influential Zen scholar of the twentieth century, is a primary example. Comparing Christianity and Shin Buddhism, he defined the cross as “the symbol of cruelty or of inhuman- ity.”° When Suzuki used this phrase, he most likely had a baroque crucifix in mind, and even imagining Jesus under crucifixion must have been too painful. Being a Buddhist, his conception of sacrifice was anything but bloody. Indeed, even after mortification, Sakyamuni was not bleeding, but astringent and dignified.” In addi- tion, according to Suzuki, even when death is concerned, death for a Buddhist is not anguish, distress, and pain but rest and peace.® What epitomizes this difference in the conception of death is the posture, Buddha’s horizontal posture on the death- bed contrasting with the Jesus hanging on the cross.” It is within this cultural con- text that the “cross of light” takes on greater significance. Ando’s cross confronts 
Zen Buddhists’ characterizations. By eliminating materiality from the cross, Ando brings forth an unexampled cross that is diametrically opposite to that of the baroque crucifix. This cross thus shapes a state of what one might call pure or non-materialistic iconicity, and has the effect of radically Protestantizing the univer- sal symbol of Christianity. The blankness of this cross, or its dimension of the invis- ible, is thus a distinctive cultural achievement.  This blankness takes on further importance. Blankness conditions the cross’s per- formance as a channel for the introduction of light. Thanks to the strong presence of the phenomenal light in darkness, the cross oscillates between two values: the referential value of the cross as the universal symbol of Christianity and its vehic- ular value for the introduction of light. This alternation is neither vicious nor point- less. It enriches the perception of the cross as both a gestalt and penetrating light. This oscillation renders the cross to be the penetrating light, and the penetrating light to be the cross. The cross carries out integration between the iconic and the phenomenal. The substantial, permanent, and enduring aspect of the cross as an icon is inseparably joined with the tangible, ecstatic, and transformative nature of the phenomenal light. This union of the phenomenal with the iconic is effica- cious. The light’s ceaseless alteration saves the perception of the cross from any idolatrizing fixation. In turn, the immovability of the iconic prevents the perceptual experience of the permeating light from being subjected to an endless manifesta- tion in différance.  Shintai  For Ando, any engagement with an architectural setting and its components is con- ducted through shintai, or the Japanese notion of the body. Underneath Ando’s clear statement about the role of shintai lies a distinctive philosophical tradition called Kyoto Philosophical School, which dwelled upon shintai extensively during the modern period. In particular the theory of perception and body in the philos- ophy of nothingness by Kitaro Nishida (1870-1945), the foremost thinker in mod- ern East Asian intellectual history and the father of the Kyoto Philosophical School, is noteworthy. Nishida understood shintai as an active, pre-reflective, sensational capacity to embrace and feel the world as the content of the very self. Shintai is an active, sensational vessel by which the self empties selfhood out to accept the world as his or her very content. Shintai is an agency of creation, too, at the moment when this sensational encounter is asymmetrical, as what the world offers is greater than what shintai can internalize. At this moment, shintai transcends the horizon of sensation and enters into the realm of creative act to accommodate the sensational surplus.’° A piece created through shintai is thus not a sign that would materialize an author's ideas, intentions, and conceptions. Rather, what is created is the overturning of the self, or the exposure of the limits of the self armed with ideas, intentions, and conceptions to regulate, apprehend, and measure the world. 
Accordingly, what is created operates as a contradictory compensation of the self. What is created and the self form a paradoxical ensemble of a contradictory union. This union is more solid than any other type of union, as it is contradictory by its nature.  Emerging from this cultural tradition of the body, Ando discussed shintai not from the perspective of any dichotomous severance between body and mind, but from the perspective of a corporeal totality, totality that he expressed variably as “a union of spirit and flesh” and “a maximum effect of equilibrium.”’! Furthermore, Ando understood shintai as the locus of the self that concretizes the reciprocal matrix between the outside world and the interiority of the self. While Ando did not develop this thesis on shintai to the extent of Nishida, this matrix is the condition for the emer- gence of a creative postural articulation in resonance with that which will comple- ment any sensational surplus present in the matrix. An element discovered or created in this fashion is not a sign, but an extension of shintai that heightens its capacity in encountering and embracing the world sensationally. Before it is a representational figure to be screened by the semiotic gaze ofhegemonic and instrumental attitude, it is a figure of the corporeally and pre-reflectively apprehended domain.”  Accordingly, shintai is also a key in apprehending the perceptual and situational significance of the Church of the Light. Ando positioned the church in such a way that access to the chapel from the outside is labyrinthine. This labyrinthine approach is met dramatically by an axial composition of the dark and intimate chapel whose terminus is marked by the cross of penetrating light. This integration between the labyrinthine and the axial is intentional. Thanks to the former, the latter refreshes its significance. The axial is no longer a hackneyed compositional technique. Rather, it comes alive to coincide with and guide the movement of the body that orients toward and faces things axially. One’s gradual procession toward the holy, an indis- pensible part ofa ritual, is refreshed and enhanced in the Church of the Light. Shintai —the actively knowing body through its sensational internalization of what is offered — moves along the axis and encounters the cross. Curiously, in the church, the pro- cession along the central aisle of the chapel is simultaneously an act of descending toward the cross. The more one proceeds, the more towering and prominent the cross becomes. One’s descending is thus one’s humbling, and when the journey is done, the cross that — standing at the lowest point of the church and positioning its arms close to the level of the eye of the visitor — symbolizes the modesty of the Word God, has already altered its status into that of the highest and majestic loft- iness. The cross is both humble and majestic, and each quality is apprehended based upon sensational and postural reciprocity with shintai, as one faces the cross and looks upon it to be imbued by the warmth and brightness. The verticality of the cross, inseparably joined with warmth and luminosity, embodies not merely restive- ness, toiling, struggling, and combating, but also triumph and grandeur. Suzuki is indeed right in stating that the horizontal posture of the Buddha on the deathbed marks a prominent contrast with the Christ hanging on the cross.’ He is also right  
in stating that the verticality of Christ in general represents suffering and agonizing. However, the cross of light in the Church of the Light is different. Being appre- hended through shintai, it presents itself as a qualitatively different type of cross: vertical, but warm and luminous.  The cross formulates an inter-expressive corporeal fabric with the shintai of the perceiver. The victorious verticality of warmth and luminosity, and the shintai at a lower position infected with cold and dark are joined to form an ensemble through the logic of the contrasted dialectical union. The shintai desires the cross, as it offers what is desired, or what shintai is lacking. The surplus of cold and dark combined with the lowered postural stance is dialectically complemented by the warmth and brightness of the towering cross. This bond or fabric is none other than the highest form of apprehension predicated upon the efficacy of shintai, setting free the cross from dry intellectual significance in favor of a corporeal resonance. This moment of inseparable union in immediate attractiveness between the viewer and the cross unfetters the gaze from its penchant for a programmed outline of the cross as a sign of Christianity. In other words, it is not a figure that would confront the per- ceiver as a sign to be deciphered, but a figure intimately joined with him by shaping an inter-expressive corporeal fabric.  Of course, the cross can never be dissociated from death and resurrection. This associational significance, however, is not a typical informative and referential kind, when it is concerned with the cross of light. This is because it is integrated with shintai’s pre-predicative and pre-reflective corporeal pounding, pulsation, and trembling with the cross. In other words, this association is not merely intellectual and cerebral, but corporeally efficacious. Again, the cross is thus not a sign merely with an indicative significance, but a symbol apprehended first and foremost through shintai and then amalgamated with the association of Jesus.  Notes  * Courtesy of Tadao Ando Architect and Associates.  ** Acknowledgements: This article is partially a recapitulation of the author's book, Noth- ingness: Tadao Ando’s Christian Sacred Space (London: Routledge, 2009).  1. Thomas Hasler, “The Rhetoric of Silence: The Architecture of Rudolf Schwarz,” Daida- los, no. 64 (1997): 72.  2. Rudolf Schwarz, Vom Bau der Kirche (Heidelberg: Druckerei Winter, 1947), 59.  3. Paul Tillich, “Contemporary Protestant Architecture,” in Modern Church Architecture: A Guide to the Form and Spirit of Twentieth Century Religious Buildings, ed. Albert Christ-Janer and Mary Mix Foley (New York: McGrawhill, 1962), 124.  4. Tadao Ando, “Light, Shadow and Form,” in Tadao Ando: Complete Works, ed. Francesco Dal Co (London: Phaidon, 1995), 458.  5. Ibid. 
KUNSTHAL  Rem Koolhaas/OMA  Roberto Gargiani  Office of Metropolitan Architecture, Kunsthal, Rotterdam, 1992.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
THE PLIABLE SURFACE  By the end of the 1980s a transformation had taken place in the organization of the Office of Metropolitan Architecture (OMA). One of the key factors was the departure of Elia Zenghelis from the firm, which was originally led by Rem Koolhaas, Madelon Vriesendorp, Elia Zenghelis, and Zoe Zenghelis. In addition, projects in 1987-88 seemed to conclude a phase in OMA’s work that heavily polemicized its relationship to the postmodern project and realigned the work with the modern avant-gardes. Koolhaas was increasingly dissatisfied with architecture’s standard replies to com- mon urban and structural problems. Concluding a two-year teaching commitment at the Technical University of Delft, he took part ina conference entitled “How Mod- ern is Dutch Architecture?” Koolhaas took this call for presentations as an opportu- nity to criticize OMA’s master plan and contribution at Amsterdam’s large IJ-plain social housing project. This self-criticism developed against the backdrop of the decline of socialism signaled by the fall of the Berlin Wall, which disrupted the func- tioning ofa part of their building at Checkpoint Charlie, designed when the Wall was still standing. At the conference, Koolhaas rhetorically asked: “How is it possible, for the love of God, ina century entirely marked by instability and change ... that in spite of all, these buildings constructed at a distance of almost one century can so closely resemble each other?” Dutch architecture had achieved a perfectly functional way of building, but one that was without the ideal impulses, the sentiments of “grandeur” and “mythology” of the experimental daring of the avant-gardes. Koolhaas con- cluded, “we can talk about the Dutch architecture of today as an architecture without intentions, a triumphalist Modernism, totally inoffensive, toothless, sterile. It won’t prevent our sleep at night, nor will it awake us from slumber.”’  In 1989 a new synthesis of the principles outlined in Delirious New York (1978) surfaced in the work of OMA that related more directly to design narratives and structural forces. After many competition entries, several housing commis- sions, and two major projects (Berlin’s Checkpoint Charlie Apartments and The Hague’s Dance Theater), OMA was commissioned to design a building for tempo- rary art exhibitions at the end of 1987. What would become known as the Kunsthal, located on Maasboulevard at the southern end of a park, was a new kind of project for OMA, which continued in the design for the Educatorium building that was constructed a few years later in Utrecht.  Continuous Circuit  The Kunsthal project developed in two phases, separated by the results of the com- petition in 1988. In the series of variations on the first design — Kunsthal I in OMA’s 
classification system — the building is a box with a square plan, raised from the ground like a boat moored to the escarpment of the Maasboulevard. Access to the box is from the quay-like roof of the lance-shaped volume placed up against the escarpment. This volume contains service spaces and offices. Its overall volume is shaped by the contours of the vehicle road that descends to the level of the park. The elevated box contains a single vast room and has three glass facades. The light- ing of the central zone is provided by a skylight that looks like a prism inserted in the box. The conference room, café, and other spaces are inserted in a long volume hat protrudes beyond the flat roof, perpendicular to the Maasboulevard.  Kunsthal II was designed between 1988 and 1989. Here, a compacting of func- tions made it necessary to develop an exhibition system on all the levels of the building that had been proposed as just one of the possible installation organiza- tions in Kunsthal I. Thus, a continuous path of ramps, including the inclined slab of the auditorium, would connect all the exhibition spaces on the various levels. The ramp connecting the avenue and the park, along with the vehicle road — respectively labeled “Street” and “Road” in the drawings — cut across the square plan, generating a large square exhibition space, two orthogonal bands for a hall and offices, and an exhibition gallery. In some of the design schemes an ovoidal structure bridged the Road, connecting the hall to the square room; in others the Road is open to the sky, while an arched covering is placed over the street, symbolizing (like a Venturi and Scott Brown “Decorated Shed”) the position and role of the Kunsthal as a bridge between the dike and the park.  The latter was also designed by OMA in collaboration with the landscape designer Yves Brunier, who divided the terrain into orchard, podium, and park, breaking with the traditional criteria of garden design. The apple orchard with trees planted in diagonal rows on a surface of white stones, with their trunks painted white, forms a luminous vestibule. The podium is a raised surface covered with black tarmac, a stage for performances. Separated by a wall with a reflecting sur- face, the orchard and the podium appear as abstract suprematist compositions in black and white, when seen from above. The trees are planted more densely to create the park in front of the Kunsthal (climbing plants conceal the differences between new and old trunks), while the ground is transformed into a surface scat- tered with multicolored flowers. The work evokes not only suprematist but poin- tillist compositions, to be admired from an art promenade whose ends are the square and the triangle of the works of architecture by OMA, a garden symbolizing a Dutch Secession.  The final design of the Kunsthal was built between 1991 and 1992. While the standard drawings show a square plan, the often-published axonometric diagram reveals that a circulation spiral occupies the volume. In addition, this spiral is intercepted in one direction by a vehicle road and in the other by a pedestrian ramp that connects the park and the Maasboulevard. These two passages remain always open and as such give the building a porosity that occasionally reveals unexpected insights into the building’s workings. But, beyond the circulation that  ct.  
is achieved through the complex layering of surface configurations, the move- ment through the building becomes a structural device that organizes, transi- tions, and paces.  Inhabiting Structure  Developed in response to the challenges of the site conditions and the functional requirements of exhibition space, the continuous interior space of the Kunsthal was developed further in projects such as the Deux Bibliothéques at the university cam- pus of Jussieu in Paris (1992) and the Educatorium, designed in 1993 and built between 1995 and 1997. While these projects aimed at a spatial continuity, struc- tural challenges often stood in the way of freely developed architectural spaces as a circulation path. By closely collaborating with Cecil Balmond, structural engineer at Arup, OMA began to find new structural logics that worked hand-in-hand with the desired spatial conditions. For the Kunsthal, Balmond proposed Vierendee beams at the same height as the building, with vertical poles placed at different intervals to avoid the spatial effects of repetition, and horizontal poles hidden in the thickness of the slabs. This breakdown of the poles and beams generates col- ummns arranged in an enigmatic order, like the trees in the park, apparently random in the mathematical sense. This structural order also governed the logic of the sub- sequent phases of the project, even after the Vierendeel beams had been discarded for the Kunsthal. Rather than searching for the minimization of structure, the addi- tion of other responsibilities would lead to an inhabitable structural system that became integral to the building.  “In section,” Balmond writes, “it may look hopelessly out of balance. But the structure is designed as a double cantilever. On plan, on each side of the diagonal, an equal amount of load restores equilibrium to give overall balance. A grillage of strong upright beams supports the ramp slab, evening out the distortions and twists due to the asymmetry.”” Because the slope of the row of pilotis does not coincide with that of the roof, the placement of pilotis does not block the circulation but  1 t  moves with it. At the Educatorium, most of the circular and square pillars are built in reinforced concrete, while the cylindrical steel pillars have air conditioning ducts installed at the base. The pillars are arranged to adapt to the forms of the two audi- toria above, generating an irregular pattern that is surprisingly free of any visible structural order: “‘random’ columns,” in the words of Koolhaas.’ The pattern seems to be intentionally deformed to create a succession of densities, greatest in the southern zone and least in the northern zone, making the structure take part in and reinforce the spatial sequence, ranging from the opacity of the southern wall to the transparency of the northern glass wall. Certain pillars are eliminated thanks toa steel truss beam placed ona pillar of reinforced concrete. Parts of the structure of the lecture hall sector are also suspended from beams mounted on the roof, 
while certain pillars do not enter the ground floor thanks to the use of Vierendeel beams.  The buildings are supported by twentieth-century structural archetypes that are now transformed into sculptures: a Vierendeel beam in steel, stood on end; a square pilaster in exposed reinforced concrete; a massive piloti in reinforced con- crete, painted black; a cruciform steel pilaster, painted white; and, finally, a double- T pilaster, painted black. While these schemes diagrammatically resemble the pio- neering conceptual drawings by August Perret’s theater at the Champs-Elysées, which, in turn, became the basis for Le Corbusier’s Dom-ino diagram, they depart in their configuration from one another and differ in size. In OMA’s design for the Deux Bibliothéques at Jussieu the earlier skeletal schemes are seemingly placed on top of one another. OMA’s return to the canonical skeleton implies a reformulation of the Plan Libre as well as the common stratification of floors. Here the floors are transformed into a continuous ascension —a “trajectory,” Koolhaas called it — which is simply the latest segment of a sequence through Paris, where Koolhaas envisions “[the visitor becomes a Baudelairean fldneur, inspecting and being seduced by a world of books and information — by the urban scenario. Through their scale and variety, the effect of the inhabited planes becomes almost that of a street; this boulevard generates a system of supra-programmatic ‘urban’ elements in the inte- rior: plazas, parks, monumental staircases, cafés, shops.”*  Syncopated Rhythm Each floor was to be understood as a pliable surface, or, “social magic carpet” that continues into the next to become one of the segments of the “trajectory.” At times a slab is bent to produce lanceolate sections that cannot be utilized, with an almost baroque spatial effect. OMA had already built similar continuously bent surfaces in the Kunsthal, where the path of the visitor winds along an interior spiral in a syn- copated rhythm. The spiral even continues outdoors, along the elevated garden, and terminates at the flat, only partially accessible, roof. The brusquely truncated spiral guides the visitor through the building in a sequence of scenarios, following a narrative thread, “a story,” as Koolhaas put it, that “does not have to be told in words, but is simply shown by movement, so that the path has a beginning, and leads somewhere.” The stereometric prism, crossed by a complex continuous path, was continuously reworked by OMA, always in pursuit of different solutions for joining successive levels. The diagram of the spiral in the form of a long con- tinuous strip composed of different segments, similar to an “exquisite corpse,” would become a constant in the work of OMA that also called for new ways of representation.  Attempts to express the notion of continuity in the design of the Deux Bibliothé- ques resulted in a series of model photographs and drawings. The most striking of 
these focuses solely on the trajectory, unraveling the entire building as a continu- ous path without showing the rest of the structure. This, of course, was a true departure from Perret and Le Corbusier’s diagrams of the skeleton, for now the frame structured a continuous path that in turn generated the building and culti- vated its different speeds. The rigidity of the Dom-ino skeleton is here sublimated by a dynamic energy, similar to that unleashed by the lines in the drawings by Paul Klee and analyzed by Gilles Deleuze in his writings on Leibniz.” In fact, Koolhaas’ project witnesses the “mixture” of the “straight line” (the Dom-ino grid) and the “curve” (the bent slabs) as discussed by Deleuze with reference to the “baroque mathematics” of Leibniz and Klee.*  A film-like sequence of photographs showing hands that hold a sheet of paper that is then cut by a pair of scissors demonstrates the design process through which the parvis of the university pavilions of Edouard Albert is raised, repeatedly folded, and cut to give rise to the “trajectory” of the Deux Bibliothéques. The photographs of this technique, as in the works of Lygia Clark,’ illustrate much better than the model of the same project in wood and metal, that the regular Dom-ino skeleton was introduced only to support the many facets of the “surface pliable.” The com- mon series of slabs is, in the Educatorium, seemingly transformed into one single continuous slab that is bent repeatedly in order to extend from the ground to the roof.  In other preliminary solutions for the Educatorium, OMA even tested a contin- uous S-shaped folding, which had to be rejected due to the excessive height between the first segment of “pliable surface” and the upper level. This led to the solution of two interpenetrating U-shaped slabs, partially reflecting the idea of the slippage between the two units of the house at Holten. The interlocking of the two forms generated a subdivision of the building to fit the lecture halls on one side and the auditoria on the other. The inclined slab of the ramp and the audi- toria pretends, thanks to a curved connection, to become the flat roof of the audi- toria; then it deeply penetrates the other pair of slabs that are connected by a vertical element. Thus, one curved “pliable surface” forms the intermediate slab between the stacked lecture halls and stops before the vertical connector of the other “pliable surface,” visibly celebrating the interpenetrating U-shaped slabs. The effect of a continuous plane (that transforms from floor to wall to ceiling) is accentuated by the outer finish of the slab in visible reinforced concrete. In addition, structural elements were developed to conserve the continuous thickness of the pliable surface in spite of the different structural logics of the individual segments of the slab.  The room in the form of a Moebius strip of the Trés Grande Bibliothéque de France, the continuous twisted body of the Office City, and the continuous paths cut into the prismatic volumes of the Deux Bibliothéques Jussieu and the Kunsthal form the prelude to a new, more assertive symbolic and functional continuity that begins to appear in the work of OMA at this time. For the Urban Design Forum in Yokohama in 1992, for example, an undulated mantle extends to cover parking 
areas and market halls. Here, the urban layering is metaphorically defined as “tap- estry” that was to “avoid designing buildings, with their inevitable limitations and separations; continuous and formless, the project engulfs the site like program- matic lava.”?°  Program  In these projects functions are organized along the pliable surface, so as to avoid designated solid rooms and aim at a series of programmatic locations. Often, the subdivision of the continuous platforms into functional sections happens by means of geometric partitions. At the Kunsthal, OMA examined the possibilities of dis- playing different installations through the use of panels and mobile platforms. At the center, for example, exists a contraption known as the “Robot,” which is based on a similar mobile platform as in the Radio City Music Hall (described in Delirious New York) and capable of taking on different configurations, from a cen- tral auditorium to an auto show with cars arriving from the park by means of a ramp.  At the Educatorium the two auditoria form the most prominent enclosures but their borders simultaneously generate “in between” spaces for circulation. The space between the rectilinear wall in exposed reinforced concrete of the Megaron and the convex wall of the Theatron clad in shiny steel sheets contains a flight of steps covered in wood. At the Kunsthal these enclosures were already broken open, in the sense that space is confined by circulation spaces and curtains rather than by solid walls. The auditorium at the Kunsthal, for example, is a long and relatively narrow series of steps on which chairs can be arranged. However, the ramp alongside these steps is always accessible, enabling multiple parallel occu- pations. The auditorium doubles as route through the building and, as such, becomes part of the exhibition. In addition, parts of the auditorium can be sepa- rated by a heavy curtain that becomes a sculpture in front of the hall when not drawn.  In the 1970s Koolhaas had begun to see the work of Leonidov as being charged with an ideal value of revolt against the dominant ideologies in architecture and its use of program. Describing the paintings of OMA, Koolhaas noted: “They are really just exercises, except for the project of the Floating Swimming Pool, which was a response to all the dilemmas posed by New York and Leonidov, the purest demonstration of what I wanted to do with architecture: a project that was purely program and almost without form, that could coexist well with any other type of architecture.”'’ The potential of pure program and its ability to exist alongside a multiplicity of architectural forms reappears in the form of the auditorium at the Kunsthal; only this time the contamination of different spaces through program- matic overlaps is encouraged, forming a new kind of architecture through function- ally saturated pliable surfaces.  
GUGGENHEIM  MUSEUM BILBAO Frank O. Gehry  Richard M. Sommer  WAUeT =  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
A SECULAR CATHEDRAL OF ART  In the middle of the twentieth century, Frank Lloyd Wright famously designed a museum for Solomon R. Guggenheim, the main volume of which was comprised of a continuous, spiraling, nautilus-like space. First commissioned in 1943, Wright’s Guggenheim was not completed until 1959, following the architect’s death. The curving walls were seen by critics as inhospitable to traditional ways of displaying art, especially paintings, the primary medium of Guggenheim’s founding collection of non-objective art. Wright saw architecture as a medium equal to art, and as one that should play an active role in the museum experience. The Guggenheim proj- ect pitted the visionary architect against New York City and the art world of mid- century America.  In 1960, a year after the Guggenheim Museum opened, Claus Oldenburg mounted his improvisational art-performance, “The Street,” in a borrowed space  on New York’s Bowery. Among the messages scrawled on the walls of Oldenburg’s installation was: “Frank Lloyd Wright tried to eliminate painting and we are getting even by eliminating architecture.” Oldenburg’s friend, Jim Dine, added “The House” to Oldenburg’s “Street,” and a year later, Oldenburg rounded out this trip- tych of capitalist city ur-forms by mounting “The Store.” Oldenburg’s art defiantly reclaimed the artist’s rhetorical superiority in renewing the avant-garde project of collapsing art and life. When he stated in his manifesto from the same period, “Iam for an art that embroils itself with everyday crap and still comes out on top,” Old- enburg was voicing a sentiment that was to animate much of the important art of the 1960s.’ Oldenburg also set out a conceptual challenge that Frank Gehry later took up for architecture.’  Warehouses for Art and Spectacle  A half-century after the original Guggenheim project was initiated, Thomas Krens was hired to renew the Guggenheim Foundation’s mission. Krens set out to collect important works of minimalist and post-minimalist art from the 1960s and 1970s. He pursued a global program of building and blockbuster exhibitions that could capture the expanded size, physicality, and diversity of media associated with post- war art. In an age when museums, at least in North America, came to depend more and more on attendance, fees, and private philanthropy to survive, museum- visiting was undergoing a change from an expression of cultivated connoisseurship to experiences of popular entertainment, touristic pleasure, sociability, and the con- sumption of goods and services. Although it had never been particularly useful for mounting exhibitions, Krens understood the powerful potential of Wright's icon 
on Manhattan’s Museum Mile as a spectacle for engaging this new reality, and sought to reproduce that potential in a more contemporary manner elsewhere.  Earlier, Krens had developed the idea of repurposing a large, recently abandoned nearby factory, the Sprague Electric Plant in North Adams, Massachusetts, to become the largest contemporary art museum in the world. The museum would be funded with state redevelopment subsidies and private donations of cash and art. He continued to pursue this idea after he was hired by the Guggenheim Foun- dation. Although the Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art (Mass MOCA) was eventually achieved in Adams by others, it became the model for creating a satellite Guggenheim in Bilbao, Spain (there was already the Peggy Guggenheim Gallery in Venice, Italy). Like Mass MOCA, the Bilbao project was first conceived to reoccupy an old building in a dying industrial town, leverage public and private investment, and provide vast spaces for exhibitions impossible to imagine in the confined quarters of New York City. In June 1991, Frank Gehry, Coop Himmel- blau, and Arata Isozaki were invited to submit schemes and compete for the proj- ect. Gehry was selected.  By his own telling, Gehry, with Krens, convinced officials in Bilbao to move the project from a nineteenth-century building within an historic quarter to a prominent geographic knuckle in the town on the south bank of the Nervion River. The museum was intended to take advantage of its adjacencies to the Old Town Hall, the University of Deusto, and the city’s existing Museum of Fine Arts, and serve as the first stage in the transformation of a former riverfront industrial complex. Juan Ignacio Vidarte, the Director of the Guggenheim Bilbao, told Gehry they wanted a building that would transform the city by giving it a new visual identity, in the man- ner of the Sydney Opera House. Gehry, ever the demure architect, promised to try.’ The Nervion River is not Sydney Harbor, but the Puento de Salve Bridge, which is the main connection across the river from Bilbao’s nineteenth-century city center to the surrounding areas, passes over the eastern portion of the site, and Gehry’s design is composed to encompass the bridge, and function as a new gate to the city.  Gehry’s “Artsploitation” Architecture  In retrospect, Gehry might seem like an obvious choice for this 250,000 ft’, $100 m assignment. Nevertheless, there is a no small irony in Bilbao Guggenheim’s deserved status as a masterwork of recent architectural history. Mastery of archi- tecture as a craft, and applying such craft to the production of cultural icons, had not been Gehry’s forte or chosen path. His first and fundamental innovation was bringing artistry to mundane assignments, seeing the latent possibilities of a cheap- scape postwar America, and in so doing, drawing architecture out of ordinary pro- jects where it might be least expected.  Gehry’s engagement with the art and architecture scene in Los Angeles, and with the particular built geography of Southern California, beginning in the late 
1950s, is critical to understanding his later success at Bilbao and beyond. He first practiced with Victor Gruen Associates. Gruen, a Viennese émigré to Los Angeles, who had developed a large, successful practice based in large part on his concept of the shopping mall; particularly, the role that the new mall could play in the North American suburb, akin to what town centers had been in European countries.‘  The architectural sleights of hand needed to make effective retail architecture  with temporary materials and limited budgets, and the ersatz urbanism of the Gruen mall formulae are both foundational to the innovations associated with Gehry’s work beginning in the 1970s. Even earlier, in work done soon after Gehry established his own practice in 1962, one can find the mining of cheap materials for sensual and symbolic effects and the use of theatrical effects associated with shop- ping environments.” Projects for the Joseph Magnin Department Stores (1968-69), the O’Neil Hay Barn (1968), and other more explicitly experimental early projects such as the Danziger Studio and Residence (1964-65), reveal similar traits during this first phase of his career. They were influenced by the artists and gallery owners with whom Gehry forged relationships in the 1960s: Robert Irwin, Ed Ruscha, Ed Kienholz, Ed Moses, and later in the 1980s, Richard Serra and Claes Oldenburg. All of these artists were turning a new eye to the seeming detritus of modern industrial andscapes such as Los Angeles, repurposing common materials and reconsidering the broader landscape and environment as aesthetic phenomena. Gehry’s work has been taken very seriously by architects and critics since at least 1978, after the house he transformed for his family in Santa Monica was widely published. In the late 1970s Claes Oldenburg, with whom Gehry previously had only limited contact, and his collaborator, Coosje van Bruggen, whom Gehry had never met, paid a visit to the Santa Monica house. They quickly recognized Gehry’s craft in rendering aspects of Oldenburg’s own earlier performances in a more extensive, immersive, and sustained manner than any single work of art might do. They subsequently collaborated on various projects, including the Chiat/Day “binoculars” Building in Venice, California (1985-91).°  That Gehry had to build his creative breakthrough for himself, in the manner of a modern artist (that is, without a client) is significant. A self-conscious attempt to jettison the commercial basis of his earlier practice, undertaken at the risk of losing important clients like the mall developer Rouse Corporation, Gehry’s house was a provocation that seemingly flew in the face of architecture’s conservative tenden- cies and declared Gehry’s creative ambitions as an architect.  The gambit worked. His house was the subject of serious theoretical speculation by critics such as Frederick Jameson, who saw in it a palimpsest of old and new, an incomplete structure, and a representation of the postmodern condition in which time, space, and material allusion had become both indeterminate and open to inter- pretation and appropriation in ways only latent in modern space.’ The period that began with the creation and broad reception of Gehry’s Santa Monica House and ended with Guggenheim, Bilbao is arguably the most speculative and fertile of Gehry’s long career. He realized that in the expanded territory encompassed by  
contemporary practice (parking structures-shopping malls—housing—furniture), all of the commercial icons and industrial, utilitarian materials that his artist friends had sought to appropriate were already at his disposal. He simply but ingeniously retrieved “the everyday” as a conscious subject of and objective reference for architecture.  Gehry was awarded the Pritzker Prize in 1989 (before Bilbao was built), based on a 25-year record of experimental work, primarily located in his adopted home base in Los Angeles. Nevertheless, it was the project for the Guggenheim Museum at Bilbao, Spain, and others that Bilbao enabled, including the Disney Concert Hall, that provided a whole new scale of endeavor and the circumstances to build in an unprecedented way, such that these projects propelled Gehry to international renown at an advanced stage in his career.  Gehry’s Bilbao incorporates almost all the ideas that propelled Gehry’s prior work, but in many instances exceeds them, both in its degree of formal integration, and in its technical execution. Gehry has never been an explicit polemicist. Taking a page from the contemporary artist’s playbook, Gehry’s statements about his work are always positioned to place the work outside of judgment and “theory” by refus- ing any classification, leaving theoretical explanations to others. Nonetheless, since he achieved prominence in the 1970s, specific themes and theoretical tropes have been conveyed through his many statements and lectures accompanying his pro- jects, as well as the interviews with the critics and historians who have been his inter- locutors over the years. An understanding of Guggenheim Bilbao as an architectural performance, and how it reset the possibilities for the projects that followed is best achieved by seeing it through the lens of the specific tropes, procedures, and meth- ods that Gehry and his colleagues have already, to some extent, posited.  Exploding the Bubble  Gehry’s approach to designing Bilbao followed a well-established procedure in his office that had begun with his sketching and fiddling with bricolage-like models. A series of organizing models by others in the office followed:  In our office, we tend to make three models before we start building: a small one, which is purely contextual, a bigger one to work out the shapes of the building, and then a final interior model, which provides us with the opportunity to simultaneously develop shapes of the building and the interior. Hence, I do not simply jam the inter- iors in at the end of whatever is left over.*  Gehry’s deceptively simple way of describing his working method belies the complex way Bilbao’s massive program is broken into many discreet parts, arrayed on the site, and then recombined into an unlikely ensemble. Gehry’s method of organizing buildings brings together two established design techniques. The first, 
the bubble diagram, a technique associated with late modernism; and the second, village-making (my term), a technique associated with postmodernism, following planning movements such as Townscape.  The bubble diagram is a graphic means of diagramming discreet building func- tions into sets of differently weighted bubbles (in graphic terms, circles or ovals). The proximity of one bubble to another and lines drawn between the bubbles are used to create an index of needed relationships, and spatial adjacencies. Such a dia- gram is essentially a reification of the functionalist approach to architecture, devel- oped between the world wars, wherein scientifically derived use requirements are taken as the beginning and primary basis of any architectural composition. Gehry made the bubble diagram three-dimensional and loosened its functional corset: entry atrium here, public auditorium there, long gallery next to that, square gallery on top, retail, and restaurant in-between. In Gehry’s 3-D process, discreet program parts are put in containers, and given the attributes of single-volume buildings.”  Starting in the 1950s many architects, including Louis Kahn and Philip Johnson, experimented with breaking down buildings into discreet pavilions. Later, the retrenchment from the large scale utopian planning, and critique of the idea that buildings can perform as megastructures, is most associated with Jane Jacobs, Charles Moore, and Venturi and Scott-Brown in the United States, and Leon Krier and Aldo Rossi in Europe, all of whom aggressively advocated for the planning of cities in small, incremental building blocks. Frank Gehry fully absorbed this attitude in the 1980s. He retrospectively spoke about the disappointment he felt at the outset of his career with the prospect of planning cities, after an ill-fated attempt to study city planning at Harvard. He had concluded, early on, that ifhe was going to effect change at the scale of the city, he could only do so at the scale of a building, or even a room.’° Through a diverse set of projects beginning in the late 1970s, Gehry experi- mented with breaking down buildings into many parts, the most notable of which was the Loyola Law School, Los Angeles (1978), and the project for a Tract House (1982), a scheme later achieved in various built projects such as the Fishdance Res- taurant, Kobe, Japan (1985-87) and the Schnabel Residence (1986-89).  By the time of Bilbao, Gehry had distilled his bubble diagram programming, small-building-block massing approach to an extent where he could skillfully dis- aggregate a complex program into a set of different containers, and then warp and fragment the containers. Where necessary, one container could be collided or collapsed into the next. With this method, the interior volumes for galleries, offices, auditoria, services, and so on, could be maintained as somewhat neutral, geometrically simple spaces that faithfully attended to their functional require- ments. The real architectural action occurred at the points of intersection between the discreet volumes, especially in the cracks, seams, and splines between the volumes, where the various cladding systems on the exterior leaked through the joints of crudely assembled wooden boxes (or, more literally, the glue-gun joints in the rough architectural models Gehry’s office is known for). This work- ing of the margins happened at many scales, and across many intersections in the  
Bilbao project, including the main atrium, the largest manifestation of this inter- stitial architecture.  Gehry had originally conceived of the atrium as a rectilinear space that would accommodate art on its walls, but was persuaded by the client to develop a more highly sculpted space in the spirit of Wright’s Guggenheim in New York City.’' As built, the atrium rehearses the swirling, centrifugal space of Wright’s Guggenheim and collects all of the fragmented volumes of the Bilbao complex, assembling them like pendants on a necklace. Instead of being unified, and closing in on itself, as in New York, the Bilbao atrium acts a portal and continual space of reference for the museum’s visitors both through the circulation it affords, and by having the built fragments of the rest of the complex on display act as material teller, or index, to the vaults of art on display in the attached spaces.  The Baroque Turn  Robert Venturi and Denise Scott-Brown posed the ugly and ordinary “Decorated Shed” as a rhetorical, baroque foil to the overly synthetic “Duck” of modernism.’ In the early 1970s the Decorated Shed was a watershed concept with a serious impli- cations for architecture understood as a form of city building, but one that Venturi and Scott Brown nevertheless never managed to mine fully in their own work. Yet early on, in Complexity and Contradiction, Venturi, alluding to the baroque, described an architecture of “things in things, and things behind things.” With a Decorated Shed, the exterior surface and iconography of a building is disengaged from the shape and functional requirements of the interior. The exterior, as deco- ration, is freed to manage its material, scalar relationships and implicit responsibil- ities to the surrounding context, while the interior houses the explicit program. Works such as Borromini’s San Carlo alle Quattro Fontana, from the Seventeenth century forward, have been understood, in retrospect, to embody this idea.  The equation of sculptural exterior decoration and functional interior shed can be found in almost every project from Gehry’s mature period, including the Guggenheim, Bilbao. Instead of rendering the decoration flat and over-determining its symbolism, as was implied by Venturi and Scott Brown’s focus on signage, Gehry conjures a three-dimension decoration that alternately acts as camouflage, decoy, or sign. The strategy has the effect of diversifying the project’s overall image, and a local effect of unifying discreet volumes and sections of a building complex. The main function of the highly wrought metal, masonry, and glass clad- ding that constitutes the primarily exterior decoration at Bilbao is to dissimulate the perfunctory nature of the loosely stacked, plaster-lined, functional boxes that con- stitute a majority of the project’s spaces.  Understood as three-dimensional decorated sheds, Gehry’s sculpturally exuberant urban compositions constitute a new baroque. Many adjectives and modifiers have been attempted to describe the character of Gehry’s architecture, expressionistic being  
the most common. Yet baroque is the most correct and evolved historical concept — as opposed to style — to understand the Guggenheim Bilbao. At the advent of modernism, the art historian Heinrich Wolfflin defined the baroque as “movement imported into mass,” and a technique which repudiated the pure, geometric classicism of Renaissance art. In more recent scholarship and theoretical speculation, from Walter Benjamin’s equations of allegory and baroque theatre to Gilles Deleuze’s phi- losophy of the fold, the baroque is understood as prefiguring the temporally volatile, layered nature of modern consciousness (and therefore space). Gehry’s architecture is baroque not just because of its lyrical quality and its circular, Crustacean-like geome- tries; it is baroque because its carved, decorated surfaces unpeel from the basic volumes of the building and dynamically shape space, both inside and out, in ways that exceed the rectilinear logic of so much of the western, classical canon.  As the Decorated Shed analogy brings to light, the utility of separating the inte- rior of a building and shaping it to meet specific requirements, and composing the exterior envelope to meet its surroundings, is one of the technical developments of baroque urbanism from the eighteenth century. In its preindustrial manifesta- tion, the baroque was a means to sustain a continuous, or at least the appearance of a continuous architecture, across many discreet buildings and spaces. The city Gehry is engaged with, whether it be Los Angeles, or Bilbao, Spain, is no longer the genteel fabric of blocks, churches, and squares of the (projected) baroque city, but is rather a post-industrial landscape of infrastructural detritus — the concrete and steel spaghetti of rail and automobile geographies, and incon- gruous building stock.  Baroque was originally a term of derision for irregular and ill-formed artistic works and a precursor to the romantic elevation of the altern and the vulgar. This is the tradition in which Gehry must be understood. The plastic qualities and inde- terminate sculptural abstractions of buildings like Guggenheim Bilbao are baroque in effect (and picturesque in sensibility) because they create a verisimilitude of vis- ual continuity with their unevenly formed surroundings in ways few works of modern architecture ever could.  The Vulgate, Digitally Remastered  Gehry had built buildings with dynamic, baroque-like forms before Guggenheim Bilbao, but never at the scale, intensity, or level of precision found there. Before the Bilbao phase of his career, Gehry’s process had involved working between lyrical sketches and a series of models and drawings. In this highly iterative process sculp- tural gestures were transcribed into buildable shapes and rendered in raw assem- blies of common material. While this still occurred with the development of the Bilbao design, the building, or at least its exterior shape, looks remarkably similar to the early models produced for the competition. Achieving a more direct trans- lation from design-gesture to built form, and animating the material of a building at 
this level of exuberance, required bringing new technical innovations to bear from the emerging field of computation-based modeling.  The technology, or more precisely the digital tool Gehry and his team used to develop the design for Bilbao, was adapted from software originally developed for the aerospace industry, called by the acronym CATIA (Computer Aided Three- Dimensional Interactive Application). First developed in France by the company Dassault Systémes to aide the design and fabrication the Mirage fighter jet, CATIA was later applied to other complex, engineering-intensive products such as auto- mobiles and ships. Gehry’s office was the first to fully adapt CATIA to architecture. They first used CATIA to develop the Fish Sculpture, built as a folly-like structure for the Olympics in Barcelona, 1992. CATIA was transformative for Gehry because it allows complex shapes to be digitally modeled, modified, and tested, such that they can be dimensioned, styled, and subdivided into a series of parts that can then be fabricated by machines, directly from a digital file.  Over the past two decades there has been a revolution in the use of digital mod- eling in architecture. Early applications tended to repeat the rational, tectonic tradi-  tion of modernism because the technology was largely seen as simply a replacement for traditional drafting tools and construction documents. Gehry upturned this tra- dition by starting with a shape that did not have a type of construction or material cladding associated with it. His formal grammar allows an indeterminate logic of construction. CATIA was revolutionary because it allowed Gehry’s office to reverse engineer his abstract, idiosyncratic forms into buildable shapes. The key factor was that the CATIA process involved a laser gun that Gehry’s office could use to scan the handmade wood, plastic, and paper models that were cut, cast, and molded, as they had always been in Gehry’s shop. Model scans made by the laser gun allowed shapes tobe translated into a vector-based digital drawings. From these computer drawings, accurate 3-D models could be developed to visualize large assemblies, integrate incongruous aspects of a project, rule complex surfaces, test various material appli- cations, and ultimately fabricate the project at a level of craft not imaginable before. Gehry had started his career with the conviction that pursuing architecture in the refined, craft tradition of Europe had become impossible in the commercial context of North America. He would instead make something artful with cheap, off-the-shelf technology such a balloon frames, plywood, chain-link, and sliding glass doors. Even with the design of Bilbao, Gehry’s mode of ideation and way of drawing and mod- eling did not change. He does not personally use a computer. Nevertheless, as an animator can put an artist’s sketches in motion, 3-D software enabled Gehry to engage a new mode of architectural production and achieve a new mastery." With Bilbao Guggenheim we see the convergence of two realities that changed Gehry’s architecture. First, technology linking the visualization of dynamic form to its fabrication developed to a point where the fantastical forms of influential early archi- tectural avant-gardes such as the Russian constructivists could now be achieved. Sec- ond, Gehry’s status as an architect was elevated to an extent where he was enabled to make a museum into a cultural monument. Monuments require an air of permanence, 
amastery of material, and a steadfastness of purpose. Therein lies the irony alluded to above: Gehry’s architecture once owed it power to its temporary, incomplete, quo- tidian nature, and allusions. His penchant for creating fragmentary structures that were raw and unfinished gave his projects the accessible, empathic quality associated with forms that reveal the way they are made. Again, in this he was following the influence of 1960s art, not only the craftsman-cum-minimalists of the American West Coast such as Robert Irwin, but also Oldenburg.  Writ large, refined in temperament, and industrially crafted at the Guggenheim Bilbao, Gehry’s architecture, once dynamic and pleasurably vulgar, ran the risk of becoming ossified. Whether due to the high expectations that had come with suc- cess, or a desire to master the execution, as opposed to the conception of his pro- jects, the work produced by Gehry and his office in the years after Bilbao is often formulaic. Given how many prominent architects have refined and used the same methods and vocabulary over and over again, it may seem unfair to hold Gehry toa different standard of originality than others operating on the world stage. The dif- ference is that the language and rhetoric of Gehry’s architecture is one of sponta- neity, openness to circumstance, and freedom of expression, and these attributes do not tend to survive repetition particularly well.  Democratic Form  Forster: “You used the term ‘open ended’ in several ways, particularly in terms of expanded vistas... [referring to the work of David Hockney|”  Gehry: “... I think that the idea of open-ended structure in painting or music suggested openness to interpretation and a freer way of dealing with the world. It suggested a way of dealing with the environment that to me was somehow easier for democ-  racy to adapt to than traditional western classicism.  What is lost if, with Guggenheim Bilbao, Gehry’s work transforms from some- thing once liminal to something more reified and concrete in character?  In many cases, this would merely be a sign of progress and the expected mat- uration of a creative project over time. Yet, Gehry and the critics who have pro- pelled his work continue to use terms such as open-ended, incomplete, pluralist, provisional, nonconforming, and individualistic to describe the qualities he has aspired to and achieved in his architecture. Persisting in this rhetoric has utility. In their capacity to embody certain liberal democratic values closely associated with modern America, these terms have a political dimension that has been instru- mental to the reception and success of Gehry’s work.  Not since Frank Lloyd Wright has an architect so strongly positioned his work as democratic in spirit and American in character. Wright had claimed his work as a unique expression of the self-reliant Jeffersonian strain of American democracy. 
His architecture combined an arts and crafts influenced appeal to truth in construc- tion and material expression, with the counter-classical and temporal aesthetics of Japanese art. Wright argued for the disaggregation of the rent-based mercantile city into a horizontally oriented (prairie) urbanism. To replace the commercial city, Wright reimagined the agrarian grid, from which his asymmetrical, in-the-nature- of-materials architecture was to rise as a living ornament to American democracy.  Gehry’s earliest independent works, such as the Steeves House, Brentwood Cal- ifornia (1958-59), were decisively Wrightian, and he acknowledges the degree to which a Wright-influenced interest in Japanese architecture and Japanese aesthetics was prevalent at the University of Southern California during his formative archi- tectural studies there. Nevertheless, Wright’s influence was waning by the late 1950s. His puritanical, Victorian attitude toward the popular, commercial world did not ring true with a new generation contending with the reality of postwar America. This generation was as apt to confront or co-opt the everyday reality of the existing city as abandon it.  Thus, in comparison to Wright, Gehry’s appeal to democratic values is less idealistic, less drawn from nineteenth-century utopias of social reform, and less suspicious of the cosmopolitan artifice of modern life. While professing to be left-leaning on a personal level, Gehry’s professional identity is that of the artist whose self-expression can transcend ideology. Yet, his cultural references are the counterculture of the 1960s, at least those aspects of it that crossed over into the art world; especially the tune-in, turn-on and drop-out, and let-it-all-hang-out ethos. The picture of a VW Beetle propped up on Gehry’s corrugated cardboard Easy Edges chair designs from the early 1970s, his first design to achieve any wide- spread attention prior to his house, is perhaps the most indicative of his identifica- tion with the spirit of that time.  Marshall McLuhan argued that democratic media should be “cool rather than hot,” that is, unfinished and open-ended to induce transformation through interac- tion, rather than coercively manipulate by means of closed narratives meant for  whole consumption. McLuhan’s view on the role of art is also instructive for under- standing both Gehry’s formation and the conflation of art, architecture, and spec- tacle in his work. McLuhan took the position that the “machine turned life into an art form” and argued that that proliferation of technology created a whole new series of environments, wherein the arts function as “anti-environments” or “coun- ter environments.” This is a curious revision of the role of the avant-garde, one in which art functions as an early alarm or radar system for a technological society gone awry.’  To some extent the culture of “Happenings” and pop art (including Oldenburg’s) can be seen as presaging both the transformation of the art museum, as an institution, and the role of architects, such as Gehry, in creating the new spaces of art. Drawing on John Cage’s art of chance, this art privileged the sensuous and temporal situation of art, effecting a collapse of the traditional  . A : 16 ; boundaries between visual art, music, and theatre. ° An open-ended, bohemian 
Gesamtkunstwerk, the Happening offered a highly differentiated space of engagement in an urbanizing world that was becoming ever more bereft of ale- atory social encounters and sensual pleasure.’” Just as the right to public space and assembly for the many became enshrined in law, at least in the Western world, racial tensions, suburbanization, class stratifications, and purely market driven patterns of development eroded the cosmopolitan, democratic potential of the urban condition.  Gehry’s abandonment of the social project of planning forced him to conceive each building as if it were a self-contained Happening. He shares this approach with many of the leading architects of his generation, including Rem Koolhaas. For these architects, each building must summon its own provisional city (essentially a walled village) that by necessity need not connect with or depend on its neighbors and surroundings.  By the late 1980s, the urban theorist Mike Davis found Gehry’s approach to the city emblematic of a disturbing trend. Identifying a “fortress” mentality behind Gehry’s vaunted everyday realism, Davis saw in Gehry’s artfulness, a false consciousness:  [Gehry’s] strongest suit is his straightforward exploitation of rough urban environ- ments, and the explicit incorporation of their harshest edges and detritus as powerful representational elements. Affectionately described by colleagues as an “old socialist” or “street-fighter with a heart,” Gehry makes little pretense at architectural reform- ism or “design for democracy.” He boasts instead of trying “to make the best with the reality of things.” With sometimes chilling effect, his work clarifies the underlying relations of repression, surveillance, and exclusion that characterize the fragmented landscape of Los Angeles.’*  Where others have seen in Gehry’s chain-link fences, dumb-boxes, and blank walls a benign verisimilitude with the modern city, Davis’ neo-Marxist analysis sees Gehry’s slumming representations as a false bunker-like front and Trojan horse for the exertion of social privilege and the forces of gentrification within the dispos- sessed spaces of the contemporary city. Of course, Davis is not raising a new prob- lem for architecture; in the service of the church, state, and market, architecture has always represented the interests of the powerful. What has changed is that under the aegis of modern democracy, many expect architecture, through both its formal and informal performances, to play a more liberating role.  The Happening was an attempt to stage a space of authentic encounter, a momentary liberation from the established norms of everyday practice, where, in Kaprow’s words “ritual, magic and life” could supplant the western tradition of mimesis and aesthetic reflection. What we find in the subsequent half-century of partnerships between artists and cultural entities such as museums is the enshrin- ing of this idea in a quasi religious space. Architecture plays an essential role in the secular rituals associated with this new art, which often requires a scale of space, 
and technological and administrative support well beyond the picture galleries of the past. The extreme of this is Gehry’s design for the Experience Music Project in Seattle, built just after Bilbao in 2000, in which visitors get to “interact” by, for example, play-acting guitar licks with a virtual Jimi Hendrix, and where Gehry’s architecture plays a contributing role in the commodification of creative freedom, artistic play, and alternative culture as brand-identity clichés. What was once an insurgent practice of counter-culture art becomes a pragmatic way of coping with the difficulties of sustaining authentic modes of public life in societies where the promise of freedom of access and xenophobia play equal parts in making every- place a kind of ghetto.  Conclusion: The Secular Cathedral  How then do we evaluate the Guggenheim Bilbao’s success as a public work of architecture? Soon after it was completed in 1997 it had entirely transformed the prospects of what had been a little known and declining industrial city. The museum has continued to attract close to one million visitors per year, with typ- ically more than 50% of these visitors being from abroad. The economic impact of this influx to the city and region has been carefully calculated and often touted: Guggenheim Bilbao is a commercial colossus generating an estimated $150 m in revenue from museum related visits and businesses in a typical year.  Granted, to celebrate its 700-year anniversary, Bilbao made other infrastructural, public realm investments in which architecture also played a role, including a transpor- tation hub by Michael Wilford and Associates, new Metro stations designed by Foster and Associates, and an airport and footbridge by Santiago Calatrava. Nevertheless, peo- ple do not travel to Bilbao to see the Metro stations. The prospect that a singularly important work of public architecture, crafted by a visionary architect, could change the fortunes of a city is now enshrined in the phrase “Bilbao Effect.” Reminiscent of cathedral building during the medieval period, the desire to replicate the Bilbao effect has influenced many municipalities and institutions to commission singular works of architecture (often, but not always, art museums) by internationally renowned archi- tects in hopes of putting their own city or city district on a global map of cultural trade and tourism. The Guggenheim Foundation has made several attempts, so far unsuc- cessful, to spread the Bilbao effect, with major international design competitions, and projects designed by Gehry and Rem Koolhaas/OMA, among others.’  Is Gehry’s achievement at Bilbao simply a matter of good timing, of architecture giving institutional form to ideas propelled by vanguard art? Much has been made about the closeness of Gehry’s architecture to the themes, techniques, and motiva- tions of postwar art. That Thomas Krens sought to build a museum for the Guggenheim Foundation in Bilbao whose spirit, and permanent collections draw on the avant-garde art of the 1960s and 1970s, and found an architect who has explored similar territory was fortuitous. After the 1960s, a conceptual repositioning  
of the sites and media through which art could be explored only further expanded the avenues and areas of art’s influence, which could include, but was not limited to, “everyday” experience. Architecture, on the other hand, by virtue of the expectation that it should provide stable and accommodating shelter has always been bound up, to some degree, in the everyday. The extents and limits of architecture’s environ- mental effects and zones of influence cannot be conceptually or physically cireum- scribed in the way the “art” can. This is why equating architecture with the everyday does not provoke the shock achieved when art partakes in the same subversion: for architecture there is always the risk ofa tautological bind, and with this a loss ofimag- ination and a capitulation to the status quo. To both avoid this risk and overcome its weakness as a profession, serious architecture has typically eschewed the ordinary, and has instead striven to establish its autonomy as both an art form and a mode of building. As an aesthetic and moral posture, high modernism had much to offer this identity crisis. In particular, modernism’s assumptions of originality, internal consist- ency and austerity of form and its concomitant rejection of the decorative, the con- tingent, the discursive, and the hybrid helped create the illusion of a cultural power that in fact continues to elude the architectural profession.  Gehry’s singularity as an architect is not only in his formidable skill in composing the very material of architecture, but also in his ability to opportunistically adopt, when necessary, the political identity, modes of creative production, and ideolog- ical independence of the artist, to the practice of architecture. If, with Gehry’s house in Santa Monica we had a case where life masqueraded as art, with an insti- tutional project such as Guggenheim Bilbao we may have returned to a more tra- ditional arrangement where art imitates, or more optimistically, animates life. In either case, the artist (as opposed to the architect) has the freedom to seduce by eroticizing the everyday or mainstreaming the exotic — effecting through poetic means a change in an audience’s conception of reality.  In venues provided by various institutions artists are involved in creating a spec- ulative space, capable of capturing the multiple interests of prospective audiences. The speculative space of art, wherever it sits on the spectrum between the com- mercial and the sacred, is construed by desires and concepts, and may resemble other “ordinary” spaces, but is decidedly not perceived through an ordinary lens. This ambiguity of being rooted in the world, both geographically and culturally, but at the same time establishing a quasi-art-religious space apart, is precisely what gives Guggenheim Bilbao the power to inspire an unprecedented pilgrimage of tourists seeking an authentic experience.  The seeking of a space apart is also what links Gehry and the Guggenheim Bilbao to Wright and the first Guggenheim in Manhattan. Architects and the work they produce can never be fully extricated from their time, place and the cultural forces that shape them. Yet, architectural projects take time to gestate and build. Once built, they linger in time. A utopian reformer rooted in the nine- teenth century, Wright wished to replace the existing city with an organic, prairie architecture. A pragmatic liberal contending with the eclipse of progressive pol- 
architecture’s ability to create value in cities built on speculation. Thus, Wright’s Guggenheim ignores the existing city and the Gehry’s props it up. Both created an urban specter, and in that void conjured a compelling architectural vision of engagement.  Notes  lL. 12.  13. 14. 15.  Image credit: Xauxa (Hakan Svensson) (Own work) [CC-BY-SA-3.0 (http:/ /creative- commons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)|, via Wikimedia Commons.  . Claes Oldenburg, “I Am for an Art...,” in American Artists on Art, from 1940 to 1980, ed.  Ellen H. Johnson (New York: Harper & Row, 1982), 98.  . Aspects of this chapter expand upon and paraphrase my discussion of Frank Gehry’s  Tract House Project, 1982, and Robert Venturi’s Pearson House Project, 1957, in Richard M. Sommer, “Four Stops Along and Architecture of Post War America,” in Perspecta 32, Resurfacing Modernism, ed. Ann Marie Brennan, Nahum Goodenow, and Brendan D. Moran (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press 2001), 76-89.  . Barbara Isenberg, “The Bilbao Effect,” in Conversations with Frank Gehry (New York,  Knopf, 2009), 132-46.  . See Jeffery Hardwick, Mall Maker: Victor Gruen, Architect of an American Dream (Phila-  delphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2004).  . For an expansive catalogue and discussion of Gehry’s early work, see Bickford Arnell,  Frank Gehry Buildings & Projects (New York: Rizzoli, 1988).  . Cristina Bechtler, ed., with Kunsthaus Bregenz, “Conversation between Frank O.  Gehry and Kurt W. Forster with Cristina Bechtler,” in Art and Architecture in Discussion: Frank O. Gehry/Kurt W. Forster (Ostfildern-Ruit: Cantz, 1999), 67-70.  . Fredric Jameson, “Architecture: Spatial Equivalents in the World System,” in Postmod-  ernism, or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism (Durham: Duke University Press [1999] 2001), 107-30.  . Frank Gehry, “Since I’m so Democratic, | Accept Conformists: A Lecture on Recent  Work,” in Frank O. Gehry: Individual Imagination and Cultural Conservatism, ed. Charles Jencks (London: Academy Editions Ltd, 1995), 49-50.  . Ibid., 49-50. 10.  See interview: “Frank Gehry and Peter Arnell: A conversation (No I’m an Architect)” in Frank Gehry: Building and Projects, ed. Frank O. Gehry; Peter Arnell, Ted Bickford, and Germano Celant (New York: Rizzoli, 1985), 14.  Gehry, Individual Imagination, 49.  See Robert Venturi, Steven Izenour, and Denise Scott Brown, “Ugly and Ordinary Architecture, or the Decorated Shed” in Learning from Las Vegas: The Forgotten Symbol- ism of Architectural Form (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1977).  Gehry, Individual Imagination, 50.  Bechtler, “Conversation,” 18-19.  For aspects of Gehry’s association with Louis Kahn, Marshall McLuhan, and Robert Venturi/Denise Scott Brown, | am indebted to Luciano Rubino, ed., Frank O. Gehry Special, trans. Susanna Marsch and Eddy Levy (Roma: Edizioni Kappa, 1984), 29-35, 
SENDAI MEDIATHEQUE  Toyo Ito Ron Witte  Toyo Ito, Sendai Mediatheque, 2001.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
THE FIFTH PLAN  In recent architecture a new type of plan has been afoot. It has been stealing into architecture for a decade or two, perhaps longer, alternately announcing and obscuring its arrival via the paroxysms that come with a long gestation. Does this plan signal a significant architectural turn? It is hard to say, for as yet it is more ofa twinkle in its parents’ eye than an established progeny, insinuating its potential without yet assuring us of its longevity, or even its vivacity. Nonetheless, this plan has made it far enough along an accelerating arc to make it worth looking at its origins, its manifestations, and (most importantly) its promises.  Arriving at the tail end of a century’s evolution, this new plan descends from four antecedents: the premodern plan (through the nineteenth century: line-‘em-up- just-so); the modern plan (early twentieth century: give-me-liberty-or-give-me-death); the postmodern plan (1960s/1970s/1980s: we-used-to-do-it like-this-plus-je-ne-sais- quoi); and the sequel-modern plan (from the 1980s through the turn of the twenty-first century: modernity-non-chalant). On the heels of these four plan iterations, this new plan arrives as a fifth generation — a fifth plan.  While each of the four preceding plan types had tendencies toward self- definition — the architects of each self-consciously, and usually zealously, distin- guished “their” particular plan predilections from any antecedents — the fifth plan appears without Oedipal angst. It uses, discards, adapts, and mixes plan attributes from the entire genome of the preceding century. It unflinchingly cross-fertilizes “free,” “open,” “dense,” “axial,” “figured,” “serial,” “serendipitous,” “functional,” or other techniques, employing the seemingly hardened ideologies of its ancestors in surprisingly malleable ways. Free-plan spanning systems are filled with high- density programs. Exuberant form runs alongside ultra-rational technological orga- nizations. Volumes are surfaces and surfaces are volumes. The fifth plan is not only comfortable in its skin, it revels in its mongrel lineage. Without looking like a mutt (at least on its better days), the fifth plan is indebted to the full and ostensibly dis- parate spectrum of its pedigree.  Where can this new plan be found? Differing strains of it appear in a range of contemporary practices including those of Michael Maltzan (Pittman Dowell House, Malibu Beach House), FANStudio (Fat Flat), Johnston Marklee (View House), Mansilla & Tufién (MUSAC), Sou Fujimoto (Musashino Library, Chil- dren’s Psychiatric Center), Natkevicius & Partners (Family House), Herzog & de Meuron (Cottbus Library), SANAA (IT Student Center, Toledo Glass Museum), OMA (Casa de Musica, Zeebrugge Ferry Terminal, National Art Museum of China), and, of course, Toyo Ito (Sendai Mediatheque, U House).  No single practice lays claim (or, for that matter, is trying to lay claim) to this new plan type, and none of them can be said to deploy it consistently. Still, when  
scanning these projects an increasingly forceful exhibition of evolved plan thinking comes into focus. The fifth plan’s presence might be found in a single building, in a part of a building, across a string of projects produced by a particular practice, or in a cross section of work by many architects. It may well be that this plan’s lack of singular origin or ownership is what allows it to appear in so many different archi- tectural contexts: across scales of work, types of programs, geographies, practices, economies, and social worlds.  What Is The Fifth Plan?  The fifth plan is compound, a fact that tints all other definitions that might be ascribed to it. As will be elaborated below, the fifth plan’s propensity to combine rather than distill is especially true regarding its tethering of program to form. Without a doubt, the fifth plan’s breadth-mandate is at least in part an echo of today’s de rigueur rejection of any form of cultural singularity. But the fifth plan moves well beyond representing multiplicity. Already half a century ago, with the introduction of collage, juxtaposition, and complexity, Venturi and others let us know that modernism’s singular definitions of architecture had run their course, opening the floodgates of architectural diversification. The fifth plan is only that much more multiple. And yet its multiplicity is of a resolutely synthetic sort. It is often impossible to discern where free-plan ends and figure begins in these new plans, or what is primary and what is secondary, or even where they sit in relation to commodity, firmness, and delight.  The fifth plan’s contribution to contemporary architecture lies not in its valida- tion of ever more heterogeneity but rather in the unified condensate that emerges when these several spatial states are brought together. In an almost alchemical sleight of hand, the fifth plan’s mash-up of origins produces a coherent organization of parts that sidesteps any indexing of difference without becoming singular.  With this alchemy of paradigms humming in the background, the fifth plan’s parts and their interactions can be collected under a set of plan traits: viscosity, cropping, and susceptibility. While these traits are broad and regularly overlap one another, they are nonetheless a helpful set of lenses through which to look at the contemporary plan.  In what follows, each of these fifth plan traits will be discussed across two threads. The first will lay out kinships: what are the primary inheritances of the fifth plan? The second will discuss new manifestations: where are particular tech- niques present in the contemporary plan and what are the implications of these techniques? This structure is meant to suggest that while the fifth plan is new, its newness does not depend on distinguishing itself from what came before. The fifth plan’s newness arises from the last century’s many sustenances now coa-  lescing into plan-based configurations that are, in toto, unfamiliar. 
The examples below include, for the most part, versions of all of the traits above (small scale work — houses — present these characteristics in a different way simply because of their size). These traits are not yet capable of defining a fifth plan hand- book, though they might be seen as a manual in the making. Together, they are meant to identify organizational and formal strains circulating in plans today, to highlight them at times and, more ambitiously, to advance their combined possi- bilities for those interested in the contemporary plan. These labels are likely to evolve and, in fact, should evolve ... their purpose here is more like that of iodine in a CAT scan than pillar in a paradigm.  Viscosity  Over the last hundred years, architecture has tended toward one or the other extreme: plan openness or plan definition. In Houston, for example, this polariza- tion plays out in two museum buildings across the street from one another: Mies van der Rohe’s posthumously completed Brown Pavilion (1974) and Rafael Mon- eo’s Beck Building (2000), both built for the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston (MEFAH). In the former, walls, structure, circulation, and optical control all cede to boundless openness and the immanent optimism attending its universalist ambi- tions. In the latter, a matrix of rooms divides space into discreet bites of discernible museum inventory, invoking the choreographed order of John Soane’s Bank of England (1788-1827). Curiously, the MFAH buildings are both late versions of their respective sensibilities. Mies’ building mirrors work that he had been doing since at least the mid-1950s and Moneo’s emanates from discourses running through architecture as early as the 1960s. The late appearance of exclusively open or defined approaches in these projects exposes the tenaciousness of the debate. Among architects, this debate has a tendency to be framed in unusually profound (even moral} terms, obliging us to align our sympathies and leaving us with little middle ground. There are those who side with flexibility, the virtues of technolo- gies, and the seeming socio-political liberties of the free plan. And there are those who align with functional discretion, the rhetorical value of rooms, and the stabi- lizing role that knowing “this is a space in which X will happen” can bring to a social organization. The gap between openness and definition disappears in the fifth plan. That which had been open is less open, and that which had been defined is less definitive, resulting in the delineations of openness and definition being pushed toward one another.  One of the more extraordinary examples of this squeezing together of open and defined occurs in Toyo Ito’s Sendai Mediatheque (2001), most obviously in the sev- enth floor plan. There is no “free” space and there is no “determined” space in this plan. The large figure of this plan’s central space — an undulating wall circumscrib- ing a set of interior rooms and creating a ring of space at the plan’s edges — is large and idiosyncratic enough to dissolve as it encounters the varied columns of the 
plan. The columns are expanded across their diameters, enlarging their technical / structural presence and, in so doing, biasing the space around them in ways that a simple point column never could. The interaction of the large figure with the col- ummns produces local relationships — program pockets that hover among the collu- sions of the large figure, columns, furniture, and building perimeter.  At Sendai, there is only something akin to viscous space, thick with the interac- tions of walls, structure, program, and circulation. Moving across the plan, these viscosities are constantly changing; the central office area opens up and closes down, but never in an entirely consummated way. The perimeter “doughnut” of program narrows, widens, and re-narrows again, its dimensional heavings shap- ing program into greater and lesser definitions. The line that expands and constricts this doughnut is at times autonomous — defining the large figure — and at other times deferential, entering a tighter orbit with the columns. This is a line, a single line, with multiple loyalties: to its exterior and its interior, to its overall and local organizational roles, and to its delineation of difference and connectedness. Many of the spaces in this plan (especially those in the corners) are capable of changing their own definition-states, pulsating between semi-open and semi-closed. The Domino plan is alive and well in the Mediatheque, but it is now captured in a gelat- inous spatial system that slows down the dynamics of its larger organizational umbrella and increases the momentum of the subsets of space that live under that umbrella.  A different version of the fifth plan’s viscosity occurs in Kazuyo Sejima’s entry for the IIT Student Center competition. In this non-winning scheme, Sejima con- fronted Miesian universal space by replicating that very space with her own big box and then relentlessly over-packing that box with program. Imagine, for a moment, Mies’ Neue Nationalgalerie filled to the brim with a mini-mall, albeit a mini-mall saturated with the material /technological /aesthetic affections that an architect like Sejima would of course lavish upon Mies. The project’s aformality no doubt halted it at the starting gate vis-A-vis the competition (the scheme was presented in a set of ink line drawings so delicate that it read as little more than a vaporous cloud of hair-like marks hovering over paper). The Sejima IIT proposal is, nonetheless, a radical repackaging of Mies’ universalism and Koolhaas’ congestion in a single architectural prism, producing fifth plan viscosity through extreme functional compactness.  New viscosities have risen out of our pursuit of closer program-form relation- ships. With so much airtime given over to arguing the merits of program or form in recent years, the mere fact of these two interests coinciding marks an evolution in plan thinking. Beyond this realignment, however, the program-form merger has given us a means of being unabashedly geometric and willfully programmatic, which is to say these projects suggest a shift away from our recent (over)indul- gences of indeterminacy and flexibility as architectural paradigms. The merger of form and program leads directly to the thickening of relationships and, what is more, directly to an explicit declaration of organizational subjectivity. New 
viscosities are filled with programmatic densities and intensifications, common turf over recent decades. But the fifth plan inscribes in this mix the force of deliberate- ness, an open assertion concerning a plan’s artifice (its partiality) and a chance to say “this isn’t all worlds; this is a world that I think is better.”  Cropping  Over the last century, countless black lines have been laid down on countless sheets of white paper with the sole purpose of laying claim to what an architectural perim- eter should do. These lines at times focus on the relationship between interior and exterior. At other times they articulate the form of a building or its functional ethos. Regardless of what we intend when we draw them, these lines have been enmeshed in our conception of the plan with one of two inevitable outcomes: a perimeter that is definite (high contrast) or a perimeter that is indefinite dow contrast).  As endgames, high and low contrast perimeters depend on how one chooses to inscribe form and program relative to one another. This choice represents a fork in the road for architects: either “architecture = stabilizing vis-a-vis life” or “architec- ture = vulnerable vis-a-vis life.” This choice is, to say the least, loaded. It is the undercurrent running beneath many of our ideological directives and, as such, is how we edit (bias) architecture’s otherwise too-expansive cultural resonances in directions that we “believe in.” One might see form and program as concentric (i.e. Frank Gehry’s shrink-wrapped EMR Communication and Technology Center) or one might see them as cross-grained (i.e. Mies van der Rohe’s pin-wheeling Brick Country House). Concentric sensibilities produce high contrast perimeters and cross-grained sensibilities produce low contrast perimeters. Curiously, making this decision has little to do with deciding to “be formalist” or “be functionalist” — Gehry’s UTS Business School is cross-grained at times and Mies’ latter career work (Farnsworth House, Crown Hall, etc.) is decidedly concentric. What this decision does do is inscribe a reciprocal relationship between form and program in the way that we access architecture. A concentric form/ program sensibility leads us to “see” form and “intuit” program while a cross-grained form/program sensibility directs us to “see” program and “intuit” form.  Our penchant for high or low contrast decisiveness along architecture’s outer boundaries has disappeared. This change is not about indecisiveness. Neither is it about one or the other boundary types having won the war. In fact, any number of recent projects can be said to depend on a calculated cohabitation of these traits. These projects include Herzog & de Meuron’s Cottbus Library, Michael Maltzan’s unbuilt Malibu Beach House, Gintautas Natkevicius’ Family House in Birstonas, SANAA’s Kanazawa Museum, and Toyo Ito’s Sendai Mediatheque as well as his Tama Art University Library, among others.  
Each of these projects crops plan relations into new sub-states, using the overlay of a knife-like line to compress some proximities while atomizing others. Cropping amplifies unevenness in these plans, which is to say cropping confronts head-on any pretense of modern universality. This is particularly curious in Ito’s Mediatheque as the building has an obvious debt to Corbusier’s Dom-ino system with its ground- ing in the evenness of a colummn-field. As with the Dom-ino, and regardless of their exaggerated size, the Mediatheque’s columns instill consistency across the build- ing’s seven floors; their slight variations are alone unable to produce significant affectations of each plate’s organization. But the lines that Ito introduces on each level — the walls and scrims that slice across and lasso subsets of column-spotted space — convert each floor into its own biased world. The ground floor’s “open square” is formed with the sharpest of lines...one that is little more than a virtual indicator of this space’s status as a programmatic no-man’s land. On the second floor, an udder-shaped line — part solid wall, part low counter — extracts the north-west corner of the building into its own state, bundling staff areas, service rooms, a “talking room,” and the children’s reading area into an autonomous pro- gram block. On the third floor, a lone linear stroke clips the library offices out of the overall plate. On the seventh floor described above, a single meandering line completes a solitary figure in the plate’s interior, bounding a dense programmatic mass that hovers in the ether of the surrounding perimeter. On each floor, a seem- ingly flippant line is etched among the columns so as to profoundly prejudice the free-plan starting point of these plates.  Herzog & de Meuron’s Cottbus Library also depends on cropping, though here the technique plays out primarily on the building’s perimeter in contrast to the Mediatheque’s use of cropping as an exclusively interior technique. Cottbus holds a serialized interior organization — a modernist organization based on repetition, alignment with the structural grid, a field matrix — that is bluntly sheared by the undulations of the building envelope. While different in other regards, the Kana- zawa Museum by SANAA uses a similar perimeter-focused technique, its field of cells and corridors clipped by its cylindrical face. The most visible transformation in the edges of these plans is that of the change from an offset or indexed interior to a shorn interior-envelope relationship.  If graphic shearing is the obvious delight of these plans (and is also what makes them subject to too-facile critiques falling under the heading of “gratuitous geom- etry damnation”), their organizational rewards are more nuanced. The incongru- ous relationship of a perimeter to its interior catalyzes a minor wilderness at their outer edges. “Minor” here is meant to differentiate these edges from the wholesale (whole plan) wilderness of projects such as those of the Biirolandschaft species ... minor means local, not total. Here, in fact, cropping depends on a systematic organ- ization of interior space with enough momentum to let its truncation be legible. Put another way, fifth plan cropping exploits the systematic to momentarily sus- pend that same system’s certainties. On a particularly hubris-filled day, one could  
make the case that cropping, with its interior efficiencies meeting minor wilder- nesses, is a means by which architects can, at long last, stop the absurd swingings of the rational/liberatory pendulum, swingings that have produced some of archi- tecture’s most caricaturable Gf not always comic) moments over the last one hundred years.  Architecture’s perimeter has long been a flashpoint for invention and critique — think of the discourses surrounding architecture’s qualifiers: object/anti-object, public/private, form/function, inside/ outside. The fifth plan introduces cropping as a way of perching these pairings on the same, single, thin line, invoking both, only to then flicker between them at breakneck speed. Is Kanazawa an object? Of course it is — its circle is more perfect than anything Ledoux could have imagined. Is Kanazawa an anti-object? Absolutely — its inner workings are ruthlessly amputated by the blade of its outer edge. Cropping’s shotgun wedding of form and program does nothing to soothe their irreconcil- able differences; on the contrary, it bluntly exploits their agitating exchanges to redefine architecture’s edge, opening up a new field of relations among architec- ture’s parts: its exterior receptions, its internal organizations, and its transitions between the two.  Susceptibility  t would be easy to write a history of architecture organized around plan modu- ation types, with chapter headings including “axis,” “grid,” “symmetry,” “repetition,” “field,” “figure,” “system,” “proportion,” seriality,” “centralization,” “rhythm,” and so on. Perhaps a few recent experiments might make it in, at least into the appendix: “collage,” “index,” “lattice”; there are no doubt others. Until per- haps 50 years ago these were the spatial mechanisms for giving architecture “order,” a way of organizing architecture’s parts and, more broadly, of civilizing  or at least explaining an unruly world. Order was our means of articulating and  projecting our ambitions: an axis will create importance; a field will be democratic; a grid will contain the universe. Across the history of architecture, modulation (a technique) and order (an idea) have had a remarkably intimate, quasi-synonymous relationship, like twins with their own indecipherable language. And yet, the dis- appearance of order from our lexicon already a half century ago has hardly dimin- ished our use of modulation. How can this be? How can architecture’s “Dead Ringers” — modulation and order — suddenly find themselves cut apart?  Once a twin, always a twin. Modulation and order have not now, and have not ever, been cut apart. Transformations in architecture’s order-modulation relation- ship can be placed into the five categories sketched out at the beginning of this chapter: pre-modern: modulation supports order (Garnier’s Paris Opera); modern: modulation establishes new order (Mies’ New National Gallery); postmodern: modulation has a fistfight with order (Venturi’s Hanna Venturi House); sequel- 
modern: modulation and order take a time-out (OMA’s Netherlands Architecture Institute); fifth plan: modulation makes order susceptible.  In short, modulation and order have never been far apart but they have regularly changed their posture relative to each other. Their perceived estrangement appears with postmodernism, when modulation and order take up adversarial positions, producing a surfeit of anti-hegemony, anti-total, anti-object, anti-you-name-it archi- tectures. In fact, postmodernism’s adversarial repositioning of modulation and order allowed us to conduct countless fruitful architectural experiments leading to a plethora of alternative-orders in architecture, all the while requiring us to mutter the second part of that hyphenated phrase — “orders” — under our breath to avoid persecution.  The fifth plan establishes another new posture in the order-modulation sequence of relationships: a modulated order whose aim is susceptibility, not firmness. This posture amounts to, on the one hand, a resurrection of order as a positive attribute and, on the other, a deployment of that order in a way that runs entirely contrary to its legacy as a civilizing/ stabilizing agent. In the fifth plan, order is always there but always volatile, unpredictable, and sometimes woolly. It is also legible, coherent, and even reasonable.  The most important attribute of this new susceptibility is the ability of contem- porary modulating systems to generate relationships that exceed their systemic terms (in contrast to modern or classical systems that work diligently to reinforce their systemic underpinnings). The Mediatheque’s 13 columns are arrayed across a four-by-three near-grid, with a single exceptional column intruding on its southern- most near-grid column line. This grid’s wobbliness — it teeters it in the X, Y, and Z directions — produces extreme polarizations in what we have come to expect from modulation, with comparably extreme implications for what we intend as order. Ona spatial level, the inebriations of these columns heighten their independ- ence from one another, making each of them susceptible to absorption into local circumstances. They are variously enmeshed in rooms (floors two, three, and seven), border markers (floors one, three, five, and six), and free agents (floors two, three, and four). As conduits of gravity, their intoxications are kept in check by the physics of plate tectonics — the span of Matsuro Sasaki’s extraordinary webbed floor system was constrained by a 40 cm depth requirement. Programmat- ically, in other words, the soft modulation of these columns allows their systemic role to entirely dissolve while technically these same modulations unload an almost heroic structural obligation onto the spanning and design requirements of the webbed floor system. The former is a system that produces its own disappearance and the latter is a system that incites an extreme rationality elsewhere. And, almost miystically, the two systems are one and the same, a single set of wobbly columns.  Mansilla & Tufién’s MUSAC building announces an alternate version of a modulating system that consumes itself. MUSAC is astonishingly consistent in its unit articulations, it is a thick-line plan, not field-of-dots plan, made up of either four-sided or six-sided trapezoids, depending on how one chooses to read them.  
The lucidity of the overall plan comes from the confidence with which these trapezoids are arrayed. They are relentless and they are modern. Until: 1) one looks at their effect on the overall perimeter, with its indiscernible profile; 2) each unit is examined for consistency only to find that there is none; and 3) unit-to-unit (and, in turn, room-to-room) aggregations are highlighted to expose a series of latent pro- grammatic and circulation hierarchies superseding all of the democratizing rhetoric that we expect to run alongside such unitary organizations (compare this to, for example, the plan of Herman Hertzberger’s Office Beheer building, wherein the gaps and the connector portals between cells assure that the primary reading of these cells will always be individual, not aggregate). “Until” is a critique, a way of Mansilla & Tufién declaring that theirs is not, in fact, a modern building.  Beyond critique, the conclusion of “until” in the MUSAC plan lies in its suspen- sion, not negation, of modulation. In the abstract terms of geometry, every cell in this plan remains a cell. In the application of walls, doors, and materials to those geometries no two cells are alike. Walls stand alone, pair up into chevrons, or make long strings of ziggy-zaggies; they construct perimeters in space or serve as islands around which one moves; they change from solid to open; they aggregate into lar- ger areas or subdivide into smaller rooms. At the same time, no matter what, all of this difference is held in place by an uncompromising geometric system. The archi- tects’ affections appear to run in opposing directions at MUSAC: heterogeneity and the disciplining of space. The turning point in this plan and others of its ilk is that modulation and heterogeneity are not opposed, but in fact have a complementary and catalytic relationship to one another. The success of the MUSAC plan is meas- ured by the ease with which one can place a finger anywhere on its extents and ask “field or cell?,” “unit or unique?,” “edge or center?,” and not be able to answer.  The fifth plan has removed the pejorative tone that has hung over order for 50 years. It has done this not as a sentimental lamenting of order’s absence but by rethinking order’s reason for being. Order, what we (as classicists or modernists) used to depend on to get us through the day, and what we (during our after- modern self-flagellations) then propped up as the straw man, has of late become a means of designating where and how architecture can and cannot enforce its rule-sets. Order has entered a new phase as the carrier of susceptibility, the bearer of architecture’s openness and vulnerability.  Some Last Fifth Plan Thoughts  We have been staring at architecture through our Rhino viewports for some time now, beguiled by the ease with which we can whirl and twirl our way through and among objects. After years of volumetric and surface-invested investigations, a number of architects have turned their attention to the incisive conceptual role that plans play in architecture’s evolution. This is not a move “away from the digital,” or “toward a lost tradition.” It is the opening up of a new line of inquiry: important 
transformations in our thinking about architecture are taking place and many of those changes will find their greatest potential among the marks that make up plans. Viscosities, croppings, and susceptibilities may or may not be the headers under which the fifth plan will continue to evolve. Nonetheless, regardless of how these labels might be applied, their net effect is to illuminate a series of recent speculations leading to new conceptualizations of architecture.  Nothing is more evident in the fifth plan than the near total collapse of form and program into one another. These new architectures suggest that architecture has moved beyond arguments based on exclusive extractions from the Vitruvian triad: “It’s about commodity!” “It’s about firmness!” “It’s about delight!” Form and pro- gram are only slightly offset Venn-diagram zones in these experiments, with tech- nology acting as a silent partner. Their nearly concentric state makes it essentially impossible to discern formal acts/results and programmatic acts/results from one another. And it gives the fifth plan a synthetic timbre long absent, even ideologi- cally opposed, for a very long time. One might imagine that, some time from now, the fifth plan may enable architecture to appear whole again, as a reverberating semblance of singularity.  Notes  * Reproduced with permission from Toyo Ito. 
YOKOHAMA FERRY TERMINAL  FOA  Helene Furjan  Foreign Office Architects, Yokohama Ferry Terminal, 2002.”  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
INTERNATIONAL PASSENGER TERMINAL  Life is, more than anything else, a tendency to act on inert matter. The direction of this action is not predetermined; hence the unforeseeable variety of forms which life, in evolving, sows along is path. Henri Bergson’  Architecture is not a plastic art, but the engineering of material life. Farshid Moussavi and Alejandro Zaero-Polo.*  When they left Rem Koolhaas’ Office of Metropolitan Architecture in 1992, Farshid Moussavi and Alejandro Zaera-Polo started Foreign Office Architects (FOA), moving the practice to London to teach at the Architectural Association (AA). The AA in the 1990s, under Chairman Alan Balfour and Jeffery Kipnis, Direc- tor of the Graduate Design Program, was a crucible for experimental practice and design research. Zaera-Polo and Moussavi were commissioned to run a three-year research studio using international competitions to provide content for AA Files, the in-house scholarly journal. The Yokohama Ferry Terminal was the product of the 1994-95 competition to rebuild the 1894 Osanbashi Pier in the Japanese port city of Yokohama as an international passenger terminal.’ With their 1995 winning scheme, FOA and their students took a decisive lead in the shift toward digital design that no longer distinguished between ground and building mass, or between surface and depth, section and plan.‘  Yokohama was one of a number of competitions that brought young innovators to public attention: Jussieu Libraries (1992, won by OMA); Cardiff Bay Opera House (1994, won by Zaha Hadid); IIT Student Center (1997, won by OMA, with significant entries from Eisenman and Resier Umimoto); West Side Convergence for IFCCA (1999, notable projects by UN Studio and Resier Umimoto); and Eye Beam Museum of Art and Technology (2001, notable projects Greg Lynn Form’s bleb facade, D + S’s continuous surface, and Scott Cohen’s tensegrity circulation). Significant to Yokohama was not just the cultural shift FOA’s winning proposal indicated, but the ways in which the competition’s theme — the sea, fluid dynamics, transportation interchanges, circulation-as-program, temporal flux, transitional space, hybrid programming — prompted invention. Reiser Umimoto’s similar scheme, which folded public park and interior circulation through each other, and OMA’s diagram of program intensities varying over time, are stand-outs, and the competition enabled exploration of what Stan Allen was later to call “land- form building” as never before. The postwar mat building had grown up, improved its ideas about circulation, and understood that it was fundamentally an urban for- mation, not simply a “city-within-a-city.” 
At Harvard’s GSD, Zaera-Polo and Moussavi were taught computation by Bill Mitchell and Branco Kolarevic. But surprisingly little else marked this new terri- tory. The “paperless studio” would not be introduced at Columbia’s GSAPP until 1994. OMA’s Jussieu Libraries entry had manifested in the modest Rotterdam Kunsthal (1992). UN Studio’s 1993 Mobius House, the only single-surface project yet built, was important. Coop Himmelb()au had, since the early 1980s, begun to think of form as ‘scape, in which ground plane, roof, walls, skin were no longer discrete.? Himmelb(1)au’s 1980 manifesto, “Architecture Must Blaze,” was a call for non-orthogonal, non-Cartesean design that, like their earlier experiments of the 1960s, were affective and sensational environments. The accompanying “Blazing Wing” installation, a tessellated structural skin “clad” in flames, rejected modernism and postmodernism in favor of dynamic, non-normative form.  Influential were Frank Gehry’s iterations of the unbuilt Lewis House (1989-95),  his Bilbao Guggenheim (1991-97), and the fish sculpture for the 1992 Barcelona Olympics that led to the horse heads roughly contemporary with Yokohama (1995-98). However, Gehry’s approach to fabrication — structure as gantry-support for non-standard skins — was not the structural surface of UN Studio and FOA. Herzog de Meuron, much admired by Moussavi and Zaera-Polo, had built the first of their iconic signal boxes and begun the second, but these breaks from normative geometry were not close to the daring of Yokohama. Peter Eisenman had barely begun to leave the world of the trace with designs for the Church of the Year 2000 and Bibliotéque de L’IUHEI in 1996. Zaha Hadid’s Monsoon Restaurant and the Vitra Fire Station of 1994 were still planar compositions if the signature landform massing of her mature work was already present; her interest in hybridizing ground, envelope, circulation, and surface emerged in the projects of 1997-99, and were fully realized by 2000. At the time of its submission, FOA’s Yokohama was a pioneer for the potential of emerging digital tools that enabled parametric modeling of dynamic surfaces, where the form of circulation became the form of the building as a whole. Event and organization replaced program, adaptive envelope replaced facade, and digit- ally manipulated surfaces replaced composition. The project, completed in 2002, marked a paradigm shift that would itself take more than a decade to come to full fruition.  Form to Formation  An important precursor for Yokohama, close to the AA’s Bedford Square home, was The Imagination Group’s London headquarters, designed by Ron Herron in 1987.° Member of the avant-garde practice Archigram, Herron died in 1994 but was teaching at the AA when Moussavi and Zaera-Polo arrived. The tensile roofscape, stretching across two existing buildings and a decommissioned street, 
can be seen from the terraces in the middle of the AA complex: an undulating min- imal surface structure that glows at night.’ Homage to Cedric Price’s unbuilt Fun Palace (1960-62), and an embodiment of Archigram’s interest in flexible event- based spaces (“instant cities”), the new roof creates an urban landscape that verti- cally connects two buildings across six floors, linked by scaffolding walkways that cross at random angles, and culminating in a gallery and event space on the original roofs.  In Herron’s Imagination building was the urban theater that Price and his col- laborator on the Fun Palace, theater director Joan Littlewood, envisioned as social catalyst.® For Price, architects were not in the business of providing meaning or aesthetics, nor of constructing architecture as a visual symbol. Anticipating Bernard Tschumi’s late 1970s coinage of the term “event space,” Price believed adaptive environments should enable a range of changing programmatic potentials. Tschumi’s notion of urban theater, developed at the AA under Alan Boyarsky and inscribed in Manhattan Transcripts (1981)° and Event Cities (1994),'° and other essays published in the 1980s and early 1990s, was predicated on the argument that “there is no space without event.”’’ Following landscape architect Lawrence Halperin’s “urban scoring” of the 1960s and 70s, Tschumi sought to “choreograph” space. Form could no longer “follow function,” but had to enable flux and dynamic change, catalyzing event and social encounter, and mediating, by interconnecting ith, exterior climates, circulation patterns, urban organizations, and cultural and social formations.  z  Central to this thinking was Sanford Kwinter, whose course on complexity at Harvard’s GSD influenced Zaera-Polo and Moussavi as students. His 1992 “Land- scapes of Change,” which discussed Conrad Waddington’s “epigenetic landscape,” developed in the late 1950s to describe the genetic influence of environmental  changes on a population.’* Rene Thom’s idea of “fitness landscapes” followed in the 1970s — developmental space, within which organisms evolve, as topological  and dynamical models, accounting for the potential combination of chance and pre- diction. Kwinter enabled “typology” to become “topology,” and “form” to become “formation,” adapting, mutating, and evolving. Yokohama understood the surface- landscape not just as a material form, but also as a formation of matter — of potential pathways of development:  The radicalization of matter requires that matter is from the beginning irreducibly sensate and responsive; that at every scale sensate, responsive matter organizes itself hierarchically into discreet, irreproducible configurations with specific emergent behaviors; and that all discreet material configurations at any and every moment and any and every scale further arrange into complex ecologies.’  In Phylogenesis, Moussavi and Zaera-Polo classified the office’s work as a “population” of projects, both the figure for the culture of FOA’s practice and its protocols and techniques — what they call its “genetic potentials.”** The 
nineteenth-century biologist, Ernst Haekel, introduced the term “phylum” to group organisms around a “body plan” or blueprint — families of morphological and developmental similarity.’ Zaera-Polo and Moussavi described their practice “as a lineage of ideas that evolve through time and across different environments,” a “phylogenetic process” generating “differentiated yet consistent organisms,” organized in the 1990s around the phylum “surface.”!°  Formative Processes  Moussavi notes in The Function of Ornament, “Architecture needs mechanisms that allow it to become connected to culture.”!” The concept of the phylum — the dia- grammatic lineage that creates a “culture” of work — for both Moussavi and Zaera- Polo must be dynamic, adaptive, and responsive to cultural change. In the 1970s, Denise Scott Brown and Robert Venturi compared the “duck” — the building as sym- bol — with their preferred typology, “the decorated shed,” or the building as sign.'* Yokohama was a direct response: Zaera-Polo and Moussavi were taught by Scott Brown at the GSD. The decorated shed rethought as mat building was a hybrid of shed, ground, and circulation. The mat building, a term developed by Alison and Peter Smithson, was the direct precursor of Yokohama’s shed-ground-flow hybrid. Zaera-Polo and Moussavi described the mat typology as the organization of circulation, with architecture then “deployed on the circulation diagram”; Yoko- hama was to become more consistent — “in which circulation can literally shape space,” an expression of “landscape urbanism,” a preoccupation of the 1990s.’*  Stan Allen, proponent of landscape urbanism, begins his “thick 2-D” manifesto with an appraisal of Yokohama.”° A “porous mat of movement and waiting spaces,” Yokohama is a continuous surface of “differing intensities of occupation”: “Con- ceived as an artificial landscape, minimal sectional variation separates and smoothes traffic at the same time that it activates complex programmatic varia- 21 Yokohama proposed that the urban condition operate as a thickened sur- face in which “program” equated to moments of intensity in the network of the urban field. As such, it was heir to Koolhaas’ notion of the continuous surface, first proposed in his analysis of New York, and developed in the Jussieu Libraries and Kunsthal. The “synthetic carpet” of “programmatic lava” was “a single program- matic composition” in which the city and building each flowed into the other, and which, in turn, embraced a wide heterogeneity of program.” For Koolhaas, the continuous surface was an urban condenser — “smooth congestion” — and an urban intensifier — “engineered disorientation” and “enforced detours”: “an unforseeable and unstable combination of simultaneous activities.””*  Eisenman identifies Le Corbusier’s unbuilt 1964 Palais des Congres Strasbourg as the source for floor as a ramp, which joins the ground and the roof in a contin- uum.”* The ground delaminates and rises up through the building, marked as a continuous urban condition by sectional variation, and by “vertical voids,” forces  tion. 
that push up and out of the envelope.”* Yokohama, though a horizontal organiza- tion, follows Jussieu Libraries’ development: “Koolhaas uses the void, which is con- ceived as an inversion of poché ... by conceptualizing it as a latent force contained between layers of solid floors ... Conceptually the circulation and the floor levels become a continuous surface.”’° The continuous surface as the diagram of pure circulation was confirmed by Stan Allen’s focus on “field conditions,” leitmotif for landscape urbanism.” Allen’s shift from points and lines to waves and fields was also heavily influenced by Kwinter’s 1987 essay on the post-relativity universe in Zone 1/2: “an open, far-from equilibrium system, responsive to and willing to amplify every destabilizing fluctuation in the environment.””* Yokohama is a clear manifestation of form understood as a plastic and dynamic field of events, devel- oped out of rhythms, movements, pulses, and flows, and their effects on form.”” Form is formative process.”°  Surface  Bernard Tschumi, describing The Manhattan Transcripts project (1976-81), notes, “Architecture is not simply about space and form, but also about event, action, and what happens in space.”’’ Successful public spaces emerge, they are not prescribed. Christopher Alexander’s 1965 “A City is Not a Tree” contrasted the sterile institutionalized playground “asphalted and fenced in,” to spaces which would enable play:  Play itself, the play that children practice, goes on somewhere different every day. One day it may be indoors, another day ina friendly gas station, another day down by the river, another day in a derelict building, another day ona construction site, which has been abandoned for the weekend. Each of these play activities, and the objects it requires, forms a system... The different systems overlap one another, and they over- lap many other systems besides. The units, the physical places recognized as play places, must do the same. In a natural city this is what happens. Play takes place in a thousand places — it fills the interstices of adult life. As they play, children become full of their surroundings.”*  Alexander was interested in the interdependency of urban contexts and events.” Buildings were to be organized as large-scale self-similar organizations, locally adaptable microenvironments responding to patterns of behavior, allowing for the emergence of second-order effects. With multi-dimensional problems and unpredictable circumstances, performative design processes produced “generative results”: form as a set of algorithms, anti-figural, anti-representational, anti-monu- mental, anti-typological. For Alexander, the city was an open, self-regulating, complex system, not a closed hierarchy of discrete elements: a space of pure and infinite connection, of networks, flows, and ecologies. 
By thinking of the ferry terminal as an urban formation in these terms, FOA was able to challenge the normative linear organization of piers, creating circulation around multiple interconnected loops. This aim required the building to be conceived as a model of fluid dynamics: an interweaving of flows with different speeds, orientations, interferences, and eddies. Directional flows connecting points of departure, arrival, and transfer could be diverted, bifurcating to other pathways, or slowed, pooling into eddies of programmatic interference. What they termed a “no-return diagram” involved branched interchanges and nested circuits, such that visitors to the pier could circulate in either direction along many differing routes: “In whatever direction the pier is travelled, the experience will be of a continuous forward movement.”**  Yokohama’s concept is surface-as-ground, rather than surface-as-envelope. Conceived as a surface that delaminates then (re-)enfolds, the surface-as-ground is a continuous but layered organization. As a “loosely bounded aggregate,” the terminal complex was characterized by “porosity and local interconnectivity,” and by emergent behaviors that self-organized into a coherent, if complex, matrix, defined by inter-relating, local constraint.” These localized moments could be rippled, pinched, or perforated in turn, but were above all sectional. As Allen has written, “In field configurations section is not the product of stacking (discrete layers, as in a conventional building section) but of weaving, warping, folding, oozing, interlacing or knotting together.”’®  To translate circulation and surface into a three-dimensional organization, each segment of the no-return diagram was assigned a surface of specific size, while each branching node within the circulation network was assigned a bifurcation geom- etry. The no-return diagram had to be assimilated to the surface-ground: a branched network overlaid on a field. Program was intensive rather than extensive:  Conventional programmatic distribution is fundamentally related to an extensive use of space and time: programs are allocated in particular extensions of space and time with well-defined limits...The potential of intensive space is to set up a degree of specificity without delimiting extensions.’”  Intensive space as a defining concept was, for Zaera-Polo and Moussavi, better able to negotiate shifting or time-based programmatic conditions, by creating a continuous but differential variation, not tied to size or volume, nor to fixed locations or configurations:  Programs link the flows to the overall scheme, where they become like sediments in the channels created by the folds on the surface, which in turn integrates the seg- ments of the program through continuous variation of form. Varying degrees of intensity diminish the rigid segmentation that social machines — especially those that maintain borders — usually produce.** 
Changing diurnal and seasonal demands could thus be seamlessly accommo- dated. To achieve this, immigration control had to be mobile: the border was estab- lished not as a fixed line, but as a series of strategic control points, along the axis of the building. Program, both interior and on the exterior roof deck, was contingent on the specificities of the surface — curvature, access, exposure or insulation, visual connection, adjacencies, and proximity. But more importantly, it was determined by speed. Program adheres to slowness, to the locations in which flow eddies or stagnates, to moments where circulatory paths are momentarily held, redirected, or detoured.  Smooth Spaces  Yokohama is a smooth continuum of surface, infrastructure, structure, material, and program. In this, it is indebted to two iconic works of the postwar period: Frei- derick Kiesler’s 1959 Endless House, a continuum of life’s cyclicality and rhythms; and Erwin Hauer’s topological sculpture and screens of the 1950s—1970s. But math- ematics, geometry, and rules of ordering (algorithms) have always been central to architecture, and the experimental search for non-standard geometries has existed since at least the baroque. We could think of the surging, undulating dynamics of Francesco Borromini’s San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane, or the sensual curvatures of Balthazar Neumann’s Vierzehnheiligen Church, whose non-focal transept crossing requires a series of compound curves that could only be modeled in 3-D, long before parametric software.  The baroque attempted to synthesize the modular Renaissance church into a single spatial experience, one, moreover, that was expressly dynamic. Interpene- trating forms, “smooth” geometries, and complex three-dimensional bodies char- acterize the baroque, based in geometric calculus.” Plasticity replaces the planar, becoming “free form”: restless jumping forms, vibrating or “swaying” forms, on the cusp of deformation, a dynamic condition in which masses remain in tension, ina state of unrest or transience.*® The baroque building is a complex system: com- plex geometries in a continuum, forms within forms, fluid morphing from element to element, and continuous variation. For Sergei Eisenstein, in his famous essay comparing different iterations of Piranesi’s Carceri, the Renaissance state of repose and equilibrium transformed into baroque “ecstasy,” a transformation from a pro- totype to a dynamic system organized by an intensification of effects: montage.*? FOA’s Yokohama follows this logic, space and form once again relational:  No longer are objects plugged into space but they become relational objects with intrinsic spatial constructs: space is not just containing, it is a network of relations; space is not invariant but dynamic; and shape is space (localized and transmutable).’*  Space itself becomes “a restless matrix affecting, and affected by, the behaviors to  , oa a AZ ee le 7 a 
emerging out of the field: moments of intensity, peaks or valleys, vortexes pro- duced within a continuous field, “defined not by overarching geometrical schemas but by intricate local connections”: “Form matters, but not so much the forms of things as the forms between things.”** Model of an “emergent metropolis as a thick, living mat of accumulated patches and layered systems, with no singular authority or control,” Yokohama is the opposite of the iconic civic monument.”  Form-as-ground is the diagram of Deleuze and Guattari’s “smooth space,” a space of pure connection, the space of journeys — trajectories, movements, and speeds. It is intensive space — temporal, contingent, and dynamic. The ocean and the boat are both examples. Its opposite is striation. Striated space is of the old order of Cartesian space, of the modular, extensive, territorializing grid; smooth space is topological, non-standard intensive, continuous, heterogeneous, rhizomatic, non-linear, modulated haptic, deterritorializing:  Contrary to what is sometimes said, one never sees from a distance in a space of this kind, nor does one see it from a distance; one is never “in front of,” any more than one is “in” (one is “on”...).”“°  Yokohama’s smooth deformation of surfaces is picturesque — undulating board- walks spliced with grassy knolls, timber and steel grottos festooned with handrails and fishing nets, craggy cliffs of structural glass. The warped surface geometry of Yokohama, mediating between sea, cruise liner, and city, operates as a space that, like the active picturesque of William Gilpin and Richard Payne Knight, opposes the pictorial framing of territory, and of one’s place in it: it has to be moved through, traversed, in order to be understood. This desire, which fueled the “occluded landscapes” and Romantic ruins of the early nineteenth century, equally motivated architecture’s embrace of parametric design tools, taken from the movie industry and engineering, in the 1990s.*”  But Yokohama’s smooth space is perforated and striated. This is significant. For many of their peers, smooth space, so easily generated by Maya or 3D Studio Max, became a holy grail. But, as Deleuze and Guattari have insisted, smooth space and striated space exist only in mixture: “Smooth space is constantly being translated, transversed into a striated space; striated space is constantly being reversed, returned to a smooth space. In the first case, one organizes even the desert; in the second, the desert gains and grows; and the two can happen simultaneously.””*  Great Waves  Origami is the perfect example of smooth and striated mixtures. It is, of course, a traditional element of Japanese culture, easily identifiable in the West. But to view origami as a cliché would be to miss an important point: computational origami has for some time been a branch of computational geometry, and thus of enormous 
in surface-structures, that is, surfaces that are also structural, with structure an inte- grated aspect of surface deformations. Mathematical origami was developed in the mid-twentieth century, to tackle problems of geometry traditionally unsolvable using compass and straightedge that could easily and simply be solved by folding paper. The first International Meeting of Origami Science and Technology was held in Italy in 1989. In 1991, Italian-Japanese mathematician Humaiki Huzita developed a sequence of increasingly complex origami axioms. By the turn of the twenty-first century, computational origami had exploded.  Paul Jackson, who lived in London and taught techniques of origami to designers there in the 1980s and 1990s, has argued:  All designers fold. That is, all designers crease, pleat, bend, hem, gather, knot, hinge, corrugate, drape, twist, furl, crumple, collapse, wrinkle, facet, curve, or wrap two-dimensional sheets of material, and by these processes of folding, create three-dimensional objects.”  The original concept models for FOA’s ferry terminal competition used origami tessellation to develop both structural principals and their integration with surface deformations and perforations. Structure was developed by adjusting the surface geometries, creating a gradient that shifted from the soft undulations of surface- ground to sharper v-pleats and x-pleats, creating v-fold and x-fold spans.  This relationship Moussavi and Zaera-Polo referred to as a “metamorphic” assemblage, “a hollowed ground where loads are not distributed by gravitational force through columns ... but rather by displacing stresses through the folded sur- face of the shell.”*° These folded span geometries are robust, adjustable, and able to create single span shell structures that accommodate complex compound curves. The folded shells also provide seismic performance. They are readily “unfolded,” that is, able to be documented in 2-D cut sheets. Scale creates differentiation: tigh- ter pleating where more robust structural support was needed on the one hand; on  the other, looser folds that scaled up to become girders where extra stiffening was needed, within which were housed ramps, forming sectional connectors between the layers, and thus perforations in each layer that became folds that created a topological seamlessness of levels, like a Klein Bottle.  The second significant Japanese reference is to Katsushika Hokusai, artist of the Edo period. His best known image is The Great Wave off Kanagawa of 1831, part of his Thirty-Six Views of Mount Fuji. Influential on the development of Jugenstil and Impressionism in Europe, Hokusai produced a number of prints depicting wave formations, including Big Wave, Ocean Waves, views of Homoku and Kajikazawa, and Feminine Wave and Masculine Wave, both intense inhabitations of the interior of a breaking wave. These images, part of the collection of cultural artifacts used to spur invention during the competition phase, helped determine many aspects of the design, from the general undulation and bifurcation of the  evels, to localized details: the interiorized ramps, overhangs of curving 
cantilevered deck, or the valleys and rolling hills of the roof deck, circulation, and park spaces respectively.  Hokusai’s waves are early examples of images that capture movement, holding in dynamic tension dramatic experiences. Later in the nineteenth century, in 1882, EtienneJules Marey developed his chronophotography gun, which could capture movement at 12 frames per second. The image sets produced were less simulta- neous moments than diagrams of movement as continuous vectors of curvilinear flow, or “phase portraits.” In 1899-1902, Marey shifted attention to capturing the effects of interference and turbulence in air movement using smoke arrays. These photographs were also diagrams — the first notations of fluid dynamics and aero- dynamics — that tackled a new problem, one that would become crucial to air travel: the flow of air around a surface. Studying the way air reacted to certain forms, he focused on curvatures, examining interference patterns such as eddying, turbulence, updrafts, and drag, by taking images at a rate of 100 frames a second. Marey’s “graphic method” pioneered the study of curvature as the notation of force and time, a demonstration of the way topological entities incorporate time and motion into their shape through inflection.  Yokohama had to develop its own graphical method, most significant of which was the serial section, which is of the same family as Marey’s serial images of humans walking or birds in flight. The section set was not descriptive but gener- ative: the complex single surfaces of each level were originally produced by detail- ing local conditions every 15 meters, as transverse sections, which were then overlaid and morphed along the building’s longitudinal axis. The single surface was produced out of control lines, cuts that in turn generated gradients of topolog- ical change. From this point on, the project was led by the “resolution” of the trans- verse sectioning, which shifted from 15-meter intervals, to 3.6-meter, to 1.8-meter. This technique effectively “built” three-dimensional form by mapping different dia- grams and distributions to each other: surface deformation geometries to no-return diagram segments, surface bifurcations to no-return diagram branchings, and so on.  Using large numbers of two-dimensional sections to create a three-dimensional form was very much of the moment, and not just as a consequence of documenting complex topological geometries. In 1989, the US National Library of Medicine began the Visible Human Project, which documented a male and female human cadaver by taking cross-sectional photographs at small intervals. The male data set was completed in 1994, with 1,871 transverse sections taken at 1-millimeter intervals; the female set was completed in 1995, taken at a finer resolution of 0.33-millimeter intervals. Coinciding with the duration of the Yokohama compe- tition, the completion of these data sets, and the stunning high-resolution images produced, caused a sensation. Within the field of architecture, these serial sections moved notation from diagram to model: the image sets constructed a virtual vis- ualization, which, if compounded together, reconstructed the three-dimensional body. Yokohama became the architectural emblem of this new mode of  
visualization: the serial transverse sections often appeared alongside their com- pounding, showing the ways in which the form of the building was “built” out of these sections. Eventually, the systems had to evolve, moving from “a ‘raster’ space, where each point is determined by local information, to a vectorial space, where each point is determined by differentiated global orders.””*  Arrival-Departures  FOA’s Yokohama International Ferry Terminal subverts the typology of the trans- portation pier. In doing so, it works against the “super-modernity” of the type, or what Marc Augé referred to as “non-places.””” An influence on Koolhaas’ definition of junk space, Augé’s non-place identified typologies in which “place” is replaced by “space” — depersonalized, homogenous, transitory spaces, regimes of transit and travel, technologies of communication, spaces of control and detention. These are also spaces of abstract unmediated commerce and leisure. In them, people are atomized: “community” is broken down into discrete, anonymous individuals — “customers, passengers, users, listeners” — with all references to the temporality of the exterior world removed. The international terminal, at once a border zone and a transit space, with its restaurants and shops, parking and transfer points, decks and parks, is the epitome of the non-place. The challenge, then, was to find a way to reintroduce place into the generic space of interval and transience.  How did FOA achieve this? Through “the expression of embedded forces through processes of construction, assembly and growth.””’ By thinking of a built ground that was shifting and unstable, but that was also a critical component of an urban organization, linked to the intense activity of Yokohama Bay, and projected back into the city proper. By extending the city into the sea, with the civic facilities as far along the pier as possible. And by shifting the terminal from a gate and con- duit to an interface, one that replaced a linear circulation structure with a looping, networked organization: “The structure becomes a warp in urban space, breaking the polarity between citizens and visitors.”**  By 1999, Lynn had coined the term “animate form” to describe this approach to morphology.”” Static architectural form becomes a dynamic formation, a field of force and interaction characterized by “smooth transformation involving the inten- sive integration of differences within a continuous yet heterogeneous system.””° No building is ever static; it is a complex interplay of energy transfers and multiple microclimates, all constantly modulating. As a ferry terminal, Yokohama was the perfect infrastructural program for this thinking: “the abstract space of design is imbued with flow, turbulence, viscosity, drag so that the form of a hull can be con- ceived in motion through water.””” It was not an autonomous entity but a hybrid organization, meshed to its environment, in a constant flux of thermodynamic and socio-political intensities; the coming together of ship, sea, pier, city, and different modes and vectors of transportation. 
21°’ CENTURY MUSEUM OF CONTEMPORARY ART  SANAA  Xavier Costa  4  "y  7  SANAA, 21" Century Museum of Contemporary Art, Kanazawa, Japan, 2004.*  The Companions to the History of Architecture, Volume IV, Twentieth-Century Architecture. Edited by David Leatherbarrow and Alexander Eisenschmidt. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Kanazawa proposes a new paradigm in museum conception and design. Inscribed in SANAA’s trajectory, this structure manages to reposition the art museum in architectural culture, as it redefines its sense of space and materiality, its relation- ship to the phenomena of exhibition and display, and its role in today’s society.  In the modern era, the newly conceived institution of the museum offered a spe- cial opportunity for architects and urban designers to shape the spaces containing and representing art and history. Originating as public institutions during the years of the French Revolution, modern museums started by collecting and displaying past artifacts, and thus became a designed incarnation of history. In this role of securing a space to facilitate the encounter between citizens, the arts, and the past, the museum turned out to be a most essential public building in the new expansions of Western capital cities during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Designs like Karl Friedrich Schinkel’s Altes Museum in Berlin, completed in 1830, fully expressed the monumental quality of these new, secular cathedrals of art. The mag- nificence and grandiosity of museums grew over the decades, and even in the sec- ond half of the twentieth century, museum designs such as Mies van der Rohe’s National Gallery in Berlin, built in 1968, would redefine the overwhelmingly large, empty hall as the main space for the museum, conferring a quasi-religious solemnity toa program otherwise based in displaying small-sized artifacts. Later museum pro- jects have tended to break from the grandiosity and monumentality of their prede- cessors, seeking new references. A case in point is that of the Georges Pompidou Center in Paris, designed by Renzo Piano and Richard Rogers in the 1970s, which equates the space for art to industrial and temporary structures.  This progressive inquiry into museum designs that would relate to other, new references cannot be dissociated from the exploration that contemporary art has undertaken on the conditions of display and public presentation of the artwork. The museum also embodies a model of civic membership, of social identification, and engagement in the presentation of artifacts. In this sense, SANAA’s different designs for museums during the past two decades significantly contribute to this process undertaken since the mid-twentieth century. Their galleries and art centers reduce their material presence to a complex interplay of containers, glass or reflect- ing surfaces, and a pervasive use of light tectonics that let them substantially depart from the monumental tradition in museography.  One could argue, with the museology scholar, Jean-Louis Déotte, that the phe- nomenon of a universal process of “museification” ofall sorts of sites and artifacts in contemporary culture detracts from the museum being the only repository of meaningful objects. In this perspective, any object, built place, even natural envi- ronment, or non-material cultural expression, may be “museified” — that is, virtu- ally decontextualized to coincide with its own display.’ The former contents of the museum, therefore, explode to take over a universal presence, and the museum- container inevitably remains as a much more profane structure.  Yet museum programs posed the challenge of providing magnificence to a large collection that may suggest a repetitive series of galleries, housing hundreds or 
thousands of items. How architecture handles this programmatic need has consti- tuted a key question in the evolution of museum design.  Glass  Kazuyo Sejima and Ryue Nishizawa, founders and partners at SANAA, have worked on a number of designs for museographic institutions for the past 20 years. The most significant and realized designs include the N Museum in Wakayama, Japan (1995-97), the Glass Pavilion at the Toledo Museum of Art, Ohio (2001-06), the New Museum of Contemporary Art in New York (2003-07), the Serpentine Gallery Pavilion in London (2009), the Teshima Art Museum in Japan, and the Louvre-Lens in Lens, France, completed in 2012.  Among these designs, the Kanazawa museum may be considered their first major realized commission, designed and built between 1999 and 2004. In this case, there was a close collaboration between the architects and the art director of the institution, Yuko Hasegawa. Hasegawa wanted the museum to showcase recent art, from 1980 onward, and at the same time to reflect the local, Kanazawa tradition of pottery and craftwork, which has a smaller presence in the museum’s collection. She coined the term “new flexibility” to refer to the spatial quality of the museum as articulated through a large number of spaces of different size, instead of a few large areas that could be partitioned in temporary ways.  This is a fresh concept in museographic design, and one that framed the resulting decision of conceiving Kanazawa as a dense cluster of rooms. Any exhibition or display would therefore need to be adapted to the sequence of rooms, which pro- vide different conditions of volume, height, light, and so on. SANAA expressed that this engagement of the museum’s director was crucial to the design process, and was much appreciated by the architects. Indeed, Kazuyo Sejima pointed out during an interview that new museums are too often designed before a museographic project is in place. This programmatic vacuum translates into a tendency to overly emphasize the need for flexibility in the architectural result, so that when the cura- torial team would later start working on their project, the building would also need to adapt to its spatial requirements. In Sejima’s words:  In Japan, the client usually requires that the architect create big exhibition spaces that use movable walls, so we [SANAA and Hasegawa] decided against making two or three big spaces and designed eighteen smaller spaces. The circulation is flexible, so that she can arrange the exhibition spaces in different ways, according to the needs of each show... This allows them to run separate, smaller shows simultaneously, or to use the whole museum. It’s very different from the usual way of operating.’  The design started as a grouping of rectangular spaces of different sizes and shapes, tightly clustered and held together by a circle in plan, a low cylinder that 
constitutes the limit and facade of the building. In volume, the 18 rooms emerge over the level of the general rooftop with different heights, so that the complex appears as a micro-city contained by a disc of glass.  SANAA’s other museum designs also conceive the entire building as a grouping of independent volumes. The New Museum in New York City appears as an irreg- ular stacking of containers that make the structure look like a casually piled-up series of boxes. On the other hand, the Toledo Museum of Art Glass Pavilion fol- lows a spatial organization similar to Kanazawa, with a floor plan that contains within a square 18 different spatial units — thus making the floor plan resemble a complex yet neatly organized food tray. As a reference to the glass objects being exhibited, all volumes are shaped with rounded edges, and this geometry allows for a more fluid connection between the units.  As Akos Moravanszky has noted, the frequent use by SANAA of curved glass vertical surfaces, especially for display purposes, seems to refer back to Lilly Reich’s designs in collaboration with Mies van der Rohe, especially for the 12 large curved glass plates presented in the mining industry section for “Deutsches Volk, Deutsche Arbeit,” the first propaganda exhibition after the Nazi takeover in Berlin, 1934.’ SANAA have used this way of display repeatedly, especially in the exhibit of their own work in the Leon Museum of Art, as well as in their intervention in the Ger- man Pavilion in Barcelona. Some existing techniques of ephemeral display, there- fore, are incorporated into their permanent galleries. In this way, the museum comes closer to the temporary condition of the display design and, architecturally speaking, of the pavilion.  The “collection” of box-like volumes at Kazanawa results ina variety of naturally lit spaces, ranging from the four open courtyards to the diverse galleries offering different skylight solutions that combine with changing sizes and ceiling heights. The repertoire of rooms should allow for any art exhibit to find the right space.  Photographs  SANAA’s interest in reflecting surfaces is a constant design element throughout their work. Their first art gallery, the N Museum in Wakayama, consists of a sus- pended, horizontal prism of glass that acts as a large-scale mirror in front of the city and surrounding landscape. So as not to break the continuous reflecting surface, the architectural design introduces a complex, rear ramp entrance that remains invis- ible from the front of the building.  Sejima and Nishizawa pay a special attention to the photography of their archi- tecture. Over time, they have selected a few photographers and have closely col- laborated with them toward certain results. A common effect in the photography of SANAA’s spaces is an intense white light that powerfully bleaches all interiors. The qualities of their spaces reside in the transparency of surfaces, an augmented pres- ence of natural light, and the ubiquitous location of white planes that maximize the  
made invisible. An interesting precedent is their proposal for the new Campus Cen- ter for the Illinois Institute of Technology (1997-98):  We selected a very small, thin column and very thick glass for the partitions. We wanted to study an idea of reducing the usual hierarchy between structure and par- tition, where the structure comes first and partitions are infill. So we tried to make the structure disappear and the partitions very thick and heavy.’  In Kazanawa, SANAA chose to introduce a series of extremely slender columns on the facade. The photographers selected to work on the Kazanawa museum were Walter Niedermayr, Luisa Lambri, and Takashi Homma. Their work was dis- played and published at the time of the opening of the museum. Niedermayr pro- duced interior and exterior images with a strong, bleached white light that lets certain colored objects — furniture, visitors, some art work, greenery — stand out in a white space with few references. Luisa Lambri focused on a few windows and doors, where the images reflected on the glass surface translate into a different color distortion that brings them close to the white of the building surfaces. With a different approach, Takashi Homma focused on recording the construction proc- ess, with images that show the snowed, white surface of the construction site before it was broken in, then the layering of horizontal surfaces and materials, from concrete to the layers of insulation and paving, to end with a snowed, white over- view of the building that connects with the initial photograph of the site.  Pavilions  In two recent temporary installations in London and Barcelona, SANAA designed structures that were based on producing a reflecting effect on the surrounding spaces, echoing the previous experiences in Kanazawa and other art centers. These two installations shared the common architectural theme of the pavilion, whether it was about inscribing a temporary element in a temporary pavilion, or creating a new one that would mirror the Serpentine Gallery as a pavilion-like structure in Kensington Gardens.  The pavilion, with a name that derives from the Latin papilio, or butterfly, con- tains the sense of ephemerality in space. Its originary use in landscape design cap- tured the transitory character of its use, briefly along an itinerary. The pavilion is based on lightness, as well as on an architecture conceived in visual terms, as con- stituting part of a visual parallax, of offering and framing a point of vision, a per- spective, in an open landscape.  At the German Pavilion in Barcelona, designed by Mies van der Rohe, SANAA introduced a free-standing acrylic curtain spiraling and defining an interior space within the glass volume of the pavilion itself. The transparent acrylic surface was positioned facing the main glass facade of the building, thus engaging in a rich 
as a mirror that reflected the already reflecting surfaces of glass, marble, and stain- less steel.  The Serpentine Gallery Pavilion was a light, open structure that provided a reflecting ceiling made of polished aluminum, a horizontal mirror suspended above the heads of the visitors, reflecting the green surface of Kensington Gardens — and the blue of the sky on its upper surface. One cannot avoid thinking of the hor- izontal mirroring effects of Mies’ pavilion, with its still pools of water, and the many symmetries between horizontal surfaces.”  Mirrors  Returning to the museum designs, the Toledo Glass Pavilion creates a transparent labyrinth made of rounded glass rooms wrapped in two separate layers of glass, setting up a contrasting effect between the galleries and the fluid interstitial spaces that separate them. Here, as in other SANAA designs for displays, the transparent surface is acting as a curtain that sometimes wraps the visitors, sometimes the exhibited objects. In their own renderings of the architectural designs, SANAA strongly emphasize the reflected images, which often tend to mirror the surround- ing landscape. In the case of the Louvre-Lens, the exterior views strongly represent the mirrored landscape, to the extent of making the building disappear. This is a gesture that reminds us of Dan Graham’s series of pavilions, small-scale outdoor constructions positioned in the middle of landscapes, mostly made of glass and one- way mirror surfaces. Therefore, they dissolve in their environment, becoming mul- tipliers of their context. Graham’s pavilions act as devices that visually interfere and disappear in their locations. These pavilions provide a frame for their users to vis- ualize the surrounding landscapes. This visualization takes place through a thin, almost immaterial layer that defines an interior space from an exterior one — some- times with degrees of ambiguity. Graham’s structures often may be termed as a “minimal presence,” a purely visualizing device with an extremely light structure that is sufficient to support it.  Dan Graham’s and Mies van der Rohe’s pavilions have a strong presence in SANAA’s design through the use of reflecting surfaces, of mirroring volumes. Regarding Kanazawa, Sejima stated that the choice of a circular plan and a circular facade was a way to erase its monumental presence: “Avoiding a main entrance makes it less monumental, less of a building. It can dissolve into the surround- ings.”® Asked about the concept of pavilions, and how it exists in Japanese culture, Kazuyo Sejima responded that “small kiosks within nature exist historically in Japan, but also in Europe,” and that “dissolving the edge of interior space is some- thing we are interested in, in our own work. It is easier to realize this in pavilion design than in most other building types, so we really enjoy it.””  Museums tend to be structures highly charged with a public, representational role. The cathedrals of the modern world, as they have been termed, museums 
offer an opportunity to architecture to display its most symbolic and often monu- mental face. SANAA, through their many museum designs, have avoided any form of monumentality and have approximated their museum designs to the pavilion type, which necessarily refers to concepts of ephemerality, visual and narrative dependence on its surrounding landscapes, even a playful or recreational use. Pavi- lions are not dwellings; they are just temporarily inhabited kiosks that punctuate a much larger itinerary.  SANAA’s design decisions and their fortune in our society are also revealing about the changing nature of museums, and by extension, of public structures. As museographic institutions have become less the cenotaphs of massive archeo- logical collections and more the transitional spaces where art is temporarily dis- played, their architecture needs to express this change. An interesting reference is Jean Nouvel’s design for an art center, the Foundation Cartier in Paris. One of its main design decisions was to create a free-standing glass facade toward the street, whereas the building stands at a distance behind this surface of glass. It evi- denced that the logic of display as we know it through shop windows and art cases was extended to the entire structure, similarly “displayed” to the whole city.  The pavilion may be seen emerging as the new type for public architecture, par- ticularly for museums and exhibition centers. In Kanazawa, we do not find a highly hierarchized architecture, but rather what seems to be a randomly put together archipelago of box-like galleries — a perfect circle embraces and frames a clutter of diverse, seemingly unrelated spaces. Its plan reminds us of a concentration of different-sized paintings on a gallery wall, or an accumulation of items as shown in collections, holdings, displays. From John Soane’s house-museum to Christian Boltanski’s accumulations of portraits and historical evidences, collecting may be portrayed in the sheer piling of materials. The Kanazawa museum similarly reg- isters and articulates a resonance between its condition as a collection and its many spaces as an accidental grouping of different galleries.  Notes  * Image credit: © SANAA.  1. Jean-Louis Déotte, Le musée, Vorigine de l’esthetique (Paris: Harmatann, 1993).  2. Hans Ulrich Obrist, The Conversation Series: SANAA Kazuyo Sejima & Ryue Nishizawa (Cologne: Walter Koenig, 2012), 17.  3. Akos Moravanszky, “Mies-en-scéne,” in SANAA: Intervention in the Mies van der Rohe Pavilion, ed. Xavier Costa (Barcelona: ACTAR, 2010).  4. Alejandro Zaera Polo with Kazuyo Sejima and Ryue Nishizawa, A Conversation, in SANAA Sejima Nishizawa 1983-2004 (Madrid: El Croquis 2007), 18.  5. Robin Evans, “Mies van der Rohe’s Paradoxical Symmetries,” in Translations from Drawing to Building and Other Essays (London: Architectural Association, 2005).  6. Obrist, The Conversation Series.  7. Obrist, The Conversation Series, 65-66. 
12 The Early Twentieth Century  10.  lL. 12. 13. 14. 15.  16.  17.  18.  19.  20.  21.  pronounced use of gaps and dashes of varying size, and while these occasionally punc- tuate sub-paragraphs, their role is primarily decorative.”  . Peter Sloterdijk, “Wo sind wir, wenn wir Musik héren?,” in Weltfremdheit (Frankfurt  am Main: Suhrkamp Verlag, 1993).  . Charles Rennie Mackintosh, “Seemliness (1902),” in Robertson, Charles Rennie Mackin-  tosh, 223.  Hermann Muthesius, Style-Architecture and Building-Art: Transformations of Aychitecture in the Nineteenth Century and its Present Condition, ed. Harry F. Mallgrave, trans. Stanford Anderson (Santa Monica, CA: The Getty Center, 1994), 78-9.  Schwartz, Making Noise, 53.  bid.  bid., 61.  bid., 64.  Ole W. Fischer, “Nietzche-Archive in Weimar: A Retroactive ‘Studiolo’ of Henry van de Velde,” Thresholds, no. 32 (2006): 42-6.  bid., 44.  bid.  Crawford, Charles Rennie Mackintosh, 88-90. Mackintosh’s artistic typography was pub- ished in Rudolf von Larisch, Beispiele ktinstlerischer Schrift (Vienna, 1902).  See the official CRM Font Company website: http: / / www.charles-rennie-mackintosh- ont.co.uk/ fonts  n Marshall McLuhan’s hands, the story of Echo and Narcissus is a cautionary tale. For McLuhan, Narcissus’ inability to enter into genuine dialogue with Echo is the result of a narcosis or numbness (the etymological root of his name) born of the experience of gazing at a replicated image. McLuhan concludes: “He was numb. He had adapted to his extension of himself and had become a closed system.” For McLuhan, this closed system of the likeness, the copy, or the replication, is theorized as a form of “autoamputation,” and he classifies all inventions and technologies as “self amputations of our physical bodies.” McLuhan’s interpretation of the myth of Echo and Narcissus begs the question of whether there are technologies and inventions in Mackintosh’s oeuvre that constitute similar forms of autoamputation, facilitating the experience of numbness in the presence of the replicated image. Like McLuhan, scholars refer explicitly to the alphabet and to the practice of writing as technological extensions of the self. See, Luther H. Martin, Huck Gutman, and Patrick H. Hutton, ed., Technologies of the Self: A Seminar with Michel Foucault (Amherst: The University of Massachusetts Press, 1988), 27. See also, Ivan Illich, In the Vineyard of the Text (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1993), 93 ff.  In a frequently referenced image in which Kircher illustrates various experiments in acoustic space and echo theory, a lone figure stands parallel to a long wall with five perpendicular wall segments affixed to it, and utters a single word, clamorve. As the echo of this word bounces off each subsequent wall fragment it is distorted and transformed: amore, more, ove, re. Kircher’s diagram is not simply an illustration of the dissipation of sound as it ricochets from one hard surface to another, but rather, it is a testament to the re-presentation of sound that is latent within the echo. For each of the auditory distortions Kircher represents is not merely a diminished sound, but rather a word 
22.  23. 24.  25.  26.  27. 28.  29.  30.  House for an Art Lover 13  in its own right — clamor, love, more, mouth, again — beginning with a loud noise and concluding with an evocation for repetition.  One way to situate Mackintosh’s white period, as it paralleled a similar tendency in the Vienna Secession, is to examine it through the a posteriori historiography of the Viennese architectural historian Emil Kaufmann and his 1933 publication of Von Ledoux bis Le Corbusier (From Ledoux to Le Corbusier). Kaufmann’s work in tracing a continuous lineage from Ledoux to Le Corbusier is germane to this narrative as he is the first to have coined the term “autonomen Architektur” (autonomous archi- tecture); he described an architecture of isolation “isolierenden Architektur,” parallel- ing the emergence of modern individualism; and though not an explicit argument of his text, the implicit continuity of the architectural tradition extending from the neo- classicism of Ledoux to the modernism of Le Corbusier, is the principle of mono- chromy. In Kaufmann’s agile narrative, the abstraction of neoclassical form yields to the whiteness of high modernism, as monochromy becomes the operative sub- strate of formal abstraction, autonomy, individualism, de-contextualism, and pristine anachronism. Though Kaufmann’s progressive narrative had many detractors, Meyer Schapiro and Hans Sedlmayr among them, it positioned whiteness to become oper- ative in modernist design and discourse: whiteness embodies principles of abstraction and autonomy; whiteness connotes novelty, newness or a pristine condition; white- ness imbues an ensemble of elements with cohesion; and importantly for this narra- tive, whiteness is a vehicle of displacement, rejecting mimetic tendencies, and proffering an abstract moment of totalizing synthesis in its place. See Anthony Vidler, Histories of the Immediate Present: Inventing Architectural Modernism (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2008), 18; 24.  Robertson, Charles Rennie Mackintosh, 194.  Crawford, Charles Rennie Mackintosh, 98-9. Here, Crawford is quoting the German painter Friedrich Ahlers-Hestermann who visited the Exposition in Turin as an impres- sionable 19-year-old.  Robertson, Charles Rennie Mackintosh, 200.  Denise Riley, The Words of Selves: Identification, Solidarity, Irony (Stanford: Stanford Uni- versity Press, 2000), 156.  bid., 157.  Robin Evans, “The Developed Surface: An Inquiry Into the Brief Life of an Eighteenth- Century Drawing Technique,” in Translations from Drawing to Building and other Essays (London: Architectural Association, 1997), 195-232. In this seminal essay, Evans dis- sects the representational technique used by architects to depict a room in the eight- eenth century, and identifies a moment in which techniques subtly shifted from sections to “developing a surface” — a term used in descriptive geometry for “folding out the adjacent surfaces of a three-dimensional body so that all its faces can be shown on a sheet of paper” (Evans, “The Developed Surface,” 202). In Evans’ essay, the con- sequences of this interiority are explored and are germane to the radical interiority of Mackintosh’s work being explored here.  Pat Kirkham, “Living Fancy: Mackintosh Furniture and Interiors,” in Charles Rennie Mackintosh, ed. Wendy Kaplan (New York: Abbeville Press Publishers, 1996), 234. Ibid.  
AEG Turbine Factory 11  6. Following earlier characterizations that referred to a “Cathedral of Work,” “Machine Dome” or “Iron Church,” Posener suggests this characterization as more appropriate. Julius Posener, “Vorlesungen zur Geschichte der Neuen Architektur III: Das Zeitalter Wilhelms IL,” Arch+ (October 1981): 50.  7. In a speech about “Art and Technology” in 1910, Behrens refers to Houston S. Chamberlain’s distinction between “civilization” and “culture,” with “civilization” standing for progress in the material world and the realm of reason, and “culture” referring to the world of the spirit and the soul. Peter Behrens, “Kunst und Technik” [1910], reprinted in Buddensieg and Rogge, Industriekultur, D278-D285. Against the dominance of the sphere of civilization in modernity, Behrens (like many of his con- temporaries) emphasizes the artists’ role of integrating or elevating civilization’s achievements, like modern technology, into the (higher) realm of the spirit (i.e. cul- ture) in and through their creations.  8. Lebensreform is the German term for a variety of social and artistic movements in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century that aim at a reformation of all aspects of modern life by means of a (re)turn to a “natural” or “original” form of life, be that in the area of food and clothes, or sports and medicine, art, design, and archi- tecture etc. The impulse toward Lebensreform can be seen as a critical response to  modern industrialization, materialism, and urbanization, and its ideological compo- nents range from anti-modern and reactionary to a positive engagement with artis- tic modernism. For an analysis of the wide range of its manifestations see Kai Buchholz, Rita Latocha, Hilke Peckmann, and Klaus Wolbert, ed., Die Lebensreform: Entwiirfe zur Neugestaltung von Leben und Kunst um 1900, 2 vols. (Darmstadt: HauBer, 2001).  9. Cp. Gabriele Bryant, “Timely untimeliness? Architectural modernism and the idea of the Gesamtkunstwerk,” in Tracing Modernity: Manifestations of the Modern in Architecture and the City ed. Mari Hvattum and Christian Hermansen (London: Routledge, 2004), 156-72.  10. Friedrich Nietzsche, Kritische Studienausgabe (KSA), ed. Giorgio Colli and Mazzino Mon- tinari, 15 vols, (Munich: dtv, 1988), 11, 32 ff.  11. For an introduction to Behrens’ life and work, see Alan Windsor, Peter Behrens: Architect and Designer (London: Architectural Press, 1981); and for a detailed and critical analysis, see Stanford Owen Anderson, Peter Behrens and a New Architecture for the Twentieth Cen- tury (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000).  12. See Tilmann Buddensieg, “Das Wohnhaus als Kultbau,” in Peter Behrens und Niimberg: Geschmackswandel in Deutschland: Historismus, Jugendstil und die Anfinge dev Industrie- form, ed. Peter Klaus Schuster (Munich: Prestel, 1980), 37-47.  13. See Gisela Miller, Peter Behrens in Diisseldorf: Die Jahre von 1903 bis 1907 (Weinheim: VCH Acta Humaniora, 1991); and Kurt Asche, Peter Behrens und die Oldenburger Aus- stellung 1905 (Berlin: Mann, 1992).  14. For Behrens’ work for the AEG, see Buddensieg and Rogge, Industriekultur, and for the postwar expressionist Hoechst Administration Building in Frankfurt (1919-1924), see Bernhard Buderath, ed., Peter Behrens — Umbautes Licht: Das Verwaltungsgebdude der Hoechst AG (Munich: Prestel, 1990).  15. Buddensieg and Rogge, Industriekultur, 12. 
12 The Early Twentieth Century  16.  17.  18.  19.  20.  21.  22.  23.  24.  25.  The emphasis here is on form that expresses or symbolically represents a modern concern with utility, functionality, and purpose-orientedness, etc., rather than a more rigid functionalist ethos that establishes form as directly determined by material and function. Jordy speaks of the “symbolic objectivity” of modern European architecture as a “mythic factuality omnipresent in modern experience ...|moving] from fact to inmost essence: from the blunt out-there of non-art to the mysterious in-here of art, which nevertheless holds on to the factual starting point.” William H. Jordy, “Symbolic Essence” and Other Writings on Modern Architecture and American Culture, edited and with an introduction by Mardges Bacon (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2005), 138-9.  Frederic J. Schwartz, The Werkbund: Design Theory and Mass Culture before the First World War (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1996), 13.  The foundation of the Deutscher Werkbund was instigated by Hermann Muthesius (1861-1927) and it was conceived as an association of artists, craftsmen, and industri- alists in order to promote good modern Formgebung in a partnership between manu- acturers and designers, and to integrate traditional crafts and modern industrial mass- production techniques. The Werkbund soon became an important forum for debating key issues relating to the role of art and the artist in the modern period, for example in the famous 1914 controversy known as Werkbund-Streit concerning “individualization and/or typification.” See Joan Campbell, The German Werkbund: The Politics of Reform in the Applied Arts (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1978).  Julius Posener, Berlin auf dem Wege zu einer neuen Architektur: Das Zeitalter Wilhelms I (Munich: Prestel, 1995), 15.  Behrens defined the criteria for this as a rejection of the imitation of crafts, other mate- rials, and historical styles, and a formal emphasis instead on the quality, exactness, and precision of mechanical mass production, with a refining of the material world by means of spiritual values, ie. through artistic Formgestaltung. Peter Behrens, “Kunst in der Technik” [1907], reprinted in Buddensieg and Rogge, Industriekultur, D274-D275.  AEG factory director Paul Jordan, quoted in Henning Rogge, “Ein Motor muB ausse- hen wie ein Geburtstagsgeschenk,” in Buddensieg and Rogge, Industriekultur, 91-126 (esp. 104).  Behrens, “Kunst in der Technik,” D285.  Anton Jaumann, “Neues von Peter Behrens,” Deutsche Kunst und Dekoration 12, no. 6 (1909): 343-61 (esp. 352).  The prominent architectural critic Adolf Behne sees Behrens’ approach to industrial architecture as characterized by a monumental pathos (hence referring to him as a Pathetiker), and he writes of Behrens’ “Cyclopean” heroization of his building in this context. Adolf Behne, “Romantiker, Pathetiker und Logiker im Industriebau,” Preus- sische Jahrbticher 154 (October 1913): 171-4.  Karl Bernhard was one of the most prominent building engineers of his time. Apart from his extensive international work as an engineer, both independently and in con- junction with important contemporary architects like Max Taut, Ludwig Hoffmann, Hermann Muthesisus, and Peter Behrens (with whom he also collaborated after the  
26.  27.  28.  29.  30.  31.  32.  33.  AEG Turbine Factory 13  Turbine Factory on buildings like the AEG High Voltage Factory of 1909/10 and the AEG Assembly Hall for Large Machines of 1911/12 on the AEG company site in Berlin- Wedding), Bernhard was influential as a teacher and prolific writer. See Cengiz Dicleli, “Der Bauingenieur Karl Bernhard,” Bautechnik (April 2010): 220-8.  For a more detailed account of this collaboration, see Buddensieg and Rogge, Indus- triekultur, 53-62, and Anderson, Behrens, 136 ff. Dicleli has recently argued that Bern- hard’s contribution is still underestimated, and that this is the result not just of the different interests of architects and engineers, but of an over-emphasis of Behrens’ role on the part of art historians. Dicleli, “Bernhard,” 225 ff. This argument has also been put forward by Miron Mislin, Geschichte der Baukonstruktion und Bautechnik (Diisseldorf: Werner, 1988), 269 ff.  From 1939 to 1941 the building was extended to a length of 207 m to designs by archi- tects Jacob Schallenberger (1882-1959) and Paul Schmidt (1889-1959), and a second extension followed in 1969.  On the innovative use of these three-hinged arches in modern roof construction in the Turbine Factory as well as the later AEG Assembly Hall for Large Machines (1911-12), see Mislin, Industriearchitektur,190 ff.  See Mechthild Heuser, “Die Fenster zum Hof: Die Turbinenhalle, Behrens und Mies van der Rohe,” in Peter Behrens: “Wer aber will sagen, was Schénheit sei ... ?, ed. Hans- Georg Pfeifer (Diisseldorf: Beton-Verlag, 1990), 108-21.  Furthermore, Behrens emphasized the advantages of rhythmic regularities and the uni- fied appearance of buildings’ street fronts as a result of the need to take into account in modern city architecture changes that have taken place in modern perception, for example because of a greater speed of movement through a city in fast vehicles. Beh- rens, “Kunst in der Technik,” D284.  In his own comments on the turbine hall design, Behrens emphasizes his rejection of the dematerialized, fragile, and dispersed appearance of a modern iron grid construc- tion in favor of a more “enclosed” space that also emphasizes architectural plasticity and proportions. Cp. Peter Behrens, “Die Turbinenhalle der Allgemeinen Electricitats- gesellschaft zu Berlin” [1910], reprinted in Buddensieg and Rogge, Industriekultur, D277-D278.  Behrens himself explicitly declared that he intended the corners not to appear as load- bearing, but to be recognized as the space-enclosing infill that they are, to give a greater sense of physical solidity and corporeality to the whole building (Behrens, “Turbinenhalle,” D277), though it is clear that this is not how they were generally perceived.  Bernhard refers to the “unjustified” use of concrete here and in the visually massive gable (which in fact consists of just a thin layer of iron and concrete), questioning there- ore the artistic quality of Behrens’ main facade, which he compares with earlier archi- tectural tendencies to mask or disguise the work of the engineer, in contrast to the Berlichingenstrabe front, which he regards as a highly successful work of art. Karl Bern- hard, “Die neue Halle fiir die Turbinenfabrik der Allgemeinen Electricitats-Gesellschaft in Berlin” [1911], reprinted in Buddensieg and Rogge, Industriekultur, D307-D312 (esp. D211).  
14 The Early Twentieth Century  34, Mies van der Rohe (1928), quoted in Fritz Neumeyer, Mies van der Rohe: Das kunstlose Wort (Berlin: Siedler, 1986) 104. 35. Peter Behrens, “Uber die Kunst auf der Biihne,” quoted in Fritz Hoeber, Peter Behrens (Munich: Miiller & Rentsch, 1913), 226. 36. Behrens, “Kunst in der Technik,” D280. 37. Peter Behrens, “Speech on 10 Dec. 1912,” quoted in Matthew Jefferies, Politics and Cul- ture in Wilhelmine Germany: The Case of Industrial Architecture (Oxford: Berg, 1995), 112. 38. Anderson, Behrens, 127. 39, Anderson, Behrens, 130. 40. Behrens was influenced by the art historian Alois Riegl’s notion of Kunstwollen, the idea of a collective “artistic volition” or “creative will’ that manifests itself in a particular culture. 41. Nietzsche, KSA,VII, 199. 42. And they were clearly intended to be understood as such by Behrens, see note 31. 43. Nietzsche, “Uber Wahrheit und Liige im auBermoralischen Sinne,” KSA, I, 880-1.  44, [am using this term in the sense in which it has been introduced by Hans Vaihinger, Die Philosophie des Als Ob: System der theovetischen, praktischen und religidsen Fiktionen der Menschheit auf Grund eines idealistischen Positivismus, 3rd ed. (Leipzig: Meiner, 1918). 45. Posener, Berlin, 564-70.  46. See Annemarie Jaeggi, FAGUS: Industrial Culture from Werkbund to Bauhaus (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2000), 43-4.  47. Anderson, Behvens, x, 260.  48. See Neumeyer, Mies, 88 ff.  49. Walter Curt Behrendt, The Victory of the New Building Style, translated from the German by Harry Francis Mallgrave and with an introduction by Detlef Mertins (Santa Monica: Getty, 2000).  50. The relationship between the timely and the timeless in architecture remained a life- ong concern for Behrens, and he explicitly reflected on this again in 1932 in a speech called “Zeitloses und Zeitbewegtes,” a late summarization of his artistic beliefs, which  has also been chosen as the title of a new scholarly edition of Behrens’ collected writ- ings and speeches: Peter Behrens: Zeitloses und Zeitbewegtes. Aufsdtze, Vortriige, Gesprdche 1900-1938, ed. Hartmut Frank and Karin Lelonek (Munich: Délling & Galitz, 2015).  Bibliography  Anderson, Stanford Owen. Peter Behrens and a New Architecture for the Twentieth Century. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000.  Asche, Kurt. Peter Behrens und die Oldenburger Ausstellung 1905. Berlin: Mann, 1992.  Behne, Adolf. “Romantiker, Pathetiker und Logiker im Industriebau.” Preufische Jahrbiicher 154 (October 1913): 171-4.  Behrendt, Walter Curt. The Victory of the New Building Style. Translated by Harry Francis Mallgrave. Santa Monica: Getty, 2000.  Peter Behrens. “Kunst in der Technik” [1907]. Reprinted in Industriekultur: Peter Behrens und die AEG 1907-1914, edited by Tilmann Buddensieg and Henning Rogge, D277-D278. Berlin: Mann, 1980. 
10 The Early Twentieth Century  8.  lL. 12.  13. 14. 15. 16. 17.  18.  19.  20.  21.  22.  23. 24.  25. 26.  27.  28.  Bruno Taut, Alpine Architektur |Alpine Architecture] (Hagen: Folkwang-Verlag, 1919), sheet no. 19.  . See “Erste Annaherung,” in: Thiekétter, Kristallisationen, Splitterungen, 11. 10.  See “ “Wie ein verhaltenes Gahnen...” — Die Kélner Werkbund-Ausstellung,” in: Thiekétter, Kristallisationen, Splitterungen, 15.  Ibid., 15-6.  See Birgit Schulte, “Dekonstruktion,” in Thiekétter, — Kristallisationen,  Splitterungen, 158-9.  See Held, “Kleine Glashaus-Chronologie,” 169.  See ibid., 170.  See ibid., 171.  See “Erste Annahrung,” in Thiekétter, Kristallisationen, Splitterungen, 11.  See “Ach, knallige Welt, du Lunapark...,” in Thiekétter, Kristallisationen, Splitterungen,19.  See Eugen Kalkschmidt, “Die Deutsche Werkbund-Ausstellung in Kéln,” Frankfurter Zeitung 58, no. 159 (10 April 1914) (in “Wie ein verhaltendes Gahnen ...” in: Thiekétter, Kristallisationen, Splitterungen, 13).  See “Ach, kmnallige Welt, du Lunapark...,”. in: Thiekétter, Kristallisationen, Splitterungen, 19.  Angelika Thiekétter, ed., Kristallisationen, Splitterungen: Bruno Tauts Glashaus (Basel: Birkhauser, 1993), 183 pages, is entirely devoted to the documentation and description of the Glass House and provides an all-encompassing study of the building. The book and its 44 short chapters written by 13 different authors provided most of the source material and is the basis for this chapter.  Ian Boyd Whyte, Bruno Taut and the Architecture of Activism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982), 33.  Sharp, Dennis (ed.). Glass Architecture by Paul Scheerbart and Alpine Avchitecture by Bruno Taut (New York: Praeger Publishers, 1972), 12-3.  Bruno Taut. Alpine Architektur, 56.  See “Alles flieBt, alles bewegt sich ... Ein Rundgang im Glashaus,” in: Thiekétter, Kristallisationen, Splitterungen, 26-8.  See ibid., 26-7.  See Felix Linke, “Die neue Architektur,” Sozialistische Monatshefte 2, no. 18 (October 1914): 1134 (in Thiekétter, Kristallisationen, Splitterungen, 26).  See “Alles flieBt, alles bewegt sich ... Ein Rundgang im Glashaus,” in: Thiekétter, Kristallisationen, Splitterungen, 26-8. Markus Breitschmid, “The Architect as ‘Molder of the Sensibilities of the General Pub- lic’: Bruno Taut and his Architekturprogramm,” in The Art of Social Critique: Painting Mir- rors of Social Life, ed. Shawn Chandler Bingham (Lanham: Lexington Books, 2012), 162. The Glass House should be understood as an exemplary effort of a much larger dis- course by Bruno Taut that found form in such theoretical documents as the Architek- turprogramm |Architecture Program|] (1918); Die Stadtkrone |The City Crown] (1919); Alpine Architektur |Alpine Architecture] (1919); Die Auflésung der Stadt |The Dissolution of the City] (1920), Der Weltbaumeister |The Builder of the World] (1920); and Frithlicht [Light of Dawn] (1920-23). Also of importance, particularly with regard to the subject  
Glass House at Cologne 11  of glass in architecture, is the correspondence of the Glaserne Kette (Glass Chain) (1919-20) and Taut’s admiration for the work of Paul Scheerbart: Paul Scheerbart, Glasarchitektur, (Berlin: Verlag der Sturm, 1914), translated as “Glass Architecture,” in Sharp, Glass Architecture, 31-74).  29. Taut’s embrace of the two sides of modernism is also reflected in an essay titled “Das Ewige und das Lebendige — Zur Philosophie der Architektur” |The Eternal and the Alive - On the Philosophy of Architecture], written by Paul Bommersheim and pub- lished by Bruno Taut in his journal Frihlicht (Winter 1921/1922), in Bruno Taut, Frihlicht 1920-1922. Eine Folge fiir die Verwirklichung des neuen Baugedankens (Berlin: Ullstein, 1963), 114-6.  30. An introduction to Bruno Taut’s world conception can be found in a letter titled Mein Weltbild (My World-Conception), written as part of the correspondence of the Glaserne Kette (Glass Chain) circle on October 20, 1920. See Ian Boyd Whyte, ed., The Crystal Chain Letters (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1985), 159-64, and Renata Hejduk and Jim Williamson, ed., The Religious Imagination in Modern and Contemporary Architecture (New York: Routledge, 2011), 276-9.  Bibliography  Bommersheim, Paul. “Das Ewige und das Lebendige: Zur Philosophie der Architektur.” In Frihlicht 1920-1922: Eine Folge fiir die Verwirklichung des neuen Baugedankens, edited by Bruno Taut, 114-16. Berlin: Ullstein, 1963.  Breitschmid, Markus. “The Architect as ‘Molder of the Sensibilities of the General Public’: Bruno Taut and his Architekturprogramm.” In The Art of Social Critique: Painting Mirrors of Social Life, edited by Shawn Chandler Bingham. Lanham: Lexington Books, 2012.  Hejduk, Renata and Jim Williamson, ed. The Religious Imagination in Modern and Contempo- vary Architecture. New York: Routledge, 2011.  Held, Bettina. “Kleine Glashaus-Chronologie.” In Kristallisationen, Splitterungen: Bruno Tauts Glashaus, edited by Angelika Thiekétter, 168-72. Basel: Birkhauser, 1993.  Kalkschmidt, Eugen. “Die Deutsche Werkbund-Ausstellung in Kéln.” Frankfurter Zeitung 58, no. 159 (10 April 1914). In Kristallisationen, Splitterungen: Bruno Tauts Glashaus, edited by Angelika Thiekétter. Basel: Birkhauser, 1993.  Krausse, Joachim. “Kosmisches Haus in Lichtbauweise: Bruno Tauts Glasbaukuppel.” In Kristallisationen, Splitterungen: Bruno Tauts Glashaus, edited by Angelika Thiekotter, 95-106. Basel: Birkhauser, 1993.  Linke, Felix. “Die neue Architektur.” Sozialistische Manatshefte 2, no. 18 (October 1914): 1134. In Kristallisationen, Splitterungen: Bruno Tauts Glashaus, edited by Angelika Thiekétter, 26. Basel: Birkhauser, 1993.  Scheerbart, Paul. Glasarchitektur. Berlin: Verlag der Sturm, 1914. Translated as “Glass Archi- tecture” in Glass Architecture by Paul Scheerbart and Alpine Architecture by Bruno Taut, edited by Dennis Sharp, 31-74. New York: Praeger Publishers, 1972.  Schulte, Birgit. “Dekonstruktion.” In Kristallisationen, Splitterungen: Bruno Tauts Glashaus, edited by Angelika Thiekétter, 158-9. Basel: Birkhauser, 1993.  Schwartz, Frederic J. The Werkbund. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1996. 
10.  lL.  12.  13.  14.  15.  16.  The Early Twentieth Century  (Rome: Laterza, 1983), and Enrico Crispolti, Architettura futurista: attraverso Varchitet- tura futurista (Modena: Galleria Fonte d’Abisso, 1984).  . For an overview of Marchi as architect and set designer see Enrica Torelli Landini, Vir-  gilio Marchi architetto e scenografo (Rome—Livorno: Galleria André—Galleria Peccolo, 2009); Alessandro D’Amico and Silvia Danesi Squarzina, Virgilio Marchi, architetto, sce- nografo, futurista (Milan: Electa, 1977).  . Edwin Cerio, ed., “Il Discorso di Marinetti,” in I! convegno del paesaggio (Naples:  Gaspare Casella, 1923), 38. My translation.  . Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, “Elogio di Capri,” Natura 1, no. 1 January 1928): 41-8.  My translation.  Virgilio Marchi, “Primitivismi capresi,” Cronache d’attualita 6, no. 10 (1922): 49-51. For a comprehensive anthology of Marchi’s writings see Ezio Godoli and Milva Giacomelli, ed., Virgilio Marchi: Scritti di architettura (Florence: Octavo, 1995).  Antonio Sant’Elia, “Manifesto of Futurist Architecture,” republished in Umbro Apol- lonio, ed., Futurist Manifestos (New York: The Viking Press, 1973), 160-72.  Arturo Lancellotti recounts his experience of viewing Balla’s relief paintings in Arturo Lancellotti, Le mostre romane del cinquantenario (Rome: Fratelli Palombi, 1931), 50. Balla’s daughter Elica recounted that “for this series of paintings Balla prepared a series of cartoons on which he spread red paint mixed with sand. With this use of materials he wanted to obtain the airy feeling of open-air paint. |...] These twelve paintings were displayed on the walls of the beautiful hut,” Elica Balla, Con Balla (Milan: Multhipla Edizioni, 1984) vol. 1, 224. (My translation)  During those years the adjectives savage and primitive were often used by intellectuals when discussing the peoples of the Agro Romano. See Emilio Cecchi, “La mostra dell’agro,” I! Marzocco (October 29, 1911): 3-4.  Anna Maria Damigella, “Idealismo e socialismo nella cultura figurative romana del primo ‘900: Duilio Cambellotti,” Cronache di archeologia e di storia dell’arte 8 (1969): 119-73; Rossana Bossaglia, ed., Arte e socialitd in Italia: Dal Realismo al Simbolismo, 1865-1915 (Milan: La Societa per le Belle Arti ed Esposizione Permanente, 1979). Fortunato Depero, Fortunato Depero nelle opera e nella vita (Trent: Tipografia editrice mutilate e invalidi, 1940) 2008-208. My translation.  See Dennis P. Doordan, “The Advertising Architecture of Fortunato Depero,” The Jour- nal of Decorative and Propaganda Arts 12 (Spring 1989): 46-55. For an overview of Depero’s oeuvre see Gabriella Belli, Enrico Crispolti, and Maurizio Scudiero, Fortunato Depero Opere (Trent: Luigi Reverdito, 1987).  Bibliography  Apollonio, Umbro, ed. Futurist Manifestes. New York: The Viking Press, 1973. Balla, Elica. Con Balla. Milan: Multhipla Edizioni, 1984. Belli, Gabriella, Enrico Crispolti, and Maurizio Scudiero. Fortunato Depero Opere. Trent:  Luigi Reverdito, 1987.  Bossaglia, Rossana, ed. Arte ¢ socialitd in Italia: Dal Realismo al Simbolismo, 1865-1915. Milan:  La Societa per le Belle Arti ed Esposizione Permanente, 1979. 
lL.  12.  13. 14.  15.  16.  17.  18.  19.  20. 21.  22. 23. 24.  25.  26.  27.  28.  29.  Monument to the Third International 11  Both Meerzon and Shapiro would receive architectural diplomas in 1927 for projects devoted to the participants in the Revolution, but neither of their projects bears direct formal resemblance to Tatlin’s Monument.  IVia Ehrenburg claimed the model was 25 meters tall: Il’ia Ehrenburg, A vse-taki ona vertitsia (Berlin: Gelikon, 1922), 19; Strigalev offers the most plausible estimation of the original model's height: Anatolii A. Strigalev, “From Painting to the Construction of Matter,” in Tatlin, ed. Larissa Zhadova (New York: Rizzoli, 1988), 43.  Margit Rowell, “Vladimir Tatlin: Form/Faktura,” October no. 7 (1978): 97.  Troels Andersen, “On the reconstruction of the tower, 1967-68,” in Vladimir Tatlin, ed. Troels Andersen (Stockholm: Moderna Museet, 1968), 23-5.  See Pamela Kachurin, “Working (for) the State: Vladimir Tatlin’s Career in Early Soviet Russia and the Origins of the Monument to the Third International,” Modernism/ Modernity 19, no. 1 (2012): 26-7.  Nikolai N. Punin, Pamiatnik ITT Internatsionala (St. Petersburg: Otdel Izobrazitel’nykh iskusstv N. K. P., 1920).  On these exhibitions see Maria Gough, “Model Spectacle,” in Tatlin: New Art for a New World: International Symposium, ed. Museum Tinguely (Ostfildern: Hatje Cantz, 2013), 253-7.  El Lissitzky, “Die Ausstellungen in Russland,” Veshch’/Objet/Gegenstand, no. 1-2 (1922): 19.  Vladimir Tatlin et al., “The Work Ahead of Us” [1920], in The Tradition of Constructiv- ism, ed. Steven Bann (New York: Viking Press, 1974), 12-14.  Gough, “Model Spectacle,” 256.  Irina Kokkinaki located images of Tatlin’s drawings in a film about the exhibition. Zha- dova reports that the original model was held at the State Russian Museum in 1929 and that Tatlin had suggested that the museum buy it. In 1933 it was acquired by the State Tret’iakov Gallery, where it presumably remained until the evacuation of Moscow dur- ing World War II. After this time no record of it remains. See Punin, O Tatline, 106; Zhadova, Tatlin, 246.  Zhadova, Tatlin, 343.  Ibid., 393.  Leon Trotsky, Literature and Revolution (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1960), 247.  Konstantin Umanskij, “Der Tatlinismus oder die Maschinenkunst,” Der Ararat, no. 4 (1920): 12-13; Konstantin Umanskij, “Die neue Monumentalskulptur in Russland,” Der Ararat, no. 5/6 (1920): 29-33.  Ehrenburg, A vse-taki ona vertitsia; Elias Ehrenburg, “Ein Entwurf Tatlins,” Friihlicht, no. 3 (Spring 1922): 92-3; I’ia Ehrenburg, “La tour de Tatline,” L’Esprit Nouveau 14 (1922): 1680. El Lissitzky, “Architektur Russlands,” ABC: Beitrdge zum Bauen, no. 3-4 (1925): 1-2; Lajos Kassak and Laszl6 Moholy-Nagy, Buch neuer Kiinstler (Vienna: Buch- und Stein- druckerei “Elbemiihl IX,” 1922).  Louis Lozowick, “Tatlin’s Monument to the Third International,” Broom 3, no. 3 (1922): 232-4.  El Lissitzky, “New Russian Art: A Lecture” [1922], in El Lissitzky: Life, Letters, Texts, ed. Sophie Lissitzky-Ktippers (London: Thames and Hudson, 1980), 342. 
12 The Modern Project  30. El Lissitzky, Russia: An Architecture for World Revolution, trans. Eric Dluhosch (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1970), 29.  31. Moisei la. Ginzburg, Stil’ i epokha (Moscow: Gosizdat, 1924), 110.  32. Moisei la. Ginzburg, “Konstruktivizm v arkhitekture,” Sovremennaia arkhitektura 3, no. 5 (1928): 145.  33. Lissitzky, “New Russian Art,” 343.  34. Ibid., 338.  35. Punin, “O pamiatnikakh,” 17.  36. Ivan Leonidov, “Konkursnyi proekt pamiatnika kolumbu,” Sovremennaia arkhitektura 4, no. 4 (1929): 147-8.  37. Roman Khiger, Puti arkhitekturnoi mysli, 1917-1932 (Moscow: OGIZ, 1933), 19.  38. Karel Teige, Vyvoj sovetské architektury (Prague: Monografie Sovétsky svaz, 1936), 15.  39. Mikhail P. Tsapenko, O realisticheskikh osnovakh sovetskoi arkhitektury (Moscow: Gos. izd-vo lit-ry po stroitel’stvu i arkhitekture, 1952), 112.  40. Sigfried Giedion made passing reference to Tatlin’s Monument in Space, Time, and Architecture, but offered no sustained analysis.  41. Alina Abramova, “Tatlin (1885-1953), K vosmidesiatiletiiu so dnai rozhdeniia,” Dekor- ativnoe iskusstvo SSSR, no. 2 (1966): 5-7.  42. Vittorio De Feo, URSS architettura, 1917-1936 (Rome: Editori Riuniti, 1963); Anatole Kopp, Ville et révolution (Paris: Editions Anthropos, 1967); Troels Andersen, ed. Vladimir Tatlin (Stockholm: Moderna Museet, 1968).  43. Ernesto Nathan Rogers, “Russia, contenuto e forma,” Casabella continuitd, no. 262 (1962): V.  Bibliography  Abramova, Alina. “Tatlin (1885-1953), K vosmidesiatiletiiu so dnai rozhdeniia.” Dekorativnoe iskusstvo SSSR, no. 2 (1966): 5-7.  Andersen, Troels, ed. Viadimir Tatlin. Stockholm: Moderna Museet, 1968.  — “On the reconstruction of the tower, 1967-68.” In Vladimir Tatlin, edited by Troels Andersen, 23-5. Stockholm: Moderna Museet, 1968.  De Feo, Vittorio. URSS architettura, 1917-1936. Rome: Editori Riuniti, 1963.  Ehrenburg, Elias. “Ein Entwurf Tatlins.” Frihlicht, no. 3 (Spring 1922): 92-3.  Ehrenburg, Il’ia. A vse-taki ona vertitsia. Berlin: Gelikon, 1922.  — “La tour de Tatline,” L’Esprit Nouveau 14 (1922): 1680.  Ginzburg, Moisei la. Stil’ i epokha. Moscow: Gosizdat, 1924.  “Konstruktivizm v arkhitekture.” Sovremennaia arkhitektura 3, no. 5 (1928): 145.  Gough, Maria. “Model Spectacle.” In Tatlin: New Art for a New World: International Sympo- sium, edited by Museum Tinguely, 253-7. Ostfildern: Hatje Cantz, 2013.  Kachurin, Pamela. “Working (for) the State: Vladimir Tatlin’s Career in Early Soviet Russia and the Origins of the Monument to the Third International.” Modernism/Modernity 19, no. 1 (2012): 26-7.  Kassak, Lajos and Laszl6 Moholy-Nagy. Buch neuer Kiinstler. Vienna: Buch- und Steindruckerei “Elbemiihl IX,” 1922. 
10. The Modern Project  lL.  12.  13. 14.  15. 16. 17. 18.  19.  20.  21.  22.  23.  24.  25.  26.  . Arthur Korn, Glas im Bau und als Gebvauchsgegenstand (Berlin: Ernst Pollak Ver-  lag, 1929).  . As anoun that derives from the adjective sachlich and the noun Sache, Sachlichkeit has  been translated in numerous ways: objectivity, thingness, practicality, straightforward- ness, functionalism, realism, and matter-of-factness.  . Paul Scheerbart, “Licht und Luft,” Ver Sacrum 1, no. 7 (1898): 13. 10.  Cornelius Partsch, “Paul Scheerbart and the Art of Science Fiction,” Science Fiction Stud- ies 29 (2002): 204.  Ivis likely that while Taut was drafting the sketches of this pavilion in July 1913, Gott- fried Heinersdorff, a famous glass painter from Berlin, introduced him to Scheerbart. Immediately after Taut built the Glashaus, Scheerbart published his Glasarchitektur, which Taut accepted as a programmatic account of his building; they even went so far as to dedicate their respective works to each other.  Taut wrote: “Human beings recover gradually their earth, and from this earth they make the carrier of their subtle feelings, the glass. Depending on the excess of their work on the soil, they can carve out the opulence of color in glass by adding metals whose preciousness is ranked according to the lumi- nosity of the color; gold for red, silver for yellow, copper for blue and green, nickel for violet and iron for brown.” Bruno Taut, “Glaserzeugung und Glasbau,” Qualitdt: Wirtschaftliche Bildung und Qualitdtsproduktion 1, no. 1/2 (April/May 1920): 12. Adolf Behne, “Bruno Taut,” Der Sturm 4, no. 198/199 (1914): 183.  Walter Gropius, the organizer of the exhibition, declined Mies’ Kréller-Miiller project by saying that the architecture they were looking for was “something entirely differ-  ent.” Detlef Mertins, “Architectures of Becoming: Mies van der Rohe and the Avant- Garde,” in Mies in Berlin, ed. Barry Bergdoll and Terence Riley (New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 2001), 107.  Bruno Taut, Alpine Avchitektur (Hagen: Folkwang-Verlag, 1919).  Mertins, “Architectures of Becoming,” 114.  Bruno Taut, Modern Architecture (London: The Studio, Ltd., 1929), 71.  Mies, untitled, in Frihlicht 1, no 4 (1922): 124, translated in Neumeyer, The Artless Word, 240. Ibid. Andres Lepik, “Mies and Photomontage, 1910-38,” in Mies in Berlin, ed. Barry Bergdoll and Terence Riley (New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 2001), 325. George Dodds, Building Desire: On the Barcelona Pavilion (New York: Routledge, 2005). Dodds, Building Desire, 14.  Carl Gottfried, “Hochhauser,” Qualitdt 3, no. 5 (1922/23): 63. Cited in Neumeyer, The Artless Word, 3.  Raymond McGrath and Albert C. Frost, Glass in Architecture and Decoration (London: The Architectural Press, 1937), 370.  Robin Evans, “Mies van der Rohe’s Paradoxical Symmetries,” in Translations from Drawing to Building and Other Essays (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997), 233-78. Mertins, “Architectures of Becoming,” 132.  
FriedrichstraBe Skyscraper 11  27. Evans, “Mies van der Rohe’s Paradoxical Symmetries,” 270.  28. Gaston Bachelard, Water and Dreams: An Essay on the Imagination of Matter, trans. Edith R. Farrell (Dallas: The Pegasus Foundation, 1983).  29. C.G. Christofides, “Bachelard’s Aesthetics,” The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 20, no. 3 (Spring, 1962): 263.  Bibliography  Bachelard, Gaston. Water and Dreams: An Essay on the Imagination of Matter. Translated by Edith R. Farrell. Dallas: The Pegasus Foundation, 1983.  Behne, Adolf. “Bruno Taut.” Der Sturm 4, no. 198/199 (1914): 183.  Christofides, C. G. “Bachelard’s Aesthetics.” The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 20, no. 3 (Spring, 1962): 263.  Dodds, George. Building Desire: On the Barcelona Pavilion. New York: Routledge, 2005.  Evans, Robin. “Mies van der Rohe’s Paradoxical Symmetries.” In Translations from Drawing to Building and Other Essays, 233-78. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997.  Gottfried, Carl. “Hochhauser,” Qualitdt 3, no. 5 (1922/23): 63.  Korn, Arthur. Glas im Bau und als Gebrauchsgegenstand. Berlin: Ernst Pollak Verlag, 1929. Lepik, Andres. “Mies and Photomontage, 1910-38.” In Mies in Berlin, edited by Barry Berg- doll and Terence Riley, 325. New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 2001. McGrath, Raymond and Albert C. Frost. Glass in Architecture and Decoration. London: The  Architectural Press, 1937.  Mertins, Detlef. “Architectures of Becoming: Mies van der Rohe and the Avant-Garde.” In Mies in Berlin, edited by Barry Bergdoll and Terence Riley, 107. New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 2001.  Mindrup, Matthew, ed. The Material Imagination: Reveries on Architecture and Matter. Farn- ham, Surrey: Ashgate, 2015.  Neumeyer, Fritz. The Artless Word: Mies Van Der Rohe on the Building Art. Translated by Mark Jarzombek. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991.  Partsch, Cornelius. “Paul Scheerbart and the Art of Science Fiction.” Science Fiction Studies 29 (2002): 202-20.  Riley, Terence. “Making History: Mies van der Rohe and The Museum of Modern Art.” In Mies in Berlin, edited by Barry Bergdoll and Terence Riley, 17. New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 2001.  Scheerbart, Paul, Bruno Taut, and Dennis Sharp, ed. Glass Architecture by Paul Scheerbart and Alpine Architecture by Bruno Taut. Translated by James Palmes and Shirley Palmer. New York, NY: Praeger Publishers, 1972.  “Licht und Luft.” Ver Sacrum 1, no. 7 (1898): 13.  Taut, Bruno. Alpine Architektur. Hagen: Folkwang-Verlag, 1919.  “Glaserzeugung und Glasbau.” Qualitét: Wirtschaftliche Bildung und Qualitatsproduk- tion 1, no. 1/2 (April/May 1920): 12.  — Modern Architecture. London: The Studio, Ltd., 1929.  
Brick Country House Project 11  himself, like his House for the Architect (1914), this time for a site in Postdam-Neuba- blesberg”; see Detlef Mertins, Mies (New York: Phaidon, 2014): 92. Curiously, Mertins’ source is Dietrich Neumann’s un-footnoted extended caption for the Der Neubau drawings in Mies in Berlin, and not Teghetoff. See Dietrich Neumann, “Project for a Brick Country House,” in Mies in Berlin, ed. Terrance Riley and Barry Bergdoll (New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 2001): 194.  4. Ibid.  Oo oN  10.  lL.  12.  13. 14.  15. 16.  17.  18.  19.  20. 21.  . Neumann infers the imaginary layout from the location of a stair in the first floor plan,  and the volumetrics intimated by the massing and fenestration evinced in the perspec- tive; email exchange with Dietrich Neumann, August 10, 2012.  . See Jean Baudrillard, The Ecstasy of Communication (New York: Semiotext(e), 1988): 19. . See Tegethoff, Mies van der Rohe, 43.  See Werner Blaser, Mies van der Rohe: The Art of Structure (New York: Praeger, 1965).  . See Tegethoff, Mies van der Rohe, 42-4. There are, of course, other equally influential  and no less erroneous plans of Mies’ seminal Weimar work, drawn under the archi- tect’s supervision in Chicago. See George Dodds, Building Desire, 129-30.  Ivan Illich has called this phenomenon Bildwelt (a universe of images) which he juxta- poses to Weltbild (an image of the universe). Illich’s neologism of Bildwelt occurs, for example, when a legion of images is available to us in a search engine’s millisecond, far more than one can apprehend, let alone study.  The Mies in Berlin compendium to the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) exhibition of the same name, is an excellent case in point. It contains several high quality reproduc- tions of the brick villa drawings, yet they vary substantially in quality and clarity; even in the same book, one’s apprehension of these images can vary widely owing to the particulars of their reproduction. Terence Riley and Barry Bergdoll, ed., Mies in Berlin (New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 2001), passim.  Hans Soeder, “Architecktur auf der Grossen Berliner Kunstausstellung 1924,” Der Neubau 6, no.13 (1924): 153-8.  Hans Richter, “Der neue Baumeister,” Qualitdt 4, no. 1/2 January/February, 1925): 3-9. Paul Westheim, “Mies van der Rohe: Entwicklung eines Architekten,” Das Kunstblatt 9, no. 4 (April, 1925): 110. Also see Tegethoff, “From Obscurity to Maturity,” 90, n. 78. See Tegethoff, Mies van der Rohe, 15-51.  Alfred Barr, Cubism and Abstract Avt (New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 1936): 156.  Ibid. Barr also juxtaposes Gabo’s, “Monument for an Airport” (1925-26) with Berthold Lubetkin’s Penguin Pool at the London Zoo (1935); ibid., 139.  See Werner Graff, “Concerning the So-Called G Group,” Art Journal 23 (Summer, 1964): 280-2.  Siegfried Giedion, Space, Time, and Architecture: The Growth of a New Tradition (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1954), 433; ibid. (1956): 435.  Ibid., 155.  Absent any illustration, Giedion refers to Mies as a “German architect — one of the few whose early work reflects Wright's influence without either being absorbed by it or reducing it to a merely decorative use — | who] developed the ‘windmill’ plan in several 
12 The Modern Project  22. 23. 24. 25. 26.  27.  28.  29.  30. 31. 32.  33. 34. 35.  of his schemes.” In a footnote he expands: “Project for a brick house in 1922,” presum- ably referring to the brick country house; Giedion, Space, Time, and Architecture, 327. Ibid. (1956): 435.  Ibid.  Ibid.  Ibid., 545.  James C. Rose, “Freedom in the Garden: A Contemporary Approach in Landscape Design,” Pencil Points (October, 1938): 639-41. Rose attempts to relate avant-garde art explicitly to landscape design. “The Constructivists probably have the most to offer landscape design because their work deals with space relations in volume. The sense of transparency, and of visibility broken by a secession of planes, as found in their constructions, if translated into terms of outdoor material, would be an approach sufficient in itself to free us from the limitation imposed by the axial sys- tem.” Rose, “Freedom in the Garden,” 642. On further implications in landscape and garden art, see George Dodds, “Freedom from the Garden: On the Work of Gabriel Guévrékian,” in Tradition and Innovation in the French Garden Art: Chapters of a New History, ed. John Hunt and Michel Conan (Philadelphia: Penn Press, 2002), 184-202.  Rose, “Freedom in the Garden,” 639. Also see Marc Trieb, “Axioms for a Modern Land- scape Architecture,” in Modern Landscape Architecture: A Critical Review, ed. Marc Tried (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992): 40.  Rose’s caption to the reoriented van Doesburg painting and the plan of the Brick Coun- try House Project speaks for itself: “Recognizable continuity of the contemporary style from pattern to architecture to landscape, is exemplified in two more illustrations from Cubism and Abstract Art ... They are “Russian Dance’ by Doesburg ... and a house plan by Architect Mies van der Rohe.” Ibid.  Kenneth Frampton, Modern Architecture: A Critical History, 3rd ed. (London: Thames and Hudson: 1992) 164.  bid.  Alan Colquoun, Modern Architecture (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002), 174. bid., 260, n. 27. This is the tactic used by Colin Rowe and Robert Slutzky in their essay on phenomenal transparency — flattening out the image of, for example, the Villa Stein de Monzie at Garches (1927), until one apprehends it as a two dimensional image, dif- erent only in degree form the Synthetic Cubist works to which the authors equate it. See Colin Rowe and Robert Slutzky, “Transparency: Literal and Phenomenal,” in Transparency, ed. Colin Rowe, Robert Slutzky, and Bernhard Hoesli (Basel: Birkhauser, 1997): 21-55.  Jean-Louis Cohen, The Future of Architecture since 1889 (London: Phaidon, 2012): 148-51. bid., 151.  Mies would later reinvent himself, first in response to the new political demands of the azi propaganda machine and the exigencies required to keep the Bauhaus operating, and later, when he emigrated to the United States. Indeed, the design and construction of the Seagram Building (1958) in New York, his most celebrated large-scale building, seems the final act of Mies’ quintessentially American reinvention. When negotiating  
36.  37.  38.  39.  40. 41.  42. 43.  44. 45. 46. 47.  48. 49.  Brick Country House Project 13  the logistics of designing Seagram with Phyllis Lambert and Philip Johnson, after it became clear that Mies would need a younger associated architect in New York, he unexpectedly suggested to Johnson, “Shall we make it Van der Rohe and Johnson?” See Phyllis Lambert, Building Seagram (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2013), 36 and 122. Invariably capable of accommodating himself to altering terrain, to accomplish the design and construction of Seagram, Mies transformed himself yet again, into the American avatar “van der Rohe,” a suffix never legally acquired in 1921, but now explicitly adopted in his contract with Johnson. For a discussion of Mies’ transformation in 1921 and his appropriation of “van der Rohe,” see Franz Schulz, Mies van der Rohe: A Critical Biography (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1985): 104.  Barry Bergdoll, “The Nature of Mies’s Space,” in Mies in Berlin, ed. Terence Riley and Barry Bergdoll (New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 2001): 66-105. See specifi- cally 67-74.  Hermann Muthesius, Stil-architektur und Baukunst (Berlin: 1902), passim. See Hermann Muthesius, Style-Architecture and Building-Art: Transformations of Architecture in the Nineteenth Century and its Present Condition (Santa Monica: The Getty Center For the History of Art, 1994), passim.  Peter Collins, Changing Ideals in Modern Architecture: 1750-1950 (London: Faber and Faber, 1965) 42.  Hermann Muthesius, Landhaus und Garten, 2nd rev. ed. (Munich: F. Bruckmann, 1910), xxv, cited in Bergdoll, “The Nature of Mies’s Space,” 72.  Bergdoll, “The Nature of Mies’s Space,” 69.  Peter Behrens, “Der Modeme Garten,” Berliner Tageblatt 40, no. 291 (June 10, 1911, reprint edition, Berlin: Piickler Gesellschaft, 1981) 9. Cited in Bergdoll, “The Nature of Mies’s Space,” 76. Also see 374, n. 34.  Bergdoll, “The Nature of Mies’s Space,” 84.  Bergdoll, “The Nature of Mies’s Space,” 84. Also see 375, n, 70. The note refers to Tegethoffs observation regarding the status of the photograph of the original drawing being cut, which seems unrelated to Bergdoll’s assertion. Tegethoff's com- mentary regarding the cropping of the print (not the negative as the print in the MoMA collection is not cropped) is in reference to the assertion that there was an actual site for the project — indeed, probably the same one as the Concrete Coun- try House project from the earlier year. It in no way supports invented terraces and imagined frames of non-existent views for an undisclosed site that probably does not exist.  Bergdoll, “The Nature of Mies’s Space.”  Giedion, Space, Time, and Architecture, 435.  Bergdoll, “The Nature of Mies’s Space.”  Mark Jarzombek, “Mies van der Rohe’s New National Gallery and the Problem of Context,” Assemblage 2 (February, 1987): 32-43.  See Tegethoff, Mies van der Rohe 87., fn. 80.  Jean Baudrillard, The Ecstasy of Communication (New York: Semiotext(e), 1988): 19.  
12 The Modern Project  12. 13. 14.  15.  16.  17.  18.  19.  20.  21. 22. 23. 24.  25.  26.  27.  28.  29.  30.  Robert Van’t Hoff’s Villa at Huis ter Heide, near Utrecht, 1916.  Jan Wils’ Hotel De Dubbele Sleutel, Woerden, 1918-19.  See Frank Lloyd Wright’s Unity Temple (1908) and Robie House (1910), and Berlage’s St. Hubertus Hunting Lodge (1914) and later work, First Church of Christ, Scientist (design 1922, construction 1924-26).  Jaffé, De Stijl,160-1. Van Doesburg, “The will to style,” in Peterson, De Stijl, 1922. Jaffé, De Stijl, 93-4. Bart Van der Leck, “The Place of Modern Painting in Architecture,” in Peterson, De Stijl 1917-18.  Jaffé, De Stijl, 101. Van Doesburg, “Notes on Monumental Art,” in Peterson, De Stijl 1918-19.  Els Hoek, ed., Theo van Doesburg: Oecuvre Catalogue (Utrecht: Centraal Museum, 2000), 220. Letter dated July 31, 1918.  Hoek, Theo van Doesburg, 224. Letter dated June 17, 1918.  Theo Van Doesburg and Cornelis Van Eesteren, “Vers une Construction Collective” (Towards a Collective Construction). See Peterson, De Stijl VI, no. 6/7 (1924): images from the Paris exhibition and a re—print of “Vers une Construction Collective.”  Van Doesburg and Van Eesteren, “Vers une Construction Collective.”  Hoek, Theo van Doesburg, 343.  “Développement d’une architecture démontré par une maison particulieve.”  Evert Van Straaten, Theo van Doeshurg: Painter Architect (The Hague: SDU Publishers, 1988), 115. Also supported after a literature review in Hoek, Theo van Doesburg, 344. Evert Van Straaten, Theo van Doesburg: Constructor of the New Life (Otterlo: Kréller— Miiller Museum, 1994), 46 and 49. This is Van Doesburg’s 1927 reflection on the 1923 approach. Some have noted a lack of correspondence between the height, width, or depth to particular colors. I don’t believe that Van Doesburg’s words should be read this way; rather color, generally, was used as another device to treat space — specifically, architectural space’s three dimensions (height, depth, width) — plastically.  Such pictorial parallel projection drawings were used by architects, engineers, and geometers in the late nineteenth to early twentieth century. Prior to 1923: engineer Auguste Choisy, mathematician Howard Hinton, architect Claude Bragdon, architect Auguste Perret, architect Walter Gropius, and designer Herbert Bayer.  Fora history of the development of oblique parallel projection and orthographic axonomet- ric parallel projection, see Hilary Bryon, “Revolutions in Space: Parallel Projections in the Early Modern Era,” Architectural Research Quarterly 12, no. 3-4 (December 2008): 337-46. In at least one case, Van Doesburg himself loosely referred to similar parallel projection drawings as “axonometries.” See Theo Van Doesburg, On European Architecture: Com- plete Essays from Het Bouwbedrijf 1924-1931, trans. from the Dutch by Charlotte Loeb and Arthur Loeb (Basel: Birkhauser Verlag, 1990), 245-6, Theo Van Doesburg, “Develop- ing a Spatial-Functional Architecture,” Het Bouwbedrijf 6 July 1929): 305-8.  Hoek, Theo van Doesburg, 369. Later, an identical set of tracings was developed by Van Does- burg as Constructions of Space-Time. Van Doesburg inscribed two drawings, both dated 1924 as “Construction de Vespacetemps HT” and “Construction de l’espace-temps II.” These drawings are effectively identical to Construction of Color drawings no. 21 and no. 22, respectively. The images in the exhibition correspond as follows: no. 16 to no. 20; no. 17 to no. 21; no. 18 to no. 22; and no. 19 to no. 23.  
31.  32.  33.  34.  35.  36. 37. 38.  39. 40.  41.  42.  43.  44.  45.  Contra-Construction 13  Joost Baljeu, Theo van Doesburg (New York: Macmillan Publishing, 1974), 142; Van Doesburg, “Towards Plastic Architecture,” in Peterson, De Stijl, 1924.  See Peterson, De Stijl 6, 6/7 (1924), 392, four juxtaposed drawings of Maison Particuliére: “Architectural development of a private house: 1 and 2 Contra—Constructions (colors: red, yellow, blue, black, white and gray); 3 and 4 Space-time relationship between sur- face and mass of architecture.” 1 and 2 correspond to exhibit nos. 22, 23; 3 and 4 are colored oblique projections of the architecture, one worm’s eye and one bird’s eye view — exhibit nos. 25, 27.  Hoek, Theo van Doesburg, 370. These drawings do not seem to have been made for an exhibition or any other direct function. They remained in Nelly Van Doesburg’s pos- session until 1947. Also, it seems possible that the drawings were not inscribed with title and date until completion.  See Linda Dalrymple Henderson, The Fourth Dimension and Non—Euclidean Geometry in Modern Art (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1983). Van Doesburg was partially influenced by the work of Hinton’s The Fourth Dimension.  Cited in Henderson, The Fourth Dimension. André Tudesq’s interview with Gleizes, 1912, “Du Cubisme et de ses detracteurs; Une Quelle autour de quelques toiles,” Paris—Midi 4 (October 1912): 1.  Jaffé, De Stijl, 154. Van Doesburg, “The will to style.”  Jaffé, De Stijl, 192. Van Doesburg and Van Eesteren, “Vers une Construction Collective.” Baljeu, Theo van Doesburg, 175-80. Theo Van Doesburg, “Space-Time and Color,” in Peterson, De Stijl 1928.  Baljeu, Theo van Doesburg, 180; Van Doesburg, “Space-Time and Color.”  Hoek, Theo van Doesburg, 408-9. Only two of the three were finished; the third was traced out, but uncolored.  The original, Paris exhibition item no. 21... and Construction de l’espace-temp II, Con- struction des couleurs dans la 4éme dimension de l’espace-temps.  See Robert Willis, “On the Construction of the Vaults of the Middle Ages,” Transactions of the Royal Institute of British Architects 1, pt. 2 (1942): Plates 1-3 and Robert Willis, Remarks on the Architecture of the Middle Ages (1935), Plate 1. See also, Auguste Choisy, Histoire de Varchitecture (Paris: Baranger, 1905).  Choisy, Histoire de l'architecture, Preface note, “...Le lecteur a sous les yeux, a la fois, le plan, Vextérieur de Védifice, sa coupe et ses dispositions intérieures.”  Le Corbusier-Saugnier, “Trois rappels 4 MM. Les Architectes,” L’esprit nouveau, no. 4 (December 1920): 457-70, esp. 458. Also reprinted in Vers une Architecture, 1923. Van Doesburg, On European Architecture, 246, Van Doesburg, “Developing a Spatial— Functional Architecture.” The essay includes three bird’s-eye view oblique projections by Alberto Sartoris, 1928.  Bibliography  Baljeu, Joost. Theo van Doesburg. New York: Macmillan Publishing, 1974.  Bryon, Hilary. “Revolutions in Space: Parallel Projections in the Early Modern Era.” Aychi-  tectuval Research Quarterly 12, no. 3-4 (December 2008): 337-46. 
Plan Voisin 11  . See Flora Samuel and Inge Linder-Gaillard, Sacred Concrete: Le Corbusier and the Church  (Basel: Birkhauser, 2013), for a discussion of his world view.  . Tag Gronberg has written of the importance of also considering the “more ephemeral  (and ostensibly trivial) aspects of the 1925 exposition” as a whole in order to understand the way in which the Esprit Nouveau Pavilion and the Plan Voisin set itself apart. See Tag Gronberg, “Modernity on Display at the 1925 International Exposition,” in L’Esprit nouveau: Purism in Paris, ed. Carol S. Eliel, Francoise Ducros, and Tag Gronberg (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 2001), 124.  . For an in-depth discussion of their origins see Jean Louis Cohen’s introduction to Le  Corbusier, Toward an Architecture (Frances Lincoln: London, 2007), 10, originally published as Vers une architecture in 1923.  . Le Corbusier, Toward an Architecture, 83. . It is mentioned, for example, in Le Corbusier, Toward an Architecture, 121.  7. Dora Wiebenson, “Utopian Aspects of Tony Garnier’s Cité Industrielle,” Journal of the  lL.  12. 13.  14.  15.  16.  17.  18. 19.  20.  Society of Architectural Historians 19, no. 1 (March 1960): 16-24.  . See Charles Jencks, Le Corbusier and the Continual Revolution in Architecture (New York:  The Montacelli Press, 2000) for a particularly rounded account of Le Corbusier's life and work.  . Le Corbusier, The City of Tomorrow, 85 10.  See Sarah Menin and Flora Samuel, Nature and Space: Aalto and Le Corbusier (London: Routledge, 2000) for a psychoanalytically driven discussion of the importance of nature to Le Corbusier.  See for example, Letter Le Corbusier to Edouard Trouin, March 25, 1956, FLC 13 01 108.  Le Corbusier, The City of Tomorrow, 298-301.  The only funding Le Corbusier received for this was from the sugar manufacturer Henri Fruges at Pessac. He was soon to be disillusioned. Robert Fishman, Urban Utopias in the Twentieth Century: Ebenezer Howard, Frank Lloyd Wright, and Le Corbusier (Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 1982), 225. It should be mentioned that he also unsuccess- fully sought backing from the Vichy regime early in World War II, ibid., 244-51. Lle| Clorbusier |S|augnier], “Les Maisons “Voisin,” L’Esprit Nouveau, no. 2, 211-5. Cited in Mary McLeod, “Architecture or Revolution: Taylorism, Technocracy, and Social Change,” Art Journal 43, no. 2, (Summer, 1983): 141.  Fishman, Urban Utopias, 219.  Antonio Amado Lorenzo and Penelope Hierons, Voiture minimum: Le Corbusier and the Automobile (Cambridge MA: MIT, 2011), 5.  Carol §. Eliel, Francoise Ducros, and Tag Gronberg, ed., L’Esprit nouveau: Purism in Paris (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 2001), 112.  Eliel, Ducross, and Gronberg, L’Esprit nouveau, 107.  See, for example, Jean Louis Cohen, introduction to Toward an Architecture, by Le Corbusier, 1-82. Also Tim Benton, Le Corbusier conférencier (Paris: Moniteur, 2007). Published in English as The Rhetoric of Modernism: Le Corbusier as a Lecturer (Basel: Birkhauser, 2009).  Flora Samuel, Le Corbusier and the Architectural Promenade (Basel: Birkauser, 2010): 62-3. 
12 The Modern Project  21. 22. 23.  24.  25. 26. 27.  28. 29.  30. 31. 32. 33. 34. 35. 36.  37.  38. 39. 40. 41. 42. 43.  44.  45.  46. 47. 48. 49. 50. 51.  Le Corbusier, The City of Tomorrow, 7.  Le Corbusier, Toward an Architecture, 255.  Le Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret, Oeuvre complete 1919-1929 (Zurich: Les Editions d’architecture, 1964), 34-9.  Jean Jenger, Le Corbusier: Architect of a New Age (London: Thames and Hudson, 1996), 41. In amongst Le Corbusier’s collection of books is Guillaume Apollinaire, Alcools: Poémes 1898-1913 (Paris: NRF, 1947) in FLC.  Paul Turner, The Education of Le Corbusier (New York, 1977), 131.  Eliel, Ducros, and Gronberg, L’Esprit nouveau, 103.  Amédée Ozenfant and Charles-Edouard Jeanneret, “After Cubism,” in Purism in Paris, 1918-1925, ed. Carol S. Eliel, 138 (New York: Harry N Abrams, 2002).  Ibid., 165.  Le Corbusier, The Decorative Art of Today (London: The Architectural Press, 1987), xiv. Originally published as Le Corbusier, L’Art décoratif d’aujourd’hui (Paris: Editions Crés, 1925).  Le Corbusier, Toward an Architecture, 266.  Tbid., xviii.  Le Corbusier and Jeanneret Oeuvre complete, Vol. 1, 100.  Ibid.,104. Le Corbusier, The Decorative Art of Today, xxiii. Ibid., 72. Le Corbusier, Precisions on the Present State of Architecture and City Planning (Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 1991), 111. Originally published as Précisions sur un état present de Varch- itecture et de Vurbanisme (Paris: Crés, 1930).  Gronberg, 109. Flora Samuel, Le Corbusier: Architect and Feminist (London: Academy, 2004), 52.  Le Corbusier and Jeanneret, Oeuvre complete, Vol. 1, 100.  Le Corbusier, Toward an Architecture, 259.  Le Corbusier and Jeanneret, Oeuvre complete Vol. 1, 104.  Ibid., 100.  Gronberg, 103.  Le Corbusier, The Decorative Art of Today (London: Architectural Press, 1987), 188, orig- inally published as L’Art decorative d’aujourd’hui (Paris: Editions Crés, 1925).  Le Corbusier and Jeanneret, Oeuvre compléte 1919-1929, 95. This image made a strong impression on Alvar Aalto.  Le Corbusier, “Le Plan Voisin de Paris,” Almanach d’architecture moderne (Paris: Editions connivences, n.d.) quoted in Gronberg, 104.  Le Corbusier and Jeanneret, Oecuvre compléte 1919-1929, 104.  Gronberg, 103.  Le Corbusier and Jeanneret, Oeuvre complete 1919-1929, 37.  Le Corbusier. The City of Tomorrow, 94.  Preface to second 1924 edition. Le Corbusier, Toward an Architecture, 83  Le Corbusier in “Preface to present edition. 1945,” Le Corbusier. The City of Tomorrow and its Planning, 11.  
52. 53.  54. 55. 56. 57. 58. 59. 60. 6l. 62. 63. 64. 65.  66. 67. 68. 69.  70. 71. 72. 73. 74. 75. 76. 77. 78. 79. 80. 81.  82.  83.  84.  85.  Plan Voisin 13  Le Corbusier, The Decorative Arts of Today, 74.  Le Corbusier’s writings are sometimes oddly random. It is significant that he didn’t always apply his strict ordering principles to its content.  Le Corbusier, The City of Tomorrow, 73-4.  Ibid., 75.  Ibid.  Ibid, 93.  Ibid, 90.  Ibid, 78.  Ibid, 76.  Le Corbusier, Toward an Architecture, 121.  Le Corbusier, Toward an Architecture, 135.  Le Corbusier, The City of Tomorrow, 81  Le Corbusier, Toward an Architecture, 190.  See the chapter, “Regulating Lines,” in Le Corbusier, Toward an Architecture, 131-45. Le Corbusier, Modulor (London: Faber, 1954). Originally published as Le Modulor (Paris: Editions d’architecture d’aujourd hui, 1950).  Le Corbusier, The City of Tomorrow, 93.  Ibid, 91. Ibid, 92. Le Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret, Oeuvre Complete Volume 3, 1934-38 (Zurich: Les editions d’architecture 1995), 157. Originally published in 1938.  Samuel, Le Corbusier and the Architectural Promenade, 61.  Le Corbusier, The City of Tomorrow, 90.  Ibid, 85.  Ibid, 86.  Ibid, 88.  Ibid, 88, n.2.  Le Corbusier, Toward an Architecture, 254.  Le Corbusier, The City of Tomorrow, 84.  Chapter entitled “Physic of Surgery” in Le Corbusier, The City of Tomorrow, 263.  Le Corbusier, The City of Tomorrow, 85.  Ibid, 84.  Antonio Amado Lorenzo and Penelope Hierons, Voiture Minimum: Le Corbusier and the Automobile (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2011), 8.  Le Corbusier. The City of Tomorrow, 89. First published in French 1924 as Urbanisme. See Nikolaus Pevsner, Pioneers of Modern Design (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1949; originally published in 1936 under the title Pioneers of the Modern Movement).  Le Corbusier was later to express a marked abhorrence for functionalism because it denied the “magical” qualities of architecture. André Wogenscky, Les Mains de Le Cor- busier (Paris: Editions de Grenelle, n.d.), 41.  See “The Functional City” in Eric Mumford, The CIAM Discourse on Urbanism, 1928-1960 (Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 2000), 59-123.  
14 The Modern Project  86. Commission of the European Communities (1990) Green Paper on the Urban Environ- ment, COM (90) 218. Brussels: CEC. Quoted in Jo Foord, “Mixed Use Trade Offs: How to Live and Work in a “Compact City’ Neighbourhood,” Built Environment 36, no. 1 (2010): 47-62.  87. Fishman, Urban Utopias in the Twentieth Century, 207.  88. See Flora Samuel, “The Unité Marseilles,” in Common Ground: A Critical Reader, ed. Kieran Long and David Chipperfield (Venice Biennale: Massilio, 2012) for a discussion of this.  Bibliography  Apollinaire, Guillaume. Alcools: Poémes 1898-1913. Paris: NRF, 1947.  Benton, Tim. Le Corbusier conférencier. Paris: Moniteur, 2007.  The Rhetoric of Modernism: Le Corbusier as a Lecturer. Basel: Birkhauser, 2009.  Cohen, Jean-Louis. Introduction to Toward an Architecture, by Le Corbusier, 1-82. London: Frances Lincoln, 2007.  Eliel, Carol S., Francoise Ducros, and Tag Gronberg, ed. L’Esprit nouveau: Purism in Paris. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 2001.  Fishman, Robert. Urban Utopias in the Twentieth Century: Ebenezer Howard, Frank Lloyd Wright, and Le Corbusier. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1982.  Foord, Jo. “Mixed Use Trade Offs: How to Live and Work in a ‘Compact City’ Neighbour- hood.” Built Environment 36, no. 1 (2010): 47-62.  Gronberg, Tag. “Modernity on Display at the 1925 International Exposition.” In L’Esprit nouveau: Purism in Paris, edited by Carol S. Eliel, Francoise Ducros, and Tag Gron- berg, 101-28. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 2001.  Jacobs, Jane. The Death and Life of Great American Cities. New York: Random House, 1961.  Jencks, Charles. Le Corbusier and the Continual Revolution in Architecture. New York: The Montacelli Press, 2000.  Jenger, Jean. Le Corbusier: Architect of a New Age. London: Thames and Hudson, 1996.  Le Corbusier. “Le Plan Voisin de Paris.” In Almanach d’architecture modern. Paris: Editions connivences, n.d.  Toward an Architecture [1923]. Frances Lincoln: London, 2007.  The City of Tomorrow and its Planning [1924]. Translated by Frederick Etchells. Lon-  don: Architectural Press, 1947.  The Decorative Art of Today |1925]. London: The Architectural Press, 1987.  ——— Modulor. London: Faber, 1954. Originally published as Le Modulor. Paris: Editions @architecture d’aujourd hui, 1950.  —_—— Precisions on the Present State of Architecture and City Planning. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991.  Le Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret, Oeuvre compléte, 1919-1929. Zurich: Les Editions d’arch- itecture, 1964.  —— Oeuvre complete, 1934-1938 [1938]. Zurich: Les Editions d’architecture, 1995.  Lorenzo, Antonio Amado and Penelope Hierons. Voiture Minimum: Le Corbusier and the Automobile. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2011.  
12 The Modern Project  10.  lL.  12.  13.  14.  15.  16.  17. 18.  19. 20.  21.  22. 23. 24. 25.  26. 27. 28. 29. 30. 31.  32.  33.  . Martelius, “Langs bokens rygg,” 16; and Stuart Wrede, The Architecture of Erik Gunnar  Asplund (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1980), 109.  For an in-depth study of that period see Barbara Miller Lane, National Romanticism and Modern Architecture in Germany and the Scandinavian Countries (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000).  Claes Caldenby, “Time, Life and Work: An Introduction to Asplund,” in Asplund: A Book, ed. Claes Caldenby and Olof Hultin (Stockholm: Arkitektur Férlag, 1985), 12. Knut Tynell, “Stockholms Stadsbibliotek,” Byggmdstaren (1922): 147, 150.  Erik Gunnar Asplund, “Our Architectonic Perception of Space,” (orig. 1931), here from Michael Asgaard Andersen, ed., Nordic Architects Write: A Documentary Anthology (Abingdon: Routledge, 2008), 325.  Hakon Ahlberg, “Gunnar Asplund Architect,” in Gunnar Asplund Architect, 1885-1940: Plans, Sketches and Photographs |1943], ed. Gustav Holmdahl, Sven Ivar Lind, and Kjell Odeen (Stockholm: Tidskriften Byggméstaren, 1986), 43.  Robert Venturi, “Diversity, relevance and representation in historicism, or plus ¢a change ... plus a plea for pattern all over architecture...” Architectural Record 6 (1982): 116. Steen Eiler Rasmussen, Nordische Baukunst: Beispiele und Gedanken zur Baukunst unserer Zeit in Ddnemark und Schweden (Berlin: Verlag Ernst Wasmuth, 1940), 120.  Asplund, “Aktuella arkitektoniska faror fér Stockholm, Hyreshusen,” 130 (his italics). Erik Gunnar Asplund, “Bilder med randanteckningar fran konstindustribyggnaderna pa Géteborgutstallningen,” Byggmdstaren 22 (1923): 277-8.  Eva Eriksson, Mellan Tradition och Modernitet (Stockholm: Ordfront, 2000), 473.  Eva Eriksson, “Rationalism and Classicism 1915-1930,” in 20th-Century Architecture: Sweden, ed. Claes Caldenby, Joran Lindvall, and Wilfred Wang (Munich: Prestel, 1998), 52.  Kenneth Frampton, “The Classical Tradition and the European Avant-Garde: Notes on France, Germany and Scandinavia 1912-1937” and Henrik O. Andersson, “Swedish Architecture around 1920,” both in Simo Paavilainen, ed., Nordic Classicism, 1910-30 (Helsinki: Museum of Finnish Architecture, 1982).  Kay Fisker, “Svensk: Nogle spredte indtryk,” Arkitekten 5-6 (1917): 41-6, 49-56. Erik Gunnar Asplund, “Litteratur: Liselund,” Arkitektur 3 (1919): 44-5.  Frampton, “The Classical Tradition and the European Avant-Garde,” 170.  Uno Ahrén, “Turning Points” (orig. 1925), translated in Andersen, Nordic Architects Write, 311-23.  Morton Shand, “Stockholm, 1930,” Architectural Review 68 (1930): 67-72.  Uno Ahrén, “Reflexioner i Stadsbiblioteket,” Byggmdstaren 18 (1928): 93-5.  Ibid.  Ibid., 95.  Aage Refn, “Stockholmsudstillingen 1930,” Arkitekten 7-8 (1930): 133.  Sverre Poulsen, “Funkis 1930” and “Stockholmutstillingens Boligavdeling,” Byggekunst (1930): 122-3, 124-8.  Alvar Aalto, “The Stockholm Exhibition 1930” (orig. 1930), here from Géran Schildt, Alvar Aalto in His Own Words (New York: Rizzoli, 1998), 72.  Ibid., 76.  
Stockholm Public Library 13  34, Henry-Russell Hitchcock and Philip Johnson, The International Style (New York: W.W. Norton & Co, 1932).  35. Erik Gunnar Asplund et al., acceptera (orig. 1931), here from Modern Swedish Design. Three Founding Texts, ed. Lucy Creagh, Helena Kaberg, and Barbara Miller Lane (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2008) 338.  36. Ibid.  37. Johan Ellefsen, “What is Contemporary Architecture?” (orig. 1927), and Poul Henning- sen, “Tradition and Modernism” (orig. 1927), translated in Andersen, Nordic Architects Write, 215-25, 19-33.  38. Aalto, “Town Planning and Public Buildings” (orig. 1966), here from Schildt, Alvar Aalto, 213-14.  Bibliography  Aalto, Alvar. “The Stockholm Exhibition 1930.” In Alvar Aalto in His Own Words, edited by Goran Schildt. New York: Rizzoli, 1998.  Ahlberg, Hakon. “Gunnar Asplund Architect.” In Gunnar Asplund Architect, 1885-1940: Plans, Sketches and Photographs |1943], edited by Gustav Holmdahl, Sven Ivar Lind, and Kjell Odeen. Stockholm: Tidskriften Byggmastaren, 1986.  Ahrén, Uno. “Turning Points.” In Nordic Architects Write: A Documentary Anthology, edited by Michael Asgaard Andersen, 311-23. Abingdon: Routledge, 2008.  “Reflexioner i Stadsbiblioteket.” Byggmdstaren 18 (1928): 93-5.  Andersen, Michael Asgaard, ed. Nordic Architects Write: A Documentary Anthology. Abingdon: Routledge, 2008.  Andersson, Henrik O. “Swedish Architecture around 1920.” In Nordic Classicism, 1910-30, edited by Simo Paavilainen. Helsinki: Museum of Finnish Architecture, 1982. Asplund, Erik Gunnar. “Aktuella arkitektoniska faror fér Stockholm Hyreshusen.” Arkitek-  tur (1916): 127-34. ——— “Planmiassigheten i Stadsbyggandet i Géteborg och i Stockholm.” Arkitektur 8 (1918): 109-10. “Litteratur: Liselund,” Arkitektur 3 (1919): 44-5. “Bilder med randanteckningar fran konstindustribyggnaderna pa Géteborgutstill- ningen.” Byggmdstaren 22 (1923): 277-8. “Nagra Uppgifter om Biblioteksbygget.” Bygemdstaren 18 (1928): 100-4.  “Our Architectonic Perception of Space.” In Nordic Architects Write: A Documentary Anthology, edited by Michael Asgaard Andersen. Abingdon: Routledge, 2008. Bergsten, Carl G. “Stockholms Stadsbiblioteks Férlaggning.” Byggmédstaren 24 (1923): 305-8. Caldenby, Claes. “Time, Life and Work: An Introduction to Asplund.” In Asplund: A Book,  edited by Claes Caldenby and Olof Hultin. Stockholm: Arkitektur Férlag, 1985. Caldenby, Claes and Olof Hultin, ed. Asplund: A Book. Stockholm: Arkitektur Férlag, 1985. Caldenby, Claes, Joran Lindvall, and Wilfred Wang. 20th-Century Architecture: Sweden.  Munich: Prestel, 1998.  
Goetheanum 13  8. Kenneth Bayes, Living Architecture: Rudolf Steiner’s Ideas in Practice (Hudson: Anthropo- sophie Press, 1994), 66. 9. In this, Steiner’s thoughts paralleled many others’ in the German milieu, such as Hermann Finsterlin’s. Sharp, Modern Architecture, 151.  10. This was developed by German writers on aesthetic perception and psychology, such as Robert Vischer, Theodor Lipps, and Wilhelm Worringer. For key documentation on empathy theory’s development as Steiner matured, see Harry Francis Mallgrave, ed., Empathy, Form, and Space, Problems in German Aesthetics, 1873-1893 (Santa Monica: Getty Center, 1994). The theory was popularized for English-speakers by Geoffrey Scott’s The Architecture of Humanism (New York: W. W. Norton, 1999). For influences of empathy directly on Steiner, see David Adams, “Rudolf Steiner’s First Goetheanum as an Illustra- tion of Organic Functionalism,” The Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians 51, no. 2 (June 1992): 191. Steiner possessed a copy of Worringer’s Abstraction and Empathy, see Wolfgang Pehnt, Rudolf Steiner, Goetheanum, Dornach (Berlin: Ernst & Sohn, 1991), 33.  11. Sharp, Modern Architecture, 156.  12. Rudolf Steiner and Andrew Beard, ed., Rudolf Steiner, Architecture (London: Sophia  Books, 2003), 9-10, 19-27.  13. Wolfgang Zumdick, “The Central Core of Anthroposophy, Notes on Rudolf Steiner’s  Philosophy,” in Rudolf Steiner: Alchemy of the Everyday, ed. Mateo Kries and Alexander  Von Vegesack (Weil am Rhein: Vitra Design Museum, 2010), 41.  14. Rudolf Steiner’s book was titled: Friedrich Nietzsche: Ein Kampfer Gegen Sein Zeit and  published in 1895. Steiner was deeply moved upon encountering Nietzsche personally.  15. The theosophical hierarchy supported the reincarnation ofa Hindu boy as bearer of the  “Maitreya Buddha” (the “reborn Christ”); Steiner could not accept this. For him, the  birth and passion of Jesus Christ was a unique event in the history of humanity. Zumdick, “The Central Core of Anthroposophy,” 42; see also Pehnt, Rudolf Steiner, 9.  16. Sharp, Modern Architecture, 146.  17. The quotations in this paragraph are drawn from Zumdick, “The Central Core of Anthroposophy,” 43, 47.  18. Andrew Beard, introduction to Rudolf Steiner: Architecture (London: Rudolf Steiner Press, 2003), 3.  19. Walter Kugler, ““World Spirit, Where Are You?!,’ Rudolf Steiner and the Emergence of the Modern Age,” in Kries and Von Vegesack, Rudolf Steiner: Alchemy of the Everyday, 34.  20. Wolfgang Pehnt, “Something Like the Blush of Dawn, The Architecture of Rudolf Steiner,” in Kries and Von Vegesack, Rudolf Steiner: Alchemy of the Everyday, 118. For a full treatment of the relation of Steiner to German Expressionism, see Eugene Anthony Santomasso, “Origins and Aims of German Expressionist Archi- tecture: An Essay into the Expressionist Frame of Mind in Germany, Especially as Typified in the Work of Rudolf Steiner” (Ph.D dissertation, Columbia Univer- sity, 1972).  21. Kugler ““World Spirit, Where Are You?!,”” 33.  22. Pehnt, Rudolf Steiner, 35.  23. Important additional sources regarding the Goetheanum sequence not specifically cited here include Wolfgang Pehnt, J. A. Underwood, and E. Kustner, trans., Expres- sionist Architecture (New York: Thames and Hudson, 1980), 137-48; and Hagen  
14 Revisiting the Modern Project  24. 25.  26.  27.  28.  29.  30. 31.  32.  33. 34.  35.  36.  37. 38. 39. 40.  Biesantz and Arne Klingborg, The Goetheanum: Rudolf Steiner’s Architectural Impulse (London: Rudolph Steiner Press, 1979).  Adams, “Rudolf Steiner’s First Goetheanum,” 191.  For the Malsch project see Pehnt, “Something Like the Blush of Dawn,” 111. For Stuttgart, see Pehnt, Rudolf Steiner, 11. The Stuttgart hall did not survive the Nazi regime; the anthroposophical movement was banned in 1935, the building sold, and the room removed.  Pehnt, “Something Like the Blush of Dawn,” 112. For references to this as a sort of “medieval guild” system (a Bauhiitte), see Mateo Kries, “Furniture Mutations or Design as Natural History, From Rudolf Steiner’s to Contemporary Creation,” in Kries and Von Vegesack, Rudolf Steiner: Alchemy of the Everyday, 209.  For graphic documentation, see Kries and Von Vegesack, Rudolf Steiner: Alchemy of the Everyday, 71, 111. Johannes Thomasius was a prominent male protagonist created by Steiner.  Pehnt, Rudolf Steiner, 10-11. Other draft schemes show the domes already beginning to diverge in size in Munich.  Pehnt, Rudolf Steiner, 11.  See, for example, Steiner, Rudolf Steiner, Architecture, 111.  For documentation, see Klaus-Jiirgen Sembach and Michael Robinson, trans., Henry van de Velde (New York: Rizzoli, 1989), 183-90. Particularly striking as parallels are the curving, downturned eaves, the rounded projection of the entrance, and, most sig- nificantly, the unusual, curved character of the stage area. For further commentary, see Julia Althaus, “Rudolf Steiner and the Performing Arts,” in Kries and Von Vegesack, Rudolf Steiner: Alchemy of the Everyday, 56.  The use of interlocking domes of different sizes likely derives ultimately from Bavarian Rococo church examples such as Balthasar Neumann’s Vierzehnheiligen, though some scholars dismiss this source. See Adams, “Rudolf Steiner’s First Goetheanum,” 198. Adams asserts that the Rococo’s illusionism in domes is very different. Yet Steiner him- self painted his dome with murals.  Adams, “Rudolf Steiner’s First Goetheanum,” 194, 199.  Steiner parted company with Schmid-Curtius in 1914. Ernst Aisenpreis then assumed a greater role.  Steiner himself painted many of the murals. Rudolf Steiner, Architecture as a Synthesis of the Arts: Lectures by Rudolf Steiner (London: Rudolph Steiner Press, 1999), 145. Despite much evidence to the contrary, Steiner rejected claims that his approach was inherently symbolic, claiming that symbolism is only shadows of the spiritual world visible in the sensual. For him, symbols did not need to be interpreted, but would be subliminally perceived and understood by initiates. Pehnt, Rudolf Steiner, 17.  Adams, “Rudolf Steiner’s First Goetheanum,” 202; Pehnt, Rudolf Steiner, 13; Bayes, Living Architecture, 74.  Adams, “Rudolf Steiner’s First Goetheanum,” 183.  Steiner, Architecture as a Synthesis, 163.  Pehnt, “Something Like the Blush of Dawn,” 114.  Pehnt, Rudolf Steiner, 17. Initially, there had been a desire that the surrounding build- ings would occupy points of a yet larger landscape pentagram, but site conditions did  
41.  42.  43.  44.  45.  46.  47.  48.  49.  50. 51.  52. 53.  54. 55.  56.  Goetheanum 15  not allow this. Eventually, a looser idea was adopted and the paths simply followed the contours. The secondary buildings on all sides roughly faced in the direction of the central structure.  See site documentation in Werner Blaser, Katja Steiner, and Bruce Almberg, trans., Nature in Buildings: Rudolf Steiner in Dornach 1913-1925 (Basel: Birkhauser, 2002), 99.  Steiner, Architecture as a Synthesis, 39. Steiner did not himself design all these buildings, but the force of his personal authority gave a consistency.  For Steiner's own extensive comments on this structure, see Steiner, Rudolf Steiner, Architecture, 109-24.  Pehnt, Rudolf Steiner, 19. Adams suggests that the protuberances express the smoke- issuing process happening within. Adams, “Rudolf Steiner’s First Goetheanum,” 187. Pehnt, Rudolf Steiner, 19. Other buildings followed the second Goetheanum and reflected it, such as the 1923 “Eurythmeum,” which was “the infant of the Goethea- num.” Rex Raab, Ame Klingborg, and Ake Fant, Eloquent Concrete: How Rudolph Steiner Employed Reinforced Concrete (London: Rudolph Steiner Press, 1979), 149. Like the main building, this had a freestanding column.  Adams, “Rudolf Steiner’s First Goetheanum,” 184. Steiner never visited Spain. Adams notes that Steiner derived his ideas from the formative principles of nature, whereas Gaudi drew inspiration from nature in a finished, perceptible form. For Chochol, see Pehnt, Rudolf Steiner, 110.  The form of Haus Duldek proves that Steiner did not directly generate the second Goetheanum in response to any direct influence from Mendelsohn. Mendelsohn, it should be noted, derived formal inspiration from machines, not nature directly. For further discussion of relations of Steiner to Mendelsohn, see Pehnt, Rudolf Steiner, 35. For Steiner’s own comments on this interior/ exterior comparison, see Steiner, Rudolf Steiner, Architecture, 188-91.  Pehnt, Rudolf Steiner, 37.  Raab, Klingborg, and Fant, Eloquent Concrete, 109.  Steiner denied that the building derived from any direct, mimetic relationship to nature; see Raab, Klingborg, and Fant, Eloquent Concrete, 31. This parallels his assertion that direct symbolism also played little role in his work. Steiner, Architecture as a Syn- thesis, 96. See also Rudolf Steiner, Das Goetheanum in seinen zehn Jahren, in: Der Goethea- numgedanke inmitten der Kulturkrisis der Gegenwart: Ausgewdhlte Aufsdtze (Dornach: Rudolf Steiner Verlag, 1982), 149.  Steiner, Architecture as a Synthesis, 175.  Coates, Erik Asmussen, 194. Blaser, Steiner, and Almberg, Nature in Buildings, 16. Steiner, Rudolf Steiner, Architecture, 190-1.  Pehnt, Rudolf Steiner, 7.  This particular example was made from a reddish-brown English product called Harbutt’s Plasticine, at a scale of 1:100. Raab, Klingborg, and Fant, Eloquent Con- crete, 44.  When it became operational in 1928, most of its rooms were still bare; see Pehnt, “Something Like the Blush of Dawn,” 119. Internal changes continue to this day, most recently with a major rework of the auditorium’s interior, inserting flanks of seven  
16 Revisiting the Modern Project  57.  58.  59. 60. 6l.  62. 63.  64.  65.  66. 67. 68. 69. 70. 71. 72. 73. 74. 75.  76.  freestanding pillars (akin to those of the original building) designed after Steiner by Christian Hitsch. Christian Thal-Jantzen, introduction to Architecture as a Synthesis, by Steiner, xiv-xv. For a plan and section of these changes, see 161 and for photos, see 165.  For a book-length treatment of the suppression of this “other” by canonical modern- ism, see Colin St. John Wilson, The Other Tradition of Modern Architecture, The Uncom- pleted Project (London: Artifice Books on Architecture, 2007).  Althaus, “Rudolf Steiner and the Performing Arts,” 57. As Pehnt also notes: “Rooms and activities cannot be read for the building in the way twenties architectural func- tionalism used to require.” Pehnt, Rudolf Steiner, 7. The cross-axial wings are not just functional stage wing spaces, for example, but also are filled with stairs, seminar rooms, etc.  Pehnt, Rudolf Steiner, 7.  Althaus, “Rudolf Steiner and the Performing Arts,” 54, 57, 84  The word eurythmy derives from Greek roots meaning a beautiful or harmonious rhythm. Eurythmy is sometimes called “visible music” or “visible speech.” It only became a major force in anthroposophy in 1912/13. Manuel Gogos, “Anthroposophy as a Cultural Medium,” in Kries and Von Vegesack, Rudolf Steiner: Alchemy of the Eve- ryday, 273. Greek and Roman architects used the word to refer to the harmonious pro- portions of a design or building.  Raab, Klingborg, and Fant, Eloquent Concrete, 44.  The use of a reversed trapezoid is unusual. One place it appears, though, interestingly, is in van de Velde’s early schemes for the Werkbund Exhibition Theater, which pro- vided prior inspiration for Steiner. For documentation, see Sembach and Robinson, Henry van de Velde, 184-6.  Raab, Klingborg, and Fant, Eloquent Concrete, 43; Pehnt, “Something Like the Blush of Dawn,” 115.  For documentation of this extraordinary spatial sequence, see Raab, Klingborg, and Fant, Eloquent Concrete, 82-3.  Bayes, Living Architecture, 81.  Sharp, Modern Architecture, 156.  Raab, Klingborg, and Fant, Eloquent Concrete, 68.  bid, 76-7.  Pehnt, Rudolf Steiner, 37.  Raab, Klingborg, and Fant, Eloquent Concrete, 80.  Pehnt, “Something Like the Blush of Dawn,” 119.  Adams, “Rudolf Steiner’s First Goetheanum,” 189.  bid, 190.  nterestingly, these two visible exterior piers support only themselves. Pehnt, “Some- thing Like the Blush of Dawn,” 118. Possibly they derived from the two columns at the Temple of Solomon — seen as Jakin and Boaz. The idea of the seven internal pillars to each side of the first scheme also might have roots there; “Wisdom built her house, and hewed seven pillars.” Pehnt, Rudolf Steiner, 31.  Reinhold J. Fath, “Goetheanum Style and Aesthetic Individualism,” in Kries and Von Vegesack, Rudolf Steiner: Alchemy of the Everyday, 137.  
Goetheanum 17  77. Steiner himself occasionally used the term in an affirmative context; see Pehnt, “Some- thing Like the Blush of Dawn,” 118.  78. Bayes, for example, says expressionism is a mistaken connection. Bayes, Living Archi- tecture, 57.  79. See, for example Hans Morgenthaler, “Expressionism,” in Encyclopedia of 20" Century Architecture, ed. R. Stephen Sennott (New York: Fitzroy Dearborn, 2004), Vol. 1, 427.  80. Pehnt, Rudolf Steiner, 39; see also, Adams, “Rudolf Steiner’s First Goetheanum,” 183.  81. Pehnt, “Something Like the Blush of Dawn,” 118; Raab, Klingborg, and Fant, Eloquent  Concrete, 15.  82. Pehnt, Rudolf Steiner, 39.  83. This is asserted, for instance, in an interview by Paul Virilio. See Kries and Von  Vegesack, Rudolf Steiner: Alchemy of the Everyday, 198.  84. Raab notes how most forms Steiner sculpted were indeed symmetrical; Raab,  Klingborg, and Fant, Eloquent Concrete, 111.  85. Pieter van der Ree, “Living Thought and Plastic Art, Rudolf Steiner and Organic  Architecture,” in Kries and Von Vegesack, Rudolf Steiner: Alchemy of the Everyday, 189.  86. Pieter van der Ree, “Living Thought and Plastic Art,” 191.  87. Pehnt, Rudolf Steiner, 39.  88. Coates, Erik Asmussen, 31, 158-65.  89. For a full discussion of possible progeny, see Bayes, Living Architecture, 92-117.  90. Jeffrey Cook, Seeking Structure from Nature: The Organic Architecture of Hungary (Basel:  Birkhauser, 1996) 29-30. Makovecz’s Community Center in Szigetvar, Hungary, in  particular, seems inspired by Steiner.  Bibliography  Adams, David. “Rudolf Steiner’s First Goetheanum as an Illustration of Organic Function- alism.” The Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians 51, no. 2 June 1992): 182-204.  Althaus, Julia. “Rudolf Steiner and the Performing Arts.” In Rudolf Steiner: Alchemy of the Everyday, edited by Mateo Kries and Alexander Von Vegesack. Weil am Rhein: Vitra Design Museum, 2010.  Bayes, Kenneth. Living Architecture: Rudolf Steiner’s Ideas in Practice. Hudson: Anthropo- sophic Press, 1994.  Beard, Andrew. Introduction to Rudolf Steiner: Architecture, by Rudolf Steiner. London: Rudolf Steiner Press, 2003.  Blaser, Werner, Katja Steiner, and Bruce Almberg, trans. Nature in Buildings: Rudolf Steiner in Dornach 1913-1925. Basel: Birkhauser, 2002.  Biesantz, Hagen and Ame Klingborg. The Goetheanum: Rudolf Steiner’s Architectural Impulse. London: Rudolph Steiner Press, 1979.  Coates, Gary J. Erik Asmussen, Architect. Stockholm: Byggférlaget, 1997.  Cook, Jeffrey. Seeking Structure from Nature: The Organic Architecture of Hungary. Basel: Bir- khauser, 1996. 
10 Revisiting the Modern Project  10.  lL.  12.  13.  14.  15.  16.  most important modern accounts of the building appear in Kathleen James, Erich Men- delsohn and the Aychitecture of German Modernism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997), 178-93, and Regina Stephan, Studien zu Waren- und Geschdfishdusern Erich Mendelsohns in Deutschland (Munich: Tudev, 1992), 108-22.  . Sigrid Achenbach, Erich Mendelsohn: 1887-1953, Ideen, Bauten, Projekte (Berlin: Staatliche  Museen Preubischer Kulturbesitz, 1987), 75.  . Erich Mendelsohn, “Harmonische und kontrapunktische Fithrung in der Architektur,”  Baukunst 1 (1925): 179.  . Animportant early appraisal of Mendelsohn in the context of the New Building appears  in Norbert Huse, “Neues Bauen:” 1918 bis 1933, Moderne Architektur in der Weimarer Republik (Munich: Heinz Moos Verlag, 1975), 26-35. See also Janet Ward, Weimar Surfaces Urban Visual Culture in 1920s Germany (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001), and Eric D. Weiz, Weimar Germany: Promise and Tragedy (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2007).  . Regina Stephan, ed., Erich Mendelsohn: Dynamics and Function: Realized Visions of a  Cosmopolitan Architect (Ostfildern: Hatje Cantz, 1999), and Anthony David, The Patron: A Life of Salman Schocken, 1877-1959 (New York: Metropolitan Books, 2003).  . Erich Mendelsohn, letter to Dr. Plant, December 1927, in Erich Mendelsohn: Letters of an  Architect, ed. Oskar Beyer (London: Abelard-Schumann, 1967), 98-9.  . Salman Schocken, “Zur Eréffnung: des Kaufhauses Schocken in Niirnberg, Oktober 11,  1926,” lecture, printed text, Schocken archive.  . As reprinted in translation in, Anton Kaes, Martin Jay, and Edward Dimendberg, ed.,  The Weimar Republic Sourcebook (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1994), 452.  . Wolfgang Pehnt, Die Architektur des Expressionismus (Ostfildern: Hatje Canz Verlag,  1998).  lain Boyd Whyte, ed., The Crystal Chain Letters: Architectural Fantasies by Bruno Taut and his Circle (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1985).  Klaus Hentschel, The Einstein Tower: An Intertexture of Dynamic Construction, Relativity Theory, and Astronomy (Palo Alto: Stanford University Press, 1997), and Norbert Huse, Der Einsteinturm: Die Geschichte einer Instandsetzung (Stuttgart: Kramer, 2000).  George L. Mosse, Confronting History: A Memoir (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 2000), 19-47.  James, Erich Mendelsohn, 50-7 and 70-7. See also Erich Mendelsohn, Rufland — Amerika — Europa: Ein architektonischer Querschnitt |1929] (Basel: Birkhauser, 1989).  Erich Mendelsohn, Amerika: Bilderbuch eines Architekten (Berlin: Rudolf Mosse, 1926), James, Erich Mendelsohn, 57-70, and Mary Nolan, Visions of Modernity: American Businesses and the Modernization of Germany (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994).  Karin Kirsch, The Weissenhofsiedlung: Experimental Housing Built for the Deutscher Werk- bund, Stuttgart, 1927 (Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlags-Anstalt, 1994), and Richard Pommer and Christian F. Otto, Weissenhof 1927 and the Modern Movement in Architecture (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991).  Konrad Fuchs, Ein Konzern aus Sachsen: Das Kaufhaus Schocken als Spiegelbild deutscher Wirtschaft und Politik 1901-1953 (Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlag, 1990). 
Schocken Department Store 11  17. This store was the work of Stiefer and Kénecke. See Neue Baukunst 5, no. 8 (1929): 4-5.  18. Geoffrey Crossick and Serge Jaumain, ed., Cathedrals of Consumption: The European Department Store, 1850-1939 (London: Ashgate, 1999), and William Leach, Land of Desire: Merchants, Power, and the Rise of a New American Culture (New York: Pantheon, 1993); and for the stores Mendelsohn would have seen in the United States see Richard Longstreth, The American Department Store Transformed, 1920-1940 (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2010) and Joseph Siry, Carson Pirie Scott: Louis Sullivan and the Chicago Department Store (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988).  19. Michael B. Miller, The Bon Marché: Bourgeois Culture and the Department Store (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1981).  20. Susan Porter Benson, Counter Cultures: Saleswomen, Managers, and Customers in American Department Stores, 1890-1940 (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1986).  21. Elizabeth Otto and Vanessa Rocco, ed., The New Woman International (Ann Arbor: Uni- versity of Michigan, 2012).  22. Thomas Lenz, Konsum und Modernisierung: Die Debatte um das Warenhuas aus Diskurs um die Moderne (Bielefeld: Transcript, 2011) and Louis Parmes, Bauten des Einzelhandels (Zurich: Orell Fiisseli, 1935).  23. Schocken, dedication speech for the October 4, 1928 opening; untitled typescript, Schocken archive, 2, 7.  24. David, The Patron.  25. Kathleen James-Chakraborty, In the Spirit of Our Age: Eric Mendelsohn’s B’nai Amoona Synagogue (St. Louis: Missouri Historical Society, 2000).  26. Petra Ralle, Konsequenz Abriss: Das (un)vermeidbare Ende des Kaufhaus Schocken in Stutt- gart (Stuttgart: Hohenheim: 2003).  Bibliography  Achenbach, Sigrid. Erich Mendelsohn: 1887-1953, Ideen, Bauten, Projekte. Berlin: Staatliche Museen Preubischer Kulturbesitz, 1987.  Beyer, Oskar. ed., Erich Mendelsohn: Letters of an Architect. London: Abelard- Schumann, 1967.  Boyd Whyte, lain, ed. The Crystal Chain Letters: Architectural Fantasies by Bruno Taut and his Circle. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1985.  Crossick, Geoffrey and Serge Jaumain, ed. Cathedrals of Consumption: The European Depart- ment Store, 1850-1939. London: Ashgate, 1999.  David, Anthony. The Patron: A Life of Salman Schocken, 1877-1959. New York: Metropolitan Books, 2003.  Diissel, Karl Konrad. “Drei Kaufhauser Schocken in Niirnberg, Stuttgart, und Chemnitz von Erich Mendelsohn.” Moderne Bauformen 11 (1930): 480-2.  Fuchs, Konrad. Ein Konzern aus Sachsen: Das Kaufhaus Schocken als Spiegelbild deutscher Wirtschaft und Politik 1901-1953. Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlag, 1990.  Hentschel, Klaus. The Einstein Tower: An Intertexture of Dynamic Construction, Relativity Theory, and Astronomy. Palo Alto: Stanford University Press, 1997. 
E.1027 11  8. Le Corbusier, Une petite maison 1923 (Zurich: Editions Girsberger, 1956), 34-5.  9. Gray and Badovici, “Description,” 28. 10. Jean Badovici, “L’art d’Eileen Gray par Jean Badovici,” Wendingen 6, no. 6 (1924): 13. lL. Cited by Peter Adam, Eileen Gray Architect/Designer (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1987), 216. 12. Ibid., 309. 13. Charles Baudelaire, “L’invitation au voyage,” Paris Spleen (1869), trans. Louise Varése (New York: New Directions, 1970), 32. 14. Jean Follain, “Fernand Léger,” Cahiers d’art 15, no 1-2 (1940): 22. 15. Jean Badovici, “Peinture murale ou peinture spatiale,” L’Architecture d’aujourd’hui 7, no. 3 (March 1937): 75. 16. [Gray and] Badovici, La Maison d’aujourd’hui (1925), 18. 17. Jean Badovici letter to Le Corbusier, July 2, 1941; Fondation Le Corbusier E1-5-53. 18. Le Corbusier Sketchbooks, 1957-1964 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1982), vol. 4, no. 778. 19. Le Corbusier, “Unité,” L’Architecture d’aujourd’hui 19 (special issue on Le Corbusier; 1948): 53-5. 20. Jean Badovici letter to Le Corbusier, December 30, 1949; originally FLC E1-5-92 (no onger catalogued with Badovici correspondence). 21. Le Corbusier letter to Eileen Gray, Cap Martin, April 28, 1938; Eileen Gray collection, ational Museum of Ireland. 22. Adam, Eileen Gray, 341. 23. Undated postcard from Eileen Gray to Prunella Clough [December 1961]; Eileen Gray  collection, National Museum of Ireland. 24. Adam, Eileen Gray (1987), 357. 25. Gray and Badovici, “De |’éclecticisme au doute,” 30.  Bibliography  Adam, Peter. Eileen Gray Avchitect/ Designer. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1987. Badovici, Jean. “L’Art d’Eileen Gray par Jean Badovici.” Wendingen 6, no. 6 (1924). Intérieurs de Siie et Mare. Paris: Albert Morancé, 1924.  “Harmonies” Intérieurs de Ruhimann. Paris: Albert Morancé, 1924.  Intérieurs francais. Paris: Albert Morancé, 1925.  — La Maison d’aujourd’hui. Paris: Albert Morancé, 1925.  — “La maison d’aujourd’hui.” Cahiers d’art 1, no. 1 (January 1926): 12-3. — “L/Architecture utilitaire.” L’Architecture vivante (Winter 1926): 17-24.  —— “Peinture murale ou peinture spatiale.” L’Architecture d’aujourd’hui 7, no. 3 (March 1937).  Baudelaire, Charles. “L’invitation au voyage.” Paris Spleen [1869]. Translated by Louise Var- ése. New York: New Directions, 1970.  Follain, Jean. “Fernand Léger.” Cahiers d’art 15, no 1-2 (1940).  Gray, Eileen and Jean Badovici. “De l’éclecticisme au doute” [From Eclecticism to Doubt]. L’Architecture vivante (Winter 1929): 17-21.  “Description |of E.1027].” L’Architecture vivante (Winter 1929): 22-38.  
14 Revisiting the Modern Project  15.  16.  17.  18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26.  27.  28. 29.  30. 31.  32.  33. 34.  35.  36.  37. 38.  39. 40. 41.  Barbara Klinkhammer, “Machine 4 Habiter or Euvre Plastique? The Color Concept of  the Villa Savoye,” Recalibrating Centers and Margins, Proceedings of the 91st ACSA Annual  Meeting (Washington, D.C.: Association of Collegiate Schools of Architecture, 2003).  Henry-Russell Hitchcock and Philip Johnson, The International Style (New York: W.W. orton & Company, 1966), 127.  Amedée Ozenfant and Charles-Edouard Jeanneret, “Purism,” trans. Robert L. Herbert,  Modern Artists on Art: Ten Unabridged Essays (Englewood Cliffs, NJ.: Prentice-Hall,  1964), 58-73.  bid., 60.  bid., 66.  bid., 67.  bid.  bid.  Le Corbusier, Precisions, 136.  Boesiger and Stonorov, Le Corbusier et Pierre Jeanneret, 23-6.  bid, 130.  Translation: Two Houses by Le Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret: Five Points of a New Archi-  tecture. Werner Oechslin and Wilfred Wang, “Les Cinq points d’une architecture  nouvelle,” Assemblage, 4 (October 1987): 86-9.  Translation: theory of the roof-garden; house on stilts; horizontal window; free plan;  free facade; suppression of the cornice; Le Corbusier, “Ou en est l’architecture?” L’Arch-  itecture vivante: documents sur l’activité constructive dan tous les pays Cinquiéme année 17, (Automne, 1927): 7-28.  Boesiger and Stonorov, Le Corbusier et Pierre Jeanneret, 128-9.  Le Corbusier, Precisions, 134-5; redrawn and published in Boesiger and Stonorov, Le Corbusier et Pierre Jeanneret, 189.  Le Corbusier, Precisions, 134.  Sigfried Giedion, Building in France, Building in Iron, Building in Ferroconcrete (Santa Mon- ica: The Getty Center for the History of Art and the Humanities, 1995).  Reyner Banham, Theory and Design in the First Machine Age (London: Architectural Press, 1960), 309.  Boesiger and Stonorov, Le Corbusier et Pierre Jeanneret, 7.  Sigfried Giedion, “Le Corbusier et l’architecture contemporaine,” Cahiers d’art 4 (1930): 204-15.  Sigfried Giedion, “Le Corbusier and the Means of Architectonic Expression,” Space, Time and Architecture: The Growth of a New Tradition [1941] (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1959), 513-5.  Kevin D. Murphy, “The Villa Savoye and the Modernist Historic Monument,” Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians 61 (March 2002): 68-89.  Sbriglio, Le Corbusier, 147.  Reyner Banham, Theory and Design in the First Machine Age (New York: Praeger Publish- ers, 1975), 303.  “Stompin’ on the Savoye,” Time (March 23, 1959): 68.  Robert Slutzky, “Aqueous Humor,” Oppositions 19/20 (Winter/Spring 1980): 29-51. Giedion, Building in France, 176. 
Villa Muller 11  9. Bofivoj Kriegerbeck, “Moje prace pro arch. A. Loose,” ms., Municipal House, Brno, quoted in Zahradnik, “History of the Villa,” 86.  10. Quoted in Zahradnik, “History of the Villa,” 59.  11. Ibid, 56-9.  12. Ibid, 63-7.  13. Claire Beck Loos, Adolf Loos: A Private Portrait (Los Angeles: DoppelHouse Press,  2011), 36.  14. Quoted in Zahradnik, “History of the Villa,” 60.  15. Heinrich Kulka, Adolf Loos: Das Werk des Architekten (Vienna: Anton Schroll & Co.,  1931), 43.  16. Adolf Loos, “Joseph Veillich,” in Adolf Loos, Trotzdem 1900-1930 (Innsbruck: Brenner  Verlag, 1931), 249.  17. Kulka, Adolf Loos, 14.  18. Stenograph of a conversation between Karel Lhota and Adolf Loos in Pilsen, 1930. Lhota later published his memories of the conversation, Karel Lhota, “Architekt Adolf Loos,” Architekt SIA (Prague) 32 (1933): 143.  19. Yan Duzer and Kleinman, Villa Miller, 32, 34; Karel Ksandr, “History of the Building since 1995,” in Ksandr, Villa Miiller, 102-5.  20. Photostatic copy of the visitor book from the Villa Miiller, 1931-1968, Estate of Milada Miillerova, UMPRUM, Museum of Arts and Crafts, Prague.  21. Robert Scheu, “Kennst du das Haus?” Prager Tagblatt (February 28, 1931): 3, quoted in Zahradnik, “History of the Villa,” 75, 77.  22. Kulka, Adolf Loos, 43.  23. Antonin Matéjéek, “Miillertiv dtim od Adolfa Loose,” Mésic, vyddno v Geské a némecké jazykové mutaci (Prague) 5 (1932): 5-12.  24. Ludwig Miinz and Gustav Kiinstler, Der Architekt Adolf Loos: Darstellung seines Schaffens nach Werkgruppen/Chronologisches Werkverzeichnis (Vienna: Verlag Anton Schroll, 1964), 135.  25. Yehuda Safran and Wilfried Wang, ed., The Architecture of Adolf Loos, exhib. cat. (Lon- don: Arts Council of Great Britain, 1985), 72, 74-5.  26. Benedetto Gravagnuolo, Adolf Loos: Theory and Works (New York: Rizzoli, 1988), 201, 203.  27. Denti, Adolf Loos, 6-10.  28. Van Duzer and Kleinman, Villa Miiller, 53.  29. Ibid., 41-2.  30. Beatriz Colomina, Privacy and Publicity: Modern Architecture as Mass Media (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996), 244. See also Colomina’s essay, “The Split Wall: Domestic Voyeurism,” in Beatriz Colomina, Sexuality and Space (New York: Princeton Architec- tural Press, 1992), 73-130.  Bibliography  Colomina, Beatriz. “The Split Wall: Domestic Voyeurism.” In Sexuality and Space, 73-130. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1992.  — Privacy and Publicity: Modern Architecture as Mass Media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996. 
2  4 5 6 7.  8  Dymaxion House 11  . “Design: The Dymaxion American,” TIME Magazine 83, no. 2 (Jan. 10, 1964), http:// content.time.com/time/subscriber/ article /0,33009,875527-5,00. html.  . R. Buckminster Fuller, “Designing a New Industry,” in The Buckminster Fuller Reader, ed. James Meller (London: Jonathan Cape, 1970), 155.  . Ibid., 209.  . John McHale, “Buckminster Fuller,” Architectural Review (July 1956): 107.  . Fuller, “Designing a New Industry,” 164.  . R. Buckminster Fuller, Nine Chains to the Moon [1938]. (New York: Anchor Books, 1971), 252-9.  . Sigfried Giedion, Mechanization Takes Command: A Contribution to Anonymous History, 2nd ed. (London: Oxford University Press, 1969), 707.  9. Ibid., 709.  10. R. Buckminster Fuller, Inventions. The Patented Works of R. Buckminster Fuller (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1983), 31.  11. MeHale, “Buckminster Fuller,” 110.  12. “Off the Record,” Fortune (June 1933): 12.  13. Ibid., 8.  14. Fuller, “Designing a New Industry,” 201.  15. Simon Sadler, Archigram: Architecture Without Architecture (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005), 107.  16. Hadas Steiner, “Off the Map,” in Non-Plan: Essays on Freedom Participation and Change in Modern Architecture and Urbanism, ed. Jonathan Hughes and Simon Sadler (Oxford: Architectural Press, 2000), 128.  17. Kelly Minner, “Video: Norman Foster Recreates Buckminster Fuller’s Dymaxion Car,” Archdaily (March 22, 2011), http: // www.archdaily.com/121530/video-norman-foster- recreates-buckminster-fullers-dymaxion-car/_.  18. Greg Lynn, Animate Form (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1999), 10.  19. Ibid.  20. Greg Lynn, “Carbon in Motion,” video (March 22, 2013), https://vimeo.com/ 63581578.  21. Greg Lynn, “Introducing Composites, Surface, and Software,” in Composites, Surfaces, and Software: High Performance Architecture, ed. Greg Lynn, Stephen Nielson, and Nina Rappaport (New Haven, CT: Yale School of Architecture, 2010), 11.  22. Reyner Banham, The Architecture of the Well-tempered Environment, 2nd ed. (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1984), 268.  23. Ibid.  24. “The Industry Capitalism Forgot,” Fortune 36, no. 2 (1947), 67.  Bibliography  Banham, Reyner. The Architecture of the Well-tempered Environment. 2nd ed. Chicago: The  University of Chicago Press, 1984.  Fortune. “Off the Record,” Fortune (June 1933): 12.  “The Industry Capitalism Forgot.” Fortune 36, no. 2 (1947). 
VDL Research House 11  11. Thomas S$ Hines, Richard Neutra and the Search for Modern Architecture: A Biography and History (New York: Oxford University Press, 1982), 114.  12. Jose Maria de Lapuerta, Casa de Maestros (AV Monographs Madrid: Architectura Viva, July-August 2008), 410.  13. Reyner Banham, Los Angeles: The Architecture of Four Ecologies (New York: Harper & Row, 1971), 190.  14. Neutra, Nature Near, 149.  15. Banham, Los Angeles, 189.  Bibliography  Banham, Reyner. Los Angeles: The Architecture of Four Ecologies. New York: Harper & Row, 1971.  de Lapuerta, Jose Maria. Casa de Maestros. AV Monographs Madrid: Architectura Viva, July— August 2008.  Hines, Thomas S. Richard Neutra and the Search for Modern Avchitecture: A Biography and His- tory. New York: Oxford University Press, 1982.  Lavin, Sylvia. Form Follows Libido: Architecture and Richard Neutra in a Psychoanalytic Culture. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004.  McCoy, Esther. Vienna to Los Angeles: Two Journeys. Santa Monica, CA: Arts and Architec- ture 8.  Neutra, Dione ed. Richard Neutra: Promise and Fulfillment, 1919-1932; Selections from the Let- ters and Diaries of Richard and Dione Neutra. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois Univer- sity Press, 1986.  Neutra, Richard. “Problems of Prefabrication.” American Architect 123 (December, 1935): 33.  “The Changing House.” Los Angeles Times (June 22, 1947): E6.  Life and Shape. Appleton-Century-Crofts: Meredith Press, 1962.  Nature Near. Santa Barbara, CA: Capra Press, 1989.  
PSFS Building 11  name change, adding an “s” to “Saving.” The new name was subtly different: Phila- delphia Savings Fund Society. This change was an effort to maintain continuity with the former business, yet distinguish it slightly.  . The PSFS Building’s inclusion in Johnson and Hiteheock’s “Modern Architecture —  International Exhibition” at the Museum of Modern Art in 1932, and the subsequent publication of Hitchcock and Johnson’s The International Style, cemented its identity as a particular strain of modern architecture, despite the opinions of historians about its nuanced modernism.  . In Howe and Lescaze’s analysis of the proposed building, written before it was built, on  September 26, 1930, they attempted to define “modern.” In doing so, they separated “modern” into two tendencies, “functional,” and “decorative,” and proclaimed them- selves as proponents of the former. William Lescaze, “Architectural Analysis of the Proposed Building for the Philadelphia Saving Fund Society at 12™ & Market Streets,” William Lescaze Papers, Special Collections Research Center, Syracuse Uni- versity Library.  . Howe and Lescaze, “Architectural Analysis of the proposed building for the Philadel-  phia Saving Fund Society,” September 26, 1930, William Lescaze Papers, Special Col- lections Research Center, Syracuse University Library.  - “Poetic functionalism” was coined by Maartje Taverne, in Maartje Taverne, Cor  Wagenaar, and Martien de Vietter, ed., A Poetic Functionalist: J.J.P. Oud, 1890-1963. The Complete Works (Rotterdam: NAi Publishers, 2001). “Dynamic functionalism” was coined by Kathleen James in Erich Mendelsohn and the Architecture of German Mod- ernism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997).  . Ibid., 93.  9. Clarke Dailey, President of The Alliance Reality Company of New York to James M.  10.  lL. 12. J  13. J 14, 15.  16. 17. 18. 19.  20.  Willcox, September 12, 1930, Hagley Museum and Library.  Richard Seltzer, Rental Agent, to James M. Willcox, Hagley Museum and Library, Sep- tember 12, 1930.  bid, 5.  ames M. Willcox to George Howe, June 3, 1930, Hagley Museum and Library. Refers to the comment from Seltzer, rental agent that people think the design is ugly and like a oft building,  ames M. Willcox to George Howe, June 3, 1930, Hagley Museum and Library. bid.  “Brand,” see Frederic J. Schwartz, The Werkbund: Design Theory and Mass Culture before the First World War (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1996).  George Howe to James M. Willcox, May 26, 1930, Hagley Museum and Library. Hitchcock and Johnson, The International Style, 74.  bid.  See David Leatherbarrow, “Practically Primitive,” in Architecture Oriented Otherwise (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2009).  See footnote 55 in William H. Jordy, “PSFS: Its Development and Its Significance in Modern Architecture,” The Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians 21, no. 2 (May 1962), 64.  
12. Revisiting the Modern Project  21. Ibid.  22. Burton Harrington, Essentials of Poster Design (Poster Advertising Association Inc, 1925), 13-5, footnoted in Catherine Gudis, Buyways: Billboards, Automobiles, and the American Landscape (New York: Routledge, 2004), 74.  23. Both architects reportedly visited, separately, the 1925 exposition. Lorraine Welling Lanmon, William Lescaze, Architect (Philadelphia: Art Alliance Press; Associated Univer- sity Presses, 1987), 16; Robert A. M. Stern, George Howe: Toward a Modern American Architecture (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1975).  24. The Delaware River Bridge (now known as the Benjamin Franklin Bridge) was designed by Paul Philippe Cret, friend and colleague of George Howe, and completed in 1926. The idea that the angled sign directly faces the bridge was first mentioned to me in conversation with David Leatherbarrow, who writes about this phenomenon in his book, Architecture Oriented Otherwise.  25. “A Sign Erection Based on Scientific Tests,” Signs of the Times, The National Journal of Display Advertising (November 1932): 18. Hagley Museum and Library.  26. Delaware River Joint Commission of Pennsylvania and New Jersey, Report of the Del- aware River Joint Commission of Pennsylvania and New Jersey (Camden, New Jersey: The Commission 1931), 2. The total of 62,126 included 30,486 passengers by 1,810 buses, 31,205 passengers by 13,687 automobiles, and 435 pedestrians.  27. “Does Modern Architecture Pay?” The Architectural Forum (September 1943): 74.  28. Ibid.  29. “A New Shelter for Savings: George Howe and William Lescaze, Architects,” The Archi- tectural Forum 57 (December 1932): 483-98.  30. “Does Modern Architecture Pay?” The Architectural Forum (September 1943): 74.  31. Ibid., 78.  32. Ibid.  33. Report of the Building and Property Committee, May 1, 1933, Hagley Museum and Library.  Bibliography  Architectural Forum. “A New Shelter for Savings: George Howe and William Lescaze, Archi- tects.” The Architectural Forum 57 (December 1932): 483-98.  “Does Modern Architecture Pay?” Architectural Forum (September 1943): 74.  Delaware River Joint Commission of Pennsylvania and New Jersey. Report of the Delaware River Joint Commission of Pennsylvania and New Jersey. Camden, New Jersey: The Com- mission, 1931.  Gudis, Catherine. Buyways: Billboards, Automobiles, and the American Landscape. New York: Routledge, 2004.  Harrington, Burton. Essentials of Poster Design. Poster Advertising Association Inc, 1925.  Hitchcock, Henry-Russell, and Philip Johnson. The International Style: Architecture Since 1922. New York: W.W. Norton & Company, Inec., 1932. 
10 Revisiting the Modern Project  Notes  Image credit: Neil Levine.  . On Fallingwater, see Bruno Zevi and Edgar Kaufmann Jr., La casa sulla cascata di F. L.  Wright: F. Lloyd Wright’s Fallingwater (Milan: ETAS/Kompass, 1963); Edgar Kaufmann, Fallingwater: A Frank Lloyd Wright Country House (New York: Abbeville Press, 1986); Donald Hoffmann, Frank Lloyd Wright’s Fallingwater: The House and Its History, 2nd ed. rev. (New York: Dover Publications, 1993); Robert McCarter, Fallingwater: Frank Lloyd Wright, Architecture in Detail (London: Phaidon Press, 1994); Neil Levine, The Architecture of Frank Lloyd Wright (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1996), 216-53; Richard L. Cleary, Merchant Prince and Master Builder: Edgar J. Kaufmann and Frank Lloyd Wright (Pittsburgh: Heinz Architectural Center, 1999); Ezra Stoller, with text by Neil Levine, Frank Lloyd Wright’s Fallingwater, Building Blocks (New York: Princeton Archi- tectural Press, 1999); Franklin Toker, Fallingwater Rising: Frank Lloyd Wright, E. J. Kauf- mann, and America’s Most Extraordinary House (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2003); Neil Levine, Modern Architecture: Representation and Reality (New Haven, CT: Yale Univer- sity Press, 2009), 204-12; and Lynda Waggoner, ed. Fallingwater (New York: Rizzoli, in association with the Western Pennsylvania Conservancy, 2011).  . Philip Johnson, “Whence and Whither: The Processional Element in Architecture,” orig.  pub. Perspecta 9/10 (1965); reproduced in Philip Johnson, Writings (New York: Oxford Uni- versity Press, 1979), 151-5. For an earlier iteration of this idea, specifically in relation to Wright’s architecture, see Philip Johnson, “100 Years, Frank Lloyd Wright and Us,” orig. pub. Pacific Architect and Builder (March 1957), reproduced in Johnson, Writings, 196-8.  . John McAndrew, A New House by Frank Lloyd Wright on Bear Run, Pennsylvania (New  York: Museum of Modern Art, January 1938). The Wright text, along with several of the same photographs, was published contemporaneously in Frank Lloyd Wright, “Frank Lloyd Wright,” Architectural Forum 68 (January 1938): 36-47.  . Because the interior furnishings had not yet been completed, the only interior view  was that of the study area. It was enlivened by books on the shelves, writing accoutre- ments on the desk, and plantings.  5. To be precise, the nighttime shot zooms in slightly more than the daytime one. 6. “Usonian Architect,” Time 31, cover, 29-32; and Wright, “Frank Lloyd Wright.” 7. Frank Lloyd Wright to Edgar J. Kaufmann, December 26, 1934, in Bruce Brooks  10.  Pfeiffer, ed., Frank Lloyd Wright: Letters to Clients (Fresno: Press at California State Uni- versity, 1986), 82.  . Frank Lloyd Wright, statement, in McAndrew, New House, n.pag.; and Wright, “Frank  Lloyd Wright,” 36.  . The term “trays,” which is perfectly appropriate for the shallow, container-like shape of  the terraces, was used by Edgar Kaufmann Jr. in “Frank Lloyd Wright's Fallingwater 25 Years After,” Architettura 8 (August 1962): 218-21.  Preliminary designs for the guesthouse, which was built in 1938-39, show the bridge connecting it to the main house as either a double-height affair, coming off both the second and third floors, or a single level joining at the third floor. It was ultimately decided to have a single level only, connecting to the second floor, which made the top floor useable as a bedroom suite. 
lL.  12.  13.  14.  15.  16. 17.  Fallingwater 11  Frank Lloyd Wright to Robert K. Mosher, August 21, 1936, in Bruce Brooks Pfeiffer, ed., Frank Lloyd Wright: Letters to Apprentices (Fresno: Press at California State Univer- sity, 1982), 134-5; and Frank Lloyd Wright to Edgar J. Kaufmann, April 2, 1937, Box ST 22, Edgar Kaufmann-Fallingwater Collection, Drawings and Archives, Avery Architec- tural and Fine Arts Library, Columbia University, New York. Mosher, a Taliesin apprentice who was supervising construction of Fallingwater at the time, confirms that the hatch was originally supposed to be used for access for swimming. His description of Fallingwater appeared in “At Taliesin,” (Madison) Capital Times, 22 January 1937, reproduced in Randolph C. Henning, ed., “At Taliesin”: Newspaper Columns by Frank Lloyd Wright and the Taliesin Fellowship, 1934-1937 (Carbondale and Edwardsville, Ill.: Southern Illinois University Press, 1992), 232-4.  The perspective view is from the base of a partially hidden path leading to stone steps that descend the far (south) bank of the stream. The famous Hedrich-Blessing photo- graph was taken from this spot in November 1937 in preparation for the Museum of Modern Art exhibition.  Lewis Mumford, “The Sky Line — At Home, Indoors and Out,” New Yorker 13 (February 12, 1938): 31.  Although there is no reason to believe that Wright had them in mind or even knew of their existence, many ancient Roman floor mosaics were designed to imitate the effect of moving water. The tradition persisted throughout the Byzantine and early medieval periods in the Mediterranean, the most spectacular example being the book- matched marble floors of Hagia Sophia in Istanbul. See Fabio Barry, “Walking on Water: Cosmic Floors in Antiquity and the Middle Ages,” Art Bulletin 89 (December 2007): 627-56.  Wright reused the idea of a curved resonating chamber to transmit the sound of water in the oceanfront project for the Morris House, outside San Francisco (1944-46). There, a well leading down through the base of the house to an opening along the shore would have carried the sound of the lapping waves to the upper living floors.  Frank Lloyd Wright, An Autobiography (London: Longmans, Green, 1932), 173. Yukio Futagawa and Paul Rudolph, Global Architecture, vol. 2, Frank Lloyd Wright: Kaufmann House, “Fallingwater,” Bear Run, Pennsylvania. 1936 (Tokyo: A.D.A. EDITA, 1970) np.  Bibliography  Barry, Fabio. “Walking on Water: Cosmic Floors in Antiquity and the Middle Ages.” Art  Bulletin 89 (December 2007): 627-56.  Cleary, Richard L. Merchant Prince and Master Builder: Edgar J. Kaufmann and Frank Lloyd  Wright. Pittsburgh: Heinz Architectural Center, 1999.  Futagawa, Yukio and Paul Rudolph. Global Architecture, vol. 2, Frank Lloyd Wright: Kaufmann  House, “Fallingwater,” Bear Run, Pennsylvania. 1936. Tokyo: A.D.A. EDITA, 1970.  Henning, Randolph C., ed. “At Taliesin”: Newspaper Columns by Frank Lloyd Wright and the  Taliesin Fellowship, 1934-1937. Carbondale, IL: Southern [Illinois University Press, 1992. 
10 Revisiting the Modern Project  9.  10. lL.  12. 13.  14. 15. 16. 17.  18.  19.  20.  21. 22.  This way of thinking about the relationship between the past and the present was not unique to Valdameri and his associates, but was typical of fascism more broadly. For more on this see Mark Antliff, “Fascism, Modernism, and Modernity,” Art Bulletin 84, no. 1 (March 2002): 148-69; and Claudio Fogu, The Historic Imaginary: Politics of History in Fascist Italy (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2003).  Terragni, “Relazione sul Danteum,” 128.  For more on the Gruppo Milanese and its entries to the Palazzo Littorio competition, see David Rifkind, The Battle for Modernism: “Quadrante” and the Politicization of Archi- tectural Discourse in Fascist Italy (Vicenza: Centro Internazionale di Studi di Architettura Andrea Palladio, 2012).  Terragni, “Relazione sul Danteum,” 129.  As Mark Antliff has explained, this conception of history was central to fascism: “to reinvigorate the body politic, fascists looked beyond a decadent present to past eras, but they did not advocate a nostalgic return to, say, the era of imperial Rome. Instead,  they sought to incorporate qualities associated with past eras into the creation of a rad- ically new society, fully integrated with twentieth-century industrialism and technol- ogy.” See Antliff, “Fascism, Modernism, and Modernity.”  Schumacher, Terragni’s Danteum, 95-6.  Terragni, “Relazione sul Danteum,” 132.  Ibid., 131.  The moments where the organizational logic of the plan would have been most vis- ible were all points of entry and exit, which the architects located in various gaps articulated by the overlapping squares and rectangle of the plan. The primary entrance is located in the gap between the front walls of the two squares on the main facade on the Via dell’Impero, while the primary exit occupies the trough between the walls of the western square and the larger golden-section rectangle. Another door- way, leading directly to the study center and library, is located on the northern facade of the building, opposite the main entrance. Terragni and Lingeri’s fascination with geometry was well established before they began work on the Danteum. For more on the use of geometry at the Casa del Fascio, for instance, see Rifkind, The Battle for Modernism. The main floor is set at a height of 1.6 meters above grade, while the second level is set ata height of 6 meters, and the third level at a height of 10 meters; each level was to have a  height of 8.10 meters.  The arrangement of columns evokes the forest in which Dante wanders at the begin- ning of The Divine Comedy. The hidden entrance, tucked in the space of overlap between the two squares, also references the opening lines of the poem. The meta-  phorical equivalencies between the Danteum and The Divine Comedy have been thor- oughly explored by Thomas Schumacher in Terragni’s Danteum.  There is little information in the extant documents about the library and study center, but together they defined a golden-section rectangle equal in size to the rooms of Inferno and Purgatory, located adjacent to and directly above them respectively.  Terragni, “Relazione sul Danteum,” 138-9.  Ibid., 139. 
Danteum 11  23. These panels were to be designed by the artist Mario Sironi, who prepared a small series of rough sketches of the panels. The architects incorporated these into the draw- ings that they presented to Mussolini at the meeting on November 10, 1938.  24. See Diane Y. Ghirardo, “Italian Architects and Fascist Politics: An Evaluation of the Rationalists’ Role in Regime Building,” Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians 39, no. 2 (1980): 109-27; Diane Y. Ghirardo, “Politics of a Masterpiece: The Vicenda of the Decoration of the Facade of the Casa del Fascio in Como, 1936-39,” Art Bulletin 62, no. 3 (1980): 466-78.  25. “Architettura razionale” was one of the earliest terms used by Italian modernists to describe their work, which led to the widespread use of “razionalismo.”  Bibliography  Antliff, Mark. “Fascism, Modernism, and Modernity.” Art Bulletin 84, no. 1 (March 2002): 148-69.  Ciucci, Giorgio, ed. Giuseppe Terragni. Opera Completa. Milan: Electa, 1996.  Fogu, Claudio. The Historic Imaginary: Politics of History in Fascist Italy. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2003.  Ghirardo, Diane Y. “Italian Architects and Fascist Politics: An Evaluation of the Rationalists’ Role in Regime Building.” Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians 39, no. 2 (1980): 109-27.  “Politics of a Masterpiece: The Vicenda of the Decoration of the Facade of the Casa del Fascio in Como, 1936-39.” Art Bulletin 62, no. 3 (1980): 466-78.  Rifkind, David. The Battle for Modernism: “Quadrante” and the Politicization of Architectural Discourse in Fascist Italy. Vicenza: Centro Internazionale di Studi di Architettura Andrea Palladio, 2012.  Schumacher, Thomas L. Tervagni’s Danteum. 2nd ed. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1996.  Terragni, Giuseppe. “Relazione sul Danteum.” In Terragni’s Danteum by Thomas L. Schumacher, 127-49. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1996.  
2.  Maison du Peuple 11  Images in articles and recent books on Jean Prouvé; see for example, von Vegesack, Jean Prouvé.  . According to the restoration architect Franz Graf, the Maison du Peuple de Clichy was  barely saved from demolition in 1983 by “a handful of architects who lobbied for its scheduling (classement).” The public did not recognize its value as a cultural monu- ment. Architecte-en-Chef of the historical monuments service, Mr. Hervé Baptiste, took charge of the design and execution program (1990-2005).  . Prouvé, “Sheet Metals and Welding.”  5. Rather than architect, artisan, or craftsman, Jean Prouvé called himself a constructeur,  meaning (master) builder, constructor, designer.  6. Prouvé, “Sheet Metals and Welding.” 7. Nils Peters, Jean Prouvé: The Dynamics of Creation (Cologne: Taschen GmbH, 2006), 27.  10. lL.  12.  13.  14. 15.  16. 17.  18.  19.  20.  . The mass production of cars took place at the plant at Quai de Javel during the period  1919-75.  . Béatrice Simonot, La Maison du Peuple, un bijou mécanique (Paris: Blou Editions Mono-  gtafik, 2010): 46-7.  Simonot, La Maison du Peuple, 79.  The art nouveau movement flourished in particular in France and Belgium around the turn of the twentieth century. It embodied a strong reaction against the rigid styles of Beaux-Arts classicism and found inspiration in motifs of nature, craftsmanship, and material expression. See William Curtis, Modern Architecture since 1900 (London: Phai- don Press Ltd., 1982), 53-9.  Peter Sulzer, “Shaping Years from the Workshop to the Factory,” AV Monographs 149 (2011): 35-7.  L’Association de VEcole de Nancy was founded in 1901 by Emile Gallé (1846-1904), in collaboration with Victor Prouvé and a number of artists and artisans who wanted to promote high-quality industrial production. L’Ecole de Nancy also formed an intellec- tual environment where socialist ideas and feelings where cultivated. Victor Prouvé was the head of the school after Gallé died. Sulzer, “Shaping Years,” 37.  Sulzer, “Shaping Years,” 37-9.  Mairie de Clichy, “La Maison du Peuple: La Maison du Peuple cherche encore son avenir,” hep: // www.ville-clichy.fr/270-la-maison-du-peuple.htm  Prouvé, “Sheet Metals and Welding.”  The Reliance Building was a skyscraper built in Chicago between 1890 and 1895, designed by the architectural firm Burnham & Root.  The Aéro-Club Roland-Garros at Buc, near Versailles, was commissioned by Mlle Deutsch de la Muerthe, who was a passionate pilot herself. It was destroyed during World War IL.  Peter Sulzer, Jean Prouvé: Oeuvre complete/Complete Works, Volume 2: 1934-1944 (Basel: Birkhauser, 2000), 117, 193.  According to the files the total budget for the building was 9,000,000 Francs. The total volume was 26,000 m’ and the price per cubic meter was 317.30 Francs. See Simonot, La Maison du Peuple, 97-9. It is important to note that the price was dealt with in cubic meters instead of square meters, which gave the architects an incentive to gain as much space as possible. 
12. Revisiting the Modern Project  21.  22.  23. 24.  25. 26.  27. 28. 29. 30.  31. 32. 33. 34.  35. 36.  37.  Bruno Reichlin, “Maison du Peuple at Clichy: A Masterpiece of ‘Synthetic’ Function- alism?” DAIDALOS 18 (1985): 92-3.  Jean Prouvé was trained as a blacksmith and wrought iron craftsman, first by the sculp- tor and blacksmith Emile Robert, and later by the reputable Adalbert Szabo, in Paris. In Nancy, in 1924, he set up his first workshop, which he named Ferronnerie D’Art-Serrur- erie (Ornamental and Wrought-Iron Works). It was a true craft-based workshop where Prouvé himself worked at the forge. Also in Nancy, in 1931, he established his second workshop, Société Anonyme Les Ateliers Jean Prouvé, where semi-industrialized (prefab) processes were implemented by use of modern tools such as folding and welding machines. In 1947 he built a regular factory in Maxville with 25,000 m* of factory space equipped with powerful machinery and as many as 200 workers. Catherine Prouvé, “Itiniaries: a Biographical Portrait,” AV, Monographs 149 (2011): 26-31.  Sulzer, Jean Prouvé, 187.  Les Halles of 1850 were designed by the architects Victor Baltard (1805-74) and Felix Callet (1791-1854).  Cecil D. Elliot, Technics and Architecture (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1984), 74. Franz Graf, “The Restoration of the Maison du Peuple at Clichy — A Critical Viewpoint,” in Reworking the Modern Movement — Or How to Preserve Modern Movement Monuments, ed. Wolfgang Jung, Ola Wedebrunn, and Stefan Hessling (Frankfurt am Main: DoCoMoMo, European Community Education and Culture Socrates Pro- gramme Erasmus, 2007), 154.  Simonot, La Maison du Peuple, 88.  Sulzer, Jean Prouvé, 201.  Prouvé, “Sheet Metals and Welding.”  Jean Prouvé was known for his liberal ideas, his confidence in the skill of his employees and the social concern of his workmen. He introduced paid vacations, believed in self- managed work operations, and shared the financial profits. Catherine Prouvé, “Ttiniaries,” 31.  Sulzer, Jean Prouvé, 209.  Sulzer, Jean Prouvé, 196-7.  Eugéne-Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc, Lectures on Architecture, Vol. Il (New York: Dover Publications, Inc., 1877/1987), 115.  From the Latin, Aedicula, meaning a canopied niche flanked by colonnettes intended as a shelter for a statue or a shrine.  Curtis, Modern Architecture, 58-9.  In 1931 he won a competition with a system of movable internal metal walls. In 1935 he worked in collaboration with the architects Beaudoin and Lods for the design of the BLPS system for prefabricated lightweight houses. The metal facades were at first made of steel but later they were made of aluminum. James Strike, Construction into Design: The Influence of New Methods of Construction on Architectural Design 1690-1990 (Oxford: Butterworth Architecture, 1991), 148-9.  After the war he was commissioned by the Ministry of Reconstruction to build hun- dreds of prefabricated houses (demountable Saharan shelters) with a central portal frame, for war refugees. Catherine Prouvé, “Itiniaries,” 31. 
Maison du Peuple 13  38. Facade systems developed for the college in Orléans (1967-68), by the architects Andrault and Parat, and for the Free University in Berlin in COR-TEN steel (1967-72), by the architects Candilis, Josic, Woods, and Schiedhelm, are well known.  orman Foster renovated the latter in 2005; Benedikt Huber and Jean-Claude Steineg-  get, ed., Jean Prouvé: Une architecture par V'industrie (Zurich: Les Editions d’Architecture  Artemis, 1971), 163-5.  39. Torben Dahl, ed., Facaden: Teori og Praksis (Copenhagen: Kunstakademiets Arkitekts-  koles Forlag, 2003), 141.  40. Curtis, Modern Architecture, 475-6.  41. Work by Jourda & Perraudin and Jean Nouvel shows similar design ideas and interests.  42. Jean Prouvé was never a professional politician, although politics always interested  him. During World War II he was committed to the Resistance and after the war  he was appointed mayor and assembly member of Nancy. Catherine Prouvé, “Ttiniaries,” 31. 43. Sulzer, Jean Prouvé, 11.  Bibliography  Curtis, William. Medern Architecture since 1900. London: Phaidon Press Ltd., 1982.  de Clichy, Mairie. “La Maison du Peuple: La Maison du Peuple cherche encore son avenir.” http: / / www.ville-clichy.fr/270-la-maison-du-peuple-htm  Dahl, Torben, ed. Facaden: Teori og Praksis. Copenhagen: Kunstakademiets Arkitektskoles Forlag, 2003.  Elliot, Cecil D. Technics and Architecture. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1984.  Graf, Franz. “The Restoration of the Maison du Peuple at Clichy — A Critical Viewpoint.” In Reworking the Modern Movement — Or How to Preserve Modern Movement Monuments, edited by Wolfgang Jung, Ola Wedebrunn, and Stefan Hessling. Frankfurt am Main: DoCoMoMo, European Community Education and Culture Socrates Programme Erasmus, 2007.  Huber, Benedikt and Jean-Claude Steinegger, ed. Jean Prouvé: Une architecture par Vindustrie. Zurich: Les Editions d’Architecture Artemis, 1971.  Peters, Nils. Jean Prouvé: The Dynamics of Creation. Cologne: Taschen GmbH, 2006.  Prouvé, Catherine. “Itiniaries: a Biographical Portrait.” AV, Monographs 149 (2011): 26-33.  Prouvé, Jean. “Sheet Metals and Welding.” Paper presented to the Société des ingénieurs soudeurs, January 19, 1950. Text published in Soudure et Techniques Connexes 718 (July-August 1950): 141— 8. In Jean Prouvé: The Poetics of the Technical Object, edited by Alexander von Vegesack, 130-1. Weil am Rhein: VITRA Design Museum, 2004.  Reichlin, Bruno. “Maison du Peuple at Clichy: A Masterpiece of ‘Synthetic’ Functionalism?” DAIDALOS 18 (1985): 92-3.  Simonot, Béatrice. La Maison du Peuple, un bijou mécanique. Paris: Blou Editions Monogra- fik, 2010.  Strike, James. Construction into Design: The Influence of New Methods of Construction on Archi- tectural Design 1690-1990. Oxford: Butterworth Architecture, 1991. 
Villa Mairea 11  December 1917, shortly after the Bolshevik takeover in Russia. Civil war erupted in Fin- and in January 1918. Alvar Aalto left his architectural studies to serve with the Whites, forces predominantly constituted by farmers from rural Finland, in their struggle against the Reds, whose main source of support was the urban working class. The Whites pre- vailed. As a result of the conflict, which lasted less than five months, nearly 30,000 Finns, about 1% of the country’s total population, perished. See “The Finnish Civil War” at ttp:/ / countrystudies.us/finland/15.htm. The division of society and the specter of class-based revolution were therefore very real for Aalto and Marsio’s generation. The idea that social reform could be advanced through innovative industrialized processes  —an idea that was prevalent among the modern movement’s avant-garde — had a pro-  found influence on the epoch. Indeed, without this frame of reference, it would be difficult to understand the social significance of the Aaltos’ architecture and product design.  . Museum of Modern Art, Exhibit #75 March 14 — April 18, 1938, Alvar Aalto: Archi- tecture and Furniture. The exhibit included enlarged photographs, drawings, and mod- els of four of Aalto’s buildings including the Paimio Sanatorium, the Viipuri Library, his own house in Helsinki, and the Finnish Pavilion for the Paris 1937 Exposition, as well as 50 pieces of furniture and bent wood experiments, https:/ /www.moma.org/ momaorg/ shared/pdfs/docs/press_archives/437/releases/ MOMA_1938_0017_1938- 03-14_38314-10.pdf?2010. Aalto was also Included in MoMA’s first modern architec- ture exhibit (Exhibit #15 February 9 — March 23, 1932, Modern Avchitecture: International Exhibition, http:/ / www.moma.org/ docs/press_archives/64/releases/ MOMA_1932_0001_1932-01-16.pdf?2010).  . By the late 1930s, through his association with influential industrialists and leading poli- ticians “Aalto changed from an outspoken opponent of the establishment into an expert deeply entangled with industrial captitalism and national strategies.” Pekka Korven- maa, “Aalto and Finnish Industry,” Alvar Aalto: Between Humanism and Materialism (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1998), 75-6.  . On content and form, see Alvar Aalto, “The Latest Trends in Architecture” [1928], in Alvar Aalto In His Own Words, ed. Goran Schildt, (Helsinki: Otava Publishing Company Ltd., 1997), 62. On national and international influence, see Alvar Aalto, “Motifs From Past Ages” |1922], in Schildt, Alvar Aalto In His Own Words, 35. On the new and old, see Alvar Aalto, “The Old and New Churches” [1921], in Schildt, Alvar Aalto In His Own Words, 35. On emotional content, see Alvar Aalto, “The Stockholm Exhibition” [1930], in Schildt, Alvar Aalto In His Own Words, 72. On social equity, see Alvar Aalto, “The Housing Problem’ [1932], in Schildt, Alvar Aalto In His Own Words, 83. On the benefits of industrial manufacturing, see Géran Schildt, ed., Alvar Aalto In His Own Words (Helsinki: Otava Publishing Company Ltd., 1997), 72.  . By the time they began the design of the Villa Mairea in 1938, Alvar and Aino Aalto had designed factories, housing for factory workers, summer houses, city houses, hospitals, restaurants, a theater, a library, a newspaper headquarters, and exhibits for world expo- sitions. In addition, they designed an extensive line of furnishings.  . “During Aino’s lifetime, Alvar Aalto’s office was connected with their home in all the cities in which they lived, and during their years in Jyvaskyla, and even in Turku, she participated actively in the office’s interior design projects and was always involved in  
12. Revisiting the Modern Project  10.  preparing competition entries.” Renja Suominen-Kokkonen, “The Silent Central Per- sonage: The Architect Aino Marsio-Aalto,” in Kinnunen, Aino Aalto, 213.  . See Carl Marklund and Peter Stadius, “Acceptance and Conformity: Merging Moder-  nity with Nationalism in the Stockholm Exhibition in 1930,” Culture Unbound. Journal of Curvent Cultural Research 2, no. 35 (2010): 609-34. http:/ /www.cultureunbound.ep_liu. se/v2/a35/ As the Finnish delegate to the CIAM in Frankfurt in September 1929, Aalto encoun- tered the vanguard of the modern movement and participated in discussions that would have a profound impact on his development as an architect, both immediately and in the long term. Aalto was elected to CIRPAC, the executive body of CLAM, and travelled to attend its meeting in Berlin in 1931, and later to its third meeting (The Functional City) in Athens in 1933. Aalto’s writing from this period was to a great extent influenced by CIAM ideology: The crisis of housing, standardization, industria- lized production, modern materials, functional zoning, daylight, and even biological analogies. In fact, the first sentence of Le Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret’s report of 1929 CIAM conference in Frankfurt (Analysis o Problem of the “Minimum House”) reads: “The dwelling place is a distinctly biological phenomenon.” Unfortunately, biological analogies and an ideological interest in the psychological and physical (psychophysiological) well-being of the modern dweller, while widespread among modern architects in the 1920s, became increasingly con- nected to Alvar Aalto whose architecture is hardly “organic,” other than in the formal sense, as parts fitting together as a harmonious whole. In fact, Aalto considered an  the Fundamental Elements of the  expanded concept of the rational, including empat  y for the day-to-day life of “the little  man,” as a necessity for a “more humanely buil  t environment.”  lL.  12.  13.  “Aalto and Johnson did not meet until 1939.” Eeva-Liisa Pelkonen, Alvar Aalto: Archi- tecture, Modernity, and Geopolitics (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2009), 217. Henry-Russell Hitchcock and Philip Johnson, The International Style (New York: W. W. Norton & Company, Inc. 1966). Originally published as The International Style: Archi- tecture Since 1922, in 1932. In his foreword to the 1966 edition, Hitchcock retrospec- tively notes that Aalto’s sculptural columns in the Turun Sanomat Building (1929-30) placed him among those architects who “effectively rivaled — or rejected” the International Style “during just those years when it was also spreading most widely through the western world.”  Two competitions, in particular, accelerated Alvar Aalto’s development as modem architect: The Viipuri Library (1927-35) and the Paimio Sanatorium (1929-33). Both were initially designed shortly after his arrival in Turku in the late 1920s. Like the Turun Sanomat building, these were severe functionalist buildings, predominantly rendered with white stucco and characterized by taut rectilinear volumes, steel framed ribbon windows, and large expanses of polished plate glass — features that drew attention to both advanced building technologies and new conceptions of space and light beyond the facade. In each of these buildings, however, the severity of the architectural encounter was softened by furnishing, fittings, and fabrics, designed by the Aaltos linking the interior architecture with materials and forms characteristic of the region. The wooden features of two rooms in particular —  
14.  15.  16.  17.  Villa Mairea 13  the undulating acoustic ceiling, curvilinear stacking chairs, and floor of the Viipuri Library’s lecture room; and the three-part window and contoured wall-hung closet in the Paimio Sanatorium’s patient room — were significant departures from the characteristic austerity of the early modern movement’s interior architecture. The three-part window of the sanatorium, in fact, was similar in type to the win- dows with curtains with which patients were familiar in their homes, contributing to an atmosphere of warmth and domestic comfort. The long corridor, just outside the patient rooms, by contrast, has no recognizable domestic qualities whatsoever. It is lit by the kind of continuous metal-framed strip window that Le Corbusier made famous in his “five points for a new architecture” in the early 1920s. Aalto’s ambivalence about the universality of an international style and its relevance to the everyday well-being of the individual, made present here, would continue through- out the 1930s and culminate with his manifesto on the subject: The architecture of the Villa Mairea.  Kristian Gullichsen, foreword to Inside the Villa Mairea, ed. Kirsi Gullichsen and Ulla Kinnunen (Helsinki: Alvar Aalto Museum, Mairea Foundation, 2009), 9.  Pelkonen, Alvar Aalto, 118. “Aalto gained a new outlook on Finland, its future and how it should be run after Gullichsen invited him to join a think tank of politicians, indus- trialists, and cultural leaders charged with shaping a vision for Finnish society based on American-style economic pragmatism and left-leaning social ideals ... Both husband and wife (Harry and Maire Gullichsen) believed that with privilege came social respon-  sibility, such as providing housing for workers....” Pelkonen’s book is an essential resource for situating Alvar Aalto’s work with what she calls “a geopolitics of architec- ture.” Pelkonen convincingly makes the case that Aalto’s works are inseparable aspects of Finland’s cultural, political, and historical milieu — and, further, that Aalto actively  took part in shaping Finland’s particular geopolitical reality: “The discourse surround- ing Aalto’s life has involved fellow architects, clients, industrialists, politicians and  critics, and his architecture and objects, their makers, users and viewers — all became ‘coproducers’ of Finnish Society.”  The Artek (Art and Technology) Company’s larger aesthetic and social mission was to raise awareness of good design; to enrich public dialogue through exhibitions advan- cing the interconnectedness of art, architecture, planning, and product design; and to promote the advantages of well designed, industrially manufactured furnishings for everyday domestic life in a new egalitarian society. In this sense, although it was a busi- ness, it also seemed, paradoxically, to function like the “intermediary institutions” of a civil society, enriching public participation in an egalitarian institution. http://www. artek.fi/ company.  In the early years of the twentieth century the German architect, Hermann Muthesius, forecast the pivotal role that basic aesthetic education could have in shaping society. As Stanford Anderson notes in his introduction to Muthesius’ book, Style-Architecture and Building-Art: “Progress in the arts and in a reinvigorated culture necessitated that people again acquire an understanding of quality, a yet uninaugurated matter of fundamental public education.” For his part Muthesius writes: “Previously the guilds upheld the level of work. With today’s altered conditions the public must be on its guard against 
14 Revisiting the Modern Project  18.  19.  20.  21.  the factory owners. This requires a fundamental public education in the appreciation of quality, which today has not even begun. What we need,” he continues, “is not an emotion-laden furniture and a luxurious art but decent household artifacts for the ordi- nary man.” Hermann Muthesius, Style-Architecture and Building-Art: Transformations of Architecture in the Nineteenth Century And Its Present Condition, 1st ed. 1902; 2nd ed.1903, trans. Stanford Anderson (Santa Monica: The Getty Center for the History of Art and the Humanities, 1994), 17, 92, 95. The idea that architecture and design could contrib- ute to the ethical and aesthetic enlightenment of a new middle class permeated the ideology of the early modern movement in northern Europe. A principal feature of the theoretical program advanced by the Left Front for the Arts in Russia and its journal LEF (1923-25) “was the view that art offered a vital means of exerting an influence on the psyche of the proletariat, and that this influence could stimulate it to build a new life.” Anatole Senkevitch, Jr. introduction to Style and Epoch, by Mosei Ginzburg (Cam- bridge, MA: MIT Press, 1982), 33.  The ethical basis of art was also a fundamental tenet of the Bauhaus under Gropius. In the abstract to her insightful essay, “The Ethics of Perception,” Eva Diaz writes: “Albers encouraged a reflexive relation between better art production and better social perfor- mance ... Better design thus alters habits of perception and can improve society.” Eva Diaz, “The Ethics of Perception: Josef Albers in the United States,” The Art Bulletin 90, no. 2 (June 2008): 260-85. Through the CIAM, Aalto met Gropius and Bauhaus masters Josef Albers and Laszl6 Moholy-Nagy, who taught in the school’s Vorkurs or Founda- tion Curriculum. Moholy-Nagy visited Aalto in Finland in 1931, where he inevitably shared the Bauhaus vision of an improved society through artistic education.  Alvar Aalto was chiefly responsible for the Minimum Apartment Exhibit in Helsinki in 1930, and as late as 1932 wrote of a “planned economy in the production of utility hous- ing ... under a management working scientifically, as if in a laboratory.” Alvar Aalto, “Hyva asunto” |A Good Home] [1932], in Schildt, Alvar Aalto In His Own Words, 76.  Aalto was encouraged by the clients to experiment, but he was somewhat hesitant to take full advantage of the opportunity. In fact, the clients, upon seeing an early rend- ering of the house, remarked that it was not ambitious enough. “No, Alvar, you can do better,” they told him. Interview with Kristian Gullichsen, “The Villa As an Experiment for Aalto,” quoted in Hiroshi Saito, Villa Mairea, Alvar Aalto, 1937-39 (Tokyo: TOTO, 2005), 184.  “Mairea,” the architect’s description of the Villa Mairea, was published in Arkkitehti, the Finnish Architectural Review, no. 9, 1939. This text, often attributed to Alvar Aalto alone, was attributed to authors Aino and Alvar Aalto. Schildt, Alvar Aalto In His Own Words, 229-30. Their statement is not a theoretical position but a statement of actual practice. Numerous elements and themes, empirically tested and developed prior to Mairea, became manifest in the house itself, emerging later, with continued refinements, in architectural commissions ranging, in scope and scale, from worker's housing and exhibition pavilions to concert halls, museums, and cultural centers. These experiments range in scope and scale from broad ideas such as the volumetric and material expression of program, the integration of the natural site, and the flow of inte- rior space, to specific elements including skylights, floor treatments, entrance canopies, and door handles.  
22. 23.  24.  25.  26.  Villa Mairea 15  Unpublished notes in Aalto Archives. Schildt, Alvar Aalto In His Own Words, 226-9. That many of Aino and Alvar Aalto’s furnishings designed in the early 1930s remain in use and in production today speaks to the first principles of sustainability — beauty, utility, and durability. Aino’s “Bélgeblick” glassware series (1932), which was Gold Medal Winner at the Milan Triennale in 1936, is the longest selling line of glassware sold by the littala company. Alvar Aalto’s furniture continues to be the financial core of the Artek Company. The laminated birch L-system stackable Stool 60 design (1933), whose prototype, according to legend, was repeatedly thrown across the production floor to test its ability to withstand heavy use, was famously forecast by Aalto to sell in the thousands. By Artek’s 80th Anniversary in 2013, more than eight million copies of Stool 60 had been sold. A recent Artek venture, gma Cycle, debuted in 2007, featuring reissued Aalto furnishings complete with patina and provenance. No market research was used to predict the success of either of the objects mentioned above or of any of the dozens of other furnishings the Aaltos created in the 1930s. This is a testament to the belief that simplicity and quality could easily be perceived when presented to the pub- lic. For this reason, exhibitions were crucial to the success of early modernism, and the Aaltos were regular participants in exhibits — ranging from pavilions in Paris, Milan, and New York to department stores and shops in Helsinki, London, and Zurich. While many who visited the exhibits could not afford modern housing, many of the furnish- ings exhibited were affordable to the middle class. By bringing these objects home and interacting with them on a daily basis, the burgeoning middle class could begin to cre- ate the foundation for a new aesthetic based on quality and a certain indifference to the fact that they were industrially manufactured.  Between 1936 and 1939 Aalto began designing serially produced wooden houses (“A” series) for the A. Ahlstrém Company and the construction firm EKA. Later, in the early 1940s, during the evacuation and resettlement of refugees following the Winter War with Russia, Aalto produced more developed versions of the houses (“AA” series). Gran Schildt, Alvar Aalto: The Decisive Years (New York: Rizzoli, 1986), 264-7. In his essay, “Rationalism and Man,” Aalto argued for an expanded concept of the  rational, extending it beyond what he called “technical functionalism” to include the “rationally undefinable requirements, still invisible to us.” “We have conceded,” he writes, “that objects that properly can be given the label rational often suffer from a noticeable lack of human qualities.” He used Marcel Breuer’s Wassily chair, a tubular metal chair he and Aino owned and lived with in their apartment in Turku, to illustrate  his point. While Aalto conceded that the chair was a “clever technical solution,” he remarked that it failed as a “thoroughly rational creation” in the sense that its chrome-finished steel reflects too much light and too much sound, and conducts too much heat, making it cool to the touch. The chair suffers, in Aalto’s estimation, from a lack of the rationally indefinable term, “coziness.” Alvar Aalto, “Rationalism and Man” [1935], in Sketches, Alvar Aalto, ed. Géran Schildt (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1978), 47-51. See, for example, Van Doesburg, “If we interpret form not as an a priori-determined  style scheme, in which the various spaces are fitted according to dwelling needs and the demands of life but rather as the final result of functional and constructive necessity, 
16 Revisiting the Modern Project  27.  28.  29.  30.  31.  32.  33.  then, in my opinion, modern architecture should base itself upon the latter.” Theo Van Doesburg, “The Virtues of Craftsmanship, Architectural Purity and Regional Tradi- tions” 7, no. 7 (March 1930): 145-9, in Theo van Doesburg, On European Architecture: Complete Essays from Het Bouwbedrif 1924-31 (Basel: Birkhauser, 1990), 102. Another example would be Mosei Ginsburg: “Indeed, modern industrial plants condense within themselves, in an artistic sense, all the most characteristic and potential features of the new life. Everything capable of establishing the essential thrust of creative progress is to be found here.” Mosei Ginzburg, Style and Epoch |1924] (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1982), 80-1. Given his direct contact with large scale industrial manufacturing and its architecture (the Aalto office designed a number of factories for the Serlachius Corpo- ration, the A. Ahlstrém Company, and the Tampella Company: Toppila-Vaara Pulp Mill, Oulu, 1930-33; Sunila Pulp Mill and Housing, Kotka, 1936-38; Anjala Paper Mill, nkeroinen, 1937-38) it is not surprising that the machine romanticism that character- ized Ginzburg and the Russian constructivists, Le Corbusier, and other early moder-  nists, would find little support — even an opposite reaction — in Aalto’s early writings,  public buildings, and domestic architecture.  Juhani Pallasmaa, “Image and Meaning,” in Alvar Aalto Villa Mairea 1938-39, ed. Juhani  Pallasamaa (Helsinki: Alvar Aalto Foundation, Mairea Foundation, 1998), 62, 93.  “It is necessary to know Aalto’s work first hand, because it translates so poorly into pictures. So much of its excellence is its absolute rightness of conception, the three- dimensional relationships of its elements, its use of light and low-key color, the subtle sensuousity of details, remarkable for consistency and restraint, and ultimately, its humanity. All this is resistant to a photographer's art.” Ada Louise Huxtable, “Where They Do It Right,” On Architecture (New York: Walker & Company, 2008), 181. First published in The New York Times (January 23, 1972).  n lesser hands, the result would have been what Daumier, Director Guido’s artistic conscience in Federico Fellini’s 8% called a “series of gratuitous events.”  For an enlightening disussion of Aalto’s use of the motif of polarity in the Villa Mairea see: Juhani Pallasmaa “Villa Mairea — Fusion of Utopia and Tradition,” in GA 67 Alvar Aalto, Villa Mairea, Noormarkku, Finland, 1937-39, ed. Yukio Futagawa (Tokyo: A.D.A. EDITA, 1985). The word “tempo” is used here in the double meaning that Aldo Rossi ascribes to it in  the Italian language: “tempo which signifies both atmosphere and chronology, is a prin- ciple that presides over every construction: this is the double meaning of energy that I now see clearly in architecture, as well as other technics and arts.” Aldo Rossi, A Sci- entific Autobiography (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1981), 1. Because the approach to the villa is, by intention, neither axial nor direct, the speed at which the house is experienced on foot should not be overlooked. In fact, the timing of  the approach could be compared to music’s eight basic tempo markings for speeds slower than walking pace (andante), from a bit slower than walking pace (moderato) to very, very slow (larghissimo). The proprioceptive sense — the awareness of the posi- tion and movement of one’s body in space — although a transitory feature of the archi- tecture, may be one of the key features of the villa. In his 2010 essay, “On Atmospheres,” Juhani Pallasmaa writes: “The judgement of envi- ronmental character is a complex fusion of countless factors which are immediately and  
34.  35.  36. 37.  38.  Villa Mairea 17  synthetically grasped as an overall atmosphere, feeling, mood, or ambience.” He goes on to say, “Peripheral perception is the perceptive mode through which we grasp atmo- spheres. The importance of the senses of hearing, smell, touch (temperature, moisture, air movement) for the atmospheric perception arises from their essence as non- directional and non embracing experiences. In deep thought,” he concludes, “focused vision is blocked and thoughts travel with an absent-minded gaze.” Juhani Pallasmaa, “On Atmospheres,” in Encounters 2, ed. Peter MacKeith (Helsinki: Rakennustieto Pub- lishing, 2012), 238, 250. For a more extensive discussion of the predominance of vision in the understanding and evaluation of architecture and the underemphasized role of the multitude of other human senses in the experience and production of architecture see Juhani Pallasmaa, The Eyes of the Skin (Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, 2012).  The word “visceral,” which relates here to immediate, deep-seated, even primor- dial emotions, is used rather than the term “somatic,” which perpetuates the com- mon separation of mind, body, and self in architectural discourse. As the artist Bill Viola perceptively notes, “There is still such a strong mistrust in intellectual circles about things which speak to the mind via the body. In my opinion, the emotions are precisely the missing key that has thrown things out of balance and the resto- ration to their rightful place as one of the higher orders of the mind of a human being cannot happen fast enough.” Interview, Bill Viola, Jorg Zutter, in Bill Viola: Unseen Images (Diisseldorf: Verlag und Offsetdruckerie, R. Meyer, 1992), 101. Like- wise, more than a half-century earlier, Aalto wrote, “There is hardly anyone who  would seriously deny that instinctive joy is the right response to an aesthetic expe- rience. It is related to all intuitive activity, the joy of creation, the joy of work. Unfortunately, modern man, particularly Western man, is so deeply influenced by methodical analysis that his natural insight and immediate receptiveness have been greatly weakened.” Abbé Coignard’s Sermon, radio broadcast (1925), Schildt, Alvar Aalto In His Own Words, 57. In reference to his ephemeral works, where forms built of light entice yet elude the grasp of the hands, the artist James Turrell asserts, “touch goes out of the eyes like feel.” Scott Poole, ed., James Turvell, The Thingness of Light (Blacksburg: Architecture Edition, 2000), 2.  Aalto, “Motifs From Past Ages,” 33.  “The purpose of art,” wrote the Russian critic Victor Shklovsky, “is to impart the sen- sation of things as they are perceived and not as they are known ... to make forms difficult, to increase the difficulty and length of perception...” In this regard, a primary function of art is to overcome the dull, mechanical effect that automatic mental schema can have on a person’s everyday encounters with their environment. Victor Shklovsky, from “Art as Device” (1917), quoted in Roger Fowler, ed., A Dictionary of Modern Crit- ical Terms (London: Routledge, 1993), 101.  The antechamber is an interesting feature and a key to understanding Aalto’s accre- tional approach to architecture of the villa. It is one of three functional elements, lit by four skylights, in a rectangular one-story volume attached to the main, two-story volume. A flat roof overlapping the entry canopy hides the fact that this small vol- ume is “added on” to the main volume. In addition to the antechamber, this volume contains a water closet and a welcoming open volume with a built-in bench where  
18 Revisiting the Modern Project  39.  40.  41.  42.  43.  the family or its guests can sit and remove boots or shoes during inclement weather. The entry to the main hall of the villa is through the thick walls flanking the end of the antechamber. Once inside the entry hall, one must again pass through the thick walls of the two-story volume to re-enter the one-story volume with its sitting area and water closet. It is part of a sequence of welcoming gestures — open portico, enclosed antechamber, arrival hall, open wardrobe, and closed water closet — that brings the visitor full circle, to a room that shares a wall with the ante- chamber and the front door. This small volume is significant because it demon- strates Aalto’s priority to “good form,” in the sense of good architectural manners or a correct level of comfort, over an excessive concern with formal appearances. It is the first of many events in the villa that will illustrate what Aalto, in his 1935 essay “Rationalism and Man” called “...the mysterious concept of ‘cozy’” (Aalto’s italics). Schildt, Sketches, Alvar Aalto, 48.  Aino-Marsio Aalto was also responsible for the design of a number of other interior furnishings for the villa including the linen upholstered “Mairea Sofa,” the dining room table, a modern kitchen, and built-in cabinetry as well as leather chairs, lamps, and chil- dren’s furniture designed for previous commissions. Renja Suominen-Kokonen “The Interior Design,” in Pallasmaa, Alvar Aalto Villa Mairea 1938-39, 129.  Aalto seems to have been influenced either directly (Aalto was fluent in German) or indirectly (through teachers or colleagues) by Hermann Muthesius’ writing on domes- tic architecture. In Muthesius’ text, Style-Architecture and Building-Art: Transformations of Architecture in the Nineteenth Century And Its Present Condition, the terms “cozy,” “psychophysiological,” and “rental barracks industry” are used to make the case for a new domestic environment. Likewise, in Aalto’s own writing, these same terms appear in several essays as he developed his own advocacy for a new approach to the architecture of the home. I would like to thank Dr. George Dodds for referring me to Muthesius’ use of the concept of “cozy.”  In Hopper’s paintings, like Cape Cod Evening (1939) or Gas (1940), the interrelation- ship between an architectural element, a shallow clearing, a dark forest, and one or two human figures are recurring motifs. This backlit image with its faint halo is also rem- iniscent of late nineteenth-century landscape photography and, in particular, certain photographs by I. K. Inha (1865-1930) whose images of Eastern Finland’s Karelian countryside and its people were recorded in Suomi kuvissa. Havas’ photograph of the Villa Mairea has a strange foreboding quality as well. Shortly after this scene was photographed, Finland was at war with Russia and eventually lost Karelia, a ter- ritory deeply attached to Finnish identity, to the Soviet Union, as part of a World War II reparation agreement.  This is one of the rare instances where the visitor encounters a focused view and the  predominence of vision. More typically, Aalto relies on the full range of senses — hear- ing, smell, touch — as well as the proprioceptive system (position, orientation, and movement of the body), vestibular system (sense of balance), and peripheral vision to grasp a mood created by the totality of the environment. See note 33 on Pallasmaa. “The garden was initially developed by Alvar and Aino Aalto and Maire Gullichsen in collaboration with Paul Olsson (1890-1974), a landscape architect with whom the Aal- tos had worked on other projects ... The earth excavated from the foundations of the 
44.  45.  46.  47.  48.  Villa Mairea 19  building was used to level the courtyard and create the gentle hillock which provides it with a sense of privacy.” Juhani Pallasmaa, “The Garden,” in Pallasmaa, Alvar Aalto Villa Mairea 1938-39, 163.  n his essay, “From Doorstep to Living Room” (1926), published in the Finnish journal, Aitta, in 1926, Aalto uses two images, Fra Angelico’s The Annunciation (1426) and a view from the roof terrace to the exterior from Le Corbusier’s Pavillon de L’Esprit ouveau (Paris, 1925), to demonstrate his belief that the past and present are linked by repetition, by the unfulfilled potential of permanent features of architecture — in this case the intertwining of interior and exterior. His caption for the Pavillon de L’Esprit ouveau reads: “Latter-day classicism,” “A brilliant example of the affinity of the home interior and the garden. It is a hall, beautifully open to the exterior and taking its dom- inating character from the trees, or is it a garden built into the house, a garden room?” Schildt, Aalto In His Own Words, 49-55.  “Cosmopolitan localism” is an idea expressed by industrial Designer Ezio Manzini for a sustainable society — environmental, economic, ideological, social, cultural — exam- ining the delicate balance between the specific qualities of being rooted in a place and its community and the general character of global exchange. “Today, the context is totally different. Today the small can be influential at the large scale as a node in a global network. And the local can break its isolation by being open to the global flow of people, ideas and information. In other words, today we can say that the small is no longer small and a local is no longer local, at least in traditional terms.” Ezio Man- zini, “The New Way Of The Future: Small, Local, Open And Connected,” Social Space (2011): = 100-5. __ https: //centres.smu.edu.sg/lien/ files /2013/10/Social- Space2011-The-New-Way-of-the-Future-Small-local-open-and-connected-Ezio-Man- zini-.pdf Alternate sites were briefly considered, including one that would have had the villa in the middle of a stream on the Ahlstrom’s land more than a mile from the present site. Schildt, Alvar Aalto: The Decisive Years, 154.  “Human civilization has so far reached its greatest development in what was originally forest and grasslands in temperate regions ... Man, in fact, tends to combine features of both grasslands and forests into a habitat for himself that might be called the forest edge .... When man settles in the forest he replaces it with grassland and croplands, but leaves patches of the original forest on farms and around residential areas ... Man depends on grasslands for food, but likes to live and play in the shelter of the forest.” Eugene P. Odum, Ecology (New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1943), 135. Quoted in Fit: An Architect’s Manifesto, Robert Geddes, (Princeton: Princeton Architectural Press, 2013), 31.  While Aalto’s bent wood furniture was new, it emerged from a nation with an ancient forest culture whose down-to-earth customs and skills with wood continued to be  respected in the twentieth century. Like his forebears, Aalto is practical and realistic. His industrially manufactured furniture and the Villa Mairea, itself, is neither nostalgic nor technologically utopian. Aalto’s approach to the unvarying condition of man, to those aspects of human nature that persist and endure, prefigures architects like Aldo Van Eyck who were seeking, amid tumultuous change, a starting point based on humankind’s permanent qualities: “I dislike the sentimental antiquarian attitude towards the past as much as | dislike the sentimental technocratic one toward the 
20 Revisiting the Modern Project  49.  50.  51.  52.  future. Both are founded on a static, clockwork notion of time (what antiquarians and technocrats have in common). So let’s start with the past for a change and discover the unchanging conditions of man.” Aldo Van Eyck quoted in Kenneth Frampton, Labor, Work and Architecture (New York: Phaidon Press Limited, 2002), 291.  Aalto’s Finnish Pavillion, New York World’s Fair (1937-39), designed simultaneously with the Villa Mairea, featured a 52 -foot-high open space, dynamically shaped by a canted and curved wooden multimedia wall, organized horizontally into four separate themes: Country, People, Work, each represented by very large photographs and, at the ground level, by their actual Products. Like the Villa Mairea, the exhibit brought international attention to Finland’s specific national identity. http:/ /www.greatbuild- ings.com/ buildings /Finnish_Pavilion_1939.html While this observation is that of the author, this linguistic structure of the sentence was influenced by the fine essayist, Joseph Epstein, “The Prince’s Man,” Wall Street Journal (uly 27-28, 2013).  When the Villa Mairea was completed in 1939, it received widespread recognition, but  its significance was largely underestimated. In fact, the year after its completion, in Sig- fried Giedion’s first edition of Space, Time and Architecture (1940), Aalto was scarcely mentioned (three sentences and a single illustration of Aalto’s cantilevered bent ply- wood armchair “31”), and there is no reference to the Villa Mairea. In the book’s fifth and final edition, published in 1966, 50 pages and nearly 50 illustrations were devoted to Aalto’s work and focused, to a large extent, on work completed prior to 1940, includ- ing several pages accompanied by photographs and a plan of the Villa Mairea. “Superficially the concepts national and international are regarded as opposites; in a deeper sense this is less plausible ... When everything is said and done, no matter what the starting point or end may be, it is the connection between the concepts that achieves the balance we need in today’s world, where the concepts national and inter- national can hardly be separated from each other.” Alvar Aalto, “National—Interna- tional” (1967), in Schildt, Sketches, 168.  Bibliography  Aalto, Aino and Alvar Aalto. “Mairea.” Arkkitehti, no. 9 (1939). Aalto, Alvar. “The Old and New Churches” [1921]. In Alvar Aalto In His Own Words, edited  by Géran Schildt. Helsinki: Otava Publishing Company Ltd., 1997.  — “Motifs From Past Ages” |1922]. In Alvar Aalto In His Own Words, edited by Géran  Schildt. Helsinki: Otava Publishing Company Ltd., 1997.  “From Doorstep to Living Room” [1926]. In Alvar Aalto In His Own Words, edited by Goran Schildt, 49-55. Helsinki: Otava Publishing Company Ltd., 1997.  “The Latest Trends in Architecture” [1928]. In Alvar Aalto In His Own Words, edited by Géran Schildt. Helsinki: Otava Publishing Company Ltd., 1997.  “The Stockholm Exhibition” [1930]. In Alvar Aalto In His Own Words, edited by Goran Schildt. Helsinki: Otava Publishing Company Ltd., 1997.  “A Good Home” [1932]. In Alvar Aalto In His Own Words, edited by Géran Schildt. Helsinki: Otava Publishing Company Ltd., 1997.  
Golden Lane 11  2. The Smithsons’ work in this direction continued the CIAM response to these issues that had been the focus of the CIAM 8 “Heart of the City” conference in 1951. See Jaqueline Tyrwhitt, José L. Sert, and Ernesto N. Rogers, The Heart of the City (New York: Pellegrini and Cudahy, 1952). For a more detailed discussion of how Sert and others first shifted the postwar discourse of CIAM toward these concerns, see Mum- ford, The CIAM Discourse, 201-14: and for how Sert then attempted to adapt the heart of the city concept to American cities, see Eric Mumford, Defining Urban Design: CIAM Architects and the Formation of a Discipline, 1937-69 (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2009), 80-8.  3. The Golden Lane competition brief called for housing for 400 people at a density of 220 people per acre, the highest density called for in the 1943 County of London Plan. For a  brief discussion of the winning entries as well as the Smithsons’ project, see Nicholas Bullock, Building the Post-War World (London: Routledge, 2002), 117-18.  4. Reyner Banham, “School at Hunstanton Norfolk,” Architectural Review (September 1954): 148-62. Peter Smithson (1923-2003) and Alison Smithson (1928-93), were both from provincial backgrounds in different parts of Yorkshire, and received their archi- tectural training at the University of Durham. They joined the London Institute of  Contemporary Art’s Independent Group in 1952, and organized a series of exhibitions there; David Robbins, ed., The Independent Group: Postwar Britain and the Aesthetics of Plenty (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1990), 18-53. A favorable unsigned editorial on the Smithsons’ work and ideas titled “The New Brutalism” appeared in Architectural Design (January 1955): 1-2, which was then expanded on by Reyner Banham, “The New Brutalism,” Architectural Review 118 (December 1955): 355-61, later discussed in detail in his The New Brutalism: Ethic or Aesthetic (New York: Reinhold, 1966). According to Banham, the term “brutalism” originated in Swedish architecture around 1950, before it then became popular among English architects. It was soon linked to the French description of the exterior material of Le Corbusier’s Unité d’Habitation, Marseille (1946-52) as beton brut (raw concrete), as described in Alison Smithson, Without Rhet- oric: An Architectural Aesthetic 1955-1972 (London: Latimer New Dimensions, 1973), 4, as well as to Jean Dubuffet’s “art brut”; Kenneth Frampton, Modern Architecture: A Critical History (London: Thames and Hudson, 1992), 262-8.  5. Alison Smithson, Urban Structuring (London: Studio Vista, 1967), 8-28. Alison Smithson published many articles and books on their work and ideas, among them Team 10 Primer (London: Standard Catalogue, 1966); Without Rhetoric (London: Latimer New Dimen- sions, 1973), The Emergence of Team 10 out of CIAM: Documents (London: Architectural Association, 1982); and Team 10 Meetings (New York: Rizzoli, 1991). Alison Smithson, Ordinariness and Light: Urban Theories 1952-1960 (London: Faber and Faber, 1970), is an edited republication of many of their influential earlier articles. The posthumously published Alison Smithson, The Charged Void: Urbanism (New York: Monacelli, 2005) and The Charged Void: Architecture (New York: Monacelli, 2001), provide an illus- trated summary of what she saw as their most important contributions to the field. For some scholarly interpretations of the Smithsons’ work, see Helena Webster, ed., Modernism without Rhetoric: Essays on the Work of Alison and Peter Smithson (London: Academy Editions, 1997), and Annie Pedret, Team 10: An Archival History (London: Routledge, 2013). 
12 Postwar Trends  6. Inspired both by earlier British Garden City planning and by American New Deal and Swedish social planning efforts from the preceding two decades, these British govern- ment efforts included the institutionalization of national town planning, including the self-contained peripheral New Towns, the legislative creation of the London Green- belt, and extensive national housing and prefabricated school building efforts. For a concise illustrated discussion of many of these efforts, see Bullock, Building the Post- War World; John R. Gold, The Practice of Modernism: Modern Architects and Urban Trans- formation, 1954-72 (London: Routledge, 2007); and Mark Swenarton, Tom Avermaete, and Dirk van den Heuvel, ed., Architecture and the Welfare State (London: Routle- dge, 2015).  7. According to the directives issued by Le Corbusier and his French associates at CIAM 7 in 1949, the CIAM grid was to be organized to present urban projects comparatively using standard-sized 21 x 33 cm panels. At first these were to be set in color-coded hor- izontal rows corresponding to the four CIAM functions of dwelling (green), work (red), cultivation of the body and spirit (yellow, a function previously known as “recreation”), and circulation (blue); but for CIAM 9, the French ASCORAL group had modified the format, so that the horizontal bands were to be instead “lifestyle,” “material expression,” and “technical implementation,” while the vertical columns were to con- tinue to show aspects of each project, organized into categories such as environment, ethics and aesthetics, economics, building technology, legislation, and social conse- quences, Programme du 7éme Congrés du CIAM: The Athens Charter in Practice (Bologna, 1948); Catherine Blain, “The CIAM grid, 1948,” and Annie Pedret, “The CIAM Grid, 1948: Le Corbusier and ASCORAL,” in Risselada and van den Heuvel, Team 10, 18-19 and 252-7. For a detailed account of CLAM 9, including a discussion of the Golden Lane project, see Frances Strauven, Aldo van Eyck: The Shape of Relativity (Amsterdam: Architectura & Natura, 1998), 244-6.  8. Josep Lluis Sert (1902-83) was a former associate of Le Corbusier and an émigré Barce- lona architect who had fled Spain for New York in 1939, and who then worked exten- sively in town planning in Latin America to 1959. He also served as Dean and Chair of Architecture at the Harvard Graduate School of Design from 1953 to 1961, and contin- ued there as Dean there to 1969. During his term as President, Sert worked closely with the Swiss Secretary-General of CIAM, Sigfried Giedion, and with the British landscape architect and planning educator Jaqueline Tyrwhitt, both of whom he brought to teach at the GSD before the dissolution of CIAM in 1956. On his efforts to create the new dis- cipline of urban design after the end of CIAM, see Mumford, Defining Urban Design.  9. Alison Smithson and Peter Smithson, “Collective Housing in Morocco,” Architectural Design 25 (January 1955). The Baku-born, Greek educated Candilis and his design part- ner, the American born, Irish-educated Shadrach Woods had both worked with Le Corbusier on the construction documents for the Unité d’Habitation, Marseille (1945-52) in a group called Atelier des Batisseurs (ATBAT). Along with Bodiansky, another ATBAT member, they were then invited to work with Michel Ecochard, the French master planner of postwar Moroccan urbanization, in a group they called ATBAT-Afrique. On the context of this work, see Jean Louis Cohen and Monique Eleb, Casablanca: Colonial Myths and Architectural Ventures (New York, 1992), 301-63. For a brief account of the formation of what became Team 10 at the postwar CIAMs, see  
10.  lL.  12.  13. 14.  15.  Golden Lane 13  Strauven, Aldo van Eyck, 238-79. The theme of CLAM 9 was to be “habitat,” understood as the programming and design of housing and its “extensions” such as local shops, health services, and child-care and recreational facilities. At the Sigtuna, Sweden meet- ing to plan CIAM 9 in 1952, Le Corbusier’s associate Andre Wogenscky, representing the French ASCORAL group, was reluctant to accept the youth members’ interest in focusing on integrating housing complexes into “human settlements in their entirety.” The Swiss youth members Rolf Gutmann and Theo Manz (Basel) nonetheless argued that the CIAM 8 focus on the core had already shifted the discussion in that direction, and they referred to Martin Buber, the influential Jewish philosopher and author of Ich und Du (1923, translated in 1957 as I and Thon) to propose that CIAM examine “das Gestalt gewordene Zwischen” in urbanism, usually translated as “the space of the in-between’; Rolf Gutmann and Felix Schwarz, La Charte de l'Habitat: Uberlegungen tiber das Wesen des Thema, 1952, cited in Jos Bosman, “CIAM After the War,” in Rassegna 52, no. 4 (December 1992): 14-16, 21 note 32. These ideas, which were also invoked by Giedion at this time, became central to Aldo van Eyck’s (a Dutch protégé of both Bakema and Sigfried Giedion) subsequent work, but they do not seem to have had much impact on the Smithsons.  “Doorn Manifesto,” in Joan Ockman, ed. Architecture Culture 1943-1968 (New York: Riz- zoli, 1993), 181-3. This document rejected Le Corbusier’s Athens Charter and the CIAM idea of analyzing cities according to the four functional categories. Team 10 acquired its name then as it was designated to plan the next CLAM conference, CIAM 10, originally scheduled for Algiers in 1955 (though ultimately held in Dubrovnik, Yugoslavia in 1956). It was at this point that Team 10 began deliberately to challenge the CIAM leadership of Sert, Gropius, Giedion, and Tyrwhitt about the direction, organization, and terminology of CIAM. The analytical alternatives proposed by the Smithsons for CIAM 10, shown at the 1956 La Sarraz CIAM Council meeting and based on Patrick Geddes’ Valley Section, did not in fact create enough consensus to be the basis for a revitalized CIAM, and by 1959, Team 10 decided to stop using the CIAM name, over the protests of existing CIAM leadership (Oscar Newman, ed. CIAM ’59 in Otterlo (Stuttgart: Karl Kramer, 1961).  One of the first efforts to provide a canonical account of the group was “Team 10 + 20,” Larchitecture d’aujourd’hui 177 (January/February 1975), which included Kenneth Frampton’s essay, “The Vicissitudes of Ideology,” 62-66.  David Robbins, “Alison and Peter Smithson,” in David Robbins, The Independent Group, 109-15; Smithson, Without Rhetoric, 2-3.  Robbins, “Alison and Peter Smithson,” 111-12; Smithson, Ordinariness and Light, 50, 58. Alison Smithson and Peter Smithson, “An Urban Project,” Architects Year Book 5 (1953) 48-55, quoted in Bullock, Building the Post-War World, 119.  Le Corbusier’s projects that integrated infrastructural elements like highways with housing first appeared in a drawing he made for his South American lecture tour in 1929. He proposed the reorganization of cities such as Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo with new highway viaducts that would provide a permanent framework that could be infilled with housing, commercial, and other changing uses; Le Corbusier, “Brazilian Corollary,” Precisions (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991), 233-45. From 1931 to 1942 he then made a series of detailed design proposals for Algiers, and used related ideas 
14 Postwar Trends  16.  17.  18.  19.  20.  21.  22.  23.  24.  25.  about connecting urban infrastructure with housing in his other unbuilt proposals for various European cities; Le Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret, Oenvre complete 1929-1934 (Zurich: H. Girsberger, 1935), 138-43; also see the plans for Stockholm-Norrmalm and Antwerp, 155-9. At CIAM 5 in 1937, Le Corbusier presented a scaled-down ver- sion of these ideas in a proposal for a slum clearance housing project of linked slab blocks; Le Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret, “Ilét insalubre no. 6 de Paris,” Oeuvre com- plete 1934-1938 (Zurich: H. Girsberger, 1945), 48-55. He also proposed the “Durand” project in 1934, a set of three stepped megastructural housing blocks for a site near Algiers; Le Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret, “Lotissement de ]’oued-ouchaia a Alger,” Oeuvre complete 1929-1934, 160-9. None of these projects were built, but they are sim- ilar in some ways to postwar Team 10 and other megastructures. They also inspired projects like Affonso Reidy’s built Pedregulho curved housing slab in Rio de Janeiro (1946), shown at CIAM 7 in 1949; Nabil Bonduki, Affonso Eduardo Reidy (Lisbon: Blau, 2000), 83-103. Reidy also designed several other large curved slab housing projects in Rio, two of them actually built (Bonduki, Reidy, 104-13).  Alison Smithson, “Human Associations,” and “Realisation,” in Ordinaviness and Light, 39-61; 95-101; among many other published presentations of the project is Smithson, The Charged Void: Urbanism, 20-30.  Maxwell Fry, Jane Drew, Lindsay Drake, and Denys Lasdun, “Flats: City of London,” Architectural Review 145 (January 1954): 51-2; Bullock, Building the Post-War World, 118. A model of the same firm’s larger adjacent Barbican redevelopment is illustrated and discussed in Reyner Banham, Megastructure: Urban Futures of the Recent Past (New York: Harper & Row, 1976), 184. Other MARS Group grids shown at CIAM 9 included those by Powell and Moya for the Churchill Gardens housing estate (1946-62), the first large London slum clearance housing project after the war, and one for the Hallfield Estate in Paddington by Denys Lasdun, then a partner at the firm of Drake and Lasdun, the suc- cessor firm to Tecton, founded by Berthold Lubetkin in 1932; Mumford, CIAM Dis- course, 228; Maxwell Fry, Jane Drew, Lindsay Drake, and Denys Lasdun, “Flats: Bethnal Green,” Architectural Review 145 (January 1954): 49-50.  Banham, Megastructure.  Bullock, Building the Post-War World, 120-1.  On the context of this competition, see Florian Urban, “Recovering Essence through Demolition: The ‘Organic’ City in Postwar West Berlin,” Journal of the Society of Archi- tectural Historians 63, no. 3 (September 2004): 354-69.  Alison Smithson, “Sheffield University,” in The Charged Void: Urbanism, 174-5; Alison Smithson, “Berlin Hauptstadt,” in The Charged Void: Urbanism, 45-63.  Victor Gruen, A Greater Fort Worth Tomorrow (Fort Worth: Greater Fort Worth Pla- nning Commission, 1956).  Alan Powers, Britain (London: Reaktion, 2007), 113-14; Alan Powers, “Park Hill 1 and 2,” Architectural Design (September 1961): 393-404.  Stefan Muthesius, The Postwar University: Utopianist Campus and College (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2000), 138-49.  For a brief discussion of the built outcomes of these debates in postwar Britain, see Powers, Britain, 53-123.  
Golden Lane 15  26. “Urban Design,” Progressive Architecture (August 1956): 97-8.  27. Alison Smithson and Peter Smithson, “New Brutalism,” Avchitectural Design (January 1955): 1.  28. Arata Isozaki, “Yayoi and Jomon,” in Japan-ness in Architecture (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006), 33-46.  29. Seng Kuan, “Tange Kenz0’s Architecture in Three Keys: As Building, as Art, and as the City,” doctoral dissertation (Harvard University Graduate School of Design, 2011), 240-5. For a detailed account of the 1960 World Design Conference, originally intended as a site of the Aspen International Design Conference, see Rem Koolhaas and Hans Ulrich Obrist, Project Japan: Metabolism Talks (Cologne: Taschen, 2011), 174-221.  30. Giinther Nitschke, “Tokyo 1964,” Architectural Design 34 (October 1964): 481-524. In the same issue, Peter Smithson discussed Tange’s Tokyo Bay plan in detail and said he found it “centralized, absolutist, authoritarian”; Peter Smithson, “Reflections on Kenzo Tange’s Tokyo Bay Plan,” Architectural Design 34 (October 1964): 479-80.  31. Fumihiko Maki, Investigations in Collective Form (St. Louis: Washington University School of Architecture, 1964) and Fumihiko Maki, Nurturing Dreams: Collected Essays on Architecture and the City (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008), 31-2.  32. “Team 10 at Royaumont,” Architectural Design (November 1975): 664-89; Shadrach Woods, Candilis-Josic- Woods: Building for People (New York: Praeger, 1968); Eric Mumford, “Team- work after CIAM: Team 10 at Royaumont,” SOM Journal 8 (2013): 93-102.  33. Strauven, Aldo van Eyck, 363, 372-5, 397-406; Woods, Candilis-Josic-Woods.  34. Mumford, Defining Urban Design, 185-6.  35. Max Risselada and Dirk van den Heuvel, “Byker Housing Estate, Newcastle-upon- Tyne 1968-81,” in Team 10, 224-7.  36. Reyner Banham, “The City as Scrambled Egg,” Cambridge Opinion 17, 18-23, quoted in Simon Sadler, The Situationist City (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998): 29-30.  37. Banham, Megastructure, 180-3; Walter McQuade, Architecture in the Real World: The Work of HOK (New York: Abrams, 1984), 126-9.  38. Smithson, The Charged Void: Urbanism, 176-7.  Bibliography  Architectural Design. “Team 10 at Royaumont.” Architectural Design (November 1975): 664-89.  Banham, Reyner. “School at Hunstanton Norfolk.” Architectural Review (September 1954): 148-62.  “The New Brutalism.” Architectural Review 118 (December 1955): 355-61.  The New Brutalism: Ethic or Aesthetic. New York: Reinhold, 1966.  —— Megastructure: Urban Futures of the Recent Past. New York: Harper & Row, 1976.  Blain, Catherine. “The CLAM grid, 1948.” In Team 10: In Search of a Utopia of the Present, 1953-81, edited by Max Risselada and Dirk van den Heuvel, 18-19. Rotterdam: NAi Publishers, 2004.  
10. lL.  12.  The Naked City 11  . Guy-Emest Debord, “Théorie de la dérive,” Les levres nues 9, Brussels, November 1956,  reprinted in Internationale situationniste 2 (December 1958): 19-23, trans. “Theory of the Derive,” in Knabb, Situationist International Anthology, 50-4.  . McDonough contends that drift was profoundly informed by surrealist paranoiac  methods, such that the drifter willed the city into being whatever the drifter believed it to be; the subsequent psychogeographic map was in effect an anti-map intended to devalue normative cartography.  . Anon., “Urbanisme comme volonté et représentation,” Internationale situationniste 9  (August 1964): 12-13, trans. Thomas Y. Levin, “Urbanism as will and representation,” in On the Passage of a Few People through a Rather Brief Moment in Time; The Situationist International 1957-1972, ed. Elisabeth Sussman (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989), 161.  . In “Terres Inconnues: Cartographies of a Landscape to Be Invented,” October 115  (Winter 2006): 13-30, Anthony Vidler analyzes in detail Debord’s use of academic car- tography and geography as media in sufficient contact with the real to be able to tran- scend mere spectacle, yet still capable of sustaining a state of distraction.  - Quoted in Alison Smithson, ed., Team 10 Primer (London: Studio Vista, 1968), 15. . Aldo van Eyck, “Knots and Labyrinths,” in Jacqueline de Jong, ed., Situationist Times, 4  (Paris 1963).  . Reyner Banham, “City as Scrambled Egg,” Cambridge Opinion, 17 (1959): 18-23,  insert, 22-3.  See Anthony Vidler, “The Third Typology,” Oppositions 7 (Winter 1977).  “Sous le pavé, la plage (under the pavement, the beach),” Koolhaas wrote in S,M,L,XL, recalling the famous situationist-inspired graffiti: “initially, May ’68 launched the idea for a new beginning for the city.” Rem Koolhaas, “What Ever Happened to Urbanism?” (1994), in Rem Koolhaas, S,M,L,XL (New York: Monacelli, 1995), 959-71. I develop my discussion on the architectural assimilation of countercultures in more detail in “The Varieties of Capitalist Experience,” in Architecture and Capitalism, ed. Peggy Deamer (New York: Routledge, 2013), 115-29.  Bernard Tschumi, Architecture and Disjunction (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996), 255.  Bibliography  Anon. “Urbanisme comme volonté et representation.” Internationale situationniste 9 (August  1964): 12-13. Translation, Thomas Y. Levin, “Urbanism as will and representation.” In On the Passage of a Few People through a Rather Brief Moment in Time; The Situationist International 1957-1972, edited by Elisabeth Sussman. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989.  Banham, Reyner. “City as Scrambled Egg.” Cambridge Opinion 17 (1959): 18-23, insert, 22-3. Debord, Guy-Ernest. “Théorie de la derive.” Les lévres nues 9, Brussels, November 1956.  Reprinted in Internationale situationniste 2 (December 1958): 19-23. Translation, “Theory of the Derive.” In Situationist International Anthology, edited by Ken Knabb, 50-4. Berkeley: Bureau of Public Secrets, 1981. 
12 Postwar Trends  10.  lL.  12.  13.  14.  15. 16.  17.  - NOVACAP means Companhia Urbanizadora da Nova Capital. Congress approved its  creation on September 19, 1956. The competition was announced on September 30, and the result was announced on March 15, 1957.  . The jury comprised Israel Pinheiro (president of NOVACAP); Hildebrando Horta Bar-  bosa (representing Clube de Engenharia); Paulo Antunes Ribeiro (representing Instituto dos Arquitetos do Brasil); William Holford dargely responsible for drafting the British Town and Country Planning Act of 1947); André Sive (co-author of the Fir- miny-Vert plan); and Stamo Papadaki (US-based Greek architect and writer, author of two monographs on Niemeyer). A good analysis of the seven prizewinners is Milton Braga, O concurso de Brasilia: sete projetos para uma capital (Sao Paulo: CosacNaify, 2010). A fundamental document is Lucio Costa’s report, “Memoéria descritiva do Plano Piloto,” in Lucio Costa: Registro de uma vivéncia (So Paulo: Empresa das Artes, 1995), 283-97.  . See Carlos Eduardo Comas, “Précisions brésiliennes sur un état passé de l’architecture  et 'urbanisme modernes, d’aprés les projets et les oeuvres de Lucio Costa, Oscar Niemeyer, MMM Roberto, Affonso Reidy, Jorge Moreira et cie, 1936-45,” doctoral thesis (University of Paris VIII, 2002).  . Euclides da Cunha, Rebellion in the Backlands (Chicago: University of Chicago  Press, 1957).  . Alfred Agache, Cidade do Rio de Janeiro: Remodelagdo, Extensdo e Embellezamento (Rio de  Janeiro: Ed. Foyer Brésilien, 1930).  . For the University City, see the Lucio Costa report, “Cidade Universitaria” in Lucio  Costa, 173-90.  . For Chang'an, see Ervin Y. Galantay, New Towns: Antiquity to the Present. (New York:  Braziller, 1975), 7-8, plate 3. For the Chinese sources of Lucio Costa, see Costa, Lucio Costa, 304.  Charles Baudelaire, “La Modernité,” essays published in Le Figaro, 1863-69. Oeuvres completes de Charles Baudelaire. HI. L’ Art  in “Le peintre de la vie modern,” ina collection of  romantique (Paris: Calmann Lévy, 1885), 68-72.  For CIAM’s history, see Eric Paul Mumford, The CIAM Discourse on Urbanism: 1928-1960 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000).  Edmund N. Bacon, Design of Cities [1967], rev. ed. (New York: The Viking Press, 1974), 234-41; see also appendix, 324.  Norma Evenson, Two Brazilian Capitals: Architecture and Urbanism in Rio de Janeiro and Brasilia (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1973), 204-5.  See Carlos Eduardo Comas and David Leatherbarrow, “Solving problems, making art, being modern,” Journal of Architectural Education 64, no. 1 (September 2010): 65-8. Stamo Papadaki, Oscar Niemeyer (New York: Braziller, 1960), 29.  For issues of gender and composition at the Pampulha complex, see Carlos Eduardo Comas, “Suites brasileiras: notas sobre o passado presente em Le Corbusier/Lucio Costa/Oscar Niemeyer,” in O Moderno jd passado, o passado no moderno, ed. Carlos Eduardo Comas, Marta Peixoto, and Sérgio Marques (Porto Alegre: Uniritter, 2009), 343-58.  Lucas Mayerhofer, Introdugdo ao estudo dos tetos abobadados: Sua origem e evolugdo na antiguidade (Rio: edition of the author, 1950). Architect Mayerhofer was the project 
Brasilia 13  architect for Lucio Costa’s Museum of the Missions (1937-41) and subsequently pro- fessor of Analytical Architecture in the Faculdade de Arquitetura da Universidade Fed- eral do Rio de Janeiro, established in 1945 to replace the course of architecture at the Escola Nacional de Belas Artes. The Treasury of Atreus is illustrated by plate V.57.  18. Oscar Niemeyer, “Official theatres in the cultural sector of Brasilia,” Médulo (17 April 1960): 6.  19. Bruno Zevi conducted his campaign against Brasilia in L Architettura crohache e storia in 10 articles from 1956 to 1970, issues 12 (1956); 22 (1957); 51 and 53 (1960); 63 and 64 (1961); 104 (1964); 139 (1967); 164 (1968); and 180 (1970).  20. As reported by Evenson. Besides Bacon and Evenson herself, a sympathetic voice is that of Reyner Banham, Age of the Masters: A Personal View of Modern Architecture (New York: Harper & Row, 1975).  21. As Guilherme Wisnik noted in the introduction to Braga, O concurso de Brasilia.  22. IBGE, 1963 Census.  Bibliography  Agache, Alfred. Cidade do Rio de Janeiro: Remodelagdo, Extensdo e Embellezamento. Rio de Janeiro: Ed. Foyer Brésilien, 1930.  Bacon, Edmund N. Design of Cities [1967]. Rev. ed. New York: The Viking Press, 1974.  Banham, Reyner. Age of the Masters: A Personal View of Modern Architecture. New York: Harper & Row, 1975.  Baudelaire, Charles. Oeuvres completes de Charles Baudelaire. Hf. L’ Art romantique. Paris: Cal- mann Lévy, 1885.  Braga, Milton. O concurso de Brasilia: sete projetos pava uma capital. Sio Paulo: Cosac- Naify, 2010.  Cavalcanti de Albuquerque, José Pessoa. Nova metrépole do Brasil: relatorio geral de sua loca- lizagdo. Rio de Janeiro: Imprensa do Exército, 1958.  Comas, Carlos Eduardo. “Précisions brésiliennes sur un état passé de l’architecture et lurbanisme modernes, d’aprés les projets et les oeuvres de Lucio Costa, Oscar Niemeyer, MMM Roberto, Affonso Reidy, Jorge Moreira et cie, 1936-45.” Doctoral thesis, University of Paris VIII, 2002.  Costa, Lucio. “Cidade Universitaria.” In Lucio Costa: Registro de uma vivéncia, 173-90. Sado Paulo: Empresa das Artes, 1995.  Costa, Lucio. “Meméria descritiva do Plano Piloto.” In Lucio Costa: Registro de uma vivéncia, 283-97. Sao Paulo: Empresa das Artes, 1995.  da Cunha, Euclides. Rebellion in the Backlands. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1957.  Galantay, Ervin Y. New Towns: Antiquity to the Present. New York: Braziller, 1975.  Mumford, Eric Paul. The CIAM Discourse on Urbanism: 1928-1960. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000.  Evenson, Norma. Two Brazilian Capitals. Avchitectuve and Urbanism in Rio de Janeiro and Bra- silia. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1973.  Comas, Carlos Eduardo and David Leatherbarrow. “Solving problems, making art, being modern,” Journal of Architectural Education 64, no. 1 (September 2010): 65-8. 
12 Postwar Trends  10.  lL.  12.  13.  14. 15.  16. 17.  18. 19. 20. 21. 22.  23.  24.  25. 26.  Lisa Phillips, Frederick Kiesler (New York: Whitney Museum and W.W. Norton, 1989), 16.  Friedrich Kiesler, Contemporary Art Applied to the Store and its Display (New York: Bren- tano’s Publishers, 1930); Robert Leo Leonard and C. Adolph Glassgold, ed. Modern American Design by the American Union of Decorative Artists and Craftsmen [1930], (New York: Acanthus Press, 1992).  Friedrich Kiesler, “Notes on Architecture. The Space House: Annotations at Random,” Hound and Horn 7, no. 2 (January/March 1934): 292-7; Frederick Kiesler, “Design Correlation, Certain Data Pertaining to the Genesis of Design by Light (Photo-Graphy), Part 1,” The Architectural Record 81 (July 1937): 89-92; Frederick Kiesler, “Design Correlation, Certain Data Pertaining to the Genesis of Design by Light (Photo-Graphy), Part 2,” The Architectural Record 81 (August 1937): 79-84; Frederick Kiesler, “Design Correlation, Glass,” The Architectural Record 81 (March, 1937): 53-60; Frederick Kiesler, “Design Correlation, Towards Prefabrication of Folk-Spectacles: Scientific Development of Sound Reproduction Proves an Important Influence on Architectural Design of Theaters,” The Archi- tectural Record 81 (June 1937): 93-6, Frederick Kiesler, “Design Correlation, Ani- mals and Architecture,” The Avchitectural Record 81 (May 1937): 53-60; Frederick Kiesler, “The Architect in Search of... Design Correlation, A Column on Exhi- bits, the Theater and the Cinema,” The Architectural Record 81 (February 1937): 7-15; Frederick Kiesler, “On Correalism and Biotechnique: A Definition and Test of a New Approach to Building Design,” The Architectural Record (September 1939): 60-75.  Hsiao-Yun Chu and Roberto G Trujill, New Views on R. Buckminster Fuller (Redwood City, CA: Stanford University Press, 2009), 109.  Phillips, Frederick Kiesler, 150.  Frederick Kiesler, “Design Correlation as an Approach to Architectural Planning,” VVV: Poetry, Plastic Arts, Anthropology, Sociology, Psychology 2-3 (1943): 76-9. Creighton, “Kiesler’s Pursuit of an Idea,” 114.  Frederick Kiesler, “Endless House and its Psychological Lighting,” Interiors 110 (November 1950): 123-9.  Creighton, “Kiesler’s Pursuit of an Idea,” 106-8.  MoMA, Visionary Architecture, 2.  Kiesler, Inside the Endless House, 382.  Creighton, “Kiesler’s Pursuit of an Idea,” 112.  Roger L. Held, Endless Innovations: Frederick Kiesler’s Theory and Scenic Design (Ann Arbor, MI: UMI Research Press, 1982).  William Braham, “What's Hecuba to Him? On Kiesler and the Knot,” Assemblage 36 (1998): 6-23.  Gottfried Semper, The Four Elements of Architecture and Other Writings, trans. Harry F. Mallgrave and Wolfgang Hermann (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), 257.  Semper, The Four Elements, 217-9.  Friedrich Kiesler, “Space House,” The Architectural Record (January 1934): 44-61.  
Endless House 13  27. Kiesler, Inside the Endless House, 375.  28. Kiesler, “On Correalism and Biotechnique,” 61.  29. Kiesler, “On Correalism and Biotechnique,” 60-75.  30. Lewis Mumford, Technics and Civilization (New York: Harcourt Brace & World,  1934), 370. 31. Kiesler, “Pseudo-Functionalism.” 32. Ibid. 33. Kiesler, Inside the Endless House. 34. Ibid., 380  35. Interview. Thomas P. Creighton, “Kiesler’s Pursuit of an Idea,” Progressive Architecture (july 1961): 104-23.  Bibliography  Braham, William. “What’s Hecuba to Him? On Kiesler and the Knot.” Assemblage 36 (1998): 6-23.  Chu, Hsiao-Yun and Roberto G. Trujill. New Views on R. Buckminster Fuller. Redwood City, CA: Stanford University Press, 2009.  Creighton, Thomas P. “Kiesler’s Pursuit ofan Idea.” Progressive Architecture (July 1961): 104-23.  Held, Roger L. Endless Innovations: Frederick Kiesler’s Theory and Scenic Design. Ann Arbor, MI: UMI Research Press, 1982.  Huxtable, Ada Louise. “Architecture on TV: Greatest Non-Building Architect of our Time Expounds his Ideas.” New York Times (March 27, 1960).  Johnson, Philip. “Three Architects.” Art in America (Spring 1960).  Kiesler, Frederick. “The Architect in Search of... Design Correlation, A Column on Exhi- bits, the Theater and the Cinema.” The Architectural Record 81 (February 1937): 7-15.  “Design Correlation, Glass.” The Aychitectural Record 81 (March, 1937): 53-60.  “Design Correlation, Animals and Architecture.” The Architectural Record 81 (May  1937): 53-60.  “Design Correlation, Towards Prefabrication of Folk-Spectacles: Scientific Develop-  ment of Sound Reproduction Proves an Important Influence on Architectural Design  of Theaters.” The Architectural Record 81 (June 1937): 93-6.  “Design Correlation, Certain Data Pertaining to the Genesis of Design by Light  (Photo-Graphy), Part 1.” The Architectural Record 81 July 1937): 89-92.  “Design Correlation, Certain Data Pertaining to the Genesis of Design by Light  (Photo-Graphy), Part 2.” The Architectural Record 81 (August 1937): 79-84.  “On Correalism and Biotechnique: A Definition and Test of a New Approach to  Building Design.” The Architectural Record (September 1939): 60-75.  “Design Correlation as an Approach to Architectural Planning.” VVV: Poetry, Plastic  Arts, Anthropology, Sociology, Psychology 2-3 (1943): 76-9.  “Pseudo-Functionalism.” The Partisan Review 16 (July 1949): 733-42.  ——— “Endless House and its Psychological Lighting.” Interiors 110 (November 1950): 123-9.  
10.  Church of Christ the Worker 11  In any case, ceramic building materials laid in fabric-like patterns occur in many cul- tures, and Dieste might have recognized such usage as suggestive for distinguishing a non-bearing wall. See Gottfried Semper, The Four Elements of Architecture: A Contribution to the Comparative Study of Architecture, translated by Harry Francis Mallgrave and Wolfgang Herrmann (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, |1851]1989), especially Part V, “The Four Elements,” 101-26. Further, the fine workmanship of the small ceramic units of Dieste’s lightweight vaults also suggest a fabric — something even of a tent-like structure.  . Ochsendorf also discusses reinforced brick construction by Torroja, specifically the  Church of Pont du Suert, Spain, 1955; see John Ochsendorf, “Eladio Dieste as structural artist,” in Anderson, “Eladio Dieste,” 94-105.  Eladio Dieste, “Arquitectura y construccién,” in “Eladio Dieste, el maestro del ladrillo,” sp. no. Summa: Coleccién Summarios (Buenos Aires) 8, no. 45 (July 1980): 84-93; and as “Architecture and Construction” in Anderson, “Eladio Dieste,” 182-90; see also Tor- recillas, Eladio Dieste.  11. Dieste, “Arquitectura y construccién.”  12. ibid.  13. Ina thoughtful essay, Martin Cobas argues that Dieste’s achievements in architecture, realized in the churches and his home, are special conditions within Dieste’s general- ized invention process and the transformation, via repetition, of the structural type into an “infrastructural tectonic field.” Cobas also sees this phenomenon as intrinsically related to what Dieste referred to as “cosmic economy.” Martin Cobas, “Dieste Redux, mdaquinas hacia un orden tecténico infraestructural,” PLOT Arquitectura 10 (Buenos Aires, 2012), 206-11.  14. Dieste, “Arquitectura y construccién.”  15. Eladio Dieste, “Técnica y subdesarrollo,” in Summa (Buenos Aires) 70 (Dec. 1973) 17-8; and as “Technology and underdevelopment,” in Jiménez, Eladio Dieste.  16. Dieste, “Arquitectura y construccién.”  17. Eladio Dieste, “Arte, pueblo, tecnocracia,” in Carbonell, Eladio Dieste; and as “Art, peo- ple, technocracy,” in Anderson, “Eladio Dieste,” 194-7.  18. Torrecillas, Eladio Dieste, 160.  Bibliography  Anderson, Stanford. “Eladio Dieste: A Principled Builder.” In Felix Candela Lectures on Struc-  tural Engineering 1998-2005, edited by Guy Nordenson. New York: Museum of Mod- erm Art, 2004.  Eladio Dieste: Innovation in Structural Art. 2nd ed. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2012.  Barthel, Rainer. Eladio Dieste: Form und Konstruktion. Munich: Lehrstuhl fiir Hochbaustatik  und Tragwerksplanung, Technische Universitat Miinchen, 2001.  Carbonell, Galaor, ed. Eladio Dieste: La estructura ceramic. Coleccién Somosur. Bogota,  Colombia: Escala, 1987. 
12 Postwar Trends  of Relativity, trans. Victor J. Joseph (Amsterdam: Architectura & Natura, 1998); Nathaniel Coleman, Utopias and Architecture (Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge, 2005), espe- cially 196-256. For an overview of van Eyck’s work, see Strauven, Relativity; and Aldo van Eyck and Vincent Ligtelijn, Works, ed. Gregory Ball and Victor J. Joseph (Basel: Brikhauser, 1999). For the orphanage only, see: Francis Strauven, Aldo van Eyck’s Orphanage: A Modern Monument, trans. John Kirkpatrick (Amsterdam: NAi Publishers, 1996).  2. Strauven, Relativity, especially 76-8.  For more on CIAM (Congrés International d’Architecture Moderne), see Sigfried Giedion, Space, Time and Architecture: The Growth of A New Tradition, 5th ed. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1982), especially 696-706; see also Eric Mumford, The CLAM Discourse on Urbanism, 1928-1960 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002). For more on Team X, see Alison Smithson, ed., Team 10 Primer (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1968), Alison Smithson, ed., Team 10 Meetings (New York: Rizzoli, 1991); and Team 10 Online, available at: http:/ / www.team10online.org. For a record of the convergence of Team X and CLAM, see Oscar Newman, New Frontiers in Architecture, CIAM ’59 in Otterlo, By Order of Jacob B. Bakema for the Otterlo 1959 Participants, ed. Jiirgen Joedicke (New York: Universe Books, 1961).  Strauven, Relativity, 449-52. For Whorf’s writing, see Benjamin Lee Whorf, Language, Thought & Reality: Selected Writings, ed. John B. Carroll (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1956).  . For an illustration of the Otterlo Circles, see http:// www.team10online.org/team10/  eyck/index.html  6. Strauven, A Modern Monument, 13.  7. Ibid. 8. Adolf Loos, “Heimatkunst,” lecture, Vienna, 1912, reprinted in Adolf Loos, On Archi- tecture, trans. Michael Mitchell (Riverside, CA: Ariadne Press, 2002), 117. 9. Adolf Loos, “Cultural Degeneration,” reprinted in Adolf Loos, Ornament and Crime: Selected Essays, trans. Michael Mitchell (Riverside, CA: Ariadne Press, |1908]1998), 163. 10. Much of the understanding of van Eyck’s principles and their application in the orphanage developed here has been informed by Aldo van Eyck, “Steps Towards a Configurative Discipline,” Forum no. 3, (August 1962): 81-94, reprinted in Aldo van Eyck, Writings: The Child and the City and the Artist; Collected Articles and Other Writings, 1947-1998, ed. Vin- cent Ligtelijn and Francis Strauven (Amsterdam: Sun Publishers, 2008), 327-43. 11. Leon Battista Alberti, On the Art of Building in Ten Books (1486), trans. Joseph Rykwert, Neil Leach and Robert Tavernor (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1988), Book 9, chapter 5, 302-3. Bibliography  Alberti, Leon Battista. On the Art of Building in Ten Books. Translated by Joseph Rykwert,  Neil Leach, and Robert Tavernor. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, |1486]1988.  Coleman, Nathaniel. Utopias and Architecture. Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge, 2005. Giedion, Sigfried. Space, Time and Architecture: The Growth of A New Tradition. 5th ed.  Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1982. 
10.  lL.  12.  13.  14.  15.  16.  17.  18. 19.  20.  21.  22. 23.  24.  25.  26.  Plan for Tokyo 13  Kiyonori Kikutake, Kisho Kurokawa, Masato Otaka, Fumihiko Maki, Noboru Kawazoe, Ekuan Kenji, and Kiyoshi Awazu, Metabolism: Proposals for New Urbanism (Tokyo: Bijutsu shipansha, 1960). For more discussion of utopianism in Tange and the Metabolists’ work, see Zhongjie Lin, Kenzo Tange and the Metabolist Movement: Urban Utopias of Modern Japan (London: Routledge, 2010). Both Tange and Isozaki’s work was included in the “City and Life of the Future” exhi- bition at Saibu department in 1962, which featured the Metabolists.  Tokyo’s 31-meter building height limit was set after the 1923 Great Kanto Earthquake that destroyed the majority of the city. It was abandoned in 1963.  Tange’s influence on the Metabolists was evident in three aspects of his work: the definition of a “new tradition”; the comprehensive approach to city planning; and the expressive use of technology. Lin, Kenzo Tange and the Metabolist Move- ment, 55-60.  For details of Tokyo’s dilemmas in postwar reconstruction, see Roman Cybriwsky, Tokyo: The Changing Profile of an Urban Giant (Boston: G.K. Hall & Co., 1991).  For details of Kano’s plan, see Kenzo Tange and Terunobu Fujimori, Kenzo Tange (Tokyo: Shin Kenchikusha, 2002), 345; and Noboru Kawazoe, “A New Tokyo: In, On, or Above the Sea?” This is Japan 9 (1962): 60.  Kawazoe, “A New Tokyo,” 60-3.  Newman, New Frontiers, 172.  In fact, Tange’s plan did not appear in Shinkenchiku [New Architecture] until March 1961, and the first foreign journal that covered this plan was Architectural Forum in the September 1961 issue. Kenzo Tange Team, “A Plan for Tokyo, 1960: Toward a Structural Reorganization,” Shinkenchiku (March 1961): 8-38; “Tokyo into Venice?” Architectural Forum (September 1961): 142-3.  Kenzo Tange Team, A Plan for Tokyo, 1960: Toward a Structural Reorganization (Tokyo: Shikenchikusha, 1961), Banham, Megastructure, 49-54.  Ibid, 6.  Tbid, 10.  Like many earlier plans for Tokyo, the Capital Region Development Plan was not very successful. Tokyo’s urban sprawl grew so quickly that many of the restrictions specified in the plan soon became outdated and were abandoned. In 1965, a revised master plan erased the greenbelt altogether and offered this zone for suburban growth. In the meantime, the outer boundary of the capital region was substantially extended. Another significant revision of the 1958 plan was the abolition of the 31-meter building-height limit in the 23 wards of central Tokyo, taking effect in 1963. Tokyo Metropolitan Government, A Hundred Years of Tokyo City Planning (Tokyo: the Tokyo Metropolitan Government Publications, 1994), 56.  Christopher Alexander, “City is not a Tree,” Architectural Forum 122, no. 1 (1965): 58-62 and no. 2 (1965): 58-61.  Peter Smithson, “Reflections on Kenzo Tange’s Tokyo Bay Plan,” Architectural Design 34 (1964): 479-80.  Maki, Investigations in Collective Form, 11.  
14 Postwar Trends  27. Jean Gottmann, Megalopolis: The Urbanized Northeastern Seaboard of the United States (New York: Twentieth Century Fund, 1961). The fact that Gottmann’s book and Tange’s plan were published in the same year was not entirely coincidental. They both addressed a global phenomenon of urban geography and demography emerging in this particular period. Gottmann employed the term “megalopolis” to describe the linear form of dense urban agglomeration in the northeastern seaboard of the United States. Japan’s Tokaido area is widely regarded as another high-density megalopolis.  28. For a detailed discussion of Tokaido megalopolis and the influence of Tange’s plan on current mega-projects in the Tokyo Bay area, see Zhongjie Lin, “From Megastructure to Megalopolis: Formation and Transformation of Mega-projects in Tokyo Bay,” Jour- nal of Urban Design 12 (February 2007): 73-92.  29. Kenzo Tange, “Function, Structure, and Symbol,” in Kenzo Tange 1946-1969: Architec- ture and Urban Design, ed. Udo Kultermann (Artemis Zurich: Verlag fiir Architektur, 1970), 243.  30. Kenzo Tange, “From Architecture to Urban Design,” Japan Architect (May 1967): 26.  Bibliography  Alexander, Christopher. “City is not a Tree.” Architectural Forum 122, no. 1 (1965): 58-62.  “City is not a Tree.” Architectural Forum 122, no. 2 (1965): 58-61.  Architectural Forum. “Tokyo into Venice?” Architectural Forum (September 1961): 142-3.  Banham, Reyner. Megastructure: Urban Futures of the Recent Past. New York: Harper and Row, 1976.  Cybriwsky, Roman. Tokyo: The Changing Profile of an Urban Giant. Boston: G.K. Hall & Co., 1991.  Gottmann, Jean. Megalopolis: The Urbanized Northeastern Seaboard of the United States. New York: Twentieth Century Fund, 1961.  Kawazoe, Noboru. “A New Tokyo: In, On, or Above the Sea?” This is Japan 9 (1962): 60.  Kenzo Tange Team. “A Plan for Tokyo, 1960: Toward a Structural Reorganization.” Shin- kenchiku (March 1961): 8-38.  Kenzo Tange Team. A Plan for Tokyo, 1960: Toward a Structural Reorganization. Tokyo: Shi-  kenchikusha, 1961.  Kikutake, Kiyonori, Kisho Kurokawa, Masato Otaka, Fumihiko Maki, Noboru Kawazoe,  Ekuan Kenji, and Kiyoshi Awazu. Metabolism: Proposals for New Urbanism. Tokyo:  Bijutsu shOpansha, 1960.  Lin, Zhongjie. “From Megastructure to Megalopolis: Formation and Transformation of  Mega-projects in Tokyo Bay.” Journal of Urban Design 12 (February 2007): 73-92.  Kenzo Tange and the Metabolist Movement: Urban Utopias of Modern Japan. London:  Routledge, 2010.  Maki, Fumihiko. Investigations in Collective Form. St. Louis, MO: Washington University  Press, 1964.  
8 The 1960s and 1970s  found its most influential celebration. Among the 20 facades that were staged along the interior street of the Corderie dell’ Arsenale, two contributions set themselves apart: the installations of Rem Koolhaas and Frank Gehry. With their non- conformity in mind, the 1960s and 1970s might best be understood as one of the most contentious and, therefore, productive periods of the twentieth century. For that reason alone these years might hold the key to many of today’s misunder- standings, for going beyond the modern was then as much about a return to the past as about a different conception of the future — the one that we have inherited.  Notes  1. Aldo van Eyck, “Is Architecture Going to Reconcile Basic Values?” in Writings, ed. Vincent Ligteljin and Francis Strauven (Amsterdam: SUN, 2008), 202.  2. Jacob Berend Bakema, “What Became of CLAM?” Architectural Review (April 1961): 226.  3. Alan Colquhoun, Modern Architecture (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002), 254.  4. Hassan Fathy, Construire avec le people: histoire d’un village d’Egypte: Gourna (Paris: Sindbad, 1970). First published as Gourna: A Tale of Two Villages (Cairo: Ministry of Culture, 1969).  5. Denise Scott Brown, “Learning from Pop,” Casabella (December 1971): 359.  6. Reyner Banham, “City as Scrambled Egg,” Cambridge Opinion, no.17 (1959): 18-23, and Los Angeles: The Architecture of Four Ecologies (Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1971).  7. Robert Venturi, Denise Scott Brown, and Steven Izenour, Learning from Las Vegas (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1972).  8. Aldo Rossi, L’architettura della citta (Padova: Marsilio Editori, 1966); Robert Krier, Urban Space/Stadtraum, trans. Christine Czechowski and George Black [1975] (New York: Riz- zoli, 1979); Colin Rowe and Fred Koetter, Collage City (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1978); Rem Koolhaas, Delirious New York: A Retroactive Manifesto for Manhattan (New York: Oxford University Press, 1978); Bernard Tschumi, The Manhattan Tran- scripts (London: Academy Editions, 1981).  Bibliography  Bakema, Jacob Berend. “What Became of CIAM?” Architectural Review (April 1961): 226.  Banham, Reyner. “City as Scrambled Egg.” Cambridge Opinion, no.17 (1959): 18-23.  Los Angeles: The Architecture of Four Ecologies. Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1971.  Brown, Denise Scott. “Learning from Pop.” Casabella (December 1971): 359.  Colquhoun, Alan. Modern Architecture. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002.  Fathy, Hassan. Construire avec le people: histoire d’un village d’Egypte: Gourna. Paris: Sindbad, 1970.  
12 The 1960s and 1970s  NAW &  lL.  12.  13.  14.  15.  16. 17.  18.  19.  . To be mentioned are, of course, Robert Venturi, Complexity and Contradiction in Archi-  tecture, The Museum of Modern Art Papers on Architecture 1 (New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 1966), and Robert Venturi, Denise Scott Brown, and Steven Izenour, Learning from Las Vegas (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1972).  . See Frederic Schwartz, ed., Mother’s House: The Evolution of Vanna Venturi’s House in  Chestnut Hill (New York: Rizzoli, 1992).  . Vincent Scully, “Everybody Needs Everything,” in Schwartz, Mother’s House, 39.  . Venturi, Complexity, 117.  . Ibid, 88-9.  . Stanislaus von Moos, Venturi, Rauch ex Scott Brown; Buildings and Projects (New York:  Rizzoli, 1987), 25.  . “The first and most evident | difference between the high-modernist and the postmod-  ernist moment] is the emergence of a new kind of flatness or depthlessness, a new kind of superficiality in the most literal sense, perhaps the supreme formal feature of all of the postmodernisms...” Fredric Jameson, Postmodernism, or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1991), 9.  . See Frederic Schwartz, introduction to Mother’s House, 29 (endnote 27). 10.  See in particular the chapters on “Architecture as Space” and “Architecture as Symbol” in Venturi, Scott Brown, and Izenour, Learning, 1-3.  David B. Brownlee, “Form and Content,” in David B. Brownlee, David G. De Long, and Kathryn B. Hiesinger, Out of the Ordinary: Robert Venturi, Denise Scott Brown and Associates; Architecture, Urbanism, Design (Philadelphia: Philadelphia Museum of Art, 2001), 28.  Robert Venturi and Denise Scott Brown, “Some Houses of Ill-Repute,” Perspecta 13/14 (1971): 259.  Robert Venturi, “A Postscript on My Mother’s House,” in On Houses and Housing, Architectural Monographs 21, ed. Robert Venturi, Denise Scott Brown, and Associates (London: Academy Editions/St Martin’s Press, [1982] 1992), 25.  In their more recent theoretical output, Venturi and Scott Brown have attempted to introduce the notion of “mannerism” as an ahistorical category for architectural design that is not bound to the homonymous historical period or style. See Robert Venturi and Denise Scott Brown, Architecture as Signs and Systems: For a Mannerist Time (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 2004).  See Venturi, “A Postscript,” 25.  See Scully, “Everybody Needs Everything,” 46.  See Martino Stierli, “In the Academy’s Garden; Robert Venturi, the Grand Tour and the Revision of Modern Architecture,” AA Files 56 (2007): 42-63; Martino Stierli, Ven- turi’s Grand Tour: Zur Genealogie der Postmoderne (Basel: Standpunkte, 2011).  See Vincent Scully, “Louis I. Kahn and the Ruins of Rome,” in Modern Architecture and Other Essays, selected and with introductions by Neil Levine (Princeton: Princeton Uni- versity Press, [1992] 2003), 298-319; Eugene J. Johnson and Michael J. Lewis, ed., Drawn from the Source: The Travel Sketches of Louis I. Kahn, exhib. cat. (Williamstown, MA: Williams College Museum of Art, 1996).  See Scully, “Everybody Needs Everything,” 45. 
20.  21.  22.  23.  24.  25.  26. 27.  28.  29.  30.  31.  32.  Vanna Venturi House 13  Personal communication to author, Philadelphia, January 3, 2002, see Stierli, “In the Academy’s Garden,” 51.  See Robert Venturi, “A Justification for a Pop Architecture,” Arts & Architecture 82, no. 4, (1965): 22.  See Vincent Scully, The Shingle Style: Architectural Theory and Design from Richardson to the Origins of Wright (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1955); Vincent Scully, The Shingle Style Today, or, The Historian’s Revenge (New York: Braziller, 1974).  For the evolution of design in a number of steps and schemes see Schwartz, Mother’s House, as well as Scully’s analysis therein. On the early “Shingle Style” version of the Mother's House see Brownlee, De Long, and Hiesinger, Out of the Ordinary, 29.  See Deborah Fausch, “Ugly and Ordinary; The Representation of the Everyday,” in Architecture of the Everyday, ed. Steven Harris and Deborah Berke (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1997), 75-106.  On the debates between the “whites” and the “grays” see Robert A. M. Stern, “Gray architecture; Quelques variations post-modernistes autour de l’orthodoxie,” L’architec- ture d’aujourd’hui 186 (August-September 1976): 83-98, reprinted as “Gray Architecture as Post-Modernism, or; Up and Down from Orthodoxy,” in K. Michael Hays, Architec- ture Theory since 1968 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000), 240-5.  This anecdote is told in Schwartz, Mother’s House, 25.  See David Van Zanten, “The ‘Princeton System’ and the Founding of the School of Architecture, 1915-20,” in The Architecture of Robert Venturi, ed. Christopher Mead (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1989), 34-44. See also Stanislaus von Moos, Venturi, Scott Brown and Associates; Buildings and Projects 1986-1998 (New York: Monacelli, 1999), 28-9. For a survey on architectural education in the United States see Joan Ockman, ed., Architecture School: Three Centuries of Educating Architects in North America (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2012).  For a proto-postmodernist interpretation of historicist American architecture see the classic George L. Hersey, “Replication Replicated, or Notes on American Bastardy,” Perspecta 9/10 (1965): 211-48.  The canonical contribution with regard to Le Corbusier in this respect is Colin Rowe, “The Mathematics of the Ideal Villa,” in The Mathematics of the Ideal Villa and Other Essays (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1976), 1-17.  For a discussion of strategies of such “irreverent” borrowing from modernist in post- war and postmodern architecture see Martino Stierli, “Taking on Mies; Mimicry and Parody of Modernism in the Architecture of Alison and Peter Smithson and Venturi/ Scott Brown,” in Neo-avant-garde and Post-modern: Postwar Architecture in Britain and Beyond, Studies in British Art 21, ed. Mark Crinson and Claire Zimmerman (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2010), 151-74.  Paul Goldberger, “Venturi and Rauch; Houses,” in Venturi and Rauch: Vanna Venturi House, Chestnut Hill, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 1962 — Peter Brant House, Greenwich, Con- necticut, 1973 — Carll Tucker II House, Westchester County, New York, 1975, Global Archi- tecture 39, ed. Yukio Futagawa (Tokyo: A.D.A. Edita, 1976).  Brownlee, De Long, and Hiesinger, Out of the Ordinary, 29. 
14 The 1960s and 1970s  33. Venturi, Complexity, 117.  34, Quoted in Goldberger, Venturi and Rauch, np.  35. On the significance of Bertolt Brecht’s notion of “de-familiarization” (Verfremdungseffekt) for the architecture of Venturi and Scott Brown, see von Moos, Venturi, Scott Brown, 48-51.  36. See Gilles Deleuze, Difference and Repetition, trans. Paul Patton (New York: Columbia University Press, 1994).  37. Specifically, Owens explains the functioning of such “allegorical” imagery in postmodern- ism as follows: “Allegorical imagery is appropriated imagery; the allegorist does not invent images but confiscates them. He lays claim to the culturally significant, poses as its inter- preter. And in his hands the image becomes something other (allos = other + agoreuei = to speak). He does not restore an original meaning that may have been lost or obscured; allegory is not hermeneutics. Rather, he adds another meaning to the image. If he adds, however, he does so only to replace: the allegorical meaning supplants an antecedent one; it is a supplement.” See Craig Owens, “The Allegorical Impulse: Toward a Theory of Postmodernism,” October 12 (1980): 67-86, 69; see also Craig Owens, “The Allegorical Impulse: Toward a Theory of Postmodernism, Part 2,” October 13 (1980): 58-80.  38. See Scully, “Everybody Needs Everything,” 41.  39. Alice T. Friedman, “It’s a Wise Child: The Vanna Venturi House, by Robert Venturi,” in Women and the Making of the Modern House: A Social and Architectural History (New York: Abrams, 1998) 192-4.  40. Venturi, Complexity, 117.  41. See Umberto Eco, The Open Work, trans. Anna Cancogni (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1989).  42. See Venturi, “A Justification,” 22.  43. Robert Venturi, “Mother’s House 25 Years Later,” in Schwartz, Mother’s House, 35.  Bibliography  Brownlee, David B. “Form and Content.” In David B. Brownlee, David G. De Long, and Kathryn B. Hiesinger, Out of the Ordinary: Robert Venturi, Denise Scott Brown and Associates; Architecture, Urbanism, Design. Philadelphia: Philadelphia Museum of Art, 2001.  Brownlee, David B., David G. De Long, and Kathryn B. Hiesinger. Out of the Ordinary: Robert Venturi, Denise Scott Brown and Associates; Architecture, Urbanism, Design. Phil- adelphia: Philadelphia Museum of Art, 2001.  Deleuze, Gilles. Difference and Repetition. Translated by Paul Patton. New York: Columbia University Press, 1994.  Eco, Umberto. The Open Work. Translated by Anna Cancogni. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1989.  Fausch, Deborah. “Ugly and Ordinary: The Representation of the Everyday.” In Architecture of the Everyday, edited by Steven Harris and Deborah Berke, 75-106. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1997. 
Salk Institute 13  the former category, see also Sarah Williams Ksiazek, “Critiques of Liberal Individualism: Louis I. Kahn’s Civie Projects, 1947-57” Assemblage 31 (1997): 56-79; and Kiel Moe, “Extraordinary Performances at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies,” Journal of Archi- tectural Education 61 (May 2008): 17-24. In the latter category, see also Daniel S. Friedman, “The Sun on Trial: Kahn’s Gnostic Garden at Salk” (Ph.D. diss., University of Pennsylva- nia, 1999); Joseph A. Burton, “The Architectural Hieroglyphics of Louis I. Kahn, Archi- tecture as Logos” (Ph.D. diss., University of Pennsylvania, 1983); and Jeffry Kieffer, Readings from the Architecture of Louis I. Kahn (Bloomington, IN: Xlibris Corporation, 2001). Vincent Scully, introduction to Kahn Libraries, ed. Xavier Costa (Barcelona: Publica- cions del Collegi d’Arquitectes de Catalunya, 1989), 34, reproduced here following its publication in Louis I. Kahn Archive: Personal Drawings; The Completely Illustrated Cat- alogue of the Drawings in the Louis I. Kahn Collection (New York, Garland, 1988). Louis L. Kahn, “I Love Beginnings,” paper delivered at the International Design Con- ference, Aspen, Colorado, 1972, in Latour, Louis I. Kahn, 288.  5. Scully, introduction to Kahn Libraries, 36.  I owe this phrase to Judith Thurman, “An Unfinished Woman: The Desires of Margaret Fuller,” in The New Yorker (April 1, 2013): 76.  7. Adrian Forty, Concrete and Culture (London: Reaktion Books, 2012), 44. 8. Michael Merrill, Louis I. Kahn — On the Thoughtful Making of Spaces: The Dominican Moth-  10. lL.  12.  13.  14.  erhouse and a Modern Culture of Space (Baden: Lars Miiller Publishers, 2010), 7; Robert McCarter goes a step farther, declaring Salk “unquestionably Kahn’s greatest and most seminal design”: Robert McCarter, Louis I. Kahn (New York: Phaidon, 2005), 182. See also David G. De Long, “The Mind Opens to Realizations,” in Louis I. Kahn: In the Realm of Architecture, ed. David B. Brownlee and David G. De Long (Los Angeles: The Museum of Contemporary Art and Rizzoli, 1991), 70.  Vincent J. Scully, Louis I. Kahn (New York: George Braziller, 1962), 27, quoted in Alex Soojong-Kim Pang with Preston Thayer, “Alfred Newton Richards Medical Research Building, University of Pennsylvania,” in Brownlee and De Long, Louis I. Kahn, 325, and Scully, introduction to Kahn Libraries, 26.  David De Long, “The Mind Opens to Realizations,” 90 and 75 n 72.  For an authoritative analysis of the site, vegetation, and landscape of Salk, see Mare Treib, “To End a Continent: The Courtyard of the Salk Institute,” Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians 63 (September 2006), 402-27.  Respectively: Merrill, Louis I. Kahn, 133; Rykwert, Louis I. Kahn, 76; Manfredo Tafuri, Theories and History of Architecture, trans. Giorgio Verrecchia (New York: Harper & Row, Publishers, 1980), 92, 124, and 130; and Thomas Hines, “The Power and Pitfalls of Greatness,” Philadelphia Inquirer (September 2, 1984) no page number, clippings file, Kahn Collection.  David B. Brownlee, “The House of the Inspirations: Designs for Study,” in Brownlee and De Long, Louis I. Kahn, 95. For a synoptic history of this project, see also Daniel S. Friedman, “The Salk Institute for Biological Studies,” in Brownlee and De Long, Louis I. Kahn, 330-8; and Daniel S. Friedman, introduction to The Salk Institute by Ezra Stoller (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1999).  For a full account of this chapter in modern epidemiology, see David M. Oshinsky, Polio: An American Story (New York: Oxford University Press, 2005). 
14 The 1960s and 1970s  15.  16.  17.  18.  19.  20.  21. 22.  23.  24. 25.  26.  Louis I. Kahn, “Louis I. Kahn Talks With Students,” Architecture at Rice University, no. 26 (1969): 12, cited in Friedman, “The Salk Institute for Biological Studies,” 330. Jonas Salk, interviewed by Esther McCoy, “Dr. Salk Talks About His Institute,” Archi- tectural Forum (December 1967): 32.  Although Mare Treib reports that Jack McAllister recalls no mention of Assisi in his conversations with Kahn, Kahn clearly notes this reference on yellow tracing paper in an early but undated graphic analysis of the project, which he populates with dozens numerous schematic vignettes and diagrams. Kahn’s thumbnail perspective of a four- bay arcade loosely resembles the lower part of a rendering of the courtyard at the Basil- ica of St. Francis, which Kahn rendered 30 years earlier during his 1929 sojourn in Europe. See Alexander Tzonis, ed., The Louis I. Kahn Archive: Personal Drawings (The Completely Illustrated Catalogue of the Drawings in the Louis I. Kahn Collection, University of Pennsylvania and Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission), volume 2, Buildings and Projects 1959-1961 (New York: Garland Publishing House, Inc., 1987), Plate 540.10 [also 540.11], 38; Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts, The Travel Sketches of Louis I. Kahn, (Philadelphia: Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts, 1978), plates 15 and 16, p. 27; and Jan Hochstim, The Paintings and Sketches of Louis J. Kahn (New York: Rizzoli International Publications), plate 70, 86. Kahn included a pencil sketch of Assisi in his first known publication: Louis I. Kahn, “The Value and Aim in Sketching,” in T-Square Club Journal of Philadelphia 1 (May 1931): 4, 18-21. Louis I. Kahn, “Interview with Patricia McLaughlin,” in Latour, Louis I. Kahn, 301. Louis I. Kahn, “A Staternent,” in Latour, Louis I. Kahn, 152; and Louis I. Kahn, “New Frontiers in Architecture: CIAM in Otterloo 1959,” in Latour, Louis I. Kahn, 84.  See George Howe, Oscar Stonorov, and Louis I. Kahn, “ ‘Standards’ Versus Essential Space: Comments on Unit Plans for War Housing,” in Latour, Louis I. Kahn, 14-17, originally published in Architectural Forum 76 (May 1942): 308-11.  Merrill, Louis I. Kahn, 119.  See Merrill, Louis I. Kahn; and Michael J. Lewis, “The Dominican Motherhouse of St. Catherine de Rici,” in Brownlee and De Long, Louis I. Kahn, 384-9; Carla Yanni, “Fine Arts Center, School, and Performing Arts Theater, Fort Wayne,” in Brownlee and De Long, Louis I. Kahn, 346-51; Kathleen James, “Philadelphia College of Art,” in Brownlee and De Long, Louis I. Kahn, 358-61; and Daniel S. Friedman, “The Salk Institute for Biological Studies,” 330-9.  Louis I. Kahn, “Abstract of Program for the Institute of Biology at Torrey Pines, La Jolla, San Diego,” n.d., typewritten photocopy accompanied by earlier drafts with auto- graph edits and corrections, and by an autograph draft in grease pencil, n.d., unpagi- nated, Box LIK 27, Kahn Collection, Architectural Archives, University of Pennsylvania and Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission (hereafter Kahn Collection). Ibid. See Charles Percy Snow, “A Second Look,” in “The Two Cultures” and “A Second Look”: An Expanded Version of “The Two Cultures and the Scientific Revolution” (Cambridge: The Cambridge University Press, 1964).  “Agreement Amending Architect's Agreement between the Salk Institute for Biological Studies, San Diego, California, formerly The Institute for Biology at San Diego, and  
27. 28. 29.  30.  31.  32.  33.  34.  35. 36.  37.  38.  39.  40. 41.  42.  Salk Institute 15  Louis I. Kahn,” August 29, 1963, “Salk-George Conn Correspondence,” Box LIK 89, Kahn Collection.  Dr. Jonas Salk, telephone interview with Daniel S. Friedman, December 18, 1989. Moe, “Extraordinary Performances,” 17.  For images of the evolution of the courtyard and garden in model and drawings, see Brownlee and De Long, Louis I. Kahn, 98-9, figures 157-60; also Friedman, “The Salk Institute for Biological Studies,” 332, figure 438; for recent scholarship on the origins of the Salk courtyard, see especially Treib, “To End a Continent,” 405-22.  Barragan, interview (interviewer unknown), in Richard Saul Wurman, What Will Be Has Always Been, 268-9, quoted in Friedman, “The Salk Institute for Biological Studies,” 334.  John E. McAllister, Kahn’s project architect at Salk, telephone interview with the author, December 18, 1989, in Friedman, “The Salk Institute for Biological Studies,” 332 and 339 n. 29.  Fred Langford, interview with the author at University of Pennsylvania Architectural Archives, January 5, 1990.  McCoy, “Dr. Salk Talks about His Institute,” 27.  Quoted in Friedman, “The Salk Institute for Biological Studies,” 332. For a contempo- rary analysis of building systems at the Salk Institute, see Moe, “Extraordinary Performances.”  Merrill, Louis I. Kahn, 164.  Many critics have described Kahn’s composition in terms of twos and threes. See, for example, Klaus-Peter Gast, Louis I. Kahn: The Idea of Order (Basel: Birkhauser, 2001), 62; also Merrill, Louis I. Kahn, 169.  August Komendant, “Komendant on Concrete,” Progressive Architecture (October 1966): 208.  Thomas Leslie, Louis I. Kahn: Building Art, Building Science (New York: George Braziller, ne., 2005), 155. See also David Leatherbarrow and Moshen Mostafavi, Surface Archi- tecture (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002), 18-20. Kahn explored the properties of concrete during his early work on mass and prefab- ricated housing, which he extended in his proposals to the Israel Housing Survey Com- mittee in 1947. See Susan G. Solomon, “Secular and Spiritual Humanism: Louis I. Kahn’s Work for the Jewish Community in the 1950s and 1960s” (Ph.D. diss., Univer- sity of Pennsylvania, May 1997), 26, 26 n. 48, and 61-2. Anne Griswold Tyng, foreword to Gast, Louis I. Kahn, 7. Rykwert [new photography by Roberto Schenzen], Louis I. Kahn, 26. Notably, the author, photographer, and editors for this large-format book chose a photograph of the Yale Art Gallery concrete ceiling for its front and back pastedowns and free end- papers; for the book’s frontispiece, they chose a photograph of the Yale Gallery stair- well ceiling. See also Thomas Leslie, Louis I. Kahn, 155.  discovered this drawing in the Kahn Collection at the Architectural Archives, Univer- sity of Pennsylvania, in the fall of 1989, sandwiched between two blue line prints in one of numerous flat files storing Salk Institute construction documents. Fred Langford ver- ified the authorship in a conversation with the author on January 5, 1990. Kahn released  
16 The 1960s and 1970s  43. 44.  45. 46.  47.  48. 49. 50. 51. 52. 53. 54.  55. 56.  57.  58.  59. 60.  6l. 62. 63. 64.  65.  the architectural set of construction documents to the contractor on January 18, 1963. See Leslie, Louis I. Kahn, 148.  Langford, conversation with the author, January 5, 1990.  Kahn’s drawing is still visible today, across from the electrical panels, protected by a sheet of Plexiglas.  Langford, conversation with the author.  Dr. Jonas Salk, interview with David B. Brownlee et al., April 18, 1983, cassette record- ing, Kahn Collection.  Letter, Fred Langford [for Louis I. Kahn Architect] to Greer Ferver, April 5, 1963 “Re: Design of formwork for concrete], in “Salk Dr. August Komendant,” Box LIK 89, Kahn Collection [copies to Dr. Salk, Mr. Kahn, Mr. Conn; carbon copy, initialed “JEM” (John E. McAllister and “DPW” (David P. Wisdom), upper right hand corner].  Letter, Langford to Ferver, April 5, 1963, Kahn Collection.  Langford, conversation with the author.  Latour, Louis I. Kahn, 327.  Notation, lower right hand corner of drawing 030.1.540.237, Kahn Collection.  Louis I. Kahn, “Toward a Plan for Midtown Philadelphia,” in Latour, Louis I. Kahn, 46. Kahn, “New frontiers in Architecture: CIAM in Otterloo 1959,” in Latour, Louis I. Kahn, 98. The author of these two terms and their distinction is Joseph Rykwert, “Inheritance or Tradition?” Architectural Design 49 (1979), incorporating AD Profiles 21; Leonis Battista Alberti: 2-6.  Forty, Concrete and Culture, 48.  “...[O}rnament may be defined as a form of auxiliary light and complement to beauty. From this it follows ... that beauty is some inherent property, to be found suffused all through the body of that which may be called beautiful; whereas ornament, rather than being inherent, has the character of something attached or additional.” Leon Battista Alberti, On the Avt of Building in Ten Books, trans. Joseph Rykwert, Neil Leach, and Rob- ert Tavernor (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1988), 156; in this volume see also “Glossary,” s.v. “Beauty and ornament/pulchritude et ornamentum,” 420.  See David Leatherbarrow, Architecture Oriented Otherwise (New York: Princeton Archi- tectural Press, 2009), 102.  Leslie, Louis I. Kahn, 156.  Leatherbarrow, Architecture Oriented Otherwise, 101.  Ananda K. Coomaraswamy, “Ormament,” in Coomaraswamy I: Selected Papers: Tradi- tional Art and Symbolism, ed. Roger Lipsey (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1977), 241-4.  Kahn, “How to Develop New Methods of Construction.”  Louis I. Kahn, “Harmony Between Man and Nature,” [A lecture in Paris, 1974], in Latour, Louis I. Kahn, 333.  Louis I. Kahn, “I Love Beginnings” (1972), in Latour, Louis I. Kahn, 291.  See Marco Frascari, “A Secret Semiotic Skiagraphy: The Corporeal Theatre of Mean- ings in Vincenzo Scamozzi’s Idea of Architecture,” VIA 11; Architecture and Shadow (1990): 32-51.  Luce Irigaray, An Ethics of Sexual Difference, trans. Carolyn Burke and Gillian C. Gill (Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press, 1993), 51. 
66.  67.  68.  69.  70.  71. 72.  73.  74.  75.  76.  77. 78.  79.  Salk Institute 17  Claudio Sgarbi, with Mirva Bertan and Grazia Biondi, “Speculation on De-sign and Finitio,” VIA 9 (1988): 161.  Donald Kunze, “The Silence of Drawing,” paper, “Open and Closed Representation: A Symposium on the Nature of Graphic Visualization,” University of Pennsylvania, March 25, 1995 (author’s notes).  Harold Bloom, “Poetry, Revisionism, Repression,” in Poetics of Influence (New Haven: Henry R. Schwab, 1988), 127.  Giovanni Filaramo, A Short History of Gnosticism, trans. Anthony Alcock (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1990), 44.  “Lab against studio,” Carles Vallhonrat noted, “these two spaces constituted the maker of the plan.” Interview, Spent Light | videorecording] producer, Robert W. Hayes; direc- tor, Mary Laheen; written and researched by Mary Laheen and Robert W. Hayes (Berkeley, CA: The University of California Extension Center for Media and Independ- ent Learning, 1993).  Klaus-Peter Gast, Louis I. Kahn: The Idea of Order (Basel: Birkhauser, 2001), 61.  This discussion draws directly from class notes | took during David Leatherbarrow’s introductory lecture, Theory Seminar, Ph.D. Program in Architecture, University of Pennsylvania, September 15, 1987; also his introductory lecture, Theory of Form I, Department of Architecture, Graduate School of Fine Arts, January 18, 1989. See also Hans George Gadamer, The Idea of the Good in Platonic-Aristotelian Philosophy, trans. P. Christopher Smith (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1986), 159-78; Hans  Jonas, “The Practical Uses of Theory,” in The Phenomenon of Life: Toward a Philosoph-  ical Biology (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1966), 188-210; and David Leatherbarrow, The Roots of Architectural Invention (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer- sity Press, 1993), 215-20. Kahn issues similar distinctions in 1966, around the time  he was finalizing the revised design of the central courtyard: “I felt there were three things that had to be taken care of in the teaching of the architect. One is profes- sional (and that had to do with everything that is measurable - however a man can measure things it belongs to the profession), that which had to do with the strength of materials, that which had to do with the way you conduct yourself and the client, the office, statics, science and technology.” Louis I. Kahn, “Address,” in Latour, Louis I. Kahn, 210.  Filaramo, A Short History of Gnosticism, 44.  Louis I. Kahn, “On Form and Design” [Speech at the 46th meeting of the Association of Collegiate Schools of Architecture, University of California, Berkeley, April 22-23, 1960], in Latour, Louis I. Kahn, 103.  Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Phenomenology of Perception, trans. Colin Smith (London: Rou- tledge & Kegan Paul, 1962) 101.  Scully, introduction to Kahn Libraries, 34.  Kahn, “Harmony Between Man and Architecture,” in Latour, Louis I. Kahn. 338. Manfredo Tafuri, The Sphere and the Labyrinth: Avante-Gardes and Architecture from Piranesi to the 1970s, trans. Pellegrino d’Acierno and Robert Connolly (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1990), 293-4. | am indebted to Nadir Lahiji and Eric Puryear for stim- ulating conversations about this passage.  Forty, Concrete and Culture, 34. 
Swimming Pool on the Beach at Lega de Palmeira 11  am Strand von Leca de Palmeiva/Piscina na praia de Lega de Palmeiva, Alvaro Siza 1959-73, with photographs by Thorsten Hiimpel, ed. Luiz Trigueiros, trans. Melissa Thorson- Hausse (Lisbon: Editorial Blau, 2004), which includes a series of excellent panoramic photographs by Thorsten Hiimpel, and the sketches and drawings by Alvaro Siza men- tioned in this text.  2. Information courtesy of José Salgado, Porto, in March 1999.  10.  lL.  12.  13.  14. 15.  16. 17. 18.  . Alvaro Siza, Meméria descritiva. Piscina da Praia de Lega, 1°. Fase, unpublished typescript,  Archive Alvaro Siza, Porto (March 15, 1960), 1.  . Fernado Tavora (1923-2005) was Siza’s teacher at the Escola Superior das Belas Artes  do Porto (ESBAP), his first employer after graduation, and lifelong mentor. One of the most notable Portuguese architects of his generation, Tavora participated in CIAM congresses and Team X meetings.  . Rainer Franke, “Interview with Alvaro Siza,” Bauwelt 81, no. 29/30 (August 10, 1990):  1462-98. The extent to which the 300 meter-long swimming pool on the seafront of the city of Casablanca, Morocco, built under French government in the 1950s, served as a model for this ambitious proposal is not confirmed. See Jean-Louis Cohen and Mon- ique Eleb, Casablanca: Colonial Myths and Architectural Ventures (New York: Mona- celli, 2003).  . Fernando Pinto de Oliveira, Letter from the Mayor of Matosinhos to Alvaro Siza,  unpublished typescript (Matosinhos: Archive Alvaro Siza, August 31, 1961), 1. Alvaro Siza, Meméria descritiva, Ante-Projecto, unpublished typescript (Matosinhos: Archive Alvaro Siza, October 25, 1962), 1.  Alvaro Siza and Bernardo Ferro, Meméria descritiva e justuficativa 2°. Fase — Projecto,  unpublished typescript (Porto: Archive Alvaro Siza, February 16, 1965), 1-12. Alvaro Siza, Meméria descritiva, Alargamento do recinto — Ante-Projecto, unpublished type- script (Porto: Archive Alvaro Siza, September 15, 1965), 1.  Alvaro Siza, Meméria descritiva 3°. Fase — Projecto, unpublished typescript (Porto: Archive Alvaro Siza, February 21, 1966), 1.  Alvaro Siza and Bernardo Ferrio, Meméria descritiva — Planta de Faseamento, unpublished typescript (Porto: Archive Alvaro Siza, July 18, 1967), 1-19.  Alvaro Siza, Meméria descritiva, Ante-Projecto intercalar das 3° ¢ 4° Fases, unpublished  typescript (Porto: Archive Alvaro Siza, April 2, 1973), 1-5.  “Decreto no. 16/2011, May 25th, 2011,” cited after: O Secretario de Estado da Cultura, Francisco José Viegas: “Portaria n.o 608/2012,” Didrio da Republica [Portuguesa], 2* série, no. 206 (Lisbon: Imprensa Nacional-Casa da Moeda, October 12, 2012): 34938.  Ibid.  Jorge Marmelo, “Casa de Cha da Boa Nova esta ao abandono, vandalizada,” Publico July 29, 2012).  Alvaro Siza, Immaginare  Evidenza (Rome/Bari: Laterza, 1998), 19.  Fernando Tavora, Da Organizacao do Espaco (Porto, 1962).  Interview with Alvaro Siza; Pedro De Llano and Carlos Castanheira, ed., “Fragments of an experience,” Alvaro Siza: Works and Projects, exhib. cat. (Santiago de Compostela, 1995), 33. 
12 The 1960s and 1970s  19. William Curtis, “Alvaro Siza: An Architecture of Edges,” El Croguis no. 68-9 (1994): 32-45.  20. Toshio Nakamura, “Alvaro Siza 1954-1988,” A+U, Architecture and Urbanism 6 (1989): 30.  21. Curtis, Alvaro Siza.  22. See Flora Samuel, Le Corbusier and the Architectural Promenade (Birkhauser: Basel, 2010).  23. Siza, Immaginave VEvidenza, 23.  24. Ibid., 22.  25. Alvaro Siza, interview in GA Document Extra 11 (1998): 20.  26. Franke, “Interview with Alvaro Siza,” 1468.  27. Alvaro Siza, Professione Poetica (Milan: Electa, 1986), 36 f.  28. Albert Camus, L’Etranger (Paris: Les Editions Gallimard, 1942), 186.  Bibliography  Camus, Albert. L’Etranger. Paris: Les Editions Gallimard, 1942.  Cohen, Jean-Louis and Monique Eleb. Casablanca: Colonial Myths and Architectural Ventures. New York: Monacelli, 2003.  Curtis, William. “Alvaro Siza: An Architecture of Edges.” El Croquis no. 68-9 (1994): 32-45.  De Llano, Pedro and Carlos Castanheira, ed. “Fragments of an experience.” In Alvaro Siza: Works and Projects, exhib. cat. Santiago de Compostela, 1995.  Frampton, Kenneth. Alvavo Siza: Tutte le Opere. Electa: Milan, 1999.  Alvaro Siza: Complete Works. Phaidon: London, 2006.  Franke, Rainer. “Interview with Alvaro Siza.” Bauwelt 81 no. 29/30 (August 10, 1990): 1462-98.  Ganshirt, Christian. “Das Schwimmbad am Strand von Leca de Palmeira: Ein Projekt von Alvaro Siza.” Forum der Forschung No. 11, 84-90. Cottbus: Brandenburgische Tech- nische Universitat, 2000.  ——— Swimming Pool on the Beach at Leca de Palmeira/Schwimmbad am Strand von Leca de Palmeira/Piscina na praia de Leca de Palmeira, Alvaro Siza 1959-73, with photographs by Thorsten Hiimpel, edited by Luiz Trigueiros. Translated by Melissa Thorson- Hausse. Lisbon: Editorial Blau, 2004.  Marmelo, Jorge. “Casa de Cha da Boa Nova esta ao abandono, vandalizada.” Piblico July 29, 2012).  Nakamura, Toshio. “Alvaro Siza 1954-1988.” A + U, Architecture and Urbanism 6 (1989): 30.  Oliveira, Fernando Pinto de. “Letter from the Mayor of Matosinhos to Alvaro Siza.” Unpub- lished typescript. Matosinhos: Archive Alvaro Siza, August 31, 1961.  Samuel, Flora. Le Corbusier and the Architectural Promenade. Birkhauser: Basel, 2010.  Siza, Alvaro. Meméria descritiva. Piscina da Praia de Leca, 1°. Fase. Unpublished typescript. Porto: Archive Alvaro Siza, March 15, 1960.  ——— Meméria descritiva, Ante-Projecto. Unpublished typescript. Matosinhos: Archive Alvaro Siza, October 25, 1962.  
Kharga Market 11  the early 1960s have since become progressively overlaid by the two symbiotic instru- ments of Megalopolitan development — the freestanding high-rise and the serpentine freeway...the victory of universal civilization over inflected culture.” Kenneth Framp- ton, “Towards a Critical Regionalism,” in The Anti-Aesthetic, ed. Hal Foster (Port Town- send: New Press, 1983), 17. 7. Emesto Nathan Rogers, “Preexisting Conditions and Issues of Contemporary Building,” in Architecture Culture, ed. Joan Ockman (New York: Rizzoli, 1993), 202. 8. Alex Tzonis and Liliane Lefaivre, “The Grid and the Pathway: An Introduction to the Work of Dimitris and Susana Antonakakis,” Architecture in Greece, 15 (1981): 178; Frampton, “Towards a Critical Regionalism,” 20. 9. Hassan Fathy, The Architecture For the Poor: An Experiment in Rural Egypt (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1973), 1. 10. Ibid., 43-4. 11. Christian Norberg-Schulz, Genius Loci (New York, Rizzoli, 1980). 12. Fathy, The Avchitecture For the Poor, 19. 13. Interview with Hassan Fathy in Majallat al-‘Alam (1986): 103. 14. James M. Richards, “In the International Context,” in Hassan Fathy (Singapore: Concept Media, 1985), 11. 15. James Steele, “A Tribute to Hassan Fathy,’ in Architecture for a Changing World, ed. James Steele (London: Academy Editions, 1992), 51. 16. Ibid.; Fathy, “Bariz,” 2. 17. Ibid., 7. 18. Hassan Fathy, “Presentation Memorandum of Planning, Bariz Village in Kharga Oasis” (in Arabic), Archives of the Consulting Office of Planning and Housing, Qairo, June 10, 1965.  Bibliography  Colquhoun, Alan. “The Concept of Regionalism. In Postcolonial Spaces, ed. G. Naobantoglu. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1997.  Fathy, Hassan. “Presentation Memorandum of Planning, Bariz Village in Kharga Oasis” (in Arabic). Archives of the Consulting Office of Planning and Housing, Qairo, June 10, 1965.  Interview in Majallat al-‘Alam (1986): 103.  The Architecture For the Poor: An Experiment in Rural Egypt. Chicago: The University of  Chicago Press, 1973).  “Bariz: A Case Study in Rural Housing, New Valley-Kharga Oasis.” Rural Housing in the Arab Countries. Seminar Proceedings, Cairo, November 6-11, 1977.  Frampton, Kenneth. “Towards a Critical Regionalism.” In The Anti-Aesthetic, edited by Hal Foster. Port Townsend: New Press, 1983.  Ibrahim, Abdelbaki. “Contemporary Architecture in Egypt.” In Alam al-Bina, no. 68/199. Cairo: Center for Planning and Architectural Studies, 1998.  Norberg-Schulz, Christian. Genius Loci. New York, Rizzoli, 1980.  Richards, James M. “In the International Context.” In Hassan Fathy. Singapore: Concept Media, 1985.  
8  The 1960s and 1970s  Notes  Reproduced with permission from Ron Herron Archive.  . The main members of Archigram were Peter Cook, Warren Chalk, Dennis Crompton,  David Greene, Ron Herron, and Michael Webb. The name of the group derives from their eponymous magazine, which ran from 1961 to 1974. Major resources on Archi- gram include: Peter Cook, ed., Archigram (New York: Praeger Publishers, 1973); Dennis Crompton, ed., A Guide to Archigram 1961-74 (New York: Princeton Architec- tural Press, 2012); Dennis Crompton, ed., Concerning Archigram (London: Archigram Archives, 1999); Simon Sadler, Archigram: Architecture Without Architecture (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005); and Hadas Steiner, Beyond Archigram (New York: Routledge, 2009). An indispensible online resource is the Research Centre for Experimental Practice at the University of Westminster, “The Archigram Archival Project,” http: / /archigram.westminster.ac.uk (accessed January 10, 2016).  . Sigfried Giedion, “The Need for a New Monumentality,” New Architecture and City  Planning: A Symposium, ed. Paul Zucker (New York: Philosophical Library, 1944).  . On Team X’s search for a new symbolic expression, see my essay, “An Architectural  Theory of Relations: Sigfried Giedion and Team X,” Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians 73, no. 3 (June 2014): 226—47. For primary documents on Team X, see Max Risselada and Dirk van den Heuvel, Team 10: In Search of a Utopia of the Present (Rot- terdam: NAi Publishers, 2015).  . Anthony Vidler, “Histories of the Immediate Present: Inventing Architectural Modern-  ism, 1930-1975” (Ph.D. diss., TU Delft, October 2005). Republished in 2008 by MIT Press.  5. Terence Riley, ed., The Changing of the Avant-Garde (New York: MoMA, 2002), 38. 6. Michael Webb quoted in Beatriz Colomina, Craig Buckley, and Urtzi Grau, ed., Clip, Stamp,  Fold: The Radical Architecture of Little Magazines, 196X to 197X (Barcelona: Actar, 2011), 453.  . Archigram 2 (1962): 2. The Archigram Archival Project is an indispensible resource that  can be found online at http:/ /archigram.westminster.ac.uk. It includes the complete series of the magazine and Archigram projects.  . Peter Cook, Amazing Archigram 4 (1964): 17.  9. On the megastructure, see Justus Dahinden, Urban Structures for the Future (New York:  10.  lL.  Praeger, 1972) and Reyner Banham, Megastructure: Urban Futures of the Recent Past (New York: Harper & Row, 1976).  For documents on the Visionary Architecture exhibition, see the online MoMA archive, https: // www.moma.org/learn/resources/press_archives/1960s?page=4 (accessed on January 10, 2015). On visionary architecture in France, see André Parinaud and Michel Ragon, ed., Le visionnaires de larchitecture (Paris: Robert Laffont, 1965); Frédéric Migayrou, Bloc: Le monolith fractuvé (Orléans: Editions HMX, 1996); Mark Wigley, Con- stant’s New Babylon: The Hyper-Architecture of Desire (Rotterdam: Witte de With and 010 Publishers, 1998); Larry Busbea, Topologies: The Urban Utopia in France, 1960-1970 (Cam- bridge, MA: MIT Press, 2007); and Caroline Maniaque Benton, French Encounters with the American Counterculture, 1960-1980 (Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 2011).  Archigram 5 (1964): 2. The diagonal was an important formal feature of visionary pro- jects by Architecture Principe (Paul Virilio, Claude Parent, and Michel Carrade). 
12.  13.  14. 15.  16.  17.  18.  19.  20.  21.  22. 23.  24.  25.  26. 27.  Walking City 9  Archigram invited Architecture Principe to their conference, “International Dialogue of Experimental Architecture,” in Folkestone, England in June 1966.  Reyner Banham, Theory and Design in the First Machine Age (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1960), 321. According to Vidler, Banham defined style in terms of an aesthetic and visual category corresponding to the symbol, the icon and the image. He writes: “An image for Banham, whether referring to a Jackson Pollock or a Cadillac, meant ‘something which is visually valuable, but not necessarily by the standards of classical aesthetics’ ...and paraphrasing Thomas Aquinas, ‘that which seen, affects the emotions’ not just the result but also the cause.” Vidler, Histories, 134.  On Reyner Banham, see Nigel Whitely, Reyner Banham: Historian of the Immediate Pres- ent (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002). Anthologies on Banham’s writings include Penny Sparke, ed., Design By Choice (New York: Rizzoli, 1981) and Mary Banham, ed., A Critic Writes: Essays By Reyner Banham (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996).  Reyner Banham, in Cook, Archigram, 5.  For more on the Independent Group, see Anne Massey, Out of the Ivory Tower: The Independent Group and Popular Culture (New York: Manchester University Press, 2013). Reyner Banham, “Convenient Benches and Handy Hooks: Functional Considerations in the Criticism of the Art of Architecture,” in The History, Theory and Criticism of Archi- tecture, ed. Marcus Whiffen (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1964), 93.  Reyner Banham, “Stocktaking,” Architectural Review (February 1960), reprinted in  Sparke, Design By Choice, 51.  “[TJhe mechanization of the total environment in which architects are called upon to work still acts as a powerful stimulus to their professional activities,” Banham wrote in “Stocktaking,” 52.  Reyner Banham, “A Home is not a House,” Art in America (April 1965); reprinted in Sparke, Design By Choice, 57.  Banham, “A Home,” 58.  Borrowing the term “expanded field” from Rosalind Krauss, Nigel Whiteley situates Banham’s analysis of modern architecture in the second machine age within the expanded field of environmental design. See Whitely, Reyner Banham, 189. Archigram 6 (1965): 5.  On the Austrian counterculture, see Gunther Feuerstein, Visiondre Architektur Wien 1958/1998 (Berlin: Ernst & Sohn, 1988), and Eeva-Liisa Pelkonen, Achtung Architektur! Image and Phantasm in Contemporary Austrian Architecture (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996).  Reyner Banham, The Architecture of the Well-Tempered Environment (London: The Archi- tectural Press, 1969).  Hans Hollein, “Alles ist Architektur,” Bau 1/2 (1968). For an English translation of this essay, see Fosco Lucarelli, Socks website, http:/ /socks-studio.com/ 2013/08/13 /hans- holleins-alles-ist-architektur-1968 (accessed January 10, 1916).  Hollein, “Alles ist Architektur.”  Leonardo Savioli and Adolfo Natalini, “Spazio di coinvolgimento,” Casabella 326 (July 1968): 39. The coordinator of the studio was Leonardo Savioli. Teaching assistants 
10 The 1960s and 1970s  28.  29.  30.  31.  32.  33. 34.  35.  36.  included future Archizoom member Paolo Deganello and future Superstudio member Adolfo Natalini. Student work from this studio was published in Leonardo Ricci, Ipotesi di Spazio (Florence: Giglio & Garisenda, 1972).  This project has been published in several places. One of the earliest is the Italian coun- ter-cultural magazine, IN. The first issue, in January 1971, is dedicated to the theme of “Utopia.” On the Italian radicals, see Emilio Ambasz, ed., Italy: The New Domestic Land- scape (New York: MoMA, 1972); Paola Navone and Bruno Orlandoni, Architettura Radi- cale (Milan: Documenti di Casabella, 1974); Andrea Branzi, The Hot House: Italian New Wave Design (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1984); Gianni Pettena, Radicals (Florence: Il Ventilibro, 1996); Roberto Gargiani, Archizoom Associati (Milan: Electa, 2007); and Roberto Gargiani and Beatrice Lampariello, Superstudio (Rome: GLF editori Laterza, 2010).  Superstudio, “Twelve Cautionary Tales for Christmas,” Architectural Design 42 (December 1971): 737-42. This visual essay was published in Italian as “Premonizioni della parusia urbanistica,” Casabella 36 (January, 1972): 45-55.  Ettore Sottsass, “The Planet as a Festival,” Casabella 36, no. 365 (May 1972): 41-7. On the critique of the megastructure by French and Italian radicals, see my essay, “Memories of the Urban Future: The Rise and Fall of the Megastructure,” in Riley, The Changing of the Avant-Garde, 23-35. For a contrasting view of the Italian radi- cals, see Peter Lang and William Menking, Superstudio: Life Without Objects (Milan: Skira, 2003). On the French radicals, see Simon Sadler, The Situationist City (Cam- bridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998); Mare Dessauce, ed., The Inflatable Moment (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1999); and Craig Buckley and Jean-Louis Vio- leau, ed., Utopie, Texts and Projects, 1967-1978, trans. Jean-Marie Clarke (Los Angeles: Semiotext(e), 2011).  The exhibition included installations by the Smithsons, Archigram, Hollein, Arata Isozaki, Archizoom, and Superstudio, among others. By the summer of 1968, even the counterculture in architecture had found itself caught in the crossfire. The protests were documented in Carlo Guenzi, “La Triennale Occupata,” Casabella 325 (June 1968): 82-8; and “qq Triennale,” Domus 466 (September 1968): 15-41. For a detailed account of the exhibition, see Paola Nicolin, “Beyond the Failure. Notes on the XIVth Triennale,” Log 13/14 (2008): 87-100.  Martin Pawley and Bernard Tschumi, “The Beaux-Arts Since ’68,” Architectural Design (September, 1971): 536.  Banham, Megastructure, 206.  Sylvia Lavin reasserts the indexical relation between form and material performance (plasticity), via projects from the 1960s such as Michael Webb’s Cushicle and Suitaloon, in “Plasticity at Work,” in Mood River, ed. Jeffrey Kipnis and Annetta Massie (Colum- bus, OH: Wexner Center for the Arts, 2002).  On High Tech’s rehabilitation of the modern movement, see my essay, “High Tech: Modernism Redux,” in A Critical History of Contemporary Architecture [1960-2010], ed. Elie Haddad and David Rifkind (Hampshire, UK: Ashgate, 2014), 51-68.  Reyner Banham, “Foster Associates” (1979), reprinted in On Foster... Foster On, ed. David Jenkins (Munich: Prestel Verlag, 2000), 69.  
10 The 1960s and 1970s  15. Ibid., 52.  16. Almost all published drawings of the first version show three sets of similarly dimen- sioned steps. These lead respectively to each of the verandas (both having two possible entrances) plus one at the north-eastern end. An interesting precisely dimensioned 1974 plan shows an extra surrounding (unbuilt) pergola but it is otherwise very close to the much-published version. This drawing shows only two flights of entry steps, both to the northern pavilion. In this version the south-eastern porch off bedroom two is more private. Isolated from the ground, it is enclosed by glass louvers. A measured drawing is published in the folio introduced by Frampton, in Glenn Murcutt, Architect, (Sydney, Australia: 01 Editions, 2006), drawing 1.51.  17. Fromonot, Glenn Murcutt, 99.  18. Frampton, “In Search of Glenn Mureutt,” 53.  19. Glenn Mureutt in Drew, Touch This Earth Lightly, 13.  20. Fromonot, Glenn Murcutt, 29.  21. A. Krista Sykes, ed., Constructing a New Agenda: Architectural Theory 1993-2009 (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2010), 23.  22. Glenn Murcutt in Drew, Touch This Earth Lightly, 123.  23. David Malouf, “Glenn Murcutt’s Tough Lyricism,” in Glenn Murcutt, Architect, (Sydney, Australia: 01 Editions, 2006), 25.  Bibliography  Banham, Reyner. “Toward a modestly Galvo architecture?” Design Book Review 14 (1988): 49-51.  Beck, Haig and Jackie Cooper. Glenn Murcutt: A Singular Architectural Practice. Mulgrave, Australia: Images Publishing Group, 2002.  Drew, Philip. Leaves of Iron: Glenn Murcutt; Pioneer of an Australian Architectural Form. Sydney, Australia: The Law Book Company Ltd, 1985.  Touch This Earth Lightly: Glenn Murcutt in his Own Words. Sydney, Australia: Duffy & Snellgrove, 1999.  Frampton, Kenneth. “In Search of Glenn Mureutt.” In Glenn Murcutt, Avchitect, Sydney, Australia: 01 Editions, 2006, 33.  Fromonot, Francoise. Glenn Murcutt: Buildings and Projects. New York: Whitney Library of Design, 1995.  Malouf, David. “Glenn Murcutt’s Tough Lyricism.” In Glenn Murcutt, Architect, Sydney, Australia: 01 Editions, 2006, 25.  Sykes, A. Krista, ed. Constructing a New Agenda: Architectural Theory 1993-2009. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2010.  
Centre Pompidou 9  . Peter Smithson was a dominant presence at the Architectural Association when  Richard Rogers studied there in the 1950s.  . Reyner Banham, “The Enigma of the Rue du Renard,” Architectural Review 161 (March  1977): 277.  . Charles Jencks included the Pompidou Center under the heading of “The Death of  Modern Architecture,” The Language of Post-Modern Architecture (London: Academy Editions, 1977), 30.  . Deyan Sudjic writes about Roger's memorable visit to this house in The Architecture of  Richard Rogers (London: Blueprint Monograph, 1994), 38.  - Rogers, while studying at Yale in 1961-62, was briefly taught by Kahn, who was there  in the capacity of visiting professor.  . Denis Postle, director, Beaubourg: Four Films by Denis Postle, Tattooist International for  the Arts Council, 1980.  9. Quoted in Sudjic, The Architecture of Richard Rogers, 26.  10. Peter Cook, “A Worked Belief in the Modern,” in Richard Rogers Partnership: Work and Projects, ed. Richard Burdett (New York: Monacelli Press, 1996), 23.  11. Bryan Appleyard, Richard Rogers: A Biography (London: Faber & Faber, 1986), 169.  12. Stanley Mathews, From Agit-Prop to Free Space: The Architecture of Cedric Price (London: Black Dog Publishing, 2007), 69.  13. For a complete narrative of the development of the Fun Palace, see Mathews, From Agit-Prop to Free Space, 64-99.  14. Quoted in Mathews, From Agit-Prop to Free Space, 75.  15. Reyner Banham, Megastructure: Urban Futures of the Recent Past (London: Thames and Hudson, 1976), 89.  16. Banham, Megastructure, 89.  17. Ibid, 81.  18. Constant Nieuwenhuys, quoted in Banham, Megastructuve, 81-2.  19. Banham, Megastructure, 212.  20. Banham, Architectural Review, 277.  21. Banham, Megastructure, 214-5.  22. Dennis Postle, Beaubourg: Four Films by Denis Postle.  Bibliography  Appleyard, Bryan. Richard Rogers: A Biography. London: Faber & Faber, 1986. Banham, Reyner. Megastructure: Urban Futures of the Recent Past. London: Thames and Hud-  son, 1976. “The Enigma of the Rue du Renard.” Architectural Review 161 (March 1977): 277.  Burdett, Richard. “Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris, 1971-77.” In Richard Rogers Part-  nership: Work and Projects, edited by Richard Burdett. New York: Monacelli Press, 1996.  Cook, Peter. “A Worked Belief in the Modern.” In Richard Rogers Partnership: Work and  Projects, edited by Richard Burdett. New York: Monacelli Press, 1996. 
lL.  12.  13. 14.  15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23.  24.  25.  26.  27.  28.  29.  30.  31. 32. 33.  Parc de La Villette 11  A 21-person international jury chaired by renowned landscape architect Roberto Burle Marx evaluated the schemes. Baljon recounts how the jury failed to reach a decision the first round, awarding joint first prize to nine entries. Tschumi was awarded the prize after a second-round submission that provided more information. For more on the competition and the other entries, see Baljon, Designing Parks. Of particular note was the scheme by Rem Koolhaas of the Office for Metropolitan Architecture, which many thought should have won.  Bernard Tschumi, Cinégramme folie: Le Pave de la Villette (New York: Princeton Archi- tectural Press, 1987), ii.  bid., iv. These descriptions of the systems are excerpts from the architect’s report to the inter- national jury, 1983, as contained in Tschumi, Cinégramme folie, 7-8.  bid., 40. bid. bid., iv. bid. Many thanks to Mark Linder for his comments on drafts of this section. Did, Vu.  bid.  bid. Philip Johnson and Mark Wigley, Deconstructivist Architecture (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1988), 10.  For a broader and retrospective discussion of Parc de la Villette as a critique of foun- dational principles, see C. Greig Crysler, Stephen Cairns, and Hilde Heynen, ed., The SAGE Handbook of Architectural Theory (London: Sage Publications, 2012), 1-4. Many thanks to Joseph Godlewski for pointing this out.  See Robin Evans, The Projective Cast: Architecture and Its Three Geometries (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 85-7, for an insightful discussion of the representation effected by the follies.  Crysler et al., SAGE Handbook, 2-3.  For an insightful description of La Villette’s lineage, see “Interview between Alvin Boy- arsky and Bernard Tschumi,” in Bernard Tschumi, La Case Vide (London: Architectural Association, 1985), 22-6.  hetp:/ /www.tschumi.com/ projects/18. For a description and reading of Tschumi’s 1976 competition scheme, see Baljon, Designing Parks. 212.  For more on the rewriting of the relationship between theory and practice, see Michael Speaks, quoted in The Invisible in Architecture, ed. Ole Bouman and Roemer van Toorn (New York: Wiley & Sons, 1994).  For an excellent account of the association of Mitterrand’s Grand Projets with leftist pol- itics, see Annette Fierro, The Glass State (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006). Tschumi, Cinégramme folie, 1.  Ibid.  James Corner, Recovering Landscape (New York: Princeton Architecture Press, 1999), 17.  
12 The Present Generation  34. 35. 36.  37.  38.  39.  40.  41.  42.  43.  44. 45.  46.  47.  Ibid.  Christophe Girot, “Learning from La Villette,” Documents 45 (Spring 1994): 31-41. Tschumi, Cinégramme folie, 1. lrecount some of this debated history in my introduction, “Speculating on Size,” in Large Parks, ed. Julia Czerniak and George Hargreaves (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2007), 16-31.  Elizabeth K. Meyer, “The Avant-Garde and the Public Park: A Comparative Interpre- tation, Parc de la Villette and Pare des Buttes-Chaumont,” in The Avant-Garde and the Landscape: Can they be Reconciled? Conference Proceedings, April 1989, 317.  Ibid., 322. For more on landscape representation, see my essay, “Challenging the Pictorial: Recent Landscape Practice,” Assemblage 34 (February 1998): 110-20.  Miwon Kwon, “Looking Back at Pare de la Villette,” Documents 45 (Spring, 1944): 23. Crysler et al., SAGE Handbook, 3.  Julia Czerniak, CASE: Downsview Park Toronto (New York: Prestel, 2001), 82.  For a discussion of frameworks see my introduction, “Appearance and Performance: Landscape at Downsview,” in Czerniak, CASE, 12-23.  Ibid., 58. Charles Waldheim, “Landscape Urbanism: A Genealogy,” in “Landscapes,” ed. Amanda Reeser and Ashley Schafer, Praxis 4 (October 2002): 14.  See Julia Czerniak, “Legibility and Resilience,” in Large Parks, ed. Julia Czerniak (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2007), 214-51. recently revisited the park for the first time in 20 years. It was a cold gray December  day and I was struck by how little thought I gave to what the park has meant, what sponsored its design, or the discourses it has participated in. During my visit and since, am much more interested in what the park design has, and can, enable. | walked both axial galleries that linked the park spaces and facilities. I followed the faded blue tile trail through the thematic gardens, many of which have filled in nicely. The park’s meander  was not unlike Olmsted’s ramble in Central Park: sinuous, nested, apart from the city. climbed in and out of the folies, despite the deterioration most have endured. As the day unfolded I witnessed great diversity, from vast openness to sensual enclosure, intri- cate detail to neutral expanses, groups of boisterous school children to lovers hidden in the gardens. I also noted the park’s strong edges, reinforced by parking lots and service  acilities. It felt less an extension of the city than a city within the city — a microcosm, really. Yet certain systems breach the park’s edges. The galleries extend to metro stops in one direction, and, following the canal, to Ledoux’s tollhouse and the suburbs in the other. Although the park is organized by superimposed systems, they are not experi- enced as such. Indeed the collision of systems produces fragmentary places (the shape ofa garden), odd moments (when a stair slams through a folie), and indexical conditions (where paving patterns register the meeting of a grid and a sinuous line). Change is evident. And slow. The Philharmonie de Paris by Jean Nouvel is taking over the park- ing on the east side. The dragon garden is being redesigned. The folies are weathering, and many are empty or, worse, cordoned off. | was unable to climb the belvedere, that important moment when the park could be viewed from above. Yet despite these 
Stone House 7  3. Alina Payne, From Ornament to Object: Genealogies of Architectural Modernism (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2012), 16.  4. See Ilka Ruby, Andreas Ruby, and Philip Ursprung, Images: A Picture Book of Architecture (Munich: Prestel, 2004).  5. Joachim Gasquet, Joachim Gasquet’s Cézanne: A Memoir with Conversations, trans. Christopher Pemberton (London: Thames and Hudson, 1991), 166.  6. Robert Smithson, “Incidents of Mirror-Travel in the Yucatan,” Artforum 8, no. 1 (September 1969); reprinted in Robert Smithson: The Collected Writings, ed. Jack Flam (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996), 119-33.  7. Mack, Herzog ex de Meuron: The Complete Works, 61, fig. E.  8. Ibid, 63, fig. G.  9. Ibid, 66, fig. D.  10. Gerhard Mack, “Nr. 17, Stone House, Tavole,” in Mack, Herzog é& de Meuron: The Com- plete Works, 57.  Bibliography  Gasquet, Joachim. Joachim Gasquet’s Cézanne: A Memoir with Conversations. Translated by Christopher Pemberton. London: Thames and Hudson, 1991.  Mack, Gerhard. “Nr. 17, Stone House, Tavole.” In Herzog and de Meuron,: The Complete Works, vol. 1, edited by Gerhard Mack. Basel: Birkhauser, 1997.  Mack, Gerhard. Herzog &r de Meuron: The Complete Works. Vol. 1. Basel: Birkhauser, 1997.  Payne, Alina. From Ornament to Object: Genealogies of Architectural Modernism. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2012.  Ruby, Ilka, Andreas Ruby, and Philip Ursprung. Images: A Picture Book of Avchitecture. Munich: Prestel, 2004.  Smithson, Robert. “Incidents of Mirror-Travel in the Yucatan.” Artforum 8, no. 1 (September 1969).  “Incidents of Mirror-Travel in the Yucatan.” In Robert Smithson: The Collected Writ-  ings, edited by Jack Flam, 119-33. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996.  
10 The Present Generation  6. Daisetz T. Suzuki, “Shin Buddhism and Christianity Compared,” in Popular Buddhism in Japan: Shin Buddhist Religion and Culture, ed. Esben Andreasen (Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press, 1998), 60.  7. Shinichi Hisamatsu, Zen and the Fine Arts, trans. Gishin Tokiwa (Tokyo: Kodansha International Ltd., 1971), 31.  8. Suzuki, “Shin Buddhism and Christianity Compared,” 61.  9. Ibid.  10. Kitaro Nishida, Complete Works — Nishida Kitaro Zenshu (Tokyo: Iwanamishoten, 1947), vol. 6, 129-30 and vol. 10, 236-7.  11. Ando, “Light, Shadow and Form,” 458.  12. Dalibor Vesely, “Architecture and the Conflict of Representation,” AA Files, no. 8 (1985): 21-38.  13. Suzuki, “Shin Buddhism and Christianity Compared,” 61.  Bibliography  Ando, Tadao. “Light, Shadow and Form.” In Tadao Ando: Complete Works, edited by Fran- cesco Dal Co. London: Phaidon, 1995.  Hasler, Thomas. “The Rhetoric of Silence: The Architecture of Rudolf Schwarz.” Daidalos, no. 64 (1997): 72.  Hisamatsu, Shin’ichi. Zen and the Fine Arts. Translated by Gishin Tokiwa. Tokyo: Kodansha International Ltd., 1971.  Nishida, Kitaro. Complete Works — Nishida Kitaro Zenshu. Tokyo: Iwanamishoten, 1947.  Schwarz, Rudolf. Vom Bau der Kirche. Heidelberg: Druckerei Winter, 1947.  Suzuki, Daisetz T. “Shin Buddhism and Christianity Compared.” In Popular Buddhism in Japan: Shin Buddhist Religion and Culture, edited by Esben Andreasen. Honolulu: Uni- versity of Hawai'i Press, 1998.  Tillich, Paul. “Contemporary Protestant Architecture.” In Modern Church Architecture: A Guide to the Form and Spirit of Twentieth Century Religious Buildings, edited by Albert Christ-Janer and Mary Mix Foley. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1962.  Vesely, Dalibor. “Architecture and the Conflict of Representation.” AA Files, no. 8 (1985): 21-38. 
8 The Present Generation Notes  The author thanks the editors of this volume for their input.  * © Office for Metropolitan Architecture (O.M.A.) Stedebouw B.V. Heer Bokelweg 149, 3032 AD Rotterdam, Netherlands. http:/ / www.oma.eu.  1. Rem Koolhaas, “Hoe modem is de Nederlandse architectuur?” in Rem Koolhaas: Antologia  di testis su Bigness, progetto e complessita artificiale, ed. Federico Bilo (Rome: Kappa, 2004), 48.  2. Cecil Balmond, Informal (New York: Prestel, 2007), 101.  3. Koolhaas-OMA, Educatorium in Utrecht (Rome: Alinea, 1999), 302.  4. Rem Koolhaas, “Unraveling: Two Bibliotheques Jussieu, Paris, France, Competition,  1993,” in S,M,L,XL (New York: Monacelli, 1995), 1322-6.  . Ibid., 116.  6. Hilde Bouchez, “Interview with Rem Koolhaas,” A+ U, no. 419 (2005): 93.  7. Cfr. Gilles Deleuze, Le pli: Leibniz et le Baroque (Paris: Editions de Minuit, 1988); Italian  trans, La piega: Leibniz e il Barocco (Torino: Einaudi, 2004), 25.  . Ibid., 24, 28.  9. “Pour moi, le travail d’un Hélio Oiticica ou d’une Lygia Clark est essential” (“For me, the work of a Hélio Oiticica or a Lygia Clark is essential”), Koolhaas said in 1998 (Jean- Francois Chevrier, “Entretien avec Rem Koolhaas. Changement de dimensions,” L’architecture d’aujourd’hui, no. 361 (2005): 89.  10. Koolhaas-OMA, “Yokohama Urban Ring,” El Croquis, no. 79 (1996): 208. 11. “La deuxieme chance de l’architecture moderne ... entretier avec Rem Koolhaas,” L’architecture d’aujourd’hui, no. 238 (April 1985): 4.  Bibliography  Balmond, Cecil. Informal. New York: Prestel, 2007.  Bouchez, Hilde. “Interview with Rem Koolhaas.” A + U, no. 419 (2005): 93.  Chevrier, Jean-Francois. “Entretien avec Rem Koolhaas: Changement de dimensions.” L’architecture d’aujourd’hui, no. 361 (2005): 89.  Deleuze, Gilles. Le pli: Leibniz et le Baroque. Paris: Editions de Minuit, 1988.  La piega: Leibniz e il Barocco. Torino: Einaudi, 2004.  Gargiani, Roberto. Rem Koolhaas/OMA. The Construction of Merveilles. Lausanne, EPFL Press, 2010.  Koolhaas-OMA. “Yokohama Urban Ring.” El Croguis, no. 79 (1996): 208.  Educatorium in Utrecht. Rome: Alinea, 1999.  Koolhaas, Rem. Delirious New York: A Retroactive Manifesto for Manhattan. New York: Oxford University Press, 1978.  ——— “La deuxieme chance de l’architecture modeme ... entretier avec Rem Koolhaas.” L’architecture d’aujourd’hui, no. 238 (April 1985): 4.  — “Unraveling: Two Bibliotheques Jussieu, Paris, France, Competition, 1993.” In S,M, L,XL, 1322-6. New York: Monacelli, 1995.  —— “Hoe modern is de Nederlandse architectuur?” In Rem Koolhaas: Antologia di testis su Bigness, progetto e complessita artificiale, edited by Federico Bilo. Rome: Kappa, 2004.  
16 The Present Generation  16. Paraphrased from Sommer, “Four Stops Along,” 84; see also: Allan Kaprow, Assem- blage, Environments and Happenings (New York: Abrams, 1966).  17. Sommer, “Four Stops Along,” 84.  18. Mike Davis, “Fortress Los Angeles,” in City of Quartz (London: Verso 1990), 221-64.  19. Just after Bilbao opened, Guggenheim commissioned Gehry and his office to design a massive waterfront museum and arts complex roughly three times the size of Bilbao on Manhattan’s East River, a project that was canceled soon after the attack on the World Trade Center in 2001. In 2001 Guggenheim built two related venues in Las Vegas, both designed by Rem Koolhaas/OMA: the Guggenheim Las Vegas, which closed after two years, and the Guggenheim Hermitage Museum, which closed after six years (the com- mercial churn of Las Vegas would appear to surpass and supersede even the most new and clever works of the vanguard). Finally, a Gehry designed Guggenheim Museum on Abu Dhabi’s Saadiyat Island, almost twice the size of Bilbao, has been underway for several years, alongside satellites of other major Western museums and institutions, such as the Louvre. Unfortunately, the Abu Dhabi project has been plagued by controversies surrounding the abuse of human rights of foreign workers on which the construction industry in the U.A.E. depends.  Bibliography  Arnell, Bickford. Frank Gehry Buildings e Projects. New York: Rizzoli, 1988.  Bechtler, Cristina, ed., with Kunsthaus Bregenz. “Conversation between Frank O. Gehry and Kurt W. Forster with Cristina Bechtler.” In Frank O. Gehry/Kurt W. Forster, Art and Architecture in Discussion, 67-70. Ostfildern-Ruit: Cantz, 1999.  Davis, Mike. “Fortress Los Angeles.” In City of Quartz, 221-64. London: Verso 1990.  Gehry, Frank. “Since I’m so Democratic, I Accept Conformists: A Lecture on Recent Work.” In Frank O. Gehry: Individual Imagination and Cultural Conservatism, edited by Charles Jencks, 49-50. London: Academy Editions Ltd, 1995.  Gehry, Frank O., Peter Arnell, Ted Bickford, and Germano Celant, ed. Frank Gehry: Building and Projects. New York: Rizzoli, 1985.  Hardwick, Jeffery. Mall Maker: Victor Gruen, Architect of an American Dream. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2004.  Isenberg, Barbara. “The Bilbao Effect.” In Conversations with Frank Gehry, 132-46. New York: Knopf, 2009.  Jameson, Fredric. “Architecture: Spatial Equivalents in the World System.” In Postmodern- ism, or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism, 107-30. Durham: Duke University Press, [1999] 2001.  Kaprow, Allan. Assemblage, Environments and Happenings. New York: Abrams, 1966.  Oldenburg, Claes. “I Am for an Art...” In American Artists on Art, from 1940 to 1980, edited by Ellen H. Johnson. New York: Harper & Row, 1982.  Rubino, Luciano, ed., Frank O. Gehry Special. Translated by Susanna Marsch and Eddy Levy. Roma: Edizioni Kappa, 1984. 
Yokohama Ferry Terminal 13  Notes  *  1.  12.  13.  Courtesy of Foreign Office Architects. Henri Bergson, Creative Evolution, trans. Arthur Mitchell (New York: Henry Holt & Co., 1911).  . Farshid Moussavi and Alejandro Zaera-Polo, The Yokohama Project: Foreign Office  Aychitects (Barcelona: Actar, 2002).  . The competition, then the largest in Japanese history, drew 660 entries from 41 coun-  tries. FOA won the competition and spent the next five years developing the design, with construction completed in December 2002.  . The terminal is 430 meters long and 70 meters wide, with three levels: vehicle access  and parking at the lowest level; the passenger terminal, immigration, lobby, passenger drop off and pick up, restaurants, and stores on the middle level; and a park/plaza with viewing decks and event space on the roof.  . See, for instance, the1982 installation, “Architecture is Now,” the 1983-88 rooftop pent-  house, the 1990 video clip folly, and UFA Cinema Center, begun in 1993. These pro- jects have typically been discussed in terms of the concatenation of disparate materials and geometries.  . The Imagination Group is an event and innovation company started in the late 1970s.  Herron’s building was completed in 1990, and awarded UK Building of the Year in 1991. ot well known in the United States, the building was influential in the UK and Europe. The building was much admired at the AA, and the visual connection reinforced the kin- ship of Herron and Archigram’s connection with the school. Its organization captured the ‘ocus on spectacular events environments and experiences of what is referred to as “the experience economy” Gary Withers founded Imagination to develop.  Herron’s building in effect took the AA’s intensely compacted sectional network of  theatrical public spaces — bar, member's room, library, gallery and event rooms, ter- races, exterior staircases, and walkways — and tured it into an urban typology. For everyone who has taught or studied at the AA, the power of these higgledy-piggledy spaces patched together across several townhouses and mews lies in their role as “social condenser,” to use the phrase of AA alumnus and former employer of Moussavi and Zaera-Polo, Rem Koolhaas.  . Drawing set produced for exhibition from 1976-81, now in the possession of MoMA. 10. lL.  Bernard Tschumi, Event Cities (London & Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1994). Bernard Tschumi, “Spaces and Events,” in Architecture and Disjunction (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1994), 139; originally published in Themes I: The Discourse of Events (London: Architectural Association, 1983).  Sanford Kwinter, “Landscapes of Change: Boccioni’s ‘Stati d’animo’ as a General The- ory of Models,” Assemblage 19 (December 1992): 50-65. Sanford Kwinter, a leading the- orist for this generation, also wrote the influential essay “Soft Systems,” in Culture Lab, ed. Brian Boigon (Princeton: Princeton Architectural Press, 1993), 207-28, and co- edited the Zone Books 6th volume, Incorporations, with Jonathan Crary, in 1992, look- ing at the convergence of the machinic and the organism.  Jeffrey Kipnis, “On the Wild Side,” in Phylogensis: FOA’s Ark, by Foreign Office Archi- tects (Barcelona: Actar, 2003), 572. Originally published in 1999. 
14 The Present Generation  14.  15.  16. 17. 18.  19.  20.  21. 22.  23.  24.  25.  26. 27.  28.  Farshid Moussavi and Alejandro Zaera-Polo, Phylogenesis: FOA’s Ark (Barcelona: Actar, 2002), 11. Phylogenesis, Moussavi and Zaera-Polo’s complete works, was published to accompany the ICA exhibition, Foreign Office Architects: Breeding Architecture, in London in 2003-04.  The term would have been in the news, and thus brought to the attention of architects: used in biology since Haeckel, botany accepted the designation only in 1993 at the International Botanical Congress.  Moussavi and Zaera-Polo, Phylogenesis, 8.  Farshid Moussavi, The Function of Ornament (Barcelona: Actar, 2006), 5.  See Robert Venturi, Denise Scott Brown, and Steven Izenour, A Significance for AéP Parking Lots, or Learning from Las Vegas (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1972). Moussavi and Zaera-Polo, Phylogenesis, 228. On landscape urbanism, see James Corner, ed., Recovering Landscape: Essays in Contemporary Landscape Architecture (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1991), and Charles Waldheim, ed., The Landscape Urban- ism Reader (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2006).  “The lessons of mat building ... have been internalized as a series of architectural objec- tives: a shallow but dense section, activated by ramps and double-height voids; the uni- fying capacity of the large open roof, a site strategy that lets the city flow through the project; a delicate interplay of repetition and variation; the incorporation of time as an active variable in urban architecture.” Stan Allen, “Mat Urbanism: The Thick 2-D,” in Hashim Sarkis, CASE: Le Corbusier’s Venice Hospital and the Mat Building Revival (Munich: Prestel, 2002), 121.  Allen, “Mat Urbanism,” 120.  “Manhattanism’s unspoken theory of the simultaneous existence of different programs ona single site.” Rem Koolhaas, Delirions New York: A Retroactive Manifesto for Manhat- ten (London: Thames and Hudson, 1978), 170.  Koolhaas, Delirious New York, 85.  “In section the project implies a continuity between the ground and the roof. This sec- tional continuity denies the ground as a datum by suggesting that the ground is con- ceived as a malleable fabric, capable of being pulled up to meet the roof.” Peter Eisenman, Ten Canonical Buildings: 1950-2000 (New York: Rizzoli, 2008), 201, on Le Corbusier, Palais des Congres Strasbourg (unbuilt), 1964.  “The object is no longer merely contained in the volumetric enclosure but rather a series of forces push the object out through the exterior enclosure of the object, while the movement of the subject continues to circumscribe the volume.” Eisenman, Ten Canonical Buildings, 79.  Eisenman, Ten Canonical Buildings, 201-5, on OMA, Jussieu Libraries (unbuilt), 1992-93. See Stan Allen’s “Object to Field,” AD Profile, no. 127, Architecture After Geometry (London: Wiley & Sons, 1997), reprinted in Allen’s Points + Lines as “Field Conditions” (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1997).  Sanford Kwinter, “La Citta Nuova: Modernity and Continuity,” in Zone 1/2: The Con- temporary City, ed. Sanford Kwinter and Michel Feher (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1987), 88-9. Quoted at the beginning of Stan Allen’s “Object to Field.” Field conditions are a system of organization of loosely bounded aggregates characterized by porosity and local interconnectivity. 
29. 30.  31. 32.  33.  34. 35. 36. 37. 38. 39.  40. 41.  42.  43.  44.  45.  46.  47.  48.  49.  50. 51.  Yokohama Ferry Terminal 15  Kwinter, “La Citta Nuova,” 88.  “Meanings, communities, persons, organisms, landscapes, and artifacts are configured, constituted, brought into being — formed — in the relentless emergent relationality that is the world. Far from connoting a fixed type, form is formative process. No one could look at an embryo and think anything else.” Donna Haraway, Crystals, Fabrics and Fields (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1976), xvii.  http: / /www.tschumi.com/projects/18  Christopher Alexander “A City is Not a Tree,” Architectural Forum 122 (April 1965): 58-62. Republished in Jonathan Crary and Sanford Kwinter, ed. Incorporations (Zone 6) (New York: Zone Books, 1992). Zaera-Polo and Moussavi would have known the essay. Alexander and his colleagues at MIT were writing programs in the early 1960s. See Alexander, “A City is Not a Tree.” See also Gordon Pask, “The Architectural Rel- evance of Cybernetics” Architectural Design (September 1969): 494-6, an essay produced out of debates on the limits of science held at the AA: “Design is control of control, i-e. the designer does much the same job as his system, but be operates at a higher level in the organizational hierarchy.”  Alejandro Zaera-Polo, Sniper’s Log: Architectural Chronicles of Generation X (Barcelona: Actar, 2012), 329.  Allen, “Field Conditions,” 92.  Allen, “Field Conditions,” 101.  Moussavi and Zaera-Polo, The Yokohama Project, 17.  Zareo-Polo, Sniper's Log, 283.  See George Hersey, Architecture and Geometry in the Age of the Baroque (Chicago: Uni- versity of Chicago Press, 2000).  See Heinrich Wofflin, Renaissance and Baroque (London: Collins, 1964).  See Sergei Eisenstein, “Piranesi and the Fluidity of Form,” Oppositions 11 (Winter 1977): 83-103.  Dennis Sheldon, “Towards an Ontology of Space,” lecture presented at the University of Pennsylvania, 28 February 2011.  Lindy Roy, “Geometry as a Nervous System,” ANY 17 (1997): 24.  Allen, “Field Conditions,” 92.  James Corner, “Landscape Urbanism,” in Landscape Urbanism: A Manual for the Machinic Land- scape, ed. Mohsen Mostafavi and Ciro Najle (London: Architectural Association, 2003), 59. Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia, trans. Brian Massumi (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1987), 493.  For explanation of the “occluded landscape,” see John Barrell, Dark Side of the Land- scape: The Rural Poor in English Painting, 1730-1840 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980); and Helene Furjan, Glorious Visions: John Soane’s Spectacular Theater (London: Routledge, 2011).  “Never believe that a smooth space will suffice to save us.” Deleuze and Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus.  Paul Jackson, Folding Techniques for Designers: From Sheet to Form (London: Laurence King, 2011), 9.  Zaera-Polo, Sniper's Log, 295  Moussavi and Zaera-Polo, The Yokohama Project, 91. 
16 The Present Generation  52. See Mark Augé, Non-Places: An Introduction to Super-Modernity (New York: Verso, 1995).  53. Farshid Moussavi, “The Function of Ornament,” in The Function of Ornament, ed. Farshid Moussavi and Michael Kubo (Madrid: Actar, 2006), 8.  54. Zaera-Polo, Sniper’s Log, 282.  55. See Greg Lynn, Animate Form (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1999).  56. Greg Lynn, “The Folded, the Pliant and the Supple,” in Folds, Bodies and Blobs (Brussels: La Lettre Vollée, 1998), 110; first published in AD 102 (March/April 1993).  57. Lynn, Animate Form, 10.  Bibliography  Alexander, Christopher. “A City is Not a Tree.” Architectural Forum 122 (April 1965): 58-62.  “A City is Not a Tree.” In Incorporations (Zone 6), edited by Jonathan Crary and San- ford Kwinter. New York: Zone Books, 1992.  Allen, Stan. “Object to Field.” AD Profile, no. 127, Architecture After Geometry. London: Wiley & Sons, 1997.  — “Field Conditions.” In Points + Lines. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1997.  ——— “Mat Urbanism: The Thick 2-D.” In Le Corbusier’s Venice Hospital and the Mat Build- ing Revival, by Hashim Sarkis, 121. CASE series. Munich: Prestel, 2002.  Augé, Mark. Non-Places: An Introduction to Super-Modernity. New York: Verso, 1995.  Barrell, John. Dark Side of the Landscape: The Rural Poor in English Painting, 1730-1840. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980.  Bergson, Henri. Creative Evolution. Translated by Arthur Mitchell. New York: Henry Holt & Co., 1911.  Corner, James, ed. Recovering Landscape: Essays in Contemporary Landscape Architecture. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1991.  ——— “Landscape Urbanism.” In Landscape Urbanism: A Manual for the Machinic Landscape, edited by Mohsen Mostafavi and Ciro Najle, 59. London: Architectural Associa- tion, 2003.  Crary, Jonathan and Sanford Kwinter, ed. Incorporations (Zone 6), New York: Zone Books, 1992.  Deleuze, Gilles and Felix Guattari. A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. Trans-  lated by Brian Massumi. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1987. Eisenman, Peter. Ten Canonical Buildings: 1950-2000. New York: Rizzoli, 2008. Eisenstein, Sergei. “Piranesi and the Fluidity of Form,” Oppositions 11 (Winter 1977): 83-103. Furjan, Helene. Glorious Visions: John Soane’s Spectacular Theater. London: Routledge, 2011. Haraway, Donna. Crystals, Fabrics and Fields. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1976. Hersey, George. Architecture and Geometry in the Age of the Baroque. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000. Jackson, Paul. Folding Techniques for Designers: From Sheet to Form. London: Laurence King, 2011. 