BOOK Martin Filler Makers of modern architecture I.pdf
Makers of Modern Architecture 
Michael 7. Wise. and Win de Wit Hogh Fakin ot Tbe Net York Ret rere Wasa paragon of collegiahey in sharing with me presioush unpub lished intormation about the legal troubles of the J. Paul Geety Trust, on which he has ceported with distinction tar Phe Neto York Drntes,  Pedro 1. Guerrero, Frank Plosd Wright's offical photegrapher has touched me deeply by allowing his retarkable ry § 3 portraits of the vreatest of Amerwan architects to be used ter the dust packer a Personal accolade that sets a capstone on our long and much-valwed trendship, For three decades, Duane Michals. a great artist and cher: ished trend, has made portraits of my tamuly and me ta commeme rate mayor landmarks i aur lives. Here his author's photo once again Manitests the magnaninuc ot bts vision. Nathaniel Bletter was a tremendous help in setung up the index and wath other Computer: related matters.  Lowe an trredeemable debt ot practude toms wite, Rosemarie Haag Bletter, who has influenced my thinking about architecture more than anvone. During our thirty vears together her depth of knowledge, acuity of percepoon, soundness of judgement. equanimity of rempera ment, and deliious sense ot humor have enriched ms dite bevend all measure, Without hee intellectual generosin, unthlagging encourare ment, steadtast lowalty, and incomprehensible forbearance, DP could never have produced this bods of work, which Preckom my finest. and  otter to her with devotron and dove, “als Werbegrias memier Drew  Martin Filler New York  hebruary sc. noc  Introduction  ALL HISTORIES ARE destined to become dated sooner or Liter, bur dure ing the weenneth centur books dealing with the Modern Movement in-architecture became obsolete especially quickly, This retlecred the catachsimie chanues thar swept through the architectural protession with gathering speed during the century and a quarter begenming. on the r&Scs—rhe decade when the Arse great Amerwan Modermst, Louw Sullivan. began hos career, and when the first generation of Luropean Modernist masters was born  This book wonot a histors ot Modern architecture, but rather a sequeme of cultural and aesthetn studies of some leading feures in the budding art acove during the lare-nineteenth theouph the early- owents firstcenturtes, Nor does ieconsatute my “top ow eng © list, tor although all ot these architects have exerted noteworthy influence, several ot chem, inom opinion, have been anvehing bet benetoral te the wause of Modern architecture at is most intelle ually clewated ant humants Fesponsne  Saliless isis approach an endorsemeatet the Great Man Dheary, to Which T de not subscribe. Asa criti far more than thirty sears, [have gained anointimiate perspectioue on hows architeetuial frais of  various kinds work) -tram the ways in which they get comm sions to 
the strugules and compromises internal as well as external endemic to the profession at every level The only common denommator | have found among these firms has been the collaborative nature of the architectural design process. no matter what the purported divs  sion of labor, though the long standing tendency for a firm’s urular head or principal partners to wet sole credit tor whatis always a group ettert ms onthe rise. Nonetheless, throughout the history ot the build  Ing art. certain figures have made contribucons so singular that our vontiaued attention to them remains merited,  Tsubseribe to no overarching philosophy or theory of architeccure, apart fromimy convicnen that what a souery butlds mirrors its salves more clearly than any other physical objects; and the chapters af this book, which hegan as essays written over a span of twenty vears, tetlect contemporary concerns ne dess than a budding does. During the Last quarter of the owentieth century, many avant garde architects, educa- tors, and thearses exhibited what now seems an extreme preaccupa- tion with the bestors of savde: net pust a renewed interest in Cradinenal motits disdained by orthodox Modernism, but a strange certitude that one histoneal phase had definitively caded and another-—rermed Post- modernism—had begun. Such self-Conscrousness appeared preposter- ous even atthe time, especially when it was claumed that new Post modernise buildings embodied the renucus theories that inspired them,  To be sure, atter World War] the proncering advocates of the Mad- er Mosement bad alse declared thar the building art was gomg through an epochal break, nothing less than the end of history ina lire eral sense, because they believed that eternal architectural pertecuon had at last been attained. The torgotten Cor suppressed: truth about Modernism was that the radial new forms of architecture and urbatisniits peactiooners advocated were only parts of broad and highly detailed agendas tor the reform ot hte in everything trom cco: nomigs and poliogs to spirituality and class equality. Far trom being  aomonohthi desclapment, the new architecture responded to local  condinons more than it adhered to the restrcted range at charac- teristics thac Ameriean polemicists codified and dubbed the Inter: national Style. aterm by no means synonymous with the Modern Movement.  The alleged talures attributed to Modern architecture durme the ryscs by Postmodermst partisans stemmed froma basic premise so contrary to historical riecetharone is soll astounded Iv the widespread uncriteal acceptance of ther argument. Revisionist theoreticnins characterized Modernism’ thwarted utopian and universalist aims as inimigally ante American, as an alien agenda promulgated bs socialist ideologues whe larer inhlerated architectural education in this coun try atter they fled Hitler's Lurope. In fact, the International Stvle—the cartoonish simplitied version of Modermst architecture most tamil iar to the American public—was as American as apple pie, Named, packaged. and promoted by the Museum ot Modern Art, it was so polincally sanitized and nei defined that it bore ne more than a superhyial resemblance to che mulotanious Modern Movement un all iscunruls Furopean comple sity,  The vision shared by Purape’s earl Modernist. of a brave new architecture thar would foster social reform on an unprecedented scale Was viewed as faindy ridiculous by the Americans whose very comare “the International Style” proclaimed their personal preter eme tor stvle over substance, a complete reversal of the Modern Movements prionties. Further refuting the Posemodernists’ conspir- acy theory was the speed with which the Amer.tn corporate estab lishment had accepted the International Style atter World War UH, which had nothing te do with tdeolopy and evervthing to doo wach coonemis: the new was of Construction was simply much cheaper and more proftable than carher, more ornamented modes. The dwin- dhing expressive potential ot the late Internanonal Style crea 1a6c was quickly exhausted by architects devoid of creative impetus  bevond making money tor themselves and their chents. The flagrant 
inpustice of equating the spiritual hankruptey of the deraciated Inter- nauonal Sole with the humane ideals of the Modern Mosement’s carly masters—-sume of Whose positions at times had indeed been muis- guided, tHlawed, hy pocrineal, contradictory, or unrealisue—ts another thread thar runs through these pages.  Several of the architects inthis collecdon hase been the subject at extensive scholarship that nvals cin quanuty atleast: that on any ot their precursors in carher centuries, High-stvle architecture hay tos: tered anunternanonal sere ss stem far centuries fat least since Bernini's roos sojourn in Paris), but am recent years the protession has adopted mans of the attrebutes of popular celebrity culture. No Modern mas: ter has received more brographical scrutiny than Frank Lloyd Wnghe, not only subjectot a vase architectural biterature, but ale a protage- nc ot novels, plays, and an opera. Beginning inthe types, Wright's Hambovant transgressions of middle-class morahoy through a lurid succession of dramatic and sometimes tragic love attarrs and mare tlages made him a star of America’s nascent tabloid press. Yer his inexhaustible self-confidence helped him survive setbacks far better than same ot his most talented Contemporaries.  byen now, an archueet still needs a chent betore a project can pro ceed bevond the drawing board. Rereading these studies ay 4 continu: ous narrative, Lsec the recurrent theme lexpressed more overtly in some chapters than in others: of the deceive role that personality, character, and temperament play in shaping architectural Garcers, Larger torces bevond the control of any person—the coononn, war nationalism, polo cil mstabihoy, natural disaster: -determine evetes of comsteugen as much as anething else, Yer the wavs in which an architect, even the most creatively endowed, ws able to cope wath external pressures can make all the difference, as borne out by several of the lite stories TP recount in the following pages.  All the architects examined at dength inthis book are. with the  exception of Dente Scote Brown, male. Phe other woman whose  name heads a chapter, Ray Fames, was nocan architecn) hat se tew women were able to reach posipons of prominence nH architecture until the last quarter of the peenteth century is antrretucable, if deplorable, tact. Following the Corrective ascounts of fenumest desige historians during the poyes, Phave tied to show how the tenaile collaborators ot several Modernist misters were instrumental in the creation ot seme of the movements best-known works. These remarkable women were long overshadewed by the renewn of the men who benented trom their ong unacknowledged efforts. “Without condoning the vender discrimination that persists in architecture well atten ic hats abated in other protessions, i should be added that male architeers hase had no bias against stealing ideas from men, either. |  Having been personally agquatated with more than halt the sub. fects of these Chapters. can say that the upper ranks of architecture arte cand hase always been) populated with egotsts no less grandiose than svmphony conductors and surgeans, Yer who could blame the minuscule percentage of architeets who achieve tame and tortune— let alone Crigeal aecbum—ter beheving they aust be destiny ’s dar bnas, having overcome the setbacks mopial of cher cruel callings Only actors have to endure a simular svstent in which landing a role never ceases to be a humubaong senes of auditions and rejections that can have bere to do wath prior experience, to say nothing of pervasive tyepecasting chat turther limits job prospects  The lucky few amon architects, howesen creas Cpperlunities for artiste expression thaccan make the size, permanence, and visibilits opother mediums seem paltry, Although practinoners atter Pours Kahn have taken ter uranted fis reassernen et che architect as artisn and architecture as Mother otthe Vets, that supremacy has been reyes ted hy someartisgs, most catpokondy Richard Serta and Prank Stella, whose large scale environmental sculptures verge cccllingdy enough lon heng works of architecture. Phe vehemence seth whigh Serra and Stella  have denounced the vers notien that strugtures of a pragheal mafure 
could even be Considered on the same breath with what they do less successfully, inmy view, than their generanonal rival Prank Gehry! indicates the threat they perceive from another discipline.  Some sears ago Thad lunch at the home ot one of the architects I write abour here. among a group of a daven of se that included his waite, several of bis colleagues, and a muscum curator, Atone port during the meal the hast. perhaps carboldened by his wince, curned toward me and asked loudh. "When will erties coer understand what we architects po through?” As all eves turned te the only crite pre- sent. Edeided to wnore this breach of the basic laws of hospacihts ithe architect called me that evening to apologize. at his wite’s behest: and to calmly Correet a common misperception wbout orides  Drephed that to my knowledge nothing [have cser written bas either won or lost a commission ter an architect, and Ported mv poor power to add or detract” iany such decision making process. Dwas quick co add thar Fam indeed deeply sympathetic te the travails sut- tered by ardhireces, and most keenly those with Ingh aspirations. But even the best of intentions cannot excuse buildings that thout the famous criteria ot Natruvaus: “hirmness, commodin, and dehyhr.” Phe srandards by which chose qualiges are defined and judged Change as surely as architectural fashions, and cach epoch seeks its deat bal ance among the three, but Phave never shied away trom voring my opmion, whatever the consequences,  Lam aware ot how much bas already been sad about severabot the histone tures Epay homage to here. Yer cher lives and the lessons to be learned trom them sertke meas my thie in ther enduring faycinanon, even after countless cetellings, Lor the more tamilar these archers pal tales becaine, the more one recounizes haw vulnerable even the most celebrated architects always are te the vagaries of fashion, the tekle ness af tame. and. above all, che whin of fate, tram which not even  the sturdiest structure of human creation can shelter anvene.  LOUIS SULLIVAN  AMBRICAN ARCHITECTURE DURING the last quarter ot the nentieth eentuns scemed Caughr henveen the rerection of an outmoded Mod- emism and the uncensinaing products of an emergent Postmaod-  emus. a comdinon thar mabe well have been summed up as tollows:  Weare at that dreamin moment in our national lite wherein we tremble event between decas and evolution, and our architec- ture. with strane ndelity, reflects this equipoise. That the terces ot decadence predominate in quandps there can be ne deubr that the recreative forces row balance them by virtue of quality, and may eventially overpower then ry a matter of conecture. That che bulk otour architecture is cotton (othe core, psd state: ment which does not admit ot one sohrary doubt, Phat there is our tational litesin the genius of our people. a feuittul germ, and that there are a handtul who percense this, is likewrse  hevond queston,  Aside trom the faintly archar qualits otis digthan and seatax, this passage gives one other clue to the face chat it was written nor ac the end of Modernist supremacy bata century carher una amie ot far  greater optimism than our owe. kor who todas truly believes, as did 
its author Pours Henn Sulbvan, that the collective architectural will ot ademocrane people Would not only manitescitselt, bur would tri umph over what he castigated as “the Feudal flea”?  Throgghout his troubled lite, Sullivan renamed his conviction that architecture is the truthtul mirror of a nation’s values, “As vou are. so are vour buildings,” he wrote. TAnd. as your buildings, sore you.” Along with his credence in the evolutionary ascent of democracy as the historical destiny of the modern age went his certitude chat architecture warble to stumulate these benehetal impulses, which he, ardent social philosopher as well ay revolutionary architect, sought to promote,  The most productive portion of Sullr ans create hte che pects - hive vears trom the beginning of his partnership with the German: Jewish engineer Dankmar Adler in i883, te the completion at his Natronal Farmees’ Bank in Owatonna, Minneseta. in ryahk—eoin- cided with a great American epoch of capital formation. No architect was more wary than Sullivan ot the etfest dhe lasses-faire Capitabismn would have on the democratic spirit. In the baletul rhy this ot an Old Testament prophet. Sullivan warned that “torbles and tellies have usurped sn sour minds the vacant seat ot wisdom Thus. has vour Dollar betraved vou, asiemuse.” Yeono other Ameriwan architect was so shilltal a servant of the governing economi order, dagnityiig its often unody acovities by clevaung tts most characteristic structures offices, banks. and stock ex hanges—te the level of high art,  This has not always sat well with criti, especially those who require parity. between an architect's chearies and his desizns. Tewis Mumtord, though on the whole ao partisan of Sullivan's, had miyvings about che architects most iifluental Contribution When in rasa he wrote in dhe Broron Qeeades ot Sullivan's call othee butldings:  More than anvthing, the mischiet lis in the notion that on che  foundanon of practical needs the skyscraper could on should be  translated into a “proud and searing thing.” This was giving the skyscraper a spiritual function co perform: whereas. in actualiny, height im skyscrapers meant enther a desire tor centralized admunistravon, a desire to mmerease eround rents, a desire tor  advertisement. or all three of these together,  More than fit. vears lates, David So Andrew, in fis debunking ce- assessment. Powers Sadlinar and the Polennues of Modern Ancbiter ture, moralizingly maintatned that Fibs Wainwright. the ne‘er-do-well St Lous brewer tor whom Adler and Sullivan designed two of their most memorable works—the Wainwright Building of rSoo-1Xa7 and the Wainwnght Tomb of rsu2-1863—was thereby granted “a distinc: tion to which he was not tally entitled. His tarnished public career would hardly seem to justity the memorial he reserved.” But did Lo- renzo and Giuliana de’ Media desene Michehingelo’s tunerary chapel?  Sullivan's architecture, hike all architecture, was powerless fo eno: ble what was less chan Commendable in the dives of tty patrons, nor was thar his intention. Bur he tell short ot the ambitious goal he did set tor himselt: to establish a genuinely American architecture based on his very personal models. He was thwarted decisively while stl at his creative apogec. as were several other exponents of the new tree styles that Hhoarished im America and Purope acthe end of the nineteenth century. Charles Renmie Mackintosh, incomparable mas ter of the Glasgow School and idol ot the Vienna Secession, died as diminished in substance as Sullivan. whe like Mackintosh became 4 alcohol and spent the last two decades of his lite patherieally under- emploved and destitute, Bernard Maybeck, the maverick pemus ot the Bay Area Style tater became a hireling designer tor other archi tects, while Joset Hoftmann, tounder of the Wiener Werkstarte, saw his career in Vienna des up thirty sears hetore his death  However i would be wrong to regard Sullivan's tate as the san at  tragte taiure. Ay Mumtord wrote, “Sullivan ded the way inte the 
promised land, only co perish in solitude betore the caravan could catch up with him.” $0 1 seemed in the first decade of Modernism’s dominion; now it would appear that the caravan has passed us by. Sullivan's tierce determination to cultiwate an architecture that would nurture self-rehance, encourage populist tendencies, and confirm his transeendental sew of nature and the relanen of the man-made object to iecommands a respect that can remain undiminished even in Tight of fluctuating atucudes Coward his work,  Sullivan has received attention for two particular aspects of his practice: his proneering accomplishments, both tangible and theoretical, inthe genesis of rhe most one American structural torm, the sky- scraper: and hiy synthesis of a singularly mventive order of architec turabornament ‘based forthe most parton native American botanical motits) as onpinalas the edifices uowas destened to enrich. His sem nal cSy6 essay" Phe Tall Office Burlding Artisacally € onsidered” ws now regarded asthe urtest of bugh-rise architeceare. leuleimatels became a touchstone for those seeking a sound set of principles tur how to move bevond Ludwig Mies san der Rohe’s irreducible glass-and-steel bax, as well as a reproach to the sevlistic excesses thar gave mans Post- modernist skyscrapers an appearance far more bizarre and debased chan Sallivan would have rhoughe possible even at his most despondent.  Sullivan's formula, tor practical as well as aesthetie reasons, has not been surpassed: he recommended a tripartite organization af base, shatr, and crown caken direetly trom the Classical cradition iwhich should be noted by cries who see his work as wholly anteC lassical and as traditional as the idea thata drama mast have a beginning, a middle, and an end. He also preserrbed a strong vertical emphasis in the extenor arnculagon of the skyscraper. Though Mumford would take excepuion, porting out that the steel-cage Construction of the new cull buildings expressed the horizontal as much as the vertical, at became clearer ay skyscrapers grew higher that a pronounced sense  of visual uplite was required to prevent those megastructures trom  weighing down the cityscape around them, Mostimportant, however, was Sullivan’s understanding of the necessity for undifferentiated, easly Convertible otfice space throughout ali the scores of the shaft: it was this inpovation thatdres cheats to him, and though a number of his contemporaries seized upon that concept, too, none cloaked an cconomn imperative more arttilly than he.  Thus Sullivan's approach to apphed decoration as ameans of clu cidating a building's tunetenal nature has been studied by desizners mundtulot his desire to supersede the Chassical vocabulary and to sup plant che acanthus and palmertes of the Mediterranean ancients with Patterns more relevant to the modern American experience. Bat those Points of reference were enough to embroidk Sullvan in controversy again during the stvle wars of the Tasos, when several new books on his architecture Were tar trom admunng, even though their vers num ber, ther simultancaus appearance, and the tenor of their arguments regarding bis historical status said enough about his radical qature and Continuing UNportanee  Astonishingly, no full-scale biography of this: pivotal figure appeared inthe more than halt.a century between Hugh Morrison's Lowts Suddiian; Proper of Madern Ardutecture of 1946 and Robert Iwombly’s focters Suedftsat: His Life aad Work of rye. Twombly’s study had been caverly anouipated, net least because his presicus book, Prank Liovd Wright: Hes Late and His Architecture, was a shrewd and serviceable surves of the man who called Pours Sullivan his dieber Meister, Itwas dithoult, atter reading Iwombly’s Sullivan monograph, ro believe that it came tram the same hand as the Wright biography. Though he was tar more sympathete te hes subject than other Late- tventieth-centur historians, his valuable imsqhts land there were many! got So dostin a thicket of irrelevant minutiae that the aathor had ditfcules in engaging the attention cven of che specialist: what of the lav reader eager to learn mere about Sullivan's pachbreaking  architecture and his Camples personality? 
Vhere sono question thar che early vears ot Lous Henri Sullivan, who was born in Boston in p&se6, are unusually IM POrtanle ty under- stunding his turure direction, rtanly because he himyscht sec so much store by thase yuvenile eprsodes. Sullivan's emphasis on hes childhood and his abruprcessauen of his lite story atthe exactimoment wheo his professional circumstances began te unravel, i 1843, are anly two of the tactors thar make his book Phe Antodtoeraphy of aa idea ipub- lished just dass betore he ded, ain razge. one ot the oddest and mose fsanating documents of ios kind in American brerature. As Mum-  tord poetically phrased tt:  Whereas tor the ordinary biographer youth monk the prelude towcarcer, for Mr Sullivan, one might say, vouth was the career and what we call macurity seemed httle more than the tading of  the vision into the light et common day.  To putt more plaink, Sullivan had a severely arrested personality, and The Autobrography of an ddecoan be read as an uneansctous case history begging tor psvchoanal cecal mrterpretation. Twombly followed Sullivan's lead: hatter ao fashion) vn his bnagering secutry ofthe few knows tacts of the bows fite until he entered Wii at siateen to study architecture. Sullivan knew he wanted to be an architest we the age of eleven, and his parents encouraged him, ome so tar as to allow him to contnue his schooling in Boston atter thes: moved to Chicago the tollowing vear Bur rather than offering cons lusive explanations of Sullivan's very strange tamuly relations, Twombh digressed into al] manner of pomtless intormation. His most novel hypothesix—tor which he produced no correboranve proot—was that Sullivan was homesexuabl Phere a indeed some basis tor belies ing that presumption might be correct, though not necessarily in the way Pwombly ser torth his brit.  In Fhe  Autofrography, Sullivan wrote with contessianal operness  ob his revulsion tor his tather, and the architece’s undiminished veche mence when he composed that memoir atthe age of sian tye, could be taken to indicate the presenge of an unresolved “¢ Yedipal phase,” which one school of psechoanab te thought dared to bea trequent component in the psychological profile of the “i pieab’ male home. sexual atheors subsequent attacked by others as tallacious, unser cute. and poltiallsy incorrect, Moreover Sullivan recollected bis early attraction to workinen engaged tn physical labor, his dolization ot asuccession otolder men. and his specail interest inthe bowies of his tellow members ot the Lotus Place Arhlene Club,  Twombly tound ne direet evidence of homosexual activity by Sul dwanson the contain, Chigage legend long hadot thacthe anhitect Was something of a wormatuzer, though [woambly showed that there wascittle co back ap that claim, either Bur Sullivan wrote in 7Ae Auto: Poegraphsy of his earls crush ona temale cousin, he was married tor ten vears betere he and his wite separated and subsequently divorced; and one sohice af his grim final period wos the mutual atteston he shared with a “losal Little henmashaired milliner” recited by Wiayghe bur orberwise last in the shadows of history.  Twombly ’s homosexual theme could bre overlooked were tt not tor his allegation that Sullivan's “sexualies intormed and rs visible in his work,” even though fe Coneeded that “at was se repressed he may not have Koowst re hemsclt.7 Using extremely simplostic and subjective terms, Iwombly contrasted “male! structural forms to temale’ orn ment.” proposimas thar “the Smale cattomahes ata buartding’s shape provided the occasion tor temale’ embellishment.” burthermore, “In his method of design. inspiration and emotion — the female part ot the dichetoms ame fest. eosin berth co the orders. logical werk: ingoutot mass and detail the nile part ot the process,”  Aparttrom the banality of Twombly ’s “logieadtnide” versus Seme- thonal temale” analogs. at was noresen avers new readuie at the  intriguing tension between the ornamental and the scruccural nm many 
ot Sullwan'’s call buddings. Mumford. no enthusiast for the hush dee- oratve elements that. in his Modernist opimon, undermined the integrity of Sullivan's desipns, wrote in gaat thar *Sulliwan’s build ings, hough often oremnalin conception, began in a subtle way co disintegrate; the masculine and the temunine clements, form and tecl- ing, drew apart” Twombly unwisely atrenipred te take that tenuous  ling of argument several Gontusing steps further:  Overvhebming ornament did not characterize every late Sull- van butlding. Bur it happened otten enough te call atrention inretrospect to the format the century. Schlesinger Qo Maver {department store}... when the temale emotional appeared to beprn its dominance...  {Pfis wite| Macgarer entered Sullivan's lite in pseu... during Schlesinger & Maser’s designing. rust as the trend emerged. It he sensed that the female side of his scrsibilitw. the female Goin ponent of his nature, was ciking over he may tye tried to repress it through bowing, far one thing, a peculiirls male act: iy he rediseovercd shortly before...  Sullivan's emerging homosexuality. at that as what ie was, comncides with Ais mariage and wath his tall trom popular faver Itas cempong te link his dechine to Margaret, to blame her somehow ter his increasing tmabiity to rer work. Buc wos more dikely thatan the male world ot archiresture doubrs about his masculinity: would de fim yreater damaye than anvdung she mas fave done His obvious artiste inclinations could have been used te suppor rumears ot Lick of manh- ness. Butt there was cik, ie cannot be proven and must be  fete aside.  Indeed it must: by the poscs, several leading members at che archi  tectural profession in the United Stares—inglading Philip fohnson,  Paul Rudolph, and Charles Moore—were widely known to be home: sexual, Butacatie. te say nothing of the general pubbe, would tind it impossible to demonstrate tram those architects) works alone whether or not they were in tact homosexual How would one detect the “temale-emotional” Component in ther personalities during a period chat had largely dispensed with architestural ornament? Oid the pub- heaton of Twombls's Sullivan brogeaphs during the decade of Post- modermem and its renewed interest in applied decoration encourage him to speculate abour such progliy ities?  Twombls Sinept banding af this issue was fortunately Counterbal- anced bv his sound exalugtens of other more peronent questions surrounding Sullivan's rise and especiafly his undoing! as an archi test. Chief among them. again because Sulliwan places so much emphasis on tin The Autobregraphy of an tdea is the architect's contention that the oSg3 Worlds Columbian Fxposition in Chicago, with ats cesplendenth magniticd Beaux-Arts Classical architecture, sounded the death knelbot bis career, Only chree vears cartier Sulliwain had completed the Chigage Agditorimum Building of 1886-1880 ice Hlustration rasa stupendous accomplishment. A monumental. mult use cultural and Gommercial complex, the Auditorium Building com bined a techmiwal progran atthe utmost inventiveness with a decorigve scheme of high sophisneation Nodhing like st had ever been seen in the United States. and at dramatized. as no other single structure had, the shitr ain the leadership ot Amerman architecture trom the bast Coast to the € fticage School,  Tris true that the comprehensive design of the Columbian Bsposittion, tor which Suibvan’s local ral Daniel Burnham was generally respon sthle, ssinbolized the popular acceptance of cversthing Sullivan tought against in architecture: the servile uaitation ot historical pro- cotepes: the resort to empts turmal rhetane: and the concept rigid - ins umposed by axial symmetrical pling an which all architectural  elements are subordinated ta a preconcerved layout. In describing 
the ettest the exposition bad on the building art in Amerea, Sullivan  could express himself only inthe vocabulary of disease:  From the height of its Columbian Festacs fste f. Chicago drooped and subsided with the rest, ia common sackness, the nausca of oversumulanon.... Meanwhde the virus of the World's Fain atter a pertad ot imcubacon inthe archite tural profession and inthe population at large, especially che mntlaential, began to show onmistakable syns of the nature of the Contagion. Phere wame a stolen outbreak of the Classi and the Renaissance im the East, which spread westward. contaminating all that it  touched. berth at its source and outward  But there were other, more immediate circumstances attendant on Sullvan’s preaapitous slide trom the summit of success. His stunted personal development did not improve with protessional attamment: he was denninding, detached, and difficulr with Colleagues and subor- dinates alike. Prudent, his partner Adler handicd dealings with chents. and the very arrangement of their offices atop the Auditorium Burhhing Power said it all: Adler's was nest tethe reception area while Sullivan's was cna tar corner hevond the Consultation room, sanity: ing their respective roles ay Mr. Outside and Mir Inside. Phe collabo- ratory’ split r8as. precipitated by the depression of r8ay and the subsequent downturn in architectural activa, lett Sullivan without his tacttul butter against the outside world.  Avant-garde architects have never been able to depend on the sup- pertot the establishment, singe the customary patrons of this most conservative and slows moseng ager form have histor ally been resis tant to innovanon and risk-taking. Phings improved somewhat ter expermmentil designers with the broadening of architectural patron: age that accompatied the growth of the bourgeoisie durin the Indus  tral Revolution. Nonetheless the building are remained. as it stall as,  the only medium thar normally requires a Ghent, During the modern period, the vanguard architect has usually cched on small residential lebs both to supply a steady meonie and to serve as “sketches” for ideas that are etten later translated to a larger scale, Lours Sullivan designed atdease 238 projects during his Bee-decade career, but only ao handtul of them were houses: Frank Llovd Wright completed almost five hundred buildings in his seventy -five-vear protessional Ite most of them residences. One reason Sullivan did noe build more houses ws thar he Was not particularly good atin, Nor was he par- tiularly mnterested in seeking out that hind of work, preterring the prestige of poander public structures. As a result, he was deprived of one cushion against cconomig exigeney when mstitutional support tailed.  Tras certain char Sullivan brought mach ot his trouble on hirmsell. Abas s opintonated and scorntal ot official authority, he cherished a particular contempt for the American Instuce of Architect, orga nized in iNs7 te promote the protessonalizauon of architecture in the United States. Before then. architecture had) been generals regarded as a master cratt rather than a protession such as medicine or the daw. Within a generation of the vii's founding, heowever, the group had largely succeeded in ransing the status of architects. Sul- livan. within an even shorter ume span, did something even more remarkable still: he assumed the Parnassian rank ot artist. Ps rer. tonal anumos agaist the Ata Gaused that group to protect tts recent gains with a vigor equal to his attacks. Phe architectural protessian, then as now. was largely an ofd-boy network, and as Dwombly evoca  tively described it  Retaliation could be subtle bat crtecrive, Only a tew quiet words inthe right places would be enough, Brom the same soutal Lass as most chents... Vs members could castly see te i thar Sullt  van got his gust deserts, The more established the clents, the less 
thes would tolerate Controversial connections with troublemak-  ers and tirebrands.  netheless. Phe Antobrorraphy of aa idea was published by the Ata, although the organization did not award Sulltwan its hithest honor the Gold Medal, until 1944. two decades atter his death.  From time to time atter his break with Adler in sys, Sullivan was able to attract commercial chents as adventurous as those who seek out “advanced” architects for private houses, None was more note worthy than Carl Kent Bennett. the rural tinancier who in race asked Sullivan, then ata very low point ot his carver, co design the Nagonal Farmers’ Bank in Owaronna, Minnesota fsee lustration ob) Todays itis considered one ot the wreat American architectural landmarks ot its pernod, all the more se torus remore locaton away trom the cos mopohtan venues of most high-stvle design. That small but mayest structure was the most demonstrative example of Sulltvan’s faith in the populist stirring be telt certain would spawen anew architecture of democracy. He was acheast partalb eight: his tollawers among the so-called Prairie School spread his egalitarian gospel throughout the heartland with buildings that kept his principles alive even when he was unable to get work himself.  Ot course there sa certain trons inthe tact chat Sullivan was never called upon co design a state capitol a county Courthouse, of even a town hall, During his Career, twenty crght state Capitols were built, hut only two of them—New York's Romanesque-cum Renaissance concoction in Albany by HORE Richardson and Leopold bidlita, and Connecticut's Victorian Gore extravaganza in Harttord by Richard M. Upjohn—departed trom variations on the ( lassical domed theme set by the United States Capitol in Washington. Seats of local govern: ment generally followed suit, and itis not surprising that this maver- wh didet have a chance of winning such smaller Commissions,  Instead. Sullivan was party to the metamorphosis of the savings  and loan industry in the Midwest trom ryce to ress, when bankers sought to portray there institutions as the frend rather than the foc of the farmer. He built ght banks at small towns in Towa, Minnesota, Ohio, and Wisconsin, and they drew on his imaginative talents ina most producuse was. They peemitted him to offer a viel alternative toa an existing architectural platrrude without anv sacahee or the Impheait qualines in this case, security. stability, and probity) thar his chenes wished to rena ar the sare cette his banks showed the are tects Capacity tor rethinking the same problem over and aver again with results that were alwass fresh and often surprising,  Those institutions’ newtound Cooperative approach in response to farmers’ reactions against entrenched big-city economic interests required a strong new architectural aspeet to replace the familiar Clas- sical treasury torm, and Sullivan provided at. bor three of the best of those buildings, he drew on the argh within-a-cube motif he employed in his Getty Jamb of r8acoin € hicage pa strongbox ot another sort. as several orithes have noted . Phat simple but ettective device imparted a monumental gualin. to what were very seal struccures, grand: bat decided hs anintimidating. ft was an architectural civics fesson tora new era—a brief but fascinating reformist phase in American political and cconomie histors—in which Sullivan's banks retlected the growing Brassroots power ot the Progressive Movement. As the architectural  histonan Walham Jordy descrdbed the clents whe sought out Sullivan:  Phese individualisue businessmen, somewhat provincial, but perhaps cultured a some degree, appear to have been roughly the same type whe patronized Wright, except that many of Wright's chents had gone through the ehastentmg. and possibly cvdizing, experience of the widespread Arts and Crates interlude, as eventually se did Sullivan's patrons ter his fate hanks. The chears tor Sullivan’s office buildings scem rather to have rep  resented the end-phase of the most amlugous and venturesame 
Victorian chents who sought a certun conspruousness in what they Commissioned. Sullywan’s chetorecal design would have been just eight tor them. Showy, popular, extraordinary, mod- ern, high-flown in sentiment: these qualities in his design would  seem fo hase struck a responsive Chord in his busmess patrons.  Phe architectural historian Wim De Wit wentesen turther portray ing the backers of Sullivan's banks as no fess than patrons af architecture  inthe service of Anancial reform and social change:  Bankess realized that thes had the power to influence cconemis and pohtwal lite, but thar they Could noe do so without the faver of ther chents. In che fist pve decades of this century the realization would be transtormed inte anew coneepeat the banker's role in societs, and as a consequence, ot the service he should give to his chents. The bank burlding was gone to play anamportant part ar aghieving the image of the bank ws an insti:  tution chat is essential to evervone’s well being.  Attengen to such issues is central to an understanding of Sullivan's motuvatons, for he always telt himself ta be an agentin the process ot poltial, and through at cultural evolucen. Therefore the dismissive observation of one commentator on these banks chat ‘Sullivan's thapsadie vision of American democracy was simply warmed over Whittan” seemed partiubarks ohtuse.  One can readily become impatient with Sullivan the theorist, tor he could be selfandulyent, murky. and repentive. However compared to the woozy philosophical musings of Pours Kahn, Sullivan seems a Montagne of oblective clic, He somenmes edged toward the crackpot an the relentessness of fis passionate obsessions, mast notably his insistence on the Morante” nature of architecture. His  analogies to Pology and botany have a certain metaphoneal value,  thourh i the end they seem contradictory to the clearly morgane character of man-made objects. But one might just as well write oft Willam Blake ay a simple lunati and ignore fis theories of art, tor Sorusaating: intuitions were strewn along the circuitous paths ot Blake's davclinghy discrdered mind, and so if was with Sullivan,  David So Andrew's revistonist book of poss. bowers Seddieaer and the Polevtres of Meader Architccnee: The Present Avast the Past, Was iiessetie a Postmodernist tract, though more subrh argued chan most, save tor the authors ridiculous assertion that Sullivan's promi nenee has beer Largely unmerited because his “questionable polene of architecture was the product ot bes disdain tor and condescension toward history,” In tact, Sallivan’s extensive rheones of history and architecture onteristaed the ovo na diatectie trac to his synerety blend of the ideainne and the utilitanan. drawing on such diverse sources as the American Pramscenderntahises, Darwin, Nietzsche, and Herbert Spencer  Discrepanetes between the letter and the spirit of architectural law can be deceptive. and those who demand strive concordance between the pwoorsk missing the point of Sullivan's importance entirely, Some contradictions between what architecss have claimed thes were doing and whacthes actuals did cinnecdiscount built works it our expert enee at them ts satistving., Andrew displased tar trom uncommon naivety When he objected thac "what [Sallivan] was domp was in tact netanciuded within che curlines of his own thears ! Sullivan's build: ings by and large succeeded. even though bis philosophy often dal Not. and his structures stand as dhe bese evidence ota highly ctte tise archirestural intcligence.  bobome che party ine ot Postmodernist polemucists, Andrew te erated them view ot Modernsim as an ahersint interruption in the inexorable continuum ot Classtepm, tn ther estimation the one true  architectural taith of Western costlizatian, He asserted that 
an architect. even. a “modern” one, whe desires to communicate ideas about insatauons housed in the buildings he designs ts prompted naturally to set forth those ideas in seme universally  apprehendable—ne., historically valid—manner,  Never mind that Sullivan's indisputably “natural” promprings led him co conchisions annthetical to those ot Classical precedent; Andrew continued wath his restrictive approach by reiterating one of  the tavorite ante Modernist canards of Latter-day resistomists:  Tris one ot the untorcunate oddites of recent mes, in tact, that a doctrine ot architectucal aesthetes concenved tor a timited group of human activities those of commercial mtercourse’ has come fo receive acclanm as the doctrine that should govern the design of buildings housing all Kinds of human actiits, no mat-  ter how unrelated to things mercantile.  Actually, Sulltwan—-who studicd atthe Feole des Beaux-Arts in Paris tor about six months in r8—g and a8>s—was far more adept than most of his contemporanes tramed inthe Beaus- Arts system, whether in Paris or elsewhere, in devising meaningtal wavs ot bunlding to serve the new tunstons that nineteenth century architecture had to deal with, By the fare pwenuecth centucs the passing of the purianical phase of Modernism made ita rehet ter many architectural enthustasts te be able to enjos the bestresalsed cxamples of Beaus-Arts Classicism without scemmge he reachonartes. But need that pleasure preclude  an egual abiliey to appreciate Sullivan as well? For Andrew it did:  The Paris Opera... emplovs the classical language... gramman- cally and Consistently, as befits a public edifice. The Auditorium, with ts bizarre and solecist: ettecas. as a) difterent: creature  entirely,  In the Wholesale reassessment, thar took place inthe aftermath of Modernist architceture’s long unquestioned dominance, Sullican seemed tikels to be toruven by revisionists tor the sims committed: in the name of his often misquoted Credo “form ever tollows fang tan,” ibonk because of renewed admiration ter his florid. Sunmedern” omament. But ast turned out, he seemed to catise unease amony raScs conservatives in much the same wav thar he did when he began to present his Challenge architecoiral visions of anew America hundred vears carher, Mans, perhaps most, of his contemporaries did not tke what thes saw, because Sullivan's architceture required a degree of selt examination chat tew wished to confront, an aversion as typical of American life in the late pwentieth century as it had been during the Gilded Age  The mainstream architecture of the retrograde past—Civil War sevle towhih Sulbvan ran counter, later termed owith Orwellian overtones! the “American Renaissance.” was adnured again during the Age of Reavan tor exactly those qualines prized by its orginal advocates— ity unembarrassed emphasis on marenal displays ity effort to symbol- rally Gonnest with the power of imperial regimes. and ats delusive averias of wansentionalls intarmed reference. at ance selt-flarcering and neove. Richard Moras Hune’s Admunstranon Building at che Worll’s Columbian Psposigon ot 18u 3 and his Breakers of 18a3- rSus ain Newport. Rhode fsland, and Ernest Flags United States Naval Awidemy at pXosstecson Annapelds, Mion hand ithe couniry’s largest concentration of Beaux Arts buildings! gave form toa tar dit ferent America than the one dreamed ot bs Sullivan. Hes lite giving eontriburien to architecture wall always be resited hy reactionaries tor the same reasons it was spurned at the high noon ot che first Gilded Age. Soth Sullivan wall survive as an authenne here of Amen can culture tor as dong as the promressive teadencies tor which he  tought contutue co have ther chanipiotis, 
ld  FRANK LLOYD WRIGHI  WE TAKE FROM the arrot the past what we necd. Che variable posthu- meus reputations of even the greatest artists and the anpredictable revs otintorestanm esc the most edscure ones tend to reveal more about these who make such assessments than abour those who are reassessed Phra especially true in the burkding art, which, woth ats sab: stantial sogaland pohtical content hay abors been subjeet to chang ray fashions tmore rapad during the madera period than ever betore: that are seomingiv at odds with the slow execudgen of architecture, thoammobiigy otits arttacts. apd the long durnacon at rts presence.  Hossesen atter the death ot Frank Lhavd Wrightin rasa. regard tor hinvand his samense Contobaron to archites ture andy Continued to rise and broaden unkke tie mam vetisth. seputugens that tallinte ummc dhate postmortem obinien, Qoe reason tor Wrahe’s creroal appeal seetas clean Phe chaote srate thar within pista decade at his deriise was avcepted as an inseludle Gondinen of contemporary archites ture -a held that beg ame as factenal, contentious, and lackarn aa shared sense of higher purpose vis Aimericag souets during dhat same perod—anade Weehe appearin hindsight to hive been above alla tore tor units  Ir budwee Sbes van der Rohe refined architecture te what he con  sidered its essentials. ft be Corbuster recomeensed in mere oreughls 
than anvenc since Palladio, and it Louw Kahn elevated architecture to a plane ot ameless aspiration thar had been lost in Contemporary con- struction, then Wright insisted that his baldings be organm—that is, untied im conception tram the largest principle to the simallest detad. He rerected the celebration of dixsontinuiny that has been a main characteristic of Modernist art trom Cubism and Dada onward. In archttecture that discontinuity has been expressed in the paged, taceted shapes ot Expressionism carly in the twennieth century, in Postmodernism’s pastiches ot histarical motits during the roses, and subsequently an the tragmented, seemingly collapsing forms at Deconstracmvist arc hicesture at the end of the century.  Philp Johnson's wicked gibe that Wraght was the greatest architect af che nineteenth century was not entirely inaccurate. bor although Wright was also the supreme Ameriwan master builder of the twent- eth century, he was indeed the List surviving practigoner of ideas fos tered by the design reform groups ot the decades immediately betore and atter his birth i 1867—in particular the Arty and Cratts Mave- ment, the Acschetne Movement, and the various schools ot Art Nou- veau. Phose ideas meluded a belief in design as a catalyst of social improvenient: the related conven that good design should be avatlible to all people; the repudiation of ornament not conceived as  an inseparable clement of design: the quest tor the tully integrated  work of actor Gesanuthiensttieerks and the need for society to finalls master the machine in the service of those goals.  Moreover asthe Cultural historian and geographer Willranmt Cronon pointed eutin his brilliant essay tor the Museum ot Modern Arts tua Wright retrospective, the architect's huge debt to Ralph Waldo Emer- son—-particulark Brenon’s view of mature as the countenance of the divine—purs Wright firmly among the Transcendentalises, ao matter how torward-looking so much of his thinking appears. For example, when Woebt imcorporited boraniwal mouts into bis work—such  as sumay tor the Dana house of ryct-19yeg i Springheld, Uhnors;  holly hocks tor the Barnsdall house of rare—ro2. in bos Aneles: and Spanish moss tor Auldbrass Plantanen of y38 rags in Verassce, South Carolina—it was to connect his buildings with nature not pust In asambolte sense, but ina sprit one as well, And the architects preference tor using focal materials whenever possible gives many of his buildings the teeling of having grown trom: their sites tully imbued with the spirit of the place.  No other Amertean architver ts so well Known te the general pub hoas Wrght, Tris acare sear without halta dozen or mare new books on him. His buddings are the mest frequently visited works of Mod ern architecture inthe Country and threats tether preservation pro- voke passionate debate. The strong dentiheation that Americans sull have with Wright derives fargely from his continuing appeal to our Romantic seltamage asa natien of mdivtdualists: like him nature: loving. distrusttul of enerenched authority, healthily rebellrous, suspr stous of foreign inthuences, proudly selt-rehant, endlessly resilient, and adept at sequential selt-reinvention  More accurately refleetmy our national character, however Wright Was alc outspokenls anteurban, a stubborn upholder of the unprac- tical fetfersonian idealat the treestanding house on its individual plot ot land, and an avid promoter of the automobile culture, In fact, Wright's most pervasive intluence has not beer in high styte are hites ture at all, busin the suburban houses that have become part of the American pop sernagdian, A tew vean hetare Wrights death. the British Modernist architect David Plesdeli Bousere sisittd dis “desert cncamp: ment.” Jahesin West of ry3ct resy in Scortsdale, Vrizona, Plevdell Bouverie asked his host what would become ot the Complex ation he died, whereupon Wright replied. “It will go back tothe desert to whi h ithelongs, bur hy thar time Evwall have saved the Ameria houses ite trom the Gape Cod bes,”  lahesin West stil stands, but che scgend partat Wright's prediction  did Come true. In place of the Cape God box. he imdizecth ave the 
American housewite and her husband the ranch-sevle house. Phough  his own efforts at devising an mexpensive, mass-produced Usoman  House (as he called his smaller residential designs trom the mid- 143: onward) met with only limited success. the many clements he popu larved through them—-long. low conmstrucnan: overhanging roots: stained wood siding: high, narrewy strap windows; open-plan inten orc small kitchens: dino spaces rather than separate dining rooms; concrete slab toumdations instead of basements: and carports in place ot full paraves—attected decades ot industrially tabricated houses built by developers throughout the United States. Alfred Pevitt, the archi tect ter Lexitt and Sons, the most famous af the suburban contracting firms after World War Th boasted thar seme ot his best ideas carne trom Wrieht. According to ene historian of bevittown, Barbara M. Kelly. “Alchouuh Wright disdained the Levitt houses as trash, Levit was tond of porting out that he had been able to produce the taw- cost houses that Wright had only theorized.”  Wrights prescrnt feel ter what the postwar Ameren public would want was borne out by his Broadacre Cats. a visionary scheme that he began to work onion rove, dumng the depths of the Grear Depression, and which he never realized This low rise, low alersity plan ter rural land development, knit coxecher by roads and puns tu: ated by the odd tall building, was as predictive in its general ouchines ashes Csonan Houses were  Unbke the lives of most architects, thatot Frank Pfoud Wrrhr was notmercly atramate Hib was epernine. This was sageested by Shura Brow. an opera composed by Ark Hagen toa librerro by the Erish poct Paul Muldoon, performed tor the first rime mn tous by Wascon sins Madison Opera. The same theatrical quality animated the rugs hiography brah blovd Wrote by Merde Secrest, the first study te  make use cot the mncrofiche transcription of the complete Wright  archives — 100, 202 pleces of Correspondence abd 21,ace drawings—  sponsored by the Getty Foundation, Although there were ne starding  revelations or major departures trom the general outlines ot the archi teers bre and Career in Secrest’s account, outshone Brendan Gals debunking ras> Wright hography, Mav Masks. which was Spotals resears hed. exayperated intone. and grudging on its yudyments. Gall portraved Wrieht asa rogue and a charlanin, Na doubt there were aspects of Ghicanery m the architect's evasive character and manipula tive taiture, butome gets little sense ot his authenti genus trom Gall, who knew Wright personally and seemed determined to settle scares with ham, Ina single sentence Lewis Mamtord expressed a truth about Wrehe that cluded the invidious Gall: "le heed from first to Lise bike a God. one whe ages but ty not acted upen.”  Robert Twombis’s tute Pract floyd Wright: bls Dafe and Hes Vrohutecture paid areater attention to Wright's protessional activites than Scerests book did. though Twombly shiteed back and tomth between biography and architectural work without making it clear enough bow onc maghe have attested the other Scorest touched on Worehts work mainis as part of her tasteimosing narranve, and pot  boxved down only in her excessive discussion of Wrighe’s forebears  wt Wales. Thats net te sax that she was mistaken in exploring Wright's ancestrs inorder te better understand bin dfs vase un- avsumilated Welsh taal inhabited Wisconsin's Helena Valley much as they had lived close to one another inthe old Gountey. Indeed. the inthuence ot Wrihes maternal clan, “the Ged Almughty Dhovd Joneses” whese tanuls matte was “Truth Againse the World” — envapsulaited the archicess dial sense of himself as bork divinels aghe and bumanh embattled. dn tach his genius was recopnized early and widels, and uns ditheulnes he encountered biter on were ofthis owt oreatunn +  Scene Wright in the Welsh setting of Noncantermist religion, nature worship. and trebal merch helps us to understand bint better as when be designed the stardingly unconventional Cnity fomple et  rucs-roohw on Oak Park, Uline, for a Citartan Congremation as 
unorthodox as his own tamily’s Unitarian sect, or even when as a boy he helped decorate his family’s Country chapel with deaves, weeds, and wildtlowers. His natural gitts tor must and language suggest even more of his Welshness.  However much Wright's extended tamily helped shape his person- ality, nothing approached the soaring self-confidence he derived trom the mrense hopes tor him and attention lavished on him by his mother, the ambitious, teustrated Anna Lloyd Jones Wright. (Her only son was orqgnally called Fragk Lincoln Wright after the recently: mart red president, but he adopted his mother’s maiden name when he was a teenager, around the time his parents divorced. ! In bis often mislead ing but revealing lite story As Autohrography, Wrieht claims that even betore he was bora, his mother preordamed his carcer by hang: ing his nursery with tramed engravings af the Enghsh cathedrals to Inspire him.  The architect’ shadowy, teckless fathers, Wilham Cary Wright—a tailed itnerant preacher and talented church musienin—withdrew in the wake of Anna’s maternal possessiveness. As the architect observed  in his version of his hte story:  When her son was born something happened berween the mother and father. Sister Anma’s extraordinary devotion to the child dis- concerted the father,  The tather never made much ot the child, it seems.  No doubt the wite loved him ne less but now loved something more, something created out of her own terver ot love and  desire. A means to realize her vision,  Wright habreually sought out strong women fhe his mother. He lett his first wite—the sweet-tempered Catherime Tabin Wright, mother of six of his seven children—tor the treeth ming feminist Mamah Borth- wick Chenes, the wite of a chent and nerhbor in Qak Park. The  abandonment by Wright and Cheney ot therr Tespecuive spouses: the adulterous couple's escape to Purope: ther return to build dale lest of retire gy in Spring Green, Wisconsin, Weights rural retreat on his mother’s lind i the Helena Valles: and Cheney's subsequent murder there—along with six others. including her two chifdren—at the hands of a demented servant who then burned down Laliesin, provided the basis of the Verdun plot for the opera Shane Brow. M Tahesin.” the name at the legendary Welsh bard. means Shining Brow.  While sill shaken by his devastating loss, Weight became mesmer ved by the intriguing bur unstable Miriam Noel an insmuating stranger Whe weote hin an emotional condolence letter atter the widely publicved tragedy. Wright's conjugal scandals bad become a staple ot the popular press since his Ul-tated clopemenats The oo soon bean anattain In rots Wright wrote a bret pasiticatory state: ment oot his admittedly unorthodox domestic arrangements, “On Marriage.” bur could gather the courage to divorce hes tirst wite only after his morher died in ra23, whereupon he finally marced Miriam, His soluble new wate turned out to be addicted to morphine, and itter sex months they separated. For the next six vears she waged a relentless harassment campayn against Weaght and his latest lover: Olgtanna Ivanova Lazosich Hinzenberg, a Montenegrin dancer and disaiple ot the Greek: Armenian myst Gol Gurdpett. She began [ie ing with the architect early in ry2s and guakh became pregnant.  Miriam Noel Wright stalked her estranged husband: Liunehed legal actions qaibst bins held press Gontecences denounging him had fin throes nointe yaa ter vicdating the Mann Act the was accused of havin taken Oo anna access state lines for “immoral purposes” saad when Olgmwanna pase birth ta Tevanna. Wrights seventh child, hounded the new mother and daughter out ot the hospital been atter Wersghe wor adborce and was able to marrs Olgivannain russ cbs which  time ther daughter was three! Miriam traded them to ¢ ablttornia and 
vandahved their house. Phos avenging Fury continued to pursue legal charges against hin unl her death two years Liter  Wrarht'S third and final wite, with whom he lived tor the three last decades at his life, was no less herce than her predecessor, though Olgwanna’s chergies were directed toward her husband, not againse him) Accurding to many ageounts, Olunanna Liovd Wright cas she stvled herselt, adapting his matron as though op were part ofa compound surname! was possessive, grandiose, scheming, paranoid, and vindictive. She seems admirable onls in her extreme belief in and unswerving devonon to Wright, who depended on her utterly and recenved trons her the hind of uncondinenal emetional support. indeed almost worship, fe had enpoved trom fis mother Though toa degree the Couple ted cach others lease appealing characterstes— sanity, sclf-pity, quickness to take oftense, and a sense ot cntitlement—thes were also Complementary: personalities: he javing and she hoarding, he optimisne and she ansvtous, he gregarious and she seeretive,  Teas unlikely chat without Olgas anna athis side Wreht Could have made his astounding oreanve comeback ot the nid-ro3cs, well atter mast people had written bim oft asa hiscorical relic. Wright's epochal Prune House period of pacssracg, when he devised the trast Anierr ean architecture thar was to intluence new developments in Furope. was brought to an abrupt end bs the Cheney scandal Theugh his patrons in and around Chicago were by and Large selt-made and tn- dependent businessmen, they still expected a certain decorum and discretion inn architeet: a house builder should nor be a home wrecker Waht'S subsequent sqqourns in fapan te budd the Imperial Hotel ot rarz-tyz3 in Tokyo where he mesth: hyed berween roe  and rgf2 removed him trom the changing American scene i  harue cal time. The resurgent fashion tor CLasstensm made the work ot Wright and his mentor, Cour Sullivan, seem dated to many potential chents. Wreht, determined not to share Sullivan's dismal tate,  devised a new repertory of architectural forms and motits—derived  trom Mesoamerican and “primitive” sources but had hirthe chance to demonstrate his diversity in the few robs he reserved between his flisht trom Oak Park in rece and bis tive Mayan uispired Los Ange: les houses of the earl besos.  been dunmg America's boom vears of the rates Wonht’s carer taded to revive. In tact, the decade between rotg and regg const cored Wright's truby lost vears. during which he executed onmty fee eodmissions. Were it ner tor Oli ines ceaseless em ouragement, the Great Depression might duise fimshed him off alrogether. Wright had seen Sullivan die in penurs in rag. Frank Furness, the maverick Philadelphia master with whom Sullivan apprenticed, was reduced late in lite to ghost-Jesigning a burldimg tor the Clissieal Resival firm of McKim, Mead and White, whose anniguarcin philosophy was ants thetical te fis. In pasi. two decades atter burness died, the architee- tural tom that had taken over tis business in turn went under and his architectural archives were thrown out with the trash,  During the Depression, further beset by chrom financial problems Chat had dogged him tor decades, Wrghe retreated onee again co Lal resin and “the valles of the God Almighty Llovd Joneses.” there to fveatt the hind and start an archetectuni school Though he begin the enterprise to rate mones, the likelihood that few prospective students would have the ready cash to pas hor Tatar led ta hrs cence ptonotthe Talesia bollowsbip as ues perunont in ccrununal, Qerarian living: he saw asa combmaton of bibbure and medieval brotherhood of cratt apprentices. Taliesin also became Wright's archi tectural firm, the tellews who worked inat “learning by dere.” as it thes wereapplying John Dewes s unstraamentalism,  Some Wright brographers have chariterized the Tahesin Pellow - Ship as an explottative teudal ss stem many devoted to prosidim the preatmatand be Gonniing consert with a Constant suppl of unpatd servants fo support a svbarrtn way ot tite chat the lixuts bovine  Wrights could othersise dhattord. Bur chat view disrewards the hermae 
quality ot Wright's strategy tor creanve and spiritual survival, Though the Tahesin Fellowship was indeed strictly hierarchical and tar trom democrate. it nonetheless created a nurturing atmosphere that kept ws members going through hard umes, with a strong emphasis on cooperation, self-respect, and: antimateriahoc values, Wright may have been a great arustig exemplar but he was nota great teacher—or perhaps what he knew could net be caught, Though some of his most uMportant work Was done at the Tahesin bellowship during the tygcs, hiy career atter that final ettlorescence was much less distin guished, and Taliesin Associated Architects, as his successor firm was known, produced nothing approaching the quality ot Wright's carher desten atts best.  The positive aspeors of lite at Taliesin were made guite clear by the architect badar Latel, who yomed the tellow Ship soon after ity incep- nonin faa and remained close to his mentor ter the rest ot Wraght’s lite. One of TatePS most amusing recollections concerned Arthur Miller's account of a trip he and Wreht made in res7. two vears betore his death, with Miller and his then wite. Marva Monroe, to Inspect the site tora house they wanted the architect to build ter them ny Connecnwut, During the site visit, Wieht unnated on the property and proudly announced that he had thereby Qlaimed i His design turned outto be se much more unposing than the cheats wished thar mwas never executed. Nonetheless, numerous witnesses co Wirighes buoyant spirit and untlagging energy gave the Cumulative impression thatte spend yust a tew hours with him—even in bis advanced ald age—could be the encounter of a litetime.  Atter the death in ros of Olgivanna Lloyd Wracht pswhe survived her much-alder husband by more than mecnty the years the revival of Wright studies owed much to Bruce Brooks Preittern, who had joined che Tthesin Fellowship as an apprentice im rage and became the chrector ot archives tor the Frank Llovd Wigh) Memorial boun-  danion. Dike many other artises” widows, Oljrvanna did her husband  the disservice of overprotecting his memon, in this case causing Wright scholarship to come toa virtual halt durin the Last years ot her ite. Graduate students and scholars were required to pay exorbi- tant research tees, and pernussien to reproduce Wright draw ints and photographs case accumpanicd by steep charges! was vranted ons if texts were first subnutted tothe Wright Foundation tor approval, Pteitter changed all that. Ele encouraged the arrangement with the Getty Foundation whercbs the Complete Wright archive is ta. avai able to researchers not only ac falesin West but alse through che Getty Website, Under his intelligent supervision, the Wright Pounda- tion sold ott duplicate and lesser versions of Wrghe's drawings. ras ing mones ter the presersatien of the two Laliesins and improving the archival tagihaes in Arizona. And Ptertter also oversaw the publica- ton ot Wright's complete wrinngs ina six-volume uniform edition,  A contury after Wright's reputauen making Prairie School period, number ot his aging buildings faced sertous conservation problems, epitomized bs che engineering program to stabilize the cantilevered eonerete structure ar his best-known house, bales ater of 1a34- to37 in Bear Run, Penasstvania—an Soi millon endeavor Completed inzcoa sce lustranon 2a. Despite a rather cvaggerated reputarion tor leaks skylights. Woehe's achitecture has held up relatively well tor experimental construction, and has continued ta become a part at its landscape setumms——and thes seemungh pare of the architecture—in an unsurpassed integration of the natural and the man-made.  Phe current exterior condinon ot most of Wriehe'’s structures is all the more impressive when compared wath that of other surviving Modernist works Contemporary with his, especially those wath smooth white stucco surfaces in northern climates, whieh in many cases have been in terrible shape. Por example, be Corbusier’s Villa Savoye has greatly detenorated between restorations ot varving thoroughness. as has Mies sander Rohe's Tugendhat bouse  Surprisingly, despite Wirighe'’s prodigtaus prouducisit, the list ot 
his mdaspurable masterpieces is rather short: Unity lemple: the Robie house of rgce -tyroin Chicaeo: Tabesing Fatlnewater: the Johnson Was burldings of rase-resioin Racine, Wiseensin tsce luseranion thy, lahesta Wests and the Solomon Ro Guggenheim Museum ot Teg3-tagein New York. In cach of then, Wright treed himself com: pletely from routine arctitectural responses to house, church, attice building, ar muscum. But ris not nevelty that disaauuishes the few quintessential works of Wright's large output, Rather they hase the qualiey of all great art—-tescem perpetuall new. nocse much “ahead of ther time” cas the owvmoronte cliehe would havese: than aut ot all ume. Phatas the secret fo ther continuing Basxciation tora wide pub- le otherwise unengaged by high-stvle Modern architec cure.  Pryen desscelebrited Wrisht birldings have attracted: partisans, and new arguments have been advanced tor his cocentre large scale schemes fromthe md-ryres te the earch razos, especially Midway Gardens of pur actarg a Chicago beer hall destroved in ruse: the Barnsdall house in bos Angeles, burt by anon herress as a private tes idence and semupubli acts copter: and the bmperial Hotel an odd hy brid of Pagihe Ram styles. Phe dmperial could perhaps be more belovcu by those who had never seen te before i was tom down in res than wowas by those who had actually experienced its cramped. over: designed interiors, The actress Aline MacMahon, whe staved there in rage with her husband. the architece ( hirence Stem, tound Wrihe’s bust scheme less cozy than claustrophobic. as she recalled co me vears Jacer  One constant throunhoue Wrights sescnn five sear cancer was has extraordinary controb ro turmshing his buildings, trom the highly ter tal house be began te buf tor hes tanuly in Oak Park un pSSe to hes more casual, but safbexacunels arranged. houses of the rasgos. Uhat owners of his buildings would have great dltticuley in using any turnt ture other chan che master’s own designs was of course has oitention,  Comntore was nots and Wriehe himselt poked about his nororiausts  torturous chairs. He otten concenved Mirtture for a specific space within a building, the dimensions ot both architec cure and abyect matong ituntikely that one could tind another table tor a particular alcove or another place tor the orginal cable whit were removed trom Its aosigned spat.  His personal caste im decoragve objects Japanese prints, Near Lastern carpets. even plaster casts of € Lissical staruary —impbedl the retined cultural eclecticism made tashionable during his vouth by the Aesthene Movement, but he shunned antique tunmiture that maghe distract attention trom br caretolly calibrated spacal compositions. Tn that respect Wright remained a true product of the Art Nouveau period until the end of his lite. Though the spect attibutes of his Interrors Changed a great deal over the vears—trom earth tones to behter colors, trom dark woods to hgebt. and trom stylized patterns inspired by nature to abstract monts ef an Arablan Nights exod- epm—his Acts and Crafts Movement beliet in the architect as the Supreme arbiter of allaspects of design remained intact  Worishe’s fame remains se firmly established that admirers find at hard toimagine his dong midhte eclipse. Feen though Wrught's exhibe gon histers acthe Mauscum of Modern Art had been extensive, the insatanon did not accord him a tuibscale retrospeetive until rag4. The closest thing before that had been its tyes show of his drawings, mans borrowed trom the Wright organizagon, Which ust three vears atter his death gave permission no doubt more easily than his wich: holding widens would have done during the nwo decades te come.  Wright never formave StoMs the marginal place ip begrudeed him intsantlucntoal “Modern Vehotecrare: Internanonal b hibitian” of ta32—the seo called Enternational Stude shew = organized by Henry Russell Hitchcock and Philip Johnsen. Wright had: already been angercd by Hitcheook’s placime hint among the "New Dradiunartal- sts” rather than che New Proneers” an his defining pase book, Mod  ert Architectiare. Johnsen canvered bi dismissise attirode toward 
Wreht, then almost sixty-five, ina fetter to J. EP Oud, another archi tect inchided in the show: “Frank Elovd Wright was included only from courtesy and in recognition of bis past contabucens.” Who knew, as Johnson admitted long afterward. thac Wight was on the brink ot making a grand Gameback? Within the next five vears the septuagenarian survivor would design fallingwater. the Johnson Wax building, and Tahesin West.  In ryar, when Wright tound our that his work was going to be dis- played in the Internacional Stvle survey alongside that of Raymond Hood (wham he despised) and Richard Neutra shor he disparaged), he threatened co withdraw. It was only the diplomacy ot Wright's great advocate Bewas Mumford (who wrote the introduction to the exhibition catalog’s section on housing that kept the attended egotist in the show. As the crite shrewdly cabled to the architect, appealing to Wright's messianig vision of himself: “There is no more honorable positon than to be crucified benween nwo thieves.”  Wright was no happier at being part of the nunw fittle remembered tygo MOMS exhibition “Two Great Ameneans.” in which he was Paired, improbably but imaginatvely, wich O.W. Grithith, another innovative gents who had suttered decides of neglect and was con- sidered a past master ata time when he would rather have been wark In on new projects. Individual buildings by Wright were the subject of five small MoM) presentanons between tas8 and rasz, bur Wrights last. great retrospective, “Sixty Years of Living Architecture,” was put on by the rival Guggenheim Museum in tas 3. complete with a tall: seale model house, a taverite Me sey exhibition technique atthe time,  The Guggenheim disphas house also harked back to the Ha-o den, the model Japanese temple that Wright saw ar the ius World's Columbian Exposimon in hicago. Joseph Marta Olbrich’s tally tur: nished Summer House for an Art Lover part of the German Pavillon atthe tycg Lousiana Purchase Exposition in Se, Louns, impressed Wright so much that he sent his assiseants there to see it, too, and  he remarned such a tan of world’s furs that his tury at being lett out ot the 1933 Century ot Progress Sposttion in Chiao was scarcely less than his anger at Mto8ts a vear earlier, He was night about beng Shehted by stosty. however, Thatit has given three large retrospes  tives to Mies van der Rohe but rust one to Wright. whose body of work woinfinitely richer and seems more relevant to mans went  first Century concerns, recontiemy the museum's unwaserin prefer- efve tor architecture Chat fits into the narrow definition of Modernism promulgated bs Hitcheock and Johnson, which was mmphertiy memo- rdlized by seme might say etfecavely entombed in—Yoshio Tan: gushr’s much disparaged MoMts expansion of ryut=2o04.  Nooother anhitecs otters a better correeeve to Hitchcock and John- son's distortion of what Modern architecture really meant than Wright, In Mrosta’s roug retrospective catalog, Kenneth Frampton stressed the architecds anterest throughout his career in new: matertals and advanced technologs, which as atodds with the popular mscomep tonot Wrohtas solels preowsupied with natural materials and tradi genalomethods. His quickness fo experment with untested wars of building cercainds resulted in seme of the problems his structures have suttered over the sears. But Frampton notes that Wright developed his own distinetive neocon of the relaconship berween architecture and technology: “By the turn ot the century. Wright had already: posited the idea oat che hurting as a machine, most nerabh in che Larkin Company Adminstration Building” of pyo2-19¢06 m Buttalo idemol ishedan rasch However with Wright, the machine always took ona human aspect. As Frampton observes of the Larkin interior which was inscribed wath improving mottoes inthe Arts and € ratte manner, “This coms cious coocaten oof an bimersenian aura was greads enhanced by the installation of an organ... tor the occasional Comcert atdunchume or in the evening.”  Wright's anomalous place inthe history of Modernisny stems trea  his being atonce central to and vet estranged trom it Fle presents even 
greater dithculoes in that his exceptional emphasis on the organic unity ofevervthing trom the Landscape to tableware makes the separation ot any partot bis wholly integrated ensembles a grave contradiction of his Most basic intention, For example. a large cable lamp created tor the hiving reomtot the Robie house, with an oblong leaded-giass shade that echoes the great canulesered root of chat structure, makes Considerably less sense when shown in iselanon. Sal worse, the lucrative trade in Wrebes decorative designs, propelled as prices soared during the rodeos, hastened the stripping of the leaded glass windows, light fix tures, hardware, and other details trom some of bis most important  houses, As the Wright scholar Donald Hottmann has written:  Architeture...can be distinguushed trom the other arts be use ay essentially cavironmental, spout. tea place and meant to stay put. dna Wright building. the deculs are Conceived as minor parts or dependencies of the fabric ised: they also become its ornamental Howerag. or tull development as abstract pattern, Pheu character is thoroughly archirectome and usually expres: sive of baste motits in the pling or elesatens.. 2 Dhis means the dev ot collating Werht’s arctitecture in stray fragments repre: sents nothing so much asa contradimenonin terms, a sviolatien of  the whole spirttot his art or its spirttay a whole,  And this. by extension, esplains why Wrights all encompassing view of architecture ay a vital force tor soaal cohesion can never be cap: tured within the walls of any gallery,  bor proatotwhy that isso, we muse return to the Mast evocative book ever written about Wroeht, av Autofsograpey First published in rasa. heanaly revised by him and remsued in 194 3.and republished posthumoush with Wrights tutther Corrections in rytt. this preat clays of American autobogeaphy comparable with those at Ren-  Jamun Franklin, Ulysses 8. Grint, and Henry Adams— has been shown  by scholars over the sears to be riddled with tabricatons, prevarica tons. am nusrepresentations, But itembodies a deep trad about as duthor and his work tharno other publaagon bas cver captured Speaking of himself in the third Peren ha cumanern sin of grandiosip asa corn hos in Wiscensin, Wreghe says. [Has rata don made a world ter himself protey much as he would have it exeepr where rodely intruded upon by torees that would and could have wWaotherwise.” Elsewhere in An Avtofaouraple he writes ina similar vein." Phe artouor bang in the world is aor the same chime as making Shiteta cer about anit A werldot his own, to whigh Weysbt Could invite the rost of burmanits, way what he was atten Phat is the kes te  bis arehotecture,  Throughout des Avtedcoueapday the author cites bis tacher’s ara his awn abiding dove of music. The architect was an accomplished hesbourd miustaan, and although Bach and Beethoven were fis favorite composers, the best analog to Winehes personae and artis: tho aspiratens can be tonpdin Richard Wanner Dheir litespans over lapped tor almost htteen vears. and there are many pomts of biographical Gomparigon berween them: the adoring mother and ats tant tather: the devoted bur spurned first wete; the marital scandals, dleginmmate Ghuldren, and sensational press caserages the scrapes with the daw: the constant timamial crises and the uraguenchable tust tor fuxures the anachremisty dandsisin, the wathdrawab toa nunab re doubt where the master could rengn unchallenged: and the visdant Jong Tived widest as keeper of the crernal fame  Abows all Warner and Woabt shared a behet athe suprennigs of the Geamithiontoork. the complete work ot art that was the dream of tuneteenth centaur vistoranies wher foresaw the disiiteyation at culture atrer the Industral Revelutwei, Ons by radios Ghaneings the werkl—or fading that, creatine an alternative to it-—aould art be  saved, In Trestasr send feoides the solipsistis Winer wrote, “Nedhst  ware Be ice dre Wel" bimssctham the world rod. Tike him,  
Wiehe saw his personal creations as universal, Phatis why the uranic achievement ot Frank Dlovd Wright still communicates so directh to so wide an audience of admirers, who can find in him a separate, selt contuined, comtortingly consistent, and pleasingly confident universe  toinhabit,  wo  CHARLES RENNIF MACKINTOSH  IN THE FRAGMENTED and scemuimgh directiontess world of aventy- frst-century arc hire ture, no cone pt continues fo beguie the popular imMaginagen mare than that ot “organ” design, The bagering beliet thar all the parts of a comprehensive archueceural scheme can best be orchestrated as a seamless whole under the direcdon ob one designer reflects a Vearming tor Complete integration im architeerure and saws much about the publics ceaseless fiscination wath the figures who ar the cura ot the tpwenteth century broughe chasidealeo the buldiny are more fully than ever before. Theirs was ne mere personal expresston bat part ofa widespread reaction aginst the cnormods soc tab lista. cations Brought about bs the Industrial Revolution, a response that TCSOILITOS CTO ARE Eo period ab energy sental change caused by exen more overwhelming technolo economic, and political developments  Three great proponents of that all inch) approach whe thear ished in the earh osenteth century sall command a fellowing tar larger than could be Glanmed by av meen brstcentury architect, ever international stars bhe Prank Gehry and Santuge Calatrava In the United States. Prank Lloyd Wrrsht remtains the un hailenmed and unchallengeable idol da Catalonia, Anton: Gaud: has ascended  tothe status ofa verttable national sang with publis respanses to hits 
idiosyncrans landanirks providing a iitmus test tora host of podinical, relnmeus. and cultural attitudes. Andin Glisges. aonee mighty trad- ingecenter now dete wath few coonom resources Save cultural rourinia, Charles Renme Slackintosh, who was born there mm i868, has become the basis of lucrative loci nndustes and a workdawide cult.  Its not dithcule to explain the particular appeal at Mackintosh’s work. Bxtreme and senking, bis most tameus desagns—tor furniture, not architecture—were cxeniphtied by the high-backed Chairs sath which he furnished the dozen remarkable Glasgow teargoms be ove: cuted tor Kate Cranston between tsye ind perc. These chairs are quite antike any others onade betore or sic, Flagrant exaggerated and patently umpractial, netoonly by the standards of the then: nascent Modern Meavement but abe by those of the waning Victorian era, the chairs of Mackintosh nonetheless dramatized the act ot sit- ung with vreater authonts than any af the more “tuneuonal” desauns Jater produced by more renowned architcegs, includine: Alvar Aalto, Marcel Breuer le Corbusier, and fudwig Mlies San det Rohe. Indeed. the troe fincnot ofa Miickintosh chair was to look arrestin a spe cifle architectural setang, and bis designs did that spectacularly well,  been hy themsecbes and outside che singular settings tor which they were concerned, Mackintosh’s chaies retain a stroma hieratic presenve, One of the most memorable photographs of Prince Charles and Provess Dura durme ther protracted public disphivs of marital discord showed them slumped awas tram cach other in reprodue hens of Mackintosh’s chairs tor fis Arse Street fea Rooms of NeS-rNyy. Though che andisguised scowls and Contorted body lane guage of the warring royal couple suggested exacth the opposite of nobility, che stately call backs of the obairs, surmounted by broad oval cutout motits recalling the moar crests ob Japanese aristocrats, invested the sad spectacle with an inviedably regal presence.  Today, Mackiatosh is particularly resered in Japan. whose chisse  calartand architecture had adeep ettect on his work, asataid on thar  ot his London-based cantemporatios Vubres Beardsley, BW. Godwin, and James Abbott McNeil Whistler Since Japan's reopening to the Westin iss s.ithas heen by turns xenophobic, adept at absorbing torenen influences, and worshuptul ot fapanesque tendencies in West: erm desi. One ot the most amusing manitestations of the batter isa Japanese come book biography of Mackintosh, published in ray 4 and part at a series called Geniuses Without Glory. The caption to ome oot the cartoons panels declares, “This is the original torm of modern art, several decades ahead ot ars time while another addresses the timeless quality so many peaple And in che architect's destinies: “When we dook atin ip has been so perected chair we don't tech any strangeness.”  Bur one could hardly expect a come book to reflect advances in scholark rescarch when even senous publianons on Mackintosh perpetuated the same myths and moapprehensions about his lite and work for more than halla centars, Phe sourge of the standard inter pretation of Mackintosh as an architectural archetype ot the tragi- cally misunderstood tnovator ultimately destroyed by a philistine society was Thomas Howarth’s Charles Renae Mackintosh anid the Miader: Morementot rasa, long the essential rand only: studs of the architect, who died. torgotten and destitute, in 1g 28,  Howarth’. lite-and-works is one of those paradosial scholarly  efforts chats hindsimeht provokes mixed emotions. He started his  rescatsb ino tag outsell an accet brive intelectual opontusm ae che onset ot the Bhizy matched by fobn Sumrnerson, who in that vear of woe bean bis peerless Georgia Pondom, Howarth commenced just mnoome, tor although at had been qust a dozen sears since Milas kinteash died, the last sursivors among his closest Collaborators and patrons weld sean exit the scene. When Howarth’s book was finally pub- lished. a doven years atrer he bewan it at seta mation ao toayer  reassessment ot Mackintosh’s reputation ant was instrumental ut  scouring fim aommich-higher place in history; the book remains an 
invaluable collection of primary source maternal. (Howarth was alse an astute collector ot Mackintosh’s long-undervalued turniture and decorative objeurs, The sale of his boldings ac Christie's in bondon in rogg. sis sears betore his death, tetehed ¢2.2 mulion.|  However no historical writing is tree from the biases of che times that produce i, and Howarth’s Mackaitosé, first issued atthe height ot the International Style’s intluence, tally reflected the then-presalent atotude that the only signifeant nineteenth and twentieth-century architecture and design was of the reductivist sort thar culminated in the nexorable trumph of Modernism, In that respect Howarth sim ply tollowed the lead established by Nikolaus Pevsner with his highly influential Promeers of the Moder Movement: Frou Willner Marrts te Walter Gropars ot to3z6. the first book to inehide an important posthumous discussion of Mackintosh, Ty prolly, Pevsner would cite only those examples of architecture and desian that supported: his preference for minimalist aesthetes, merely one of a much wider range of innovative tendencies pursued during che period under dis- cussion, Pevsner praised Mackintosh’s School of Artin Glasgow, which opened in pSa9, because it “leads on to the nwenticth century.” However, though the historian percened that the School of Art's “transparency of pure space will be tound in all Mackiotosh’s pring pal works.” he decried if eapressionistie aspects, which intluenced  later buropean desygn trends that “held ep the progress of the main-  stream ot modern architecture,  lo be sure. there are components of Mackintosh's architecture, and especially his interior destyns, that stall seem quite contemporary to thase who Game of ave during the hevdas of high Modernism. The monobthic massing of his buildings (inspired by the severe cles ations of Scottish baronial castles: the strong profiles ot his turniture (otten encased ma carapace of paint to emphasize surtace rather than mate: nalicand the monochromane palette of bis room schemes ba striking  departure trom the rrotot color, pattern, and texture characteristic of  Vin corian interiors: all purportedly pointed, mn the tar-teom-obective interpretations of Howarth, Pevsner Siegtried Guedion, and other mideenturs polemicists, to the Pharonie puriey and thus mnate supers anty ot che International Ste.  fn fact many of che signature elements in Mackintosh’s work dur ing the bustest decade of his career fram tNee to race, can be found inthe work of mans of his Cortemporanes as well) Mackintosh’s very tew domestic designs owe a clear debt to the houses at C.F A. Vovses, the Pnglish Arts and Cratts archatect whose updated Tuderesque cot tages, stripped ot quaint details and clad in whitewashed pebbledash Hao stivcolke mortar ageremate mixed with small stones to create a rough texture, were more imaginativel): organized than Machine tosh’s residences, which were notably repetitive in their L-shaped tleor fans. And Voyses’s sanations an his primary theme of the upper middle-class Country retreat were more inventive than Mackintosh’s rote revvelings,  Lhe turmiture designs of the Vienna Secession, and specifically these ot such members ot the Wiener Werkstatte as foset Hoffmann and KRoloman Moser had plased a decisive parton Mackintosh’s Mose aways trom the sinuous lines ot Art Nouveau and toward the keametrie and grid monts of his supportive Austroin counterparts, That change can be dared precisely to Mia kintosh’s sasit te Viennaon tycoa, Where his Scartish Room installanion was shown at the Pighth Secessromist Fvhibitian,  White walled rooms were not unbeard af in ryoc. when Mackin: tosh and his wate cand trequent collaborator), the artist and desipner Margaret Macdordad, transtermed their first Glasgow: flat ite: an  environment that ene GOnTOM Por ey VISITOr recorded as being, “amas  bso white and Clean-looking. Walls. cerhng and turmiture have alll the virgimal beauty of white satin” isco dhustration aan. A decade car her Standen -the great Ares and ( ratts Gountry house in West Susses  designed by Philip Webb and decorated by Morris & € ompany—had 
Jarge expanses of white-painted walls mit principal rooms, not merely in the utilitarian spaces where whitewash or distemper were traditionally used instead of more costly colored payments. Even the New York apartment done ap in isos by Elsie de Wolte cane of the first professional woman devorators: tor herself and her Companion, Phsabeth Marbury, had the white walls that bs the end ot the nine- teenth century were becoming a tashionable alternative to subtuse Nictortian miteriors,  One of the clearest signs of Mackintash’s having at last attained a secure phice in history was that the catalog tor the ryye retrespective ot his work scen at Ghisgow's Melellan Galleries and New York's Metropolitan Miuscum of Are made ne excessive claims tor bis sali nae squture. Phe dong-dotnant portran of Mackintoshosket head bys Pessner executed at till lenech by Efowarth, and reduced to the car- toonish outhne of the Japanese Gomic-book versson—was that et the lonel rebel who tlourshed but brieth betore being brought bow by bis uncaring, unvemprehending interiors, Architecture is an art term with no figure as thay oas Vincent van Gogh. The sobriety needed to win bukding commissions guards againac much. if not all erratic behavior in architecture. But the Romant stereotype ot the tortured create atemus dies hard, and te became an article of tauh om the Mackintosh cult.  One of the most comarkable aspeets of the essays inthe rage exhe bition catalog was that although they dispensed with recened ideas about his ite and carcer, Mackintosh emerged trom the demwvtholo wang ws an cnormously sampathet tyre all the same. fuliet Kinchin provided a trenchant analysis of the economie and social sendinions that made hate-ninereenth-century. Glasgow especially  open to design innmocation. As she wrote:  Troan be argued chat the tangible torn ot [Mackintosh’s} archs-  tecture and design expressed a distinctive Givi Comscrousness  and a sense of cosmopohtin regional denne, while ale reflect: ing the mans conten and tensions that living in) Glass entailed. On the one hand. Mia kintosh’s stvlisa. assurance and theatneal panache sce in cane with the buevanes of the ary’s COOnomy it iitermiatonalism, and its clianate of thrastimg. com petave individualism. On the other, his work's excessive ten yon and exaggeration point ton ideelogs under theear and te the disruptive potential ot che prevarbng seal, economic, and teshnologeal torces. Stanlar creanve censians characterized other great manufacturing centers where the "New Art alse known as Are Nouveau amd Nanome Romantiosn: tlourished  caities dike Purin, Tai, Nanas, France: Cticapes and Brussels.  And. she might have added. Barcelona,  Most carher wotmg on Viagkintosh’s Glasgow had tocused on the obvious contrast between his raretiod desten schemes and the gritty tidustral venter that during bis ime was the second city at the British Poprre Yer Kinghin showed thar Glasgow already had a century: fone histor of what mht be Caled competitive dewonating., which puca high prema oon onahts and startling etteces. An arast ot Miackintosh’s cocenton individualin was therctore able te sitcceed in hus hometussa to anextent that would hase been tar more dithcult ia tradition bound communities. Kinchin’s essay. a superb addition te the lrerarure on Mackintosh, demenstarcd chara the studs at arehe tecture anid design. an understanding of the focal Culture as essentual iid tec otter overooked an tivar or the Lirger tarces thar shape the More visthle torts burldinges anid cities take  Reintoring her approach was Daniel Robbans's essay on the Glas now Schoolat Art the progressive rsttutian supported with enhphe ened selt interest by the ats s industrial leaders to proside chenn with fo gal talene tor ther burgeoning teghra al and monuba tari apasl  nes The schoolewhose cast boldime of iSe7 1 Sua and west wing of 
1g07—ryoy sseetlhustragon sbi would eventually become the crown ing achtevements ot Mackinrosh’s thwarted careers—allowed its most famous pupil, the sen of a pele inspector to receive a first rate architectural and design educauon and te be launched. by che late Ds8s, into the professional class. [The school’s idealistic director Frangs Herbert. *kra” Newbery, became one of Mackintosh’s Strongest advouites. +  Not the least of the opportunines the Glasgow School ot Art ottered was the chance for young men to meet the talented young women whe made up a notable pornon of the insatunon’s earallment atactme when cocducanon, while sall rare in other disciplines, was Increasingh common in the apphed are. ft was at the school that Maskintosh and his best trend and tellow student Herbert MoNaur encountered two jufted. spirited, independently well to-do sisters, Margaret and Frances Macdonald, The siblings’ private incomes allowed them to enroll as day students, while the men, of more mad- est backgrounds, worked as architectural drattsmen by day to pas tor their Classes ar night. Charles and Nlargaret paired otf, as did Herbert and Frances, both couples shanng a Romantic vision ofanew kind of artand desiin that could elevate mankind tea higher spiritual plane. They soon became knowns the Four an inseparable unit thar formed amoyement of ts own within the Glasguw Sehoul,  Janne Helland’s ryge Mackintosh catalog essay. Collaboration Among the Foun” emphasized how inextricably bound up Mackin tosh’s designs. and tertunes—were with those of the torgotten Mar waret Macdonald. Itshould not have taken so long-- Mackintosh dhed mm cars, Ma donald tive vears laiter—tor the record to be set straight. He somenmes signed works with both sets of them initials though scholars debate whether this meant actual Collaboration, conceptual Vospiration, or merely, in the case of his series of bocanteal water solory ora tors, her prowmity when he parted them. Macdonald  often contributed the decorauye panels that imparted such a haunting  air fo Maskintosh’s intertors and) turmeure. Her beaten metal or leaded glass mountings of wraithtike tentale fares Isvmbolism that carned the Four the alternate epithet the Spook School gave his cabr- netey the preciousness ona rebquars, and ber gessovd triezes of ethe- real spirits brought a Howing, curvibnear dynamite the msastent vergeaboy of his interiors. Their works are loaded wath sembolism, Prompuny e\travagant overinterpretigans bs some scholars, parth- ularly those who see the veusre ot the hour as tarrky dripping in sex- ual meanmy. Qecultimagery fas been anottier focus of specalanon, Some think the Couple's almost obsessive use of The rose mont ports quite clearly tothe Rosierucian Movement, which enjoved a revival atthe tur at the twenneth century,  Troy netuncommen tor the contents of a traveling exherbition co change during the Course of a lengthy tour because of space restris- tions, Conservauion restricuens, or works unavailable tor extended loan. But the was ain which the rye Glasgow retrospective “Charles Rennie Mackintosh” was altered when iearrived ar the Metropolitan Muscum later thar sear was an entirely ditterent manter. Reconcen cd by J. Stewart Johnson, then the Metropolitan's consultint fer archi cecture and design. the New York version birgely dispensed with two signiticant issues whose previcns neglect was redresscd by the Glas: gow presentation and its catalog tie necessity af scemp Mackintosh not as an isolated arose but asa highly characteristre produce of has time and place. and the umporninge his wite and helpmate had ua bonging his stunmingls comprehensive deste schemes te truntian, The show AS SCH AT the Metropolitan Wibs about a percent smaller both in thoor space and number ofebjcuts disphiscd. bat chit was not ay disturbing as the face that almost all ot the rereted artifacts were by the least famous three of the Foas, Similarly dinunished were see uons dealing with the wider Glasgow scene. while new libelig througheut reverted to the old Pfawarth fine and thereby contra  dicted the Catalew essavisty’ valuable corrective cttorts, 
There has been an understandable proclivity ter the publie and critics abhke toast Mackintosh as Scothind’s Frank Llevd Wright. bue despite their sthired advogaay of “ronal desipa” there are few feud. mate parallels henvcen them. Wright exsceuted some tour hundred buildings, Mackintosh ao mere tourteen. Whatever the superticnil resemblances between some of their furniture desis, the seamless flow of interior space that was among Wrghts most revolutionary accomplishments is rarely found im che architecture ot Mackintosh tregardless of Pevsner’s assertion to the contrary. Hermann Muthe- stus, the German architect and writer whe was amon: Mackintosh's Most avid Contemporin supporters, once perceprvels noted that the Scotsman tended to desien indasidual rooms and then wrap build ings around them, The distuneave feeling one vets during a wath through even Mackintoshs masterpiece, the Glasgow Schoolat Art — dosernes of dazzling but unrelated spaces med woth little discernible Joie amd noe continuity ar all—bears out Muthesius’s observation all too well,  Purthermore, Wright was preternaturally rosihentas aman and an artist, regenerannyg himself and his architeeture time and again i the face ob every arisis, One vear edder chan Mackintosh, Wright was among the ver few avant garde architects atthe cucn ot rhe acenneth sentars to Gaeve ont a successful new direction for himsclt. He. like Mackintosh, sultered cnormoush as che vogue tar Classicism bein to intensity around feta, After the catastrophe of World War [ Classiaisin was evsngiore widely cmbraced. and i wrecked a number of other unconventional arctutectural Careers, including these of Voysev and Hotimann, And though Wright alone among them sur vised protesstomally, he was seventy lw the time his resutuoon was complete.  In temperament Mackintosh more closely resembtcd Wright's earls emploser and cautionary figure, Pours Sullivan Both Mackintosh  and Sullivan were inveterate ormamentalists, but their often excessive  attention to decorative detail Could sere off Cast canscious prospes- tre vhents: Despite havime worked in barge architectural ottices, both bevame known as dithcuit colleamiues, The predispesinon that the avo men bad to bouts of depression was no doubt exacerbated by their Alooholismy or vice versa a tatal Haws ina profession where a client's trust is 2 Prerequisite for geniiig, work  The downward path of Mitekintosh’s career is nearagsveb visible at Auchinibert, the Stirhnusbire Country house he began to design at fuas tor the Shand tamils cancestors of Prince € hardes’s second waite, nee Canutla Shand’. The burlding was situated atop a steep slope, but Mackintosh setdem bested hupsclt te hearse the more congental attraytions af the local pub oar the bottom of the hill. There. mare often than nor he was tound drunk by his exasperated patrons. who eventually treed hing and bere anocher architect to finish the job,  Far tram being crushed bs heartless patrons, Mackintosh enjoyed the estraundinary forbearance of hos small bur loyal Glasgow chen- tele. some af whoo induleed tus moods and erratic behavior bevond all reasonable expecnitions, Neo doubr his head was cured by the entreaties of his admiring Viennese colleagues, whe urged him to rosette i their supposedly more apprecagye fats amove precluded by the ourbreak at World Ware Lo iione of the toge exhibition cata few ’s niost acute Obsersations. Che architeccural historian and ering Gavin Stamp wrote than “the tragedy ot Miackintesh as an part that... Hermann Muchestus and Joset Hotta made a brian but naive Glaswegnin believe thar he Gould play the role of an interna nomal ture. thas making hing ampaticnt with the environment that had made and sustained han.  (tthere is another twcnnerh century architece te whom Mackin tosh omught beomore tellomly compared ats. surproingh coongh, Lous Raha. On the surtace, an analouy between the decurauye saauity of Mackintosh and the Brutalist asports of Kahn mmiyht seem absurd  Yer the buildings ot bork men were deeph inthienced by the sassaye 
masonry and defensive position of medieval Scottish fortresses, bach architect was bighly adepr at inventive detarling of a sort pardacularls admired bs ther Goprotesstonals, And both Mackintosh and Rahn excelled at dramanzing vertical corculagon tn ther serietures, desiin- Ing staircases with torcetul psy cholownalettects, The case stairway of Mackintosh’s Glasgow School otf Art. which he unprovised to con nect his original ease building to his west wang, as every bit as mystery ous and surprising as Kahn's tamious ovtindrical stairways at his Yale Art Gallery addition.  Phourh the work of both men Could otten seem awkward and an- resolved —the result ota relative lack of experience in both instances, as opposed te the myriad opportunites Wrihe had to work out his ideas and Jearn from bis mistikes -Mackintosh and Kahn could: be uncannily adepe ar sacralizing the small rituals of daily lite. Thea willingness to expose themselves bs proposing designs tar out of the Nunstredm ot contemporary pracoce, by sccing them work as anart dnd nota business, and by remanune taithtul to ther vision eat che architect as the great mtesgrator of society set them apart trom their tellow protessionals tar more chan any ceadib cecagmizable motits,  [has all tea easy to be seduced bs the superficial allure ot some Mackintosh designs, and thus sme at the recurrent pleasures ot his work is Go contemplate the strange distortions and odd contortions at the objects he desipred with such evident passion, Mackintosh’s ant thenwually tortunate contemporary—one Whose genius for rem enting Chassteal tradition, unmatched since John Soane, enabled him to enjoy the long. lucrative career dented to the Scotsman—wwas Tadwin butens. After batvens visited Miss Cranston’s newhy opened Buchanan Street Tea Rooms in t8er, he wrote to his wite daughter of an car! who had been viceros of Endl thar he tound Mackintosh’s rsterior decorative  scheme “all very claborately simple.” Ie took the world almost a cen-  tury to comprehend how wrong thatbon mot tral was.  [LUDWIG MIES VAN DER ROE  MPRE DEATH CANNOT spare architects tram oushaps of cuming that ean attest sotteal standing long bevond an artse’s drtetime. As the tese conrnnial or Ludwig Shes van der Robes birth approached, it became more amd more dithcult ta ansist that he had indeed heen ane ofthe greatest architects of the twentieth century, lot alone of alltime. The Postmodernists had demonized Mies as the pnmarn source of the visual stern and spiritual stagnation of fare Modernism to such an extent thar has admirers Could onls be gratetul that his death tp rgég spared tum an ordeal perhaps worse than the capphing archritts that sontined him tea wheel hare during hes tinal dectde.  Noeader in that reselr aginst Mics. which beean well betore his demise. was none other than Philip fottasen. Asa sour man he idalved Mies as ome of the founding fathers ot the Modern Mlove ment and brought bun co Ameria in middle age he copied trom and collaborated with bits aod told ave he retionneed both the Miesiin philosophy and its reductisist aesthictie. As carly as tesa lohnsen  observed:  Sios has transtermed ordinary building nite poetry, but his the ores. ds faras theory goes, would afse tit halt the factories ra  this gountrs. Sfies based bis aetoan three things: economy, 
scrence, technologs; of course he was right. It’s pust that Pam  bured, We are all bored  Far better remembered bas been the subwersive Slogan Gained by Robert Venturi in his iconoshastic and seminal Comtpleainy and Cosmnadicty ot wn Architecture of robe, “Less isa bore” ashy play on Mies’s most famous dictum. “Lessis more.” The mid: roses were the begining of the end tor hush Modernism, and to a younger generation of archi tects and crimes, the tall budding formula desised by Mies in Ger many dumng the pasos pbutonls realized by himein Amenoa during the roses: had come to represent all the halings of che Internagonal Sevle, the instieutienal manitescation at Modern architecture thar by the tu6os had imposed a bland unmtormits on sky lines around the world.  Starting in ty2t, Mies proposed a visionary series ef high: and low-rise office buildings that became the proton pe tor what he called “skin and bones architecture”: the stecl or conerete-skeleton strug: tore clad in a tauc curtain walbot glass. In due ceurse this became the most charaeterpte commercial budding tormacer the jventicth cen- tury. But Mies’s pervasive Contribution to architecture cast such a Jong shadow that his other unpartant aghievements—espectally the open plan. which he devised tor his houses of the rezcs ca develop: ment often misattnbuted to Prank Plovd Wright. who never took the idea as tar as Mies didi--were Larvely obscured, and bis reputation unyustly suttered because of the countless liteless amitations his sks setapers prompted,  However by the end of the res8os, thanks in large part to the excesses Of Postmodermsm, much of Mies’s architecture began to look wood again, even to Venturi. As he contessed in Michael Black  woods rose documentary Alm Vues:  OF allthe things Dhave ever written and said. there ts nothing Pwant te take back. except maybe the term “Less isa bere.”  oo brom our positon aaw, Phase no doubt that Maes pone of the great masters of this century and of architecture, And all architects should kiss the feet ot Mies van der Rohe because af  his accomplishment and what we have learned trom him,  Learning from Mies, howesen was perhaps more easily achieved by aninsighttul scholar of archirectucal history ike Venturi than by ron: tineers crudely exploring che master’s lessons tor financial gain, That whe parades of Miesiarusm: thoagh ots onpinater bebeved he haa established uarversai models that made ir possible tor all archirects ta design clear finchomal, economical scructures atter his example, this architecture was in tact so dependent on highly personal tactors—his Inflate sense of proportian. bis obsessive umterest in detath and his keen Instinct tor dramtth contetst in scranges ranuing from the bucolicalls tural co the densely urban—chat his principles remained woetulls meemplete athe bands of bis less-sattentive followers, bo say nothing Ot His COhaANS CORTITOFICITODS.  The same ceuld be sardat Prank Thowd Wright. who was as devoted a pedagewue as Vhes ver paradowialis, was no more able to perpetu ate an architectural tradition bevond his titetume. But rhe Miestan conundrum isa case unto atsedt. As Pames Ingo Freed, one at the tew independent unded architects to emerge trom the Mies school, said  in Black wood’s documentary  Mies reduced his bugidings te the absolute Platomi. pure min mum evocation af the de. Amd then there was ne phive to ge Andot there as no plaice tages itis cealls nota style that as useful ter anvbods che. He was able to unflucoee a ten whe did yori work. bur tea inostat begame a road tea deteneraqon af sensdbtlits cather than a hembrening of sensibiliny. And the traweds is that there sven. litte good Miestan work atter Mics  You had to have his uneotipromusing magure Mies. atter allay 
the bad Conscrence of today’s architects because they think back to Ais uneompromusing Comnmutment, to the excellence of the execution and tothe pertecuon of the deta. And it vou don’t have that ven can't do wood Miestan work. And even tt vou de  have tt, What can vou de bur replicate it?  And as Freed observed at the Muscum of Modern Art ssmposium held during the Mies van der Rohe Centennial Fshibition in ra 86:  Mies desertbed tas architecture as “almost nothing” [Pernahe nibest and atter almose nothing the onis ching vou can dois  nothing, which os vers difficult,  That respecttul understanding of the perplesin underlying mint malism—the better one does the fess one Gin do wath twas isu herently acknowledged during the dechne ot the Modernist hegemony inthe cases. One reasan was that vers betle “Mbesran” archites ture was actoally: Miesnan at all, but rather no more than expedbent con struction by speculators who saw minimahlsm not as a medium tor clegane saphficanon and techoieal perfection buconk as an oppor: tunity tor cheaper caster and therefore more profitable real estate development than had been possible betore. Costly materials, mtricate detading, and tune-conmsanung coittsmanship—all ot which were pre- sent imsuch archetypal Mies works as his Barcelona Pavihon of rear8- Tazyin Spain see lustragon gat, Rarnsworth house of bug ss tas nat Plano, Ithnors, and Seagram Building of 1964-1458 in New York dsee Ulustration ghi-- were largely dispensed with by his imitators, [twas the cooneme mpetus behuid that shitt away trom Mies’s exacang prtcre ples land away tram the ornament and decoranon of conventional ofhve buildings up to that times rather than any new philosophical cothusnism, thar established the International Style as the tavered  mode of the Amencan corporate establishment ateer World War Uh  Mes himself had a thoroughly developed mtellectual cand indeed spirnitual—-reason tor evervthimg he did as an architect (though was regrettabh clear that the same Giboot be sat of his arora position as Amanot atta But those behets became tn time as unfashionable as his architecture. Pairk typroal ot the scorn with whih Mlies’s philo sophical commurment—among the mest extensive that could) be claimed bs a Modern architest—eame to be regarded is demanstrated  in this passage trom the crits Charles fenc hss Vauderss Mra emerits nt  Andbitectere of revs. published tear sears atten Mies’s death  Nomunaloc philosophers and pragmaitats, who bebeve that ane versals do notin tact exist, would find the Platonte statements  of Mies mosth qust humorous, because thes ze to sach terrcihy  Pains to project a nor-esistenat reatinn.... Notanty docs Mies refer te Aquinas’ termulatnen fin the Sree Phentovica: ade ateereret ofelle fo" the cantormity of object and anteble er” ] expla. but be aise seems co uphold the ructher scholastic dow croe that il the apparent phenomena of this world are actuals mere svinbols tor a greater reality Ing belund them... Une versal essences may indeed undertie all appearances, contrary te wharthe qommudiest believes, but the dea that thes are all neo metrical reetaneles er even geometric is farcieal. In fact wien we test the architecture of Mies agaist more developed bebets, wetind thar his world, like thator farce. is based on the radical reduction of things tea few sample tormulie and rigid laws that are made te stand tor acceber ceabty. oo Tnother words. thane does fake Mies toe sertousts. one starts ceally to bebeve chat fine mere unportant and nourishing than trageds or thats  Walt baked. unusalent arcdore rare ps better than an ing bisive one  By those standards. one would also have ta dismiss the efforts of the  Zen Buddbists, the fansenises, the Shakers, and other aroups diruehout 
history that have purposely promoted a cult of sumpheain ay a means obattaimag spirttual purity, not visual poserty, There yin hagt, some:  thing remarkably akin to the Zea way in Mies’s pronouncement:  In architecture. the proportions that are important are nor dlwars the proportions of the things themsclyes. Otten itis the Proportions besecen the things that are important, There may  be nothing there, but the proportions are still there.  But Jencks was atleast Gorrect in Gatkentratuig bis argument on Mies’s philosophical interests, misinterpreting them though he did. That crucial aspeceiot Mies’s aritude foward design was earls and succincdy dealt with in Franz Schulze’s Mies naetader Robes A Corath al Brography of ross. the firse tull-scale creatment ot the architect's lite and works. One of Schulze’s most helptul insights in his discussion at Mies's philosophy as at pertains to his architecture was that the designer intentionally ditterentiated between appearance and reality tv structure, As Schulze wrote ot Mobes’s Atumn Memorial fall ot 1u4s—1ag6 on the campus the architect deswned tor the Hhnors Insa-  cure of Technology i Chreago:  The real structure... though suppressed, is expressed: what one knows os there is not Whatone sees, but is made evident by what one sees, Mies’s reasoning is tortuous, but ever so much his owrr to demonstrate that the supporting steel trame is the basis, or essence, of the building. ints indicated. rather chan shown, externally: to acknowledge thar what shows, moreover is not  fact bur ssimbal of tact  Mies contrived the Limous steel corner detail of that brick and-ghass building to look Ike a “found” clement—a pair of exposed E-beams  flanking a squared ott columm—butin truth i was decorative, a tact  Mies signitted by stopping the corner before at reaghed the ground and having te come terest ena clark nonloadhersing brick pliath, Hn any case, Mies could not have dete the true seracairal members exposed because the loi re code remulatens requited hint to give them a hreproot sheathing) Che burlklan’s real loadbeartngs appara tus—tts steel skeleton frame is likewise sovisible, and this treatment, in Schulve’s usetul termulation. was Mies’s “aaa ot distmguishing bepween the primar stracture of the burldiar and the secondary structure of the sku”  Such highly arbutrary handling of seeming fanctionab design eotmponcots Wars actually only a metaphor ter tunction, However Mies was comhdent enough as anarist to bend and even break his own rules When he found it desirable. and bas profound grasp of the necessart relation, and cecastortal Gonthet, between der Sehear rer das Sear seenune and beme! attorded tuna teeedout with which he could tarn his Constructions into works of high art.  Mos. who was born in Aachen on e886, had touted rormal educatiea but high intlestual asprragens, and was quite proud of his attain ments as an autodidact. From che aves of ten to thirteen, Mara Lud wag Michael Mies che rook his coders amaden name, Rohe, and the arrogated Dutch fardadle oobthaae “van der” when he was thirty five attended his nomerowi's Deearadude woathedral sc hool:and Cone luded his teaming with two vears in the low) Geeerbeschude (rade school rather than the Gyemasaea thar muycht have been Chosen bad irnot been decided thar be woould alumarely enter his family's stone sutting busisess. Seane historians fave uiterted thar the Catholic phase ot his education wars the primary source of fis subsequent inter esto the rhought ot the schobiste Chun bh fathers. Bat i na rirens row  with Schulze. the aghisistot the Aachen Cathedral Schoed was  sure that ueither [Mies’s| relgieus studies nar bis ceading: in  Laon broughe himine contuct with those ava philosophers, 
Saine Augustine and Saint Thomas Aquinas, whom he cited often  in his mature vears amd associated with his Cathole veuth.  A challenging study of Mies’s philosophical ideas as thes mntormed his architecture is to be tound in Pritg Neumever’s essay Mies as Selt- Educaton” an Mies car der Robes Architect usb diucator of tase, another incthe outpounng of publications prompted by Mues’s cone tennial. Neumever did not overstate the case tor the ettect these carly e\perences had on Mies, bur he made extremely suggestive use of the  tacts of his early ite, and noted that  the relynoush biased education Mies resened ar The Cathedral Schoolin Aacheu planted a specail disposition tor the absolute and metaphysical anda tendenes towards a comparable world  VGN.  Ir was not, however until Mies Game across a cops of the mtellecrial ournal Die Zaekrorfe (° Uhe Furare7) while an apprentice in an Aachen architectural office in tac chat his interest in the lite ef the mind was awakened, One essay in that issue was written by Alois Rochl. a professor ot philosophy atthe Friedrich Walhelm University in Berlin, trom whom Mies received his tirst cidependent Commission  tor a house five sears later. Richi introduced the provincial masons  son toca highly cultivated Grete: and throuyh Riehl, Mhes met suck Philosophers as Eduard Speanger and Romano Guardin, as well as the art historian Heinrich Woltthn ashose fiancee. Ada Bruhn, Mies marned masiat By the rascs. according to Neumesver, Mies’s inter: estan philosophy had gone tar bevond selteimprovement or intellec-  tual avocanon:  bor Mies. the kev to reabty fay hidden in philosophical under-  standing. Philosophy, alone among the paths ro enlightenment,  had the advantage of depth and samphaty, because irs method separated the pramary from the sevondary, the eternal tram the  temporal  That same impulse to connect with the timeless and the absolute was evident inthe bsstorieal arehtrectare that Mies most admired: not the celebrated monuments ot high art. bur rather the Medieval vernacu  lar buildings ot hts birthplace:  ‘Thes) did net belong to ans epoch... [but] bad been there tora thousand vears and were still impressive... AM the great sides  passed. bar fthes remaimedl.  As Mies wrote on one of the nate cards he prepared for his acceptance speech upon recening the Rowal Gold Medal trom the Roval Insarute  ot British Architects in pogae “OP ATONE) SPOS TD PRONE ODD BUIEDINGAS.”  What he valued about them was not qust them stohd endurance though thar was partiularh enviable ina ceotary of unprecedented stint changes, but specufeall the was in which thes proved to him thar there were unalterable vermties in architecture as much as there were tn bis view ot philosophy; the entire direchant ot has career must thus be understood according te che primary incent of his designs: to comves intellestual and sproitualeruth, selt-esident and inpetutable, as pertecd as possible. bike Weight. Mics was much less tortheoming about the mthuence of his Contemporaries; tor example, the architects and pamters of the De Styl Mostment, especialy Thee san Doves: burg. were his unacknens ledied source fear the revolutionary noneen pues walls in tis burldanes of the races  The interpretative literature ot the Modern Movement im archi tecture Was stl surprosimals small bs the cark toSos. and Chis helps roreaphan why atawas seccass for the palemicists af Postmodernism  during that decade te perperrate so mansy Ginards about che mature 
and intentions of Modermsm’s mayor practimoners. Furthermore, hiographical intormaton about the leading Modernist architects had long been cantalivinghs scarce. With the exception otf Wright—che Goethe of his protesston. at lease in longevity: in the extensive dowu: mentanon af his acnsvides trom avery earky ages and in the degree to which he impressed his contemporaries as a worthy subject tor record: ing their remamscences—there had been relanvely little data available onthe powate lives of his peers. Phough che lack of a Mies biography betore Schulve’s rots book now seems shocking, it should be recalled thatthe entire literature on Mies in Paglish remained tay betore 1ag7.  The use ot biographical tacts to support questionable thearies abourtan artists work tsa well-known abuse. but the singularly social nature of architesture makes such clues to its practitioners” personal: ities especially sumpestive. Schulze’s book resealed tar more about Mies’s lite and personality than had ever been known before, but he used that new information with ereat discretion and never attempted te read more inte things than he could demonstrate was actually there. His greatly amplified porta of Mies dtd not simiftcantls diverge trom the phlegmate persona his subject presented to the world, but Schulze drew convincing parallels hetween Mies’s imper- turbable temperament and his unusual deliberate way ot thinking and designing,  Mies, like Wright. was dikely to rununate tora very long tine about a proiect before even purting penal ta paper Atrer Mies'S deaths ania period when thinking before acting became much less common chan ip once w AS, SOME Were tempted to see his working habits as thoroughly unspontaneeus, Ios indeed ditficult to think of a personality type more anurhencal to the impulsive and restless Wright. But Mies was alse tar trom: emotionless. As remembered by several acquaintances, he had an earthy directness and a blutt, hearty humor thar could be released under certain circumstances, particularly when  he had a tew martin. A more pervasive account, howeven 1s that ot  Mies as a single-minded carcerist, a man whe let nothing—tamals, lovers, of polities ger in the was of his professional ads ancement,  That view Was reintorced in several ways bs the Museum of Modern Arts ra8e Mies exhibinan, which was organized bs the museuors then director of architecture and design. Sethur Drester, and was the second of three retrospeeties thar istinien has accorded him ithe firse was the one-man shaw presented by Philip Johnson and designed by Mies humsedt in rag7y and the most recent was “Meson Berio” of scot, whieh covered the first halt ot his career and can concucrenths with the Whitney Museam’s ° Mires in America.” devoted to his later work! Mies’s intense seriousaess about his act has always been Conveyed by stony, the home of the Mies van der Rohe Archive. repository of the architect's protessianal Papers his personal correspondence isin the Library of Congress. | Because tesa has heen in aunique position to mount a definitive review of bis work, hopes ran high among Mies’s adherents that the centenmal exhibiaen and the post millennial survey would redress the nusrepresentanans that had been taken tor the truck by too many tor too dong.  Regrettably, both the ruse retrospective and the 2oer double- header reinforced the impression of an architectural talent thae entered a precipitous decline during the tyacs and never returned to its high meal devel with two tmaor exceptions, the Farnswerth house and the Seagnim Buildiey. Mues’s work between tolr and lyst the vear of hes laste importine completed works in Furope, hes House and Apartment atthe Berlin Phalding byposition: was the meh: estot his career and the essential nature ot his architecture Changed dramatically thereafter. His so-catled Five Propects—the Driedrich- strasse Otfee Building at tara. the Glass Skyscraper of ryzz. the Concrete Othee Building of rg22- rus. the Concrete Countey House ot puts. and the Brok Counters Hlouse of fazg—tom one of the  most bolliant aomplishments in theereteal design ever concerted. 
Mies’s Monument to the November Resolution (dedicated in Berlin noigsb and torn down by the Nazis) was a twenty-foot-high, torty- toorlong, thirteen-four-deep red brick gravestone tor Karl Diebknecht, Rosa Luxemburg, and the other Communist martyrs Of 1018, a mav- ing and whally orginal rethinking ot the pobtical memorial tor the modern age (sce tront cndpapers!. As artisus director and planner of the Weasenhotsedlung, part of the rgic Werk bund housing exhib Genin Stuttgart, Mies presided over a highly visible manutestanan of the socal conscience of the Modern Movement. a combination ot apartment blocks tor workers and atrracove villas designed bs sivteen architeets trom five Buropean countries. His Barcelona Pavilion ot tyzg—the German Pavihon at che Barcelona Intermational Fxpost ton isee lustranon gai—was the Plaronicalls pertect evocation of his theories. a low, elongated ceremonial structure whose dari com bination of simple terms and neh materials tew acher Modernist buildings ever matched. His Tugendhat house of ry2k8=ra32 in Beno, Ceechostowtkia. was the most sumptuous domestic design Mies ever executed,  In pass Mies bad wertten, “Architecture iy the wall of an epoch  translated inte space.” Certainly the "will ot the expansive post-World Warf America was drasccally ditterent trom that of the deteated. depleted Germans ot the ryzous. When he resettled in this Country in rysS, Mies, ever caver to have his architecture tapamto the ceitrert, began te design buildings that responded co speciteally American conditions, notably the much larger scale and more ambirrcus pro grams of our corporate and cducanonal tastituctons,  Mies’s drawings trom his carhest vears onward provide ample proot ot the thadity of bis hand and the dels of his senstbilits, as wellas the familiar steadiness of his eve. Elis drattsmanship reveals an entirely ditterent procure trom that which many people later had ot him as the unyielding Teutonic caskmaster ot the orthogonal rule.  Fyen his relanvely minor drawings reveal Mies’s humanistig impulse  in domesue destin, later untairh: misconstrued as being reductive ta the pomt of deprivation. But Mies’s many sketches of houses alse serve as areminder that he saw ane vcess of intrusive turmishing asa hindrance. rather than an aid. to trac comtort. which he believed must be psy cholowiabas muchas physical,  Jo rege. the Miuscum ot Modern Art mounted a rtehly deserved exhibition, cura by Manda VOQaad. bororing Dib Reh, Mass prinetpal interior design Colleague and tor many sears his mustress, with whom he collaborated on “his” best-known tarmiture desitns, produced tor the most part between past and reac, Mies was acutels concerned with the precise placement ot his turmiture in his intert ors—as he was tthe desman ot those preces and spaces themselves and saw furmeure arrangement ay a vital aspeet of creating an internal architecture wathat his open plains. Such characreristreally Shesian arrangemeng asa hulking row ot theee Tugendhat arm hairs oranmtot Broo armehairs surrounding a circubar dining table bork tirst dene ter the Tugendhat house: hada strong architectural pres emee. Put nene became as ubryuirous as the pairs of side-by-side Barcelona chairs thar Could be found in innumerable Internanenal Ste ottive reception rooms tor decades atter they were mtroduced at the Barcelona Pavilion, with anterior design by Reah.  The big questian ain the air betore both the rae and 2-c7 Mies shows at Moats washoaw auch mere would be told about the mase contre: versal phase of the emigre architects career: his compli wich the Navi rouime, between Fbtler’s apporntmentas hanceltor ora 3 3 and Miessnnal departure tor the Cruted States fee vears liter Speculation had lone been rite about yust what Mies did cand when te remain in the good enices ofthe would-be niester architect aid urban plannes Adolt Hitler, Chardes Jencks’s bhind misstatement io tis Madera Maire prents in Architecture that Mies “worked tor the Navis[ antl pay” was charactensoe ot the wax in wich dis parti the architecture of  the Third Remh had been bork oversimplihed and underins cstigated 
Any expectation that the Museum of Modern Art would ever look closely inte this murky area did not cake ito agcount the lingering influence of Philp Johnson, Mics’s prinuipal American promoter and a MoMA mamstay tor seven decades. There was ne quesqon that any Initative to Ret to the bottom of Mies’s polingal culpability: would inevitably lead to the parallel suc ot Johnson's own Navi sympathies. In the Mies centennial vear of ry, Johnson was eqghts, but alse at the apex ot his building career, churning out Postmodernist skvserap- ers that seemed almose Oedipal im their thigrant flout ot Maes’s principles tor the design of call buildings. Johnson's mtluence on the MoMA board at trustees was sell weihry, and there was no wav the museum would have countenanged anvehimg that might have embar rassed a venerable and generous benetactor se central ro its history,  At the end of the ra8cs, the fall ot Communiom, the reanitication of Germany, and the opening ot archives in the former Sevier Uman raised hopes thar hitherto unknown documentary evidence would emerge to tally explain Mies’s relations with the Hider regime, Dur- ing the phinning of the 2091 Mies exhibitians in New York. Johnsen was still alive, and no doubt so. ofticnils agai tound it unthinkable to countenanve any lese-mayeste against the tras oinety ty e-sear-old, who made his last major public appearance at the dinner, held ina tention the Seageam Building's plaza, celebrating the opening of the OW part retrospective.  The "Mies i Berlin” catalog. edited by the stosny exhibition's orgamizers— Terence Riles, then the museunr’s architecture Curator, and Barry Bergdoll, a Columbia Universite art histors: protessor who would succeed Riles tn 2cot—weas a major contribution to the Mies Interature because of the amount ot new research and critical analysis it contained. However, that a prorect thus titled avotded addressing Mies’ politics co such an obsious desree undermined the intellectual credibility of the entire enterprise. Omissions, circumbocutions,  and cvasions abounded both in the Mosiy show's wall labels and  the catalog. There clearly had been ao ettore to make use of newly available source material te dear up the tacts about Mies ind Pascisa once and tor all. Perhaps there was nothing toumphieate the architect more deeply. but even the altermanve prospect at Mies’s possible exculpatton presented too great ask to Most during obason’s long senescemee.  Tnterestingds, despite the Compromiing nature of some of Maies’s actions during His last five vears in Germans, his mame renamed re markably untuinted un this countes throunhout hes lterme. Phat must  have been especially irnigng te folnson, whe tirstimet hin in Bera  in doscand when several late lite interviews did hetle to charity: Mies’s ambigueus positon, mo doubt because Johnson's own aupposedls regretted: Nazi svinpathies during thar pertod would have made it neeessan tor him to account tor far more than Mies ever had to.  Phe most Complete sumimars and esaluation of Mies’s polities appeared in Schulve’s brographa, though other books published around the ume at che centennial contained new information worth examin: inganoareater detail Asin Schulve’s padhuous handbing at the mter- plas beeween Mies’s philusophical beliets and hry architectural design, the hrographer did not draw sweeping conclusions about Mies’s will nENess te ungratiate himself with the Nazis. Pards because of the worldwide economic depression, and partly because of the tde ot architectural Conservatism that decompanied FEMers rise to power, Mies’s pracuce had come toa veotable standsnll by 133. Elis inclusion among the thirts architeces myited in Febraary of that veal Go paruce pate ea dimited omiperition tor the desiga of aew Ren bsbank bead quarters in Berlin—the first aren public Commussion tobe piven hy the Navis—was cerramly a welcome turn obevents ter tam, Phe destin he submitted was cotchosen. but he was amon say semutinalises.  In her acerbie role ay aone-woman “truth squad” on Mires’s dealings ssith the Nazis, Sabs | Maohols Nags. the ars titectare crime cand: wide  ot Mies fetewing Bauhaus colleague Laszlo Mohols Nau who 
hecamne a bxture at architectural conterenees inthe rues, saw Mies’s Reichsbank scheme asa “deadly Pasar” desait and. more importanc, ascatimuble ssmbob of his political complasance, She tound ints severe regulaney and symmetry proet ot ity are hiteet’s ahverity to alter fis style sipmaiboinels to saat the anticipated desires ef bis new chents.  Some histonans cincluding Kenneth Prampton ain his Mader Ardutecdure: A Crithal History of caS oe clanned thar the Renhs bank design represented the exace stvlisne curming pore in Mies’s oeuvre aways trom che lively, assmnimetocal nature ot his ark arche tecture }characterized by the loose arraniement of mterion spaces and exteriors Chat attempt te blur the transitions beeween indoors and outdoors) and toward the hierane. monumental tecling ot his later work iidentbable bwin Ghar contaunuent and tendency to tormal cttects}. Howeser those charactertsties could already be seen in Mhes’s Concrete Othe Burlding propect ot razz- rasa, despite crits” undersnindable desire te see the Navi period as the stumulus tor his changes trom the open ended spiritiat carck Modernism to a more resenting architecture of stasis and enclosure  Atuller investigation ot the Re hsbank compention, and one which provided a better reconstrucuon of the atmosphere that surrounded inwas provided bs Wintned Nerdinver’s pass essay "Versuchume und Dilemma der Avantyarden an Spreel der Architekrurwertbewerbe resy—as Temptation and Oilemmaot the Wwant-Garde Mierored inthe Architectural Compergons cay3 a3". Phe shorthst tor the eompention was put tosether by Manisterialdirektor Mfartin Kiess ling. a trend of the fetast Martin Wagner the chict municipal planner ot Berling who also served on the qurw talon wath che conservative architect Paul Borate and the muiddle-ot-the-road Peter Behrens, tor whom Mies had worked trom russ ta carse An approximatels equal number of “progressives,” “moderates” and “conservatives” were asked to submiedestans, and it cannot be assumed thar evervone  Who was invited was svmpathene to the Navi regime,  Far more damaging was Mies’s sening a proclamation that appeared un the Nazi newspaper, the Volkischer Beobachter, on August 18, ryagcone dav before the rubber-stump clectian thar was to confirm Hider as both president and chancellor of the Reich tollowinys the death ot President Paul von Hindenburg, Entitled Asetraf der Rudi: sohutfendon iroughly, “Proclamation of the Producers of Culture ya  teads in pare:  We bebeve mn this Fuhrer who has tultilied our fervent wish tor unity. We trust bis work. which demands sacrttee bevond all sarping sophistry: we plaice our hope in the man who, bevond man and things, beheves in God's providence... The buhrer has called upon us to stand bs hime trust and taith, None of us  Will be absent when ut matters fo bear witness,  Tn addition co Shes, other sainers sncluded the artists Prost Barlach, Georg Kolbe who sculpted the haure of Rvenire that stood in a retlect- ing pool ofthe Barcelona Pavilion tl, and Faml Nodde, and the Conductor Wilhelm Furtwangler fn the greatest of rromes. neat to Mies’s name was that of the reactionary Paul Schulece- Naumburg. prophet of the Blut and Rodeo movement, vitrioly catis ofthe Bauhaus, and arch enems of the Modernism he wished to cradivare by returning. to cod kisch architectural values. A revealing letter tron: Altred Rosenberg, the Nast ounister ot cuiture, te Joseph Goebbels, the minister ot propa ganda and enlightenment ot the people. dated October 25. 6a 44 [hut  never maned:. otters evtdence of Mhes’s precanious positon athe aime:  The Raseler Nachraditen reports on the matter of che “Prog mation at the Producers of Culture” tor the clechom on August ty the tallowing: a privy Councilor in vour Ministry supposedly urventiv asked the Cultural Bolsheviks in question (to sign che  Proclamation. oo. Prot, Maes van der Rohe. the oreater ot a 
monument for Fiebknechtand Rosa Luxcmburg, finally agreed, bur apologized to his trends immediately thereatren... Its depressing atthe same time to beg tor sygnatures tor the Fuhrer among those whom We have for vears tought co the utmost cul  tury and politically.  Earheran raag. Mees received the onky Commission trom the Nazis he would see through te cempletion: partoot the design tor the “Deutsches Volk Deutsche Arbeit” "German Peoples German Work 7 eshibitton in Berlin, sponsored by the Deursshe Arbortstront. a labor group within the Nazi party, Though Walter Gropius alse took part idisplays of nonferrous metals and mining were the relatively miner assignments given tothe two old Bauhaus colleamues and directors | at was hardly an mnocucus trade show. As the architectural historian Richard Pommer noted in his scrupulous and caurageaus tySa AtoAGA tecture an Mies’s politis—an unvharactetstie Lapse at that institutien—the pasg Berlin exhibition “was setup as a warnings to Germans of the dangers of racial degeneracy, and a display of the countermeasures of the new regime.”  The chronelogs of these events is worth norng. in thacthe procla- mation published on Vuguse 18.1944, followed by over avear Mies’s deenion te close the Bauhaus, which he announced to ats students on Auguste, 1a33. During bos American vears Mies made much ef his seemingly hizh nunded sacrithe af the Bauhaus adeabon the altar of pringaple—since the Navis had granted provisional permission ter the school te remain open but itis lear that Mhes in tact made a virtue ous act our ofan unavoidable one. He was not then, nor had he ever been. a tphter tor treedom, and Gonenucd tor at least a vear there- after to curry favor with these whom he much later depicted himselt as having vahbantly dehed.  Theonk other pob Mies won trom the Nazis, also ra3g. was tor  the design ot the German Pasihan atthe 1036 Brussels Universal and  Intermaconal Exposimen isee back codpaperst. ie was never built hewause of economic constraints. | Mies was a logical Chane, an view or the acchim thar had sreered his German Pavilion at the ruse Barcelona tar, even theugh the cheat tor that was the Wernar Repub Ie. The inclusion of a Nes drawing for the Brassebs payihon in the ToS MOMA retrospective Gaused more than a tew evebrows ta rise: quinkls bur aiamustakably sketched on one of the flags flanking the projet was the dreaded swarsdka. Butonly a few feet away in the same gallery were several or his drawines tor the Monument te the November Revolution, bedecked with the Communist star, hammer, and sickle see tram cndpaperss Phe pout was thar Mies would work for anvoneos he treed ta do for the old unpertal regime betore the revenutrom af ros S, qantas he aid tor che Weeanar cegaime on Barcelona, He could do so precisely because of his lack of any strongly held pohowal prmerples. the very reason he was chosen to head the beleaguered Bauhaus in toa.  Nbox wan der Rohe bad the sorrow of seeking a pertecuble vision ot the world athe deast pertest of tunes and places. Dora Mars, his mustross tor the last three decades ct bis hte, perhaps put it best: “He was an avewed atheist. but he was canstantis: searching fora spunitual source.” Mies’s Romante quest fer eternal certaumtivs -a deep. nner realiuy beneath the surtace of things= was strangely at odds with the highh abstract mature of his architecture. Prd it ever oe vcur te him that tec brigal expertise alone could not imbue architec ture with the qualiaes strength, cloquence, and tmiclessness—thar  hese estecmed ano the anonymous Romanesque Lindiarks of his  birthplace? dea certam extent he odtrmarely cand amwisels 1 sup pressed seme of the most intuitive aspects of his architectural manure, which thoursheul mt his designs of the paces, toensure that hy work not be undermined by chance miscatoulinens. 7 You must be caretul vothimprovisanon.” he wired a student, batter himself thar maghe  fuse been the worse advice he ever took, 
Nevertheless, as a whole Mies’s carcer must be seen as a heroic,  and darrely sagcesstal, undertaking—not least because his raprint has been so strong thar aris unlikely ever to be tully ettaced, dimmed thourh it had become after decades of debased adaptation of its most casily mumiked teatures. At the very end of his tite, when the tarces he still sought to marshal were alreads in disarray, Mies could not understand why the diserepaney berween his eas and the use made of them by others had become such a vewing pane, “We showed then what to da.” he complained to Arthur Drexter, “What che bell went  wrong?”  EF CORBUSIFR  STARS FELL ON architecture during the e88as, the decade when mans ot the central tgares at the Modern Movement were born. Their cen: tenanies were celebrated with an almost unbroken series of commen: orative events and cntial reevaluations. None at those observances approached the scale of those surrounding the most important Nod: ernist architect of chem all Le Corbusier born © harles-kdouard Jean neretm ¢8 Sera ba hawsede- Fonds ithe Swiss fur.  The deading polemieot ot the generation that soughe to estabhish arational aesthetic order out ot the unprecedented technic ab ads ances at the Awe ot Tndustriaization, Pe Corbusier detmied the Modertist project in the mast momentous of his thirty chr books, Vers tow an bite tare nest published io recs, and translated inte Fnylish mnoryatoas Dueards @ Neto Arcbatecture: bugene Vrollet-le Duos nineteenth century assertion thar new materials would wise birth toa  new ate cohoes an be Corbusier's words  The histury of Architecture untolds reself slowb across the cen tunes ay aomodihcation of stricture aod armament, baton the last fies sears stech and concrete tive brought new Conquests, which are the index ofa greater Capavity tor Construction, and  of amoaircbirecture in which che ld Godes bave been overturned 
Ir we Challenge the past. we shall learn thae “so des” no fonper existtor us, thata sole belonging to our own period has come  about: and there has heen a Revolugqon,  The “ponfication” of architecture—moving away from dependence on the eedectte bistortcnsim ot the late minetecnth century aad coward a structural and formal vocabulary based on che new engincering ponuples was Le Corbuster’s untal geal At the same time he attempted to direer these principles toward human aims, He achieved his program with scunming swiftness and Completeness dung his so- valled Heron Penrod. the vears berweeen his peroinent move to Paris inotedsoand bis tundamental architectund redirection bepanning: in the earky rages,  be Corbusier's most famous works of that decade and a halt of titerse research, experanentition, and construction were the sixteen houses—"machines tor faving an” as he called them——dhar became a Baste source ot imagers tor Modernist domestic architecture tor decades to come. Indeed, even atter the turtof the twenty -Hrat century, Righard Meer continued to rely on the Cotbusian repertoire of motits and materials trom the Heror Period as his haste points of reterence.  Those villas ofthe patos oeverabot them built torexpatriate Amer: ans who knew Gertrude Stem: her brother Michael was a patron ot ene of the most importantet bet orbusier’s houses, the Villa Stein de Monge of tyte-lyss at Garches! were as starting as their designer's philosophical wrtings. bong attcr the houses cased to shock, they sill manage todmpress wath their Clarity of line, mrensity of contrast, equilibrium of proportion, and, above all, simphin of capression, Dispensing with tradiconal ornament, pattern, texture, and mast volorieven though Le Corbusier's “white ar hte ture” was tar trom monochromane, employing many colors fostin black-and-white pho tographs or subsequenth parted avert, he dared co make the most  estreme Challenge with the most minimal means. He would recreate  architecture: and. bs rmplianen, the way ot lite pursued in it— Absolutely and complereh, as fully as Renaissance archite ture sup: phinted the Medieval andl his Hlerore Pertod villas were the dagzling evidence that he could. In those buildings Le Corbuster convinomuly earned out his core belie dat “architecture as the skilltul, Correct. and manninhcent play of volumes assembled in tight.”  Bac there must have been a great deal more coat tor him than that, tor how che does one explain the proteund Chari be Corbusier embarked upon almost inineduitels atter the completian of his Villa Savoye at raae-ray sat Poissy. the house i which his imagers ot the machine most pronounced? See dlustranon sacc bor be Corbuster the Nulla Savove represented both a chmawx and a cul de sac: epiter mucins the excepronal range he achieved tn his sustared seres at Modernist themes and variations while exposime the ultumate limita tons of his trorctul bur tite Purist approach As the architect wrote indus pag book Precgaons ser ienetat present de Pan dates tare et de Crrbansete:  Seaphoity oe netegiacaleut to pareve itis a choice, a discrimi:  nation. acrvstaliaagon. Tts objects purity. Sonphots svnathe sides. A taeged aaglomeration of Gubys san acadental event.  bur a svathesis ty an intellectual act.  This atetude was eather ditteren: trom those ot other carts Modernist architests who, bke be Corbusier were attempone toe reshape the man-made COV EPO bic at ath the atten ith vit the destracuers atid chaos ot World War bo Cnbke the members of the fh Styl Mosement in Hofland, who Chermshed transcendental philosophy. or the Russtin Cousteuctiasts. who belreved in them desapms as the arcbite tunel tamtestanan ot che Octehber Revaluation. be Catbusae was Lirgels without a specie spintualor pohitial prowrgin  Donne the pasos. he thought pure reasar was caoughs when tt 
proved inadequate to the level of emotional expression he wished his buildings to convex, he crnbraced an increasingly priminvast style. whose Charscterptics at first ghince scem tke an open repudiation ot his Purnst aesthetu. What could be more ditterent trom the Villa Savoye cub and hovering lightly over ins meadow Ihe an aben spaces tate —than his pilpritiage chapel of Notre Dame du Haucot raga-ros¢ at Ronchamp isce dlustragon sbhimirregularky sculproral, with a sen suously Cuming root, and seeming to vrow outotots hill in organi response to the landscapes In tact. bok halves at be Corbusier's eas tlh divisthle career drew trom the same Medtterranean vernacular sources, though the forms were much more abstracted in the archi tects work betore rag than they became atterw ard  His prowing interestin the primitive Was presaged by che pamnemss mowhich he worked out omigh of fis thinking about form, and whieh between raze and ruts became nonceabh more prucse in thet subject matter, He moved aways trom the exacame still lites of hes  carlier Purist phase and became preoccupied with the biologicals  Inspired Po bromerphic 7) terms of fis later uraphie works, carming away from inanimate objects and toward human and animal figures with overth sexual aid mathio conmonitons. His travels, especially to Barcelonain ta2S where he encountered the bizarce and sensuous architecture ot Aneom Gaudi and te South Amertcaa sear liters Made himiawarc ofnew possibilities fir ditterent trom those be tound on his extensive Puropean tours asa young man.  Peenthen, however De Corbusier's suscepubility to the imstiietve clementinherentin the design process was clean Heres his reagnan to his first prolonged exposure te Mediterranein vernacular archites ture during his pott Wusadernabr in Greeee, Turkes. ttab. and che  Balkans, recorded in ars hook forrtey to the Bast:  he art of the peasant isa striking creation of aesthems sensual:  IN. Heart clevates iself above the scrences, itis precisely because,  Incopposigen to them. at simulates sensuality and awakens protound coboes un the physical bem. ft paves to che body te the animal---ity fair share, and then upon this healthy base, con dusise to the expansiear of jayait kiiows baw to erect the mose  noble ot pallars.  This tan observation tar ditterent in teching trom the recone image of hime as the detached. aes theoremern of an archireceure of denial and sublimation  Historians have dittered over which of be Corbusier's buildings Was the frst to reflect fis dramane transtormation, Some have made aaase tor the Villa de Mlandrot ot posu-ra32 near Poulon, closely related to the houses ct the Hero Pernod traits oseeall Gontimuragon, butousimg ter the frst cme the masonry rubble wall chat was co hecome a hallmark of his new prinnitiism. Others have sungested the Pavillon Suisse of tag 2 -re33 arthe Cire Cniversitaire in Paris, with ps rubble wall and bold handing of miss amd volume in exposed cone erete—tor che hestame lettin natural color and nar cosered over inowhite-pamted stucee tke the rasss houses—pomting toward be Coorbuster’s high tose niudte unit hous schemes ot a decade later, ALL have agreed thar wich the construcnon of the architeces own Peote Martone Weekend ot ras s atbadedle Sam © loud the taange was cotupiere. With its treestone walls, saulted portals, and sod root. this small put vasth underappreciated Lindmark acknowledwed Pe Cor bosier’s loss oot fathoua Modernist absohutiin ar deast chirty sears betore it became prevalontin the protesscon at barge.  hut as was iwaws the Case with be Corbusier there were a momber of practical factors that bere on his artetic decisions in adelition to fis larger Conceptual concerns. bar csaerple, thie muscular columns sup porting the Pasion Suisse roreningers of the event ere aiassiee Ones Re hater osedia bis Cintas Phabitagens were a tea tion to anes pected  site conditions, in this instance the discovers of an abandoned quarry 
on the plot that accessitated ao stronger footing for the five story structure. And as the architectural historia Tim Benton pointed out, when Le Corbusier specthed stone walls on his unexecuted plans tara workers housing estate of rada, he was scmulated by more than les growing interes in indigenous building techniques. In response to politcal pressure from: the masons) unton, which had supported the “Lor Loucheur™ onamed for the brench heusmg minister, Touts Loucheur that financed this government sponsored proyeut tor Fonwoce muss-produced houses, aecomcession was toy faded in the leg ishigon requiriage that oar feast one wallin each house be imade of masanty—a kind of architectural teatherbedding,  The parallel and persistent interest be Corbusier maimtained an die  intellectual and the intuntive. the technological and the hand cratte  the theoretical and the pragmatic. were die aiderh ing corstants m1 a-carcer filly puscisaing the accolade ot 7Architect of the Century” bestowed on hint by the title ot the Centennial exhibition held at Dan don’s Elavward Galler in pea Sct dn Benton's judgement, “his dedi ae com to the real was always quatificad by has willingness to beliese an the weal” and ters precisely that complementary, rather than contra dirctors, duality that gives che architecture ot be Corbusier both early and late, acomplexiy far more interesting than the momnelithic imave ofit put torth by many ot his ces istonist detractors.  The copious evidence  Peupportoot Le Corbusier's preenunetice among the makers ot Modern architecture abso led. mn due Course, te his berm held largely cosponstble ror the talures of the aos order he promulyatcd, proselytized tor and put inte practee. Phe animus against be Corbusiee and the distarced image same crates have put torth of him talong with Pudwip Mies van der Rohe! because of his decaive tole im overthrowing an architecture) tradimon chat had remained virtually intact since the Renaissance were oy pitied by the architecture crite Colin Amery in his resis ot Wallrim ER. Curtis's  be Corbuester: hdeas tnd barns ot pase:  [Le Corbusier's] mad polemes have rebormded upon his own head and aitas notuntair te say that, outside the arches tural pro- esstom he carrics much of the Blane tor urban derehetion and  deca and the absurdin of port blocks. prlote and pollution  Yeton the book Curtis cautioned chat although there certamis have  boon disasters ta the wake ot be Corbusier's ¢ Sample,  tras really too tae to bhinte the banality of tations upon the prototypes that they imitate by thes low one ought alse to blame Pailadie tor every mock cLissical suburban house using  take Colomos and pedunenes.  Stmularly. as the arehitectianal historian Norma bvensen wrote ot be  Carbuster’s urbatise  One qs sometimes fed to hebese thar be Corbusier is directh responsible ter overs present das example ot misapplied tute toma zoning. destructive maton expressways, risensitive urhan remowal, overscaled urban parkland, regumeuted: apartinent housing. and monoronous eliss-walled skvserapers. be Carbu  siet otter allo orngurated tome ot chess thirass  In the Cited Stares, the onus tor what went wrone with Moder ar bitecture Wap assigned: primarily to Mies. who established the dominant termuéa ter Amenvan urban construsgon daring the botdine boom tron the end of World War Tuntd the cecesston at the eark duces. be Corbusier's ailucnee—aside thom tis pepulingeation erosuch basi tehnial onnmovatrens as remftorced comerete slab comstrucdan this: Dori Tae svstom, patented mt toriimwas tah there pronounced ro third: world Countics, where be designed anper  cant burldings isuch as his deven structures in tnadia, becom mn 
tysil ot tad active disciples such as the Brazilians Puste Costa and Oscar Niemever, tor whom he acted as Consultant tor the Min- istry at Fducation and Pubho Health building of ry se-rugs in Kio de Janciro’.  Phe onpacnat be Corbusier's Later career was singularly consequen- thilin poor Gountries, with his emphasis on tmass housing: telativedy tow toch building methods employing Concrete and masency tar mare atten than steck takimg advantane of the plentdul cheap, unskilled labor assuloble theres and particuiarls saith his search tor anew kind af asic ssmbolism, umpertant at those developing oanans caper to wastoti the ar hitewturab sins of Colomadin: coven while tauren tesa Western architect to previde anew paradigm. In India especnlly. bes mistence thatanesw tocmal vocabulary Gould be extracted trom the humble Gamponents of peasant dite resulted ino pubhe buildings at Chandiwarh thar nealed the powertul etfeet of Fdwwain Lutvens’s Miahal-cume-  Lisstal Vicerow’s Pfouse at New Dethtot rer y-rasa. hose mayest stele be Corbusrer tound “thiwless bur deadds.”  De Carbuster’s tatense interest in urbanism, larnels confined te fis work ofthe tases and ryscs) bold. often megalonanial schemes tor the transtermation ot the modern aitvscape-— had an inmense Wmpacconindustealizcd Counties, especially those needing extensive reconstruction atter World War Th West German, Holland, and par: teularks Great Brains Between the work wars, the Connmnental brand of Modernism: rccencd lithe: support in Great Beira, oddly enough since secmminy advances m modern materiuis., fechas, and town plinning cook phice there during the mineteenth century, when much ot burope laged behind the engineers, theorists, and retarmers of Victorian Eneland.,  The argent need tor rapid cestorarion of the devastated cities of Britain atter the war conterred advantages on an itreads formulated model and Te Corbusier's proved the most accessible ane. Mod  ermsmy and specrnoally Corbustin Modermsinr ot his Luter, so-called  Brotalist phase rtrom berod frag South concrete’ his tivated  material atter pases, became the preferred architectural stvle ef the Britsh weltare states as wells the prevalent argtude amon: the new generation of archieeets educated in postwar Paatand. [he wholesale appheagen of his ideaxs om the rebudding of Great Britam atten the Blite resulted in his becoming, ut Ad:iin Barty ’s phrase. 7Modernisa ttseft as taras the Britsh are conccrmed. ©  Inthe Crited States, aceepiance of be Corbusier's ideas was less widespread, bur sell choueh teomuake a mark on the skyline. [fe largest ot the ainbitous sfurm-clearance and low and moderate invemie housing constractien prowcanis of the bite rages through the early Typss—such as Stuvvesant Lown and Peter ¢ cooper Vifkage mn New York: Cabri Green mn Chicago: and the ietimous Pruitt doe progestin St. Dour an carh desiga bs Minoru Yarnasaki the deme  tron ot Which. ant tects. came to svinbolize the tartare of Madernst  architecture to mans of ts crits took a tiamber of ther cues fram Le Corbusier’s most controverstal urban proposals: his Contempo rary Cats tor Three Miter of reas. Veusin Phan for Pari of russ, and Radiant City ot boas  Intentionally provocative. be Corbusier's chilling vistors of rally anor teowers widely spaced: amid vast revnsastrds and reached ba  Droad shperimgiwass were amoget the mest untorercable and ines  undemtend—images on peentieth century architestare, He saw his ans plains ais preesiprsve strkis. as itwere, decediig to the mes ipabal- isooranew urban scale but hopin cocmpreee dhe quality ot ait. tite ba the Prescrsy Hien coe Cre thetn, cet ange QU TANTO s cP open splge for hubto ain nd recreation. Prd rise ronewal scleres were Comins borh among the popular press one skyscraper fantasy an a Tari newspaper cabthe rags was headhincd oS: Paris 8 Aner sd ie as swell as dug stele architects. Pn fact. senie af fis Contam penirios.  inghiding the German Pudwar Pilbersenmer aed the Nustran-born  Ammemcartemire Richard Neatea, destined Miodetiist ats phtes even  
more trvhtening in ther ryadiny and regularity than De Corbuster’s  better remembered proposals. Ay Norma bvenson wrote:  Ibe Corbusier’ visions urban desags became better Known, and thos more intlueaal chan thease at other modernists, tty because thes were more comprehensively developed and trad tar  geeater visual appeal  Unscoled polienal aanditions in brance dari the Depresstan of the tages and the war sears ef the pyqes delived eXcoutien of be Cor buster’s tall cower schemes anol the besimmim atthe pag oss by which time his utopan adeas of three decades carlton fii begun to have a mayor effec in the United States, In ress. bewrs Mumford: birrerly  wrote to bis baglish town planniog colleague Frederic f. Osbern:  Inothis Country housing offtaads, who have bared heard of Le Corbusier nevertheless rmitate his Voisin Phan nm every new projet between New York and bos Angeles, with onky a tess lone vonees, Fike. mane. fo pratest agaist oat. That the mtyili ventsia oof Britain should have gene unter the same absurd tor-  muladsankening  Nectuails, thar was a bit ot au csaerertion. Dhough the adopaon ot the residential fngh rise rather that the low-rise housime format which Miumtord and Osborn preterred. became widespread ain Ameria bervcen fogs and pees aitwas by ne means emploved every where trom coast ta coast, Phe trastration Mamtord and Osborn tele over having ther ideas, based on che Brdish Garden Cars model shunted aside in tavarot those of be Corbuster muse be taken inte account. fo them, and mans other ontes of the Corbustan city, his plains ot the rusosand ragcs were Alphaville seer da dettre, celebrating the crad:  haltien oof exacng budldines and the discontinuin amom: the new  ones. eo at the deepest and most common oni teas during the destructive, fragmented twentieth century, Bur the urban serum that gave birth to De Corbusier's proposals needs to be Considered nanny babinced assessment on what he was trevins to accomplish, hurchermore. the low densins ot the Pnehsh Garden Cas ideal-- whigh, intecescpels, De Corbusier apphed sath abmose texeboek correctness in his unexecured Cite fardin aun Cretets at raug tor fa Chaw-de-Bonds— was nota surtable solution tar one of the greatest onal metropotises  The Parts that be Corbuster first came to Kraw asa voung tire brand std harbored mans pockets of disgusting sqaalon The attempts othe Salsatoan Arma. which was notably acuve in France, to break the age-old vigrus cine or indigence. poverty, and deci tn Paris cosultred upon ot be Corbusrers most tudacious, of problent plagued, desiuns, the City of Refuge of tyty-ras3. With some pustificitien, Te Corbusier bebosed thar a spectagubir proposal to sweep away the bhobr was nest ukeb to capture the paditterent publ 's iniianatgen, Arter all. Baron Elaussmann’s Procrustean plan to hack diaenal beutes ards threaad Paris hed been completed hole more than a  halt  tury betore. notions were the pretests aver the disiocagons and disruptions at Caused fong: torgetten, bar the cin had) sinee becom the pode ot the aisdived words Might net be Corbusacr de more of the same:  Phougdh fos creat upban schemes were never built Pe Corbusier's three mater wigs plains did more te conmsolahate opposition to their destener’s ideas chan all hes other works conmbined. Elis sumeestiens ter the restrugtanog at Panis in his Voisin Phan were indeed slog kitg. but thes were often pertrased as even more drastia than he stated  foechme allot Central Paris,  them. bor exampis, he did noe call tor hutonls a parteticen the Right Bank, leasing retict histotis aong mets such as the Fousre compos and the Palais Koval Phe sixty  story skescrapers that domunated bis ew Cine oot Dacht were not 
residential as some crines have contended. bur were meant solely tor offices; apartinent housing on the periphery ot the bagh tise business district would have been prosided in six-story gepaenides edlas “villa buddines.” comprised of duples units, cach with a double herghe liv ny room and sel-contamed terrace warden much larger than a can ventional balcony Nonetheless. block atter block ot the tanuliit Paris mibea, with ts tongs inulared texture of thats. shops. offices, cttes, and negbborhood relinonsbips—dr cre de quarters would: have been abliterated. Phe Voisin Plann thar respect presented the single most upsetting prospect over advanced by ans Modernist architect, The dosest Le Corkuster ever got to erecting skyscrapers was the oblong. slab-shaped housing superbloagks—the Unites dU babininans —he executedin Marsedles rage) ras 2t Nantes cas 3, West Berlin brugt ras Sh and Bries co boret, France (tuer. The most famous of thent was the trst, executed as part af the government spensarcad postwar rcconstruction of Brance. Phe Marsedles Crate is a logement predonge vestended dwelling: Contaming 337 units in twenty-three vontgunitons, tram one roam to dupleses, hous pec peaple [ts clesations are the antthesas of his taut, moirtumabst tagades af the rears: the exteriors of the Unite are nohth shadewed bs the deep reveals at the brises sates osuimssreens) and some are are brighds paunted. Otter Ing me tewer than owenty six serstees ceincluding shopping. a avin  nastmy and day care ter children—ar turned out to be one of the  most popular et ovcncerh century avant garde housing developments, despite all the dire prediggons char at would tester lunacy and pre- more socal turpitude. Pram the das im opened it has been tor many a hashh desirable and pleasant place in which to live. As Lim Beaton  reported thutts hye sears on:  At Marseilles, the experiment has been successtul, albert in the rather specail creumstances of relatively attluent protessronal  inhabitants... There are plentehal signs of acave community  lite. The place bavzes with children. the hits seem ta work  and there are ne grattiteand lide deterioration,  Dhar walling asceptance ofan unprecedented form of housing muche be ascribed te the adventurous tendencies of educated Erench protes- sional people. Yet seme carl Maodernst housing intended tor Berlina workers Aad, in the sears betore German reomtionion, become tash- lonable amen, professionals there. qust as at least one such estate, Brano Taut’s Hutesensiediung, had ateracted mteliggtials soon ater it Was burt during the ruses.  However be Corbusier's Quartier Moderne Frages et ryns- ro 2s, aworker’s housmi development i Pessac. near Bordeaus, uninten: honalls cand fer him unwelcomely! demonstrated the tundamentil fleabikty ot his demesne architecture, even as inhabited by the less educated people for wham it way designed. Pessue de Le Corhuster, Philippe Boudon’s chissie ruou study on what happened after Pessac wap Arscossupied, was aimphy dlostrated with onstructive betere and atter photos thar documented the extreme alterations made to the stack White stuce row houses emblemate at be Corbusier's Purist phase,  At the Quarter Moderne Fruges, orignal thar housetops were replaced in seme cmstances with pitched roots, often tied. Phe hall mark Cortusiin ferretres at donated) cobbon windews! one of has vanonal “Rive Peants of a New Archetecture” —trequently were htledin te create smaller windows. generally with shutters and embed Ushed woth applied ornament. So many changes were made during the tour decades herween the projceps vompletion cin Bowden's studs thant was arare ait arong the cas that rehuned is cogil appear: ance. Although Corbusier revered the vernacular inary “pure” peas ant tor. ne doubt he would fase had much less paticnee tee thas populist manitestanen ot icin the largest built housing scheme ot che  first halt of his carcer Indeed, the sentimental ideaation ob peasant 
arghitecture and the Concomitant contempt for contemporary paral lel. whether in suborhan shopping centers of thtut houses. would rematn a hypocrisy unchallenged until Robert Venturi in bis Con: plexity and Contradiction in An dite tore ot bape. validated the pop tlaroand the commerial cemacular as other legitimate “found” sources of architectuni] inspenitien,  When Boudon’s remarkably unbiased analysis of Pessag wats first published, anti Modernist techog was rising in oppesitian to the wanings Lnternational Stele. The Pessac report was thus cited by same as continniation that Modernist architecture was an inhuman abstrag- tan, requiring svimbol as wells pracoeal modifications to make tt tolerable to the average person. Subsequent, though, Bessa umd its ad hoe permutations were appreciated as just the oppasite: evidence that Modernism atats best has been adaptable enough to absorb even kitsch decoration while retanuanic its rite. as anoinmncvanyve arche teatural Goneept. Providing healthtul. attordable workers’ housing was vcardinal soul witot the earls Modern Moventenr, and Pessas proved the validin and endurance of thac cision bevend mere cos mete modihuanons,  One of the tehest concentrations at be Corbusier's earliest work ts to be tound, understandably enough, on his hometown ot ba-C haus de-Fonds, which durtog his south was the center ot the Swiss wats h- making industes. be Corbuster built a Nea-Palladian Geni and say villas there—ranging trom the Are Nousean-cum-tolklorsge Villa Pallet ot raom-socc tothe €lassimalaun Modecnist Villa Schwab ot rere renee. Phe editeanon be Corbuster resend at the local Poole WArt under the remarkable Charles UP platter ca broad minded pedagogue open te the most advanced reformist thinking of the dass was unusually intermed. LF plattener was especially parti to the legacy ot Joho Ruskin amd Willian Morris, no doubt accounting tor Le Corbusiec’s tendencies toward both unbrariamisnr and iaituire war  Ship. Howe oy to cespham che combination of selt confidence and  urgeney Le Corbusier always had in regard to his misstonary prosieam tor recasting world architecture, we Gan find seme of the sources on chis art school an the Jura  Perhaps only siathtly dess important in shaping the mind and eve ot be Corbusier were his senithtal travels to the wechire tural mona: ments of the Mediterranean and Near bast, recarded in fears te the bast ties dlustrated diary at raid. tiest published un book tern inane, avear ater bis death. At the time of the trap through the Balkans, Turkey, Greece, and tab was uutally printed. in part. in ba beralle PM Vis, a newspaper in ba Chau de-bonds. Even though there sevidence of phimansm in his ascounts ot iscanhul craken trea Claude Darrere’s PHovnine quit essooent and the Parthenon cbrnest Renan’s Prrere sta OAerogide, there is ne doubt thar the ovents three vearord author possessed precocious powers of obsery tran, as welfbas the prcocal and verbal skills to Communicate his ea peric tes toathers with a high desree of mimediagy.  His ardor in absorbing the aimeless culture of the Mediturninean and the Near bast sill exerts a contagious, if occasenalby callow, charm, He was surprised by the strom. direct architecture of the folk lors Durtdings fe saws on fis journeys. Some ot dus reactrans foretell hay cave ntul reqee than cf his mas hine aesthetic at the 1UlLas hasor of the primitvesm of his hater career: “Phere os nething b know more lamentable chan chis mati teday to disawe ¢radition tar the sole purpose of creagny the coveted “new.” Phat armeude wall come ase surprise Ca those mipdtul of be Corbusier's Gotstant respect tor histor otonat historeism sand the aspirator be cook tron the indigenous, primes al anhitectura: forms at Narth Vtrica apd Greece in the formulation ait his white, tht rooteak, bot taniented atchites turcoot the Herr Portod. Some cesidenty of Posse seem fa mie in miterstiews with Boden ches  tuted those reterences, since in thet  frequently used the word “Atrgan” to descebe De Corbusier's style  theres: 
The best sketches trom his Mediterranean tap were vid evga Uons of mass and space, proof of his voragieus visual appetite and artiste skulls long betere he serthed in Pars at the wee et thirty in ryt. Phere he came under the intluence of the painter \medee Oventane and began to cake his owen painting considerably more sere ously than he had before. lowas alse at Oventancs estgation that in ryote the architect adopted bis Goncocted pseudonyer—a vanant af an ancestral name, | ocorbester  The Purst artet Ozentantand Le Corbusicr—whe together wrote the book Pic Peaature ntadernte at toas—ts best understood against the so called Ruppela Pordre the “call to order” that sounded through the arts in brance ater World War bh Anattempe te reestablish the “tradi tonal” French varrues ot charity and reason, the Kapped a Pordre cone veved certain rightwing politnal undertones es hoed Liter in the py sos by the burneoning KRedressemtent Fratyr troughls. “Freach Resur gence” movement, which Le Corbusier supported and vice versa dn those reactronars circles, the uncontrolled “excesses” at Cubism were trowned upon, and Pe Corbuster’s Parisi was tntembed as a retuen te first principles from the extremes reached bs Proasse and: Braque though without be Corbusier's resting some otthe baste perceptual discoverios tnade by those two Modernist proncers ©. Indeed. the work ot Pieasso hamselt was te undergo a conservative retrenchment ducing fos White Pertod of the roses, and ithe placa Classical monumen- tality of Imeres hangs heavily over Picasso's pauntings of that decade, ase wonder thatatas also presentin those at be Corbusier,  Inman ceent although be Contmued parting aod ubrawiog nanan chitectural subjects thronghout the rest ot bis carces his most tertile phase asa painter was timeted to the decade atrer rare, when he exe cuted has firse Purise canvas The finest of Pe Corkasten’s Paris sell lites of the pertod— impeccably arranged greupimeys of the utitarnain obneten pes he loved: machine made bottles, hisses, and plates, as  wells those old Cubist tavorites, the pipe and the guitar—van hold  their own with some of beger’s anthir Compositions dote at dhe same tame. Le Corbusier's tibictop Landscapes dea great deal to clacidate his contemperans architec rund Goncenis his emphasis on the trocsal ettects of buildings; on achiewine transparency through the chmuna non atheayy loadbearim walls and the extensive use ot ehiss: and tes introduction of a rotting viewport through emagnatise creubinen pattertis. Those pictures were certainks anoimportint means tor hem in testing bis thinking betore apphane such ideas te fos burtdines.  In later sears, the sulmeet matter of be Corbuster’s paintings would again parallel motes tound in bes burdings-- for esample. the forms ot voluptuous nite females durum his shire ta a bomarphis approach in the ragos, or the recurrent open hands, oxcarts, and honed bulls dace his work on the Puntibr capital city of © hands warhoim che pascs. But rhe cuatncenens between hes panting and fis architecture would never agar he as genuinely reciprocal as they bad been dure the re2os. dt was almost as rhouph once Le Corbusier badd resolved his creatine crisis as an architect —-reycenme the limited expressive spectrunbof Poristi in hacer ot the treedoa ofa ie. prim wvism—bis paunting ceased te funetian asa sounding beard tor his atchitecture, Ww hich wy Tien became tar Tess cerebral and mreran hore sersuous. One suspects that Pe Corbusies way aneare and deeph resenttub ot tus chiminished powers as a parmter aitter rage. As Ne garnered more and more praise tor his architegture he became mercasmaly ccbsessed with anuip ngs recommitian for his protures, there Is pathos i anaster ofone dicdiain Coanibs vail for acceptance in another at which he Could never excel Not cantent to be the Preise ot architecture, be Corbuster wanted to be the Pactsse ad artas well  Pe Corbusier's success ig adeanwing bis archiregturad anders derived inesmall measure trom his skills asc pronioter Elis mais books tracts. tor the most part gave festitions fa his tretess deeernun aren tooase the printed word teowin converts te the Modern Nboxemett  Graphic format was extremely important te bin reser more so than 
in his design tor Vers cere arutectare. Its scdla spellbinding book: large type. short sentences, spacious Margins, snapps slogans sim hud- Ing the famous Sr hetse ist machine tor ling in 7 and unexpected HUNtIpositions of photogriphs, especially the irreverent: pauangs of motor cars aml Greek temples. Vers wt architecno brims with the  patent appeabot the most eftecive revehunosarsy propaganda: blunt.  catchy. pressepose, and, above all, well tuned.  Composed ot aradles that originally appeared ind Pept Nee teau—the avant garde journal be Corbusier edited cand mostly wrore himself; bemween gate and pass 0 Vers rete arc bitecten was tollowed by Prt deconstet Pate Phat ot race: simuiarin concept, chough more verbose and therefore less gripping. His articles on product and furniture design were concerned ats a trontal assauloon the establish hone sewpomtotthe ages Internagenal bypositien ot Modern Dev: oranve Vets and Industries i Paris. Today best remembered as the show that biter wave Art Deco ats name. this lontied at think dis- gitsed) trade fair was intended ro recaprire brenvh dominance in the desien of luxury consumer goods. which had shitted te Austria and Germany ithe decade and a halt hetere World War |  Atthe ruts eshiinon, Pe Corbusier was as appalled bs the brench povernment’s promotion of the Liborsntensie, hirgedy useless  objects tor the tthas he was ba the items chempselees. ° Modern deco  rate actos ner decorated,” be proclaimed in one of his more ays  thoromie animes. Toollusteate his poont, he depacted mass: prodiced examples he approved of-— Michael Lhonets simple bent ood hairs of cima oS sen the Ronea ottiee trlimg system. the tuschiae of the barman Gobath airphine--as wellas those he scorned: a grotesque Lalique brooch om the form ota cock’s head devour a huge gern, the shows protertal glassware of Brute Calle, and the ponderous Aaret bugreeors tamitare of Suc et Mane othe Paris tien that delped deco  cate the ocean tines dleede- Pane, daunehed in peace  One of the greatest aomes of be Corbusier’. achievement is that  this idelater of technology had such trouble i making ip work ter Dinseit. Daunted by che unavahibilins ot ceads-nitde: Components with which te realize his pertectionist designs, be Corbusier had te resort toccosth handeraftsmanship to attain the sleek, machinelike look he craved. The architects chrom, cost overnins—otren more than twice his orngnal estimates and his systematic decepuon ot his unusually Gooperinve clhents anders ace the Rantantie miture of be Corbusier's mtatuation wath mos hanvagen,  Dunn the roses. be Corbtster Was suspected of having Com: nist terfemeies besause of bis work tor the Parts in particular his unesxesuted scheme of raze-resc ter the Centrasavuz building in Moscow. justas Mies van der Rohe had been because ot his Monu- ment to the Noscomber Revelugon af tez6 om Berlin. But as wath Mies. Fo Corbusier's actual politcal beliety were vers much ded te the ospediencres of gc flag Comnisstois ter hos es pensive experimen: tal Puildines, and led te his work tor the Communists atter they came te power it Russia, bur had commensurate ls little ettecton hes ability to nid patronage in the postwar period,  Dunne be Corbusier's sears of struzele i toy ine Co Win Qccepranee tor lise program ter world architecture, be entertained the wea ot anmomorpotent colin Agtorteta help smooth the way for hts radical retormaten ot architectural production, Phe mternatenal econonie doprosston cnceurteed: Hann to porn the Svadacalet Mievement in reas WS Wallan JR Cutts exphincd abour the atatecrs polities  and cher effect on his work berween tary and baggy  Svndicalisne Way attrac to satcllectu iis who saw capitabisimn tailing. who tetred Bascom du aise recoded tram the wdea of “the dictatorship of the profetaniar.” Vieng therm was be Cor busier... Ac the same time he Conable diet AGE PE COTID TESTE, perhaps semen that tnt satertere with fis clase stance abs  philosepher artist and that sr mighs disallow his chershed urban 
ideas to Hlourmsh oo. For this Svndiealism seemed to hold out some promise. Its doctrines were an-eclecte mixtuce of eliasm and egabtananism, technecracy and organiism, consery atism  and propressive thouphe.  The ambicunies omphied fs that position scem to have vanished atter the talbot France in June rage. Pleang ton obscure town mn the Pyrenees. Pe Corbusier eventualiv cast his lor with the collabera tlonist pevernment and went to Vighy. That decision caused a break  with has two closest Coworkers—his cousin and architectural partner,  anneret. and Charlotte Perrtand, with whom he had destined  Pierre  has classic turniture dhirmig the bares and pyacs. His colleagues pomed the Resistance while he tied to per work trom the Petain regime. Through COTHECS ETS wath fortner members ot the Redressemient Prongds and che Swndiabyt Movement now. in the puppet goverment, Le Corbuster was named toa panel meant to determing the new archi tectinel direcdon of the defeated natin, That he apportinent wats terminated as carh as fuly rogr was one of the lucktest things thatever happened tohun. Fle then went notte Paris, where his Compromise” postion would have been common knowledge. but hack to the Pyrences, where he sat our che rest of the Oecupation in salubrious anonymity, directing his restless cnergs to his writing and his art As  Curtis Wrote:  [De Corbuster's| acronis were abo untlucneed bs bis self umae asa propher, his Crude environmental determinism, and his his fonwist bebet chat acuews end. was about toa dawn ba this scale ofutopiin values. the trest dun has inthe reahvatien ot the plan, because this was for the greater social need over along period: did moto cur te be Corhusier that a pact with the devil might  besminch bins and his architecture.  In view of the humiliating peranes meted out te callaborators atter the war it now seems amazing that be Corbuster vot off se tihth, though perbaps noritone cakes mate account the hugh-rank ims Views otheials whe remained hidden i plan sight. even in high office, in France tor decades arter the Liberation. specially sarprising is the source of Le Corbuster’s most important patronage mi the muirmedrate aftermath of the war: the Ministers of Reconstruction, which commis stoned hint te burd rhe Marsedles Unite Whabinanon un ogs.  Le Corbusier reconeticd and reamted) protesstomaily wath his architect Gousin Pierre. and upon the complecien of the Marseilles proeetin fags was presented wath the Pegion ad Honneur by the ther Minister ot reconstruction, Eugene Marius-Pett, a decorated hero of the Resistance who Lirer un the decide gave be Corbusier (wo com: mostons on his heme town of Firnuas, Atecr the architest died in rates, Whee swimming in the Mediterranean, fis bods Lay in state in the Cour Napoleon ot the bousre, where he was culogized with great emotion by another Restseance nehtern the culture minister Andre Malraux. justas he had done a vear earher over the ashes of the revered Resistance martes foun Moulin  One explinacen ter be Corbuser’s cttortless reintegration inte the manestream od French archicestural attains this only bas government commision betare the war had been fis uoexe cuted Leucheur hous  gift tor making unsavory aspects at bis  ing scheme: was that he had. career aisibhe. musts he hada mote ob ious talenr ter pubherzing lus praseworthy acnsines on behalt ot architecture tor sectal better ment Phere ain be no doubt that be Corbusier's attemipes Co iigratatc laimselp wath the Vachs governs niust bave been kaon subse quently to atieast some ot his French chents. ones weir histers berg of creat relesance ip that Lissdianiarobsesscd seaaiety But his aver: riding genius was sureby the mgt paictor thacimade his numerous shortcomings: -polittal. protessonah and personal matter far less  thindosestraordinars strength ot sisioa, aivcuto a ail consetdagon, 
fe Corbusier was the mose intluential architect on the tear cen tunes since Palladio, another master pubbest who svachestzed the architectaral direction of am entire ane. In Modern art, be Corkusier’s career bears comparison with that of Proasse, whose comburition ot formal innovanon, stvlisue evolugon, unceasing research inte: the communiiove potentiilot his median, and demon sitahey made him as termudable and central a heure in painting and sculpture as Le Corbusier was in aire hitectare.  Another parallel between those utins beciume clearer anks utter there deaths. Both artists had been long aeknowlediedt as preeminent in their respecte felds. but the fuller revelation ot then ocusres and the deeper studs of ther agcomphehments supported the beliet that they were even more important than previoushs imagined. They were tideed heirs of those aeants ef history ches scoselt-canscroushy posed themschyes against: Picasso as successor to Litnin, Velazquez, and Gova, wich his fellow foremn-born Parisian be Corbusier as the  twenteth-century degatee ot Vitrusius. Albert, and Palladie,  6  AEVAR AALTO  AMONG THE MORE prquaer paradoses of Modermisr architecture was that owe ot the greatestorth exponents of its most widespread man tostanen—the Intermagonal Stvde—moved away from it forty sears  betore the rest of the word discus cred the shortcomings ot thar boldh  samiplitted bur severed circumscribed was of building. whieh wos but one etomansy schools wathie the Madern Mosement. fust four sores atter be Corbaster coditicd his basig desten principles in his frre Pout. ra New Ancbtectoe at rote, be bein to abandon the maa hinetike forms and pristine firushes of Purim and ratreduced the bromorphic contours and couch materials that be preterred durin bis bates Career  Le Corbusier badtemiore brilliant nes geueriben taalower chan tac Fintish architect Alvar Aglta, born in tSaS, clevert veces the punter at the Swiss-brench master who was such ate adept sel publroost chat ne aspiring turopean Modosust during Aaltas tormatee protessraral sears Gould fave been unaware of bis work. Pt haims that the [utes national Srvle Gould be aniversalis appled were ar the heareot be Corbusier's revolutionary procor. then be coud have dad ne better conhrmatian than the unexpected emergence of Such a cutted adher- entna cultural backwaters cs brohind was tind atten solbist resardeat im cosmopokois circles  From its nvepton, fe Corbusier s approach had becn tanned: tor 
beim less sumed tea northern Climate than that of the Mediter ranean, Whose vernacular builders traditions largely inspired hts tor- mula ot white wally. dat roots, and Gabi vedumes. fo have those features apphed with Comspicious sugcess ina subarcne fegion far a wide range of tanetions—ineiuding a sanatorium. a library. ao apart ment blogk, and a newspaper othce and printing plant. allot which Aalto desired in his homeland before tayo: gave a tremendous boost co fe Corbusier’s argument dhait the new architec tire could thrive throughout the world.  Yet despite the significant torengn reseumition Aalto’s fest Mod- emust schemes broughe bing betore he was thirty hve irelatively carck inthe career of an architect) he. dike be Corbusier bur quite indepen: denth ot him, toresas dhe creitac limitations mplicit inthe pew soles rigorous reductivism, With the skeptical insight "the git ot doube,” as he called it—that was alwavs bis most caluable critical tacults, Aalto came te realize. as he would write in ia 3y8. that “nature, not the machine. os the most important model tor an hitecture, 7  Twenty years liter ina telegram te John Burchard. the test dean of  Stu's School ot Huntanities and Socal Sciences, Aalto wrote:  INREE ENT Debt VOR S PEE DR DED SEES Porc] MELE LT EON EEAS BEEN POINTER OOD VS MAING NEM GOON TEMPORARY ARTE PHINK PROM EVER LEP ONE MY NE MERE ONE fs MROTIERN Bok - MVD ISMOSOS ER ADT TTOOS AL WHERE INET MEAN ELEMENTS Git DOMINATING SLOP PREP ARO HIDEO TURE THE REAL EPHING Is ONSET WHERE AVN SDANDIS IN ENTER  Aalte’s sugcessive changes of directan—trom bis inital Strapped Chassiealimode. parth inspired by Remassance buildings, tothe Inter  national Sole: and then te his very Personal brand of organics archi  Toe CiRCA Ore relatives waist tor dim te make boc ase he WAS TOV OT  coustratncd by purely ideological issues. An ampresario of duality and  ambinuity, he was willing tome ld scommnnh disparate poms ot view. tastngle desten. which can he seen asa binnish oarienad temdenes as wellanindividdal tratot his awa  Ruled bs Sweden trom the oweltth conturs Gadd psc aid then by Russiaunti tar. Finland for almost a collennmian had te decor: date rtself tothe dominant powers thar surcounded at bhard)y) remes bered. however the Finnish alliance with Germany doring World War Tio when Aalto s Gourtrsimen saw the fosserot tee css ii jomine forces with the Nazis te drive our thor most hated historeal encmy, the Russians --who bs then, even worse, were Communtsts, Like bud wig Mies san der Rohe be Corbusier and Philip folman. Aalto says. allroowalbag to cedkiborare with bascots. During bags qumket to Ger dans to ipspect Navi architecture as a aaest of Alber speon Pfidler’s Maniteans minister and court architest, aloo cheenbh urged his aneasy Finnish tellow travelers. “Pook. bows, dent vou think we sbould treat this trips acame?” Ata tarewel dinnerin the imfarncus Bertin sub. urbat Wantisce. Valle aase a speech chitin retoaspeet scum less than  dypoke. Rewalling arrip te the US inthe bite pases, he sand,  Once wher Daas wating ter Laurance Kocketeller ar the thar vard Clubs eves happened te hallona book wath red covers  onthe shelt. toons at down. and discovered that it was written  by an author completeh apkuessn tome ba the mame ob Adieu Hider Dopenedup the took ariandem. and ms eves felbana sentence thatimmediireds pleasedbine. ft sad that architecture ts the hing of the arts and music the queen Uhac was crough tor  me, bredt that | did moat need te read further  In sau. dear Nicholas Hebeswin bis Russiicatior campus tee sub atare the Duis of binkind culturally andi teutearace ec rulls usta dis empire, The Finny arteme revolt the movement called: National  Romuantiisin—wsas typitied bs the lush tone poets of fear Sibelts,  
which evoked the Gountry’s painesal landscape. and the tancitulls tolktore carly architecture of Flich Saarmenu, which harked back to what he saw as the paran siratits of the Vikimes. By the come Aalto began his career, atter eraduaning tram the Helsink: University of fechnolows in tesa. he in turn rebelled against such calculated: emocdonal vesthets propagundias and disparaged National Romany csm, which he called “thar absurd races period ot the thowenng ot the birch - bark culture when all that was clus. and Course wot con sidered sovers binnish.”  Yeu Salto was a Remanta in his own way. and ais souag rin dreamed of teanstormimg Binland into a Phorence of the Nerth. Dur ing brs nitiabvears of practee in his rural hometewn ot fyvaskvla, he designed sever esceptonally clegant buildings tna pared-dowa teal wan Renaissance manner ceamimocent of Atbortn Yer those sephists cated ( lasstoal paraphrases alse seemed thorough at home in ther Nordic sete, as did dus carks Cauntrs house destzas, which derive equally trom the villas ot Patladie and the dachas ot Karelia, che east era province that the Soviet Cian took back as boots atten the fionish de bade ot World War Tt  Daring cach of his three stvlistie pends. Aalto proved dinisclt to bon iunverenite ssathesiver bat necmere compeoniser, Vitor fis con version ta: Modernism am raat, he desaned structures according te “machine aesthetis” bur they were rareh as unvielding as these of his more nleohawgal Contemporairies, Vad his bromorphig schemes trom rays onward. which recall the rounded shapes of Jean Arp, vonled the seltindidgent bpresstonmism that deviation trom: recdlin car order cffa scems tomate. Atte wanted has architecture te coin bine quabues that seldom went tovether: at onee monumental buat monte cesat dis Savnatsato Lawn Pballot rags-res2c see dlustra ton eb pracneal bur sembolo cFinflandia Hall at ige2-rucd on Helsimbottlestble bur immutable sche Church ot the Theee Crosses of  fess- tosh at Vuoksennoka iinowitive but respecttub oat venerable  local traditions chis awn Countes house aid sauna ot mast-1964 at Muurataalor Alte’s true genius was for combining diverse quahties i Jonele propeot without any of them sccm: extramcous orm conmther,  net Aadro's most colebrated destin obras was his caduhagion vlass vase ot rese, commenty known as the Saves catrer the Helsinki restaurant he desened with bis test wate aad pomoapal collaborator, Aino Marsto- Aalto, who diedin tagot—thourh he gave dhe vase the more cisque name of Pskame Woman's Peather Breewhes. Vs Valta's ravishime propanators sketofes tora variety of product doesn suppest and asthe historal record vantirms, hes triendships during the ra ycs with Arp. Brancusi and Calder were dre likely sentee ot his new Interestin baamorphis torm, of which the emblemane vase ys his best: known cxample. The Savov case ost produced by the Finnish firm fitreata was a hishiaht of the Museum ot Moderna ets rag8 Valo centennill exhibroon, which abe displayed a number ot variants of  the tree term vessel. along with his strikingdy Arpesque studies tor it,  and the Brancusnin wooden molds used ints maaubacture,  fake other siembers of his generation, Aalto was excited by the potential chat uidustrodlzadon offered for bruins better and mare attordable architecture and design too broad public. * Phe real build: ing cconemics is how much ot rhe wood thins, ap bow Cheap acest, can weve.” he sakbin a pass lecture. Aalto often expressed himself in such pithy coments. [na speech te the Architectural \ssoeragorn im Londen in rages he sand. Oo What an architect says does nat mean a damned thing, what counts as what he does.” Phe could alse be quite sarcistie. Stung by postwar catiism ot his work an Finland, he named his speedhout Newie fro pheta or Patra oo Necone isa prophet indasoasn connie TL And around thartime fe rtd a Compentien ents foranew customs terminalis Pebsnki bacbor “Come otto Paradise.”  Por all bis enthasasar about iiass prouducnon, however Aalto began te sserry earky ti las carcer that modern obpects untccessarus  resembled the machines thar onembatured them eather than the 
people whe used them. He greath adiured the into. ative metal bent: tube furniture of Marcel Breaer, which Phoner—the Central kur: pean firm best known since the nud-nineteenth century: tor its mass produced benpeood: turmshings—introduced ino rg is. Much taken woth the structural ingenuiny ind formal danny ot Breuer’s Wash chain, Aalto boughe one tor his own house, but atter ling with at tor awhile he tound the chrome-plated: stecl too cold ta the touch and toa reflective at light and sound. Aalte’s response was the bent-ph wood furmrare be desipned trom: paar onward which wo his typeally syrthete fishion combed the conmonucus ley-and-armn torms proneercd by Breuer with a low-tech appleanen of Finland's most abundant natural resouree, Wood  Aatto’s bent plywood Painio chair ot ragr-1ro32 was first made ter the cponstnous tuberculosis sanatorium pwhich ranks amen his finese buildings), and subsequenth pucince production tor the world market. The precisely inclined angle ot the Paamnio chairs back was determined not by aesthere concerns bur co provide the opomum position for patents’ case ot breathing, as determincd by the archs teces consultations with doctors, an extension of Aalte’s conception otthe Pamue sanatorium asa “medical imsteument.” Eis tarninure iwhich causcd a sensation when it was exhibited abroad tor the tirst tmeao Pondon on ress. at bormam & Miasan, ot all phicest hada Protound ctfection countless Modern designers, most notably Charles and Rav Fames, whose molded-ph wood chars would have been unthinkable without the binn’s inventive precedents. Vhong: wath his nlassware and bis world’s tur pasthons of fate in Parts and of re39 me New York, Aalto’s Chaus were the most persuasive exaitiples ot his work te be oreulated intermanenals during his defimng decade, spreading his reputation tir bevond bis remore nagve bind, where three quarters of bis buildings were to be erected,  ood, as Aalto wrote. was for hin “the pnngipal matertal of sen-  sitive architectural detarhiag.” Certamly no ather member ot the Mad:  ern Movement used wood as extensively or with greater mnpenurts, tecling. and samen than he did) Rurthermore, fis wenuine athtmn tor wood led te the most important patronage of tay career: Piotand’s mayor forestry product COPPOT LEON, WW hose numerous Commissions tor hictortes, otftee buildings, mtanagers’ and workers’ house, and even entire Company Tow were fo become the maiosin ot the Aalto: ottice, the sope ot whose work nan front interior desan ta remonal planning. He was able coomake the alhance between high stile arch tecture and laree scale imdustry that most of bis Madernist col leanuesespecuilb Te Corbuster--could only fantasize about. The ever accommodating Salto, heweren worked in close concert wach bis countess toremost capitahsts- though he palitical semipathies and economy beltets remained thoroughty sogalist, Ip the bargain he gave Fintand’s lumber barons an onsalaable international show ase tor cher produ ts  Nowhere was this more evident chanon Aalto’ binmsh Pavilion atthe pase New York World's Fain new generally regarded as the anbirsterg febheht oot the exposition. Larn down atter the fair closed an age. it has been Kaown ceo most people through a single bhagk-andew hie VTE wage | rar Stoller’s widely reprodin ed photouraph at the pasihon Somaikortemor exhibition Spee isce illustration oe. So starthng and powertul was the architectueal presence of that tow: cnt gallery that comes asa shock to dearn that this was only an interior design scheme. Because binland could nor attord to ercet tts awn treestarding: burklieg atthe New York tar ithongh Aalto had done so quite econotiailly ive corns carter atthe Paris expositions, the architect worked within die bows cantines of one ot the Stripped Classical shelters provided by the fan's organizers for hese parc pants, Gamely detenmimed tognake the bestor chins, Valte athscd a row oot birch sapling trunks on one exterior wall ot dhe pasihon to make the METIS SET Sttlia tute SCO Hare OPERATED  Aaltoenvisioned the pasdion’s fite tour toot bark display space as 
resembling a torest Gdeanmg. a mout he would return to aga and awa, butoas here, alwass ina thoroughl abstract manner In no way drawn to the representananal kirsch of the atmosphere movie theaters thatwere popular a decade carher—this was ne Poow's bap: tand—he nonetheless devised light tiatures to evoke the glow of the aurora borealis and made the gram roore reflect the source of the wood products disphived init, Undalatng screens of vertical wood slaty grew trom the periphery ot the pavthorn’s curving Hoor plan, forming nonstructural walls that leaned prouressivels more iw aed as they rose higher, creating a sensuously embracing spave. fn sinuous outhine and vertical development, twas remarkably like a superscaic version oF the Savoy vase.  The closest contemporary architectural analog to chs uitertor was te be found an the Greac Workroom ot Prank Eloavd Wenghe’s Johnson Wax building. abso completed an case. Wrights similacl high corlinved. streamlined. imweard curring “Landscape” was aver: table prove of rreehke cohimos, making the techn of atorest even more exploit. Phe atfimits beoween Wrieht’s restcalized work of the buacs and that ot the i} mnish HUW OOTNOT WON Tot leet on the Aimeriain TIRAS- tern w he, TTL AT) Uke haracteristie outburst ot ROETICTOSIEY TOW ard al rival, danng a svasitte the Branish Pavilien progbumed Aalto te be a genius.  Several scholars bave examined Aatto’s relation to the binaish landscape in general and the terest in partwulan Yet Aalto’. meta phone woodland was above allimeant tobe a homan habitat and the human body. se palpable un the Voluptuous contoues of his destes, mattered as much to him as the actual landscape. He demonstrated fis tavored warntap techimque when he taught ar abt unmediatels atter World War Hi, during the design and consteucdon ot the Baker House dormitory of rage-ruge, bis most spectacularly cCurvaceaus structure, Aalto would arnve inthe studio ata vst. phice a borrle ot Aquayibon hes dratang table. and proceed to sketch the nude female  model he had added te the Curruhim, By noon the bette would be  empn, Aalte’s drawing arm would be suttaenth loosened. amd the Master—w heat scems tar tessa. was teh tanetoming aioholie telt reads to face the Challenges of architecture,  Toa rogt trticle, Aalto asserted ims perseral, curatiamal aes thar architecture and is details dream some was all part et bratos.” Finding that Conne don, he wrote, Was tor hon a ekitter of treemy the INTUIESe Creative process trom undue ratianal chinking although he onmuteed mentoring the catalog cole aleohol often phased tor himein  reaching that iiberated state!  Lrorget the whole maze of problems tora while, as soon as the teclotthe assrgnment and the mmnumerable denands me invedves fase sunk ntoins subconscious. |b then move on toa method of working thats vers mich like abstract aver dP amply draw by imstinet, qe architectural sentheses. bur what are sometimes quite Childhike Gomposimons, and in this was, on an abstract  basi. the mut idea uradualls takes shupe. a kind of universal  Substance that helps mete bring the numerous contradte tary  elements inte harmon.  That Aalto scmehow remains the srost underippreetated (nant ot the Modern SMlasement tas fad muck to de with the remoteness ot Finland. locas of the saat maperts of his built work, as well as the tact that his formally dittuse architecture as particularh cesistunt tothe kind of one shot phorography that cin adequately sump a burkbng byosay. Mies sander Rohe Aaleas dett and distacove tustan  obopposites was underscored fy the subtitle of the Muscunrot Vou  erm Arts pugs conmennil exbobirron and canidos, Adour Aadtes Betreven Hrentaniorand Materssleet the qarne the architect titiself pase tod tags lectures.  However thar duality. which was addressed on rhe ste y cntalog’s  excellent cssats, Was nor tills enough reflected ta the show s pha sical 
presentinon. The biggest and mast persistent problem an mounting any Aalto exhibition hay always been the apparent anpossibility ot unparting das architecture's allencompassing character through piecemeal objets ma muscum setting, He produced tew drawings with cnouch “wall power” to animate a gallery space--he was much more interested in construction than deprctrn—aind models, however wood they may bein explaining his schemes’ workings, can give little idea of the enviranmental sertings that inspired Avbto’s mdividualzed conceptions. which waned drimatwaliy tram one site te the pean Indeed, Aatta’s adherents insist that his gers can be tally Compre: hended oniv by visi che birldings themselves, whichis trac ot all architecrs’ work, ofcourse, burewerwhelmingly soa this nsninge. Feemplitving che dithult. at anderstinding Aalto’s wreatness at second band is his moscrmpertant house, Vila Mairea of rast-tage in Noornarkhko. Uhis was comimssioned by Mare and Harry Gul Tichsen when she was heiress to, and he the Chief executive ot the A,  Abistroam Company manutacturer of tarestry products andar the  time Priland’s largest Corperagen, The Gullohsens were also owners ot Artech. the companys tharsoll manutaccures Aalte’s turniture. Phere house sas remarkable tor its Connections with Finnish industry as ait moas an aroste achievement, ranking among the hatt-dozen ar se esscotial masterpicess of O6enteth century residence destin  Buailoon the Ahistront tanul's heavily wooded Compound near ther tiray’s headquarters ro cual western binkind, \aila Marrea as come pletely unprepossessini when one first sces ity pringpal tigade, a modest looking. low slung. iwo-story structure Clad in where pamted brick and natural wood siding. Phe tront door as protested by a caneps supparted by uroups of slender unpecled birch sapling trunks. That forest arose mott comanues msiate dre enters hall, where the stairwat is sereened Pxomore smoethl trushed birch posts ot the same dimen- sors as the sapling tratks Outside  Though Villa Marrea’s floar plain tollaws the familiar P-shape  of the English Arts and Crates country house. the spatial develop ment Aalta Germed otf within us aatines os stinminuls ormgnal Assmmetoal and episodic, the interiors untold as a sequence of reve fanons prompted by subtle chanues in fevel, floor surtace. and orienta oon todahitht, oiiking the house reef more fipanese than Pirepean Gremne In the standard hierarchical PTOcesston frog one foam te the nent. In tact rhere Scarceny seent ter be rooms acalhonly congenial and Casual atroupings of tatmiture dnd obrecos aiid architectural elements. thatappear to hase been randoms, oven temponiah, placed.  This was a thoreughmorny: rethtaaiay ot the style af an uppers hiss rosidetiee, Here te this domain of plato nats ate none af the Convent tonal trappings of wealth though the Gullichsens assembled an Hpressise collecoon ot Mleder aeth Instead, the weaerous How of space. the ommupresctae at ranural dlupinacen, and the constantven tact weth trees aad ska bevond the Gast rind very expensive winders walls become the true luxury a reerdemmg: of values thar has had tremendous international mfucnee ever since.  \ecmarredetinton was accomplished in the Cited States by the San Praticisco Bas Arca architest Witham Wirster, Aalto’s Arierivan contemporary, kindred spirit, and close tried The spacious: fut unperetentiods houses Wurstor desiocd tor omlishtened West Coast chents during the Groat Depressson and atrer World War Ub rar Counter tecostentatien. Which. it these ccononmmalls and poliacalls Une erhani Cbs, seuntied TWscrsdttye anid poreng lls hatlimnaters One thinks at che mmultiatliond dellar misgisiens thar technology  tycoons dase butitsimec the bog Sar Pacis Neathavest hacales. Sone  of those quanti arructures whieh: orc closets roscmpble tesort hotels thar Pris ate residenes trike A OUETE PSC TIN GTOIE CUE ONS TEATS toward temtonal traditions. natural wader iis, cs eninge teen tron, and ccolowcal “sustarcabilits,” but ther excessive st20 megaites those testures, and mene of those houses bernis fe aipprotch  Wurster's sumptuary estianinor Aalters atts iste iid, 
Since Aalto’. death in race, fis reputation has never been as high asctoshonhd be. His taudtless integration ot the taai-made and the matunal would doubtless appeal co these who support the cnseiren mental Gancepts he proncered. Tthonly away could be tound te open the eves of rhe general publis tothe hte athrming venias ot Aalea, tor the degree te which fis humane pritaples are emulated wall continue  tosignits the arcana of ans architectural culture.  “s]  CHARLES AND RAY FAMES  BECAUSE ERANSFORMATIONS IN architectural stvle so often tollow Matter qoonmemig. segne. pedithad, or tochsological change, iis not surprise that the buridiog are was so onmutable daring the mventieth conturs. atat wil lakes be oven more se dunn the msents first. And certainly tes. peruads on madern Histere were more marked by a can- lenwtron of suddie chanaes than the sears gust atten World War TE Wath \me  iid Minories primis on the miterrateonal scone rattted bs vieters,  nhoas industoes rem igorated by che all-out military ettort  pore broweht an uisent need tor new catlan and Commercral can- atructigg bor mtreen years there had been an architectural hiatus in the treated Statessiiposcd bs the Great Depresstor and protricted by Tho warcinte ban onasdb sonmessential buildin:  Dhosin ag s oppertunities tor Ameneat architeces at list seemed  abioss Giatiess, especially a beust for homecomunt veterans and thoipnew tamites birat das bad wot been umawarted. bong before the endoot the conflicn forward-thinking architects. crmes. and editors beni te phan for bare scale comstructien, the fast such hoon in a neneration. Vecuipreecdented opportunity presented itselr: the Chance reoresiuape Che scerkd in the gleaming unare of Modermsnn which herore World War Thad been bars  the mere than a sporidt: phenomenan inthe torte stares  wespenmontibian Burope and lit 
Despite avid proselytizing. in dis country during the ragas: by Phehp Jobson and others on behalt ot the arbitrary version of Mod: ermim thes called the Entermational Side, io took the forced industn ahzagen of Amencan architecture in the first halt et the rages te make a case for aotruly mechanied Modernism. Cnet thes, Mod emmst architects often had te resert te custem tabo uation er ourtmher tukers to aehreve the machine gmaversy advecated by be Corbusier aswell as the Bathaus after ts mital baprossionist phase, Stucco masqueraded as remtorced sonorete; custom made fixtures capred automobile headhehes; and covets were usead tar decorate. ALL such stearegies exposed the tact that theeres calling tor archites ture te voatvedt World War fl  brought with ve the real thing. Construgton applying advanced tech-  reflece technology had outpaced: technol  neal developments in the use of steel, Concrete. ways. and plastics supplanted the highly aesthetiecd version of Moderns that had been presented in such atteatien getting exhibitions as) fohmasen’s “Machine Are ot res g atthe Muscontot Modern Artowith its ever Appropriation of propellers and ball beara as sidptires bratrecs,  In the scars between the world wars it was Gaise for architects (0 make use ot the ornamental detal har was Commer toons styles of twentieth century architecture trom the high manner ot Beau Arts  C Lassnasmoand the Vets amd (ratty Movement teasing h poputise modes  as Art Deco abd Spanish Colonial Anetcan architects of every sev lis- te persaaston contd reboon the cheap Libor ot imine artisans, and the dethitianans econenin ot the Great Depression prompted a new Hurry of attordable apphed decoration. Phat tomiten came to an aibraptend with Vieris ents inte World War dh  Phe unheralded and seems aitomatiy dace prince at the anor namented International Side un this Gountry atter lags was among the sagnidiitleasacies af the war, Dyer betore the hostibities. the inthis of refugees from Hitler's Germans had changed the narure ot Amerie  ein irchite tural education, previously demutated by the hisconeving  Beaux-Arts method. do re gS. owe former directors of the Baubaus assumed intlucntial academe positions: Walter Gropius as uatrnian ot Harsard’s Department ot Architecture, and Tadwas Mies wan der Rohe as head of dio architecture school ut the Arirour dlirer dbnors: Inscitute of Techoology in Chica,  The euphoria ot the amiuediate postwar pertod was rete red ia the parucular gualitics assumed ut the Cited States by the Internati Sole iehick had become veetialiy a synonven ter Modern rehire ture bv that cing’ —burldinas be cime taller more expansive. and more  transparent than ans that had been built in burape, thanks co che  STIUCGINE Gapacities mide possible chroggh engineenmag and matertals the US devcloped tn wartime. Pho now architecture Wis scents express: Ing Aimer s optimist. outlook, just as the fragmented saisions of German Papressicnism fad mirrored the aaxieties that ascompanied the end ot Workd War bie thar country. Phe cndorsement ot the Inter national Side as the otneral architectural tera atthe American bisa hess estabisament was rapadand sanomeide. boresamph, Sawarines, Saarinen and Assowiates’ General Morors Techoieal Institute of rag t- ross Warren, Michtsin: Metro Bellusches Fauttable Savings aid Loan building of togg fag8 un Pordand. Orogen: Skidmore, Owings & Merilis Dever House of rosterysain New Yorks and Harrison and Abramesargs Vieod birding of rast cecaan Pittsburgh gave corpo: rate approval tow mescment that had been considered ahen and sab MEePsIVe WOOT PROS COITID EE SS b id previously baile the if Ae idqunirte Ts. The swittoriove casas frome the tepid © Lassicab balectreisen ot the tyses and toward a bold now Modertisin sugaled one ot the aest extreme stutts ra thie atoads ed atebites tural paste ait parromarse  No Amercan ndiitect aod designer better oscmplified that change than C harks bames. whe with fis wit and parties Raw boames, ar: keted bighestole Mode cnismemiote adepely. prefinibh. and democrat cally than wai of ther Contemporines. Prom augi. the vearot cher  marnage and the teunding of ther firm. antl his death ar rats, che 
couple broweht torth a prodiieus cutpouriag of work that ranged tram atchite ture wad materiors to the design at furniture, graphics, and evhubicens. as well as tims. mulimedia presentanons, advertising, and the logotypes aud other eroblems ot whats now known as worperite dentin Through ther concerted, Coteistent approach, anchored ino ther almost religrous beltef an rigerous research and Patient experiment, tne bameses donunated Modernist destin in this count throurhout che did quarter of the tworteth century. And they achieved what tew other prastigoners before theat had been able toabe thes wave date Miodermsm a buman aspect and made it nat onks nonthrearniig bur tmdecd personable,  Charles Bames was boron pyacty sin vears atter Lows Kahn and one year atter Phuip Johnsen, The son atia Cial War veteran, Eames was amember ot the architec tural eneraten whose vouthtul prospects were arcumscrtibed by the Great Depression His bewhood taseia pon with me hares aod enmmeenmi as neta allesident a the Neo- Georgian and seme Art Deco houses he builtin the a sos, atter bere dismissed trom: Washington Crisersity in his mative St. bouts One redsem giver: ter bis expulsion was hus overcealous advawaes of che then out-ot-tashion work ot Prank Dlowd Wrahe. even theugh that cathy aesthete bad no disceruble impaction bames’s methodieath rattotialized sovles then or thereatrern Doubles owas Wright's heron serec ot bomselt and brs Conception of arcintestare and desiun as an lodivisthle, orimis whee that appealed to the voung man, and the overall Goheretice ot the Fames ocusre does indeed recall Wright's. in FOOIREDy HE bat at Ei its SEVHIStig Speg ites.  Pobboitens showunt bames’s cari buildin caught the eve ot Phel Sateen. the emigre Finnish architect and director of the Cran  brook ACadems or Arrthe Michizan desi school thatwas Vmerica’s  vlosest equisaeort te the Bauhaus cithough onk the Bauhaus each Ponco whidh cmphasized Chute Saacnen ne doubt saw something of  honiseltin bames, severnibot whose better schemes ot the period bore  avanue resemblance to the masters own stele. a Nordic eariagtot the Art oand Crate Movement chat. in Saarnien’s adaprition, had us err sins tn the desnins et the Vienna Sceessien andiits aseat stub talk morts. Saarinen, Whe oftercd bames a tellow ship an cag, maisted an a coordinated approach in whieh the structure, che formate, and the denals ota building would all retleer che same conceprot design. Phrs was ancarls conetet the Arts and Cratts Movement. and at hada Last Inicetfecteremi on bames but aberon another new €ranhrook sta- dent. Ras Karser.  Borman Sacramento r. pag. Kamer began studving artin New York dune the early res cs woth the pater Plans Hlofmmann, he onest mitluential avant warde studio teacher of ho ome, Hotprarin’s enthust ASTI. TLLDSTTMISSTEAD ct Peropean prinsiples at Ubstractian, his Strang CIPO asis Or the struature at the Pature plate, wn his PROer por sOen et bromorpha and quasi Agural terms ip nenrepresene itrenab cm posers all became part of Ray bares’ desgin philosophy. atret Cranbrook rcdirected her mrerests trom the fine to the applied arts.  The Baceses tarcried six months berore Peal Harbor and settled mebos Amelie. wii thes chose for ats anfterimab wan of lite aad lack ot sega distractions As ther longrime colleriucs and chroniclers Mianlse and Job Neahuaer peanteddy, observed, “¢ harkes amd Rass Dees were structured: ie dr aamest qtemaste was amd can be dese ribed very samply: Charles's hte was dus wartk and Rass dite was € harles.” Vet heron work was nonetheless co parinioune miportance to Ran, Joath thouul she was tecopents compere warh fer charsnite, Wateis seta Spouse. Fagether the couple embraced Fehon Ruskies praeprot  - |  feo debor aiid cook a puritanical pleasure mie ametustoaniis bat  NOTICES ec Wake ct [tte that Cgarles described as beri “based on dome rather th in has cape .  Phe bamescs pretend teostay apart fron bes Amecles hte und isseveral artiste suboultores. Visitors tethers ureber in the sietrepwa  Wwe Deeth atest anew ere  Tiss Verne sectuan romarke d tian in cout 
Inaity complete detachment fram: the outside world. The couple conduated an cnergente and increasingly lucrative practice in which their individual eftorts were tor the most part inseparable. fn her landmark cove brosraphs, Charles and Kav bantes: Destgners of the hreenteth Contin. the bstocan Pat Kirkham pamstakingly recon: structed ther working cebatensiip i @ktersiy cnterviesss with former Lames Othee emplovees, the anh possible source of much primary information, same the partners wrote virtually ro memos, commun cated serbaih, and worked with niodels aod photogeiphs rather chan developmental drawings Irs true that Ray boumtes was nets tals cavolved as hee ar hitect husband ithe design of the qrnav’s very tew buildings. throuh which he pursued the Modermst Gitmert ota builds soxnabubiry based on inten taneable odustaal components char would be beth econo, etband readily avaihable. Yer her couetab rmvb ement—at once atu wand forehiimin albother create aspests ofthe partnersiip was treatly omereseeaiced until the pubbertion at Kirkham's revisery studs, deed. her pear was to show chat Ras was no acquiescent helpmeet bor an equal partner in one af che most truittub artista col laborations of the Modern Maoyement Howesen as was cident to catvene who spoke with the endear  igh datty Mrs. bames who died an russ. a decade to the dav atrer her busbandi one of the leading Culpets in unpusds downphone her status was the Lick herself) Wath aominimum of teministe spectal  plotdiog. Kirkham traced Ras bames’s self abner  ATI person to peosisrent preqadices ayaiise women in architecture itll all too pro nounced in the pwenty test century) Taking ag count ot che dithcul- ues thar Ray Bames misht hase had it she had worked on her own, hee broutapher also gives a phinsthle interpretation of the private emotwintl contract the bameses devised: Kay had a deep need to be protected. whole Charles possessed in equal desire to protect, though  he alsa Qaused his adermy wote Considerable emotional distress,  With rare and admirable cat. Markham showed thatthe drabolm alls handsome Charles bames had many extramarital atta: she described thers cffestion his protesstonal celinens woh his wite and revealed that durmy che lire rages Ras bames conmstdercd diverec: "Partot her decision to stay with Charles alaese corraihy was a desire Ge remain  nat lose working partnership: as was his decir te stay weathir the  marrage and that partnership.” As was demonsceated by Ray Lames’s complete inability to keep the Bames Otfve gous after her husband's sudden death, Rirkhant wrote, [Se bbinketig wos [lis] peeteetcion, howeser that Ras never fad te tise ap to domme things she did not Ihe or do well. his meant thar she never came te grips wath cerca matters in which she was nara skifled as Charles, paracalarh bust ness dealings, mose things pracheal and speaking in public.”  Incan dhaetonatems amadvsrs ofa pata architec” lives too atten  overloone  histast ROC Tipe Pha iee TE CETTE Ab professorial persona, Ritkham considers the meaning at the Dameses’ distimenve was ol dressing. Their Clothes auvht have scemied merely an artier version ot postwar Calitorgia Casual hein shagks and epen-necked shirt, Wearti 2 bow Te OTE Tar Corpor dite COmPerOnoes, SAO WR EEHTE, pets ant dirndls, ballet slippers, and a bis bew other har—bat the book wasn factas caretulls thought otis Weriehes aaachronipsde presen  tation oof hiniselt asa caped Aesthoms Moscone dands or Le Cor  baser's droliimperscnaton ota bowler bitred Mavritthin bourgears.  The Fameses’ iiterest in ther poranal version oot what iy pow called poseer dress: wats as honitial and exdeting as then work habits. Phe Couple drove there trends tocdistractiot in search of just the neht tabme. ribbor, cr braad ter cher net-sqcotthand outfits. Indeed. Charles's sports Giothing was talon mid: by Dorothy Jeakins, a teddh wood costume desatier, Mest nese qitaly, Rocklin bheaed Ras barmess lith-rerl pradtoces. whe gh ste wore all the custo her lite, to fuds Garlind’s costume in Phe Wasa of Os Such compariscnns  are sound: a phore ot the barmieses ciker in reg g shews the perky 
Rav beanng an uncanny resemblance to the soung Garland. In her iNCongruous, nAChanging Costume, the elderly Ray—hindly, imgenu ous, and exclaiming ar every new sight that bedazzled her—seemed hke a stout, superannuated Dorothy,  Mans crimes have concurred that the bameses designed the hest furniture ot the Modern Movement, The most important of those pieces —the series of motded-ply wood destans introduced im tog6—hase with stood the test of time so well that thes have tended te overshadow the couple's other, highly varied ageomphshments. Although most great twenneth-century architects -ancluding: Wright, Mies van der Rohe, Le Corbusier, and Aalte—destned noteworthy turniture, are biteets less renowned for ther baildings chan their fucmture--including © barles Rennte Mackintosh, Joset Hottmann, and Marcel Breuer —have been consigned toa second diviston. Bu the rascs, however, a sideline in furniture was again deemed a prestigious adjunet te an ambitious build: ing career—the designs of Frank Gehry, Michael Graves, Richard Maer and Robert Ventun come to mindset tor an architect to be most famous fora chair remained something ot a habrir.  The Fameses’ first furniture Collection, introduced in rege, included a baste molded plywood desizn meknamed the Potato Chip Chaos because the compound curves and golden brown color ot its thin seat and back brought to inind that popular Amervan snack. The chai soon became a commercial success. and mv aime rose to the status of a Modernisticon. Prohtably nianatactured first by the Bvans Products Company of Los Angeles and subsequeadhs by the Herman Miller Furniture Company of Zeeland, Michigan che Fameses’ most com- mitted sponsor, the famous design grew outot the couple's pre-war Interest in biomorphic forny and their wartime experiments with molded plywood.  In togr, Charles Fames and Pero Saacmnen (Phel’s sent took test place in the searing category of the Museum ot Modern Arcs Orga  Design in Home Furnishings competition, The most direct source tor  cher prize-winning chair was Aalto’s molded ply wood seating of the  previous dlecide, which oftered a warmice, low-tesh alternative to  the metal teamed designs ot Breuer be Corbusier and Mies, When the  net le wed barmeses settled in bos Angeles later thar year they contn- ued focexplore the parentalot bending Laminated phy wood inte sen- stall cononuous terms. and later apphed there findings to che design eharephins scars and tiseclipe campornents forthe Pans tirnarwhen it switdhed teamiiitars produsten dura World Wir ih Phes abo devised mohled ph wood spires and stretchers that contormed to the con touo ofthe human bods more narurally chan Convenoonal recolmear modes did. Phen. in ene at the smoothest retoolings of a wartime Industry te peacetime purposes, the Pameses redirected Pyars’s tocus Tes fupieture the SCOT CINE d along, the STEN linac Sof comtort and Vout copys therurthumedn aids.  Kirkham prnpernted Ray bames’s precise role an the desclopment othe Potate ¢ hip © hain arguably the most inventive piece af seating sme Machael Phonet’s disassembrible bentwood designs of acenturs rath Raw bates had been much toluenced bs her art instructor Hans Hote  posbon—as with the dy naam tomion beosecen ads ang ing and reced-  nsadea thar there must be “push and pall” ina com:  vag Planes thar abe ottes explored in his own abstract paintings. This poate a cardinal rule tor ner andi clearly discernible in the Potate Chup Chaie’s broathtak.ng separinon aod dramanzaton ot the bie morphic wooden scat and back. whteb are pored above. and away  trom, both the metal lees and rhe metal bracket suppectuag the back  Northe loastet the uppulses unleashed in Arteria bs the eurbreak OF Pele bags Wasa pent up hunger tor consumer goods, especnailly honsthedd obits tar re patratted soldiers and then incipient tannlies. Toiany soung people atthe dawn ot the Atomic Age, the destns ut the Depression seats whether Crutronste revivaling ar trendils streamlined calreads scerned annoqtuated, whale the hehe athordable,  Internal farsitare otth: Parieses caught the bues ant spirit ot the new 
day. Unquesnonabis this was an advanced Giste—even “hirhbrow,” mothe Jaw brow pargon of the tune — burt the Lames line was notincom prehensible to those primed bs sigh eather mass-produced: bramer- phic designs as Russel Wrights Ameoncan Modern corms dinnerware, widely avaiable since a was uerroduced by Cues Steubens dle Por- fervan tay7 and another staple ot postwar Modernist interiors,  The Famescs’ tirniture series emerged trom concentrated bursts of ACU TG as ther cttce nd look QA Treas Vane ob tssinments, bur their casumyg desiens tor Herman Miler, however excellent, never enurely superseded the inital group. which retained its freshness because of the Couple's nisistence on relondessdy) cefinomy ther designs betore releasing them inte the marketplice. New ideas came trom sources as varied as Vermee Beach, not fir trom therr ottiie, where thes saw the surfboards thar prompted cher Elipucal Liuble ot rasa; onthe Victorian men’s Clibs of London. which inspired their capa ctous Lounge Chur and Ottmann ot pase, wath sett leather uphol- stery Charles Bames specced tegive “the warnt receprive look of a Well-used first bascmian’s met.”  Adaptible and accommodating as the Bameses’ turniture could bes it was pertected under condimens of Gormmplete autonomy rare incthe product design iodustes aid unheard ot evo an the mast exalted echelons ot che building art. Architecture, wath its unexpected variables and esiaible Compremises. allows for inuch fess arent congel than the couple demanded. and this oxplans why they did se few buildings. To be sure. ther own house of tag7- baggy in Pace Palisades belongs on any shorthst ot great Modern Amer: forn structures see illustration wa Dome overshadowed by is more glamorous see through Contemporaries Mbes’s Farnsworth house and Johnson's Class Hause othe baames house nenetheless attracted a cult rollowing among those who sa anata imane Modernism that was lostas the International Stvle metamorphosed trom the marginal  tothe imperial  Offigally Known as Case Study House #8. the kames residence wap binds partet the ae hite tune demonstranon progeunonsuniced intogs by John batenca, cditor and publisher or the Los Angeles- based pournmal aris Co Ar dutectere. Recruitimg the inost advanced soung architects in Southern Calitormay Potenza setour ra provide vasily adaptable models tor developers and: homeewners about to beni the most cancentrated period et domeste Gomstructians it Amecian tustors. Afthough Richard Neutra and Rudolph Schindler had binle seminal Modernist houses in Southern Cabtorni: bevanning, inthe carl roses, Pntenca wanted examples more suited te the mod estimeads of average families. Parcrpants had their houses published  in detest Vretutes  are and tecerved some nancial help, butin retuen had to agres to open ther homes to the publ toca while atten thes were cuinpleted. The Case Studs Program won many converts to the Modernor Grose. imdeven thounh most postwar suburban destin tol lived more Gomservative prototypes suchas the niass produced houses ot the Devitt organization on the Bast Coast—a few enbisht- ched decrlopers, Tike the Calitartina bader Joseph brobler rethected the progressive atrtudes Eetenza promoted. through which por Modern residential destin WWoas accepted on the West Coast well betorc at spread throwehout Viera  Charles Bames wanted to show hoa acomeless but wholly conten porary structure coud bo ussembled trom reads made parts thar would otter substantial savings over specnilly constrasted elements, which etroaddenermoush te che caspot budding. Preterriag to use the better parted herr badger tora spectacular sigan ids lis Chittrop meadow overlooking the ocean in Pacith. Palisades the bameses and Potenza itor whorl ¢ tarkes bames and kero Saamoen built a sitatee adparear residenee, the Case Study House dy of regs roger revealed from the outset there intention that this fowse would be ot historical impertines  Charles Batnes’s mital desma ot rags resembled a brrdise rarsed  on Splthke supperts above the sloping terrani. Bur his vasan te the 
Mitseunm oat Modern Ares rag7 Vhes san der Rohe retrospective Qaght hom up sort. Phere he saw the German masters unexccuted design tor aronnirkabls similar house, and perhaps teary chatges ot plaisarim, he returned to Cabtornia and came up with a completely new configuration. The house, as he revised and erected it. wits a handsomely proportioned pare of sample paneled boxes une tor hiv: Ingone for working —set thitan the grodnd Phe rhythin aicerplas of opaque, fransiieent. and trounsparent wall clemients wos remus contat Classical Japanese architeccure, but without ans angguariin ocethnognaphie overtones  The ostertorsS monoghromante Modernist palette of black, white. and grass endivened by acceuts in the De Stub Movements hallovark ted and blue. brngeig toomind the paintings ot Mondrian. Bur in plac ot the third priovary codon vellow, Bames addled a qgeld: panel reminiscent of fapanese screams. Neshaped cress braging wires an seme ofthe panels bring ceotund samiblir use of the same structural device tn the bameses’ bookuises and other storage units ab base. Phe  secluded. verdant serr:  wy ovhaded by towerme cucalsyprus trees that decades later aimost obscured the long main tagade, muugated the induptealchbaracereat the structure. whch ait enchanted glen seems more bhe abies tos thatea seal factors.  Phe tarneses almost uptaling abiles to make uritanan desipn teel Toots os domonstrated most persiasivey inthe mtenor ot ther house,  which they occupied untill their deaths, and which remains remark  aby auchangedl Phere the couple worked out ther most mtrtcate ever: secup “funetioral decorapiens asdhes somew har detensneh quabited Ihab teemmime assctublage of turmture and objeces that turned the  somewhat stark architec tical container inte a stoking backdrop tor  ther wast collestons ot folk ar matse crafts, plavthimes, house  plants, and tou cdyects csee llastranans che,  Almost sit handed), the bameses broke the Miodermst: taboo  avaiost dram on the biter at cultuce and reitroduccd a densits  of decaibnot seen in archite turalinteriors since the Victorian Age. fa this respeet the bameses can be seen as the mssiige lak hemw een Modernism and Postmodernism. alleasig, dhe eereration ot are lites ts that directly) tellawed them—mosr notably Charles Mioure, Robert  Vencurn and Denise Scart Brewin toamdalge thei tose of the decors  tie ormimentanon and clutter proscribed bs the Patermational Sis le When the Pames bouse was badt. much was mide ot the fact that its pretabricated steci tramewark was crested bs only five ticit in just sateen hours-- Kind ot Modernist barr raping putative pret at the scherne’s lou. adaptabiie. and economia Ver as with almiese ail other mnovatne structural concepts at ther aiasepten, the realits turned outte be quite different. Phough € fares Bames boasted that his house cost tn amivingh tow $i per square toet to buildin cone  are foot for wood frame con  toast te the standard Siu.g: per sa struction at that time—he peelested te factor im the huge amount ot preparatory. labor oe his office staff in speatyinc rhe many compe nent parts, which Were mot as Commtonplice as he assumed thes world bes to sas seding of the bine expense at the steel as opposed tow, trams,  Whatever the trig Gastoot the Pames hatse—irs archiet would never disclose the tuiadameunt ub was bs iis rechouims mmpeacn walls capenses. Phar sobering espenenee dampened the parr’s enchu-  seism ter oorclitectanel practee They tuebed visas fren burldiag  Qeomocteh prefabricated, att  es Ofte Lake has  desnmnm ands the Neuharts wrote  the shedt atractare was not desmined bs the ban  Eases Deen terh- Century COU1 fer pain, Darth farnitre destinies turned architect Gare Rierecdd. € harles barnes burl omnis one ereat werk. and vet that was ale eneaph to conselstite and sustain a melon architectural rs patation,  fhe scar atrer ther house was Compicted. the barmicses produced the frstetimore thanermho stort thas that becarrie foe most stctin  capt partooft ther output during the sccond talt of thor career 
In ces y they put digether wharis now considered to have heen the first mulimedia prescatition. Cyilled Co amrencation, this conuincaon of the bameses interdiscipliiars interests combined tlm, slides. graph less Musi. aromas, and spoken Cammentitsy tna syresthete manner thacatreampred. with Gansiderable suscess. fo feast the ninetecath century ponon of the Geswnduen teen ina contemporary techne: logical mold,  The bameses” proncerim asc ot malople image prope. tote ost memorably exploited in ther nweaty awe screen film Phaak, shown inthe bames-desizned theater inside the eyrshaped test Pavilion at the rabg New York World's Far which was conceved and sketched by Pero Saarmen shorth betore bis death in tee scsought ta break dow decepted notions of the quintessential Modern medium. keen when their films were confined toa single screen, the Fameses could  carn ottextlarating tears ot imaginanon, Thisas excmplihed by their  outoreetnible Ponce f bear imade in ove versions, ib bgeS and ratty Which shows orders of maunitude im the universe through a sequence of progressions trom the submoleular te the wakes,  Estibioor design beoume the bameses’ last mater enterprise, bar chepts suchas te stand the Uintted States posermment, they ereated the public cquivalent of them prsate intemer spaces, many davered Mosaiesotimaites, objects, and typography thatottered a cumulanive HN pressioty at subrest cation thirt was treaquench THISS TERR EA PSE EN TEE Modernist ntilens instaliations, Here them intent was clearh cinematic. bor The Workbot Pooiklin and Tettersan” of pace. in exhibition in Washington, (000, Gomunissromed by the Amermcain Revolution Bi ceptenmial Admiusteation, the Lameses qaxtapesed historical artitacts aod photoyraping reproducdons, fenuthy wall fibels aid punchy Mmottoes inscribed an overhead banners, home with maps, full-scale architectural deta. and esc a stutted huttiada,  Becatise somuch way puta view Ca barter pace tepid ot the  bameses” Lire alesis in several mediuais! ne sasitar was likely to  come awa with a predictable experience at the pamoramie evhibt den, Atonme ensagigh populist apd appropriately digaitiead, the Instalhatuen Gomrmursiwatce ovochundredey carol ideas wath a pour vablste immediacy that tew histone surveys atrenwand have: been able tocaipart, even with moeseuns areas i rohan. on clectrortis gimmicky. Widels unutated. the daameses’ displays techmigues were the Hol maritestarion ot there cit tor ssarhesiaing sisualintoraition  aud proscatmig at tor wide qodicnes waeth ait, Giste, and ergcuilits  One cannot help wonders what the bameses would have been  able todo woth the Computernener ited tes broloaes thae tills emerced  only atten ther deaths tchading the Internet. morphing, holography,  virtual roakes, and a hostot others, One can be certain. at che very least. that these Sommitted busmatists would have becr able to iden- ats ind sumugare the best aspects at the eebernote Intormacen Age: whatever they miht hase done. thes would have added the iaproy: ma clotneet thar was albawass atthe center ot ther poveus aad ane lasive  ait 
POUTS KAHN  THE GREAT MISFORTUNE of bauss Kahn's long-chwarted bur alte imately Trip hant Sateen wos bis berg born in pact. a poor vintage wear for Modern architesss, who, by that acerdent of timing, were ta be hindered bs factors de more within their controf than the weather Too wou te be Carriaad afone bs the tiesetlood ot the Modern Maove- mentatter Word War Lo Rabo fer decades remained perpetually out af phase sorh the nades of economics and polices that hirnely deter  nome whee. whut how. and how much an architcee buds. This  Amencain hovaitae was often marooned hy CUTOUPTING TT GS. that  destroyed lesser tanres as posers inthe pasos and warn the rages  took ther dion bus contemporaries, Thus one of the wonders of  Raht’s protesssucl te ms that this most slowly deceloping of Mod  eroist masters wos ible fo porsesere aainst such ammense odds and to be Gonsidered at hast bx most histornains-satter a mature phase of  PHS EM CUTS Seltes. fran the earls pus S tathe cagk pactcs—aas the  world’s leading midccntars architect  Only Prank Clos d Wereht ode as great challenge to bustiess-as- dsdalon the mwenieth contans archetecrure af this country rf aed that otthe cutie seodd Philip lohnsan, amare acute pudee of other aretha tects talents than fis oseiomicager desman abilities onght supytest, jus  thed his late dite taendships with mucheveumiier colleages trom the 
rectssonward by clirmning that the architects of hos caen generation incladinge the Rocketeller famuly courtier Waltlice Harnson and the corporate havcnite Gorton Bunshatt ot Skidmore. Owings & Mer- nllcheld hittic mterest tor him, Bue Johnsen convementh tended te tontet his most tower contemporary, Kalin > born at Fstema and his elder bv tye years. Kahia’s quixotic quest. anid che isttutional plantades ot postwar Vimenoain Modernism, tor an architecture that would fave a decper meaning served as a strong reproach ro che ever earcerpim and accommodating: strategies at fohoxon and his svmbi ety proteges the decades toliowang Kahi’s death in pasty  Rahn whose parents brought bin to Philadelphia at the age ot five: was a full veueratien vounser than the Mialent Mosement architects of the firse wave. including the nee greatest, be Corbusier and Mies san der Rohe, He Commanded neither the ravenaveness  ot be Corbusier ner che ¢  vance ot Mbos. Archites ture—both ity Cone cepoon and its cvceutian never ceased te be a struggle for Kahn, He Jacked extensive prictal experience until well mite middle age and never mastered the appearance of ettortlessness that many creators use to conceal their Eabors, pists bis onrbrans to mask his persenal awhwardacss made potennal Ghent believe thes were dealme woth anuorchable oddball, Vong them was an unnened Robert Kennedy,  Whom ruag Warned bis sester in Liss facquehne agemst hiring Rahn  todesagn her bite husband's presidcnmal librare,  During the last hyo decades of his hte. Kalin was unusually depen dentoon the advice of hes Chiet consultant. the seructural enpuncer Auuust Komendant, who supplied the technical oxpertise the archr tect needed te bring, his destans to reality. Kahn himselt treed te cam pepsate tor this dehoengs with his extraordinary persistence foftert misinterpreted by umpatent chents as sloth or andeciion . Els tenag my canst be telran the obdurare stroagth he gave te his best desiens,  Kahn's peak accomplishments itclude the twentierh concurs s atose  admired art callers. the Kimbell Art Museum of rage ratsain bore  Worth isco lustrigon Soy as well as its most inspiring capitol burld- my. Shere Bangla Naga the Nanonal Assembly Burling ot ree. - rosso Dhaka, Bangladesh tee dilustranon Sb Phey stand wath be Corbusier's and Mies’ finest public works as monuments tothe belret chat Modern architecture Could attain a civic presence commensurate wath that of the noblesr archirectune of che past. Although all three arshiteces dittereal tremendoush from one atother ia the ways in whigh they acmeved that presences they were alike in sharing an  woshakable Canviccon chit burlding meaningtuily tor one’s own tine  and ter postenty | comld be done not bs imitanen buconly through transtorduny archatccture to adapt te the needs - spiritual as much as tunetional--ot the modern ae  While Be Corbusier and Mies were bringing there first revolution Ary schemes to tanterinthe carly roscs, Kabiwas being taughe the proeepts ot the Boaus Arts tradinen atthe University of Pennsylvania by the € Lasstat arcnitcet Pauw Thitppe Cret. designer of the elegant buat Folger Shakespeare Library ain Washinton, be Corbuster and Mies were b:hewise Comverse with the language of Chassical archites ture, but thar schoolia: and apprenticeships put more emphasis on cnutts than ou the tustora forms thar were central te Rahin’s trai Ing. Yer Kaon eventually became enough ofan individualist to see post the superthaal Chanaterpstes of the Chassical style, Fle seuuhr tnstead whathe thought way ce essence of the varchar spirttot ka pr, Greece amb Ree, whisk he felt was irossut in both contemporary tradiotal aid niaistreai Vedersist archites ture  Upon recenims his degree team Peano basg, Kalin wentta work ter the head architecoat Philadelphia's Sesquicentenoil Internal Bspostten ob bate.) new foretien wworkd’s tare that was a dare bane rather poor: cxample ot bistormeat cclecteism. Kaha became chiet ot  desnin ter the exposition, buronis throes years sfterward the Carag De  pression brought ancnd to most copstrughon ane halted nmamerable  careers. Few architeceural Gommussions were avaiable im Ameria 
durmy the tajas, and mans ot these that proceeded te constricion were spansared by the New Deal Kalin way ducks to get some work through these government subsidized programs oneluding houses and a tactars tor the Jersey Plomesteads ot rurs-ruact in Roosevelt, New ferses. bride bs the Resettlement Administration), but tor much ot that decade hy remamed unemployed  Wodd War Tbimposcdapether fraras. daring which building nate rks essential cathe war eftore were controlled and Gadnin comius Stons were Stree, Bs the Cane talbscale building activites: resumed: on the Gaited Stim. an boge. Katina had helped te desqin housing prop cots tor detense workers but fe stil hadi not executed an important highdine Poothe talbot that sear he ar bast reached a turning pount in hus languishing tortures. Ga the basis of his wall pebleized wartime housing schemes, a inarive postwar urban renewab proposals, and new role as presudent at the Amernean Sout of Planners and Archie tects. Kahn became avenge erties im advanced design ar the Yale Schoolot Art  rectute: Phere ie omct Vincent Scully a perepose voung archistery inscructor who was to boseme fis most ardent advacate  Scully. MN he torinulated at Ronninti, evel mathic, vaiewoot architec tuna) histers as an epi ot Promethean creators whe steal tire trom the gods. needed a present day here to tit his narrative, and found at inthe undikeb. unprepossessing Rahn. Toverher they formed ane at the most mathally beneteral alliances ever between artist and crite. Fike Scully. Kahn saw € lassical architecture. and especially archare Cassis as the necessains sGurtima, pennt fora refurn tea contempe cap atchitecture With amore authentic spiritual grounding. Phanks nn partie Scully's sapport along with thacet Kahn's old Philadelphia trond the architect Geense Howes theo Yale's dean of architecture, Raho cecencd Bis frst im porliit omimisstan, new wing tor Frerton Seurrrwours history weedecue Yate Ver Gallery at rg ss  In Rahns addinen of regi rasa. Scully saw his conhdence  rewarded. Wath its perverse window tess street tayade—a rude brick  elevation broken ontv by hour thin het zontal bunds ot linestene-—ats deeply recessed teanguiarcoticnd concrete colitpis, add igs oenumern tal stairwell with a triangular tocmation of Hhebrs within a Concrete vw hodern Raho's caward cacuing stractare dasphived a mtked power absentin Swartweuc’s paturesgue wlery. aid was whoth dittercnt in both tone and ambicon front che sicek, trinsparcnt corpontte Vorson ofthe International Style tint had wer ower th: Viner buisness cate  But where did this sudden surte of crating daring come trans fr seems that Kahrs stas atthe Anterian Academy in Reune, where he was ine residence wher he recened word that he wars Chosen for the  Ye  Work took ashe was tbeut te tare tits. Although Kahn had tras eled  - . rery tabs wats dees of ATOM Fy “ Art Galle t Jesrsave for the starthog new direction hes  in burepe dure bis lito oeerties, the ancient buypteim, Cereck, ana  Roman architecture thar he saw oventy sears Liter at Saqqana. Mivce  nae ard Pisoli as well ay orher ar hacilogical Lindmarrks, fala tar more minediate onpactan dia That stutt books tains Compared to AO Rabe wretean pags te dis attee colleagues back on Phitidelptir, and tor rhe res at bis ate he cred to uive fis ons work the wenhts ness both senses of the werd tharse moved hun when be visited the creat € Lassteal sites  Phat cnange as evident an the intumseh concentrated drawings Rahn produced) durian tas forcir teases et pase and past. A ath cal draftsman since boshood shor tre tock dtwoing chisses at Phitadciphia’s Graphig Sketch (lib, whose carher menibers tad ipgluded Thorius bakias and Thenoiys Vashoten Rabe tarther devel: oped his pictorial talents at Pon apder cho Beaay Vets systerns emphasts on drawing as the primary tieags of cerca ing archites tuna destgis. borat cmeble to budd. Kat bancled mach ot hes cre athe enerca inte fis drawings. which canged fer besond arcditectunn subjeers He drew nny birds apes ane sti ites as well as obsers ant portraits of thas trots, bes long suttenne wite. Psthbor bs wlormn he  had one child. as he abe did wath peo women who werked ae his 
office: his ane son. Nathan was the director of the well reseed  A documentary til bt ade Avftee dg) and hunselt: in one arresting  bogy sketch, Rahn captured his own sharklike facial teatures with unspaning aecunies. Despite bis comer itive cdusanon, Kath was receptive Canew developments, and his watercelers of the ra yos refleet the intlucnes of Contemporiry Furopean painters trom Henri Nhitisse to Raoul Duty as well as Amertean artists of the tun and American Scene groups, such as John Marin aod Marsden Hartley.  Bur not unt Kabnowas Gontronted with the monumental an hires - ture at buxerand Karnak. Athens and Delphi. Ostia and Pompen did bis drawings beau to reflect the deep inner tite that had been stirring wadhin hin for sears. Pspecnilly inthe stark Charcoal and viv ab pastel Sketches revealing the pressure ota hand bearme down at toll bore, Rahn’s records ot what he saw took ona new urgetes. As he drew the tomples of the ancients, owas is thoaih he was trving te store ap ther magna) energy for Liter ase back biome. He was noching less than speilbound by the architecture ot Tiperal Rome, aod he aor porated the lessens he learned fram aante his most resonant work, trom the mid tos 2s onward. The angent Rome ot columns, pedi ments, and other tediaenal detads did not onterest hing nearly se muah as ifs vast veometre interiors, stapped oof ther marble Caidding. wath thei bold strnturab aasonns laminated i natural overhead Tight. Kaho’s asa late masterpieces, the Kumbeli and Sher-e Bangla Nagar hteralhy “Cun ot the Bengal leer” 2 derive directh trom tos Ronin nm awakenimnye at midlite.  He loved most the Baths of Caracalla. reterring te it orten as his ideal ° My destun at Dacca inspired, actually. be the Badhs of Cana calla, but much extended.” Kabn said ana reog tecture. “TE vou book atthe Baths ot Cariatla® he wrote in page. Swe know that we wurbathe rusts wellander an S-tooe ceding as we can under a rgee foor corhng, but Pbebeve there's something about a 1¢s-toot coulis  thatniakes ainaradittercent Kind ot man.” He might have added thar  destutimy aor g2 toot Gating che Gime close to tharon his Assembts Chamber tor the Dhaka capitol) also makes an architect a ditterent kind of architect) one who sees moaumentalit as desirable prings pall tor how orimebt enhance and indeed sancrts pubhe acai. One reason the influence ot Chissical antiquity entered Rabav’s schemes with such undiluted power ns that he was nor ar atl inclined todntellestualinguirs atten che thishpesnt ot inspiration. He always clanmed never te have read wrote the arehirectunal hiseornain David G. De Leng. “and there as to reascn not te beheve dam” Rahin’s vis eeral reactions were what ceunted mast te him. and sud later cethec- tons ashe had were gencrally directed toward thrucime our how to get the thing bute Althougn he was an extraordinarily foquacious man, he bad great dithoults oxpresstac honiseltcfearh. Phat was borne oat ina decture Kast ease in Pars during the rast weeks ot his ites when  he med toesphin the exalution of Greck archites ture:  Terus take the example et rhe Parthenon Yer qin see in the sunstine che walls are broke: the cabanas romed rhe walls, which protected niin trom danger Whew man realized that all wars ciin outed. be prereed at hole ate the walland sad “Phave made weopenien.” Poe wallawcprand sod "What are seu dom, tomes” And man said ‘dtelt tharali was well and that d had te thake thas open” Man revived the need tor an apemmye, he decorated ap and made che top haltante an argh the wall biked  rem tharotasas beaurtul Ouro bese considers HOHE gs  thar anda  noble ordorto tay. an opens becuic in the onderot the wall  the window was te. ude  Scab oo pob inparable promeuncemenss, with tere shits: points at referee, Michiabinaicdes the rchoveis tdeveiepini aot Remain, Tot Greck bio ater. tortured sera, ane The Water's se TP Cons. TOUS  dialogues with balding miaterrils his dross Birmous was UL asked the 
brick whatithked, and the brick said. Tlike an arch’ 7h rend to tall apart on the printed page. But such was the torce of Kahn's charisma thathe was able to infuse his rambhag and imprecise statements with aconviction that communicated itself in persan te bis followers more clearh than the actual words themselves, Hundreds of Kahn's stu- dents found bom the ereatest teacher they had ever encountered, a guru who veritably radiated colyghtenment,  Certatnh Kahn was more interested ib imparting Know ledge than In acquiring tin conventional ways. One of the most telling anes dotes about him converns his encounter with the plan at Hadrian's Milla Ganother Roman tavorite of hist, eleven vears atten his return trom the American Academy. According te De Lang, during the ardu ous process of desiring the Salk Tnsccate tor Broloueal Studies of tysy-tyues in da Jolla, Caltornia, Phomas Vreeland, a vounk arche tecton Rahi’s office cand ason of the fashion editor Diana Vreeland.  otten heard Kahn musing  upon Hadrian’. Villain his atrempe te conjure the essence of a “place ot the uameasurable.” Atter several of his ettorts to come up with a sanstactory scheme vielded only withering gre maces trom Kahn, Vreeland took a plin ot Hadrian's Villa our ata book in the office library and traced a portion ot inonto the troublesome site. Rahn did not immediately recognize the grate  and responded to Vrechind’s drawing: with great cothustasnt.  Kaho did not use historical sources as quotations but looked upon them as cvocdtons of the ameless grandeur he tound wanting i imose Mod ernst architecture. He did not seek the pedigree ot established proce dent or try to display an erudition he did not have. Thus ie was a supreme grony rand posthumous tndiemity: that soon after his death he was hailed most offen as the tounding tather ot Postmodernist  architecture,  That dubrous designation was encounmed because Kahn had been the teachur ar employer of many of the leading partuipants in the early phase or Postmodernism, ineludio Robert Venturi, Dense Scott Brown, Chartes Moore. and Roamalde Gaurgeda. And several of the mornts nas identiticd with Rabin balan evident cttect on them, These include the “bintding within a rain” ba complete seracture set within a second set ot perimeter screen walls with ungiazed windows, asatDoaka and the Indian tostieite of Management at rabs-rycg in  Vhinedabad o mason walls wich huge areukir or triangular “cut out as at Dhaka and the Philips Academy Library of ry@s-ro72 mm bxcter, New Planipstires anda Beaus Arts untlucnced emphasis onal seme. as atthe Salk Enstitute. But these who tried to make Rabnointo a proto Postmodeciust belutthed his most iunprobable dcoumplshment—wresring American isturutonal architecture aways frou the bigng COMET Tat, and TRUTCCTLATY values at the late Interna- toma Stvie-—and talsedy Gorbested him te the theeption of what was soor sceas a tailed stvustig and polemic abadventury, whieh, though  relate short ined. caused lone lasting damage by comading with  che Venn balding boon ot the pases  Kahn's insistence that arcitecture ty above all an art torm recast tho nature ot high-sesvle burkding desnen oa has rmmediite ateermath and proved tharesenipthe architest could ne donger be credible as the sextalcumcer dreamed ot bs the carly Modern Movement he could stil beg central force am centemporar culture. Rabin’s oeuvre roughed per mans questions thut have oubled Amenean architcets sipet the denis. ot orthodox Moernisin and the exact mature of  his Cantripanon ceriibs at sintular importance to the tacure of hes  protession. Atter World War TL America’s prospermg business estab:  lishment Pecans the prmopal spensorot Modern architecture, [a cen  Tost MGR of or Two exceptions, suc as an unexccated skyscraper scheme af para pacts for KRarsas Car. Missourny, Kaha recened ne  corporate Commussians, His core consntaenes adoart cducadonal, 
and religious misuicutiens prohwured the drarmanie shit, a che Last quarter of the Contry, of progressive patronage Prom the commercial tothe cultural scctern epitemuzed bs thy supremacy of the museunt by the end at the matlenmign  By contmon consent, the Kimbell is notonk) Kaha’s masterpiece. but also the finest art museum of the Modern pesod. Peen those whe have reservations about seme ot the anhitecrs other buildings— mncluding his vene rally uneiteresting penvate houses; his liteless First Unitanan Church of pasa-rueg in Rechestern, New York; and che depressing Erdman Hall dormicory ot pues rues at bev Shaw Col lene in Penosvis tani—are worever by the Kimbell. [ets the unassail- able demonstration ot the tact chat architecture ter the display of are need nor be neutral to the porto self abnegation, as some benctac- tors and cuties argued atter Prank Gebrs ss Guaenhenn Museam Bil hao made the building rather thangs conten che main attraction, At the Kimbell. art and architecture Goexisr in sublime equilibrium, each enlivening the other and creatine an atmosphere best captured: by Baudelaire’s tamous cand tor once absolurch appropriate: trinity of fave, adie. ot codupte  kor the Kimball, Rahn went back again te Reman sources tor his fareralls arranged baccel-sulted callenes surrounding tour courtyards va larger series of ateums was proposed in protininary sersinist But this came he did not deaw on the publi architeeture of the ancient baths and forums as he dad ter Dhaka and Ahmedabad. Rather he turned to the more intimate stheagh sell imposing —seale an the Roman villa seta a garden. He alse drew oan less-exalted € lassical forms, specthoally storage structures and warchouses with relativels low vaulted corlines, suchas the Kamesseamat Phebes and che Port cus Acmubain Rome,  Heoasvented any hint ot the werkadas or atiitarian by enachine the Kimbell wath a cawns veneer ot travertine marble and surround  Inge wathoanareadiin landscape of genthy) Cascading retles ting pools  and delacte vanpen holly dees. Mithough one now caters the miseum trom the east through an unpromising door trontng the parking lor, Kahn had wanted visitars Gy approach via the west ¢lesagen that ts now considered the back of the building, facing a park and: Philip Jebrsen’s Amon Carter Museum ot taeda charaictemsceally super cuit Johnson amaksam at Classical and Modernise sts tina! Nevertheless, once made the Rimberl one is drawn up te the ex hie broom galterics by bork a thaht of steps thar introduce a sense of high ogwastonoand the overhead dhamunanen trom KRabars migeneous sks hiehts, che most suguestie and memorable since John Soane’s Dulwich Picture Gallers of Sirus eg an Londen. The eve i chus coustandsy saeried upward tondieg co retarn only snerementalhy tothe prerures, whi are acerded a perceptual discreteness greater than chat  attorded bs the gallertes’ spatial divisions alone. Pah masterwork—  Secture for picture, the KRanbell’s sumone dhe best collections of Old Master pamtins in the Urited States—anhabirs ar unplictt architec tarab sotume. defied by hutht. late own. ind a Complete rapport berseen the asrtace and the viewer is thereby achieved. In evers respect Kalin exceeded the sask ser forth fy the manscum’s visionary tousiine director KRuchard Parco Brown whoa geee called upen the araiteet teoairg ter Twwaemth, melow ness and even elegance in  spaces ot Puatimerioaas SEPT mycand human preportion ”  Atthe Rambcll Kann took the barrel shaped root ot Roman arch  recture bar plised witb roa away thar wed lave boon meoncen able tothe ansents Phose vaulted coulis are nor structundily tanctainmals a skeitgh: slic brscets cach Sault lomotudiialls. and the archi forms  Vts Lan Wipennetas  are aetna composed FE TO POT ONE EMOLIS se structural method devised tar Kabra bs bis caginmeer KRommendane Leo Modern ter hard fire Classicsts and toe Mannaist ter orthodoy Modernists. Chis uncensentionab souirien epitomizes Katies di terns tation foouse feghaorgs an the service of fechas as well as tunegon,  and ot coronas well as ett icnes 
The toremost histertin ot Rahin’s museums. Patria Cummins Doud. observed thar though ho had tour excepoonally sympathettc patrons Vales architecturally aware president AL Whitney Gris wold the Ga amoded Velma Kimbell: the modern Maecenas Paul Meion tdoner ot Kaba’s last completed werk. the Yale Center tor Britsh Areot rusu-ruct, constricted after his death by the firm ot Pollecoshta and Meverss: and che disammushed collectors fen and Dortieigque doo Moen) ivhe Commissioned Kabn's unexccuted Ment Museum of rotz- recy ter Phoustont—the architect found all those projests vers rough worn. bach scheme went through several mater versions, Chis uiotelbis ser unusual architectural practee, but ta Kahn’s case the extraardinan avtoatoot his chanwes seems to have boop t necessary part of che process by which be worked oura design, notunlike a woter WHO mikes extensive revisions ae printer's galleys madher than the carkier manuscnpr  Kahn AWALS. alse capable uf musteaadiing his vhrents” washes: his first, grandiose propesal terthe Yale Center tor British Art proceeded trom  has unauined idea ce whatthe tibulousiv och Ntcllon would find appre  priate. On one rart sketch Kaba wrote die levend “Palazzo Melhoni” The rchitect soem discoversal that he discerning ver unassuming sponser Sadan mind something mere along the lines of a comtortable Bit unestepoimoids bradish couatry house. When Kahn came face to tage with his more eminence clients, he could besaine a bit unhinged Judes Proway the Vale art history professor who acted as Mellon's mntermediins car the propeat, recatleal that partot his pob was teving to comvaiee Mellon ind his assognates “thar this gus wase tome kina of mad poet Vthough Mellou was more thant a bit bemused by Kahn, he tollowed bis lomyscandime practee of heeding the sound advice ot the srtso. advesers he was scoastuge in selene  Butane note that Katto was an ropa dead sistonars is dispelled bs the snmobhoe aura ot his best buildmes. and be the mans superb  Passaues that be found ever arrromns bis less successful works. Phe  Vale Center tor Berish Art organized around two titty sin foot high internal Courtyards that demonstrate the problems Kahn often had Moth mulastors tnterior spasesnancthcless tus top thoor pasture aaticrios with sky hahts chan impartoxcepromal warmth atid fumes: Wout net quite the mutuneus qualo oof the Kumbebn Lhe baxcter library sotters tram simanin disimenons emer colossal pubby sPaces and cramped studs areas. Yet despre the picreapy transitions between the owo difterent hinds of space. these not caring: resndved  schemes express the an hateers desire ta tntuse ovr cultural astirae  thons wath a senke ot h Purpese and te show that thes have a ceatral plaice thea Sogen. which toca great extent maristream Mod- rast anditesture atten Word War dD bad undermined  For allot his mental sreandernes. Radin could someriutes suageest What te was about Ashe wrotea race sith midsrot bis work on the Kambell commission. “Tam remuided at Totstos, who dewated trom faithlessness to faith without questeat Tn his hatter stage he deplored the muinacies, saying thar Chest has radmnce withour than, Tres were beddbre a candle te the sum te sce the sen better” Phat in ctlect was what Kuhn acempted and often socecued i deni. Phe ntoners ot the Kambel. washed with t pearkescent matuea: dash thar mivesctyarctitads qdalts an ethercal presenccs is as dose ise tre Likely  poem in nredeis tapes te ait irehitectare et the aarrts  The spintiet Kabromakesctselttelt most profound os his crise Tipespressen of virchitcctare vis aet Tar art ii become a cennod  isoall too casds. and an the veda of arcirecture perhaps cost et  Qoasthe imercusimiesplectutercet high se he disign tor the purposes Gftnarketia, aidadsertsipcindic ites Pheseth Bodio aspired te badd tos the ages aod tcathemed tre bastore pocot the architect ts artast, the cxatted status he reciaumed ter des Gaprotessmonabs. as tah tea  hanseltois hs no mieans etecial  Muscumt architectuval seargd committees hase ey unabls ing tide  the Rimbell og thea pitermationar scoutin: torte eb ec semiphans set 
galleries ath practhe proncered by Velma Rambell. the tounder’s widow. i ry6yh Those groups no doubt respond to the Kimbell wath suitable reverence, bur agven the burldings they fater commissroned, tans post Bilbao muscu patrens oby rusty wanted someching quite ditterent, Phe disparity between Kahn's muscums and recent exam: ples of that werre parallels the discrepant he saw between postwar Modernism and angienr € hissrosia: “Our stutt books tiny Compared cout” Ataume when commercial values are svstermaneally corrupt: fag the museum —ane af cnghized sodetsy’s most cle acing experrences —the example ot Kahn, among the most cournmeous and successtul architectural rotormers of all time, scems more relevant and Qauden  ars thaneser  9  PHIRI? JOUNSON  Th AS EHE philosopher trams Bacon wrote, “the monuments of wit survive the monuments of power” then Philp Johnsen might be  remembered bs tuture generations atten ail febnsan. whe died in  soos atthe age otamen cighto is entikels te be reparded very brehly  asanarcbitect. Boweser Dunne a charmed career of more than halt  weeentun propelled by has persenal wealthy quick intelligence. pro tean ambittan, sturdy comsticution. unpeesable timing. seducive  charisma. gravitadon toward the righ asd poswertud, aad genius for  publ relations -he produced but halt a dozen strictures ot any real Interest. Same mayor architectural reputations rest on even fewer works, bur thes areqiarcontrisened. as an Johmsan’s case. be a much Larger proportion of poor dessins  Johnsons mastertulh counteccd mage as the perpetual enfant ternble of fis ComservaGee protessroan was based beth on his bistorn  redeas Gaesurator of the Minsecit ot Modern Ares ‘Moder Arche  erermanonal bxdubinon’ of rage avhich bad a resoluronr  tecture:  Tie ettect on American architecture akin to thitesxerted dy the rans  Armor Show oon Viner partionit uid fas sappertot anes gener:  dtion of avant arde architects from the puctcs enward. Simboli ot 1  Jotinson’s cstablishiment role in sporsenini aid dispersing lesser  Comitissions to those SOUITEGe TE ircbitects wars fis series at Private, 
black-ne stag dinners tor his acolytes at New York's Century Club. In return he shamelessly appropriated their ideas, though his work was only as good as that ot those he copied, and never ans better. Ver throughout his career he was bound mainhy to convention, albert high- spvde convention, numbly shitting his sevle co sure his pereerved sense of the zeitgeist,  Johnson first became a disaiple of Ludwig Mies van der Rohe in Berlin in ia3c, when the voung Amerwan was in burope gathering maternal for the torthcomings Mospa show and tt. accompanying pubheanons with hy collaborator, the architectural historian Henry Russell Hitchcock. Johnsen came tram a rich Cleveland family, and his tather had given him an independent income; he was then twenty: four and had graduated trom: Harvard with a degree in classics and philosophy. Unschooled in architecture bue inspired by a chance meenng with Alteed Barn the missonarvbke founding director of stoia, Johnson threw himself into the pursuit of the new way ot building owhich Bare named the Internacional Stele) and established the museum's department of architeccure. [ohnson declared Mies the wreatest ang architect, not least because among the top Modernists Mies lent himselt che most readily to copying well.  Johnson took up the formal study of architecture ar the Harvard Graduate School of Desai in raga, atter a decade durnag which both he and Mies seriously compromised themselves by their dealings with the Nazis, Mies had sought commusstons trom the Hitler regime, and Johnsen cotounded an American Fascist group in 1934. Thanks mainly to Johason’s sponsorship, Mies Jett Germany tor good in 1o38 and bemin teaching atthe Armour cnew THlmost Insatute of Technology in Chicago. But the deeply superficial Johnsen had no intention of following his mentor to that provincial outpest and sub miting to the laborious curceulum setup by the tormer Bauhaus director Johnson, who became bored casily and seldom bothered to  extend bis shore attention span, was mainly interested im assumilating  ba. Adler & Sudivan. Aadiroriam: Borihne. ( biaee iS 8eo18Ny  Drs steme-whad acte dnd a had devchopment cisompassed a getoe scat  sees falhoa heten shops, amg ottwes. mcudine the architects .  Jtoe the seecutecr story tawer at iett.  rho Loan Sulla. Nate barteets Bark. Cis aterm, Maric  Compact sot moaiGoental the sste cht tren squcce dite bli»  MP Sullitis areisree ek  uted. bis he sid l teas ik 
fa broth Dlos Wrohe, balltrss ares, Bere Raat, Portiss Iya, cage bay za Charles Rene Stichiotes’ apd Slama Sficdenald. drawing room, Here Wri boar die Interns enne Side at ts oasie carne with Mackintosh Sbacdenald that, Giasgow. pass  sohoepritl anebierts nd sbeer emcneertiat brs ude Phe newbs wed couple decantted cher trst home werb cher own desains,  techidieg bork cases paneled an headed athiss  thobrank Pies! Wrihe, Great Workrooin, fodimsen Wao ompans, uh Charles Kernnie Macaintesty, west tigate. Giasgos Scho at Art dat tae Moving, Woscemnste, boge pede MuGhutosies masreepirce, the wcstosing et tay dims iiiter  bapecies lds pod cabins aed ndisest baht  ive this iw ard turn conrans the Shad’ tliat. whore llaeiaated be 
sabe Corbusen Villa Savere, Poise, Prame., beresra gi  da daadwag Mies sander Rohe, Geeinan Pasion, Nooet the ospxreen houses ot be Corbusier's Hiro Perea ty pities  Tntemetiarcd Papostion. barceciii, resi h- tute his deturert ot the lorse as “aman tor disane herrer  Thi chgart cornpretticn ct plincs that sccmipgh glide past eagt  TMA. THIS Gent tetreat bear Pures  ewes muh te the artiot Gre de Stal Miascment  doo Ludsen Mies van der Rohe aint Merlip fofisen,  sho be Gorbusten Netee Durie cha Paar Room botin, Berice, pay bay  Scapram: Burlda., New York. tusg bass  . Phe otast se poace modern Churciies marked the oolreuraron ab ors The Phinene edeabot the \Vboderusr sha scraper dereanetrates Wess oP . 
PoC dieh ss Pato. bers betase, Pacts Palisades. (orttertina. bug peepee Phe Mtodk  srempenicnts Fides) sere tles speeds costh outcenn.  bal Alvar Aalto. interron fintush adios. New York Worlds bain page ist roan? Bundines iyscnbled trons ott thi shelt  The Nordic forest Ghia tectercn Vain rote, was palpabis comveved mothe organi thaw ot thes adulation. weed pate ted titre teu foe dak  remporars exfibien spas which deterred farure Lares architectural enrorns  pb Aleir Valro Savane Down Fill, Sasnatsalo, Prtbinds reqs=1as bo Charles anit aay dogs. deat sora battea terran,  Pho sno carbon center exempltred Aalte’s yott ter place making Pact Pes cdi st alitors hat Tega  tnd intlueneed preqeets toon Britsth town Counc halls te phe tha erragton shah teeth bedi rs tt Hs utr in setae  
va. Philp Johnson. Ghiss House, New (naan, Connecthut, tage-beg  j shrisen, a us Nososs wales SMart as : Sa. Dour Kahu. Seath Gallery. Rimbeil Act Museam, Johnsen approprait.s Mics. cass sled Barriastorth house concept  beter rhe prorampe was pratt dat ceold nor captare the hiwete  Dore Worth. baer rete Wn et te tare sophisticated orginal  Raghth revered abewe all Modernist museums, the Rimibell remains  unsurpassed ti tostereng itary with artworks,  sho bors Kahin. Shere Bangla Nasir Dhaka, Banglidesh. roe spas ys wh foliison Burges. Dh. Corparate Be adquartors, Tirsburgh. paca boss Theo uteatiess of this migornal capitol owed less coop sublime desnst Ino perverse amsceston ot dhe material that made hom fae. Jobrsean thane Rahs mokong ie buildable bs hand. thereby auras Clad his kussch pastiche ot benders Nec Ceortig Vactoria Lawn tt 
roa Rober Soom, Vania Nanri faoase, Chestuat Hb Porisads dy tess pet Vtter decades of Inteciatenal Stile probubsteons. the pitched tot,  ipplicd nicddines. and taupe pacar scented tagboard pros etienis  vols Neri Scott Brower and Assocrires. pallens entilide, Sainsbors Wine, Natorat Gallons. Borden, cu8e. cag Fis additoe ton ledin and Northern d anpe  » Renaissatee petites  tra brack Gehes. Gebes brane. Sanne Momo. abbots, pact recs,  Cahess starthop renes anon ota rates burtalow rescaled bis rrentivemess  Doone eurrorns th Cemtompeariny artoespesially Geardon Miara €biek's  fesndentie! deconst ric tictts  th. Prank ©) Geto and Assocnetes, Guvgenheun Mirserin Bsthao, soe dae This os oberarr toon bad abecractiob seunib da break rbecuete ie  public taste. Putt soni wer mos ioprosscd bs the pabhers acl 
tga Roster + Partoers. Remhetag dome, Borin. poe perce  te Raghard Meier X Partners, Gert Carter, bos Vie es. ruse baat Reguured te replice the ren ind-elass cupeba destanved in World War IL Phe arhireet catiemed te have modeled Aus planan Hadrsin’s Villa Foster devised steel amd ghiss deme with aspera inner camp an faved, but this mountaintops coriples anor: Caasels mnt views of the reaaited capital  reserttles an aititolarsy at icin s own works  oe  ANFIIGI I4IID Pn r a  2  ry. Machado Siver and Assocutes: Ger Vikas Missbu, Cabbie. pau gsseca  tab. boster + vers, Miho Veaduer,  Sheert: remodcied the uppor ster ot the Reman replay added  Dare Revers Viadless Prarice. beg neg woamphathearer ind several ourbureidings, ate created an  tacest sehiuhir bende,  Tooonmerete Pers Support the wee 
ryt Roe Prone Budding Workshop, Merl €ollocron, Houston, puNt-1aNe  The wood sadam: and steel tramem: ot this private maseun tilled  Domangue de Merits wink for exquatte simplicity  tab Renee Pome Burkey Worksbop, Gatices, Nastier Scalpeure (enter, Dallas. reag soc4  The awenth arched skvhliehts are scteered wath piseous trees  peb. Studia Daarnel Babe skort. rh. Dhad C bikds, Skidmore, Nimoy boundaries) site poe Oncor & Merl, breedkeoy bean derol New Vorb: Now Vorko sy  bor fis amoscnin phan Pibeskisd evoked broken Starot Precad,  aOd tor his skyscraper tae Stunie et aborts s ophttrd vate. 
iw Swanage Chitra. Phinecrrum. Cite ot Arts and: Sciences, Valen Spain, fuel foun The spherical audio is cvccrate hed bya steel amd glass  superstructure sith anoterived wads that move [the evchds.  ih Santiage Cahitraa, Quadra: Payihen,  NUrlw vanee Art Mascum ruwge po cun Fearing bike Mihi. this auian wine fisers tlambowanr externa  Mies’s perfectly ratronabved, readib adaptable stvle—with its tlar roots, steel l-beam tranung, and large elass and brok panels. That he did in the comfort of Cambridge, where he buile himself a hugely expensive Nhestan house on Ash Servet that doubled as his senor the: sis project.  Johnson put what he learned from Mies to the cleverest: possible use mn Whats cectam to be his bese remembered building. the cele- brated Glass House of rogg-recc im New Canaan, Connecticut see Whustration gat That memomatist structure, in which the walks are made of huge transparent ghiss panels is now the centerpiece ot chir- teen subsequent structures Johnson erected on his wooded estate, which he bequeathed to the National Trust tor Historie Preservation in his shrewdest bid for arristic ummertalin. He crvistoned the Glass House nor onky asa countre retreat but alse as an architectural coup de theatre guaranteed to capture pubhe attention. The ompinal idea, ashe treels admureed in his raga article on che budding in Phe Arche tecteral Recrere, came direct trom Mies. who destined the sunilar Tarnswerth house in Phang, liners. in rags, but did not complete its constroggan until pugi. Maes had always intended his struerural sexabulans to form the basis tora new linguage of architecture chat could be widely used: emulation was a basi component of his peda- geaical method. Yer Johnson's preempuon of Mies’s concept: hor dered on outright thievery, despite snamific ant ditterences between che two schemes.  Nevertheless, because Johosen had given Mhes his best American commission ffohnson'’s own New York apartinent at caged, helped him emivrate to the United Stares cleht vears Liter and and nmmediare acidenig emplosment, and oranized the fist sto sta rerrospestie on hy work in rage. Mies was scarcely uta positian fa complain publicly, though he could not resist Chidime fohnsen tor his inept detuling of the Glass House dunt his firse sisi te New (aaa,  The Gomphoated personal, professional, and insarutienal relacens 
benveen Johnson and Mhes provide a good introductory example of the web ot patronage and power Johnson detth wove around hiniselt over the vears,  bor a decade atter the Glass House was completed, Johnson con: tived to work inthe Miesiin mode. Severabot his commissions dern ed from his stoats Connections fatter leaving the museum im 194. he returned to the scaff between rage and rosqcand he was a trustee trom rysS anol his deaths. Ehose pobs included an addition to the museum of rast anda Manhattan guest house of the same vear tor John D. Rocketeller HD and fis wete. Blanchette, benetactors and ofticers of MOSES whose prinsipal tounder was his mother, Abby. Firungly. Johnson's most memorable project of that period was sat v's Abby Aldrigh Rogketeller Sculprure Garden of rasa. Callaboraung with the landscape architect James Fanning, he created a sequence of subtly detned spaces thar becume a beloved oasis in the heart ot midtown Manhattan, until its intimate nature. like that of the museum ttself, wap obliterated by Yoshio Lamiguchos gargandnin SoMa expansion ob boyr 2a,  fust afew blocks away from Most are Johnson's quieth glam oreus interiors for the Pour Seasons restaurant of rasg,an Mties’s Seagram Building. for which Johnson served as the Chicago based master's local assemnite architect sce trontispiece Happily the rooms remain intact, protected by legal landmark destpnation. Restaurant interiors have always been tar more likely to be destroved than art mascuins, and the role reversal imphet in the dittenng fares of these two vers ditterent schemes indicates how much chings have chaneed since the high neon ot Johnson, who moved with case between the realms of Culture and Commerce but never torger which was which,  During the cosss, when large architectural firms adopred their serporate Ghents) hierarchical patterns of organization, Johnson's otfee remamed a sinall operanion, Despite his closeness to several  members ot the Rocketeller clan, their big Comimussions generally went  to Wallace Harrison ot Harnson and Abramovits. For other chents in search of toolproot. tastetul Modernism, Gordon Buonshatt of Skidmore, Onings XS Merrill was the architect ot Chore. Johnson's intense com Petitiveness—w hich he kepe carctully hidden behind a tagade ot debonair mmyeucance-—put some distance between himselt and. his Protessional contreres: \ca time when architecture was sall very much a gentleman's profession) an old bays’ lab Johnson Gould eases have jomned—he stood aleot. “Td rather talk to vounger people with ideas than my contemperanes.” be told mein ta88. "One's contem Poraries are nor interesting. One has cither yealouss or contempt tor them, and they're both very ugly feelings.”  Inone of the more tisighttul passages of the archirect’s authorized biography, Philp hibasen: Lite and Work ot iy94, the architectural  historian Frang Schulze wrote:  This mach we know abour Philips Ele vearned for success, thirsted ter at and was ever so good at achieving the look of ty trnoralwavs the substance. Yer he was given to growing bored, a reacnon hardly Gonsistent with the real mastery of Whatever he undertook. Charmed by his own faciliny. he was noe sure he could be more chan tage, with che result thar he would strive all the harder to succeed again. preterabhy ina new realm, tak-  ing ap an uitanulir challenge.  By che late rages. the expressive hontanons of the Tnfernaganal Style—imposed in large pare by Ebtcheock and Johnsan had become inessapably apparent te mans architects and critics, Johnson. dis: posed to thinking about architecture prumaniy as a uatter of stvle, Was attiod skeptical of Gantemperantes tke Pero Saarinen who were  seckimie a wary ourot the dead em of the late International Style. As  Johnson sani ress, 
brhink the striving that Saarinen is corms through, which isa real stramele in hay soul, his dingish, Nordic Comperament is really hard at work Grsving to break this effect that he chinks as one influenced by Mies van der Reheo... But it anvbods can change this styles or change this seve phase. fo tise aminar sub  division of asevle. ter them tev,  One whe did chatlenge the International Stvle, amd berowally superseded an was Loum Kahn. whe saught to restore a civic grandeur to American architecture that commercialized Maodernisin had robbed tof Indeed, there Gin be no hope ot Gnderstanding Jobn son's place in the architectural landscape of fis dime wathout reter- ence feats most estunable hyure. Kabn, tive sears older than Johnsen,  was not nearly so well favercd. Both men aor late starts on their  building Careers, in part beyause of the hiatus rmposed fs World War U. Johnsen served ay a private inthe US Army: Kabn designed war workers’ housimg.! Byven betore then, Kalin was held back by the dit- heulty of supporting himselt and his tamuly during the Great Depres ston, while the bachelor Johnson was able to aver comcentrated work thanks to the private tortune that allowed fam to iidulge dis nadih nature and Capricious crthustisins,  What came cisib te fohason.a born satan and glib anprosiser, Wasa challenge to Kahn, sogiatly oblivious and an inveterate ques: toner, The fluent Jobson could spin out sparkling justifications tor any architectural whim while Kaba, cikanse buctongue-tied, labored to give vere fo his lotes ideas. Johnson, though no drateaman. was a whiz at Hraghng a novel architectural image. alben a shaflow one Rahn. who drew beautitulls, came to his penetrating designs anky after the most grucling ettort. Factally dishgured, rumpled, and awkward noaannern Rahn could never appeal to establishment eats. Jodin- son, handsome, dapper, and davclingly selt assured. had no trouble  coming such patrons chat he was one ot theatand knew fast what  they didiv’t yerhnow thes wanted Rahns Career, even after he recciwed belated recognition, wos a continual battles by somnparisen, pobtisern’s Was a nonstop coullion,  Rabnoand Johnson atcended te the aumuries in vers ditterent wares In raga. Carter He Many fro a fohnsen classmate at die TP barsard  Graduate School or Destin, had written:  Philos a brillrans man. [pos toa bad he is so avmcal cand worse, that he ws resigned te doing nothiag about it Dam gear: to ake An ettert.. te resterc an him seme ot the meals char he once Hardy dat boast  Whether or not Mann cied te help his trend is aot recorded, but his  hopes were mm vane. As Johnsen remarked decides Liter:  Ady phuosophical outlook dates trenra time anda was ot chink ing that ditrers trom tne bberal, acceptable, podigeallsy Correst line that we all subscribe to today. Pome, Plato was the worst-= living the word and the trae and the beautadul Phere’s ne such thing as the good or the true or the beauetul Poa redacsist, Pn  anihilist.  No wonder that Kahn, with tis determiruitien to tind medern eqais  alent. otiaspiing Classical structures. alwass made fobnsen uncisy. Tha poet ontercew Rahn rapressed dis vers ditterent belot char architeature is mdeed Capable ot crmbodsang the values Johnson so  sharph reeetad Ws Rabr send  Weare net centibunng te the making of car cascnatians wieater andl greater aad greater E Whar we hope ie thick (he spaces thempsclyes Gurevoke acreatine atitude cows.ird the ists  tupons because the men whe work oi will be greath cies ated 
ite the seriousness, or vou might say into the glory, ef con: tobutmye to this nscrunon, Architecture, atleast, can do its part  an imaking the spaces in ie year,  Fryen if Kahn had net died in ructg and been granted the two addr tional decades of lite and work that Jolson enjyoved, its stdl doubt- tul har he could have had a broader impaction mainstream Amerwan architecture, By the late tgs, Kahin was revered as the conscienes of his protession. but his patronage came almost exclusively from cul: tural, educational, and religious institutions, which aise had been the source of Johnson's carly work, When we consider the extent to whioh architecaire tetlests prevailing economts values, Kahn could never have made the transitian to corporate architect that Johnson achieved so suavely around the time his nemesis died.  Faced with changing public tastes, fohnson never had the shghtest dithculty in throwing ott one side tor another Wheo corporate clients in the late tases briefly responded te the decorate Neos his sical Moderusnt of such tHeetuigh fashionable architects as Fdward Durell Stone and Minoru Yamasaki, Johnsen, who had lone har bored Romane tendencies, prrouetted into what was called his “Bale let School Pertod.” in partareterence to hes biggest commission unal then, the New York State Theater ot ragsS-ryeg. a pob he received thanks to the influence ot his old Harvard taend Lincoln Kirstein, a tounder ot the New York City Baller, Phe composer and entice Virgal Thomsen bitchdls remarked that the theater's grand interior prome- nade. ringed with narrow cagwalks screened with lacy golden grilles. reminded him ot a women’s prsen in New Orleans, However the ssoimetrigal pare or eravernine srarmeavs leading up tothe promenade trom the ground floor suggests more authoritarian models.  Poosened trom the constraints of the Miestan tormuta, which had atlease assured Johnson's derwvative work a certain dignity, he plunged  Intoone of the Worst phases of his career, Phe single exception was his  Museum tor Pre-Columbian Are of pees ar Dumbarton Oaks in Washington. a uracetully proportioned shaw case with curving ghiss walls, shallow domes. and travertine Columns thar plays with abstracted (Lassical ideas inca senes of ldting and divertng, crreular spaces. Years later, Johnson corrcetly called che Dumibarton gallery “my most clesane building.”  Charles Jencks, always one ot Johnson's sharpest crimes, cided fas mercilessly ineisive bat Pessay on thes ettlorescent phase * Phe © andid King Midas ot New York Camp.” But Jencks also discerned a darker seam beneath the ghtterumg surface of the architect's work of the tyoos. Unatrad to draw parallels between Johnson's Fascist polit al ssmpathies ot the ta3os and the vesthene of his past-Mhesian period, the crm likened Johnson's Sheldon Memorial Art Gallery of rages in Lincoln, Nebraska, to Paul Pudwa Proost’s House of German Art of Pes3creyc oan Munich. Amd fencks’s roty book Veden: Vare- meats om Architecture, be noted close simularines benween the gate ot Johnson's Rootless Charch of Gauss in New Harmony, lidiata, and those of Nazi villas. and wrote chat the New York State: Pheater “resembles Fascist work orthe Phirtics.”  Towas netany moral indignation onthe partot Pobmsons cbents or ever a general decoding of hisers pre but taundny references to other, more sintster buildings thar caused Johnson co abanden thar decora tive mode by che end ot the raecs. Io simply: wasn’t gecoms: brn the jobs he wanted. Nor antl Jobasen’s first high cise progects: the les Center ot ge S=recs in Minneapolis and Pennzoil hice ot rats tacte in Houston, both intloensed by Mirinalit Ameria sculpture af the pened ay well as the ervstalling terms ot Germain Expressionist anc he revtore—adid bemave beyond berms a monginal tire ia bas profession  In po67 when he hired Joti Burece. a C hicage architect (vents seven vears his quntor and with corporate experience, lobnscn at bist began tomose his tiom toward the bighhy protialh tall Puce peas  tie he always erased. Phe animal Johnsen Burece rawers-—ospecuily 
Ponazoil Place, commssioned by the Houston real estate dev eluper Ger ald Hines. whe wentorn fo become the most inportintchent of John. sons career putthe nes partners ina posen te take full ads antage ofthe meipienr boomin the construction ovcle, atten the recession ana “staptlation” that had seumind the anbitectucal profession during the bartas  Jencks likened Jobtson’s work of the rues to "the Camp reading of High Culrare.” Hlowevern his architecture ot the ras oy could: be best described as hatch. a classi defnuticay of which isa familar object transposed ute an mcangruons now use. such asa Statue ot ober table limp or bast Supper broadboa. Johnson merely inverted the usual shite in scale. working from smallro birse. Phe anaor build: Ings ot has Postodenist pero are generals pereenved as imvol img such inane transpositians: the ersct Building of tata-rus8y in New Yorks agiaat Cliuppendale bigbbess the pre Carpotate Headquar ters of pety-ros gon Pirsburch as the Victoria Lower ot €hartes Barry's Pabiee of Westrmaster ot aSae-08agin London redone ant mir ror glass ssce laatragon eb pand the office building ar bast s ard Street and Third Avenue in New York of ra8a fais asa colossal lipsack  Such works cxcinphity Johnsan’s sern atremprs at approxnmatins the pha tal Gainstornations of architectural sin and svmbal thatenh the mnostadrou Postmodermers weadd poll ott, Particubark vedfemsive was us Universigy of Houston Sotiool at Architecture of pas a-rus asa varmoature of Claude Nicedas Tedeus’s unexceuted House of bas atien promestat rt gcpcta, The best chat ain be said tor this appalling scheme HLInit provides architecture students with a textbook @xan Moo folison’s design if its worst amd bts Ovnaismatats mast blatant  Atter a kade ot Large scale commissions that imide Burges rich  wil foheson rioher thete partnership bean tecunravel Burges, ne  es aiibatious than his semen collaborator but ne match tar him im cunning. worried abour the sarsisat ef the fo aitrer ats toander’s  death. and proceeded to reduce the octogenarian folosan’s role by  degrees until the cghty five vear old superstar was pushed our com pletelyin teat Tt way a tatat stake tor Bure, whe underestimated the estenr rea which [obnson's sheer personal magnetism was the source ot cher ottce’s terranes. Within months, a rumous Hnancial serrtement won by another of the fien’s partners who wanted to cash out forced Burece nto bankrupts.  Johnsen, tree ot any habiin, bhthely sec up shop om smaller Premises chewbere a tis “Lipsock Building? and) conrimned to Attract important chents, Ransacking historical and contemporary architechire ter the nest new Jold thr Ba zantine one moment and Deconstructivint the neat—he teund aasetul decow ain the work ot Hermann Fansterling an obscure German Expressronist architect whose wild bromorphis schemes of seven decades earlier Johnsen cited as his latest inspiration. rather than acknowledging the tagas’ emerging superstar Frank Gebirs. Finsterling a neglinble Agure whe outlived most of his Contemporarios, Wits dssidgeus a overstunmng brs tofean the Papresstanist Movement: several books by the sugeestble  historians he Gourted during the roaes and cach ryctes accorded him  amuch bigher place than he deserves. But Finscerlin knew, as did the unbeatable strategist Johnson. thac history as written by the survivors.  Perhaps Johnson wil be best remembered as one of the more enter: taming wits of the lice twentieth century, “Ud rather steep an the nave of Chartres Cathedral with the nearest john sin blocks dawn the street than bwould ana Harvard bewse woth bask te hack barhrooms” he declared ina pasos dite agains routing mistirutional Comstreeion, anuperge that abso dbsphived his disduin tor social issues and super: hous preference tor appearance atthe expense of function, Joboson’s undiscuiscd pleasure in penversity reniined one ot bis very tew con srants In tysg, atthe bemght op ModeruismS dominance, be warned an audience ap Yale that “you cannot not know histor.” In pgas, atter be had siviv abducted Postinodernistn from the academy and  peddled atte the corporate establishment, which wanted scmeching 
more eve catching than the standard that-topped glass hoxes of the late International Style, he characterstnaally Contradicted himseclt, assuring listeners in Fort Worth thar “you cannot know history!  The most notonoeus ot all fobnsan'’s aphonsmys was “foam a whore.” which could be interpreted either as his resigned ackness] edement that architveture, alone among the arts. requires outside patronage betore a work can be executed, or as his evil adiission that it given enough money he Gould be had by anvone. The crack created a stir when te Rest appeared in printin recs. and Johnson repeated at wath relish oon numerous public oscasions cthereatter, Despite his delight in being outrageous, his uistingt for socal advan- tage abwass kept him trom gomg too tar Although he agreed not te censor rang Schulve’s othuial biography, the architect sopulated thar tereqiam unpublished during his lifetime. By che time the manuseripe was finished, Johnson was well into his crehtes. but his preternatural vigor and tamuly history of longevity made his death seent tar trom immanent. As the vears passed and he lived on and on. Johnsen finals relented and allowed the book to be released in toug.  Schulze’s overcontident assumption that he could capture Johr son's mercurial personahty i pemt—especiilly the architect's pray ate lite and his homosexuality —way terably misjudged. Asa bos, John: son was. in Schulve’s words, “a brunette with an exquisitely shaped face. canda pan ot hips that bring Ganymede to mind.” One trend of lohnson’s “had the bearme and the manner ot a cole. nor nearh so plable or passive as his predecessor” And in tring to deseribe fohn son’s contradivtory nature Schulze wrote, “He who had sweated and stehed in che arms of lovers hastily preked on che streets of Weimar Berhin,.could be the most tastidiousiv self abnegatinag puritan in bys glass palace in Connecteut.”  More disturbing way Schulze’ handling of Johnson's polineal past. As was the case with the authors admirable rose biography ot Mies.  one of the Most antaipated portions of this book was a tull account  of the architece’s relanions wath the Nazis, Mies, an apolitical opper- tunist who had already accepted work trom the Communists and tned co get yobs trom the Nazis, at least had the excuse of strageling tosursive ip his native Land. His agtaages in Germans trom 1433 to 1938 were deplorable but understandable.  loosens spontaneous enthusiasm tor Hitler was harder to pustify. It had been a matter ot pubhe Knowledge since toga. when id William Shirer’s best-selling Rerfis Diary the yournalise described Johnson, whom he met in the German capital after the outbreak ot War. as Tan American fascist wha says he represents Father [Charles] Coughhin’s [weekly paper] Scot! fustice. None ot us can stand the tel- low and suspest he is spying en us tar the Nazis.” During frequent tips to Germany in the late ry2cs and 1a3cs8, Johnsen avhose Cool, distant tather, a lawyer, had investigated pogroms agamst Polish Jews tor the US government atter World War DT became mesmerized by the Navn, atrending party rallies and caking an official Seuemrerkrers fer Aushonder, a summer lecture series for foreigners on the movement's behets. Hes arcractian, he selt-servingly confessed to Schulze, was based pardy on the homoeroti undertones of Nazism (all chose blond bows in black leather” in the architect's phrased, but Johnsen’s Wrinngs atthe tine revealed his undisguised attraction to the theories ot racial supertority espoused by Hither and his supporters. As John-  son explained inan American paper, The Pyare in 1g 4a:  Atthe basis ofthe Hitlerisin ans stage is the notion ot "nace. Ihooowe overlook the ternu|elogs that Hitler phents trom Gabineau and Houston Stewart Chamberbiin—and chat has become so repugnant to Americus because it has been made te Appear primacy anc-Semin.—we shall find a ditterens preture tram wharwe had been led to expect bs readin excerpts front the more lard German “anthropologists.” Redttecd to plain  terms, Elitler’s “racism” isa pertcerh sumple chouith far reaching 
idea. Itas the oth of we the best” which we find, more or fess  tully developed. in all vigorous cultures,  For all che persistent rumors about Johnson's actual record, few pene ple had read his repugnant alypatches tur Sout! fretoe untl the architect and cra. Michael Sorkin Gourageously quoted excerpts tram them in his paSs article on Johnson's culpabiheys in the humor Inagazine Spy, the onk penodiab thar dared publish it. Tone had net dimmed the virulence ot fohnsen’s pieces. In rasa he wrote chat France “has fet the one group ger control whe always vain power ta nation’s ime of weakness—the Juws.”  In 1944. Johnson's triend Lincoln Karsten wrote thatin his view fohnson had “sincerch repented” ar his tarmer bascist behets and that he “understood the nature of hiy great nustake ”. bur “in lis mest rabidds tascmr days” Kirstein added. “he told me thacbwas number ong on his bst tor elimination in the coming cevelution, tele bitterly towards him, and rewards what he represented.” Johnson's personal carre spondenee was equally repellent. Atter the Nagi aston ot Polandin tei9, which he tollowed as a correspondent for Soci! fast), fobn son Wrote [ton Amercian woman biter coms reted asa Gerniin ALeNt, ina letter Schulze obtained from Johnson's extensive Pet tle through the Freedom: at [ntormanon Acti that ‘the German green uniforms made the plaice look gay and happy. Phere were net many Jews to he seen. We saw Warsaa burn and Modtn borne bombed. le was a stir ring spectacle.”  Yet ater worhing the sebsrantal amount of evidenee he mare  shaled against Johnson. Schulze somehow decided that  in politics, he proved to be wetter. amodel ot tughiny so never much ofa pohteal threat to anvone. sal less an ettective doer ot ether polincal wood or pelital evil oo. In any case. to the  extent that his actions can be made our thes were deidedts  unheron, mermng btde more substantial attenhen than ches  have gained  Tras rte that Johnson's almost burlesque atempts to start a crass footy Fascist mosementia the United States trom pes gp tee past crane to naughe Thacit couldn't have bappened here, thar box were never tolled inte Grand Central Teomial to deport American Jews, Is beside the point. And all the more amazing is the extent to awhih Johnsen avended iesountabliny, even when the chdlimg: evidence finally Cauehe upawirb him dn dane reogapperng on Phe Charlee  Rose Meate. dohason was more tarthrieht at  sout his past than over betore. His support of the Nazis, he said, “was the stupidest thing Lever did. Pouver forsave misseht and Pnever can arone tor it. Phere’s nothim vou candles” He alse sand 0. The ante Senuasm, bows in onsand thar’s the part Pri really ashamed ot”  Bur was fobrsen’s admission sincere. or pust apether Calcuhored volte-fice? He and bis apolouists mide stub at the awe proqcets they ated as bis gets ot contrition tor his Nazism atid ante Scouts: the Kneses litereth Svnagentue of race om Port € besten New York owhich he desrened tree ot charge Sand the Rebowor Nusei Reactor ot ryae nn dsrach fut even those Ghose te Johnsen wore nor necessarily Cotvineed. In later vears. be shocked bis architectural proteses. several at whom wwere Jews. wath his occastomal anteSemutne outbursts, but no hard evidence emerged toes pose fimias an ane constructed bascist.  Dunne the peuncs. Jobson boaneed Columbia Finiversits S Nfoders Araitecture Ssimposiumis, three brential conteretees ar whit the periods leading architectural shots souuhe to put the Modern Move mintinte historical perspective ter the brsedime. das eos whole deers archival research tora book onthe ssmpastutos, the arate tural fry tornin Rosemarte Haag Better discovered the first documentary prod that Johnsen remained warepentint cvetoatter lis purportedly ¢aprt  ron comimisstetis. dram unpublished terten dared Lipuars pes rang, 
and addressed to George Collins, che Columbia professor who orga mved the symposiums, Johnson wrote, “Personally behink che Nazis were better than Roosesell. hut Phaven tame to dig ap the proot.” Whether Johnsan’s many good works atrer World War H derived from feehngys of guilt or were only diversionary tacties, they remain worthy of recognition. A generous donor to many cultural inscratons and anespeciallh discerning collector of innovative art helped immiensels I making astite agquisipons by bis lover of tarty-tye years, the cura: tor and writer David Whitnes, who died. at sinty six, five months after Johnsons the architect gave more than 362 works to Masta, An open: nunded berets tor of intellectual inguiry as well he was the chiet pri vate source of tunds tor the Institute for Architecture and Urban Studies, the mitluential New York chink tank of the ruges through the  TQsics.  And as padrone of avant garde architeets, he fostered several maipor careers, including these of Peter Fisenaman, Frank Gehry, Michael Graves, and Rem Koolhaas. Johnson did more te promote the visual artyin America than almost ans of hiy contemporaries. Toason those grounds, rather than his architecrare, thar Johnson's histormal place os bikely to rest. His buildings isave a handtal of exceptions, all dating betere rasct wall be recalled, ipat ally as symp tomatic of the poverty ot American asi culture inthe fate oventieth century, culminating with his most hollow monuments—-the Pose modernist skyscrapers that became coveted Corporate trophies during the Reagan vears. One of Johnson's least-decened prateses, the arch tect Jaquelin Robertson, hit the nation che head ata ross protes sronal conference attended bs tthe dean ot Amencan architecure.” as the old man was retlewnvely described bs them. Although Johnsea loved delivering provocative pronouncements and claimed to) be imperieus fo crticsm, the magpie of Modernism cannot have been amused when be heard Robertson give him principal credit tor “the  pecular ooh emprness ot che latest American architecture.”  1O  ROBERT VENEURE AND DENISE SCOTT BROWN  AMONG ALL AMERICAN architects since Dour Kahn. whe cdhed pase betore the tinal quarter ot che twentieth century. only three— Frank Gehry and the busband-and-wite team: of Robert Venture and Denise Scort Brown—by the end of the century seemed guarantecd a permanent phice i the brstory of ther art Yet a question remained: What would they he remembered tore Gebts’s idiossnerite han dling of cocentme Sculptural torn distinguished him as one ot the few architects to hase desised a convincing alternative fo the rect linear rule that prevated in che Classteab and Modernist budding traditions alike. Bur Gehry way neither a Cheerist ner a teacher and despite a vounaer peneration’s attempted emulation ot his wdleas Inaver generabived way. his bighis personal approach ottered hate inthe was ot an adaptable vocabulary tor less-autted architests te tollow,  Venturi and Scott Brown are quite another matter, bow present: das architects Gan equal the formidable arrays ot skills thes dims te thetr partnership: brillant draftesmanship. a superb fit sometimes intentionally quirky) sense of proportion, keen uederstinding ot rhe power of symbols, acure seal insight, anid in ables cocappls the lessons ot history meaningfully te contemporary purpeses, Veta  number ot their esseotialconcepty—especnilly the reuse of traditional 
mots tna simplited bur recognizable tanncr—vould be appront mated more easily than Gebrs'’s designs  thus mans architects tar lesser vitted than Venturn aad Soot Brown most notably Philip Johnson, Micha! Graves, and Robert AM Stern wereable te protir franc ialic tne ctcalhy | trom the couple's adeas aed designs more than the orminators chemise ves. Phas wasn Large parta consequence of Venti and Scote Brown's deter Hynatin too create an architesture that way ac one high-stste and Renene, appealing to the cultural clite amd the general pubbo om equal. demoxrane measure. Although oo copyist has approached the min: able quahts or the pares work, the uppreecdented tortns des ised bs Gehrs have proven more resistant co flattens sncerest term. During the roees, Venture and Scott Brown usectdeadpan trans i their work Justas pounted|y as che Pop oartsts Ands Warhol, Lasper Joli. and Row Poshtenstein didn theres. Buti would be another three decades betore Gels s Gugeenbenn Museum Bilbao made patrons equate the investment value ot an architect's “signature” with thar of a pamter on sculptor  bar worse than being kmoacked off bs coutenes was the tact that Ventun and Scott Brown received so few ot the grand mstrutenal commissions thar were nacirded duruig thee ntost produetye decades No architects who were socrmally acchaimed hada higher proportien oftaribsynlt tresccuted prowers than Venture Score Brown and Asso ates est there Philadeiphia fry ora longer mare disporitiag bes fon ous the undeserving loser of so Mans imporkint Competitions of the pertod By uocinestis was the Couple ever unsuccesstul, and: tes otthe proicers thes seught went to Johason, Graves, of Stern instead Hoesen the extent to which Ventan and Scart Brown were meat hed curide the professton cand even within ath as Postntedernists<— a desumation they always rected and resented severely damaged ther cniplowinent prospects when Postmodernism tell out of tishion,  barely a decade atten it became te Latest ante Muodermst design tad.  the biggest since the short-lived Neoclassical Modernism of the late ros. sandoarhy rans,  bortunately, dunmng the ra8esx and tages, the sia othce devel: oped a solid practice based largely on university buddings, particu: lark Laboratories at Prencetin, the Catenin of Pernssisanii and PoUA, among others: cultural mstituqons aingludie che Seattle Art Miuscum of raSg-reer, San Diewo Museum of Contemporary Art of pg8e— page. ind Houston Chikdren’s Muscum of ry8u- tages has torval restoration, particularly Victorian landmarks tbrank burness’s Uniseraty ot Pepnssiyania Dibrary and Henry Van Brunt’s Memorial Hallat Harvardic and several schemes tar the Disney Company. Ptow- ever despite the Couple's insistence that they wanted to be known as practitioners rather than philosophers, thetr theories seemed more important than cher buildings oa some observers, as them ideas be ounce as pervasive as the architectural principles of Vitruvius and Palladio were in prestous centuries,  Nenturr’s seltestvicd “gentle manitesto,” Complexiy and Cuntradic: tout An bitectr scopy sighted rose though not distebuted antl the following March was published, surprisingly enough, by the Museum ot Modern Art, Che architectural historian Vincent Scully, whe w rete the introdastion. baned the book as the most revolutianary theoretical statement singe be Corbusser’s Vers we architectere of 1424. Venturn’s polemie deeply deanned, broaddy intormed, clegantly argued, beater tully written, and sapportvels ustrated proposed tar wider sources han hites tural inspiratien than was the nerm after the Mod:  ern Afovement bad been paromed ioro the stnutcket of the Interta  conal Style,  Nenturt later objected te berg: Libeled a Postmodernist, be sand. bose atne porot had he abandoned Modernisy and indeed trom time to time bis and Scott Brown's buildings owed more te the Inter: natronal Soule than te ans other squrce. Heoweser by the mud rons  the humanizing elements that were so obviousty missing i Amernas 
sersion ot the International Side impelled him to urge a restorative  synthesis. Ashe wrote in Complenrty and Comtradi ton:  Litke clements which are hy bod rather than “pure.” Compromis ing rather than “clean.” distorted rather than “straughttorward.” ambrueus rather than “articulated.” perverse as well as umper-  sonal, boring ay wellas “interesting.” Conventional rather than “desipned. 7 accommodating rather than cacluding, redundant rather than simple, vestigial as well as mmoewatig, inconsistent and equivocal rather than direct and Clean Pam tor messy vitality over obvious unity. Linclude the non-sequitur and proclaim the duality.  Dam tor rnghness of meaning rather than clano of meaning: tor the implicit function as well as the exphoit tancnan, | preter  “borheand” to “erther-ar”  Ina characteristalls daring pambit, he plived oft the subtle pocu larity of fralan Mannerism against the energete vulgarity of roadside Amencas Sixtus Vomeets Route 6 and made the cheeky analogs stick. Ele concocted a new mix, a cocktail et high and tow culture. thatintoxtated the growing number of younger architects and critis who telt there way little creative juice fete in the late, denatured phase ot the Internanonal Stile. To be sure, Modernism was never without its own intuences from both the recent and distant past vhowever much tothe contracs that appeared by the carly roecst and was dike: wise susceptible to certain populist developments tram the outset Isuch as the use of advertising sovle graphics by the Russian Con structvise architects! But after tort. vears of international Sele denial, i took the sudden polt ot Compdearty aad Contradn tear ta open whar be Corbusier called “eves that de not see.”  Within a year otig pubbeation, Ventures provecanye tract had a pronounced effect on architectural education i the United States,  exerting what has aptly been called “the shock of the old.” Students  flocked to learn about the history of architecture, and Scully's clecter tying. overenralled Yale lectures tor non-art history mayors were echoed at Columbra by his student Eugene Santamasso's hugely pop- ular surveys Courses, At the same time, a new generation of architectural design teachers, then in ther earh torties especially ¢ harles Moore. Venturr’s exact contemporary, born in ress and head of the an dites- ture shookat Berkeley and Later ac Yale took ap the call tora return ta dongstanding so listic teadinons that had been suppressed atter Amer heanonstitutions adopted Bauhaus principles cand principals, such as Walter Groprus and Dadwig Mies van der Rohes in the lite 1a 30s, This renewed attention te pre Modern architecture among the avant-garde did not mean a retreat to the old Beaux-Arts method at adapone ancient models of buildings to contemporary funetians— the Baths of Caracalla as transtermed by MeKim, Mead and White mta New York's Ponnssisvania Station, tor example. Rather, Venturi athemed thar recent as well as older stvles were equally admissible, an “andiusive” approach very much in the hberanonist spirit ot the ryoes. busthermore, the costly details and labor-intensive crattsman- ship required under the old tradigon, dispensed wath since the later corporate phase of the International Style, were ner to be remstated, Once the American construgnon industry bad gladly chiminated the elaborate detailing of Classaism. there would be no tornimy back, Ventures and Moore's Beans-Arts-trained Princeton architecture pro- tessor ean babatut exhorted his students to seck “the maxunum of effect with the minimum of means,” anid his (eo most famous papals accepted thar notonls as atairtich: of tach but alse as a new reality, Nenturi’s taste tor dake was palatable to many others because counterbalanced the traditional and the modern and tavored the validanon of opposites rarher than a chomne beoscen them. That attitude, unusual tor an Wy League-educated architect of lay gen: tration, doubtless made bun aware that he had teund a congensal  co-conspirator in Scott Brenen when he was thirty tye. Born Denise 
Lakotskt in Northern Rhodesia cnow Zambia in rayi. she grew upain Johannesburg, where her tamily’s carb International Side house was built at the ungng ot her mother, who had studied architecture betore she married. In an nnasual instance of a wom architect ful filling her mother’s thwarted ambinons, Lakotski earalled in the architecture program at her mother’s alina mater in Johannesburg. There she met a tellow student, Robert Sco Brown, wath when she later seudied atthe Archerectural Assogninion im London. At the ALA as eversone called it, she responded espesnilly to the school’s emphasis on the socuil aspects ot design and planning, a concern that remained central co her work. The pair marred on ros and moved to Philadelphia to study an the University ot Pennsylvania wath Pours Kahn. Four sears later Robert Scott Brown was killed tn an automobile accident. Ventun and the voung widow merata Peng ticulty meeting in ty6o, and soon afterward they collaborated on a seminal archites- tural theary course chat not only crystallized philosophical themes and design strategies neither had resolved individually, bur aise encour: aged the personal dynanis that helped them become the most intl ential male temale architectural team of the twennerh century. Countless women devoted lind otren subrumaced: cher talents te the canonical masters of Modern architecture, but none attained the renown of ther collaborators: Frank Plovd Wright's principal dratts- person, Marion Mahony; Charles Rennie Mackintosh’s devoratve collaborator and wate. Miirgaret Macdonald: Gernt Rrecveld’s lone term mistress and cordesiner at the Schroder house ot teagan Utrecht, Holland. as well as cea subsequent schemes, Truus Schroder Schrader: Mies van der Rohe’s interior design specialist and mistress. billy Reich, be Corbusier's tarniturce desities € harlotee: Perragd: and Alvar Aalto’s design partner and first wite, Aino Marsio Aalto. One of  the few granted jount billing betore Denise Scott Brown was Rav  bames. but even though her husband. Charles ames, struck a bhow  tor equals when he insisted they presence themselves as professional  partners, he exuded her trom: certain business meetings when be thought it advantayeous too eetoms a job So assiduous dal she downplay hee role --the Brash Modernist architec Visen Smithsan, who practhyed with her husband. Peter called Ras baaties ao Japanese wite” —thaitipwas onk atter her death thatthe parin of far conrriba tron could be determined,  Although Scott Brown neser comemplated such sclt effacement ‘and Venturi treated her more respecttully than bames had dealer warh his wite and partner. bs the ome the two Philadelphia architects manned in rues Seote Brown became a partner inthe Ventas fen two vears Later—he way already so celebrated a professional circles Chatimany dismissed her as arisen assescant rather than accepting: her asa toll collaborator Netded bs that tusappreherstan, but sta fy  nature and desdhimtul at the talse Charm she had seen dadhed our bs  epportunistie weber it borden. she struck some people as clots and derensive. the polar opposite of rhe bubbis, allombracing Ray Lames. But Sootr Brown would soon prove that in onmmablty ot chinkiag, eatholon of niste. and audacin of spot she bad not oarred ap. She flouted convention and nether adapted her new husband's last name ner—althoagh a staunch femunist— reverted techer birth mame. but mnstead hopt her test SPrisc's Surpame tomeniornilize bits  In rues. Scott Brown made a transtermirnyve tep ta Das Vepas— then nats coeaeding-ding Rar Pack glory davs) which opened her oven tothe wealth ot untapped desmn ideas oftered bs this plupertect specutien ot Americtn pop culture. | Phe precedime scar saw the pub lication ot doa Walte’s bayaire qiagaaitie atade “Das Vodas Wharzs Las Vemas Can't Hear Yea Pou Noss Das Ver ast whack made some ot the same ports, and wars Liter cited bs Soom Brown Mion architects have been content ta discover adaprable mots doris there travels tone plices, bur Score Brown was mach more excited bs che  concepts she was ctble toalecode when contmouted bs the tlabpercist  Ing clestromic sens and stvlized symbols of the Vexas Strip. Pertaaps 
the most Consprruous blind spot ot high-sevle American architecture during the owentieth century was the refusal to acknowledge the tightening stranglehold ot the private automobile as the maim mode ot transport. Almost every ill in the built enviconment—ineluding the decline at our inner cities: the metastasis of suburban spraw i the mis: direcnion of government tunds away from mass transit: and, above all the far-reaching catastrophe of nauonal energy pobesy and tts ettecoan climate change— ould be traved back to the tranny of the Ameriean car culture.  Soom Brown was by no means capitalating to the onass commer: cahem of the American roadside seap when she understood that Many recent strategies improvised by nonarchitectural despners dealt with Contemporary conditions more teankhy and ettecnvely than the good taste preseripbons of professional urban planners. fo cath the ese of drivers who barreled along highways in Detroits new hith- horsepower “muscle cars.” advercsimg sigms needed ta be higher brighter, and bolder than ever, and the Strip showed haw it could be dane well. To Scott Brown, this was a demonstrauble fact, noe an endorsement of the values thar produced the phenomenon. Yet the very Choughe that Commercial reahties codld soo nakedds attect hyth- stivle pracave scandalized the architecturabestablishment, despite ubry uitous evidence that the very same thing had recently happened in the debasementot International Sole architecture by dow rent developers  A vear later Scott Brown teok Venturi to bas Vegas. He gor her pointommediaitel, and in reas they caught a studio course at Yale thar analyzed Amertca’s Sin Civ as seriously as itinwere the Rome ot Borromins and Bernini itwe other favorites of the coupler, As meticu- fously measured, dovumented, and annotated as an archacelagical din. the Yale studio's site work sidestepped all questions of taste. The clectrwal and neen totems proclaiming the Stardust, che Dunes. and Caesars Paltce. among others. were evaluated ay dispasstonately as it  they had been artifacts of a civilization other than our own. Ctesars  Palace. with ity kitsch appropriadons of imperial Roman architecture and sculpture, got much ot the team’s attention. A latter das if samp correlate ot Hadrian's Villa or cuca rag-isg boat Tivol which was consenved by the emperor asap omperial theme park recreagne, exon Lindscapes and landmarks tram throughout his farthing domimons—[ as Veeas similarly invoked the maga of distant splen dors. Tt all kinds ot design—peood, bad. and mnafitterent—are waorths ofour scrugns, dy Score Brown and Ventun prodded their students te consider Whey notalso a cts scape that epitomized America atits most characteristicalls excessive?  Fearmmng trom Las Vegas the rect. report they wrote with cher longtime partners Steven I7enour, caused even more of a ser than Ven- turds first book. Tis pronouncement in Counipleaiy aid Contrada fro thac Mara Street lis] almost all ght” was easy for mast at his teaders to decepe in tts reasonable suggestion that even unremarkable vernacular construcdon- which he characterized approvingly as “Uely” and “Ordinars -1s worthy of a place in an architectural Inerarchy on which every buldime need nor hand indeed canner! be a masterpicce. Howesen Lear trom bas Veuus went much turther, and outraged those whe could see na redeeming value beneath the glitz of Glitter Gul.  Bevond unaccountable matters of taste, other eritics of the couple denounced them fora percenved moral relatives that bypasseal the conceptot architecture aya vehicle for soo betterment, ao article at tach during the carly Modern Mlevement. In chen blasphemous new book, as some sass it, these apostate studedts of Kahn cagerh embraced the laisse faire capitalist values ther primapled. meat rupuble master despised. Or had thes = Despite the adverse ettect that ther Pop sensibility had on ther abiliey to ger establistunent coninas wions, these architects were ne different trom: Warkel and Ticheen sternan takin the caitmercial culture at tase sahae and esis 1 as  there port of departure. Though Venturt and Scott Browns output 
hay always been quate varied and incorporated more and more histor: ialreterences over the decades, their strident early schemes tended to stakorn the memory at potental chents. Those challenging propests. outdome Disney and Veras at thei most gaudy and superheiil were particularly esteemed in burope. where Venturtand Scot Brown ifike Warhol were better understood as artist. who treshly interpreted Amerate stlues.  The primar theoreteal convept advanced an fearing from bas  Vewas was the divisran ot all acchtreeture inte two categories: “dia ks”  and “decorated sheds.” Whi a dack? Scott Brown took dhe mime trom che poultry tarmers Martin and Joule Maurees Big Duck ot tos. in Riverhead, New York. a readside stand mn the shape ata huge water towlowhth onginedh sold. amonye other things, duck. Phis vernacular  example otarfatectare parkantes a uniding that spesks ofits fune  non, had mans fagh-stele amdglogs, though tew as piquantas € Liide- Nicolas Pedous’s unesccuted Maison de hiner ot r-se tor Mone muirtres at Neochissiial bordello wath a phatls xreurnd plain thanked bs aparrottestioulit chambers fe desipmated Buettet and Sadle a anager  More veneralis, Scott Brows) and Venturr denned the duck as  “the bidding as artedlated sculprure” a contrast to the uecorsted shed, “the burldine as gener shelter whose planar surfaces are deco rated “In those terms, Feank Gehry weuld hegeme to the destin ot hinh-sevle ducks what Vertun and Score Browa were te high style decorated sheds. ln tact many buddinus are hybrids ot both cate genes or tall somewhere between the ave. Ventue: and Scott Brown's strat disisiaa. asetul thourh at may have been ter polemioal par Poses. seumed an unusual example ob absolutise “either or” tram the vhamprons ef Sboth aid.”  Imploot on the Couple's preference tor the vernacular and the generte Was ow tiatever ther Later disclaimers) a sharp critique of lace  Modernisen which had become evermore monumental and boribas-  te. Dransdated to the Ameran scenes the often modest character at  hest-generation Modern Movement architeccure was inthited i scale and deflated in social atfece: Mies cain der Rohe’s deceptively simple fookime steel and glass tors worked bese as tors te: traditional masonry buridinuss a skyline full or Miestan copies was considerabhs fess ettective. On the other bhamd, the overscrenuous structural etfes ts Eero Saanmen became se enamored of--as ca fits Dulles Internadenal Mrport of rasS-re6son Chandth., Virginia, and his Gateway Arch ob pages tues in St. Pours—needed there settnigs of splendid wolation teaghtovse manip impact. Far from seeking a aviddle way between those twarextremes, Venturiand Scott Brown wanted in architecture that Gould be borh recessive and assertive. but even thes, so attuned ra ambucuins and muleplots, could nar always bring that dual ideal to realite When Ventun and Seort Brown were at Penn during the cuges, the aboot Phiadelpina was in the throes of a sweepuig urban renewal some suid urban removal: program under the leadership of the Mod erat urban plinner Fdmund Basen, whose Corbusian concepts wreaked havo on Wiliam Penn's smali-seale ross grid plan tor his  “pre country tiene.” bo create huge axes and grassy malls, Bacon  decreed thar blook after blogk of Victorian architecture Cingludings a small muisterpicee ofa bank by the maverick nineteenth centun Neo Gathicnt Prank Furness! be demolished, Scart Brown and Venturs, whe wanted to promote anew respect tor teaong well enough alone and ter caking cues tram the particular character ot even the most modest nenhborboud. were appalled by the wholesale destruction of seomans histories dit chen untashionabios Landmarks. Scene Bacen lhkened to Sistas Vo whom ches revered as Rome's urban mastermind of the Ave ot Baroque. added onsale te todgenation  In ther search eo reconnect wath the past in clean simple ways, Ventur and Score Brown brought hack anamber at archety palarch tectural ssmbols especial such icons of doniwesticiny as the pitched  root and the massive chumnes thar had been discarded by the 
International Site. The modern that root versus the tradimenal pushed root was anissucas heth debated in ryzcs Germany as that of centralized versus apsidal altars had been during the Reformation. Thus when the Vanna Venture house of tasycreeg in Chestnut Hill, Pennsybainia, desutncd by the architect for his mother flaunted tmurror image patched routs thar resembled a Classical split) pedi ment—underscored by a vertical vod bisecting the tag semmetrical fagade— Modernists were scandalized by Venturrs ettrontery ise Hlustration toat However, by 2065, the Vanna Venture house had become such angen that it was depicted on a US postage stamp, onc ot the dozen buildings chosen tar the “Masterpieces of Modern Amer tan Architecture” series, along with Johnson's Glass House, Rabin’s Exeter Library, amd Gebrv's Walt Disneys Concert Elall.  Venturs and Scoc Browa's use af fanuliar tornts was ner moti ated by easy nostalara, chough some of their more benign schemes could prompe such a reaction among a puble unattuned to their sophists cated variations on familiar themes, Rather the architects preterred buildings chat could be quickly comprehended bat revealed their other intentions only atter closer scrutiny, For example, the parr’s Trubek and Wislocki houses af pyctc on Nantucket Gan be readily understood as ther homage to the ninereenth-century Shingle Sevte, which was parneularh popular in Fast Coast American resorts. But these nwo deceprively simple vottages were sited ata precise and crit cal angle toward cach other and the Contronung sea. a atirect refer ence to mweratthe Hellenistic temples at Sclinus in Sicily, Noworks in Ventur and Scott Brown's oeusre better Wlustrate their predilection for an architecture informed by a disparate vanets of tradimons,  Starthogls orignal though ther work could be, Venturt and Scort Brown often recvaled a baste pattern from one similar project to another, kor example. ther Seattle Art Museum and the Sainsbury Wing of ry 8s—regs atthe Nagonal Gallery in Londen are both mid  nse rectunpulir structures with the main entrance cut into the narrow  neht-front corners and both have a grand staircase set to the mpht of the entrance and leading up to main gallenes on the upper tloor Yer semmussions for the same kinds of buildings could also inspire wildly different responses trom them.  boresample. it young Americans are most rami with caging in fase: tood restaurants, why not design a college ding hall resembling the neon-ht tood courts of shopping malls, as the architects did with their Larble Student Center of ra84-19Ns ac Swarthmore College in Swarth- more, Penasvivamia? Conversely, the frin’s dining commons at the Pennsvivama State University Eaculty Club of rat3-ry76 in State  Collere. Pennsvivania, and Gordon Wu Hall ot ros§c-re8y at Prince-  ton draw on tradimonal Collewate imagers. bur in such a thit-tooted ralberr stylish was chat thes Gan be seen enther as asly parods of a sin- cere terbute., or buth. In Comtplevity and Contradicteot, Venture cited the literary oritiasm ot William Pmpson and Stanley Fdgar Hyman in support of the validity of ambiguity as an artiste device. Soll, ambi  eum tends norte be vtlued by mest patrons of architecture, who pen  eralls preter mediire certitude to brillant equivocaey,  After the firestarm of fearon from bas Vevas, Venturi and Seort Brown beran to regret that thes were becoming better known as the ores than as builders. Rivals such as Philip fobnyen lose no opportu: nity to stress Ventures HN portance as the former at the expense of the Jatrer, ay well as bis importance asa designer at the expense of Scott Brown tor whatever it was she didi in ther office. Johnsan’s misogyny needed no enoourazement, but Score Brown's pactg artale an him In The Saterday Ketiee—a brisk summation of what was mtrinsically wrong wath his work—zase him his pretest. Her irreverent: title, “Hath Bow: Phe Miking otan Pleo” alluded to his resent design tor the tPad headquarters mn New York. a Postmodernist sks scraper with a spht-pediment cop thar many bkened toa Chippendale high- hav. But she stopped short of pomnong outthat Johnson litted the dea  tor the buldmg's roattap directly trom the Vania Venturr house, a 
charge the couple would not shy awas trom after their unitator said, one me too many, that Venturi was really pust a theorist, while his wife remained tor Johnson unspeakable.  Years betore Frank Gehry became tamous, he was warned about the dire Consequences of noc developing a cheary hy the architect Peter Bisenman. who at that time seemed te have nothing but theories Although Venturiand Scott Brown had theories to burn, and despite ther repeated protestations that they wanted to stress the pragatate rather than the philosophical aspeees of architecture, them theortes kept conmung all the same. pacalleled by the grow img unportance of theory in architectural education and art history ito say norhing ot other branches ofthe academs) beginning ithe late rgecs  Although the couple hated being ragged as Postmodernist, thes positively delithted in being termed Mannerists. That, atter all was how Venturr saw his great Philadelphia predecessor and idol Prank Furness. whom he wrote about with great eloquence in his introdue:  tion te the rage Furness catalogue rasenne:  Plook at Furness as an American Fmersenian, mdisidualist refornist, naturalist artsc as one whe tollows ae the same time the sturdy, continental, functionalist Gothicism ot Viollet le: Duin France and the exuberant Iealanate Gothignntot Ruskin in Britain, But also cas ao mannerist. Hes a cannerist as the anguished arose descrtbed in these osays evolving bevond the Amernea ot Manifest Destiny amd abolitoniasc idealism and toward the postwar realities of dynamic ccononme growth and uolimited polineal corruption, Tome fis mannerist tensians are  esseritial,  The complex, contradictory duahties ot Furness so intrigued Venturi, no doubt, because he possessed them hunselt, and his use at the word  “mmannerist” was. typically, histariwalls intormed. Lhe twin virtues  most paved in Toalan artises at che Mannerist perro were disexare and pirearcione destan. or drattsiimnshap ai sts watest sense. iid InveTton, the Creation af presously Gascen COMIpas ans OF cote ctfe reanceptss Anda his virtuosic Command of both, Venta had me equal amon his archites tural contempanairies,  Butin that profession. tashien atten trumps genius. buariess saw the end of his once prospering career when his qairks brand et Nou Goth Felecticim tell sean to the same Classtoal Revival thar made Pours Sullicin’s tess historicaliy reterential architecture look dutheult Asitismow toaunaging cold tishioned by the mid: eSaos. Venta and Ssott Brown taced the consequences of similar changes in baste tas iee uidess than a decade. In ras §. Postioderdisin was declared armarlls dead by fohoson. who. having tidden that style quite the ground  during the decade since he designed his wea Building. decreed: the  new architectural mode to he Decomstructiesnr —the subject ot “Decorstrucuenise Architecture.” ao MfoMps exfabicran he organized woth the ardutect and theories Mark Wigley. Venture and Scot Brown, unabie tu beat the rap that they were the Adam and Lye ot Poscmod- emism, had gone trem outre to passe im record tune. even fy Amer can standards  Phen tn eet came the over more serious Callenge of the Bilbao Frtecn Mithough Gehry ’s mascum broadened the cient base for avait: garde architeceure as ter simude Modern buildin ever had what that new vonstituencs really wanted was dessen as novel and: arrention vetting ay bisa boon ter Zaba Phidal Daniel fibeskind. aad Sane age Calatrasa, amon others, bur a dsine tor Ventun and Score Brown Pven betore the apotheosis of Gebrs, the aan couple Ventun turned seventy in deers saw where chigus were beading aad, der enomed nor to became fistorka bas beens, devised anew architectural theor more attuned te the cmenuing computer techaologion ot the pasens than ther lang-accepted hivhétow formulations cd dhe tapos  In Venturr's polenncal freaaruphy aid | lectreaie sf porta Gainers 
Arditecnore ot rage he vented barely contamed outrage over recent trends an architecture—wlih he tound to be. among other things, “theoretically pretentious, bornely abstract, technologically obsolete.” Yer he remamed optimistic about what he and Scott Brown saw as the plumed in second coming of their ryncs heyday: the creative potennal of new clestrome technologies, which he believed capable of INtUSING CIVIC space with a vigor equal to the glory of Byzantine archi tecture. In his opening essay en this hook, Ventur: welcomed the advent  ofan  clectrome age when computerized images can Change over time, intermecon can be infinitely vanted rather than dogmanecalls universal, and cammiumeauon can accommodate diversites ot cultures and vocrbulanes. vulgac and tastetul, Pop and highta- luting—trom here and there. In this Context the grand adverts: ing Jumbotrons atop buildings in Lokwe and Osaka can, along with temple Ineroglyphigs and mosar iconography, work as precedent tor a penerk architecture emploving video display Aystenty—where the sparkle of pivels can parallel the sparkle of tesserac amd ftp can become the mosis of todas. Whats.  Apolhinare Nuove does inside we can do inside andvor autside.  This vision of a modern Raveana struck some observers as Comiplexainy  wand Contreidn dion meets bearnme froon Las Vexas. Ventun's adva  adey of what naught be called an Celectranie shed” scemed to meld a generic structure of the sort he had defined in his firs book and the appropriagen of visual imagers trom the commerce sphere thar he proposed in his second book written with Score Brown and Uenourl. feonuyraphy aid Electronics also contained the couple's tugs essay “Das Vegas Atter Tes (lassie Ages” ther lament tor the vibraney that Was fost when Mob Control gave way to conglomerate ownership and  Sodontand- Gomorrah West morphed into a tamiuly-tnendh holiday  desunation. Though Venturi and Scott Brown's larest artempe to enliven pubhe architecture through populist wonogriphy was wholly consistent wich their ecarher aims. this expansion at ther design vocabulary was prone to the Same msundertindinis as ther work of twenty nye sears canker  Dhroughour their jount carcer, Venturt and Scott Brown overesti mated the willingness of architectural patrons to acepethe appropre ateness of Pop imagers and materials tor high-sevle burldings on “serious” publo sctrmgs. Much the same happened ro Charles Moore, Whose St. Josephs Fountain atthe Prazza dTralia ot racs-1gc8 in New Orleans, theugh a rare high point of Postmodernism, oftended bis patrons, the citv’s Italian Ameran community, because his use of maltiweiored neon reminded them of Cheap saloons rather than the decoraus prazaas of ther ancestral homeland. Espeqall in commis stons where more than one deomsien-emaker is nvebvbed. cheats are unlikely to find Consensus im schemes that to most people look mndis- nnguishable trom the eftluvia of the roadside stmp.  Thas a sceimed past bhe old Gmes when Ventun and Scot Brawn lost the tows cenpeutioen fora new United States embassy in Berlin, among the sores of foreign legations designed for the reestablished German capital, Phe projects prominent site next te the Brandenburg Gate and che abilin te represent America ina countrs where thes telt more appreciited thanin the US had prompted the couple to break their recent rule against conteses, having fost seomany at such mone tary and cretional expense. Chouch the masonry exterrer of their scheme was restranid and diemted, the embassy forecourt, only shighth visible throuih a marrow vertical stot on che entry trade. was tobe dominated bs ahare ftp billboard wath Popomauens of the sor proposed in feenugrapby ward dlectrois son which colurtul images of Amerean {ite world be shown. Once ain they dost  Avant-arde artists bs definitian tev Go bead the rest ad soaety ito,  new wavs at scene and expertenang the world. Vers otter they tar 
but thes must tev, Unjust as their numerous repcetions seemed to Ven  ture and Scot Brown—w hose poswate compliant was “ft weore se tarmous, then why domt we have mere works” vanguard artists cannot haveat bork ways. With ther Knowdedee of histor, the couple must have understood, on seme level that there positions. hallenging marnstreant trends pat them in vers good Gompans indecd. and more over giase them contain rela nce as innosyators ana stage in lite when most attherr contemporaries had subsided ito the comfortable banalittes oF architectural business as usual. Tellids, around dt the nonet the oven trop centaes they were Gikem up ba Rert Koolhaas, Whose anth utopnin werldview and readiness to accept ewistimg condi dons at face value saw him condemned in much che same was the couple had been when Koolhaas was stil a scadent  Ventun and Scott Browars best-known building. and their most resounding endorsement bs the mnternational cultural estabhshment, was the resulpot the most contro ersna) Commissten ot the late oven neth ceatury: che Saiasbary Wink ot rase-reur at the National Gallers on Tondo see dlusrraten pot Ap carher proposal—an ageressivels Bih-tech destin by Richard Rovers —was humousls denounced by Prtice Charles in ra8g as “a monstrous carbunele on the tage ofa mach loved and clegant trend.” Phe ensuing pubhieiny led to ascarch tor amore “surable” solution toc the Pratalisar Square site Phe ssi centes co that limited. up itanoral Gompention was Geark the best ot the offerings. but the buldinu’s opeming met with reviews that were tet so much mixed as polarized in ther extreme nance ot camdemiaigon an admeranon,  been mans who prased the Samsbury Wink saw at as something luss than a Camptete success. Vt the teretront of the taalttinders vss Venton himselt. wha wrote co trends who were abour to pay ther tint esi tothe addinon and ported eut the flaws in the couple's MOST prestigious commission. They had been compelled by muscunt  othoils to alter there winning desu in several respects, most notably  coremove a large window meant te tice Pall Mallat the south end ot the Cencrabadlers coftlide. Gtier parts ot the propect—the resturant, the aatt shop. che tiirniture, and the color scheme of the dobbs —were removed trom the architects’ Control alrowether and lacked distine tion, A hoster other Gaiphiunss resister in the press went unas Knowledeed bs Vencurr  Awhwwardness fad alas. beer a arertsire—amd ner an undesired ope ot Venton and Scent Brows designs, aed clements atthe Sains: burs Wir were me eXceptiomn, Crties commented on the thick mul Hons oor the great ass wall ep glosimg one side of che aronumental sthrwas that doads ap trom street devel ra the preture galleries oat the pare omni Others distiked the purely decorative, Victornan- mispurcd stee arches suspended abot) those steps. Venturi, a lover ot the ant herete gesture, wanted the stone wall at the top of the stairs tobe crarived wert the superneaphig inseripron tit iss he deplored the Gee Gifdhung tb artendh significant: parntime chat curarars  Rong there onsterd. Pe. stone tor columns ot gray dtaban petra se  tema Who Veter spectted ia hemage to the architecture of blo-  rence and the Renaissance. partings the Sarasbury Weng was burt to  spshoipe, was qauareed trem a dettereat ver that the opattrowente suitcrnah and dooked gems ad stained aor tome after the building epottod. Givi a hers In presstOn fo SOT VEMEOTS, And art speetal otscomploted about tic ueoish qaaip atthe gablertes’ [ihe  coalowerked) Phe aeeep ot che superbly propor  Yor. sete troaed stllenes os terdige. and che pokwepal rooms are much better waited for shoes ia postures thi Case i Pames Strrfitsy and Michael Wouters Neue Stagrsiiilerne: of pects pus son Stuttearc, which was often ranked aimed the bost Postaredertast aviseuims ot the decade. Thtenoh designed ps Anrertoansan love wath there Countrs S arcdites tural archetypes, tie Samisburs Wang teels both appropriately Gakiain woth vttects of false perspective thar brug co mound che Mantieeast  Wostarny ot bork Borrariuint and Bereant: amd at the same time  
remarkably English owith wallers skehghts that owe something to John Soanc. and a stately) progression of impasiig spaces that recalls the viceregal interiors of Pdwin Datvens:) Most important of all. the patures make a strong, Concentrated appearance. Byer the basement level galleries tor temporary exhibitions are superior to subterranean Spaces ints other muscuins.  Paradoxically, ic was Venturt and Scort Brown's certainty abour ainbanaits as cher kes to creativity drat adlowed them—despite the many disappointments thar ther oxalted artistic status could never fully assuage—te endure the trostratons shared by all architects, even stars of the profession, Venture spoke to the inevitabrhioy that much os hound tego wrong in the most compromised at all arusne mediums wher be addressed the Amerwan Institute ot Architects ip ryan. Things are almost bearable.” he said. “when a chen loves the holding inthe end and appreciates sour Commitment...and the building i vour onsen eves is almose all ight” Then be dosed with the words of his wise tellaw Philadelphiin Benjamin Eranklin: “Beauty is notin being pertect. beauty son knowing bow coomake the design se  the impertections are unimportant”  11  FRANK GEHRY  JUST AS THE annals of pwcnteth- century architecture began drawing  to their cbose and the erand summagons were being written, a dramatic and dargely unexpected denouement was provided by brank Gehry The opening at his Guggenheim Museum Bilbao of toyt-tuys in the Basque Country ’S hirgest city caused a worldwide press sensation of unprecedented proportions see lusteanion cebh Phe only debut ofa building oo tiing memory that had attracted publicity: remotely approaching Chat level was Frank Jloyd Wrights Solomon Ry Guy wenherm Museum an New York. almost forty vears carlion And just as the first Framk’s starthon cancrete coron Fatth Avenue has been renarded over singe as the muscum’s greatest work of art. so has the second Frank's biomarphic. ctanium-swathed Spanish Guggenheim,  Proving that the apparatus of comtempanics celebrity culture could glamorize even anhiteeture, once dismissed hy the popular press as deadh duil, peurnalists ined up to praise Gehrw’s biarrely heautetul and untaiing!s photegene Bilbao seructure. Phe architest and critic Michael Sorkin summed up the costatk reception when he wrote, ’Mans fave descobed the building as the frst of the mveney first centucy, aithough Topreter to think of itoas the apotheosis of our own.” Bur spontaneous popular epithets are che surest sy that at  building bas captured the publiommagination, tor pood ar dl and the 
new Guienhern was compared teevens thing froma writhing fivh to woolossal artichoke. the tavored simile ot puzzled Bilbaimos  Phe cts ot Bilbao suas ipelt raped to global promineace on the steenuth ot dis one prorat the orginal purpose of the enterprise. To reverse the ance thriving ndustial center's sauging ceonomy through cultural tourism, local sponsors invited and paid the New York mancum teestubhsh an attshoor there, but even the most sanguine amen chen bad net imagined the extentot the budding’s ummediate renows of imiuerise tlagnetisa, Nether had Gehry, tor all his high ambitians. Amid the Bilbao bally hoo, badmutted te diam tharesen his mast fervent early supporters ceuld never base foreseen such a trie umph, to which he replied. “How do vou think / teed?”  During the late peasccs. Gehry was among a number of emerging avaitandrde Vineraan architects Who beman to propose daring: ew desen directons during the breakdown of Modernist orthodoxy, Bur toubd not appear possthic thar Gebes intentionally gapalsked and sontrontatonal architecture: -usig such low grade mettertals as cor tugated metal, unfinished ph wood, chicken-wire ghaiss, and chain: Lok femong  Coukd cver Wana Wide judic tee, Despite COUMOE Crt ES cothusiasin terits naw encrey and insolent unconscanonailio,  Mishacl Graves’ rasishinals colored: pastiches of Tuscan and  Vienna Sccesstan tents seemed the most promusig in ther potential for popular appeal, whie Kichard Moter’s and Peeer bisenman’s clever resvodiigs ot Clissie Modernist motifs suagested there aught be hte mothe old moscment va, Butin rete, when America’s Bicenten- oll prompted countless predicnons, ne one would have bee that  Gebes. pustong ditty and wank nomen publi burtdangs to hes credit.  soouid become the Country Ss. letalone the world’s, dominant archices: tural fides bey the LaTSANS millennium,  Heowas born Prank Ovsen Goldberg in loronte an rata. Gehry came toregrer coking anew surname to diseuise his berms Jewish, and  one told me. “lL basen’t done anvthing bad, escept tor changing my  name.” Atter World War Th he moved with fis workine-chiss family to fos Angeles. The haphazard and improvisational burldiag ethos at his adopted region, te sax nothing of the premium the bholly wood insth places on creative fantasy and personal transtormation, nade a deep impression on the Sonny mat Though he dus been resedutels antihistaticalin bis impulses and catholic in bis cultural reteremyes, he Isalsounmmaginable as the product otany other metropolis,  After revervirs a degree trom the University at Southern  alitor: nig, Gehry brieth attended the Harvard Graduate Schaal at Design. and then worked tor firms in bos Anueles. Adinta. Boston, and Paris betore setting up his own othe ie Santa Monica an dans. Fle accom pished his remarkabke. though slaw. ascendance bs alnimately de- parting trom the usual American pathwas to architectural success: remaining with a jarge organization and secking bisger and brewer semimissions regardless of there potential for creative expression Resisting the lure of such hollow prestige. he looked clewhere tor mrodeis to adenice. and he tound them in che workd of contemperary art  Noo Amerwan ardutet atter Dour Kahn had oa stronger selt- identiheamer as an artist. associated ay closely with Contemporary paroters and scuiptors, or toed mere dilisenth to be accepted as 4 tellasas artist by them than Geis. As die architcctural lustoria Kurt  Porster wrote, basedt am his rorerviesss wath the ine hetect:  When Gehry was a student [in the rags}. irtists represented sommethins approaching the incon ot perenne trocdom in Aimertcan culture, Mones could’ bus wea tbertes. polities a shire of praver ard Hollywood motores wid tame. bur allot these blind shmernts exacted he same heavy tell the sacritce or personal treedom Onls artists scomed abie rewan prisileres without inourrincthe tereble tosses dhatother carcebs catanied:  Atthe sume time as deo seught the Companys of artisss. he  competed wath them on turtoot bis oven choesiig. fe wasa't 
really bem an artet among artists that he strove after, but tather ta become anartse in the field ot architecture... He could not escape the constramts of his protession, but as an  artist he muighe be able to change the rules of the game,  Gehry drew considerable msprranioen trom the artot the ranos, raking cues from sources as diverse as the “combine” paintings of Robert Rauschenberg and the Minimalise sculpture of Carl Andre and later applying then te his own designs. Andre's work taught the architect about the potential power of the humble tound object, speciheally through a floor piece of common bricks that Gehry cited asa revela- tion. Though Modermsc architects including another adopted Ange: Jeno, Charles ames! had wdealved ott-the-shelt building materials as Jhasi benetit of mass prodaenon, ie took Andre's sculpture te show Gehrv that such Components could be liberanng tor artiste purposes asvcll just as Marcel Duchamp’s concept at the “Readymade” had wntuenced the Pop artists,  broam Rauschenberg, Gehry learned to use incongrucus [UNTApOsL: tions to striking ettect. The artist's Marton mith Grey Wore of ruse canvas with a naxiderms bird's wing attiaed te itis echoed in Gehrv's C ahtorma Acrospace Miscum of ru82-ra84 in bos Angeles, whi has a Lockheed b-tc4 Startighter jet clamped ta the tagade. And Gehrv’s fate Patry te the Chieage Prdiate Lower Competition of poX—a sketoh ofa skyscraper sprouting a reabsne eagle's head and wings: derived exactly from: Rauschenberg'’s combine sculpture CocreCada Plan oat casa, which sports Gavidermy bird's wings emerg voy from the sides ofan upright rectangular term,  Gehry long chershed. and exphated aie. of humselt as anembat thed Creative outsider based on the Romante cult ot the tragically Misunderstood artist, buat chat positon seemed torced by raxa, when he was the subject of a traveling retrospecave, “Phe Architecrure ot  Frank Gehry” organized atthe Wather Art Center in Minneapolis by  hiv Jongome advocate Mildred: Friedman. bor the epigraph of the Wather catalog, Gebey chose bis canker reutark “Borg accepted isn’t everything.” [twas a surprismig statement tren a architect whe ever then. a decade betore Bilbao, enjoved catical prestise that the vast majonty ot his coprotesstanabs Gould only hintisive about  Adimuttedh, Gehry did ner benett much tranche building boom of the rodeos when his Postrnodernss Gontemperanios tocenved Comins: sions more vistble and prohrable than his fow-pronic, low-budget promeces. yen mere hurttal during that decade be lost seseral mayor muscu jobs tor whiab be was eminent qsabtied. having desasned. a number of superb gallery iustallations trom: the mid rages onward, Furthermore, he possesscd as good ano understanding of eontempa fay artas mans curators ind was amore presgeat collector than mans muscu donors,  During the rys8 s Gebty was considered: tar thres prescious prop ests in fis home state: the Muscum at Contemporniny Art )Mtou vi and the Getrs Center bothin bos Anueles. andthe San brincsce Museuin of Modern Art He reserved: ume ot these assigmments, which went respectively co Veata Tsavaki. Richard Meter and Marta Botta, aieh with disapporiting results, The boards of directors ot those museums, teartal of seeming shausvingstic apd unworidh op they proked a Cah tornian, passed over Che gemus an ther own bagkvand and cherehs missed the arciitectural opportunits toa titerune thar woukb be realved so stanmngly at Bilbao. Phis was pure prosiigialism, Asa consolation prize tram sta Gehre was asked soon atterw and tare: mode: ase dewnrowa bos Viteles warehouses into the Tempenaey Contemporary of ro82 1o8 3, uitended as the muscun’s interim dis: play space durin the Constrition of INovakes poetanent boda, bur at was reramed atter Gebry serine, corse rsion bu ime mere pap ular than bvozakis Constrncted: and monnered scherse.  Te was common miopereption that Gebrs procteed force better  part ot twa decades before he demonstrated ary discenuble artiste 
imhinanons, fo make his dramaty nudcarcer transtormauen seem all the more astounding—a perception the architect encouraged — Gehrv’s cark ocusre has been depicted as ttle more than Gompetent hackwork. Bot the quality of hey little Known developer phase was high andeed and os tiled with Clucs about his tuture directian. To be sure. Gehry, like most other voum architects, dtd his share of farger- table Commercial and residential construction. But he was tortanate to recenve several barge yobs trom: fares Rouse, the most calightened American developer of the bases and ryccs, tor whom he designed aeorporate bendqaarters and several other stractures ia che planned communion of Columban Marviand. Prom Rouse, Gehry learned aboot orgamving large-scale projects, office Management, and other practical concerns that served bim well un establishing his bora fess asarelable pracobonern even when his woldly imaninatoe proposals meht mdicate the opposite ta wary chents  back ondiation ot Gehr's artist interests can be found in two related Calitornia projects besun in raes: the O Ned hay barn in San Juan Capistrano. anda studio and residence in Vali bur commissioned be the arnt Ron Davis. Working with the eals anized corrugated steel and phy wood that were to hecoine nwo of bis favorite baring mate: nal. the architect cnvaged in llusianisce play with perspective in tHe  took his areal wea tor the angular slantrooted tarm shed and  those extremely low-budyvet schemes. | Phe bay barn cost $2.5  expanded ont tor Daviss projet atter discusstons with him about geometry and the nature af visual perception, themes the arust had been exploring in his avn work. Bs skewing the roothioes and wall heights of the Various elevations ot those simplihed structures, Gehry Moisable tec create the cmpression that the bustdines were bern viewed ina deepen perspective even when one was) standing directh im teont of them. Ara ome when mamstream Amenean archi tects thoughe thar curtain: walls ustng new kinds of tinted! mirror  glass marked the outer himits of formal investiaadon, these phssteally  trodes bur comeeprualis adveaturcus steuctures marked ao brave departare tron the accepted norms ef prictee arb opened up to him dncdartcd territars  Gels (ier artiste turmimg pountou generally aureed te have  been Wisco house of rettsrec8 a Santa Momo see dlastranon fia ad romodelng ona pares gantbref-roored lapgatow ona ytlict resident street He senov ated and expanded the structure in tga - boa oripprag the ereund toorot the esistaig piok slimeled fagade moanoancular pauside ot Corrupated steel and screening the upper story wath chou brs tom aay ne nscrted tworarsstallmne, wood: framed Woaidow sasanht tories. onc ob them a rotated cube thar added te the Calagiee lige sense of Pypresstonist distortion. As the architect Liter opoenedir Longiage qane ube Chatot his matterot- het coprotes: seomals. TP tangasiced that wher [hosed an the box othe old: banse there were hosts onthe horse thar would try tecereep out, and this Watidoss ws a cultist ghicst  Toatde hes house, Gabe stepped away plaster wall and ceding sur tacesteddas fare the wooded daths. Pears, and porsts beneath: he buale prita -cand-chiss addition forages kitchen and paced the oor with vsphalt and cn plases cett duemwork and pipes exposed. an aet of creation threuah-derettuen that had) direct Gounterpart in the  Conmeniporiny Vinerosant world. as nated by Kurt barster:  Onn a tea sears cartier the aatiat Geordon Marna Clarks whe  swhue Greties seas titstiine his house. dad exhibited wall scaunts be fad out trom a condenincd touase ima New York callers Nop ithet indiss, the vredenee that had broushe them miter Dera, Milagre: Cark sstuipents made teranwittiigh pretty  peat.  Phere bt aitditfcreice Perseon Grats s sets dons arb eta i ana  dations of space aid the obscure aud discqcutimng gamesimatiship at 
his no fess artsdcally ambitrous Contemporary Peter Fienman. As  Gehry put that distinction to borster:  Idiot have che need like he does to corture them when they use the hutiding. In the Wexner Center [in Columbus, Ohta). tor example, Fisenman made itso thar peaple wha worked there would have to ook down a certain was tosce the view, bimean,  Twouldi’t think code that. Pim more user-trendls,  Another mayor factor in Gchev’s widening appeal during the tyes Was his imeretsini use of ne materials. What he ceterred coin a rae8 Columbia University lecture as “ms old chain-link tetsh from years age” undoubtedly scared att some potential hess. He expluned that hus orginal intention was to demonstrate that ne building product as inhereatls disreputable and thatits value derives tram haw creatively rooin be used But as the Pop architects Robert Venturi and Denise Seott Brown, as well as Charles Moore, discovered in the fu6os and reces, the pubhe’s nveatve ceagtions to the commen ial reterences at vernacular features Gan neither be disresaarded nor casily overcome.  Gehry moved te more expensive materials in designing hie Winton guest house of ry82-rg8 7 in Wayzata, Minnesora, where along with hus tanubar plywood, sheet metal. and chicken wire glass he added stone, lead-coated copper ind brick othe latter a cespanse te his shen brgk maint douse of tase by Philp Johnsen in his earh Miestin moder Gehrv’s expanding iaternatienal pracace reintorced his shithaway from omatecal that empl would not list as long in Northern furope as they have in Southern Calitornmia. But even more than his suave ctheugh sal funky new repertoire of tinashes, Gehrv's once-unthinkable move mite the big time secauned trom his new teund abilins to please the public and make places thar tee! good even though they look strane.  Gehry’s first experiment with the freels Curving, sensuously organte  forms that would culminate so dramatically in Bilbao was his Vitra Destan Museum of ta8s-1e80an Wel am Rhein, Germany. Bart in that decade he designed a series ot Southern Calitorma houses that were never built. With angular tloor plans that appeared to explode in ditterent direceons and simmlariy tractured wally. ches seemed to have survived an carthquake. The transitional Vier design combined cle ments trom: both modes, and theagh the small museum burldine would come to seem more hesirane and awkward to many observers atter Gehry’s unconstrained and better-executed muasterpicees, Vitra Was nonetheless a deaaive breakthrough, As the architect Michael Maltzan, Gehry’s project designer tor the competinion phase ot the Walt Disney Concert Hall or ra8o-2003 in Los Anteles. observed, Tow. [Mitra would look dumps; chen it was a radioactive mugger — vou were seeing the tuture.”  Its adronk thatin raSS\ when Philip foboson and Mark Wigley invluded Gebrv cagainst his wall he later claimed tin their "Deconsteue tvist Architecture” exhibigen atthe Museum of Modern Art, he was urthe midst ot the Vitca project and had alreads progressed well bes ond the nervous tragmented style chat Johnson and Wigley promated as the newest avantwarde fashion. Although Gehes'’s transigon trom sharp-edged provocauon to bomerphie tantasy was no mere plov to enhance his cob prospects, there i po deube that after he won the Pritzker Prive in tase bis commusstons proliferated. Ie was through those propeuts that he discovered a tar neher vocabulary of formin biemorphism than be hadin the pingled peametries of his pre ceding period,  All architecture, Classical or net, muse have some sense ot order and order as much harder to achieve wathour the straight fines aud night angles thar have domunated the botlding art from time immeme nal. The voluptuons outburst of Bilbao was an amazing tear in lange part because it secms socerderh even as it overturns conventional  nenens of regularity. Phere the visiter teels an almost palpable sense 
of propubion as he walks inte and moves through the ebullient stenctore, one ot the boldest recone prams of architectural space since the Age ot Baroque. Dike his arost frends, Gehry eveballed the destin, ddiusted ab ointurtiveb. and came up with a persuasive lew paradnon ter his com cotion-bound joleapues to tollow. Bilbao hints atevengtreater possibilittes than it embodies. making wa work chat ewudes an almost Gongigtods optnnistn,  When a mascanm brilding os an exceptional werk of art in itself. there is a tendeney to overtook its bmitations inthe presentation ot art, epronized bs Wrades Gugrenhern which shows arf sonte things brilliantly — sculpture in pardeular—but others poorly. Ina  oprah qupudent remark about Gehts Ss oasten ork, Philip John- i 1  son sand. “Ht the architecture is as good asin Bilbao, tuck the artt”: but such dischimers are met needed. in hich artworks at many ditter: ent kinds have been cttecuvels agcommendated there: Old) Master dravings trom Vienna's Albertina collection inthe smaller rectangu lar nallemes, and panorimig roses Pop parntings in the larger ryght- angled rooms hough when diana wath less eve can hing works chose boxy qallertes Gan dook drears The museum's most unusual displays spaces sags feet lon. 90 toordith volume miaknamed the Bish Gallery because of ity shapes daminated be a stupendous perma  nent moanting of Righard Seroes Garsiig. tilting. rosting-steel sculp  tutes, seme charts fect hash  The Guggenheim Bilbao instantly became a popular tourist attrac Gon. ard just one vearatter the completion ot the Stoo millon struc. ture, dere than twice that amount had been returned co the local  coon by pilgrims te the mascum. Not all Basques were imeaib  cothiralled wath the Gugenherm. however and amor tts most out  spoken carly opponenty way Joseha Zulatka, a protessor of Basque studies atthe University ot Nevada at Reno. Many Nevadans are ot Basque descent. In reo-, Zolatka wrote thar the actual cost of the  project—almost none of which was borne by the Guggenheim tar  exceeded the othaulls reported Siosimilion the Basque eevernment pard tor the building ised He abso reported immediate cathacks in government tundmge ot other cultural Programs te pay ter the mtascum.  Iworvears later however he tolbme he tele dittarends:  When we look terward to what histers willsas at chs, the tact Iwthatitwasagreat thine tor Bilbaa. Those otis who were cat waboritdidn’t toresce thatone building Could de this much ter ao and never suspected char Gebry’s building would be such astunner Lhe pobtaaas cealh hit the packpor with Gehey bo actual coonumie terms, E don't believe them numbers. But a rorms ot psychology tas dereg wonders tor Bulbao What thes Paid fori now looks bhe peanuts. Phe great thi about the Guseenheim os thariucs allowed: Bilbao the discourse of opt  brim" we ca det aga.”  Betore Bobve, adapting modern barking materials co tancitully dis- torted stapes was Gehrs’s greatest challenge. Phough Antone Gaudet produced detailed drawines tor his iurregabar Are Nouveau structures yn Cataboma athe turn ot the century, be aade working models that he would photouroph and theo trace over to create the drawings. bur  radi worked with maternib—hrck, stone, and tile--avwen  thermicte tralroche Catalin oratts tembton and wath forms aehievble cheoaagh skilled but cheap Jabor making it possible for him te rowerk ideas atfordabls during Ganmstrug con  But the unheard of things Gelins proposed. and the tatenals he  wanted to use. were atanother order Po construct his rerefoot dar  to -toor-hith stone. glass. aid steel fish sculpture tor che Vila Olimpia ot pyse-reg2 in Barcelona, Gch s othoe beman working with Catia. a comporer program desiscd De the Prench sennnauites fires Dissault Ssstemes te desi comples stapes for the aerespace tidus:  try. feopened the was ter making the budding at Biltto possible, and 
saved the dav tor Gehry Ss Disney Concert Hall. Gehry had no interest Inusing the Computer inthe early stages of design, preferring his long: accustomed method ot tise sketching an idea and then moving on to an extensive series of developmental models, which often began Intormally with a sheet ot crumpled paper or some found object. But the Cana sottware made teas to sean tree-torm models and trans late chentinte highly accurate working drawings. As Gehry explained at Columbnr in coos, 7 Phas computer technalogy design iy a miracle for allot us, because it rechums our position as the parent over the contractor to get them te bull whatwe want.”  Thar technalogial breakthrough did not alter Gebry’s ihinacien to consider alternate outcomes toa design problem, however. “There's notone way of dome things.” be remarked in his Columbia lecture, “and that’s really interesting tro ome.” Nonetheless. he remained warsoof having ans other medim—whether drawing, photography, or computer unaying—vompromise the ymimedives of the final arafactoand thus rewarded evervthing up oto the fineshed building itself wath a healthy skepocism. as something aiuch less than the real thing.  Uhe bigeest danger for Gehrv atter his stupendous success in Spain was thar chents expected more than ust a budding tram him: thes wanted to bus inte the so Galled Bilbao btfect. the phenomenon that turned museum architecture inte a form oof “branding.” wath dire effects on the was artis presented tothe public. Phe benete tor Gehry, aticastin the shore cerm. was that the international Clanior surround: ing Bilbao enabled hin co tollow at with a compacable masterpiece night in his awn backyard. bas Angeles has dong suttered tram a cal: lective interiority Complex and has regarded the creative achieve: ments of other cites, above all New York. as intrinsically superior ta sown. That mopar permited when ttcame to LAL. view of Gehry, Perhaps the most extrpananthy atte of all che cin’s aruses during  the List quarter of the twentieth century,  By the mid-rosos. the disparity bemveen Gehry’. sine itera tonal reputation and contig lick ofr cagniten ip his fonietown began ro sceminexpheabls disproportionate. Nonethcioss. his chances seemed dim when coS8S he was named one et four bealists i the compention tara new heme tor the Pos Vageles Philharmonun. The project was funded with an initial Sscomuilon vrane trom Eilhan Dis nev owidow of Wadty ter whom the building weuld be named. and wound up cestmag Sieg muailion. Phe building sires on Bunker Hillan downtown Pos Vnacles—acress from Welton Becket Associates’ Dorothy Chandler Pasihon crthe Vase Center of rae g-1o60, which had been the archestra’s home since to opencd was meant to help revitalize the heart ona diitese city chit has esemplitied the sprawl Metastasizing deross the Aimer Lindsetpe.  One ot the most persistent rmages in American urbanism has been tharot the proverbuabain ana hill as thst ervastonedd on chese shores by the Puritan Jehn Winthrop. via the Gespel according te Satnt Matthew. Flesated Ioganons base otters inipled elevated purposes though samerimes repressive ones as well. Thus there was yreat opomism when re sa the |. faul Getty Prost bought a spectacuhir filltop site in Brentwoud tors new museum and research comples, desimned by Richard Meer Bar when it was cermnpleted. fourteen vears later, many found the citadel te be aloat tram the Gt rarhee than a unatvine) clement warker it  Phe glory ot Gehry s Dusnes Hallo. that unlike the Gere. ar seems te taltdl che adeabot the Stadthrceare. or “Crown ot the city a concept articubated most cloquaentie by the Geri bypressionist  arctitect. urban planners and theerst Brone Taar The vestorary vet  practical Taut—whe deanised noboddabis colored vliss whigiers tor the Alps and bolt superb workers housing mi Bern saw the con struction oof sach ao surmounting urban oyiosure met mereky as a ssimboli act bur as presiditn: a place that would eneutage soci  coheston. Dhators precoels what sem or the peaple ivelyed in 
Disney Hall wanted at to be: nor just an aeoustmally excellent audito nun tor performances, hue a catalyst that at long last would help to make the center of Los Angeles come tully alive,  A techn of mounting excifemeat a palpable as vou approach Disney Hallo te fares ap an the citv’s messy downtown horizon like a silver gallean wath toll sats billowing ina brisk westerly breeze. As one comes closer ane sees restless but harmontous ares at stainless steel, Ther pracetul curv dinear chy thins attest te Gehry s skilbin cone terring on carthbound buildings both the gravity defying motion of ballet and the ume altering syncopation ot music. Though the Bilbao muscumisundemably a work of venus, Disnes Hallas more tosused, more polished, and more thoroughly Cohesive as a single caperience, andatis better executed inits deriuls, Beers thug an ebis rich and cae plex orchestrinon of surface and velume, light and shadow, comes covether with assurance and authority. Phe tincoonal requirements tor the Bilbao muscum were Largely open-ended. It has a neghgible per manent collection and serves as an exhibiqon space tor a shitting series of objects. dn contrast. Pasnes Halls tuecaonal mission was highb specite: to provide a suimable home ter a greup of musicians whose excellence bad been appreciated Ghieth in other cities much hike the work at Gehny himselt:  Arriving at Disnes Hall vou mis teel propelled torward into the flung open arms ofthe mam entrance, which is set on a street Corner, The fobbs bevond is sindarhs) encompassing, Irevokes a metaphoric grove at stylized, thigk-trumked trees— massive, arching, squared-att  wood veneered columns thatlend this gathering space the techn of a Wagneriuin sore set There are wide, meandering stareases for the semand be seen promenades that some concertiorrs doves womblike soves in which small musical ensembles can hold intermal pertor  Manee  panda vertiginous shate that shoots upward toa glazed open: mycin the root, as lumenarimg as the skylushts in Ponden’s Soane  Museum,  Miest stunning of alls the Pounders Roum. a freestanding, simu ously Gistorted Gane ust te the audiroriunmt, omginalls Gad an the oXtenor in spimtvss stecl more Prehthy polished than the rese ot the  buiding—se brehtoan tact that the metal later had to be gaven a  duller priosh because fetlectons it cast oade aparimenes an nearby  buidines anbeaabh hor Phe anteaor ot the Founders Room leaps to  Varvestors nigh waudted white plaster coding with intricately layered  tolds. bene to mind the dome at francesca: Borromins Sant lye  “I  cllaSapinvact rege-reeoim Rome. Never had Gehrs Ss Mannerise Baroque prowiniges boon scoapparenn Quoside, surrounding: wardens And an epen are aerphirkeater roan aimestane and travertine podtum rinsed apove thy sloping sitch are open tothe pubhe esen when there inne performance nthe hall making ae space avalible to people wheomas never attend a cancert within, Phisas the acropolis Los  Anuecles had Be tor aidatas much more accessible than the  Getty ter the nema tite residents whe by the carn ot the milleanim trade ap the maremt. ofthe ain’s population,  The protonope ter che Disney audinertam was flans Scharoun’s Padharmome ctiese jueyauBerli’s Kulturtorum. Phatadioss nora Stragture, desitoed bs the lastagtive Gerinin Pxpressionist architect ate un bis caresn departed fram the contunes ch “shochow” Convert hab ftontar aids by ceneral Garsent qgcaustially superior te: most ether Mederniat teusi aiditonutisc at remains the model ot the sa- called vines ard Gonficoniaon. whercin the orchestra, atthe center of  nosurtontided bs the aachenceimisteeply raked seateny,  Pic spas  Phe Distey aodbeoruoe i stugmoae. both visually and auth, Shearmed in Dhoauhas fraser Plaster, it embodies the warmth and tnelbow tess ote ase ndates Math Stradivarius and Gajarmed strany rosteumicnts. Osethead. the Goudhke cenhwuragen of the mine part  noostspended cevim: cohoes the carsdinear rhythms of the  Wired walls. baloomtes, aad bess shaped ross of seating. Phas dynam  Apace is inehored bs a specracuhir organ desmped by Gehry wath his 
customary scalptoral abandon. [ts angled. wood-encased pipes thy up and recall the mbbontike hosannas ascending trom the mouths at sigma angels in Flemish Renassaece paintings. Phe high visual qual ityof the auditerium reminds one how architecturally lackluscer even the most acoustically outstanding tradiqonal auditoriums can be, among them Ssmphons Hall in Bosron, the Concertgebouw in Am- sterdam, and the Mustkvercinsaalin Vienna.  Fine as Disnes Hall might look. however the architect kaew that the sound quality must excel, No clement of the scheme obsessed Gehre semuch. He worked with master acoustiehins—Miinoru Nagata atfestoand then atter his retirement in rogg, bis worthy successor Yasuhisa Povota—to arrive at the best possrble balance of sound, and willingh adtusted dimensions to Nagata and Tosota’s caretully cali brated recommendations. At the Pox Angeles Philharmonie’s first rehearsal in the new auditory in fume sol4. 0 took ondy che test tew bars of the final movement ot Movares fputer Ssmphons tor one to apprecnite the phenomenal acoustes, which have a tall, sibrant resonance, halinced by oa fimpid Garg oor tone and an overall searmth. bates as the orchestra Gammenced the slaw second move- tnent of Beethosen’s Seventh Svmphons, once could teel the thrum- ming bass dine through the soles ofone’s teer, Gehry admitted that the offen mexaet saence of sound is “one third acoustics, one third psy: choaceusties, and cae thiedia great orchestra” The sound seemed to me sublime.  Noche least ot the surprises of Gehrv’s artistic development was how well he made the transition trom the small scale typical ot vane guard projects to the Lirge scale of mainstreant publ commissions. That his bay work Gan tech as spontaneous ay his more intimate com: posinons has been one of his most renurkable achtesemenrs, He once spoke tome of his admuranon tor the sculpture ot Alberto Giaco- metty speciboally the mimediaigs he was alle co resin in the Anished  Artifact:  Its hard to sustain the techng of Ite trom a firse model to the nnal work. Henry Moore got inte trouble raking: his rechining heures trom wood to bronze, ke de Kooning did when he took his Chao: Deegers trom clay to bronze, ve taced the same prob- lem in making ntanium look as spontaneous as a sketch, but Gaacomerty pust gotit des all about surface. and it cakes a lite  time to know how co dean And Greomette beured tout.  Freer sinve Gehry decided to recast himself as an artst-architect, he has been fasciiated with arvhitesture as sculpture; hence he prefers to create a destin by modeling. His jong term friendships with sculp- tors who work ona large sale—mainty Claes Oldenburg and Richard Serra—have been based on their exchanges of ideas about the seulp- tural nature of archite ture and the architectural nature of sculpture. Disnes Hall demonstrated how muuch Gehry learned trom them, even though Serra openly dismissed the notion chat architecture a an art torn atall, The serpentine passages chat snake between the shapely stainiess steel forms of Disney Hall's extenur recall but quite outdo those of Serra’s Lorguaed Ellipse senes; they have none of the macho menace of Sernavs phasially smposing but psecbologicall territs img Cor den steel sculprures,  The triendh. cepro Pop nagar ot Gebrv's architecture owes 3 great debt to the ante animanon of Oldenburg’s carly sketches of pablo sculpture, among them biomerphig conceits like his Sealy fer Colossal Mbanenent: bagends oo bivde Parks ot tyee, a superscate pile ot crushed cigarette stubs: and Desig for a fronted kartrance it the berm of a Nose ot pass, both of which seem to predict Gehry vemupositions. Whatever dirccnon the final phase ot his astomshing scarcer may tikes iis to be heped that Gebrs will continue to draw on the work at such bke-minded rellow arnsts, lavage or dead. ota rene he proposed a Goudhike plass structure tora vaguely defined cultural  center in Paris sponsored by the lusury goods Conglomerate 1\ ME, 
andcarh the tollowing sear came up with brs third Guyenherm oft shoot. this ime a brangh tor Vba Dhabs inthe Cated Arab Fourates. Less promising was Gehry ’s comtresersial destin tor Aelantn Yards in Brook hina neenty tao acre mised use urban redes clopnicnt s heme thar inchided a basketball arena, office and retail space, aparements,  and ahotel, which won planning approval atthe end ot 6.)  The hanger tor any artist whose works beth rstanth recogniz: ablevind Inghty sought atteeas the temptation to crank out repentive desnms. This worrted Gebrs whei he was quickiy besteged by Clients Climoring tor Bilbao dlones. Byen the patoons of Disney Tall, who had been working with Gehry for two tears before he gat the Guggen hea rob. were netoamenune to the mutate urge. Atter his Basque sensation, they asked hin ta change the proposed Hmestone Gadding of the orchestea building te stamtess steel Tike the silvery skin- at the museum although cherr ostensible purpose was to cut $imuatlion ieesty. Other chents coscted that “sntmature” book. tea, and at the request of the family that founded the Privher Prize. Gehry added deveratnye titanium flourshes co the praseemmun af his fas Priteker Pasthenot pogu-toug. rbandshell in Chicago's Millepnaim Park.  Muscums were especeuly eager for Gales te werk tharold Basque tang anthem, even the Gugeenheon teselt. tts enereprencurial diree ton Vhoniuis Krensowho was ever happy with the dimitanens of Wooahts Gus  enhom -canimissroned a bower Manhattan branch  trom Gebrs in pees Krens intended ta keep the muscum's permanent vollecnon poor. and tose the Gehry burlding tor che museum's headquarters and Chaming exhibinons. The proposed Guggenheim sites om the bast Raver atthe toor er Wall Street and ser agaims: the dramaue backdrop of the skyline, posed a dagnnng compositronal problem tor Geb Eis design oa that horvental mass of otanium fommuscaut of Pitbao bur devonb ot ats cnergene sweep and momen- tum would have beea dvsarted bs the tall burldings chose behind ot.  His repeated atemprs co mednite between the O40 scales by inserting  aAomudmse tower ae dhe arrangements center dad net help. In any event the fmaniails beleaucred Gaugstonfe rie abaddored the prorat WD Oey  The comumtien of crt! amd popalar Consensus on Biulbie, of anoordor thar has almost never beer ache abt a iodernd umes. Ineated mans qustitucerial ients, cemmmercol as well as cultural, co seck oxpermmental ssbemes tran vounver vanguwrd arelirects thes would never have considered before Gehry opened the way tor Zaha Hadid. Rem Koolhaas. Daniel Libeskind. Phom: Maas. and aans others whose careers blossomed an the atrergiaw of Bilbaos Gohes alscoopenced the won tor Santas Clara, the most Conspucuons uipresarnioootawhar bas been called the architec ture of spos taste  Howesen Gehry was ne more cuipable tor the excesses spawned hy the Bilbao Bttect than Mucs sander Rohe was ter the Countless cativatures of fas rminenatisc skhyserapers: Nonetheless. even odiens comparisons ein draw attention ta Weaknesses ut the ecusre ef a master and expose problerns more readily apparent mn the work ot comuars., as happened atter Nbes's death. wher his reputaten went mato temparasy treetall The same might bappen te Gehry samedas, dthoueh he bhe Mies. Grint be dermicd firs ciesitable bach phice an  the history ot Modern architecture 
RICHARD MVETER  FLYING INTO LOS ANGELES, vou dant barber te Took tar lindmarks. The could-besu where Custer ot ling Modecnist and: Postuaodernse towersan the ons oid downtown is noe worth a festalance. Phe tine prntotthe Holby wood stem is often occluded bv the vellowish Tid of gases thathesvers over the autocemissions capitalof the United States. The vast net of the sprinsling Gis streets his pnone only when atts ltupon the dark. Suddends the creas. gleam: Get Center stands outoaaainst the acre brown Santa Mlonna Mountains wath afl the ummiutable mass ot a geolewtcal lermainod Faoview of the kilotans ot carth moved ang stone quattied for us akin, this vrehites tinal prodigs wandced aman made mountain see ilustratian 12)  Aso head northasest from to. om the San Daeso kreeway. the Getrs Center, perched tush atop a dasrans hill deites an and our etosothe Te branes ce mused a later day Shaneredima dlat-rooted, vaatuel) Streamutie Moderne opoe Uke the Limascny ia frank Capra's Dost Horizon ot pesc. fiet bevond the Sumer Bonles ard overpiys. the Getty ip hist heaves rere fill view on the stoop: prantontory to the westoot the toadseas. The sheer Glitr ot butt Colored miuasonry  looms over Slopes planted warb wmarted western oaths an serncd fatths.  Meant to seuuts architec tucal subiawimen of thas reaited: tercam,  that fortnal landscape cttuct is hie toc tame. ar makes Che Getty site 
look tor a moment lke a very taney vineyard created bya retired movie mozul,  Pagnng at Getty Conmter Drive, sou switch back south ona loval street. cross under the treeway, and enter the Getty demain. The first order of business os for a guard te determine whether vou belong, there atall. fe ver in dunng weekends and other peak attendance Periods, parking reservations must be made well in advance, because although there are toc: Spaces toremployees’ cars, there are only § 6c tor the general public. You can, however arrive unannounced if vou are willing to walk or cofferblade at lease a few miles. ar i sou Gomie ota bike or motoreyele, Gake a tani of ride whacis Known in some West Side TOA. Girdles as “che mds? bus.” the pubhe transportation hie that runs along Sunset through Beverks Hulls, Bel Ai and Brent- wood. Atter boing vetted by the Getty martre dy vou leave vour .arin the seven level parking garage af the hotramper che fall take an eleva tor up te the roettop carbway scation, and there board a mult car white tram that climbs, somewhat cttorttulls, three quarters of a mule up weurving track to the summit.  Faypectanons run high, netonk because this is one of the most vorplicated sequences by which a visitor arcaves atans publics build: ing Ameria. bur also because most people must plan tar the expe- eence with constderable torerhoumbt, You cannot walk inte che Getty asceppulsively as seu amaehbe cuter the National Gallery or Bertish Museum in Lendon, or the brick er Metropolitan in New York. But when the tram comes toa halt aml sou emerge vie the long-awarted destination, hopes ef mastery and mage vanish the blaving san- hehe. The hist, punishing impression i one ot binding glare. Phe highly retleuve surtices ofthe brogd cuts. pliga paved in pale stance: and the six median rise, late Modernist bualdangs that surround it sheathed in ditterent places with rough-Cert Roman travertine blocks, enameled aluminum paneling, of vast expanses of whasst eun the cob  Ofte spectrum trom white to off-white to beme. kven when the sun  seonky haltway tects venithy dark vlisses hesome necessary equip: ment, Theaminalrrany ot this shome tothe visual arts es that atter the Oh ustime kot gettime there, vou Qintiot sce am without sqiinnng.  The Germ Center completed nn ray c iis a iiditiase compley made ap erche ) Paul Gert Miusenm the Consers anon Iasocure, the Research losoruce ter the Histore ot Art and the Humamtes, the Bducation Insotute ter the Veo. the Interoiation Insitute, and the Getty Gran Prouram. as well as oftiees ter che Gat Trust an auditorium, a rostaanint pavilion and a stone canparted hebcoprer Landing pad. All otat was destenedd by Richard Meter the New York architect whe established bison tionan rues aml whose sugcesstul career was fuolton box perny handled sacaitoonssm Purst themes tise set torth my De torsuster the teios. do those tamenir with Merer’s sleek and seltassured style Modern agadenteisne eta hash order—the Getrs a aentibie ompondrr ot ak his marr concepnans and miner Thonts an tbridged version ot his Gamplete warks.  Wecansee phantoir tethecqons ot Meters Hish Museum ot Artot  ToS? pascon Atanta bothouo the Getty Museums entry hall rotunda  atubou the Croulir esteror at the Research Insetute, where visiting scnohars work Phe architects \rhencumi ot fut -roce mn New dare mom, tralia acs evoked in the priuer curve facades af several of the  Getp stoituressas Wel asi the trles and ines of white pipe-rail  esters that outhare tae mags external stare cowers chroughoue the compe be Corbuscr aw asentrinecd bs the uobtariin forms at ocean ners and bos nuaat beech rrerces sat on inte histon at Moers Getry,  Theres ro discrace on recs ling artist tee whether one’s own or outters atid Mfers bas adwcas aalimed: hase Howarth the rate Stroar diaater strates of devchopng a saccesstul tormaha and then Stickene woth ot. is mans other Modernist arohatects tas well cus patorers and sculptors have det before tim. None at Murer’s selt horn ings Would master much ait the sum at the Gerth Centers vers  Mans Pabets ridadeat Hp To Satis tae whale Nltdiestiacts Modernist 
architecture largely dispensed with Classical notions of harmony, a Modernat budding can soll have an internal coherence, But the Getty does nor Nowhere on Meiers imorearless level pbc -aere Gam pus the only builldahe portion of the hilly 74 2-acre property is there Avista otcalm and repose, except when one looks past the trenetivally overdestmned buildines—with thar competing forms and mixture at stone. metal, and alass-—and out toward the dazehing views of the Pagh® Qoein, the mountarms, and the ap chat sereteh in ditterent direcuons. This, of course, as pertectly all ight with many visitors, who ome, cide the trim, rake in the panoriniuis, sraib a appuse ino, and leave without bothering to explore or even enter the museum, as often happens atthe Pompidou Center tn Paris  The Getty Center was immediately dikened to aimansy things: an duropols, a crusader castle. and, less flatteringtsy. a corporate head: quarters, a medical center, on is ane bos Angeles architect purity, "a stack of Deco refrigerator doors.” Lhe point shared bs those diverse charactertzations ts that in some essential way the Getty does net look dike whatinactiall ba repository of art, where the treasures at the tew can be sharcd by many. Phere bas been no consensus on contemporary muscu architecture, bat the temor af the eriticism: bs epithet that greeted the Getty suggested thac tor mans people it sim: ply dees not work as an embodiment of the values che insercunion’s uotticnals saa they wanted to promote  The Getis’s aloot remove trom the cite that hes atts tect was not the trulr ot the architect. Phe Ses milhon site—spectaculan presti gious. and wholly austutable tor cass public access—was deeded upon by the Getty Trust before Meter was chosen. Phe museum's director atche tine ot ips openmie, foba Walsh. and his successor Deborah Grbbon, wrote thatthe Jocanon was mtended to bring the insarucion, previously houseduat | Paul Gets ’s hillside Mahbu ranch, “closer ta the population ot the city amd attract Ta broadened audience.” The  new Getty wb indeed nearer to more people and considerably more  accessible than the Malibu site because imabuts one ot the niese heavy Uv traveled roads in Cahtornia. However itis doubetul chat many cam Tumites io the morcasmghy mutoethore ciry have seen the muscum as wWeleaining or its architecture as inviting, even with the intense “out: reach” campaign the Getty mounted to counter charges of cliasm., Among the members of the architectural search Committee who selected the three finalists in res ithe ultimate choice was made by Getty officals: was Ada Louise Huxtable, the longtime architecture enbeot The Netw York fones and aqucor oft the Pritzker Prize. which Meter won several months before he received the Getty jab. In her essay for Maker An dutectioc: The Getty Canter, che othcial publica- tion on the projet, Huxtable sounded uncharacteristicaliv detensive  as her role shitted trom that of crime to apologist:  .. There is ne culture thachas not placed is best buildings high, that tas not directed tts ambitions to the sky. The Center's crit res—thes came with the ferrttors and are present trom the scart sce onl a monument ata time when monuments are out of favor the wall visible trom the treeway below is “exchusionary, 7 the elegance of the architecture “elitist.” and the Getty agenda of education, conservarion, restarch, and scholarship othe arts “patermalste” The polincally correct chehes of the moment come castly and will probably dhe hard. bor many, however, this hand ot budding. in [the cota Colinf Davies's astute definition, represents “a vitorous COMMItment fo a programm ar principle”  earned outin Crop drawer architecture.”  In addition co the historical onsconception chat all cultures have inevitably equated elevated sites with lofty purposes, Huxtable’s behet that meruments had fallen Gucot tavor was also unpersiaste, especially in view of the very Conspicuous new one thar opened in  Spain ove nionths betore the Getty. and wasagrected wrth a wat lay te 
enthustasm that bordered on hysteria. Mach of the praise tor Prank Gehry Gauggenhenn Museum Bilbao bad to de with how imaging tech he recast the notin of architectural monumentaligs in ways Getty ottiqub and thea adsisers never dreamed when they Chose the seemingly foolproat Maren Phe receptian of the Caltornia comples paled by Gomparnson to the Bilbao mania. Thus its iasrrugtive to recall that desigiimns the Geers Center was once widely regarded as the dream commission of the late ovenatierh century. But the Bus Rock Cands Moonta: that ought have sustamed the lucky winner's Cancer tor vears and coorantecd Lasting time and fortune turned our to be, as Maier himselt admitted. anendless bureaucratic boondogide  Mictor aired fis discentents pubhohy go his tel all inemour ot tugs, Bialdore the Getty. a classie in the iterature of sore winners-—bs turns professorial qutebiognaphy. an eserase a preemptive history, and postpartum seore-setthms. Gerry officals were mornhed, and in the documentary they Gumimussioned front Mlavstes bles. Cevncert of Wills Mukorg the Getty Comter widely miterpreted as the official rebuttal te the architect when the movie wos released, also im rags, Murer Game across as petubint, itheable. and childish, Nonetheless, fis book didaccuratel) portray the kunbs ot problems that even eme rent architeets face as a matron et Gourse but thar were in thiy case astnitiod bs the scope ob the proiest  Strats speakinu. the Gert ’s architceturad selection process, which be in basa. Wars nota competion, im that it did noe require the Chirterbree anvited partuipants fo present prospestiae schemes. Iosteadk Gimbdites were antersemwed te determine ther atntudes toward the prorar ther previous boddinys were assessed and cin the eae otthe seven semiftialists: visited by the comouttec. Phatthe pro- cedure Was se speculative reflected the fact thar officials at the fo Paul Getry Trost had tire dea ot what thes wanted. am noe small measure beausc utananandopated windtalh Phe cruse——the benetaars ot the  tyeoon’s beqnest ot Soro milion in Getn Ol stock apen his death in  Lyt6—saw ity endow ment Balloon to $i.7 bilan arrays when Lex aco aoquired Getts Onl thereby making the Gerry the world’s ne hest artomsncitton, which at remaimed io che eal ovengs test century with assets of some Se billion  The old Getty Muscamiin Malibius an appresimare replica ot the anaes Roman Villa der Papier ac Hercuianeum and completed in Putg. Was aomuch visited oddity bur dearly qadequate toe the leap wate the international bre leagues envistoned by Harold Walhams. a Lawson anda former Charman of the Scouraties and bc hare © eens Misstan Whoan roSi was named president and chet executive otticer otthe Gems Trust dn plansing ims new budding. the browd array ut architectural approaches the Getty considered ranged tran the ascene suman ot the Mestan master bis Barranan and the flashs Commercalism of the Calitornia tir Weltan Becket te the pop Miannerism ot Robert Ventur and Denise Scot Brosen and the high ted engrieenna of Norn Poster Vise ameng the first eroup ot thirty-three. but mot the senmmtnalists, was the Dos Atgeles-lased Gehry whe by poS3 aireads emeved a serum toflowine in avant watdeart and architecture: aires. though aot the antermaigerab super: star stacus he would acrain in the Closiius vcars ef the Goneurs.  The Tote Case TN GEES merbers ot the nO lection SOUL T EIST hase considered Gers sc saberant unconventional aesthets antither  halite the harmonious display at the Geto. tradimenal boldsnas  pracy Old Mister parntings and Gace f poe: Prench decor ares. Gamvorsch, althouuh there seemed tec be Canmpellioa factors in tavorot Meter there aise were good reasons fo question why be was considered the most saraible ter the jabs Bor exctipte. bis coueraet wath rhe Geto Prust stipulated that be get desnca cie ot bas typical all  white schemes. Whe. then. so te ag architect whe had doe mocruin  bat stich werk tor decades? fh the end. bas stain ioedbitot of tame,  tocott white anal be had tittle ettect om the ovtetie: ahire et fhe Gets  
Feen more pertinent to what went wrong with the Geary Center was Meier's sense of the relation benween art and architecture. He lang harbored aspirations to beme a painter, sculptor, and collagist, bocastonally extibiong his works in hath-prohle commercial galleries in New York and Dos Angeles. But lke mans of his coprofessionals, he esidenth did not want any work of artto gave his barldings undue competition. In one ot the most rescaling passages in his Getty book, he railed agains his chene’s deqsion te ask the arast Robert Erwin to design a garden tor the Center, “Whatwas most ditthoult for ime un this whole atrau,” Meter wrote, “was that Invin was berng treated as anartist while Twas berg relevated to the secondary status at archi tect. ewin’s kitschy garden desizn—bisected bv a stepped artiheial waterfall tinked bsotwoo gygantie concentrs roundels of garish parple-pink avaleas—onght bring gasps ina fapanese shopping mall, butts Hamboyant ser pieces and outlandish combimations of plaints carned smickers in hortaulrural circles.  Although Meier had always made much ot bis dove for Contempo- fins art -especnally the work or his eld trend Frank Stella his teel- mgs toward the tradinenal works in che Gettv’s Colle cuon seem to have been quite another matter, He adeutred that when he went to Mahbu te review the maseum’s holdings, he tound the callection to be “an eccentric and oddly disguncasve combination.” sentiments he ne doubr withheld trom his potential emplovers and committed to pomeonts atter ce job was done.  Dura the ress. the decade when an unprecedented museum: budding boom bean, Meier started to spestalize in that area. During the tye sears berore the Getty hired him, he designed the Frank ture Miuscum ot Decorative Arts of pacg-rasy, the High Museum of ryso- tys3 in Atlanta, and the Des Moines Art Center addinan ot pyds. qudg. Lhose projects wave bum the specitie experience that chents—particularl major msanitional ones bike the Getty Trust—  want to bo assured of before awarding a major progect, the creular  thinking beng that ont someone Whe bas aircads desined a muse ai ts qualifed to desnga a musecutn.  Tn tact, Meiers tirst two musenos de rnat serve either pamgnis of decoraove arty very well) He treated the procure gatlories of che High Museum as subsidiary spaces and shunted chem otf trom the domu- nantentry rorunda bebind the buldine’s curving ghiss tagade. which admutted so much unmediited davleht thatthe comida was tudged unusable tor disphivims works that require cares) conservation. by zoos, the enlargement ot the High was enteusced notte Meier but mstead to Renzo Plane, whe had become the most sourht-atter muscum archirect atthe period. o Phe daionmmatic falar urged that Meier be extended the courtesy of worsubtang onthe nenes ado of his ort structure, which at the tac wats dess than twents wears olde! The Hrh’s EN PArision scheme was not prompced solely by the gag TSM SUINpLomate of se many muscum projects around the carn of the mullenmiuin, but by an urent need tor the adequate oshibitien space Meier had tailed te provide in the test place. Prana positioned: his CXTODSING rectangohir wallers WWATHES. completed IN Dog, ae tight anules to Moros bow-ftronted pay gion, and tured ioiace the gfortied lobby many thougkt it had away been.  For the Frankturt Museamot Decorate Arts. Merer sant he took his cues trom the riverside Biedermeicr villa deat tort anod te “eon testualamo” oa trends virnie promated in urban architcenire at that ume bur careboabecen invoked bs Meier before cr stice. Althenaeh an scale and proportion the these tuuldiig was well rntegrated inte an overall scheme foraproup of seiall nroscigis. ts trarstow bite exterior was anvthing bur deterencal tots park bke surroupadies. Silarby in Meters gleaming white walled wailerios, Che eistitution’s sollee tion of tradiqenal German turmiture andl lensetotd obiccts aahout ward: robes, stoneware puss. and the ther ss oserpowetod bs the pertes tlonist, Clintcal scrane. and looked direcisted art dinis [tas quite  bhels that the alarming cette or Moots harsh Pruktart galleries 
prompted Getty officials to push for the appocmtment ot a tradinonal interior design speguailist to prevent a simular visual collision un bos Angeles.  Accordingly, tn ruse the Getes stunned the architecrural Gammu- mits --and nome among it more than Mleter—when ip engared the colestas French-born. curehitecturathy dained decorater  Phierrs Despont to outht the new muscum’s decorative arts galleries tor the collesnon’s particularly tine cxamiples of antique French turniture, Despont subsequenth expanded his role and moved on te choosing the background materials and colors tor the Getts picture and sculp ture galleries as well) Meier was apopleene atwhart he considered not only an usurparion of bis role but stolation of che complete stylist unity between exterior and intener he had always insisted on as a fundamental tenet of fis architectural philosophy. Despont’s rooies devoted to emhteench century intenoars ac the Getty were teund objectronable by many traditionalists as well as Modernists, nat candy because these gatleries seemed bizarrely at odds with Meter’s archi tecturadl setting but abo because of thear inherent vulgarity.  Despont’s touch, however was fihter aud far bean anmweleome mn the prcture galleries, where subthe background colors—ranging from hehe gras-geeen to ah brown—-ot tabre and paint generally showed off the paritngs to good advantage. Mast suceesstul of all were the cated plaster finishes ot the sculpture galleries, Ay demonstrated bs Kahn's Kimbell—the Gets losest analog anaes Gambinatton ata building by a mayor Contemporary architest, an mportant colle don of traditonab artworks. and an cnormaus budget there sno reason whs Old Master art cannot be shown agaist walls that de noe attempe toamtate those of Furopean palaces. And though Merer’s calents were notot the same order as Kaba, the Getts’s pamang and sculpture walleries work well ror visitors in their livour and lighting, and in the was they were setup am ascries of pavilions to allow frequent breaks  trom the long room-ation room toakke 6 picalot many other muscunns  some of the spaces were strangely proportioned one vernyuneus tory five doot-hith sculpture gallery dwarted its contents, for exam Ple—bur visitors tound the museum more agreeable than the rest af the Complex. most ot which tell umvomrortably like the Command postota mulpnanenal Goaglomerate,  Why. then, was Meter chosen in the first place? There is always an  unspoken personal aspect te the selecoon of any architect, nor out ot  Keeping with an oar torm so dependent on personal and social rele sons. Ay the architecture erties Revner Banham, amember ot the tirst Geto sclecgon commiuttec, wrote in an article that appeared shortly  before Meser was named:  The real hidden agenda behind most archuectural competitians woot sc much to pick a design as te prek a desmeaer.... In the owo days otheavs mterviewang and discussians, we came back  rothe persomalitics aga and again.  Or ay Banham putat even more ported) tome atthe tune, tlt will come down ta whom the Gert wants co cat widh tor the nest ten vears.” His implication was that among the three Analises, neither the proper but eather stitt Pumthike Maki nor the unbatroned, sora qious fares Stining who died in raga. fee years betore the project was campleted) was Hkely te be seen as an ideal long rerm dani cempanran,  Then there Was the apparenths proonibrole of Nanos Faplinder the Ger Trost oftiaal wo wasan Charge of preaeanty aril sis” and served on the mine eriber conumitte) that chose Meier trot among the three finalists. She and Harold Wobams were abo the mons oni members atthe earher group that selected the semufinalists.! \Qcording: toca tormer close asseciate of Meier's, Englander a trend ot his, “exerted enormous intigence” in the ultimate devistan to hire ham She lett her  position at the Gert ain pose and Liter marred Walliams. 
Meier began receiving wide notice as an architect of promise while sallin his carly thirties, and won the Pritzker Prize past as he turned fitey, fong betore two shyhtly younger contemporaries who would later become his competitors-— Noeman Foster and Renzo Prano—gor so tar, The series of all-white, Neo-C orbusiain residences Meter desizned during his tirst decade of independent practice—the Smith house ot 1963-1967 on the boulder-lined shore of Long bland Sound in Darien, Connecocut: the Douglas house of rytt-1u73 on a steep, wooded slope overlooking Lake Muchiwanan Harbor Springs, Mishigan: and the Shamberg house of ryt2-ryt ain the hilly Westchester suburb or Chap- Paqua, New York—hinted ac what he mht do once he moved beyond the domestic scale expersmental architects are expected to start with  Yer rather than use that enviable head start to remain at the toretront of his generation, Meier chose to husband his skills with a qautousness remmniscent ot a preternatucall yitted opera singer who sticks toa hinted repertoire of undemanding roles to ensare voeal longevity, rather than risk the hazards of artistic growth that might also shorten a career. Ostensibly Garetul not to puta teot wrong, Meier tollowed a narrow path thar led him co the Getty in res4, but onge he got there he was unable to tind much by way of tresh inspira ton, Tn pust two decades, the high Consistency of Mever's designs came te be percerved as dull predictability, especrally in: contrast te the work of fay more Courageous peers, Whe ourpaced him and made the Once precodious prodigy seem prematurely passe,  Bata shght at of mustiness is rarely a deterrent to institutional chents, and trom the Getty’s port ot vew—which had become more corporate under the leadership of Walllams-- the combination of dependabilio and Lick of surprise in Merer’s work proved ideal. Le be sure, during Williams's tenure the Geers boundation embarked on many admirable projects: it published an important series of scholarts art history books and sponsored the most advanced research in the  restoranon and presen agen ot art objeces. Ir distributed previously  inaccessible archival material through Computer technology, in tud- ing the complete papers of Prank Lloyd Wright. Among academicians invart history and the hunninites, an ofter te become a tellow at the Getty Research Instirute, with ats Comprehensive Library, ample ser vices, thy agreeable chintuite of Southern ¢ alitoraia, and a high supend, became regarded as the mtelectual’s equivalent of winning the lottery.  Within the Getty bureaucracy, the prevail opimon ot Meier quite Hheb was that no one’s postion would be adversely attected it he were in charge, But he wasn’t ant charge. exacts. Many ourside torces bore down on hin during the planning and design phases of the project. These came trom the Gerry's campenung tetdoms; trom the Brentwood Homeowners’ Association, which exerted heavy political pressure on dogal coming agencies ta restemet the bulkiness of the buildings: and trom the various consultants the Getty Trost retained to advise on the giantic operation Goguding a “work ther- apenas emplosee morale began to buckle ander the strain ol the unending venture’s manttold atthetons!, Iris hetle wonder char che Getty Center metamorphosed into Meier's camel, the proverbial horse designed by a caimmittee,  Meer recalled his initial dismay at beine told he would have to meet at untervaths with a Getty desutn advisory commutteg. “TD slowly realived this was the was the Gers Prust liked to work.” he wrote. “While inimas have suggested a certain lack af confidence. one of ifs primary cttects was to forestall Critcism by outside speatalists.” With cheeks and balances in place to ailaw ample second guessing about whar the archirect might do, Gers officials no doubt felt contident about the tinal result. Wot atten all che sound and furs, Meter was placued by second thoughts, which wave hes laricly self-serving histers of the project an unespected ponies:  Peoking back, Dhave to ask meselt whether the Getty selaetion committee was under some misapprehension that Lwonld perhaps be the most malicable  ot the finalists.” 
Even betore Meiers plum job ¢urned inte biter trai, bis attempts tomove trom the domestic te the pubhe scale had been uncomunecins at best. Although that transition is generally thought to be mandatory tor a mayor career several revered heures in Owendeth century archi tecture—ineluding Gerrit Rietveld, C bares kames, and Carle Scarpa snever built big. Indeed. a high-protie, bith-budser enterprise can imperil the reputanon of an architeet whoo better surted to smaller obs in much the same was that a carcer retrospective can barn the standing ota paitrer whose warks are better sroased sing then en masse. But the aura ot athrmauen that surcounds prestigious agen: lades atten leaves unwary artists more sulnerable te fame s double edged sword.  None of Meter’s problems was as consequential as has inabilies te concenve of the giganti. Brentwood scheme as anetbing other than anamahgam of small parts. Jo some extent, that precemeal qualits reflected the proGteration oft departments atthe Geto attr Willians aggrandized the inscitatian. burchermore. if was cass to sce the sru- pendous enterprise asa law unteitselt, and to give Meter the benett ot the doubt chat he was not solely to blame tor all the failings at che  Get. Yer the large scale Work that poured into Merer’s offer atter  his co S4 Prtchet-Getty pertectaturther exposed his biications, which seemed all the more surprising beoruse his bigh degree ot contral imphed a tormula that guaranteed beh guahiv atbeat with little vary ety ne matter what he turned his hard to.  Phe large urban projects Meter bathe ia Furope--imluding his Cin Halland Central Library of rase-reeg i Pbe Hague and his Muscum of Contemporary Artoof ca8-- rages in Barceclonacwere hard to disanguish team cach other because he automatically resorted to the same white Gladden. gridded tugades. sind extensive hazing from one yob te the near, with hietle discertuble Gomeern tor ditter- ences in climate or function. bor example, the curatorial stragele te  centrol danwagiig natural tight mside the Barcelona museum became  such Common Knowledge that Meter’s longstanding: art warkd God stituenes scemed te wamish os ertiahe.  Mithough Meiers torass canta hirtesscile desi were disapperit ing. he never fost lus couch for the kind ot exquisite villas with which he made bis name. Pbs cark: proponents were erated by the tnuh heboot his hater Gireen the Raghotske house of pais padi Dablas, comusstoncd by a Modern art collector undeterred by the bad buzz trom Barceloaas The house's tinnlar Neo-Corbustin voxabibhins recdhed Meier's glare days. ver here bie demorsentred be cole soll pall something new cutet hes bag of ald crigks. Phe architect gave the street trontot the Raghotsky house athin belboourdiibe tagide. with anoeblong white metal sancled sures punctured byovers fow open Thats Nu CRIPLS compositranal aesture, thas ast haat sa TOUT [rate vides ore protection tor thy artworks within than the thamspurent elevations of several Mleer miuscums. Vrhough ravorng small pre Vato spaces to specine warks on pormancnt disphus gs caster than ete  dune large pubhe gabltcrics acapoble co an unknown ninge of paeine  eemtinucnies, there Gan be ne demsing thar this house which subse quently was tured inte gd pri ete Muse readacrtod: Meters stronmaest  architectural areebutes cing broube hon back te hus rears as he  d  neared the end ot the Get. or  The completion at tae Getty Center aa poet an last showed the tub extent and qaadits of the museums held, tor durise the same portadin which the redoubt wots desnmed aide rested the istration Purucd ome of the sist ares ae busing programs ip modern ames. been thoughainportant works had been pation vies ui the abd Malibu building as thes were asqaired, He inaggaration ct thie new  museunt provided the finst eccisten to consider bow well the Gets  mary high publioced pur hasesinctadins there ot the tea tiost  expensive protures soll ar auction dur the Boor at the pass coalesced rite a coleetien  Many art warld observers comouticd: that despite several tan 
exceptions ameng the Old) Masters—including a pewertul gold ground Dadde tripesch, Ponturmo's noble Halberdier, and Rembrands’s meditative Sait Bartholomien —the Getty was strongest i nineteenth: century paintings, wath three pictures by Jacques: Lours David that tormed one of the Hnest such ensembles outside Frances a pewertul Gova ballfight scene: a monumental Cezanne still lite; and one ot the landmarks of nimetcenth- century art, Christ's bntry mite Brussels mossy by James Fnsor, Furthermore, the Gerty’s extensive phorog- raphy holdings were admired tor therm very high quality, especially the proncering works assembled by the collector and curator Sam Wosraitt.  The Geery casi matched the escellence of severafother American mascums. Yet ever before the scandals that would harrow the Getty during the carly years of the twenty nrst century. it scemed incapable of keeping its finances aur of the headlines, untike the intalhibly dis- ereet Kimbetl, The Getty could become quite tesps when questioned how much it pad tor things. and its spokesmen tied. with letle success, to dispel the notion that the institution's finanaal power had adversely attected the art marker. Whe then, was the museum drawn, mothlike, te works that concentrated atrention on hew much thes cast?  Most norortous was frises bs van Gogh. At the time the preture was sold at Sotheby's in New York in rgsct—ce Alan Bond, an Aus: trahan wheeler-desler who was unable to Complete the pur hase—it fetched $s 3.4 million, then an aucnon record tor ans work of art Ln rugs, the Geto beunhe the van Gogh through private negotagens tor an undisclosed amount generally believed to he less than the price Bond had bid. though i must sill have been vers expensive. Che pur- vhase suggested a departure trom the more demanding kinds ot works that the museum bad hitherto favored. In addinon to the pamtng’s artlostorical merits, frases was a surehre crowd: pleaser, and: was  likely irresistible to the Geto tor that vers reason ara dame when the  Its anNiedes about its popular appeal, cvacerbated by doubts about Its architecture, began to mount.  It che Getty debacle had taughe Morera hard lesson abour the dan: gers of oxeess, the incoming head ot the Gert Trust, Barry Sanita. thought the Crucial question that faced bis institution as the new cen  ter opened in rags was how, rather than how much:  Fven with all the expansion, there really isivt roam tor the large temporary exhibitens that people in Los Angeles aren't getong anyplace else. And there clearh isn'ta lot of room toexpand....  It Glearh: Cannot he outside of our mission and it clears eannor all be met on our site. Therefore we have to partner up with other exbibroon spaces around the world, bur particulark in Los Angeles—baposition Park, for example. Thar muscun comples, other exhibition spaces and public spaces around the eo will have to be ongaged and interacting with the Geers. And the technology, the outreach, the digitalization, the school vis  its, the visits co schowds, the websites, the videos, the ob RIMS,  Munitz’s beans became gospel tor the many other American muse ums that. goaded on by the Getty felt Gompelled to expand their audience and inveme on response to devastatings Cuts 19 government and corporate funding ter the arty during the lase two decades af the century. Ircould be thar Mantz and his board teared that after one trip to ther mountaintop, average visitors would aor be uiclined te return without the incentive supplied bs a block buster special event. The Getty’ pamsrakingh considered. mieteulousl overseen. and exacunels cxccuted new premises Were planned with esersthing ui mind, IT seems, except the arowth It desired Just AS TTA h AUN ITS other Amenean miiscum of the period. Cocked mito its ploy sical and mstitu onal eminence, the new Gero had barely opened betere ats stewards  fel thes must reassure the publi thar was ota, forbidding as at 
looked and would even, now aad agai, descend te the low Lands, the betrer to conmectigs activities with the lite of the Gemmunity. Inaugural assessments of Meter’s masterprece manque were sel dom witheut a reterence tethe projece’s coscat Si billion. Phe other fure ot netic, ofcourse, was the thirteen Vea it took to cemplete. By architectural standards. thirteen wears ts but ananstant im cone And vet the Getty Center even as it oponed, alreads feie dated. Though there Was more rhan aiwhttt ofthe celle about in it nonetheless hacked the cntimations of immortals ats sponsars so clears citended vet se tecbly evoked. Conceived amid the cortitudes of the ryscs) prospernn and conspicuous Consumption. which it echoed a its extravagant archieesture, the Gort at fast areived ian che world cultural stage armal the tational osuberance of the rages) new esonom, whioh ip hike  wise echoed. with ahubris chat was soc to be pedressead,  RODOLEFO MACHADO AND JORGE SEEVEE TL  THE CATASTROPHES THAT betel! the [. Paul Getty Trost halt o cenrury atte the cponsameus orf tycoon established atin casa ter tthe ditta ston of artistic and vencral knowledge” were of such magnitude thar ont Chassisal mithalogs seemed to otter archerwpes equal te this latter-day eps othubrs and retribution. In sce and 2ace. the f Paul Geos Muscum,. which two decades earlier had become the world’s Mostcuvied and prothwate art onsttution. saw a dbrecton Deborah Gnbbon, and its lonutime, hishiv respected curater of Greek and Roman ant, Matron True. resign. Phe board Churdan of the Getty Trust stepped daw. months betore his term was due to end. Barry Munite, the truses president since racy awwas compelled te: quit, forgo fis severames pagkawe of mere than Sz aullon, ail commburse the trust tar S2sc.cc7 urter alleeed|) Gammmrang impropricties Mrouding hisish expetse account spending. Those and acher rregu lances prompted a tnited States senator te call tor the revocation of the Getty S Lae xcmpt status,  Tn October te 6, Californias attornes general endeba fourteen: monthinvestitation of the Geto Prust and psucd a report cone tading thar Muruty and his board had acted Hiegalb. However he decoded Dotto purste comma or cual acdons aiceest ther and appomeed aa  independent moritor ti supersine the truscy activities. Worst of all 
inthe opimien of many museum protessiooals, Prue was indicted by the lahan government, charged with Compliity mi the trathicking of Mealy excavated and exparted antiquities. She came to teel like a sacrifictal orfering seeved ap by the Getty for the remission of its sits,  and at the end of so senta bitter letter tors officials denouncing  them tor abandoning her “What PGainnot understand and accept” she wrote. “is the malice, che attempt to bend the truth, and the injus- ue within the Trust resclt.”  No cultural insotucen had suttered such ao stunning reversal ot fortune in modern times, save for acts af war, The phieht of che Getty seemed more gnevous during the muted inauguration fesasities ter iss newly renovated $275 million Classicalart branch, the Gerry Villa, in fanuary soon. The propect’s official publication bore the bytines of Truc owho was absent feom the opening while standing tret)in Rome: and the Boston-based architect Jorge Sibvett, who had the bad duck ¢o see the finest work of his Career overshadowed by events he had noth ing to do with, Indeed, were at not tor the mulbtudimous disasters confronting the Gerts, this unanticipated architectural taumph would have been properl celebrated asa proud turning pouitin the statue tion's checkered musenlogieal history psee illustration 130  The first ncarnaten at the [. Paul Gete Muscum—which to com ply with the new cruseopencd in res gin its namesake's Spanish Colo. otal house ona hilltop Matbu citcus ranch—was a transparent Lax dodge. tulfliing the barese statutory requirements to mamtain its chantable status. Pubho access co the Gert collection was limited ta sis hours per week and bs appomtment only. Persistent art lovers who trade it throuzh the gates to che Malibu mascain were in fora letdown. The teunder never progressed bevond the mundane tycoon taste that during bis young adulthood prevailed among rich Amert eansain thrall te the London art and antiques merchane Joseph Duveen. The cautious Getty bought several preces from Duveen ancluding one  ot the dealer's most relible staples. a Rommnes portrats and stuck tor  the restot his lite ta the shrewd salesmiuun’s tormular mix ot Classical annguities, Old Master pamungs, Persian rugs, and brench aneten regime turtuture. Capestries, and carpets  Although Getts never stopped trumpeting his love et art, the ught fisted bilonaire—whe billed his own sens tor visits to his Surres estate, Sutton Plage —loved nothing more than a bargain, and his sharp eve tor the bottom line did nat help his eve for protures, As the art his- torian John Richardson, who knew Gette’s collecnon well, reeled to me, “He wanted masterpreses on the Cheap.” baperts subsequently demoted severabot Geer’s supposed Old Masters to workshop pieces or comes. invluding a Rubens and one of approsumately pica known versions of Raphael's Madeunna of Porete, which he boughein 6938 ter around S2co and then spent a small fortune erving to authenticate. He nmally succeeded. but the attnbution was withdrawn attee has death.  bor all his wealth and Canning, Getty lacked the passion and com- mitment to become a erand agquisitor on the level ot his younger con- temporanes and tellow magnates Nubar Gulbenksan, Paul Mellon, Norton Simon, and Hans Hemrich Physsen Bornenusza, allot whom endowed museums to preserve their celebrated Wd Master collections, Perhaps inspired by their exaniple, in rate he determined to erecta more suttable wallery budding on his Malibu property, to which he never returned abter becoming AN CAPATL be TH best, Gretty's SUTHOUS. nuature oft detachment and obsessiveness. se evident in bis Attul col fecting habits, became mare pronounved tn tis dong-distance micro: management of the muscu burlding prapeot ta whieh he devoted his tinal years and ultimately most of his worldly goods.  Gets taste um arcbites ture Was as Conservative vis his faste in art, but his desion tu replivate an ancient Roman count house tor his museum struck mostartand architecture protesstonals as perverse in the extreme. Viany felt that even an ormimal Neu hassial seructure would have been preterable to that worst of artist oxy morons, at  “authent reproduction” an this case a copy ot the Villa der Papirt 
at Herculaneum, which was buried in che eruption of Mount Vesu- snus ty Vb and rediscovered ia the mud-gehteencth centurs,  By puto. the revert against Modermust orthodoxy in architec tare Was tiring momentum, though (would be several sears more until Postmodernisin was widely accepted and made € Lassial motits per missible in bigh-stvle building design toc the firse tome in decades, Ina collaborative design ettort thar anvolved the tradimonalist architect Stephen Garrett and the architectural historian: Norman Neuerburn. the Gen building was based on the Roman villi and exccuted bs the Los Angeles tr of Langdon Wilson. Phe scheme was assumed bs tam te be accurate down to the simatlest denul but much of it was Nevessarily pure conjecture. The upper storys ot the Villa dee Papin had been destroved in the voleame cataclysm, and thus Getty ’s desien team had to rmprovise the entire second floor and root ot ther strue ture. Its nor what we don't know about che past thac dooms such re- ereations, but rather whatwe do know. rising tale hopes diit ne amouncot pantiscaking research Gan full And thes berg Caliornia, something alse had to be done with the cars. which, rt lett ourdoors ono typroal parking dot near the new sila. would rain the € Lassical Mlusten ats absentee Linddord envisioned  Thus twas decrded te plaice the muscum atop a podium, some meenhenwe tect high oa phe ent sade. within which a parking garage could be concealed. More than a funcconal anachronism, the raed badding was an archacological selegam: che mtertors at an ariste emia Roman country house were meant to Communiwate at ground level with the surrounding Landscape. Bue elevating the Geto Villa vasth improved the nuocun’s south facing sea views. Lt suspension of disbelief as necded to Gorvince oneselt that bes ond lies the Mediter: rancan rather than the Pacers the easiest and most sanstymye— stretoh of imaimation one is asked fomuike in this stninge, seduce, and undemtably entrancing cavironmert, the guiltiest pleasure in the  me nfern TMUSCUTTL W orld.  Amenas collective amnesia docs betexempt the arts, and recciseal notiens about the ertieal reception of the Gers maintain that wher the Mahbo burkding opened. in racy. protessiomals loathed ieand the publa doved tt But the response was nor se cuenty divided, By the prevails standards of High Miodernist taste. the news muscane was easy tehate tor all the right reasens. and mins establishment critics did qust that. Bua surorising number of commentators did ner ch ae fenae the promtiac of what Neuerburs. the Getty’s historical consu tant called “a cescreatten rather than a repro gon”  The architect ( harles Moore. whe cciished the hinlilow arnbiguities of Southern (alterna culture. appros mis cited Nect Coward's aperaic “There is abways something se dehebrtulls red about what is phos bere. And sermerhing se phos about whats real” Enstead ar risise mt thatthe desig ought ro have been Contemporary cather than listers cal several reviewers focused on the propeets execution, John Paster, then the architesture criti oot the Les Anvefes Tones. taulted the buildings dak or Chdetio rethe sprritob the orteimal oo ftes a faith tul eeproduecen ot nothing that ever existed, re created by appre priate techoolowes and freaquenth dagkime in baste design padgnacn. 7  Heoweser the arctitectural historian bsther MoCos whose pie neering pues stad. bere t alterna Vobates ts) csamined the careers ot Bernard Masbeok. Insta Gill) Charks Sommer Cereete. Phen Miarther Greene. and Rudolph Schamdlen and made the frst Gonv its Matecase tor ¢ aliberiiaas the true couter ofa bite tir tl inres atin ant meormeth ooauturs Ameria surpriscd rans wath tet opto, MCos, anunrecenstren ted Modernist, wrote an appreciation ol the Getty i the protossonal pourgab Prowse Ve batec ter aud found aie be te pragoon the vias vant of andoer ard cutdteor spaces, banal ete wulanon potreres, asd overall sargibilits to tts tuncoon  The subtiest roading et the cow Remar siniaba con i MErobu cane  trom the intallible sibylot the (abtorniacmssteres, Jioii Pidier. Weritias  in Pos pare three vears atten the gluse opened, Didien noted hess 
The Getes sa menument te “tine art” in the old-tashioned didacete sense, which is part of the problem people have with it, The place resists Contemporary notions about what artis or should be or ever was. A museum is now supposed to kindle the untratned imagination. hur chis museum does nor, A museum is now supposed fo set the naturabehild in each ot us tree, bat this museum dees nat, Phas is art acquired to teach a lesson...  Yet despute the Gette’s lack ot whatat would later term “Conumunits outreach” yi an attempt te overcome its haughty imate), che muscum became an instant popular success. Qace again, Didion alone among  the crities divined the underlying class implications:  Large numbers at people whe donot ondmarih visit museums like the Getty a great deal just as ats tounder knew they would. There sone of those peculiar socnthsecrens artwork here, On the whole, “the Cries” distrust great wealth, but “the public” does aot On the whole “the critics” subserrbe to the Romantic view otiman’s possibilities, but “the puble* does not. In that way the Getty stands above the Pacihe Coast Fhehwas as one of those odd monuments, a palpable Contract between the very rich and  the people who distrust chem least.  In June tate, owe and a halt vears atter che |. Paul Geers Mfaseum opened, its creator died, without ever having visited the monutent he hoped would change his perception by postertty. “PE would like to be remembered asa teatnote in histary.” he cold a confidante, “but as an art collector nota memes laden busimessmant” From the hegrinings, one of the strongest atcicgons his Malibu marvel held for average eigacns was their seeing the villa asa house muscum that ottered a ghinpse into the private hte of a modern day Midas, [twas a ficnon  the benetactor himself encouraged when he wrote. “Tl would like  every visitor to Malba to fechas if Phad invited hint co come and look about and teel at home.” Though the building 6 domestically scaled only by phitocrate standards, its orginal palatad decor—partiulart the sccond-stors gafleries’ watded hoisertes, ritzy dattisks, and par quet thoors—scemed a genuine bulionaire’s paradise,  The unanticipated terns of the orl magnates wall, which lett noch  ing co hts family and evens thine —$-oc million an Geers Onl stogk—  to his museum, seta monon a metamorphosis werthy at Osid. In ryS2. the Getty Oi stock an the Geen Trast’s parttoho was worth Si. bilhon. The tollowing vear, Texace acquired Getty Oil, and wath the pump in share price spurred by the takeover the endowment’s value ballooned to S17 bullion, making the Getrs the world’s richest art insutarion, with assets that grew ta some Se billion carly in the new millennium, |. Paul Gers ’s bequest transtormied the nature of the insotution he tounded bevond anv conceivable expectanons.  Required bv law to spend 4.2¢ percent of the trust's annual income on-art purchases of programs, the Getty Museum became the domi nant plaver an the intermanonal are nurket. established new record prices and pretty mach had tts prok of ansthing ot wanted coven though some agquistaens were thwarted by preempoon laws in Britain and France. which blocked the export of several mayor works dechared national treasures:  The Gette's petro ckpor inspired its board of trustees in aS to appornt anew presalent and cio. Harold Willams, an atroames and atormer head ot the Secantics and Pachanpe Comumissten, to whoa it gave the mandate to expand the institution's acavines bevond the founder's Limited testamental directive to collect and disphis et Willaims’s prandiose vision ot the Gees as cultural colossiis led fo dhe creation of six new departments, and bis Corporate maagerient stele was equally expansionist, He Comported humsclt like the bbe ata Fortune §o2 company rather than the head ot a cultural msetacern,  behavior his successor Barres Mlunitz, a tormer Beekules Literature 
protessor and titer Chancellor ot the Californnna stite university: suse tem, would be accused af raking te coven greater extremes.  Mihough the Getty Muadibu spread comprised sixty-four teres, mohoot the sloping canven site could pet accommodate buddines, and the muscum irselt was deemed unexpandable. A new dogarion was the only solunon, and thus begin the peopect walely considered wong architects as “the commission ofthe century.” In peasy. atiera lengths selection process, Richard Meter was chosen toe plan the new Ger Center tora diccacre doiltop site in Brentwaod. Phe ofall, Neu Corbusiin style pursued bs Morer signihed a dramane departure trom f. Paul Geto Ss destzn philosophy. As the benehictor saad in rusty trang fis decston to repheate an ancient building, “Tectuse to pas tor ong of those goncrete-bunker type structures that are the fad amon muscunt ardutests—noer tor some thited-aliss and stamless-steel Monstrosity.”  Althounh Meier's Getty Center was clad in enough travertine ta erecta brand-new borum Romanum itis bkeb thar Getty himselt would hase seen the tortresstike complea as the vers thing he did notwart. Phe Lind forthe new Geto Center cost $2¢ milfion $8 rule honanere than ar took to burldé die Malibu wills, bat ecen that seers J pittance compared tothe propeats ultimate cascat St ballin, Getty nacre Would have sancnened such disproportionate spending on irchitcature, of any stile. Phe $136 nulbon that Ronald Lauder reparted hs pan in tece te agquire Gusts Klimts portrait ddele Blot Kaser Ptor bis Neue Galerie in New York occasioned this per- tinent comparison bs Phe New York Lones’s chict art critic, Michal  Kinuneclinan  When the Metropaditan spent $<. million on Velazquez’s por tratiet Juan de Parenan recs. it was a scandals mow i sees cheap for one of the great pamtings inthe counte. Phe sams  that phices be the Muscum ot Modern Art squander on mediocre  buildings. which became obsalere the moment thes open, are  scandalous.  The same could be said ter Meier's Getty Center, which became absatete long betercitopened. To be sure. the Getn frist ticed une: pectedty strong legal opposition trom nenhboring property owners, whe demanded that the munmaipales limat the project's size. height, and the amount of land ip coudd Qeeups. In order to win zoning approval the Getty was forced co agree never to expand on the new site. Suddenly the osfubitian space allotted tor the burneoning collee- oon seemed inadequate. Phatlooming shortage prompted acceptance ot the dea ot Keeping the Getty S Greek and Roman objects in the more “sympathet” surroundings or the Malibu silla, thereby gaan ing gallery space in Brentwood for parmtings and decorative arts, Jnabls more popular aterncians  Announced in dass, the Gette’s second architecture competiqion ina desade =the commission to comodel the Malibu villa— was fess coveted than the frst. This was noconty because of che smaller scale and more restrictive setat givens, but because the problems Meter Was struggling with ra his dream jab had become all too well Known within the profession by then sata tine when the cconems was an the upswing and architectural opportoniies were pleatitol Perhaps has: ine earned ther lesson atten deating: with a datfecult star desmner the Getty this ime invited 4 Group of voungEr, More tractable Pee titi eps te sublut proposats  The shorthst tor the Geto Villa job was remarkabh presceene in denoting some ot the best small architectural firms ac the end ot the oventieth century, especiilly those of the Portuguese Peizker Prize winner Alvaro Siva, the bos Anveies othees of the late Frinkdio Israel, and the husband-ind-wite team of Crags Hodgeres and Elsine Mima Fung. The Gers Ghose the equally disanguisbed Boston partnership  ofthe Arnentine born Rodolte Slaghade and forse Silver. who, like 
the atorementioned contestants, were as esteemed within the protes- stonas they were tlle Raown outside it.  Atew months before Merer’s acropalis opened in rgu7, the Malibu binlding was shut down, and tts contents went into storage atthe Brent wood comples, save tor coken pieces shown ina temporary gallerys on the new museum's lower level. [t rook another nine vears before che renovated, reconfigured, expanded, and renamed Getry Villa would be completed. Four vears alone were lost cto fegal challenges from local residents. who, like their Counterparts in Brentwood, teared the Impact of increased tratfe and other environmental depredations on ther quiet community. Thus when the Malibu project finally opened. the taming seemed a cruel accident of fate and drew added atrention to the mounting crises that had brought low the once-envied Getty with charges of callasian inant theft, mismanagement of tunds, and betraval ot the ethical standards expected ot a cultural crust.  The controversy that wreeted the fo Paul Getty Museums rosy debur seemed somewhat rdtculous in retrospesr when the comodeled Malibu silla was inaugurated thirty nwo vears later in view of the Increasing acceptance that Chissial revival arc hetes ture enjoyed dur ing the intersening decades. J. Paul Geety was merely ahead ot his ume in bemg behind the times. The Modernist monopals on design education ended an the pasos as several neotradinonal American architecture schools—especially atthe University of Notre Dame and the Unuversigs of Miantoi Flondacbegan teaching the € Lassical orders with Boaus- Arts tastidiousness, and some of their graduates turned out desizns noe appreciably different trom that ot che Malibu Gerty. Bototothe Getty’s tags architectural search commttee had picked a revivalist arebitect, the character ot the villa would have been undermined, rather than enhanced as it was by the vigorous but respectiol contemporary sedution devised by forge Silverts.  Machado and Silver customarily had worked in close collabora:  non on ther cartier designs, but because the Getty job was the largest  their small ottice had ever handled. the partners decided that Silvectt would concentrate on it while Machado attended to the firny’s other, smaller projects and aeted as a crime ot this one. Machado and Siivert’s nondoctrinaire Modernist work adhered ro no set sevlistie tormula, although several of thei schemes emploved masonry that evoked Classtcal proportions and mortits in such an abstract manner thacthe designs never seemed overtly histortcah Above all, Machado and Sdvett: shunned any sense of irony in ther work. Ehis was the real secret to the surprising success of an assignment that many ot their coprotessionals predicted would be hopelessly dithcule because of the supposedly) amprovable Getty Villa inset, a. standoth some thought winnable only through subjugation ot the thing.  \s Silverti explained to me. his strategy was quite ta the contrary: “We putthe building in quetagon marks.” That ts to say rather than commennng on the incongruity of the villa, either through interven- tons to the building or freestanding addinons deploved around it, he took the centerpiece at face value. Stlvette was not concerned to leave hisamprnran the oronal cops. as most ot his tigh-sevle colleagues would have dane and indeed urged him te do. Phatis not te sav he did not alter the nature of the entire phice signithoantiy, The ground tloor of the villa carranged around a central atrium replete werh splashing fountain remamed much as onanmilly bull Sculpture gal lentes were stlbindard with vancolored marble in intricate, vivid par- rerns taken trom Classical antiquite. Several rooms on the entry level were turned inte orientation spaces, with the computer gadperes that noearly pxenn. tiestoentucy muscum seemed able to resist.  Sivett’s major miiscologial task swas to remodel the villa’s upper ston, Which had previously housed the Gert ’s parmiony andl furniture collections, into a@alleries thar would show off annqaities to better advantage than the former Duvecnesque diteriors, what subverted the credibility ot the C hissical conceit. Durning over the entire budding to  Greek and Reman art conferred a grasiray lacking in the scructure’s 
frst version, but with no apparent loss of popular appeal. a consider: able achievement tor works believed too arcane for mass cansumnp tion by many other muscums. In order to maximize wall space and nnaunize hehe levels tor the displays and protecnon of protures on the second stors, blind panels had orginally been burt co look Hike win dows in some instances. Sulverte opened fifty four ot those decoramve rectangles fo ceeate real windows, giving the reconhgured galleries a welcome sisual connection toather portions ot the villa and tts tay tidieusls tended gardens, destined by the lindscape architect Dents Ruruty, whe died three vears before the renovation asi finished.  The transtarmation of the upper stacy galleries was breathtaking Siiveru’s use of mohly colored. chiborately tyured terrazzo tloors and integrally tinted plaster walk-in unusual bur complementary combr nations that are waned so that ne adpacent rooms fook exactly the same—were among the handsemest that had been devised ter any museum in vears, The surtaces’ warmth and depth of ronahits were further enhanced bs subde lighting thar called so httle atrentien to ibselt thar an aura of authenteits: permeated the Gert Villaas never hetore. Typical ot Silvecd’s master of every detail was the ghiss he used tor the display sitrines, se tree of reflection that visitors wore often startled when they realized there was in tact glasimas berween them and the objects they reflesivels reached out te touch. such as the endeing ancient coins of superlanye quality donated by the come: dran Daly Tomlin  Highinshts ot the Collection were arcane thematically rather than chronologically in gatleres deveted to subleces suchas “Gods and Goddesses,” "Starnes at the Tropat Wan” and "Women and ¢ hildren in Antqatty an approach opposed bs some scholars but cadenth more mviting Gea general audience than the Chranolowical muscum march ofame. At the center ot the “Women and ¢hildren” gallers stood a larger-than lite size sccond-eentury Roman marble statue et  the Fmpress Faustina the Flden a soft otfgsal amace bought by Gerry  himself and typral ot his Pretercnee fag works—allirass HD TTISga- ends provenance bur unenaging to phsysial presenee drat mght have pleased tarot the century rabber barca. Gi view ia nearby easeoat the gine of che openime was a fourth cengury be Gareck weld tuneran wreath thac was amor the collesmars dapured holdings. another harbinger of tuture muascites. Overall loweven the Gerry Nilia itselt fads been improved abeat as much as qinacunible. and would have been a laudable achieserment mt atselt even wathour che Muy Compemeniiry additions Siivetn baile void it  The cumulitice resadeot bis biter. is one of (ase arrestigg are hs tectural ensembles that remains incomprehensible through sali pho tography adome. He treated the site in mach the same way as a  vlassical fapanese stroll garden of che seventecnth century, such as  Ratsatain KReetos or a picturesque brahid Landscape garden of che cabroeenth coaturs. like Stonirbead in Waltsbires che experience ab vis rong the rew Getty Vill be oaine samibirly epradsa. propulsme, tlt otingdent ind surprise, Beate additional parking was needed te avennumed re mor cars than the oid muscum,. anew multleved warae was builtano a hillside southwest otthe callers furldaag. his elim tated the most disconcerting aspeeted the ormanab arrival sequence. rnowhih sivrors world: park i the warage ander the miuscum and then take ai ciovater ap oe the Retin replica  [hanks roe Ta well-constlercad ON PATS Ott Pekran, SISifos Gant leave their wars a goed distance from the tiicim ond proweed towardit by foot ahora igenenish Chercompaphea series of pads wars. ramps. and steps that berg to nund the ald (unard Pines sto  gan “Geting there ds halt ie tan.” Phe torresal bepammene ot the corts  wonuirked bs the omonumentab portal of the Cub brtes Masiboa,  which oscopen te the sks amid within which oath ihe usid orascon  recepriou serviges are grouped. Phe comerere pasabot as biced on warn brown cope rete paneling anid matchings Gaserting, the perp  maternals used to clad mest of the new boven comstrnctian 
Oudhiming the top ot the roofless walls are thin panels of translucent golden onys that proieet horiventall into the open space. Phis dis- crect Brace note, using ao maternal remiuscent of the golden onyx inner wallot Mies sander Rohe’s Barcelona Pavihon. is charactersty ot Siivettrs understated elegance. The thirty -toot-high portal-—tlanked by an angled wall to the lett and a simple post-and-hatel reetangle to the cight—imparts an auraot Classical nobility through scate and Prepertion only, making the Composition unquestionably Modern tn spirit.as well  Prom there, visitors Gan ascend toa hiber evel either by elevatur or an outdoor staineay fod multiingled walkway that positions che villa abwass tothe nightot the Gewer justasa Lipanese stroll garden always onents its principal vista in that direction. Similarly Japanese is the way inowhigh Svein cunningly manipulates saght lines and strategically diverts one’s atrendion co heighten visual drama, prolongs antieipation of arrival, and increases perception at space, He achieved these effects I Various wass—with lainges in ground level or paving texture that momentanhy pull one’s eves downward. or with screen wally that have antermittent cutouts, alternately hiding and exposing caretully tramed sexments of the villa, which ts not revealed as a whole unl  anes almost upon it. The site planning was a masterstroke in itself.  Among the oblpaters muscum-ndusta amenities Silvett was asked to provide was an indoor cate with a large outdoor dining ter race top an expanded bookstore and gate shop, allof which he peatly inserted tite a hullside uorthwest of the villas The architect was daunted by tring to find a proper site tor the Greek sole amphithe ater the Getts alse wanted, He considered placing the semicircular arena up near the crest ot the hill coing behind the villa te che norch, but the logistis of getting audiences sately up and down trom that height were msurmountable, as were objections trom neighbors wary of pease and heht trom nighttime pertormances. Atter repecting: sev-  crab akternanve locations, Silvera took the bold step ot placing the  amphitheater directly adjacent to the villa’s west clevation, the side through which the public enters the mmscum. He was aware that the close uAtaposition ofa public auditorium anda penate house would have been unthinkable in Classteal anmquiy, bu the arrangement here made se much sense spatially and functional thathe put aside any qualms about the composition’s historical correctness.  Atter the silla’s unveiling. in fanuary 2cobé—the same month chat Michael Brand, tormer director of the Virminia Museuin at bine Arts, became the new head of the |. Paul Gerry Muscam. of which the Getty Villats part—the trust's othcials attempted to stem the nonstop ude of bad publics that had enpulted the institution. Bur the Getty's dealings had caused controversy, even scandal, tor decades. The MUScUMT’S first antiquines curator Jin Frel, was forced to resign in re8e@ and way fined for endorsing mtlated tax appransals of objects donated to the collection. In ress the Getty par $> million tor what sooow known as the Getty houwros, a supposedh angent marhle statue of hay provenance, depicting a nude young man. Subsequently judged a teke by many experts, io was displayed dunoy the villas reopening with a label—"Greek. 532 bor modern tergery”-—that ackoow lodged scholarly repectton of ats authenticity,  To stimulate a new atmosphere of transparcnes, and ne doubr to anticipate rhe mpending findings of the California attorney general's investigation, the Getty Trust, soon atter the alls ceopecmag, hasty instituted rerorms that included the board of trustees approval ot all purchases of properts and the posting of ity financial intormanon on the Gerry Web site. And in what was widely seen as ae rare stroke of duck tor the embattled Getty at persuaded one of the most respected and sought-after administrators in the musecor world—Pames Wood, former director of the Arc institute of C hieage -to become president ot the Getty Trust.  The crust alse reengaged wath the Tralian government. which  wanted forty-six objects repatriated, but the talks were hetul and 
cantendous. byenoas che abot Marron True proceeded. her erst- while emplover did nor find her pilonsing in the mternagonal press SUTAOeNE WM petus ta roach sertlement, toc rhe Gerry's wood if not for  hers. Suddenive in late othe Gets avrecd to relinquish twenty sis  arttasts, bat dismissed Habe ’s Glamt te rwents others and broke ott nemetiations unilaterally. Perhaps Getts otthaals believed chat ans cancesstons trom: them at chat point would be too little. toe late te callott these new bumendes. and the outchissed warriors at Malibu tormed awa. with arrogant Oisimpiin inditterence, from the persaral traceds ot the Marton True cruail As the Prada cubtare minister sard ata press conterence in December soon. 7 We Cannot understand wht thes are Boing so obstinate, WP torty-srs pieces belong in dials, period 7 Apparenth encouraned by the tough stance of Italian authorities, Greek authorities that same month Gharged Proc amd four others with excavate and egalls exporting an angent Greek funerary wreath inthe Getty collecnon,  Troe bad been asked te resin trom her Getts post net tar ans presumption of guilt ga the Itahan action but becuse she had accepted ao personal loan the trast comsidered an ethical Gonthet Indeed. there was a consensus an museum cirdes that a scholar esteemed amon her peers had been made a scapemeat tor the ques tionable practies ot the Get Trast, whieh sancnoned acquisitiens totapidls reas its angent bedtime i quality and quarcigs as the Gets Vilas unveding approached. Mans believed, moreover that Frog had abso bees stngled our untarls by the frahan government, which had esacerbated the problot ot allicit digs aid Clandestine sales througtoats svstem bs which the state charms absolute ownership at all newly discovered antiqiides anid demes ans compensation te finders,  Undeobredh, the Getre’s severely compromised ethics prevented it from prting Triecoreren itself with the moral authorts chat other culmuiraiotticials. i luding Philippe de Montebello ot the Metropol  cin Museum of Ver summoned in detending their instintians trem  similar torcign campargns to reclaim antiquiges. Bat de Montebello was known as an accomplished diploma unbke the toothardy Getty otheals. whose outright retusal co return any warks ta dealan author Wes pact was reparded as the gisule chat sparred dhe dealnans’ dea stonto goatier Proc with the vengetulness ot VMectu, the bury whose Greck mame means “uncedsin i pursuit” [nthe irony of ironies, Proc. who had quater brokered the return of other disputed obicets Incthe past. was not amore Che muscum’s negotiators at the fatetut sotz meenne that the atteonted Ttalnans deemed a casus bell.  The world in general, bur America in parteulan has always rel ished cautionary tales of preat wealth causing vreat woe. Yet there  canbe fittle queseen thatthe house thar Getty built brought its own  plague of musertes on utselt, whieh Gould be Comprehended without recourse to myths of supernatural intertcrence the ancients needed ta  make sense ot such otherwise mexphoable human toll. 
14  NORMAN FOSTER  IN THE HIERARCHY of architectural commissions, the mose Prestig1ous of allisa new national capital, but its alse amon the mose difficult to design successtully, Quite aside trom the demands of creanng a finwoonal iogashigse center, the archituct is expected: to sumehow divine and embeds the vers essence of a nation. However the late meenteth century witnessed the completion of several architec turalls cempelling nacenal capired buildings thar do just chat, including Lous Kahn's Sher ¢ Bangla Navarin Dhaka, Bangladesh; and Gvat- trey Bawa’s Parhament House at pyctstass in Colombo, Sei Lanka barker and even more ambrittousls, severabentirely new tederal cines Walter Burley Gethp and Marion Mahony Ceattin’s Canberra of rant tyec. bdwin Datvens and Herbert Baker's New Delhrot rg ta-rgat. and Oscar Niemever’s Brasilaot ty se-ryeo were created on largels sawantsites But none of those progects was as polite ally charged: as the rebuilding of Berlin duriig the century's fal decade, atter ur became the Capital aes ofa revnied Germany. And its most sensi aeamissiot bs tar css that tor the remo agen of the Remhstag, the nanonal parhament budding,  Astrongls felt consensus thar emerged trom the widespread Ger man debate about the rebuilding of pose rcuncication Berlin centered  on the obheanen to make new places that would Come to terms with 
Germany's troubled history, One Corolliey of that attitude was how to deal wath the aig 's surviving monuments of the past, Carl Gotthard Langhans’. Neoclassical Brandenburg Gate af i288 -pturmas much the emblem of Berlin as the Bittel Tewcrisat Paris or Bie Bens ot bon don—-remained one of the city’s few public structures without loaded poliocal aso cuitions, simee it was never particubirh identtied woth ans single regume, Phatet course was not the case werb the Ren hstau.  Atter the German states were unihed inte the Second Reh in Stor 87 1 and Berlin became ats capital, che nese national gos ert ment occupied the Baroque and Neoohissial buildings that had been tied by the Prussian motarchs. Stoll needed. bewever wars a mew home ter the parluument. A site was Chosen tor it just north ot the Brandenburg Gate, and the Rhenish architect Paul Walker won the competion tor the commission. The direct model tor Wallor’s Reichstag of rSNg-rSeg was Hermann Schwarzmann’s Memorial Hallot is-4-18 6, the mart budding ot the Cited Stites Center Eshrbirion in Phitadelphia. Schwarvnainti, a Germarreenngre cnc en had never desamned a bunlding betore. and who knows what sources inspired dis florid Beaux-Arts structure, centered bs oa square dram that rose to anon and-ahass domes  The Reihstag’s exposure was the areat rrom-sind-ghiss: cupela, which Wallot granditoquendy termed the Volksdapped, ar people's dome, prefiguring by a century Germany's post reunitaaten belet in Jiteral architectural transparency. Whi was meant fo encodnae an equrvatenrt polmeal tramsparcnesy, Wallocs brikding—an architectural  Pe broged bad-luck birdy it there ever Was ane—scemed doomed  trom the stuart. Phe site was moved three Gmes, torts the arditect to redraw his plans with cach change. Phen the dome appeared to be settoo tar back in rebition tothe fiyade, and the beleaguered desutner reposimoned it forward tn hes tinal scheme. Atter dirde mare that four decades of use, and soon atten Hitler's rise to Power in 1933,  the bunuag of the Rewhstar sizmtiod the ammolanan of German  democraes, whereupon the sham aensipes at the papper assenbls were moved, with traeony aptness. tothe ots s Kr t Yrurd Phase The Rewhstau was heasih damaued atthe ondot World War th and the remains ot the cupola were tara down, Phe candle scractire, atthe vers cde atthe West Zone. was stroethened between rags and feet. Paul G Ro Baumitarten’s antertor remok lo ot reap puact reconfigured the orginal spaces inti assembis halls. Gonrerettee rooms, and exhiburion ealeries,  Alghoueh for miostoetits tumuitgons century the Rermhstag had  been round ys hated ter vanung political reasons and anlaved for ies  undeniable uaiiness, too—there seems fo dnive been necaeestian atter rounitcatien thac it must ayag: become Gerona s capitol busting Alb three tinalists inthe rag2 Reschsnig Compention were foreniners, pecbaps Pease fie honor was deemed too peat far any Geri to bear More to the pom thouga, was the fact thar no fate oventeth centers Gerri architect could remotely be Considered: ain mitersig Bona stan byen the sclegtion ib tude et the anh German to be awarded the Priovker Prive, Gootttrred Bohne, was remarded as ams tyieg flake wethon the protessiom, while bevend at Bohra romaine as obscure atten he WOT as he had bee n hete Te, I urthermere, the TATOOS ing glebaligagen of architectural pragmee singe the fucose ded te several comspaots Purcpean publ commmissiitis bere awaeded to  torino arcintests. toast notably the Georges Paripideu Center in  Parste Renzo Prone ait Richard Rewers, the Ger tal Lanne or Paras ted ME Pen and the Sarasburs Wang co the Nanoual Gallery in bon don toe Robert Verturcand Denise Scott Brown  The excoptiomabestent to tich the carton Was Goeniin ease mento and then the reuuied German stag. welQomed: mainminur iis salthough ther acess te citizenship awa seconds restacted was parallecd by the penuitupate hone ad three ren Goris arp hine ces tor the Berlin capita yob. Phe ariaasts—S.troite Chitra at Spee  Iide Broun ot Helbind. amd Norn Poster ct brehind: aver asked 
to desise concepts thar would he subject “to the discussion that was eapected to cake place berween the client and the public about the  role Parliament Was to play and the image it wished te proyect.” This  open-ended parneipatars process was soon to widen from design by committee to design by reterendum, as Foster discovered to bis dis- may atter he won the job  Bornin rays toa working-class tamiy in Manchester Foster stud- ted archutecture Arstar tharos universin and tater at Yale, where he met brs country man and fellow cechnologs enthusiast Richard Rogers. When thes returned to Pnglandin tyes. thes and their respective first Wites—the architects Su Rogers and Wends Cheesman—secup Team 4. dbexperrmentally minded London practice specializing in housing and industrial projects. The group disbanded atter four years, where- upon Foster founded his own office, Foster Assoctites subsequently renamed Foster + Partners: soon became known tor highly adept schemes with a freshness of conception and lightness of touch absent trom most Late- Modernist works.  Unhke many of bis emerging contemporaries, Roster trom the boomy was Gipable of working at scales both stall and large. Hs Willis Baber and Dumas headquarters of tat r-ro7s in Ipswigh—an amet bod three-story offtee budding with an almost invisibly athved glass skin—contormed to and maximized the treetorm city block it oxcupled to the sidewalk line. in the same way as William € rabtree’s Peter Jones Department Store of reaye-teg8 an Londen, the Mod ermst fandmark chat presaged i. And Foster's vast. hangarlke Sains: burs Center tar Visual Arts ot pacy-roct atthe University of Fast Anglian Norwieh isponsored hy the same family who would later underwrite Veneurt and Scott Brown's Nanenal Galery wing! used engines rong techniques previously associated with structures tar the aerospace industry, and enclosed an unebstructed space 426 teet Jong. reas teet wide. and 2g feet bith, tree of internal supporung  columns thanks toa peripheral cubularsteel frame  During the pasos building boom. Foster scaled: his credibiliey amone the global business establishment wath big, orideally acclaimed schemes such as his Hongkong and Shanehar Bank Headquarters of totg-1e8e in Hong Kons, which ottercd a high-tech Modernist alternative to chents made uneasy by the Postriodernist revivalism twpited bs the late-carcer skyscrapers of Philip fohnson, As demand tor Fosters services soared, his statt expanded to meer the workload, but even when his job list passed the one thousand mark, he was stl careful to martin che dluston that bis was adesign boutgue with an artiste soul, not some impersonal corporate operation. Foster's pub: heists turther cultivated thar impression as they promoted not the firm's commercial work but tes tar smaller number of cultural com: missions. These ranged in size trom che small but exquisite Sackler Gallenes ot ryXs-regt at Londons Royal Academy ot Arcs with one ot the greatest cles ators in Modernist architecture: to the sprawl ing vet somehow suthocatng Queen Fizabeth UH Great Court at tgge- roca atthe Briteh Maseum it London witha surrealisoe metab and glass trellised root thar makes every masonry architectural clement below rt. historical or new. look like a plasty replat  Unaccountubly, che most overlooked engineer marvel of mod ern times has been Foster + Partners’ Millau Viaduct ot tay s-20cg tn Prance’s Tarn River valles (see ilustramon ogbe The world’s hinshest sehicular bridge ac atmos nine hundred teet above the valley tloor, this mile-and-ashalt long span as supported by seven monumental columns. sone as tall asthe Pittel Tower with masts that tise another ninety teet above the roadway. In cechmigal audacity and sheer size. the Millau Viaduct ourstrips any of the much mere saunted mitra: Strusture schemes of Santiago Cahitesa, one ot Poster's nwo tellow finalists in the Reahstag competition which boster was untikels to have reached, let alone won, had he been pegged as a comunercialls oriented architeat).  Foster's intial Reichstag, proposal called tor the crecnon over the 
landmark building of an ommense hyh-tech Canopy, supported by acrid ob ovens towerme masts thar would have reduced the scale ot the old structure to that ota tabletop bibelor Ac first, Wallets hideous dome was notte be replaced: but that decision caused such An Gutters among a mayjonts of the five hundred parhamentariarts who were given design approval that Doster was forced to add anew Vidkskuppel, Worse vet, he had to propose asenty six schemes betore aroving atene thatwon the approvaledanaponit ad the lawniikers. Foster had fo spin cutsuccessive revisions Of every thing trom the shape ofthe parhamentary chamber—which finally took the Compromise tormtota sqaashed ov alto the myanti metal Geraian caghk mounted behind the speakers rostrum, a cross breed that wor Consent after some found ane mage too rapadeus, apether too domesticated  To be sures the restoratgon of the building was as scrupulously executed as all the Foster firm's work, but wath unusual couches such ws preserving behind ehiss panels the angn and often obscene weather sera wled by invading Red Army soldiers an rags. Yet the overall cttest Was one of expensive techrologieal prowess and chilly: bureauc nate effin an ag bites tural srercoty pe at the supposedt Teuton nature rather than a svmpathetiy evocation of German cultures finer qual tes. Reaartless. the Renhstag rmmediatel became Berlin's bigest tour attraction. tid visttors would) wart for hours to ascend to ats ahass-and-ster! dome and stroll the helwal walkways thac w raps wleouirtd HS TTC rLOn, othe bara Peon VEIWS ONCT the atToy see itis. trinen taal Prom the outside booking a. however the view is unter tunate. with the tounots trudging aloms the ramp hike inmates ina Benthamite workhouse. Suspended trom the wenter of boster's cupola moabuge. fhisty. mirrer-chid Gone. Its obs ious source Was the thuted. upward) thinng cobain that stood at the center of the entry tover at Thins Poutg’S Grosses Sehausprelhaus of tot 8-racain Berlin, The pub- Ian ase look direcds dow ard into the legistative assembly itselt.  which, as Bernhard Scbuly credulotish wrote ma guidebook to the  new attracdon, “shows the Chamber's Complete openness fo scrurny,” ay itdow deeds caunet be pertonmesdin the toll hight at day Soopnerous and unendiag has been Germany's burden ot the Nazi past thacanvthing even hinting at bascest architectitre Was strenmu ously shunned in the cobushdiag of Berlina. Phos meant prohibirien notonly on C)assiaamin its many permutations, but event on sold Masons surbives aod ssmmmetey, nerther exclosive co the Hither vears, In Meghacl 7. Wises insnthttul book on the reconstruction, Capetal Deleon: Gaoreaay s Sean for New Urcbitecnere of Democracy ot tyss. coe architectand educator Plains Rallhott noted chat "every: thine that has stone fagade anda barge doar as cemarded here. in this  pantuond siGianen, asa fascist budding. 7  Yerrhe desiderinieraleosvernmental architecture include a sense ot stelisth. tunclossness and phy sical permanence, so some approximations ef those chasm it net overth Classical solutions were attapted. Least successtal ot all turned our to be che Pederal Chancellery ot teacher rooma site next tothe Rewhstay. by the German architects Avel Schudres and Charfotte Prank, In tows. Schultes and Frank had womtthe curimissten te phin the entire Band des Bundes, or Federal Strip. ad geserurental stristures conning easeeard trom the bederal Chan-  sellers, mature thatwas tially scripped because it way far coo costly. |  The new Peder. Chancllers was faulted fromots inception. for beeng too atte niere tharcthree quarters ofa nidion square feet) and foo expense S22u midien., or mere than oviee the price af Gehre's Guawerhern Miiscuim Betws As Chancedlor Gerhard Schrader diy ts  remarked. OMs fechas trom the bese was Dan’ t vou have atin  4  tosmualicr sizer 0 Indeed. the Chancellen s overblown proportiors road beatles POSTON ISL scem rote ih hee puns with Scheoder’s united: ate predecessar Hlelinut Kohl Not for nothing did Berlin wars. who have abwass foved geome wes oickrnenes to strane new buildings, mnmediately duborrodhe Rebbosseaae’ anid less antasinels though  more deseripuscis. “the washing tachine 
Schultes and Frank apparenth inuaimned thes were channeling the spurs ot Louis Kahiin this scheme. But there superseale geometric hon sequiturs, portentous voids, and inchoate Classical references are the angthesss of Kaht’s supring etosations at Roman prototypes. One ot the architects’ most ludicrous ideas was to erect freestanding columns wath trees popping out at the cop, as it te give Green ereden- nals town incipient hascist svinbol, a supposition confirmed by their extensive use of green tinted gliss and green interior destan schemes, Fear ot making the slightest poliggally incorrect misstep and waking the ever-present ghosts of old Berlin led to an atmosphere in which not offending anvene hecame the most expedient design motive. Insanely micremanaged by the goverment on one hand and cravenly abandoned te commercial interests on the other, post-resq Berlin became a fhisco of sorrowtal proportions, the greatest lost apportue HIE. postwar urbanism.  Learn how to rebuild a world city in the wake ot man-made Armageddon was something the infinitely resitent burghers of Berlin had been doing since Maus rage. Rarely up modern times have there been reconstruction projects anwwhere as tarreaching of lavishly tunded as those of post apoualypse Berlin, and never were thes so traughe with angsc or so wreughr with soul searching. The nmmediate posewarn aime of the West Germans and their American patrons were essentially the same as those of the bast Germans and ther Soviet patrons. Both superpowers wanted their respective seetors of Berlin tradvertisc the benefits of ther poling al systems, and no expense was spared in transhiing: those ideolowtes inte built form, But smee the parallel programs were Conducted largely tor the greater glory ot their sponsors on the world stage. litth worm was wasted on whether the schemes addressed the local past,  Architects and planners in both halves of rages Berlin telt tree to do as thes pleased. in part because Hitler's capital had been bombed  into veritable tabula rasa, Such wholesale departures tram regional  Practice as the Socialist Neoclassical apartment towers of Stalinallee inthe Last Zone which cabbed mots trom Karl boednioh Schinkel’s Felner house or eS2c--r829 im Berlin and the Corbustan towersan a-park of the Hansavertel nehborhood inthe West Zone ling luding Le Corbusier’s Unite dhabiragen of rose rasa) ony served: as reminders that the Gy fad never achieved a cohesive urban identity. Spread out over almost asc square miles, the peenn -three Compe- nent boroughs of Berlin did net metamorphose inte an organic ennts mthe sas the villages ot London or the Saabourgs ot Pars did. Indecd, Berlin's lackadaisical sprawl low toomediamerise profile, medsam densin setdement patterns, and disparate atmosphere from ane part etthe metropolis Co another niake iimere akin to Dos Angeles chan te anv ather burepean capital,  Schinkel, Germanys supreme mneteenth-century architect, served as Prussia’s general burlding director and constructed much in and around Berlin. But the depleted frances of the state during and atter the Napoteonis Wars anda parsimonious king corcumsctbed the scape ot his etrorts. Phe Gtv’s rapid development after Germans s unitica toni psto-asc rand the ingreased industrialization in the decades that tollowed Were lett Lirtely to speculators, who expanded the cap itabante a true metropohs within a generation, Berlin's Wilhelmine growth spurt lagked SGhinkel’s grand overview. one shared in his own ume by foha Nash his Metropolitan Improvements for Londen and later the nineteenth century by Baron Haussmann in his dadeeard: rsateorot Paris. Dhe closest Berlin ever Game toa modern iaster plan was Hitlers mexalomumiac dreani of turmng ipinte a pathologically overated wher capital to be renamed Germania, In view of that tight: cing precedent. im vcas only to he expected chat the pest reuntheation tederal and local gosernments insisted ona consultanve and partic patory approach rather than a single authoritative vision for rebusld- ing Berlin.  Determined notre repeat mistakes planners bad made in the recent 
pastsuch as inesng traditenal Berhn balding tornmats like the Hinterbat ca back courtvard around which apartment houses were grouped those ropensible tor supers ising post-reumncation devel: opmentimposed a series of guidelines to restore the ciy’s distingnve character Phe size and proportion of cts blocks, bulding herghrs. cladding materials. and the equilibrum between residential and com meroil coninmi were al Considered ter ther impact an the reconsti tuted urban scone. Bat althouvh che general qualits of design in small Senin proicets ot the pases was actually quite decent, the great vie undertakings of that decade were overwhelming disappoimuny. One ot the most memorable architec tunilumages of the nineteenth eentuns sa plate trom Schinkel s monograph Sander arbiteke ot  padter Frticurte (C ollccuemrot Archutestural Desens. That exquisitely  outhned engraving deprts the view from the entry low ot his Altes Mauscumopisss issccim the heartot Berlin. Pookimg out over the Ss principal square—the Dustgarten through a portico ot € Lassi eal columns that trame the Baroque roval palace the Stadochtoss ton one side and Sohinkel’s Neo-Gothio Fnedri te Werder Church on the other this is architectunil harmony of the highest order By plagng one otthe frst public art galleries at the epicenter of the Prussian cap: ial, Schipke? and his patrons athrmed the exalted role of culture in the bre of the stare, Whatever belloose tendenges that nation and ifs successor reuimes would pursue, dtd however much subsequent Ger manuarchitests and patrons might pervert and discredit the Classical tradinon, Schinkels great museum still stands as testimony te a unt tiedaand umitsing sense of urbanism atits mest calyshtened. Atami vantage poritan another part ot Berlina the vast areporthke entes hathot Flemse Helmer and Chrostoph Sartler’s Neue Gemafdee dente iNew Proture Gathers! of pags-toas, partoot the Rulturforum just southwest af Potsdamer Placg—the outhook is dit ferent oindecd: a transtormed in scape thar in ats hiscorieal oblivious  ness ind helter shelter heedlessness mightas well ben Berry as in  Brandenburg. In the toreground hes anall assorted areas et cultural  buildings that predate remmib cation -rciiding Phinas Scharaun's  Neo Fapressionir Phdharmome of bese tues and Sousbebiorhek eb raecsrute, Ladwarr Mies van der Rohe’s Lite: Moderna Neue Nationalgalerte of raey-tuoeS. and James Serle and Michael Wal-  tord’s Postmodernist Wosserschattszentrum af tusg cess. Phat pam  ble at shows structures, amad hog world’s fair of aareciated addres, was noramproved by Hilmer and Satders spochieuharty mediog re, sciscalls nondessrprinalers.  Por decades. the bighlight ot mam peoples visi ta West Bertin Was atrip our ro the southern suburb ot Dahlem to see one of the world’s Reese Colle thins of Old Master paintings in the ald Germalde- adler. provesiomally housed since World War Tay Brune Pals un remarkable but congenial Astateches Muscum ot rargetor3. Phe  Di tres daphas there telt partcubirly accessible on chat bow hes  and cnerowded serine. Ants distanr remove tram the ae ceptor the mipseaum Was Biessedly tree team che hordes of mdittercat tautists ar the sort whee shutte mindlessiy through the Louvre. and one could commune wath artin a way Chit has become a thing of the past an Most other ECU TMUScCuTs  Phiimer and SattionS Neue Genivhlesalene, with its poor Lasaut at badly proportioned cooms, harsh lighting. pompous and abstracting wad covers. and pricposetoss public spaces. mist be ranked baw on WM Ustotmiuscuins fron an ceef mink muscum huldsng. This spe cite mistake will net be perpetuated inletmiteis, leave ver AS part or ddeaal though danetngl) Ovocisecc promt te ectira Berlin's pub roartcoflectiesis cothe central lagated Miscnim Island. where dies bad bec Copsobdares: cen World Ware TE rhe Neus Games ale rig collection as scheduled te be renistallcd amr ew wr added reins old  third desde ot che twenty fest  home, the Buade: Museum, dharin century Alas the Neue Geenuderulerie a the Kulrusteram wll be  reevcled to house Modern and contemporiny art 
Rising up behind the Ralturtorium are the Clustered towers of Pots- damer Plata. which was once one of the commercial habs ot the cits but became a ne man’s land bernween the bascand West zones atter World War He To gain support tor the well-intentioned master plan drawnup by Hilmer and Sattler with aaitvwide building hehe limi otsome ois teen abou ten stortest it was decided as a concession to developers co atlow Potsdamer Phaitz to rise to some 2a¢ teet,or about beent seven stares. Ehis was a serigus matake. Histarically low: aod medium nse cites Like Paris tharcontned tall baddings to periph eral disteicts have pursucd ao wiser course than comparable cittes like Pondon, where sporada othce towers base needlessiv detaced a Jargeby intact premodern skvline.  In London, that practice fell inte destuctude atter Prince Charles's  poSos craves avauist high rise ceastructian there, ancl hasten +  Partners’ Swiss Re Headquarters of tugt-nosg—a forty-one: stars  tower politely mekaamed “rhe Gherkin” rather than scimething cuder because otacs rounded, tapermyg shape—brought the skyscraper back fo town with a venpeance. Foolishh, Berlin would allow what had not happened there because of war and partiqen,  Founvest the aventy nine burldins of Potsdamer Platz with archi- teturab quuality, ain iiternatianal team ot esteemed architects was asscrnhled onder the sapersision of Renzo Planc whe desimned the developments attics tower tor the Daimler Bens subsidiary Debris and fis focal assocuite, Chroatoph Rehtbecker The participation of such fuminanes ay Prane’s and Foster's erstwhile partner Richard Rogers. Anita bovaki both of whom were assipned an ethee build: ingt and Ratacl Moneo rvhe did a Hyatt hotel: resulted in desiins thar were far trom their Hnest.  bar worse was the German-born, ¢hiage-based Helmut fahn's Sony Center aghias, glass skinned shopping and encercumment center bercer surted to Fas Veras. hough Hans Kollhott was correctly crite  wabot Beclins paranora about Fascist architectural reterences, his  dark brick Potsdamer Platy ottice cower seemed tke across between the Gothic-anspired North German Expressionism of the pyzes and Philip Jobnoon and John Burgee’s Repubho Bark Center af 1o¥1- paSgon Houston, which the architects wrote was imspured by pabled German Rathaieser ctown balls’ of the Renaissance. Clauns that a eructalaspectiot the new Berlin would be ro encourage a mere acuve street Lite were negated bs severil at the Porsdames Place buildings, which were turned utward to ateums and mululevel shopping malls ascaateurban as anything an the Amerwan roadside stop. a fatal blow corevavinye the ci Sone vital boules ard culture.  Onk oa handral ot buildings crected during Berlin's frst post: routitieation dewide. albot cheat relanveds small, Gould bay amy claim to lasung architectural interest. Frank Gebrv's mixed-use bu Bank buutding ef raag-s enear the Borodenburg Gate at the western end ot Coter den Dinden. refested the strc conuig regulations imposed inthis histor district. which torbade Gebrvw to ndulpe in either the  H  Bilbao manner. instead. he clad the bee Bank's rectilinear tye story  llawing biomorphig forpis or reflective metallic skins of bis post:  tagade on Pariser Platz ina recessive litiestone and glass ampasimen ot regulac bays and: puasters chat recalled the better US cmbayey buildings of the rues. a kind ot date Madernist Scapped € Lassicism, Onh the outeardhs angled wandow panes at the penultimate story stenaled thar this was ne ordimars structure. In contrast, the build ing’s undulating rear fagade, fora ten story residential wing, seemed typroalat the arbiters work  Onb oon the interior ot the be Bank was Gehry tree to let louse. Canong outa lange atrium atthe center af che rectangolie block, dhe anhitect covered ot owithoa Vaulted sky bulicre quottier reneradean ct his recarrent fish moat adikeness remterced by the scafelike pattern othe triangular glass panes. Beneath that scaiproral roat he phaced a conference center in the absteacted bat stl rocarmzable shape  op aagmeantis horse's head, che contours oF which are clad swath dull 
stamless-steel panels. The naturalist reference had no symbolic meanmp—on tact Gehry had developed the dea tor his unexccuted Lewis house project of rus8o-rees in Evndhurst, Ohio. This oddly contradictory hank TOC HIOR 40 Owe ERATSBressive anal digmincad, marked a clear departure from the corporate blindness thar blighted the tugs rebuilding ot Berlin.  from racy te to8 7. West Bern enjoved well-deserved renown as aseedbed of advanced architectural thought and pracnce thanks te its Internationale Baugustelbing dnternatenal Building Exhibitions More offen Known bs its German initials ty, Cader the direction ot the architect Josef Paul Alethues, the 184 program, nnanged by gener ous government subsidies, commissioned avant-darde architects of every perstiasion trom all over the world to design and erect housing projects at sites seaticred throughout the Western sector Not since  the extensive construction of workers’ housmy in Berlin during the  Tozcx—an unsurpassed tullliment of Modernism ’s belief in design’s abies co bring about social equality had there been an urban rest dental building campaign se architecturally adventurous, though IKACS SEVIS. preagcupations superseded soctal concerns ima was all too typical ot the pasos. Dhe crushing coses of reuniticanen ended such publicly supperted programs, but Berlin asain became a shass case for high-sovle international architecture dung the pygecs,  When the Bundestag (as the West German national assembly was renamed after World War Th seted in taut to shaitt the federal pow: ernment trom Bonn te Berlin by che end af thar decides 1. or se countries also began te plan co move their embassies to the once-and future capital, By the ame the Remhstag was cededicated, in April reay, the generally poor design of Berlin's newly) Completed tarcnn leganons mide it scem as ub the entire city had been architecturally nosed. Nations nehoin architectural talent overlooked their best rep resentatives and turned to preapproved Pritzker Prize winners: for  example, France chose the much-overrated Christian de Portzampare.  ind Austria seleded the once trends Hans Hollen. Phe British embassy by Michadl Willard whe cook over the practice of hay pure nen flames strbne. atter he died. un rae: reprised dared satnarure motts tran ther pasos German golden ate and seemed bike the sur- waving halbeta Botush pop music die ona Continental nostalgia tor,  Fasily the bese burkding te rise in Berlin since the Wall went down Wats Rem KRoolaas’s Dutch embassy. The Netherlands covernment shrewdly plaved its bands down trump ard, Koolhaas. And although  he Ras often expressed somtempe tor the orders, canventional,  humane values or his homeland, he Cond not have served Pfotlind better thant he did wich this sali but by ne means minor masterpiece.  Though there was anelemesit of luck because the building: site, over  hooking the Spree River net tar trom Schinkel’s Adres Museum, wears  popsubjcot te the rand vening rules cotorced elsewhere in the cin, Koos Kepe the ontbasss ss cubn exterior fares simple nonetheless. Retoren tao prinapal materiats ravered by Foster—rlass and per- porated stes! Roolhads conjured up an uitewately inrertocking series of interior spaces thar somehow teased rweneethree levels tram the  clescrstors stracture. Auibituaihy isditferent to accepted notions ot  vhatinse. vitier bsthet or scienttte, Koolhaas here stepped: out ot sentninar oharacter with an unembarrasscd diphay of architectural chatanen afar mest osenmab complesits made perfectly dear and mvcnter mide seve mies icibly  The den temmompblottons of the overly hase. pace of German reunite tien and rebuitdhint Berbn were disregarded Ds poditeuins  mapelled roo make Germans aodits capane wliole sagan atten Seemann  thearted hopes. Bur that wastetal specd wel atteat Berbri’s arc bites  ture iad arhan planame—or lack chereat—well cota the Bventy fest  comtnrs ELnang spent some Siac huhos oo intrascruccure alone bs  ce Berha went situa bank rupe, with appronariitely S yo bulbon  ai debt the interest on which cost some Ss onsllien per das. remark  able autres tor acts oot quest ag mullian people. Ssnapromanealiy 
several bar urban renewal plans were tobbed ott on the already overextended tederal povernment or delaved indennicely.  Although mayer corperanons rushed to build new branches in the reconstituted capital, no mayor sector of the German coonomy shitted its base there. Finance remained tirmly ensconced in Frankturt, media to Hamburg, the auto industry mp Stuttgart. and heavy industev in Dusseldort. Before World War Th Berlin prospered less ay the seat of government than as the center of commerce, with 6o percent of all German companies—including sto, Alans, Deutsche Bank, and Sremens—headquartered there. Atter the war West Berlin survived on financial lite support from the West, with large populations of stu- dents and pensioners heavth subsidized to defend. with whatever demographic inappropriateness, the tshind outpost ot democracy.  From the end at the rages to the end of the ruScs, Berlin was not aplice where people went to pursue entreprencurtal carcers, and that renuained (ruc atter reumfiewtion. Without independent economic stimulus, no civ well develop an authentic architectural character. whatever specitic farm it may assume. Poonome growth does not dbreetly correlate with mere consumerism, however as Was misunder stood inca prometional brochure for Porsdamer Plate, which main- tuned that “in terms ot culture, Berlin has been atthe top tora dang time, more so chan Londen or Paris. But whatat still lacks is a well developed tradition of shopping.”  The greatest world cites mere as stow and steady accrenons over fine, retaming their underline cvte character bevond: superticial changes in acstheuss. Berlin has been defining itself tor latle more than two centuries, much of which tune has seen the city at war, under repression, ortn cn. A disruption of a very different sort— the decade Jong post reunification binge of too much, foo seon—was no less hacmtal to the natural progression of plaice making in Berlin than the nosadventures of world politics had been. For all the hand:  wringing about politcal sensitnaty, the untrammeled speculative  trenay ofa lasses-hure boomtown overwhelmed all other ampules in tugcs Berbin, a capital that finally needed a respite trom che haser unpulses ot capital,  There was no sadder postscript to the impovermshment of the reunited Berbn than the fare ot Hlemz Grattunder and Karl Betis Swors Palace ofthe Republic ot tucy pace. the tormer home ot the hast German pachament. Builoon che cums ot the Stadtsehloss and chabin bronze-tinted glass, the Palace of the Repubhe was an archi tectural attrone by any dehmnon, all the more so more because it taced Schinkel’s Altes Muscum, Nonetheless, the old Communist par- lament building was beloved bs manvy- surely bs more than have ever loved the Rea hstag—it ons because its public recreational rac mes held happy memorics for mans East Berliners. Pttarts to preserve thas a landinark ef the old Ulbricht regame tailed. and demolition ot the shoddihy carstructed. asbestos nddled white clephant finally beganin 2cc5, Calls tarits removal started with a post rounthearion scheme to tecenstruct the long -sene Stadtschloss, 4 hich caprured the popular imagmaces when tull-size painted serims were temporarily unstalled to cvoke elevations of the old palace. But that wos ata ine when spending mulbons ceplhoating an old roval residence was stall seithin the realm: ot tcal possibility, before the Palace af the Republic wondd be torn dhawn wath ne hope of replacing to wath ans ching more than a castle in the air  Bar the most comsprucus benehciary of the rebuilding ot Berlin didi not want ter ver lucrative Gommmisstens an the atterglow ot the Remhstag renovation. bester’s tint projet in the Cauted States was has Hearse Tower of 2eca-2cc9 in New York, ao turty-stors corporate headquarters tor the maatazine pubbshing firm. fe way the fret major Manhatian budding granted planning approval atter the terror attacks of September pay tua. Developer Parry Sulverstent has since asked the architect todesien dower Pwoutthe World: Prade  Center site.: 
The Plearst rower was meant fo complete a sis story Classical Art Deco base structure burtein ro28 tothe designs of Joseph Urban ithe enuere Viennese architect amd Zteuteld Bolles vrertemren-scenet and the hem ot architect George Bo Post, but adkiing on to that silly soule Iany meaning ral was wos outof the question, boster went for an aggressively expressed ec sterier chgineering scheme: a diagonal rid ot hicted supporting trusses based on a module of four stors high tri dtghes, whieh aniposes a chilis absteace character an the corner at bighth Wenue and sch Street.  When boster 4 Partners’ publicists are nor stressing: his urtist. ore: dentials tor when such assertions are patenth untedable . thes emphasize that the frm os the world’s foremost practitioner ot Spreen” dimth tech architecture: botdiings that took mechanistic in che eatreme but which are actually more ecelogicalls bemen that mans peorets wich amare woodsy apperiince. Whatever chums thes tas make for the Hearst Lowers “sustainability” referring to desrans that de noe take an uadue toll on the envtranment. to sense of homan habrtagen is discommible trai the exterior of this structure,  Somehow, though, the Hearst Lower mspured Paul Goldberyer, Nor-  man bosteris the Movaclet Modernism Hem mimble and proline.  anhiconie cnn ot Phe Neve Yorker, to rhapsodize thusly:  and hes buildings are marked by hghtiess and grace.” It Foster as the Movartoot Mederusa. that mist make Gordon Bunshate ats fs Bach. prosing thatitas cnureh possible tor an arebirecture cringe te  have ati eaeas wells a tinese  RENZO PIANO  SINCE PIS INCEPTION, inc rata, the Pritzker Architecture Prize has boon promoted bs ity creators: owners of the Hatt horel fain—as the Nobel Prize ot che building art. Phe raster cat Pritzker "laureates." as the Hyatt Foundation calls che winners of its annual award. has indecd wari te rescmblie thar ot the Nobel Prize in literature. rt ons Ios semenmes odd chetees exphorble omusstons. ideoiogieal biases. and geopabtigalmotives Fut the quabts of aay award’s recip ents inexorabbhy comers mere honor on the prize char sige Cersa, as Was the case when the fralian archieeet Reaze Prine won the Priczker In pads  Born Gena csc. Poines studied at the Stilan Pols techie Scheolot Architegmiee. and afer recenmi bis degree there im rudy he went te wwotk tor dis tarber Carla, ao second ener iiian Gartotse building contactor Phe cider Plane warrod his son aniinst entering ao profession thaton postwar Eras resubted! carly riteeageer hs te res comet tron. “iy der sou wart tobe past am archimets” he asked.  “You can bea ba  venue Prats | apE CO utes vpocted diteriatiogal fame: ter seats later  Ver Bat his vor did not listers and an pace the  he setup apindependeat practhe in his birthplace swithoa bears han Paris: and by the end ot the ceptors te was barked asa rercnings mas  tenet higherech Modernism bee mere romatkably, Prone bab adse 
become the most sought-after muscu architect ata time of unprece- dented construstion in that theld.  Simce carl ot his career Renzo Pino bas been an enthusiast ot bravura industriabettets such as these of lis and Richard Ragers’s career making commission, the Georges Pompidou Center of but r= roccan Pansswhich resembles a towerng oil refinery. Paine cchough not Ragers Lier dimmished such cmphatte use of mechanisie clements, and tempered fis schemes trom the ca8cs onward with a strong under: currentotmmenimablism. This simplihcanon wave his mature architecture Ascrsc of repose rarely found either in the later work of his tormer partner or other onc lkeminded Contemparines whose concer did not parallel his quest for strus tural wergtitlessness and revelatory lume Tosity. se rewardingls tulflled i Phino’s mature work atags best.  That Phano was able ro fulfill both his father’s pragmatic bopes as wellas bis own artisoe nature was borne ourin the swarhene nature of his oeuvre. Artses in ib medians otter dawnaphas or disregard ther debroco cheer masters in direct proportion to the inthuence: Stravin- Shes diounurion of his teacher Rimsks-Korsakos was among the worst Pano has given credit toa number of his mentors, espectally the midcentun French architect and turniture designer Jean Prouve, whos head ot the tury tor the Pompidou Center compention suc- cesstully lobbied tor the voung Italian's scheme. (So did another jury member, Philp Johnsen, but Pring seems te have intentionally steered cleat ofthat Mai ghiivelinig operator who tot tor nothing way known as the Godtather of American arcbite ture. :  Prouve’s bahince berseen modern technicabewpertise on one hand and the use ot natural materuals cpartsalarlys wood) and vernacular traditiens trom mural rextons of Prange on the other set hum apart frome mans of fis Gontemporanes, Prine alse ackitowledged. it rather less sey the mnflocnce of Lourns Rahn, in wy hese Philadelphir studio he  served a beret stint while Kahn was working on his masterpiece, the Rombell Art Museu  Surproingds, Pano ride ne mention of the hambell in the account of has own Ment) Collvenon of raSs-ra8e see iustiation ¢6ahin Houston in his cout career sures, dowtook. dHowevern Prno has been mere forthcomina in citing the Kimbell as the primary tuspira  tion tor his Nasher Seulprure Genter at tageescos in Dallas. see  Whustranen rsbho The Kimbell and che Mend have been considered by mans tobe the test of all modern Amenean muscunts. and Prane’s omussion seemed all the more conspicuous becuse at the obs ious debt bis Houston scheme owed tots more colebrited predecessor in Fort Worth.  The Kimbeil led to Kahn's commission tor che Meni museum in tuts. bur tollewing the death of ots patron John de Meni the next year and of the architect a sear later de Memil's widow, Dominique. pat aside the incomplete proposal and bided ber trate, Prano demon: strabh learned much trom Kahn about the umportance of natural fhton arckeestural ncertors, a quality faethe valued dureng the final corporate phase ot the Enteniitonal Side whieh placed much mare emphasis on the devclopment of extemal term than iernal volume, and shinwed little rorerese ip natural amination, Although Praine’s high-tech aestherie us markedly different trom Kahn's self Consctous primunivism and im reasimg recourse to € Lissical and Medieval sources, tas stu possible te discern Kadtn’s under ane iitigence teseveral ot Piane’s schemes.  Atthe age ot thirey tour sallan cmbrvante phuise tor inest archi tectsscand with onb a handtul ed Completed! protests to has credit, Prange was suddenly thrast mite the iitersational spocht when he and Rowers scored an upser victors and wor the covetcd CommiNstor to design the hake culturil center on the Plateau Beaubourg in the Marais quarter of Parte subsequentis marned die Centre Georges Pompidou and more tamibark: know as the Beaubourg . Dut ater ook wehteen vears. the Pontpidou Center had taflen ante such at  dilapidated stare thatin cous Prine was called duck to undertake at 
extenaive restoration program, the brilding’s sceond renovation ina decade. in rok, the Inhan architect Gae Aulent: recontigured the museum's unditterentiated, lotrike galleries into a series of smaticr- sealed rooms. 1  Phe rapid decline of the Pompidou Center's physical tabrig, already evident within a tew vears of ity opening, was offiaally blamed on the toll rhe buildings extracrdinanily heavy trathe had taken on the strug ture, which for same tine was France's sumber one tourist atende- tion, Ourstanding as many of that muscum’s exhibroons have been over the vears, asimitcant number of visitors never enter the build ing atall, bur merely take the tubular ploslass escalator to the cop and enjos the panoramic views of the city trom the abservadon deck.  But its preposterous imagers of an otf refinery in the heart ot the otherwise gracetully: preserved Marius comains as ottensive vais ever In hindsight, the Pompidou Center seems less an architectural landmark than a milestone io the deyvelutin of the art museum into a populist tun tar. Richard Mesee’s Getty Center was clearly deriva trye—in spiritat not stvle—or the Poripidou Center im its excessive emphasis on crowd-pleasing diverstons that have nothing to do wath art, and included such samilarh entertaming amenities as a mechanized people-mover spectacular sceme lookouts, and muldple dining tacde tes, AL chat was missing at the new Gere were the fre-eaters whee were fong.a popular fixture on the Plitewu Beaubourg. but who would be inadsisable in the disaster-prone ccalogs of the Brent ood site.  “When the Beaubourg was concened. at the beginning of the sev entices” Prine wrote, “ne one went to muoseums, They were dreary dusey. and csoterie institutions, and were perceived as politically Incorrect, or rather as something tor the hte.” Tn tact millions had thronged museums dunmny the late roecs and carh retos, when the culture boom was already an tull swine not only in the United States i where the publicy-conscrous promotions of Thomas Hoving, the  POL. Barnum of the blookbuster extibtnon. were shaking up New  York's Metropolitan Minsecunnot Acti barat i such Purepean cities ascartrih as Vesterdam, with ats superb, aliverse. heavily atrended tausciis bused bs ample government subsidies.  Vomore decuntte account ot the Pompider Center's concepron would have te acknowledge thar bs rust, the Preneh had finally realved that Pans was no date the center of the international art world ad that radical measures would have te be taken to ty te fcapture the aity’s tormer ghore as mee et the avant garde. Prange’ National Musca et Modern Arto chen housed ithe Palas de Tok vo ap old pasion fetcover trent the past world’s tain, was an embar- rassing remainder that Paris lagged well behind New York. whose Drancophiic Miscantor Modern Vet possessed more ot the canonical Treasures of twentieth ventars. parting and sculpture abowe all by Prengh artists chanans other instanton  The apparent omagimahn of the Prono and Rogers compettion entry intrigued the puro, whe tially chose tr tram: among o8t sub: fusstons Te otruth, the wena: architects’ desimm was already a bar dated. a fate oxainple ot the vastinultifimcoonal bith tech structures dessgned singe the mids bubcs by experimental fiems in bondon fespe- walis Sresieranie, erence, Vienna, New York. and Pokwe, chough vers fom at those sispiiars schemes were executed,  Phe brerot base bom had aoseaktess forthe ries superticnal man fostatians qd Moderuoin aid tor hadi tech exhibineoism above all Thus the pseudeproaressis6 Pring aml Reasers peaposal—ossentialls banc sheebos cnimesbed ame tales ed tuosthy useless parted metal ducts. pipework. and scatradding had the eppesice of ity intended cttecrim anc hitcctaral orddes. and cards recertinined how out ot totich weithorhe avant werde Pars had become. Two decades lates, Prine clarmed that he and fis Brinsh PAPrner Mshose assemnition did not eentiige beyotid this ives meant the Porprdou Center to bea  send apoat Modern 
Beaubourg as a double provocation: a challenge to academ- cism, but alo a parody of the technological imagery of our nme. lo see itas high tech isa misunderstanding. The Centre Pompidou isa Tceltbare machine.” in which the flaunnng of brightly colored metal and transparent cubing serves an urban,  symbole. and expressive function, nota technical one,  Iris truc that the frequent discrepancy hetween the outward appear: ance and the internal function ota budding was a central paradox of Modernism, espectally in structures with a pronounced machine aes: then, This may bave been understandable inthe ryzcs, torexample, when Le Corbusier's desire to give fis designs as fururistig an aspect as possible Gould be fulfilled only by his using costly) hand tinishes and custom detailing: co take industrial components because certain advanced building techniques were not vet available. But whatexcuse could there be, tits sears atter that, fo continue the Charade! Phano’s revistomist Case for his and Rogers's Concept as intentionally trom and Pop tan idea thes had not expressed when the building was launched) must have occurred to the Trahan architect only atter his Increasing refinement forced him to acknewledge that there was something mercies about the Pompidou Center He later work displiss less and less dependence on such hollow ctteets,  The same cannot be sand of Rogers's subsequent architecture. His beseknown pose Pompideu building. the Plovds headquarters of Tacs. ty86 on bondon. os remomscent ot the Paris museum in its ex: bibittomistie array ot high-tech parts such ay segmented metal coils thar resemble a centipede and run down the tront ot the burkding —that are ay eve catching as they are dithealt to keep clean, hike wise true at the Pompidou. Robert Ventun apis charactertzed this  Neo Modernist vogue tor decorigyve imagery as “industrial rogaille”  anil  by ped and askew versions of architectural sculpture, patadas- wally garbed in decoration representing heron fincconalist exposed-trime construction ssmbolizing cimeteenth century engineering while evervbods Knews the Industral Revalutian  dead.  The esstane reception of the Pompideu Center owed much te the tact that few other important cultural buildings had been crected during the neernational recesston setatr bs the Arab oil embare ot tacy. The extensive publi quickly led te other commissions tor Pring, meluding his ryst-ros4 expansion of the Schlumberger Compans’s offies in the Parts suburb ot Monerouge. Chat imtell- genth comsidercd and cleanly executed scheme brought him to the attention ot the Prench-born Texas art patron Dominique de Menit daughter of a rounder of the Schlumberger oll-drilling equipment sompans. Furthermore. Prince's amaginative ry82 installation of an Alexatder Cahler retrospective in Turn showed tis putt tor the svi pathetn display of Modern art. a talent not immediately apparent ac the Pompidou Center  In rosz,de Menil an aesthete of legendary refinement and restraint. viskead Pring to sdecced Kaho and design dhe small private muscu tor the superb and hossocrane collecnan of peenteth-century and tribal art she had assembled with her Lire husband. fohn see dlustra- vem asa. The move toward sunplittaten that Plaine had bean since bis split with Rogers was further encouraged by de Meni. Whove taste foraustents wap almost Jansenistin igs reducuve but per fectiomist ogor dn stark Contrast to the muscum theme parks amd cultural shopping malls that began to proliferate durcmy the roXos, the Mend Collection building was ensissoned by tts hash-nimnded benefactor wath respect to whacit would not have. Phere was to bene gitt shop, no restaurant, no hyperluxurious materials, no grandiose  homage to donors, Above all the musctum was not to be set apart 
trom the jdpacent residential cammumey but instead integrated inte it with the utmest care and subtle. the cleat told her architect that She wanted the t20.. 08 square-foot building ca “look small on the nutside and be broon the inside.”  Takings his cues trom che modes: but architecturally pleasig hits Ants amd Crateostde bungalows ra the quiet aerghborhood thar sur rounds the mascum site—the houses were purchased by the Menil Foundanon and restored, wath their Caphoowird exteriors parted a uniter, Histor aly accurate ines treen wath white trim-—Prine not only preserved but stremthened the appealing character of the set oi. Ele fiomted the height of fis dies strocture co the tweestorsy scale ot the Largest adjoins houses; to Aacmonize with them, he tilled ut the thin, white tiitshed mineral teaming of his aumupalise desig wath Hlawless horizontal ey press siding scained. a pale aras.  Pring occasionally returned co the extensive use of wood im his Subsequent work. Phe cowering. shicidtike forms of his Ppbaou Cul tural Center of tou) pagan Noumeain New Caledonia -the French territory castot Austriiacwere tispired bs the coma, wood-aind- woven tber hut roots of dite indigenous Kanak people. Phough Prine could hardly be Gitled an environmentalist. his ascot wood when it seamed appropriate and tis ereat skill in handling: eoniarked bin as one of the tew high soto architects since Alte to work with the mate thakate a corsistenths mastertil manner  Dominique de Mend took an uncommonly active part in develop tithe plans tor her otuscum, partioubadts in her Conviction that its ton thousand obits ought to be stored under tdeal adisen anon cone ditions ia" Preasure Pflouse” and exhibited only breth. As Pino recalled Why mot she asked. create a protected and secure place. an Whit the Cinwin could be keptunder stret contead, separate trom anarea open te the publics and put the works on shew an turn, tor short periods of cme?” As tians other museums tried to qustits cher  wrandiose expansion plans by Complaming thatonh atiny percentage  oftheir permanent collectious could be viewed at any mement, her simple solution was eminendy detensible.  Sho Considered thar concept resiabat the ancient lapanese tradi nemot teequenth ropidng the display of works ot are. both i order to preserve tragite obycets and te prevent the sisual fartigue thar sets INIT A piece is See too atten Prov clopedie musecuans dike che Metre politan must Keep thar grostest treasures an perpetn al view fer avast tourist pubhe thar demands ta sce certau masterpieces. Bur small Mises woth premarin local audiences have good reason te engour ange repeat vistts by otterng a reciting selecuen of their boldings. Altnough the Mem became anew bens himark tor art world insiders,  too mans of them—especnilly muscu arclotesture search come  tees—have tailed to appresiate that the struccure’s small sie is inte eral tects stnwcss. and that wha they mrose lowe about the burldan: isnot transterable tea farger scales even ap they chose Pring as there architect  Phe Momls disphis polis of damned: csposure which Prine cdeerh ombraced, tread ham trom the most worrseite aspect ot the commiipsien: haw to deabwith the potentially destructive cttect ot the intense Lexassunbyhbtonworksotarn Dh did noemear charestrems modulaten of natural llaminanon was undesirabbe. The architest and his demetaue structural consuleaut. the dosh-hortn engineer Peter Rivcasho died i page ot Ose Arup Xd Bartiers, desised the Merl Collecthon’s samnature an bine turabinedit the pracetalhy Cars igs asere head bauserscor “leaves” as thes were called: that tet ay dishes battles tor the skvlichtred waheres. With the ocuanr cormoms of rorn that typined there Collaborations, Pano and Roce censured that those wave The, white terroaconerete sufsefecis alsa scrted aosthacturad function,  reintoraing the antrigate reef trance that seems ro floaracop the chan,  white-tpihed stec] Columns thar sartourol the biridiens, a com tenpes  ran verstomot the (Liss calcotabhiture and cornice ahove the colon  dade thar surrounds the baddase om al tea: stdes  
The vallenes orthe Ment) Collection are notimere “white cubes” — the dasae Modernist museum sareriors that have been much dended —hut stead are spaces at ancannsy fumatoste, Phe quality of light that Piano and Rice established tone cithteth of local outdoor levels ona sunny springtime davias not the cascade of muted sunshine that washes down the barrel vaults of Raho’s Kambell and bathes the Old Master protures below in aa appropriately warm glow, enhanced by creams travertine walls. fastead. the Meml’s plain. white painted exhi- bition rooms owith dark-stained sote pine tloors that intensity one’s trans onthe wallsi seem to vibrate inthe almost hallagiuators Clarity of tthe hieh-khesed bur oven lahe. Dhar to usme eftectunderscares the powertul Gharagter of the Colleggon, Which ws particulirly outstanding ints Northwest Indiag and other cabal arotacts, Surrealist pamtngs, Minimalist art, and works by Andy Warhol Ina period of rampant vommercialzation io the museum world, the Menil Collection became adnodel of how archirecture Gan clesate the pubbe experience of art toa supreme level ot intelicerual stimulation and sensual pleasure.  Prona’s Beyeler Foundation Museum of tagz-tyas in the Basel suburb of Richen was commissioned by the Swiss blue-chip art dealer Benst Beveler tor the display of his amportant personal callecoon ot Moder and Mra art The Beyeler isa tir more opulent produc: non than the Ment. Though che Swiss muscum’s similads cop-lehted  allors spaces are alse well propertioned and show off the art to  handsome cttest, they lack the aura of intimacy and intense char makes the Ment] so memorable. Phis is not se mach a matter at size both bulduigs enclose roughh equivalent spaces—as itis of spirit. The sleek ane ston Beveler museum is clad in elass and stone, which give the binding tar fess warmth than the wood-walled Houston muscu. The Bevelors rough-cur red-sandstone Gladding ithoush similar tothe stone ot Basel’s cathedrals particularly untortanate, in much the same was thar the textured travertine veneer at the Gert  Center looks the vers expensive petrined shingles  Modernist architects whe began bs usm dagh tech desizn— mcluding James Sorling, Meter, and Prno—apparently telt obhizated teccontess that the stone surtaces of cherr hice: buidings dida’t bear loads. fe make that rather irrelevant pom even more obvious, the mortar custenniriiy used to bond masonry was emphatically omitted in these designs, by which we are to understand char this support tuncron os pertormed bs underlsing metal structures. Che result thin apphane effect is apparent im the squared columns of the Beveler’s colonnade. The sandstone facing heahrens the deluxe auraot the Basel pasvihen by sceming less an integral clement than actopoot thedine garnsh. Despite Phin’s wssertion thar these two Private Museum chents Ti same wavs. care alike.” the seriking con trast between the momastic cain ot the Mend and the worldly sheen ofthe Beveler might best be ascribed te the very different tempera ments of thor respective patrons: on one hand the selt-confident hetress wath ber biebly Galdvated taste tor exquisite plamness: and on the other the self-made art merchant with a desire tor rich mate: rials to advertise his business aeumen and memonahze his protes sional prosperity.  Phe potentiat rsh materials base tor undermining Modern art was torescen and avonded by the espatrate American artit Gy Twombly, seme oof Whose best parmnongs are permanenth housed in Pano’s ascene burgewellike Cy Lwonibh Galler of tygz-rye in Plenston, Commiusstoned by Donumdgue de Merl and erected across the street trom the Ment Collestion, the Tsombl: Gallery ts at once distenet from vet Complementary teats larger neashber, Lwortbh, the archi tat wrote, Tis a moddest person who. when asked to os press a preter ere amon the vanous desis, ahwass opted for the most tragal, and least ustentaguus Vnoorter fromm at stone bad beer proposed, but he preterred raw cone rete”  Moth the exception ot Frank Gehry  the Mend bas probably inspired more art rasttutienus te onmulate it  srenhon Miuscan Bilbao, 
iwhether through designs by Prano himself or other architects! than any other contemporary model, Indeed it could be argued chat the seennnghy uiversal ambinon ot cultural patrons fo) commission “the next Bilbao” had less to de with the architectural distinction of the Gehry prototype than it did with the extraordinary pubhaigs and Inercased tourism it prompted. Pew chents considered the crucial role they thetmselves would play ie the fortuitous outcome of a commis Mon, as if an architet of proven talent were certain to produce a budding of guaranteed excellence tume atter ume. Indeed. Prano’s Supposedly intallible touch for small museum buildings was seon shown to he vulnerable te the Competitive priorities aha chent. Prine’s great tre ot small museam butdings—all. remarkably, on Texas culnunated with bis Nasher Sculpture Center of rygg- 2.3 in Dallas (sce ustration tsb. Raymond Nasher, a Dallas shopping center developer, began Collecang sculpture in the mid reece because, as he cald me, he telt chere was greater value to he found in thar medium than in painting, otten borne out by the wide ditterences in price between procures and sculptures by the same artist. even an acknowledged master, Nasher used the large scale outdoor sculptures he bought co adda touch of chiss to his shopping malls, but aided by the discern eve ot fis waite. Patss. he steadily edited. refined. and inereased his holdings antil che collecnoen was ultimately regarded as the finest and orost Comprehensive pn private bands. dm rags, soon after Nasher turned seventy-ftye. Dallas aie leaders, cages to keep the more than three hundred works in the community, arranged tora  Prestusous downtown site next tothe Dallas Art Museum, and the  collector chose Pranc to design the $7 million gablers. which he von served as his mentortal  Pino's scheme for the Nasher Sculpture Center has a more pro nounced € lassieal teching than any at his other small museums, even the svinmetrical Pwombly. The Nasher is composed asa row at tive  identical rectangular bays with ecoth arching roothnes that meet at  the juncture of cadhoumt. The rhechime cegularits of the single-story  Philip Johnson's soe ted Batict School Pered ot the earh cages,  However such Gaiuparikons vanish ance one enters the Nashee's ute non aa imcontestable bik pome of Phare’s career,  Although sculprure does nor aeed the same deiree of protectant from liehe thar works i most other medtums do, dluntnation none: theless satin’ mporninge in how a theee dimensional object is per- served withut an cnelosed archiresninad vodame. Here Plime devised aperker mnovatiye light titer svstem to address both the particular  chitany cordiqnsms of Poxas and the specie needs ef the artifacts on  display. althouab boone danger could rely upon his late engineering partner, Peter Rive, who had heen instrumenral in pertecane the tliumunation of the Meath bor the Nasher Pring desamned a series of wht parted ment skvhebe panels composed of raws of hollow, cod shaped spheres with round apertures at the top and bottom of cach owed. Doe openmes. signth off-center were posinoned so that vntense Tight trom che seth would be detlected. amd cooler fight from the gotth could conten The strates works so well that there ts not the shrebtesc saanstren of artihee. and regardless ot the time of das or seasat the works on display scom suspended within a sertable ether that shea. off scurptuires of overs period te wretter advantage than any other Miodirrwaiiers. As the phaowright lohn Guare sad of the Nashooin ler o Ga derniaciziac, Phe lightanive che impression Daas secre the arnt. crimana! pnfesuion.”  Althounth the materials. fishes. and detailing at the Nasher are tarbiore daunted those ar the Merl they de not seem grit (tous watvs, ts those atthe Bescler do. Workane closely with Prine moesedry step ot the Pratact, Noohker on several OM ASTON obyes ted tha tnteboitics He tele seoutd undermine the serenity and: harntens he wanted the fintstied bounding teccmibods > specitalls arr condiening,  eqepment that was te fave been placed on the root ot ane of the 
bays. and a loading dock thar would have been cut into one of the building's side elevations, In both instances, the benetactor autho- oved aherations chat added imlions to che proyece’s tinal cost: Prane hid the oltending machinery inside a fess visible, rootless ground-level englosure. and added a huge bydraulie lite ar street level by which tricks could descend, out or sight, to make delivenes and pickups on the museum's subterranean level. Dhis level ot gentility was different trom Dannmgue de Meml’s Zen-hke renunciation of ostentagon— expensive as that could alsa he —burt the Nasher is the closest anyone has come te creating the clusive “neat Merl”  Phe vapanes of architec tucal patronage are such chat there are never any guarantees, However there seemed litle doubt that in tdeal paring of desitner and clene had been achies cd inthe wagumission for Prano’s roe in New York. At$ro6 mil han. the Morgan's budget was $36 million larger than the Nasher’s,  Morgan Ltbrars and Museum of 232  though green the Components of che bieger, amenity -heasy, techmally complicated scheme in New York —where construction casts were far higher thanan Texas—the ditterence wars less than it scemed. Morgan otfials asked Pring to replace Voorsanger Qo Mules steel and glass ATTHINV Of dug T—baas with anew strug ture fo unite the insucuden’s three carher buildings, afboo the same city blogk. the Victorian brow nstone Morgan mansion on bast ycrh Street and Madison Avenue; Charles Follen MoKum’s ongmal f, Pretpont Morgan Library of pyoz-1goé, directly south of the house. on Fase yorh Street: and Benpamin Wistar Moros’s brary addition of poss. to the cast ofthe MeKim building.  Pounders of private muscums Ihe the Mend and the Nasher have been faulted ter competing with public institutions ina period when privatization has become such an alarms trend nm se many other areas of our national lite. Mitch less has been sand about public muse- ums) seemingh contagious Compulsion to imitate each orher, to such anextent chat unique defining qualities are lostin the process. A clay:  se cxample of that selt destructive tendenes wats the transmeyritied  Morvan. Prino cannot be Blamed tor the Morgan's detiand that he give the seperable institution all che appurtenanves Dominique de Meni banned trom her gatleny: the Morgan's new restauriits, audi todum, pitt shop. and rentable “event” spaces were all added to Ingrease Gheome. Further comphoating Puine’s desin dilemina was the Morgan's insistence that he rerain the institution's low-rise char acter, Alrheugh he valianedsy tried to satsty his chent’s contradictory requnrements and sonccaled as much as he Could bs digemy deep mite Manhattan's bedrock. the ar hiteers ll proportioned elevation draw: INgs ave critics Cause tor alarm as soon as thes were revealed.  It anvehing. the € lassigal undertones of the Nasher would have been even more appropriate forthe New York institution, given its history, haldings, and progeammina. Inexpheably, Prano chose an International Styvfe aesthetie with a corporate teeling antithetical ro the domestic calbert quite baronial atmosphere ot Prerpont Morgan's marble Neo: Renaissance falaccettes Pranc’s main materials were also uncharac: Teristialls nustudged. notimerels the beme- painted metal paneling he thought would unise the exiting budldings’ vaned masonry surtaces more plausibly than an one kind of stone mught, but also the large expanses of glass thar toed the new atrium with hicsh, unmediited light. Aran inaugural tesepron an that space. a curator of another truseam Pritio was desening fooked around and declared “Ah, Prine, the Master ot Paghr'” Phat indeed he was at the lucid Menil and numinoius Nasher buratthe malbiike Maraan atrium he scemeal lit te more than a miscast glazier.  Phe aphorism thar success fas many fathers bat tadure as an orphan does not apply to architecture, However much a genius an architect may be. credit for asreat burding ty zenenlhy given to one commanding: patron, where a poor outcome a orten the taut ot anirresalute comnomttec. Indeed the starthog faidure of this project: - which fike the Ment and the Nasher wanted neither toe finan cal  resources ner proven tilent—seemed most attabucable to the cheats 
desire to compete wath bigger museums, in vain pursuit of which Pianos particular gets were squandered and the Morgan's character dinunished.  PianeS small muscum burhlings have been among bis most satisty- ing works, but he has ate worked ofa garngintiain scale rarely avail able toarchitcts ot his artisne inchoations. Certainly the masterpiece among his targe works as the Kansar International Air Terminal ot reSS—paog Osaka. Phough catredd stations were among the mayor architectural projeets onthe carl) Modern Mlovement, most areports were una wountabls: bark woth ates exceprions suchas Pero Sadan mens Trans World Aerlines fermuieal ot case) tues at Kenoeds Aur portin New York and bis Dulles Intertatienal Virportot pag s= rap 3 in Chantlly, Virginia dn hes Karas airport, Piang attered a perua  SIVO TOT TEIOTE ot the ENOHCTACN TE ar travcl macht Teh  AINE more HTT: ination wer apphed toate crowd faolties fo say nothing of dnght service teselt:,  Budlton an arotcal stir d on Osaka Bay the Katsde airport is en  closed by a waselike Ganapy ofS  podentical stainless-steel panels Phe Pillow oie. Gonttieus root and wall Gonmuraiten, as the meta: phoralls inchiiced Prine wrote, was stanested by the anontilous oft  shore site and bis first Sling seat coor wath his chiet collaborators:  Architects aire creatures of the lamb. Phere maternads rest en the ground Theos themselves belong essentially to the world ot materiality fio this scuse Etech atspradh, perhaps because of my vourhtul passione: the harbor canparirs structures, loads sus pended trom cranes, reflections im water, Aboard thar boat we tried to think ah corms ot water and win cather than hinds ot air and wand, clongated, lghtwemwht torn. desizned to withstand the earthquakes towdhigh the areas prone: of water sea, tides; ot hiquid forms ii movement, ciens, waves, Mian of the wdeas  that shaped the proper were bern that das on the sea,  The great root ot Ramsars mile dong deparmire area andilares ner only laterally but alse lengthwise. tremioa bouht of about tarts teer atthe muidpotit ot the structure ro about theteen feet at its (wo ends That arching sistas the ends of which one Gainmor see trom the center, acs metiphor tor the curvature ot the earth. Phe lihoscnsht but exepuonall reosthent enginectinmag of Pranic’. structure was severe  tested wrebin months at ip operuna. The catastrophic Kubo carch  qtake ot Jamuary rows lett thy Kansan terminal mtact. and ins archy  fect Was able soe uitin words remunscentat those with which brank Lloyd Wright cclebrated the survival ot his newly opened Emperial Hotetan Tokso ater the even gore disastrous Rante quake and tre op rea. As Plang wrote, sourmting Tike a chissial Japanese poct,  Lhe tars ot the eerents topoled the oak. but did mor break the light and sepple reed."  However the sure grasp of colossal scate that Prine demonstrated ithe wsolated Ratisat site was notuibaiss te be tou is his Large ubbar complexes. His breless Cate Internationale ot tuS@-tuws i Dvors—a Mop seiner” redevelopment af ald targragtds aban the banks ot the Rhone—indudes offtes buildings. comferetee cen ters, a hotel a casine. a cheater, and a mupcum of Contemporary art devondesen onthe pudse magne Cawdriness ot the Pompidou Center  Adnutedh otis care tiderd ter massie ci phigaing se hemes con served TT esti stroke tor rath the mipros sation foe of nuiphbor hoods thar hase evealved over cine and through necd The faude on Lyons max have fad more te do weth cis ottongs whe preanoted: an oserk aribitious preest than wath ity architect Adee rse @Canoniny,  wind sextaloosti|es bevend a desniper'’s Controf can saboraa ever thie  Bart the peobierns  Mostowetlententioncd code improascment etter Prune Gantranted an Berting Bis bagees: and most challensig: city plammng profest. showed: well hetore the Morgan. and oon ii urban swwalt- chow even the best andhitccts can bo raphaated tse beuies con  trains tether essai best roe la atearns 
Prano’s atrempr arone-shor place-making in the redevelopment ot Berlin was perhaps doomed from the start because of the freebooting trenss that engulfed thy aite’s post-reumineation bunting boom. Begun wtug2, the Pordumer Platz proyect was sponsored by Debris ithe real estate subsadians of Darmler-Benz1, whose high-rise headquarters Prine: destencd as the vertical anchor of this new quarter which was meant to cransterm the farmer ne man’s land berween the old bast and West cones, As master planner tor the ensemide ot ftteen brildinps and the archi tectoreimhe ct tchent. Plane also supervised a roster of international scars brought ito desin the seven other parts. Phis was the kind at scale dnd contol thararchiteets usually can ony dream at. But should thes ¢  In aomoment ot commendable candor ata rege architecture cone ference. Paine betrayed some of the same musgeings thar would Liter  be expressed by critics ot the Potsdamer Platz propest:  Making a scheme dor Berlin is an impossible pab, although | would never sav this in trontot my chents. A civilized person woalled urbane. evenin bnghsh. and when we reter to thes term, we mmediatels think about all the beautital cines that have ever been. We know. however that they were not designed. Dhes were and sill area produetot organi vrowch, When vou walk around these croes, wharas beauatul is the very face that whar you are looking at has not been designed. bnstead et Tepre: sents the matenaliation of the miflions of lite stores that have been enacted within ther respeetive walls across centuries, When son are asked ta design a piece of ait, even as hetle as titted buildings. tots really dithoulr, because sou don't have the ome todo sucha thing. However bem an architect vou still accepe the challenge to doit... Berg an architest, especsalls When sou are asked te design a piece of a cits, is ike being an acrobat However if sou have grown up oan the Furepean  hunanise atmosphere. vou have anet beneath vou,  Such “nets” as Plano muvht have imagined ro exisc in Berlin were not satets devices inthe hands ot fis tellow humanises but eather snares nthe grasp ot hard nosed realestate operators, whe made the atv the viddiest speculative development Gisina of the ryvos. Heart telt pledues had been made te retain the old architectural haracteris tes of Berlin—whih were ditteult enough te ascertain, given the rumous state afse muchot the es urban fabrie and dust as quickly forpotten. Tn response wll too ty prot ot those ot his Coprotesstotals, Piano tasled to contront the tact thar his sponsor's brict tor the devel opment at Potsduimer Phlitz called tora concentration ot Burling. sinipls Toes bag, Coter dense . wid tine ereedtils exploitative seh ONT StH re centometer, Phe scheme dit not admit cither the human qualities or the tracetul ase at asite Chae aotine fis best work. tro Houston oo Osaka. The upward thrust ot che Potsdamer Platz scheme was nor ori contrary to Berkars histor mediaierise sade. whieh is much like thaced Paris, puns tuated bere and there with taller public monuments and open Spaces It Wols alse UBT ONSATPN TD sprawiing metropolis that approaches the Lind area at Pos Angeles. “Pfoweven as Pring said. “berg an architest. con stl ascept the chatlemee to do i”  Unrold harm bas been iithyted on the budt environment by archi teatsoocmer tor che seated thar thes wall agcepe doy Comrnssiany moomatter how tundamentalls masconucesed, am the deluded bebet that thes wall beable te doo better poboot in chan ais other desiznet. The sarrest umae toocemente from Prins fo2..0 5 square meter aoctoonbabrant Berlin extrasaganza—wath the asad cus -within aes amis otoettices, houstin shops, cestanciits. a theater od a wasine—was thar ot the buue. globe shaped IMS cmema msertea mite one af the wndded. chiss walled superblocks ormunalls ig nuded forettoes. In clewation. this Comtbananion of celostial sembedismn and fuchdian geometry brings te miid such vistomars Schemes as Fuenne Tous Boullee’s (eneraps ter Newrorbot oo od Dearth Decidio 's  Denm Insetute of taac tor Mloscess Tn seal, Prana’. yaant caed 
sphere seemed more an emblem of the dithcultics even idealistic wreobitects Gan fall saci tof ches work aint ther finer inpilses. Atter the turn of the mullenmiim, some observers posed Prato as the profession's anteGebry savior an architectural composer ot Chas: sealnnen capable of halting a slide toward creatine Gavophony. Aad although Prano was indeed at his best ercating intimate museums that were the architectural equivalent ot Chamber must, the orchestral scale ot his great Japanese airport encouraged the hope he would also bring torth sustained symphomie equivalents of has enteancie smaller  SOTAPOSITIONS  16  DANTEL LIBESKIND/ DAVID CHILDS  “WHEN THE GODS wish to punish us.” Oscar Wilde wrote in An fdeal Husband, “they answer our prayers.” That rings trac in arg hitecture, Whose modern history is replete with cagerly contested publie com: missions that hase turned our to be anything but the apotheoses their Manners frst imagined them to be, Rarely in the past century have the most memorable buildings resulted trom compeutions, ne matter how promoting the rosters of partaipants The ress contest for a new Cuca Pebtete headquarters bas been best remembered for the losing entries ot leading earhy Mlodernist arehitests such ay Walter Gropros, Pliel Saarinen, and Brine Taut. Indeed, Adolt Loos’s design tora Tribune tower in the tarm ot a colossal Dorie column is tar more famous todas thantthe teprd Neo Gothic pastiche by Ras mond Flood and John Mead Howells that was Constructed  The moist coveted CeO ission of the Jate twentieth SCTTUry, the Getty Center in bos Anueles. did fitele to cihance the reputation ot Richard Morn whose dimited powers of mvention were overwhelmed by the pittless denhinds ofa progectot such preat mnautude, resources, and durapen. The ronosanen and expansion ofthe Muscum ot Mod- ern Artin New York was anether example. Vtrer a widely pubhorsed competition in pues thatinchided several nsing stars among the arg he  tectural generanon then at midcarcer— amon them Rem Koofhaas, 
Jacques Herzog and Prerre de Meuron, and Tod Willams and Bulle Isen—the ob went to an older litle Known museum specialist, Yoshio Taniguchi, A minimalist and a pertectionist, Tariguc ha discon ered, to his eventaal dismiaa, that in America, working on the mam- moth scale of the new toMy. he Could not attain the Irieal deloaus of his smaller and more finely cratted burldings im fapan,  But because of the underlying political implications, no architescural compennon has ever approached that tor the rebuilding of the World Trade Center sire in New York in sheer volume of press coverage and heightened level ot publ expectations, Renturkably, the architcuns whe were awarded the Commissions tor the fowl components of the Ground Zero site~-Dantel Lirbeskind in 2oc3 tor his "Memory boundagons”  master site plan ot prismatic high-mse burldings and angular plazas  see Hustragen cob and Mihach Arad ain 2ocg tor his minimalist “Retlecting Absence” memorial—all but vanished soon atrerw ard.  Pictures on The Nete York Tones wordlessly told the stars of those diappeannyg aces, On the morning atter Libeskind’s unexpected tin phoover a crowded Held of more tamous and prolific competitors in February 2633.4 photo ot the exultane victor beaming wend a sea ct Gamoring pourtialises topped the lares’s tront page, Phis image—hke one of chose unheralded Metropolitan Opera debuts the Newspaper oft Record tikes to put on page one every so often—represented an extraordinary Goatercal of star status. But what had bibeskind accu ally wons The Lower Maghattan Desclopment Corporation a rie i, which sponsored the call tor proposals, had insisted tron the first that it was conducting nota competition bat an Innovative Design Studs in which parnupants were to follow the Este Ss keneral guide: lines and had to accept that their plans were subject to revisions,  Phe Taaes giveth. and the Pontes taketh away. The cruel astea- tion that accompanied an article entitled "The Incredible Shrinking Dantel Libeskind” on the tront page ot the Sunday Arts & Letsure  secniom in June 2oog showed the diminutive architect silbonetted  aROse an inimense von at white space. [twas a graphic contirima- non ot his drastically reduced role in the epochal projeer he ote behesed te be his alone. Six months after that prctorial gibe, the paper rand progress reporton the memorial, an anodyne desi that secured the commussion tor che unknown Arad, whose scheme had several features in wommmon wath proposals hy other finalists. Those shared elements included a pan ot scpulchral sunken chambers outlining the “tootpniats” ot the Twin Tawers. scrimlike watertalls, and inserip- tons of the names of the dead. all set within park taking ap about one quarter af the sixteen acre site. Arad was awarded the job only after he acceded te certam stipulations. Considered too voung and inexperienced to handle the prestgrous task on his cave at chirty tour ithe same ave Renzo Pring was when the French government entrusted hin and Righard Rovers to design the Pompidou Center mn Parisi, he Was instructed bs the Pstte to ally himselt with a major landscape architect. Poter Walker. and an established architectural firm, Davis Broadly Bond  The Tretes apdate included a photo of Governor George Pataki and Miasor Michael Bloomberg examining the latest version of the memo- rial mode L which bad a dandscape treatment signincainely ditterent tram the simpler one tirst suggested by Arad. The othcials were shown with Walker and the new associate architec, Mas Bond. Another umden- ched neure was almost completely hidden behind the governor: the marginalized winner visbly missing in acnon Pike the unlucks Libes- hind. wie was alse pushed aside bs has apported colliboritor Mad might well attest to the trurh of Wilde's mordant words.  Smoke had not vet stopped isang trom the weeekage ot che Twat Lowers betore opportunistic architects fas well as carnest amateurs! began desimping replicements. Phe value ot Capitalizing forthwith on that restorative rmputse was nat loston Max Proterch, a New York art and architectural drawings dealer who, wathin month at the dis  aster, Sought design proposals tor Ground Zero from ras architects. 
Fewer than halt of those invited responded. Some theaught ian decency soon atter the tragedy to contemplate rebuilding: others no doubt shunned this hypothetical exercise rn expectanion of bey vonsidered for the real thing, and were foath to give away Cher ideas prematurely, The show, which opened early in aca2 atthe Proteteh Gallery in Chebea, was greeted with predu table tintare in the press,  Although many of the fitty-cazht projects i bich the dealer quickly sold en blog to the Library of Congress for $4c8rgoo were visuals striking. all suttered from: being no more than supertisnl images, deverd of the functional underpinnings that necessarily intorm the conception and exccunon of any building— namely, wha well it be used tor and who wall pay tort? It was thar same lack at both tune. qonal detninon and financial realism that led to the disputing Ground Zerosaga, Phos anip improvisational organization, hasty mounting, and empty imagery, the Protetch exhibinon can be seen ay unintention ally prophets of the creative Rasco that was about to ensue in bower Manhattan,  For pure presctence, no commentater came close to Ada lL outse Huxtable, unequaled among her tellow architecture cates in ber bom expertence of urban planning wsues and her tearlessness in speaking trankly about the Conjunctien of political power an hire tural ambi tion, and the common good. Wrong in The Wall Street boreal less than a week atter the attack, she turetold the Course of events with the  prophens accuntey of amodern-day Cassandra:  {New York is}acity incapable of the Large, appropriate gesture inthe public interest tit costs too much...  Tt the asual seenariae as followed, the debate will lead to a “solution” in which principle is lost and an epee opportunity squandered. With the best intentions the Mumeipal Art Society,  a conscientious watchder of the cin ’s urban quality, will  Anneanee | compeduon to determine what should be done with  the site. The results will make a mice little exhibioon, and dis- cussions and lectures will be held. Allthis wall be anored bs che masers and shakers making bee building plans under the hanner ot physical and symbole reconstruction. Phere will be a fuss in the press. with letters to the editor, pro aind con. City Bhalla split political decision between areed and lors, will Game out tor the builders and a memorial—a monument ora small park,  something tinancialh inottensive in the Larger scheme ot thas.  Although Bloomberg would be detrly ourtlanked by Pataki—who controlled both the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey rowner of the World Trade Center site: and the bibs . which he ere ated to oversee the rebuilding Huxtable was uncannily Gorreet in her general predicnens. Lip service was duly pard in pubhe to the higher tdeais ot Commemoration and aesthetics, giving citzens the talse hope that Mayor Rudulph Guiliiors aidal appeal tor a tsear- ing. beautitul memorial” would be eealized. Bur none ot the people who could have assured such an lustrous cutcome—above all the pohtsally turtive Patak: and the site's less-rhan-adealinti: leaseholder the real estace developer Larry Sifverstetn—kad anv inchaation te de setbitmeant endangering the coonermis status que  Publishers alsa cashed te Gash in on the unprecedented publics surrounding the rebuilding ot Ground Zero, Among the first hooks to appear an 2ceg, were the architecture cage Philp Nobels Sevtees Acres—tracing the redevelopment process up to fanuary of that vear when Arad won the memorial competition and Saotane Chitra was named architect tor the World frade Center Transportation Hib hy Pore Authority flar- and Paul Goldbercer’s Cp tron: Zens in which he covered much che same wround. Nobels iiterpretanon, irreverent and skeptical, was much better suited te the realities of dre subject than Goldberger’s tamilar establishment-tremdlly arccde.  Goldberuer’s wrionw—duriae bas decades as the archites ture Ceti 
ot Lhe New York Tones and later at The New Yorker—alwass Liked a discernible moral center, and although in his Ground Zero book he displaved less ot the maddening cquivocanen thac had become his most defining characteriso, the targets he picked bere were, true to hus tastion, quite casy ones and ublikely to har him trom the corr dors of power. € p from Zero, though dutitully detailed with usetul tacts that Goldberger gained through his easy access to high-ranking sources who never doubted his essential complrary, was less revealing than Nobel's book was, and somehow made the most dramatic archi tectural story ot modern tunes scem dull.  Alo playing to the pubhe's insatiable interest in Ground Zero, though with a ovens no publisher could be accused of were a series of sham public torums wf the sort Huxtable had foreseen. which in- cluded a parrot “2st Century Town Meetings” organived by a non- profit organization called Amerisaspeaks. As a disitlusioned observer described the gullible audience atone of those events te Nobel. This isthe starvota thousand people drinking Shirley Temples and smoking cand cigarettes, and they all think ches ‘re ina back room with cher Scotch and crac.” Such “partapatons 7 events—at which inonbinding! votes were taken to determine the public's preterences among the pre posed sehemes—oncouraged the vain behet that average cinzens could play acrole in shapmy offal pohew at Ground Zero. Indeed, not since the Competition tor the Vietnam Veterans’ Memorial in Wash Ington (wo decades earher had se many well-meaning people felt thes had such a personal stake ina work of commemoranee architecture.  Among the Gonstitucneres that sought a role at Ground Zero were lowal residents whe wanted a return to normal aemhborhood life as SOOT AS posstble: VaTlOuUs CIVIC Braups who sought to turn the Gatas trophe inte an epportumty tor urban improvement; and survivors ot the disasters victims, the most Clamorous and unassailable of the special interest groups, Known as" Che Families” (which made some  of there hapless opponents think of that term inmits underworld sense:  The Famihes’ shall in gaming press coverage tor their demands and appealing to popular sentiment was unanticipated by polinarans, whe suites learned that they openly challenged the aggrieved bereaved at their own perl, More than halt the dead ot September re leteno tden- tittable remains, and their survivors came to regard the World ‘Trade Center site. and particulars the two handred-toot-square footprints ut the Twin Towers, asa bteral cemetery. Phey denounced any attempt te disturb those toundations, and often expressed themselves with emo tional outrage. As one activise widow asked aban Mie heanm. “How can we build on top ef their souls that are erving?” Thouph the Fam- thes were instrumental in forcing the tederal government to respond with an otheral report on the attacks and an overhaul of the nation’s intelligence agencies, even they could nor keep the abyss inviolate.  No one dared te draw comparisons openly between Ground Zero and analogous sites of civic destruchon abroad. Many cries in Furope and Lapan would look quite ditterene if places where thou sands of innocent noncombatants died during World War Ho had been lett vacantoas memorial. Though the ciwiban casualaes ar Ground Zero were without equalin Amenean history, the death tall in count less urban bombardments iv decades earlier was vasdy higher. Yet co present such an indelicate argument atthe time of the World [rade Center compention would fave ben considered scarcely bess trea- sonous than to suggest thar America’s military response to the atracks of September pi was likewise out of proportion te the otterse. fo say nothing of misdirected, mismanaged, and self-destructive.  Phe bizarrely thactuatng pace of the World Trade Center redevel opment ametable—which accelerated and slowed wath litde apparent outward Jewe—had much to do with behind the scenes manipula pons hy Pataki and his tunctenaries, whe damimated both the Port Authorits and the PMipe, Phe temporizing of some Pantha apporntees was intended to minimize the ettects that architectural decnions  might have on his sos reelection prospeets. The governor—whe like 
George Wo Bush was outshone in the days after September or by ”Amenca’s Mavor” Rudolph Giuliant - wanted to be seen as moving ahead with the eeconstruction, baton too fast lest any part of it stir up the Families and become a politeal habilty, Phus Pataki’s hurry up-and- wait longueurs were followed be ampessibhy caght deadlines This errane rhythm resulted in onterior design and plansing solutions that nught not have been accepted had there been more time for thoughttul dehberaton.  Parakis race tor achird term in Albany was not his final politcal concern, however [wo vears later, the 20254 Republian Navenal Convention was scheduled to be held in New York—a city reviled by the partys “hase” of evangclied! evtremists—less than neo weeks betore the third anniversary ot Seprember on. The governor who cap: ttalied on the tragedy as shamelessly as national Republican leaders, wanted the cornerstone of the central Ground Zero: skvscraper— which, in the Orwellnin: spurt of the times, he mamed the Preedine fower—to be lad bs that date. Silverstern caused a furor when he blurted out, whether knowledgeably: or not, that the ceremony was planned to commde with the Convention itself: he had to retrace his renark, and the Consecration was carried out carher that summer to avon charges thatat was berg exploited for partisan purposes,  The mosc vivid personahey to emerge trom the saga of rebuilding Ground Zero was Daniel Libeskind. His rather premature 2c 4g auto: biography, Breakor Groteid. may well become for architecture butts what Alma Mahler Gropius Wertel’s rus8 memoir tad the Bridge Is Potes ts tor musi dovers—an enduring wimp classic. Despite their authors’ vers different hte stortes, Mabler and Libeskind share an un ntynated sel regard Coupled with a stummng bik ot self-awareness, Although that combination of tarcissisth Chats is tar trom uncommon hamong architects as much as artic. advenruresses!, itis rare tor books that are so transparcads exeraes in spin contrel to show oft  their authors so untavorably  Libeskind’s unfantife belet thar the irresistible toree of huis person alievinitselt aan overcome anv adversity leaps trom almost every page ot his hte story, which at mimes reads like a post-Ereudian case hators, The disointed narrative—itis hard to belese the architect collabo, rated with a protesstenal writer—lurches back and torth with disori- entmg speed. We zoom unsequentiall trom bode, where he was born In rage, the son ot Polish-fewish parents who survived Hitler and then Stalin's gulag; to his tamubs’s vears in Iseied and lus saccess as an accordion prodigy: to New York and his hte there as a teenager and architecture students to Berlin and his Jewish Museum ot rg 8u- rues sce itustramion roan which brought him international recognitien when he was aver tittys and back co New York for his Litest, least edie fying struggle.  Though Trheskind wrote with what same may see as a gaileless, openhearted Gander os uistractive to read hes self-serving account side by side with Nobels gossips vet credible versions af some ot the same invidents. The architect's wrte, Nina—alse hes public relations direc tor business manager and all-purpose adviscr—hecame known it architectural circles asa tearsome character and a major agent ot her husband's advancement. which he wratetully acknowledged several times in his repetitive teat, Phere can be lietle doubt thatthe couple's Sosy phean persistence Carried the das tar them in Berlin, where thes sunpls retised to acept the mpending: deteatot his scheme atseveral points during its troubled, decade lonpeyestatian, when i was subicet to numerous bucaucrate delays and protracted debates over its deti ninen and centent,  On Seprember a, 2208. Libeskind’s fewish Museum reapencd te the publy atter the long-awarted instalation of is exhibits. The inten: nonalis dithcalt and inhosparible airehiteeture made its surprising popular appeal -cc attracted approximately yoreooo visitors during the theee vears betore any displays were ostalled=aall the more  remarkable. Although the tuctan like appearance of the muscum’s 
jagged exterior surtaced in vertical panels of ¢ing and scored with a web of violent angular openmys, clearly alludes to the Nazis’ indus: tralizanon of mass murder one need not know thar Pibeskind derived his irregular ground plan trom a smashed and tragmented Star of David. The tecling of impending doom is accentuated by the proximity ot the menacing building to the gracetul Baroque Goure house that tormerly housed the Berlin Museum, and which one now enters betore moving into Tibeskind’s Chamber ot moderna horrorns— the ascent to Poightenment Gomung betore the descentinto barbarism,  The marche—the caretully directed route through a sequence of architectural spaces—was one of the cherished pringples of the Beaux-Arts tradition. Transtormed in quite ditterent wavs by such Modenust gemuses as Weitht. Le Corbusier. and Kahn. it was insuth tenth) employed by the end ot the peenceth centurs, a paradoxical apse ina period of so called desanation architecture. Libeskind, however, turned the ournes through his Jewish Miuscum inte an mnphed narrate ot the Helo crust. Phathe had done so without ans of the artitacts, words, or symbols that other such memorials depend onto prompt ateemonornab response —untl the museum's additian, in zoo. of Lamentably misconcenved extibtos and enureh unnecessary wall labels instructing visitors precisely what they should be teeling at various points along the way—attered retroactive proot that he had ereated anattecting, i impertect. work of architecture,  The subterranean passage that links the Jewish Muse's old and new buddings announces a departure trom che usual Gamventions of arrival, and serves as an etteetiyy dierentng deve. Reemerging within the Libeskind budding, one is quickly contronted by a mula. photty of possible routes, at first seemingly random, then revealed as drabolally premeditated, lke the Nazi genocide itself. inthis network of concrete walled. fluorescent lyghted corridors, the architect has Imposed a series of seven “voids” to emphasize entrapment within hs  metaphorical construct, forcing: the sisitar fe retrace steps, double  back again, and quickly feel lke an animatlostin amaze Iwo esis then present themselves. [he steep. narrow, and oppressive Star of Contin ity leads up to peo floors at gallery space, butin essence if goes nowhere, terminating atthe vers top uma blank walla scada regad trom hell,  Phe sccond apparent escape route is abe nee that ac all, but leads ta the museum's holy ot hohes, the Holocaust Void. Phe need to memorialize incomprehensible tragedies has become a commonplice of the modern world. and here Libeskind rose to that challenge by suggesting the very depths ot grief, Besond a starthagh: heasy door lies a dimly lighted space. sunk in such crepuscular gloom that one’s evesanvolontirh rise to the small sliver ot davlight overhead. This angular four-sided concrete Chamber its long, narrow foorprint tar smaller than the roams ninety toet hehe, gives one the sensation of beng sunk atthe bottom of amineshate. Uhere as nothing to grasp onto cmononally here—this os the aboot amanmadism at esistental despair—and even the hracketlike service ladder that climbs one wall commences tar above human reach. Rarely has architecture camvesed nothingness with more visceral umpact. and Libeskind’s masterseroke was to have done so una way that the general public teleic very deeply, even betore thes were directed to tee! this or that by wall labels,  Phe Libeskinds’ abihts to withstand the brunsing treatment thes recerved in the German capital may fase made them avercontident about the challenges thes were about ta face in New York. In Berlin, thes fnessed the politics of victimhood more successtully chan the Sep- tember tt bamulies Would ater dein New York, Letom no one forget that his parents were Hedocaust survivors, the Libeskinds seized the moral birh ground and intlucneed pabhe opimon so ettectively that atter reunthcation, when the overextended Rohl government slashed ity cultural badgers in taver eta host of urgent socal programs, the Jewish Muscum: proceeded nonetheless, becauye niiny Germans feared anew nanonal disenime at chat much discussed ssmbol of contriton  were canceled, or even further delayed 
There was no such card to playin New York, where the t theskinds encountered a nemesis whose polincal insaners and tenacity far out stripped even theirs—Dasid Childs. design principal of Skidmore, Owings & Mernilisoseh Childs was born in Princetonin rag i. stud: ied at Yale, and rese co promimence atter he moved trom scnt'’s Wash- ington branch to the tirm's New York ottice during the pasos burlding boom. A cool operator with a history of Changing stvies when in was useful to his advancement, Childs brought to mind the successtub con: tormist architect Peter Keatingan Lhe borertambead. In contrast, the Libeskinds” tacties—audacious, but impulsive and amatcursh—were reminiscent of Borne and Civde. bor all cher bray ado, howes er, the architectural Couple was noomatch for Childs. a consummate strate: Bist without Peer among his KONTOMIPOT TIES.  Sw weeks betore September ri. soar, when Silverstem signed his ninetv-nine-vear lease on the World Prade Center, Childs beran Preparing renovation plans tor the three decade-old Twin Towers. In the immediate attermath of the disaster, the architest was asked to rebuild has chene’s smaller 7 World Trade Center building, adjacent to the main complex and also destroyed on the tard day While “goo- goos” turban plinming slang tor high mindcd “good government” advowates, deriving fram "goods goodies” Cconspired to toist a first- rate architest on the aesthetwaliy inditterent developer Childs was secretly preparing an alternative Freedom Tower design that Silver stern tatended to offer in place of any offaalls sancnoned scheme that did not meet his demanding proht projeenons.  As Childs polled the rug out tram under Libeskind bit by humuibat ing bir, Ground Zero’s designated master planner Continued te deny that he had lose control ot the rele chat catapulted him co interna nonal tame, Dong ater he had nothing lett to dose and everything te maint he resigned ina ficet redemptive indignation, Fibeskind clung tothe pasion that he was still invelved with the Freedom lower  unnl he appeared less stubborn than delusional in truth, owas he  who had overstepped the guidelines of the Innos ative Design Siidy in the first place. fustas nature abhors a vacuum, soa arebirect as rte sisnbly drawn to an attractive absence. Because the Ground Zere briet way so ill-defined, the more enterprising of the campeutors in the Pita S buriedly arranged studs took itapon themselves to fll in the most conspicuous blanks.  One semitnalse who adhered to the regulations and accordingls presented a plan that looked unresolved in contrast to the others— Rover Dutt, who headed a Skidmore. Owings & Merrill team chat worked independenth of ( hilds—came to rue his tumidits, and with- drew betore the winner was chosen. Duthy may also have been pres: sured to do so within his Arm in order net te conther with Childs’s contmumg and largely Gandestine relationship with Silverstent Sev cral arshiteets who exceeded the contests vague sapubanons may have pretended that theirs were mere suggestions rather than. tull fledged proposals. Bur the publ took all che schemes ar tace value, and the designs settled im the general imaginarion as the actual chores trom which the hnal plan would be chosen, thereby forcing the isthe ’s hand  A memorial was ne more a partoet the fimoavative Desi Study bret than a tally detarted sksscraper Yetan his mister pling Pibes- hind decreed a de tacto shrine dy deaing the towers) monumental toundanon walls exposed, a theatrical gesture that would have made anything added there, bevord a place ter insertbins the names of the dead. scem supertlueus. This suzpeston struck the expected chord with the Bamspbies, whose rallying ory for leone: the foorprings sag rae sanct thereatter became “Prom bedrock to mia.”  Paraki showed a preterenee tor Pibeskina’s scheme, intartine that it would bese tulfll the survivers’ desire tor an emotionally rescustdinge memorial [he governor went oo faras to averrule the i Mins selee fonmot Pit Sand hoe tearing lading: the archite ts Ratacl Vinoly,  Shiner) Banwand Predere Schwarte: > arid named Dibeskind it its place. 
ltdid not help THINA’s chances tharon the morning the decision was tobe made, in February 2903, The Wall Street Journal ran a tront-page story saving thar Vinoly designed a soccer stadium and other build ingsan his native Argentine tor the Counts ’s miliary punta during the  fotos, betore he moved co New York, although the fosrnal added.  “Noone has suggested the architect supported the punta’s politics. "|  The CHINK design proposed a pare of aie latiework evlinders that would have risen over the Twin Lowers’ footprints and incorpo rated various Components of a World Cultural Center, Commerctal development would have been pushed to the penphery ot the site. Pataki characterized the desien in the same treinghted terms the Libes kinds used to disparage it." Phose rowers look bke death tome.” the governor told Roland Betts of the Page. *There’s no goddamn way Vin going to build chose skeletons!” Thereatter, Patake supported Libeskind until the troublesome architect was at last pudged a super tHhuous irritant who could only impede the smooth resolunon of the project, and was quicth cephiced by Childs.  The t sto hoped a compromise tinessed by Childs could satisty che developer as wellas comply with Libeskind’s master plan: it wanted to compel the warring architects to Collaborate on a by bred tharw ould meld their individual schemes. But this ploy soon unraveled. Accord ing te Libeskind, his proteses about bem shunted aside caused Childs torell him, “That agreement means nothing tome. My cheats aut the Ith or the people ot New York. Irs Larry [Silverstein] who's calling: the shor.” When an isto. ottaial explamed to Childs that “the Libeskinds are atrant ot being chewed up bs the Skidmore, Owims & Merced machine,” he responded, with all the sincertey of Breer Rabbit, “Well Pim atrud of being chewed up by the [tbeskind machine.”  Although Childs was solieitous, he was also opaque. and neither Goldberger nor Nobel could dima a convincing portrait of him, despite both authors’ having mmtersiewed him. ar length. His contradictory  craving tor establishment status and artistic credibiliey recalled Philip  Johnson, though the tacturn Childs could never approach fahtison’s hght-switch charm and soul acumen. Like fohnsen betore hin, Childs wanted to have things both ways, as a trend of both men,  Peter Fisenman, told a New York ciblod:  [Childs} ts tormented abour being fis own sinature self and being ina big corperate Arm. He has aspirations to be a great architect. but they are limited by a lack ot capacity to say what he wants todo. Hes a Hamler-lhe hgure. Qn the one hand he says, “TPve get te get out” On the other hand he says. "What  abourallthe vears ve purine” [sost{is very powertul and very  sceong. He'd lose that backing.  Amore obvious impediment te Childs’s “aspirations to he a great architect” was the fact thar he was a dreadtul designer. As with John son, his ambivalent position nonetheless wave him the chance to build ona large scale. Teo ot Childs’s Manhattan skyscrapers Worlds ide Plaza of raSe-tusy. a Postmodernist behemoth on bachth Avenue in midtown; and the Time Warner Buslding af 2o0c- 2004, a Neo Moderne pastiche on Calumbus Cin fe—were among the worst added tothe cin 's skvline in decades. Phose who subscribe to an aieferr the om of architecture and behieve that there are seme tgures whose every building as worthy of serious consideration regardless of their occa stonal talures. whereas uthers seem incapable of crearing any ching, of  hast merit, Would be inclined te plaice Childs in the second  atenars,  Phat udemenr was noc altered bs the unseding. in Deeomber 2504, ot Chifds's senthete reviston of the Freedom Tower tor which bibe shind was torruoush credited as “Collaborating architect during Con- cept and schemane design phases.” echoing: the cuphenisce titles sonvocted tor custed COTPOr abe ONC OULLEES, Albthat romamed ot Libes- kind’s orginal visions can asyvmmereeal, crystalline shatt meant to  echo the Statue of Prherty—were a vestugial evouaton ofits nevdle 
like. off-center spire and ity tocé-foot height ia figure that Nina Libeskind seized upon asa patrioge selling poime:.  Childs, seeking the sex appeal chat his stohdl preparatory sketehes lacked. called in the structural engineer Guy Nordenson, wha sug: gested a torqued eftect to give the tapered shatt more sculptural inter- est. Butot was all mere stvling. Most ansatstactory of that scheme’s elements was the insubstantial uppermost portion, Even the irrepress- ible Salverstein admitted he would have trouble leasing space there ar heighrs above ttey enht floors. Tenant reluccinee would be under- standable, especially it prospective lessces remembered that the Sep tember ir attack was already the sccand deadly assault on the Twin lowers. and thar a plot against their replacement would not be unttkely. Though Childs's revision reflected Sulverstem’s demand tor fewer stories, the architect added a scattold-like Grown one fourth of the structure's total hemeht se bts patron could cham the site would again hold the tallest buildime in the world.  a New York  City Poboe Department sccucity analysis of Childs’s Freedom Tower  Thar was not the Last ot ig, however In Aprils:  wats so critical of severabaspests of the scheme chat the architect was forced back to the drawing board and came up with a compliant but even Worse desize Qe0 months later isee dlustramon tien Consteue- tion aclast besan in April sadn.  Neither the state nor the ait ot New York had sutticrenr tands to do what many geo-noos terventh hoped tor a buyout of Silverstem, which would hase paid the Gradgrindian developer to step aside und allow a complete reconsideration of the entre enterprise, treed from the protic motive. An IARC RTOUS ALAC CP TO OS UL OOH this IM Passe Was dreamed up by Bloomberg's andes, who proposed that the cg cake over the sixteen acres of Ground Zere, and allow Silverstein and the Pore Authority fo have in retarn the s.650 acres ot city -awned Land thar he beneath KReanedy and LaGuardia airports. “The Port Authority  runs the two wirports, though the city collests ground rents from the  operators of the archne terminals and other busldims.- Because the transaction offered mo guaranteed gain te the Port Authors can appomnted, quasi-governmental buds that operates outside the restraints imposed on clected officals, the mayoral wea died of macuan,  What was equally feasible maven the bends of cronvine that linked several power brokers in Patakrs orbit—would have been tor the ted- eral government to attercede an behalt ot the Gash-poor state and cits and provide funding tor some imaginative reuse of the World frade Center site. Roland Betts ot the Mtpe who fad been a Yale traternity brother of George Wo Bush's and remamed close to the President, would have been the perfect pom min te press that cause. For rust $6 bilbon or se cthe flare io was romored Silverstem would setrle tor and about what the US atthe me was spending per month in Iraqi, the Bush admintcration, never reluctant to assert linkage benween al- Qacda and Saddam Hussein, could have controlled a poliowatly use tul ssmbol at Ground Zero,  Ir certainly would have been possible tor better designs to be pro: duced fad more time and thought been devoted ta the master plan, the prinwipal skyscraper dad the memorial. As the baphacard scenane untolded, the urgency of producing final versians of the individual components of the World Frade Center site’s compheated intrastructure hefore other decisions could be made had a direct bearing on what would be biadt. bor example one aypectot Libeskind’s ensemble chit captured mans peoples imagination was the “Wedre of Pight his acdtectural framing of the san, which he alkeped would dlomumate the heartofthe complea cvers September ricacthe vers hour of the 2591 attack, tke some modern-day Stoneheare. Arial architec: soon de: burked this mclodraimane notion as tatpossible, given dic berht of sur rounding structures. But the subsequent pesmonmi of Santiago Calarrias ues Transportation Hob te lok i woth the Xba commuter rabwas’s World Prade Center stanon sealed oft the sre’s castward  Prospect irrevecably 
Mans obsersers bemoaned the projects lack of a seromg leader alang the lines of Robert Mases, New York's autosrane mid-twentieth: centuns urban planning chet. Paciks could have assumed that author- Inave role, when we consider how astutely he took over control of the Ground Zero deasten-making process, Theee businessmen ditestly invelyed an the rebuilding of Ground Zero were among the higeest donors to his campaign tor governor in 2504.) However, Pataki pre- terred a tndden-hand approach thar carned oat to be ess crarcly Machiavelhan than crissh expedient. The governor was more con: cerned wath his bad tor reelection owhigh was never serioushy un doubtland fis polingal tuture inthe Repubhean Party than in striving fora proud architectural legacy.  Pataki leteothee atthe end of 2co6. and his successen Blot Spitzer, while running tor the governorship, ericaved the breedom Tower as “a white elephant” that lacked! “economic srabie,” On day three ot his adnunistration, Spitzer told che New York stare legislature that he would reassess the entire Ground Zero project “a meanument to government gridlak.” However within weeks he shitted his opiuon AS increasing occupancs rates in bower Manhattan made che center piece of Ground Zero seem mare bhely to be coonomiealls siible.  Stverstem’s g8ucpare lease with che Port Authority suggested chat his impetus toe rebuild on a massive scale was not dictated by the doc unmentoas the prevariating devefoper long insisted. The lease’s ambuyu- ous wording might have allowed interpretations other than the one he chose te accept. The usual practee atter catastrophe disasters is for Insurer and insured te agree on some kind ef mutual compensacon and renegenation of ther contrac But Silverstein admitted he was first drawn tothe World Prade Center asa trophy property, a depar- ture trom his prior inditterenee te the prestige thar could make a Property more profitable. Fate soon turned his new acquisition inte Atocusot @obal actenton, and inthe process cranstormed hint from  asecond ner developer te the controtling power ofa histori ettort,  From the outset, Silverstenm insisted that the attack on the Twin Towers—separate buildings hit by separate Urplanes—was nora single ogcurrenee edie term used by the wosurance industry) but tee distingr events and losses. Ele had insured his newly acquired lease- hold tor $3.65 bilhon, and although his insurers had agreed to rer burse him tor char ameunt —more than enough to proceed with the breedam Jower whose cost was estumated at Siog billton at was nor enough tor che redevelopment of the entire site. Sdverstemn’s Lawsuit, which soughe $= billion, drayged through the Courts, and few amas Ivses believed he would prevail Bur atthe end of 2504.4 tederal jurs awarded him an addinonal $1.2 bilhon. Though much less thar Sil- verstern seughe. thar judgment enabled him cto begin planning the rebuilding of Tower Pwo, designed by Norman Foster In 2oce the  developer agreed ta cede contrad af the Freedom Tower and Tower  Five tothe Port Authorts inex chanue tor financing trom unallocated  Fiberty Bonds to pas tor Tower Twos well as Tower Three, designed by Reghard Rogers, and Tower Foun designed by burnhiko Maki. But why: There was no need, nor would there likely ever be, tor cen mulion square feet ot rentable space to replace what was lost there. ans more than there had been to build the World Trade Center tour decades earlier. Itrack New York's then governor Nelson Rock- etellern, to bark out that overreaching proreees prome maser—his brother Dayid—bv installing floor after floor of state agencies in the Largely unleased towers, Although by noon the complex had frally attained amuch-higher rane of neagevernmental tenants, after the disaster they relocated elsewhere. often tar trom: Ground Zero, nesertoretur Tithe Nelson Rocketcllers feather bedding of che Pwin Towers, Pataki pledged a state reotal subside ter the freedom Tower Soon atrerward. ina television commercial promonny the rebuilding ot Power Mantiuitnin, Pack prog lanmed it C¢he center of commerce, culture. and commute” but an treth i was never any of those  thins, 
The inexorable decentralization of the workplace. especially in the financial services industry, once concentrated in Lower Manhstran but increasingly: dispersed throughout the surrounding metropolitan region with the spread of computer technology in the ryves jand all the more so atter September rr! made the Freedom Tower seem pathetically outmoded trom the very beginning. Instead, what Could have been an uphtong demonstration of imaginative urbanism-— drawing strength from the new architectural awareness of a public hoping fora symbol tor che ages—devulved, through polneal petre ness and personal greed, into just another New York schlock pob,  SANTIAGO CALATRAVA  GREAT ARCHITECTS ARF often blamed tor the sins of ther imitators, and atthe end of the pventeth century it was Frank Gebew'’s turn. The global ballvhoo thar surrounded his Guggenheim Mascum Bilbao spurred an cutbreak of dreadtul iminitions. Yet Gehry ’s improvisa tonal Neo-bapresstomusm could nat be mimicked with as much taut wyoas Mies van der Rohe's Viuimalisnior Venturn and Scott Brown's Pop Mannersm. Alchough Gebrs’s intluence has been fess specific in Ws cttects on architecture stulec it has been no less significant. the example or Bilbao cacouraged establishment patrons to abandon the eautiousness codemi te publi msntutrons and te award coma: slens fod younger genenition of expermonnl designers, none ot whom benehted mere fram Gehry s halo ctfect than the Spanish anhiect Santane Calatrava, the protessen's tint superstar ot the new amilennum,  Born im Valeniain rasa. © alatrasa earned a doctorate in techie cal scence atthe bidgenossiche fechrs che dbo disc hule re Zurich and established his own offee in that ats in ty cy, fis cureer got ott tea fast starr when, atonly thirts, he basin esecunng the staking series ot bridges with which he made fis name. Betore lon he was bere com pared to the ureat Swos French engineer Robert: Maillart. whose  pared down bridges, verduers, and other (ntrastricture ab the ba gee 
became the Internanonal Stvde's ideal of the clegant solution in civil engineering although later in Calatrava’s career the superiority: of Miaillart’s schemes was rarely) mentioned!  Calateasa’s opportunites capally proliterated, as inans tound che Mure of his designs hard to resist, parteulariy the gleaming, all-white structures set amid verdant landscapes. A pertect example ts his Sun dial Bride of ragp-zocg. which spans the Sacramento River in Red- ding, Calittornia. On one bank of the stream, a lone, rowenmy pylon alts landward atan acute angle, like a catapult ready to he sprung. The bridge's seven-hundred-toot deck i supported by a harplike series ot cables strung out from the mast and macobing an cnhormous tranple. Although the engineering formats tential to thar of Calatrava’s Ahamulo Bridge ot ry8--1692 in Seville, the Sundial Bridge seems more lyneal, no doubt owing coats setaing ian ccological preserve, aswellas the north south position that allows the pslon’s shadow to indicate the time of day, hence the project’s name. The Sundial Bridge became the tounst attraction its sponsors had hoped tar when they hired che pertod’s most celebrated designer of intrastructure.  Calateava often used exapgrerated or distorted parabole arches to increase the sculpruralettece of his bridges. The Gomples curves of the Campo Volanun Footbridge of rgea-ryg7 in Bilbao yive the rela cvels small structuce a stronger presence of large solume ¢hana more straightforward scheme might conves, useful ino thts case because of the bridge's Close proximity co Gehrv’s Guegenherm Vuscum, loonung nearby on the banks ot the Nerion River. Yet the Campo Volantin Footbridge and some other Calatrava spans are insistent Romantic una way chic Mullare’s ethereal vet controlled designs never are. As the weiter Chery] Rent noted, “The consistent theme in Cala trava’s work is te dramatize and mysaty the physics of structure.”  However, some of Calatrava’y coprofessionabs casta skeptical eve on what they saw trom the outset ay his tendency co overelaborate his  designs and obfuscate che underlying structure. This hardly eypical  In engincerias. a discipline whose practitioners comsider it mere a set ence than an art. much fess a form of ilusionimi, Ame engineer or architect wall attest that itis hard to keep a design simple. On the other hand, the use et design in order to exaugerate visual effets, detectable in some ot Calatrava’s bndves, i also not easy to da. Nor albot has eve-catehimg gestures are useful functionally: they must be duemented by less apparent components that actually do the heavy hitting. As the architect and architectural historian) Mare Treih remarked tome: “With Calatrava there is the bridge. and then there is the real bridge.” Renzo Piano ance told his longame rechnical collab- orator the engineer Peter Rice. of his interest in the sounp Calateava’s work. Prine recalled to me Rice’S Cautionary response: “Something. i not right there, When vou design a bridge, you go trom here co here” which the engineer lustrated with a quick bortzontal swope of his fin- wer Then Rice added, * You do net go trom here to here” arching his nehe hand aver his head and toushing his lett car.  Several buildings Calatrava completed atter Rice's death in tug. make the skeptical engineer's gesture scem specifically prophetic, A good example is the Tenente Concert Hall of regt-209 3 an the Canary Islands. Dhis was a product of the fevered moment when sev- eral other Spanish cines—especially Bilbo and Valencta—ommis- Sioned attention-getting: architecture to vie with Seville, site of the tugs Worlds bac. and Barcelona, host cin ot the ryg2 Olympics. Not to be outdene by any at them, the zovernment ot the Atlant island ourpest asked Calatrasa to design an mistant landmark that would give Tenente what Jurn Uten’s Svdnev Opera House of rage) rary gave Australias Lirgest itv an architectural logotype wath a graphs silhouette as aniversally recoyntzable as the Tay Mahal.  The white painted conerete shells endosing the aceantront Lene nite audicorium are overarched by a cantle ered. sickle shaped root, 199 feet high and intended to suggest a tsunami size ware, Vs the  architecture professor and weiter Alexander Teonts wrote, 7 This ts 
perhaps the most extreme analogs implying movement ever gener: ated by Calatrava.” Phe ryygos Spanish mania tor spectacular archi tecture soon became an international vogue, one reason why his theatrical aesthene was sao warmly received in many parts of the world by the turn of the pweney first century  Calatrasa won many admirers because his bods of work was exceptionally consistent by latter day standards, especially those ot the architeccural avant-garde. His polar apposite is Rem Koolhaas, Whose chents never know what thes might ger front that protean master, whose Schemes, though untailingly tascinating and often wondrous, have tallowed no predictable sevlistie pattern. Yet Cala trava’s streamlined allwhite architecture -anstanth identifiable ay his alone, and distinctive trom that of any of his Contemporaries —ts not quite so onginal as some have believed.  Calatrava himselt admitted as much in citing hrs debt te Anton Gaudi, although he licks anattimny tor che quirky, handmade qualits ot the Catalan master’s buildings, with their teral materials, textures. and colors. Instead, € alateasa was drawn to che was in which Gaudi modeled structural clements that resembled sev lized aminial skeletons. Phe bonelike columns that can be seen in Gaudi's drawings and mod: chy tor his Templo Papiaterio de ta Sagrada Famitain Barcelona, on which he began to work in iNS 4. reappeared in Calatrava’s unexe cuted scheme of road far che Cathedral © burch ot Se. John the Das ime in New York. And the long enfilade of paraboli arches at Gaudis Colesio de Santa Teresa de Jesus of rS8o-t8ag in Barcelona is se simular te several passages inthe work at Calatrava thar ites clear he knew the building well,  Iris cass to pay homage toa genius Ike Gaudi cespeerilhy if vou are alse Spanishy, bat che ghosts of hater, lesssmemorable architects haunt Calatrava’s ceusre. including some little remembered mid- twengeth-century Modermsts, The lie attenuated Neo-Gaothie  canopies that the Japanese Amencan architec Minoru) Yarnasake  made the centerpiece of his Federal Science Pavilion at the raes Seatdle World's Farr rematernahzed. in modified form. in vartous Cala- trava projects. The radial concrete abs and paraboli arches assoer ated with the Italian engineer Per Lug Nervi are Commonplace 1m Calatrava’s buildings. Less easy te pinpoint but palpable nonetheless Warnarvete suman to tharot Walt Disnes’s Tomorrowland of rug ¢ at Disnevland in Anaherm, € aliforaia, which svathesized motits by some of the same once-fishionable architects Calatrava has channeled. The tuture never stands seb od course. and Tamorrow land—the first version of which imagined what the world of cop mathe look like  date. Ir Calatrava moved backward through that time warp ain his  Mas remodeled TWIN 1a ae and rags, sodas net ty be out-of  nostalgia tor the Space Vee. he took many tans along ter the nde. To them. the ambition of his architecture was semellating, and reassur- imyginip recollecuon ofa time, not so dong age, when cechnology held our the promise of unlivuted human prowress. Calatrava’s confident and awenspiong publis works capped inte a deep-seated desire tora tuture quite ditterent tram the onc presented by the twenty frst cen tury. a vearning that does much te explain hts extraerdinary sugeess,  Justas ra8u was called the Year ot LM. Per because several ot his biezest projects opened in rapid succession. sa Lots was an amis muraiils tor Cabttrava. During that sear he was awarded the Aimer can Institute of Srohitects’ Gold Medal its highest honor yamitg Sul livan, Wreht. Mies. be Corbustern Aatto. Kahn. Johnson Gebers, Meter and Doster, ainomeothers. In Cualitnaars berthploce of Valencia anew opera house. the Reina Sotia Palace of the Arts, was mau rated. the laste major structure in bis Cats ob Arts and Scenes. an eights -Ave-aere developrmicat that abe includes fis Scienee Museum and Planetarium. To ropacall ott. the Metropohran Museum of Art pave him the extraordinary accolade ataty tiost exbrbition ona lang architect since its Miircel Breuer show opened in tac,  Atthe carn ot the twenty frst century. ts Chatrava approached bes 
fittieth birthday, prospering but restive, he apparends devised a game plan to clewate bis status bs rebranding humselt ay an artist-architest and estabhisiung himselt inthe United States, where he was not vet a  big name. He hired a New York public relations firm specializing in  high end cultural accounts, Which in soe aeranged a Calatrava press  Junker to Valencia, Zurich, and Florence, in the lastot which a survey  ot bis work much bigger than the 22a5 New York show was grandly mounted atthe Palaseo Stross  The Metropelitan retrospective, “Sannago Calatrava: Sculpture inte Architecture.” reflected its sabjece’s deep desire to be taken ser: ously as an aetise The subrule implied an explanation at how his designs emerged in one medium and were more tully developed when trinsposed to another, Whatever relevance those explorations in other medians had to hes architecture, the artistic meritot his slrekls tinished stone, metal, and wood sculprures—especnuly the ones that seem Co amitate Brancusior Noguchi tell well beneath the standards of the world’s greatest cnevelopedic museum, and it was a consider: able shock tosce chem on display there, Sherthng in another way were the show's nwo motorized kinetic sculptures: a waselike undulanng floor piece and, above the pallers entrance, Maadore Mac hrae of 2205, Arrow ot twelve white-painted meral hooks thar thaled up and dawn like the talons of some rysos Japanese serf menster ft scemed imeon cemable that any of these works would ever have been allowed ante the Metropolitan were it not tor the Gonnecten cotter tenuous at thare te Calitrava’s architecture.  The Metropolitan installagen concluded with an incredible pusta- posinon. At the tar end of the pallens, two of the architeet’s tall, chin, tapered bligk: gramme sculptures flanked the broad doorway that opened onto a selection of the muscum’s carly ow enderh-centurs works. Locthe cuthe stead Calatrava’s blick gramte Prat of tg09, Which closehy resembles Brancusts Bad at Space. Centered in the  room bevond was the real ching: the cy23 white marble version ot  Brancus'’s masterpiece. in all its immutable pertecnon, a rebuke to Calatrasa’s pretensions and the Metropeliain’s endorsement of them,  Further evidence of these pretensions could be found in Cala trava’s ceramic vessels. nade to his designs in the Valencian town of Mamses, with which he heedlessty invited Comparison to the ceramics Picasa began prodgamg in tage acthe Madoure pottery works in the Provencal village of Vallaury. Picasso thoroughly transtermed those blink carthenware jugs and pitchers through the wizardry ot his drattsmianship, although his sty humor deceived those who under-  rated his ceramics as a mere toomote to his other, more “serious” work. In going vher a mnaro against the most tormudable and feared ot all Modern artists, Calatrava entered a losing battle. The prohles of his pots retraced ryacs brench and tagos Scandinavian: proto- ipes, bat he decorated many ot thent i the contrasting red-and- black or ancient Attic vases. The surtaces of must of these picees were mitsed with thin outhnes of prim Arcadian nudes, fess like the ¢ Lassi cal phases of Picasso and Macisse than Jean Cocteau’s slight appraxt mations of them. Proasse’s creative urge Was so uncontamable that he could not keep bis hands off any maternal within reach: Calatrava’s repeated torays inte mediums beyond engineering and architecture made itscem as though he was intent on completing seme imagined list of cequirements.  The poorly recensed Metropolitan show did nothing to advance its subjects quest for oriticalesteens, [sa tong way from Walt Disney to Frank Gebrv. and Calatrasa tills somewhere between the avo. These architects Competed tor the same jobs Gehry fost the Milwaukee Art Museum commission to Calatrava and mans saw sinulariges in the swooping fines and swelling solumes of ther architecture. But there are many mere notable ditterences, beginmime with the wan me which Calatrava’s busy but basically obvious burldings can be Comprehended at first wlance aehich many people fad reassuring), whereas Gehrv’s  complex and ainbigueus compositions take more aime to absark, 
When Gebry’s Wale Disney Concert Hall in Los Angeles opened in 200}. It was greeted with praise only somewhat less raprurous than thar tor his Guggenheim Miuseam Bilbao. Yee fittle nerve was given to Calatrava’s concert hall in Tenente when it was dedicated, usta month before Disnes. A remote logduon can affect pournalistie inter- estan anew building, but Bilbao, never a cultural crossroads, quickly hecame a compulsory destination atter Gehrs. Tenente did not become anarchitectural mecea atter Calatrasa, though for another reason. In areview ot the nwa concert halls, the British crite Dey an Sudye found in Calatrava’s work “the kitsch dark side to Gehrv’s plavtul, tree inven- von.” He drew a sharp rebuttal trom the Spanish editor and oritn Luis Fernandez -Gahano, whe decried Sudte and others who admire Gehry bot “wrte oft the Valencian asa kitsch populist whose rhetorical hunulity is hardly in keeping with the mecalomaniac scale or his works.”  “Kitsch as a word te be used with Gaunen. desalaed asa has become ay an all-purpose peyorative for bad taste. dius lassie deba tion by Gallo Dortles, kitsch identited a specitic phenomenon: the appropoacon ofa tamiiar thing thatus then altered in scale, made in aditferent material and assiened a wholly ditterent and meongruous function, rendenne the hybrid wrotesque. Olyects based on famous works of artand architecture are atten cited as examples, such asa Venus de Milo figuring with a Gloek in its stomach ora) canna Lower ot Pisa pepper mill) Architectural kiteh fas been most commen in the commercial Pop vernacular, Bur its not anknewn in the higher reaches af the building art. All the mndicators of kigch conversed 19 Philp Johnson and fohn Burgee’s tee. Corporate Headquarters ot tovo-taS yg in Preesburgh, where the shape at Sir Charles Barry's Vie- tora Tower of rS3ye-18e5 tor the Palace of Westminster in London was altered in size, tuncron, and material and transmogntied into a torty story murror-glass othice building.  Just because a useful objector a work of architecture is representa  tonal does nor make it kitsch, however. brank Gelire’s Fish Lamp  series, Fishdance Restaurant in Kobe, fapan, and fish sculpture at the Vila Olimpica in Barcelona are among many examples of a sembal he equated with the lite force and evoked ta give his designs a feeling ot animation, Those schemes cxude a jaunty Pop sensabiliry much like that of the carly work at Gehry’s trend Claes Oldenburg. The archi tect collaborated with Oldenburg and his waite, Coosje van Brurgten. on the Chiar'Day Building of roSs-rega am Venice. Calton, where the arnsts provided a sculpture of Superseale binoculars upended to torn a gateltke entry. The torthright humer and casual presentation ot such ain unexpected image inthis kind of art and architecture as querte difterent trom the contorted dloge of kitsch. Fyven though Gehrv’s Guggenheim Bilbao was bkened tor gine fish ar mega ardchoke, and his Disnes Hath to a galleon, he did not mtend such specitte reter: ences. But abstraction prompts people to define untamiliar things bs referring to things they know, and when architects go too far in help ing the public make such connections, the result rs kutseh.  Calaraiva’s formal inspirations most otren came trom nature, but the most bisarre made a lengths detour through the history of architec: ture. Since the tazos, the Vistomary projects of the eighteenth-centurs French architests Foenne Pours Boulfes and Claude: Nicolay Pedous have heen seen as monumental modernism wrant da lettre. although mostot dose schemes were never executed. Calatnasa. tor hos Pane tariurt OF byyictede atthe City of Arts and Serences in Valencia, took destns hy both architewts, Combined elements trom each, and altered them ina ways sate fo venture. diait ne other Gontem pa: rary architect ot his stature would have dared (sce athustration pa.  One of the Ave of Fnlightenment’s most fy pnot images ps bedaua’s render ot his Neodasstual theater of ret 5-e7 8g in Besancon, sur  really retlected in the Galossaleve of an unidentfed cosmic beng. In  rN 4, Boullee dreamed up his Cenotaph tor New ton—a massive gbabe witha hollow antenor than would semulite the Subbime of celestan space  Calatrava conflated those two ideas in the Valencia Phinetariim, Its 
auditorium is housed ina windowless ball centered under the contin: nous are at the glass-and-concrete root, Only the top halt of the inner sphere ts visible trom ground level, but reflecting pools surrounding the structure complete the ocular fusion with a waters mirror image that tums sitinto avast orb iresembling William Golden's F ve logotype ot POst tore Rss  Ledous’s all scemmp eve never blinks, bue Calatrava’s did not stup at thar. Motorized glass-and-metal Ganoptes on opposite sides of the pasthon can he cased and lowered like evelids, making the thin verti cal members that move up and down with them seem like Brobding- nagian evelashes. Calatrava often has incorporated mechanized elements in. his acruetures. When Chersl Kent asked him why he rephed, Like some architectural Edmund Hilam, “Because it is posat He. and because tots possible itis part ot our time.”  In soog Calateava scored a major vtetory in his campaign te win over America when he was chosen te design the Sa billron World Trade Center Transportation Hub ar Ground Zero, which began con: struction while the rest at that beleaguered rebuilding protect remained mired ina bureaucrane, quagiure. In Gontrast to the nervous, frag mented torms ot Damned bebeskind’s master plan or the bland mini malism of Michael Arad and Peter Walker's World Trade Center Memorial, Calatrava’s bristhinig white steel-and-ghass trai station— witha motonzed reot to open the main Con vaurse to the sky seemed to many people a veritable benedicuon, indeed spurtual despite ity secular nature. [ts ssmbolsm was camistakable, and many immedi ately interpreted teas a dove.  Calatrava confirmed that this desatn radeed began with his vision of the bird ot peace fluttering up trem the hands ot a child—a tantase later enacted by his young danghter who released two white doves atthe building's groundbreaking in September sacg§. Like Libeskind, he had an mtiitee understanding of the emononal issues involved  at Ground Zero and was not shy abour playing co chem. Whereas  Libeskind’s Freedom Tower used the Statue of Liberty, the revolution of rece, and his own immigrant experience as shamelessly asa vaudesilian wasing the Stars and Stripes to milk applause. (alae trava’s Transportation Hub, though not overtly patriotic. was just as unphotly commemuratve, even though that was not the chent’s requirement. And antike Tibeskind, Calarnava was adepr at pleasing the difterent interest groups mvolved init.  When the design tor the Transportation Hub was first presented at Flo y Press vonterence, general reagdon was cestatig, summed up by Mavor Michael Bloomberg, who exclaimed, "Wow! is the first word that’s ger to come te vouc mind.” Others saw tas ananstant historic monument. perhaps out uf cagerness for some sort of makeshitt memorial while the real one remained in dimbo, as did the rest of the rebuilding at Ground Zero. The charman of the citv's bandmarks preservation commission haltyoked ar that event, “Should we pre- empavely landmark chis?”  The Transportation Hub design was but the most pubheized ex- pression of Calatrava’s longstanding avian obsession, The mort int calls manitested ipeltin the wing-shaped plass-and-stee! Ganope over the entrance to his Wohlen High School of 1u83-1988 in Wohlen, Switzerland, but really teok off wath the pterodsctyliin wings of hrs Lyons Atrpore Stanon of rake -rag4, one of several tram terminals he has built. His hrst American bird alighted on the shores of Lake Michigan: the Quadrace: Pavilion ot raggeruoe at the Mibsvagkee Art Museum tsee dlustration actbi. an addimon to bere Saarmen’s building of ras3-ras7. which was expanded by Dasid Kahler in ty. Inthe museun’s atheial publication on the Calatrava building, he chose a telling metaphor to deserbe has alleged. old-tashioned architectural education: “Learning was handed terme. Epreterred teheara bird singing rather dana person singing bke a bird,” Pons compared the building's z1c-toot-wide mechanized brise soleil ior  sunscreen! to “the wings of a great seagull” Yor as Kent candidly 
reported in the museum's official publication, “the brise soler does  not do a wondertul job of keeping sunlight out.”  so dif  terent trom the hovering vibranay Mies and be Corbusier gave mans  After the stuliitying radin of che lace International Sey le  ottherreark Modernist strucdures—architecss ar the end of the twen- ueth century sought co give ther work a greater tecling of animation, Noone achieved that more convincingly than Gehry, who buile some ot the liveliest pubhle buildings in the entire history of architecture. Lacking Gebrys sculptural pitts. Calatrava nonetheless hoped to cre- ate movement with the press ofa buttons esen though maltung tions had plagued his electronic components in earher proeets,  In designing the Milwaukee Act Muscum’s Quadrac Pasion, Calatrava hrought together hes two great Hyations: birds and machine- powered building parts. His preference for bravura effect at the expense of function could alse be discerned in the disparity between the Quadracar’s extravagant superstructure, Which as little more chan alobby, and the dreary exhibinoa galleries Gonsigned to the Concrete box beneath ip like some bothersome atterthoueht. fle based the museum's new vround-level structure on Fero Saarinen’S Trans World Aurhnes terminal at Kennedy Airport in New York. Saannen wanted that binlding to suggest a great thine bird. no easy trek ina medium so tettered by gravity, Yet he managed te du that not by means ay sim- plete as Calatrava’s shallow sembobsm, but bs samulitms a buos ant physteabty analogeus to flaht with an acrodvnami tlow of sinuous lines and billowing spaces. At OWA chetore ham-handed alterations later ont the changes in tloor levels were se genth tinessed thar ches never uiterrupted continuity of movement. The allusion was so subtle and sustuned that atter one passed through the luminous. gentl arching tunnel to the departure gates and hially boarded a plane, rhe real takvott could come as an aati lima,  Cost overruns are not uncommon on architecture, particularly tor  designs thar depart trom: structural or technologreal norms, or  demand a her quality of csecunion than commercial schemes—eon: dinons wpral of buildings tor cultural oisnitunons, Budgets ace exceeded for many reasans, notalbot then wichin an architect’S Gon trol Lack in ming can be eral, especial oa lenuthe prorects. TM. Pos bast Buniding of rocg-rocS acthe Nanonal Gallers af Art in Washington was te have cose $c nallion, bat rechiieal preblems, labor disputes. and soarmg prees during an inthatonary decade pushed the total te Segog aullon. Rethinkimge a scheme when it is dlreddy undetwas canalso prove rumnousl) esposice. The ontial  buduet ter Yoshro Lanaguches Museum of Modern Art ot ryac-  4 mb New York rose atdeass Soa qullion. i part because of program matty. changes the chent requested atter building commenced. Con- Strustion eventually cose Saas nullion, and to make up tor the defi, wean. Pducigon Binldings a large and much-saunted Component ot the new comples, didi not open until nwo vears atter the rest ot the muscum  Projeces thar must be rushed tecomplenon to meet anurgent dead- line Gan incur punishing overtime charges. That happencd with the aor g Athens Oboph Games, whose centerpiece was Calatnava’s Olsnips. Stadium, which bas a motertved rout and was fished just inthe mek of ome. Overspending te ereate a consprenous work ot arghitecture Gain also hase a damawing effect en other imstitugans, The Greek soveriment discovered it would take vears. if ot decades, to pay terig Givmpi orgs. Phos was nothing new. Renzo Prine aod Richard Regers’s Pompidou Centerthe true sedre of the modern Tbean as popular spechade wound up costing se much more than planned that the Prengh goseniment solved the shorttall by Cutan Support far severa. regtom al muse Gils  Much the same happencd on Milwaukee, where the cose aft Calateaas Qradtace: Pavition aietose quadrupled, trom the ornuinal estimate ot Sas milbon te Srag millon. Sheiden Lubar a trustee at  the ruscum, told a newspaper that “he discovered that the propect 
had been musmanaged by tormer trustees and start members.” The Increase Was caused atleast in part by techmieal problems in con- structing the building's wanglike machine operated brise-soleil. Fish gotta sun, birds gotta tly, but buildings do not have to move, atleast notin the hiteral and often costly Cablitras.t manner.  The emergency tund-raising drive the Milwaukee Arc Museum launched to pay off the last $26 million in cost overruns set otf a chain reacden thar brought several of the Gitv's older cultural institu- tions lose to bankruptey because of increased competition tor local donations, To keep the Milwaukee Public Museum from Closing, the Milwaukee County Board guaranteed a Se milion loan while tert: cved “building binges” that tueled the tunding crisis. Atter the initial spurt of Curious visitors that followed the opentag of the Quadracel, attendance figures—and revenue tram entry tees-tell helow the Muscum’s projections, rasing further Amancal concerns. Although the building became the logotype tor a comprehensive marketing strategy to stimulate Milwaukee's Hageing economs, the huge deficit runcup by Calatrava’s scheme cast doubt on the rudgment of over- Optimisne patrons,  Some other Amenean cities, however saw the Milwaukee project notay a misadventure but as a paradigm for mmproving their public relanons. Buttalo sought to use its considerable architectural heritage which tidudes landmarks by FEE Richardson, Sullisan, Wrighe, and bero Saannen—as the basis at a program te inerease cultural toursm and boost an cconomy that, like Milwaukee's. had) been bardbly robust, Nonetheless, some Battalo otticnils teared that historic bruikdings, no matter how esteemed, could not compete with contem- porary marvels tke the Quadracen As one Buffalo booster put it, “You need awesome. vou really do, because these other cities are doing awesome. Ehars what creates buzz and incredible word of mouth.”  The flashy Contours, flamboyant engineering eftects, and mechani  cal tlamimers of the Calatrava style revived a shin-deep futurism that  went out of fashion circa rae, when the laste New York World's fair dosed. The seemingly advanced ithough ain tact retrograde: aypects of has architecture disguised its underlying sentimentality, and made it palatable to patrons of a certain sephisacanon who would have rejected more pronounced expressions of Kitsch in other medians. That he toumd a Consttuenes in the art world was perplexing, but hrs Appeal toa popular audience made pertect sense at the turn of the twenty frst Century.  As cultural institutions around the world reinvented themselves as marketers of mass entertamment, the buddings they created reflected that change all too Geary. Like the mvthical Roe—the huge bird that thew Sinbad the Sailor to saterw—the architecture of Santiago Cala- cava spoke to macal hopes tor salvauen. And given the menacing pescmilenntal world he and his chents hoped to reshape, who among  them did nor want te be uphtred on the wings of the dove? 