BOOK Sigfried Giedion Building in France Building in Iron Building in Ferroconcrete.pdf
Introduction

Sokratis Georgiadis

There is broad agreement among historians of modern architecture that
Sigfried Giedion’s Bauen in Frankreich, Bauen in Eisen, Bauen in Eisenbeton
(1928) may without reservation be called a classic of modern architectural
literature (fig. 1). Reyner Banham presents this book as a kind of authorized
history of Modernism: “the Modern Movement’s view of its own history.”!
On the basis of this book and in connection with Giedion’s work as secretary
of the Congrés Internationaux d’Architecture Moderne (c1AM), Spiro Kostof
characterizes him as “the official historian of the Modern Movement.”? And
Stanislaus von Moos maintains that with Bauen in Frankreich Giedion has
“drawn the picture of a developmental continuity” that “time and again has
inspired the history of modern architecture.”>

Nevertheless, one can hardly describe Giedion’s intention as primarily
historiographic. With this book, born as it was from a series of articles writ-
ten for the journal Cicerone and still bearing “the odium of a manifesto”
(von Moos), the author wanted to be, in his own words, “the conveyor of a
viewpoint.” He wanted to sketch a vision of a modern architecture that—in
accordance with the demands of the avant-garde — broke decisively with the
traditional values of the discipline. Only later did he place this vision within
a historical context. He attempted to do so by means of the hypothesis that
the great iron constructions of the nineteenth century and the ferroconcrete
architecture produced by the pioneers of Modernism belong aesthetically
under one and the same roof.

Intellectually, Bauen in Frankreich is the product of Giedion’s direct con-
tact with the leading personalities of Modernism, “with the artists of his
own time.” This contact began during the summer of 1923 with the large
Bauhaus exhibition in Weimar (his first meeting with Walter Gropius) and
continued during the Esprit Nouveau exhibition of 1925 in Paris (his first
contact with Le Corbusier). It resulted in Giedion’s numerous articles on
contemporary architecture, which appeared in newspapers and professional
journals in Germany and Switzerland. With the publication of Bauen in
Frankreich and with the assumption of his role as secretary general of claM
(which he helped found in 1928), Giedion the historian renounced the
neutrality of an outside observer of events: he willingly shed his supposed

Fig. 1. Sigftied Giedion. Courtesy Archiv S. Giedion, Institut fiir Geschichte und Theorie der

Georgiadis

innocence and became, both programmatically and definitively, an integral
part of the Modern Movement. This, in any case, is how Giedion himself
related the sequence of events on various occasions. Yet things began quite
differently.*

Giedion was a Swiss citizen born in Prague on 14 April 1888. After com-
pleting his secondary schooling, he studied mechanical engineering in
Vienna at the behest of his parents. But engineering, with a view to taking
over the family’s textile concern, was not to his liking, and he decided
instead to study art history. In 1915 he commenced his studies at the Uni-
versity of Zurich and eventually transferred to the University of Munich,
where Heinrich Wolfflin, one of the great art historians of the day, taught.
Giedion did his doctoral work under Wolfflin and in 1922 published his
dissertation, Spdtbarocker und romantischer Klassizismus (Late Baroque and
Romantic classicism).> Concurrent with his studies he wrote poetry, prose,
and — inspired by the Aktivismus literary movement —a play called Arbeit
(Work), which was staged in 1917 in Vienna, Leipzig, and Basel, and in
Berlin by Max Reinhardt. In the turbulent years following World War 1
Giedion became politically active and supported the Munich Rédterepublik.
In Munich he also met the art historian Carola Welcker, who was to become
his wife.

Notwithstanding his excellent preparation for it, an orderly academic
career interested Giedion about as much as the management of a textile
mill. Instead he cast himself in the role of a comrade-in-arms in and — wher-
ever possible — fellow creator of an admittedly still-vague but all the more
passionately desired cultural renewal. It was precisely with this aim that he
turned toward modern architecture, which received its first, unshakable
foundation with Bauen in Frankreich.

In the decade following its publication, Giedion was active as a freelance
writer on art. He contributed regularly to the journals Cicerone and Cahiers
d’art; he wrote a small book on the modern housing form for a Zurich pub-
lisher (Befreites Wohnen (Liberated dwelling], 1929); and for Editions Crés he
prepared the first short monograph on Gropius (Walter Gropius, Paris, 1931).
He also worked intensively on a projected multivolume history of modern
civilization, Die Entstehung des heutigen Menschen (The origin of modern
man), which remained unfinished. From his home in the Zurich Doldertal,
which served both as the c1am headquarters and as a meeting place for
Europe's avant-garde in art and architecture, Giedion launched an extraordi-
narily broad series of activities. He organized exhibitions, gave numerous

introduction

lectures, and codirected a firm that had as its goal the dissemination of mod-
ern furnishings.® His interests ranged from the origins of the new vision in
modern painting to efforts to introduce a quiet toilet. As an architectural
client he initiated construction of two prototypical multifamily residences in
Zurich, designed by Alfred and Emil Roth and Marcel Breuer.”

In the 1920s Giedion also tackled the issue of architectural education. In
the early 1930s he even sought an academic post at Zurich’s Eidgendssische
Technische Hochschule (Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, ETH). His
breakthrough, however, did not come until a few years later when, through
the auspices of Gropius, he was appointed: the Charles Eliot Norton Profes-
sor of Poetry at Harvard University for the academic year 1938-1939.8 From
his series of lectures titled “The Life of Architecture” came the book Space,
Time, and Architecture,’ which has gone through numerous editions and
been translated into several languages. One of the century's most successful
architectural books, it gained a considerable international reputation for its
author. Giedion integrated large parts of Bawen in Frankreich into this work,
which Gropius described in a letter to its author of 18 May 1941 as “really
the best statement about our movement.”

In Space, Time, and Architecture Giedion also broadened his conception
of Modernism. He discussed the turn-of-the-century’s moral revolt against
eclecticism and the revolution of modern painting (which was the first art
to develop a new spatial conception} as further important factors in defin-
ing the new architecture — factors that reached beyond a simply technical-
constructional interest. In precisely this architecture, the cultural role of
which extended beyond the narrow boundaries of the discipline he had pon-
dered, Giedion believed he could discern the first signs of a synthesis of the
objective, practical, and expressive aspects of culture and of a repeal of mod-
ern man’s disastrous “schism between thinking and feeling,” for which he
blamed the nineteenth century.

This dilution of the subject matter of Bauen in Frankreich can be traced
not least to the fact that in Space, Time, and Architecture Giedion made an
important new discovery: America. In quick “close-ups” he sketched the
architecture of the New World, from the anonymous buildings of the first
settlers to the so-called Chicago school and Frank Lloyd Wright. America
now became for Giedion an aspect of the modern adventure that could not
be circumvented and at the same time a “primary influence in the matura-
tion of his historical vision.” It is thus not surprising that America would
become the central theme of his next book, Mechanization Takes Command,"

Georgiadis

Whether in the Patent Office in Washington or in the slaughterhouses of
Cincinnati, he steadfastly sought out the documents of an anonymous
development that impressed itself upon the countenance of modern life.
Meanwhile, Europe degenerated into a negative image of an emotionally
unresolved onslaught of the modern. The vestiges of Bauen in Frankreich
had now completely disappeared, and the optimistic perspective that had
defined the tone of this publication in the 1920s similarly disappeared.
Giedion questioned the omnipotence of a rationalism that was an end in
itself and registered his skepticism of the naive faith in progress. In his
view, the command of mechanization went hand in hand with the increas-
ing loss of humanity, which ultimately became apparent in the unparalleled
catastrophe of World War 11.'2 Its restoration became the primary objective
of his work for the next twenty years, until his death on 9 April 1968.

During these last years Giedion’s interests followed two paths. He con-
tinued to be an activist in the Modern Movement, directing c1aMm until its
dissolution in 1956. He developed new ideas for a “more humane” Mod-
ernism and concerned himself with such questions as the “new monu-
mentality,” the “new regionalism,” the increasing significance of aesthetic
values in architecture, and the possibilities of architectural expression.” At
the same time, he continued his historical research, the results of which
directly influenced his teaching, which now alternated between the ETH-
Zurich and the Harvard University Graduate School of Design. The origins
of art and the beginnings of architecture now became the themes of his
studies.'* Constancy and change became the main aspects of his focus. It
was his avowed goal to make visible the immutable elements of the human
condition embodied in art and architecture leading up to Modernism.'5
The avant-garde pathos of the 1920s, which resonated throughout Bauen in
Frankreich, was thereby silenced. Perhaps this reflected the fate of Mod-
ernism as a whole.

I.
“An Almost Aesthetic Pleasure”: The Architectural Appropriation of
the New Materials and Bauen in Frankreich

The Crystal Palace, designed by Joseph Paxton, was erected for the London
World Exhibition of 1851. The fascination and shock provoked by this build-
ing were due not least to the fact that it conveyed the impression that archi-
tecture could free itself from its material constraints and even to a large

Introduction

extent dissolve itself as a body. No one summed up the relevant feelings
better than the architect Gottfried Semper, who called it a “glass-covered
vacuum.”!6 This sensation was made technically possible by using a material
that seemed quite unexpectedly to shatter the age-old tangible certainty of
architecture. This material was iron.

Some eight decades separate the erection of the Crystal Palace and the
appearance of Bauen in Frankreich. This is, by and large, also the period dur-
ing which the debate over the architectural use of iron took place. Whereas
the debate was in part very intense and indeed passionate, it also had quieter
stretches and more sober turns. Nevertheless, much was at stake: nothing
less than a new style of architecture, the new form from which one hoped
to tailor an architectural dress for the modern age. Semper’s ideas about
iron formed one of the two most important reference points during the
first phase of this debate. The other pole was defined by the theories of Carl
Gottlieb Wilhelm Botticher, the author of the epoch-making study Die Tek-
tonik der Hellenen (The tectonics of the Hellenes).’”

Iron: The Expectation of the New Art-Form
Botticher’s decisive plea for the extensive architectural use of iron and
this material’s promise of creating a new style go back to his lecture “Das
Prinzip der Hellenischen und Germanischen Bauweise hinsichtlich der
Ubertragung in die Bauweise unserer Tage” (The principle of the Hellenic
and Germanic styles of building with regard to their application to today’s
way of building). It was an address given at the first festival commemorating
Karl Friedrich Schinkel, organized in 1846 by the Berliner Architekten-Verein
(Berlin architectural association).'®

In his monumental work Die Tektonik der Hellenen, Bétticher had con-
cerned himself with comparing “Hellenic and Germanic styles of building.”
As he had noted in that work, he felt obliged “to dispel the suspicion that a
constrained, one-sided preference for the forms of Hellenic tectonics has
guided the principle of my work and robbed me of an eye and free aware-
ness of the value of medieval tectonics.” Bétticher’s contribution can thus
be placed within the context of the ongoing debate on style, which had
excited the temperaments of architects and architectural thinkers since the
1820s.” He sought to reconcile the differences by proposing a stylistic syn-
thesis. In this, Schinkel’s work provided him with a prototype.

But in his Schinkel address of 1846 Bétticher developed a completely dif-
ferent position, the foundation of which was a radical historicizing of the

Georgiadis

architecture of antiquity and Gothic times. On this ground he questioned
the viability of either style for future development. Bétticher’s starting point
was the same one he had used in Tektonik der Hellenen: architecture had no
analogs in the world of perception, no models in nature. This was the rea-
son for its “working independence.” He reproached classicists and Neo-
gothicists alike for the fact that they had remained stuck on the “outer shell”
of architecture. The “working principle” of architecture — from which, so to
speak, the different physiognomies of the two styles had arisen — rested
precisely on their respective “static principles” and “material relations.” For
this reason, the two competing parties had failed to see that the two ways
of building had been merely evolutionary stages of a history that would
certainly not end there.

Both [styles] define only two evolutionary stages, which have to run their course
and complete their prescribed circle before a third style can see the light of
day. Fhis in no way invalidates either of the styles; rather, only by basing itself
on the results of both can a third and higher stage of development come to the
fore —a third style, whose creation is reserved by historic necessity for a later
time but whose foundation our own age has, in fact, already started laying.?!

Classic and Gothic architecture are no longer seen, as in the Tektonik der
Hellenen, as dialectical opposites, whose poles are on the verge of synthesis.
The historical perspective opens up, and this opening is bound to the cer-
tainty of an expected epochal change, upon the threshold of which Bétticher
believed his generation had already arrived.

Botticher was convinced that iron represented the dawn of a new, higher
historical level. He believed this material presaged a new, third way of build-
ing and consequently also a new architecture. Naturally, he made his point
of view from a constructional perspective. Just as he had asserted in Tek-
tonik der Hellenen, he attached decisive importance to roof construction and
regarded it as the most essential aspect of an architectural style. The sys-
tem of monolithic stone beams in antiquity and the arched vaulting of the
Middle Ages, he said, had completely exhausted the constructional and
architectural possibilities of stone. A material was now needed that could
facilitate construction and span great openings, one that could therefore
guarantee a reliable roofing system and thus permit every imaginable floor
plan and spatial configuration —a material that consequently might bring
with it a “new realm of art-forms.” This material was none other than iron.

6

Introduction

Botticher was certainly not the first to discuss the new material from a
theoretical perspective. The year before Botticher’s Schinkel address, Eduard
Metzger contributed to the still-lively debate on style, and iron construction
constituted an important part of his argument. Metzger described the view
of his contemporaries thus: “Iron Constructions: 1 can well imagine these
words terrify the plastically minded architect!”2? But he was of the opinion
that the architect must face the challenge presented by iron. He himself
did so by seeking to link the use of iron with his own penchant for the Neo-
gothic. “The network of the Gothic arch and all of its spanning members is
closely related to the one that develops in accordance with the nature of
iron.” In Metzger’s eyes, the main problem was the practical joining of iron
to stone construction, for “it almost appears as if iron spanning members
and the more massive architectural bodies are distinct incompatibilities.’**
Althéugh he offered no solutions, he spoke confidently concerning the
developmental possibilities of a new pointed-arch style in which iron would
play a critical role.

The significance of Bétticher’s contribution is already evident. He was
the first to deduce a wholly new tectonic principle from iron, one funda-
mentally different from any that had gone before. At the same time, he
endeavored to base this principle on a historical-theoretical foundation. He
did not, however, succeed in satisfactorily answering the aesthetic question.
Although he held out the prospect that iron construction’s “core-form” (Kern-
form) would create a new sphere of “art-forms” (Kunstformen), he avoided
outlining even roughly the character of these art-forms, which he had done
in Tektonik der Hellenen for stone buildings of antiquity. There the art-form
was the symbolic representation of the tectonic form, or the core-form.
Richard Streiter, who in 1896 wrote a comprehensive critique of Bétticher’s
Tektonik,?5 pointed out this omission and correctly noted that the various
attempts to translate Botticher’s theory into practice had not yet yielded “a
fundamentally new way of designing, evolving from the characteristics of
material and technique.””® Instead, Bétticher’s students had simply trans-
posed the ornamental motifs of the Greek temple to the iron components.

“Invisible Architecture”

Bétticher’s remarks did not meet with unconditional agreement. Even
Heinrich Leibnitz, who in a short book of 1849 attempted to popularize the
Tektonik der Hellenen and apply its system to all of architectural history, dis-
tanced himself from Bétticher’s position as soon as it touched upon the

Georgiadis

architectural applicability of iron. At the end of his book, where he examined
contemporary events, Leibnitz noted that “iron is not the kind of material
that can call forth a new artistic epoch in architecture, for it transpresses
measure, contradicts static feeling, and destroys mass.’”” The question of
the new style was also drawn, like a red thread, through the entire theoreti-
cal work of Gottfried Semper. His most brilliant statement on this subject
was given in his lecture of 4 March 1869 in the Zurich City Hall, in which
he discussed the conditions of the origin and change of architectural
styles.28 His polemical sting was directed against two contemporary theo-
retical conceptions of style. On the one hand, he criticized the historical
Darwinists who would apply the laws of natural selection, heredity, and
adaptation to architecture. On the other hand, he opposed those who “start
from the erroneous assumption that the question of style is chiefly a con-
structional question.” It is clear already from this criticism that Semper’s
position is incompatible with the idea that a constructional material alone
has the’capacity to create a style — as Bétticher's Schinkel address implied.”
The same is true for Botticher’s prophesy that the use of iron could lead to a
third, modern way of building, following the Greek and Gothic styles.

Semper’s negative attitude toward the extensive architectural use of iron
was also based on another important factor. He had discussed the material
as early as 1849 in an article reviewing the Jardin d’hiver in Paris,*° and
there he altogether rejected the open display of it, at least in monumental
buildings. As a constructional material iron should “by its nature be used as
slender rods and sometimes as cables.” Due to the small surface displayed in
these forms, the more perfect the construction, the more the iron visually
disappears. It is in this sense that Semper spoke of it as an “invisible mate-
rial.” Barely fifteen years later he repeated this assessment in his principal
work, Der Stil in den technischen und tektonischen Kiinsten; oder, Praktische
Asthetik (Style in the technical and tectonic arts; or, Practical aesthetics).
We have in metal-rod construction, he noted, “a poor soil for art! There can
be no question of a monumental style with cast-iron rods; its very ideal is
invisible architecture! For the thinner metal is spun, the more perfect is its
manner.”}! Clearly Semper could not tolerate a dematerialized architecture.
For him, matter carried the symbolic form of the architecture and thus con-
stituted a necessary precondition for the pursuit of its social function.

This is why Semper completely dismissed the idea that iron could engen-
der a new monumental architecture and warned that “the dangerous idea
that iron construction, applied to monumental building, could give us a new

8

Introduction

architectural style has already led many talented, yet artistically estranged,
architects astray.”?? It is also quite certain that here Semper had in mind
Henri Labrouste, whose Bibliothéque Sainte-Geneviéve in Paris he had also
explicitly criticized in his review of 1849.3

Whether in the form of rods or cables, iron’s unfitness for monumental
purposes did not mean, however, that it was unsuited for other tasks. Sem-
per was fully prepared to acknowledge the possibility, for instance, of using
the material for decorative purposes in latticework. In addition, he advocated
the use of iron in sheet form. By that he meant “sheet beams” (Blechbalken),
which must always remain invisible but could play an important role in
bridging large spans; sheet metal used as a wall dressing or as a material in
doors; and finally hollow, cast-iron forms, such as tubular columns.

Moreover, iron could be used in buildings of a nonmonumental nature,
in Semper’s words, “buildings of a decidedly practical purpose.” The iron
roof trusses of railroad stations gave him a “satisfactory impression.” In Der
Stil he spoke about them in an almost enthusiastic way but distinguished all
the more rigorously such building tasks from monumental architecture:
“Let us permit and praise the visible, plain iron roof trusses of the railroad
engineer in terminals and other such things as symbols of their provisional
nature. Spare us the wonders of decorated iron libraries, festival halls, and
the like!”34 The consequence for the architect is clear: he should not yield to
the temptations of the material.

Iron: The Engineer’s Material

The Gotha architect Ludwig Bohnstedt*’ reflected on the premise that archi-
tects and engineers had completely different responsibilities, which in
many respects could never be reconciled. This premise also influenced, as
it were, his ideas on the architectural use of iron. With clear reference to
Botticher’s Schinkel address of 1846, Bohnstedt thus noted in 1867 in his
essay “Uber die Bedeutung des Eisens fiir die Baukunst” (On the signifi-
cance of iron for architecture): “The question of the creation of a new style
that owes its origin to metal may be seen as already settled; a new style stem-
ming from the use of iron cannot be expected.”*«

Yet, at the same time he recognized iron’s applicability to the construc-
tions of engineers, and he even spoke of the great progress that could be
made when iron was used in appropriate works. The strength of the material
and its ease of handling were its greatest advantages. Speaking about archi-
tecture, he maintained that iron was completely inappropriate for carrying

9

Georgiadis

the art-form because “it had to appear undisguised.” Like Bétticher, Bohn-
stedt was convinced of the role construction played in determining a style.
He believed, however, that only stone construction (that is, the quintessen-
tial architectural material) was receptive to a formal treatment, and he could
not imagine the possibility of forming a style without taking this into
account. “Our traditional laws of style,” he wrote, “are rooted precisely in our
experiences with a solid material — with stone — and have been made to
harmonize with it; those laws determine the fulfillment of all demands,
which up to now only stone has been able to satisfy."37 Consequently, only
stone was acceptable as a construction material; stone was the “autocratic
tuler,” as Bohnstedt characteristically expressed it. The reason for iron’s
unsuitability for architecture was its lack of corporeality, the impossibility
of employing it “in all dimensions.” Its volume could only expand and
approach that of stone when it was shaped as a hollow body, but that would
contradict #ts materially appropriate use.**

Preliminaries Toward an Incorporeal Architectural Aesthetic

The aesthetic development of iron construction was the topic of a lecture
delivered in 1870 to the Berliner Architekten-Verein by Richard Lucae, archi-
tect of the Frankfurt Opera House. It was not the first time he addressed
this issue. A year earlier he had written an article for Andreas Romberg’s
Zeitschrift fiir praktische Baukunst, in which he entered what was at the time
uncharted theoretical territory. The subject was the architectural signi-
ficance of space, which the author attempted to decipher by examining
various architectural tasks. Among these were some that were directly
related to the use of iron. At the center of Lucae’s reflections was the effect
of space on human feelings. He saw form (understood as the relationship
of spatial dimensions to one another), light, measure, and color as critical
factors for spatial perception as well as decisive artistic moments. Each of
these factors played a particular role as a component of architectural space.
Thus, form was responsible for the aesthetic effect of space; light for its
character; color for the specific mood produced; and, finally, measure was
“the spatial relation of our body to our spirit as perceived by our conscious-
ness.” Lucae specifically emphasized that the question of style could be
ignored within the framework of his theory: “Style only influences the effect
of space to a very small degree.”*! He gave different explanations for this, but
failed to mention the most important: namely, that his theory of space
removed from style (in the sense of conventional historical styles) the basis

10

Introduction

on which it had traditionally been able to work — the architectural body. And
it was precisely this that led him to iron construction. Thus his extreme reti-
cence is quite surprising in his discussion of the spatial effects of those
building tasks for which iron is the material of choice. Among these are the
railroad station halls, in which, according to Lucae, one “had thought one
could do without art.”

Ifa meaningful thought of beauty were added to the grand constructional ideas
of their roof form, then our eye might find rest and enjoyment among the con-
fusing web of iron bars and cables crossing each other in every direction. Then
we would, figuratively speaking, not notice the individual instances of this
mathematical formula translated into iron and simply organize the result into
an ‘easily surveyed sum, into a system appearing as beautiful form. For the
purely mathematical construction is not a finished artistic achievement, but
only a skeleton like the one in the human body.*?

Lucae, on the other hand, was utterly fascinated by the Crystal Palace,
which in the meantime had been rebuilt in Sydenham. He characterized the
building as a “piece of sculptured atmosphere,” as a “magically poetic form
of light,” and forgot, apparently out of sheer enthusiasm, about the demand
for a “meaningful thought of beauty.” He elaborated upon his remarks in his
lecture on the aesthetics of iron construction. Lucae referred to the issue as
“one of the most important questions of architectural development,” in
order to underscore the great difficulties one encountered in surmounting
it. These difficulties were without exception related to the diminished bulk
of iron construction compared to stone construction. Lucae again used the
analogy of the human body: “A purely mathematical construction is as much
an unfinished artistic result as is the human body with its muscles and ligaments
exposed, or even as its skeleton is capable of being a living creation of nature; thus
I maintain that the beauty of a building system is partially due to the fact
that there is a surplus of mass beyond the material necessary for support.”

Lucae thought that architects were facing a dilemma. Through its “lim-
ited corporeality” iron had rid itself, “as it were, of the material by which we
can display beauty.” Without an increase in iron’s dimension, it lacked the
aesthetic sense conditioned by stone. Increasing its bulk, on the other hand,
robbed it of its characteristic property, “namely, that it remains delicate and
yet still evokes the impression of strength.” Yet Lucae did not exclude the
possibility that “a new art-form” could arise “out of the nature of iron”;

Il

Georgiadis

rather, he shifted its emergence into the future. His own generation was
denied the push toward the new art-form as well as an unbiased approach to
the question of iron construction: “A succeeding generation will grow up
with iron construction, just as we have grown up with stone construction;
they will in many cases have the fully undisturbed sense of beauty that still
today leaves us unfulfilled, for we feel that the tradition of beauty so dear to
us is under attack.”4*

From this basic assessment of contemporary conditions Lucae deduced
the promise of a new art-form: his was a technical age rather than a reli-
gious one, an age dominated by exact science and its representatives, the
engineers. As a result, the hub of the new architectural aesthetics could be
neither the palace nor the church, but solely utility buildings — that is,
bridges and transportation buildings, the vessels of modern life.

~ He sought to sketch the elements of the new sense of beauty and support
it with his previously developed theory of space. He was thoroughly con-
vinced that the creation of space was not the result of constructional consid-
erations. The “totality” of space, the “spatial image,” originated exclusively in
the human imagination. Although construction remained architecture's
sine qua non, it was inconceivable without a fundamental idea of beauty.
Lucae was of the same opinion as Bétticher (without mentioning him by
name) that the roof was of decisive tectonic importance. At the same time
he wanted to see Bétticher’s concept of Tektonik expanded. It was one of
the principles of tectonics that the art-form had to explicate symbolically the
constructional conditions, yet this was far from being its only task: “But tec-
tonics glimpses its higher task in the grand, general thoughts that must be
expressed with each small, individual symbol — the words of these thoughts,
so to speak!”45

In the case of the roof, for example, this general symbol was “suspen-
sion.” (It is interesting to note that the “suspension” of Greek tectonics loses
its original meaning as a structurally passive architectural element and is
here transformed into a symbol.) To this end and in order to bolster its true
significance, Lucae thought it possible that the actual construction should
not be visible: “As paradoxical as it might at first appear, one can only show
the roof if one more or less conceals it.”*

Lucae’s theory broke up the unity of body and space. It had still existed
for Bétticher, who wrote in the preface to his Tektonik der Hellenen that “the
working hand of the tecton [builder] forms every member according to a cor-
poreal schema as it... fulfills the creation of space.”*? He meant that the

12

Introduction

“space-creating organism” was none other than the corporeal members
(membra) of that organism. In drawing upon this, he maintained in his
Schinkel address that the “essence of architecture resided in expanding”
ideas into a “corporeal-spatial entity.”

What is significant about Lucae’s understanding of the roof as a symbol
of “suspension” is that the “spatial image” in this instance no longer needs
the body for its support; at least Lucae in this instance refrains from refer-
ring to the need for corporeality. This conception comes very close to an
aesthetic of the noncorporeal as it was developed by later Modernists.

These ideas indicate the general limits within which Lucae saw the role of
the architect. The architect was not allowed to operate exclusively based on
his “constructional feeling”; he needed to collaborate with the representatives
of the exact sciences. However, his specific role was indispensable. Lucae
stood for the “separation of disciplines,” even though he was also convinced
that the architect and the engineer were working toward a common goal.

Iron: Emaciated Stone

At the third convention of the Verband der deutschen Architekten- und
Ingenieur-Vereine (League of German architects’ and engineers’ associa-
tions), in 1878, Semper’s biographer, Constantin Lipsius, delivered a lecture
entitled “Uber die asthetische Behandlung des Eisen im Hochbau” (On the
aesthetic treatment of iron in architecture).* In it he attempted to articulate
a modern position on this issue, a position that would be open to the most
recent developments. The premises upon which the science of engineering
produced its works were presented as follows:

Among the technical sciences, the science of engineering, a pure child of our
time, has forcefully stepped to the fore. Standing upon thoroughly modern,
thoroughly real grounds, it aims at the fulfillment of purpose and — delegat-
ing aesthetic questions to other enterprises — strives to express them with a
relentless consistency and the most naked, inexorable truth. The less material
expended or the attainment of maximum results with minimal dimension, the
greater the triumph! And since purely technical purposiveness does not require
transfiguration through beauty, since its visual appearance is only the expres-
sion of the function it performs, that is, function that has become form, such
purely purposive artifacts convey in their construction also the explanation of
their existence, their necessity; in that way they are often aesthetically satisfying
and convincing to a certain extent.”

13

Georgiadis

But precisely only to a certain extent, for in order to evoke aesthetic plea-
sure, the satisfaction of emotional requirements should be added to that of
intellectual ones. Lipsius believed that truth and beauty were mutually
dependent, yet a truth oriented merely to purpose such as that expressed in
the works of engineers is not sufficient for a work of art. The real truth must
be supplemented by an ideal truth. And this is precisely the domain of the
architect, whose task it is to endow the ideal with artistic form.

Lipsius warned all those who were “promising to themselves the blos-
soming of a new, unique art from the use of iron” against exaggerated expec-
tations. Although elements of a new worldview loomed on the horizon, he
added (in following Semper) that its particular architectural dressing did
not yet exist. Yet, during the process of its formation one could not deny a
certain importance to the emerging technical possibilities corresponding to
the use of the new materials — naturally presuming that its aesthetic imple-
mentation be successful.

Returning to the original question of the aesthetic treatment of iron,
Lipsius then explained that he did not mean its use as a constructional aid
but its appearance as an independent organism. He first of all drew a sharp
distinction between wrought and cast iron. To the former he attributed no
significance for monumental architecture beyond its use in the manu-
facture of light latticework. The slight volume of wrought iron lagged
behind its actual capacity for carrying a load. With cast iron it was dif-
ferent; when formed as a hollow body, it assumed a “corporeality in this
manner of presentation similar to that of stone, the monumental building
material par excellence.” It was suitable for both columns and trusses and
also for the construction of roofs. The important thing was to make the
cast iron itself recognizable and visible. Only in this way could “the pos-
sibility of a building’s solidity” be visually understood and its “factual
reality” explained. The same was true for the connections between the indi-
vidual constructional members and for the connections between supporting
and supported parts. In the discussion of roofs, whose importance he (like
Botticher) stressed, Lipsius praised the achievements of Labrouste (refer-
ring to the Bibliothéque Nationale in Paris) and Félix Duban (referring to
the roofing of the inner court of the Ecole des Beaux-Arts), and he praised
one of the iron designs presented by Eugéne-Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc in
his Entretiens.

Lipsius’s concept of the “aesthetic treatment of iron” remained fixed to
the tectonics of stone construction. Iron appeared as a substitute for stone;

14

Introduction

iron construction was nothing more and nothing less than a stone building
with emaciated contours.

Although the display of iron construction for Lipsius was an essential
precondition for its aesthetic effect, its appearance belonged merely to the
preliminary stages of the architectural work of art, which he viewed as
the aesthetic embodiment of an architectural idea beyond construction.
The aesthetic realm remained the exclusive domain of the architect. Thus
the goals of the architect and the engineer were in his view widely divergent.
At best, their mutual contributions could be compared as creative and inven-
tive activities.

From Invisibility to Monumentality

At the tenth annual meeting of the Verband der deutschen Architekten-
und Ingenieur-Vereine, in 1892, the architect Hubert Stier delivered a lec-
ture entitled “Riickblick auf die Entwicklung der deutschen Architektur in
den letzten 50 Jahren” (Retrospective of German architectural development
in the last fifty years}.°° Referring to the question of the architectural use
of iron, he spoke of two phases during this period. In Stier's words, the first
phase began “with the use of iron mainly as cast iron for decorative pur-
poses instead of wrought iron, whose treatment had been forgotten: there
was at that time hardly a glimmer of understanding of iron’s importance
for constructional purposes.”*! The entire first phase, which according to
Stier lasted until 1872, was admittedly characterized by an increasing use
of iron, “but primarily only as a constructional aid under the sheathing
and veiling of another material. No one had the courage to display it
openly. One wrote about its aesthetic treatment, but no one attempted such
treatment.”

The debate about the use of cast and wrought iron was in fact settled at
the latest in the early 1880s, and indeed in favor of wrought iron. A com-
mentator in the Deutsche Bauzeitung noted that the hope was long gone “that
through cast iron one could achieve either new stylistic forms or transforma-
tions of certain elements of inherited stylistic forms according to time and
place, such as, for instance, the Moorish.”®? Architects now favored wrought
iron alone, the “so-called genuine” material.

But wrought iron still posed a problem, and possibly an even greater one
than cast iron. One was still uncertain as to how to treat it aesthetically. Its
limited corporeality or linearity offended many people, as did the “confusing
number of small, crisscrossing structural parts — flat bars, angle irons,

15

Georgiadis

round bars, and so on.’** There was a demand for visual repose, which one
hoped to achieve, for instance, by using supports covered by compact deco-
rated walls instead of latticeworks and frames. A further nagging problem
was the treatment of the points at which iron joined the stone construction;
this problem appeared especially in cases where wrought iron by itself was
used to cover vast spaces.>$

The Cologne architect Georg Heuser also attempted to solve the trou-
bling problem posed by Semper and others since him — architecture’s loss
of corporeality through the use of iron. At the end of the 1880s and in the
early 1890s, Heuser launched an extended journalistic investigation into
the aesthetic question of iron construction.°* He developed his position
from his reading of Botticher’s Tektonik der Hellenen, Semper's Der Stil, and
Darwin’s theory of evolution. He was particularly interested in “compart-
mented forms” (Gefachformen), that is, iron construction consisting of the
“flange and web” (Gurt und Steg). These elements furnished him with the
name of his theoretical construction: the “compartmented style” (Gefachstil).
Heuser proposed a three-step plan by which the dematerialized lattice-and-
rod construction visually transformed itself into a mass-form, which only
then made possible a monumental architecture:

Depending on the shape of the web, the expression of the compartmented style

changes as follows:

1. If the web consists of the lattice-and-rod system that characterizes the “iron
style,” then we have an invisible architecture...

2. Ifthe web is a thin but generally enclosing wall, then we have a bodiless, mate-
rially weak, yet very visible architecture, even in iron...

3. If the web is massive in whatever material, then we have a corporeal, monu-
mental architecture, in which the principle of “flange and web” can be
appreciated as an artistic idea, both for its stability and for its basic decora-
tive richness.*”

In this way, Heuser traversed the path from line to surface to mass,
thereby intending to eliminate Semper’s reservations about iron construc-
tion. The only thing that seemed to remain was a convincing answer to the
question of decoration. And precisely on this issue, Heuser attempted by
means of Darwin to confirm Bétticher’s art-form. Heuser championed the
naturalistic ornament, which was applied to the technical form — the latter
understood as “organ projection” or the imitation of nature — and which

16

Introduction

was thus analogous to the static function of each constructional member.
Here the decoration was subordinate to the constructional web.

Despite his very ambitious theoretical claims, in the final analysis
Heuser’s position remained rather conventional. The aesthetic closeness of
iron and stone, which he explicitly presented as a goal, in the end amounted
to a perversion of the new construction.

Heuser’s “compartmented style” found approval and support from the
architect of the Imperial Post Office in Berlin (kaiserlicher Postbaurat), Robert
Neumann.°* In his remarks on the future architectural style, iron played an
extremely important role. The well-known themes were repeated in his enu-
meration of the advantages and disadvantages of iron. Iron construction was
lauded for its strength, durability, and ability to span wide spaces. Its lack of
corporeality, however, its light and airy character (which did not allow the
affixing of decoration), limited the possibilities of its use. Although the
author praised Heuser’s compartmented style, he registered doubts about
iron’s ability to accomplish monumental tasks. Neumann’s argument is at
least paradoxical: he thought that iron used structurally in roofs accomplished
too much, far more than needed for monumental purposes. Hence, he con-
cluded: “Iron in monumental buildings will probably always be used mainly in
roofs, thus falling far short of taking full advantage of its structural potential;
for that reason, one should not overrate the style-forming influence of iron.”

Yet Neumann also saw great potential in iron when it was used in con-
junction with “hardened mortar materials,” that is, with cement. Otherwise,
one could really only use exposed iron in architecture for the roofing of inte-
tior spaces. “On the exterior of buildings,’ notes Neumann, “iron will not be
very conspicuous, and for this reason it will have little influence on exterior
architecture. Here stone, and above all the very efficient ashlar, still retains
its old right”

“Scaffold Styles” — “Mass Styles”
Despite the contradictions and difficulties in Heuser’s theory, iron construc-
tion was still the point of departure for his compartmented style. This was
not so for all the defenders of architectural corporeality. On occasion, the
fixation on stone assumed lofty tones. This building material became, in
fact, a synonym for architecture, and efforts were made to link it inseparably
with the historical destiny of the discipline.

At the end of the 1880s the architecture professor Adolf Goller in Stutt-
gart confessed his belief in stone. In his book Die Entstehung der archi-

17

Georgiadis

tektonischen Stilformen (The origin of architectural styles),°! he laboriously
laid down fourteen “new” formative principles by which a style allegedly
undergoes historical change. As soon as he started discussing iron in the
conclusion, however, he fell into astonishingly conventional categories
of thought. He essentially repeated the reproach of “bodilessness” and
expanded it by claiming that no decorative forms could be developed from
wrought iron and therefore an aesthetic treatment was hardly possible. He
also rejected the connection between iron and stone as a basis for the devel-
opment of a new style:

Indeed, a new style for our time is, despite some hopes, not to be expected from
this union; for one thing, in most building types wrought iron will never accom-
plish very much for wall construction; for another, with its slightness iron can
never offer sufficient form. Therefore, stone must, as before, be the sole vehicle
for such a style.

The defense of stone against iron led many writers into theoretical
sophistry, to claims that could not stand up to even elementary historical or
factual review. One such example was given by the editor of the Deutsche
Bauzeitung, K. E. O. Fritsch.

Fritsch delivered the keynote address at the ninth annual meeting of the
Verband der deutschen Architekten- und Ingenieur-Vereine in Hamburg in
August 1890. He was interested in stylistic changes in contemporary
architecture; however, he placed the theme within the historical perspective
of architectural development since the Enlightenment. According to Fritsch,
the first phase of this period was characterized by the “idealism” of early
historicism. Around 1850 this was replaced by an increasingly realistic atti-
tude, due in part to the significant impact of Gottfried Semper. The “real-
ism” of the second phase consisted of different styles. Fritsch listed them —
Hellenistic, Renaissance, northern Renaissance, Baroque, Empire, Gothic,
Romanesque — and did not conceal his preference for the Neoromanesque;
yet he came to the conclusion that none of the currently used styles could
claim absolute validity. In closing, he expressed the wish for a new style,
which he was inclined to see as a welding together of all historical styles. In
this connection, he also spoke of the “iron style.” Fritsch emphatically
rejected the idea that this could become the future style, as had been said
everywhere since the Paris World Exhibition of 1889: “I must confess to
being a stubborn heretic on this point. For such a belief seems to me to be

18

Introduction

not only an extreme overestimation but above all a complete misjudgment
of the significance of iron for architecture.”

Fritsch’s attack was directed at none other than Bétticher and his
Schinkel address of 1846. Fritsch rejected Bétticher’s thesis that the roofing
system was the historical motor of architectural change —a thesis from
which the latter had concluded that iron would be of decisive importance for
a future style. Fritsch held that the wall rather than the roof was the decisive
element. From this perspective, the history of architecture recognized two
main groups of styles. He called them, respectively, “scaffold styles,” which
derived from the craftsmanship of carpentry, and “mass styles,” which
derived from masonry. In ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia, in Rome and in
the early Middle Ages, and also during the Renaissance and the Baroque,
mass styles were practiced without exception. Ancient Greek and the Gothic
architecture, on the other hand, were scaffold styles. In the period immedi-
ately after the Enlightenment, the scaffold style became the foundation of
architectural activity. Fritsch saw this simply as an enfeeblement and gave
the following explanation:

The reason, however, that the stylistic experiments that started more than a
hundred years ago were oriented primarily toward the two scaffold styles —
Greek and Gothic art—is simply that these styles, as opposed to the mass
styles, had a canon. However, the canon yields to a certain extent because it is
necessary to let the architectural scaffold appear; the mass style, on the other
hand, allows considerably more freedom to the individual sentiment of the
artist. Weaker talents are thus always more comfortable employing a scaffold
style, and it was also inevitable than an age that demanded, above all, firm prin-
ciples for artistic activity eagerly reached for them.®

It is surprising, in fact, that the realist Fritsch praised artistic individual-
ity and clearly renounced the idea of architectural normativity. The upshot of
his analysis was that the artistic freedom he so desired could be attained
only through the material that permitted the effect of mass, in short, stone.
Iron merely permitted a scaffold construction. In order to be able to argue
against iron, Fritsch, as expected, quoted Semper: iron offered “a poor soil
for art,” and its use resulted in an “invisible architecture.” An “iron style”
was nevertheless possible, in Fritsch’s view, but only in the sense of a mar-
ginal event within the architectural panorama.

19

Georgiadis

The Beauty of the Line

The division of responsibilities between architect and engineer — and conse-
quently the question that had been dramatically addressed by Bohnstedt in
the late 1860s, only to be taken up again later by Lucae and Lipsius — raised
further and no less serious concerns for architects of the 1890s. One can
assume that this problem was one of the reasons many architects main-
tained an air of reserve toward the new material. The defense of architec-
ture’s domain in the face of the ingress of iron — the engineer’s material —
was in some respects also the defense of the professional interests of the
architect against the increasing power of the engineer. Conversely, in view of
iron’s inexorable triumphal march, one began with the conviction that the
position of the architect could only be secured if the discussion of iron’s use
in architecture were uncoupled from simple utilitarian considerations and
diverted to a course in which aesthetic arguments prevailed.

Stier had the following to say concerning the period 1870 to 1890:

izon, too, has not only assisted us in creating ever freer spaces in dimensions
that had previously been thought impossible: we have also attended to its artis-
tic development. I must say, however, that precisely in those areas where the
two professional lines of art and engineering must work together, such a collec-
tive effort has been somewhat lacking in Germany.

He hoped for a future cooperation of the two disciplines and regretfully
observed from the Paris World Exhibition of 1889 that the French had
“somewhat anticipated” this issue. The importance that Stier attributed pre-
cisely to this problem appeared in the concluding lines of his fifty-year
retrospective, in which a subliminal sentiment of professional antagonism
toward engineers is unmistakable:

May our younger sister, the science of engineering, in short order have dashing
success: we will happily and ungrudgingly grant her that, for we shall also reap
great advantages from it. Yet the architect's patent of nobility has been written
by thousands of years of human cultural history, and if in fifty years a speaker
shall look back to today, he will confirm that we, too, have understood how to
uphold that nobility!®?

A short while later, the same problem concerned the architect (and later
coeditor of the Deutsche Bauzeitung) Albert Hofmann: “Is it possible that

20

Introduction

Hercules the engineer sits at the distaff of the delicate beauty Omphale, that
the liberal and cheerful art of architecture can get in touch with the somber
austere seriousness of the science of engineering?”®

Thus he poses the question and seeks an answer in light of the global
upheavals caused by the intellectual and material conditions of the time.
The author's conclusion, based on an anatomy of the contemporary zeit-
geist, is that under the new conditions, the advance of the engineer seemed
not only plausible but an outright necessity. “Everything is in transition,”
wrote Hofmann, “and this ongoing transition is at the same time economic,
scientific, political, and philosophical.”® In his opinion the old idealistic
worldview was in the process of disintegration, induced by the pressures of
the “positivism of science,” the “nihilism of intellectuals,” and the “material-
ism of daily habits.” Metaphysics had been replaced by “independence of
thought, the scientific boldness of research, and industrial and commercial
activity.” Taking the art historian Robert Dohme’s remarks in Das englische
Haus under advisement, Hofmann thought that these changes influenced
human experience.” Thus the expectation for new forms was not directed
toward the architects, nor was the demand for a new architecture corre-
sponding to these needs. “The engineer,” Hofmann continued, “presses
forward victoriously, and it is undeniable that the world is enthralled by his
bold and beautiful works.’”!

Implicit in these statements is the question of the aesthetics of engineer-
ing construction, which, as Hofmann further argued, was none other than
the aesthetics of iron construction. The engineer’s works are inextricably
bound to iron. Stone, according to Hofmann, is the domain of the architect;
iron, by contrast, has “put the development of technology primarily in the
hands of engineers.” Can iron construction be beautiful? “Can iron bridges
be beautiful?” asked Hofmann along with the mechanical engineer and
cultural theorist Franz Reuleaux.”? He was inclined to answer the question
with a rigorous “Yes!” By this beauty, however, he did not mean “the free,
picturesque or so-called artistic beauty, but rather a dry, mechanical beauty
deriving from the structural framework.” But which of the two beauties is
the most beautiful? “The architecte constructeur was always the soul, the
architecte décorateur the dress for this soul,” wrote Hofmann, leaving no
doubt that ultimately it was the soul that mattered.”

Today, in many cases, the dress has become the main thing, the soul has been
abducted by another. ... The architect is in danger of sinking, the engineer

ar

Georgiadis

ascends disproportionately. This sharp, calculating, rational, intellectual activ-
ity, supported by the steadily developing sense of beauty, forms the sublime
moment in contrast to the free, artistic, emotional activity of the architect.”

The new feeling of beauty brought forth by the engineer was founded
upon the “awareness of the beauty of the line.” The beauty of the line is pre-
cisely what aesthetically separates engineering construction from the works
of the architect. The beauty of the line was indeed not unknown to the archi-
tect, but it did not play the same critical role in his creations as it did in iron
constructions. The two concepts of beauty were for this reason different but
still not incompatible. But when they were combined, “it was certainly indis-
putable that the beauty of the line forms the highest concept of beauty.”’5
With this, Hofmann made his aesthetic preference clear. However, his aim
seems to have been the unification of architecture and engineering in a syn-
thesis, and he saw this synthesis as the retreating architect’s only chance of
survival. He explicitly distanced himself from the position of Lipsius, who
had postulated the divergence of the purposive and the beautiful in his lec-
ture of 1878. Hofmann saw the harmony of their relationship in the much
more comprehensive unity between art and exact science: “Until now, art
has allowed itself to be led more by feelings, [but] why should it not make
the intellectual progress of the exact sciences its own? Here opposites clash
and are united, feeling and thinking cling to the same appearances and are
reconciled.” This occurs because both serve the new culture. The same is
true for architecture, whose creations must, on the one hand, satisfy the
needs of the age and, on the other hand, bear its characteristic features.

Necessity will create a rapprochement out of the contrast between the two; today’s
rivals will work together tomorrow. And a new art arises from the collaboration
of taste and mathematics, of formal beauty and technological boldness —a pic-
ture of our culture, like Euphorion, the symbolic son of Faust and Helena, in
whom is united the spirit of the old and the new age, the enthusiasm for beauty,
and the sense of the utilitarian.”

The Immanent Beauty of the Work-Form

Despite the different views in the debate about iron, one thought seems to
form the lowest common denominator for the various positions: it is agreed
that in order for a building to be characterized as an aesthetic object, the
architect must always do something special, beyond merely meeting func-

22

Introduction

tional needs or constructional efficiency. Even for Hofmann, who dismissed
the sharp distinction between purposive form and beauty, the sense of
beauty remains a necessary pendant to the rational activity of erecting a build-
ing. Left to his own devices, the engineer is incapable of producing beauty.
Beauty belonged exclusively to the domain of the architect.

The idea of an immanent beauty of purposive form became increasingly
important in the next phase of the argument and heralded a shift that char-
acterized several contributions. There were, of course, important differ-
ences among this community of authors. There were those who began with
a causally acting mutual dependence between purposiveness and beauty. To
them, purposive form was aesthetic precisely because it was purposive. Oth-
ers conceded that beauty had a certain autonomy. In order for purposive
form to be beautiful, it was necessary to activate a specific sense of beauty in
the early phases of the object’s design: in this way one could summarize the
relevant views. Even with these authors, however, the ability to create beauti-
ful form ceased to be the privilege solely of architects. The engineer increas-
ingl¥ appeared on the stage with a claim to equal rights.

The engineer Gustav Lang addressed this theme very early, in an essay
published in 1891.”8 He pointed to the approximate character of structural
theories, which in themselves could supply no clues about possible fail-
ures or inexactitudes of calculations. This task fell to a “healthy sense of
beauty,” which at the same time served as a criterion for judging the correct-
ness of the mathematical calculation. This was possible because correct
theory and a healthy sense of beauty were mutually dependent. According
to Lang, the constructions of engineers were by no means things in them-
selves “that could be neither beautiful nor ugly”; they were instead “man-
made works that had to reflect those natural laws in which our whole
feeling and thinking are so rooted that nothing can be held to be beautiful
that appears purposiveless according to these laws.’ And he asserted
apodictically that

a contradiction between the products of correct mathematical calculation and a
healthy sense of beauty does, in fact, not exist.... If our mathematics leads to
ugly forms, it means that not all the relevant influences have been correctly
balanced in the setting-up of our formulae; the sense of beauty may thus
remain for us a guiding star that prevents our mathematics from becoming
one-sided.®°

23

Georgiadis

The postulate of an immanent aesthetics of purposive form was a
symptom of the increasing approval for the wide-ranging use of iron in
architecture. The reasons for this are certainly not to be sought or found in
a successful conversion of iron construction into architecture, or rather, aes-
thetics. Iron construction found acceptance, above all, because it became
regarded as a genuine expression of the modern zeitgeist. In a practical
way, the aesthetic sense had to comply with this turn in cultural history.
Cornelius Gurlitt found an accurate expression for this fact: “We have not
artistically conquered the work-form of iron,” he wrote, “rather, the work-
form of iron has conquered us and forced us to see it as beautiful, for it is
rational and the product of a creative idea.”*!

In 1890 Gurlitt settled his account with Botticher: praising him as the
last man of the Enlightenment but at the same time rejecting him as “a
representative of a scientific art.” “Hellenism is out of the question for the
German nation,” Gurlitt continued: he explained this by the extinction of the
“rationalism of art.” He then announced prophetically that “the days of indi-
vidualism will dawn again!”*? What Gurlitt did in 1890 with Bétticher, he
repeated ten years later with Semper. He maintained that “Semper’s entire
theory of style” was demolished because we have ceased to comprehend
the symbolic content of a work of art as the “application of stylistic forms.”
He attached to his criticism against Semper his disagreement with Otto
Wagner's thesis that in architecture the art-form gradually arose out of the
work-form. This criticism implied the view that the work-form by itself
already possessed both aesthetic and symbolic relevance (arising from
Gurlitt’s criticism of Semper).

For Gurlitt, the new paradigm was Japanese art, whose forms “are simply
developed from laws of utility and are yet undeniably artistic.” Moreover,
they can convey symbolic content. This is the basis on which Gurlitt, so to
speak, integrated the forms “invented by engineers” into the realm of art.
He vehemently opposed the view that “the work of the mathematically
inclined engineer was inherently inartistic” and that consequently the archi-
tect has “to make forms intelligible through art.” Straightforward design,
practical planning, and simple and purposive execution suffice to character-
ize a building as beautiful. Even the general population understands this.
Naturally this explanation brought Gurlitt into conflict with his earlier criti-
cism of Bétticher and his alleged “scientific art.” For the beauty of which
Gurlitt himself spoke, as he conceded, was a pure product of mathematical
calculation. Be that as it may, Gurlitt’s contribution is typical of the new

24

Introduction

ideas that had now entered the debate. The magical words “utility.” “Sach-
lichkeit” (architectural realism), and “purposiveness” — with all of their
implications ~ now set the tone.

Hermann Muthesius, for example, emphasized in his famous book Stil-
architektur und Baukunst (Style-architecture and building-art) that modern
architecture had to conform to the new economic and transportational
conditions, to the new constructional principles, and to the new materials.
He praised the architecture of iron and glass, the works of Paxton and
Labrouste, the Eiffel Tower and Galerie des Machines of the Paris World
Exhibition of 1889, and finally Alfred Messel’s Wertheim Department Store
(1898) in Berlin. But somewhat later in the text he explicitly deduced from
these givens the signs of a new style, indeed, with a wording that fully
endorsed Gurlitt’s conceptualization:

If we wish to seek a new style — the style of our time — its characteristic features
are to be found much more in those modern creations that truly serve our
newly established needs as for example in our railway terminals and exhibition
buildings, in very large meeting halls, and further, in the general tectonic
realm, in our large bridges, steamships, railway cars, bicycles, and the like. It is
precisely here that we see embodied truly modern ideas and new principles of
design that demand our attention. Here we notice a rigorous, one might say
scientific objectivity [Sachlichkeit], an abstention from all superficial forms of
decoration, a design strictly following the purpose that the work should serve.
All things considered, who would deny the pleasing impression of the broad
sweep of an iron bridge? Who is not pleased by today’s elegant landau, trim
warship, or light bicycle?

Muthesius returned to the theme of iron construction in an essay of 1913,
published in the yearbook of the Deutscher Werkbund.* His position was
different from that of 1904 in that he now no longer traced the cause of
aesthetic feeling (the pleasing impression) experienced through technical
form to the fulfillment of practical purpose. He argued, like Hofmann in
1893, that a certain sense of form contributed to the technical form of iron
construction and that it, essentially, helped to shape the appearance of iron.
He was even more specific in linking this sense of form to an “aesthetic sub-
consciousness,” which was active in every human form, such as the “produc-
tion of instruments, building, and constructional activity.” As he noted,
“Even if the producer aimed only at purposive reason, we could claim that

25

Georgiadis

he has also been influenced by considerations about form, even if only
through an unfelt aesthetic ‘subconsciousness.’”®

Muthesius now gave an unequivocally negative answer to the question
that Hofmann left unanswered in 1893, namely, whether purposiveness and
beauty are mutually dependent. “It is a false idea that an engineer is entirely
pleased when a building, an instrument, a machine that he creates satisfies
a purpose; still more erroneous is the recently often-heard proposition that
if it fulfills a purpose, it is also beautiful. Utility in and of itself has nothing
to do with beauty.”8°

And precisely because they are independent of one another, it is neces-
sary to weld them together. This synthesis does not take place when the
architect beautifies the exterior of an engineer's work. The sense of form has
to contribute at the outset to the transformation of the purposive idea that
supports the object, as a kind of controlling device. The logical conclusion is
that Muthesius did not make any distinction between the works of engi-
neers and of architects, and in this he once again distanced himself from
Hofmann’s position of 1893.

Muthesius consequently rejected the notion that the works of engineers
were ugly and that beauty was therefore the province solely of the architect.
He distanced himself from Semper’s criticism of iron construction. Accord-
ing to Muthesius, “massive” stone architecture, which contrasted with iron’s
“invisible architecture,” was nothing more than an ideal formed by a habit
and brought about by the fact that one had always built with materials that
seemed massive. Yet, this should in no way be taken as an absolute ideal.

Incidentally, Hofmann had by 1907 reached a view very similar to that
expressed in Muthesius’s text of 1913. He spoke of a necessary “spiritualiza-
tion of matter,” an operation that already participated in the conception of
the building and that transcended the simple consideration of purpose.
Parallel to this he stressed that “we expect from engineering the enrichment
of art through new forms and new designs, as external expressions of a new
power inherent in the human intellect and its productions.”®”

An argument similar to that presented by Muthesius in his book of 1902
was put forward by Friedrich Naumann, the other spiritual father of the
Deutscher Werkbund. He, too, fought against the belated artistic treatment
of purposive form and believed that because of its purposiveness, such form
was already beautiful. Concerning iron construction, he wrote: “Here art is
not practiced alongside construction: no pasted-on decoration, no simple
curlicues; here creation is for a purpose, and form is born like a child

26

Introduction

unplanned by its parents.” Naumann thereby indicated the aesthetic
unconditionality of engineered form, and hence its actual detachment from
any genealogical connection to the discipline of architecture. He then plasti-
cally described the emancipation of technical form from its incapacitation
by historical architecture —an emancipation that heralded a new era of
civilization. In another passage, Naumann simply referred to this era as the
“iron age.”

Untold potential exists here. All the old concepts of space are shifting. Relations
of support and load have changed. To let huge vaults rest virtually on points is
something so new that the architect, as if ashamed of his youthful strength, still
often finds false piers necessary. Out of a kind of timidness, iron buildings are
still given stone vestibules. Yet the magic of the new art resides precisely in this
quiet and yet so happy emergence from the forest of the past.5?

In the first years of the new century Heinrich Pudor also published a
series of essays on iron construction ~-- mainly in the journal Der Architekt
as well as in a separate brochure of 1904, entitled Die neue Architektur.°°
He causally deduced the aesthetic effect of a technical object (whether a
machine or an iron construction) from the form's immediate accord with its
practical purpose. The basis of aesthetics was the fulfillment of this purpose
with the minimum means. For Pudor “means” signified above all the mate-
rial necessary in the production of the object. He thus expected an enhance-
ment of the aesthetic effect through a reduction of the material expended,
understandably with a concomitant enhancement of the quality of the mate-
rial, which he understood as durability and efficiency. He called this the
“material style,” noting that it “frees us from superfluous decoration and
ornament and combines beautiful purposive form with beautiful material,”
and that it “constitutes the modern form of expression not only in the
applied arts but also in commercial art and industry, and likewise in archi-
tecture and engineering.”™!

To support his thesis, Pudor used a biological analogy. He criticized every
attempt to imitate stone architecture in iron construction and contrasted it
with the ideal of an “airy,” frame-and-skeletal, iron architecture. He spoke of
the “architectural revolution” in progress, made possible by iron. [t unfolded
in two phases: “Here, too, the first period is characterized by the fact that
one was ashamed of iron construction and tried to conceal it from view,
whereas in the second period, whose beginning is marked by the Eiffel

27

Georgiadis

Tower, its naked beauty is exposed to view.’ In general, the Eiffel Tower was
of paradigmatic importance to him. It signaled a historical epoch that was
just beginning.

In the essay “Asthetik des Eisens” (The aesthetics of iron), Wilhelm
Freiherr von Tettau also occupied himself with the well-known prob-
lematics: “Should technically perfect expression be identical with artistically
perfect expression?” Not quite, was his answer, for this overlooked the
actual distinction between science and art. In structural processes the
“power of inner forces” was active, and this was precisely what should be
brought out and articulated. This was the task of art. The inner tension car-
ried to the surface appeared as an interplay of concealment and pronounce-
ment, and was “a matter only of artistic tact.” That which was statically
incomprehensible could be made more apparent to the spectator through
artistic expression. Only through this was aesthetic pleasure possible, for
“I am convinced that aesthetic pleasure is increased with greater compre-
hension of the system.”™

Contradiction

These views could not be established without being contested. Richard
Streiter, for instance, expressed grave doubts. In his book Architektonische
Zeitfragen (Contemporary architectural questions),°> which was conceived as
a critique of Otto Wagner's Moderne Architektur, he nevertheless took posi-
tions on all the important themes of the contemporary architectural debate.
He summarized the discussion on iron construction since Bétticher —
rejecting both the latter's prediction that a “new realm of art-forms” could be
expected from the new constructional material and Wagner's statement
“that wherever art has shaped this material completely new forms have in
fact appeared. Thus it has provided one of the greatest impulses to the
growth of the new style!"®° Finally, Streiter also called to account Heuser's
“compartmented style.”

Not only was Streiter’s own position characterized by the idea of the rela-
tive autonomy of artistic form from technical form, but he even gave the
former unequivocal preference. Although he accepted the possibilities
advanced by the new technical means — he described the extensive use of
iron as a building material as “the greatest constructional achievement of
the modern age” — he was also convinced “that the new technology will not
generate a new style, but that a certain sense of form will artistically develop
the new technology in this or that way.”*” Streiter had some doubt as to

28

Introduction

whether this was indeed possible with iron, that is, whether it lent itself to
artistic treatment or at least allowed such treatment. His response to this
question was similar to Semper’s argument, but it also combined various
other arguments critical of the architectural use of iron into a platform for
its rejection. Understandably, the defense of the architectural body, the sine
qua non of architecture's artistic effect, assumed center stage.

Wherever iron structures of significant dimension stand visible and alone, their
absolute resistance to artistic design becomes apparent. The hope that the
future will bring the solution to something not yet achieved can certainly be
described as illusory. For the possibility of developing an iron construction
through a structural-symbolic shaping of the whole, and especially of the parts,
into a no longer abstract-rigid system but into a concrete-living structural
organism, one whose members by the expression of their corporeality allow us
to feel immediately their cooperation in a “happy state of equilibrium” — this
single possibility of the tectonic “idealization” of the work-form is precluded
by the nature of the material and by the nature of its assembly. The fleshless
thinness and stiff tediousness of structural parts; the system's adherence to
structural calculation; the external uniformity of the elements that in general
disallows recognizing the differences of their load (resistance to tension or
compression); the confusing quantity of crisscrossing, almost incorporeal lines
in large constructions, whose sense and purpose can be understood only by a
technically trained reasoning but not by simple feeling: all this makes iron con-
struction appear indifferent to us — even though, it must be admitted, there is
often a certain aesthetic charm in the overall contour of such works (arched
bridges, the Eiffel Tower) or in the effect of the enormous interiors they make
possible. Yet even the grandest iron structure will not succeed in evoking an
important, profound, and truly artistic mood.%*

Opposition to iron construction was voiced not just by those who wanted
to bring the institution of architecture (with its basic aesthetic assumptions
and normative positions) safely into the new century. Opposition also came
from those movements forming at the turn of the century that, on the one
hand, turned against the stylistic variety of eclecticism and, on the other
hand, perceived the progressive modernization of society and its thorough-
going mechanization of the everyday world to be a menace to cultivated
ways of living and their natural and cultural context. The latter movements
were less interested in aesthetic questions, for they sought to resist, above

29

Georgiadis

all, iron’s “brutal intrusion into life and nature.” Understandably, iron build-
ings thus also became the target of this peculiar mixture of a will to reform
and loyalty to tradition.

“The magic of a solitary mountain landscape,” as it is referred to in an
appeal of 1904 of the Deutscher Bund Heimatschutz (German conservation
federation), “is destroyed by obtrusive buildings. Iron bridges with their
ugly, landscape-defacing forms span our watercourses, even where every
demand of purpose would have been satisfied with simple stone and
wooden bridges.”®? But even the Deutscher Bund Heimatschutz, a move-
ment that first found a foothold in Germany and shortly afterward in
Austria and Switzerland, was realistic enough not to advocate the total
renunciation of the constructions of engineers. Rather, the Heimatschutz
came out in favor of a “gentle” use of new technologies in architecture, that
is, above all in the sense of their harmonious integration into nature. Begin-
ning in 1913, the business manager of the Heimatschutz, Werner Lindner,
made these demands known; ten years later he even wrote a book on the
same theme with the title Die Ingenieurbauten in ihrer guten Gestaltung (Good
design in constructions by engineers).

“Engineering Aesthetics”

The preservation tendencies of the Heimatschutz, which in architecture
occasionally found expression in a plea for a national or vernacular style,
presented the later biographer of Otto Wagner, Joseph August Lux, with the
overt justification for a comprehensive defense of iron architecture, which
he published in his book Ingenieur-Aesthetik (Engineering aesthetics).!' Just
like Lucae or Hofmann before him, Lux was of the opinion that a new era
had been entered, one in which developed technology was the most impor-
tant cultural drive. The difference now, however, was that Lux belonged to a
generation that was in a position to think this assumption through to its
most radical consequences; this meant nothing less than a break with the
traditional aesthetic notions and the positing of an architectural conception
that was deployed as a polar opposite to the doctrines of historical architec-
ture. In the 1870s Lucae could only vaguely sketch the broad outline of this
development. He could not foresee the sharpness of the conflict.

Only one year after Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, in 1909, had described
the beauty of Nike of Samothrace coming to a wretched end in a collision
with a roaring automobile,’ it was the turn of another monument of the
classical cultural heritage. “We cannot help it,” wrote Lux in the introduction

30

Introduction

to his book, “that nowadays, from early childhood onward, technology is
more important than Plato.” Lux explained why this is so a little later on with
the statement that “two worlds are sharply contrasted.” The world of tech-
nology that Lux supported arose independently, even in opposition to any
tradition, in the sense of interrupting historical lines of continuity. For halfa
century theorists had been grappling with the idea of making a start at the
“artistic transfiguration” of technical form, in order — as one hoped — to
save the inherited ideal of beauty from the avalanche of advancing technol-
ogy. To Lux, this idea had become obsolete.

Should technology, which is completely a child of our time, now wear the old
fashions and tailor the old, bygone styles to its youthful, gigantic body? Should
it dress like a great-grandmother? It is a healthy instinct to reject altogether this
retrogression toward old motifs. Artistic form must be discovered anew from the

new elements. This is the problem on which we are all working.

Lux explicitly presented the demand for a “new architecture,” whose
seeds “resided in the technical field.” Its forms would be borne by a new aes-
thetics; its name would be “engineering aesthetics.” The paradigm to which
it had to conform consisted of the products of modern machine technology:
“Our culture is not reflected in the architecture but rather in the vehicles, in
modern transportation technology. If we inquire about the style of our time,
here we have it.”!%5

In positing the imperative of the new style, Lux echoed the ideas of the
Deutscher Werkbund, of which he was a member until 1908. Sachlichkeit
and purposive perfection were thus the leading concepts or, in his words,
the “supreme principles.” Lux again asked whether purposiveness and
beauty were mutually conditioned. He saw their harmony as the realization
not only of an aesthetic principle but even more that of an “ethical princi-
ple.” Truthfulness and solidity release aesthetic feelings, he thought, and the
more purely and completely they were expressed, the more satisfactory
would be their effect. Lies and masquerades were in this sense rejected; they
were even seen as hateful. It is precisely these principles that Lux projected
onto the new architecture of iron, “which impressed the modern time with
its distinct stamp of style.” Iron was “style-forming,” whereas stone killed
every new formal idea. The architecture of iron was “unconditional,” and the
personality that embodied the new spirit in architecture was not that of the
architect but that of the engineer. Lux affirmed that “the engineer is the real

31

Georgiadis

architect of the modern age,” for “not architects but engineers have discov-
ered the language of iron.”

Even though Lux viewed Sachlichkeit, purposiveness, and rational con-
struction as the essential driving forces of the radical break with the tradi-
tion of architecture, on the one hand, and of the emergence of the modern,
unconditional form, on the other hand, he did not want to break definitively
with the idea of the creative act or with the notion of genius that belonged to
idealistic aesthetics. Moreover, he was not convinced that the conditions of
beauty were set principally by technical form: “Thus we should not give
credence to the false view that technical genius works without regard to
aesthetics or, if you will, artistic appearance. Many structures and machines
owe their form not to mere mathematical calculation but to a certain kind of
experience, which offers the design of certain parts to the sense of form.”"”
This sense of form admittedly has nothing at all to do with any “stylistic-
historical influence” but is the result, as Lux timidly notes, of a certain
“presentiment of form.” In conceiving technical form, the engineer proceeds
approximatively, and precisely this fact provides the channels through
which a “sense for a certain exterior harmony” can prevail.

Lux admittedly did not go so far as to propose a grammar of engineered
form, but he nevertheless roughly sketched the formal characteristics of
iron construction. In the process, he reinterpreted in a positive way all the
reproaches that had been made against the works of engineers during sixty
years of debate. Thus the antimonumental effect of iron construction
became one of its greatest virtues, the inclination toward “dematerializa-
tion” its supreme law, and so on. In contrast to stone architecture, the goal
of which was the creation of spatial enclosures, iron construction was a
matter “of mere linear contours, of the fleshless skeleton or the open frame,
in short, the support that transmits the energies and represents lines of
force.” Like Hofmann before him, Lux emphasized the linearity of iron
construction as the essential mark of its aesthetic effect. Through this arose
“new spatial images.” He declined to expand on this statement, but he
stressed that the perception of the beauty of iron construction demanded a
“new eye.”

Lux also discussed ferroconcrete — warning against it rather than approv-
ing of it. He saw the dematerialization produced by iron construction as
jeopardized by the fact that ferroconcrete reintroduced corporeality into
architecture and thus could lead to the temptation of wanting to bring about,
although with other means, “a new era of stone building.”

32

Introduction

Tron: “Style-Forming” and “Style-Inhibiting”

Lux’s Ingenieur-Aesthetik was a polemical tract, the manifestation of a convic-
tion rather than an argumentative effort. What Lux did not achieve, Alfred
Gotthold Meyer, an art historian and professor at the Kénigliche Technische
Hochschule (Royal technical institute) in Berlin-Charlottenburg, had sought
to accomplish a few years earlier. His book Eisenbauten (Iron buildings),
which appeared three years after his death and was planned as the first part
of a stylistic-historical panorama of the nineteenth century, remained
incomplete (a supplementary final chapter was added by Tettau}.

Meyer's enterprise was twofold. First, he attempted to explain theoreti-
cally the special features of iron construction, accompanied by reflections
on its aesthetics, Second, he intended to deduce historically the beginnings
of iron construction and its further development. The fulfillment of this last
task, which Tettau undertook in the added “fourth section” of the volume,
entitled “Kunstformen” (Art-forms), was the least successful. It is a listing of
realized iron constructions in cast iron and rolled iron, without any grand
theoretical claims and intentions.

Regarding the origin of modern iron construction, Meyer referred to the
debate at the end of the eighteenth century concerning the nature of archi-
tecture. It had divided minds into two camps: those who held that architec-
ture was a “naturalisation scientifique,” based upon mathematical rules and
calculation, and those who saw it as a pure creation of artistic genius.
According to Meyer, the shift occurred with Jean-Baptiste Rondelet, who
“treated the structural calculation for the first time as an essential part of the
discipline of construction.” This opened the path to iron’s use as a building
material, for “the nature of iron building is based on ‘rational construction;
by which it is able to resist stress and strain with far less material volume
than any other material.”! Profiting from a new mode of building based on
calculation, iron construction had contributed to its further development up
to the point of perfection, that is, from calculation into formal vision. “It
stands ...so to speak, just at the end of that synthetic path, in which the
problems of mechanics are being transposed from the realm of arithmetic
operations and algebraic formulae into the vision of graphic forms.”'

Thus we may speak of an aesthetics of iron construction in two respects.
Since the purpose of calculation is the building, an “inner vision” is
required that is able to grasp the finished form visually before its erection, a
“pictorial ‘thinking,” as Meyer calls it. “Such ‘calculation’ is then a dispos-
ing of forces, in which what is sought is no longer what is numerically and

33

Georgiadis

technically ‘rational, but rather what has the formally favorable effect.”""! The
“intellectual activity of constructing” and the “sensuous imagination” are
joined; the intellect even surrenders to imagination.

On the other hand, iron construction as a finished, built artifact affects
the observer in the immediate sense of an aisthesis (sensory perception).
Unfortunately, Meyer very soon abandoned the epistemologically risky
realm of “pictorial thinking” in order to examine the aesthetics of iron con-
struction exclusively in the realm of perception. This posed the question of
the “style-forming” or “style-inhibiting” aspects of iron architecture.

Meyer was of the opinion, as was August Schmarsow,!” that architecture
was, above all, an art of space, and that the essential task of architectural crea-
tion was the design of space. The “new spatial value” that iron construction
yielded was therefore the foremost aspect of his consideration. He examined
the Crystak Palace, built for the London World Exhibition of 1851, with this
in mind. Meyer shared Lucae’s enthusiasm and repeated the latter’s charac-
terization of the building as a “piece of sculptured atmosphere.’ He spoke
of the “limitless space,” of the “bright space” that was brought about by
the shadowless, glazed architecture flooded with light, which was still
connected ~ through its structural linearity and Owen Jones’s color treat-
ment — to the “realm of measures and space” (perhaps in the sense of spatial
limitations). These last elements — line and color ~ were, so to speak, the
stylistic support for the building. Although Meyer recognized their artistic
value, he maintained that they were insufficient for “space formation.” The
Crystal Palace’s jatticework was capable only of mere “spatial enclosure” and
“spatial cover.”

According to Meyer, the “new width” was the second aspect of the aes-
thetics of iron construction, which he described by means of the Galerie des
Machines at the Paris World Exhibition of 1889. Here classical tectonics,
which had always presented the problem of the relation between “support
and load,” had been overcome. The hall of pillars and columns, in which the
design of architectural space is based on spatial division, had now become
obsolete as the main form of spatial design in architecture. The hierarchy of
the axes of expansion of the classical spatial system had been stood on its
head. Height was no longer the dominant axis, followed by depth, the direc-
tion of free movement. Breadth now played the critical role in the character-
ization of space. This unified space — Einraum, as Meyer called it ~ had
been brought about by the self-supporting roof, which became possible only
by means of iron construction.

34

Introduction

The “decisive power of the line” became Meyer's third aesthetic char-
acteristic of iron construction, the “new height” that it produced. Meyer
investigated this aspect in the Eiffel Tower, which he characterized as “a
landmark in human history.” He again took up Semper’s argument about
the “invisible architecture” of iron and objected that the three-hundred-
meter-high Eiffel Tower was the most visible structure in Paris. “Invisibil-
ity” was not its characteristic, but rather transparency, and he maintained
that this arose from the reduction of mass to surface and of surface to line.
In judging it, the historical concept of style, which had developed from
“other materials and other constructional achievements,” likewise failed.
Although Meyer stressed the Eiffel Tower’s “charm of the stupendous” and
even its mysterious effect, he noted that these judgments had “nothing to
do...with aesthetic pleasure.” He even criticized the linear labyrinth in
some parts of the structure as style-inhibiting. What Meyer experienced
as nonaesthetic, he actually described in terms of an aesthetics of the sub-
lime. His own aesthetic view was, however, so bound by the idea of beauty
that he could not exploit the theoretical opportunity that he himself had
opened up.

The fourth and last part of the aesthetic tetraptychon on iron construc-
tion carried the title “Neue Linien” (New lines). Here the emphasis was on
bridge construction and the question of whether it should be classed as
architecture. Meyer thought that bridges did not shape space but that they
were “without doubt an architectural task.” The “power of the line” ex-
pressed itself here in the sense of the contour of the structure, and it was at
the same time its most important aesthetic component.

Meyer's concept of architecture started with an aesthetics of space in
the sense of creating spatial divisions and enclosures. But he had to relin-
quish it piece by piece in the course of his presentation of iron construction.
The expectation that this process could generate a new conception of space
remained unfulfilled. The question of balance between “style-forming” and
“style-inhibiting” elements of the (no longer) new construction was not
resolved. He was thoroughly convinced that with the help of iron the birth of
a new architecture was taking place, an architecture that could find accep-
tance even if through a process of “habituation to form” (Formgewéhnung).
But he also maintained that “the ‘building-art’ arising in this way would
never be able to drive out and replace monumental style-architecture, as
some all-too-ardent prophets of iron construction were claiming.”

35

Georgiadis

An Almost Aesthetic Pleasure

The idea of “pictorial thinking” (Meyer) or “sense of beauty” (Lang) — later
described by Muthesius as “aesthetic subconsciousness,” a process that was
active at the time technical form was being invented — was further devel-
oped by the art historian and cultural critic Karl Scheffler. His book Moderne
Baukunst (Modern architecture) dealt with contemporary architectural ques-
tions and appeared in the same year as Meyer's Fisenbauten.’™ Scheffler did
not dispute that moments of imagination contributed to the phase of invent-
ing technical form. He even went so far as to claim that precisely for this
reason technical invention went beyond profane considerations of useful-
ness and as such belonged “to the domain of that higher purposiveness
based on knowledge,” that is, to the domain in which beautiful stylistic forms
reside. It is quite a different case with construction, which was directed
toward “profane material necessity,” toward the functioning of building
members. Construction was admittedly the point of departure for form; it
created the basis for it, even though it was no “free creation of form.” And
thus Scheffler could aphoristically maintain that “construction is not art,’"'5
for art was independent from constraints of matter.

“The artist dematerializes matter,’" Scheffler characteristically noted.
Yet he thought this “dematerialization” was only metaphorical, that the art-
ist “substitutes the symbol of necessity for necessity itself” Otherwise, the
act of liberating matter would presuppose the existence of matter, that is, in
the sense of the presence of mass from which the artist could shape the
art-form. The conclusion was thus evident and history had, according to
Scheffler, repeatedly shown “that there has never been a monumental archi-
tecture that has not made use of stone.”""”

This view at the same time determined the author's position on iron.
This material was, in a much truer sense than any other that preceded it, a
constructional material, “and thus it excludes the free art-form even more.”!8
In fact, every attempt to win an art-form for it had foundered. How could it
be otherwise for a building material that was “completely lacking in plasti-
city?” As Scheffler noted, “the line means nothing in architecture, mass every-
thing.’"° Nevertheless, he was prepared to grant a certain aesthetic value to
engineering constructions. This was expressed in the features of a “heroic
monumentality,” in a “primitively refined magnificence.” Scheffler charac-
terized the respective sensations as “an almost aesthetic pleasure” and thus
unconsciously found himself, just like Meyer, close to the aesthetics of the
sublime. Far from disputing iron construction’s right to exist, Scheffler even

36

Introduction

spoke of an iron style: “The iron structure has a type of beauty of the second
degree, a bound constructional beauty and a particular idea of style. The result:
the iron style.”12¢ He nonetheless rigorously opposed the attempts at a subse-
quent “aestheticization” of iron: “It is madness to want to salvage higher
aesthetics by associating historical art-forms with iron constructions.”

Scheffler’s standpoint implied a stylistic duality that depended both on
the use of stone (fit for art) and on the pure constructional material of iron.
These two styles — or “form worlds” — were irreconcilable, and any attempt
to combine them was doomed to failure. In a certain respect, this view of
things implied a radicalism of appearance that bound Scheffler not with
the defenders of stone architecture but rather with Lux and the later avant-
garde: stone, which during the entire debate represented the normative
concept of architecture, and iron, to which the role of the embodiment of the
modern zeitgeist was attributed, were ~ according to Scheffler — not com-
plementary but incompatible. However, the author did not use this incom-
patibility to establish a historical break, but rather, as previously mentioned,
a duality of styles. Scheffler did not divulge what this dualism might mean
for architecture's evolutionary perspective, and he concluded his pertinent
observations with the following enigmatic lines:

If one day we were to have our own grand architecture, the characteristics [of
iron structures] would certainly recall in more ways than one the severe, almost
Gothic seriousness of engineers. A long excursion is still needed before lasting
results can be achieved; but iron will better serve the architecture of the future
the less it claims to be an artistic material.12?

A Powerful Force in Simple Form

On 15 January 1908 the Kénigliche Akademie des Bauwesens (Royal acad-
emy of building) in Berlin arranged a competition open to “subjects of the
German Reich” for the best “treatise on the artistic design of iron construc-
tion in the field of architecture and engineering.” The submissions were
to include verbal and pictorial presentations of previous achievements in
this field, a critical evaluation of them, and the prospect of the aesthetic
possibilities of iron construction. The results of the competition were dis-
appointing: in all, only five contributions were received by the jury, which
consisted of the president and six members of the academy (three architects
and three engineers). The committee found none of the submissions worthy
of the first prize and therefore refrained from awarding one.

37

Georgiadis

The reason for this fiasco is that by the end of the first decade of the
twentieth century this subject had largely been exhausted. During more
than fifty years of debate on the aesthetics of iron construction, all the
essential arguments had already been made and all the main positions
articulated. There was hardly anything new to add. This was confirmed, in
fact, by two revised essays, both of which won second prize and were pub-
lished by the academy.

A passage in the first essay, written by the royal building commissioner
in Strasbourg, the engineer Dr. Hermann Jordan, merits special atten-
tion.'?3 It is in the section with the subtitle “Allgemeine Betrachtungen tiber
die asthetische Wirkung von Eisenkonstruktionen” (General observations
on the aesthetic effect of iron constructions).'% According to Jordan, this
subject extended beyond the narrow boundaries of this branch of knowledge
and could only be discussed within the framework of a discipline that
possessed an appropriate theoretical instrument for such a question: philo-
sophical aesthetics. The author criticized the notion that the aesthetic
pleasure of viewing a building depended on the degree of its purposive-
ness and on understanding the function of its parts. Muthesius provided
him with the argument: functional purpose was not the only critical aspect
of the modern designer’s work; the unconscious drive toward pleasing
forms should also be at work.'?5 Jordan expanded this position by main-
taining that between the basic structural idea and the design there is a
phase of “continuous selection between different possibilities.” To this he
added, “Thus scientific considerations and calculations are often of little
help”? — implying that the constructional form cannot be accounted for
simply by arguments on the level of the rationality of purpose. But he rela-
tivized even the thesis of “pleasing forms,” in that he asserted that the
aesthetic effects of iron construction did not necessarily mean that it was
also beautiful. “Aesthetically effective” is a much more general concept
than “beautiful.”?7

Jordan seems to have had his doubts even about the harmonious effect
{as a condition of beauty) of iron construction. Harmony was “unity in mul-
tiplicity,” he noted, and from this position he compared the machine form
with the iron structure. One could well claim that a machine or a vehicle was
harmonious because its design depended on the harmony of its various
functional parts. The “unity in multiplicity” would be realized here, just as it
was in nature, even if on a lower plane. Hence there was the aesthetic effect
of locomotives, vehicles, bicycles, and ocean liners. It was completely differ-

38

Introduction

ent with iron construction. For there one had no multitude of functional
parts but rather very simple, clearly visible functions that could be met by a
small number of structural elements. Nevertheless, one could also speak of
an “aesthetic effect” of iron construction that was in no way inferior to that
of machines. Jordan solved the apparent puzzle of this position with the
help of Karl Groos’s Aesthetik.

In order better to explain this effect, | must again return to the book by Groos
that has already been mentioned several times. Among the various aesthetic
modifications, Groos also explains the concept of the sublime. His investiga-
tions led him to the conclusion that the sublime required, on the one hand,
powerful dimensions exceeding the average, and, on the other hand, simple
forms. “The sublime is @ powerful force in simple form."128

Uncertain of his own discovery, Jordan did not dare to attribute fully
the characteristic of the sublime to iron construction. Thus he spoke of the
Eiffel Tower, the “American suspension bridges,” and the large railroad ter-
minals as works that were “more or less ‘a powerful force in simple form?”
Nevertheless, with respect to large iron construction Jordan was the first to
abandon the aesthetics of the beautiful. He opened the perspective of the
aesthetics of the sublime and named it as such. This occurred inconspicu-
ously, one might say incidentally, in an otherwise very mediocre text.

Ferroconcrete

In 1911 E. von Mecenseffy’s Die kiinstlerische Gestaltung der Eisenbetonbauten
(The artistic design of ferroconcrete buildings) was published as a supple-
mentary volume to Fritz von Emperger’s multivolume Handbuch fir Eisen-
betonbau (Handbook of ferroconcrete building).° Mecenseffy approached
his subject with extreme care, or rather, in an exploratory manner, and the
significance of his book lies less in the information conveyed than in the
fact that it was one of the few works that attempted to take a position on this
issue. It was, at least, the first thorough investigation of ferroconcrete to be
written systematically.

From the end of the 1880s onward, and above all in the first and second
decades of the twentieth century, there was considerable discussion of this
topic in architectural journals. Yet in a surprising way, this very extensive
architectural literature on concrete and ferroconcrete was limited to the
technical aspects of application and hardly touched upon aesthetic prob-

39

Georgiadis

lems. The reason for this might be found in the conditions surrounding the
introduction of concrete as sketched by Mecenseffy. He thought that the
advent of this material in architecture had encountered far less resistance
than iron and gave two reasons for this. The first was the general condition
of architecture at the time, which was characterized by “a certain feeling of
unease [Katzenjammerstimmung] toward the inherited world of forms,” and
the second was to be found in the properties of the new material itself,
namely, concrete’s ability to adapt “to any possible formal language.” As he
noted, “this coincidence appears to have been the reason that ferroconcrete
was approached in a more unbiased way than, for example, its immediate
predecessor among the new building materials ~ iron — the appropriate
form for which one still struggles after heatedly today.” Mecenseffy’s per-
sonal view was that the promise of a new architectural style linked to the use
of iron had not been redeemed: “Today we still experience such forms as
ugly and strange."0! He noted that as far as the aesthetics of ferroconcrete
itself were concerned, the process of producing concrete buildings (wherein
a formless material is stamped into forms) “imposed on the architect an
extensive self-denial” because the forms permitted only “fairly meager geo-
metrical surfaces and bodies.”

The same view was represented a few years earlier by the Austrian archi-
tect of the courts of law in Salzburg and Brno, Alexander von Wielemans, at
the seventh International Congress of Architects, 1906." It actually seems
that Mecenseffy borrowed his ideas about the aesthetic design of ferro-
concrete largely from Wielemans’s publications. In his excellent study Con-
crete, 1959, Peter Collins rightly emphasized Wielemans’s closing remarks
on the question of style. Wielemans noted that he was not preoccupied first
and foremost with the search for a new style, for a style arose in a fairly
natural way out of the methods of production that the material itself dic-
tated. Nevertheless, in his own buildings Wielemans could not completely
do without decorative elements applied to the concrete shell of the house.
This seems, in turn, to confirm Collins's thesis: “Throughout the whole
period, the originality being sought in concrete forms tended to be the origi-
nality of artistic inspiration, rather than the originality conferred by new
structural methods.”

Wielemans delivered the same lecture at the next international congress,
which took place in Vienna in 1908. Two years later, the annual meeting of
the Deutscher Werkbund convened in Berlin to address, among other
things, the topic “material and style.” In his relevant remarks, the first presi-

40

Introduction

dent of the Werkbund, Theodor Fischer, rejected the view that the use of
the new material alone might lead to new forms, and he drew attention to
the related design task facing the architect: only his achievement could
transform concrete into an art-form. Karl Ernst Osthaus expressed himself
in a similar fashion, seeing the possibility of a new style emerging from the
interplay of the new technical possibilities and the architect’s imagina-
tion. 34 In addition to their influence on the internal debate of the Deutscher
Werkbund, these observations possess a particular significance, for they
lead smoothly to the intellectual edifice of that architect whose work became
the focus of Giedion’s remarks on ferroconcrete in Bauen in Frankreich —
Le Corbusier. As a member of the audience at the Berlin conference, Le
Corbusier not only carefully recorded the local course of events but also inte-
grated the ideas articulated there into his theory, as can be seen —at the
latest — in his book of 1923, Vers une architecture.

“Architecture?”
Shortly before the outbreak of World War 1, all the essential arguments for
and against the use of iron and ferroconcrete in architecture were thus
on the table. When Giedion in 1928 (in the context of “new architecture”)
addressed the question of the relation of architecture to technology and
sought to answer the question historically in his book Bauen in Frank-
reich, the themes upon which his argument developed had almost been for-
gotten. As Peter Meyer noted, the subject, “despite its topicality, had almost
disappeared.” 3°

Forgotten, above all, was the great debate over “dematerialization,” which
the shock of iron construction had provoked. During the year before Bauen
in Frankreich was published, one of the staunchest advocates of the new
architecture, Walter Curt Behrendt, described the “buildings in the new
style,” above all in terms of their corporeal qualities. They revealed their
“common characteristics” as “works of simple, austere form and clear con-
struction; with flat, smooth walls, completely flat roofs, and rectilinear
contours. The articulation of the building bodies, as a rule, was produced
only by a more or less lively stepping of the building masses and by the dis-
tribution of windows and openings on the wall surface.” In this connec-
tion Behrendt thought that the new technical facts, derived from the use of
“new building materials such as iron, concrete, and glass,” comprised one of
the essential factors of the “new style,” which he logically referred to as the
“material style” (Materialstil).138

41

Georgiadis

But corporeality was not to Giedion’s liking. He therefore gave new life
to the large iron constructions of the nineteenth century, which were used
for the completely new building tasks of the time: exhibition halls, rail-
road stations, and large department stores. He made them the elements of
a second, parallel, and alternative history of architecture —in a specific
overturning of the discipline’s traditions that pointed directly to the Mod-
ernism of the twentieth century. He selected France as the field of his inves-
tigations even though his theory had profited mainly from the debate in
Germany, which had been going on among architects for eight decades. The
concepts he used in describing and interpreting iron construction, his
thoughts regarding the role of the architect and the engineer, his ideas on
the interrelationships between a visionary conception and a rational calcula-
tion of structures — all provide unmistakable and undeniable evidence of his
debt to that debate. Even the imbalance between the first part of the book (in
which he conceptually grasped the aesthetics of the new architecture by
reflecting on iron construction) and the second part (in which he applied
this aesthetics to buildings in ferroconcrete) was a clear reflection of the
German debate.

That kind of connection between building in iron (the creations of the
engineers of the nineteenth century) and building in ferroconcrete (the
works of architects from Auguste Perret via Tony Garnier to Le Corbusier
and “the next generation”) is the new element in Bauen in Frankreich. This
fact becomes especially clear if one compares it to another book, which
appeared at almost the same time as Giedion’s and which also had as its
object the architectural possibilities of ferroconcrete: Julius Vischer and
Ludwig Hilberseimer’s Beton als Gestalter (Concrete as shaper of form).
The introductory text by Hilberseimer admittedly established a connection
between the iron skeleton and the ferroconcrete skeleton, as when he referred
to them as two methods of scaffolding construction. Yet, when it comes to
the architectural design of ferroconcrete, this connection appears largely
without background, as a type of parthenogenesis.1%°

Giedion’s historical operation is not without problems. Aesthetically, he
situates works that were profoundly different in their corporeal presence in
a single line of tradition. These include the skeletal engineering structures
and the cubic, corporeal productions of ferroconcrete, above all those of Le
Corbusier. The basic incompatibility and aesthetic incommensurability can
be neutralized only when one assumes the perspective of the observer as a
point of departure for the events. And this is precisely what Giedion does.

42

Introduction

Equipped with the visual apparatus of modern man — formed and educated,
above all, through the study of Cubism and Neoplasticism — he wanders
through his objects in cinematographic fashion.'*° Thus it turns out that for
purposes of their description and interpretation he can uniformly apply the
conceptual and theoretical instruments that he had developed by recording
nineteenth-century iron construction — as a comparison of two of the figure
captions from Bauen in Frankreich will reveal:

Arnodin. Pont transbordeur, Le Corbusier. Pessac housing
Marseilles. 1905 settlement. 1925

[This structure] cannot be excluded Corbusier's houses are neither spa-
from the urban image, whose fan- tial nor plastic: air flows through
tastic crown it denotes. But its inter- them! Air becomes a constituent
play with the city is neither “spatial” factor! Neither space nor plastic
nor “plastic.” It engenders float- form counts, only RELATION and
ing relations and interpenetrations. INTERPENETRATION! There is only
The boundaries of architecture are a single, indivisible space. The
blurred.!4! shells fall away between interior

and exterior. "42

Giedion’s procedure resembled nothing less than a theoretical somer-
sault. It was only justified if one completely overlooked and ignored the
corporeal attributes of architecture. That such a method had to lead to a new
concept of architecture was a component of the strategy Giedion pursued in
Bauen in Frankreich. He was certainly not the first to demand that the disci-
pline withdraw from its normative boundaries. The discussion about the
“new way of building,” or the “new style,” had —since Bétticher — touched
the core of this problem. It spread itself like a film over all efforts, not only
ona theoretical but also on a practical level, and finally led to modern archi-
tecture. Hence, Behrendt did not stand alone when he wrote in his afore-
mentioned book, “Therefore no alternative remains but to begin anew, to give
up the old concepts of form that have become invalid and proceed in our
own independent way by constructing, forming, designing.”

Giedion’s way of seeing led him one important step further. He not only
challenged the appropriateness of the inherited concepts of form, he also
questioned the legitimacy of the architectural discipline itself. This element
constitutes, so to speak, the relevance of his book to the time when it was
published. It is best seen in a single phrase in the book, which, under the

43

Georgiadis

chapter heading “Architecture?” is presented almost as a conclusion to the
history of the book: “It seems doubtful whether the limited con-
cept of ‘architecture’ will indeed endure.’™* This expresses not
only the “radicality of knowledge” that was transmitted by Bauen in Frank-
reich (as Walter Benjamin thought when he read it) but much more a radi-
cality of attitude, that is, a “radicality of conviction.”

Il.
History of the Book

In a letter of 6 October 1926 Giedion offered Professor Georg Biermann,
editor of the journal Cicerone, a series of essays on the new architecture:
“You shall not be lacking architectural essays from me,” he wrote.'*6 A pro-
posed text on Le Corbusier would thus be expanded in order to include the
whole of the “situation of French architecture.” At the same time Giedion
informed him that he was at work on a book. “I am working on my book on
the new architecture, which will perhaps be a rather fundamental text, if my
intensity percolates evenly through all parts of it”? In fact, a few months
later three articles in a series, “Zur Situation der franzésischen Architektur”
(On the situation of French architecture), appeared in Cicerone: the first in
January 1927, the last in May 1927.48 With the first issue Giedion became
the “independent supervisor” of the part of Cicerone dedicated to modern
architecture.

Sometime between October 1926 and March 1927 Giedion must have
proposed to the editor of the journal that his material on French architecture
be published as a book. At least Georg Biermann, in a letter of 16 March
1927, returned to this proposal after praising Giedion’s contributions to the
journal and speaking of their “eminent significance”: “I will return to the
idea of publishing a book after Taut’s book has appeared.(“9)... If it is a
success, as I certainly hope, I would gladly take up your publishing idea and
make a similar second volume from your writings on the new French archi-
tecture.”!5° Although he received no definite commitment from Biermann,
Giedion tackled his publication proposal head on.

Thus, on 24 April 1927 Giedion contacted Hans Jenny-Diirst, professor
of structural engineering at the ETH in Zurich, to request that he correct any
technical inadequacies in his text. This must refer to an early version of the
manuscript. One year later, on 27 April 1928, Giedion reported in a letter to
Biermann a discussion “with the structural engineer at the Technische

44

Introduction

Hochschule” that had taken place that day. “Since he is a European author-
ity, it will be advantageous, especially when we are confronted with the reac-
tion, if we could, even belatedly mention his contribution.”"5! As the reader
of Bauen in Frankreich learns from a comment in the Preliminary Remark,
the resulting corrections could not always be fully taken into account, “due
to the advanced stage of production” of the book.

In June 1927 a provisional title for the book, Neues Bauen in Frankreich
(New architecture in France), was chosen (as a letter from Biermann dated
23 June shows). Biermann, who in the meantime had apparently decided to
publish the book, also held out the prospect of a French edition, published
jointly with Editions Crés in Paris. Yet it appears from a letter of Giedion’s
to Biermann of 15 August 1927 that there was still no contract for the
German edition. Giedion asked for — and this was later accepted by the pub-
lisher — 12 percent royalties, with the amount for the first one thousand
copies to be paid upon publication. He left the date of publication open, for
“a skillfully done work of propaganda [is] more important than a precipitate
publication.”'%? But he remarked that the book should be on the market no
later than the beginning of 1928.

Giedion spent some weeks in Paris in late October and early November
1927 collecting material for the book. At the end of November, he was still
sending letters from Zurich to various addresses in France (Diréction des
Chemins de Fer du Nord, Printemps Department Store, Bibliotheque des
Arts et des Métiers), above all inquiring about photographic materials that
he needed for the book. On 19 November 1927 Biermann returned to the
question of the title, a question that was to haunt the book for some time
even after its publication. According to Biermann, “the new architecture in
France should, in any case, not be missing from the title, however much
your real emphasis is on ferroconcrete.”'53 On the matter of the typographi-
cal design of the book, Biermann wrote:

As regards the artistic production, we should try to make do without an artist
this time, for the public has had more than enough of that in the last two Taut
books. Simplicity and clarity seem to me to be the style that the time needs,
even in book architecture. I believe that as far as the technical quality of the
book is concerned, we can in this instance guarantee the indicated direction
without the help of an artist, which under the circumstances could be very
dangerous,5*

45

Introduction

Giedion began the “propaganda” for his book at the beginning of 1928.
On 6 February he was in Berlin speaking on “Eisen, Eisenbeton, Bauen in
Frankreich” (Iron, ferroconcrete, building in France), in a series of lectures
at the Staatliche Kunstbibliothek in which other prominent representatives
of the new architecture also took part (fig. 11}. The new architectural tasks
of the nineteenth century — railroad stations, department stores, exhibition
halls — were central to his remarks, and they were discussed from the point
of view of the aesthetic possibilities of using the new materials and struc-
tural methods. The contents of his lecture were thus within the framework
of his forthcoming book. As Alfred Gellhorn commented, “The lecturer was,
on the whole, the kind of speaker one may meet only once in a lifetime. His
highly succinct manner of speaking, presenting totalities and penetrating
the essence with only three words, signified something extraordinary.”55

In view of his subsequent publication, the title Giedion chose for his
Berlin lecture is revealing. Building with the new materials iron and ferro-
concrete appeared as the first part of the title, to which was added the refer-
ence to the country that served as the field for his investigation, France.
Furthermore, Giedion used the word Bauen (building), not the notion neue
Architektur (new architecture), which Biermann had proposed as part of a
title for the book. That this corresponded to Giedion’s idea of a book title is
borne out by an undated typescript whose accompanying instructions indi-
cate that it was intended for the typesetter. It repeats the title of the Berlin
lecture, but gives as an additional component of the main title “CONSTRUC-
TION BECOMES DESIGN.”#5¢

A few days after his Berlin engagement, Giedion was in Hannover. Ina
lecture to Alexander Dorner’s Kestner Society (fig. 111), Giedion drew an arc
from the first iron constructions of the nineteenth century to the work of Le
Corbusier and established himself as “an enthusiastic apologist for the most
recent architectural intentions.” According to one attendee, the lecture was
accompanied by “a wealth of largely unknown slides.”!7 On 1 June Giedion
spoke on the same topic at the University of Zurich. The publication of his
book was announced on this occasion.'>*

Giedion wrote to Robert Mallet-Stevens on 8 March 1928 that the book
was at the typesetter’s. In April Giedion was in close contact with the pub-
lisher concerning the correcting of proofs, and this process lasted until the
end of May. He placed great importance on this matter, for “the material
of the book is quite delicate, and I must be painstakingly conscientious
about how I express myself on such a controversial subject.” Neverthe-

47

Fig. 11. Announcement of a lecture series at the Staatliche Kunstbibliothek in Berlin,
This event marked Giedion’s first lecture on the subject of his book Building in France.

Courtesy Archiv S. Giedion, Institut fiir Geschichte und Theorie der Architektur, ETH-

Introduction

less, there were continual disagreements, for instance, when Giedion
noticed in his first galleys that the question mark in the chapter title “Archi-
tecture?” was missing. “This gives the whole chapter a different meaning,”
he wrote to the publisher on 25 May. “I must ask you not to undertake
any changes of meaning without asking me, or else unwelcome things
will happen for which I cannot be responsible." The error nevertheless
remained uncorrected, and the question mark only appears in the book’s
table of contents.’

Giedion was also very concerned about effective advertising. He planned
preprints for large newspapers and put together lists of potential review-
ers. The publisher's advertising campaign actually began in early June.
A four-page prospectus was published (fig. tv) from which we learn the defi-
nitive title of the book, about which there was a fight until the very last
moment.'*? Sometime between the end of January and the end of May
(the exact date cannot be determined), Giedion decided on the title Bauen in
Frankreich, Eisen, Eisenbeton (Building in France, Iron, Ferroconcrete). As an
alternative, he considered reversing the order, that is, Eisen, Eisenbeton,
Bauen in Frankreich. But he categorically rejected the rather nebulous pro-
posals of the publisher. These wavered between the title Neue Baukunst in
Frankreich (New architecture in France) and a formulation beginning with
the word Eisenbeton (Ferroconcrete).'} The final title did not actually exist
until 1 June 1928, as is clear from a letter of this date written by Giedion to
the publisher:

Confirming our two telephone conversations. Following our discussion today,
the cover and jacket will read:
BUILDING IN FRANCE
BUILDING IN IRON
BUILDING IN FERROCONCRETE
The inner book title [will read]:
BUILDING IN FRANCE
IRON
FERROCONCRETE
.. The key word in the literature must be BUILDING IN FRANCE."

The prospectus also gives the name of the book’s designer: “Prof.

Moholy-Nagy, Dessau.” Exactly when Moholy-Nagy was taken on (against the
publisher’s original intention to avoid hiring an artist} cannot be deter-

49

Fig. 111. Invitation to a lecture by Sigfried Giedion on the subject “Building in France in the

Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries” at the Kestner Society in Hannover on 9 February

1928. Courtesy Archiv S. Giedion, Institut fiir Geschichte und Theorie der Architektur, ETH-

Honeggerbero.

SIGFRIED GIEDION

BAUEN IN

FRANKREICH
EISEN

EISENBETON

130 Seiten und 139 Abbildungen
Buchausstattung Prof. Moholy-
Nagy-Dessau

Preis:

Kartonlert M. 8.50
Ganzleinenband M. 10.50

KLINKHARDT 4 BIERMANN


Introduction

mined. However, it is certain that he followed Giedion’s very precise instruc-
tions about the typographic design. Giedion’s contribution took the form of
layout sketches from his own hand (see Appendix). The book was finally
printed during the last days of May, and an edition of three thousand copies
was published at the beginning of June.

Bauen in Frankreich, Bauen in Eisen, Bauen in Eisenbeton met with a
mainly positive response. People were especially impressed by its catchy
design, its wealth of illustrations, and its striking textual commentary. A few
aspects appear to have played a special role in its reception. Thus several
reviewers saw the book as a rehabilitation of the nineteenth century. “When
someone like Giedion places the accents correctly,” wrote C. O. Jatho, “one
arrives at a fuller appreciation of the much-maligned nineteenth century.”
Reading the book in a similar way, Karl With maintained that the new archi-
“tecture with respect to “the construction problem already is a ‘legitimate
part’ of the development of the nineteenth century.”* The anonymous
commentator from the Dresdner Zeitung spoke of a “new discovery of the
nineteenth century in a field... that is generally despised: that of architec-
ture.”*7 And Alfred Gellhorn even characterized the book as a “clearance of
the nineteenth century’s name.”!%*

A series of reviewers stressed the relevance of the topic, above all, with
respect to the lack of assent still plaguing the new architecture. Gustav Stotz
thus noted:

Giedion uncovered . . . the basis of a tradition, which may be described as the only
true one for our contemporary architecture, whose decisive forms are being
created in iron and concrete. The book gains enormous relevance and liveliness
through the way it reveals the connections and relations between the constructive
efforts of the previous century and the modern efforts in the field in question. '©

Curt Glaser wrote that Giedion’s book shows that the new architecture
“did not spring arbitrarily from the brain of a few artistic revolutionaries,
but rather had been prepared for a long time.”'”° “After reading this book,”
declared Peter Meyer, “no one will again be able to dismiss modern archi-
tecture as traditionless and antitraditional Bolshevism nor maintain that
national nuances become smothered by constructional buildings.”"7!

Yet the national aspects of the book clearly irritated many, mainly
German critics: “One would have wanted to have the only lightly sketched
connections to the great constructors of England and Germany, and even

51

Fig. 1v. Page one of a four-page advertisement for Building in France with handwritten

annotations by Sigfried Giedion. Courtesy Archiv S. Giedion, Institut fir Geschichte und

Georgiadis

America, further elaborated,” wrote Gellhorn in the previously mentioned
review.'”? Paul Joseph Cremers did not share Giedion’s optimism regarding
the further development of “industrialized architecture” in France and
added confidently, “Many signs indicate that Germany will take the lead."!73
On the other hand, there were also instances where Bauen in Frankreich
became the occasion to denounce the backwardness of the German scene.
This was the case with Paul Klopfer, whose main assault was aimed at the
advocates of the Heimatschutz.'”

Some critics stressed the imbalance between the two parts of the book.
The chapter on iron generally came off better than that on ferroconcrete.
According to Gellhorn, for instance, “the first part of the book, which is ded-
icated to building in iron, is the most enlightening and stimulating.”?”> The
reviewer for Hoch + Tiefoau found that the development of ferroconcrete
was “only lightly touched upon.”!”¢

Understandably, there were a few who disapproved of Bauen in Frank-
retth as a whole. The viewpoints varied from critic to critic. Leo Adler, for
instance, reproached Giedion for having fallen into the very difficulty he
professed to criticize: aestheticism. Because he polemicized against stylistic
romanticism, he closed his eyes to the romanticism of twentieth-century
engineers, as realized, for instance, by Gropius in the Bauhaus in Dessau.
Adler characterized the book’s passages on Le Corbusier as “pure propa-
ganda.”!”” Herman Sdérgel expressed this differently; he felt that the aes-
thetics that Giedion derived from the materials of iron and, in particular,
ferroconcrete were unsuited for precisely the building task where they lay
claim to validity in the twentieth century — residential construction. “When
Giedion speaks of the demand for flushing the new house with air, inside
and out, from below (!) and above, then one can just as well say that this is
precisely what the house should protect us from, for otherwise we would
hardly need a roof over our heads.”!78

But the general feeling remained positive. Prominent critics expressed
their enthusiasm for the book. Its modernity appeared to be the main reason
for its positive reception. Max Osborn thought that “this development [of
modern architecture} has never been shown more concisely, more plausibly,
or more obviously (particularly the captioned illustrations).””° Justus Bier
joined him, speaking of “Giedion’s bold and captivating book.”!®° And,
finally, Adolf Behne noted, “The book, filled with important new material,
with Moholy’s splendid attention to typography, belongs with those that are
indispensable.”

52

Introduction

Among the judgments pronounced on Bauen in Frankreich are those con-
tained in personal letters to Giedion. Paul Klopfer was among the first to con-
tact him: “It was particularly satisfying for my own deductions,” he wrote on
25 June 1928, “to get assurance from you that there was a question mark
behind architecture in the usual sense. I will also order the book for my school,
for it holds great pedagogical value. My somewhat old-fashioned faculty mem-
bers may also benefit, and I, too, for they do not always believe me.

Walter Benjamin, who at Giedion’s urging received a complimentary
copy from the publisher, accepted it with the following enthusiastic words:

Dear Mr. Gidion [sic]: .

When I received your book, the few passages that | read electrified me in
such a way that ! decided not to continue with the reading until I could get
more in touch with my own related investigations than I had been, due to exter-
nal circumstances, when the book arrived. {n the last few days things have
started to move again, and [ spend hours with your book, in admiration. So far,

I only know its last part. I deliberately write while I can control the excitement it
has caused me. Your book presents one of those rare instances familiar to every-
body: to know, before even touching something (or someone, a book, a house, a
person, etc.), that this touch will turn out to be most significant. This premoni-
tion does not deceive.

I am studying in your book {among so many other things that most directly
concern me) the difference between radical conviction and radical knowledge
that refreshes the heart. You possess the latter, and therefore you are able to illu-
minate, or rather to uncover, the tradition by observing the present. Hence the
nobility of your work, which I admire most, next to its radicalism. 1 would be
very glad to be able to talk with you about this. | would be grateful if you were to
remember me during some stay in Berlin. If 1 am in Paris, in the spring, J will
take the liberty of letting you know.

In closing, please take with my last words my tardy thanks for sending me
your book.

With sincere compliments

15 February 1929

Berlin-Grunewald

Delbriickstrae 23

Yours very sincerely,
Walter Benjamin!!83]

53

ot
WoL ANyos

TPE eTsScabAews?

fred sutne hie atten thy


Georgiadis

Giedion also sent his book to his old teacher Heinrich Wélfflin, whose
enthusiasm was restrained.'*

Despite the excellent critical reception, sales did not materialize for
Bauen in Frankreich. During the first month after its publication some three
hundred copies were sold, but by the end of the year this number had not
even tripled. The publisher, Georg Biermann, brought up these difficulties
in a letter to Giedion of 12 December 1928 and thought that they could be
attributed to the choice of title:

The sale of your book is very slow despite the Christmas advertising. They are a
little despondent in Leipzig and cannot explain why a book that has received
such stunning critical acclaim sells so miserably. I don’t think Goo copies have
been sold to date.!'85! | am convinced that the title is to blame, and I seriously
regret having allowed you to twist my arm at the last minute. I foresaw the con-
sequences and can prove to you, in black and white, that in a case like this one
should not reject in advance the wise experiences of an old publisher. 18°

Giedion replied on 29 December. He felt that the sales were depressing
and insisted that the book was a “decent product.” The many complimentary
reviews proved that. He pleaded for an intensification of advertising (“we
must proceed in the American fashion”) and proposed the publication of a
new prospectus (figs. v, v1). As for the title, he considered a change, which
would be made in connection with the second edition. This would appear
simultaneously with a French edition of the book and would be an expanded
version of the original German text.'®” The title of the French edition would
be Lorigine de Varchitecture contemporaine (The origin of contemporary archi-
tecture); the German title would correspondingly be Ursprung des neuen
Bauens. Giedion’s proposed change indicated that he suspected the tactical
problem of connecting the “new architecture” with one country (France),
which the book's German target audience would regard as less a prototype
and more a competitor. Biermann agreed with this, apparently forgetting his
old proposals for a title but not his reproaches against Giedion: “Believe me,”
he wrote Giedion on 5 January 19269, “the failure of your book can only be
blamed on its foolish title. No German, not even a German architect, is
interested in the new architecture in France, but yes, in the most important
problem — building in iron and ferroconcrete. As long as this title is not
changed, my feeling is that all efforts are in vain.” Biermann also insisted
on this view in later letters sent to Giedion.

56

Introduction

Giedion applied directly to Editions Crés for the first time on 3 April
1929. He referred to his correspondence with Le Corbusier who, as Giedion
wrote, was the supervisor of a publication project for this publisher on the
topic of “modern architecture,” in which the translation of Bauen in Frank-
reich would be the first volume of a proposed series. For the French edition,
Giedion held out the prospect of including additional unpublished docu-
ments. On 8 May 1929 Giedion contacted the architect Frank Otten in
Brussels, whom Alberto Sartoris recommended to him for the French trans-
lation.’ At the end of May Giedion traveled to France in order to discuss
the plans for the French edition. On 29 June 1929 he wrote to Biermann to
report that his discussions there had led to a proposal to publish Bauen in
Frankreich with the new title L’origine de l’architecture moderne. The text
would be expanded by twenty-four pages and the illustrations doubled. It
would be the first volume of a new series, Cycle d’architecture moderne. The
French publisher would apparently take care of a simultaneous German edi-
tion. Klinckhardt & Biermann would in that case be used only for sales in
Germany.

These plans, however, were not realized. In the meantime, Giedion had
embarked upon his next book project. Conceived as a multivolume work,
Die Entstehung des heutigen Menschen (The origin of contemporary man), this
history of modern civilization occupied him from the spring of 1929 until
his departure for America — in 1938.

57

INTRODUCTION

Even the historian stands within, not above, time. He has lost the pedestal of eternity.
It is the same with poets, musicians, and architects in relation to the general public;
with parents and teachers in relation to children; and in the relation between man
and woman: we struggle on equal levels.

Vital, forward-looking periods seem to have hardly a place for pedestals. We do not
fear the past. Past, present, and future are for us an indivisible process. But we do not
live looking backward; we live looking ahead. The past strengthens us, for it provides
us with the certainty that our will is not individually confined. But the future, what-
ever it may hold, is more important to us. The first concern is with those things that
are becoming: children are more defenseless than the old.

The task of the historian is first to recognize the seeds and to indicate—across all
layers of debris—the continuity of development. The historian, unfortunately, has
used the perspective of his occupation to give eternal legitimation to the past and
thereby to kill the future, or at least to obstruct its development.

Today the historian’s task appears to be the opposite: to extract from the vast com-
plexity of the past those elements that will be the point of departure for the future.

In every field the nineteenth century cloaked each new invention with historiciz-
ing masks. In the realm of architecture as well as in the realm of industry or soci-
ety. New constructional possibilities were created, but at the same time they were
feared; each was senselessly buried beneath stone stage sets. The vast collective
apparatus of industry was created, but every attempt was made to distort its signifi-
cance in that only a few were allowed to benefit from the advantages of the pro-
duction process.

This historicizing mask is inseparably linked to the image of the nineteenth century.
It cannot be denied. But by the same token we must not forget the forward
momentum that permeates the nineteenth century.

If we extract from that century those elements that live within us and are alive, we
see with surprise that we have forgotten our own particular development—if you will,
our TRADITION.

Brushing away the decades of accumulated dust atop the journals, we notice that the
questions that concern us today have persisted in unsettled discussion for more than
a century.

We see at the same time, indeed with greater assurance, that the architecture we now
describe as “new” is a legitimate part of an entire century of development.

Since it belongs to a great stream of development, we must even refuse to see its ori-
gins in a small number of architectural precursors around 1900—for instance, [Hen-
drik Petrus] Berlage, [Henry] van de Velde, [Frank] Lloyd Wright, [Peter] Behrens,
{Auguste and Gustave] Perret, [Tony] Garnier. The “new” architecture had
its origins at the moment of industrial formation around 1830, at
the moment of the transformation from hand work to industrial production. We
scarcely have the right to compare our century with the nineteenth as far as the bold-
ness of its advance and its works are concerned.

The task of this generation is: to translate into a HOUSING FORM [Wohnform] what
the nineteefith century could say only in abstract and, for us, internally homogenous
constructions. Everyone knows that we are therefore still at the very beginning of a
long-neglected transformation from handicraft to industrial building production.
The division by generations that was necessary and that we ourselves have yet
to complete may perhaps become more acceptable as we confront the past without
prejudice. For we have no fear that it may yet crush or confuse us.

Frauenkirch-Lengmatt
February 1928
GIEDION

CONSTRUCTION

Is CONSTRUCTION something EXTERNAL?

We are being driven into an indivisible life process. We see life more and more as a
moving yet indivisible whole. The boundaries of individual fields blur. Where does
science end, where does art begin, what is applied technology, what belongs to pure
knowledge? Fields permeate and fertilize each other as they overlap. It is hardly of
interest to us today where the conceptual boundary between art and science is drawn.
We value these fields not hierarchically but as equally justified emanations of the
highest impulse: LIFE! To grasp life as a totality, to allow no divisions, is
among the most important concerns of the age.

Physiologists have shown that a person’s body build and nature are inseparably con-
nected. Science traces specific characters back to certain bodily types. The connection
between respiration and mental balance has been discovered. The body takes its form
internally through breathing, gymnastics, sport. To overdevelop an arm muscle, or to
douse the face witli cosmetics like an isolated body (as the arteries harden), is no
longer acceptable.

Construction is also not mere ratio.! The attitude that drove the previous
century to expand our knowledge of matter, so much that it resulted in a previously
inconceivable command of it, is as much the expression of an instinctive drive
as is any artistic symbol.

We say that art anticipates, but when we are convinced of the indivisibility of the life
process, we must add: industry, technology, and construction also anticipate.

Let us go further: architecture, which has certainly abused the name of art in many
ways, has for a century led us in a circle from one failure to another.

Aside from a certain haut-godt charm the artistic drapery of the past century has
become musty. What remains unfaded of the architecture is those rare instances when
construction breaks through. Construction based entirely on provisional purposes,
service, and change is the only part of building that shows an unerringly consis-
tent development. Construction in the nineteenth century plays the role of the sub-
conscious. Outwardly, construction still boasts the old pathos; underneath,
concealed behind facades, the basis of our present existence is taking shape.

') We mean here not just the creative intuition that every great constructor must have. It is well
known that he fixes the dimensions mostly emotionally and that calculation often comes later only as a
test. We mean construction itself, which is not determined by purpose alone, but which seems also
to transcend rational values and is expressive. This also challenges the old prejudice that art and con-
struction may be neatly divided, by presenting art as “unintentional” and “purposeless,” and construc-
tion alone as “purposeful.”

INDUSTRY

Industry completes the transition from handicraft to machine production.

Industry is only part of the problem connected with the transition from individual to
collective design.

Machine work means serial design, precision. Handicraft has its own special charm
that can never be replaced: the uniqueness of the product.

But without machine work there is no higher technology. By hand one can neither
mill sprocket wheels that fit frictionlessly together, nor draw out uniform wire, nor
profile iron precisely. The transition from individual to collective design is taking
place in all fields, practical as well as spiritual ones.

Now, it is the case that INDUSTRY, which is intensively involved with the life process,
displayed this change before other fields—private life or art—took note of it.
Industry, big industry, is a result of the French Revolution.?

The Assemblée Nationale initiated its development with the Proclamation of the
Liberty of Labor of 2 March 1791.

With this proclamation of free competition the guild system (/es corporations) was at
once abolished.3

Before the French Revolution articles for everyday use were produced by the guilds.
Guild membership was just as limited as the number of workers or helpers each mem-
ber could take on and the kinds of product each could produce. That meant privilege
in favor of a few and an extraordinary burden (géne onéreuse) on the consumer. The
complex instrument of industry was created through the possibility of a free division
of labor.

Like construction, industry is an inner expression of the life
process.

Though we are objectively able to create anticipatory designs, old mental “residues”
prevent us for a long time from drawing the human consequences:

INDUSTRY anticipates society’s inner upheaval just as construc-
tion anticipates the future expression of building.

Even before industry existed in its present sense— around 1820—Henri de Saint-
Simon (1760—1825)* understood that it was the central concept of the century and
that it was destined to turn life inside out:

“The whole of society rests upon industry.”

It seems that the force of Saint-Simon’s influence on the schools and tendencies of
the century lay, above all, in his ability to grasp the emerging reality and to transform
it into a utopia. It is the opposite method to the cultural idealism that dominated
Germany at the time, which neglected reality in order to pursue emanations of pure
spirit.

*) There were several industrial and joint-stock companies already under the ancien régime. [Charles]
Ballot, L’Introduction du machinisme dans Uindustrie francaise (Paris, 1923), p. 23, discusses the
epoch from 1780-92 and another 1792-1815, which, under the effect of the Revolution, introduced the
machine to a few areas (cotton, wool). Industry in today’s sense was first introduced around 1830.

3) Davioud, “Un diacours d’architecte,” Encyclopédie d’architecture, 1878, p. 27.

4) Systeme industriel, 1821. Catéchisme des industriels. 1823.

Saint-Simon foresaw the great concentrations of labor, the urban centers, and the
factories with thousands of workers that transferred the results of research directly
into action. As a consequence of an industrial economy he foresaw the dawn of a
classless society, the end of war, and the end of national borders: a single army of
workers spanning the globe. The end of man’s exploitation of man (/’exploitation de
Vhomme par l’homme) will have been achieved. The eye of the visionary no doubt
simplifies and leaps over intermediary stages:5 Saint-Simon never reckoned with the
century’s divided soul, which in architecture as in society imposed the old formal
apparatus on the new system.

The anonymous process of production and the interconnected procedures
that industry offers only now fully take hold of and reshape our nature.

5) Saint-Simon, himself rooted in the feudal system, only formulated the elementary contradictions of
the military and industrial system. His students quickly drew the consequences of his system.

Fig. 1. PONT TRANSBORDEUR (1905) and HARBOR of MARSEILLES

A mobile ferry suspended by cables from the footbridge high above the water connects traf-
fic on the two sides of the harbor. This structure is not to be taken as a “machine.” It cannot
be excluded from the urban image, whose fantastic crowning it denotes. But its interplay with
the city is neither “spatial” nor “plastic.” It engenders floating relations and interpenetra-

tions. The boundaries of architecture are blurred.

ARCHITECTURE”

The concept of architecture is linked to the material of stone. Heaviness and monu-

mentality belong to the nature of this material, just as the clear division between

supporting and supported parts does.

The great dimensions that stone requires are for us still habitually connected with

each building. It is entirely understandable that, with their unusually modest dimen-

sions, the first buildings executed in tensile materials time and again evoked among

contemporaries the concern that the building might collapse.

Architecture is linked to the concept of “monumentality.” When the new building

materials —iron and ferroconcrete—assume the forms of gravity and “monumental-

ity,” they are essentially misused.

Itseems doubtful whether the limited concept of “architecture” will

indeed endure.

We can hardly answer the question: What belongs to architecture? Where does it

begin, where does it end?

Fields overlap: walls no longer rigidly define streets. The street has been transformed

into a stream of movement. Rail lines and trains, together with the railroad station,

form a single whole. Suspended elevators in glazed shafts belong to it just as much as

Fig.1 the insulating filling between the supports. The antenna has coalesced with the struc-

Fig.59 ture, just as the limbs of a towering steel frame enter into a relationship with city and

Fig. 2. EFFEL TOWER (1889)

Interior of pier

Instead of a massive tower, an open frame-
work condensed into minimal dimensions.
The landscape enters through continu-
ously changing snippets.

harbor. Tali buildings are bisected by rail lines. The fluctuating element becomes
a part of building.

Architecture has been drawn into the current from the isolated
position it had shared with painting and sculpture.

We are beginning to transform the surface of the earth. We thrust beneath, above, and
over the surface. Architecture is only a part of this process, even if a special one.
Hence there is no “style,” no proper building style. Collective design.
A fluid transition of things.

By their design, all buildings today are as open as possible. They blur their arbitrary
boundaries. Seek connection and interpenetration.

In the air-flooded stairs of the Eiffel Tower, better yet, in the steel limbs of a pont
transbordeur, we confront the basic aesthetic experience of today’s building: through
the delicate iron net suspended in midair stream things, ships, sea, houses, masts,
landscape, and harbor. They lose their delimited form: as one descends, they circle
into each other and intermingle simultaneously.

One would not wish to carry over into housing this absolute experience that no pre-
vious age has known.° Yet it remains embryonic in each design of the new architec-

°) A fascination of Corbusier’s houses consists in the fact that he has attempted this as much as possible.

REDESIGN OF THE SURFACE OF THE EARTH

Fig. 3. PETROLEUM TANK, CONCRETE BRIDGE, STREET, TRESTLE (MARSEILLES)

Fig. 4.

The same industrial Jand-
scape. Chimneys of a sugar
refinery in the background.
The various traffic levels,
the juxtaposition of objects
determined only by neces-
sity offer — so to speak
unconsciously and as raw
material — possibilities for
how our cities may later be
designed openly without
the constraints of preestab-
lished levels.


ture: there is only a great, indivisible space in which relations and
interpenetrations, rather than boundaries, reign.

The concept of architecture has become too narrow. One can no longer contain, like
radium in a bottle, the need to create that which is called art and explain what
remains of life devoid of it.

The ponderous movement of human affairs has as its consequence that the new atti-
tude toward life manifests itself much sooner in the objective fields—such as con-
struction, industry—than in those fields that lie close to us.

Only now is the housing form being seized by those hidden forces
that a century ago drove man to the constructional and industrial
attitude.

Our inner attitude today demands of the house:

Greatest possible overcoming of gravity. Light proportions. Openness, free flow of air:
things that were first indicated in an abstract way by the constructional designs of the

past century.
Thus, the point is reached where building falls in line with the general life process.

CONSTRUCTOR AND ARCHITECT

The immense influence of the Ecole Polytechnique (established 1794/95)
during the first three decades of the nineteenth century can be
attributed to the fact that for the first time the task was consciously
posed to establish a connection between science and life, to bring
about a connection between higher mathematics, physics, and applied technology.
Subsequently this extended to penetrating life constructionally instead of with
the craft experience. In all fields.

Jean-Antoine Chaptal, the great chemist, industrialist (and minister under Napo-
leon) already clarified this goal at the beginning of the nineteenth century, for he
thought science should climb down from its pedestal in order to lend a hand in the
work of easing the difficult path through reality.

Since [Jean] Rondelet, the theorist and preserver of the Panthéon in Paris, insisted in
his “Address on Starting a Course on Construction at the Ecole Spéciale d’Architec-
ture” (1816) that construction must be considered in a completely different way than
previously, the engineer has increasingly encroached upon the field of the architect.
At the same time the encroachment of the engineer-constructor signi-
fies the encroachment of more rapid, industrial means of design,
which first offered the possibility: to create the foundations of contemporary life.
Unconsciously, the constructor assumes the role of a guardian in the nineteenth
century: by continuously pressing new means upon the architect, he keeps the latter
from altogether losing himself in the vacuum.

The constructor presses for a design that is both anonymous and
collective. He renounces the architect’s artistic bombast. Upsets his special posi-
tion. That is his function.

Since the advance of industry around midcentury, we sense how the “artist-architect”
feels his privileged position menaced, out of which grows the increasingly spasmodic
emphasis on his “artistry.”

This concern reached its apex with the development of industry. After 1890, when
industrial development had lost the wonder from its time of origin and had become
self-evident, the threatening influence of the constructor abated. Underground it
continued,

Instead of derivations, some voices from various moments of the period:

1850:
We will create a characteristic architecture of our own at the moment we make use
of the new means offered by the new industries. The application of cast iron
permits and enforces many new forms, as we can observe in railroad stations, sus-
pension bridges, and in the vaults of conservatories.

The Romantic Théophile GAUTIER 1850. Journal La Presse.

1864:
Can one claim that the public is pleased when one hears complaints daily and sees
how often it prefers engineers to architects? Why this partiality? It is simply
because engineers do not take inflexible positions but satisfy themselves with the
strict fulfillment of the given program (remplir rigoureusement le programme),
whereas architects, all too often advancing what they call “beauty,” violate the
legitimate requirements and needs of the patron.

Anatole de BAUDOT,’ Réorganisation de I’Ecole des
Beaux-Arts, de son influence sur l’étude de l’architec-
ture (Paris: chez A. Morel & Co., 1864), p. 5.

1867:

“Is it the fate of architecture to give way to the art of engineering (génie civil)?
Will the engineer one day absorb the architect?” One speaks of the organic art of
the future, and at the same time it is clear what the present predicament is: “Where
does eclecticism lead? An eclectic atmosphere completely envelops the modern
world; all organs of respiration absorb it and, mixed with our blood, it acts on heart
and brain.”

(César DALY, Revue générale de Varchitecture, 1867, p. 6.)

1877:

The institute arranged a competition on the theme: “The union or the separation
of engineers and architects.” (Gabriel-Jean-Antoine}] DAVIOUD, the architect of
the Trocadéro, received the prize with the response: the union of architect
and engineer must be indissoluble. “The solution will be real, complete,
fruitful only when architect and engineer, artist and scientist, are fused together in
the same person. We have for a long time lived under the foolish
persuasion that art is a kind of activity distinct from all other
forms of human intelligence, having its sole source and origin in the per-
sonality of the artist himself and his capricious fancy. ...”

(Encyclopédie d’architecture, 1878, p. 67.)

1889:

For a long time the influence of the architect has declined, and the engineer,
Uhomme moderne par excellence, is beginning to replace him. Were the engineer
able to replace the architect altogether, the latter could undoubtedly disappear
without at the same time eradicating art.

Forms will not compose the basis of the new architecture. In the general disposi-
tion of plans and in the design of constructional systems arising from these new
situations is to be found the new expression asa whole; the details will
then follow.

*) In 1863-64 an effort was made to reform the estranged teaching methods of the Académie des Beaux-
Arts. A. de Baudot’s first publication appeared on this occasion.

Fig. 77

But you will say what you propose is indeed the method of the engineer. I do not
deny it, for it is correct.

Anatole de BAUDOT,$ to the International Congress of Architects, 1889.

1889:
It is not in the studios of the painters and sculptors that the revolution so long
awaited is preparing —it is in the factories!°

The novelist Octave MIRBEAU in Le Figaro, 1889.
(Cf. Encycl. d’arch., 1889/90, p. 92.)

1924:
The century of the machine has awakened the CONSTRUCTOR; new tasks, new
possibilities, and new means gave birth to him. He is at work now everywhere.

LE CORBUSIER, in the journal L’ESPRIT NOUVEAU, no. 25.

*) Anatole de Baudot, 1834-1915, is one of the most consistent pioneers of the new architecture. For
decades he fights resolutely for an organic basis for architecture, hie talent being more that of a prophet
and propagandist than a practicing architect.

Like Labrouste, whose student he was, Baudot wishes to impart, first of all, an architectural education
that was not predisposed to impracticality.

He sees in iron and later in ferroconcrete the appropriate building materials for the age. Indeed,
one might speak of him as the first to have employed ferroconcrete practically in architecture: in
his church of Saint Jean de Montmartre [Saint-Jean-l’Evangéliste], Paris, begun 1894.

As the leading force of the excellent journal Encyclopédie d’architecture he is often found formulating
the guidelines for building with an unerring precision that we have yet to match. In his formulations, he
is less restrained by aestheticism than Corbusier, for he comes directly from the school of Auguste
Comte’s rationalism and lived before the congestion [Verschleimung] caused by the arts and crafts.
For twenty-five years he defends his opposition to the academy and its corrosive influence — beginning
in 1887—in his annual courses at the Trocadéro (“Cours d’histoire de architecture frangaise”). Every
year the course changed. The first lectures appeared in the Encyclopédie d’architecture, 1888/89. After
his death Henri Chaine published them under the title: A. de Baudot, L’Architecture, le passé—le
présent (Paris, 1916). Much of the original punch has been lost. One can learn from Baudot how to profit
from the past without being crushed by it.

Baudot was a civil servant, a member of the Commission des Monuments Historiques, eventually rising
to be its vice president. Baudot, a student of Labrouste and Viollet-le-Duc, thus had as his main occu-
pation the preservation of monuments, but his creative force lies in the fact that he grasped the past
functionally, not formally.

9) “Pendant que lart cherche lintimisme ou s’attarde auz vieilles formules, le regard encore tourné
vers le passé, l'industrie marche de l’avant, explore l'inconnu conquiert des formes” {While art seeks
intimacy or clings to outworn formulas with its eyes fixed on the past, industry forges ahead, explores
the unknown, conquers new forms].

“Ce n'est point dans les ateliers des peintres et sculpteurs que se prépare la révolution tant prédite et
tant désirée: c'est dans les usines!” [Translated in text, above.}

CONSTRUCTORS

The names of the constructors who gave shape to the nineteenth century are for the
most part unknown. Just as in the Middle Ages, the actual develop-
ment occurred anonymously. A few names that are related to our remarks are
presented below.

It is noteworthy that the first wave—the pioneers—was born around 1800, and the
second wave—those who completed the task—was born around 1830.

Many fit the picture of industrialists sketched by Saint-Simon. They were by no
means narrow specialists. They embraced the new possibilities in all fields.
Often they were also entrepreneurs.

The first wave—comprising those born around 1800—shares a prophetic and fanatic
conviction in the realization of a worldview that existed nowhere but in the mind,
in the vision.

Antoine POLONCEAU (1778-1847). A precursor. 1797 Ecole Polytechnique. Built
roads through Alpine passes (Simplon 1801-06, Mont-Cenis 1812-14) and experi-
mented with the use of concrete in foundations. Erected one of Paris’s most beautiful
cast-iron bridges (pont du Carrousel, 1839). At the same time he was concerned with
the rationalization of agriculture, improvements in drainage, harvesting, and the soil.
Eugéne FLACHAT (1802-1873). Railroad builder. Constructor. With Emile Péreire'®
he overcame the enormous resistance of both the government and the populace and
in 1837 built the first railroad in France (Saint-Germain). One should not forget that
in 1834 a French minister, upon his return from England, declared in the Chamber
of Peers: railroads would be an unrealizable dream, useful at most for the immediate
environs of Paris, for Sunday excursions. Flachat made designs for docks, canals
(Paris-Le Havre), warehouses, harbor facilities, transatlantic steam shipping, and
an Alpine tunnel (1860). From this universal circle of ideas arose, along with blast
furnaces, the designs for Les Halles of Paris. Flachat participated in all of
the great industrial issues, but at the same time he was concerned with such details
as the wear of train rails and the organization of large technical societies.

The industrial movement appears to have been so much in the blood of this genera-
tion that, for instance, Flachat built his house on a parcel of land between two tracks
and the ceaseless whistles of trains.

Hector HOREAU (1801-72). Designer who did not achieve the goal but who formu-
lated the decisive building tasks before it was possible to realize them on such a scale.
He wants buildings that correspond to the needs of the age. He designs enormous
exhibition halls (1837), libraries, market halls.

Like Flachat he demonstrates how one could design Les Halles of Paris (1845) in
the new materials, but [Victor] Baltard builds them. In 1850 Horeau receives the
first prize for the design of the London Industrial Exhibition; one month later John

1”) The banker Emile Péreire (born 1801) works closely with the Saint-Simonists. Auguste Comte (born
1798), who witnessed the dawning of the “positive,” or scientific, age, belongs to this generation, as do
other important pupils of Saint-Simon, [Amand] Bazard (born 1791) and the diplomat [Ferdinand de]
Lesseps (born 1805), who initiated the Suez and Panama canals.

Paxton wins the commission.?! Misfortune follows him to the end. The existence of
such prophets is certainly not without significance. It encourages the subsequent real-
ization of the vision.

Henri LABROUSTE (1801-75). Attempts for the first time to combine engineer
and architect in one person: architect-constructor.

Grand Prix de Rome at twenty-three. Unstifled after five years at the Villa Medici.
Sees antiquity organically instead of sentimentally and views his Italian sojourn (con-
sidered the highest reward) as a systematic alienation from life, “for after his return
the pensionnaire de état is faced with an entirely different reality.” Labrouste
designs no romantic-classicist royal palaces.

Labrouste wins prizes for prisons (Alexandria), hospitals (Lausanne), and, after wait-
ing twelve years for the commission: the library of Sainte-Geneviéve! The methods he
uses are the methods of direct observation, those “positive” methods upon which
Auguste Comte simultaneously “wanted to establish the lawfulness of social life.”
Labrouste designs a plan “according to climate, material, and the necessities of the
program.”!? He recognizes the function of iron before railroads course through
France; he sees construction as the innermost face of architecture—the exterior
only as an encasement (enveloppe), or epidermis—at a time when the methods to
control it were still remote.

Among those in the second wave who are able to lead construction to completed
designs—besides Camille POLONCEAU (1813-47) or HENRI DE DION (1823-78) —
is Gustave Eiffel, the only one whose name is not forgotten. Gustave EIFFEL (1832-
1923), engineer-constructor, entrepreneur. In 1858 he works on the large iron bridge
near Bordeaux and attempts to sink pylons with the then-new method of compressed
air. His life is occupied above all with one great problem: the arched girder,
the arched truss (ferme en arc). He attempts to solve this problem with all
the graphic, mathematical, and experimental expertise available. The arched truss,
which springs lightly in a parabolic curve from one bridge support to the next, signi-
fies release from the rigid relationship of unilaterally supporting and supported
members: for the first time in 1869 with the viaduct over the Sioule, in 1875 with the
bold bridge over the Douro, and in 1879 with the viaduct over the Garabit. (Span of
the parabolic support 165 meters.) His tour de 300 m (1889) displays in its founda-
tions four such bridge supports translated into architectonic form. In addition, there
are also warehouses, railroad stations, and the locks of the Panama Canal. The fields
overlap.

1) Henri Labrouste, “Travaux d’éléves de Ecole de |’architecture de Paris,” Rev. gén. de l’arch., 1840,
p. 543.

%2) bid.

13) The great Berlin constructor J[chann] W{ilhelm] SCHWEDLER (1823-91) also belongs to this sec-
ond wave. He is the genuine theoretician and calculator of the so-called spatial framework (shal-
low dome of the Berlin Gasworks, 1863}. He built the great Vistula bridges and the arrival hall of the
Frankfurt am Main railroad station.

THE NINETEENTH CENTURY

Like every age, the nineteenth century is a complex whole. Perhaps more
confused than other ages. We are still too close for conclusive judgments.

We should first of all establish two currents that—often inseparable—interpenetrate:
first inheritance: to it belong all fields that somehow stand apart. Art, celebration,
representation, private affairs.

Second: life itself compels its own laws. The surface of the earth is trans-
formed as never before. (Harbors, railroads, tunnels, great thoroughfares.)
Production established on a totally different basis (industry). The
regrouping of society begins (socialization tendencies).

Inheritance is a part of us. It should not be neglected. Yet it ends bitterly if it assumes
priority over emerging life, if it violates it. This is the case in the nineteenth century.
Indeed, in the long run, such usurpation is only mock rule; subliminally, life compels
form, but there emerges an oppressive atmosphere that time and again demands
upheaval.

This is especially obvious in the field of architecture: if we employ the usual stylistic
notions to understand it, we are left with nothing but empty shells. We might say that
throughout the last century one built with a bad conscience or with uncertainty.
Especially the best feel that one lives in a contaminating air of eclecticism. The nine-
teenth century’s general attitude, torn by its urge toward integrated constructional
design and its urge toward individual isolation, is necessarily pessimistic.

Again and again one tries to find a “style” without realizing that these formalistic
experiments were condemned to failure from the start. Surface frills. The age of
delimited styles based on handicraft ended decisively at the moment when the notion
of an isolated architecture became untenable.

The nineteenth century: strange interpenetration of individualistic and
collectivistic tendencies.

Like hardly any age before, all actions were labeled “individualistic”
(the ego, Nation, Art), but underground, within disdained everyday fields, it had to
create the elements of collective design, as in a frenzy.

Today everything rests on these elements.

We must concern ourselves with this raw material: with gray buildings, market
halls, warehouses, exhibitions. However unimportant they may appear to be for the
aesthetic titillation:

In them lies the kernel!

THE NINETEENTH CENTURY IN FRANCE

The role of France is well established in the painting and literature of the nine-
teenth century. This is not at all as clear with architecture. The academic incrusta-
tions bear the blame. They dazzled all formally educated souls. When the new
architecture will have advanced far enough to allow a broader survey, it may become
evident: all the academic incrustations were unable to smother the
constructional soul of French architecture!

France played the leading role in the history of nineteenth-century constructivism.

From the beginning of the century, two poles opposed one another in France: L’Ecole
des Beaux-Arts—L’Ecole Polytechnique.

Napoleon founded the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in an unfortunate moment and
thereby revived an institution of the ancien régime. By that, official architecture
became a branch of the fine arts. That became its ruin. In the Baroque, this unity had
been complete and self-evident. But in the course of the nineteenth century it had
become conflicting and false. Even today the academy des Beaux-Arts proves itself to
be a most distressing drag on active development.

Around the Ecole Polytechnique gathered the great mathematicians ([Gaspard]
Monge, [Joseph-Louis] Lagrange),'*) physicists, constructors, economists, and Saint-
Simonists. Time and again, up to 1830, we see the blue uniform of the polytechniciens
in the pictures of the Revolution. The crucial contact between theoretical and applied
science emanated from this school.

Paging through the architectural journals of the century, one sees that the two ques-
tions that most preoccupied contemporaries grew out of the dissension between these
two schools:

1. Along what lines should the training of an architect proceed?

2. What is the relationship between engineer and architect? How are their rights dis-
tributed? Are they one and the same?

All other questions are of a secondary nature, formal disputes.

Hence the struggle of the academy against the Gothicists or the struggle of the Goth-
icists against the new “bastard style”: the Neorenaissance.“ Similarly, the current
striving for so-called national styles basically has a different meaning. National dif-
ferences develop through the influences of climate, material, and formative will,
utterly independently and unconsciously. The struggle toward a “national” style, with
its desire to retain formal-handicraft details, is fought like the struggle of the Goth-
icists or Renaissancists, on formal] rather than on functional grounds. Screened
from the real events.

%) Cf. Paul Léon, “Les querelles des classiques et gotiques,” Rev. de Paris (July 1913).

Fig. 5. STEEL. Broken Steel Rod Enlarged Three Times
Note the great density of the structure in contrast to other building materials, such as wood: from this
molecular structure arise certain properties and types of construction.

The introduction of iron into architecture signifies the change
from craftsmanship to industrial building production. The beginnings
of the new architecture can be dated to the day when the old production methods
were abandoned and mechanically manufactured rolled iron replaced handwrought
iron.

STONE can only resist compression. It allows inert masses to be layered into piles,
but only the most extreme inventiveness allows it to achieve a certain hollowing
out (Gothic). Stone signifies compact mass. Stone massively closes off spaces.
The entire width of a wall is load-bearing. Broad horizontal openings contradict its
structure.

IRON can be stretched and drawn together. It resists extension and pressure and
hence bending.

The significance of iron is: to condense high potential stress into the most minimal
dimensions. If a comparison is permitted, iron suggests both muscular tissue and
skeleton in a building. Iron opens the spaces. The wall can become a transparent
glass skin. To design a load-bearing wall becomes an intolerable farce.

This leads to new laws of design.

Instead of the rigid balance of support and load, iron demands a
more complex, more fluid balance of forces. Through the condensation of
the material to a few points, there appears an unknown transparency, a suspended
relation to other objects, a creation of the airspace, des combinaisons aéri-
ennes that Octave Mirbeau recognized already in 1889. This sensation of being
enveloped by a floating airspace while walking through tall structures (Eiffel Tower)
advanced the concept of flight before it had been realized and stimulated the forma-
tion of the new architecture. Not through superficial formal derivation but rather by
an inner law.

Of all the new building materials, iron has the longest tradition of construction. It is
fascinating to see with how much fanaticism the fight for its introduction persisted for
half a century, and with what regularity its design slowly revealed itself. We can fol-
low this gradual realization and discern its slow growth.

Demand for its introduction existed before the machine made possible the manufac-
ture of iron profiles. Even before the means were found to calculate dimensions the-
oretically, vision and ratio recognized it as the material of the future.

This went so far that at an early point in time—1849—the HOUSING FORM on which
we are today working was already anticipated:

“Glass is destined to play an important role in METAL ARCHITECTURE. Instead of
thick walls, whose strength and solidity are diminished by a great number of open-
ings, our houses will be so permeated with openings that they will appear trans-
lucent. These wide openings of thick, single- or double-glazed glass panes, either
frosted or transparent, will allow a magical splendor to stream in during the
daytime, stream out at night.”*

It seems that in the human organism certain attitudes develop that only later crystal-
lize in reality. Just as industry was recognized as the fulcrum of the century before the
development of mechanical engineering, so, too—on a reduced scale—is a housing
form today emerging before the social structure is ready for it.

15) By coincidence I received a copy of A[Ifred] G[otthold] Meyer’s EISENBAUTEN (Esslingen, 1907)
only when this book went to press. One will find much supplementary material there. The different
point of departure is naturally explained by the different year of publication. Nevertheless, we would
like to note that our approaches often fortunately concur.

'6) Jobard, “Architecture métallurgique,” Rev. gén. de l’arch., 1849, p. 30: *... Nos maisons seront
émaillées d’élégantes et nombreuses ouvertures qui les rendront perméables a la lumiére.”

FIRST ATTEMPTS

It started with the introduction of iron in roof framing. The wooden beams
of theaters and warehouses burned like tinder. One tried to replace them with iron.
Soon one saw that iron construction required little space, allowed much light
to stream in, and, when used in combination with glass, was especially suited for
the roofing of courtyards. Glass and iron galleries appeared, the true point of
departure for railroad stations, market halls, exhibition buildings.
Before the introduction of rolled-iron beams, complicated experiments with com-
posite iron-and-wood systems were conducted to make roofs fireproof, to render
them incombustibles.”

In addition to purely technical application (bridges, railroads) there were building
details: such as cast-iron stairs and iron canopies in theaters (apparently introduced
by [Jacques-Ignace] Hittorff and Lecomtel*! in the Théatre de l’Ambigu-Comique
after 1824).

Glass houses," with their— compared to walls — virtually invisible exterior
shell, provide the impetus for the introduction of cast-iron supports and skeleton
constructions.

England, industrially far ahead of France, enjoys the lead until about midcentury.””
Visible exponent: the Crystal Palace in London, the Industrial Exhibition of 1851.
From the beginning, France showed itself to be superior in construction.

The books by Ch[arles-] L[ouis-Gustave] Eck document more fully how varied the
efforts were regarding the introduction of iron already in the century’s first three
decades.?°|5] The architect L[ouis-] A[uguste] Boileau’s books give a good insight into
the next three decades.?! [61

The first building that anticipates subsequent developments is the library of
Sainte-Geneviéve (1843-50) by Henri LABROUSTE. Henri Labrouste is without
doubt the most prominent figure in the field of architecture at the beginning of indus-
trial development. As a pensionnaire de l’Académie in Rome he did not approach
antiquity in an aesthetically ceremonious way but scrutinized the temples of Paestum
for “the organism of each construction.”2?

") Ch. L. Eck, Traité de Uapplication du fer, de la forte et de la téle dans les constructions civiles, indu-
strielles et militaires, dans celles des ponts fixes ou suspendus, des écluses et des digues de la mer (Paris, 1841).
18) One of the first glass houses built completely with an iron structure is found in the Jardin des
Plantes, Paris 1833. Gf.M. Neumann, L’Art de construire et de gouverner les serres (2nd ed., Paris, 1846).
19) English constructions are bold and ponderous, such as the enormous cast-iron roof truss that Mathieu
Clark designed in 1833 for the Théatre Alexandrin in [Saint] Petersburg. (Illus. in Ch. Eck, Traité de con-
struction etc., Paris 1841.) Our fig. 15 from the same period shows one simply replaced wood with cast iron.
20) Ch. Eck, Traité de construction en potertes et fer (Paris, 1836). Ch. L. Eck, Traité de l’application
du fer, de la fonte et de la téle (Paris, 1841).

2) L. A. Boileau, Le fer, principal élément constructif de la nouvelle architecture (Paris, 1871).

22) Henri Delaborde, “Notice sur la vie de Henri Labrouste. Lue dans la séance publique annuelle du
19 octobre 1878,” p. 8.

It seems typical that nothing substantial has been written about a master like Labrouste since his
death and the related eulogies, despite the fact that he was one of the most significant architectural per-

Fig. 6

Fig. 9

Fig. 6. Victor LOUIS:
Wrought-lron Truss of the
Théatre-Frangais. 1786

It seems remarkable to us how —
in 1786 — the reinforcement of
the truss instinctively follows the
correct moment of inertia, which
was studied only later:*? “What is
most noteworthy in this roof is the
thinness of the walls on which it
rests.... Finally, the ingenious
form of buttressing applied to the
weak points in the structure by
external vaults in iron and clay
tile” (Ch. Eck, Traité, p. 50).

Fig. 7. [Frangois-Joseph]
BELANGER and [F.] BRUNET:
Corn Exchange (Paris). 1811

The architect Bélanger and the
engineer Brunet gave the Halle
au Blé its complicated iron-and-
copper structure in 1811 (the wood-
en dome of 1783 burned down in
1802). To our knowledge this marks
the first time that architect and
engineer were no longer combined
in one person. (Cf. Brunet, Dimen-
stons des fers qui doivent former
la coupole de la Halle aux grains
[Paris, 1809]). Hittorff, the builder
of the Gare du Nord, received his
first insight into iron construction

from Bélanger. At any rate, here it
behaves more as an application of
iron than as an iron construction.
The methods of wooden construc-
tion are simply transferred to iron

sonalities of the nineteenth century. In the course of this work, when we wanted a better look at the orig-
inal plans for the Bibliothéque Nationale, it became evident that even these have disappeared. It would
have been important finally to bring documentary clarity to the academy’s sabotage-like conduct toward
Labrouste and his students. In principle, it is still true today that the academy sabotages and sup-
presses young talent by preventing the realization of their work only to assimilate them in old age.

25) A few years earlier, Victor LOUIS at least partially attempted something similar in his large theater in

Fig. 8. [M.-G.] VEUGNY: Market
Hail of the Madeleine. 1824 :
The gracefulness of the slen- .
der cast-iron columns recalls
Pompeian wall paintings. “The
wrought- and cast-iron construc-
tion of the new Madeleine market

hall is one of the most graceful
productions of this kind; nothing
more elegant or in better taste
could be imagined...” (Eck,
Traité, ibid.}.

Fig. 9. [Pierre-Frangois-Léonard] FONTAINE: Galerie d'Orléans in the Palais-Royal (Paris) 1829-31
Even FONTAINE, one of the founders of the Empire style, converted in old age to the new material. In
1835-36 he replaced the wooden floor of the Galerie des Batailles in Versailles with iron panels.
Galleries like those in the Palais-Royal underwent further development in Italy. They represent for us
the point of departure for new building problems: railroad stations, etc.

Fig. 10. Henri LABROUSTE:

LA RESERVE

(Ground floor of the library of Sainte-
Geneviéve.) Cast-iron columns lead
freely and boldly through the space as
a part of the iron skeleton sunk into the

he z . a building

He demonstrated that although students of the academy produced beautiful draw-
ings of antique details, they completely missed the inner organism of the building.
He learned to recognize “that the best buildings from an artistic standpoint were pre-
cisely those constructed by the simplest, most truthful, and most rational methods.”
For the first time, he expressed an expanded MEANING of CONSTRUCTION, yielded
by the new possibilities:?> The essence of construction is found not in
the isolated study of the mason’s or locksmith’s handcrafted
details but in the interpenetration of every part of a building.
Labrouste belongs to the generation of 1830 that, as noted in a completely different
connection, was guided by a single grand current, by the demand for renewal of
social, moral, and intellectual life.2°

By the time he was assigned the library, Labrouste was regarded by everyone as the
purest incarnation of the esprit nouveau.’ For twelve years he had roamed Paris
without being entrusted with even a single building. Labrouste was past forty when
he received the library commission.

24) Eugéne Millet, “Henri Labrouste,” Extrait du Bulletin de la Société centrale des architectes, Exercice
1879-80, p. 5.

*) ‘This is one of the rare personal statements of the architect H. Labrouste: “la construction consiste
dans la combinaison de toutes les parties architecturales” [construction consists of the combination of
all the architectural parts} “Travaux des éléves de l’école d’architecture de Paris pendant l'année 1839,”
Revue gén. de l’arch., 1840, p. 59.

2) Willy Spuhler, Der Saint-Simonismus (Zurich, 1926), p. 22.

oe a ne ee

1926

Fig. 11.
LE CORBUSIER:
COOK HOUSE

It took approxi-
mately eighty years
before one dared to
show uninhibitedly
the freedom of La-
brouste: an uninter-
rupted construction
{column) even in a
living space.

Science and industry gave him very little assistance. Nevertheless, with the library of
Sainte-Geneviéve he attempted for the first time to insert an iron skeleton into
a building, from the foundation to the roof. Sainte-Geneviéve is at the same time the
first pure library building in France. Labrouste was more sensitive to the possibilities
of iron than his architectural contemporaries. The material corresponded with his
intention: to condense the meaning of all things!?*

Labrouste inserts the iron frame into the building like the works
into a clock:

The massive masonry core encasing the building still remains unaffected, but within
this masonry core, from the ground floor to the ridge of the roof, is placed an iron
system: columns, ceilings, vaults, girders, roof construction.

In individual rooms of the ground floor (la réserve)}, cast-iron columns without
visible beams are connected to the upper story. These slender cast-iron tubes run
down the middle of the room, attached to the ceiling only by a narrow flange. Sleek
function, no beam with the hint of support and load, no ornament, no capital. These
are things that today are dared only by a Corbusier or a Mart Stam.

The upper story, a double-aisle reading room (84 meters long, 21 meters wide),
forms a single structural skeleton with the roof. The semicircular trusses are sup-
ported by cast-iron columns and—along the walls—consoles. If the plans are correct,
Labrouste already split these semicircular ceiling trusses into three segments so as not
to make them totally rigid, in order to allow for expansion. As we know, it was more

%8) Delaborde, p. 13.

Fig. 10

Fig. 11

Figs. 13, 14
(12, 13}

! .
Pee

Ma

Fig. 12. H. LABROUSTE: LIBRARY OF SAINTE-GENEVIEVE. 1843-50
Section through the upper story {reading room) and the roof truss.

Fig. 13. H. LABROUSTE: LIBRARY OF SAINTE-GENEVIEVE
Reading room with cast-iron truss. The windows are placed high to allow continuous shelving.

than four decades later (Galerie des Machines, Exhibition 1889) that such a line of
reasoning led to a real form: three-hinged arches.

The roof framing rests atop these semicircular trusses and the columns. Upon enter-
ing the attic space, one is astonished by the bold dimensions and by the slender,
ingeniously stiffened wrought-iron struts carrying the heavy zinc roof. Labrouste
achieved an astonishing thinness in the barrel vault by spanning the trusses with an
iron webbing bound in plaster. One cannot help thinking of the delicate reinforce-
ment of Perret’s eggshell-thin concrete vaults in Casablanca and Le Raincy.
Naturally, Labrouste could not use the Polonceau truss, the recently invented visi-
ble tie system, for a library. He prepares his own system with primitive means,
going straight to the point that subsequently leads to completely new structural form:
iron construction has to be balanced in itself!

Labrouste’s contemporary, the theoretician Léonce Reynaud, succinctly summarizes
this: “The iron skeleton, which results in the suppression of the vault’s lateral thrust,
is here realized in a perfect system.”29

In his BIBLIOTHEQUE NATIONALE (commissioned 1857, reading room and stacks
opened 1867), Labrouste perfects this system. Again a tall aqueduct-shaped system of
arches encloses the space. The iron framework of cast-iron columns stands free of the
walls. The free suspension and self-supporting frame are thus clearly emphasized.*°

29) Léonce Reynaud, Traité d’architecture (Paris, 1852-56), p. 387: “L‘ossature ferronniére, qui a pour
conséquence la suppression de la poussée des voutes, se trouve formulé la dans un systéme complet.”
3°) Unfortunately, it is not possible to explore this more fully here. The thoroughgoing functional logic
of the building acquires a very new meaning not only in the reading room with its domes that should
provide each desk area with uniform light but also in the stacks where perhaps this effect is even more
intense. Cf. Revue gén. de UVarchitecture, 1878, p. 144.

Figs. 47 to 52
[47,48, 50-53]

Figs. 75, 76

Fig. 5

FRENCH CONSTRUCTION

ao _ ae
ae

Fig. 14. POLONCEAU TRUSS
trom the Gare du Nord. Arrival
Hall (1862)

The Polonceau truss, invented around 1837, on the occasion of the first French railroad, already dis-
plays careful attention to the inner structure of the material iron. RESULT: lightness of construction,
elimination of any lateral thrust. Only the weight of the truss bears down on the supporting surface, there-
fore thin supports, very clear layout of the spaces. The visible tie-rods are still disturbing. One will
try to eliminate them. As soon as this has been accomplished constructionally (cf. fig. 51), we stand before
unprecedented designs.

FIRST FORMATION

In order for iron to conform in its building parts and shapes to its actual molecu-
lar properties three conditions were necessary:

1. Wrought iron and steel should be manufactured in such a way as to avoid the
accidental flaws endemic in the handicraft method of production. The English-
man Henry BESSEMER brought about the decisive revolution. He prepared steel
in a purely chemical way (through mineral decomposition and regulation
of the air supply in a Bessemer converter), precisely mandated by decarboniza-
tion. 1855.

2. The most important step toward industrialization: mechanical production
of certain FORMS (profiles) from wrought iron or steel. The fields
overlap: one did not start with building members but with train rails. In an English
rolling mill in South Wales*! the American [Robert Livingston] Stevens turned out
the first broad-base rail mechanically produced (through rolling), that is, rails
with a wide foot and a narrow head—the kind still in use today. 1832. Here is the
starting point for sectional iron, that is, the basis for structural frameworks. Iron
skeleton.*?

3. Taking into account the molecular properties of iron, science had to study the
material’s specific laws, and constructors had to find a formative pro-
cess that differed from the treatment of wood. The engineer Camille

3) Cf. [A.] Haarmann, Das Eisenbahngeleise (Leipzig, 1891), p. 53. To roll is to stretch the red-hot
piece of iron between ungrooved cylindrical rollers.

*) The new production methods slowly made their way into industry. Double-tee iron joists appeared as
ceiling beams in Paris in 1845 because of a masons’ strike and as a result of the high cost of timber dur-
ing a building boom and the increasingly large spans. L. A. Boileau, Le Fer (1871}, p. 65.

ENGLISH CONSTRUCTION

Fig. 15. [M. M. Maudsley}
ENGLISH MACHINE HALL.
1833

Direct translation of the
wooden roof truss into cast
iron. RESULT: heavy con-
struction and a need for
thick walls to bear the lat-
eral thrust.

POLONCEAU made the first steps in this direction. The Polonceau truss, which is
still in use today, employs the material’s preeminent property: its tensile strength.
English cast-iron roof structures worked like Gothic vaults with enormous lateral
thrust on the load-bearing walls. The significance of the Polonceau truss is that a
light system of spanning members is self-contained, resting only with its own weight
on the support, thus eliminating lateral thrust.

The elementary guidelines are seen in buildings without prototypes in the past. Build-
ings shaped the new demands: metropolis, traffic, industry.

The common characteristic of these buildings is that they serve transient purposes:
market halls, railroad stations, exhibitions.

Add to this—after 1870—the factory and the large warehouse as iron-skeleton
construction.

MARKET HALLS

Metropolis problem of the nineteenth century entirely of a transient character. Func-
tion: in a few hours goods must daily be brought to and removed from a population
of millions: Les grandes Halles of Paris.5+

3) In the first issue of the Revue générale de l’architecture, 1840, Camille Polonceau explains the
reasoning behind his construction. He insists that every construction have: (1) durability; (2) economy;
(3) the least possible dimensions; (4) the greatest simplicity. It is no accident that this construction
was first used in an engine shed for the first railroad line Paris-Versailles. (Span 8.5 meters.)

34) In the excellent essay of César Daly (“Les halles,” Revue générale de l’architecture, 1854) his judg-
ment is thoroughly functional and farsighted. Of particular interest is the passage where Daly talks
about the construction of Horeau and Flachat and withholds judgment because the material seems still
too new for him to know for sure what form it should be given.

Fig. 14

Figs. 16,17

Fig. 16. BALTARD: LES
HALLES (PARIS) at the
Pavilion. 1853

Fig. 17. BALTARD: LES HALLES (PARIS).
1853
. Section through two pavilions and the con-
ae ~ necting covered alley.
: . The markets consist of two groups of pavil-
« : ions that are connected to each other by
rues couvertes. This is a case of somewhat
. 7 : .. timid iron construction that avoids the
_— .. ——  —— —— ambitious spans of Horeau and Flachat
t i and obviously clings to the model of the
greenhouse.

What should a market hall accomplish?*> “Jt must protect from the worst inclemen-
cies of weather, besides it must consist of open halls with freely circulating air. This
prevents stagnating odors and facilitates the delivery of goods.”

What is required? “Freedom of movement, fresh air (le grand air), light, broadest
prospect.” This demand for a CLEAR LAYOUT (Ubersichtlichkeit] and the possi-
bility of quick MOBILITY, which only the new materials could provide, are common
to all the new building problems. To ascertain at what point we now
stand in this development, consider the fact that the same requirements archi-
tects then used for the design of the individual new building tasks are today
applied, with the same words, to the design of the entire city.
Herein lies the leap from the then-acute management of passenger traffic to

38) Revue gén. de larch., 1854, p. 22.
3) Revue gén. de l’arch., 1854, p. 22.

Tre

reese

: i
‘apeana Po nwenne

PLE LL

j
i.
"4
Fig. 18. HOREAU: DESIGN

FOR LES HALLES. 1849 noe -

HOREAU proposed a span (86 meters) with enormous glass walls on the sides, a feat that was not real-
ized until decades later. Extensive basements—the carriages were to be conveyed to these soubassements
by elevators—were intended for the arriving goods. Horeau displayed his first designs in 1845. His
large-scale design was shown in the Salon of 1849. We see in such projects what might be called antic -
ipated development.

ae

Fig. 19. FLACHAT: DESIGN FOR LES HALLES. 1850

This design with its Polonceau truss also had an audacious span (80 meters). Possibility of immediate
execution with the available technical means. Unknown tautness of the freely spanning horizontal mem-
bers and more open, clearer layout of spaces with a minimum of supports.

Fig. 18

Fig. 19

Figs. 16,17

the now-acute management of the means of transportation (automobiles).
Victor Baltard (1805-74), whose name is still associated with Les Halles of
Paris, was neither a great architect nor a greater constructor.

He first built a massive stone pavilion in 1851-52 and, after a trip to England, came
to the conclusion that this country, too, had nothing new to offer. He had the support
of the city administration of Paris, which, as L. A. Boileau says, envisioned a monu-
mental style only in stone.3”

But there were others in France who understood completely how to handle such a
situation. First among them were Horeau, the architect, and Flachat, the railroad
builder. Their plans and those of others had long been available when Baltard erected
his stone pavilion.

Horeau never executed a building, but he foresaw and anticipated the development.
His plan for Les Halles shows a boldly sweeping parabola with a span of 86 meters.
Although girded with masonry, it would have needed massive masonry piers to
counter lateral thrust.

Flachat’s project was actually the basis for Baltard’s later building. Yet its matter-
of-fact solution is infinitely freer than Baltard’s execution. It is altogether consistent
with the development that a prophet of railroad construction would find the most
elegant and practical solution: he was accustomed to designing necessities without
inhibitions. These broad, spanning halls with Polonceau trusses were based on the
idea: “Eliminate the solid to the utmost in favor of the void...increase the one at
the expense of the other.”** Condensing the supporting structure to a few
points; avoiding columns as much as possible, hence vast spans.
Baltard’s stone pavilion was already completed when the interested parties criticized
the fort de la halle in which “the vegetables and they themselves were enclosed in a
citadel.”*° The prefect [Georges-Eugéne] Haussmann ordered the pavilion pulled
down. Baltard laboriously patched together his work with the ideas of others. [Félix]
Narjoux* handed down an anecdote indicative of Baltard’s position. As Napoleon HI
visited Baltard’s new project under the direction of the prefect Haussmann, he asked,
“Is it possible that two such contradictory projects stem from the same architect?”
Haussmann countered that “the architect is indeed the same but the prefect is different.”
Despite Baltard’s lack of originality,*' the construction of Les Halles nevertheless con-
tributed to the erection of hygienic and airy buildings of the same type even in the
remotest provinces.

RAILROAD STATIONS

Their function, disposition, as well as transient nature compel the interrelation of
architect and engineer.

37) L. A. Boileau, Le fer, principal élément constructif (Paris, 1871), p. 65: “The city councillors of Paris,
subjected to morals and customs, could not imagine a monumental style otherwise than in masses of
stone, and so they had selected a project designed accordingly.” Precisely Baltard’s first project.

38) Revue gén. de Varch., 1854, p. 31.

3°) Revue des deux mondes, 1874 {no. 2}, p. 803.

4°) F. Narjoux, Batiments élevés par la ville de Paris 1850-1880, vol. 9 (Paris, 1883), pp. 11, 12.

1) Baltard also brought out a large folio publication on Les HALLES (Paris, 1863). Baltard’s
church of Saint-Augustin, Paris, 1860-71, employed a visible iron vault inside, yet this decora-
tion had nothing to do with the design.

it

ey Na

Fig. 20. HITTORFF: GARE DU NORD begun 1862
The glazed canopy is from a later date (1880).

Begun in 1862, the Gare du Nord (Paris) is the great work of this period. Better
than its successors does it satisfy its function: the swift dispatch of traffic.*?

The architect Hittorff’s facade in the style of Roman public baths is soon forgot-
ten. In the tightly measured ticket balls one can already see the combination of visi-
ble iron skeleton and stone. Immediately beyond, the expansive arrival halls open up.
(Constructors: Couche and Boucher.) Engineers are responsible for the extraordi-
narily clear layout of the arrangement, the maximum of freely disposable space
with a minimum of material, the airiness of the halls, whose grand arrangement still
satisfies today’s needs. The luxuriant abundance of space in the waiting rooms,
entrances, restaurants, as seen around 1880, which led to the formulation of the rail-
road station problem as exaggerated Baroque palaces, is still completely avoided here.

DEPARTMENT STORES

The DEPARTMENT STORE is the emporium of industrial production. Like the cov-
ered market hall, the railroad station, the exhibition hall, it had no models available
from the past. Like them, the department store is based on rapid service, on large-
scale operation, on movement.

The idea for the docks @ bon marché arose from the exhibition of 1867. The direct

*2) The architect Hittorff (1792-1867) was concerned throughout his life with the new material iron and
was probably well suited to work alongside constructors. More interesting than his well-known church
of Saint-Vincent-de-Paul (begun 1832) were his “Rotonde du Panorama” (1838) and the “Cirque de
I'Impératrice” on the Champs-Elysées that were probably the models for the overscaled rotunda of the
Vienna World Exhibition of 1873. This rotunda, the work of an English constructor, is one of the first
examples of how one can misuse iron by treating it as a surrogate for stone. The attempt to surpass the
exterior dimension of Michelangelo's dome of Saint Peter’s is quite evident.

Rene

ONES

Fig. 21. L. C. BOILEAU and EIFFEL: BON MARCHE DEPARTMENT STORE. 1876

Fig. 22.
BON MARCHE DEPARTMENT
STORE. Plan

First iron-and-glass department

store. Surface area: 10,000 square

metere

Fig. 23. L. C. BOILEAU and EIFFEL: BON MARCHE DEPARTMENT STORE. 1878. Glass Roof
When the nineteenth century feels itself unobserved, it becomes bold. If possible, one conceals the new

designs. Only gradually do the unobserved rear fronts of railroad stations, factories, the unspoiled forms
of iron and concrete become visible.

impetus was the great disparity that everyone could see there between wholesale and
retail prices. This price margin had to be reduced in order to meet the purchasing
power of the poorer population.
The design of the department store demands:

Greatest possible freedom for circulation, clear layout,

Greatest possible influx of light.
Glass and iron thus become the constituent materials. Glass for the generous sky-
lights as well as for the broad plate-glass windows for displays and the upper stories
(side lighting).
The iron skeleton allows thin pillars within: freedom of circulation, clear lay-
out, and it permits the best utilization of light at the front.
The first consistent realization of a department store in glass and iron is the MAGA-
SINS AU BON MARCHE (Paris). 1876. Eiffel as engineer-constructor, L{ouis-]
C{harles] Boileau, the son of the indefatigable advocate for the introduction of iron,
as architect.
Broad windows at the front. Only the corner pavilions, a reminiscence of French
chateaux, could not be abandoned, as was even the case later (Paul Sédille’s Prin-
temps). But already Boileau remarks that these stone pillars are no more than the

Figs. 21 to 24

Fig. 24. Boileau and EIFFEL:
BON MARCHE DEPART-
MENT STORE, 1876, under
construction®

Surprising lightness and un-
erring precision in this first
attempt to solve the depart-
ment-store problem. Like the
Gare du Nord, still free of the
later degeneration.

hors-d’oeuvre de la construction,** pure veneer (placage). The problem of the
department store’s interior is already understood, so that in principle the solution
is retained in later cases: the different stories form a single space. One
grasps them, “so to speak, all in one glance.”

“Under no circumstances does such a building tolerate thick supporting walls, even
massive piers are amiss here. Only pillars of small diameter are permissible; safety
requirements have to be satisfied with these extremely limited elements.” (Boileau).

*3) The photos of the Bon Marché and the exhibitions of 1878 and 1889 are unpublished and are origi-
nal to the period. Photo: Chevojon.
4) L. C. Boileau, fils, “Lea magasins au Bon Marché,” Encyclop. d’arch., 1880, p. 184.

Fig. 25. Paul Sédille: Printemps Department Store
(1881-89)

Here for the first time the fateful principle was taken
seriously: “To attract the crowds and through deco-
ration to seduce them into staying.”*> Sédille lets the
iron frame rest on concrete foundations.

Fig. 26. Paul Sédille:

Printemps Department Store
(1881-89)

As with the Bon Marché, sheathing
the skeleton with stone facings and
tacking on pavilions.

Fig. 27. FRANTZ JOURDAIN:

SAMARITAINE DEPARTMENT STORE (1905)
Increase of open space, overgrown with Jugendstil orna-
mentation inside and out, yet the framework is
clean and does not Jack the courage to display unclad
iron also on the exterior.

45) Cf. Science et l'industrie, no. 143 (1925), p. 6: “Accuetllir la foule et la retenir en la séduisant.”

EXPERIMENTAL ARCHITECTURE

EXHIBITIONS *

Almost every age, according to its own inner attitude, seems to develop a specific
building problem: the Gothic the cathedral, the Baroque the palace, and the early
nineteenth century with its nostalgic inclination to imbibe the past, the museum.
In no building of German Romantic-Classicism is the will of the age more clearly
manifested in form and idea than in [Karl Friedrich] Schinkel’s Altes Museum
in Berlin (1819). The Frenchman Henri de Saint-Simon simultaneously perceives
industry as the central concept. Later in the century, between 1850 and 1890, as
industry achieved its full development, exhibitions become the creative expo-
nents of building production.*? Only when industrial development’s initial wonder
had lapsed into a self-evident fact did the attraction and meaning of these arrange-
ments abate.

Exhibitions are light buildings, quickly assembled and quickly disassembled: labo-
ratories for industrial building.

One wanted to build in iron because stone, as a material, was far too heavy and
expensive: “With iron, the various parts of the construction could be fabricated in the
many separate workshops.” Beyond this, iron had the advantage “of giving the build-
ing a special character, highly appropriate to its purpose.” (See Monographie.
Palais et constructions diverses de l’exposition universelle de 1878, exécutées par
Vadministration, p. 7.)

The history of exhibitions becomes the history of iron construc-
tion. Following the first tentative efforts of 1851 (London) and 1855 (Paris), it hap-
pened almost regularly that previously untried solutions on which a group of
constructors was working were realized for the first time. Immediately thereafter,
they left their stamp on life to the broadest extent. Often it was a matter of a daring
and even dubious way of building (Eiffel Tower) into the unknown.**

Exhibitions not only summarized the results of the development but they also
anticipated it.

In the history of exhibitions one can trace directly the transformation of the old
static feeling of load and support into a new system of suspended equilib-
rium. Let us advance step by step to make this evolution clear.

46) The French word EXPOSITION —like the word INDUSTRIE —is much more ambiguous than the
[German] word Ausstellung [exhibition]. Exposition also means: overview, juxtaposition, comparison,
site, and even, in the figurative sense: representation of a theory.

+?) A certain reservation is perhaps in order, for architecture in the nineteenth century— understood as
a precursor of later evolution—was seen as an isolated field that could be grasped only with difficulty.
In the crucial areas of design the fields overlap. Command of a collective formative will con-
nects the exhibitions with the bridges, railroad buildings, machines, vehicles, in
short, with the entire field of anonymous design.

+8) This is confirmed by those works that are far removed from the exhibitions. In 1883 F[élix-Benjamin]
Lucas says in the large publication Les travaux publics de la France, vol. Routes et ponts, p. 90: “Exhi-
bition halls from 1855 and 1867 familiarized constructors with large spans and so increased the ideas of
the specialized professionals that these dared, without hesitation, to erect a single-arch bridge with a
span of 160 meters (bridge over the Douro).”

In an age of bounding transformation from handicraft to machine production exhibi-
tions served to place all new discoveries next to one another immediately. Work
proceeded feverishly and simultaneously in many places. Exhibitions now lined up
the products of every country next to each other for comparison so that a mutual
adjustment and intensification of the total production process happened as quickly
as possible.

The exhibitions since 1850 were the first confirmations of a thoroughly global com-
merce. Yet their very existence indicated that no breaks are possible in the field of
human activity.

Temporary and transitory in their very essence these arrangements were closely con-
nected with life, and at the same time they were the birthplace of today’s advertis-
ing. These exhibitions, mounted in a short time and at great expense, produced an
as-yet-unknown intensification in the medium of publicity.

The whole range of human labor was to be embraced: all disciplines and, often even
retrospectively, all periods. From agriculture, mining, from industry, from machines
shown at work, to raw materials, to processed materials, to fine and applied arts.
This is due to a remarkable need for a premature synthesis that was also typical of
other fields in the nineteenth century—the synthesis of the arts [Gesamtkunstwerk].
Apart from unquestionably utilitarian reasons, there was also the intention to give
rise to a vision of the human cosmos in a new state of movement.

The exhibitions were born with industry. Like it, they were a result of the French
Revolution. In the first half of the century they were limited events. Toward mid-
century, as industrialization marched forth, the world exhibitions begin.

The first exhibition, which called itself Premiére exposition des produits de l’in-
dustrie francaise, took place in 1798 (year VI) on the Champ de Mars. It no longer
dealt with luxury items—as did some presentations of the eighteenth century —but
with articles for everyday use, such as clocks, safety locks, wallpapers, textiles, cot-
ton yarns “carded and spun by machines” (page 51 of the exhibition catalog).*°

In the catalog of the second exhibition (year IX), the actual purpose was already more
precisely formulated: only perfectly executed objects should be displayed. Especially
new inventions (découvertes nouvelles). As Bonaparte, who as consul opened the
exhibition, clearly emphasized: “This solemn and memorable exhibition must calm
all anxiety as to the future of our commerce.” (Cf. Seconde exposition publique des
produits de Vindustrie frangaise [Paris: Imprimerie de la république, year Lx (1801)]).
Iron, transportation, industry interlock. Between 1840 and 1850 development by fits
and starts is evident. England—in contrast to the continent—is hardly disturbed by
political turbulence. Apart from this, England is in the forefront of industrial pro-
duction in the first half century. Hence, the first Industrial Exhibition of All Nations
took place in London in 1851.

1°) One of the few surviving copies of the first exhibition catalogs is in the Conservatoire des Arts et
Métiers in Paris, established in the same year—1798.

Fig. 28.
EXHIBITION, LONDON 1850.
Plan of the CRYSTAL PALACE
Material: cast iron. Span: 22
meters, thus less than late Gothic
vaults. Innumerable cast-iron
columns. Someone has counted
3,230. Fear of open space. But
consistent in the pure structure
of glass and iron.

EXHIBITION, PARIS 1855.
Main Building

The column-free space in the
middle forms the nave with a 48-

meter span.

Fig. 29. EXHIBITION, PARIS 1855. NAVE

Span 48 meters. Material: hand-wrought trusses.
Cast-iron columns. First halls with such a bold
span. Empire-style barrel vault. Even at this primi-
tive stage of construction the meaning of the new
material is sensed. Openness instead of spatial
enclosure. Light. Lightmess.

EXHIBITIONS OF WORLD COMMERCE

PARIS 1855

The first French event of this kind was called Exposition universelle des produits de
Vindustrie.° Compared with later exhibitions, both the public and the press still
adopted a certain waiting attitude toward the exhibition of 1855. This is also sensed
in the overall disposition: new participants®' were constantly coming forward, so the

5°) That is almost identical in name to the first show on the Champ de Mars, of 1798, only now, instead
of the “French” limitation, the word was “universelle.” Global commerce.

+1) Number of exhibitors: London 1851, 17,000; Paris 1855, 24,000; Paris 1867, 60,000; Paris 1878,
52,800; Paris 1889, 61,700.

Fig. 30. EXHIBITION, PARIS 1855.

Galerie des Machines

Gallery 1,200 pieters long, attached to the main
structure laterally along the Seine (cf. L Tilustra-
tion 1855).

Fig. 31. Pont de Longon
(Garonne) 1854-55
Span of 77 meters. Height
of girders 5.5 meters.

specified surface area proved to be too small, and the exhibition showed numerous
additions. Plan: a rectangular structure with a high nave surrounded by a double
row of galleries. The low, encircling aisles were supported by countless cast-iron
columns. A circular panorama connected with the main structure and with a 1,200-
meter-long gallery—containing mostly machines—that was oriented along the Seine.

CONSTRUCTION: the soaring round arches of the nave seem much advanced, their
span approaches a bold 50 meters. No tie-rods encroach upon the free space,
yet one feels that the construction lacks a certain tautness that we are accustomed
to today.

In fact, the hand of the constructor is here guided, both internally and externally, by
historical concerns:

Figs. 28, 29

Fig. 30

Fig. 28

Fig. 32

Figs. 34,35

These neat, self-contained barrel vaults recall numerous palatial halls of the Empire
period. And in order to resist the lateral thrusts of the large vaults, there was still no
alternative but to imitate Gothic structural principles, that is, to buttress the iron,
which was both expensive and wasteful of space.

Compared to London’s Crystal Palace of 1851, the span of whose central nave did
not exceed 22 meters and thus remained below what had already been dared in the
Gothic period—the 27-meter span of the wooden vaults in Padua’s Il Salone—great
progress is shown here. The architect L. A. Boileau, who incidentally in the same year
erected the first church in Paris with cast-iron columns, drew attention to the fact®3
that the Crystal Palace in London was only a large-scale reproduction of the glass
houses in the Jardin des Plantes in Paris (erected 1833), which were consistently built
of iron, and that in the first version of the Crystal Palace, which was dismantled
shortly after the exhibition, the most difficult part of the construction, the dome, was
even executed in wood.

The English, in fact, are less talented as constructors, but one must admit that they
left the structure free, they did not encase it with a triumphal archway and stone
walls as was done in Paris in 1855.

Cast iron was the construction material employed in London. In Paris in 1855
wrought iron was used for the first time for the vaults, although most pieces were still
executed by hand.

Even without the appropriate structural solutions having been found, in this exhibi-
tion attempts had already been made: large spans, unusual luminosity,
lightness of execution.

PARIS 1867

PLAN: two semicircles of identical diameters joined by two straight lines form the
outer contour. Small axis 380 meters, large axis 490 meters. (The site of the Champ
de Mars, between the Seine and the Ecole Militaire, was selected for the first time.
The oblong form of the site defined the outer contour for this and subsequent exhibi-
tions.) The question arose of how one should dispose the individual sections so as to
give the spectator an ordered and undisturbed insight into the whole development.
The elliptical ground plan was filled with seven concentrically arranged galleries; the
garden was laid out inside the innermost ellipse of this colisée du travail.
Proceeding outward, the galleries grew progressively wider and larger. The outer-
most gallery, the Galerie des Machines, with twice the width and height of the others,
towered over them all. Behind this belt followed encircling rings: clothing, furniture,
raw materials, until the two innermost —smallest— galleries, in which a retro-
spective exhibition, l’histoire du travail,*4 and the fine arts were displayed. A palm
garden with sculptures formed the open, innermost oval. The oval building was

52) Saint-Eugéne. Though Boileau resorted to imitating the Gothic columns of a refectory (Biblioth. du
Conservatoire des Arts et Métiers).

53) This is not to be taken literally, for John Paxton used his own greenhouses as a model in his Crystal
Palace, or, as the French called it, in his “cage de fer.” (L. A. Boileau, Le fer, principal élément constructif
DE LA NOUVELLE ARCHITECTURE [Paris, 1871], p. 71). In any case, it should be mentioned that
Paxton used wooden ribs in his large greenhouse for the duke of Devonshire in Chatsworth (1837-41).
54) The exhibition also concerned itself with social problems. Workers’ housing was built, and “the Uni-
versal Exhibition of 1867 prompted new inquiries into the state of the working classes.” It presented

PARIS 1867

Fig. 32. EXHIBITION, PARIS 1867,

PLAN OF THE MAIN BUILDING

(On the Champ de Mars between the Seine and the Ecole
Attempt to line up the products of different countries
and parts of the world next to each other, almost as a
SET OF STATISTICS. Arranged peripherally: the
EXHIBITS. Radial avenues connect the seven rings to
permit visitors to examine the total production of a

country at a glance.

divided into individual segments by transverse avenues, so that the spectator could
follow effortlessly the development of a single country by itself and in relation to
others. Attempt at a set of “living” statistics. In reality the system did not work due
to the unequal development of the various countries.

“To go round this palace, circular, like the Equator, is literally to go around the
world. All peoples are here: enemies live in peace side by side. As with the beginning
of things on the watery globe, the divine spirit now floats on this globe of iron.” (Cf.
L’exposition universelle de 1867 illustrée: Publication internationale autorisée par
la commission impériale, vol. 2, p. 322).

CONSTRUCTION: the iron skeleton of the Galerie des Machines (span of 35 meters,
height of 25 meters) consisted of pillars reaching 25 meters high. They received the
basket arches of the vault girders at the height of 19 meters. These pillars were
allowed to continue past the spring of the vault straight up into the air.>> The chief
constructor, J[ean-] B[aptiste-] Séb[astien] Krantz, did not want to expose tie-rods
within, and the lateral thrust could only be borne by free girders that punched
through to the sky from the pillars to the basket arches. These projecting pillars were
considered hideous, and one attempted to disguise them with trophies and flagpoles.
Hydraulic lifts, with all the clumsiness of newborn monsters, afforded access to the
peak of the roof, around which ran a platform allowing an unusual view into this
gallery city of corrugated sheet metal and glass.

Behind Krantz, the chief, stood the actual inspirator, the young Eiffel, who

“objects specially exhibited with a view to improving the physical and moral condition of the people.”
Cf. G[eorges] Weill, Histoire du mouvement social en France, 1852-1924 (Paris, 1924), p. 89.

55) A similar solution on a more modest scale was attempted in the Palm Garden in Frankfurt
a. M. of 1871.

Fig. 35

Fig. 33 [36]

Fig, 34

Fig. 33. Edfouard) MANET, EXHIBITION, 1867

MANET not only grasped externally the reality of the age but also translated it into an adequate pic-
torial language: colors dissolve the fixed form, the verifiability of load and support, what counts in this
image is the suspended relation between figurations of color.

(Suggested in the distance at the right is the exhibition building with its soaring piers.)

Fig. 34. VIEW FROM THE PLATFORM
of the seven-ring gallery of glass aud corrugated sheet metal.

Fig. 35. EXHIBITION 1867. JARDIN CENTRAL
with sculptures in the innermost oval and an encircling gallery of slender cast-iron columns.

had recently established his firm in Levallois-Perret. Eiffel calculated and later
experimentally verified the large supports of the Galerie des Machines, which were
the core of the entire arrangement. Thus for the first time the coefficient of elastic-
ity for a large-span building was verified. Eiffel later published his findings in
a memoir.

These tall, kilometer-long galleries were undoubtedly grand. They were filled with
the roar of machines. It should not be forgotten that people still arrived at the par-
ticularly famous festivities of this exhibition in eight-horse carriages. As with con-
temporary rooms, one attempted to reduce the scale of these 25-meter-tall galleries
with furniture-like installations and to soften the severity of the construction. One
was afraid of one’s own greatness.

PARIS 1878

The success of 1867 was so great that the scale of the next exhibition was significantly
enlarged. It was divided into two sections. A monumental structure and a temporary
exhibition building. Across the Seine in 1876, Davioud and [Jules-Désiré] Bourdais
built the Trocadéro as a masonry palace.*¢

The actual exhibition structure was again defined by the elongated form of the
Champ de Mars. A rectangle: 350 x 700 meters. The earlier elliptical form was

56) These monumental buildings inherently contradict the meaning of an exhibition, and they led—by
1900—to the collapse of the exhibition idea. The Trocadéro is cited only as a symptom. Davioud and
Bourdais were excellent architects and are to be thanked among other things for their design for a
National Opera for an audience of 5,000, which for the first time used acoustics as a design principle.

Auten

f ricoge ve EEPNFOQXta ymin cm 1
ni cuaPeL : =
i ee pes S

7

Fig. 36.

EXHIBITION, PARIS 1867.
GALERIE DES MACHINES
Mechanical elevator to the

roof platform.

Fig. 37. SECTION THROUGH EXHIBITION BUILDING 1867
In order to avoid visible tie-rods, KRANTZ and EIFFEL extended the pillars of the superelevated
GALERIE DES MACHINES into the sky to deflect lateral thrust externally.

Fig. 38. GALERIE DES MACHINES 1867

In the center of the gallery ran a platform on cast-iron columns, which served as a carrier for the trans-
missions of the machines.

Fig. 39. ENCIRCLING OUTER
GALLERY 1867

It included restaurants from each
country. CANOPY that would soon
be replaced with glass. [Francois]
COIGNET used CONCRETE in the
basements for the first time.


Fig. 40.5’ First thoroughly consistent IRON-
SKELETON BUILDING. 1871-72

Menier Chocoiate Factory in Noisiel-sur-Marne
near Paris. Architect: Jules Saulnier

Cantilevered on four piers, the building is sus-
pended above the water on box beams.

Instead of a rough surface of advancing and retreat-
ing elements, the architect, guided by the construc-
tion, astonishes us with a thoroughly planar
facade. As the architect himself expressed it: “The
system of construction adopted in the facades
yielded an entirely flat surface from top to
bottom, without any horizontal or vertical projec-
tion” (cf. Encycl. d’arch., 1877, p. 92).

We feel: the “planar surfaces” of the “new” archi-
tecture have their origin far in the past.

Iron breaks through to the surface. The diagonal
braces still show clear reliance on half-timbering.
But the primitive state of the construction pro-
tects it from being draped with false architectural

hangings.

ne wae nen

=

ey

peony

i ran ]

57) To suggest the evolutionary path, we are throwing in a

wo6U4tsfsSGaahetl ey tid 1

1871-72

a

3 Fig. 41. JULES SAULNIER
Menier Chocolate Factory in

2 , Noisiel-sur-Marne
/*. : Plan. The main building on the
riverbank dates from 1864—67.
The iron-skeleton building shown
above is the one that rests on four
piers and is set boltlike into the
riverbed.

few buildings in the “Exhibitions” chapter.

Fig. 42. The IRON SKELETON as HOUSING
FORM. 1927. Apartment block of the Stuttgart
Werkbundsiediung by Mies van der Rohe. 1927

It took more than half a century before the impor-
tance of the iron skeleton for apartment houses
was recognized. The conclusion to be drawn here
from the construction is: fixed interior walls are
senseless in this type of construction! Each tenant
should be given the opportunity to arrange his
dividing walls freely according to his own needs.
Industry is given the task of constructing such
walls flawlessly.

Fig. 43. PONT DU BELLON. 1868-71
Two pylons. Height 48 meters. Total length: 231
meters. Bridge girder: 45 meters.

From the beginning, the French used slender iron
frameworks instead of stone pillars (cf. [Edouard]
Collignon, Chemins de fer; contains photos of bridges,
railroad stations, etc., from the period 1850-1880).


Fig. 44

1878

Fig. 44. EXHIBITION, PARIS 1878. VESTIBULE, MAIN ENTRANCE Facing the Seine.
CONSTRUCTOR: EIFFEL

The representational inflated sheet-metal architecture of the domes is only a part of the entire picture.
What is important here is the courage with which the glass and iron are functionally united: the GLASS

WALL and the unity with which the glazed canopy projects. These canopies significantly
undercut the viewer's preconceptions concerning the relations of load and sup-
port in a structural system.

replaced by a quadrangle, for one had learned that the curved girders of the inner
supports were more difficult to reuse than straight ones (Encycl. d’arch., 1878,
p. 36).

A series of galleries in parallel formation extended over the length of the site; all were
flanked and dominated by the two Galeries des Machines. Vestibules were
placed on the two short sides of the site in front of the galleries. Eiffel constructed
the monumental vestibule facing the Seine. The corners and middle of the vestibule
were accentuated by great démes métalliques, whose inflated volumes and dubious
architecture were described already by contemporaries as “highly questionable”
(Encyel. d’arch., 1878, p. 62). In these domes, iron was violently forced to assume
monumental! forms alien to the material. The result is obviously an inflated sheet-
metal architecture.

Nevertheless: it should not be forgotten that along the length of the entire vestibule
ran a glazed canopy, a marquise vitrée. Unpretentious and perfectly light. In these
details one detects the hand of Eiffel, who at the same time (together with L. C.
Boileau) placed a similar marquise vitrée on the first iron-skeleton department store
(Bon Marché).

If we were to scrape the decorative sludge off these buildings
and make it a habit impartially and urgently to inquire into

Fig. 46. J[an] Flrederick] STAAL:
SHOPPING STREET (Jan
Evertsenstraat), AMSTERDAM
1926

The freely cantilevered canopy is
only now beginning to be used
nnaffectedly

Fig. 45. W[alter] GROPIUS:
BAUHAUS DESSAU 1926

Only after half a century are we
able to explore the tensions® inher-
ent in the materials and overcome
the decorative incrustation.

58) Tension in the aesthetic sense.


Fig. 46

Fig. 47

their true nature, we would see that their bodies already con-
tain all the essential building elements that we today describe
as new. We could compare the glass wall of 1878 with the glass wall of the
Bauhaus just as easily as with the Glass Building department store in San Francisco,
1878, or we could compare the running glazed canopy of 1878 with the canopy of
the shopping street in Amsterdam of 1926, where it becomes a truly articulating
element.

CONSTRUCTION. The essential point: the two flanking Galeries des Machines.
35-meter span, 25 meters high.

The barrel vault has disappeared. The form resembles a capsized ship’s hull. The
truss girders meeting at the ridge of the roof are distinct and separate elements and
already show that this is not a rigidly continuous construction.

Pier height 16 meters. They are box-shaped with a quadrangular cross-section. The
truss girders begin halfway up.

SUPPORTS: de Dion type. The engineer Henri de Dion was the real creator and
pioneer of girders for very large spans. After the most careful studies of material
tensile“strength he arrived at the form truss girders should have in order to be able to
withstand, without the aid of tie-rods, the various stresses placed on them. De
Dion died shortly before the exhibition opened, while still working on his calculations.
The profile of the truss girders already shows a certain inner elasticity, the result of
studying the actual laws of the materials.

Stepped purlins running through and connecting the lattice girders gave the girders
in their continuity an expression of precise repose such as had not previously been
realized.

On both sides, from the halfway point up, the walls were filled in with glass. Such
a union of glass and iron, by its nature, demands an extensive
dematerialization of the building, as can already be seen here.
Boileau precisely describes the expression produced by this union: “The spectator is
not aware of the weight of transparent surfaces. The surfaces are to him air and
light, that is to say, imponderable fluidity.”

Because of the Dion truss it has become possible to transmit all apparent forces
directly into the foundation without outside help. Nevertheless, the foundation
remains rigidly connected with pillars and framework: the pillar is riveted into
U-shaped iron sockets that are sunk into the foundation. But an iron skeleton is
subject to changes, it cannot be rigidly bound together like a
stone palace. It lives with the temperature fluctuations.

One begins to take this into account: each 60 meters along the ridge of the roof,
where the two girders meet, a complicated system of bolts and oval holes permits
independent expansion and contraction of the entire skeleton.

Perhaps there is still in the rigid connection with the ground, in the box-shaped gird-
ers of the lower part, a memory of the old relationship between column and base. But
after the—if you will—capital-like enlargement of these girders, at the mounting of

59) “Les toitures et les plafonds vitrés ne supportent pas une construction d’apparence massive ou com-
pliquée” {Glazed roofs and ceilings are incompatible with any construction that looks massive or com-
plicated]. “Le spectateur n'admet pas la pesanteur des surfaces transparents. Pour lui ces surfaces
représentent de l’air et de la lumiére, c’est-d-dire des fluides impondérables.” Encycl. d’arch.,
1887-88, p. 97.

Fig. 47. EXHIBITION, PARIS 1878. GALERIE DES MACHINES. CONSTRUCTOR: HENRI DE DION
Span 35 meters. Height 25 meters. For the first time in a large span all the forces connected with the
system are carried freely into the foundation without auxiliary means (tie-rod).

the framework, there is a new tensile elasticity. One begins to recognize that the
expression of iron skeleton also represents something new, demanding a hovering
balance of forces.

PARIS 1889

The exhibition of 1889 is both the climax and—interpreted from the standpoint of
knowledge —the conclusion of this development. Its influence was enormous.

Plan: dispersed layout. The Tour Eiffel by the Seine was the focal point, behind
which the court-shaped exhibition buildings receded. The two wings contained the
beauz-arts and the arts libérauzx; a section devoted to general exhibitions connected
them. The Galerie des Machines with its immense metallic nave rose in the back-
ground to tower over the complex.

CONSTRUCTION: GALERIE DES MACHINES. (Actually called the Palais des
Machines.)*° Constructor: Cottancin.) Architect: [Charles-Louis-Ferdinand]
Dutert. The dimensions exceeded anything previously known. The
largest previous internal span of 73 meters wide and 25 meters high had been
tried in England in 1868.

6°) In 1910 this culmination of constructional design was torn down—as Frantz Jourdain correctly
notes — out of “artistic sadism.” This hall was imitated in the Chicago World Exhibition of 1893
where it served as the palace of art, costumed as a Palladian basilica and senselessly imprisoned
behind walls.

°t) At London’s Saint Pancras Station, though of a similar form—also without columns—the girder
framework is rigidly connected to the ground with heavy anchors. The lateral thrust is offset by tie-
rods buried beneath the ground. Constructor: [William Henry] Barlow.

Fig. 48

Fig. 49

/

*

Fig. 48. GALERIE DES MACHINES, PARIS 1889

Assembling of the hall. One sees clearly how the two trusses are connected only by a bolt at the ridge
line. Instead of a rigid connection, some movement is allowed at the top. Joint.

Fig. 49. SAINT PANCRAS
STATION, LONDON 1868
Span 73 meters, internal height
25 meters.


The Palais des Machines spanned 115 meters with a height of 45 meters, that is, it
exceeded the height of the nave of the cathedral of Amiens, whose span was about
one-eighth (15 meters) of this hall. The skeleton is formed of twenty trusses. Total
length 420 meters. Huge glass walls enclosed the sides.°?

The freely spanned spatial volume signified an unprecedented conquest of matter.
Nothing from an earlier time can compare with it.

The glass walls at the end did not close up the structure. This is not a building that
rests within itself. There could be more trusses, there could be fewer trusses lined up,
which would not decisively alter the building, for the aesthetic meaning of
this hall lies in the perceptible union and in the penetration of the

62) “The large truss has a grand and bold profile~the forms of the metal were everywhere so devised
that it constituted its own decoration” (EXPOSITION UNIVERSELLE de PARIS de 1889, Monographie.
Palais, jardins, constructions diverses et installations générales, par A[dolphe] Alphand, 1892-95),
p. 521. On a smaller scale, J. W. SCHWEDLER had previously attempted the free “pointlike” support in
what was from the point of view of construction and aesthetica the most beautiful hall of the age: the
Central Station, FRANKFURT A. M., dedicated 1888. The tripartite halls of the Frankfurt railroad sta-
tion indeed have trusses that touch almost in points at the apex, but which do not lose the barrel-vault
form that the TRIPLE-HINGED GIRDER of the Galerie des Machines overcomes intrinsically through
its essence. Dimensious of FRANKFURT: 186 meters LONG, 56 meters WIDE, 29 meters HIGH.

Fig. 50. GALERIE DES MACHINES, PARIS 1889
Upper gallery. View into the spacious hall.

Fig. 51. GALERIE DES MACHINES, PARIS 1889

“Baseless,” the weight of the entire hall rests on small hinged joints, without rigid connection to the ground,

exterior space, resulting in an utterly new limitlessness and move-
ment, in keeping with the rotation of the machines that filled it. Each arch was made
up of two segments. They were joined—hinged~with a bolt at the apex of the hall.
Below, the girder gradually tapers so as barely to touch the ground.

Above, it expands, achieving enormous impact. The usual proportions seem to be
exactly reversed, the traditional static feelings disturbed and disrupted: TRIPLE-
HINGED ARCHES.

Further proportional distensions: the trusses are approximately five times as
high as they are wide (3.5 meters high by 75 centimeters wide).%

With these truss proportions in an enclosed space we had to become aware that—in
contrast to stone or wood construction—the filling material was missing. These
trusses were unusually light because this was the first time that a steel framework
was used to such an extent. The eye of the contemporary onlookers felt insecure and
disturbed as the light pouring in from above swallowed up the thin latticework. The
vault optically attained an unusual hovering state.

The last hint of columns has disappeared, it is impossible to discern where support
and load flow into one another.

The arching begins quite low,° bent as though in the act of leaping in order to
receive the load. If you will: this is the symbol of our caryatids: they
bear their load with neither the dignity of antiquity nor the buck-
ling of the Baroque. They spring toward the load in order to unite
with it.

The ends of the downward-tapering girders are no longer rigidly connected with the
ground but are left free to move.® They transmit their weight, as well as a horizon-
tal thrust of 120,000 kilograms, directly into the foundation by a hinged joint. With
this supporting structure even foundation movements can take place without creating
internal stresses. This was the only means of controlling the play of forces at all
points.

The division of support and load, which was still suggested in de Dion’s halls of 1878,
is here obliterated.

**) A[rthur] Vierendeel, L architecture métallique au xixe siécle et l'Exposition de 1889, @ Paris (Brus-
sels, 1890), p. 30: “This disproportion makes a very bad effect, the beam is not balanced, it is not firmly
seated, the eye is not reassured.”

6) This was seen as a distortion, for the eye demanded as an eternal point of comparison the
dimensions of the stone architraves.

°5) Critique of contemporaries: Vierendeel, p. 31: “The keystones of the Palais des Machines have yet
another fault, which is that they are too much hollowed out.”

56) Vierendeel, p. 29: “The curvature of the vaults is also highly defective from an aesthetic point of
view. It begins too low.” Precisely these criticized points were retained for later development. Con-
temporaries, even a de Baudot, found the “proportion” wanting!

67) As often happens in the nineteenth century, important results come about when various fields over-
lap: one took over the principle of free support from bridge construction. At the same time one sees in
such instances how difficult it is for human knowledge to carry over the results of one field to another.
68) “Only one mode of construction provided a mathematical determination of the distribution of thrusts
in the different parts of the curve: this was that of articulation at the support and at the crown. This sys-
tem guarantees an absolutely rigorous rational distribution of the thrusts and of the materials.” Cf. A.
Alphand, Monographie 1889, vol. 1, p. 46.

Fig. 52. GALERIE DES MACHINES, PARIS 1889
View toward the main entrance. DIMENSIONS: 115 meters INTERNAL WIDTH, 45 meters HIGH,
420 meters LONG.

Fig. 53. GALERIE DES MACHINES, PARIS 1889
MAIN ENTRANCE


1909-13

Fig. 54. TONY GARNIER: SLAUGHTERHOUSE IN LYONS
Dimensions: WIDTH 80 meters, LENGTH 210 meters.

Fig. 55. BRIDGE OVER THE
FIRTH OF FORTH, 1883-89
CONSTRUCTORS:

JOHN FOWLER and [Sir]
BENJ[amin] BACKER

Three gigantic steel pylons 100 meters high, span of each superstructure 520 meters. It employed nearly
5,000 workers. (Cf. Encyel. d’architecture, 1888/89, pp. 166 and 186.)

The iron skeleton has found its true form.

A play of enormous forces is held in equilibrium. But not rigidly, like support and
load, rather, almost floating.

It is the equilibrium of a balance beam daringly poised against continually varying
forces.

A new oscillating harmony is created.

An elastic counterpoise is achieved with respect to changes within, without, and in the
foundation:

Equilibrium with respect to change in its own molecular structure.

Equilibrium with respect to external pressure (wind, snow).

Equalization with respect to the surface fluctuations (foundation).

CONSTRUCTION BECOMES EXPRESSION.

CONSTRUCTION BECOMES FORM.

Fig. 56. EIFFEL TOWER 1889,

A PIER. EXTERIOR

From the ground floor to the first
platform.

FURTHER DEVELOPMENT

The significance of the Eiffel Tower lies in its structure. By its silhouette undoubtedly Figs. 2,
a product of its age: monument, sculpture. But all flesh has been left off, everything 56 to 58
is reduced to connective parts, and the air drawn into the interior of the

piers now becomes, in an unprecedented way, a formative material.

Eiffel and his engineers erected the tower in seventeen months. Each rivet hole

had been factory drilled in advance to a tolerance of one-tenth of a millimeter,
whereas the English did this work on-site for the bridge over the Firth of Forth Fig.55
(1883-89).

Fig. 57. EIFFEL TOWER 1889
View from the second platform to the first. Taken from inside the elevator shaft. Right and left the
curved elevator rails that continue down to the ground floor.

One might also view the Eiffel Tower as a manifesto: the successful realization of
a 300-meter-high structure provided the decisive impetus for tall steel-skeleton
buildings.

This development continued underground: America. The question of
who built the first skyscraper is still being disputed. We know only that in Chicago—
apparently at the same time as the Eiffel Tower—quite a number of architects started
building the first eleven- or twelve-story steel-framed houses.”

In Paris itself-— quite apart from department stores—a series of modest skeleton struc-
tures with iron facades was erected in the following decade.

An entire square was even placed on an iron foundation. It was the place de ]’Europe,
the generous structure over the wide network of rail lines from the Saint-Lazare
Station. (Engineer: Julien). With a half-dozen intersecting streets.

The tradition of the nineteenth century is today being renewed. Many efforts in

69) “Who Designed the First Steel Skyscraper?,” The Western Architect 32 (November 1923), p. 125. It
is mentioned that the architects were [John] Root, [Dankmar] Adler and [Louis] Sullivan, [Wiliam Le
Baron] Jenney, [William] Holabird, and [Martin] Roche in Chicago as well as L. [Cass} Gilbert (eleven-
story Tower Building) in New York.

Fig. 58. SUSPENDED STAIRS within

the EIFFEL TOWER

(Connection from the ground floor to the

first platform. )

One sees the elevator track next to the

stairs. Our modern intenti

dents even in the detailing of forms such '
as the horizontal railings of the airy stair-

case. Cf. fig. 62.

1926

Ls ty re ad
i

ions find prece-

Fig. 59. MART STAM:
SUPERSTRUCTURE OF THE
ROKIN DAM AMSTERDAM
1926

Only now do the seeds that lie
in structures such as the Eiffel
Tower come to full fruition.
The affinity with a building
such as the Eiffel Tower lies not
merely in the connection and
interpenetration by suspended
transportation or free-hanging
stations; one reaches the conclu-
sion viewing both buildings:
ARCHITECTURE NO LONGER
HAS RIGID BOUNDARIES.

Fig. 60. PONT
TRANSBORDEUR,
MARSEILLES.
CONSTRUCTOR:
[Ferdinand-Joseph]}
ARNODIN. 1905

The ferry is suspended at a
height of 51 meters from a
trolley that runs on a gang-
way. The FERRY glides
a few meters above the
water. Length of gangway
240 meters. Graceful com-
bination of stationary and
moving parts.

Fig. 61. PONT TRANSBORDEUR 1905

View from the stairs toward ferry and city.
The oldest “suspended ferry” of this kind is in
Rouen—also executed by ARNODIN, in 1899—
yet one finds others, for instance, in Nantes,
and the largest, still under construction, in
BORDEAUX.

Fig. 62.
PONT
TRANS-
BORDEUR
1905

View from the elevated gangway, 54 meters above the water, to the suspended ferry. Plenty of new visual
possibilities: everything is based on mobility. Notice the platforms of the staircase that boldly
project out into space. The “new architecture” has unconsciously used these projecting “balconies” again
and again. Why? Because there exists the need to live in buildings that strive to overcome the old sense
of equilibrium that was based only on fortresslike incarceration.

Fig. 83. View of Houses from Pont Transbordeur Marseilles

Fig. 84. VELODROME
d'Hiver, Paris


England, France (through Henri SAUVAGE), and Germany are being made to use
the SKELETON building even for HOUSING SETTLEMENTS. Research and experi-
ence in this area are still very much in the initial stages. It is not yet possible to
determine beyond doubt their economic feasibility.

The historian must therefore establish that by midcentury the problem of mountable
and transportable iron housing with cavity walls was already posed. Such houses were
built for the tropics (colonies) from the perspective: thermal insulation and resistance
to insect attacks (termites).

Fig. 65. VELODROME
d@'Hiver, Paris

Gallery bleachers.

The bleacher rows that are
perforated and cut in order
to achieve lightness enable
new effects through light,
structure, material variety.


FERROCONCRETE

It is pointless to discuss the new architecture in France without touching upon its
foundation: ferroconcrete. It is not extracted from nature as a compact material. Its
meaning is: artificial composition. its origin: the laboratory. From slender iron rods,
cement, sand, and gravel, from an “aggregate body,” vast building complexes can
suddenly crystallize into a single stone monolith that like no previously known nat-
ural material is able to resist fire and a maximum load. This is accomplished because
the laboratory intelligently exploits the properties of these almost worthless materials
and through their combination increases their separate capacities many times over.
We know: a load-bearing beam—be it a bridge girder or ceiling joist—is chiefly sub-
jected to compression in its upper part and to tension in its lower part. Therefore,
iron, which possesses excellent tensile strength, is placed more on the underside,
whereas concrete, with its great compressive strength and compact mass, predomi-
nates in the upper part.

[Joseph] Monier did not know this—in 1867. In his reinforced-concrete containers
iron gave the form and concrete was the filling. Being more persistent than his pre-
decessors and contemporaries —[Joseph-Louis] Lambot (1854), Coignet (1861),7
[Thaddeus] Hyatt (1877)—Monier elaborated his system step-by-step and succes-
sively took out patents for pipes, flat slabs, bridges, and staircases (1875). Despite an
instinctively correct arrangement he failed even at the end to recognize the function
of iron and concrete. This insight fell to German engineers in 1880. But the decisive
step that would enable a new means of architectural design to arise from an ancillary
material, from a construction detail, was taken by Fr[ancois] Hennebique.”
Even this, like almost all enduring knowledge of our age, was not the result of fan-
tastic visions—they were later consequences—but of microscopic examination. Or,
expressed in the more modest language of the our time—of patents.

In 1892 Hennebique took out a patent on “composite beams.”

Until then the weak point in ferroconcrete construction had been the joints: those
places where the ceiling merged with the beam and the beam with the supports. It
didn’t work there. With an appropriate placement and bending of the reinforcing
iron, Hennebique succeeded in bonding the ceiling, beams, and columns into one

”) To our knowledge, the first extensive use of CONCRETE occurred at the Paris Exhibition of 1867.
In the large ellipsoidal main building (cf. fig. 39) Coignet used concrete ceiling slabs above the cellars
of the commercial areas that were located in front of the Galerie dea Machines.

7!) Francois HENNEBIQUE, who came to ferroconcrete via stone masonry and iron construction, is him-
self one of the first examples of an industrial building entrepreneur. Just as one had previously sold
machines to every part of the world, he erected his constructions in the most widely different countries:
mills in France, granaries in Genoa, silos in Strasbourg with the help of Way & Freytag, harbor struc-
tures in England, the first wide-span bridge over the Rhone (near Vienne); the decorative confections of
the Paris Exhibition palaces of 1900 likewise conceal Hennebique’s path-breaking concrete frames.

continuous unit (ribbed beam). The building as monolith became possible. Isolated
cast-iron columns were replaced by ferroconcrete pillars. The unified frame-structure
emerged. The architectural imagination could move in tow of the patents. We know
how cumbersome this process was.

It is clear where this path would lead. Formerly little-noticed uprights were now
busily examined. In 1899 Armand Considére discovered special methods to make
them rigid (corded concrete). Most recently one has even succeeded in making the
beams —these last vestiges of timber construction— disappear: girderless ceilings! The
efficacy of iron radiates almost like a magnetic field over its corporeal expanse within
the concrete (developed by the Swiss [Robert] Maillart), and to be sure in a more
empirical than mathematically acceptable way. We are faced with a very complicated
interplay of forces that even our theory can scarcely calculate.

Meaning of ferroconcrete: this laboratory product, this product that emerged
only by focusing on the material, through—if you will—a material vision, is very sig-
nificant for the present and the future. With its prevalence, the architect, as a roman-
tically sketching hero, became an embarrassment. No material avenged its violation
through its ebstinate behavior as much as did ferroconcrete! On its framework one
could, it is true, attach the most outrageous facades, but its actual control, despite
possible exterior mutilation, belonged to the engineer. And bebind the engineer:
industrialized building production.

The concrete firm is not the conventional building entrepreneur who passes the work
on to about fifty manual laborers and actually does nothing more than continue the
medieval building production in a coarser way. Scientific, industrialized building
production stands behind the concrete entrepreneur. Ferroconcrete requires this, from
its laboratory beginnings to the treatment demanded by the material on-site. There
is no other way. Here we point out its characteristics; this is not the place to expand
on the many shortcomings ferroconcrete still possesses today that impede its applica-
bility. It will hopefully not remain the only new material. To say nothing of the fact
that wood and iron also are about to be rediscovered.

What is important: to show that we find ourselves in a lawful evolution and that our
real tradition has gradually been formed during the last half century. In its strength
and depth it is comparable to any other age. Only we must place the accents correctly.
The discovery of Monier-Hennebique-Considére was initially passed to French archi-
tects. In 1903 the brilliant constructor Perret already drew the practical conclusions
in his house on the rue Franklin. The banks declined him a mortgage because the Fig. 68
experts predicted that the slender frame would collapse.

NATIONAL CONSTANTS

Fig. 66. LIMOUSIN
AND COMPANY
(Freyssinet
Technique}. ORLY
HANGAR 1916

View of one vault ELE-
MENT in a finished
state and of another
with scaffolding.

Each elementhasaspan
of 80 meters, width
7.5 meters, height 56
meters. One arch was
erected every eight days.

We want an international architecture. An architecture for the age. All living nations
are moving toward it. Nevertheless, each country has its own predetermined role in
the movement. This is already clear today. Precisely the new avant-garde architecture
of France, which has rapidly freed itself from traditional formal games, is a sign that
the native primeval voices speak again. Naturally, not in imitation of the royal styles.
Even in France the new architecture is being reproached: it is international! Hope-
fully it is that! Likewise we cannot overlook that in its entire method, in how the tra-
dition of iron and ferroconcrete was founded and amazingly developed, the threads
lead backward: Gothic. The same soil produced the cross-ribbed vault. The same
urge to lighten matter, to demand of stone what apparently goes beyond the strength
of stone, has returned. The strands lead from the almost fragile, slender arches in the
choir of Beauvais to the enormous concrete parabolas of the Orly hangars built south
of Paris (1916) by the engineer [Eugéne] Freyssinet, commissioned by the firm of
Limousin & Co.

Once again we should add that the battlefront between national and inter-
national no longer exists in reality, just as today an actual battlefront is basically
no longer drawn between states, but in the ongoing struggle about SOCIOLOGI-
CAL STRUCTURE!

The state of this problem differs from one country to the next, but the problem itself
is everywhere the same. Architecture is as closely bound to the socio-
logical structure of a country as to its climate, materials, customs.
A fruitful variety of types naturally evolves from a common ground.

When we describe lines arching back in time, we are doing so in order to emphasize
the French constructional temperament.

The constructional temperament of FRANCE is as indispensable for the new archi-
tecture as America’s organizational aptitude or—in its place—Holland’s handicraft
aptitude. Each country must in its own way contribute to collective advancement.

1900—1920

In the nineteenth century the struggle between the functional architecture of ratio-
nalism and academicism always ended with the academy winning. The particular
time was simply not yet ripe, either in its means or in its knowledge, to prevail. It
cannot be denied: the past proved itself to be stronger. Only today can the past
be finally put aside, for a new way of living [Lebensform] demands a
breakthrough. This new way of living is to a large degree equiva-
lent to the expression anticipated by, and latent within, the
constructions of the nineteenth century.

The last struggle between functional architecture and academicism is seen in the gen-
eration whose pathbreaking works occurred shortly after 1900. Auguste and Gustave
Perret (Paris)—born 1874 and 1876—and Tony Garnier (Lyons)—born 1869—
generation-mates of the pioneering wave: Lloyd Wright (born 1869), Adolf Loos
(born 1870), van’ de Velde (1863), Berlage (1856). Both Perret and Garnier are
students of the academy. Garnier even a prizewinner and pensionnaire of the Villa
Medici. Both carry the academy within. This is their limitation. It has been claimed
that the school did not harm them, but in reality they are directly bound in their
design to the classical French ideal. It surfaces at every opportunity and roams

through their buildings. Disguised and undisguised.

Fig. 67. Aug. Perret on the Roof Terrace of His House,
25 rue Franklin

Terrace and railings (made of automobile pipes) built in
1903. Picture taken in 1927.


Fig. 68. A. G. PERRET: HOUSE, 25 bis RUE
FRANKLIN, Paris

First undisguised skeleton-frame building
in FERROCONCRETE. Slender ground-floor
dimensions, hollowing out of the compact facade,
soaring dissolution of the top of the building.

A.G. PERRET

Perret is a constructor.!*! Engineer-
architect. From the beginning. He comes
from a Burgundian family near Cluny.
One might draw a connecting line,” if one
were so inclined, between the severe art of
engineering construction of the Cluniac
monks and the architect who, for the first
time, understood how to translate ferro-
concrete into architectural expression.

In his apartment house in Paris, 25
bis rue Franklin, 1903, ferroconcrete
is used for the first time for a RESIDEN-
TIAL BUILDING, and the facade openly
shows the skeleton frame as a constituent
element.”

In this narrow apartment building reside,
almost like a vision, the germs of later
development that Le Corbusier and others
elaborated: the planar facade is shattered. It
is hollowed out, recedes in depth, springs
forward again: allowing six cantilevered
stories to jut out, freely suspended, with
the sixth story exposing naked, rectangular
piers. The whole facade is in movement.
The roof already carries the rudiments of
a garden. Above, the building is almost
suspended, and on the ground floor—where
one notices the thin concrete ceiling slabs
of the shops—there are only slender con-
crete piers, otherwise no mass remains.
The building also grows lighter at the base,
it approaches the iron constructions that
touch the ground only at points.

No light well. In the narrowest space a
staircase brightly lit by daylight, as glass
bricks were used for the walls, a material

72) Cf. Paul Jamot, A. G. Perret et Varchitecture du
béton armé (Paris and Brussels: Edition G. Vanoest,
1927)

73) Hennebique’s residence on the rue Danton uses
ferroconcrete only as a concealed substitution. The
ceilings of the first Perret building, the Casino at
Saint-Malo of 1899, were also of ferroconcrete, but it
should not be forgotten that many instances of its
use in utility buildings preceded that.

Fig. 69. A. G. PERRET: RUE FRANKLIN,
1903

View from the uppermost roof terrace to the
eighth story. The elements of later loosening
are already clearly present.

that, as is well known, only much later found acceptance in residential construction.”
The next step is the garage on the rue Ponthieu (Paris) 1905. The masonry Fig. 72
fill is dropped. A thin structural framework and glass surfaces predominate; in a

7) Perret explained to us that he used these glass-brick walls because a neighbor could legally have for-
bidden him from installing windows on this side of the building. This detail nevertheless naturally
belongs in the series of progressive applications of materials, just as do the railings of exhaust pipes on
the uppermost roof terrace or the dissolution of the ground floor into glass walls.

~ « . .
uu - ua
“i
i ri
7 r i” *
-— . » .
» . « a
™ _ * nee Fig. 70. A. G. PERRET: RUE
: FRANKLIN, 1903. PLAN of a Story
. Note the few concrete piers on which
- ~ 8
the slender building rests. Staircase
. a a

with glass-brick wails to the right.

Fig. 71. A. G. PERRET: The PERRET STUDIO on the Ground Floor of rue Franklin, 1903
The fenétre en longueur, later used by Corbusier, is developed here already in 1903 as

an interior plate-glass partition wall.

Fig. 72. A. G. PERRET: GARAGE RUE PONTHIEU,
1905

First logical attempt to let the FERROCONCRETE
CONSTRUCTION become facade. The reminis-
cence of Viollet-le-Duc’s rose-window Gothic ia
the splendid, vast central opening is completely
irrelevant.

word: the opening! These were also taken up in recent French architecture and inde-
pendently developed further. Perret himself judged his building: “The (world’s) first
attempt in the aesthetics of reinforced concrete.” At the same time, this building of
modest proportions begins a series of large garages that in today’s building activity in
Paris are almost the only places where positive design can be discerned.

The new constructional interpenetration of a building is also found in Perret’s
Théatre des Champs-Elysées of 1911-1913. The significance of this building is
seen less in its traditionally attired space than in its innards, its dissolution into a
concrete skeleton. In this very complex building—two theaters, one of which is sus-
pended above the vestibule—the whole interrelated play of forces is transferred to the
static calculations of load and support. Certainly the facade, like the auditorium, is
designed in a conventional manner, and, just as in many American skyscrapers, the
logical relation between skeleton and flesh is not achieved. But here as there the
integrity of the frame stil! possesses unlimited possibilities for development.
These possibilities are more valuable than any—for the moment— aesthetically satis-
factory design.

The Casablanca docks (1916) and the church at Le Raincy (1922/23) are assem-
bled with the same design elements: the Casablanca docks are of extreme lightness.
The shallow vaults of the roofs are—for the first time, as is emphasized—executed
with a membranelike thinness (3 centimeters). A few perforated layers of open bricks
provide ventilation and animation.

The church of Le Raincy (1922/23) employs the same system:” flat vaults only
a few centimeters thick form the three aisles. Expression and animation arise mainly
from the construction. The nave has a longitudinal barrel vault, the side aisles spring
with small transverse vaults against it. The lateral thrust is thereby effectively elimi-
nated, and the room appears elastically modulated instead of rigid.

The exterior skin is only slipped on. Accordingly, it is perforated all over. The
Casablanca ventilation system is—somewhat ornamentally, ceremoniously— utilized
here. The form of these concrete stretchers in the windows may be questionable, but
not their function: they serve as effective light filters. They block senseless streams of
light and overdimensioned stained-glass windows that contradict the clarity of the
concrete design.

The system of support consists of only four columnar rows.” It acquires an expres-
sive quality because the outer rows are slightly set off from the wall.

The space breathes a lightness that is achieved only by an inner transcendence of
matter.

The most recent generation carries on directly from Perret’s achievement because—
besides the academy ~—in him survives the legacy of the French constructors of the
nineteenth century. He has the power to integrate a material —ferroconcrete— into the
organism of architecture on a constructional basis.

78) While it should not be forgotten that Anatole de Baudot in 1894 erected the first concrete church —
Saint Jean de Montmartre — Perret is to be credited with the first actual constructional reconsideration
of the material.

76) The exterior of the church, especially the tower, is not free of a certain “concrete Gothicism,” which is
also manifested in the church of Sainte-Thérése 4 Montmagny and above all in the design for the basilica
of Jeanne d’Arc (Jamot, pls. 47, 48). But even in this design the boldness of the construction of a glass-
and-concrete tower 200 meters high should not be forgotten. Perret worked with double-glass walls, as
did Corbusier in his subsequent design for the Assembly Hall of the League of Nations building.

Figs. 125,139

Fig. 73

Fig. 76

Fig. 75

Fig. 77

Fig. 73. A. G. PERRET: CHAMPS-ELYSEES THEATER 1911-13
View into the skeleton frame. Note the continuous ferroconcrete columns on which the

building is hung.

Fig. 74. A. G. PERRET: THEATER OF THE PARIS DECORATIVE ARTS EXHIBITION,
1925

Not the tripartite stage that has provoked the authorship conflict with van de Velde but the
remarkable combination of wooden columns with ferroconcrete and iron appears to us to
be what is worthy of further development in this building. Wood is a material that has
found its new position in contemporary architecture from a very fragmented beginning.

Fig. 75. A. G. PERRET:
CHURCH OF LE RAINCY
1922/23

The Casablanca docks and the
church of Raincy are based upon
the same formal elements.

Fig. 76. A. G. PERRET:
Casablanca Docks 1916


Fig. 77. ANATOLE DE BAUDOT: SAINT JEAN
DE MONTMARTRE, PARIS, Begun 1894

First church with ferroconcrete frame. Ata
time when only the most hackneyed patterns
were used for representational buildings, it was
an extraordinary risk to use a constructional
FERROCONCRETE framework as an essential
component of a church. By using ferroconcrete,
DE BAUDOT’s costs were approximately half
those of other entrants in the competition (cf.
p- 96). Cf. A. de Baudot, L’Architecture et le

ciment armé (Paris, n.d.).

Perret, architecte-constructeur, is inspired by the material. He perhaps
accomplished for ferroconcrete what Henri Labrouste accomplished for iron. In his
language of forms Perret stands on a pathetical pedestal from which none of his Euro-
pean contemporaries can rid themselves.”’ Moreover, the classical canon survives in
the works of the French architect, just as [Jean] Racine, Moliére, and [René]
Descartes live on in the French people.

Lloyd Wright is not inspired by the material like Perret. He is no pathbreaking con-
structor. But he lives on American soil and, despite all romanticism, is better able
architecturally to design an unpathetical, self-evident way of living.”®

77) lt is to be thoroughly appreciated that the importance of the architecte-constructeur would diminish
significantly should one classify it by form or hy its use of ornament. It is significant that architectural
expression becomes more consistent wherever a certain material spareness occurs and buildings are
erected with the absolute minimum: utility buildings, 25 bis rue Franklin, the church at Le Raincy. The
consistency of the design is easily obscured in those instances where unlimited means are available: the
Champs-Elysées Theater, the basilica of Jeanne d’Are, and the skyscraper projects of 1922. Likewise in
his project for the League of Nations building.

78) A striking example of Perret’s knowledge of how to design an open transition from house to garden
is provided by a villa in Versailles of 1926 (fig. 110).

TONY GARNIER

Fig. 78. TONY GARNIER: Design for the QUARTIER DES ETATS-UNIS. LYONS 1920

The elements for the types of houses are already contained in a similar way in Carnier’s Cité industrielle
of 1904: no light wells, accessible roofs, open staircases, and in the house plans one large living room
with cellular bedrooms.

Perret adopts the French tradition of penetrating a building constructionally,
Tony Garnier (born 1869), above all, that of urban organization. The roots of his
life’s work, too, lie shortly after 1900.

He begins as a pensionnaire de l’Académie francaise in Rome with a study: Cité
industrielle. That is not an acceptable project for a prizewinner of the academy, and
to mollify his masters in Paris, Garnier chooses to reconstruct “Tusculum.”

La Cité industrielle:

In the configuration of the site (terrace landscape, large river valley), the large-scale
project for an industrial city of 35,000 residents resembled the architect’s home-
town: Lyons.

According to Garnier’s statement, the whole project (l’ensemble) was exhibited in
1901, its details in 1904.79 For all of its formal restraint, the project instinctively
anticipates tasks that the new architecture would realize over the course of the next
two decades. The picture that Garnier sketches is subsequently confirmed by life, for
it is not slapdash visions that, like the highs of cocaine, dissipate already the next day,
but it shows the engineer-minded penetration of the detail. The results were thus
the product of a precise presentation of the problem and attention to the smallest cel-
lular detail. Garnier proceeds: (1) from the building material, (2) from the urban
organization. A social conviction leads to the idealistic superstructure.

From the start, the building materials are concrete and ferroconcrete, still

79) Published by Vincent (Paris, 1917).

Fig. 79. TONY GARNIER: Design for the Underground SUBURBAN RAILROAD STATION of the CITE
INDUSTRIELLE 1904

In the age when—forsaken by all instincts—one hid a railroad station beneath marble architectural
trappings, CARNIER as the lone forerunner designs his railroad station by taking into account function
and the new materials: glass and concrete.

unusual in housing at that time. “The foundations and the walls consist of concrete;
the ceilings, the roofs, and all important buildings almost exclusively of ferro-
concrete.” Even if in some cases the houses in their details cannot cast off their cubic
unity: in accordance with the idea, the consequence of ferroconcrete construction is
already drawn:

These houses have no cornices, the roofs are accessible, and one already works
with differences in levels. For Garnier, the flat roofs are a completely self-evident
result of the construction.®° Freely suspended concrete stairs lead up to the roofs of
multistory apartment houses—in part already covered like a railroad platform. The
city—seen from above—receives its uniform flow from the horizontal fabric of roofs
and the steplike ascent of the iron constructions of the factories and warehouses.
Garnier is already working with differences in levels. His schools have open and “cov-
ered” lawns (préaux couverts et découverts) that run freely beneath the terraces like the
lawns beneath the chambers and the secretariat of Corbusier’s design for the League
of Nations. From these differences in levels emerge new tensions and interrelations of
surfaces, solutions that Garnier himself was never allowed to translate into reality.
The house, which always proved to be least accessible to new formulations, here, too,
remains restrained in its classicist form. The full consideration of each house, how-
ever, is based on principles that only today are taking effect: bedrooms oriented
toward the south, “large and small courtyards, which means spaces that are enclosed
by walls and are meant to provide light and air are precluded. Every room, however
small, must be illuminated and ventilated from without.”®!

The simpler the design, “the lighter will be the construction and consequently the
lower the cost. The simplicity of the means leads logically to a great simplicity of
expression (une grande simplicité d’expression).”* Public buildings in the Cité

8°) It should also not be forgotten that the classicist tradition is closely related to the flat
roof, and forma! connections lead to it.

51) Preface to the Cité industrielle.

#2) Preface to the Cité industrielle.

industrielle display a greater informality. Already in the first half of the nineteenth
century, hospital and prison complexes in France were broken up into pavilions in
order to avoid light wells.

The assembly halls, the SUBURBAN RAILROAD STATION with underground tracks
running through it and a renunciation of monumentality as later designed by Mart
Stam and the young Swiss, display the same informal character as the gardenlike
treatment of city streets around schools and the connection of single houses whose
plots flow into one another.*

Under Edouard Herriot, Garnier found the opportunity in Lyons to realize some of
his projects. His large concrete complexes: stadium, slaughterhouse, hospital, define
Lyons’s townscape. What he had begun in his utopian Cité industrielle, he continues
in his second published work, of 1919. The Grands Travauz de la ville de Lyon pre-
sents a curious mixture of works executed, to be built, or in progress.

Garnier’s buildings dragged on due to the war. The slaughterhouse, begun
already in 1909 and largely finished in 1913, is now almost completed.

The Grange-Blanche Hospital (project and drawings from 1911, begun in 1915),
is probably riot so far along. The stadium, from 1916, was realized most rapidly.!°)
The most difficult buildings to execute—as always in France—are residential
buildings. Only five houses now stand in a forgotten suburb of a large district
(Quartier des Etats-Unis, designed in 1920), through which should have flowed an
avenue with open gardens 50 meters wide by 5 kilometers long. Even these houses
suggest solutions:®° the greatest possible suppression of vestibules, small kitchens,
one large living room, small bedrooms.

Garnier is undoubtedly impeded by classicism, particularly in the stadium, but aside
from these Hellenistic aspirations, he possesses what Edouard Herriot praises in his
preface to the Grands Travaux: “Une méthode rigoureuse.” The clearest indication of
the crossing of classicist, monumental elements with the future-oriented attitude is
found in the twenty-two pavilions of the Grange-Blanche Hospital. It is regret-
table that in the final design Garnier did not relax the original, somewhat rigid axial
arrangement of 1910. The individual pavilions are built of heavy concrete masonry
with high-ceilinged infirmaries. Given the skill with which concrete is handled in
France, Garnier can venture to form the amphitheatric lecture hails of the individual
pavilions in concrete, including desks and bleachers.

Elevators carry the convalescent in his bed to the generous terraces to which the roofs
have been converted. Despite the heaviness of particular details of the design, the eye,
through the interplay of the various horizontal surfaces, has an impression of the air
always separating and hovering, just as our future cities will be shaped.

A survey of Garnier’s work indicates that the utopia of his Cité industrielle remains
perhaps his most important contribution. A fantastic expansiveness grows out of a
cellular interpenetration. One senses the combination of ratio and vision that will
perhaps most clearly silhouette the coming age.

83) Designs for the Geneva-Cornavin railroad station by Stam and by Hans Wittwer (Basel), 1924. A pro-
ject by [Julien] Flegenheimer that is not worthy of mention will be executed.

84) Mies van der Rohe attempted something similar with his first design for the Stuttgart Werkbund-
siedlung of 1927, but it was not accepted.

85) The designs can be found already in the book Grands Travauz, therefore before 1919, and show how
problems mature at the same time, in different places, independently of each other (cf. Holland: Oud’s
plan for Tusschendijken, Rotterdam).

Fig. 92
Fig. 79

Figs.54,80,81

Figs. 82,83

Fig. 80. TONY GARNIER: LYONS SLAUGHTERHOUSE 1909

Largely completed in 1913. To the left, the large hall of the cattle market (cf. fig. 54).
In the background, the actual slaughterhouses. (One of the first aerial photos in exis-
tence [1913], for which we can thank the generosity of the architect.)

ama

Fig. 81. TONY GARNIER: LYONS SLAUGHTERHOUSE

Covered passageway in ferroconcrete, which has an elevated track— “conveyor belt” —on which the meat
is transported. It is one of the four tongue-shaped connections clearly seen in the background of the
aerial photo.

Fig. 82. TONY GARNIER: LYONS STADIUM 1916

Fig. 83. TONY GARNIER: LYONS STADIUM 1916

Fig. 84. TONY GARNIER: ROOF of one of the 22 PAVILIONS of the GRANGE-BLANCHE

HOSPITAL, LYONS. Construction Begun 1915

Despite the massiveness of its form, the harmony of the many airy islands conveys a hint of what our
future cities will look like.

cane PIE Se

Fig. 85. TONY GARNIER: GRANGE-BLANCHE 1915
The same pavilion with a view toward the mouth of the stairwell and elevator shaft. (During construc-
tion in January 1927.)

Yet Garnier’s buildings still carry the mass and weight of a pathetical attitude toward
life. The influence of the academy is not the only thing to blame. The conflicting
nature of his work is a characteristic of his entire generation. As is typical of the
legacy of the nineteenth century, superficially representational and future elements
are often placed immediately beside each other.

In drawings of recent years, Garnier dreams nostalgically of distant times in southern
laurel groves. Just as from another perspective Lloyd Wright lately designs fan-
tastically shaped “residential yachts,” or houses that burrow back into the folds of
the earth. These are constantly recurring features of a generation of architects in
whom the divided soul of the last century survives: historical burden and construc-
tional penetration.

LE CORBUSIER AND THE YOUNGER GENERATION

Destiny of a generation: the past generation recognized and consciously
formulated the importance of the place of work. The value of utility buildings (fac-
tory, warehouse, office building, the beginning of the problem of the tall building).
To the present generation falls the task of lifting the HOUSING PROBLEM out of
individual dilettantism and pseudohandicrafts and onto the level of industrial stan-
dardization through the most precise and thorough consideration of housing func-
tions. The future generation—which is already emerging from the mist—will once
again prefer large construction projects. But this time variable buildings, open to
all possibilities and closely connected with the means of transportation. With elevated
and underground trains, airplanes, waterways. Comprehensive relational coordina-
tion of all means.

LE CORBUSIER, the French-Swiss from La Chaux-de-Fonds (born 1887),*° gets
credit for having placed the housing problem, the notably most underdeveloped
aspect of French architecture, unequivocally in the center of his theoretical and prac-
tical activity. Corbusier, in any case, appears certainly to have loosened the tongues
of many a young Frenchman. If we were today to attempt to describe his function,
we would immediately be faced with the two-part question: where does he stand
within the French movement, and by what means has Corbusier advanced
the housing problem beyond the inherited norm? Only then can we dis-
cuss the formal structure of his buildings.

Corbusier depends entirely on the tradition of ferroconcrete. Only in France is it pos-
sible for an architect to trust this material unconditionally. The corrosive “ifs”
and “buts” with which this material, often legitimately, is being opposed in other
countries especially by leaders of the avant-garde, and which cause insecurity in pro-
duction, do not apply in France. One need only think of Holland where, despite the
best intentions, residential construction cannot be freed from the use of brick. The
city of Amsterdam has allowed concrete villages to be erected according to the most
varied methods without achieving any real satisfaction. Robert van ’t Hoff’s concrete-
masonry house in Huis ter Heide (1915), which, by the way, is not a true “skeleton
house,” remains a process of construction virtually without followers, although in a
formal! sense it became a point of departure for the whole Dutch movement. Corbusier

8°) Further biographic data may be found in our article on Le Corbusier in volume 22 of the Thieme-
Becker Kiinstlerlexikon.

Fig. 86

Fig. 87

has principally mastered two things: the ability to simplify things to an often almost
dangerous terseness, and an unswerving consistency in development. Since his first
house in the Swiss Jura (1916),°? which is externally of conventional form, but already
contains the germ of later developments, Corbusier has composed his buildings with
a ferroconcrete skeleton.

Perret’s work contains prophetic germs and constructionally ingenious individual
solutions: that of a precursor. No stylistic comparison, just this: when one visits
Perret, he likes to hold up the flawless, self-contained oval of an ostrich egg, which
he considers to be the most perfect earthly form. The only “nature” in Corbusier’s
Pavillon de l’Esprit Nouveau (1925) is that of an eternally open, self-transcending
mother-of-pearl spiral of a large turbinate shell. Like no one before him, Corbusier
had the ability to make resonate the ferroconcrete skeleton that had been presented
by science. We do not mean his designs. We mean the skill with which he knows
how to translate construction, the frame, into the new housing function. Out
of the possibility of hanging the whole weight of a building on a few ferroconcrete pil-
lars, of omitting the enclosing wall wherever one so desires, Corbusier created the
eternally open house.

All of his architectural solutions lead back to it: his city on concrete piers (1915), the
suspended houses that toward the base appear to become ever lighter, the cubes of air
that spill over into his apartment houses (the first of these buildings, which are essen-
tially villas set on top of one another, is to be built in Frankfurt), the gardens on the
roofs and sides. Cubes of air within, cubes of air without. Cubes of air down to the
very smallest units at Pessac and the individual cells of a cité universitaire. Maximum
of air, minimum of walls!

This flow of air through the house: inside, outside, below, above (the flat roof is but

HOLLAND 1915 FRANCE 19175

Fig. 87. LE CORBUSIER. Ferro-
concrete Skeleton Frame for the
Housing Settlement “Domino” 1915
C. develops the new housing function
from the ferroconcrete skeleton frame

Fig. 86. ROB. VAN 'T HOFF: House in Huis ter with a thrusting boldness that has
Heide near Utrecht 1918. (Concrete) enriched all of architecture. From
Independent treatment of Lloyd Wright’s influ- the elements of concrete pillars Cor-
ence. The horizontal concrete slabs are attached busier develops the suspended, open
to the house like wings, without the cube itself house and bestows on it a previously
being permeated by cubes of air. unknown, exhilarating lightness.

87) Pictured in Kommende Baukunst, p. 62. We might also here call special attention to the German transla-
tion of Corbusier’s best book, Vers une architecture, which the translator, Hans Hildebrandt, has published
under the title Kommende Baukunst, more richly illustrated and more carefully printed than the original
(Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlagsanstalt, 1926). [Translation of} Corbusier's Urbanisme is also in preparation.

a partial problem in a larger unity): this is what we demand from the new house!
The reinterpretation of lean ferroconecrete construction in the
redesign of the house demanded by the age and its will is what we call the
true productive aspect of Corbusier’s achievement.

Why should the house be suspended and made as light as possible? Only thus can we
put an end to that fatal legacy of monumentality. As long as the play of load and sup-
port, in reality or symbolically intensified (Baroque), received its meaning through
load-bearing walls, weight was justified. Today with nonsupporting exterior walls —
the ornamentally accentuated play of load and support is an
embarrassing farce (American skyscrapers).

We will eagerly pursue the extent to which the house can be suspended without falling
into lyricism. Corbusier has been reproached because his houses, especially those in
Pessac, appear as thin as paper. In fact, they avoid supports projecting from the wall,
cornices. The solid volume is opened up wherever possible by cubes of air, strip
windows, immediate transition to the sky. The new architecture shatters the original
conceptual polarity: space or plasticity. The new situation can no longer be under-
stood with these old terms!

Corbusier’s houses are neither spatial nor plastic: air flows through them! Air
becomes a constituent factor! Neither space nor plastic form counts, only RELATION
and INTERPENETRATION! There is only a single, indivisible space. The shells fall
away between interior and exterior.

Yes, Corbusier’s houses seem thin as paper. They remind us, if you will, of the frag-
ile wall paintings of Pompeii. What they express in reality, however, coincides com-
pletely with the will expressed in all of abstract painting. We should not compare
them to paper and to Pompeii but point to Cubist paintings, in which things are seen
in a floating transparency, and to the Purist [Charles-Edouard] Jeanneret him-
self, who as architect has assumed the name Le Corbusier. In his Peinture moderne
([Amédée] Ozenfant and Jeanneret, Peinture moderne, Editions Crés & Co.) he likes
to assure us that he has deliberately chosen only the most ordinary bottles and
glasses, that is, the most uninteresting objects, for his pictures so as not to detract
attention from the painting. But the historian does not see this choice as accidental.
For him the significance of this choice lies in the preference for floating, transparent
objects whose contours flow weightlessly into each other. He points from the pictures
to the architecture. Not only in photos but also in reality do the edges of houses blur.
There arises—as with certain lighting conditions in snowy landscapes—that dema-
terialization of solid demarcation that distinguishes neither rise nor fall and that
gradually produces the feeling of walking in clouds.

Fig. 101

Figs. $4 to 97
{93 to 96]

Fig. 88. JEANNERET 1924

Just as transparent objects interpenetrate in the
painting, so Corbusier with every means also light-
ens the traditional gravity of the house.

Individual houses do not satisfactorily demonstrate this: housing settlements. The
relation of several houses to each other. Corbusier has his first housing settlement
behind him: PESSAC near Bordeaux. (Completed 1925).*8

ORGANIZATION: Pessac is the first housing settlement in which no restraints were
placed on the architect. So far, some fifty houses have been erected, but fifty more are
planned.

In these relatively few buildings the advantages of standardization already became
obvious. Room dimensions were normalized. Module: 5 meters. Rooms: 5 x 5 meters,
or the subdivision 5 x 2.5 meters. Each building, according to its size, contains six,
eight, or more cells. Window sizes derive from individual room sizes: 5, 2.5, 1.25
meters: ‘4, 2, “1 windows. This standardization permits the greatest variety of appli-
cations while at the same time requiring but one order from the factory. Roof and
floors have the same module: 5-meter concrete beams. In addition, there are also uni-
form doors, hearths, fireplaces, stairs.

Machines fabricate the insulating cinder blocks and the concrete beams on-site. I
have personally seen the Ingersoll-Rand Company’s “cement gun” (the concrete
cannon) spray forth a 100-meter wall in just a few days. This aroused the resistance
of the workers to the point of sabotage.

For the time being, six different house types are being used. Of these, the gratte-ciel
type (duplex) and the smallest type are repeated most frequently and thus determine
the overall look of the housing settlement. “Type 14” appears to us to be the most ele-
gant: it most decidedly leads to that lightening of the dwelling. It is suspended on its
concrete columns. The staircase is organically pushed to the outside in order to leave
all space free for living. From that it follows naturally that staircases resemble rail-
road overpasses.

58) The name of the patron Henri Frugés of Bordeaux will not be forgotten in the history of the
new architecture. Frugés told the architect, whom he had looked up after reading Vers une architecture:
“You have my permission to put your theories into practice and to take them to their ultimate conse-
quences. Pessac must be a laboratory. You have my full permission to break with all conventions and
to abandon traditional methods” (cf.: Science et l'industrie 154 (Paris, 1926]). Cf. also Corbusier's
statements in Architecture vivante (published by Morancé, 1927). Further on Pessac: [Steen Eiler} Ras-
mussen, in Wasmuths Monatshefte, 1926, no. 9.

Fig. 89. LE CORBUSIER: PESSAC. The Smallest House Type (Pian: 49-54)
In the foreground, small animal stalls are skillfully disposed along the wall. Gratte-ciel
in the background.

Fig. 90, LE CORBUSIER: PESSAC. Smallest House Type with Sarrel-Shaped Store Rooms
(Pian 61-64)

Fig. 91. The Executed Portion of CORBUSIER’S HOUSING SETTLEMENT IN PESSAC
1925/26

Liberation from the inflexible constraints of the housing settlement plans. The free, informal
distribution corresponds to the character of the contemporary house, which is shaped so that
proximity does not also mean crowdedness, for individual parts and the whole are opened up.

Fig. 92. [E.] LAVEZZARI:
i Prison. 1877
‘| The informal floor plan also has
a long tradition — especially in
“Il France. It is common in hospi-
tals, schools, and institutions
after midcentury.


Fig. 93. LE CORBUSIER
Pessac: “Type 14.” Roof Garden.

Pessac: “Type 14.” View of first story.

Figs. 95 and 96.

Pessac: “Type 14.” Plan of first story.

Fig. 94. “Type 14." Stairway

In order to gain space in this southern climate,
the stairs are placed outside the house, A detail
of the anonymous design of the engineer: A RAIL
OVERPASS becomes an architectural member.

a

Figs. 97, 98, 99. LE CORBUSIER: PESSAC

Figs. 97 and 99. Three-Family House (Plan 68-78)

In the Middle: Three-Family House (Plan 56-58)
These Z-shaped houses are placed at the head of the
current development (color: light blue).

Combining standard elements guarantees a quite
unusual flexibility of the houses and a new profusion
of potential views.

Fig. 100. LE CORBUSIER: PESSAC. The Gratte-ciel (Plan 17-35)
These taller structures are arranged so as not to interfere with the others, In order to pre-
serve the unity of the whole, one is no longer bound by the facade plane or the frontal height.

Fig. 101. LE CORBUSIER: PESSAC 1925/26.
(Type: Plan 1-13)

The spaces between the houses become roofed
gardens. The vaulting is achieved by the least
expensive means. Wire netting is sprayed with a
concrete gun.


Fig. 88

Fig. 90

Fig. 102. LE CORBUSIER: STUTTGART 1927

It must still be noted that the basic elements of the Pessac housing settlement —
including its 5-meter module—date back to 1921. One will find them in: Vers une
architecture.

The flat contours of Pessac merge with the sky: the suspended canopies over the roof
gardens form the transition. The color scheme is taken from Jeanneret’s paintings:
ethereal sky blue and light green, a more intense brown.

The interplay of the units can be judged neither spatially nor plastically. Only rela-
tions count. Relation of mass to void. Relation of smooth surfaces to perforated
ones, relation of horizontal layers to vertical bodies. COLORS serve to lighten the vol-
umes, to’ advance and recess surfaces.

How could one judge the space and plasticity of, for instance, the brown row houses
of the smallest type without taking into account the oscillating relations between
things? These houses that so rigorously respect the planar surface are themselves
being penetrated with expansive, onrushing cubes of air, which among themselves
receive new stimulation and modulation—as by the swelling, visually hard-to-
discern vaults (pantries). The row houses as a whole again reach into the space next
to and behind them. Still photography does not capture them clearly. One would
have to accompany the eye as it moves: only film can make the new architecture
intelligible! But even then only in a limited excerpt: does one really think that the
wall on the right, as taut as a movie screen and altogether deprived of its corporeal-
ity, stands there only accidentally, unrelated to the opening and surface of the
brown elements next to it? Certainly this effect in its particular features is not calcu-
lated. But the result evolves by itself from the elements of an architecture that—
freed from the play of load and support—has cast off the anthropomorphic
shackles. We owe it to the Dutch, to [Piet] Mondrian and [Theo van] Doesburg, that
they first opened our eyes to the oscillating relations that may arise from surfaces,
lines, air.8°

®) In his theory Corbusier is often less daring than in his design. In Vers une architecture there is a
chapter on tracés régulateurs—Hildebrandt translated it [into German] as Aufrifregler [regulators of
the elevation], that is, the attempt to overlay similar triangles on the facade. Berlage was perhaps the
last —1907—to be allowed to do that. This is permissible for a uniformly elaborated, anthropomorphic
architecture. But in the case of Corbusier it is absurd. The proportions that will result from standard-
ization are no longer restricted by the old formulae, but apart from this, these proportional formulae are
invalid today because a BUILDING is no longer a closed form like a Renaissance palace but demands
CONNECTION TO THINGS NEXT TO IT. Perhaps Corbusier himself has negated his method in the LA
ROCHE house; there the proportional formula is inscribed in the facade, whereas the functionally pro-
jecting wing for the art collection naturally refuses to be restricted by a schema of similar triangulation.

Figs, 103, 104. LE CORBUSIER: MIESTCHANINOFF HOUSE. BOULOGNE-sur-SEINE

1923/24

A step on the way to freeing the residence from its innate weight. The flat roof is still not
organically integrated into the body of the house, and the bridge-shaped veranda pas-
sage is too literal, but the rigid volume of the house appears already under attack.

477

mn oO - : oo SPATIAL

Fig. 105. LE CORBUSIER:
Villa on the Sea 1921

Without having found an
actual architectural form,
these designs already con-
tain the vertical fusing of
space, broad openings, and
the greatest possible avoid-
ance of partition walls made
possible by the FERRO-
CONGRETE SKELETON.

Figs. 106, 107. LE CORBUSIER: La Roche
House in Auteuil. Architectural Elaboration of
the Sketch in Fig. 107

Left: The structure.

Right: The finished building.

Fig. 108. MART STAM: Large Room
in the Werkbundsiedlung House 1927
With the avoidance of window lintels
with their shadows the last barrier
stressing the division of interior and
exterior falls away.


INTERPENETRATIONS

Fig. 109. LE CORBUSIER:
COGK HOUSE 1926/27.
Boulogne-sur-Seine

View from the study (cf.
plan) to large room, stairs,
and roof terrace.

Exterior space (roof ter-
race) and the various inter-
penetrating levels of the
interior space are blended
together. Fig. 105 and fig.
109 indicate the distance
traveled in five years.

Fig. 110. PERRET A. and
G.: Study in a Villa in
Versailles 1926

Perret also throws the house
wide open toward the gar-
den. But integration remains
limited to one level.

One realizes: normalization and standardization are only expedients
for the liberation of architectural vision! They play no other role in
architecture than the vacuum cleaner or the washing machine in the average house-
hold: to free the mind for better things!

Details lose their disastrous tyranny only when they are standardized. In every
sense it can be understood for the future: there are no more details, there is only an
ensemble!

Fig. 105

Fig. 106

Fig. 107

Figs. 11,109

Figs. 111, 112

Figs. 113, 114

What is it like INSIDE these buildings?
From the beginning, the will requires a strong interpenetration and inter-
relationship of all parts and connection to the outside:

In 1921 the basic ideas were already formulated in the sketches for the book Vers une
architecture: avoidance as far as possible of partitions. The spiral staircase as an
open and interconnecting member.

In the well-known studio Corbusier designed for Ozenfant in 1923, the idea
acquired form. Garage within the body of the house. A spiral staircase winds upward,
connects to a hall and, in a further rotation, opens unexpectedly into the dining room.
A suggestive notch allows one to make out further spaces. After a turn, one stands in
the most beautiful studio, in which the work cell is suspended like a crow’s nest. A
place of isolation. All other rooms breathe together.

The La Roche house in Auteuil of 1924.° The spheres of the stories interpene-
trate one another. Just as Lloyd Wright--twenty years earlier—fused the rooms of the
house horizontally, so Corbusier primarily does it vertically.” It is good to peel the
skin off the house and to expose in the naked skeleton itself how the structural parts
flow seamlessly into one another. Spaces and light, interior and exterior stream
together. In an unexpected spot in the ceiling (above the wall-less library of the sec-
ond story) is cut a square skylight, through whose clear glass one sees the sky. Even
the ceilings are light. No burdensome closure. (Rietveld, for example, was able to give
his house in Utrecht skylights at a stroke.)

1926/27. In the La Roche house Corbusier only dared to put a lateral and paraboli-
cally advancing part of the house on posts so that the garden could continue under-
neath. For the Cook house in Boulogne-sur-Seine he draws the conclusion of setting
a house on posts and lets only a small portion (staircase-vestibule) be walled in. Only
on the upper story do the freely supported walls begin, and there the continuous strip
windows are displayed with full consistency. The roof garden of the La Roche house
is, to be sure, already thoroughly modeled, but only here is the integration of house
and roof complete. The large room of the house extends above the roof plane up to
the height of the covering baldachin, which protects against rain. A staircase leads
from this large room to a smaller study which, at roof level, forms the middle link of
an indivisible interlocking of interior and exterior.

1927/28. De Monzie house (Garches, near Saint-Cloud). Just as Corbusier in the
Cook house fully disengaged the building from its socle, so in the de Monzie house he
attacked the facade of the building with enormous boldness and left it so penetrated
with air that one can almost speak of a crushing of the actual house volume.
Corbusier’s utter mastery in accentuating certain lines in a fascinating way is
also evident in his ability to conjure up spaces whose appearance far exceeds their
real cubic dimensions. There is in these terraces and bridges an almost balanced
manipulation of spaces and particles of space that continuously interpenetrate. There
seems to be a limit here. One senses that the architect has not fully escaped the

°%) Cf. our remarks, “Das neue Haus,” Kunstblatt (April 1926).

91) The elements of the open, two-story plan are found in many studios in France. Corbusier has elabo-
rated what was rudimentarily available. It remains an open question how such vertical interpenetrations
may be applied to non-Latin peoples.

Fig. 111. LE CORBUSIER: COOK HOUSE.
BOULOGNE-sur-SEINE 1926/27. ROOF TERRACE
The ROOF is completely integrated into the organism
of the house. The house is no longer a structure
whose gable happens to have been shaved off. It is
opened on all sides and has finally lost the closure of
cubic armor.

ly “
fe a munigrticens

y zi
s i|

{

‘

Fig. 112. COOK HOUSE. PLAN of Top Story
Interlocking of inner and outer, of roof space and
interior space. Cf. figs. 109, 111.

Figs. 113, 114. LE CORBUSIER: DE
MONZIE HOUSE in GARCHES near Saint-
Cloud, 1927/28

Attempt to lighten the house not only at the
base and upward but also at the front in
order to let it be penetrated with air.
Breaking up the tangible facade!
The “Type 14” house at Pessac is the pre-
cursor of this deeply cantilevered terrace.
Fig. 94.

Fig. 115. LE CORBUSIER:
ASYLUM FOR THE

HOMELESS, PARIS 1927
The architect has removed
the ground floor to gain

space.

danger that today is always posed by unlimited financial means.

One wonders if it is possible for those of us who are accustomed to a quick pace
to cross such a terrace—so flooded with air as if by floodlights— without having the
feeling: I am on a stage. At such points the next generation of architects begins
to smell danger. We have no doubt that we must accept slow and
gradual development, continually controlled by social and finan-
cial obligations, if architecture and our culture are to receive
that perhaps still-unrealized unity and constancy that have
already been proclaimed in many other fields.

Fig. 116. LE CORBUSIER: ASYLUM FOR THE HOMELESS, PARIS 1927

Today in the important places, as in all ages that felt themselves to be laying the foundation of a
new culture, there is a noticeable UNITY of design:

Thus the FUNCTION a window has to fulfill must be so predominant that its form should remain
the same whether in an asylum for the homeless, in a luxury residence (de Monzie), or in the
League of Nations building.

Nevertheless it is important that isolated experiments, such as the de Monzie house,
are made, for they help to loosen up the still-too-rigid means of expression in archi-
tecture. If it is at all possible to design luxury today—the actual problems lie
elsewhere—it would be only the kind of luxury shown in the de Monzie house: luxury
of air volumes whose interpenetration and harmony let the new way of SEEING
become form.

We know that human housing must be shaped more sensitively than garages. But
a perhaps justifiable fear of aesthetic emphasis persists, driven by the expe-
rience of a century. No one thinks in terms of a schematic machine-for-living
(machine G habiter}. But more important for us than aesthetics and poetry is it
that the architect concern himself with the biological function of the house and
thus help to combat the coarseness with which these things in many cases are still
being treated today.

We do not doubt that at the very moment when these things furnish a solution, an
equally obvious beauty will emerge from houses as from ships and airplanes.

This beauty becomes still more intensive, for it appears connected
to our human functions.

Then this point will also be reached without emphasizing an isolated aesthetics,
which Corbusier illustrated as the difference between the Parthenon and an auto-
mobile: inner movement!

Fig. 117. LE CORBUSIER: LEAGUE OF NATIONS BUILDING 1927

ie

ASSEMBLY BUILDING to the right, with the Presidential Pavilion in front. To the left, behind the
assembly building and linked by passageways is the CENTRAL SECRETARIAT with library and archive

projecting to the rear.

Fig. 118.
LEAGUE OF NATIONS
BUILDING

Axonometric sketch. View from
land toward lake and mountains.
One notes the clear arrangement
of the building complex without
light wells. Covered roof terraces
with gardens and broad vistas.
The secretariat is suspended on
supports, beneath which flows the
lawn. One sees the PLATFORM
for arriving cars in front of the
assembly building.

Fig. 119. LE CORBUSIER:
. . LEAGUE OF NATIONS
il a ‘ BUILDING 1927

a a“ - The 140-meter-long PLAT-
° FORM (quai de débarque-
as el ta ae ta Rasa i ment) for arriving cars.

i os . ‘This “railroad platform” is
applied as a formal archi-
tectural device.

What is Corbusier’s achievement? He has grasped the house with the sensitivity of a
seismograph and released it from traditional weight.

He is not as precise a constructor as Auguste Perret, nor do his houses display, down
to the last detail, the deliberate functionality of a J[ohannes| J[acobus] P[ieter] Oud.
But Corbusier has ventured pioneering work like no one else in our time. He attempts
to translate into the housing form that suspended equilibrium, that lightness and
openness that iron constructions of the nineteenth century express abstractly. He has
shown us how one must mold the house throughout —below, above, on the sides —
in order to relieve its weight.

Corbusier’s means are not unique to him but originate earlier in
industry. The posts that support his houses can be seen in many French ware-
houses; the strip windows—fenétres en longueur—are commonly found in factories
and wooden barracks as the result of construction, and the concrete column running
freely through the stories is of the same origin.

Garnier has already realized the flat roof and Lloyd Wright the free plan, but Cor-
busier is the first to conceive a house so thoroughly that the weight has actually been
taken away from it, and it has not remained a block whose roof has simply been
shaved off. Not the least of his roles seems to be the fact that he, in overriding all
inhibitions, has helped people go their own independent way.

Corbusier’s houses can be attacked on several points. He has been reproached for his
romanticism, as when he—for instance, when he started out—takes over a whole
series of forma] motifs from shipbuilding (figs. 103, 104). There is also a certain dan-
ger of a strong, aesthetic emphasis, which today’s architects understandably fear.
Architecture today—like nineteenth-century construction—proceeds gradually, for it
must lay down foundations for a long time to come.

Others may appear who will purify Corbusier’s work. What is laid down nevertheless
stays, for it is controlled by an architectural vision, and its roots are torn from the

flesh of the age!

The THEORETICIAN: Corbusier has exercised as much influence on our time as @
theoretician (his impact in Latin America is similar to here) as he has by his build-
ings. For an age in which even the artist is allowed to make use of ratio, it is under-
standable that one can be at once both a popularizer and a creative individual,

just as in politics—for instance, Lenin—one can be a journalist, theoretician, and
state leader all at the same time.

In the pages of the journal ESPRIT NOUVEAU, which Jeanneret coedited with
Ozenfant (1921/24), one can find almost everyone who in every field was active in
formation of the epoch.

Corbusier's effectiveness is explained by his ability to simplify things to a point of
lapidary succinctness. His presentations are not made unpalatable by any half-
thought-out philosophical claptrap. He reduces the problems to the clarity of film
titles. Of course, the French language helps give unequivocal wording. Subtly dif-
ferentiated complexes are often dealt with summarily, but people retain the basic
ideas. The three introductory chapters of Vers une architecture on “eyes that
see not...automobiles, airplanes, steamships” cannot be expunged from our age,
and at the same time they form a bridge to the forgotten predecessors in the nine-

teenth century.

Corbusier’s design for the LEAGUE OF NATIONS BUILDING (first prize ex
aequo) contains the elements that constitute Gorbusier’s work and whose gradual
development we here tried to suggest.

‘The synthesis of constructional and standardized elements,” which are
welded together through artistic vision into a totality, might explain the privileged
position it has achieved among the 377 submitted entries.

We need to consider here the competition for the League of Nations only insofar as it
touches upon the large issues that run through the entire century.

We thus encounter, perhaps for the last time in history, the name of the ACADEMIE
DES BEAUX-ARTS.

The academy was—as we mentioned—renewed by Napoleon at the moment (1806)
when he was preoccupied with giving a feudal veneer to the new empire. The
tradition the academy maintains is in no way a generally national one: it is the
mentality of feudalism! Because feudalism as a social system is dead,
the academy, too, is dead. That is the reason why for the last hundred years
the academy’s name has appeared only when it has been a question of impeding
development.

Nothing has changed since Labrouste, already in 1840, proved that the academy’s
training produced students with an incapacity to deal with life (see page 98).
Already fifty years ago the secretary of the academy, the vicomte Henri Delaborde,”
publicly declared that the doors to the academy opened only “when genius was
gradually in accord with everyone,” that is to say, the academy inconsiderately
reserves for itself the traditional right to sabotage young talents, to suppress their
development as much as possible, only to assimilate them in their old age.

When the Eiffel Tower was being erected, the academy was its most zealous oppo-
nent, only it could do nothing against the government then in power. For thirty years

92) ELEMENTS: ferroconcrete skeleton with uninterrupted supports, non-load-bearing walls with
continuous strip windows, absence of the plinth, and inclusion of attic space within the building
complex.

93) The state of affairs may be expressed with almost cynical candor: “Sooner or later they find that they
have no adversaries left and, without yielding anything of substance, they are more or less in agreement
with everybody. This is how it has been in our century with painters such as [Jean-Auguste-Dominique]
Ingres and [Eugéne] Delacroix, with sculptors such as David... , with such a musician as [Hector]

Fig. 118
[117, 118]

the academy sabotaged Henri Labrouste, up to the final works of his students, and it
later even suppressed a (Eugéne-Emmanuel] Viollet-le-Duc; and just as it yesterday
ostracized Auguste Perret, so it today ostracizes Le Corbusier.

No one outside France has yet concerned himself with the academy. But through the
inertia of events or the mentality of political leaders it is a reality. This is why we
must concern ourselves with it, however little it can be doubted that this feudalistic
holdover will soon be swept away.

The task of designing a building in which all nations would assemble to maintain the
equilibrium of the world is completely new and belongs to the time. To want to solve
it any way other than with TODAY’S MEANS is dilettantism, for, as we will show, one
is already compelled by the task subsequently to patch the new building tech-
nologies (contained in the projects of architects working out the problems directly)
onto the most ridiculous stage-set buildings.

The League of Nations building consists of two parts: the administrative appa-
ratus (General Secretariat). This is a continuously functioning office concern, an
office building that will have to use all knowledge currently available to achieve a
smooth functioning of the business within. The second part: the chambers for the
world parliament. Because of its vast dimensions the Assembly Hall is by defini-
tion a task that cannot be resolved with “monumental” means. If one did not
take the acoustic problem into account, the requisite dimensions would make it
impossible to hear a single word.

In addition, there are integral elements of the overall composition: the
regulation of automobile traffic—five hundred cars must be able to arrive within
a few minutes—and the accommodation to the site.”

Corbusier has oriented his building complex slightly toward the south, toward Mont
Blanc. The Assembly Hall advances, the General Secretariat recedes. The entire com-
plex blends easily into the landscape, it is integrated with the surroundings, and
through its architectural treatment—the General Secretariat on supports, extensive
use of glass—it avoids any awkward heaviness. As in all truly new projects, auto-
mobile traffic is not a concern that disturbs the architecture but instead becomes
a stimulus for design.

The means supplied by the age are evident everywhere, often unseen and unused, as

Berlioz.... And so, in the domain of architecture, the same has happened to M. Labrouste,
whose name...once seemed to personify the spirit of extreme independence...” vicomte Henri
Delaborde, secrétaire perpétuel de ]’Académie, “Notice sur la vie et les ouvrages de M. Henri Labrouste,
lue dans la séance publique annuelle du 19 octobre 1878” [p. 36].

%4) A detailed account of the competition and the project itself is not possible here. We refer to our
remarks elsewhere: “Die Architektur am Wendepunkt” (cf. Neue Ziircher Zeitung, nos. 1247, 1249, of
24 July 1927, as well as “Wer baut das Vilkerbundsgebaiude?” Bauwelt 44 [1927]: 1093). See also Sch-
weizerische Bauzeitung 90, pp. 13ff. (text by Corbusier); p. 59 (“Uber das Problem der Akustik,” by F.
M. Osswald); on the legal situation, p. 180; on the breach of contract by the League of Nations,
p. 197. The course of the competition is presented best in Christian Zervos’s essay “Qui batira
le Palais des Nations?” Cahiers d’Arts. See also the fall issue of Architecture vivante, 1927, by Jean
Badovici and Corbusier. Finally the “REQUETE” to the Société des Nations signed by MM. Le Corbusier
and P[ierre] Jeanneret (Paris, 1928). A pamphlet protesting the unlawful proceedings of the League
of Nations.

°5) The uncrowned project by Richard Neutra presents the most thorough integration of the
traffic problem.

it needs a visionary outlook to recognize them. To build a living architecture means
to have at one’s disposal the ability to recognize these means and to transform
them into architectural design.

Hence, acoustics provides the foundation of the design of the large Assem-
bly Hall. The architect translates into form the knowledge discovered by the spe-
cialist (in this case G{ustave] Lyon, Paris). The result: even new formal possibilities
arise thereby. Competition for the new League of Nations building means: conflict

between a living and a rigid, feudal architecture.

RIGID-FEUDAL PROJECTS
SITUATION: No consideration of the ter-
rain. The park is rolled flat and serves as
a socle for the architecture. Rigid axial
alignment according to an incidentally
preexisting building ({Henri-Paul} Nénot’s
project).

SECRETARIAT: Is perceived as a cum-
bersome appendage, for it spoils the
“monumental” effect. One of the selected
entries ({Carlo] Broggi) arranges the sec-
retariat like armor around the assembly
building with some twenty light wells.
No “monumental project” can do
without light wells.

ASSEMBLY BUILDING: Automobile ap-
proach is neglected. Instead fountains
and colonnades. Problems of acoustics:
nonexistent.

COSTS: Two, three, four times the bud-
geted amount of thirteen million franes.

LIVING PROJECT

SITUATION: Organic integration with
the surroundings with respect to function
and landscape. Southern orientation.

SECRETARIAT: The design grows out of
the task: office activities. No light well.
Even the lowliest clerk has a view of lake
and mountains.

ASSEMBLY BUILDING: Automobile traf-
fic generates the “facade” (platform).
Acoustics lead to new design.

COSTS: Twelve and a half million francs.
(Le Corbusier).

SUMMARY: When they were submitted, the “MONUMENTAL PROJECTS” utterly
failed on every point: for the monumental gesture completely drowned
out all functions. This is thoroughly understandable. The armoring with colon-
nades and column orders binds much too tightly, like a corset, and is too coarse to
be able even remotely to fulfill the demands put forth by life today.

Even the diplomatic committee that selected the architects of the four worst designs
has understood that. The committee demanded fundamental changes that were
taken almost point for point from Gorbusier’s project.

°°) The intrigues, questions of prestige, connections that obviously decided the issue appear virtually
impenetrable. Looking over the whole complex, one can understand why the eighty-year-old Frantz
Jourdain, the architect of the Samaritaine (cf. p. 119), is said to have commented: “C'est une seconde

affaire Dreyfus.”

Fig. 120

Fig. 122

This competition recalls Les Halles in Paris, where Baltard likewise laboriously had
to patch his building together from the ideas of others. As we already mentioned, the
Paris city councillors of 1850 saw— according to the judgment of their contemporaries
(cf. p. 114)--monumentality only in the accumulation of stone masses. Unfortu-
nately, in the eighty years since then, those in power in the League of Nations have
not advanced one step further in their judgment.

Who works alongside Perret, Garnier, and Corbusier?

First, the in-between generation—age-wise between Perret and Corbusier—that did
not fully develop. Two names: Rob[ert] Mallet-Stevens, Henri Sauvage. One must
first say about both: they, too, have the tradition of ferroconcrete in their blood. But
they did not achieve consistent formulations.

Rob. MALLET- STEVENS (born 1886) is the movement’s élégant. He remains a for-
malist who drapes the new means over the old frame. His youthful impressions
revolve around the Stoclet house of 1905 in Brussels (by Jos{ef} Hoffmann), which,
by the way, represents the best realization of the Wiener Werkstatte Movement.
Mallet-Stevens has a special relationship with this house. In his youthful work Une
cité moderne (Paris: chez Massin, n.d.—around 1914—introduction by Frantz Jour-
dain)" that house and the dreams of the Wiener Werkstatte keep recurring. No over-
all vision as in Tony Garnier’s Cité industrielle already around 1900. Details. Arts
and crafts. Yet the French tradition of ferroconcrete lives on in him. The hall of his
transportation pavilion at the Paris Exhibition of 1925 is actually suspended on only
two supports, and all five stories of his Alfa-Romeo Garage (1925) are hung from two
parabolic girders so that no supports obstruct interior traffic. The facade and shop of
this frequently reproduced building exhibit a mixture of Dutch and Viennese crafts
influence (cf. by contrast J. J. P. Oud’s Café de Unie in Rotterdam).

For the well-to-do in Auteuil the architect built an entire cul-de-sac named after
him: RUE MALLET-STEVENS. The most interesting aspect of these four-story, single-
family houses (ferroconcrete) with a half-dozen bathrooms is the imperative with
which our age, even if only faintly heard, strikes down all ostentation. There is still—
in the largest house—that multitude of rooms that formerly seemed indispensable to
wealthy households. But the stridency of capitalism is nonetheless slipping away. The
ground floor is devalued. Where formerly the suite of rooms unfolded, now reside the
chauffeur, garage, and domestic facilities. Everything has been pushed upward. On
the first story: only remnants of the old ostentation but—compared to the total cost
of the house—negligibly little. No millionaire would previously have tolerated that. It
is clear that the house has no garret. In the basement there are special rooms for
furs, paintings, baggage, and supplies.

A dumbwaiter runs all the way to the roof; to the most comfortably arranged roof
that we have ever seen. A flat concrete baldachin cleverly suspended from broad
chimneys protects the table linen from every last particle of soot! Then an adjoin-
ing tiled pantry. Rooftop pantry. Le Corbusier’s astringency reinterpreted for the
gourmand-élégant.

If evidence were needed that contemporary architecture and a “rich” style are incom-
patible: the houses on the rue Mallet-Stevens would supply it. The historian must
establish the strange phenomenon: for the first time in history, not the
upper class, but the lower class is a factor in the creation of a

Fig. 120. ROB. MALLET-STEVENS, PARIS 1925.
BUREAU DU TOURISME. Decorative Arts Exhibition
The entire longitudinal building is suspended on two
ferroconcrete uprights. The Dutch influence is evi-
dent ix the overall modeling, above all in the canti-
levered concrete slabs.

style. For the first part of the movement—around 1900—it was the white-marbled
Stoclet house, this banker’s fairy tale for which no expense was spared, that carried
development, historical value. But this much can be said with certainty: today no
building conceived in luxury and unlimited expense can any longer have any impor-
tance in the history of architecture.

Fig. 121. MALLET-STEVENS.
Unfinished Villa for [Paul] Poiret

Figs. 123,124

Fig. 122, MALLET-STEVENS. From the RUE MALLET-STEVENS. Paris 1927
Garage and staff on ground floor, left. MAIN ENTRANCE, right. Staircase in the
center. The reception rooms begin on the first story. Note the comfortably arranged

roof terraces above. The house serves as a single-family residence.

The traditional massiveness of the residence is not overcome. The various
bodies (staircase, roof canopy, house cube) bump into one another without inter-
penetration. One sees how the exterior components of the new architecture (smooth
surfaces, flat roof, Jack of cornices, suspended elements) immediately disintegrate
into mere details when the formal-representational building type still underlies the
overall approach.

Henri SAUVAGE’S merit lies in having realized, in Paris, the maison @ gradins,
the recessed, terraced apartment house. These houses that recede story by story —and
that are furthermore white-tiled—provide a source of light in the street. Even more
than for the house built already in 1913 on the rue Vavin off the boulevard Raspail
is this true for the block of apartment houses on the rue des Amiraux
much farther north. Built by the city of Paris. Inexpensive residences.

Since the block sits on three streets, the empty space beneath the receding stories
could be used for an indoor swimming pool instead of a black light well. This method
of suspending the construction of an entire block is possible only with the tradition
of ferroconcrete.

Fig. 124. HENRI SAUVAGE.

RUE DES AMIRAUX 1925

The balconies are recessed in order to
admit light.

Fig. 123. HENRI SAUVAGE.

The Terraced Apartment House.
PARIS, RUE DES AMIRAUX 1925
Section.

Right and left are the recessed bal-
conies. Swimming pool in the middle,
above it storage space in the middle
of the house.


Fig. 125. HENRI SAUVAGE: GARAGE for 1,000 Cars, PARIS 1926
Left: the gracefully ascending ramp connecting the various stories.

In his garage for a thousand cars off the boulevard Raspail (1925), Sauvage is prob-
ably more involved in the facade than in the actual engineering, and the same can be
said about the other facades, which were kept completely in the Beaux-Arts style.

More important is the question of the real SUCCESSORS, of André Lurgat, [Gabriel]
Guévrékian, R. Boyer-Gérente, J[ean-Charles] Moreux,”” L[ouis] Thomas (of Lyon),
J. Beaugé.® One may say of all of them: they have no impact. One cannot as yet
definitively separate the wheat from the chaff. France was a country of pensioners. As
in other complacent countries the prevailing sentiment is: “La peur du risque!” The
fear of the new. Even the backwardness with respect to obvious hygienic demands
(bath, shower, boiler) is not simply the product of economic weakness but equally the
power of a tyrannical tradition that has become a specter that does not in any way
want to change living habits.

7) On Jean-Charles Moreux, who is still too indebted to French applied arts, cf. the illustrated essay in
Art et decoration (February 1928), pp. 40ff. Jean Porcher publishes photographs of “la maison nouvelle
en France” in the issue of January 1928 of the same journal.

98) A design for a multifamily house with roof gardens appears in volume 7 of Manométre, edited in
Lyons by [Emile] Malespine.

%) PLEYEL HALL (Paris, 1927) must also be mentioned. A concert hall for 2,600 people by the archi-
tects J[ean-] M[arcel] Auburtin, A{ndré} Granet, J. B. Mathon. The hall is based upon GUSTAVE
LYON’s principles of acoustic design. The enormous parabolic vaulting, ranging from the podium to the
highest seats, simply allows no opportunity to add “STYLISTIC DETAILS.”

Such examples show where the path leads. Even architects who have no feeling for the principles of
the new architecture will simply be forced to follow the path consciously chosen by the avant-garde,
for the functional aspects of every new building task must be satisfied. It is well known that
Corbusier based the Assembly Hall for the League of Nations on Lyon’s ideas. Excellent publication
in the issue of L’Architecte from January 1928.

TNH

Fig. 126.
G. GUEVREKIAN.
DESIGN FOR A FERRO-
CONCRETE VILLA 1923
Earlier attempt to elimi-
nate the massiveness of
the house and to draw the
consequences of the pos-
sibilities of fercoconcrete.

Fig. 127.
G. GUEVREKIAN.
DESIGN FOR A FERRO-
CONCRETE VILLA

Fig. 128. ANDRE LURGAT. CITE SEURAT, PARIS 1925/26.

GARDEN FACADE OF A HOUSE

This house acquires an original appearance when one understands that the charmingly
diverging lines of the first and second stories are to accommodate a mother and daugh-
ter who wanted to live as separately as possible. Similarly, the windows turn their backs
on one another.

Fig. 129. ANDRE LURGAT 1927.
Exercise Area on the Roof of the Guggenbuhi
House in PARIS, PARK MONTSOURIS


Figs. 130, 131,
R. BOYER-GERENTE.
Villa in HYERES (Riviera)

Gabriel GUEVREKIAN, a Persian living in Paris, had a very interesting start. The
ferroconcrete villa of 1923 is probably one of the earliest attempts to loosen the rigid
cube of the house and interpenetrate it with air, to lay out three roof terraces, to
lighten the ground floor, and to use an interior skeleton to suspend the building ele-
ments, without the trickery of decoratively cantilevered concrete slabs.

Guévrékian has yet to have any real impact. There are a few shops by him in Paris
(such as the boutique Simultané, 1924, with its textile window displays moving at var-
ious speeds, or the Alban Photographic Studio, 1926). Guévrékian’s executed gardens
(at the Exhibition of Decorative Arts, 1925, and for the comte de Noailles in Hyéres,
1925) do not bring us any closer to this difficult problem. With their virtually complete
elimination of living plants they resemble a flirtation with abstract design more than
a design itself. They are on a developmental sidetrack just as much as Mallet-Stevens’s
frequently cited concrete trees at the Paris exhibition, which were actually an unnec-
essary attempt to shock the Philistines. A large house in Neuilly is under construction.
The small, cubic studio of André LURGAT (born 1894) is also known in Germany. His
most significant achievements are the groups of houses of the Cité Seurat (1925/26),
two houses in Versailles, and the Guggenbuhl house (Paris, Montsouris). His work is
distinguished by a certain austerity, coolness. Whether by predisposition or by lack of
understanding by the patrons, the imagination often seems restrained. Among the
younger architects in France he is perhaps the one most concerned with sociological
problems: hence the importance of his designs for apartment houses and his develop-
ment plans related to them.

R. BOYER-GERENTE has followed in Corbusier’s path with his design for the
Ville de Curepipe by opening up the single house and striving for standardization.
(Published by van Doesburg in Bouwbedrijf, 1927, p. 88.) His villa presently under
construction in Hyéres underscores this impression.

Figs. 130, 131

Fig. 132. J. BEAUGE, 1926.

Housing Settlement for Intellectual Workers

Size: 50 x 80 meters. Nevertheless, a substantial area is reserved for collective games. The
terrace gardens — facilitating broader vistas—emerge without additional expense by employ-
ing the surplus material of a neighboring building. Individual offices, beneficially removed
from the residence, are placed at the top.

The young J. BEAUGE, from Corbusier's studio, displays a sympathetic grasp of the
layout of the terrain and interpenetration in his design for a cité jardin for intellec-
tual workers (exhibited in the Autumn Salon of 1926). Despite the essentially still-
undigested influence of his master, one sees in him a hope and the possibility of
further development.

Unlike Holland, the contemporary meaning of the new French architec-
ture does not lie in the transformation of the whole country through a housing form
for our age. Whereas in Holland the results rest mostly on the refinement of crafts-
manship and less on industrialization, the way of looking at the problem in France is
far more interesting because it is constantly directed toward employing ferroconcrete.
Ferroconcrete buildings of the most elegant and bold construction are spreading all
over France. Utility buildings. Upturn is enormous. And general. But only with regard
to utility buildings and—with a certain reservation—“public works.”

“Public works” —travaux publics—are an old Saint-Simonist issue, which both
Napoleon I and the republic took over.

It is different with residential buildings. According to a discussion in the French par-
liament of 13 November 1927, France lacks approximately

ONE MILLION DWELLINGS.
Any traveler who comes to the outskirts of the city—6anliewe —can vouch for this

housing distress. One is astounded that in Lyons, for instance, abutting Garnier’s vast
slaughterhouse complex, there are inhabited wooden barracks whose damaged parts

are patched together from tin-can lids and crate slats. In contrast to Holland, the
housing problem in France is making almost no progress. In the long run this will
force the avant-garde into an utterly untenable position: into an aestheticism.

The public hand provides no commissions. A few painters and wealthy people—who
can be counted on the fingers of one hand— are the only patrons. It is certainly good
for experimental buildings not to be bound by financial considerations but only to the
extent that it is possible to apply the collected experiences a hundred times over in
the future. Without slow, industrially bound construction there can
no longer be a lasting solution; without a collective will there can
be no architecture.

Now, the problem in France is this: if the people are sufficiently driven to feel the
need also to give their inner life an appropriate form, our age will instantly get a
foothold there. As long as the masses are satisfied with the present bad living con-
ditions, then the new architectural knowledge gained in France will only be benefi-
cial elsewhere. The avant-garde, which in France encounters the most formidable
resistance whenever a new housing form is attempted, is small but confident. One of
its representatives wrote me: “Our hopes are vast, for we expect to win the game some
day, and win it decisively. There are very few of us committed architects. But we have
such a will to succeed that our ideas will slowly but surely make their way. It is only
a matter of time.”

The backbone of the young people is still artificially broken in the schools, and the
ideal of the Académie des Beaux-Arts survives in the minds of the bourgeoisie.
Blinded by grotesque ignorance, this institution still pretends to be the “guardian of
a grand tradition.” Its shameful influence on all official milieus is undeniable. With
the competition for the League of Nations building we have observed with amazement
how much apparent power such an institution can still have, even though for a cen-
tury it has been without significance for the history of art.

But, after all, our age is a barren soil for such specters. Sooner or later they must
decide to expire, even in France.

THE CURRENT STATUS OF
FERROCONCRETE

Fig. 133. Limousin & Co. (FREYSSINET Technique). SAINT-PIERRE-DU-VAUVRAY Bridge 1922
A SPAN of 132 meters is bridged by a single arch. The

widest span executed so far. Conspicuously lithe form.

This is achieved by thorough consideration of the mate-

rial’s properties, for example, the verticals are of iron,

for this exploits the cable tension. Cf. Le Génie Civil,

3 November 1923. Freysainet’s bridge near BREST, cur-

rently under construction, has three arches, each span-

ning 190 meters. Material: ferroconcrete.

In the three decades of its most widespread application, ferroconcrete has reached
such a high level of design that fewer fundamentally new results are to be expected —
but rather an extension and refinement of practical methods.

It is curious that ferroconcrete has needed about the same length of time as iron for
its development. Iron between 1850 and 1890, ferroconcrete from the beginning of
the 1890s.

Likewise, ferroconcrete attempts to break up the rigid relationship of support and
load. This is especially visible in so-called mushroom slabs, where supports are
allowed to flow directly into the ceiling plane.

With ferroconcrete there is today also the possibility of anchoring buildings high
above the ground and letting their weight be suspended from a supporting arch. Be it
the arch of a bridge, a garage, or a hangar.

Just as Eiffel pursued the problem of the parabolic support his whole life, so the engi-
neer Freyssinet has~—since 1916—made attempts in ferroconcrete to suspend loads

Fig. 134. Limousin & Co.

PONT DE VILLENEUVE-SUR-LOT 1914-1919.
SPAN 96.25 meters

The arch is made of unreinforced concrete.
Compare the previous bridge and its formal
litheness, achieved through the use of ferro-
concrete.

from above and has in this way arrived at an until-now unknown lightness, grace, Fig. 133
and span (pont de Saint-Pierre-du-Vanvray, 132 meters). One always sees that same
balance of an arithmetic and aesthetic solution.

Limousin & Co. explain in the catalog of their constructions: “Ferroconcrete is no

longer a mystical dish for which everyone unfailingly has a better recipe than his
neighbor. Constructions are based on a number of well-tested methods. What counts

today is the perfection of production.”

Next to the creator of forms (créateur des formes) a second corrective authority
emerges from handling of such a complicated material as ferroconcrete: the entre-
preneur, the organizer!

Fig. 135. Limousin & Co. (Freyssinet Technique) AIRPLANE HANGARS in CHARTRES
1924

The weight of the hall is suspended from above. The same design elements in bridges and
building construction.

Fig. 136. BRICE & SAINRAPT. VAULT (TOUR FORTE) of the BANQUE DE FRANCE
Ten stories. Underground. Height 32 meters. Diameter 50 meters. Closure by means of movable

concrete wings.

He sees to it that manual labor is reduced to the absolute minimum and is concerned
to design the form in such a way that the frameworks may be repeated and used as
often as possible; at the same time, for reasons of thrift, he requires their quick and
easy assembly and disassembly. This leads to a new inner lawfulness, to a new as-yet-
unknown expression.

Fig. 137. BRICE & SAINRAPT. TRIBUNE of the Club athlétique de la Société générale
3,000 seats. 100 meters long. CANOPY: 10-meter cantilever.

Fig. 138. BRICE & SAINRAPT. WINE STORAGE
30,000 HECTOLITERS. Firm of DAMOY in IVRY.

How is ferroconcrete related to HOUSING CONSTRUCTION?

It is France’s special role that, with her pleasure in overcoming constructional diffi-
culties, she has devised almost all buildings in ferroconcrete, taking into account
the new housing functions.

But this does not resolve the questions: there is a certain inherent rigidity in
ferroconcrete. We know how difficult it is to demolish or even just alter buildings
in this material. Our dwellings should not be rigid, they must be allowed a certain
amount of free play for change, for they do not always serve the same function.
Because of the rigid nature of today’s house, we have been all too accepting of the
immutability of the floor plan and have let it tyrannize us.

Iron skeletons are after all more open to reassembling or addition, yet they display
other disadvantages. Gradually, experience accumulates that allows us to determine
with confidence which material can best be applied in a specific area of a house.
The beginning of industrialization and transportation in the nineteenth century led to
the formation of iron. Later, as the world economy recognized its importance, it
demanded containers for large-scale storage: warehouses and silos. This demand pro-
duced the suitable building material: FERROCONCRETE.

In the field of building, our age has one primary demand: the creation of a
humane and unconfined human dwelling that meets minimum
etandards [Eristenzminimum)

Fig. 139. ROOF OF THE RUE MARBEUF GARAGE, Paris 1826

The broad surfaces at the top level of the large cities will be used for sports, gardening, and eventually
probably also for landing strips for aircraft. For hygienic reasons alone, steep roofs will soon be forbid-
den in large cities. Flat ROOFS will serve recreational purposes and offer points of rest for the eye
accustomed to today’s disruptions.

Everyone now knows that a substantial price reduction is possible only through the
industrial organization of the fragmented building process. No city in the future can
do without experimental laboratories for practical building, for one must determine
for each stretch of land which building method, or better, which combination of
building materials is optimally suitable for it.

In addition, it is to be hoped that our age will form a new BUILDING MATERIAL
that comes closer to its demands—a house that meets minimum standards.

Just as the nineteenth century—at a given moment —developed iron and ferroconcrete
for its needs, so we can assume that our age, too, will find the material that responds
to its demands.
