BOOK Francis Ching MJ VP A Global History of Architecture.pdf
INTRODUCTION

For a million years, humans lived off hunting,
food gathering, and fishing. From the
perspective of our advanced world today we
tend to look back at this and wonder how

we could even have survived given all the
difficulties. We once labeled these people
savages or barbarians, and then we called
them primitives. More recently we call them
hunter-gatherers, as if all they do is obsess
about food acquisition. But the !Kung, who
have lived in the Kalahari Desert in Botswana
for hundreds of thousands of years, spend
only about 40 percent of their time hunting
and gathering. The rest of the time, they do
what most of us might do: they socialize,
dance, cook, and rest.

In the Kalahari, rmongongo trees, which
produce tasty and nutritious nuts by the
thousands, proliferate in mile-long groves.
Tubers can be dug from the ground, and
animal herds migrate through the territory,

easy prey for a canny hunter and his poison-
tipped arrows. The !Kung live in camps that
are rebuilt every year near seasonal water
oles. Women make the huts around a
common campfire, usually under the shade
of a large tree. The huts are not really to live
in, since people tend to live mainly outdoors,
ut serve as storage areas for tools and as
shade on a hot day. The modern world has
ittle respect for its venerable ancestors.
Because of forced relocations, mining on
their territory, and fences cutting across their
land, the 'Kung people’s survival into the
next decades is much in doubt. It is not the

natural world that endangers them, but our
civilized world.

As populations expanded, groups would
bud off to form new communities in the next
valley or further along the shores. In this way,
the first groups of people left Africa some 1.5
million years ago with a second group, our
human ancestors, following around 60,000
BCE to slowly yet persistently colonize the
globe, reaching the southern tip of South
America around 13,000 BCE. First Society
people, however, were not nomads as is so
mistakenly assumed. Instead they tended to
live within prescribed and familiar territories,
moving seasonally between winter camps
near rivers and upland summer camps for
hunting and fishing. The ancient people of
Australia, for example, moved in predictable
cycles: in some parts of the year they lived
in relative isolation, and in other parts
they would get together for large annual
ceremonial and social events.

During the Ice Age (ca. 25,000 BCE-
ca. 15,000 BCE), humans faced a global
phenomencn the likes of which we have
never seen since. The extreme cold, which
sent massive, mile-deep ice sheets far to
the south of the polar regions, impacted
Europe in particular. But the people there
did not leave. This was not because they
were trapped. It was because those areas
ad become a hunter's paradise, with bears,
ions, and, above all, huge herds of horses,
reindeer, and mammoth moving across the
grassy landscape. The Gravettian Culture was
the first to master the cold. They developed
leather-making and the needle to create fur-
ined clothing, boots, and jackets. In great
festivals, they congregated near caves where
artists had painted brilliant images of animals
on the walls and ceilings. What form of magic
these places produced is still unknown, but
the quality of the art staggers the imagination
even today. The animals were painted not
as carcasses but as living creatures moving
and breathing, and were made by artists who
had practiced their skills over a lifetime. As
the weather warmed, the hunters moved to
the east, crossed Siberia, and around 13,000
BCE crossed Alaska to enter the open plains
of North America. Called the Clovis People,
they hunted mammoth and then, when the
mammoth were all hunted out, they switched
to bison. Their sacred landscapes include
Seminole Canyon in Texas, with its ancient
rock art depicting shamans and sacred
animal spirits.

1.2 Haida settlement, Canada

The warming of the weather raised the

levels of the oceans, separating Japan from
China, and England from mainland Europe.
It created vast rivers, swamps, and forests
teeming with animals and plants, drawing
humans to the river shores. It was, one
might say, an age of affluence. At Lepenski
Vir along the Danube River, a settlement of
triangular huts emerged. The people there
caught sturgeon, a fish that averaged some 3
meters long. Why go hunting when catching
one fish would feed an entire community?
The nearby forests provided a wide
assortment of berries, mushrooms, and nuts
to complement the diet. Nor was this village a
solitary community. Similar villages lined the
shores, and their inhabitants traveled by boat
to connect with each other for ceremonial
events.
Half a world away, another affluent
society emerged along the northwest coast
of Canada. It was a favorable site for many
reasons. It was in a pocket of relatively mild
weather, the result of cross-Pacific winds; it
was also sited along the migration path of
whales, and salmon came in the thousands
to swim upstream to spawn. Huge cedar
trees, sacred to the Haida, provided material
for houses and boats. The tree was not just
“wood.” Its red color and sweet smell were
indicators of its connection to the world of
the spirits. Linear settlements sprang up
along the shore, cornposed of large, clan-
based community houses facing the water.
Each house was a sacred diagram designed
in relation to the cosmos, which for the

Haida was divided into three shamanistic
zones: the sky world, the earth, and the
oceanic underworld. The building's frame
systern consisted of massive roof beams,
often more than half a meter in diameter
and spanning the width of the house, which
ranged from 7.5 to 15 meters. These beams
were supported by posts carved to represent
important family ancestors or supernatural
beings associated with the family’s history.
Walls were clad with split-cedar planks tied
horizontally between paired upright poles.

lt was not just rivers and shores that
attracted human habitation to make the first
settled communities, but also the emerging
great rain forests. The Bambuti in Congo still
today pay homage to a forest spirit, Jengi,
whose power is thought to ernanate through
the world. Jengi is seen as a parental figure
and guardian. Society is organized around
individual households consisting of a husband,
a wife, and their children, forrning settlements
that can number up to about fifty residents.
The women build the huts that, in the shape
of upside-down baskets, are made out of a
frame of saplings and clad with leaves. Other
rain forest cultures developed in Brazil, Central
America, and Southeast Asia.

Beginning around 10,000 BCE in some
places, the great First Society traditions that
had sustained human life for so long began to
change. Instead of hunting animals, humans
began to herd them, and instead of gathering
and tending plants, they began to domesticate
a few chosen plants and grow them in
organized fields. These changes altered


1.3 Village scene

the imaginaries of the spirit world. Cattle in
particular were seen as living gods, requiring
daily attendance and a culture of respect. They
were not killed for food but were sacrificed
to mark special events in the life of the
community. Among the Dinka in the Sudan, a
man knows his cattle by special names, sings
songs to them, and sleeps next to them for
long periods of time. Cattle are sacrificed only
on special occasions, such as at weddings or
funerals. Although only a few cattle-centric
societies remain today, the impact of this
worldview can be felt even in modern religions.
Just as important was the shift from
gathering plants to farming. Rice in southern
China and eastern India, millet in Africa and
northern China, wheat and barley in the
Levant, and corn in Guatemala—all rose from
being just one of thousands of plants that
humans tended to the precious focus of effort
and devotion. The combined transformation
of our relationship to animals and plants
produced a new way of life: agropastoralism.
While today we call this period the birth of
agriculture, we have to remember that crops
like rice and barley were not raised as food.
They were gods. We have so secularized food
production today that we forget that the birth
of what we call agriculture coincided wit!
profound transformations that deified certain
foods and thus, it might be said, guaranteed
the proper and complex work ethic needed for
their production. The impact on women was
particularly profound; harvesting, grinding,
storing, and cooking were all largely women’s
work, as was pottery making, basket weaving,
and, of course, the raising of children.

The emergence of pastoral and agropastoral
cultures produced village societies organized
around chiefs with more or less power
depending on circumstances. Villages were
well calibrated to meet the needs of the
animals, to deal with the calendar of planting
and harvesting, and to produce the necessary
equipment for life, such as the bowls and
containers that stored grain and water and
that allowed fermentation and cooking to

take place. These activities were all governed
by ritual practices and unwritten rules of
behavior that shaped the destiny of all. But
village society could not spread just anywhere.
It needed the right combination of good soil
for farms, grasslands for cattle, forests for
firewood, and upland areas for hunting—and,
of course, water and salt.

The Mesopotamian highlands were perfect
for such agropastoral societies, and beginning
around 9000 BCE compact villages began to
spread along the slopes above the great rivers

1.4 Pottery making

in the plains. A similar expansion took place
along the Sahel in Africa, where sorghurn was
the main plant, as well as in the foothills of the
Baluchistan Mountains (barley), in northern
China (millet), and along the Yangtze River
(rice). By 5000 BCE these places had also
established themselves as profoundly different
from the First Society worlds that neighbored
them, even if they maintained some aspects of
the older traditions. Whereas the agropastoral
tradition in Mesopotamia, the Indus Valley,
China, and Egypt remained confined by their
ecological niches, a remarkable transformation
took place in Europe, where between 9000.
and 4000 BCE, agropastoral cultures rnoved
slowly along rivers and shores to reach even
northern Ireland. There the newcomers thrived
and built one of the greatest structures of

the time, Newgrange, a vast artificial mound
with a sacred chamber in its interior that was
designed to mark the first rays of the winter
solstice.


™

China: Hemudu Culture
ca. 5000-3500 BCE

@© Monte Verde

<1 Nabta Playa

ca. 9600-6000 BCE
<1 Gébekli Tepe

ca. 9000-7500 BCE
<1 Jericho

ca. 9000 BCE
Vinca Culture

ca. 5700-4200 BCE

<{ Tell Aswad
ca. 9000-7500 BCE

Clovis Culture

Haida Society

‘nene)
@ Eridu settled

eainac ca. 5000 BCE
©” Hiiyiik u®
a0) Qe amara (0)
(0)

. Banpo
Nabta Playa Eridu (©) Mehrgarh

China: Yangshao Culture
5000-3000 BCE

Hongshan Culture
4700-2900 BCE

Longshan Culture
3000-2000 BCE

A Niuheliang Ritual Center
ca. 3500-3000 BCE
A Yaoshan Ritual Altar
ca. 3300-2000 BCE

A Banpo
ca. 4500 BCE
Indus Valley: Early Harappan Period
ca. 5000-2600 BCE
A Mehrgarh

ca. 6500-2800 BCE

4500 BCE

Late Neolithic Period
ca. 5000-2000 BCE

<q] Catal Hiiyiik
flourishes ca. 7400-5500 BCE

Mesopotamia: Ubaid (Eridu) Culture

ca. 5300-4300 BCE
<{ Tell es-Sawwan

6000-3500 BCE

A White Temple
Begun ca. 4000 BCE

A Temple at Eridu
4500-3800 BCE

@ Invention of the wheel

Egypt: Pre-Dynastic Period
ca. 4500-3100 BCE

Earliest tumulus tombs in Portugal
ca. 5000 BCE
A Newgrange
ca. 4000 BCE

A Dholavira
ca. 2650-2100 BCE

A Harappa
ca. 3000-1900 BCE

3500 BCE 2500 BCE

Early Bronze Age
ca. 3000-2000 BCE

@ Bronze casting begins in the Near East.
ca. 3600 BCE

Uruk Period
ca. 4000-3100 BCE

A Temple at Uruk
ca. 3400 BCE

@ Earliest readable documents in Mesopotamia

ca. 3600 BCE ca. 3200 BCE

Early Dynastic Period
ca. 3100-2649 BCE
A Tombs of Hor Aba
ca. 3100 BCE
A Tombs of Hor Aba
ca. 3100 BCE

A Royal Tombs at Umm el-Qaab
3100-2890 BCE

Europe: Passage Tombs and Dolmens of Megaliths
ca. 3500-2500 BCE
A Stonehenge
Begun ca. 3000 BCE

A Passage grave: ile Longue

ca. 4100 BCE

@ Saracen Ring added at Stonehenge

A Carnac Stones 2500 BCE

ca. 3500 BCE
@ Cursus tradition in England
ca. 3500 BCE

RITUAL CENTERS

n the agropastoral environment, humans
egan to think and act differently than

their First Society ancestors had. Forests

jad to be chopped down, clay had to be
gathered for pots that then had to be fired in
ilns, granaries had to established, animals
tended to, wool harvested and made into
cloth; plants that were once considered

food were now thought of as weeds that had
to be culled from gardens and farm plots.
Decisions had to be made about priorities;
children had to learn their respective roles as
adults; and priests had to secure the privilege
of the divine. Customs had to be followed
about social ranking, finding a mate, and
building a house. Herds could die because
of disease or predators, and crops could be
lost to pests or carelessness. Grains could
rot, and neighboring tribes could attack.

The marshaling of energies that the village
required, the stratification of gender activities
along with the creation of a new set of
powerful gods in privileged communication
with the elites, produced a type of cognitive
revolution. The cohesiveness that this
required is impressive, and in many parts of
the globe the village world is still the glue that
holds society together.

One of the first sites where we see the
transformation is Nabta Playa in what is
today southern Egypt, some 80 kilometers
west of Abu Simbel. It is now an inhospitable
desert, but in 9000 BCE it was next to a large
lake with pastured shores. The site featured
a circle of slender upright stones, the main
stones being four pairs set close together.
Compared to Stonehenge, built 6.000 years
later, the circle is small, measuring roughly
4 meters in diameter, but its purpose was
similar: to organize time according to the
seasons. Two of the stone pairs are aligned
north-south, the other two pairs northeast-
southwest. They aided in the observation
of the motion of the sun and probably of
the constellation Orion. Priests and their
associated clans probably came to live at
Nabta Playa permanently, with the population
swelling periodically with the seasonal arrival
of herder tribes who would have come from
far afield with their cattle for large celebratory

O

events. By 3500 BCE, however, Nabta Playa
had become increasingly arid: the lake

dried up, and the site was abandoned. The
exodus from the Nubian Desert to the Nile
River played a large role in the development
of social differentiation in the pre-dynastic
cultures of the Nile Valley. One important link
between Egypt and the ancient cattle cult

of Nabta Playa was Hathor, the goddess of
fertility.

Another ritual site was on top of a hill near
the village of Urfa in southeastern Turkey.
Here, too, the now arid site was once a lush
forest. The oldest layer of the site appears
to date back to around 9000 BCE. The
structures, called Gébekli Tepe, consist of
several circular dry-stone walls, each of which
contains monolithic pillars of limestone up to
3 meters tall. Since there is no indication of
any roof covering, it seems that the circles
were open-air ritual chambers. They are now
called temples, but it is unlikely that they
were temples in the sense of being used
by a priesthood with organized devotional
practices. What went on in these spaces is
not known, but they most certainly had links
to ancestor cults and might have been used
in conjunction with mortuary rituals. The
floors consisted of a concrete-like substance
made of burnished lime. A low bench runs
around the inside of the circle walls. The
pillars show detailed reliefs of foxes, lions,

Line of sight

6
p

\ 4

\

al

Lkm
en i!

\

°

1.6 Plan: Nabta Playa, Egypt

cattle, wild boars, herons, ducks, scorpions,
ants, and snakes, all executed with great skill,
demonstrating that precision work—even
without metalworking tools—was possible
even at this early time.
f we add to these two sites the Niuheliang
Ritual Center (ca. 3500-3000 BCE) in
northern China, with its numerous platforms
and structures, and, of course, Stonehenge
(ca. 3000 BCE}, we have four ritual centers—
and there are certainly countless more—that
served as gathering places and eventually
as religious centers for newly settled
communities. Niuheliang will be discussed
in this chapter; Stonehenge, perhaps the
last of the great early ritual centers, will be
discussed in the next.
Around 3500 BCE something quite
remarkable happened in four places on
the earth: groups of people developed
something that we today call cities. This
transformation was not as natural as one
might assume, even though it was dependent
on several thousand years of village life and
the necessary cohesion that came with it. In
Mesopotamia, the farmers in the hills at first
stayed away from the vast, overgrown, flood-
prone swamps of the Tigris and Euphrates
Rivers. But an intrepid group must have set
out one day to try their luck. Finding a knoll,
they dug up the reeds, planted barley, and
carved out canals, activities that were hugely


labor-intensive. It was a success, built on the
simple premise that by doing one thing well—

growing barley—the inhabitants of an isolated
place could trade for everything that they did
not have. They created the wheel to speed
up travel; they created writing to document
trade transactions; they created city-scaled
gods to protect them; they laid the foundation
for laws and regulations; and they created
walls to defend their precious grain surpluses
on which the entire operation depended.

The first cities of Mesopotamia were thus
experiments in an extreme landscape. They
were governed by an elite, with most of the
work done by slaves from nearby conquered
regions. Some cities thrived, some did not,
but over time, the power and wealth that they
created for themselves pushed their destiny
forward. In Egypt, the story is similar, but
here the rise of cities—more like sprawling
villages—was the consequence of the rapid
influx of refugees from the expanding Sahara
Desert. Prior to about 5000 BCE the Nile was
an unruly, lightly populated, swampy river,
but with the drier climate that created the
desert, thousands of people came with their
animals and agricultural skills. Over tire they
refashioned the Nile into a fertile paradise.
The intensity of this foreshadowed the rise

of a controlling elite who became first chiefs,
then gods.

1.7 Gobekli Tepe, near Urfa, Turkey

In India along the Indus River, cities also
emerged, spectacular in nature, because
unlike in Mesopotamia and Egypt where the
building material was largely mud-dried brick,
here the inhabitants made kiln-fired bricks
that could not only withstand the test of time
but also allowed them to build close to the
river, and to build pools, drainage systems,
and multistory houses. Ships from these
cities traded with the Mesopotamians
to the north.

In China, the development of cities had
a slightly different cast. Village communities
had formed in the south in the swarnpy
regions around Hangzhou Bay and the
Yangtze River estuary, where rice could
be planted. Villages were also forming in
the north where people had long since
discovered the value of millet, a hardy plant
that grows on hillsides. Here people used
a form of architecture well-known in the
north since 25,000 BCE, the pit house. Dug
partially into the ground with a superstructure
of thatch held in place by posts and beams,
these communal buildings were dry and
warm and the focus of a range of ritual
activities. Unlike the Mesopotamian cities,
which were import-export centers, these
dense villages were more self-sustaining as
they attained the scale of cities. There were
areas for the manufacturing of pottery and
bronze, just as there were areas reserved for
the elites.

1.8 Elam, a typical Mesopotamian city with
walls and towers, as depicted in this bas-relief
commemorating Assyrian king Ashurbanipal’s
conquest and destruction of the city in 647 BCE.

These first cities produced a concentration of
wealth and power that was to have significant
implications for the destiny of humans and
indeed for their definition of thernselves
as “civilized.” But as much magic as they
worked on the human imagination, these
cities’ experimental nature should not be
forgotten. Cities were made; they were also
made to be destroyed. The Chinese, in fact,
would continuously destroy their cities; with a
new dynasty, the old capital was often burned
or leveled and the inhabitants forced to
relocate. The Mesopotamians and Egyptians
glorified their destruction of enemy cities, and
so it went on—until even today.

Although urban densities were able to pull
a large amount of resources into their orbits,
around 3500 BCE they constituted only a tiny
percentage of the world population, maybe as
small as .001 percent. Most people lived in
spread-out village societies, and many more
lived in a world with no agriculture at all, as
humans had for hundreds of thousands of
years.


BEGINNINGS OF CHINA’S
CIVILIZATIONS

In China, the shift to an agricultural/village
world took place around 9000 BCE. There
was, however, no single “origin” of Chinese
civilization. Instead, there was a gradual
multinucleated development taking place
somewhat independently at first, with the
emphasis to the south on rice and to the
north on millet and pigs. Rice grew wild
and was then domesticated on the swampy
shores and in the delta of the Yangtze River.
Millet, which prefers a cooler climate, grows
wild on hillsides, where it over time was
also domesticated. Pigs played a role in
village life from early times and, along with
sheep, were introduced to northern cultures
by 5000 BCE, if not earlier. By 4000 BCE,
especially in the north, small but well-
organized regional cormmunities emerged.
These included the Hongshan Culture
4700-2900 BCE) to the north of Bohai Bay
in Inner Mongolia and Hebai Province, and
the Yangshao Culture (5000-3000 BCE) in
Henan Province. Geographically between the
two, and developing later, was the Longshan
Culture (3000-2000 BCE) in the central

and lower areas of the Yellow River. The
emergence of walls around communities is a
clear indication that the political landscape
was very much in flux. To the north, villages
were generally composed of pit houses
that, whether large or small, trace their
ancestry back to 20,000 BCE and possibly
earlier. Pit houses were used throughout
Inner Asia by steppe hunters. People to the
south developed houses on stilts, a natural
response to the swampy soil of the rice
paddies.

Niuheliang Ritual Center

he Hongshan Culture, with its villages
focusing on millet and sheep and pig grazing,
was located along the Laoha, Yingjin, and
Daling Rivers, which empty into Bohai Bay.
Though scattered over a large area, the
community's ritual life focused on a sacred
landscape in which a mountain known locally
as Pig Mountain must have played a part,

as its silhouette is visible to the south. The
ritual center consisted of at least fourteen
urial mounds and altars over several hill
ridges. It dates from around 3500 BCE, but its
importance could well have been established
earlier.

Yellow River

Hongshan
4700-2900 BCE
Zhaobaogou
5400-4500 BCE

Yangshao Cishan Houli
5000-3000 BCE 8000-5500 BCE 6500-5500 BCE
ae
O29"
OO ae ane? Beixin
ite 5300-4100 BCE
Himalaya Range pice Yangize River
4 Daxi
‘% 4500-3000 BCE
eoeneeenenny
~ /
‘ Fert
| eee,
San oat Yifiang River ’

Area of wild rice
Before 10,000 BCE

1.9 China’s early agriculture

Though rituals would have been performed
here for the elites, the large area of this
sacred landscape implies that audiences
for the ritual would have encompassed all
the villages of the Hongshan Culture. The
site might even have attracted supplicants
from further afield. A key building was a
structure that is called a goddess temple,

though its purpose is not known. The walls,

made of interwoven branches and covered
with packed mud, leaned inward to form
a tunnel-like space. Its main body was 25

meters from south to north, with secondary
spaces projecting from that. On the outside,
its surviving footings show that its surface
was covered with geometric designs in high
relief that were painted yellow, red, and
white, all of which certainly suggests that it
stood out in the landscape in a colorful way.
To its north was a single detached room
where excavations have uncovered clay body
parts, including a head, a torso, and arms,
belonging to an image of a protectress or
goddess (from which the site got its name).

1.10 Plan: Cairn with stone tomb,
Niuheliang Ritual Center, tomb site II

Another structure of interest to archaeologists
is an artificial hill at the entrance to the
valley. On the ground level, the mound is
encircled by a ring of squared white stones.
Another ring of white stones is embedded

at the middle height of the mound; a third
was placed near the top. Artifacts found

near the top of the mound include crude
clay crucibles used for smelting copper.
Since the top of a hill is a surprising place

to melt copper, the structure seems to have
been meant for ritual events. Burial grounds
on hills seem to mark the north and south
extremes of the moonrise in the east. All

in all, this center contains the essential
elements of Chinese ancestor worship—burial
cairns, platforms, and a ritual temple—as
evidenced, for example, by the Ming tombs
built five thousand years later.

Cross section

1.12 Reconstruction of circular dwelling at Banpo

1.11 Reconstruction of Banpo village, China

In the valleys of the Yellow River we see

the emergence of several compact villages,
such as Banpo (near the modern-day city of
Xi'an), which dates to about 4500 BCE and
was part of the Yangshao Culture. It was
surrounded by a ditch or moat 5 to 6 meters
wide, probably for drainage and defense. The
homes were circular structures of mud and
wood with overhanging thatched roofs, all
raised on shallow foundations with fire pits at
the center. Entrance ramps sloped down into
the dwelling. Such pit houses, with furs lying
on the floors and hanging from the inner walls
for insulation, were comfortable places to live.
If the timber bears could be kept dry and the

thatch was properly maintained, a pit house
could last twenty years. The dead were buried
in the back of nearby sacred caves or in
simple pits outside the village in a communal
burial area. The remains of children, it seems,
were interred in urns just outside their homes.
Within the town there were large open plazas
and storage holes, and at the center of the
village was a large house, presumed a clan

or community center, which was built of a
heavy timber construction. One area of the
village was dedicated to the production of
pottery, indicating the emergence of craft
specialization. Pottery was used not only in
daily life but also in mortuary rituals.

Plan

2 0 |

1.13 Reconstruction of meeting hall at Banpo

In terms of religion, the Hongshan and
Yangshao cultures were shamanistic. A
shaman is an intermediary between the
natural and the spiritual worlds who travels
between these worlds in a trance. A tomb
at Puyang, dating from about 4000 BCE, is
likely that of a shaman priest. It was made
in the shape of a single, squarish room with
a lobed space at the rear. A man was buried
in the pounded earth floor, flanked by a
dragon on one side and a tiger on the other,
both painstakingly and beautifully made of
hundreds of shells. Dragons and tigers, still
central to Chinese Confucian symbolism,
are considered to be prospectors in both
life and death. Hill ranges, especially those
with prominent peaks, are considered to be
dragons.

Along the Yangtze River, farrners had
developed rice as their prime staple by
around 5000 BCE, if not earlier. It was a
labor-intensive crop that required level fields
and the precise monitoring of water levels.
The first culture to master rice farming was
the Hemudu. Given the swampy nature
of the land, the people at Hernudu built
elevated houses that served for both living
and storage. The houses were also ritual
centers. This house type was introduced by
rice growers to other parts of the world, most
notably to Japan and the Philippines.

By the time of the Liangzhu Culture
(3400-2250 BCE), located in the Yangtze

River delta, we see the emergence of

numerous smiall cities.

Shijiahe, had walls, otl
were regional centers

Some, such as
hers had none; some
with villages around

them, others were more autonomous. A city

near Yuhang, south of
was quite large—3 mi

roughly rectangular city, about 0.5 kilometers

modern Shanghai,
lion square meters. A

long, located a few ki

jometers east of the

modern town of Pingyao, is believed to have
been the capital of the kingdorn. It had a
fortification wall and a planned irrigation

system.

1.14 Dragon, human, and tiger figures found in tomb at Xisuipo, Henan Province, China

Rammed earth platforms on which palaces
and temples were built were now a common
feature of Chinese architecture. These
platforms (known as hang-t'u) were created
by pounding layers of 12 to 14 centimeters
of earth onto each other with wooden or
stone mallets, creating a very hard and
long-lasting material. Since what was built
on top was made of wood, nothing of this
superstructure remains. A Liangzhu Culture
ritual altar at Yaoshan, located to the west
of Tai Lake, gives some indication of the
religious edifices of the time. A ditch defines
a sacred precinct extending over 25 meters
square, at the center of which is a platform

1.15 Walled city of Shijiahe, China

measuring 6 by 7 meters constructed of
rammed red earth, red being a particularly
sacred color. Archaeologists found twelve
graves, presumed to have belonged to
priests, arranged in two rows within the
platform. It is still unknown how this platform
was used, though it most probably involved
ancestor worship and ritual feast offerings.
The use of jade for religious and devotional
objects was by this time common to all of
the Chinese cultures; the quality of Liangzhu
jade was, however, quite remarkable. Though
there were several sources, one was in the
mountain deserts of modern-day Xinjiang
Province in the northwest of China.

General built-up area N

&, : Mehrgarh | A “Ye “
S / 7000-5000 sce ft
Zp Harappa | ae
6 ©3300-1900 sce bon a .
; Mehrgarh *
Raluchisian & 6500-2800 sce 1.16 Location of the Indus civilizations bo
lountains Sy N :
& of Mehrgarh and Harappa ‘A Mehrgarh'|
& This period is characterized by the | 5000-3200, ece
N i ,

Arabian Sea

MEHRGARH AND EARLY INDUS
SETTLEMENTS

Though evidence of the Neolithic occupation
of India dates back to 10,000 BCE, settled
cultures began to emerge around 7000

BCE, in the eastern hills of the Baluchistan
Mountains in today’s Pakistan. It was an
agropastoral environment typical for the age,
allowing farming along the slopes above the
river, herding in the flat lands of the valley,
and hunting in the hills and mountains.
Around 6500 BCE, one community seemed
to rise in importance and became the first in
a long line of proto-urban environments that
were soon to grow here. Known as Mehrgarh,
it was strategically located overlooking the
Kachi Plain southeast of modern Quetta
near the Bolan Pass, an important gateway
connecting South Asia to the rest of the
continent. Its five-thousand-year history

can be traced from a village to a regional
trading center that covered, at the peak of its
development, an area of 200 hectares.

By 3500 BCE, its occupants had mastered
extensive grain cultivation. Dominating the
urban landscape were mud-brick buildings
presumed to be granaries, designed as multi-
roomed rectangular structures with a long
narrow corridor running more or less down
the center. The absence of doors suggests
that grain was fed from the top, as it would
be into a silo.

elaboration of ceramics and the

BY

beginning of copper metallurgy, i \
stone-bead making, and seal-bone l ‘ \ .
carving. The beginning of writing I -A Mehrgarh Illy
is seen in the form of graffiti on \ ~ 3500-3200 BCE

pottery from around 3500 BCE. \ : !

Though the presence of these granaries
connotes social organization, there is no
evidence of dominant temples or ritual
structures, nor are the granaries aligned
with adjoining structures. And yet it is clear
that the granaries were the center of social
and ritual life. Outside one such granary,
along its western wall, a large hearth has
been found, complete with several hundred
charred grains. Along the southern wall,
archaeologists found the remains of the stone
tools and drills of a steatite- or soapstone-
cutter’s workshop. On the eastern side, there
were heaps of animal bones mixed with
ashes, indicating the presence of intense
butchering activity. Life, in other words, was
organized around the sacred granaries. The
granaries were also associated with mortuary
practices: human bones, presumably those
of priests, were found buried in its corridors
and intermediary spaces. Archaeologists
excavated about 360 such tombs, in which
the dead, sometimes buried with tarred
baskets, had funerary effects including
skillfully crafted ornarnents. These ornaments ‘\
used materials brought from long distances,
such as seashells, lapis lazuli, and turquoise.

1.17 Site plan of Mehrgarh, Pakistan

1.18 Plan: Mud-brick granaries, Mehrgarh II

@®> Vinca Belo Brdo

Vinca Culture Black Sea

outa"? Ne

®
\

aus

9000 sce
Catal Huytk
Tell Aswad @

Jericho —~-@

Mediterranean Sea

>.

O®
, 8

THE VILLAGE NETWORKS OF
MESOPOTAMIA AND THE BALKANS
The shift to village-world farming took place
in the Levant around 9000 BCE. During a
few centuries of cold weather, two plants

in particular seemed to thrive, wheat and
barley. The locals figured out how to tend
these grasses into larger and larger patches.
This, combined with the domestication of
sheep and goats and the herding of cattle,
produced a culture far different from that of
their ancestors. Ritual practices changed,
as did gender roles. Clan lineages became
important, and with clans there emerge
chieftains, who along with ritual specialists
managed the complex sequence of activities.
By 8000 BCE, a network of agropastoral
villages had forrned in the highlands of the
Levant and from there spread eastward into
the upland reaches above the Euphrates
River and even northward into the Balkans.

Catal Hilyiik

As village communities developed in
the hills of the Levant and overlooking
the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers, one
commodity was sought after in particular:
obsidian. This black volcanic rock with
its sharp edges could be fashioned
into small blades that were attached to
sickles. The result was a much faster
harvesting time. The problem was that
obsidian was a rare commodity that
came from the mountains in Anatolia.

6000 sce

Tell Halaf

Tell Maghzaliyah
Tell Hasuna —

Mesopotamia comes from the Greek
words mesos and potamas, meaning
“middle river,” and refers to the fertile
plain between the Tigris and Euphrates

_-The Fertile Crescent is an agricultural

region that runs along the foot of the
Taurus and Zagros Mountains in a
broad arc from the eastern shores of
the Mediterranean to present-day lraq.

Caspian Sea
4
Rivers.
7000 sce
© Jarmo
Ganj Dareh
oe
/
5000 sce 3
Memphis ce
Tell cs-Sawwan B
Susa 2
‘Ee

1.19 Fertile Crescent: An early, dense network
of cities and villages

A remarkable settlement developed as one
of the main suppliers of obsidian. Known
as Catal HUyuk, the city (near the modern
city of Konya, Turkey) dates back as far as
7400 BCE; by the third millennium BCE it had
a population of about eight thousand. The
city was located in the center of a large, well-
watered valley and next to a river that fed into
a nearby lake. The lake and river have long
since dried up. What has been recovered
archaeologically is but a small part of the city
that followed the slopes of the hill.

The city consisted of rectangular flat-
roofed houses packed together into a
single architectural mass with no streets or

1.20 Typical Iranian mountain village

passageways. Astonishingly, walls made of
mud bricks reinforced by massive oak posts
were not shared, meaning that where we
see a wall, we are really seeing two walls,
one for each house. Why this developed
has not been clearly answered. Inhabitants
moved across rooftops and descended into
their homes through the roofs via ladders.
Light came through small windows high

in the walls. If a family died out, its house
was abandoned for a period of time, leaving
gaps in the urban fabric, until eventually the
space was reclaimed. The typical residence
contained one large room connected to
smaller storage rooms. The main room was


Probable extent of city .

Catal Hiyuk jf
West 7

1.21 Site plan: Catal Hiiyiik, near Konya, Turkey

equipped with raised benches, ovens, and bins,

and its average size was a generous 5 by 6

meters. Walls were plastered, and many were

decorated with hunting scenes, textile patterns, ie)
or landscapes. The horns of animals, especially
cattle, were mounted on walls.

There was no central, communal sacred
space. Each house had its own shrine consisting
of a wall decorated with bulls’ horns. In some
cases, pairs of horns were set in clay at the edge
of platforms or ernbedded in benches. The dead ’

rn /
of the family were buried in this room and their anne -
bones incorporated into the shrine. (Bodies were X oh)

left outside until only the bones remained.) It
seems that over time, some houses were used
more as clan ancestor shrines and less as houses.

1.23 Bull design on a shrine wall at Catal Hiiyiik

Ladder leads to roof opening, which
. served as the entrance to the house
+. as well as a vent for smoke.

fa

EA
y
aN
\
in
,
Vv

4

1.24 Reconstructed shrine at Catal Hilyiik

, Ku ss a TRS
eeping platform >A big
y ~ i STK.
a“ > 2

SS
ven

A
.
\
/
LI

Open hearth

6m

1.25 Typical house in Catal Hilyiik

1.26 Terra-cotta figurine of seated goddess
from Catal Hilyiik

The principal deity was the mother
goddess. Figurine representations of her,
made of a variety of materials, have been
found throughout the village. One statue,
remarkable for its bold three-dimensional
design, is of a voluminous seated wornan
giving birth. The chair on which she sits has
armrests in the shape of lions. The figurine
represented fecundity and regeneration,
and was part of the widespread mother-
goddess worship typical of European and
Mediterranean late Stone Age and early
Bronze Age societies.

Catal HUyUk was at the northern end
of a zone of developing urbanization that
reached from Jericho (in Israel) to Tell Aswad
(in Syria) and Susa (in Iran). Jericho was a
major city—probably the largest in the whole
area. Like Catal Hiiyik, it had the benefit of
local mines. Susa had the benefit of a well-
established network of nearby villages in the
Zagros Mountains, which constituted a close
supply of metals. The Karun River, a river no
less important than the Tigris and Euphrates,
connected the city to the world at large;
grains, figs, and lemons were raised in the
river's broad valley.

Tell es-Sawwan
The climate in Mesopotamia back then was
cooler than it is today, meaning that the
verdant valleys of the Tigris and Euphrates
Rivers were far different from the deserts
found in the region today; in the highlands,
forests were interspersed with steppes and
savannas rich in flora and abounding with
goats, boars, deer, and foxes. Farmers
worked in the valley, but the community lived
in the more easily fortifiable hills. Shepherds
lived in the steppe regions between the farms
and the deserts. In the areas around the
Black Sea, one would have found a similar
fabric of habitation, except there the locals
discovered that their hills contained obsidian,
copper, and salt, which became important
commodities for trade. Around 5000 BCE the
two worlds cohered into recognizable cultural
formations: the Vinca in Romania and the
Samarra in Iraq. A few places stood out, like
Jericho (in Israel) and Tell Aswad (in Syria,
30 kilometers east-southeast of Damascus),
which were larger than the rest. Also
important was Catal HUytk in Turkey, which
was a key source of obsidian, a volcanic glass
that was needed for sickle blades.

One of the most important groupings
of villages dating from this period (6000-
3500 BCE) was located just to the east of
a rain-fed agricultural zone that arches
northeastward from the northern tip of the
Persian Gulf along the flanks of the Zagros
Mountains. Among these settlements was
Tell es-Sawwan, on the left bank of the Tigris
near Samarra. It started as a small village
that became fortified, growing over time into
a substantial community. The plan shows a
clear hierarchy, with the important buildings
in the southern half. The central building is
symmetrical and has a hall or corridor down
the center; it was built at a later stage in
the development of the village. Its purpose
is unknown, but it was possibly a granary.
There are about seven or eight houses that
have nearby areas for sheep and goats. The
basic building material was mud and timber;
the mud was mixed with reeds and dried in
a mold to create bricks, an innovation that
remains a characteristic of the region even
today. Rooms were rectilinear, measuring,
on average, about 1.5 by 2 meters. The
horizontal roofs were made of beams of oak
on which were placed a layer of branches
and reeds sealed with mud, bitumen, and

gypsum. The interior wall surfaces were
decorated with gypsum plaster, which

had been developed as early as 7000 BCE
and which was to remain a central part of
building construction in the entire area.
From the extensive outcrops of rock gypsum
in northern Iraq and Syria, stone blocks
were mined, stacked, and burnt to form

an easily transportable white powder. This
building material was not only used locally
but also exported as a trade commodity.

The development of trade in craft goods,
pottery, building materials, and metal objects
stimulated the economies of the region and
played a central part in its drift toward craft
specialization and urbanization. The Samarra
Culture produced abundant grain, which was
then exported to surrounding regions.

Though we often think of the Tigris and
Euphrates region as the birthplace of urban
civilization, the truth is that civilization—if
that complex and awkward word can be
used, at least in this area—was the product
of a combined culture in which some people
raised grain while others built mines. The
oft repeated image of Mesopotamia as a
“Fertile Crescent” is flawed if one does not
add the Metal Crescent that embraced it. In
Mesopotamia, grain and metal were mutually
reinforcing commodities. The principal
copper-producing areas stretched from the
Caspian Sea through Anatolia and around the
Black Sea.

An important early Copper Age society,
known as the Vinca Culture, flourished from
5500 to 4000 BCE in an area that stretches
from present-day Bosnia to Romania.
Whereas the Mesopotamians developed mud-
brick walls covered with plaster to protect
the walls against moisture, the Vinca lived in
freestanding rectangular houses with walls
made of wattle and daub. The roofs were
pitched and made of thatch. Their ritual
world was intense. The Vinca had house
shrines with an assortment of strangely
carved deities that governed fertility and that
spoke to the ancestors or gave omens.


1.27 Vinca statuette

The Taurus Mountains in eastern Anatolia,
known for their tin mines, played an equally
important part in the West Asian economy,
since tin was needed, along with copper,
to make bronze. Though there were many
copper-producing areas, tin was more rare.
An ancient tin mine was discovered at a site
named Géltepe, which was a large village
from around 3290 to 1840 BCE. The miners,
using narrow shafts, brought cassiterite
ore to the surface, where it was crushed,
washed, and smelted with charcoal in small
crucibles rather than in the large furnaces
characteristic of copper-smelting sites. By
measuring the enormous deposits of slag
(600,000 tons in one pile), researchers have
ascertained that this was a major site during
much of the early and middle Bronze Age.
Metal began to play an important part in
international relations in the third millennium
BCE. Around 2350 BCE, Sargon of Akkad
invaded Anatolia from his lowland base to
secure trade routes. In records that have
been found, he boasts that a single caravan
carried about 12 tons of tin, which can make
125 tons of bronze—enough to equip a large
army. Today it is widely accepted that mining
was responsible for vast deforestation and
played an important part in the desertification
of western Asia.

1.29 Iraqi marsh

3
EA
&

S
ca
%,
>

— marsh area
Susa ©

Uruk@®

Eridu

©

1.28 Location of Eridu and Uruk

Eridu and Uruk

With this in mind we can now better
understand the rise of the first cities in the
marshes of the Tigris and Euphrates areas.
Though villages spanned the area from

the Levant into northern Syrian and Iraq,

few people ventured into these marshes,
overgrown with tall reeds, useful for boats
and thatching but little more. It was an
extreme landscape that had no lumber for
roof beams, and no metal or even stone. But
around 5000 BCE we see the first atternpts

to transform this landscape. Societies gave
up their partial dependency on an integrated
farming-hunting lifestyle and concentrated

on farming alone, the aim being to produce
huge grain surpluses that would be traded
for other things. These cities were not secular
adventures. They were built at the command
of the deities who in a sense sponsored these

— Older agricultural area

ee coastline

3%
a
a
%

og
Sip

surplus-making enterprises. In Mesopotamian
mythology it was never the humans who
created cities, but the gods themselves.

But back in the realm of the humans,
the making of these places did go hand in
hand with technical advances. The Tigris
and Euphrates, unlike the Nile, flooded
before the harvest, in April and May; this
had made lower-lying reaches unusable for
agriculture. But sedimentation brought by the
rivers tended to build up natural levees that
farmers could reinforce, allowing the canal
bed to become somewhat higher than the
surrounding countryside. Farmers could then
make openings in the levees to feed water
into the irrigation channels, as they still do
today. Aerial photography has recently proven
the extensive nature of these ancient canals
and dikes, some of them more than 100
kilometers in length.


1.30 Temple atop the stone-faced platform at Eridu, near Abu Shahrain, Iran

The relationship with the rivers was a
delicate and dangerous one. The systern was
vulnerable to flood, war, and neglect. Records
from Ur deal repeatedly with repair work.
But the investment was worth the effort. In a
few centuries the area became an economic
engine unparalleled anywhere in the world
except in Egypt. Though these cities are
discussed in relationship to advances in
agriculture, what we really see are cities
serving by necessity as export and import
centers.

Eridu and Uruk were, in a sense, modern
cities dependent on a single economy of
grain, requiring the control and movement
of goods. It thus stands to reason that it was
here that the wheel came into its full use
to haul loads over long distances, and that
standardized weights were invented at this
time. Another innovation was one of the great
civilizational achievernents: writing, which
was put to practical use to record trade
transactions and keep up with inventory.
Concomitant with this was the development of
a legal and archival system. Evidence of the
impact this made can be found in vestigial
remnants of words deeply embedded in our
present-day language. In Ur, the ancient title
designating “king” is /uga/, which is probably
the origin of the Latin word fex (“law”) and
the English word /ega/. And another ancient
Mesopotamian word, pala, referring to the
garment of kingship, constitutes the root of
our word palace.

We see the emergence of a cormplex religious
world in tune with the equally complex life of
urban civilization. The mother goddess, who
had ruled in many places throughout Eurasia,
now had to compete with an expanding list of
divine presences—including powerful male
gods who tied society firmly into a network of
obligations. Significantly, the mother goddess
Apsu, who controlled the oceans, was “killed”
by her son Ea, earth, who divided her unruly
waters into chambers. Concurrent with the
shift was the emergence of a priestly class
responsible for all aspects of society, from
religion to administration to technology. The
priestly class was responsible not only for
the proper communication with the deities
through food sacrifices and ritual events, but
were also the architects of increasingly larger
buildings to stage their power.

The culture that first began to master
the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers as early as
5000 BCE was known as the Ubaid. Around
3000 BCE, they were superseded by the
Sumerians, who were to no small degree the
first modernizers, replacing old and well-
established traditions with new and better-
organized ones. Eridu was located on the
banks of the Euphrates in the delta, which
has since silted up so that the ancient site is
now located 90 kilometers inland. Originally,
however, Eridu had easy access to boats
coming up from the south.

1.32 Temple XVI-XVIII at Eridu

The temple at Eridu was rebuilt seventeen
times (4500-3800 BCE), with each effort
built directly over the earlier one, and with
each one being bigger and taller, resulting in
a massive building, a veritable mountain of
bricks. The earliest temple was a sirnple box
with an altar at the back and an oven outside
in the front, where sacred bread offerings
were prepared. The last ternple, positioned
on an enormous plinth of clay bricks, was
painted in vibrant colors and was visible for
miles. It had a form defined by rhythmically
spaced buttresses, and though roughly
rectangular in shape, it had an irregular
perimeter. A flight of steps at the center of the
broader side led up to the entrance, where

a shallow vestibule gave access to a large
central room oriented lengthwise. Ancillary
spaces, probably used as reliquaries, were
located at the corners.

a
:
1
}

1.33 Statue of King Gudea at Eridu, with a temple plan carved on a lap tablet

The chief deity was Ea, son of the mother
goddess Apsu; he was not only an earth god
but also manifest in “sweet waters.” He was
seen as crafty, for he “avoids rather than
surmounts obstacles, goes round and yet gets
to his goal.” Ea, who in some accounts made
human beings by mixing his own essence
with that of his brother, Enlil (the earth and
storm god), was also worshipped as the god
of wisdom and as a friend to humankind.
Images of Ea show hirn wearing a cloak

of fish scales, and fish bones have been
discovered near the offering table at Eridu.

A text written somewhat later states that

When Ea rose, the fishes rose and adored
him,

He stood, a marvel unto the deep...

To the sea it seemed that awe was upon him;
To the Great River terror seemed to hover
around him

While the south wind stirred the depth of the
Euphrates.*

*Thorkild Jacobsen, “Surnerian Mythology, a
Review Article," Journal of Near Eastern Studies 5
(1946): 140.

The Temple at Eridu served as a prototype
for later efforts: a statue made about a
thousand years later, in 2150 BCE, shows the
plan of a temple with similar attributes. It is
no sketch, but a precise plan with door and
pilasters drawn in, all to scale. It is placed
on the lap of King Gudea of Lagash and, in
its accuracy and precision, leaves no doubt
as to the planning that went into these early
temple designs. Its position on the king's
lap also proves that the plan was more than
just a convenience of the builders: it was an
expression of the claim to legitimacy of the
monarch and his sacrosanct function.

1.34 A size comparison of Eridu, Susa, and Uruk

Uruk developed into a significant, large city
with a possible population of fifty thousand. It
was dedicated to the god Anu, a sky god, an
important and newly emerging deity linked to
the number one, and thus to mathematics and
trade. His temple, the so-called White Temple,
begun around 4000 BCE and expanded over
the next centuries, rested on a broad terrace on
top of a tall artificial hill, irregular in outline and
rising 13 meters above the plain, with its vast
expanse of fields and marshes. Access was by
a stairway on the northeastern face.

va
Uruk
XN
ro) 2km SO ;
es ce |

1.35 Mosaics from the Stone-Cone Temple in the
Eanna District of Uruk, near Samawa, Iraq

The White Temple’s overall shape was simpler
than that of the Temple at Eridu, but as at
Eridu, one passed through a shallow vestibule
into a great hall. In the White Temple,
however, there was in one corner a platform
or altar with a flight of narrow steps leading
up to it. Toward the middle of the space

was an offering table with a low semicircular
hearth built up against it. To the west of the
building there was another temple built out

of stone that had been imported from the
mountains to the west. Its purpose and the
reason for its peculiar plan are not known.

1.36 Plan: White Temple at Uruk

During this time, Mesopotamian builders
discovered how to use the kiln to harden
bricks, roof tiles, and drainage tubes. The
Mesopotamians may have acquired this skill
on their own but more likely learned it from
the Indus Valley civilization, with which they
most certainly were in contact and which
had developed brick very early on. As wood
for kilns was scarce in the Mesopotamian
marshes, bricks were a luxury iter and
were mainly used for palaces, temples, and
gates; the Gate of Ishtar at Babylon is the
most famous. The kilns devoured enormous
amounts of wood, depleting wood resources
and contributing, it is now thought, to the
growth of the desert that is today pervasive
in these parts. The use of brick in building
foundations in Uruk indicated a building's
status. The brick city wall was seen even by
Mesopotamians as one of Uruk’s wondrous
aspects. Near the beginning of the epic

of Gilgamesh, composed in the later third
millennium BCE, we read:

Look at its wall which gleams like
copper,

inspect its inner wall, the likes of which
no one can equal!

Take hold of the threshold stone—it
dates from ancient times!

Go close to the Eanna Temple, the
residence of Ishtar,

such as no later king or man ever
equaled!

Go up on the wall of Uruk and walk
around,

examine its foundation, inspect its
brickwork thoroughly.

Is not (even the core of) the brick
structure made of kiln-fired brick,

and did not the Seven Sages themselves.
lay out its plans?*

*Maureen Gallery Kovacs, trans., The Epic of
Gilgamesh (Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press, 1985), 3.


Mediterranean Sea

Memphis ©

alN

yond

Abydos [O}
© Thebes

1.37 Early dynastic Egypt

PRE- AND EARLY DYNASTIC EGYPT
North Africa was once a vast, fertile savanna
of scrub forests and pasturelands that was
populated by humans early on. It was here,
as we have seen at Nabta Playa, that cattle
were first domesticated. But in the sixth
millennium BCE, a dramatic warming affecting
the whole globe changed North Africa bit by
bit into the endless stretches of sand that we
now call the Sahara Desert. The populations
moved either westward to Morocco, Spain,
and beyond, or eastward to the banks of the
Nile. The density of the Nile River population
was unlike anything one would have seen
anywhere else in the world at that time;

that it did not overwhelm the social systern
was predicated on several conditions, one
being that the local elites quickly learned to
define themselves as divine, assuring the
mechanism by which to protect and isolate
their power. This meant that Egyptian religion
never went through a chthonic phase based
on the mother goddesses and caves that
were common in many places in Eurasia and
the Mediterranean and that would thrive in
places like Crete and Malta for a long time.
Egyptian religion was from the start a religion
for the elite alone. There were no epic tales
of communal destiny, but rather myths of
heroic actions of kings who passed the torch

Osiris temple

Abydos
Funerary enclosures
North cemetery a : . Cultivation
NS
s
e
cS
Low desert
& *
& .
Umm el-Qaab
Low desert
R : SS
_ j Rew
Se, High desert
0 600m *'

1.38 Site of royal tombs at Umm el-Qaab, Abydos, Egypt

of succession to the next generation. This
explains why a complex pantheon of gods,
stretching from the bovine Hathor to the more
abstract Ptah and Amun, could develop so
quickly. It was only during the New Kingdom
(1540-1069 BCE) that the features of this
religion began to have a broader role in
society.
Another factor that stabilized Egypt's
existing social order was that the Nile flooded
after the harvest in the middle of October;
more people working the fields therefore
resulted in the production of more food.
But in contrast to the celebration of water
and food, there was, for the Egyptians, the
fearsome entombing power of the earth.
Life and death, the river, and the mountains
of sand became intimately and naturally
connected to each other around the all-
encompassing mythology of divine rulership.
The tombs of the First Dynasty (3100-
2890 BCE) are located at Abydos, an
important early city about 100 kilometers
downstream from Thebes. The tombs
are outside of town under the face of an
imposing cliff. A gorge opens out dramatically
through the cliff at that spot and, according
to some scholars, this opening was regarded
as the entrance to the netherworld. The site
was accessed by a processional route from a

valley temple. The oldest tombs, of Narmer
and Aha, are rather simple brick-lined rooms
placed in the ground and covered with a
wooden roof at ground level. Aha’s tomb
consisted of three chambers stockpiled with
provisions for a lavish life in eternity. There
were most likely large cuts of ox meat, as well
as freshly killed waterbirds, loaves of bread,
dried figs, and jars of beer or wine, each
bearing Aha’s official seal. Beside his tomb
more than thirty ancillary graves for servants
and animals were laid out in three neat rows.
he tomb of Queen Merneith (ca. 2900 BCE),
is, like its predecessors, largely sunken
underground, except that now the storage
rooms are part of the main structure, in the
form of long, thin rooms.

The ancillary tornbs are also integrated
into the design as a type of frame set at a
respectful distance from the tomb chambers.
his framing is open on its southwestern side,
presumably so that the spirit of the dead

can exit through the gap toward the gorge.
he tomb of the next ruler, Den, makes this
connection to the cliff even more explicit.
hough the main entrance is from the east,
there is a special chamber next to the tomb
with a separate staircase leading back up to
the surface and to the west.


Be

“WSS

Merneith

1.39 Royal tombs at Umm el-Qaab

The design and the decoration of these
tombs clearly anticipates the development
of the mastaba (from the Arabic word for
“bank”). The grandest was the tomb of King
Djed at Saqqara (ca. 3100 BCE), just outside
of Memphis. Some argue that the complex
niche pattern in the walls represented
wooden or reed construction; others have
suggested an influence from Mesopotamia
or the Near East. Only the five central
chambers, dug into the earth, constitute

the tomb. The whole was roofed over and
plastered to appear as a solid but colorful
plateau set against the sand. There was a
low bench surrounding the superstructure
at the base of the main exterior wall; on

this platform were laid about three hundred
clay-modeled bull's heads provided with real
horns. The facade was was painted white,
whereas the innermost panels of the large
niches were painted red.

In this early stage of Egyptian culture,
there was no temple architecture such as
one might find in the Mesopotamian cities,
where religious practices, highly visible
around the ziggurat temples, unified broad
swaths of society. Instead, architecture,
defining the interface between life and
death, was reserved for the elite. Its place

1.40 Tomb of King Djed at Saqqara

in society was thus more limited, but its
purpose could not have been more drarnatic.
Death for the Chinese involved the handing
down of family memories and could be
articulated spatially with house shrines and
fragile wooden temples on earthen mounds.
In Egypt, death—in religious terms—was a
dramatic event only for the ruler, with his (or
sometimes her) spirit rising majestically over
the trivialities of domesticity and family in a
specially constructed, simulated house with
all the accoutrements of a comfortable life.
What went on in that “house,” and how the

spirit moved about, ate, and drank, was a
matter of great concern, since it was thought
to determine the flow of history in the present
time and beyond. But the “house” was only
half of the equation. Death in Egypt had an
inside and an outside shape. Entombing the
“house” at the scale of the landscape was the
structure’s outside shape. Eighty percent of
King Djed's mastaba was nothing more than
a mass of walls and spaces linking these two
scales. The architect’s job, in essence, was
to bring the inner and outer manifestations of
the ruler’s death into unity.

1.41 Bull horns at the base of Tomb 3504, Saqqara, Egypt

@newgrange

1.42 Megalithic cultures, 4800-1200 BCE

EUROPEAN DEVELOPMENTS

Europe's complex geography of shorelines,
rivers, and mountain ranges made it unlikely
that it would arrange itself into a single
civilizational unit like those in Egypt, China,
and India. Furthermore, because of the
difficulties of transplanting grain northward
into different climatic regions, Europe was
only fully settled around 3500 BCE. Because
European cultures developed without the
history of agricultural domestication, their
focus was not on family matriarchal histories
through which such knowledge was, by
necessity, handed down, but on the clans
that could pull communities together for
defense, war, and trade. This explains why

1.43 Passage grave on Ile Longue, South
Brittany, France, ca. 4100 BCE

4800-3000 BceE
3000-1200 BceE

the Europeans did not develop a temple
culture or, for that matter, a more complex
priestly culture until much later.

But unlike in Mesopotamia, where
death was still a relatively informal affair,
or in Egypt, where death-as-eternal-life
was in essence reserved for the elites, the
Europeans magnified death around clan
lineages, building a variety of stone and
mound structures in places that preserved
clan memories and that served as places
for ceremony, gathering, and trade. Barrow
tombs or passage graves, for example,
consisted of a passageway made of large

stones, sometimes ornamented with carvings
and paint and mounded over by tons of dirt
and clay. Examples can be found throughout
Europe—in Portugal, Sardinia, France, and
England, and as far north as Norway—as
well as in Morocco, and span the period
from 5000 BCE to 2500 BCE. The Portuguese
tombs are among the oldest. The ceilings of
some of the central chambers were corbelled
with stones placed closer and closer toward
the center of the space till they meet at the
top. An example of this can be found in the
passage grave on lle Longue, South Brittany,
France.


Newgrange

Of the various constructions that were made
in Europe at the time, few could compete
with the great mound of Newgrange, dating
to about 4000 BCE. But this was no tornb.
Basically it was a clock with one tick,
designed to mark the winter solstice at the
end of December, indicating the passage

of the season and the promise of a new
beginning, while also serving as a particularly
powerful moment to access the spirit of

the ancestors. Thousands of people frorn

the various clans congregated at the site to
participate in dances, revelry, the buying and

selling of cattle, and, above all, memorial
services for the deceased. The structure was
not isolated but set in a sacred landscape
with various mounds in the vicinity, and
would be used for centuries to come. It was
sited on the western slope of the river Boyne.

a oN SS =, | Atlantic Ocean
oem S
Ne ee
aN ca
a i
= D _ 0
° a Abe - ©
wr ~ Ireland
ne) © o : .
: fd > oe: . Irish Sea

Site plan

1.44 Newgrange, Ireland

Source: Timothy Cooke, Geraldine Stout,
and Matthew Stout, Newgrange (Cork: Cork
University Press, 2008), 46,

Plan

wtih SS

Detail of Entrance Stone

1.45 Newgrange, Ireland

Source: Timothy Cooke, Geraldine Stout,
and Matthew Stout, Newgrange (Cork: Cork
University Press, 2008), 46,

Cross section

The large mound is approximately 80 meters
in diarneter and is surrounded at its base by
a kerb of 97 stones. The most impressive

of these stones is the highly decorated
Entrance Stone. The mound’s entrance leads
to a 19-meter-long passage constructed

of large stones leading to a small, cross-
shaped chamber. A corbelled roof covers the
chamber. The massive stone structure was
mounded over with tons of clay. The side of
the mound near the entrance was covered
with white quartz stones. It seems that people
brought the stones from quartz veins in the
hills sore 160 kilometers to the south and
threw the stones onto the mound as a ritual
act. Sadly, the modern reconstruction placed
the stones along a concrete wall, thus giving
a false impression of a wall. At dawn on the
winter solstice, a shaft of sunlight enters the
inner chamber through a concealed opening
in the roof of the entrance corridor. It is a
remarkable piece of engineering that served
as a powerful symbol of the inevitable victory
of life over death, perhaps promising new life
to the spirits of the dead.

Carnac

Carnac, named after a nearby French village,
consists of a set of various alignments of
more than 3,000 standing stones. What
prompted people to drag multi-ton stones aot
from miles away to this site? Did it have
celestial purposes? Quite likely, but no one
knows for sure. It could also be that clans
brought their stones as a type of spiritual
labor in memory of ancestors. At any rate, the
site consists of different alignments, including
the Ménec alignments (eleven converging
rows of stones stretching for 1,165 by 100
meters), the Kerlescan alignments (a smaller x ne
group of 555 stones, further to the east), and H
the Petit-Ménec alignments (a much smaller Mee nent
group, further east again of Kerlescan).

There are also several dolmens scattered . Oo 100m
around the area. A dolmen is a tomb ‘ ‘
monument composed of a set of vertical
stones surmounted with a horizontally placed
stone. Dolmens are generally considered to
have been tombs; however, the acidic soil of
Brittany has eroded away the bones. Some
dolmens were buried under a mound of
earth, but others were left without a mound.
The Crucuno Dolmen is crowned by a
massive, multi-ton capstone.

ie) 100 m

4km

1.47 Stone alignment, Carnac, France 1.48 Crucuno Dolmen, Carnac, France

2500 BCE

Egypt

“
nae
ae

Andronovo

Swat Culture

Painted Gray

wee Mehrgarh Ware Culture

Indus Civilization

Proto-Persian Culiure

2.1 Central Asia, emerging contacts, ca. 2500 BCE

INTRODUCTION

By the beginning of the third millennium BCE,
the various river-oriented civilizations were
primed for rapid cultural developrnent. There
were at the time six principal cultural hubs:
Egypt, Mesopotamia, Margiana, the Indus,
China, and Europe. In all these places, elites
emerged who ruled not just by force, but with
some form of divine or ancestral blessing.
Generally speaking, when things went well,
this was attributed to the gods; when things
went badly, this was seen as a sign of divine
displeasure.

Mesopotamian cities were the most
unusual since they were created in the
context of an extreme landscape of marshes
that were converted into agricultural land.
The first Mesopotamian cities can be
considered risk societies, based on the
gamble that producing huge surpluses
of grain would allow them to trade for
commodities that were not readily available.
The cities thus became ritual centers in
their own right, where the relationship to the
sacred was organized and mastered with
calendric precision. The elites who governed
the city were devotees of a complex pantheon
of gods who in turn “governed” all aspects
of nature, even human. The elites operated
in close alliance with a priestly class for
whom huge temples were built in the form of
artificial mountains rising in colorful terraces.
The ziggurats at Eridu and Ur were by far
the most extensive buildings of the age,

Arabian Sea

testament to the wealth flowing to the cities.
They were prestige buildings, made just as
much by “deities” as by human labor. The
cities that were built around them consisted
of a dense fabric of houses. Most buildings
were made of mud brick with wooden roofs.
Outside the walls, along the canals, one
would have found a vast network of small
villages that were controlled by the temple.
But these cities had limits on how far their
authority could reach, and so they existed
in tense alliances with similar cities up and
down the river.

Egypt, less prone to invasion, developed
a clear dynastic power structure and a
consistent set of religious traditions from an
early age. Furthermore, due to the seasonality
of local agriculture, farm workers could be
summoned by the pharaohs to perform
forced labor on building projects. Zoser's
mortuary temple, built on an unprecedented
scale, was one of the first monumental stone
buildings in the world. The mastery of stone
masonry is one of Egypt's great contributions
to architecture. The expansive mortuary
complex answered to the intricate cosmology
used by its Egyptian elites. The building was
made for a dead pharaoh who was deemed
to be still “alive” and thus in need of the
illusion of rulership in perpetuity. His spirit
was embodied in a statue, called the Ka
statue, which was ritually fed and housed in
a special chamber so that he could see the
western sunset through a small hole.

Meanwhile, around 2500 BCE, people moved
down from the Baluchistan Hills and settled
in the river valleys that define the eastern
edge of the South Asian subcontinent—those
of the Indus and the now dried-up Ghaggar-
Hakra Rivers. The Indus/Ghaggar-Hakra
region was the first urban civilization in

the true sense of the word. The reason for
its success is obvious. The 900-kilometer-
long valley is hemmed in to the north

and south by vast stretches of dry and
rainless mountains and deserts. One can
imagine it as a linear oasis. Irrigation here
was easier than in Mesopotamia, and the
plentiful supply of trees allowed for the early
development of fired bricks that withstood
the ravages of water better than mud brick.
More than a thousand cities and towns have
been discovered spread over 650,000 square
kilometers, an area roughly equivalent to that
of modern-day France. Though these cities
were distant frorn each other, they shared

a common language and a standardized
system of weights and measures. Thousands
of terra-cotta seals depicting a wide range

of human, animal, and mythical forms have
been found, each with distinctive markings
that are presumably letters of an alphabet.
The inhabitants, about whom we still know
very little, seemed to have called themselves
something akin to Meluhha. That, at least, is
what the contemporaneous Mesopotamians
called therm. Ships carried bricks, beads,
lumber, metals, and lapis lazuli up the
Persian Gulf to the cities of Mesopotamia,
where such items were scarce. The nature
of the return freight is uncertain, since few
Mesopotamian objects have been found at
the Indus. The area between Mesopotamia
and the Indus was also urbanized with cities
such as Tepe Yaha and Jiroft, in the once
fertile and expansive Soghun Valley. Tepe
Yaha specialized in mining a highly desired
stone used to make ritual bowls. Not far
away was Jiroft, an even larger city, which
specialized in the production of highly prized,
golden-flecked lapis lazuli.

This Zone of Interconnection was linked to

a fourth civilizational area that had been
developing around the Oxus River and was
known as the Adronovo Culture. It was
based at first around small villages, but two
large cities were eventually built (in today's
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan) that were
not only of great size but were designed
with great geometrical precision. The area,
drawing on the steppe landscape of inner
Asia, was a center of extensive pastoral
communities.

In China the first recorded dynasty, the
Xia dynasty, emerged around 2100 BCE. We
find there a horizontal civilization of villages
and towns unified around palace centers.
One of these was Erlitou (1900-1500 BCE).
Lying on the Yi River, a tributary of the Luo
River, Erlitou was located at the foothills of
the mountains and served as an interface
zone between the mountain area rich in
ore and the plains rich in grain. The palace
complex was surrounded by a 2-meter-thick
rammed earth wall that set it apart as an
ancestral ceremonial center for the elites. The
elites made extensive rituals that required
vessels and other instruments. This meant
that craftspeople lived near the palaces.

In this way, cities emerged not as temple
economies as in Mesopotamia, but as a
consequence of palace economies. In both
cases, small elites ruled over large swaths of
population because of their association with
the gods and ancestral deities. But whereas
in Mesopotamia important ritual events were
something on the order of public spectacles,
in China such rituals garnered esteem
because they were highly private.

Meanwhile, Europe, between about 5000,
and 3500 BCE, had slowly transformed into
an agropastoral world of interconnected
villages. Large polities never developed,
meaning that there was no centralization
of power and nothing that could be called
cities. It was a world still governed by
sacred landscapes and ancestor rituals. The
most famous sites are Carnac in France,
Stonehenge in England, and Newgrange in
Ireland. But there were hundreds of lesser
sites, from Scotland south to Portugal.
Around 2800 BCE commenced the spread
of the Beaker People, whose origins are still
debated but who most likely came from the
Balkans. They are named after their culture's
distinctive pottery drinking vessels. Known for

their advanced metalworking skill, the Beaker
People left their traces in various locations.
They arrived in England, where they
encountered such sites as Stonehenge, which
they took over and redesigned, orienting it

to the sun rather than to the moon. While
physically this was largely a matter of
fine-tuning, the cultural implications this
reorientation presupposes are imponderable.
Stonehenge, since 3000 BCE, when the

first stone circle was built, becarne a huge
ceremonial zone attracting people from

far afield. There they awaited the sacred
moment of winter solstice, when contact

with ancestors was most propitious. Far

to the south, on the island of Malta in the
Mediterranean, emerged an astonishing
culture that built large “caves” mounded over
with tons of earth. The small island eventually
had a dozen or so of these structures,
probably used as places where supplicants,
under the spell of singing and hallucinogenic
drugs, would experience dream visions. Since
there were many more of these temples than
the local population could possibly need, it is
quite likely that this was a sacred landscape
that also served people from surrounding
Mediterranean communities, who would
arrive by boat. Stonehenge and Malta
represent the last such sacred landscapes.

In other places, the ritual world was being
pulled increasingly toward the city. In fact, the
great accomplishment of the Mesopotamian
cultures was precisely to equate city with
ritual center.

Apart from an agropastoral zone that
stretched west to east just below the Sahara
Desert, the rest of Africa was still First
Society, as was all of the Americas. But
the Americas should not be written off as a
“hunter-gatherer” world. Many communities
had developed into affluent societies. The
Northwest Coast peoples in Canada, for
example, thrived from about 3000 BCE until
the arrival of the Europeans in the 19t!
century, one of the most enduring First
Society cultures in the Americas. Another
site of importance was in the area to the
north of the Mississippi River delta. The
yearly flooding of the river allowed large
annual ceremonies to take place on a bluff
overlooking the river, called Poverty Point,
where a massive artificial mound, seemingly
in the shape of a bird, was built. It seers that


different tribes helped build the mound with
clay brought to the site in basketfuls from
their home areas. To the east of the great
mound there was a 300-meter-wide dance
area surrounded by raised ridges on which
temporary huts were erected. Communal
construction of such large ceremonial sites
became an important aspect of what is now
called the Mississippi Culture, which lasted
into the 16th century.
In Peru, we see a remarkable
transformation. Intrepid farmers left their
hillside terraces on the Andean mountain
slopes for the arid valleys along the Pacific
Coast. The intent was purposeful. The newly
arriving farmers channeled the river waters
to grow cotton for the making of fishing
nets, and gourds to be used as floats. But
they were not fishermen. The fishermen
lived on the coast, and they traded with the
newly arriving agriculturalists in a way that

was mutually beneficial. It was a novel and
extraordinary arrangement that first took
place at what is now called Caral, about 200
kilometers north of Lima.

2.3 Mnajdra Temple, Malta

he Zoser Mortuary Complex and the
temples of Malta bring to the fore a way

of understanding the originating power of
architecture—as models. Today we tend to
think of models simply as practical devices
used in the preparation of a design. Yet the
history of architecture is filled with structures
that serve as built models. The Zoser
Mortuary Complex is entered through a portal
that leads past a corridor of colurnns painted
to look like gigantic reeds. The visitor literally
passed through a scaled-up model of the
swampy shores of the Nile, symbolizing not

just the transition between life and renewal
but also the difference between the human
and divine scales. Egyptians continued to

build such scaled-up models; their colurmns
are all large models of flower bundles, richly
painted and even emitting, in principle at

2.2 Zoser Pyramid, Saqqara, Egypt

least, a divine fragrance. Architecture as
model is even more obvious in Malta, where
the temples are models of caves, purposely
dark and mysterious. The Maltese also made
some of the earliest known representations
of buildings in history. The purpose of

these small models, no more than a few
centimeters across, is unknown, but it has
been suggested that they served as tokens
given to devotees after a visit. They were
more than trinkets; they were living pieces of
the temple, which in turn was itself a living
entity; thus, a model was a sure way to link
its owner to the life force of the temple. The
use of architecture as model remained a

key element of its core purpose. Even the
stepped structures of Caral are models of
sacred mountains, created to charge up or
enhance the potency of the landscape.


Caral

©

Galgada

Stonehenge @)

wata@

ciza/Sanuara® ©

Gonur

Mohenjo-Daro

ow

™

Indus Valley: Early Harappan Period
5000-2600 BCE

A Newgrange
ca. 4000 BCE

Human settlement of Malta
ca. 5000 BCE

Mohenjo-

ca. 2600

Mesopotamia: Early Dynastic Period
ca. 2900-2350 BCE
A Temple at Uruk

ca. 3400 BCE

3500 BCE

Egypt: Pre-Dynastic Period
ca. 4500-3100 BCE

Ghaggar-Hakra Civilization
7000-1800 BCE
Daro A A Dholavira
BCE ca. 2650-2100 BCE
A Lothal
ca. 2400-1900 BcE

Margiana and Andronovo Culture
ca. 2500-1400 BCE
A Arkaim
ca. 1700 BCE

A Gonur
ca. 2500-1700 BCE

Akkadian Dynasty
ca. 2350-2150 BCE
A Akkad A Ziggurat at Ur
ca. 2300 BCE ca. 2100 BCE
Palace of Naram-Sin A A Mari
ca. 2170 BCE ca. 2200-1800 BCE

2500 BCE 1500 BCE

Early Bronze Age
ca. 3000-2000 BCE

Old Kingdom
ca. 2649-2150 BCE

Middle Kingdom
ca. 2030-1640 BCE

A Step Pyramid of Zoser
ca. 2650 BCE

A Bent Pyramid
ca. 2600 BCE

A Great Pyramid of Khufu

Brittany and British Isles: Megalithic building cultures
ca. 4200-2000 BCE
A Stonehenge
Begun ca. 3000 BCE

Building of megalithic temp!
ca. 3600-2500 BCE
A Tarxien Temple
ca. 3100 BCE

A Ggantija Temple
ca. 3600 BCE

ca. 2580 BCE

Beaker Culture
ca. 2800-1800 BCE
@ Sarsen Ring added at Stonehenge
ca. 2500 BCE

@ Bluestone circle added at Stonehenge
ca. 2300 BCE

les

North and Central Andes: Early Ceramic Cultures

ca. 4000-1800 BCE
Ala Galgada
ca. 3000-1500 BCE

@ 3100 BCE

A Caral (Supe Valley)

AEI Paraiso

ca. 2600-2200 BCE ca. 1800 BCE

Mythic base date of the Maya long-count calendar

Mississippi

Culture

ca. 3500 BCE-1500 CE

THE INDUS GHAGGAR-HAKRA
CIVILIZATION

The Indus Ghaggar-Hakra civilization went
through roughly four phases of development:

1. The urbanization of the Ghaggar-Hakra
River valley, ca. 2800 BCE

2. The rising dominance of four cities—
Harappa, Mohenjo-Daro, Rakhigarhi, and
Ganweriwala—ca. 2500 BCE

3. The new urbanization of areas south and
east, ca. 2200 BCE

4. The post-decline reurbanization of the
Ghaggar-Hakra River, ca. 1700 BCE

The period around 2500 BCE was generally
one of expansion and prosperity throughout
West Asia and the Indus. Certainly the cities
along the Ghaggar-Hakra River were being
enlarged, and their builders became world
masters of hydrology. Burnt bricks were used
to construct huge platforms that served as
the bases for the cities and for defensive
walls, but also to control floodwaters. And
most important, elaborate interconnected
drainage systerns were designed to disperse
storm waters. A central drain under the
main gate of Harappa still stands in place.
lonetheless, the Indus flooded many times,
each flood burying the city under a thick
ayer of silt. Harappa was rebuilt at the same
spot at least eight times. It is thought to have
ad a population of about fifty thousand.
There were also specialized cities, such
as a port and mining towns. Dholavira had to
solve a hydroengineering problem opposite of
Harappa's: Because the city sits in a very dry
area, the issue was not keeping floodwater
out, but ensuring that enough water could
e harvested for the dry season. The solution
was a Series of strategically located dams
that controlled water during a flood and
also directed some of the water to huge,
rectangular, shallow man-made lakes that
surrounded the city and that could be tapped
in summer. In Lothal, a port city, water was
let through a sluice into a vast rectangular
tank that some speculate functioned as a dry
dock for seafaring vessels.

India

Arabian Sea

Arabian Sea

2.4 Neolithic sites and the
Indus Civilization

The largest cities were divided into an upper
town, which was on the highest ground and
had large palaces and ceremonial spaces,
and a lower town, which had most of the
housing. The upper town usually had its own
wall within the general wall that surrounded
the whole city. At Dholavira the boundary wall
was over 9 meters thick. Burials were often
under mounds just outside the city. Though
these cities clearly had a social hierarchy
with a strong ruling class (confirmed by the
fact that they were divided into sections

with larger and smaller houses), there is

2.5 Site plan: Dholavira, Blachau, India

(0) Mohenjo-Daro

. Harappa
@"erren ° .
or re
oe sos cear wo
'. & Settlements on

an inland lake in
last phase of
Indus civilization

© Dholavira

little evidence of a centralized kingship,

as there was in contemporaneous Egypt,
Mesopotamia, and China. In the same
vein, there are no large ternples. As to their
religious system, terra-cotta seals show a
plethora of supernatural animals—unicorns
in particular. There is also the depiction

of a proto-Shiva-like divinity sometimes
shown sitting in the lotus position. He wears
bull horns on his head and seems to be
worshipped by animals of all sorts. There

is also a proliferation of sculptural figures
dedicated to fertility and procreation.

“


2.6 Reconstruction view of Dholavira

Early in the second millennium BCE, the
Ghaggar-Hakra begun to dry up. The reasons
are debated, but it seems an earthquake

in the Himalayas caused one of its major
tributaries to change course and drain into
the Indus, depleting the Ghaggar-Hakra.

Its waters collected in an inland lake that
spawned a successful maritime community
around its shores. Subsequently, the lake,
too, dried up, bringing about the final

phase: the abandonment of the entire

Indus Ghaggar-Hakra region. Where the
people went is still debated, but the majority
probably dispersed eastward to the plains of
the Ganges River. Some, however, may have
gone westward and relocated as far away as
Assyria, causing a ripple effect of disruptions
that were felt all the way to Egypt.

2.8 Urban fabric of Mohenjo-Daro, in Sindh Province, Pakistan

2.7 An entrance gate to Harappa, near Sahiwal, Pakistan

Mohenjo-Daro
Mohenjo-Daro was the dominant city of the
southern Indus. The Indus, which originates
in the high Himalayas, is frequently subject
to ice floes and landslides that can hold
back its waters for a while but that eventually
give way, resulting in huge flash floods. To
guard against these, the two largest building
areas of Mohenjo-Daro were raised high on

a platform of bricks designed to disperse the
floodwaters through a series of culverts. (The
site of Mohenjo-Daro itself receives very little
rain.) Under the main streets were drains
running to settling tanks, which could be
accessed and cleaned.

Mohenjo-Daro’s neighborhoods were inward
looking. The main streets were lined with the
largely blank walls of houses, and even the
secondary streets usually did not have any
major houses opening directly onto them.
Accessible by alleys only, the houses faced
into open courtyards, with the larger ones
often having two stories, the upper level built
of wood. The number of rooms in houses
varied from two to more than twenty. A good
number of the rooms contained wells, and
the larger ones had bathrooms and toilets.


‘

2.9 Plan: The upper town of Mohenjo-Daro

Located at the intersection of the major north-
south and east-west streets, the Great Bath
of Mohenjo-Daro, as it is called, was very
likely the social and ritual center of the city.
Its 12-by-7-meter pool, which was 3 meters
deep, was accessed by means of symmetrical
stairs on the north and south. The bath is
surrounded by a narrow deep-water channel,
and an outlet from one corner of the bath
leads to a high-corbelled drain that eventually
empties out into the surrounding lowlands.
Burnt bricks lined the pool, while a layer
of biturnen waterproofed it. Whereas the
urnt bricks were certainly locally made, the
itumen must have come from Mesopotamia.
tt was, obviously, a highly valued commodity,
and its use in the Great Bath is another
indication of the importance of the building.
he water tank was surrounded by a brick
colonnade, behind which was a series of
rooms of various sizes (one had a well). The
whole structure had a wooden second story,
although the central pool was probably open
to the sky. Access was carefully controlled,
with only one opening from the south. Ritual
urns with ashes—presumably of important
people—were found close to the entrance.
One can only guess at the social practices
that led to such an institution, but the very
presence of the Great Bath indicates the
dominance of water and ritual bathing in the
inhabitants’ ideology, themes that seem to
carry through into modern-day Hinduism.
To the west of the bath is a building with
doorless rooms crisscrossed by narrow
ventilation channels. Archaeologists originally
assumed this was a granary, but more recent

evidence suggests that it may have been a
general-purpose warehouse. Its proximity to
the bath is not to be overlooked.

MARGIANA

Today, the northern foothills of the Turkrnen-
Khorasan Mountain Range near the Caspian
Sea are a desolate and relatively depopulated
area, but thousands of years ago they would
have been steppe, providing a perfect area
for grazing, combined with farming along
the river. The region also lay at the center of

far-flung trade connections linking all of Asia
into a composite whole stretching from Egypt
and Mesopotamia to the Indies and even to
China. The area is known as the Margiana
civilization, also called the Bactrian-Margiana

Archaeological Complex (BMAC). Most of ad 2.11 Site plan: Gonur, near Mary, Turkmenistan
the BMAC lies in Russia and modern-day

urkmenistan.

The BMAC consisted of more than three To the west of the site was a large burial

undred settlements in the valleys that form ground of about five thousand graves.
the headlands of the Oxus River. Gonur, It seems that bodies were not buried
along the Murghab River, seems to have immediately after death but were first purified
een its capital. It consisted of a temple/ by fire. This startling discovery has led
citadel and a palace compound separated archaeologists to surmise connections to the
y about 300 meters. The palace, dating later development of Zoroastrianism, which
rom about 2500 BCE, was almost square also emphasized the purification of the body
(measuring 120 by 125 meters) and was before interment. The fate of this culture
surrounded by a defensive wall with towers at is much debated. Some hold that with the
regular intervals. Outside were several altars, deteriorating ecology, the inhabitants of the
jow to the ground and open to the elements, area migrated to Mesopotamia and India,
suggesting that they were used for fire rituals. contributing to the general upheavals that

here is no evidence of any deity figures. To these places experienced between 1600 and
get to the throne room, one traversed two 1200 BCE.

long audience halls and made two left turns.

he residential part of the palace was at the

Cult rooms Throne room and ceremonial area

center and had two courtyards to its west.
here was also a chapel and a mortuary
complex. Oddly, there was a suite of rooms
with no access doors that was completely
illed with clean river sand. The symbolic
purpose of these extraordinary spaces has
not been ascertained, but they may have
een part of the first palace that had become

ritually protected. A long stairway led to the
roof over these rooms, an indication that the
roof was used for ritual events. In the wall

decoration of the palace, archaeologists have
noticed strong similarities to West Asian,
Anatolian, and even Minoan art. Clearly these
were people with strong ties to West and
Central Asia. Did they emigrate from there, as
some believe? Or were they a part of a larger
civilization development? The parallelogram-
shaped temple district went through several
stages of development, with the fort at the

Warehouse compound

King's residence

Administrative quarter

0 50m

center belonging to the last stage.

2.12 Plan: The Citadel at Gonur

EARLY EMPIRES OF MESOPOTAMIA
No one knows when the Akkadians first
began to infiltrate central Mesopotamia, nor
what their origins were, but by 2300 BCE they
were predominant in the vicinity of modern
Baghdad and farther north along the rivers.
Sargon, an Akkadian king who reigned from
around 2334 to 2279 BCE, reshaped the
Mesopotamian political landscape; his was
the first known successful centralization

of power in the region. The idea of village-
based civic loyalty, so important to early
Sumerians, was replaced by the concept

of loyalty to a ruler, with Sargon taking

2.14 Statue of the head of an Akkadian ruler

2.13 Early Lower Mesopotamia

Eridu, Uruk, Ur, Lagash, and, farther to the east, Susa,
which lay on the Karun River, formed a larger economic
environment, with trade developing toward India to the
south; toward Sialk, a metal-producing city on the other
side of the Zagros Mountains; as well as toward points
northward. In Lagash, archaeologists discovered the
remains of a storehouse that contained not only supplies
of grain and figs but also vessels, weapons, sculptures,
and numerous other objects connected with the use
and administration of palace and temple. Though these
cities seem small by today’s standards, at the time they
would have been the largest in the world, along with
Memphis in Egypt. The economy of the Sumerians was
thus twofold: a northward-looking Mesopotamian-based
one, and a southward-looking trade economy with the

measures that deliberately diminished the
power of local chieftains. This new concept
of kingship is expressed in the statue of a
head representing an Akkadian ruler, found
in the city of Nineveh. It is notable for its bold
features, artfully braided beard, and majesty
of bearing. The mouth, from which the
pronouncements of law and rule issued forth,
is as expressive as the eyes, which were
once inlaid with stone, resulting in an active
image in marked contrast to the quiet and
contemplative stare of the Sumerian figures.
Sargon’s capital city, Akkad, was located on
the Euphrates about 30 kilorneters south of
modern Baghdad.

Around 2150 BCE, the Akkadian
dynasty was overthrown by tribes fromm the
mountainous northeast that descended
to the plains, contributing nothing to the
civilization they ransacked. The survival of
Mesopotamia was now suddenly dependent
on kingdoms in the old Sumerian south. The
Sumerians took up the challenge, drove the
mountain people back, and reunited the
realm under the kings of Ur. These kings,
part of the Third Dynasty (2112-2004 BCE),
accepted many of the innovations that had
been created under Sargon. These Sumerian
cities were not only in communication with
cities along the Persian Gulf, such as those
of the Elamites, but also perhaps with the
hundreds of cities in the upper Euphrates

proto-Persians and Indus River cities.

region. The rulers of Ur defined kingship

as a privilege that descended from heaven
and was bestowed upon one city at a time,
but only for a limited period. There was no
notion of a single political entity comprising
a nation in the modern sense. Rulers were,
in essence, stewards of the gods who gave
them protection and guidance. The temples,
however, were the principal landowners,
which, to all practical effects, reant that the
priests controlled and organized the labor
needed to build and maintain the irrigation
canals and ditches. Priests were, in effect,
the managers of the city’s economy and
infrastructure.

eS ie} 50m
bt

2.15 Plan: The Palace of Naram-Sin

2.16 Group of statues from the Abu Temple, Tell Asmar, Iraq

The political structure was thus a type of
theocratic socialism in which all the people
worked in their various capacities—from
slave to priest—in the service of the city-
state. The chief god was Anu. Below him
was Enlil, the earth or storm god, and Ea,
the water god whom we encountered in
Eridu. Nanna, the moon god who ruled in
Ur, was among a group of gods at a slightly
lower level. He measured tirne and provided
fertility. Senior members of the pantheon
served as patron deities of individual cities,
while deities of lesser rank were associated
with smaller urban centers. There were over
three thousand other gods and demons

that governed even inanimate objects like
pickaxes and brick molds. The flexibility with
which the minor gods and goddesses came
and went and syncretically changed their
names makes it difficult to be specific about
a Mesopotamian pantheon. Some of these
deities were shared across various regions;
some were part of local cults. This divine
population was thought to meet regularly in
an assembly and to arrive at agreements that
bound all deities to the more senior deities.
The ternple was the actual domicile of the
god rather than merely a place that permitted
contact between the ruled and the divine
powers, although one of the priests’ principal
jobs was the interpretation of omens, which
had a powerful influence on every sphere of
activity in Sumerian society.

Mesopotamian religion was heavy in
superstitions and subscriptive behavior.

Life after death was portrayed as a sad and
pitiable state, and the dead as potentially
hostile toward the living. Apart from rituals
to appease the dead, burial architecture was
thus rare. A person's association with the
gods was based very much on the fulfillment
of his or her duties in the here and now and
on the principle of constant vigilance. For the
manufacture of cult statues, for example, a
text, slightly modified here, reads:

When you make the statues of cornel wood

in the morning at sunrise you shall go to the
wood. You shall take a golden axe and a silver
saw, and with censor, torch and holy water
you shall consecrate the tree.... You shall
sweep the ground, sprinkle clear water, set up
a folding table, sacrifice a sheep and offer the
shoulder and fatty tissue and the roast, scatter
dates and fine meal, set out a cake made
with syrup and butter, pour out beer, kneel
down, and stand up in front of the cornel tree
and recite the incantation: “Evil is the broad
steppe.” With golden axe and the silver saw
you shall touch the cornel tree and cut it down
with a hatchet; you shall damp it with water,
then remove the set-out material, kneel down
and break the cornel tree into pieces.*

*Frans A. M. Wiggermann, Mesopotamian
Protective Spirits: The Ritual Texts (Groningen,
Netherlands: Styx, 1992}, condensed from
pp. 7 9.

The person then carves the statues as if “clad
in their own garment, holding in their right
hand a cornel-stick charred at both ends and
with their left clasping their breasts.” After
writing his narne on the statues, the person
was asked to bring the statues he had made
to his house for the purification ritual, placing
them “on a pedestal in a walking pose so as
to repel the evil ones.” He was then asked

to touch various parts of the house while
reciting incantations and performing other
prescribed rituals. Statues such as these
were set up in temples, creating a charged
ocular and oracular environment, with the
eyes of the supplicant seeking to establish an
unblinking connection between the profane
and the sacred. Coming back from the other
direction were the silent commands of the
gods, translated into words by the priests.
This exchange played itself out most grandly
in the ziggurats.

2.17 Plan of Ur, near Nasiriyah, Iraq

Ziggurat at Ur

The Ziggurat at Ur was one of the most
impressive structures of the time, and
remains of it are still extant at Tall al
Mugayyar in lrag, about 42 kilometers south
of Babylon. Some reconstruction drawings
show it as a freestanding object similar to
an Egyptian pyramid; it was in actuality
surrounded by precinct walls to the east
within which was a large square-shaped
sanctuary dedicated to Nanna’s divine wife,
Ningal. A law court was close by. The whole
was eventually enclosed by its own set of
defensive walls.

The ziggurat measured 65 meters by
100 meters at its base, was 21 meters high,
and consisted of three terraces, with the
sacred shrine on the highest one. Though
the ornamentation of the ziggurat cannot
be confirmed, the building was not the
volumetric heap of bricks that we see today
in the 20th-century reconstruction.

300m

Three monumental staircases rose up the
northeast flank of the ziggurat, converging
at a canopied vestibule at the top of the first
platform, 20 meters up from the ground.
From there, the central stair continued on to
the next stage and then to the third. Though
highly axial, the axis did not carry through to
the surrounding architecture. Access to the
court was not from the front but diagonally
from a gate at one of its corners. The plain
brick of the modern-day reconstruction can

give a misleading impression of the structure.

The sides would have been plastered
smooth and painted to serve as a visual key
to a cosmological narrative, the principal
character of which was Apsu, the god of
the primeval waters who fathered heaven
and earth. Despite his importance, he was
defeated and killed by Ea, who transforrned
Apsu into still or stagnant subterranean
waters. The lowest terrace of the ziggurat,
representing Apsu, was painted white. The
next terrace, probably black, represented Ea
floating on and dominating the water. The

Mausoleum

2.18 The Ziggurat at Ur within the temple complex of Nanna

top level would have been red, representing
the sun-kindled air. The blue tiles that were
found on the site are thought to have come
from the temple at the top, which would have
represented the blue heaven above the earth.
What made this structure so innovative is that
the elements—the stairs, the platforms, and
the temple itsel—were no longer arranged
as a geographical mass, as at Uruk, but were
brought into the embrace of a unified and
dramatic color-coded design. Geographical
simulation had been replaced by an
architectural abstraction.

The start of a construction of such a scale
was initiated by elaborate rituals in which the
king fashioned the first brick and carried up
the first basket of earth. This act of dedication
was commemorated by the burial of peg-
shaped copper figurines in the foundation.
The hard work was done by slaves taken
from conquered lands, a common practice of
the time. The structure was made of square
flat bricks mortared with bitumen. Reed

matting soaked with bitumen was inserted
horizontally at various layers to add cohesion
and protect against vertical shear forces.

The bricks were stamped with an inscription
reading “Ur-Nammu, king of Ur, who built the
temple of Nanna.”

That ziggurats served as symbolic
conjugal sites is proven at Ur, where the
ziggurat was linked by a watercourse to a
small temple 6 kilometers west of the city
dedicated to the mother goddess Ninkhursag.
She was represented by the cow, whereas
Janna, the moon god who ruled over
Ur, was sometimes referred to as a bull.
Once a year, Ninkhursag, the Lady of the
Mountain, whether embodied in statues or
y a priestess, would have been brought to
the city in a procession and led up to the
shrine on top of the ziggurat to consummate
er marriage while sacrifices and chants
proceeded outside. Similar notions exist in
Hinduism and in ancient Greece, with the

celebration of the mystic marriage, the hieros
gamos (from hiero, “sacred,” and gamos,
“marriage”). Ninkhursag thus represented
the older goddess tradition that had been
preserved and incorporated into the more
complex mythologies needed after the move
into the Mesopotamian marshes.

The city of Ur was almost oval in shape,
with the Euphrates River coursing around
its sides. There were harbors on its north
and west sides, with the temple complex
clamped between them. The surrounding
walls, as is the case in all Mesopotamian
cities, were intended just as much to
impress as to protect. From their ramparts
one would have seen the vast stretches of
cultivated fields in all directions, as well as
the villages of farm laborers tending them.
The presence of gardens and orchards near
the walls was also common. Much effort
was made in the design and outfitting of
the gates, which were flanked by towers
whose tops were decorated with bands of
shields. The visitor, upon entering through
the gates, would immediately confront the
densely built-up jumble of the city. There
was, however, little evidence of organized city

2.19 Massing of the Ziggurat at Ur

planning. Royal roads would be designed
only later. Streets varied from narrow lanes
to routes 2 to 3 meters wide and served

not only as passageways but also as a
convenient place in which to dump garbage,
a practice that was still encountered even

in medieval Europe. Because windows were
rare, the narrow lanes forrned curving chutes
punctuated only by doors or enlivened by
lean-tos where food or goods were sold.

2.20 Pictorial view from the northwest: Ziggurat at Ur

Mediterranean Sea

Lower Egypt
GizaA

Memphis (Mennof-Ra)
sagasraL®
A

Meidum A

yan aliN

Upper Egypt

Thebes

2.21 Egypt, ca. 3rd century BCE

EGYPT: THE OLD KINGDOM

Though later Egyptians described their early
history as emerging after the unification

of Upper and Lower Egypt, archaeological
evidence suggests that unification was a
protracted process that took place over
several centuries. Out of this unification
emerged what later Egyptians would
themselves call the Old Kingdom, with its
capital at Memphis. This new political unity,
combined with the rapid development of a
powerful bureaucracy, was the final stage of
Egypt's transformation into a complex and
vertically structured society with a population
of several million farmers and slaves. It has
been estimated that by the third millennium
BCE, the Nile Valley produced three times

its own domestic requirements. From very
early on, plenty of labor was available—above
and beyond the stage of self-sufficiency.
Soon, huge workforces of slaves, laborers,
technicians, bureaucrats, and cooks were
employed solely for royal projects. And
there was no shortage of building material.
Stone was abundant up and down the Nile:
the colorful red granite of Aswan, the white
marble of Gebel Rokham, and the black
basalt of Faiyurn—not to mention the various
types of soft sandstone brought downriver
from Nubia. One tremendous obelisk of red
granite 41 meters long still lies on its side

in the quarry near Aswan. Stone may seem
to be an obvious building material, but the

Red Sea 7

2.22 Mortuary Complex of Zozer, Saqqara, Egypt

difference between a rock and a polished
slab of marble is enormous and it was the
Egyptians who first mastered this art.

a

the political stability of Egypt was secure,
with Zoser (2686-2613 BCE) creating
building projects against which later rulers
would measure their accomplishments.
The Mortuary Complex of Zoser, located
on a slight hill west of Memphis and just
to the north of Saqqara, was enclosed by a
277-by-544-meter wall laid out in precise
orientation to the four cardinal points. The
walls were of white stone and rose to an
impressive 10.5 meters. They served the
symbolic purpose of defending the mortuary
complex from the chaos of the unordered
world outside. There were fifteen gateways,
three at the north and south walls, four on
the east wall, and—oddly—five on the west
wall, yet only a single one was a functioning
entrance. The building is something of a
mystery. Clearly the dead pharaoh was
still considered to be alive, but since his
perceptions were limited, his new divine
world could be simulated in strategic pieces.
One entered the complex from the
southern end of the eastern wall. The visitor
passed through a 1-meter-wide hallway into
a narrow corridor defined by two rows of
columns attached to wall fins that projected
into the space and supported a massive
stone ceiling. These columns are probably

By the Third Dynasty of the Old Kingdom,

North mastaba éN
an:

Great altar
House of the North

SIE AEE PEED PINE SSE II NI
nen =
: by
i - .

r
|
\
|
|
a
- i

] Step pyramid 4

|

| rm

i Great court

Entrance hall

ie) 200m
4

fe L a. n

2.23 Plan: Mortuary Complex of Zoser

2.24 Section through entrance hall, Mortuary Complex of Zoser

the earliest monumental stone columns in the
history of architecture. They are fluted and
simulate a reed bundle, thus imposing on the
visitor the difference of scale that separates
the divine from the mortal world.

The shadowy entranceway led to the
south court in front of the step pyramid. This
was the Sed festival court, where ceremonial
races were enacted. In the centuries before
the Old Kingdom, the king had to prove
that he was strong and capable of ruling by
running a course for each of the provinces he
governed. If he failed, he would be sacrificed
in a religious ritual. From this derives the
name Sed, or “slaughter festival.” By the time
of the Old Kingdom this practice had died
out, but it remained an important element
in the symbolic attributes of kingship. Zoser
conceived the complex as a review stand for
this event, which lasted five days, ending with
a final ceremonial sprint. Originally it was to
be held for every king in the thirtieth year of
his reign, but that was not always the case.
Ramesses || celebrated his Sed in grand style
by inviting foreign dignitaries.

PBR SS

Since Zoser did not live long enough to
perform this ritual, the court was designed
so that he could perform it in death.
his is confirmed by the complex’s two
mastabas: one on the south side, next to
the wall—a type of fake mastaba—and the
other, belonging to Zoser, to the north. The
two structures have almost identical tomb
lesigns, a room at the bottom of a 28-meter-
leep shaft sealed by a 3-ton granite plug. In
the southern mastaba, archaeologists found
the wall decorated with small blue tiles with
a glaze just as brilliant today as it was four
thousand years ago. The tiles represent a
reed matting set in stone posts designed to
imitate the appearance of wood, the whole
thing creating the illusion of an outdoor
canopied room. Between the tile sections is
a large stone relief of Zoser “running” the
ceremonial race.
The northern mastaba was covered
with a stone superstructure with four gently
sloping steps. No sooner was that built than
it was decided that the structure should be
expanded yet again. It was transformed into a
60-meter-high, six-tiered structure by adding
material in the northerly direction. The first
mortuary temple behind this step pyramid
was also rebuilt and expanded. To the east
was another court, lined on both sides
with chapels, one for each of the Egyptian
provinces. Behind them rose the facades
of ten tall dummy buildings, replicating

a Be io for a

2.25 Entrance hall to the Mortuary Complex of Zoser

government buildings or, more likely,
granaries. Slender colurnns, drawing on the
imagery of reed bundles, ornamented their
surfaces. On their other side are engaged
columns with smooth-angled shafts holding
bell-shaped capitals modeled on the shape
of the papyrus flower. Like the reed-shaped
columns, the papyrus also had symbolic
value. The north part of the cornplex was
dominated by a monumental altar to which
offerings were brought each day, a metaphor
for the offering place of the northern heaven.
In a small chapel positioned against the north
side of the pyramid was a life-size statue of
Zoser, showing him wearing a priest’s Sed
festival cloak, a ceremonial beard, and a
ritual headdress. Sitting in the dark chamber,
he gazes through two small holes in the

wall placed at the statue's eye level, through
which he could watch the ceremonies taking
place in the court. This is the Ka statue, and
the structure was nothing without it, as it
embodied the still-living spirit of the king. The
statue had to be tended to and provided with
food and drink. Though a Ka statue might
have been placed near the altar, others were
placed in the mortuary temple. If anything
were to happen to the Ka statue, the spirit

of the deceased would never gain entrance
to the heavenly realm. The principle of living
ancestors is an ancient one and is common
to most cultures across Africa and Eurasia.
Here, however, it is the pharaoh’s Ka that
reigns supreme in the ancestor world.

po 1
i Original mastaba an)

Final enlargement

2.26 Section through step pyramid and tomb of Zoser

This building represents a shift in the idea of
death and its associated religious practices.
The low-lying mastabas of the pharaohs were
no longer considered worthy of rulers, who
now ranked among the gods. In classical
Egyptian, the word for tomb actually meant
a “house of eternity” or, more precisely, a
“house for eternity.” The pyramids were
certainly built for eternity, but they were now
defined differently, as “the place where one
ascends.” And this might explain the steps,
since that was a literal form of the Egyptian
glyph, namely a set of giant steps.

After Zoser, the pharaonic institution
began to assert its cosmological narrative
with ever-greater force and precision. One
of the places where this manifests is a cult
center for the falcon-god Menthu not far from
Medamud, a provincial town 5 kilometers
northeast of Karnak at Thebes. The
sanctuary, which dates frorn about 2500 BCE,
consisted of a roughly lozenge-shaped
enclosure 83 meters at its widest, surrounded
by a high wall with a gate to the east. The
interior contains a grove of trees and two
burial mounds that could be interpreted as
the primeval mounds appearing above the
waters of chaos.

¢ Burial chamber

a

1
1
t
4
L
¢
ue

With Snefru (2613-2589 BCE), who ruled
during the Fourth Dynasty, one sees the
maturity of the Medamud prototype. But it
took Snefru several tries. His first project

was the step-faced pyramid at Meidum.

The location of the two tomb chambers was
innovative. Separated horizontally in the Zoser
temple complex, here they are placed one on
top of the other, the lower one representing
the chthonic aspect of the Egyptian religion.
Snefru abandoned the building after fifteen
years of work and started another, larger
pyramid complex 50 kilorneters north, near
Dahshur. Originally planned to be a towering
150 meters high, it was too bold, and the
ground gave way under part of it. In an effort
to save the building, the designers added a
kink or bend to reduce the weight and angle

of the slope, which is why it is today called
the Bent Pyramid.

30m

The failure forced Snefru to ask his builders
to return to the Step Pyramid at Meidum.
They added a layer that transformed it into a
true pyramid, but this time only after careful
preparation of the ground. (In Roman times,
the stone facing was removed to be made
into stucco. Hence it is possible to see the
original form.) Still, it was not enough for
Snefru. He constructed a third pyramid

two miles north of the Bent Pyramid. Not

as steep as the earlier ones, it is called the
Red Pyramid because of the reddish cast of
the stone. This is where Snefru is actually
buried. Construction was so well thought
out that despite the weight of the 2 million
tons of stones on the roofs of the chambers,
cracks have yet to appear. The harmonious
proportions of the form and the perfection
of the system of tomb chambers made it the
model for subsequent tombs.

2.27 Ka statue of Zoser

Pyramid at Meidum

Step Pyramid of Zoser,

150 m_

Red Pyramid

2.28 A scalar comparison of Egyptian pyramids

Pyramids at Giza

Pyramids are only the massive residue of an
extensive ritual architecture that included
temples, causeways, ports, shrines, and
even special tombs for the sacred boats that
carried the sarcophagus and other objects.
The pharaoh’s body would be brought on a
funerary ship to a valley temple along the Nile
River. The ternple consisted of an intricate
though largely symmetrical combination of
galleries and courts, at the center of which
was a monumental courtyard with twelve
colossal statues in niches along its perimeter.

a
. _. a
un + Mastaba tambs, NS

of] BY pane
ol] age

8 qe engl

uamtogy Oat Hl} |

ale

of SOON

nie
enon
oN

and

: ‘ & d
‘ Pyramid of Menkaure (Mycerinus) ca. 2525 ece 1

Behind the courtyard was a row of five
chapels that held the sacred barges that had
brought the sarcophagus and other objects
down the Nile from Memphis. Once the body
had been properly prepared, the coffin was
sledded up to the mortuary temple in the
shadow of the pyramid, where other rituals
would take place, including daily prayers,
incantations, and offerings. The coffin,
attended by a lavish funerary cortege, was
then brought into the pyramid and placed

in the stone sarcophagus that was built into
the burial chamber of the pyramid. The

~
Pyramic_of Khufu (Cheops) ca. 2580 sce

Fatt

Bn] za if
UE

to mortuaty temple

Great Pyramid of Khufu

~ Bent Pyramid of Snefru

pharaoh and the canopic jars that contained
his entrails, along with assorted possessions,
were placed in the tomb chamber, and
offerings were made. Then the funerary
party exited the pyramid and the entrance
was Sealed. At the cosmological center of
this system was the belief in the sun god
Re, creator of all things, who, according to
legend, created himself out of a mound that
emerged from the primeval ocean. Snefru’s
son Khufu (Cheops) identified himself with
the sun god to such an extent that his
successors referred to themselves by the new
royal title, Son of Re.

| _ RHE couseway tr from the valley temple

300 m

a ey

2.29 Site plan: The Pyramids at Giza, Egypt

2.30 Section: Great Pyramid of Khufu

When engineers set about to build the

Great Pyramid of Khufu (Cheops), they

took no chances and chose a solid rock
foundation. Its orientation, so close to true
north, has raised the question of how the
ancient Egyptians managed to achieve such
accuracy. Six million tons of solid masonry,
consisting of 2,300,000 individual stones,
rested on that foundation. The core was
mostly of yellow limestone quarried from

the immediate area, while the stones of the
casing are of a white limestone from quarries
at Tura and Masara, on the east bank of the
Nile on the outskirts of modern Cairo. The
casing stones were fitted together with such
precision that the sides would have been
seen as a smooth sheet glistening in the sun.

barb

King's chi
RS

i g RES S
sf Queen's chamber
SONY & . x
SSEBoren
N

Though the Egyptians were highly proficient
mathematicians, the mathematical and
astronomical systerns used in the design of
the pyramids is much debated. Furthermore,
the exterior measurements of the pyrarnid
are uncertain because the outer surface has
been removed over the years. However, it is
generally agreed that the sides of the pyramid
are about 440 Egyptian royal cubits and that
its height would have been about 280 royal
cubits. The face of the triangle intersects

the ground at an angle a little less than 51.5
legrees. This means that the height of the
triangle along the surface to the top is phi
(the golden section or ratio, 1.61803399) and
that the vertical height of the pyramid at its
center is the square root of phi. The angles of
the internal passages, as well as the location
of the various chambers, are also thought

to have been defined mathematically. There
is also solid evidence that the layout of the
three pyramids is not haphazard, but that it
too conforms to a unifying geometric plan.


Mortuary temple

he upper granite burial chamber stands
isolated in the interior of the pyramid;

five upper chambers with granite beams,
weighing up to 40 tons each, serve to relieve
the pressure. The uppermost burial chamber
has a gabled roof of limestone blocks. From
the middle of the south and north walls of
the burial chamber, narrow mock corridors
point toward the southern and northern skies
to provide a direct route to heaven for the
deceased's soul. The northern one, so it is
thought, allows the regenerative north wind to
flow down to meet the body of the king. The
room below the burial chamber was meant
to house the Ka statue of Khufu. Though the
statue has been lost, early accounts describe
it as a statue of green stone, standing inside
the niche. This room was misnamed the
queen’s chamber by early explorers, but

it cannot have served as a tomb since it

was not provided with a stone sarcophagus
and was not sealed by a portcullis (stone
plug). A unique aspect of the pyramid is a
subterranean chamber that was cut out of
the solid bedrock. Unlike the precision of the
structure above, it was designed with a rough
and disorderly look. It is clearly cultish in
nature, but its purpose remains unknown.

2.31 Plan: Mortuary and valley temples of Khafre at Giza

Valley temple

Granite relieving beams

Grand gallery

Antechamber

2.32 Section through the king’s chamber, Great Pyramid of Khufu


Central axis of the Sphinx Temple.

Valley Temple of Khafre
The only preserved valle’
the one associated with
(Chephren), the second
built after that of Khufu.
support red granite lintel

y temple at Giza is

the Pyramid of Khafre
pyramid complex to get
The plain square piers
s that, in their stark

simplicity, show the supreme confidence of the

architect. The piers wou
polished. The rectilinear
contrasts with the more

id have been highly
perfection of the piers
organic coursing of the

gigantic stones of the wall; the meaning of this

distinction is unknown.
alabaster. The main cha
three statues of Khafre.

he floor was paved with
mber housed twenty-
On the outside, the box-

shaped form gives no indication of the complex

internal layout. In fact, t!

le space between

the interior and the exterior is filled solid with

enormous limestone stones; the interiors would

thus have seerned to be

carved from the earth

itself. Next to this temple is the famous Sphinx,
its purpose and meaning still a mystery.

“Eastern sanctuary

Western sanctuary

2.33 Plan: Valley Temple of Khafre

‘Sphinx Temple’

Khafre’s valley temple

2.35 Interior: Valley Temple of Khafre

2.34 Overview: Valley Temple of Khafre

Nile River

ARCHITECTURE AND FOOD
For both Mesopotamian and Egyptian

societies, food was t

he sustenance not only

of humans but also of the gods. Offerings of
food were laid out in front of the Ka statue in

its niche to provide

or the difficult journey

ahead. They consisted of meat, roasted fowl,

bread, fruit, vegetab

les, beer, and wine, all

delivered out of the temple district's own
gardens. The slaughter of the animals, out

of sight of the gods,
priests. From an antl

was supervised by the
ropological perspective,

2.36 Egyptian slab stela

A slab stela shows a royal
personage at a funerary repast
sitting next to an offering table
covered with the loaves of bread

that have been brought to him.
Next to him on the floor, on small
platforms, are containers holding
incense, ointments, figs, and wine.

Though both Mesopotamian and Egyptian
food sacrifices emphasized breads,

drinks, and the bounty of the land, the
Mesopotamians rarely sacrificed animals,
which were not plentiful in the alluvial plain.
For the Egyptians, animal sacrifices were
not uncommon, with offerings—especially
of gazelles, antelopes, geese, ducks, and
pigeons—coming mainly from hunting. The
meat was offered in either boiled or roasted
form. The shank and the heart were thought
to have a particularly reviving effect for the

one can say that this equ
for social and political col

ation was necessary
esion. There is

also evidence of this in Mesopotamia, where

the ziggurat was a type o'

elevated feasting

platform. A text states, “In the first night

watch, on the roof of the
ziggurat ... when [the sta
of heaven comes out,” thi
laid out upon a golden ta

igh temple of the
tof] the great Anu
e feast was to be

le for Anu and his

wife Antum, as well as for the seven planets.
The most exact instructions were reserved

Ka. Unlike the Gree!

in “sight” of the go

as coaxed back to li
Greeks, as will be di
sacrifice very differe

In Mesopotamia,

s, the Egyptians did not

perform the actual killing and bloodletting

Is; the meat arrived fully

cooked. The difference is telling. The Ka is
visualized as alive and sensitive, or at least

e by tasty morsels. The
iscussed later, saw the
ntly.

food was prepared

almost around the cl
ceremonies. Docum

lock for the ternple
ents list in great detail

for the nourishment and entertainment of
the gods. The flesh of the cattle, sheep, and
birds, and beer of first quality, along with
wine “poured from a golden ewer,” was to be

offered.

2.37 Statuette of a woman bearing offerings

the preperations that were necessary, from
fattened sheep and oxen to dates, figs,
fruitcakes, birds, and vegetables. It was
only at the time of the New Kingdom, the
Mycenaeans, and later the Dorians, that one
finds the multiple slaughter of large animals
such as bulls. Furthermore, for the Greeks,
the sacrificial animals could only be taken
from domesticated herds, such as cattle and
sheep. Sacrifice would remain important in
Judaism and Christianity, but mainly in a
symbolic sense. Hinduism is one of the few
modern religions that still preserves ritual
food offerings to the gods, though meat
sacrifices are forbidden.

a. oe ~ North barrow

+ Station stone

Sarsen Ring—”

South barrow <

50m

STONEHENGE

The structure of Stonehenge as we see it
today is in fact a combination of the last two
phases of its several revisions and dates from
between 2500 and 1800 BCE, making it more
or less contemporary with Ur in Mesopotamia
and the end of the age of pyramids in Egypt.
This is important because there is a tendency
to overstate the primitivism of Stonehenge,
when in actuality it was an advanced Bronze
Age structure. Furthermore, Stonehenge
must be contextualized as the last in a

line of such artificially enhanced sacred
landscapes, a history that stretched back at
least two thousand years. Newgrange was

a similar site in that it was an important
regional ceremonial attractor, but it dates

to a thousand years before Stonehenge.
Today, because Stonehenge is isolated in the
landscape, it is difficult to visualize the area
as a sacred landscape. In the immediate
area, hundreds of burial mounds would have
been visible, sorne dating back to the fourth
millennium BCE.

2.38 Plan: Stonehenge, ca. 2500 BCE

“aHeel stone

The first version of Stonehenge, dating to
about 3000 BCE, was consistent with the
circular henges of that age, except that

this one was an impressive 100 meters
across, with two or perhaps three spaces
left open for access to the inside of the
circle. Two alignments were built into it:
one astronomical, at the northeast entrance
toward the northernmost rising of the moon,
and the other to the cardinal point to the
south at the other causeway.

Around 2500 BCE, the Beaker People
transformed Stonehenge from a local temple
to a focal point for a larger civilizational entity.
They filled the area for miles around with
their circular burial mounds and founded
a new city to the northeast of Stonehenge,
now called Durrington Walls, which was
defended by circular defensive walls 480
meters across. Their wealth shows up in their
graves. In one grave, archaeologists found
gold ornaments as well as bronze pins from
Bohemia, blue faience beads from Egypt, and
amber beads frorn northern Europe.

At the center of the Beaker People’s
cosmology was a connection between
the smelting of ore and the sun. For this
reason they had to redesign Stonehenge,
transforming its orientation from the moon
to the sun. To do this they rotated the axis
an almost imperceptible 3 degrees eastward
to coincide with the rising midsummer

2.39 Reorientation of Stonehenge by the Beaker People

sun, according to the research of Gerald

S. Hawkins in collaboration with John B.
White. The Beaker People also imposed
four large stones that point to summer and
winter risings and settings. Though the
precise nature of how the stones worked is
in dispute, Stonehenge's latitude, as it turns
out, is the only one in Europe where this
combination is even possible.

The most significant change attributed to
the Beaker People was the addition of a ring
of sixty large bluestones to the interior. The
stones are not actually blue; they are a dark,
eavy, medium-grained rock, harder than
granite. The Beaker People also constructed,
about 1 kilometer north of Stonehenge, what
archaeologists call a cursus—a 3-kilorneter-
long, 100-meter-wide rectangular form,
slightly beveled at the ends. Created by
incising a ditch into the landscape, it lies
in an east-west orientation. Though simply
uilt, it is laid out with great precision. Its

purpose is unknown, even though there are
other cursi scattered across the region, some
predating the arrival of the Beaker People.

t certainly was not a running track, as the
name unfortunately implies. One can surmise
that since the eastern sector was associated
with the sunrise and the western side with
the sunset, the cursus played an important
part in the ritual expressions of life and
death. Was it a pathway for the soul?


sida ded

od

No sooner had the Beaker People completed
their work, around 2300 BCE, than
Stonehenge underwent yet another and
even more impressive transformation. The
new designers were working at the behest
of a culture represented by chieftains whose
numerous cemeteries were added to the
landscape around Stonehenge. Their origin
is even more mysterious than that of the
Beaker People. The new overlords removed
the bluestones and added the now famous
Sarsen Ring of trilithons, sarsen being the
name of the local sandstone boulders. The
ring, 33 meters across, was composed of
thirty enormous stones with an average
weight of 26 tons. The transportation of

the blocks from a site 30 kilometers away
would have been a feat in itself. Particularly

noteworthy was the e
preparation of the stot
and using stone mau

fart made in the
nes. Moving in unison
Ss swung on ropes,

workers pummeled the surface of the

oulders to pulverize

moving down to smal

protrusions, first with

jarge mauls the size of pumpkins and then

ler mauls the size of

tennis balls. When the surfaces were finally
lat, other teams set to work rubbing the
surfaces with large flat stones, back and forth

ike a woodworker with sandpaper. When they
were done, the posts measured 4.1 meters
igh, 2.1 meters wide, and 1.1 meters thick.
They were surmounted by thirty 6- to 7-ton
intels that formed a continuous circle around
the top.

wt

2.40 Plan: Stonehenge, ca. 2200 BCE

The precision was remarkable. The tops of
the lintels, once they were in place, never
varied more than 10 centimeters from the
horizontal. Such carefully worked stone is not
typical of other English henges, where stones
were usually left natural, perhaps because
they were seen as possessing a magical,
chthonic presence. The Sarsen Ring was
architecture of a particular type, for it was in
reality something akin to carpentry in stone.
Possibly the designers were replicating in
stone a wooden prototype, or perhaps they
were seeking to enhance the power of the
stone structure by embodying in it the more
familiar techniques of woodworking.

In the final phase of Stonehenge’s
transformation, some of the bluestones that
had been removed were brought back to
the site, with some being erected within
the Sarsen Ring and others placed in a
horseshoe configuration. Such a horseshoe
was uncommon in England, but occurred
more frequently across the channel in
Brittany. The implications of this have yielded
much speculation, but it is almost certain that
southern England and French Brittany were
at this time part of a single cultural province.

oe gv holes ¢.
Z holes s
0 Oem
° °
Jeter 8
2 an

ine

2.41 Plan: Stonehenge, ca. 1800 BCE

As a result of climatic cooling, so it is
thought, the culture that built Stonehenge
devolved into a hamlet society, with little
capacity to continue the great architectural
accomplishments of its predecessors. In the
shadowy remnants, a druid culture emerged
that contributed practically nothing to the
architectural legacy of England.

How Stonehenge was used has been
debated for well over a century, and new
insights are still arising. It was once assumed
that the site was a celestial clock—a clock
with one tick, which pointed to the rebirth
of the year. This is now seen as too limited
an understanding of the site. It was a site of
magic, a site where people would congregate
to communicate with ancestors and to bury
their dead, physically and ritually, while
engaged in ceremonial socializing, feasting,
and dancing.

Sardinia

Sicily

Onwalta

Gi

XO)

A

gantija

Mediterranean Sea

North Africa

2.42 Temple sites on the island of Malta

MEGALITHIC TEMPLES OF MALTA
Around 4000 BCE, settlers arrived at the
Maltese archipelago, a string of rocky islands
between Sicily and the North African coast.
There they set up farms and traded with Sicily
and Sardinia for flint, obsidian, and other
nonnative materials, tools, and foods. Today,
without modern technology, the island would
be relatively inhospitable, given that there

are few trees and no natural water sources.
But in ancient times there must have been
natural springs and an environment suitable
for agriculture, for the Maltese flourished for a
thousand years, between 3500 and 2500 BCE,
more or less contemporaneously with the Old
Kingdom in Egypt.

In Egypt, there had been a rapid shift to a
complex cosmology controlled by the elite.
But in Malta, religion revolved around the
ancient mother-goddess cult. Malta should
not, however, be seen as more primitive,
but rather as a place where the goddess
cult not only survived but thrived. It is also
unlikely that Malta was completely isolated.
In fact, the large number of temples, far
exceeding the needs of the local population,
implies that the island was a type of religious
destination. People came to the island for
oracles and to communicate with ancestors.
Ceremonies seem to have involved sleeping
and dreaming.

2.43 Sleeping Goddess from the subterranean temple of Hal Saflieni

A
An
A
A
Tarxien
eo)
@*
Mnajdra

The temples share common characteristics.
The outer walls were made of raw, undressed
megalithic stones set vertically in the ground
and forming an oval. How the massive, multi-
ton stones were brought to the sites remains
a mystery. Archaeologists have found parallel
ruts along which the stones might have
been pulled, possibly on round stones used
as rollers, but these ruts do not lead to the
temple in efficient lines (they zigzag through
the landscape), nor are they always parallel.
The interior spaces of the ternples were
defined by their own stones, meticulously
dressed and set up to create lobed
chambers, the surfaces of which were
sometimes finished with plaster and then
painted. The spaces between the outer and
inner walls were filled with dirt and rubble,
and the whole was mounded over to form
artificial hills with interior caves. How the
spaces were roofed is still debated. Corbelled
Neolithic tombs can be found in Spain and
Portugal, but given the absence of such
stonework, it seers likely that the roofs
were supported by timber beams. A model
of a tomb, made by the ancient builders
themselves, shows that these buildings
conformed to a clear prototype. This small
model, the size of a matchbox, is the
earliest architectural model in the world. Its
purpose is not known, but it is possible that
it was a type of souvenir, proving that the
recipient had indeed visited the temple and
participated in its ceremony.

2.44 Plans of temple complexes on Malta drawn at the same scale and orientation: Ggantija (above left) and Tarxien (above right)

he nature of the rituals for which these
structures were built has been lost to history.
But statuettes of heavyset earth goddesses
found on the sites are evidence of a cult
dedicated to fertility, death, and renewal.

he deities, sore sitting upright, others
ying asleep, look not unlike the plans of
the temples themselves—squat, rounded
igures harboring a mysterious, bodily inner
world. Animal bones and statuettes testify to
the ritual offerings and sacrifices that were

ikely associated with the cult. Many temples
contained carved or freestanding stone altars,
and most had libation stones with wells for
iquid offerings to the earth. The later temples
ave a type of plaza in front of them that

were equipped with stone benches, indicating
that the temples were used for communal
gatherings where people waited for priestly
announcements or perhaps for their turn to
enter.

The earliest temple on the Maltese
archipelago is Ggantija, part of a cluster of
temples situated on the island of Gozo. Used
continuously for hundreds of years, it dates
to around 3500 BCE. It was a double temple,
nearly 30 meters long. The temple had a floor
of crushed limestone slurry that formed a
hard, concrete-like surface. The portals from
chamber to chamber were huge post-and-
lintel configurations of megalithic stones. The
exterior was monumental and simple. The
core cloverleaf configuration to the west was
built first. Two more lobed chambers were
then added along its entry passage. Later,

a second temple was built adjacent to the
first and enclosed within the original mound.
The reasons are unclear. Perhaps the local
population expanded and exceeded the
original temple's capacity. Perhaps a plentiful
harvest year prompted the farmers to renew
their thanks to the earth goddess. Whatever

the reason, generations of Maltese continued
to regularize and expand the design, testing,
refining, and reproducing the archetypal
shape at different scales, with different
orientations, and with varying numbers of
chambers.

The temple at Tarxien, built around
2500 BCE, is the most complex of the
surviving temples. The imposing concave
facade of the main temple was composed of
finely coursed stone, with larger blocks at the
base and smaller blocks at the roof, which
corbelled outward to form a small cornice.
Within, pairs of symmetrical chambers were
built successively deeper over the centuries,
one connected to the next by dual trilithon
portals and connecting passageways. At
nearby Mnajdra is a complex of three temples
of the same period, overlooking an oval court.
The southern temple is aligned such that the
equinox sunrise illuminates its main axis.

2.45 Section through a typical Malta temple

2.46 Temple complex at Mnajdra, Malta

©

Galgada

2
g
%.
%
Pacific Ocean

rf
El Paraiso (O] .

©

Aspero™s .

2.47 Early Peruvian Settlements

THE FIRST CIVILIZATIONS OF SOUTH
AMERICA

During the Ice Age, between 30,000 and
10,000 BCE, nomadic populations fromm China
and Mongolia crossed the then existing
Bering Strait land bridge, moving first into
the Great Plains of North America and

then south along the shore of the Pacific
Ocean. By 10,000 BCE they had reached the
southern tip of South America. (Recently, it
has also been proposed that another strearn
of people may have come westward from
Europe, following the edge of the Atlantic

ice shelf. This is based on the similarities of
arrowheads in both locations.) Throughout
the Americas, the social structure of the
native Americans remained that of hunter-
gatherers until sometime between 5000 and
3400 BCE when, in Central America, the first
attempts were made to create permanent
settlements and cultivate crops such as corn,
avocados, chili peppers, amaranth, squash,
and beans. By 2500 BCE, villages appeared
with shelters made of wattle and daub, and
by 1500 BCE we see the first examples of
pottery.

2

2

& Caral Fortaleza River
De ee

.
e Pativitca River

¢ Supe River

Huaura River

2.48 Volumetric reconstruction: Galgada Step Pyramid, Peru

The peoples of the Americas can be
classified according to their ecological zones.
The oldest cultures were on the vast steppes
of North America, but whether they had by
this time developed the tipi as their distinctive
habitation is not known. Affluent shore
cultures had developed along the Pacific
coast of Canada, along the southern stretches
of the Atlantic coast of North America (from
Georgia to Florida), in the great flood marshes
of the lower Mississippi River, and finally in
the great rain forests of Mesoamerica and
the Amazon. By 3500 BCE, the Mississippi
River delta people began constructing large
mounds as part of their ceremonial culture.
They were the first to construct such mounds
in the Americas. Mound making was an
attempt to construct ceremonial landscapes
that brought in people from far away for ritual
exchanges. It remained a tradition in the
southeast areas of North America until the
arrival of the European colonizers.

Around 3500 BCE important
transformations were also taking place in
the western uplands of the Amazon, and
it is to this area that our story turns, since
it holds the key to the transformations that
were to take place first in Peru and then in
Mesoamerica. The rain forests were home to
an astonishing variety of plants and animals,
making them an important incubator of

human social networks. People formed tribes,
and developed a slash-and-burn gardening
technique to better harness cashew, cocoa,
and Brazil nuts, as well as the all-important
manioc, used to make bread, soups, and
fermented drinks. The process began slowly
around 10,000 BCE as the rain forests began
to expand. Groups pushed higher and higher
into the mountains, where they encountered
the potato, maybe around 5000 BCE. These
people are not considered agriculturalists,
however, because as far as we know they did
not develop irrigation, one of the elements
associated with agriculture. That changed
around 3000 BCE, when a group of intrepid
farmers settled in a high Andean valley that
still today seems impossibly arid and remote,
and began a farming community there based
on irrigation. Using the slope of the valley to
their advantage, they tapped the stream and
fed the water horizontally to garden plots.
Their method worked, and soon the dusty
valley was turned into a gardener’s paradise.
Such activities were never just “farming” but
were part of a sacred landscape; and it is
now known how that landscape was defined.
Archaeologists call the place La Galgada—
and the settlement was no casual affair, but
organized around a powerful family clan and
its sharnanistic leaders. And to emphasize

2.49 Galgada ruins today

the authority of the clan lineage, the elders
over time developed a unique architectural
form, an ancestor mound. The clan leaders,
who were also probably shamans, met in
something akin to a sweat lodge, a flat-
topped chamber that could hold about
fifteen people. The idea of sweat lodges,

a widespread phenomenon, developed in
Siberia and was brought to the Americas by
its ancient settlers. At Galgada, when the
chief died, he was ritually wrapped in a fetus
position and buried in the lodge, which was
then mounded over and a new one built on
top. Over the centuries, the mound grew
higher and higher in the shape of a stepped
mound. Its surface was plastered and
probably painted red.

Though the history of agriculture is often
told as a story of Peru, it is really a story of
the Amazonians, who, with their thousands of
years of experience, took the step to what we
call agriculture by moving into the mountains
and developing irrigation and controlled
farming.

Caral

The experiment at Galgada was such

that soon other groups were setting out

to transform mountains into farmscapes.
The most ambitious group tackled what
might seem an almost impossible task—to
transform the uninhabitable coastal Peruvian
desert into a fertile plain. The shores had
supported fishing communities for thousands
of years. The fishing here is among the best
in the world, but these fishing communities
were isolated, and could only trade north
and south. Enter the highlanders who
arrived at the Supe River floodplain, and in
a few decades made it into Peru's first great
agricultural center. Known as Caral, it was
first settled around 2600 BCE. The farmers
brought with them two plants in particular,
plants that they knew the fishermen would
need—cotton and the gourd. Cotton was
needed for fishing nets, and the gourds
served as floats. In essence, the farmers
supplied the fishermen with advanced
equipment, and in return got fish. It was

a brilliant arrangement, but it required a
strict regime on the part of the Supe Valley
farmers. At the center of the community
were the shaman elites, who governed by

a mixture of ancestral and divine right from
a huge central plaza, roughly 500 meters
by 175 meters, that was surrounded by

Rage
2.50 Circular sunken plaza, Caral, Peru

an extensive array of buildings, platform
mounds, smaller mounds, and two major
sunken circular plazas, all sited along a

bluff overlooking the river and its agricultural
fields. Brightly painted, the structures would
have stood out against both the green fields
below and the yellowish gray of the arid
mountains above. The ceremonial center
was probably activated by a special ritual
class, with events certainly taking place daily.
Some events probably involved the larger
community in multiday festivals of dance,
music, and feasting. Archaeologists have
found flutes made of condor and pelican
bones, as well as horns made of llama and
deer bones. The site had formally arranged
residential complexes for the elite. The rest of
the inhabitants, namely the farmers, lived in
a network of hamlets of thatch houses near
the fields that were dispersed throughout the
valley.

2.51 Central zone of Caral

— Pyramid Minor
<

Pyramid of the Galley

Pyramid Major, Caral’s dominant platform
mound (160 by 150 meters and 18 meters
high) is perched on the northern end of

the site, at the very edge of the terrace

from which it overlooks the valley. It was
constructed in two major phases. First, the
mound walls were built by filling open-mesh
reed bags with cut stones. Five other platform
mounds join with it to form a C-shaped plaza
facing south. Just beyond its open mouth,

at the center of a low mound, is a sunken
circular plaza 50 meters in diameter.

If the main plaza, surrounded by
mounds high above the valley floor, creates
the impression of a vast bounded space
reminiscent of a high valley plateau, then
the circular sunken plaza, reminiscent of
the later kivas of North America, repeats
that space on a smaller scale, perhaps
corresponding to the principles of the
earth. Although the ceremonial structures
of the early Andean civilizations have the
outline of a pyramid and are usually called
pyramids, it is more accurate to refer to them
as platform mounds. This is because they
were conceptually conceived as a series of
platforms. (Pyramid is from a Greek word
that describes Egyptian structures.) What the
native Americans called their structures is
unknown. The word pyramid will, however,
be used here in cases where convention has
already established it as part of a name.

2.52 Caral and its environment

1500 BCE

—

3.1 Reconstruction of the city of Mari, Syria

Private residences

Offices

Archive

Guards’ quarters

3.2 Plan: Palace at Mari, Syria

Baths

Kitchen

INTRODUCTION
How much different our world would be today
had the carmel and horse not existed. The impact
of the camel was felt first. Traditionally, the great
economic centers had all relied on boats or
oxcarts as the primary means of transport. With
the camel, traders could now cross the deserts
and mountains that stretch thousands of miles
east and west and cut Asia into separate north
and south regions. By the middle of the second
millennium BCE, caravans with as many as six
hundred animals were plying trade routes across
the desert plains. The first place to monetize this
trade was a city called Mari. Located in modern-
day Syria on the western bank of the Euphrates,
it flourished as a trade center and city-state from
2900 BCE until 1759 BCE. It was located halfway
between the Persian Gulf and the upland reaches
of the river. In other words, it was designed as
a short cut to the Mediterranean and thus was
perfectly sited to collect and distribute goods.
But this was not a city in the conventional old-
Mesopotamian sense. It did not really produce
anything but instead was an entrepét city, a
transshipment hub of the third millennium. That
the city was a perfect circle makes sense.

The palace, thought to have been built by King
Zimri-Lim (r. 1779-1757 BCE), had at its core
a vast rectangular throne room, at the entrance
of which was a statue of a maiden holding a jug
of water from which water actually poured. It
was meant to impress the visitor that here in the
desert, water could be poured away. Behind the
throne room, protected by a guardroom, were
special storage areas where the king kept his
most precious items. Nearby was an area for
the bureaucrats who recorded what went in and
out of the city. Contrast Eridu with Mari: the first
was a ritual center designed for the agricultural
production of surplus and dependent on an
exchange economy primarily through boats
(canals and seaports) and oxcarts, whereas the
latter was dependent on the rapid turnover of
goods. More than 25,000 tablets in the Mari
archives have survived, including economic
reports and juridical texts. The records describe
an astonishing abundance of material and food
going through the city, including prized spices
such as coriander, cumin, saffron, and cloves;
and even ice, a luxury item imported from the far-
off mountains. The records also show that things
did not always go smoothly. Letters describe the
difficulties of moving a massive shipment of some
360,000 liters of barley. Another record tells how
flour that had been shipped to feed an army had
been destroyed by ants.


aN ; General area of .
~ “forse diffusion

3.4 Statue of a water goddess
found in the palace at Mari

General area of
Camel diffusion

3.3 Inner Asia camel and horse diffusion areas to around 1300 BCE

The camel at this stage of history was still a
relatively local Mesopotamian phenomenon,
but its use expanded eastward until it finally
reached China, where its impact would be
felt around 800 BCE during the Zhou dynasty.
The new transcontinental network would
become the economic engine of Eurasia until
the arrival of colonialism in the 16th century.
In the second millennium BCE another
quadruped entered the scene: the horse.
Domesticated around 3000 BCE on the vast
Eurasian steppe, the horse played a dynamic
role in history well into the modern age. And
this was not just because the horse was
fast; it also conferred a significant military
advantage in that riders with bows and
arrows could now rule supreme. Indeed,
in the middle of the second millennium
BCE, Central Asia—from the Bactrian-
Margiana Archaeological Complex society in
Turkmenistan to the Indus Ghaggar-Hakra
region in the south—went into a period of
turmoil and decline. An ecological disaster—
the drying up of the Ghaggar-Hakra River—
certainly played a part in creating a political
vacuum. But just as important during this
period were large groups of horse-centric
people that called themselves Aryas and
are now known as Aryans, who moved into
northern India. Since their structures were

built of wood rather than brick, very little
tangible evidence of this period has survived.
The newcomers brought with them not only
horses, but also a sacred oral tradition of
mythologies and legends. Around 1500 BCE
these were assembled and written down.
This was the beginning of the so-called Vedic
period, named after a Sanskrit Indo-European
word that means “knowledge.”

West Asia also experienced a state of
flux and instability. Assyria, Babylon, and
other Mesopotamian cities were overrun
by horse-mounted invaders of unknown
provenance, the Mitanni and Kassite people,
who had moved in from the north or east.

A similar situation existed with the so-called
Sea People, who conquered the Nile Delta
(ca. 1300-1200 BCE) and from whom the
Egyptians learned how to make chariots and
better bows. Also arnong the newcomers

to West Asia were the Hittites, who settled
in Anatolia around 1600 BCE. There, in the
north-central region, they founded Hattusas,
a capital with numerous temples. They
brought in scribes from Syria to maintain
their records in cuneiform script, creating
voluminous state archives. The Hittites and
the Egyptians became the preeminent land
powers in western Asia.


3.5 Camel caravan in Mongolia

3.6 Reconstruction of the town of Arkaim, Russia

he time period between 1206 and 1150 BCE
was a troubled one that saw the cultural
collapse of the Mycenaean kingdoms, the
Hittite Empire in Anatolia and Syria, and

the New Kingdom of Egypt. Almost every

city between Pylos and Gaza was violently
destroyed, and many were left unoccupied
thereafter. The Hittite capital was burned and
abandoned around 1200 BCE, and was never
reoccupied.

There is a possib|

iddle of the secon

FI

the horse: the chariol
fully developed chari
of the Andronovo cu
around 2000 BCE. T!
in bronze metallurgy

le explanation for

the problems that beset kingdoms in the

millennium, namely

the development of a technology to go with

t. The earliest known
jots come from burials
ture in Kazakhstan
ese people engaged
on an industrial scale

and practiced complex burial rituals that
included the burial of chariots and horses.
They were once largely pastoralists, but

with a global warming and the growth of the
steppe, they turned increasingly to horse
herding. One can only assume that chariots
were highly prized and a core element in
newly developed mythologies relating to the
spiritual world. Over time the settlements
grew larger and developed into a series of
towns, some circular and sorne square.
Arkaim (ca. 1700 BCE), for example, had
two protective circular walls, 160 meters in
diameter and 4 meters wide, built with soil
that was packed into timber frames before
being faced with adobe bricks. The fortified
town had four gates, the widest one being in
the southwestern direction and the remaining
three oriented to the cardinal directions. The
community consisted of thirty-five houses
built adjacent to the outer wall, each of
them having an exit to the main street of the
settlernent. Most archaeologists believe that
it was an administrative or ceremonial center
with a set of core inhabitants—perhaps priests
and bronze forgers—and that people would
have gathered there for special occasions.


3.7 Ramesses on his chariot, relief in Abu Simbel, near Philae, Egypt, ca. 1260 BCE

3.8 A Western Zhou chariot burial
pit unearthed at Zhangjiapo,
Chang’an County, China

“= -~s 3.9 Vitthala Temple chariot,

The chariot spread quickly, with the
advantage going initially to the steppe people.
The chariot was brought to Egypt by the
so-called Sea People, who easily overcame
the fabled Egyptian army. It was only when
the Egyptians developed an updated version
of the chariot under Ramesses I| that they
were able to turn the tables. Ramesses
portrayed himself on a relief in his Abu
Simbel temple proudly riding a chariot into
battle against the Hittites. The chariot and
everything that it implied in terms of prestige
and power made it to China around the same
time with the Zhou, who rose to defeat the
earlier Shang dynasty. The Zhou were from
the western province, hence the chariot.
Several of their chariot burial sites have been
found, such as the one in Hougang, in Henan
province (ca. 1200 BCE). As a warrior class,
the Zhou developed a social system generally
known as feudalism, in which the nobles
ruled over the peasants, while merchants
were a social group outside the social
pyramid and were hardly even considered
people. There are certain undeniable
similarities here to the chariot-based Vedic
culture that was beginning in India around
that same time.

The chariot was a symbol of prestige, the
limo of the day. In both Hindu and Persian
mythology, most of the gods are portrayed
as riding them. Giant three-story chariots are
still today pulled through the streets of Puri,
India, in an annual celebration of Jagannath,
“Lord of the Universe,” a deity worshipped by
Hindus mainly in northeast India.

Vijayanagar, India, ca. 1500 BCE

Despite the disruptions, trade continued
unabated, especially along the Mediterranean
coast. Documents discovered at Ugarit
mention a wide spectrum of goods—wheat,
olives, barley, dates, honey, wine, and
cumin, as well as copper, tin, bronze, lead,
and iron—coming from as far away as
Afghanistan and central Africa. Ugarit seems
to have specialized in the Murex seashells
that were used in the fabrication of greatly
sought-after purple dye. Timber from the
Levant’s forests was another important
Ugaritic export.

Meanwhile, in the Andes, the
experimental transformation of the dry and

0 toa 80 m barren Caral Valley into an agricultural
paradise was being copied in the valleys to
3.10 Wooden substructure with tombs for the chief, his wife, and their horses, Arzhan, Russia the north and south, including Supe Valley

to the north. The ritual centers involved
enormous U-shaped cornplexes, the elements

In Greece, the earliest representations of of several people and their horses, with even of which would remain part of the Peruvian
horsemen in Mycenaean art is dated to about —_ the horses spectacularly ornamented in gold architectural language for millennia. Unlike
1300 BCE, which makes sense in terms of its jewelry. The central stone disk structure Poverty Point, which was a cormmunal effort,
diffusion from Central Asia. But the Dorians, was surrounded by smaller disks, each one these Peruvian centers were built for powerful
who invaded Greece around 1200 BCE from probably built by a clan in homage to their elites who ruled as gods over a subservient
their steppe homeland, brought with them leader. It is quite likely that huge gatherings population of farmers. Success depended on
an even more elaborate horse and chariot were held here to pay respect to clan leaders, the surplus production of crops like cotton,
culture. The god Apollo drove his chariot conduct business, socialize, and feast. potatoes, and squash.

across the skies every day, carrying the sun
with him. Over tirne, the steppe people who
remained in Inner Asia and cohered into

a group known as the Scythians came to
prosper as both traders and metallurgists.
On the open steppe they built clan burial
mounds known as kurgans. Thousands

of these were built between Europe and
northern China, dating back to the third
millennium BCE. Most were near a river,
including the Maikop kurgan on the Belaya
River, not too far from the Black Sea (ca
2500 BCE); Kurgan 4 near the Volga River at
Kutuluk near Samara, Russia (ca. 2400 BCE);
and the Novovelichkovskaya kurgan (ca.
2000 BCE) on the Ponura River. The most
specular kurgan, known as Arzhan (ca.

650 BCE), is located in a broad and beautiful
valley in the Tuva Republic, Russia, some 60
kilometers northwest of Kyzyl. It is a stone
structure, 4 meters high and 120 meters

in diameter. The stones entomb a shallow
structure with wooden walls, arranged in a
spoked manner, which contains the burials

3.11 Helios the Sun God

™

Moxeke/Sechin Alto ©

©

Poverty Point

China: Yangshao Culture
ca. 5000-1500 BCE

Mycenae

Knossos © Hattusas ©

Waset (Thebes) Yin (Anyang)

Hittites (emerging)

Mycenaeans (emerging?

3.12 Trade diagram, ca. 1600 BCE

THE MINOANS AND KNOSSOS

he turmoil in the Mesopotamian heartland
and northern India benefited the economies
of the eastern Mediterranean, especially

the Minoans on Crete, who developed the
world's first thalassocracy, a maritime trading
economy. The Minoans stitched together

the economies of West Asia and Egypt with
the emerging markets of Greece and other
parts of Europe. Their palace architecture
(Knossos, Phaestos, Mallia, and Zakros)

was conceived according to very different
principles than that of Mesopotamia. The
Minoans appeared not to have been overly
concerned with defensive installations, which
indicates that their trading practices were
peaceful in nature. The Minoans also never
came under the type of political stresses that
necessitated complex cosmologies. Theirs
was not an extrerne landscape of deserts
and floods. They thus emerged still clothed
in ancient chthonic religious practices,
which were more intimate and less formal
than the rigid systems prevalent in Egypt
and Mesopotamia; their holy places were
connected to landscape features.

Over time, however, Cretan religion began
to become more complex, and strong male
gods emerged, in particular the Cretan
Zeus, a fertility god who died annually and
was reborn in a sacred festival. He took the

CRETE

3.13 Minoan sites on Crete

form of a bull, which was central to a festival
known as the Thiodaisia, during which the
cities renewed their oaths of alliance to

each other. These rites included large-scale
drinking and feasting, and were staged in
the open landscape or in front of the major
palaces in special theater-like settings. There
was a joyful, life-enhancing quality to these
festivals as well as to their artwork, as can

be seen in the murals in their palaces. Three
caves were particularly important in their
cult: the Dictaean Cave on Mt. Dicte near the
village Psychro, the Idaean Cave on Mt. Ida
near Anogheia, and the Cave of Eileithyia,
dedicated to the birth goddess. The Dictaean
Cave, cold and moist even in the heat of
summer, with a pool of water surrounded by
stalactites, was the site of rituals dating back
to the earliest time of Cretan habitation. The
Cave of Eileithyia is now a Christian site and
is still visited by Cretan women. A procession
led up to the peak of the mountain to a
special sanctuary where offerings were “fed”
into a cleft in the rocks. Today an annual
procession still makes its way up to the top
of the mountain for the feast of Afendis
Christos—an example of how Christianity
often tried to nullify “heathen” cults by
appropriating ancient rituals and customs.
The cave most intimately connected with the
Cretan creation myth is the cave on

Knossos

Mi. Juktas © heave of Eileithyia
A\ldaean Cave A Dictaean Cave

A
Qeracstos

Kato Syme

Mediterranean Sea

Mt. Ida, where the earth mother Rhea gave
birth to Zeus. Myth describes him as tended
by nymphs and protected by youths against
his father, Chronos. Zeus then fathered
Minos, who became king of Knossos and of
Crete.

3.14 Ruin of ritual structure: Cave of Eileithyia,
near Amnisos, Crete

The Thiodaisia festival involved a dance

in which performers somersaulted over a
charging bull, as represented vividly on the
walls of the palace. Men and women are
both portrayed performing the jurnp, a man
in one case in midair, waiting to be caught
in the open arms of a woman. Given that the
entire landscape was sacred, the Minoans
did not build temples but rather palaces,
the largest of which was at Knossos, built
around 2000 BCE on top of a prior Neolithic
settlement. It was rebuilt and enlarged in
700 BCE after a large earthquake. The
palace contained residences, kitchens,
storage rooms, bathrooms, ceremonial
rooms, workshops, and sanctuaries.

here were sophisticated infrastructural
installations, ventilation systems, and
groundwater conduits. In storage basements,
archaeologists have found elephant tusks
rom Syria and copper ingots from Cyprus.
Though we do not know what role the
priest-king who ruled there assumed, it is
clear that the palace, with its many different
inds and sizes of interior spaces, terraces,
courtyards, and platforms, represented a
mosaic of interwoven activities. It was part
palace, part warehouse, part factory, part

religious center. It was laid out around a
large rectangular courtyard with several
entrances converging onto it. The courtyard
was surrounded by verandas at the upper
levels, allowing views into its space. Because
of the verandas, windows, porches, steps,
and doors that folded open into the sides

of the walls, the visual interrelationship
between inner and outer space is particularly
intricate—more so than in any other palace
architecture of this period.

Flanking the courtyard was the throne
room, which had built-in gypsum benches
on the north and south walls with a place
for the insertion of a wooden throne, which
was replaced with a gypsum one later. The
red stucco walls are covered with images
of griffins, legendary animals with the head
and wings of an eagle and the body of a
lion that are thought to have symbolized
strength and vigilance. The floor was panted
red. The benches, though at seat height,
were probably used to hold votive offerings.
Opposite the throne was a water basin to
which steps descended and which may
have served for initiation rites. The low room,
which was kept dark, was meant to simulate
a sacred cave, according to some scholars.

Around the room were various storage rooms,
which were repositories for the precious
objects used in ceremonies. The whole
complex of chambers—sixteen in all—was
designed as a self-contained unit that had
both a public entrance from the courtyard
and a private staircase connecting to the floor
above.

3.15 The double axe, or /abrys, principal symbol
of the Minoan-Mycenaean religion, standing erect
on a bull’s head

3.16 Overview of Knossos, near Heraklion, Crete

Throne
sanctuary

Bul court

3.17 Plan of throne sanctuary at Knossos

Minoan columns are particularly distinctive.
Made of wood, they tapered toward the
bottom and were painted dark blue; the
capitals, painted red, had the profile of
cushions. In the principal rooms, the stone
rubble walls were finished with a fine layer
of plaster painted in a fresco-like technique;
they depicted scenes of animals and plants,
and nautical life of remarkable vibrancy
and beauty. Minoan art was among the first
to represent human movement. The main

3.18 Throne room, Palace at Knossos

colors used were black (carbonaceous shale),
white (hydrate of lime), red (hematite), yellow
(ochre), blue (silicate of copper), and green
(blue and yellow mixed together).

Though palaces by definition require
controlled access, entry into the Palace at
Knossos was more than a sequence of gates
and antechambers; it was a linearly extended
spatial experience. The starting point was
the west porch, which consisted of a single
column standing between walls—an iconic
representation of the mother goddess. From
that point one walked south to a terrace

Initiation area

T
[>

West porch oni

} il

Theater area’ _]

KY
«Sanctuaries —&

that offered a broad vista to Mt. Juktas. No
visitor would have missed the reference to
the Cretan Zeus here. Through an opening
midway down the terrace, one turned away
from the mountain and entered a series of
state rooms that led to a great columnar hall
illurninated by clerestory windows designed
as a box within a box. The hall, in turn,
opened up to a flight of steps flanked by a
colonnaded veranda for spectators. At the top
of the stairs was a lobby with two ceremonial
doors right and left of the axis leading to
another hall. At the back of this hall a door
led to a staircase that descended at a right
angle to the central courtyard. Nothing as
spatially remarkable would be designed for a
long time.

South pillar hall

tm oo
~~ Fe chamber ~
i Stores Kitchen and stores
cae ee ee
West court i Throne sanctuary Goddess sanctuary

Crypt

i
i
ES

3.20 Schematic plan: Palace at Knossos

Descending the stairs, the visitor faced
across the court to a goddess sanctuary, an
imposing structure with a wide ceremonial
staircase leading up through a colonnade to
a landing in front of a pier-and-door partition.
Inside was a spacious room 18.5 by 15
meters, with eight tapering pillars around

a central square that was probably open
from above. A statue was placed against the
back wall, with the walls themselves richly
decorated with scenes of boxing and bull-
grappling, and more griffins. It is possible

to imagine the central court as a plateau,
positioned at the intersection of the sunken
throne room on one side and the elevated
cult space, with its skylight, on the other.

In the middle of the courtyard was a small
altar for burnt offerings and, off to one corner,
a large circular stone with concavities in it,
probably also for offerings. It was perhaps
in this space that the bull ceremony was
performed, with the spectators viewing it from
the numerous balconies and verandas.

Other palaces have been uncovered on
the island, as have several peak sanctuaries,
such as the one on Mt. Juktas, which was
clearly linked to the cult practices at Knossos.
It was the focus of pilgrimage ceremonies
and was also probably associated with
ceremonies legitimating the rule of the kings
of Knossos.

The demise of the Minoans was largely
due to volcanic eruptions on the nearby
island of Thera (modern Santorini) around
1600 BCE. This created opportunities for the
Mycenaeans on the Peloponnese, who set up
posts on Crete and integrated Minoan cultural
elements into their own aesthetic protocols.

3.21 Diagram of entry sequence: Palace at Knossos

3.22 One of the grand stairways at the Palace at Knossos

Mediterranean Sea

Giza, Saqqara [O}
Amarna [O}

Thebes, Karnak ©

Abu Simbel

Nubia

EGYPT: THE NEW KINGDOM

The Nile Delta of Egypt, around 1720 BCE,
was invaded and occupied by the Hyksos,
also called the Sea People, who ruled Lower
Egypt from their capital, Avaris, until driven
out by Ahmose | of Thebes in 1567 BCE. The
origin of the Hyksos, and even their name,
remains the subject of scholarly debate.

n 1550 BcE, Ahmose |, founder of the
Eighteenth Dynasty (called the New Kingdom,
a rule of dynasties lasting until 1070 BCE),
was able to throw off the Hyksos and regain
control over the country. The Hyksos, despite
eing enemies of Egypt, brought to Egyptians
some previously unknown things: not only the

chariot, but also new techniques of bronze
working and pottery, new breeds of animals,
new crops, and a particularly powerful
composite bow.

The return of stability in Egypt meant
the vigorous trade in goods on which so
many Near Eastern societies depended
could recommence. Furthermore, with the
continuing troubles in Mesopotamia, Egypt
began to dominate the region. Seeking to

wy
er

guarantee the borders against the all-too-
volatile political environment, the Egyptians
marched into Syria and besieged Nineveh
and Babylon. No longer isolationists, as they
had been in the Old Kingdom, they now
became colonizers. Their turquoise mines
in the Sinai were reopened, and Ekron and
other cities controlled by the Philistines
traded with Egypt in pottery and metals.

An important change that came with the
reestablishment of unity involved religion: no
longer only the purview of the elite, it now
comprised larger sections of society. Festivals,
processions, and celebrations that could draw
thousands of participants were introduced.
The New Kingdom saw the rise of large
temple institutions that played an important
part in hosting these mass celebrations. As
a consequence the temple priests rose in
power and played an increasingly large role in
Egyptian politics.

3.23 Egypt, ca. 1500 BCE

Waset (Thebes)

During the period of the New Kingdom, the
capital of Egypt was Thebes, where the family
that had thrown out the Hyksos came from.
The Egyptian name for Thebes was Waset,
the “city of the scepter.” It was located on a
small rise of the middle of the Nile floodplain
that became, during the inundation of the
Nile, a quasi-island. Thebes was the Greek
name for the city that eventually stuck.

The prime deity of Thebes was the ram-

god Amun-Re, the god of the sun and the
heaven and the omnipresent father of the
kings who guaranteed world order. The
ascendency of Thebes mean that Amun-Re
was elevated to the status of a national deity.
At least a dozen temples were built over a
five-hundred-year period, from about 1500
to 1000 BCE. The site spans both sides of
the Nile and includes the Valley of the Kings,
where many of the pharaohs were buried.
Thebes had been used as a burial site since
around 2000 BCE, but with its new prestige
as imperial capital, it also became the royal

site. The first temple at the site was erected
around 1970 BCE and was a rather modest
structure. Thutmosis | began enlarging the
Karnak temple complex at Thebes around
1530 BCE. Queen Hatshepsut added her
temple on the west bank (ca. 1470 BCE),
and Amenhotep III started work on Temple of
Luxor around 1350 BCE; the temple-building
activity culminated in the efforts of Seti | and
Ramesses I|, who made significant additions
to Karnak and Luxor around 1280 BCE. From
then on the complex went through periodic
expansions and transformations until the 5th
century BCE.
At the ritual core of all of this construction
was a simple, small chamber in the Karnak
temple—essentially a sacred dry-dock, which
held a barque through most of the year. The
barque chamber Queen Hatshepsut built,
which was dismantled by her successors,

has been uncovered and reconstructed at
Karnak, but not on the original site. The 3.24 Barque chamber at Karnak
chamber was made of special red quartzite
stone (thus its name, the Red Chapel) on

a base of black diorite. The current barque
chapel, built by Philip III of Macedonia

around 340 BCE, follows the idea of the
original and contains only two rooms: one
where the offerings were presented, and

one with a stone base on which the barque
rested. On special occasions the barque was
carried out of the temple in the context of a
great popular celebration and taken to various
sites depending on calendric requirements.
Though a boat, this barque never got wet but
instead was transported by priests on their
shoulders. When it crossed the Nile, it was
placed on a special boat.

3.25 Relief carving showing the barque being ceremoniously carried at Karnak

Some sixty festivals were celebrated in
Thebes annually. Some took place within the
temple confines; others involved moving cult
images from temple to temple. The three
most important of these traveling festivals
involved Amun; his wife, Mut, the Egyptian
mother goddess; and Mut's son, Khonsu, the
lunar deity.

1. Preeminent was the Opet (“secret
chamber”) festival during which the statues
of Amun, Khonsu, and Mut were escorted
from Karnak to the Temple of Luxor. At a
particular moment during the events, the
deity “spoke” to confirm the legitirnacy of the
king. The god's legitimization of the king was
reciprocated by gifts to the temple from the
royal family. The festival took place during
Akhet (roughly our September), the season
when the Nile flooded, and lasted for eleven
days, but as time progressed, the number
of festival days grew. The journey from
Karnak to Luxor was made over land along
a processional street; the return journey was
made along the Nile by boat.

2. The Beautiful Feast of the Valley
coincided with a celebration of the dead in
which Amun, Mut, and Khonsu would travel
to the western shore to visit the gods of the
West and the deified dead kings. The festival
came to be associated with renewal and
regeneration. It occurred during the second
month of Shemu, the harvest season (roughly
our April), and lasted for over twenty days.

3. Amun’s cult image traveled every ten
days from the Temple of Luxor on the east
bank to the shrine of Medinet Habu (ca.
1460-1420 BCE) on the west bank. The
original name was Djanet, and according to
popular belief, it was the place where Amun
first appeared.

The Karnak culture of processions was at
the time unique in the world and would
have a huge impact on subsequent religious
world views. The processional rituals arnong
Catholics, for example, is rooted in these
ancient prototypes.

Floodplain

3.26 The principal temples and processional routes of Karnak

Karnak has two entrances: one for those
arriving from the direction of the Nile, to
accommodate the barque procession, and
the other frorn Luxor. The Nile entrance had
its own harbor. Both entrances are defined
by a series of majestic pylons. To the north of
the enclosure is a small sanctuary dedicated
to Ptah, who was sometimes seen as an
abstract form of the Self-Created One. He
was intimately connected with the plastic
arts and especially with the mysteries of
architecture and stone masonry.

A pylon (from the Greek word for “gate”)

is a high, inclined, and slightly trapezoid-
shaped wall with a large central entrance
guarding a sacred precinct. It was often
accented by tall flagpoles and obelisks whose
tops were sheathed in gold plating. The two
flanks of the pylon, formal and imposing,
symbolized the mountain ranges that hem in
the Nile. Their form was a purely symbolical
expression of Egyptian power. Though all
architectural forms of the period—such as
the ziggurat in Mesopotamia, the megaron

in Greece, and the processional paths in
Egypt—had symbolical value, the pylon
gates were among the earliest architectural
forms that condensed wall, gate, and
cosmology into a single declaration of power.
he Egyptian word for pylon was bekhnet,
which implies vigilance. Thus it relates to
the watchtower-like nature, if not the actual
unction, of these structures. Flagpoles were
placed along the front of the pylons, the poles
and flags representing, for the Egyptians, the
presence of a sacred precinct at the most
asic level.


Like huge billboards, the pylons also
proclaimed, in image and text, important
events in the role of the donor-king. On
one, the seventh pylon of Karnak, a huge
Thutmosis Ill is shown holding a club

and taking a swing at a cluster of enemy
soldiers—depicted smaller—whom he
seemed to seize by the hair. Beneath his
feet, in three rows, are the names of the
conquered cities and peoples, also listed

in three rows. The conquest of the Lybians,
Hittites, and Bedouins are particularly
vigorously portrayed. The pylons were most
often covered with a fine layer of stucco and
painted white, while the figures and other
pictorial elements were rendered in vivid
colors.

3.28 Barque sanctuary of Temple of Khonsu


The pylons are numbered in the order
in which they are encountered when
walking through the site. Here, the parts
of the building are listed in order of their
construction:

Harbor and canal
leading to the Nile

¢ Pylon 8, Hatshepsut, ca. 1479 BCE
(Hatshepsut builds mortuary temple and
Medinet Habu.)
¢ Pylons 5 and 6, Thutmosis III, ca.
1450 BCE
« Festival Hall, Thutmosis Ill, ca. 1450 BCE
¢ Pylon 7, Thutmosis Ill, ca. 1450 BCE
¢ Pylon 3, Amenhotep III, ca. 1350 BCE Temple of
(Amenhotep III begins Temple of Luxor) Ramses III
¢ Pylons 9 and 10, Horemheb, ca. 1300 BCE
¢ Pylon 2, Horemheb and Ramesses |, ca.
1300 BCE
¢ Hypostyle hall, Seti | and Ramesses II, ca.
1280-1270 BCE (Ramesses II added pylon
and courtyard at Luxor.)
¢ Temple of Ramesses Ill, ca. 1150 BCE
¢ Temple of Khonsu, Ramesses Ill, ca.
1150 BCE
¢ Pylon 1, Thirtieth Dynasty, 350 BCE

Temple of Khonsu

Opet Temple.

om ae

Tenth pylon leading tos

Temple of Mut. 10:

ar,

300 m
a 4. 1

The first interior space of the Temple o
Amun, located behind the second pylon,
was the so-called hypostyle hall, or hal
with many columns. The intervals between
the enormous columns are proportionately
small, dwarfing visitors, who feel as if they
are walking among colossal giants. The
columns, 24 meters high, are more than
just the structural supports for the roof; they
serve as superdimensional history books: the
scenes painted on them refer to the religious
practices and great achievements of the king.
At the bottom they are decorated with images
of papyrus and at the top with offering
scenes. These details were not actually
meant to be read by visitors: the screened
light coming from the clerestory windows
high up under the roof would have created

a shadowy environment, with the bulk of the
columns rising majestically into darkness.
The columns are designed as flower

bundles; indeed, they should be seen less

as structural and more as a much-magnified
floral arrangement giving off an imagined, but
nonetheless real, sweet scent of flowers as an
offering to the deities.

3.29 Plan: Temple Complex of Karnak

3.30 Hypostyle hall, Temple of Amun

Temple of Ramesses III

Apartments of Queen Hatshepshut

3.31 Temple of Amun

Colonnade of Tarharga

Hypostyle hall, Temple of Amun, Karnak

Pylon 5

Barque sanctuary
of Thutmosis II!

Middle Kingdom Court

Festival Temple of
Thutmosis II!

100m

At the eastern end of the building is a festival
hall, the exact purpose of which is open to
interpretation. Most likely it served as a place
for jubilee festivals for the procession, as
well as for a type of hall of fame glorifying

CGGOOOS @
OC@GOO® ©

SE SOOCS
©OOOGOO
©OOGOHOOH ©
@OC@OOO®
OC OOSH@O
©©OOOSES
©OC®

the deeds of the royal conqueror. Its walls
featured scenes of gardens and animals.
On its eastern side, there was a long space
where the barque could be brought for
special viewing.

SCOCOCO@!
@@OCOOOO
SSOCOO®@ E
SOOSOGOOK

69060060 fh
OS OOCBO k
N © @OE OO:
WS Wwe x

3.32 Plan and section: Hypostyle hall, Temple of Amun

Mortuary Temple of Queen Hatshepsut

Queen Hatshepsut, daughter of Thutmosis I,
the fifth pharaoh of the Eighteenth Dynasty,
was a charismatic and controversial figure

in her role as a female monarch. She ruled
for twenty years, during a particularly strong
moment in the Egyptian economy. It is
presumed that after her death, Thutmosis III,
her stepson, ordered the systematic erasure
of her name from any monument she had
built, including her temple at Deir el-Bahri.
Some of her monuments were destroyed
outright. Such destructions were not
uncommon in Egyptian history. Her mortuary
temple, however, played a key role in the
processional events as the temporary resting
place for the barque during the Beautiful
Feast of the Valley.

The temple, built by Senmut, her
architect, combined mortuary temple,
processional way, rock-cut tomb, and
ancillary chapels into one synthetic unity
with no parallel in Egyptian architecture.

Inner court i) is" '

Chapel of Amun

Sun altar court

The original Egyptian name of the temple
was djeser-djeseru, or “the sublime of

the sublimes,” because it is located in an
area that was called Djeseret, or “sublime
place,” which was dedicated to Hathor,

a mother goddess as well as the goddess
of love and beauty. A preexistent Hathor
chapel on the site was positioned directly
under an impressive cliff and built partially
into Hatshepsut’s temple. The temple was

; ~----- Chapel of Hathor

approached by a causeway and a canal that
allowed the sacred barque to be brought
from the Nile. The temple did not contain her
tomb, which was located in the Valley of the
Kings and is concealed behind the cliff that
looms over her mortuary temple. The axis of
Queen Hatshepsut's mortuary temple was
precisely aligned to the east with the temple
complex at Karnak across the river and to
the west with Hatshepsut’s tomb on the other
side of the cliff in the Valley of the Kings,
which was to become the main burial place
for the Egyptian royalty for many centuries.
There was also a valley temple next to the
Nile, but that structure has disappeared.

First terrace

3.34 Plan and section: Mortuary Temple of Queen Hatshepsut

An innovation was the use of terraces leading
upward to the foot of the imposing cliff face;
an axis runs through the entire scheme with
ramps connecting the various courts. The

irst terrace contained trees and gardens.

he second level connects to a chapel of
Hathor. On the opposite side is a chapel to
Anubis, the jackal-headed god of the dead.
he axis leads through a hypostyle hall to

the last courtyard, with the cliff wall rising
impressively above it.
To the left of the upper terrace is a faux
palace for Hatshepsut’s ancestors, and to
the right an open-air sanctuary dedicated to
Re-Horakhty. (Re, the sun god, went through
a daily cycle of death and rebirth, dying at
the end of each day and being reborn in the
morning as Re-Horakhty.) The rooms for the
barque, which terminate the axis, together
with the room for the cult image, were carved
out of the rock itself.

The plan displays a brilliant use of
symmetry and asymmetry based on the
integration of different elements. Particularly
noteworthy are the columns along the front
of the temple that are part of a wall and pier
system that foreshadows later development.
Also, instead of using the usual lotus motifs

for the capitals, here the columns are fluted
cylinders built out of drums.

\

?

Jf NY \ IN y
/

5 ji NY elisks, of Rakesses II— /

& if NON ‘

Q fpftrance pylon of messes I

s ff N\A

a Court of Ramesses II
off

3.35 Temple of Luxor, Thebes, Egypt

3.36 Plan: Temple of Luxor

va Colonnade with scenes of 7 >
Opet Festival LL

Court of Amenophif |”
LL
Me
Barque safctdary
of Aménapihis II
Jf

Sanctuary rooms for Mut,
QA 4 Amun, and Khonsu

By 100 m
- re re an i 9

Temple of Luxor
One enters the Temple of Luxor through a
rhomboid-shaped courtyard, built later by
Ramesses II, that leads to a passageway of two
rows of seven impressively scaled columns 21
meters high. That space opens to a court and
a hypostyle hall, and finally to the sanctuary
itself. A series of successively smaller
telescoping roorns then leads to the sanctuary,
where the barque was stored. From there, one
gained access to a hall, placed at right angles
to the axis, which was defined as the mythical
place of the path of the sun. Three doors
opened to rooms, one for each of the cult
images of the divine triad: Amun; his spouse,
Mut, the mother of gods; and their son, the
moon god Khonsu. They all “gathered” here
during the Beautiful Feast of the Valley.
Egyptian temples, unlike Mesopotamian
temples—or even later, Greek and Roman
temples—were not conceived as finalities.
Instead, they could grow, be changed, get
rebuilt, and even be allowed to decay over
time. In the case of Luxor, rulers added
courts and hypostyle halls as indications of
their support and patronage. The Amun-Re
Temple, for exarnple, grew steadily toward
the Nile, with new gateways being added and
others redesigned. In this case, the temple
is not axially aligned but follows the gentle
easterly bend of the processional route, as
it was extended in later building campaigns
farther and farther to the northeast.

3.37 Temple at Abu Simbel, near Philae, Egypt

Abu Simbel spread Egyptian cosmological beliefs. His
Ramesses II (1290-1224 BCE) extended wealth enabled him to carry out numerous
the sphere of Egyptian influence from the large-scale building campaigns, the most
upper valleys of the Euphrates to the fourth ambitious of which was the founding of the
cataract of the Nile. Nubian gold from the city of Ramesses (Pi-Rarnesse). Close to the
mines of Wabi el-Allaqui swelled his coffers. old Hyksos capital, Pi-Rarnesse stood at the
To protect the trade routes, he built a series departure point of the increasingly important
of temple outposts that also served to and well-fortified road to Palestine. The city

was sprawling, crowded with ternples to
state gods, palaces, and military installations
(including stables and weapons factories).
Copper, the all-important raw material, was
delivered here from the newly opened mines
at Timma in Israel.

Southern shrine

3.38 View looking toward the sanctuary
of the Temple at Abu Simbel

Ramesses II's temple at Abu Simbel (1260 BCE)
represents the pinnacle of Egyptian rock-cut
temples. The facade, carved directly into the
sandstone cliff, takes the form of a pylon and

is dominated by four colossal seated figures,

22 meters tall, all portrayals of Ramesses. On
either side of the statues and between the legs
of each are figures of Queen Nefertari and
some of the royal children. Above the temples,
Ramesses is shown sacrificing to the lord of the
temple, Re. The cornice is decorated with a row
of baboons, their arms raised in worship of the
rising sun. The whole would have been brightly
painted.

On the interior, the ternple contains two
pillared halls, storage rooms, and a sanctuary
deep in the rock. The 10-meter-high walls are
mainly covered with scenes and inscriptions
relating to the king's military exploits against
the Hittites and against the Kushites in
Nubia. The axis ends in the sanctuary on the
west wall with a row of four seated statues of
Ptah, Amun, Ramesses, and Re-Harmachis.
The small altar in front of them is where
sacrifices were made when the light of the
rising sun illurninated the sanctuary at dawn.

3.39 Section and plan: Temple at Abu Simbel

3.40 Relief of a Djed column

Egyptian Columns

The Egyptians were the first not just to
develop advanced stone work, but also to
develop the column as more than just a load-
bearing device—it had symbolic importance.
Reeds and flower stalks bundled around
poles were used to demarcate sacred spaces.
Mostly, the columns were covered with stucco
and painted in vibrant colors. Because we
tend to see colurnns as purely structural
devices, we can easily forget that for the
Egyptians, the column was a denotative form.
The most common plant themes were the
palm, the lotus, and the papyrus. For lotus
capitals, there was the so-called bud form,
which was usually used in outer courts, and
the open form, found in a temple's central
area. At the Hatshepsut mortuary temple, one
finds fluted cylindrical columns, representing
bundled reeds, with plain square capitals
that were to have a profound impact on the
columns developed by the Greeks.

The preferred structural support for
columns was bedrock, but where that was
not possible, they rested on a broad base that
in turn rested on a cone-shaped stone below
the surface of the floor to further distribute
the weight. Foundations were often made of
compacted sand several meters deep, the
sand creating an even distribution of the
forces.

3.41 Papyrus column, bundled shaft

The Djed pillar was the archetype of the
Egyptian column. It ernerged in the early
history of ancient Egypt and, though its
meaning is much debated, it most likely
derived from a harvest ritual and came to
represent the creation myth. Its importance
grew over time to represent the world
holding up the sky, and as such it came

to represent the idea of stability and
permanence, important themes in Egyptian
dynastic definition. The pillar as it was used
in ceremonies was associated with the god
Sokar in association with Osiris, the god of
the dead.

3.42 Papyrus column, bundled shaft
with lotus bud capital

3.43 Hatshepsut mortuary temple columns

3.44 Laying out construction with knotted cords and pegs

Egyptian Design Methods

Texts relating to architecture, surveying, and
town planning make it obvious that Egyptian
architecture had risen to the level of a
distinct craft. Architectural plans—drawn on
stones, some of which have survived, and
most certainly on papyrus, though none of
these have survived—indicate a high level

of coordination between planning a building
and its construction. Beside the titles of royal
architect, builder, and overseer of works,
there were also priest-architects who had
access to secret books that had plans and
specifications for buildings and statues.
There was even a goddess of architecture
and reckoning, Seshat, who begins to appear
in Egyptian records in about 2500 BCE. She
is depicted as bearing a seven-pointed star
or rosette on her head, sometimes above a
wand. She was also the goddess of the art of
writing.

The king himself played an important part
in the planning and the symbolic execution
of a structure. In one mural, Thutmosis II is
shown performing the ceremony of staking
out the ground plan of a temple using a
special “plan net,” a netlike webbing of
rope with knots that marked off locations.
The procedure consisted of stretching a
net along the axis and then spreading it
out to determine the basic points of the
construction. To form a right angle, for

3.46 Design of a column capital based on a geometric series, each

example, the Egyptians used a cord with twelve
intervals that was wound around three stakes
at units of 3, 4, and 5. For construction, plans
were certainly produced. Sketches have even
been found on the walls of a quarry. On the
pylon of the Temple of Khonsu at Karnak is

a low relief of a pylon that could very well be
one of the first surviving architectural design
projects.

ht ate

Relation of fractions
1 to senses:

%: smell

YU: sight

VY, thought

A. hearing

Vy: taste

V/.,: touch

fraction of which symbolizes a different part of the eye of Horus

3.45 Low relief of a pylon: An early example of an architectural design

Drawings from the roof of the hypostyle hall of
Edfu and elsewhere give us some indication
of how columns were designed using a
complex ordering of ratios in which a cubit
was used in conjunction with a geometrical
series of fractions. For example, to a column
9 cubits high, the architect would add 1/4

+ Ya + 1/16, each fraction symbolizing a
different part of the Eye of Horus. Unlike
later Greek and Hellenistic assurnptions that
positioned mathematics in relationship to
cosmological spheres, Egyptian mathematics
was connected to the physiology of the

body. The eye was seen as one unit, with
each of the parts measuring a fraction. This
unit was named after Hequat, who was a
goddess represented by a frog: she was also
the sign of fertility. The name is fitting, since
Egyptian mathematics involves a system of
leapfrogging over various fractions to achieve
the desired answer. The carving of a column
and capital was thus a shortcut for these
operations.

Though we do not know for certain

the geometry of the pyramids, it has been
ascertained with a fair amount of probability
that height-to-width was determined through
the ratio of 4:1 pi or sometimes 3:1 pi.
Egyptian mathematics, as discussed by
Corinna Rossi in her book on the subject, was
the most advanced in the world at the time.
By 1700 BCE, the date of various papyrus
scrolls dealing with mathematical topics,
various complex mathematical systems were
being devised.


a
wenn

3
@ willawanca

Mediterranean Sea

Fa

£
Li
:

EGYPT p

HITTITE EMPIRE

The Hittites settled in Anatolia around

1600 BCE, choosing the site of their capital,
Hattusas, with an eye toward dominating

the intersection of two important trading
routes. One ran from the Aegean coast, from
a harbor later to become Ephesus, to the
Black Sea. The other ran southward, from
the Black Sea port of Amisus (Samsum)

to the headwaters of the Euphrates. To
further stimulate trade, the Hittites permitted
Assyrians to set up posts for their donkey and
camel caravans in eastern Anatolia, such as
the one at Kanesh, 20 kilometers northeast
of Kayseri and only 100 kilometers southwest
of Hattusas. At its height, the Hittite Empire
stretched into the Levant, leading to conflict
with the Egyptians and to the famous battle
for Kadesh (1275 BCE) in northern Syria. After
the battle, which was a draw, the two parties
wrote up a treaty that guaranteed peace

and security throughout the area, allowing
the cities along the Syrian coast to grow in
importance and also creating a power shift
away from Mesopotamia toward the eastern
Mediterranean. A cuneiform version of this
treaty, found at Hattusas, hangs today in an
enlarged copy at the United Nations Building
to demonstrate the age-old importance of
international treaties.

Though the Hittite economy was basically
agricultural, the Hittites conducted a lively
export in copper, bronze, and later, most
prized of all, iron. Many of the mines were
in the vicinity of Bokar-Maden in the Taurus

Tarsi@

,@Zalpa
?

D
:
H HITTITES

Hittite sphere of influence

ontens

‘a Hattusas
. me
Kayseri @y

(| omen"

@ rae Me, Ye
Ly jo. wee, se
4 by
ern 2 Kadesh * Uy
: SYRIA ‘.
; ‘,
’ %

Egyptian sphere of influence

ae

Ramesses

Mountains. The main military strength of

the Hittites lay in the intensive development
of new weapons, such as the light horse-
drawn chariot with its six-spoked wheels. It
contributed greatly to speed and mobility

in battle. The Sumerians had already had
chariots pulled by wild asses, but their wheels
were made of solid wood. Egyptian chariots
held only two men, while those of the Hittites
held three—the driver and two soldiers, one
each for attack and defense.

The Hittites, similar to the Mesopotamians,
had a vast pantheon of intermarried gods and
goddesses, in the center of which was the
male weather god, symbolized by a bull. His

3.47 Hittite Empire

consort controlled the rivers and the sea but
was also sometimes known as a sun goddess.
Even though ternples were important for the
Hittites, they also had outdoor sanctuaries.
In this they were much more like the
Minoans than either the Egyptians or the
Mesopotamians. One such sanctuary is
Yazilikaya, a little over a kilorneter to the
northeast of Hattusas, to which it was
connected by a processional way. It had a
pantheon of gods chiseled into the face of
the cliff, perhaps showing them arriving at
the house of the weather god for the spring
festival.

id og AN

3.48 Relief depicting twelve gods of the Hittite underworld, Yazilikaya, Turkey

&

Z y
y a
AS 0 1200 m
Hattusas

Hattusas (modern Bogazkéy), situated at
the juncture of two ancient trade routes in
north-central Turkey, lies on the northern
slope of a ridge where a high plateau begins
to descend toward a valley. Of the many
temples in the city, the most notable was the
so-called Temple |, squarish in plan with an
annex in the back. It took up an irregularly
shaped city block and was composed
principally of storage cells for sanctuary
treasure and food. Archaeologists have found
jars of Cretan and Mycenaean provenance
there. The storage room walls were very
thick, suggesting that the building was two
or three stories high. The entire complex,

including the vast number of storercoms,
measures 160 by 135 meters. The temple
was built of limestone, whereas the annex
that contained the sacred statues was built
of granite, indicating its special status as
well as, most likely, the presence of Egyptian
masons, since it is unlikely that the Hittites
would have developed the skill of carving
granite so rapidly on their own. The courtyard
was entered through a symmetrically laid out
gate, square in plan and divided into nine
spaces. In the rest of the plan there was an

3.49 Area plan: Hattusas (Bogazkéy), Turkey

attempt to balance the right and left sides
of the courtyard. In the northeast corner
was a washhouse, while a portico at the far
end gave access to the sacred spaces in the
annex. The cult statues were in the larger
of the two rooms to the northwest and were
dedicated to the sun goddess, while the other
room was dedicated to the weather god. All in
all, the building is an aggregation of different
elements: the gate, the court, and the annex.
The most important event at the temple
was a springtime festival at which the
combat of the weather god and a dragon
was acted out or recited. During the festival,
the king and queen, accompanied by jesters
and musicians, would enter through the
ceremonial gate on the eastern wall and
proceed to a stone basin, where the king
would perform a ritual hand washing using
water poured from a jar made of gold. From
there he would enter the ternple courtyard
through the monumental gate. A master of
ceremonies then prepared the king and the
assembled dignitaries for a feast, perhaps
in the colonnade of the courtyard or in the
throne room itself. The Hittites, like the
Mesopotamians, employed no columns or
capitals in their architecture. Instead, they

-— Sanctuary

50m

3.50 Plan: Temple |, Hattusas

grouped rooms around paved courts. In
contrast to Sumerian temples, which had
dark and mysterious interiors because the
rooms received daylight frorn windows high
up in the walls, Hittite temples had tall
windows starting close to floor level. Such
windows were placed on both sides of the
cult statue and would have bathed it in light.
The Hittites also employed colonnades in a
type of wall-and-pier system that enriched
their spatial vocabulary considerably. And
finally, Hittite architects strove for a deliberate
tension between symmetry and asymmetry
that has parallels with Minoan architecture.
There are other differences from
Mesopotamian temples. The cella of a
Mesopotamian temple communicated
with the courtyard through an intervening
antechamber or antechapel, so that the
congregation in the court would have a clear
view of the god’s statue in its niche. In Hittite
temples, the cult room was approached
indirectly, through side rooms; the statue
would therefore not have been visible from
the court. This has led archaeologists to
conclude that the cel/a was reserved for
priests or a corresponding elite who alone
were admitted to the sanctum.

MACEDONIA

Oiry

Aegean Sea

PELOPONNESE @rhebes

Mycenae@)
© oyioe®

Tiryns

lonian Sea
Sea of Crete

@knossos

CRETE

3.51 Mycenaean Greece

MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION

The Mycenaeans, from parts unknown,
settled in Greece around 2000 BCE. There,
ike the Hittites, they quickly coalesced

into a unified Bronze Age social order.

The numerous harbors and islands of the
Peloponnese lent themselves to a system

of regional chieftains or kings operating
under the umbrella of the lord of Mycenae,
to whom they were connected by ties of
lood, tribal loyalties, language, and old
memories of origins as reflected in their
myths. Commanding a powerful fleet, the

lord of Mycenae could ensure his city-state’s
foremost position. After the decline of Minoan
dominance over the Mediterranean, the
reach of Mycenae extended to all the Aegean
islands, including Rhodes and Cyprus. The
Mycenaeans traded with Sicily, southern Italy,
Egypt, Sardinia, and the countries bordering
the Black Sea, leaving trading outposts along
the way. Their form of power was a novelty

in world history. They were not centralized
and had no land-based army. But it was
precisely this that propelled them into world
events. Tribal affiliations created small but
fiercely loyal fighters. They developed their
own export commodities. Their carpenters,

Rhodes

NS
ce aor"
YS

yw . Storeroams

ANATOLIA

3.52 Plan: Palace complex at Pylos, Greece

for example, used ivory from Syria with great
skill to adorn furniture. Their metallurgical
skill was legendary; Mycenaean bronze
swords have been found in Romania. There
were obviously interactions with the Minoans,
from whose long culture the Mycenaeans
borrowed elements of wall decorations and
building techniques. Mycenaean architectural
sensibilities were their own, however, and
centered on the megaron, or great hall.

Nestor's palace complex at Pylos, of which
we hear much in Homer’s Odyssey, was built
between 1300 and 1200 BCE. Predominant is
the megaron, a square room with four fluted
columns in the center of which is an elevated
hearth 4 meters in diameter; the room was
vented by a clerestory ceiling. The floor was
plastered and decorated with a grid, the
fields of which were painted with nonfigural
patterns.

The walls were covered with an elaborate
series of frescoes showing animals,
musicians, and individuals carrying offerings
and a bull sacrifice. On the wall near the
throne (to-no in Mycenaean Greek, whence
comes the word “throne”), was a drawing of
an octopus with special symbolical meaning.
Did the slippery, multi-armed organism

resemble the adept, multi-zoned Mycenaean
social structure? The throne was made of
wood, plated in gold and ebony.

Behind the great hall were two storage
rooms for valuables and containing large pots
for storing oil. The residential quarters were in
a discrete block at the eastern corner. There
was even a room with a bath made of terra-
cotta. Access to the megaron was more direct
than the labyrinthine approach at Knossos.
From the outside, one entered through an
H-shaped propyfon (the word literally means
“before the gate”) with a single colurnn
dividing the path into two, much as one
would have found in Crete. It did not lead to
a hall or corridor but into a courtyard, where
a porch of columns and a set of doorways
formed the entrance into the megaron.

To the right of the entrance was the guard
room, and to the left, the palace archives and
records of trade transactions. Before entering
the megaron, a visitor would first have been
led to a room on the left side of the courtyard,
which was a place for ritual preparation.

The palace was located on a ridge with a
protected port about 5 kilometers from the
sea, right on the trade route that worked its
way through the Peloponnese.

3.53 Overview of Mycenae, Greece ~

Mycenaean palaces were much more

than residences; as at Knossos, they were
administrative centers and the locus of the
region's industrial production. The Palace
of Pylos, for example, employed around
550 textile workers and 400 workers in the
metallurgical industry. There were also other
types of artisans, such as goldsmiths, ivory
carvers, stone carvers, and potters. These
people lived in nearby hamlets.

The most dominant city of the time was
Mycenae itself. Though today the city seems
remote, this was not the case in 400 BCE. It
straddled a shortcut through the Peloponnese
between the broad and protected Argos
harbor and a port on the Bay of Corinth,
and thus connected Crete and the eastern
Mediterranean with the markets in Italy and
beyond. Situated on the side of a mountain, it
was easily protected.

Mycenae was defended by thick ring
walls that were built around 1450 BCE. Part
of this formidable defense work consisted of
a cyclopean wall named for the seemingly
superhuman strength it must have taken to
move these immense boulders. In other parts
one finds regular rows of blocks of stone
fitted without mortar. One enters the citadel
through the famed Lion Gate, which might
imply a connection to, or at least familiarity
with, Hattusas.

Palace compound

Lower town

Burial tholos

Just to the right after entering the citadel

is a large circular burial fhofos placed on
the flat top of a purpose-built conical hill,
about 6 meters high. It has six chambered
tombs containing gold, silver, and bronze
burial treasures. Entrance to this circle was
certainly restricted to the elite, who accessed
it from a bridge that connected it to a set

of ritual buildings, also placed on a high
stone podium. There were no temples in the
Mesopotamian sense. Sacred rituals were
performed in buildings that were similar

to houses, except that they were better

ornamented and made with more refined
material.

The lower town and the burial circle were
originally outside the citadel walls, but

were later encased by a more expansive
perimeter wall. The palace, placed at the
top of hill, was protected by its own set of
walls. Unlike the Egyptian pharaohs, who
were placed in pyramids, and later in secret
caves, the Mycenaean dead were displayed
within the city at a place where memory
and narrative were most likely to converge.
Later Greeks would call the gathering of
people in commemorating places a choros.
Indeed, Homer would emerge, long after the
Mycenaean age had waned, recounting the
tales of Mycenaean heroes, arnong them
Agamemnon.

3.54 Megaron at Palace of Pylos, Mycenae

Treasury of Atreus
Beginning in the late Bronze Age, the

kings were buried outside the city in great
beehive—or tholas—tombs, monumental
symbols of wealth and power. The one at
Mycenae, the Treasury of Atreus, is the

most famous and the most finely built. It
consists of a great circular chamber, some
15 meters in both diameter and height, cut
into the hillside and entered by a corridor—a
dromos—about 36 meters long and 6 meters
wide. The tomb was roofed by a corbelled
dome made of finely cut ashlar blocks. A
rectangular room, the burial chamber proper,
was tucked in next to the central one. The
whole was covered with earth to form a
conical hill. The high facade at the entrance
was flanked by two half-columns of green
porphyry—a stone native to Egypt—carved
with chevrons and spirals. Though fitted

with Minoan-style capitals, their bulbous
proportions foreshadowed the transformation
the capitals would undergo subsequent to the
Dorian invasion. The stone lintel above the
door was elaborately decorated with running
spirals and other patterns.

3.55 Section and plan: Treasury of Atreus, near Mycenae

Burial chamber

3.56 Plan: Treasury of Atreus

by,
"Cy,
Pr, & s
—_ iS &
. €
Sy s
g &
Poverty Point @e &
a
x
Natchez
§ 7 oor and Claiborne 3.58 Pictorial view: Mound A (Large Bird Mound), Poverty Point,
& near Epps, Louisiana
RS

3.57 Mississippi cultures

POVERTY POINT

First reported in 1873, the semi-elliptical
ridges of Poverty Point were thought to

be natural formations. It was only in the
1950s, when the site was viewed from the
air, that archaeologists realized they were
artificial constructions. Located in the lower
Mississippi Valley of West Carroll Parish,
Louisiana, near both the Gulf Coast and

the confluence of six major rivers, Poverty
Point is not a unique construction. Similar
earth mounds had been built along the
Mississippi River dating as far back as 4000
BCE. Humans probably moved into this area
around 6000 BCE, and the reason is obvious:
it was one of the richest areas in plants

and wildlife in North America. There were
seasonal migrating ducks, fish of various
kinds, and deer in the forests, not to mention
a wide variety of edible plants and nuts,
including hickory nuts, pecans, acorns, and
walnuts. All this made for an affluent world.
The massive spring floods allowed people to
communicate with each other via canoes.
Trade was extensive and included chipped-
stone projectile points and tools, ground-
stone plummets, and beads made from shells
and stones. There is clear evidence that
trade reached as far north as what is now
Michigan.

The mounds served as places for ritual
gatherings that lasted for weeks and were
an important part of First Society life. These
gatherings entailed ceremonial gift giving,
socializing, singing, and dancing. In that

Motley Mound

sense, this was not a village but a sacred
landscape that served as a magnet for people
from near and far, although the local tribe
might have lived there the year round.

The site consists of six concentric semi-
elliptical rings that enclose a vast open plaza
covering an area of about 14 hectares. Aisle-
like openings run between the rings, dividing
them into six sections, which are thought to
have stood over 2 meters high. It is thought
that visiting tribes built their huts on these
mounds for the festivals. In and around
the complex were six to eight constructed
earthen mounds. The main plaza faced east
and overlooked the Mississippi River. This
was the site of elaborate dance ceremonies.
Someone looking along the aisles from the
center outward would have looked toward the
sun at the winter solstice in one direction,
and toward the sun at the summer solstice in
the other.

To the west of the site was a huge mound,
built on a patch of black soil that was
ritualistically covered with a layer of white
sand, probably symbolizing the forces of life
and death. The mound was made by the
different tribes, each carrying clay in baskets
from far away to the site. When finished, it had
the shape of a west-flying bird, which most
likely was meant as a communication device
for the ancestor spirits. How the shamanistic
rituals worked, whether on its summit or on
its slopes, is unknown. Today the mound is
overgrown with grass and trees, but originally
its clay surface would have been bare.

Dunbar Mound

Ballcourt Mound

a

Lower Jackson Mound

3.59 Area plan: Poverty Point

Lkm

Gobi Desert

Yin (Anyang) @

A\Yangshao

3.60 Shang dynasty, China

SHANG DYNASTY, CHINA

Ancient Chinese historians talk of the ten
thousand kingdoms that existed before

the Xia dynasty (ca. 2070-1600 BCE), and
indeed, the rise of defensive fortifications
around cities was a testament to intra-urban
warfare. Arnmong these numerous city-states,
Xia came to control the territory on the Yellow
River, paving the way for the rise of the
Shang dynasty (ca. 1600-1050 BCE), whose
irst capital was Ao, known as Zhengzhou.

he Shang, who continually moved their
capital due to frequent natural disasters, left
Ao around the 13th century BCE. Despite

the capital's importance, centralization of
state power had not yet been developed.
Nonetheless, it was during the Shang dynasty
that the royal person came to be viewed as

a symbol of cosmic powers. While feasts for
the dead were commonplace, during the
Shang it seems that ordinary people were no

longer believed to become spirit ancestors.

In other words, the ancestors of the elite
became the spiritual ancestors of all. And,
since the royal ancestors were credited with
supernatural powers, divining their wishes
was a preeminent task placed in the hands of
a priestly class. The theocratic order thereby
established was to remain foundational

to the Chinese definition of rulership. The
king or his diviners would address an oral
“charge”—a question—to the ancestors
using a prepared turtle shell or cattle scapula

&
ro A\Longshan
Yellow Sea
@ Zhengzhou (Cheng-chou)
East China Sea

while applying a hot poker to produce a
series of heat cracks in the shell or bone.

he diviners then interpreted these cracks
as auspicious or inauspicious, after which
engravers carved into the surface of the shell
or bone the subject of the charge, sometimes
the forecast, and less frequently the result.
Apart from the living ancestors, there were
an assortment of nature deities with various
legrees of abstraction.

It was during the Shang period that there
is the first clear evidence of the rise of cities
in China. They dominated the great northern
plain that was enclosed on the north, west,
and south by mountains or deserts and open
to the sea on its eastern rim. The Huang
River and its tributaries flowed through the
plain from the mountains in the west. In
those days, the eastern parts consisted of
extensive marshes, and the coastline was
farther west than it is today. But the middle
zone, well watered and with fertile soil, was

an excellent place for agricultural exploitation.

It comprises a territory known as the Middle
Plain. In this, Chinese urbanism began in a
way that was fundamentally different from

in Mesopotamia, where cities began as

risky endeavors in the marshes. They were
dependent on extensive irrigation techniques,
and their power could rise and fall with the
next flood. The first Chinese cities were built
in much less stressful situations, and the
Chinese did not yet have extensive irrigation.

These cities were at their core ceremonial
centers for the elite, and for the construction
of buildings enormous sacrifices were made.
So much power did the elites have that

for the dedication of just one palace, 852
humans, 15 horses, 10 oxen, 18 sheep,

35 dogs, and 5 fully equipped chariots

with horses and their charioteers were all
entombed. The centers had earthen walls,
usually of a roughly rectangular form. Though
they were not purely rectangular, they were
still governed by sacred principles. An
important difference between these early
Chinese cities and their Mesopotamian
counterparts is that as ceremonial centers
they contained, either inside the walls or
nearby, workshop districts where the artisans
lived who made the bronze, jade, and pottery
objects that were necessary for the ritual
practices of the elites. In some sense the city
emerged as a production zone around the
ritual center.

Zhengzhou was immense, with its east

wall measuring 1.7 kilometers long. It was
surrounded by small villages, workshop
areas, and bronze foundries. In the northeast

section of the city, just south of a small

hill,

was a district of palaces and temples where

rammed earth (han fu) platforms of dif
sizes supported large wood-framed bui

erent
dings,

the largest of which was 60 by 13 meters
and oriented to the cardinal points. That it is

located just south of the hill is no acci

ent,

as that was and remained the preeminent

position of Chinese palaces. Whereas t
elite lived on houses built on fan tu ba

e
Ses,

the rest of the population lived in round or

oval pit houses. Han tu platforms are a
always an indication of elite status.

most

g& Tomb of Fu Shao

ie) 600 m
| a oe

3.62 Site plan: Yin, Anyang County, China

Palace-temple complex


3.63 Plan and section: Tomb of Fu Hao, near Yin

At the beginning of the 14th century BCE, the
Shang established their capital, Yin, about 2
kilometers (1.2 miles) north of the modern
city of Anyang on the banks of the Huan
River. It too was a vast walled-in ceremonial
center with palaces and temples for ancestral
worship. There was a special mortuary
district for the elite, the tombs of which were
miniature cosmic diagrams. At the center

of a royal grave, for example, was a wood-
chambered tomb, decorated and painted and
placed some 12 meters belowground. Two
and sometimes four ramps led down from the
surface to the sides of the chamber, in the
center of which the king was buried. In some
tombs, guards were buried in the corners,
each with a dog and holding a weapon. One
tomb was for Fu Hao, one of the three wives
of a Chinese king. Fu is a term equivalent

to “queen”; Hao is her personal name. She
was no ordinary queen, but rather a military
commander. Her tomb was a square wooden
room at the base of a pit 7.5 meters deep.
The artifacts discovered in the tornb include
460 bronze vessels used for ancestral
offerings. There were also about 16 human
sacrifices as well as 6 dogs, including an
armed man and a dog under the coffin to
protect her in her afterlife. The tomb was
located within the ceremonial enclosure at
Yin (Anyang).

ie) 10m
i

3.64 Interior plan: Tomb of Fu Hao


(0) Tortugas

Cerron Sechin —

San Diego

© Coe Rosario

Sechin River

Sechin Alto

Casma River

Moxeke

Ora

Ochankitio

Pacific Ocean

Las Hildas

©

CIVILIZATION OF THE HIGH ANDES
he transformation of arid Andean valleys into
larmscapes that began at Galgada around
3000 BCE continued at Caral a few centuries
ater. But these grand experiments could not
jast forever. As Caral grew it became more
vulnerable to floods, and over time the soil
quality deteriorated. The valley's decline was
certainly seen as a message from the gods.
But the energy was not lost; it simply moved
to the next valley, Sechin Alto, some 110
ilometers north of Caral. As at Caral, the
culture in this valley arrived fully intending
to transform the river into an agricultural
universe. The people erected an astonishing
300-by-250-meter platform mound rising an
imposing 44 meters above the surrounding
plain. The mound contained 2 million cubic
feet of fill, masonry, and conical mud bricks,
making it the largest construction in the
Americas at that time. It was augmented by
an almost 1-kilometer-long series of axially
aligned platforms, terraces, and circular pits.
As in the Caral Valley, the Sechin Alto
had were no cities in the technical sense,
but rather kilometer-long networks of hamlets
and farmsteads spread out next to the fields
where the slopes fan out before reaching the
valley floor. As more fields were created, new
micro-unities developed, related to one or

The Casma-Sechin valleys contain the largest
concentration of pre-Ceramic Period, Initial Period,

and Early Horizon sites along the Peruvian coast.

another of the preexisting centers. How much
friction there was between centers, if any, is
not known. The people, as would have been
typical throughout Peru, would travel to the
centers on ritual days. Trade was key to the
valley civilization’s survival. Obsidian came
from the highlands, and the wood used for
roofs and doorways came from a tree that
grows only between 1,500 and 3,000 meters
above sea level. Salt was also important for
the preservation of food and fish, with a
major source located 115 kilometers to the
north, near Salinas de Chao. Plant remains
from this site include both the white potato
and the sweet potato.

The site contains more than a hundred
platform structures aligned with two major
edifices separated by a distance of 1.3
kilometers. They are oriented 90 degrees to
the Casma River valley and along the western
side of a valley that opens into the Casma.
Between the two structures are several large
plazas, dominated by a structure known as
Moxeke, some 170 by 160 meters at its base
and 30 meters tall. It consists of stacked
platforms and is rectangular in plan, with
gently rounded corners. A staircase leads up
to a walled square enclosure on a terrace
halfway up. Behind this enclosure is another
staircase, this one between two separate
terrace mounds, both with ritual structures on
their tops.

3.65 The Casma-Sechin valleys

Just as the white stones of the Parthenon in
Athens were once painted in various colors,
so too were these structures. In Peru, the
exteriors were painted in shades of red, the
ancient color of ritual and death, but over
time the color palette became more complex
and was used to portray animals, people, and
mythological scenes. Hindu temples might
serve as living examples of how buildings
were painted.

The outside walls of some of the terraces
were ornamented with figures painted light
red, emerald, white, and black. The size of
the 3-meter-tall figures indicates that they
were designed to be visible from quite a
distance. Furthermore, their placernent high
on the mound front and extending around on
either side serves to enhance their visibility to
the audience in the surrounding plazas.

The valley contains a most unusual building,
known as Huaca A, that is composed of 38
roughly square rooms packed into a large
rectangular building about 150 meters

long, with a courtyard in its center. The
organization of the roorns is complex. The
structure, symmetrical around both axes,
consists of four approximately equivalent
quadrants. Three large spaces define its
dominant central axis, with smaller rooms to
the sides. There are no shared walls between
the room units. The units, each with walls
about 2 meters thick, were constructed as

if they were freestanding elements, even
when placed next to one another. In some
instances there no usable space between
the units; in other instances, the rooms

are separated by corridors. There is also a
substantial increase in the elevation of room
floors as one moves away from the center.
he floor level of the corner rooms is 4
meters higher than the floor of the central
court. There can be no doubt that the rooms
held important commodities, since access to
the various rooms was regulated by wooden
gates and bar closures. The rooms are not
freely interconnected; most of the large
rooms are accessible only from the two large

3.68 Reconstruction: Huaca A, near Casma, Peru

entrance lobbies. Similarly, the smaller rooms
can be accessed only through a carefully
designed system of corridors. The building
was Clearly meant to impress. Ascending the
central staircase, one enters an atrium and
is immediately confronted by an enormous
frieze of a pair of felines, 10 meters long and
about 6 meters tall, facing each other across
the entrance. The three-dimensional aspect
of the animals would have been enhanced
by the curvature of the atrium’s walls. A

low bench, 120 centimeters wide and 25
centimeters high, further accentuates the
frieze and may have served as a barrier to
discourage too close an approach. It seems
that the building was a sacred storehouse,
given that the remains of a variety of plant
foods such as peanuts, beans, and tubers
were found in the niches. And since other
items found there include turquoise beads,
a wooden figurine, and finely made textiles,
the storehouse was likely used not just for
food but for commodities of all sorts. The
building was clearly the focal point for the
bureaucratic and ritualistic activities of
collecting and redistributing food and craft
items.

Chavin de fvantar@)

San Lorenzo
©
©. Venta

Velhatri (Volterra)

Isthmia

@2 Dur-Sharrukin
Jerusalem (O) Chengzhou (Luoyang)

© Marib Varanasi
© ©

Meroé/Napata

™

A San Lorenzo
1300-900 BCE

A Ritual Complex at Fengchu
ca. 1100-1000 BcE

Olmec Cultures

ca. 1500-400 BCE

Ala Venta
1000-400 BCE

Chavin Culture
ca. 1000-400 BCE

A Chavin de Hudntar
ca. 900 BCE

Iron Age
ca. 1200-580 BCE

1000 BCE 800 BCE
Greece: Geometric Period
ca. 900-700 BCE
A Mahram Bilgis
9th century BCE
A Napata
ca. 900-300 BCE
A Temple of Solomon
953-586 BCE
Western Zhou Dynasty
ca. 1046-771 BCE
A Luoyang
ca. 1040 BCE

Early Vedic Period
ca. 1500-800 BCE
A Varanasi
ca. 1000 BCE-present

Neo-Assyrian Empire
ca. 911-612 BCE

Etruscan Culture
ca. 750-90 BCE

A Volterra
5th to 4th centuries BCE

A Banditaccia
8th to 3rd centuries BCE

@ Founding of Rome
753 BCE

600 BCE

@ ca. 776 BCE
Olympic games founded
A Temple of Hera at Samos
8th century BCE
Temple of Apollo at Thermos A
630 BCE
A Temple of Poseidon at Isthmia

7th century BCE

Kingdom of Kush
ca. 760-350 CE

Eastern Zhou Dynasty
771-256 BCE

A Dur-Sharrukin
717-706 BCE

A Babylon
Rebuilt 605 BCE

North

Gulf of Mexico

©

Tres Zapotes

© Lzguna de los Cerros
ra

San Lorenzo (0)

El Manati

Central

La Venta ©

Poverty Point Culture
{ending 700 sce)

O

@) Olmecs

South @ Chavin de Hudntar

Olmec heartland

4.2 Urbanization of the Americas, ca. 800 BCE

THE OLMECS
In the Americas, by 7000 BCE a huge
assortment of plants had come into being
that required little more than rudimentary
plant-tending to harvest. Arnong these were
the potato, peanuts, cacao, beans, manioc,
squash, and avocado. Nowhere else in the
world did such a wide variety of plants appear
in such close geographical proximity. Milling
stones appeared along the southwest coast in
Belize and in northeast Mexico. By 3000 BCE,
hoes start to appear in Gulf Coast sites, and
in Oaxaca and Puebla the first indications
of settlements and village life emerge. The
agricultural revolution had begun. If the
people of the contemporaneous Mississippi
culture had seemed affluent compared to
their neighbors of the open plains, even they
would have been amazed had they traveled
to Mexico and seen the tended garden fields.
It might seem counterintuitive that in a
land where so many different foods were
so easily available that these same people
would master the production of corn. Unlike
wheat, barley, and rice, which in their edible
forms are relatively similar to their wild
forms, corn was the product of hundreds of
years of genetic development. It seems that
this took place in the area that straddles
the El Salvador—Guatemala border, where a
wild grass known as teosinte grows. What
attracted people to the plant is not known,
since it is inedible. Perhaps it was discovered
that the seeds could be “popped” when

roasted. This might have had some ritualistic
significance that focused growers on
perfecting the plant until it finally yielded corn
in the modern sense. At any rate, it is clear
that that corn was not merely a plant—it was
a god, which mean that planting corn was not
only an agricultural process but a theological
one. Soon, certainly before 1000 BCE, it was
discovered that soaking the corn in lime or
ash softened the kernels and allowed the
pods to be made into cornmeal. The process
created significant nutritional advantages over
untreated maize.

4.3 Trade in the Americas, ca. 800 BCE

Corn came in different types and sizes and
was used in a variety of cuisines. One type
was used for cornmeal; another for roasting;
another for hominy, a type of grits; and yet
another for bread. For corn bread, the corn
was grated from the cob and made into a
milky mush—which could also be combined
with bean meal—and was slowly baked until
it became a type of cake. Some types of corn
were best when preserved, which was done
in the sun or over a fire. Corn could also be
used to make a fermented drink.

4.4 A fired-clay Toltec votive vessel with an image of corn priest, dedicated to Xilonen,
the Aztec goddess of maize, from around 1500 ce

It was the Olmecs who set in play the corn-
centric worldview that would become the
marker of civilization in the Americas. They
did so by making a risky move, leaving the
wet forests for uninhabited marshes on the
east coast of Mexico. The only wildlife of
any size in these swampy areas were turtles
and birds. The Olmecs’ decision to build in
stone was even more extraordinary, since
the massive stones that they used had to

be dragged for many kilometers from the
mountains to the north. Two elements were,
however, in their favor: One was salt from
the shore, which they processed and used
to trade for many things they needed. They
also had bitumen from various oil seeps,
which was useful to make watertight baskets
and boats. It might be a stretch to compare
the situation to the modern-day difference
between a family farrn and a corporate one,
but holding this difference in mind, even in
general terms, helps illurninate the drarna set
in play by the Olmecs. This was no gradual
expansion of plant-tending lifestyles; it was a
purposeful industrialization of the landscape.
This means that the Olmecs settled in the
region specifically to transform it from swamp
to a corn-producing center, controlled by

a cult of powerful personalities who were
probably part shaman, part deity, and part
ruler.

4.5 A characteristic motif of Olmec
art was the were-jaguar, a human face
with the mouth of a jaguar

The religious life of the Olmecs centered

on sacred caves, springs, and volcanoes.
The volcano, a symbol frequently used in
Olmec imagery, was associated with the
world being born from below but was also
viewed as the home of the storm clouds,
lightning, and rain. It was depicted as a
dragon with a gaping mouth representing
the portal to the underworld. The sky was
ruled by a bird monster or sun god whose
energy powered the cosmos and made

the plants grow. Underneath the dragon,
the Olmecs visualized a watery void out

of which the world was formed. The main
deity in their mythology was the rain god,
depicted as a jaguar, a shamanistic symbol
of transformation. This jaguar could assume
other forms—even human ones. The sexual
union of a woman and a jaguar gave birth to
a special class of gods that were represented
in sculpture as having toothless gums, fangs,
a snarling mouth, and a cleft head. The
Olmecs learned to drag and float stones and
columns of up to 40 tons over a distance

of 160 kilometers. Most were chiseled into
jaguars or human heads by Olmec sculptors.
Unlike the angular and sharp features of
the sculpture of later civilizations, the Olmec
heads were round, soft, and very lifelike.
They were also quite large—some of them
over 3 meters high.

4.6 Colossal monolithic head uncovered at San Lorenzo, Mexico

Ball playing was an important element of
Olmec ritual, as evidenced by clay figures
showing players wearing heavy leather belts
and possibly headgear. It seems that the ball
players also wore mirrors, giving us some
indication of the magical nature of the games.
Balls ranged from 10 to 22 cm and were
heavy, 3 or 4 kilograms. In a modern-day
game known as u/ama that is played in some
Mesoamerican villages, the play resembles a
net-less volleyball, with each team confined
to one half of the court. The ball is hit back
and forth using only the hips until one tearn
fails to return it or the ball leaves the court.
But why the games were held and what they
signified is not known. Were they to defuse
or resolve conflicts, struggles to the death

by captives, or symbolic activities associated
with calendric events and shamanistic
practices?

North court

Central court.

South court

San Lorenzo and La Venta

The site of San Lorenzo (founded around
1300 BCE), named after a nearby modern
village, is located in the lower reaches of
the Coatzacoalcos River. It was on a hill
overlooking a large agricultural floodplain.
The highest point of the hill was landscaped
to create a plateau covering an area of about
7 square kilometers and resembling in plan
the shape of a bird. Though the wooden
and thatch architecture has long since
disappeared, the use of basaltic stones,
brought from the distant Tuxtla Mountains,
for steps, columns, and aqueducts gives a
vivid picture of the scale and grandeur of
Olmec skills. The main ceremonial complex
consisted of a series of earth platform
mounds arranged north-south in a series of
courts.

Though the mounds are not aligned
according to a single design, huge monolithic
heads stood in the middle of the courts.
The central court also had a series of cut-
stone cisterns that, given their location and
drainage system, must have had had ritual
purpose. One can assume that sites for a
city in this era were not chosen for purely

7 ~
Bf ~ Rcd
“4- » 7 ” a
.

4,7 Site plan: San Lorenzo

economic purposes. San Lorenzo was a ritual
site, but what made it so special compared
to other locations on the plateau? According
to one argument, it was the only place along
the river where the sunset aligned with the
volcano Cerro Zempoaltepec at the winter
solstice.

For unknown reasons, San Lorenzo went
into decline. Many of the great colossal heads
that had been so laboriously brought to the
site were rolled down into the ravines that
divide the edges of the terrace and were
carefully covered up; within a generation
or two, the jungle had totally reclaimed the
site. It is unknown whether this was done to
ritualistically deactivate the site or for other
reasons.

A new center had by then already been
built and prepared, and perhaps the priests
of that center were eager to be the solitary
overlords of the region. It is known as La
Venta and is 80 kilometers northeast of
San Lorenzo and closer to the shore of the
Gulf of Mexico. La Venta was perhaps the
first use of symmetry in the overall design
in Mesoamerican architecture, with the site
appearing to be oriented to the summer
solstice sunset over the volcano San Martin to

the northwest. Its pyramid, about 30 meters
high and 150 meters in diameter—the largest
of the Olmec pyramids—was constructed
from 3,700 cubic meters of beaten earth and
clay, with a rectangular base from which rose
an unusual fluted, conical shape (although
this could have been caused by subsequent
erosion). It was not just the symmetry of the
composition that was new. The designers
used stone sculptures to create a narrative
procession from south to north, while at the
same time burying other sculptures and

artifacts as a type of of
and the visible were m
relationship to each ot!

fering. The invisible
eant to work in
er. The aboveground

sculptures are grouped at significant intervals

along the axis.

Some of the altars of La Venta show a
man exiting a cave holding an infant in his

arms. The co

lors red a

nd green played a

critical part. And naturally, an important

symbolic elerment was

four stelae, pl

jaced at t

maize, celebrated by
foot of the Great

Mound, that show stylized human embryos
wearing maize regalia. They function as four
human-maize seeds, or the originators of the
human race.

4.9 Aerial view: The ceremonial center at La Venta

) Acropolis . : ay)

\ a 0 ~~ 300m

4.8 Partial site plan: La Venta, Mexico

The northernmost plazas were topped off by platforms
and eventually by a wall of basalt columns. The
1,200 tons of stone for the sunken mosaics had been
laboriously cut and hauled from Niltepec, sorne 180
kilometers to the south across the Tehuantepec Gap.
La Venta, like San Lorenzo before it, was a place
where a sacred landscape was produced ex nihilo.
Sacred landscapes had historically been deeply
connected to specific landscapes, but in these sites
there was no such deep tradition. Here the sacred was

The site thus revolved around the concepts
of the timeless repetition of life and death.
But how the Olmecs experienced this is
conjecture. Was a yearly festival celebrated
here? Was the site a type of religious
sanctuary used only by initiates? Regardless,
the site was a man-made spiritual landscape
designed to serve both as a pilgrimage site
and as a massive energizer that would keep
the corn fields productive.

Most astonishing of all were several large
buried plazas that constituted offerings in
their own right, made up of hundreds of tons
of greenstone blocks, placed in huge pits and
imbricated with colored clays. Archaeologists
speculate that they were created as effigies of
a female life-force taking the form of artificial
lakes and rivers that controlled childbirth
and fishing. Part of the design included a
pavement made up of a geometric pattern
known as a quincunx that represents the
surface of the earth with a diamond pattern
fringe, referring perhaps to the flowering
mantle of the earth. Over these offerings,
the builders placed sand of different colors,
phallic celts, and stone figurines.

fabricated and thus spelled the beginning of the end of
the conventional shamanistic world.

4.10 Mysterious buried “pavement,” La Venta

Chavin influence

Central Andes

AChan Chan

© Chavin de Huantar

CHAVIN

© Caral

A Qusqo

Chavin influence

Pacific Ocean

4.11 Chavin culture along the Peruvian coast

CHAVIN DE HUANTAR

By 800 BCE, the innovative Peruvian shore
civilizations at Casma and Supe valleys had
gone into decline and were conquered by
invaders, probably frorn the highlands; no
one knows for sure. The rise and decline
of these civilizations within a relatively short
time, along with the militarization of society,
must have had a powerful impact on the
psyche of the times and seems to have led
to a shift in ideological focus. Power shifted
to centers away from the coast to the rugged
highlands, the most important of which was

Chavin de Huantar, founded around 900 BCE.

It is located halfway between the Supe Valley
to the south and the Casma Valley to the
north, at a place where the Mosna River

narrows dramatically into a precipitous gorge.

There, at the convergence point of two major
passes crossing the snowcapped Cordillera
Blanca, the Mosna meets the Wachesqua
River at a triangular space wedged between
descending mountain slopes that is the only
flat area for miles around. Though seemingly
remote, Chavin de Huantar was only about a
six-day trek to the Pacific Ocean to the west
and to the tropical forests to the east. The
tight valley could never have supported the

population density of Casma; agriculture here
was thus pursued by the more traditional
means of small terraced plots.

The temple of Chavin de Huantar was,
therefore, of a new type of institution deriving
its economy almost entirely from the draw
of its cerernonies and rituals. Unlike ritual
centers in the Supe and Casma valleys, with
their open plazas and relaxed and generously
scaled monuments, here the temple was in
fact less a temple than a type of machine
lesigned to enhance and produce certain
effects. The measure of divinity was not
istance but psychological intimacy, and
perhaps even fear.

The first structure that was built was a
U-shaped platform called the Old Temple.
Facing east, it consisted of a large circular
sunken plaza, with stairs on axis and a

centralized main staircase leading to the
roof of the building, which acted as a raised
terrace. The platform, built of dressed stone,

rose 12 to 16 meters above the plaza. Its
walls were adorned with numerous gigantic
grotesque heads, carved in the round

and inserted in the massive masonry. The
carvings also show jaguars, strornbus shells,
and clawed hands as well as San Pedro
cactus, an Andean hallucinogenic. They were

|
de
a)
Ceremonial center—

/

60 300 m

4.12 Area plan: Chavin de Hudantar, Peru

probably painted in black, white, and shades
of red and blue. The surface of the temple
was most probably painted both inside and
outside, as evidenced by the great quantities
of clay on the floors and the remains of

red and yellow paint that appear on some
side walls. Unlike the earlier centers, which
had rooms on the top of the mounds but

no interiors, here the main attraction was
inside the temple, which, though built as a
solid mass of stone, was honeycombed with
labyrinthine passages. Roofed with large
slabs of stone, these passages are no more
than a meter wide and vary in height, but are
large enough for a person to walk through.
One passage oriented directly on axis with
the round plaza contained a mysterious

and imposing 3-meter-high slender granite
stone known today as the Lanzén. It was not
a natural stone, but a sculpture that is half
cat and half human, the design of which is
wrapped around the stone so that it is never
entirely visible from one standpoint. Facing
east along the axis of the Old Temple but
invisible from outside, its right arm is raised
with open palm of the hand exposed and its
left arm is lowered with the back of the hand
visible. This pose seems to express the role
of the deity as a mediator of opposites or as a


personification of the principle of balance and
order. Its narrow, tapered upper section fits
accurately through a tailor-made hole in the
roof, indicating that the temple was designed
around the statue. Why was this sacred relic
hidden away in the depths of the temple, and
in such a way that it could not be rernoved?
There is a depression on the deity’s head

into which the blood of sacrificed victims

may have been poured from the hole above.
The entire structure was enlarged several
times; the two principal additions affected

the south wing, which ultimately formed a
solid rectangular structure 70 by 72 meters in
plan.

An aspect of the design that seems to
have been at the core of the experience was
sound. Water channels route water beneath
the temple and would have been amplified
in the passageways. The ducts leading to the
outside were perhaps not for air, but to emit
the sound. During the spring flood and when
the underground channels were opened, the
building would have probably come alive with
its roaring. The aqueducts, coming from the
direction of the setting sun, might symbolize
the underground river along which the sun
travels to be born again in the east. This

4.15 Site plan: Chavin de Huantar

Lanz6n

4.13 Section through central passageway of the
Old Temple leading to the Lanz6n at Chavin de
Huantar

river was regarded as the continuation of the
Milky Way. Strombus shell trumpets were
also discovered in one of the galleries, and
when recently played were found to produce
intense auditory experiences. Perhaps the
temple was seen as a type of “mountain,”
alive with the spirit of the deity—a spirit that
could be “summoned” by the priests who
controlled the building's inner mechanisms.
Light might also have played a part. The
corridors are connected to the outside by a
series of perfectly straight narrow tubes often
called ventilation shafts. Experiments have
shown that they could have brought daylight
into the corridors, but also perhaps flames at
night, which would have produced unsettling
effects.

50m

oo eT

4.16 Plan: Old Temple at Chavin de Huantar

4.14 Lanz6n, Chavin de Huantar, Peru

Chavin reflects the use and manipulation of
nature in order to reinforce the power of the
site and its authorities. The amplification of
the rushing water to a roar played a part,

as did hallucinogenic drugs. It is generally
thought that an initiate would have been
led down the corridor, which would have
reverberated with echoes from the rushing
water below, to witness the divinity and
perhaps to hear its oracular declarations.
This suggests that the religious leaders
were not the proverbial chiefs over the land,
but served an institution that was nothing
less than a living deity. The priests fed it,
monitored it, cared for it, and ritualistically
activated it. Though Chavin eventually went
into decline, its sanctity was never forgotten,
even until the arrival of the Spaniards.
Antonio de Espinoza, who visited the site
around 1620, notes that the locals from all
over the Inca kingdom came there to make
offerings and sacrifices.

Zhou

Dynasty

China
-¥'

4.17 West Asian and African metal centers, ca. 800 BCE

THE IRON AGE
Scholars generally think that the forging
of iron was developed by the Hittites, who
kept the technique secret. Its development
had taken thousands of years of familiarity
with kilns, metals, and extraction methods,
until high-temperature smelting could be
mastered. But after the downfall of the
Hittites in 1200 BCE, the art of iron forging
spread, reaching China around 600 BCE.
Apart from China, there were five newly
emerging metal-oriented societies: the
Urartians in Armenia, the Nubians in the
Sudan, the Etruscans in Italy, the Dorians
and lonians in Greece, and, somewhat later,
the Mauryans in India. As these cultures
were all marginal to the Mesopotamian/
Egyptian civilizations, the consequences were
enormous. Iron, in other words, completely
changed the political and civilizational
landscape; areas once peripheral to the
urbanized agro-centric, Mesopotamian/
Egyptian heartlands became important, if not
dominant, players in the world economy.
lron was used to make weapons, of
course, but was also superior for crafting
agricultural implements like plows and
wheels. With iron plows, the plains of
Sicily, the north coast of Africa, and
even the high plains of eastern Anatolia
became major grain-producing regions,

significantly lessening the need for grain
from Mesopotamia and Egypt. Iron farm
implements also had a profound impact

on the development of agriculture in sub-
Saharan Africa, where for the first time, large-
scale agriculture and land clearing could be
undertaken. The African connection—which
was centered around Nubia and later
Aksum—exhausted itself around 600 BCE
largely because deforestation had led to
serious environmental degradation, which
made both mining and agriculture difficult
and had permanent negative consequences
for the economy.

The Urartians were conquered by the
Assyrians in order to secure a steady supply
of metal for their army. There is little left of
Urartian architecture, apart from remnants,
most of it having been destroyed by centuries
of warfare. The Nubians, who produced
extensive architectural works, continued
Egyptian traditions. The Etruscans and the
Dorians were, however, newcomers, having
moved into the Mediterranean from the north.
Their views on the world were different from
that of the Egyptians and Mesopotamians,
leading them to create a highly refined civic-
legal description of the divine that was to
impact European architecture for centuries.
(Many Etruscan and Greek concepts were
adopted by the Romans.)

Etruscans

fast Mectiterranean Sea

Greeks
Zhou dynasty

Assyria —C)

West Asia

Nubia

4.18 Eurasian trade diagram, 800 BCE

In eastern India, the discovery of iron in the
Barabar Hills was to have a global impact. In
the 5th century BCE the rise of the Mauryan
Empire began, first along the Ganges River
and subsequently into Central Asia. By the
6th and 5th centuries BCE, the most powerful
forces in the global economy emanated from
India, Mediterranean Europe, and China, with
Central Asia becoming important mainly as a
transit region. Disadvantageously, this region
could also be attacked frorn many sides;
indeed, for the next thousand years, until

the modern era when relatively fixed national
boundaries were constructed, the borders in
Central Asia were in continual flux as state
after state attempted to secure a dominant
role in cross-Asian trade.

NR
© Spina
Road Arrezo
LigurianfSea
a

me

veil Adriatic Sea

Rome
1 aiiia

‘4, Etruscan area of influence

+

% Napoli

*, Cuma @gy P
%,

Greek area of influence

Phoenician area of influence

4.19 Etruscan Italy

THE ETRUSCANS

The origin of the Etruscans is hotly debated.
Their language, which has only been partially
deciphered, does not belong to the Indo-
European language family. They settled
predominantly in the north part of the Italian
peninsula, between the Arno and Tiber
Rivers and on the west side of the Apennine
Mountains. This territory provided plenty of
metal ore, such as copper, iron, lead, and
silver, but the Etruscans appear to have
acquired the skill to exploit these metals prior
to settling in Italy; indeed, the presence of
these ores might have attracted these settlers
in the first place. For example, Volterra, one
of their main cities, twelve of which formed
the Etruscan League (Dodecapoli), was close
to Colline Metallifere (Metalliferous Hills). The
Etruscan city of Vulci, also part of the league,
was especially noted for its bronze work.

It was not just the Etruscans’ economic
acumen that differentiated them from the
surrounding tribes but also their fantastic
belief structure, which relied heavily on
omens. The Etruscan aesthetic, as displayed
in the decoration of their graves, was
spontaneous, vivacious, and open to the
appreciation of other cultures—especially that
of the Greeks, whose goods and vases they
freely imported and copied. As a group, the
Dorians, lonians, and Etruscans all played an
important part in restoring the Mediterranean

Tyrrhenian Sea

4.20 Tumulus mound, Etruscan necropolis of

Banditaccia at Cerveteri, Italy, 7th to 5th centuries BCE

to economic and cultural viability after the
isruptions of the preceding centuries.
Despite the settlements of the Greeks in
the south and center of Italy, the Etruscans
were able to maintain their hold over the
northern half of the Italian peninsula. There
they had a vibrant interaction with Rome,
the ascendant power, until they were finally
absorbed into the Roman Empire, to which
they contributed substantively. Many Etruscan
cities, like Veii, north of Rome, were, in their
heyday, as big as Athens, with a population
estimated as high as one hundred thousand.
hough the physical fabric of Etruscan

4.21 Example of an Etruscan arch

cities has largely been lost, much can be
discerned from the multitude of tombs that
dot the hillsides—veritable cities of the dead,
all executed in skillful masonry and richly
decorated interiors. Most of the tombs are
in the shape of mounds, some 40 meters
across, that contain decorated chambers.
Many Etruscan walls and gateways in
Rome, Perugia, Cortona, and other places
still exist today. At Velhatri (today’s Volterra),
sections of the formerly 7.3-kilometer-long
enclosure, built during the 5th and 4th
centuries BCE, as well as the Porta all’Arco
and the Porta di Diana, still bear witness to
Etruscan skills. The city gate of Perugia in
particular exhibited a bold use of the arch, a
building element that, along with the vault,
was introduced by the Etruscans and became
one of their main contributions to Roman
architecture. In Rome itself, several famous
structures, including the Circus Maximus
and the Cloaca Maxima, the Roman sewage
system still in use today, were built by
Etruscan masons. The deft and unfailingly
secure use of arches that emerged in Etruria
was to have a tremendous impact on Roman
architecture, as is evidenced by the Roman
aqueducts. Even the Greeks had not equaled
this skill, remaining content with what was
basically a simple post-and-lintel system in
the construction of their temples.

Etruscan Religion

he outward aspect of Etruscan religion

was its scrupulous adherence to ritualistic
formulas. And yet, through Etruscan art and
painting, one senses a lively appreciation of
individuality. This vibrancy did come at the
expense of stylistic unity—something that
ent their art an unmistakable, and in some
sense unusual, receptivity toward outside
influences. Elements of the Corinthian,
jonian, and Attic are all in evidence in
Etruscan art and painting. This is also true
of their religion—so much so that their own
deities came to be fused with, and coalesced
around, Greek ones, paving the way for the
ater Roman assimilation of Greek culture.
Unlike the Greek pantheon, however, that

of the Etruscans included supernatural and
chthonic beings whose number and nature
ave not yet been determined. The Etruscans
also had a complex system of augury (such
as the study of the entrails—especially the
iver) and of sacrificial animals. They studied
and interpreted natural phenomena, such

as comets or the flight paths of birds (a
practice known as auspicium, or divination).
A 3rd-century BCE bronze model of a liver
recovered near Piacenza, Italy, was perhaps
used to train Etruscan priests (haruspices) in
the art of interpretation. The upper surface is
divided into forty sections, corresponding to
the celestial zones of the Etruscan pantheon;
these have the names of gods, including
many with whom we are unfamiliar, engraved
on it. The particularities of the animal's liver
told the priest which deity to invoke. It was
probably meant to be aligned north-south.

One of the words used to describe this
liver was templum, which could refer to the
sky, to a consecrated area on earth, or toa
much smaller surface, such as the liver of
an animal used in divination, as long as the
orientation and partition of the area followed
the celestial model. A fermpfum could thus be
a physical space (in which case it would be
marked or enclosed), but it could also be an
area of the sky, in which the birds would be
observed.

A tempium, in other words, was a space
where humans, represented by priests
(augurs), could interact with the gods. In all
ancient Mediterranean and Mesopotamian
cultures, nature was associated with divine
presences, but for the Etruscans, the gods

spoke through signs. This was not the case
in Mesopotamian religions, where gods
spoke more directly, through priests. For
the Minoans, religion centered on nature's
life cycles, with the gods representing the
stories associated with those cycles. But

for the Etruscans, religion was a practice

of translation. Unlike the more fearsome

and arbitrary gods of the Mesopotamians,
Etruscan gods readily communicated their
intentions. Disaster could come about just as
much from the actions of the gods as from a
misunderstanding of their messages.

©)

Cardo

Decumanus

©

pars dexira pars sinistra

©)

4.23 Diagram of carde and decumanus

The orientation of Etruscan temples was of
critical importance and was determined by
the intersection of two axes, one north-south,
called cardo, and the other east-west, called
decumanus. The idea was employed later

by the Romans in setting up military camps
according to strictly standardized rules and
subsequently became fundamental to Roman
town planning. Apparently these orthogonal
lines were closely connected to Etrusco-ltalic
religious iconography. The observer's place
was at the point where the two lines crossed;
he stood with his back to the north. The
eastern sector to the left (pars sinisira) was
of good omen and superior gods; the western
sector to the right (pars dextra) was of ill
omen and for the infernal deities. The vault

of heaven, thus quartered and oriented, was
further subdivided into sixteen minor sections
in which were placed the habitations of many
divinities. This plan corresponds to the outer
ring of sixteen compartments of the Piacenza
liver.

4
Gry
“Cy a

ne,
vy
Y

200 m

4.24 Site plan: Marzabotto, Italy, 5th century BCE

The position of signs manifested in the sky,
thunderbolts, flights of birds, and other
portents, as studied by the augur, would
indicate which god was responsible for a
particular message and whether it was a

good or a bad omen. This process was called
auspicium, a word that was a combination

of avis (“bird") and specio (“to see”). The
priest and soothsayer watched the flight

and feeding of birds, listened to their cries,
and even examined their entrails. From this
came words like contemplatio, meaning
literally “with a template.” There was also the
distinction between whether the message
was an order or a friendly reminder. All in all,
the femplum (as a type of three-dirnensional
template) stood between the ephemeral

and the real, linking the invisible absolute
realities of the divine with the real needs of
the supplicants. The consecrated ground

on which this took place was expressed

in Etruscan language by the word sacni
(becoming the Latin sancti). When the temple
was finished, the opening was presided

over by the augur in a ceremony called the
inauguratio.

4.25 Detail of an Etruscan capital

4.26 Etruscan tomb, Tarquinia, Italy

ROP DITA Lae

iP

4.27 Plan and pictorial view: An Etruscan temple, based on descriptions by Vitruvius

Etruscan Temples The Etruscans experimented with a range of these structures were of wood, Etruscan

The form of Etruscan temples paralleled columns, including the lonic, until, by the temples had wide intercolurnniations.

certain aspects of Greek temples, but there 5th century BCE, they developed the Tuscan The habit of ornamenting the temple with

are several important differences. The column, as it was later called by Vitruvius. decorative terra-cotta elernents may have
Etruscans never made the leap to stone. This was a smooth wooden column with been taken over from the Greeks, but was
Except at a very late period, the Etruscan diminution toward the top and a capital, akin implemented by the Etruscans with particular

temple was not thought of as requiring to the Doric, consisting of a round cushion showmanship. These elernents were often

permanence. The podium that raised the (echinus) and a square abacus. The bases, on the ridges of the roofs, which were

temple above the surrounding ground level, however, were inspired by the lonic order considered a type of landing place for the
jowever, was often of stone, with stairs or (Doric columns had no bases). Because divine.

ramps leading to the top. The temple proper
was built of mud, brick, and timber. Though
similar to Greek temples in that respect,
Etruscan temples were meant to be viewed
mainly from the front rather than stand as
objects in the landscape; they therefore

ave no rear facade. The pitch of the roof
was relatively low, and they had overhanging
eaves. The pediment was originally open

so that the roof timbers could be seen.
Also distinctive was the roomy colonnaded
porch, known as the pronaos (meaning “in
front of the naos”) that stood in front of the
cella. Etruscans often organized gods into a
trivium, erecting temples with three ceffae;

their overall shape was rectangular, tending
toward square. Etruscan temples introduced
the principal of an axial connection

between temple and altar, which the Greeks
eschewed until very late, and probably then
incorporated only under Italian influence.
Also characteristic was the striking use

of color for the various temple elements,

and the way the mass was broken up by 9 10m
oor i —

antefixae, acroteria, and sculptural groups.

4.28 Side elevation: Portonaccio Temple at Veii, Italy, 515-490 BceE

Macedonia

Phrygia
Thessaly *
Epirus Aegean Sea vt Mysia
Lesbos © ytilene
Aetolia lydia
Athens
Corinth @ O Ephesus @) Caria
Achaea
Ar Miletus
Arcadia Bos Delos ©
Jonian Sea
Sparta Halicarnassus @)

Sea of Crete

Crete

4.29 Greece in the Archaic period

GREECE: THE GEOMETRIC PERIOD
Post-Mycenaean Greece was a period of
migrations, confusion, and poverty. But
over time, the Dorians in Greece and the
lonians along the Turkish coast came to
develop common cultural practices that fused
elements unique to them with residues of
the Minoan and Mycenaean cultures. This
explains some of the differences in their
development from that of the Etruscans.
The Minoans and Mycenaeans, having had
no temples in the technical sense, held
caves and mountains sacred, with worship
augmented by shrines. Homer represents the
gods as highly mobile creatures constantly
visiting each other in their palaces. The
early Dorian religious practices took place
in natural settings, which made it easy to
incorporate some of the features and even
locations of Minoan religion into their own.
These rites, as described by George Hersey,
also often involved trees, or groves of trees,
that were fenced off and decorated with
materials used in sacrifices—bones, horns,
urns, lamps, weapons, fruits, and vegetables.
Trees held a special place in Greek culture,
and almost every god was associated with
one. Athena was, for example, associated
with the olive tree. The altar dedicated

to a god was set out in front of his or her
particular tree or grove.

Participants in the rites would bathe and
dress in special clothes and, accompanied
by flutists, sing while processing to the place
of sacrifice. They were led by a girl carrying
a basket of grain on her head. Under the

Lindos
Rhodes

4.30 Geometric period Greek vase, typically serving as a
monumental grave marker

grain, and concealed from view, was the
slaughtering knife. The sacrificial animal,
decorated with wreaths on his horns, was
then led up to the altar with a fire already
burning on it. Gathering in a circle, the
participants would wash their hands by
pouring water from a jug, which they would
also sprinkle on the animal. The barley grains
from the girl’s basket would be flung over the
animal, altar, and earth. Once the knife was
revealed, the priest would step forward, take
it, and prepare for the sacrifice.

The beast, which had to be a prime
specimen from the domestic herd, rather
than a wild animal, had to be willing to
submit to the sacrifice, so the priest placed
a bowl of milk at the base of the altar. As
the animal stepped forward, it would bow
its head to drink, which was interpreted as
a sign of submission. Another indication of
its assent was its shivering in the sight of the
god, a process helped along by the liberal
use of cold water. As the blood was held to
be precious, it was drained into conduits
and pits beneath the altar. The animal was
then carved up; special meaning was given
to various parts, with the liver being, of
course, particularly important for the augur.
Some parts were chopped up and wrapped
in fat to form a type of reconstituted body.
Sometimes the skull was placed on a stake
near the altar and draped in an animal skin.
Representations of this type of sacrifice
extended to trophies and spoils taken frorn
the conquered in battle, to assuage the spirits
of the dead.

4.31 Statue of a calf-bearer

After the animal was carved, the flesh was
roasted and eaten. The communality of the
meal bound together social units, from the
family to the city. The gods received the act
as devotional; as the smoke, immaterial,
rose up from the altar, it was, so the Greeks
thought, a sign of reverence. In exchange for
this act of devotion, the humans could then
read the message of the gods embedded in
the physical shape of the liver. As mentioned
earlier, the animals sacrificed to the gods had
to be prime specimens from the domestic
herd rather than wild animals.

ie) 20m

wey

ELE erig

|

MSR K UAE

4.32 Plans: The Temple at Samos, Greece (above left). The Altar of Zeus at Pergamon (upper right) drawn at the same scale and orientation

The meaning of this sacrificial process is
explained in the myth of Prometheus, who
stole fire from the gods and brought it to
mankind. In so doing, he made it possible
for humankind to civilize itself. The gods
did not take the fire back but punished
Prometheus by chaining him to a cliff and
having an eagle eat his liver. His liver would
grow back every day, only to be eaten
again. The sacrifice was thus part of a ritual
remembrance of humankind’s emergence
into civilization and of their dependence

on the gods for the regulation of their lives.
But the sacrifice also marked the difference
tween humankind and gods, for unlike

the gods, who existed in an ethereal form,
umankind had to work and show sincerity
to keep the communication alive. Only by
making a sacrifice—in sorne ways a labor of
jove—could men demonstrate that they were
thankful to the deities. That is why a skinny
ull or decrepit goat would not do: the animal
jad to be the best of the lot.

Nevertheless, Dorians, Minoans, and even
Etruscans had somewhat differing notions
about sacrifice. Etruscan sacrifice was
more formulaic and Minoan sacrifice more
intimate than that of the Greeks. Unlike the
Egyptians, Greek sacrifice was connected to
the principles of farming and herding, rather
than to the palace garden. Bread and meat
were at the center of Greek sacrifice. Even
in the Christian Eucharist, which developed
later, the importance of bread and wine is
encountered in veiled form, a comparison

that raises important questions about

the influence of Greek practices on early
Christianity. The importance of the Greeks’
attitudes toward sacrifice might easily be
overlooked because so many of their altars
were removed when Christianity tried to
destroy any evidence of heathen practices. In
fact, in the early days of Greek religion, there
were no temples, only altars built out in the
open.

One of the earliest and most sacred of
the Greek altars, on the top of Mt. Lykaion
in the Greek Peloponnese, dates back to
3000 BCE—Mycenaean times. It eventually
became associated with Zeus, the king of
the Greek gods, but whether that was true
in the earlier period is unknown. Below the
summit there was a stadium, indicating
the site’s association with an athletic
festival, a combination that was to become
another important element of many Greek
sanctuaries.

The Mt. Lykaion altar, like the Temple of
Hera at Samos (8th century BCE) consisted of
no more than a low enclosure of flat stones
forming a rectangle of about 2 by 3.5 meters.
Altars became larger as time progressed; the
one on the Acropolis at Athens, for exarnple,
from the 5th or 4th century BCE, could hold
a dozen bulls at one time. The Altar of Zeus
at Pergarnon, now in the Pergamon Museum
in Berlin, was the most spectacular of all.
Built from 197 to 159 BCE, it featured a flight
of steps on its west side and flanking lonic
colonnades. It stands on a five-stepped,

almost square plinth. The altar proper was
inside the court.

The altars were not necessarily aligned
symmetrically on axis with the ternple,
especially during the Archaic period. At
Samos, the altar, with its sacred tree, stood at
irst at an oblique angle, referring perhaps to
a different celestial moment than that of the
temple.

The emergence of the altar-plus-temple
form coincided with the personification of
gods in statues and, once again, seems to
ave been part of the assimilation process
the Dorians underwent when they came into
contact with older Mediterranean practices.
Early Greek representations of their gods
show influences from both the Mesopotamian
and Egyptian cultures. But Greek
representations were rarely as diminutive as
the Mesopotamian and Minoan statues could
be, nor as large as the Egyptians’ often were.
And perhaps therein lies the origin of the
Greek advancement of the depiction of the
human figure. The earliest three-dimensional
representations of divinities, known as korai
(draped female statues standing with feet
together) were carved from wooden columns
or planks at a roughly life-size scale. The
Greeks called such statues kofossos, which
had nothing to do with their size but denoted
an image that was shaped like a pillar or
column. The statues gradually came to
represent gods in a more relaxed stance,
one foot forward with the weight of the body
balanced naturalistically on the rear leg.


4.33 First Temple of Apollo at Thermos, Greece

4.35 Scene depicting early Greek sacrificial rites

New Temple

4.34 Plan: Later Temple of Apollo at Thermos

Emergence of the Greek Temple Form

The earliest temples, built of mud bricks and
thatched roofs, were presumably modeled on
chieftains’ houses and consisted of a single
elongated, windowless room—a naos or cella
(from which the word cellar cormes}—that
was eventually divided into a pronaos and
naos. An example is the Ternple of Apollo at
Thermos (ca. 950 BCE) in the area of Aetolia
in western Greece, where a low stone wall
supported a high, steeply pitched thatched
roof. There were no side chambers, ancillary
spaces, or storage rooms. Soon a continuous
porch was added around the body of the
building to form an oblong shape, which over
time became regularized and systemized.
Later (ca. 630 BCE) we see, in the successive
rebuilding of the temple, the developrnent

of the temple form over time, ending in

the regularized form of later temples. The
last temple had an elongated form, with
proportions of almost 5 to 1 and a row of
columns down the center.

Though Greek ternples can be found facing
the various directions of the compass, more
than 80 percent were laid out to face the
sunrise, and most, more specifically, faced
toward the sunrise on the actual day of their
founding, which in turn coincided with the
festival day of the divinity to which the temple
was dedicated. From this custom arises the
term orientation, primarily applied to the
direction of the axis of a temple. Temples,
jowever, were also sometimes oriented to
elements in the landscape, to a solitary peak
that suggested the presence of Zeus, or to
double peaks, which, reminiscent of a bull's
jorns, were equated with Zeus. The Greek
sanctuary was far from being a detached
and spiritual sphere. Symbolically, it was
representative of political, economic, and
military life as well as the well-being of the
city and the region. Many temples served as
war museums, holding the spoils of conquest
as well as serving as armories.


4.36 Slightly bigger than life-size
female figure, mid-6th century BCE

The word fernple is widely used to describe
Greek—and often non-Greek—religious
structures, though that word, which is derived
from the Etruscan, came to be used only
later by the Romans. For the Greeks, the
structures were considered a type of house
(oikos) for the deity, who was represented
inside the temple by his cult statue, originally
made out of wood. But unlike Mesopotamian
and Egyptian temples, the Greek temple

had no storage rooms, preparation rooms,
courtyards, or ancillary spaces. The temple
was an integrated architectural unit, the main
purpose of which was to house the divine
statue. The ce/la was used primarily to store
gifts to the temple and even war booty. Unlike
in Egypt, the statue was not mobile: it was not
paraded from site to site. Furthermore, the
main religious events took place outside the
temple, in front of the altar, and not within. Of
particular sacred importance was the idea of
the femenos, the boundary around the temple
precinct. It could only be crossed at one point,
marked by a gate, or propylon. The temenos
did not necessarily have to be a wall, and
could be nothing more than a row of stones on
the ground. Its sanctity was inviolate, as it was
a piece of land cut off from secular reality and
reassigned to the divine.

Long altar *:

Ripert net teecece st

4.37 Site plan: Temple of Poseidon at Isthmia, Greece

Temple of Poseidon

The Temple of Poseidon at Isthmia (ca.

700 BCE), not far from Corinth, is among the
earliest known Greek temples. Its podium
measures 14 by 40 meters, with a central
row of five columns within the cella and

two in the pronaos. The cella was of stone,
but the columns and entablature were of
oak; the roof was low pitched and covered

in fired terra-cotta tiles—a Greek invention.
his temple represents an important break in
the development of temple design. Whereas
the stones for Egyptian temples were of
irregular size, the ashlar blocks of this temple
were laid in regular courses all the way to
the roofline—a standardization of masonry
elements. Furthermore, in Egypt, a wall was
typically composed of two separate walls, the
gap between them filled with rubble. Here
the wall is a single vertical element. As with

Egyptian temples, however, the wall was
covered with a thin coat of plaster that would
present to the viewer a smooth, continuous
surface broken only, in this case, by a series
of pilasters that responded to the rhythm of
the colonnade along the outside of the cella.

The site was fortified in about 1200 BCE,

and ritual festivities were performed from

the middle of the 11th century BCE onward.
The Temple of Poseidon eventually attracted
the Panhellenic Games, called the Isthmia,
which took place every two years in honor of
Melicertes-Palaemon, or Poseidon. The altar
was a 30-meter-long structure in front of the
temple, with the sports field and stadium just
to the south.

4.38 Pictorial view: Temple of Poseidon at Isthmia

ie) 25m

4.40 Overview of Napata tombs

4.39 Section and plan: Typical Napatan royal tomb, near Kuraymah, Sudan

KINGDOM OF KUSH

Egypt had only one main export, grain, and
as the Greeks became more self-reliant, the
Egyptian economy began to falter. It had

no metal either, and in the end it fell victim
to the Iron Age. Not only was it conquered
by the distant Assyrians, Babylonians,
Persians, Greeks, and Romans, but for a
period even by the Nubians, who had been
at the sharp end of the Egyptian spear for
centuries. As a consequence of the imperial
expansion of the New Kingdom dynasties of
Egypt into Nubia, these subjugated peoples
had adopted Egyptian religion, culture,

and weapons of war. The Nubians served

as valued mercenaries in the Egyptian

army, worshipped Egyptian gods, and built
pyramids in which to entomb their rulers.
Nubia was rich in natural resources, notably
gold, with mines numbering in the hundreds
scattered over the desert. To extract the
metal from the veins of the quartz rock, the
rock was first cracked by means of fire, then
crushed into a powder by mills, and finally
washed to separate the ore, which was
melted into small ingots. The system was
hugely labor intensive but yielded, by one
estimation, 40,000 kilograms of gold a year,
an amount that would not be exceeded again

until the 19th century CE. With the demise
of the New Kingdom, Nubia, also known as
Kush, was free to assert itself and, during
the reign of Piye (747-716 BCE), conquered
Egypt and ruled there as the Twenty-fifth
Dynasty.

lron played an important role, for the Kushites
had learned the techniques of ironworking
from their Assyrian enemies. Though the
Kushites had iron, they did not have the fuel
with which to smelt it. For that they had to
turn southward, to the area around the city of
Meroé, where the ancient, largely unexcavated
slag heaps are still visible today. There the
Kushite pharaohs promoted the Egyptian
religion and embarked on programs of temple
restoration.
At first, the center of the Kushite state was
at Napata, lying just above the fourth cataract
in the Nile River. Its focal point was the sacred
flat-topped mountain of Jebel Barkal, which
stands like a natural altar in the landscape a
few kilometers from the northern bank of the
Nile. In its shadow Ramesses II had already
built several temples, one of which was the
rather substantial Ternple of Amun. The
tombs at Napata are sited on both sides of
the Nile; they are all that is left of the Nubian
capital that once stood nearby. The early
tombs were round mastabas. These gave
way to pyramids mounted on high bases with

distinctive porches. During the last phase, at
the height of Kushite control over Egypt, the
rulers simplified the form to a pyramid and

porch. A group of these are located not too far
from Napata, near the modern town of Nuri.
They form a tight cluster, with the bigger ones
loosely lined up in row.

.
4.41 Mortuary structure of Meroé, near Kabushiyah, Sudan

4.42 The ruins of Mahram Bilqis, a Sabaean temple at Ma’rib, Yemen

SABA/SA’ABIA

A much desired commodity during this time
was frankincense, derived from the sap of
the Boswellia sacra tree, which grew mainly
in Yemen. Since its aroma was thought to

be life-enhancing, it was used to anoint
newborns. It was also used in burials to
embalm corpses. The Egyptians used it to
make the distinctive black eyeliner seen

in many Egyptian paintings. The Egyptian
queen Hatshepsut sent an expedition to Punt
(believed to be either Somalia or southern
Arabia ) in 1500 BCE; it returned with thirty-
one frankincense trees, as depicted on the
walls of her mortuary temple near Thebes.
The demand for frankincense was staggering.
Cities like Sumhuram and Ubar in Dhofar
(southern Orman) were reported to export the
equivalent of 3,000 tons of it every year.

In the 9th century BCE, the leading
supplier of frankincense was the Sabaean
kingdom (southwestern Yemen), whose
capital was at Marib. The oil was brought
up to the Levant, its prime outlet to world
markets. The Israelites served as important
mediators in this trade. Though the Sabaean
area is now barren, it was then a lush oasis
irrigated by means of a massive dam, the
largest engineering work in the world at that
time. Marib's main temple, Mahram Bildis,
or “Temple of the Moon God,” was situated
about 5 kilometers from Marib. It was so

Ee

alam

4.44 Frankincense tree

famous that it remained sacred even after
the rerouting of the spice trail caused the
collapse of the Sabaean kingdom in the 6th
century BCE. The dam, left in a state of poor
repair, collapsed, causing the emigration of
fifty thousand people and the abandonment
of the city.

The temple was unusual, a rectangular
structure with an inner peristyle. It was
accessed at its north and south entrances by
massive gates and towers. Once through the
temple, one entered an oval, walled enclosure
about 90 meters across. There is still muc'
archaeology that needs to be done on this
site. The enclosure probably defined a sacred

garden, but its purpose and function are
unknown. Even the dedication of the temp!
is uncertain; some say it was to a moon

fo)

goddess, others that it was a sun temple. The
building was not an isolated structure, but
part of a large complex now buried beneat!

the sand.

4.43 Plan of Mahram Bilqis

4.45 Conjectural plan, section, and pictorial view: Temple of Solomon, Jerusalem

TEMPLE OF SOLOMON
No other building from these ancient times
quite compares to the Ternple of Solomon,
and the reason is not necessarily because
of splendor or size. There were certainly
buildings that were larger and more
elaborately decked out. Rather it is because
there is a precise description of it in the Bible
in the book of Kings. One of Judaism’s great
contributions to the world was its concept of
ethical monotheism, which became the basis
of both Christianity and Islam.

The Jewish conception of religious
space is a complex one. The Jahweh of the
Israelites is an invisible, unrepresentable
entity, a purely ethical force that is not
permitted to be called by narne. The mental
image of the Israelites’ self-identification was
that of desert tribes living in tents in which
permanent buildings played no role. Indeed,
it has been held by some scholars that Moses
refused to bring his charges across the
Jordan into Canaan for fear that they would
become concretized—that is, tied to property
and agriculture.

After Moses’s death, the Israelites entered

Palestine and founde:
capital. A threshing flo
the Jebusite “Zion” on
for carrying out the tra
and as a place to disp!

Jerusalem as their

or was brought from
Mt. Moriah as a place
ditional sacrifices

lay the sacred ark.

As described in the Bi

le, the ark was a

gold-plated, portable chest containing the
two stone tablets of Moses on which were
inscribed the Ten Commandments. On top
of it sat figures of two winged cherubim
facing each other, the only kind of bodily
representation permitted. Their outspread
wings formed the throne of God, while the ark
itself was his footstool. Wherever the Israelites
went, the ark was carried in front by priests,
especially in wars where its leading presence
was viewed as a blessing for the enterprise.

It was veiled in badgers’ skins and blue cloth
so that even the Levites, who were the only
ones allowed to handle it, could not see it. As
a more symbolic statement of permanence,
Solomon, King David's son, built the First
Temple for the ark (dedicated ca. 950 BCE).
It was built with substantial help from Hiram
of Tyre, who delivered not only the famous
cedars of Lebanon used in its construction
but also, so it is suggested by specialists, his
favorite architect, Chiram Abiff.

Because Solomon married the daughter
of Amenhotep III, one could expect a

certain ammount of Egyptian influence at the
Solomonic court. Even though the temple

had an altar in front for animal sacrifices, the
temple was not viewed as the residence of

a god but as an elaborate container for the
ark in the windowless Holy of Holies (Kodesh
Kodashim). This room—in which, it was
thought, one could speak to God directly—
contained no furniture, but had, guarding the

ark, two tall statues representing cherubim,
whose outspread wings met in the center of
the room. Over the centuries, many attempts
at a reconstruction of the temple have been
made from the descriptions given in the
Bible. Details as to the temple's features
are given in 1 Kings 6:19 and 8:6: “And the
jouse, when it was in building, was built
of stone made ready before it was brought
thither: so that there was neither hammer
nor axe nor any tool of iron heard in the
jouse, while it was in building.” The reason
for the injunction against iron tools at the
construction site—though they were certainly
used in preparing stones before they reached
the site—is the cause of much discussion.
he reason probably has something to do
with the fact that iron smelting was often
associated with negative magic and thus was
potentially polluting.

The temple was destroyed in 586 BCE
by the Babylonians, and the Jewish
population was taken into the Babylonian
Exile (597-537 BCE). Today's Wailing Wall is
a remnant of the foundations of the Second
Temple (515 BCE), built by the Israelites
after they had returned from their enforced
exile to Babylon. It was that temple that was
destroyed, in 70 CE, by the Romans. Hadrian
built a temple to Jupiter on the site. That
building was in turn demolished and replaced
by the Dome of the Rock.


4.46 Gui vessel

ZHOU DYNASTY, CHINA
The Zhou tribes from northwestern China
conquered the Shang. The Western Zhou
(1046-771 BCE) and Eastern Zhou (771-
256 BCE) periods are distinguished by the
relocation of the capital city from Hao (near
the present city of Xi’an) in the west to
Luoyang in Henan Province. The move was
apparently prompted by the need to stabilize
the eastern provinces. The Zhou soon
entered into a period of internal strife, known
as the Warring States Period (475-221 BCE).
Despite this, the Zhou made the transition
to iron, developing cast-iron production (as
opposed to forged iron in the West) around
500 BCE. They also established the first
imperial cities, two of which—Xi’an and
Luoyang—are still major urban centers today.
Though it might seem that China has
een “Chinese” from early on, there were,
prior to the Zhou dynasty, several regional
and linguistic groups (somewhat similar to
what one might have found in South Asia).
n their conquests, the Zhou enforced the
use of the Chinese language, part of an effort
that they perceived to be a civilizing agenda.
hose who did not want to succumb moved
southward, displacing or integrating into
local populations to become the ancestors of
modern Thai, Laotians, and Burmese. Rites
of worship, an ideology of harmony, and the
sacrifices to ancestral deities all served to
link political and religious authority. The Zhou
articulated this as the “mandate of heaven”
(fianming), which will be discussed in more

4.47 Zun vessel

detail in a later chapter. It is thus safe to
say that during the Zhou dynasty, many of
the cultural and political ideals that were
to pervade Chinese imperial society were
established.

Underlying this mandate was the principle
of ritual (/), a sign of aristocratic behavior.
Several Zhou period texts, including Zhou
fi (Rituals of Zhou), Yi ff (Ceremony and
Ritual), and Li jie (Record of Ritual) detail
the organization at the courtly duties that
governed every rank and office. Li consists
of the norms of proper social behavior as
taught to others by fathers, village elders, and
government officials.

At the core of the ritual were elaborate
bronze vessels that were placed on platforms
during ancestor ceremonies. The vessels
were used as offerings, with different types

4.48 Ding vessel

of foods requiring different types of vessels.
There were vessels containing millet wine
{zun), vessels containing food (ding and gui),
and vessels containing water. Some vessels,
with their long feet, made it possible to cook
the food inside, making a fire of charcoal
under the vessel. Ritual books minutely
describe who was allowed to use what kinds
and number of sacrificial vessels, with the
ding being the most important and even used
as a indicator of power. The king of Zhou
could use 9 ding and 8 gui vessels; a duke
was allowed to use 7 ding and 6 gui vessels;
and so forth down the line. These elaborately
scripted activities were meant to suppress
the tension between imperial divine control
and the agitation from the camps of the clan
elites, who were continually jostling for power
and prestige.

4.49 A modern food offering in a market stall in Bangkok

West and east
small courtyards pee

ar en

Front hall”

eee

ide rooms

aie

@ East si

Front courtyard

Screen wall

The Ritual Complex

Under the Zhou, ritual halls became part

of the standard architectural vocabulary.
These halls were places where the elite
assembled according to their status in the
social hierarchy. The vessels would be

set out on the floor or low shelves in pre-
established order, with the rituals themselves
accompanied by chimes that marked noble
rank. A chime of sixty-five bells, which would
have required six musicians standing and
kneeling on both sides of the instrument, was
recovered from a Zhou dynasty tormb. The
hall was positioned in a central court entered
through a gatehouse. A reconstruction of the
ritual complex at Fengchu (1100-1000 BCE)
shows an axially symmetrical arrangement of
one-story buildings. In front of the entrance
there was a freestanding wall, which, as in
later Chinese structures, served to prevent
unwanted spirits from entering the complex.
The ritual platform was accessible by three
flights of stairs. The main construction was of
wood, with bronze used to bind and reinforce
structural elements at the joints.

4.50 Plan: Ritual complex at Fengchu,
Shaanxi Province, China

Although the only physical evidence of

Zhou cities are earth foundations, there is

an important description of an ideal city,
accompanied by an illustration, in the
Rituals of Zhou. The description, known as
the Wangcheng plan, is presumed to be of
Luoyang, capital of the Eastern Zhou dynasty,
but is better known as Wangcheng, or
“Ruler’s City”:

The jiangren, or master craftsman,
builds the state, leveling the ground with
the water by using a plumb line. He lays out
posts, taking the plumb line (to ensure the
posts’ verticality) and using their shadows as
the determiners of a midpoint. He examines
the shadows of the rising and setting
sun and makes a circle that includes the
midpoints of the two shadows.

The master craftsman constructs the
state capital. He makes a square nine / of
each side; each side has three gates. Within
the capital are nine north-south and nine
east-west streets. The north-south streets
are nine carriage tracks in width. On the left
(as one faces south, or to the east) is the
Ancestral Temple, and to the right (west)
are the Altars of Soil and Grain. In the front
is the Hall of Audience and behind, the
markets. *

*Nancy Shatzman Steinhardt, Chinese Imperial City
Planning (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1990),
33.

4.51 Pictorial view: Ritual complex at Fengchu

4.52 Idealized plan of Wangcheng

— Site of later 6th-century BCE

Luo River

Drawings of Luoyang from the 15th and 17th
centuries CE illustrate its salient features,
with the addition of the inner city walls. Not
far from the temple one finds soil and grain
altars, the private or sleeping chambers (gin),
and the markets. Although no single Chinese
city of later date seems to actually have been
built according to the Wangcheng plan, it
can be argued that most subsequent major
Chinese cities developed along its basic
principles. Wangcheng symbolizes the notion
that the Chinese emperor is at the center

of the world; in addition, the number nine,
which sounds like the word /ong-lasting in
Chinese, was habitually associated with the
emperor. City walls were not only defensive
but also a symbol of a ruler’s power and
nobility. The three words cheng, du, and jing
are each commonly translated into English as
“city,” but cheng, as a verb, meant “walling a
city.” Later, in imperial China, cheng referred
to a walled administrative city. Even in
common parlance today, cheng is translated
as “city wall” or sirnply “wall.”

Zhou dynasty graves

} Markets

Palace

In 1038 BCE, the Duke of Zhou founded a
new city, Chengzhou, to the north of the Luo
River. It was intended to be the capital but
did not become so until 770 BCE. The city,
which closely resernbles the ideas of the
Wangcheng plan, had a palace at the center,
three markets to the north and to the south,
an ancestral ternple, and, next to it, altars of
soil and grain. It was destroyed in a civil war
in 510 BCE and rebuilt with a modified design
and with a new name, Luoyang, which is its
current name.

mS 4.53 City plan of Chengzhou (Luoyang)

Kamboja
Ghandara
Maccha
Kuru
;—Varanasi

Pancala ; .

Surasena Kosala / Vajji
v é Anga
Avanti amsa O Malla
Cetiya Kasi
Magadha
Arabian Sea Asaka
Bay of Bengal

4.54 The sixteen great kingdoms, or mahajanapadas, of India

THE ARYAN INVASION AND VARANASI
As the cities of the Indus Ghaggar-Hakra
civilization were withering away, a group of
migrants, originating in Central Asia, made
their appearance. These Indo-Aryans, as
they are now called, were expert horsemen,
inventors of the chariot, and skilled in their
use of iron. They settled first around five
tributaries of the Indus River, but then, using
iron to chop down the forests, moved into the
fertile Gangetic Plains around 1200 BCE. Of
the numerous cities that came to be built, little
remains, since everything was made of wood.
By the year 1000 BCE, sixteen kingdoms and
semirepublics, known as mahajanapadas,
had developed. Warfare armong them

was constant, with victors absorbing the
vanquished and destroying their cities. By
500 BCE, four mahajanapadas dominated:
Magacha, Kosala, Kasi, and the republican
Vrajji Confederacy. Around 450 BCE, Magadha
became the dominant power by defeating

the Vrajji Confederacy as well as Kosala and
Kasi. Kasi’s capital, Varanasi, was spared the
normal fate of a conquered city and granted
special status as a pilgrimage site. It was
here that codification of Aryan rituals, as
elaborated in their oral treatises, took place.
What emerged was not a single doctrine, but
various philosophical schools ranging from the
materialist to the atheist.

4.56 A contemporary Vedic fire
ceremony, Satara, Maharashtra, India

ive

 Manikarnika Ghat

Temple sites

4.55 Plan of Varanasi, India

4.57 A cremation fire at Varanasi

Varanasi was so important as a center of
religious learning that in the 6th century BCE,
the famed Shakyamuni Buddha made
Varanasi his first stop after his self-
enlightenment. Numerous other influential
thinkers came to the city as well, including
Adi Shankara (9th centuryCE), whose
teachings and writings laid the foundations
of Hinduism, which relied heavily on Vedic
ideas.

Vedic rituals did not require ternples
or even the creation of statues. They were
based on fire sacrifices of various kinds that
needed only brick platforms. Fire was the
agent that enabled the transformation of the
sacrificial food (matter) into smoke and air
(energy). The water of the Ganges is also
sacred as another essential element of life. At
dawn every morning, thousands of devotees
gather on ghats—steps leading down to the
shore—to face the sun that rises across the
broad expanse of the Ganges River and is
reflected in its waters. Half immersed in the
river, they greet the sun by cupping the water
of the Ganges into their palms and pouring it
back into the river with arms extended. This
is followed by a slow turn of 360 degrees
while standing in place, a miniature act
of circumambulation. A quick dip in the
river completes the ritual. This ritual can
be repeated many times or performed with
greater elaboration that includes long chants
and sequences of yogic postures.

Varanasi is built on the western side of
the river on a high, natural berm at a curve in
the river. Behind the berm, in a semicircular
arch, lies the dense fabric of the medieval
city, with twisting narrow streets and a
multitude of ternples, water tanks, and street
shrines.

76
naire

HIV GANG!

4.58 Ritual ablutions at Varanasi

The eighty-four ghats that line the river's edge
are accessed at more than fifty locations
along the berm. In the midst of all this, one
can see rituals pertaining to every aspect

of human life: the shaving of a newborn’s
head, the first blessing after a marriage,

the penances of old age. The Manikarnika
and Harishchandra ghats are particularly
important, as they are dedicated to the ritual
of cremations; it is from these ghats that

the ashes of the dead are immersed into

4.59 The ghats of Varanasi

RY g.
a en

the Ganges River. To be born and, more
importantly, to be crernated at Varanasi is
to attain the highest aspiration of Hindu
practice: moksha or nirvana—freedom from
the cycle of birth and death.

Most of the ternples and ghats that
one sees today date from the 18th and
19th centuries CE. In the 9th century BCE,
there was a much simpler—but no less
symbolically powerful—relationship between
land and water.


Khorsabad
Nreven @
Neo-Assyrian Empire Kalakh (Nimrud)

Caspian Sea

Ashur
i
g & a
iN “oy, &
¢ He, B
iS ay
&
Oo
&
y
BS Ba bylon®
QQ
3
%
%e
Xz,

4.60 Neo-Assyrian Empire

NEO-ASSYRIAN EMPIRE

The open terrain of the Mesopotamian
heartland exposed the Assyrians, who
controlled the northern river regions, to the
seminomadic intrusions of the Kassites, the
Hurrians, and subsequently, the Mitannians,
whose kingdom was to extend over all of
northern Mesopotamia. Assyria remained
under Mitannian rule until early in the 14th
century BCE, with only the core of its kingdom
more or less intact, forming a narrow strip

of land 150 kilometers long and only 40
kilometers wide along the western bank of the
Tigris River. After the Mitanni defeat at the
hands of the Hittites, the Assyrians reasserted
themselves, invading Syria and compelling
Mediterranean coastal cities like Tyre, Sidon,
Byblos, and Arvad to pay tribute. In 663 BCE,
the Assyrians were even able to sack the
Egyptian city of Thebes. They were the first

4.61 Plan: Dur-Sharrukin (Khorsabad), near Mosul, Iraq

to command a truly Iron Age army. Though
linked to Mesopotamian religious practices,
the neo-Assyrians, with the god Assur at the
top of their pantheon, imposed a particularly
strict rule of divinely sanctioned warfare.
Their engineers built bridges, tunnels, moats,
and weapons of various sorts. By the year
668 BCE, Assyria had control over Egypt and
the Nile River valley.

Because Assyria’s first capital, Ashur, on
the west bank of the Tigris, was open to the
western steppe, it was relocated by Assur-
Nasir-Pal II to Old Kalakh, now Nimrud, 64
kilometers to the north. But shortly thereafter,
Sargon II (r. 722-705 BCE) designed the
remarkable Dur-Sharrukin (Fort Sargon)
near the present-day village of Khorsabad.
Located 24 kilometers northeast of Nineveh,
the fortress/city controlled the main pass
route coming down from the mountains to
the north, and its founding was intended to
fend off any threat of invasion by the northern
tribes. It was also a place where precious iron
ore could be funneled into the empire. In
plan, the city was a squarish parallelogram,
with the palace, ternples, and government
buildings all compressed into an autonomous
unit straddling the walls. In all, it covered 300
hectares of ground.


4.62 View of palace compound of Dur-Sharrukin (Khorsabad)

On the northwest side, half within and half
without the circuit of the walls, protruding
into the plain like a great bastion, stood the
royal enclave. It rested on a 16-meter-high,
10-hectare platform overlooking the city

wall and comprised more than two hundred
rooms and thirty courtyards. The palace

in the center opened around a large inner
court. It contained the public reception
rooms, which were elaborately decorated
with sculptures and historical inscriptions
representing scenes of hunting, worship,
feasts, and battles. The harem, with separate
provisions for four wives, occupied the south
corner. The stables, kitchen, bakery, and
wine cellar were located at the east corner.
In the west corner stood the temple with

a multistage ziggurat, its seven floor levels
painted in different colors and connected

by ramps. Below this enclave, on the inner
side, was a Zone surrounded by its own walls
that held the administrative heart of the city
and the sumptuous houses of high-ranking
officials. For some reason, but likely because
of its precarious position at the perimeter

of the empire, Sargon’s son and successor,
Sennacherib, moved the capital back to the
old established city of Nineveh.

The Assyrians, though possessing a
formidable military machine, were unable

to translate military success into economic
stability. This was largely because they
relocated vast numbers of people—estimates
are as high as around six million—in their
effort to thwart rebellion. Not only were

the resettled peoples unfamiliar with their
new lands, but many of their skills were no
longer appropriate. In essence, the Assyrians
obliterated their own tax base and quickly ran
out of money.

ha , Northern fortress

Tshtar gate’ \

Summer Palace

_ a4

tty

4.63 Plan of Babylon, near Al Hillah, Iraq

Babylon
Even at the height of Assyrian power, Babylon ;
remained the ceremonial center of southern 3
Mesopotamia. By the mid-7th century BCE, >
however, as Assyria went into decline, the
city began to assert itself, sacking Nineveh ,
in 612 BCE and initiating a new but brief era
of prosperity—brief because the Babylonians
more or less copied the failed economic
scheme of the Assyrians. Nebuchadnezzar,
who ruled between 604 and 562 BCE, started .
massive building projects. By 560 BCE, if
Babylon was certainly the most spectacular
city in all of western Asia if not the world.
Spanning the Euphrates, Babylon had two
principal residential districts, with the palace .
and ziggurat compounds located along the a
shore. The palace reputedly had a garden wn
on a high terrace some 18 meters above the
river; a pump brought water up from the river.

The Ishtar gate, brilliantly decorated with -
animal figures in yellow and white glazed
brick against a vivid blue background,
conveys a sense of the splendor of the city. It a
was the terminus of a processional way that ‘
led from the palace to the ternple of Ishtar of
Agade (Bit Akitu) that was used during the
New Year festival.

4.64 Ishtar gate leading into Babylon from the north

—\

dog.

ch

a

realm

Throne room

ge
oe
pa

4.65 Plan: Summer Palace, Babylon

The Summer Palace was located on the
northern side of the city between the Ishtar
gate and the Euphrates. Similar to Assyrian
tradition, the palace was not in the city

but at its perimeter, an indication of its

ambiguous status in relationship to the urban
inhabitants. But unlike Assyrian practices,
the religious precinct remained in the center.
terraces
low,
je famous

The palace was constructed on hig!
and overlooked the plain and river
but whether it was the location of t
Hanging Gardens is not known. There were
five courtyards at the core of the palace

that formed an east-west chain through the
expansive complex, each courtyard serving

a different register of rooms in the north-
south direction. The throne room was located
lengthwise to the largest courtyard. It might
have been barrel-vaulted, given the size of
the walls. Typically for the age, the courtyards
were not symmetrically aligned with each
other. Access from one to the other was
through a type of gate room.

9

Babylonia's economic power was short-lived.
The Greeks no longer needed Mesopotamian
grain, having developed Sicily for that
purpose. Persia to the east, having a more
coherent sociopolitical system, was better
able to control the emerging trade routes
between east and west and soon became
the dominant regional player. Babylonia was
folded into the Persian Empire in 539 BCE.


5.1 Parthenon, Athens

INTRODUCTION

From China to Greece, religious, ethical,

and social thinking was undergoing various
evaluations that contrasted with centuries-old
traditions that had accepted the notion that
power was imposed from the top, by force

or by ancestral privilege, rather than that it
should be examined from a theorized point of
view. In the 6th century BCE, however, we see
the emergence of a more conscious attempt
to think though the question of ethics and
governance. In China, for example, Confucius
(551-479 BCE) envisioned a world defined by
reason and proper conduct, while Daoism,
which existed alongside Confucianism,
stressed a sort of quietist noninterference and
the paradox of complementary opposites.

In India, Buddha and Mahavira challenged
the highly stratified world of Vedic orthodoxy,
emphasizing the discipline of self-abnegation.
Buddhism might have remained tangential to
history had it not been made a state religion
by Asoka (304-232 BCE), the creator of the
first empire of South Asia. Since Buddhism
at the time was largely an ascetic practice,
Asoka did not order the construction of large
temples, but set up pillars with the teachings
of the Buddha etched onto them. In western
and Central Asia we find Zoroastrianism, an
ethically based religion that perceived the
world as a struggle between good and evil.
Man was viewed as a potential helper of God,
capable of eradicating evil. And in Greece,
Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, and others engaged
in vigorous debates about democracy, law,
and social philosophy. Athens, adopting
democracy, became seminal in prefiguring the
modern state.

- «

Politically, however, the major player in
western and Central Asia was Persia. Filling
the vacuum created by the collapse of the
Egyptian, Assyrian, and Babylonian empires,
it extended its reach from northern India to
Greece, giving rise to new architectural forms
in the expansive capitals of Pasargadae and
Persepolis. Persepolis was a showplace of
prestige. It was not a city and not a fortress,
but an array of vast palaces for feasting and
banqueting, all set up on a terrace that made
it visible to the thousands of people who
came there annually to pay their respects to
the great kings. The Mediterranean, however,
remained firmly under Greek control, with the
Greeks, in the 5th century BCE, developing
an architectural vocabulary that was later to
become foundational for Roman architecture.
Still today, the Parthenon is celebrated as one
of the greatest buildings in the world.

The famous battles between Greece
and Persia can deflect us, however, from
understanding the geopolitical energy that
these two areas brought to the Eurasian
world. Persia was the link between the
Mediterranean Sea and India; and just as
Greece was working to expand its trade
relations with the agropastoral communities
to their north, so too the Indians sought to
expand their connections to the south of the
subcontinent. These three regions—India,
Persia, and the Mediterranean/Black Sea—
were knit into a tight economic unit.

Persia’s unsuccessful atternpt to
conquer Greece was to have unintended
consequences. It stimulated the fantasy and
ambitions of Alexander (356-323 BCE), who

conquered Persia and its territories. For a
while it seemed that the Greek Empire would
stretch all the way to the Indus River, but
Alexander's ambitions were cut short by his
death in Babylon in 323 BCE. The conquered
lands, divided among his generals, turned
into quasi-independent states and regional
power centers. The strongest of these was
Egypt, ruled by the Ptolemies, who governed
from Alexandria. An equally important city-
state was Pergamon in Anatolia. The tiny
island trading city of Delos overtook Athens
as the cosmopolitan trading hub in the
Mediterranean. The impact of Greek culture,
generally called Hellenism in lands far

from Greece, was huge. It was an aesthetic
that tended toward realism, delicacy, and
emotional expression. The columns and
entabluatures of 9th-century CE Khmer

in Cambodia make it clear that, however
remotely, Hellenism was still a factor in the
architectural conversation. Knmer masons,
probably from India, knew nothing of the
Greeks, but the legacy persisted. The impact
of Hellenism made its way to China as well, in
the sculptural representations of Buddha.

n South America, the most important
cultural developments were well-organized
societies that inhabited the Peruvian
lowlands: the Moche civilization to the north,
and the Nazca tribes to the south. The
Olmecs, who had been the most influential

culture in Mesoamerica for some time, were
in decline by 400 BCE, having been replaced
by the Maya and Zapotec peoples, who were
making the transition from chiefdoms to small
states.


600 BCE

A Paestum

Founded ca. 600 BCE

Greece: Archaic Period
ca. 700-480 BCE

A Temple of Poseidon at Isthmia
ca. 600 BCE

Achaemenid Empire
ca. 559-330 BCE
A Pasardadae A Persepolis
ca. 546 BCE ca. 518 BCE

Classical Period
ca. 480-323 BCE
A Parthenon
ca. 447-438 BCE

A Propylaea
ca. 435 BCE

@ Socrates
Born 470 BCE

A Erechtheum
ca. 421-405 BCE

A Temple of Athena Nike
ca. 427 BCE

400 BCE

A Miletus
Founded ca. 500 BCE

A Second Temple of Solomon
516 BCE

Rise of great states in South Asia
8th to 6th centuries BCE

China: Eastern Zhou Dynasty
ca. 770-256 BCE
@) Confucius

@ Gautama Buddha
Born 556 BCE

A Tomb of Zeng Hou Yi

Born 551 BCE ca. 433 BCE

Warring States period
ca. 481-221 BCE

Seleucid Period
ca. 305-247 BCE

Alexandrian Empire
334-ca. 301 BCE
A Seleucid
Founded 305 BCE

Hellenistic Period
ca. 323-31 BCE
A Athenas Polias at Priene
334 BCE

A Temple of Apollo at Didyma
ca. 313 BCE-41 CE

Sanctuary of Athena at Lindos A
ca. 190 BCE

200 BCE

A Priene
Founded ca. 334 BCE

A Pergamon
ca. 300-150 BCE

Egypt: Ptolemaic Dynasty
323-40 BCE
A Temple of Horus
Begun 237 BCE

Mauryan Dynasty
ca. 323-185 BCE

A Lomas Rsi Cave
ca. 300 BCE

Qin Dynasty
ca. 221-206 BCE
A Xianyang Palace No. 1

4th century BCE
A First Emperor’s Tomb

246-210 BCE
@ Laozi, founder of Taoism
Late 4th century BCE

SCYTHIA
THRACE 2
C284, &
on Mon a
MACEDON 4 Black Sea * %

: 8

3S

BACTRIA
CILICIA PARTHIA
CRETE cyprus SYRIA Accbatana
Mediterranean Sea Damascus MEDIA
A Ba Susa P |
A Jerusalem ersepolls
Memphis
Berbers PERSIA
EGYPT io
ee
Thebes og “e
S
&
Arabian Sea

5.2 The Achaemenid Empire

THE ACHAEMENID EMPIRE

Settlers arrived on the Iranian plateau
sometime before or during the fifth millennium
BCE, with one of their ancient cities, Tepe Sialk
(in central Iran, near the present-day city of
Kashan), experiencing various occupations
until about 800 BCE. By that time, the area
had become known as Mede, and powerful
kings extended control southward over the
Elamite civilization located in the plains around
Susa. With the weakening of the Assyrians to
the west, one of the Median kings, Cyaxares
(625-585 BCE), invaded and destroyed their
capital, Nineveh, marching all the way to

the gates of Sardis, where he turned back
when a solar eclipse, interpreted as a bad
omen, occurred. The capital of the Median
kingdom at the time was Hagmatana (“Place
of Assembly”), located under the modern

city of Hamadan. The Median kingdom,
however, underwent a transformation when
the Persians, a branch of the Medians, tock
control under Cyrus the Great (559-530 BCE),
who picked up where Cyaxares had left off
and, in effect, united the Elamite, Median,
and Babylonian realms into the Achaemenid
Empire (also known as the First Persian
Empire) that extended from Anatolia to the
Persian Gulf. The ascendency of the Persians
had important geopolitical consequences in
that their lands were halfway between India
and the Mediterranean. They were well aware
of this, of course, and indeed, their existence
depended on extending trade in these two
directions.

Like all ermpires, the Persians went through
their expansionary mode, with famous military
campaigns by both Darius and his son
Xerxes | (in 490 and 480 BCE, respectively)
against the Greeks. Both campaigns were
unsuccessful, but the Persian alliance

with the Phoenicians, who contributed
substantially to their fleet, brought prosperity
to the Levant and its cities along the eastern
Mediterranean coast. Phoenician cities like
Byblos and Sidon experienced an economic
upturn. The Persians, seeing for the first time
the great buildings of Egypt and western Asia,
were eager to match these accomplishments.
From the lonians, Persia not only collected
taxes but also took their farnously skilled
craftsmen. An inscription of Darius’s relates

Greece/Phoenicia

EUROPE | |

EGYPT

that the stonecutters who worked on his
palaces were from lonia, and the wood
craftsmen were brought in from Lebanon,
along with large boatloads of lumber.

By the year 500 BCE, the Achaemenid
Empire had grown to become the largest
and most important realm in Asia, especially
under Darius (522-486 BCE), who extended
the boundaries of the empire into the heart
of Egypt; the Zhou dynasty in China, by
comparison, was still relatively isolated. The
numerous city-states in India were occupied
fighting each other. The Persians seemed
to have learned from the negative lesson
of the Assyrians and Babylonians. Unlike
them, Persian rulers attempted to gain the
good will of their subject nations. Darius,

for example, allowed Jews to rebuild the
Temple of Jerusalem, which was finished in
516 BCE, the sixth year of his reign. Weights
and measures were standardized, and an
extensive road network was built—the first
organized system of roads in history. The
Royal Highway ran from Sardis, on the coast
of Anatolia, to Susa, where it linked up, by
means of western extensions, to the silk
routes and to Pasargadae and Persepolis,
the newly constructed Persian capitals. In
fact, apart from the Greece, India, and Egypt,
Persia was to a large extent surrounded by
nomads and pastoralists, none of whom had
extensive use of iron. It therefore stands to
reason that Persia was eager to bring all of
the Mediterranean into its realmn of influence.
Its failure to do so resulted in a double
world: the linear geography of the Persians
brought together by the Royal Highway, and
the network geography of the Mediterranean
controlled by the Greeks and Phoenicians.

Persia

CENTRAL ASIA

China

India emerging

5.3 Trade diagram, ca. 400 BCE

Pasargadae and Persepolis

In 546 BCE Cyrus established Pasargadae as
his capital, locating it at one of the starting
points for the caravan route northward
across the Great Salt Desert. The city’s
administrative core is remarkable for its
spaciousness; palace, audience hall, altars,
and pavilions, all distant from each other yet
integrated into a parklike setting with trees,
watercourses, and gardens. The Egyptians
and Babylonians had palace gardens, but
such an expansive landscape of palaces,
gardens, and orchards was quite novel. It
was also a sacred landscape, for to the north
there was a sacred enclosure consisting of a
walled precinct with a series of flat terraces
supporting an open altar. Much later, the
Persian garden was to become the prototype
of Islamic gardens.

The Tomb of Cyrus the Great is located
not far from Pasargadae. Its cefla is 6 meters
high and rests on a six-level stepped plinth
that measures 13.5 by 12.2 meters at the
base. The entire 13-meter-high edifice
is of white limestone. Five huge slanted
stones make up the roof. The monument,
sitting boldly in the landscape, is an elegant
combination of sepulcher and sanctuary. The
building recalls similar, though more modestly
scaled, Greek lonian tombs. It was probably
enclosed by a courtyard.

Pasargadae as a capital was relatively
short-lived, for Darius designed his own
capital city, Persepolis—“the city of the
Persians,” as the Greeks called it—located
0 kilometers to the southwest and closer
to the fertile lands along the coast. It was
an audacious move to a dramatic site at
the edge of a large plain, the Marv Dasht
basin, surrounded by cliffs. The palace is
located directly under the west-facing slope
of one of those cliffs. Construction went
through several phases between 515 and
330 BCE. The first one involved cutting into
the irregular and rocky mountainside to level
a large platform 10 to 20 meters above the
ground and measuring about 300 meters
in length and 450 meters in width. The
foundations contained complex drainage
systerns and water channels.

\

ah ..

Shaur Palace \

5.4 Area plan of Persepolis, Iran

Principal stairway nae tower

5.5 Plan: Palace complex at Persepolis


—— Palace of Darius |

100m

5.7 Plan: Throne room (Hall of a Hundred Columns)
at Persepolis

5.6 Plan: Apadana, the principal audience hall of Darius |, at Persepolis

The purpose of the vast foundation was
make sure that the buildings placed on it
commanded views across the valley. Of
the buildings themselves little remains,
since most of the walls were of mud brick,
stuccoed and brightly painted. What we
see today are the sections that were built
in stone: the columns, foundations, and
carvings.

The northern part of the terrace, which
included the throne room (known also as
the Hall of a Hundred Columns), measured
70 by 70 meters and represented the main
section of the complex; it was accessible
only to a restricted few. The southern section
contained the palaces of Darius and Xerxes
|, the harem, and a council hall. A huge,
defendable independent structure at the
southwest corner, with separate areas for

different wares, served as the treasury.
Records found show that in the year 467 BCE,
no fewer than 1,348 people were employed
in the treasury recording and documenting
its holdings. The largest building, the
Apadana (“castle" in Persian), served as

the main reception hall; it had seventy-two
awe-inspiring fluted and tapered limestone
columns 7 meters high surmounted by bull-
or lion-shaped capitals. The ceiling beams of
cedar, ebony, and teak were gold plated and

nlaid with ivory and precious metals. The
general concept of a columnar hall dates to
early Median architecture: a palace-citadel
in Gobin Tepe from the 8th century BCE had
a hall with thirty columns, as did Cyrus's
palace in Pasargadae. This hall, however,

was designed as a showstopper in scale and
ornamentation.

An innovative design feature was a stone-
faced double staircase leading to the
Apadana, the great audience hall. The walls
depict rows upon rows of emissaries, soldiers,
and chariot drivers. It is a virtual film strip
from which we can see how the various
peoples of the vast empire dressed and what
kinds of ornaments, weapons, and hairstyles
they sported. A group from India carries

a bag of gold; a group from Africa carries
tusks. These people are portrayed not as
sad and subjected, but as if in a celebratory
mood. One frieze shows a man, like an
usher, holding another man’s hand, guiding
him along. At the head of the staircase was
a gate, with black marble benches where
visitors could wait.

The frieze helps us understand the
meaning of this innovative structure. It was
the backdrop to a great annual celebration—
perhaps a new year celebration—with people
arriving from all over to bring gifts, make
treaties, and socialize. The flatlands to the
west of the complex would have been filled
with tents of various types. The central
event for a visitor was to be received by the
Persian ruler in the Apadana, which probably
served as the setting for grand feasts, with
hundreds of people sitting on the floor around
large round platters, being entertained
by musicians and dancing women.
Persepolis might be imagined as a modern-
day convention center, where business,
socializing, and celebration are all intermixed.

5.10 Staircase frieze at Persepolis

Celtic Halsatt Culture

Celtiberians

Carthaginian Empire

Berber tribes

Illyrian tribes
Etruscans

Greek colonies

Scythian tribes

Greek colonies
Black Sea

Macedonia

Greek city-states

Greek colonies

Mediterranean Sea

Cyrene

Garamantians

5.11 Greek and Phoenician colonies around the Mediterranean, ca. 550 BCE

GREECE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

If Persia's empire was based on a
comprehensive network of roads and the
exchange of goods, the Greek enterprise

was based on sea trade and manufacturing,
particularly of bronze and ceramic bowls.
Greeks plied the Mediterranean all the way to
Gibraltar in the west and the Black Sea in the
east, founding dozens of cities and trading
posts. This trade network was a consequence
of competition among Greek cities and of the
gradual opening of the European hinterland
to commerce. Massalia (now Marseilles,
France), for example, was founded in

600 BCE as a trading outpost to facilitate
commerce with the Gauls. Many of the city-
states had their own colonies, with Miletus
alone having no less than some ninety
colonies spread around the Mediterranean.

It was a brand-new economic model; one
might call it the urban franchise model.
When viewed together, the two contrasting
systerns—the landlocked one of Persia and
the maritime one of Greece—constituted a
large east-west geopolitical continuum that
remained viable until the breakup of the
Roman Empire in the 5th century CE.

The first Greek colonies were established
around 770 BCE by the Euboeans on the
island of Ischia (Pithekoussai) near Naples;
at Cumae in central Italy; on the island of
Naxos in the Cyclades; and at Leontini in

eastern Sicily. Around 710 BCE, the Achaeans
founded Sybaris and Croton in southern Italy.
The Spartans founded Tarentum around

650 BCE, while Syracuse was founded

by the Corinthians in 743 BCE. All in all,

in a span of a hundred years, some thirty
colonies sprang up. The settlers maintained
close relationships with their mother cities
and often appealed to them in times of war.
But the colonies also began to flex their

own military muscles. In 480 BCE Syracuse
defeated Carthage in the Battle of Himera,
and in 413 BCE it inflicted catastrophic
damage on Athenian forces, which lost two
hundred ships and thousands of soldiers.

5 Achaemenid
Lyd
yea (Persian)Empire
Phoenicia
North Arabian Semites
Egypt

The Greek Temple
Greek temple design changed considerably
in the middle of the 6th century BCE, as
wood was increasingly abandoned for
stone. This may have been partially due to
a desire for permanence, but it may also
ave been spurred by the influence of
Egyptian architecture, with which the Greeks
increasingly came in contact.

At the time, the northern part of Egypt had
een divided among vassals of the Assyrian
Empire. Around 664 BCE, an Egyptian
prince named Psamtik was banished to the
marshes. Plotting his return, he allowed the
Dorians to settle in Naucratis, on the western
edge of the Nile Delta, around 620 BCE on
the promise that they help with his military
ambitions, which were indeed successful.
He was able to defeat his rivals, break with
Assyria, and reunify Egypt. This opened a
series of mercantile exchanges between
Egypt and Greece that was profitable to both.

5.12 Plan: Temple of Artemis at Corfu (Kerkira), Greece, ca. 580 BCE

The earliest known Doric temple completely of stone

5.13 Temple of Segesta, Sicily, Italy

jaucratis became a type of duty-free

zone, with the Greeks setting up factories
to produce pottery and ornaments in an
Egyptian style for the Egyptian market. They
also imported silver, which was still rare in t : . iS
Egypt; in return they appear to have received
Egyptian grain.

When the Greeks, accustomed to small
wooden temples and simple outdoor altars,
irst encountered the enormous Egyptian
stone temples and pyramids, they were :
certainly amazed, and lost no time in 5.14 Plan: comparison of Temple Gat + 2 > eens

studying Egyptian construction techniques. Selinus, Sicily, Italy, with the Temple 2

of Poseidon, at Paestum, Italy Temple of Poseidon
hey also had ample opportunity, since
Psamtik had embarked on an extensive
building campaign. The impact of these
lessons must have been immediate, for there Corfu
is very little evidence that the Doric order ©
existed before the Greek experience in Egypt.
The Greeks were, however, not unfamiliar
with stone and had already begun using it Delphi
for the walls of the cela, as is evident at the
Temple of Poseidon at Isthmia. But to make Athens
columns and even the roof of the colonnade Isthmia ©
out of stone was a different matter.

Greece Aegean Sea

Olympia
lonian Sea

5.15 Greek temple sites

5.16 A collapased column showing typical drums of which the column was made.

One can follow the development of the

Doric order at the Temple of Poseidon at
Isthmia, where, by the tine of its completion
around 600 BCE, the oak columns were
replaced by stone columns. (A Roman visitor
in 176 CE reported a peculiarity: one oak
column was still standing.) Some of the first
stone columns were huge monoliths; others
consisted of superimposed drums of varying
heights and diameters.

The wealth of the Sicilian colonies helps
explain why many of the early Greek temples
were not in Greece, but in Sicily and Italy. At
Selinus, on the southern coast of Sicily, seven
temples were lined up on the acropolis and
a nearby ridge. They date from 570 BCE to
409 BCE. At Paestum in central Italy, there
arose a temple of Hera (650 BCE), a temple of
Demeter (520 BCE), and a temple of Poseidon
(460 BCE). In contrast to the early temples
at Selinus, the later temple of Poseidon in
Paestum opened up the cella by means of
an inner colonnade and achieved closer
interaction between the body of the temple
and the pteron, or columnar surround.

There was an important difference between
Greek and Egyptian stone preparation.
In Greece, stones were brought to the
construction site in an almost finished
state, whereas in Egypt, stones for colurnns
arrived at the site still quite rough (apart from
horizontal cuts}, with much of the finishing
taking place when the stones were in situ.
This difference would have significant impact
on Greek architectural developments, as it
would allow for an ever-increasing elaboration
of detail, proportion, and form.

Greek and Roman temples are described
according to the number of columns on
the entrance front, the type of colonnade,
and the type of portico. The Parthenon, for
example, is an octastyle peripteral temple
with hexastyle porticoes at both ends. The
Temple of Zeus at Olympia is a hexastyle
peripteral temple with distyle in-antis porches
at both ends. The basilica in Paestum is a
rare enneastyle pseudodipteral temple with a
tristyle in-antis portico.

Almost all surfaces of the ternple—the steps,
columns, capitals, walls, even the figures on
the pediment—were painted in bright reds,
blues, yellows, and black. What we know
about the colors used for the ternples comes
from both archaeological and literary sources.
The pigments were made from minerals,
soot, ground stones, vegetables, and animal
matter. The purple dye, for example, came
from shellfish; the yellowish color that was
applied to columns and bears came from
saffron. The colors were sometimes applied
with wax but usually on stucco.

Though today we may perceive Greek
temples as isolated objects, they were
actually framed in the landscape by a
temenos, or sacred precinct, which could
consist of something as simple as a row of
stones but could also be a built-up wall. The
temenos was the territory of the deity and had
to be approached in a prescribed manner
and entered only at a special place defined
by a propyion (i.e., pro-pylon, or “before the
gate”).

eves
aoe e
: 5
A prostyle portico
has columns running ‘
across the entire front. oe

oe 6 oe

5.17 A comparison of Greek temple types

The cella ends with

either columns in antis
or a prostyle portico

--- Ania refers to the thickening of the

projecting end of one of the lateral walls.
If columns are set between them, then the
colums are said to be in antis.

An amphiprostyle temple has
prostyle porticoes at both ends.

@ 8 @

4
A

@6OG6 0 66

@ @

‘a @ @ @ ®@ ®@ @ ®@ @ ® @ @.

5.18 Greek temple terminology

The most basic element of the temple was the
colonnade. Though so common today that it
might seem to be a natural architectural form,
it was actually a unique innovation of the
Greeks. Called a pteron, it was a sacred form
always reserved for temples. Pteron means
“wing” or “fin,” but also “oar” and “sail.”

It perhaps refers to early awnings placed
against buildings. But it also indicates that
the Greeks saw the building as a dynamic
location—as something that literally catches
the wind and hears the voices of the gods.

In addition, the pteron evoked the idea of a
grove of trees, especially because columns
were originally made of wooden trunks. The
pteron has also been associated with stout
soldiers forming a phalanx—a rectangular
military formation—symbolically protecting the
statue within the cefla.

The following terms describe the type of

colonnade surrounding the naos of a Greek

temple:

Peripteral: one row of columns.

* Dipteral: two rows of columns

* Tripteral: three rows of columns

* Pseudodipteral: suggesting a dipteral
colonnade, but without the inner colonnade

The following terms refer to the number of
columns on the entrance front of a Greek
temple:

* Henostyle: one column

* Distyle: two columns

* Tristyle: three columns

* Tetrastyle: four columns

* Pentastyle: five columns

* Hexastyle: six columns

* Heptastyle: seven columns

* Octastyle: eight columns

* Enneastyle: nine columns

* Decastyle: ten columns

A corona is the projection at the

top of a cornice; the word was
associated with the forehead and
with controlling things from above. It
was also associated with the eagle,
the bird of omen and Zeus’s favorite
bird. For these reasons it became
the appropriate element with which

to top off a temple.

Cornice—

Frieze—

On the abacus of a capital rests the
architrave, the main stone or marble
beam running from column to
column. Above the architrave is the
frieze, which consists of alternating
triglyphs and metopes. Beneath
each triglyph, on the face of the
architrave, is a smooth band—the
regula—on the underside of which
hang six stone pegs, or guttae.
There is normally one triglyph to
each column and one to each
intercolumniation. The metopes were
often decorated with paintings or
relief sculpture depicting stories of
the local hero or episodes from the
myths associated with the god to
whom the temple was dedicated.

Capital —

Architrave—

Shaft—

Pycnostyle: 1.5 diameters \
Sistyle: 2 diameters 4
Eustyle: 2.25 diameters
Diastyle: 3 diameters
Araeostyle: 3.5 diameters

Intercolumniation refers to the
space between columns, expressed
in column diameters. This
systematization applies mainly to
Hellenistic and Roman temples.

5.19 Elements of the Doric order

The temple rested on a crepis, the base

of a building but also a shoe or sandal—a
footing, in other words, proper to the divine
presence. This foundation was constructed
from roughly dressed masonry that was

not concealed below the ground but was
designed to appear as steps leading up to
the platform on which the temple’s columns
rested.

The capital, which derives its name from the
Latin word caput (“head”), was in Greek
terminology the Aranion, which refers to the
top of the head or skull. The Doric capital,
carved out of a single stone block, consists of a
spreading convex molding, the echinus—a word
that was applied to almost anything curved and
spiny found in nature—and a low square block,
the abacus.

The column shaft tapers from the bottom
upward in the form of a delicate curve called

an entasis, or swelling. The shaft of a Doric
column almost always stands directly on the
floor, without a base. Early columns from the 6th
century BCE are often monolithic, but later the
shaft came to be composed of superimposed
drums, which were rounded by turning them on
a lathe.

The drums were doweled together with wooden
or bronze spikes enclosed in concavities at

the center. The shafts were fluted after the
columns were in place. There are usually twenty
broad and shallow flutes that meet to form
sharp edges, or arrises. The joints between the
columns would have been concealed by marble
stucco.

The steps were often too tall to ascend
comfortably, so a flight of stairs or a ramp was
provided at the entrance. This demonstrates
that the steps had nothing to do with the
necessities of construction, for they could
easily have been designed with more risers.
Instead, the steps were intentionally built to
make the temple appear as if it were rising on a
natural outcropping, cleaned and smoothed in
preparation for the building.

Areopagos ‘

gem Py
ae

Ty

5.20 Site plan showing the relationship between the agora and the acropolis, Athens

Athens

The city of Athens had three main
components: the acropolis, which was the
great ritual and spiritual core of the city; the
agora, which was its economic hub; and the
urban fabric itself, where one found small
shrines and temples. The agora, probably
laid out in the 7th century BCE and developed
in the 5th and 4th centuries BCE with the
construction of temples to Hephaestus, Zeus,
and Apollo, was a unique Athenian invention.
It was a specially demarcated space outside
of the core of the city that brought together
the different dimensions of urban life. Though
often called a public space, it was just as
much a religious space as a social one. One
of the key temples overlooking the agora was
the temple to Hephaestus. Hephaestus was
the god of the smithies, and his presence
there was a testament to the role of bronze
casting in the Athenian economy. It was set
on a hill to the west, its elevated presence
signifying its importance.

The agora was also the site of the Leokoreion,
a small shrine associated with a well in the
northern part of the agora. It was narned after
the daughters of Leos, who were sacrificed
to save the city from a terrible plague. Also
on the agora was a stoa, a long colonnaded
building with shops on the back facing the
agora. These shops were for the more elite
merchants. Council meetings were held in
a building known as the bouleuterion. The
law courts were located there as well. The
central space was used for markets, ritual
gatherings, or the making of speeches and
pronouncements. But most importantly, the
area served as a market. One could find
almost anything in the agora: confectioners,
slave-traders, fishmongers, vintners, cloth
merchants, shoemakers, dressmakers,
merchants selling cookware and other
“ . : household goods. Socrates famously taught
OX : 4 his students by walking back and forth
Theatre of Dionysus" ”~ ; along the Athenian stoa, questioning the
oe) market-goers on their understanding of the
0 400m meaning of life and attracting a crowd of
a Athenian youth who enjoyed seeing the more
pretentious of their elders made fools of. One
listener was the young poet who became a
student of Socrates under the name Plato.

___) 77 Stoa of Zeus

° ce. Shrine

+
ie
ve

4 Let 4 Stoa of Attalos
* “STholos

5.21 Site plan of the agora of Athens

5.22 Calvacade frieze, southern wall of the Parthenon, Athens

he ancient Dorians, when they arrived in
Greece from the north, had sacred groves
to which they would periodically go for

ritual communal events. What they learned
rom the Egyptians was to dramatize these
journeys into spectacular processions
involving music and dancing. They did not,
jowever, hold processions with the deity as
the Egyptians did, and in this they held true
to their fundamental belief in the deity being
ixed in special, sacred places. Over time
the number of these processions multiplied,
with some becoming elevated to the level

of state protocol. One was the Dionysia, a
jarge Athenian festival in honor of the god
Dionysus that was held in early spring. It
involved a procession of phalluses and
military equipment, and ended in theatrical
performances. A few weeks later, there was
the more official Panathenaic procession that
started at the Leokoreion and ended at the
acropolis. That it began at the Leokoreion was
an indication of the procession’s attempt to
connect deeply to the principle of sacrifice
and triumph.

The procession was an elaborate affair. For
months before, a team of maidens from
aristocratic families would weave a special
new garment for the deity in the temple. By
the late 5th century BCE the robe was as
big as a ship's sail and was, in fact, fixed
on the model of a ship mounted on wheels.
This ship-cart had a crew of priests and
priestesses wearing golden and colorful
garlands. When all was set, a nocturnal
festival took place, and at sunrise a new fire
was fetched, carried in a torch race from
outside the city—where sacrifice was made
to Eros and Athena together—through the
agora, and up to the altar of Athena on

the acropolis. A procession then formed in
which all members of the community had
their place. The high point was the sacrifice,
in which more than a hundred animals
were slaughtered at the Great Altar, and
the meat distributed to the whole populace
in the agora. From 566 BCE onward an
athletic contest was added to the program
of activities, including foot races, wrestling,
horse racing, boxing, and javelin-throwing.

The frieze of the Pantheon seems to portray
such a celebratory procession. The narrative
of the frieze begins at the southwest corner,
where the procession appears to divide into
two separate files.

What does it represent? According to
traditional interpretation, it depicts the annual
Panathenaic procession. But this view,
though oft repeated, has been challenged
by scholars who argue that it must be a
representation of a mythological moment,
not a real procession involving mortals. Since
the pediments and metopes alll illustrate
mythological scenes, it is natural to reach
for a mythological explanation for the frieze
as well. John Boardman has suggested that
the cavalry portrayed on the frieze depict
the heroization of the soldiers who fell at
Marathon in 490 BCE, and that therefore
these riders were the Athenians who took

part in the last prewar Greater Panathenaia.
Chrysoula Kardar has ventured that the
relief shows an imagined first Panathenaic
procession as instituted under the mythical
King Kekrops.

A perplexing issue is that the frieze's
location high in the building's porch would
have made it difficult to see. In the museum
today, the figures are on eye level, whereas
originally they were 7 meters up. This
suggests that they were not meant to be
“seen” in the conventional sense.

Thomas Bruce, the Seventh Earl of Elgin,
dismantled about two-thirds of the frieze and
had it shipped to England between 1801 and
1806, and today the so-called Elgin Marbles
are in the British Museum, to the outrage
of many. In looking at the frieze, one has
to remember that it, as indeed the entire
building, was painted.

5.23 Approach to the Parthenon from the Propylaea

The Parthenon

Because of the constant warfare in ancient
Greece, almost every city was divided

into a lower town and an acropolis, which
literally means a “city on the height.” The
acropolis of Athens was no exception. It
sits on a great isolated slab of limestone
tilted toward the west side, from which it
had to be approached. Already fortified
with a wall by the Mycenaeans, it was held
to be invested with divine presences from
ancient times. The waters from a spring on
its southern flank are today still considered
to have healing powers. An olive tree rooted
to a rock on its summit was dedicated to
Athena. It was here that the Parthenon was
built under the political leadership of Pericles.
The building, replacing one that had been
destroyed by the Persians, was designed
by Ictinus (with advice from Callicrates and

Phidias) and built between 447 and 438 BCE.
Designed as a monument to Athena and
housing her sacred statue, it was bigger than
any temple ever before built on the Greek
mainland, its stylobate measuring 30.9 by
69.5 meters. Early accounts of the temple
call it Hekatornpedos, or “hundred-footer,”
referring either to its overall width or the
length of the large eastern room of its cefa,
also known as the hekatompedos.

But size was not its only unusual feature:
the east and west facades were lined with
eight towering Doric columns, making the
Parthenon the only octastyle peripteral ternple
built in ancient Greece.

+ “Erechtheum ake

“aStatue of, Athena
(Promachos«

Propylaea

5.24 Plan: Acropolis at Athens

4

5.25 A conception of the interior of the Parthenon, based on the evidence

The interior of the naos has been variously
reconstructed, in some places with a
standard roof {as in figure 5.25) or with an
opening in the center. It is clear, regardless,
that the columns in the naos supported a
second tier of smaller columns above, and
that there was a shallow rectangle in front
of the statue of Athena, possibly used as a
reflecting pool, although such a pool would
have been highly unusual. The building
would have been painted inside and out, with
the columns probably a reddish hue.

5.26 Diagram of the curved stylobate and inclined vertical axes of the perimeter columns of the Parthenon

Underlying the construction is a system

of refinements that control the delicate
curvature of horizontal lines, the elegant
convergence of vertical lines, and the
nuanced size and spacing of the fluted
marble columns. The stylobate was not a
flat plane but rather like a section of a very
large sphere; it curved upward toward the
middle, rising 41 millimeters on its short
sides and 102 millimeters on its long flanks.
This curve was carried upward through the
entire structure, imparting a subtle upward
curvature even on the architrave, the cornice,
and nearly every “horizontal” line of stone.
Furthermore, every column was given an
entasis, or a slight bulging of the middle of
the column's shaft. The entasis measures
only 20 millimeters of deviation from a
straight line. Moreover, each of the forty-six
perimeter columns was tilted slightly inward,
with the corner column tilting on a diagonal.
If the columns of the short sides were
extended upward, they would meet around
4.8 kilometers above the roof.

While each of these refinements have
functional advantages—the curvature to
shed water, the angling to increase lateral
structural support during earthquakes,

and the corner adjustments to maintain
proper column alignments with the metopes
above—scholars, beginning with the Roman
architect and historian Vitruvius, have argued
that the nuances were mostly for aesthetic
effect; and indeed, in no other temple was
this visual tension as subtle and refined as
in the Parthenon. It nevertheless seems
astonishing that in contrast with other
attempts at making grand statements, where
architects sought height or the addition of
special embellishments, here the architects
sought a level of precision that was almost
imperceptible, yet could not be matched
anywhere else in the world at the time.

How these astonishing curves were made is
something of a mystery, since the building,
like all Greek temples, is made of precut
pieces allowing for few on-site adjustments.

5.27 Detail of the pediment of the Parthenon

Section

a Statue of Athena Parthenos

Oo SEES Ot x En @
S °., | ase Ror rae 8
e e Se rr

s i. 1 ° C1 Naos 5
& 8s i
Q ESAT TN a.
29

Plan

“Ne : i 2m

5.28 Section and plan: Parthenon, Athens

2

Pe @ @ @.8 @.

li

SE ad feces ha Uy

4

1
5.29 Caryatid porch, Erechtheum, Athens

Erechtheum

Unlike Egyptians, Greeks never added new
elements to a ternple. New structures, of
course, could be added to the precinct, but
the temple itself was not changed unless

it was somehow destroyed and rebuilt.

It would be wrong, however, to assume

that Greek architects were unable to think
beyond the inflexibility of the temple form.
The Propylaea and the Erechtheum on the
Athenian acropolis are examples of rather
complex buildings whose architects had to
accommodate a range of programmatic and
ritualistic purposes. The Erechtheum wraps
up different mythical narratives into a single
composition. It was built on two levels with
three porticoes of different designs; there
were four entrances besides the subterranean
one under the north porch. This irregularity
was due to the necessity of designing a
building around the spots that were essential
to the narrative of the founding of Athens.
Erechtheus, after whom the Erechtheum is
named, was the mythical founder of Attica
and the “earth-born king of Athens.” At that
time, it was believed that gods challenged
one another to be honored by cities.
Unfortunately, both Poseidon and Athena
aspired to control Athens, so Erechtheus set
up a contest in which each had to make a

r- ;

¥ r
: roe 1. .
: } rf
; ;
Sor arty oh
ia a
1 al

5.30 Drawing: Caryatid porch, Erectheum, Athens

5.31 Erectheum from the south, as it stands today

gift to the city. Poseidon drew salt water by
striking the ground on the acropolis with his
trident, while Athena grew the first olive tree
on its slopes. Erechtheus judged Athena's gift
to be the most useful to the people of Athens,
and the city was named in her honor.

The central elernents of the drama can
be read by entering first through the north
porch dedicated to Poseidon. Its expansive
design takes in the grand vista and can be
seen from the agora below. On the floor to
the left of the door, a type of window looks
down at the bedrock, where one can see the
indentations of Poseidon’s trident. An opening
in the roof above indicates the space through
which the trident was thought to have flown.
The great door leads to a narrow room that
contained a shrine to Erechtheus. Under the
floor was a cistern containing the salt water
of Poseidon. A door to the right leads to the
sacred court containing Athena’s olive tree.
Continuing on the axis made by the porch of
Poseidon, one goes up the flight of stairs to
the caryatid porch, which today sits isolated
in the field of ruins.

Although the plan of the building may
seem chaotic, the temple makes sense
as a three-dimensional celebration of the
founding myth of Athens. The north porch
is the largest and projects forward two
intercolumniations, the height of its roof being
almost level with the eaves of the central
block. The south porch is less than half as
high, but it is raised upon a terrace. Instead
of columns, there are caryatids—columns


1 North parch |

foal

\___ Sanctuary of Athena Polias

Q 10m

tad wb

5.32 Plan, section, elevation: Erectheum, Athens

in the shape of young women—carrying the oe
load of the entablature on their heads. The :
east porch consists of six lonic columns. The
central block that holds all this together has
two levels corresponding to the north and
east porches. Three doors lead into it: the
great door of the north porch, a plain opening
at the bottom of the west wall, and a small
door on the south side, to which a staircase
leads down from the interior of the caryatid
porch.

Rising up over the entire story and at a
90 degree cross-axis is the edifice of the
victor, Athena, facing east. At the diagonal,
upon descending the external stairs on the
northern side and before entering the north
porch, was an area dedicated to Zeus, the
ultimate arbiter of the contest. His position

he AANA MAS

seems to address the dynamic northeasterly E
pull of conical Mt. Lykabettos, for it, too,
plays into the story. According to legend,
Athena was absent from her city to retrieve
a mountain to use on the acropolis. Her
sisters were curious about the chest in which
Athena was protecting the young Erechtheus
and opened it, contrary to Athena’s orders.
She became so angry that she dropped the
mountain. How this plays out in the design
is unknown, but from the agora below the
acropolis, the mountain and the Erechtheum
are clearly in dialogue.

East elevation

Section


5.33 lonic capital from the temple at Neandris

lonic Order

Though usually discussed after the Doric,
the lonic should not therefore be regarded
as later. The development of the lonic and
the Doric orders paralleled each other, but
stylistically there are notable differences.
First, lonic colurins rest on molded bases
that stand on square plinths. These moldings
consist of combinations of tori, scotias,

and rondels, often in pairs. The capital has
different front and side views and is meant to
be seen chiefly from the front and back. At
the base of the capital there is a flat-topped
molding with a profile like that of the Doric
echinus, but it is usually carved with egg-
and-dart moldings. Above this lies the volute,
its loose ends winding down in dropping
spirals on each side of the shaft and ending
in buttonlike oculi (eyes). The entablature
usually consists of three bands of fasciae

of unequal height, each projecting a little
beyond the one below it. Above it runs a
band of egg-and-dart molding and over that
a row of dentils, superseded by a projecting
cornice often decorated with lions’ faces and
plant motifs.

The lonic capital came into its own during
the 7th century BCE. Unlike the Doric, the
lonic did not derive from a structural system,
but perhaps frorn symbolic headdresses or
from poles surrounded by bundled vegetation
marking sacred areas. The capital consists
of two large spirals that spring upward and

5.34 Bronze female figure with headdress

outward from the shaft, as if a pliant stick
were split at the ends and each curved
outward halfway to form a spiral. The space
between the spirals was decorated with a
fanlike pattern. Capitals of similar form were
found on the island of Lesbos.

Sima carved with lions’ heads

and floral ornaments

Cornice

Dentils

Egg-and-dart and
bead-and-reel moldings

Architrave with three fasciae

Voluted capital

Egg-and-dart echinus

Fluted column shaft

Torus with horizontal flutes

Plinth

5.36 Elements of the lonic order

Altar

5.37 Plan: Temple of Athena Polias at Priene, Turkey

To construct the volutes, craftsmen devised

a system of gridded holes into which pegs
were inserted and around which a cord was
wound and then, with a stylus attached,
unwound. In essence, the spiral was a

series of interconnected quarter circles and
semicircles. They are not “organic” but
precisely calibrated rathematical puzzles
that come in a vast variety depending on how
tightly wound the spirals are. One of the most
elegant lonic temples is undoubtedly the
small Temple of Athena Nike (ca. 425 BCE) at
the acropolis in Athens.

5.38 Development of the lonic spiral

Though proportional systems were most
certainly in play in the design of the Doric
order, the formalization of the system began
with the lonic. A temple of the lonic at its
most classic is the Ternple of Athena Polias at
Priene (ca. 334 BCE) by the architect Pythius,
who wrote a book explaining the proportions
of this temple. The larger proportions were
worked out in similar ratios of 1:2. The overall
dimensions of the stylobate measured 19.5
by 37.2 meters, for a ratio of 11:21. The axial
spacing between the columns was twice the
width of the square plinths. The antae of

the porch and the opisthodomos in the rear
stood opposite the penultimate columns of

the ends and sides and enclosed a rectangle
measuring 12 by 30 meters, for a ratio of
:2.5. No longer did architects manipulate
the form to adjust for optical illusions;
geometrical precision was now in order. The
lonic was codified further around 150 BCE

y the architect Hermogenes, also of Priene.
He worked out a series of ideal proportions
that were to influence Vitruvius a century
ater. According to this system, the height

of the column varied inversely according to
the axial spacing, so that the sum of axial
spacings and height was always 12.5 column
diameters.

5.39 Temple of Athena Nike,
acropolis, Athens, Greece

Gulf of Corinth

5.40 Sacred Way from Athens to Delphi

Telesterion at Eleusis

Festivals were an important part of Greek
political and religious life similar to the Middle
Kingdom practices of Egypt, except that
Greek festivals were considerably more folksy
in nature. The temple at Isthmia, for example,
was the center of a festival that involved a
major athletic contest. In Athens, festivals
accentuated the flow of the year, and in fact
filled 120 days, or one-third of the calendar
year.

One of the oldest of these festivals, and
one possibly once linked to the Eleusinian
Mysteries, was the Thesmophoria, a harvest
festival (thesmoj meaning “law,” and phoria
deriving from the word for “carrying”). It was
celebrated by the married women of Athens
whose husbands were Athenian citizens.

The festival centered on the earth goddess
Demeter, whose daughter Persephone had to
spend one-third of the year in the underworld
with her husband, Hades. During these dry
summer months, Demeter abandoned her
unction as harvest goddess and mourned

ior her absent daughter. The women set up
makeshift shelters outside the sanctuary,
purified themselves, sat on the ground, and
asted in commiseration with Demeter. On the
third day, a meat celebration was conducted
named after Kalligenaia, the goddess of
eautiful birth and an ancient term that
alludes to the very antiquity of this rite, which
quite possibly antedates even the Greeks: this

* Attica

Eleusis
LO}

“© Athens

A
Piraeus

festival, if it can be called that, had at its roots
the ancient Mediterranean-wide mother cult.
Another important Greek festival, one
that exernplifies the very essence of Greek
religiosity, was the celebration of the Great
Mysteries at Eleusis, which took place in that
city. Dating back some two thousand years,
probably to Mycenaean times, this city was
located some 25 kilometers distant from
Athens and became part of the Athenian
state festivals in the 6th century BCE. It
was a seven-day celebration in the late fall,
beginning on the fifteenth day of the Greek
month of Boedromion. People streamed

to it from all of Greece, and even slaves
were admitted. This festival was so deeply
entrenched in the folk practices and the
communal memory that it continued on into
early Christian tires—until the early Christian
fathers put a stop to it. The procession
followed the sacred road from Athens to
Delphi that had, according to myth, been
traveled by Apollo. The route started at the
sacred gate in the city walls of Athens and
proceeded through Eleusis to the sanctuary
of Demeter on the Thriasian Plain.

Every September a great torch-lit
procession wound its way along this route.
Two days before it was to begin, the Aiera
(sacred objects) were brought in baskets
to Athens by young Athenians in military
training. The initiates met their mystagogus (a
person initiated previously who helped them

5.41 Plan: Telesterion at Eleusis, Greece

through the process) and took piglets down to
the sea, bathed with them, sacrificed them,
and purified themselves with their blood. On
the fifth day, they made the long 25-kilometer
march to Eleusis. The statue of Dionysus

was carried at the head of the procession.
Then came the priests with the sacred cult
objects hidden in baskets and finally a huge
crowd of mystai (initiates). The high point

of the festival took place in the Telesterion

at Eleusis, a square, windowless building
arranged in its final configuration with tiers of
seats to accommodate some three thousand
people.

The Anaktoron at the center of the great
hall housed the hiera, the inner sanctum that,
though small and windowless, was precious
and of venerable age. The renovations and
additions that were made to the Telesterion
changed only the space around it, not the
Anaktoron itself. The building in its final form
(ca. 435 BCE) was designed by Koroibos. In
the 4th century BCE, a colonnaded porch
known as the Stoa of Philon was added to
the southeastern side of the building. Though
the songs and offerings were public, the
experiences of the mysta/ during the rites were
secret, and access to the inner sanctum of the
elesterion was restricted to initiates. Despite
how long they lasted and the huge number of
people who took part, the secrecy surrounding
these rites has been preserved; one can only
guess what the mysteries involved.


Chiff ‘y Delphi
f Delphi was without doubt the most sacred
A / of the religious sites in Greece, with its own
1 — . festivals and celebrations. One approached
i aT Stadium . o_Leacred spiing it from Eleusis on the sacre route that
| Ys crosses the Boeotian Plains, passes the
\ Temenos § city of Thebes, and courses its way through
| = woe increasingly rugged and remote territory filled
/ tT with history and myth. Finally, the dramatic
f 7 . scenery of the limestone cliffs, from which
t Gymnasium .
i \o gushes the Castalian Spring with its great
Threshing areas ye ; cleft, comes into view, the buildings of the
: ‘, sanctuary rising up against the base of the
\ . City of Delphi cliff. The early history of Delphi is the story of
Gatey wen. . a struggle between different types of religious
Meee ans ae \ \ fou practices. Initially, the site was dedicated
~ me Leo ; \ Temple of Athena Pronala ty the great mother goddess in the Minoan
5.42 Site plan: City of Delphi, Greece Toe : ° Mee ~-* tradition. With the arrival of the Dorians we
7 see their paternalistic practices superimposed
on the existing maternalistic social structures.
o iyconsean cult site (ater Temple of Nonetheless, despite the seizure of the shrine
Athena Pronaia) by the followers of Apollo, the new concepts
1500 ace did not totally obliterate the old; rather, the
Mycenaean cult site of earth goddess maternalistic elements were subsumed.
(later Temple of Apollo) The mother goddess was transformed into
650 pce the serpent, Python, slain by Apollo, and
First Temple of Apollo said to be buried there, but she retained
550 pce her ancient ternenos close to the Temple
Second Temple of Apollo, near the Rock of the Sybil. The
Sth century ece temple foundations come close to her spot
Stadium . A but do not obliterate it. Apparently, the Apollo
Stoa of the Athenians aan
4th century ece a ‘ cult was forced to compromise with the older
Tholos deities as two population groups made their
Theater accommodations.

Third Temple .

5.43 Plan: Temenos at Delphi, Greece

Temenos of Gaia

5.44 Delphic Pythia sitting on a tripod,
attended by a supplicant

5.45 The ruins of Delphi from above the Temple of Apollo

Temple of Apollo at Delphi
During the three winter months, Dionysus
shared the temple sanctuary on the
Parnassos slope with Apollo, a reference
to some of the ancient chthonic elements
connected with the cult of Persephone, who,
according to the Orphic myth, was the mother
of Dionysus. Out of the ecstatic dances and
choruses of Dionysus, the Greek drama was
born, and at Delphi, above the great Temple
of Apollo, there lies on cross-axis to the
temple and facing straight down the slope a
brilliant example of such a theater. Filling and
defining a natural concavity at the base of the
cliff, the natural and man-made merge into
one majestic swath—one great hymn to the
creation cycle of life.

From just inside the wall of the temenos,
the viewer would see the silhouette of
the Temple of Apollo floating against the
backdrop of the cliff. The path to the temple
was not a direct one but rather snaked its
way upward past the various treasuries—
many of distant colonies—to emerge just
below the broad terrace built up against the
slope. A supplicant, guided by an assistant
of the Delphian cult, would have been led to
the temple terrace to await his turn with the
oracle. He would have had the opportunity to
look straight down into the ancient precinct
of Gaia. He might have spent some time
regarding the ternple itself.

What is visible today is the last temple,
the site having been occupied earlier by

two previous Doric temples. The first one, a
structure from the 7th century BCE, burned
in 548 BCE and was replaced by a larger
one in 525 BCE, which itself was replaced

in the mid-4th century BCE. On the east
pediment facing the altar in front of the
temple, sculptures portrayed the arrival of
Apollo at Delphi, shown with his mother,
Leto; his sister Artemis; and his cornpanions,
the Muses. At the opposite pediment,
Dionysus, Apollo’s brother—both having
been fathered by Zeus—occupied the center,
establishing a principle of balance: Apollo
representing music and poetry; Dionysus,
wine and ecstasy. The Dionysian and the
Apollonian were not perceived as opposites
by the Greeks but rather as complementary;
together they embodied the wholeness of life.
Below the east pediment hung the golden
shields from the spoils of the Persian War, a
gift to the temple by the Athenians.

The most important festival associated
with Delphi was the change of rule that took
place between Apollo and Dionysus at the
appointed time. It was enacted in the great
open-air theater above the temple with its
thronelike overview of the sanctuary and
surrounding landscape. The sports events
that accompanied these festivals took place
in the heights above the temenos.

Once inside the ternple, the supplicant
would smell the meat burning on the hearth
and see the smoke rising toward the opening
in the roof, frorm which shafts of sunlight

5.46 Treasury of Athens, Delphi

penetrated down into the gloom. Visitors
also mentioned a perfumed smell. The
supplicants would have seen tripods, statues,
pieces of armor, even entire racing chariots,
brought as donations from the entire world
of Magna Graecia, and often from foreign
countries as well. After depositing his own
offering, the supplicant would be led toward
the far end of the chamber, where steps
descend to a sunken area a meter below
the level of the floor. From there he made
his way into the adytum, at the back wall of
which was a bench close to the branches

of a laurel tree as well as a golden statue of
Apollo. There, the prophetess, on a tripod
and hidden from him by a curtain, was
positioned over a crack in the rocks from
which, according to some visitors, emanated
that sweetish smell. An attendant, drawing
back the curtain, would relay the question
of the petitioner, and from the depths, the
prophetess received a reply to the question,
often equivocal, which she conveyed back
to the petitioner. Whatever the response—
which often required a large amount of
interpretation—it probably necessitated
further donations. What caused the sweet
smell has not been determined with scientific
accuracy. Recent archaeological studies
point to the possibility that it might have been
ethylene, a common vapor in natural tar pits
that produces euphoria, which is used today
as an anesthetic.


Europe

Ephesus _ Hellenistic world
Delos

Alexandria

Nubia/Aksum

5.47 Eurasian trade diagram, ca. 300 BCE

THE HELLENISTIC AGE

The legacy of Greek architecture would move
in two different directions, with two different
destinies. It would move westward when it
was adopted by the Romans and spread

into Europe, where, with the demise of the
Roman Empire in the 5th century CE, it would
slowly wither away, its ideas and ideals only
revitalized beginning in the 15th century
with the Renaissance. It would, however,
also move eastward with Alexander the Great
(356-323 BCE), son of Philip Il of Macedon,
and have a profound impact on Indian
architecture and even on the architecture

of the 13th-century Khmer Empire. The
modern-day notion that “classicism” is at the
core of “Western architecture” is a myth of
the 19th-century Romantics. It was in fact

in the non-European world that the legacy of
“classicism” would be most palpably felt.
Alexander assumed kingship over

the newly consolidated mainland Greece
after his father’s death and continued

his expansionary policies. He crossed

the Hellespont in 334 BCE, defeated the
Achaemenid Empire, and on his way to

the border of India founded many fledgling
cities, stocking them with some of his
Macedonian Greeks, who awaited—in vain,
as it turned out—his return with new troops
and settlers to sustain his eastern empire.
Alexander's empire fell apart after his
sudden and unexplained death in 323 BCE in

Sirkap (Taxila)

India/Maurya

Zhou
dynasty
China

5.48 Dionysus Theater, Athens

Nebuchadnezzar’s palace in Babylon. Strife
broke out among his potential successors,
but eventually three realms emerged: the
Antigonid Empire (Greece), the Seleucid
Empire (Mesopotamia and Persia), and the
Ptolemaic Empire (Egypt, Palestine, and
Cyrenaica). All are part of what is called the
Hellenistic Age. As an art form, Hellenism
had lost some of the discipline of its origins
and in temple construction tended to
gigantism and spatial experimentation; in

sculpture, it is noted for the portrayal of
emotions and empathy, as, for example, in
the Dying Gaul.

Old cities like Athens, which for a while
became part of the kingdom of Antigonus,
were given new buildings. Some were paid
for locally; some funds came from foreign
donations. The enormous Temple of Zeus
at Olympia in Athens, begun in 170 BCE,
was paid for by Antiochus IV (d. 164 BCE)
of the Seleucids of northern Syria. A new
harbor, council hall, and residential quarter
were added to the city of Miletus. Assos
redesigned its central agora with a long
two-story-high stoa. New cities were laid
out, some as far away as Ai Khanum on the
Afghan bank of the Oxus River.

Though planned cities go back
millennia, the architecture of cities and the
architecture of palaces or temples were until
then, generally speaking, quite distinct. In
Hellenistic cities, urbanism and architecture

egin to overlap for the first time. Theaters,
temples, villas, palaces, libraries, stadia,

and streets are all equally important in such
cities as Priene, Pergamon, Alexandria, Dura-
Europos, Delos, and Rhodes.

The economic engine that drove this
tremendous expansion was not Athens

ut Hellenistic Egypt, the newly restored
economic marvel of the Mediterranean.

By the time of Ptolemy Ill (245-221 BCE),
Egyptian fleets controlled most of the
shipping lanes of the eastern Mediterranean.
Building on the old pharaonic tradition of
state control, the Ptolemaic kings updated
technologies and production systems,
transforming the country with its population of
seven million into a grain-producing machine
of unprecedented proportions.

The Ptolemaic rulers introduced the water
screw of Archimedes and built machines
with drums or wheels driven by humans
for raising water and pushing back the
desert. Salt production was escalated. Mines
and quarries, as well as the development
of a state-run bank, were integrated into
the system. It was in some respects one
of the first examples of state-supported
modernization.


aS 5 s a a oe 4 eo a

Noe @uuennecesae ean ad bo0
5.49 Elevation and plan: Mercantile hall, Delos, Greece

Delos A

One of the places that most quickly adapted oo 1

to the new world order was Delos. Though oo — i
the island was small—one of the smallest we ve .
in the Aegean—and though it had no fe 4
local economy to speak of, it was almost st

equidistant from the various ports in the ae
Aegean Sea. It entered into economic Re . ot oy
relations with Egypt and Macedonia to ‘ ;
come the leading Mediterranean trading
station. The tradition that had begun with

the Minoans was perfected by the rulers of

Delos. Money was made in the transfer of

goods rather than in their manufacture and

sale. Delos was also a holy place, considered

the birthplace of Apollo and Artemis. It was, i
for a while at least, the perfect combination e
of the sacred and the economic. On one

side of its harbor was a special landing place

for pilgrims visiting the sacred sites; on the

other side, one would have found a large

and new mercantile harbor fringed with

storage houses, wharves, and commercial
uildings. The Egyptians, bringing their grain
for redistribution, built shrines to their gods. fe : . ran ° 7 :
Phoenicians came to sell ivory. Jews built a

| ue, Sanctuary of Apollo

synagogue. The Italians were on the scene to ; .
as well, building an agora of their own. A . ann ‘
mercantile hall measuring about 60 by 35 a
meters was built in 210 BCE, with houses for

the merchants laid out with unprecedented 7 500 m
richness. ‘ ! Fo te te d

5.51 Plan of Delos

30m

-—-t

5.50 Plans of two houses, Delos

Priene

On the eastern coast of Anatolia, Miletus,
Priene, and Heracleia were part of an inlet
that has long since silted over. Together with
Didyma and with the ancient sanctuary of
Samos as a type of gateway, this area was
another major religious and economic center.
Priene, founded in 334 BCE, occupies a
sloping ground beneath a fortifiable acropolis.
The streets run east-west along level ground
and are about 4.5 meters across. From south
to north, with the ground rising steeply, the
streets are mostly narrower. The principal
civic elements of the city are embedded in
the structure of this grid and yet in dynamic
resistance to it. The agora, for example, juts
out from the grid to the south and does not
align with the side streets. Across from it is a
three-block-long stoa. Up the hill a few blocks
to the west is the platform with the temple

of Athena, and a block higher yet but to the
east was a theater with spectacular views into
the valley below and the mountains across.
Farther northward yet, where the city ends
and the steep slope of the acropolis begins, is
a sanctuary dedicated to Demeter. A stadiurn
and gymnasium define the lower edge. The
city, because of its composite character,
might appear to have been built up over time,
but it is in actuality a skillful play of solids
and voids and of private and public zones,
spread out over a difficult terrain.

Ephesus

NLT

Samos
® Priene
©

© Heracleia
wiletus®

Aegean Sea i.
390 m eae Didyma

5.53 Priene and environs

t
i


Pergamon

By the year 281 BCE, the city of Pergamon
had become the center of a small but
powerful city-state rivaling Athens and even
Alexandria as a center of Greek culture.

It is estimated that at its peak, it had a
population of three hundred thousand
people spreading from the mountaintop site
to the southwest, across the Caicus Plain.
Overlooking the city was an acropolis decked
out with an assortment of structures that
show the Hellenistic spatial aesthetic at its &

best. The object of the overall composition Temple of unm tM ~ a
a
ff Propylort

~N. Seaneun

was not simply to work with the contours,
almost instinctively, as was traditional in
Greek planning, but to exploit them for their
inherent sculptural qualities. At the heart

of the acropolis stood a temple to Athena,
the protectress of the city, dating from the
beginning of the 3rd century BCE and most
likely the oldest structure on the acropolis. It

Sanctuary «+
of Athena

is one of the very rare Doric temples in Asia
Minor and was no doubt built as an homage
to the Parthenon. It was enclosed in a
temenos, with stoas on three sides that clamp
it into the hill. Just behind the stoa was the
palace of Eumenes II. Behind another wing of
the stoa but at a higher level was the famous
library built around 190 BCE, which held

up to two hundred thousand volumes. Still

farther up is the military zone of the acropolis
with its storehouses, officers’ housing,
barracks, and arsenal. 5.55 Plan: Pergamon, near Bergama, Turkey wey 2 . ' 200 m
The theater, resting against the slope of i
the mountain, is one of the most spectacular
in the Hellenic world. It was originally
constructed in the 3rd century BCE, rebuilt
around 190 BCE, and refurbished in Roman
times. The cavea, or auditorium, forms part of
the natural contour of the west-facing slope
and has room for ten thousand spectators,
with the king’s marble box just at the center
of the front row. A comparison of Pergamon
with Priene is instructive, for it shows that, as
important as the Hippodamian city grid plan

was, Hellenistic town planners also saw its
limitations and, as at Pergamon, adopted a
method that followed the lay of the land and
indeed exploited it with great skill.

5.56 Remains of the theater at Pergamon

5.57 Propylaea on the acropolis at Lindos, Greece

Toward the south, at the edge of the acropolis
and on a terrace 25 meters below the

Athena temple is the Altar of Zeus, built

for Eumenes II soon after his victory over

the Gauls in 190 BCE. The Gauls had been
sweeping southward from western Europe,
and even though they would continue to
harass the northern borders of Mediterranean
countries for centuries, Eumenes II had
managed to hold them at bay, at least for

a while. The altar was a U-shaped, lonic,
stoa-like structure perched on top of a high
socle, with a vast flight of stairs leading up

its west side to the level of the colonnade.

On its enormous socle level was a frieze
representing the mythical battle between

the Olympian gods and the ancient giants,
symbolizing the triumphs of the Pergamon
kingdom over the Gauls.

The altar stands in a courtyard atop an
almost square plinth. It was surrounded by
a colonnade that sheltered a wall on which
there was another frieze celebrating the
legitimacy of the Pergamon kings. This altar
was not only the traditional end point of
the sacrificial procession but also a political
monument and even a war memorial. These
are roles that had been in earlier days
connected with the temple—the Parthenon
being an excellent example. But here the
altar reverted to an autonomous cultural
object.

ra oO

5.58 Pictorial view: Sanctuary of Athena on the acropolis at Lindos

Sanctuary of Athena at Lindos

hough Pergamon is a masterpiece of
adaptation to the landscape, resulting in

a multifaceted architectural environment,
another example is the acropolis of Lindos (ca.
90 BCE) on the island of Rhodes, built around
an older temple to Athena (ca. 300 BCE). The
irst terrace is framed out over the landscape
y an outward-facing winged stoa, opened

at the center by a broad flight of stairs. The
stoa’s front row of columns holds its edge to
iorm a screenlike passage across the front of
the steps. The steps lead to the top level and
to a broad porch that, in turn, opens into a
courtyard with an altar in the middle. The old
temple is sited to the left of the courtyard, in
dynamic tension with the altar.

5.59 Plan: Sanctuary of Athena on the acropolis at Lindos

5.60 Temple of Apollo, Didyma, Turkey

Temple of Apollo at Didyma

It is difficult to speak of the Hellenistic
temple as a single aesthetic form. In the
cosmopolitan environment of western Asia,
one sees different tastes in different places as
well as variable influences. In Egypt, buildings
of the Hellenistic era were designed in an
Egyptian revival style. Such neoarchaisms
were not outside the aesthetic interests of
the Greeks. The Hellenistic aesthetic did,
however, draw on centuries of experience in
creating complex, composite relationships
between space, landscape, and mythical
narration—organizing it, as at Priene, into
unified aesthetic expressions. One of the
most spectacular of Hellenistic temples in this
respect is the unfinished Temple of Apollo
at Didyma, 14 kilometers south of Miletus.
Sitting on a gentle hill and exposed on all
sides, it contained the unusual feature of an
open court, planted with bay trees, arnong
which stood a shrine-like lonic temple.
Though several Greek temples—possibly
even the Parthenon—had open interiors,
this was something altogether different. The
architects are said to have been Paeonius
and Demetrios of Ephesus. Though much
of the plan may have been laid out by them
around 313 BCE, the work took well over
three hundred years to complete and was
abandoned in 41 CE.

The temple's lonic double pteron stands on

a stylobate accessed by seven huge steps.
After ascending the steps, one enters the
deep porch of the pronaos, behind which is
an antechamber. The antechamber is actually
higher than the pronaos, with its door serving
as a window from which the oracles were
delivered. Standing arnong the pronaos's
treelike colurnns—the tallest of any Greek
temple's—the windows would have appeared
to be the mouth of a cave. Access to the
inner courtyard was by way of small doorways
on either side of the window, through sloping,
dark tunnels roofed with barrel vaults.

5.61 Plan: Temple of Apollo

Penetrating through this dark “grotto,” one
enters the sacred grove. But this “inside”
was in fact an outside. The artificial grove

of trees, which is how the columns would
have appeared from the outside, gave way to
real trees on the inside. Furthermore, within
that grove was another temple, with its axis
oriented toward the entry; this small lonic
temple at the far end of the open cella faced
a grand staircase leading back up to the
antechamber, frorn which the priests could
officiate. Folding one temple compound

into another was a consummate example of
Hellenistic brilliance.

5.62 Section: Temple of Apollo

5.63 Hypostyle hall, Temple of Horus, Edfu, Egypt

Ptolemies

Alexandria was one of the principal
Hellenistic cities. Situated on the western
extremity of the Nile River delta, the city was
founded in 332 BCE by Alexander to serve as
a regional capital. It soon became the largest
city in the Mediterranean basin, and it was
unlike any other, with libraries, museums,
and a rich cosmopolitan culture. Though
little is left of the ancient city, the Ptolemaic
period left a vibrant record of its art and
architecture in many parts of Egypt, including
the construction of about fifty medium-size
and large temple complexes, not to mention
smaller architectural works. The Ptolemies
and their queens had no misgivings about
following Egyptian tradition, and set up
statues of themselves as cult images.
Nonetheless, Ptolemaic architects did not
place windows on the top of walls, as the
earlier Egyptians had done: their hypostyle
halls are pitch black if one closes the doors.
Ptalernaic architects also added ambulatories
around the temple, making it an autonomous
object within the confines of the outer walls.
Much innovation focused on the elaborations
of columns and their capitals. The capital
could be round or single-stemmed, quatrefoil
or even eight-stemmed. The plant motifs are
palm, papyrus, lotus, and lily, even though
the lily was not a native Egyptian species.
The plants’ leaves could then appear stacked
variously, frorn two to five. The richness of
form was augmented by lively coloring.

5.64 Pronags at the Temple of Horus

Temple of Horus
The Temple of Horus (begun 237 BCE) is
an excellent example of these tendencies.
The building not only had to reflect the
needs of the cult of Horus but also had

to serve as a pantheon for the cumulative
aspects of Egyptian religion. The entrance
is marked by a grand pylon 62.6 meters
across and 30.5 meters high, leading to

a court colonnaded on three sides—a
very un-Egyptian motif, more Hellenistic
in tone. The colonnade not only frames
the entrance of the temple but also
constitutes a type of extended porch that,
along with the perimeter walls, forms a
passageway. Past the two hypostyle halls
is an inner court, in the center of which

is the freestanding sanctuary of Horus.
The court gives access to thirteen small
chapels for the pantheon, all windowless
and completely dark except for tiny slit
entries. Great care was given to align
the pylon with the noontime sun at the
midsummer solstice. At that particular
moment, the pylon does not cast a
shadow.

Sanctuary
Well
Chapel

Small court

Inner hall

3

OG

Court

eeastoae

5.65 Plan: Temple of Horus

MAURYAN DYNASTY AND EARLY
BUDDHISM

ndia, despite its vibrant culture, had
remained relatively isolated from the
Hellenistic economies that linked Delos

and Pergamon in the west to China in

the east. This situation changed rapidly
when the Mauryan kings unified the

ndian subcontinent, forming a new and
potent economic force in the Asian world.
Maurya had under its control not only a

rich agricultural basin, but also the Barabar
Hills to the south of the Mauryan capital
Pataliputra, where copper and iron could

e mined. Consequently, India could begin
to compete in the global politics of iron and
thus emerge from its relative isolation. At its
eight, the empire stretched northward along
the natural boundaries of the Himalayas
and westward to Kandahar, which had

een founded by Alexander in the 4th
century BCE. This brought India into full
contact with Greek and Persian culture,
and soon Indian spices, copper, gold, silk,
and rice began to appear in distant places.
The impact of this contact manifests itself
in Indian buildings in a shift from wood to
stone architecture, initially in the form of
monumental columns and rock-cut Buddhist

caves.
The rise of Buddhism can be traced to

smoldering divisions within the Aryan polity

during the Mauryan dynasty. Brahmins were

BIHAR

India

eo Lumbini
Be
&,
Np @ kushinagar
& © Pataliputra
Sarnath
OF Gaya
Bay of Bengal

5.66 Asokan pillar at Vaishali, near Patna, India

the lawmakers, scholars, preachers, and
advisers to the rulers, who occupied the
highest position in the Vedic caste system.
Since the caste system controlled the lives
and destinies of everyone, there was little
individuality. In the 6th century BCE, two
men, Siddhartha Gautama (the Buddha, or
“enlightened one”) and Mahavira Jain, both
from marginal clans, asserted the idea of

an independent and individual journey to
spiritual bliss, or nirvana, that contradicted
not only the principles of warfare, but also the
highly regimented Vedic rituals that required
the leadership of the Brahmins. Nirvana was
accessible to all, but it was not easy to reach,
as it required a cormmitment to rigorous
asceticism. The main difference between the

two men was that while meditation-based
practices were at the core of the Buddha's

Arabian Sea

5.67 Important sites in the life the Buddha

teachings, Mahavira Jain insisted on a radical
vegetarianism that included a prohibition on
arming, since that inadvertently killed soil
worms.
Buddhism might have remained just
another intellectual stream of the Aryan world
ad it not been adopted as state law and
moral order under Asoka (r. 272-231 BCE),
the most famous of the Mauryan kings.
After a particularly brutal battle, Asoka lost
faith in the traditional Aryan order, and
after more than a year of consultation with
various philosophers, decided to convert to
Buddhism. Asoka was not the first Mauryan
leader to be interested in Buddhism. At
the end of his life, Chandragupta Maurya,
founder of the Mauryan dynasty, abdicated
is throne and became a Jain ascetic. His
son, Bindusara (r. 298-272 BCE) became
a follower of an even more extreme ascetic
movement known as the ajivikas. The ascetic
interest of these rulers derived from the
fact that they were not born into the Aryan
Kshatriya (warrior) caste, but were low-caste
upstarts who became Kshatriya after seizing
the Magadha throne. The difference between
Asoka and his predecessors was that he
adapted Buddhist teachings into a new moral
and social order for his empire that he called
the dhamma. In essence Buddhism became
a state religion.

Though most of Asoka’s dhamma derives
from Buddhism—including vegetarianism

5.68 Vajrasana (“Diamond Throne”) at Bodh Gaya, India

and belief in nonviolence—it was not identical
to Buddhism. In fact, Asoka rarely mentioned
the Buddha while describing his dhamma,
which, significantly, included respect for

all religions as a core part of its tenets. To
promote his dhamma, which consisted of
about thirty-three edicts, Asoka had them
etched in stone tablets, on the side of
prominent rocks, and inside cave sanctuaries,
all in the vernacular language of his kingdom.
He also carved them on the sides of pillars,
about twenty of which have survived. One
such pillar, in Lauriya Nandangarh (in

Bihar), made from a single piece of polished
sandstone, rises 12 meters above the ground
and extends 3 meters into the earth. Though
the pillar is surmounted by an ornate capital,
it is the shaft with the inscribed edicts that

is of primary significance. The Asokan pillars
consist of a stylized lotus base that supports
an ornamental drum on which there are
sculptures of animals ranging from the bull
to the lion signifying royal authority. Most
famous is the pillar found at Sarnath, the

site of the Buddha's first sermon, the lotus
ase and drum of which is topped by a
capital of four lions. Surmounting all this, at
least originally, was the Buddhist wheel of
jaw, which has, in turn, been adopted as the
symbol of the modern Indian nation.

To further promote the Buddhist order,
Asoka convened a council of all significant
Buddhist practitioners, whose mission it was
to codify the Buddha's teachings. Asoka also
memorialized the major sites associated with
the Buddha—in particular his birthplace
(Lumbini), the site of his enlightenment
(Bodh Gaya), the location of his first sermon
(Sarnath), and the place of his death
(Kushinagar). He sent emissaries throughout
the empire and abroad, including to Sri
Lanka, Afghanistan, Persia, and Greece.
Most importantly, he collected all the known
relics of the Buddha and distributed them to
about eight sites, at which the first centers

of Buddhist learning were established. The
Buddha was never represented as a human
figure in Asoka’s time. Representations of
the Buddha began to be made in the 1st
century CE and have become important in the
Buddhist tradition ever since. Asoka did build
the diamond throne at Bodh Gaya to stand in
for the Buddha and to mark the place of his
enlightenment.

ie) 10m

5.69 Plan, section, and interior: Lomas Rsi Cave, near Bodh Gaya, India

Barabar Hills Caves

Buddhist ascetics were responsible for the
first rock-cut caves in India, which date to
the mid-3rd century BCE. They are located
in the Barabar Hills of Bihar, 20 miles north
of Bodh Gaya, at a prominent cluster of rock
outcroppings in an otherwise flat landscape.
There are four caves, consisting of two
chambers each: a rectangular hall followed

by a round room with a
Inscriptions in three of t!

hemispherical ceiling.
em note that they

were dedicated by Asoka for use by the

ajivikas. Unadorned, wit!

crisp rectangular

openings punched into the rock, they are
carved out of the granite with exacting
precision and with a highly polished internal
surface. One of them, the Lomas Rsi Cave, is
incomplete. It was probably abandoned after
the interior rock sheared and the roof partially
collapsed. This cave has an entrance that
clearly simulates a vaulted wooden and thatch
structure of pavilion. Since the cave has no
inscription, it probably dates to Asoka, though
its exterior may well have been carved later.

Rock-cut architecture had a long tradition
in Egypt, Anatolia, and Patra, so the technique
was most likely brought to India through
Persia, particularly after Asoka. The word cave,
which is used to describe these structures, is
sadly misleading, since they are constructed
structures, and as such are a form of
architecture. In the centuries to come, this
simple beginning was to flower into a tradition
of rock-cut buildings that spread throughout
South Asia and China.

5.70 Entrance, Lomas Rsi Cave

Huang He

Qin Xianyang
. Yan Ps
Di tribes Gulf of Zhili
' Banpo
: ve
Qi wei Rt . Han Chang’an
Rong tribes te
® ; lu Yellow Sea :
Jin Cao rn
Zheng > \ ! Ming Xian
Qin ~~ Xian Song i : ;
+ Feng and Hao
a Chen : :
i Tang Chang'an
Chang Jiang
Wu
Qu Yue
Man tribes East China Sea a ° 10 km
Min tribes oes

5.71 China during the Warring States period

CHINA: THE WARRING STATES PERIOD
In the Warring States period (481-221 BCE),
the old league of cities ruled by the Zhou
nobility was replaced by a systern of
territorial states (seven major and about
seven minor ones) under the carmmand of
monarchs who seem to have engaged in
feverish construction activity. They fortified
existing city walls, multiplied enclosures
and barricades, and established satellite
towns, all primarily for the purpose of
defense. Prior to the Warring States period,
cities were cultic and political entities
inhabited by the nobility and their followers.
Populations were in the tens of thousands
at most. During the Warring States period,
as cities became capitals of states, their

nature changed, becoming divided between
a political center and an economic center,
the two holding each other in mutual
suspicion. This suspicion was articulated in
laws that attempted to control the actions
and influence of merchants. The result was
that new and sharp boundaries were drawn
within the city between the political district,
which was protected with its own wall, and
the merchants’ district. New architectural
elements appeared that, through height and
verticality, emphasized the ruler’s authority.
owers, pillar gates, and raised buildings
were all used to demonstrate power. When
Shang Yang began constructing the new Qin
capital Xianyang, the first iterns built were the
gate towers.

5.72 Map of Xi'an, China, through history

Stepped terraces—called fai platforms—
surrounded on all four sides by the wooden
columns and beams of the palace, could
give the impression of multiple-storied
buildings. In an age that lacked the ability
to construct true multistoried buildings, this
design allowed for structures that seemed
to rise above the city. The ruler was bot!
all-seeing and yet invisible. Furthermore, it
was believed that the ruler should move in
secret to avoid evil spirits and that he should
live as much as possible in towers. For this
reason, Shi Huangdi, the First Emperor,
built elevated walks to connect all 270 of his
palaces and towers. Anyone who revealed
where the emperor was visiting was put to
death. This withdrawal from the gaze of the
populace, and even from the court, became
an essential attribute of Qin and Han imperial
personages. In Rome and India, a ruler’s
person had to be visible. But in China, his
status was derived from being hidden and
remote.

5.73 The monumentality of palace complexes in the Warring States period

LJ 30m

Xianyang Palace
Unlike the enclosed and understated
ritual complexes of old, these new palaces
projected themselves into space as imposing
three-dimensional structures. In general, the
higher the fai, the more assertive the claim
to power by the ruler who had commissioned
it. In a time when rulers and states were
constantly at war, claiming authority through
buildings was critical for a ruler’s image.
For instance, a Zhou king constructed an
imposing platform at the site of his meeting
with other lords. History reveals that his
guests, struck with awe at the sight of this
platform, agreed to join the Zhou alliance.

A dramatic terrace pavilion, the Xianyang
Palace No. 1 consisted of a series of
rooms and corridors built one on top of
another around an earthen core, giving the
impression of a multilevel structure of great

(es a a

5.74 Elevation: Xianyang Palace No. 1, Xi’an, China

volume and height. While this structure has
been identified with the Xianyang Palace of
Qin Shi Huangdi, first emperor of Qin, recent
evidence suggests that it was first built during
the Warring States period and subsequently
integrated into Shi Huangdi’s palatial
complex. Located north of the Wei River,

the palace's foundations are 60 meters long
east to west, 45 meters wide, and about 6
meters high. The reconstruction suggests that
the palace superstructure was symmetrical,
having had two wings. The earthen core was
surrounded by bays on all sides, creating the
image of a three-story building of immense
size. A drainage system guided water into
underground pipes. The chambers were
connected by intricate passages, and
balconies were decorated with elaborate
bronze accessories and colorful murals.

5.75 Pictorial view: Xianyang Palace No. 1

5.76 Plan and section: Tomb of Zeng

Tomb of Zeng Hou Yi

The architecture of tornbs and graveyards
became increasingly important at this time.
Texts compiled during this period distinguish
between rituals performed within the city

in ancestral temples and others performed
outside the city at graveyards. The most
visible remnants of Zhou architecture are, in
fact, tombs, of which more than six thousand
have been discovered. The tomb of Zeng Hou
Yi (Marquis Yi of Zeng) attracted international
attention when a large collection of bronze
objects was found there, including a set

of sixty-five ritual bells weighing a total of
2,500 kilograms. The tomb consisted of an
irregularly shaped vertical pit, 13 meters deep
and more than 200 square meters in area. It
was divided into four chambers by wooden
planks, with the principal chamber, on the
east, containing the marquis’s body.

The body was placed in a double-layered
coffin. The space between the coffin and the
chamber walls was filled with charcoal, clay,
and earth to seal it as completely as possible.
The eastern chamber also had coffins for
eight women—possibly musicians who were
sacrificed at the time of the burial (although
human sacrificial internment was almost over
by this time in Chinese history). The western
chamber held skeletons of thirteen young
women, who may have been the ruler’s
concubines. The remaining two chambers

Hou Yi, Sui Zhou, China

were filled with ritual objects and weapons
made of bronze, gold, copper, lacquer, wood,
jade, and other materials.

A curious aspect of this tomb is that
small window-like openings connect all four
chambers. Even the marquis's outer coffin
bears a rectangular hole, and his inner coffin
is painted with doors and windows with lattice

5.77 Coffins with window-like and door-like
openings found in the Tomb of Zeng Hou Yi

patterns. Similar openings have been found
in other Zhou tombs. According to Chinese
Daoism, when a person dies, his hun (the
spiritual soul) would leave, but his p’o (the
earthly soul) would remain attached to his
body. The series of openings in this tomb
might be there to facilitate the movement of
the p’oin its underground “palace.”

5.78 Bianzhong bells found in the Tomb of Zeng Hou Yi, along with a 125-piece orchestra
and 25 musicians

6.1 The remnants of a Roman road, the Via Appia, south of Rome

INTRODUCTION

Eurasia was dominated by China and Rome,
interconnected by an increasingly vast
system of land and sea trade routes known
in their entirety as the Silk Route. In spite

of its name, it wasn’t only silk that moved
westward; in actuality the Silk Route economy
was a transcontinental trade in not just silk
but also other luxury items such as rugs,
gold, silver, craft objects, gems, ivory, and
perfumes—all things that could be easily
packed and transported on the backs of
camels. The term Si/k Route emphasizes
the trade that went from east to west, but
trade also went from west to east. The
Chinese valued horses as well as woolen
goods, carpets, curtains, blankets, rugs, and
Parthian tapestries since they were unfamiliar
with carpet manufacture and weaving. Also
imported into China were military equipment,
gold and silver, semiprecious stones, and
glass items, all of which were rare in China.
In addition to the trade in luxury items,
there was bulk trade in grain, lumber, and
building materials. This trade belonged to a
different economic universe and was usually
transported by boat along rivers and shores;
here, the southern route through India and
along the coast around Southeast Asia was
preferred. That trade, along with cinnamon
from the Indonesian spice islands, was to
escalate in importance in the next centuries.
The Chinese, in order to get rice and other
bulk material, such as bricks and lumber,
from the rural south to the urban north,

built a vast network of canals, some 1,776
kilometers in total length, called the Grand
Canal. The oldest parts date back to the 5th
century BCE, although the various sections
were not connected until the Sui dynasty
(581-618 CE). The Romans, meanwhile, are
still famous for their roads today. Estimated
at about 400,000 kilometers in total, these
roads ranged from small local connectors to
broad, long-distance highways built to link
cities, towns, and military bases. The major
roads were stone-paved and flanked by
footpaths and drainage ditches.

The city of Rome developed from
a relatively small town to a sprawling
metropolis. Though the Romans planned
the layout of their military camps with great
ceremonial precision, the city of Rome
developed with little top-down planning. At
its center was the forum, the political core of
the city. It was located in a valley surrounded
by hills over which the city began to spread.
Though almost all cities in the Mediterranean
world were associated with deities and ritual,
and linked to sacred acts when they were
created, the Roman Forum was designed as
a particularly intense site, from its mythical
origins with Romulus and Remus to the
Vestal Virgins who lived in a special residence
and maintained the sacred fire. It was the
site of the umbilicus of the earth and the site
where the sacred law tablets were on display.
And as the ceremonial center of the republic,
(ending in 27 BCE with the establishment
of the Rornan Empire), it was politically far

different from almost every model of rulership
to date, with the exception of Athens. The
transition to the empire was much contested,
but it was more than just a grab for power

by certain elites. The enormous sale of the
territory did not match well with the still rather
loose mercantile ethos of the republic. The
shift began when Caesar invaded Gaul, not
just for his personal glory but to gain access
to some of the best farmland in Europe as
well as to metal. For several centuries, the
Romans had traded with the Gauls and
Celts for iron, which they needed for their
military. Despite early resistance to Roman
domination, the Celts largely accommodated
themselves to a Roman way of life that
brought protection and prosperity.

Initially, the economic ascendancy o
Rome cast a pall over western Asia, and very
little of consequence was built during the
Ist century BCE. But soon Rome was able
to impose a cohesive appearance over its
expanding domains. Roman emperors from
Augustus to Trajan built impressive temples,
forums, villas, and cities, all with the typical
Roman imprint. Cities, roads, theaters, baths,
markets, and military camps began to be
built, from Hadrian’s Wall in England (122
CE) to Timgad in Algeria (founded by Emperor
Trajan ca. 100 CE).

Between the great centers of Rome and
China, there stretched trackless steppe and
desert; to get material across this area, the
Chinese, like the Romans, had to rely on
people who lived in gers, yurts, and tents,
and whose survival depended just as much
on their reliability as on their cunning and
prowess. These nomadic cultures, however,
get little credit for their efforts, as they were
generally seen as rootless barbarians, but
without them, there would have been no
China and no Rome. For instance, it was
the Xiongu khanate’s confederation of tribes
north of China that fed the ravenous needs of
the empire. Such confederations would come
and go over the centuries, but they were
indispensable to the Eurasian economy.

The Romans, at their end of the Silk
Route, had to deal in particular with the
Parthians, the great horseback warriors who
controlled the deserts of western Asia. The
Romans tried to conquer them again and
again in a series of battles that lasted over the
entire period of their empire. But although the

6.2 The Colosseum, Rome

history books emphasize war and conquest,
war or no war, it was the trade exchange

that linked people across the landscape. A
significant border city was Dura-Europos (in
modern-day Syria), built on a bluff 90 meters
above the right bank of the Euphrates River to
control the river crossing on the route between
the Mediterranean port city of Antioch

and the inland caravan cities to the east.
Initially founded in 303 BCE, Dura-Europos
was redesigned in the 2nd century BCE in

the Greek manner, with rectangular blocks
around a large central agora. At the end of
the 2nd century BCE it came under Parthian
control and was known as a cosmopolitan
center. It contained not only a well-preserved
synagogue but also an early Christian church.
he city was captured by the Romans in 165
CE and all but abandoned in the middle of
the 3rd century CE. To enhance their trade
position, the Romans tried to do an end run
around the Parthians by making alliances
with the Nabataeans, a caravan-based culture
centered in Jordan; the Nabataeans controlled
the routes to the south and to India. The
Roman attitude toward the Nabateans was
different than toward the Parthians. The
Nabataeans were made citizens of Rome

and were showered with privileges. The
extravagant tombs the Nabataeans built for
themselves are showpieces of architectural
luxury and testaments to their important
position in global trade.

The Roman attempt to control the eastern
Mediterranean included the all-important
Levant, and in 70 CE they conquered the
city of Jerusalem and destroyed its farnous
Second Temple, an act still mourned annually
as the Jewish fast Tisha B’Av. Back in Rome,
Emperor Titus built an arch celebrating
the sacking of Jerusalem and its temple.
At the center of this prosperity was Rome,
which underwent a profound transformation
between 50 CE and 150 CE. It is clear that
architecture in the Roman heartland in the
1st century CE was often magnificent in scale
and material, but in design terms it was
notably conventional compared to that found
in West Asia at the time. The architecture at
Petra, the Nabataean capital, parallels the
spatial innovation seen elsewhere, such as at
Herod’s Palace at Masada, which works its
way down a difficult slope.

The Romans built extensive villas,
including a new palace for the emperor,
the Palace of Domitian (also known as
Flavian Palace), which was completed
in 92 CE during the reign of Titus Flavius
Domitianus and attributed to his master
architect, Rabirius. The very word palace
is thought to have derived from its location
on the Palatine Hill. It consisted of a series
of open courtyards that define imperial,
ceremonial, and private activities. The plan
is a master class in spatial organization.

This period also saw the construction of the
Colosseum (72-80 CE), which could hold up
to 80,000 spectators, and the rise of vast
urban-scale entertainment. Unlike earlier
such structures that were built into hillsides,
this is an entirely freestanding structure, its
monumental facade comprising three stories
of superimposed arcades surmounted by
a tall attic story. The building was used to
host gladiatorial shows and a variety of other
events, such as animal hunts that required a
great variety of wild beasts, mainly imported
from Africa and the Middle East, and battles
that required elaborate sets with movable
buildings. Apparently there were even
simulated sea battles. The Colosseum was
so vast that the building was also used as a
quarry until well into the 15th century. Most
significant in the transformation of Rome was
the construction of the Imperial Forums, built
between 46 BCE and 113 CE. These are a
series of interconnected monumental plazas
celebrating the accomplishments of emperors
Caesar, Augustus, Nerva, and Trajan. This
ensemble of forums was unique in the world,
with an interconnected fabric of colonnades,
temples, libraries, statues, altars, and public
spaces.

In China, the Qin dynasty, systernatically
annexing all competing states, created
a centralized government with a
correspondingly large bureaucracy. For this
achievement the Qin emperor Shi Huangdi
is known as the First Emperor. It is, in
fact, from the word gin (or ch’in) that the
name China derives. Shi Huangdi’s public
works included the unification of diverse
efforts at building defensive walls into a
single effort, known as the Great Wall, that
would be the hallmark of China’s defense
against the northern nomads for centuries to
come. He divided China into a hierarchy of
administrative units: commanderies, districts,
and counties. The system was different from
that of previous dynasties, which had loose
alliances and federations. He also created a
systern of advancement in the bureaucracy
based on merit instead of hereditary rights.
His rule was brutal, however, and his dynasty
collapsed with his death. The tomb that he
built was at the time, and perhaps remains to
this day, one of the most elaborate ever made
anywhere in the world. It had at its core a
room that contained a vast landscape model

of the empire. The building was surrounded
by high walls of tamped earth, and the whole
was covered with tons of earth to make a
gigantic mound, in the vicinity of which were
extensive pits that contained thousands of
statues of soldiers and horses. This army was
there to protect the deceased in the afterlife.
The representations of both man and animal
were so meticulous that we have an excellent
idea of the clothing and even the bridles of
the time.
The Qin dynasty gave way to the Han
dynasty (206 BCE-220 CE). It was an age
of economic prosperity, with the economy
of the Silk Route drawing China ever
closer to both the wealth and the problems
associated with cross-continental trade. The
lynasty had contact with the Kushans and
the Parthians as well as with Burma and
Japan. An embassy frorn Rome, perhaps
of merchants, is recorded to have reached
the court in 166 CE. But as was typical of
the Chinese imperial system, court politics
and power struggles between the various
clans and military elites caused the Han’s
ultimate downfall. Their capital was Chang'an,
the largest and wealthiest city in the world
at the time. When the Han lost control of
the city in 9 CE, they moved their capital to
the relative safety of the east, to Luoyang.
Chang'‘an (which means “Perpetual Peace")
was destroyed in 24 CE (to be refounded
and redesigned at an even greater scale in
582). Unlike almost every other civilization,
the great cities of China were often destroyed
not by foreign invasion but by inner rebellion
or the transformation from one dynasty to
another, when entire cities would be put to
the torch. This is one of the reasons that so
little Chinese architecture has survived the
ages.
From a religious point of view, this period
was one of extraordinary experimentation
and transformation that developed out of
Hellenistic experimentations. Old static
religions were replaced by mystery cults
and religions that emphasized personal
salvation. Along with the established mystery
cults at Eleusis and elsewhere, Judaic cults
developed a new concept known today
as heaven. Christians began following the
teachings of Christ; and Mithraism, with its
complex system of purification rites and ritual
meals in underground temples, was popular

among Roman soldiers. The cult of Isis, with
its emphasis on mother and baby, was also
spreading throughout the Mediterranean.

In India, Buddhism began to develop
into a set of codified written sutras around
the 1st century BCE. These sutras allowed
the teachings to be easily disserninated and
translated. One of the key sites of the new
religion was at Sanchi, where a stupa was
built in the 3rd century BCE. It consisted
of a simple hemispherical brick structure,
crowned by a chatra, a parasol-like structure,
the traditional symbol of high rank. It was
covered with stone during the period of the
Sunga Empire (187-75 BCE). The idea of
a structure as a solid mass harkens back
to Egyptian and Mesopotamian worldviews,
but it also relates more possibly to traditions
brought into India from steppe people who
commemorated the dead by making stone
heaps. During this time, however, Buddhism’s
importance as a stand-alone religion began to
wane in India, even though it spread rapidly
into other parts of Asia.

India was mainly controlled by the
Satavahanas (230 BCE-220 CE), who
were known for their commercialism. A
contemporary text (ca. 60 CE) notes that
ships were outfitted to bring “the products
of their own places; wheat, rice, clarified
butter, sesame oil, cotton cloth...and honey
from the reed called sacchari [sugar]. Some
make the voyage especially to these market-
towns, and others exchange their cargoes
while sailing along the coast.” (Periplus of
the Erythraean Sea, chapter 14). It was along
the trade routes that Buddhism spread.

The Satavahanas produced the first wave
of Indian cultural expansion eastward into
Southeast Asia, a process that would be
known as Indianization and that would have
profound consequences to political and
urban development in lands frorn Burma to
Vietnam.

A Imperial Forums

48 BCE-112 CE

ATemple of Mars Ultor

Begun 42 BCE ca. 65 CE
ATemple of Fortuna at Praeneste ATabularium
40 BCE 78 BCE
<1 Pompeii A Mausoleum of Augustus A Palace of Domitian
From 6th century BCE 28 BCE 92 CE
A Bibracte A Petra Rock-Cut Tombs A Northern Palace at Masada
ea. 1000-30 BCE 312 BCE-106 CE 30-20 BCE
200 BCE 1 BCE O 1 CE
4239: Egyptian calendar
3763: Jewish calendar
756: Roman calendar
752: Babylonian calendar
547: Buddhist calendar
1 of the Yuanshi era of the Han Dynasty: Chinese calendar
Parthian Empire ATaxila
ca. 247 BCE-224 CE 150 BCE-100 CE
Qin Dynasty Western Han Dynasty Wang Mang Interregnum — Eastern Han Dynasty
221-206 BCE 206 BCE-9 CE 9-25 CE 25-220 CE
A First Emperor’s Tomb
246-210 BCE

Mauryan Empire
ca. 323-185 BCE

Sunga Empire
187-75 BCE
A Stupa Complex at Sanchi
ca. 100 BCE
A Rock-Cut Caves at Junnar
100-25 BCE

Pre-Classic Mayan Culture
ca. 1000 BCE-250 CE
A Teuchitlan
300 BCE-200 CE

Roman Empire

27 BCE-393 CE
A Colosseum

72-80 CE

A Domus Aurea

Kushan Empire
2nd century BCE to 3rd century CE

Teuchitlan Tradition
ca. 300 BCE-900 CE

Zapotec Civilization
ca. 700 BCE-1400 CE

AEI Mirador
150 BCE-150 CE

AEI Openo
300 BCE-200 CE

200 CE

6.3 Map of Rome, ca. 4th century BCE

THE FOUNDING OF ROME

he founding of Rome remains shrouded
in myth. From Plutarch, Virgil, Titus Livius
(Livy), and other Roman authors, there

Aeneas, after fleeing
various adventurous
Latin shores, where

sprang, generations
and Remus, with Ro

emerge colorful tales that ascribe the
founding to Aeneas’s descendant Romulus.

the burning Troy and
voyages, arrived on the
e founded a dynasty

with Livia, daughter of Latinus. From them

jater, the twins Romulus
mulus eventually

founding Rome, an event that is said to have

occurred around 750 BCE. The judgment of

modern scholars is t

at the tales constitute

a summary of folk memories enhanced by

wishful thinking.
Nonetheless, archaeological evidence
has not yet been able to undermine this
general narrative. Around the 4th century
BCE, Rome became conquest-oriented, and
one by one the neighboring cities and tribes
were brought under its control. When the
Greek city of Tarentum in southern Italy
(Apulia) fell in 272 BCE, Rome enslaved all
its citizens. The fall of Syracuse in Sicily
followed in 212 BCE. The sack of the Greek
city of Corinth in 146 BCE brought Greece
itself under Roman control, and with the
conquest of Carthage on the north coast of
Africa, Rome assumed uncontested control
over the Mediterranean basin. The religious
life of the Romans centered on the Temple of
Saturn (498 BCE) and the Temple of Concord

(367 BCE) on the Capitoline Hill. Little is
known about these temples, but they were
most probably Etruscan in style. The civic
heart was the Comitium (whence comes the
word committee), a meeting place located
on the forum just below the Capitoline Hill. It
was a shallow circular amphitheater in front
of the council chamber, or curia. Though not
a building, it was nonetheless a fempilum, or
sacred space laid out on a north-south axis.
Over time, a speaker's platform—the
rostrum, named after the ships’ prows that
were hung there following the Battle of Antium
in 338 BCE—was added. The forum (which

is the Latin word for “outdoor public place”)
was more than just an open space. It was a
composite of several symbolic layers. A few
feet away from the Comitium, for example,
was the Umbilicus, the navel of the city of
Rome. It was the syrnbolic center of the city;
all distances in ancient Rome were measured
from it. The Umbilicus had a cylindrical shape
and was about 4 meters in diameter, but
most importantly it had a door that allowed
priests to ritually feed the “navel” over which
it stood. Behind rose the Capitoline Hill, on
the upper slopes of which stood a building
called the Tabularium, constructed around
78 BCE. Built out along the cliff edge, it
featured two stories of arcades overlooking
the forum. The building housed the Roman
law tablets. At the southern end of the forum
was the Temple of Vesta, tended by the Vestal
Virgins. Vesta means simply “hearth.” The
women who served the temple took a vow of
chastity in order to devote themselves to the
study and correct observance of state rituals.
The premises were off-limits to males. The
women’s job was to make sure the sacred fire

in the temple never wet
it did, they would sacri
there were two vestals;
increased to six.

nt out; in the event that
ice their lives. Initially
over time the number

The most sacred site, however, was the

apex of the Capitoline H
of Jupiter Optimus Maxi

ill, where the Temple
mus was located (first

constructed 509 BCE). 7
almost 60 meters square
in typical Etruscan man

Basilica Porcia

O

Temple of Concord

Ss

QO

Temple of Saturn

6.4 Plan: Forum Romanum, Rome, ca. 150 BCE

Temple of the

he temple measured
e and had three shrines
ner, with Juno Regina

Castors

6.5 A reconstruction of the Tabularium, Rom

on the left, Minerva on the right, and Jupiter
Optimus Maximus in the middle. Connecting all
of this to the outside world was the Via Sacra,
or “Sacred Way.” It was the route of the Roman
Triumph that began on the outskirts of the city
and proceeded through the Roman Forum. It
was eventually paved and during the reign of
Nero was lined with colonnades. On both sides
of the forum there was a building type invented
by the Romans, the basilica. These were
rectangular buildings somewhat similar to a
Greek stoa, except that they had a central aisle
that tended to be higher than the flanking aisles
so that light could penetrate through clerestory
windows beneath the roof of the higher center
section. The buildings served as law courts

and as places where legal matters could be
transacted. Temporary partitions were set up for
proceedings, as there were no wall partitions.

6.7 Plan: Basiica Aemilia, Rome

Though there is a debate about who exactly
the Romans were, there can be no doubt
that they were deeply rooted in Etruscan
custom. This means that almost everything
was connected to ritual observances, at the
core of which was the sacrifice that served
as a type of consummation of deals made
between the supplicant and a specific god.
Supplicants could be an individual or an
entire city. Precise adherence to ritual was
essential, since deviations could contaminate
the results. Important sacrifices involved
animal victims. Each deity had his or

her own preference as to what was to be
sacrificed. The sex of a chosen animal was
also significant: male for gods, female for
goddesses. So was its color: white beasts were
offered to deities of the upper world, black
to those of the underworld. The sacrifice for

Mars was usually a combination of an ox, a
ram, and a boar. Sacrifices took place in front
of an altar and were elaborate and messy
routines. The head of the victim was sprinkled
with wine and with bits of sacred cake made
from flour and salt. The animal was then
stunned with an axe or mallet before its throat
was slit. It was then disemboweled, and the
liver and other organs were inspected. If there
was something wrong, this was considered

a bad omen and the process had to be
repeated with a fresh animal until it came

out right. The vital organs were burnt upon
the altar and the carcass was cut into pieces
and eaten on the spot, with all participants in
the ritual receiving a piece of the animal. For
large urban-scale sacrifices, this could entail
a large number of animals. All sacrifices and
offerings required an accompanying prayer

to be effective. Public religious ritual had to
be enacted by specialists and professionals
faultlessly; a mistake might require that the
action, or even the entire festival, be repeated
from the start. Even private prayer by an
individual was formulaic, a recitation rather
than a personal expression. The disasters of
the early part of the Second Punic War were
attributed by the Roman historian Livy to a
growth of superstitious cults, errors in augury,
and the neglect of Rome's traditional gods,
whose anger was expressed directly in Rome's
defeat at Cannae (216 BCE).


St.-Rémy
A APraenesie

Cosa & Ororre
Arompeii
Capri

Kbour-er-Roumia
Mediterranean Sea

Jerusalem A
Masada

6.8 Sites of Roman cities and colonies

a curved element

Temple of Fortuna at Praeneste

The temple at Praeneste (now Palestrina)
was dedicated to the goddess Fortuna
Primigenia. Her oracular answers were read
by a gifted boy who randomly chose from
among oak sticks inscribed with oracular
pronouncements. The building stood over or
near the site of a town 35 kilometers east of
Rome that had been vanquished in 82 BCE
and resettled by Romans who, because of
the cool breezes, came to use it as summer
resort. It was favored by the wealthy, whose
villas studded the neighborhood. Since the
Romans by this time had conquered Greece,
they had come into contact with Hellenism
and its tradition of spatial experimentation.

It is possible that the structure, with its
spectacular series of terraces, colonnades,
exedras, and porticos on four levels
descending down the hillside, linked by
monumental stairs and ramps, was designed
by an Anatolian or a Greek, given that ‘a
architecture in Rome was still a rather new
field. The uppermost terrace was crowned
by a double L-shaped Corinthian colonnade
that framed a semicircular theater, which was
itself surmounted by a colonnade. Behind
this, on the central axis, stood a small round
temple, or tholos, cut partially out of the rock,
indicative of a particularly sacred site. The
upper terrace and the theater were used for
festivals, dances, and rituals.

6.11 Section of hemicycle: Temple of Fortuna at Praeneste o [es ee nS)


The building did, however, make a

unigue Roman contribution to the field of
architecture. Except for the columns and
other architectural elements, the structure,
including the support vaults, was built entirely
of concrete. Exploiting the potential of the
new material, several kinds of vaults were
used, including ramping and annular forms.
That the facade of the upper level rested on

a vault, rather than on the wall beneath it,
would have been unthinkable in the days
before concrete. Though concrete had been
known to Romans since 190 BCE, it was not
able to support great weight. But during the
period of Praeneste’s construction a new form
of cement, known as pozzolana, came into
use. It was made with volcanic ash from the
Vesuvius area—especially from the city of
Pozzuoli, from which it took its name. Roman
architects might not have understood the
chemistry, but they were well aware of its
exceptional properties—especially of its ability
to set underwater, which facilitated the design
of ports and harbors. Though the famous
Roman architectural theorist Vitruvius was
still highly suspicious of the material when he
wrote his treatise in 40 BCE, the architects of
the Temple of Fortuna Primigenia showed no
lack of confidence.

Roman concrete consisted of three parts:
hydrate lime, pozzolan ash, and a few pieces
of fist-sized rocks. The trick to a strong bond
was not just in the mix but also in the proper
application. A formwork was constructed of
wood in the desired shape. Laborers hand-
mixed the wet lime and volcanic ash in a
mortar box with very little water to give a
nearly dry composition. They carried it to the

Opus incertum

6.13 Three types of Roman concrete walls

Opus reticulatum

6.12 Opus incertum concrete wall

job site in baskets, placing it over a prepared
layer of rock pieces, and then pounded the
mortar into the rock layer. This involved long
lines of laborers, who had to act quickly.
Once the process of laying the concrete

had begun, it had to be carried through
without pause in order to avoid seams.
Pouring large structures was a complex,
around-the-clock process. Modern concrete,
being wetter, shrinks when it dries and is,
therefore, actually less durable than that of
the ancients. And though concrete workers
today vibrate the wet concrete after they pour
it to make sure it fills the formwork, Roman
concrete was pounded—the pounding, as
the engineer David Moore has discovered,
being an important element in the chemical
process that makes the material hard.

Opus testaceum

The earliest form of Roman concrete is
known as opus incertum. Opus is the Latin
word for “work,” so opus incerturm means
something like “worked in,” which makes
sense since the concrete was layered with
irregularly shaped uncut stones or fist-sized
locks of tufa. Tufa is a relatively lightweight
stone and is thus easy to use. Over time,

a more finished look was produced using
more regularly shaped stones. A variant is
nown as opus reticulatum. Reticulatum is
Latin for “netlike.” This form of concrete wall
consists of diamond-shaped bricks of tufa
placed around a core of cernent. The blocks
were placed at an angle of 45 degrees to
form a diagonal pattern. This construction
technique was used from the beginning of
the 1st century BCE until opus /atericium
came common in the imperial age. In opus
fatericium, the concrete wall is surfaced with
rick.

The Romans also industrialized the
production of bricks. Their armies operated
mobile kilns so that they could build
structures rapidly. In this way, they introduced
bricks to many parts of the empire. Roman
bricks are often stamped with the mark of the
army legion that supervised their production.
Sizes, however, were not uniform. Shapes
included square, rectangular, triangular, and
round, with some reaching over 1 meter in
length.

AL
6.14 Residential fabric of Pompeii, Italy

The Roman Urban Villa

Until the 2nd century BCE, Roman houses
followed the old Mediterranean plan,

with rooms grouped around a tall, dark
atrium. Eventually, however, with increased
prosperity, private houses became ever more
luxurious. Colonnaded gardens, inspired by
Egyptian architecture, were added behind the
house. Exedrae and libraries were installed,
as well as fountains, summer dining rooms
(some upstairs to allow views), and even
private baths. Windows became bigger, and
walls were ornamented with illusionistic
pictures. In Pompeii, some families bought
out their neighbors to increase their living
space and create a grand house. Compare
this with Sirkap, in present-day Pakistan,
founded by the Greeks in around 190 BCE;
while there is a similarly dense fabric

of houses, there is little differentiation

in their scale. But in Pornpeii, after the
abovementioned consolidation had taken
place, a single villa could be as large as an
entire city block in Sirkap. The owners of
these houses, based on Etruscan traditions,
placed great value on the social importance
of feasting. Meals were elaborate affairs
prepared by professional cooks and served
on silver plates, with occasional bouts of
drinking. In 182 BCE, the senate passed a law
regulating the size of parties, but this did little
to stem the tide. Villas grew to enormous size
and can be found in the Campagna, or by
the coast.

Villas were embellished with dining pavilions,
towers, colonnaces, fish ponds, and formal
parks. During this time, wealthy Romans
began sending their sons to Greece to learn
rhetoric, leading to careers in law or politics.
Also admired was Greek art and architecture,
although there was less interest in Greek
literature, music, and science. Sundials were
brought from Greek cities in Sicily, but it
took Romans a hundred years to learn that,
having moved the sundials northward, they
had to adjust their markings for the change
in latitude.

Peristylium

Impluvium

Vestibulum (entrance)

i]

Ut
esrejaa]

i
&

—t

6.15 Plan: Portion of the Taxilan city Sirkap,
Pakistan, at the same scale as Pompeii, for
comparison

The hearth was the very spiritual center of
the home, and the woman of the house had
the responsibility to guard over it. Just as
Rome itself had its eternal flame burning in
the Temple of Vesta, so too the hearth was
meant to be kept alight. It was at the hearth
that sacrifices were made to the gods and
the spirits of a family’s ancestors. Apart from
Vesta, the other principal house deity was
Janus, the god of doorways and the chief
guardian of the house. Lares, who protected
ancestors, was also important. Statues of
Lares were placed at the table during family
meals, and their presence was required at all
important family events.

Garden
dining room

_ Cucina (kitchen)
—Triclinium (dining room)

NS Cubiculum (bedroom)

“— Taberna (shop)

6.16 Elements of a typical Roman house

6.17 Tomb of Marcus Vergilius Eurysaces, Rome

Republican Tombs
The rise of an affluent merchant class
combined with Hellenistic emotionalism led to
the emergence of a funerary architecture that
became an autonomous form of architectural
expression. Although tomb design can
easily be dismissed as a minor architectural
typology, it played a key role in offering a field
of experimentation in which architects could
work out, in miniature, certain architectural
problems or themes. Roman temples in the
time of the republic were, by contrast, quite
conventional—and purposefully so, since
they embodied the principle of tradition. Not
so with tombs.
The tomb of Marcus Vergilius Eurysaces
(30 BCE) is a case in point. A wealthy Roman
baker, he asked the architect to design
something on the theme of a panarium
(a tube for storing bread). The exterior is
decorated with rows of giant tubes—carved
in stone, of course—with a lower range of
standing tubes and an upper range where
they are horizontal. The top has been lost,
but it was most likely a pyramid. Grave
monuments of the leading class were, of
course, more monumental and dignified,
conforming to the deceased person's status
in life. The Monument of the Julii in St.-
Remy, France, for example, is sedate and
consists of three superimposed zones: a
socle, or foundation zone; a four-sided arch;
and a delicate round tempietto on top.

6.18 Monument of the Julii, St.-Rémy, France

The so-called Tomb of Absalom in Jerusalem,
20 meters high, is a mixed construction. The
lower part is carved out of the bedrock, while
the roof is constructed of ashlar. For the lower
part, a socle supports a cubic box, the faces
of which are decorated with half-columns.
Though the bases are lonic, the entablature
is Doric. On this there rests a plain and
unornamented attic element that supports
not a pedimented roof, as one might expect
given the structure's temple-like appearance,
ut a drum on which rests a “tent.” Such
combinations are typical of the Hellenistic
imagination. The tent indicates this might
ave been the tomb of a military commander.
Although the tomb is traditionally considered
to be that of King David's son Absalom, he
ived in the 10th century BCE, so this cannot
accurate. Most scholars date the tomb to
the 1st century CE. The box is broken by a
ole, which is not a window, but was made

y grave robbers.

6.20 Section: Tomb of Absalom

'
\
‘
'

Hengistbury, Head

’
i CELTIC TRIBES Gold
‘. 7
aan Olive ait” ~ FOP Wheat
Gold Silver sy ne
Copper Tin- ae Wine Metals
Lead Mercury! Wheat Honey-¢
pacers Wheat ee ce Boal
ROMAN RULE Morr
ae .
hoof
Papyrus } mone
Amber Linen # \
Silver Wheat's Peppers,
Ivory pGems \
Fm

6.21 Leading trade products, ca. 200 BCE

BIBRACTE
Originating from areas to the north and
west of the Black Sea, the Celts began to
spread westward across Europe around
1000 BCE and soon dominated the area from
Switzerland and northern Italy to France
and southern England. As a clan-oriented
society interconnected by trade, the Celts
were suited to the complex and disparate
landscapes of the region. They were also
excellent agriculturalists, organized around
networks of small settlements and farms.
Large cities developed during the 1st century
BCE. These included, from east to west, some
cities that are still inhabited, such as Kelheim
in Germany, Bern in Switzerland, and Reims
and Paris in France. Most others have long
since disappeared back into the landscape,
such as Hengistbury Head on the cliffs of
the southern coast of England and Manching
Oppidum in Bavaria. These cities, the first
efforts at urbanization in Europe, were located
on flat-topped hills or along ridges that could
be easily defended by the addition of earthen
berms. The Romans used the word oppidurn
to describe these cities, and the term stuck.
In the cities of Gaul, there was a shift
from a largely agricultural and self-sustaining
local economy to one based on regional
and transregional trade and industrial
specialization, such as metal and cloth
making. The principal trading partner was,
of course, Rome to the south. Most maps

Bretons

Bordeaux

Aquitains

Germains

Manching~ seme

Bibracte

Marseilles
Roman territory

6.22 Celtic trade routes, ca. 200 BCE

depicting Europe at the time show only the
Roman Empire, but viewing the Roman

and the Celtic areas together provides

a sense of the scale of Celtic territories.
Celtic metalworking was facilitated by the
presence of extensive forests, even though
archaeologists believe that large parts of
southern England, as well as locations
elsewhere, became deforested as a result of
these activities. The Celts also exported salt,
tin, and amber. The principal import from
the Greek and Roman territories was wine,
transported northward with great difficulty in
large amphorae. The Celts had a polytheistic
and animistic religion, with shrines situated
on hilltops, in groves, and on lakes. They
worshipped both gods and goddesses, many
associated with natural features like springs
and mountains. The oak tree was particularly
sacred. Their gods possessed particular
skills, like blacksmithing, healing, and
warfare. Some gods were local to a particular
area; others were shared. Priests were not
only religious officials but also judges and
calendar keepers, as well as guardians of the
communal memory.

Though life in these Celtic areas was
hardly static, with raids, expansions, and
contractions occurring in many places over
the course of time, by the 1st century BCE the
situation had become increasingly unstable.
A set of tribes from Germany and Denmark
began to move southward into areas held

by the Helvetii. The Helvetii themselves also
were on the move westward, for unknown
reasons; to the south, the Romans had begun
to chip away at Celtic territory, taking Milan
and Marseilles. In 51 BCE, following a brutal
campaign, the Romans took Bibracte, one of
the largest Gaulic cities, and by 79 CE, most
of the Gaulic territory had been incorporated
into the Roman Empire. Bibracte stood
halfway on the trade route between Marseilles
to the south and Paris to the north; the route
to Paris continued across the English Channel
to Hengistbury Head. Bibracte was also

the jumping-off point eastward to Germany.
The original name of the city was probably
Eduens, the name of the regional tribe.

At over a square kilometer in size and
straddling the ridge of one of the tallest
mountains in the area, Bibracte was the
same size as Rome, though considerably less

dense—it contained space for farm animals,
and the houses were rarely more than one or
two stories high. The city had a population

of several thousand, but there were
numerous smaller satellite villages. Despite its
mountaintop location, several artesian springs
fed the city with water year-round. The city
also served as a refuge for the local villagers
in times of warfare, which might explain the
construction of a second fortification ring

in the Ist century BCE, about a hundred
years after the construction of the first ring.
These rings, which are log-reinforced earthen


Quter fortification ing,

6.23 Plan of Bibracte, France

berms some 5 kilometers in length, were

not insignificant engineering feats. They
required twenty thousand logs as well as tons
of earth and rocks to be packed together to
form artificial ridges. A wide road led through
a gate to the center of the city, where the
civic buildings were placed, including, at

the city’s peak, an open platform that served
communal purposes. On that platform is

a large oval-shaped stone well—called the
Saint Pierre Fountain—which had a sacred
function, perhaps even in regards to its
unusual design. The houses were all of wood,
though later houses, built by the Romans,
were sometimes built of stone and stucco.
The city has been only partially excavated,
but a forge and its associated artisan quarter
have been revealed along its main road.

6.26 Section through fortification wall of Bibracte

6.24 A ritual basin, Bibracte

6.25 Pictorial view of Bibracte

In his Roman History, Cassius Dio wrote,
“Caractacus, a barbarian chieftain who was
captured and brought to Rome and later
pardoned by Claudius, wandered about the
city after his liberation and after beholding
its splendor and magnitude he exclaimed:
and can you then who have got such
possessions and so many of them, still covet
our poor huts?” But it was not the huts that
the Romans coveted—rather, it was Gaul's
extensive agricultural and mining network. At
first the Romans were occupiers, but by the
1st century CE, the two cultures were highly
interwoven. The Romans, however, preferred
to build their cities on plains, as they were
more conducive to the movement of their
armies. For that reason, many of the Celtic
cities died out and disappeared. One of the
exceptions is Bern, Switzerland. Bibracte was
more typical. It was eventually abandoned

to the forest, with the nearby Roman town
Augustodunum, today’s Autun, taking its
place as the regional center.

Prison .

Sed,
» ~ Rostray’
wf.

“Comitibet

Forum Romanum

>. Forum of Augustus.

Che!
&,
uy

and Faustina

Temple of Castor ne .

AUGUSTAN ROME

Rome's shift from republic to empire
coincided with the trend of deifying rulers.
Caesar was the first to experience such an
apotheosis; after that, it became common
practice for emperors to be equated with
divinity. Emperor Augustus, who followed
Caesar, changed Rome. It is said that he
found Rome a city of brick, but that when
he died, he left it a city of marble. This is not
far from the truth, for in the forty years of his
reign, Augustus practically rebuilt the entire
city, and more than anything, he remodeled
the Roman Forum.

To understand the magnitude of these
efforts, we have to remember that before
Augustus’s long tenure (27 BCE-14 CE),
Rome was an unattractive and even unsafe
city. It had a population of one million; crime,
corruption, speculation, and misrnanagernent
caused the temples to be neglected and the
public structures to crumble. Many parts of
the city were nothing better than slums. Fires
broke out continuously—in 16, 14, 12, and

7 BCE—while floods ravaged low-lying areas.
Among Augustus's efforts was an attempt
to bring order to the core of the city. After
a major storm, he asked for a study of roof
tiles. He also created a new water system,
restored eighty-two temples, increase
spending on public building and street
repairs, and even established a fire brigade of
six hundred slaves.
One of his first efforts was to complete
the Forum of Caesar, which had been left
unfinished at the latter's assassination in
44 BcE. Rectangular in shape, it was similar
in scale to the old forum but enlarged to the
north and connected to it by a portal. The
Temple of Caesar, built in white marble, sat
on a high podium at the narrow end of the
forum. The building had columns on three
sides, making it appear that the pferon and
the cella had been snapped into each other.
The fundamental idea of the composition was
Hellenistic, but its simplicity and orderliness
established it as a prototype. The new forum,
encroaching on the old Comitium, had to

* Temple of Antoninus

PS SESS,
ES Spo of Aug)

6.27 Relationship of the Forum Romanum to
the forums of Caesar and Augustus

be moved further to the south. The senate
house, where Caesar was murdered, was
rebuilt so that it fit neatly along the new
forum’s perimeter, at the southern corner.
Another of Augustus’s building projects
was the Basilica Julia, which served as
a courthouse that dealt in particular with
wills and inheritance matters. Typical of the
basilica building type, it had no walls, but had
open colonnades on three sides, with one of
its long sides reserved for shops. The building
(101 by 49 meters) defined the western
side of the forum. On the eastern side of the
forum, Augustus rebuilt the Basilica Aemilia.
It had a sixteen-bay, two-story facade, richly
articulated with columns and marbles, and
was considered one of the most beautifu
buildings in Rome.


Forum of Augustus

Apart from the efforts in the old forum,
Augustus decided to lay out a brand new
forum (10-2 BCE), which was located to the
east of the Forum of Caesar and along the
city wall to the west. Since it was in a thickly
settled area, houses had to be purchased
and cleared away. One entered the forum
from the south side, on axis with the temple,
which was placed at the far end of the forum.
It seems Augustus was not able to purchase
all the land he needed, even though the
area behind the forum was one of the poorer
sections of town. A large wall was erected
behind the building, both to serve as a
firewall and to shield against the squalor on
the other side.

The use of statues to depict great men
was a unique Roman invention. The Greeks,
of course, had elevated statue making to a
igh art, but their statues were largely used
to portray gods or goddesses. It was the
Romans who put statues to political purposes
to represent the elite class. In all cases,
statues were painted to make them more
ifelike.

The northern portico frames a temple
dedicated to Mars the Avenger (Mars Ultor)
in accordance with a vow made by Augustus
efore the Battle of Philippi (42 BCE) in
which Brutus and Cassius, the assassins of

6.29 View eastward into the Forum Romanum

6.28 Temple of Mars Ultor, Forum of Augustus, Rome

Julius Caesar, were killed. There are eight
Corinthian columns in front and along the
flanks. The plan is nearly square, measuring
38 by 40 meters. Omitting two rows of
columns created space for a generous
entrance. Inside the temple, in the apse,
elevated five steps above the floor, were
statues of Mars, Venus, and the deified Julius
Caesar. But this building was more than

just a temple; it was an imperial statement.

Augustus saw himself as the son of the union
of Mars and Venus. The building also wanted
to place that rather audacious claim in the
context of Roman history.

Forming a cross-axis across the courtyard
are two large exedrae. They held statues
that told the narrative of Romulus and
Aeneas, the great men of Rome's founding.
he Augustan Empire was depicted as the
culmination of this history, with Augustus
himself presiding over this portrait gallery in
the form of a bronze statue on a pedestal
n the middle of the forum. Apart from the
religious ceremonies that took place here,
the forum became the starting point for
magistrates departing for the provinces and
the repository of the triumphal banners. It
was also the place for senate meetings when
reports of military successes were expected.
Allin all, the design and imagery of
the Forum of Augustus were carefully
orchestrated to further the Augustan program,
portraying the history of Rome as a divinely
ordained expansion through just wars (Mars
the Avenger) toward an orderly peace (Venus
who disarms Mars) based on Roman virtues
(“manly valor,” symbolized by Romulus) and
pieties (“filial, religious, and patriotic duty,”
symbolized by Aeneas), carried out through
a long line of illustrious Romans (the statues
of Republican dignitaries in the porticoes)
culminating in the rule of Augustus, who
presented himself as the new founder of “a
new Romulus.”


6.30 Kbour-er-Roumia (Tomb of the Christian Woman), Tipasa, Algeria

Tholoi Tombs 6.31 Plan and elevation: Kbour-er-Roumia
n Algieria, in northern Africa, one finds several tummulus
tombs that obviously harken to ancient traditions.
Particularly impressive is the Kbour-er-Roumia (where

a Berber king and his queen were buried, 19 BCE),

located west of Tipasa, Algeria. It has a diameter of 60 ir Tt . oa =
meters and rests on a low square base. A three-stepped nie f é Hi 4 D 6 badd

crepis, or foundation, supports a ring of sixty slender lonic :
alf-columns that decorate a drum, from which rises a
stepped conical hill terminating in a circular platform

32 meters above the ground. The top was ornamented

y a sculptural element that has since disappeared. A
spiral corridor gave access to the tomnb’s interior. Though
such a tomb might strike one as alien and not in tune
with classical sensibilities, the type actually served as
model for the mausoleum of Augustus in Rome, which
Augustus had built in 28 BCE shortly after his victory at
Actium. This imposing structure, though badly ravished
by time, has a tall circular base 87 meters in diameter
that was covered with travertine. Flanking the entrance
were two obelisks taken from Egypt, as well as bronze
tablets summarizing the emperor's achievements. On top
of the base there was a tumulus planted with cypress
trees, at the top of which stood a cylindrical structure. The
building was thus a blend of architecture and landscape,
of building and mountain. In 410 CE, during the sack of
Rome by Alaric I’s Goths, the golden urns, containing the
ashes of Augustus and his family members and deposited
in niches in the inner sanctum, were emptied of their
contents and plundered.

6.32 Plan and elevation: Mausoleum of Augustus, Rome

Vitruvius

The Augustan Age was a boon for architects,
leading Marcus Vitruvius Pollio (ca.

70-25 BCE) to compose a treatise entitled
De architectura (“On Architecture”), known
today as the Ten Books on Architecture.
Though the book contains a vast amount of
useful information on construction materials,
choice of site, and even the education of an
architect, Vitruvius was generally critical of
the architectural developments of his age. He
was hesitant to accept concrete and felt that
many of the new buildings commissioned

y Augustus were built without guiding
principles. In attempting to reestablish

these principles, he argued that the three
orders—Doric, lonic, and Corinthian—should
e governed by proportions unique to

each. Vitruvius also differentiated between
firmitas, utilitas, and venustas (“durability,”
“usefulness,” and “beauty”). Each building,
e argued, needed to be designed with these
criteria in mind. A warehouse, for example,
should be built with usefulness in mind,

ut not be unpleasant to look at, whereas a
palace should be built with beauty in mind,
ut nonetheless designed for the ages.

The impact of Vitruvius on Rornan
architecture was minimal, but when a copy of
is treatise was rediscovered in 1414 in the
monastic library of St. Gall in Switzerland, it
ecame the foundation of architectural theory
in Europe for the next three centuries.

Following are some quotes frorn chapter
2, book 1 of Vitruvius’s Zen Books on
Architecture:

Architecture depends on fitness (ordinatio)
and arrangement (dispositio); it also depends
on proportion, uniformity, consistency, and
economy.

Arrangement is the disposition in their just
and proper places of all the parts of the
building, and the pleasing effect of the same;
keeping in view its appropriate character.

Proportion is that agreeable harmony
between the several parts of a building,
which is the result of a just and regular
agreement of them with each other; the
height to the width, this to the length, and
each of these to the whole.

6.33 Corinthian capital: Temple of Athena,
Tegea, near Tripolis, Greece

Corinthian Capitals

Among the major orders, the Corinthian
capital was a latecomer. Its first appearance
in architecture, so it is now thought, was

at the Temple of Apollo at Bassae (420-

400 BCE) in Greece, where Corinthian
columns stand framed at the end of the cella.
They appear for the first time on the exterior
of the Temple of Zeus at Olympia (begun 170
BCE), a huge Hellenistic-era temple in Athens.
The use of Corinthian columns remained
intermittent until the age of Augustus, at
which time they became synonymous with
the young empire. Thus even though the
Corinthian was created by the Greeks, the
Romans used it to differentiate their imperial
temples and buildings from Greek prototypes.

Abacus

Volute.

Astragal

Fillet

6.35 Parts of a Corinthian capital

OANA LENG Ua
WU ahd

Hol
6.34 Corinthian capital: Temple of Castor
and Pollux, Rome

The conceptual origins of the Corinthian
capital are obscure. Vitruvius tells the story
of a Corinthian girl who died. Her nurse put
various pots and cups into a basket and
placed it on her tomb. The following spring,
an acanthus root that had been under the
tomb began to send sprouts through the
basket. The architect Callimachus happened
to pass by and decided to model a capital on
the arrangement. There is no way of knowing
if this is accurate, but the themes of purity
and death were certainly important attributes
of the column, and the acanthus had long
been associated with immortality.

Unlike the Doric and lonic, which
could be transformed only in subtle ways,
the Corinthian capital tolerated numerous
variations that are usually described by the
number of rings of acanthus leaves (typically
two). From behind these rise the stalks,
usually springing in pairs at the corners and
curving into volutes (literally “turns") under
the abacus. At the center of the abacus, one
often finds a blossom. The Corinthian capital
of the Temple of Athena in Tegea (350 BCE)
is shorter and has stalks with greater
definition than Augustan-era Corinthians (as
at the Temple of Castor, from 6 CE), which
emphasize the leaves. Sometimes an lonic
capital is added to the Corinthian to make
what is known as a composite capital. At the
Temple of Apollo at Didyma, the architect
added a palmette between the stalks.

rr cu
F; ”
"
i

Post-Augustan Rome ; 6.36 Reconstruction of Villa Jovis,
After the death of Augustus in 14 CE, less Isle of Capri, Italy
emphasis was placed on grand public
monuments and more on lavish residences, The great fire of 64 CE completely destroyed
picking up on the trend established in the more than four of Rome's fourteen regions,
closing century of the republic. Emperor clearing large areas of land in the city center.
Tiberius's main residence, for example, was Nero, who was always rumored to have set
the Villa Jovis (“Villa of Jupiter”) on Capri, the fire, immediately cleared a place for
perched on top of a sheer cliff at one end of his new residence, a type of villa grafted
the island. It was built around 30 CE on an into the urban landscape and the stage for
enormous vaulted concrete undercroft that complex rituals and ceremonies involving
served as a cistern, the only source of water the imperial person. The grounds filled the
for the villa. A semicircular hall and dining valley between the Esquiline, Caelian, and
pavilion looked eastward, directly over the Palatine hills. There was an artificial lake
cliffs edge. A loggia was to the north of the in the middle where the Colosseum now
courtyard, the baths to the south, and the stands. Suetonius's description of Nero's
service rooms and a kitchen were in the wing palace complex gives some impression of the
to the west. It was from this grand perch that splendor. Its vestibule contained a colossal
Tiberius ruled the far-flung empire. statue (40 meters high) of himself. The area

covered by the vestibule was so great that it
had a triple portico 1.5 kilorneters long; it also
had a pool that looked like a sea, surrounded
by buildings that gave the impression of
cities. There were rural areas with plowed
fields, vineyards, pastures, and woodlands
filled with all types of domestic animals and
wild beasts. Walls were inlaid with gold and
highlighted with gerns and mother-of-pearl;
the dining room ceiling had rotating ivory
panels that sprinkled flowers and perfumes
on those below.

feos nico
i :

~,
~~

san

6.37 Area plan: Nero’s palace complex, Rome

+

ai

Only one wing of the palace complex
remains, the Domus Aurea (“Golden
House”), which rests against the side of the
Esquiline Hill and is in itself a remarkable
piece of architectural ingenuity. It is a
combination of small scale and tactically
applied axial units. To the east, an octagonal
room is woven into a register of rooms to the
rear. The vault of the octagonal room was
designed so that light could filter in from
behind the shell of the vault, which in turn is
supported by eight brick-faced concrete piers
originally dressed with marble and stucco.
Though it begins as an octagon, the vault
blends into a sphere at the top, where a wide
oculus 6 meters across brings light into the
room. Based on iconographic and literary
evidence, some scholars have suggested that
the oculus was covered by a lantern dome.
Equally ingenious is the waterfall room on
the vault’s northern axis. Further to the east,

1 T

6.39 Plan and section: Octagonal room, Domus Aurea

1c

6.38 Interior: Octagonal room of the Domus Aurea” -

a large, open pentagonal court intrudes into

the building from the south and pushes the y
rooms once again toward the service rooms

to the back. On axis is a vaulted room flanked “™\S

by a suite of supporting rooms. The western
wing contains a particularly elegant sequence
of spaces that, like pistons, connect the

front with a courtyard to the rear, ending in a
chamber with fountains. The long axis of the
courtyard ends in a large vaulted dining room
that also seems to back its way into the side
of the hill. The brick walls that we see today
would have been covered with marble and
painted stucco.

This remnant of the palace shows the
extraordinary spatial genius of Roman
architects. Think of the wing's plan as four
different buildings—see labels on the plan—
lined up next to each other, but in such a
creative way that the whole is seamless.

Octagonal room

es BEL
4 Peristyle . ba * aa "
~4 a za “hg Wilke ¥ ta
ad wo ow a oe te] .
Lt J j Mg Room of the aL
ri El L&, Wied vaul
[ ‘Ie , gilded vault an
sisi tinatian entail HS SS 5 nae he ai tee ak = “ee
aid INo ee, 100m

6.40 Plan: Esquiline wing of the Domus Aurea, Rome

6.41 Water garden, Palace of Domitian, Palatine Hill, Rome

Palace of Domitian

Following a period of violence and anarchy
after the death of Nero, stability returned
with the rule of Vespasian (r. 69-79 Ce) and
a century-long sequence of rulers whose
policies, broadly considered, brought peace
and unity to the ancient Mediterranean
world. Peace for Romans, of course, came
at a price for others. In 70 CE, Vespasian
destroyed the Second Temple of the Jews in
Jerusalem and forced the Jews into slavery.
About ten thousand Jews were transported
to Rome to be used as workers to help build
the Colosseum. In the wake of these and
other victories, Vespasian’s son Domitian

(r. 81-96 CE) began a new imperial palace
(also known as the Flavian Palace or Domus
Augustana), which, on the eastern ridge

of the Palatine Hill, was to become the
permanent residence of the emperors. It was
still in use when Narses, the conqueror of the
Goths, died there in 571. Domitian imposed
his absolutist tendencies upon society to a
degree previously unknown. Under his rule,
the lingering pragmatism of Roman culture
became increasingly infused with an ideology
of Near Eastern flavor with implications of
the quasi-divine nature of the ruler. The

new palace had to reflect the new notions of
power and majesty. The tight, almost chaotic
jumble of conflicting axial realities that made
Nero's palace so startling gave way to a more

controlled expressions when Domitian’s
architect, Rabirius, cut a great step into the
hillside to create a split-level palace.

The palace was in the upper part, the
residence in the lower. Though there is a
great deal of spatial innovation, everything is
thought through. There are no awkward or
surprising collisions of space, as one finds
in Nero's palace. The entrance is on an axis
that leads through two peristyle courts and
into a structure that is at first symmetrical
but, at its right and left perimeters, connects
fluidly into other spatial configurations.
Helping to negotiate the spatial transitions is
the ingenious use of curved and rectilinear
geometries. The entrance, for example, is
marked by a curved vestibule that leads
through a series of spaces that expand and
contract based on the theme of the vaults
above and on openings of different sizes and
qualities that lead to side rooms.

At the far end of the axis were two
summer houses, located at the top of the
large curve of a gallery overlooking the Circus
Maximus. On the east side of the palace one
finds another register of spaces dominated
by a hippodrome, the floor of which is some
10 meters lower. A viewing box forms the
terminus of a cross-axis connecting the
garden fountain and the peristyle court. The
aula regia, or audience hall, overlooked the
forum.

6.42 View into court, Palace of Domitian

A staircase leads to the lower level, where the
residence of the emperor was located, just at
the sear between the two buildings. Roman
stairs were never very elaborate, and this
was no exception. The principal rooms are
arranged around the court with its fountain,
while the emperor's private chambers are on
the northwest. The central room projected out
into the space of the courtyard’s ambulatory.
To the right and left were fountain rooms. The
entire suite was separated from the retaining
wall by a service corridor. To the northern
side three remarkable rooms with niches,
aediculae, and complex vaulting forrned
another unit—a palace within a palace.

To the west is another axis, but one that
is enclosed. This is the part dedicated to the
imperial state and is conventionally called
Domus Flavia. A gate leads to a peristyle
court. To the north are three state chambers:
the basilica, the aula regia, and the /ararium,
or palace chapel. The basilica has attracted
considerable attention because it seems
to prefigure the form of the early Christian
basilica. Though there are many potential
sources for this kind of space, there is no
doubt that its long architectural life as a
proper setting for a supposedly all-powerful
figure was guaranteed by its presence in this
palace.

Next to the basilica was the au/a regia, where
embassies and audiences were held in a

space calculated to dramatize Rome's claim ; Le

Entrance

to majesty and unity. It was a spectacular Bascg oN
room, with surfaces covered in marble. 6 ="
jest rooms
Ornamental columns attached to spur walls 7
Aula regia
projected into the space. Between the
columns were alternating round and square Guest roams
niches, each with an aedicula inside, another
feature that would become a trademark of
Roman wall articulation. Opposite the court
was a large triclinium, or dining hall. Doors
in the sidewalls led out onto gardens with an
ingenious display of fountains in the shape of

an elliptical island rising from a pool.

Vestibule

Peristyle

6.43 Plan: Palace of Domitian, Palatine Hill, Rome ° ae

The building is an example of the brilliance
of Roman spatial practices. The designer
starts with the courtyard of peristyle. Since
the spaces attached to its four sides do not
need to be the same, the designer then plugs
in components to match the program. These
components are usually locally syrnmetrical,
but become less symmetrical the further
one moves from the central axis. In this way,
the designer creates “blocks” that can then
be added to each other around regulating
grids. The more this plan is studied, the
more combinations can be made of these
spaces, depending on whether they are read
as recessive or dominant. For example, the
southern end of the entrance peristyle hooks
directly to another peristyle, which has three
different suites of rooms on its three sides.
The loggia overlooking the hippodrome is
one such unit, the entrance to the palace on
its opposite side is another such unit, and
the complex set of rooms to the south yet
another.

6.44 Pictorial cutaway: Triclinium, Palace of Domitian

6.45 Colosseum, Rome

The Colosseum

The Colosseum (72-80 CE), much like the
Temple of Fortuna, derives its structural
strength from its concrete vaults. If the
building, after earthquakes, fires, and
lootings, today still conveys its onetime
grandeur and even retains, up to a point, its
usability for open-air functions, we have the
ancients to thank for their bold use of that
material.

Though theaters were a common element
in Greek and Roman cities, this was the first
one that was designed as a freestanding
object. An earlier design dating from 80 BCE
in Pompeii and another from 56 BCE in
Lepcis Magna in North Africa were similar in
plan, but both were partially carved into the
rock. The Colosseum sits in a shallow valley
tween three hills, making it visible from
all directions, which gave it the status of a
landmark from the very beginning.

It is elliptical in plan and could hold fifty
thousand spectators, with boxes for the
emperor and dignitaries at the centers of the
longer sides. Gladiatorial combats and the
exhibition of wild beasts did not stop with the
Christianization of Rome. Romans remained
Romans. While gladiatorial combats were
abolished in 404 CE, games came to an end
only in the middle of the 6th century. And it
remained a place of public punishment well
into the 8th century. The masses of stone
that came down in earthquakes in 1231 and
1349 provided Rome with building material
for more than four centuries.

If the undercroft shows once again the skill
of the engineers in designing and organizing
a building on this scale, its facade shows
the architects’ confidence in their use of

the orders in relationship to the building's
solids and voids. Though ornamentation is
minimal, the system of attached columns
and arched openings allows for a balanced
interpretation of structure and mass. The
53-meter-high wall was divided into Doric,
lonic, and Corinthian layers. The fourth story
had no openings, but brackets in the cornice
allowed large masts to be clamped against
the building to support awnings.

6.46 Possible method for laying out the Colosseum

The capitals were stripped to their elernental
form. While this may have been for economy,
it also kept the columns from becoming
merely ornaments. Instead, they seem to be
infused with the same purposefulness as the
vaults, even though they belong to a different
structural system. Furthermore, the arches
have an architectural profile created by the
way a molding separates each arch from

its supporting pier at the impost blocks and
lightens the appearance of each arch from
the heavy voussoirs of which it is composed.
The columns look more structural than they

are, and the arches less so. A less skilled
hand could easily have tipped the balance
the wrong way.

50m

[a a Cs ee

6.47 Partial section and elevation: Colosseum

The Imperial Forums

At the beginning of the 2nd century CE, under
Trajan (r. 98-117 CE) and then Hadrian (r.
117-138 CE), Rome was at the height of
its power. Trajan defeated the Dacians in
Romania (101-6 CE) to dispossess ther of
their plentiful gold mines. Other campaigns
led into Armenia and Mesopotamia. The
wealth that flowed back into the capital
restored the public treasury and insured
vigorous implementation of architectural
programs. And the rulers set a deterrnined
pace. Trajan rebuilt Ostia, Rorne’s harbor;
established a new public bath; and repaired
or extended existing streets. Above all, he
ordered a new forum to be built. Attributed
to the architect Apollodoro of Damascus, it
was a complex larger than any of the other
forums. Three hundred meters long, it
covered more than three times the area of
the Forum of Augustus. To prepare the site,
the engineers had to chop away a section
of a hill that connected the Quirinale to

the Campidoglio. The Forum of Trajan was
entered through a gateway located in a gently
bulging wall. At the far end was the sideways-
oriented Basilica Ulpia (107-13 CE), whose
apses on both ends echoed the ones built
into the colonnade of the forum that, in turn,
emulated the ones in the Forurn of Augustus.

6.49 Aerial view of the Colosseum

/ .
Imperial forums £ ‘
t \
Forum Romanum ry .
ors Y
# AS) Nero'skPalace \
@. \
Colosseurn A -
Palatine Hill Ua
a“

Se

wow

aon

6.48 Plan of imperial Rome

Apart from the size of the basilica, it was designed in a traditional
manner. Two rows of gray granite columns lined the aisles, with
light filtering down, as usual, fromm a roof that covered the central
space. The roofs of the side aisles were covered by concrete vaults
rising directly from the architraves, while the roof over the central
aisle was probably spanned with wooden timbers. Sculptures and
relief panels show the campaigns and triumphs of the emperor.

On the main axis just behind the basilica stands Trajan’s Column,
with a spiral sculptural relief reading from the bottom to the top
that depicts the various important events of Trajan’s campaign

in Dacia. At the top was a bronze statue of Trajan himself. The
column contained an interior staircase. The freestanding column,
an unconventional feature in its own right, was also unusual for
Roman architecture, insofar as it interrupted the axial flow to the
temple. But it also highlights the central role of the forum as a war
memorial. The column is flanked by libraries: one for Greek scrolls,
the other for Latin. The whole cornplex ended with Trajan’s temple,
which was enormous, with columns measuring 2 meters across. The
forum’s unusual design may possibly derive from its emulation of
the central administrative area of a military camp: Trajan’s Column
and the flanking libraries seem similar to the location of the general’s
standard and military archives, which were set up behind the
basilica. Trajan was born in Spain and was raised as a soldier; the
military iconography has thus been suitably translated into a civic
monument.

~

a 4 *

t 4 . :
ras nf Me, .

ro

Pees ce reer e ree ree

6.50 Forum of Trajan

Temple of Trajan

oer

ae
¥.

Forum of Trajan

ie)

re ee

6.52 Plan: Imperial forums

Taken as a whole, the imperial forums constitute a remarkable
urban composition. There are no streets and no spatial or axial
connections between the spaces. The axis between the Temple

of Trajan and the Temple of Peace (though not exactly axial) is
purely planimetric. The elements are simply bonded to each other
to create a sequence of open, colonnaded, and enclosed spaces.
The words that come to mind when looking at this are montage or
assemblage. The Forum of Nerva, sometimes called the transitorium
(place of crossing), was the principal connection between the hill
and the older forums. A road led to a semicircular piazza on the
eastern side, the only place where the outside world infringes on the
space of the forums. But even that receptacle forced the foot traffic
to the left and around the side of the Ternple of Minerva. Traffic,
moving then diagonally through the space, exited at the other end
on the right, leading to the street that ran along the curia wall.
There was no attempt to make this forum into a street.

48 BCE Forum of Caesar
2 BCE Forum of Augustus
1CE Forum of Nerva, dedicated to Minerva
71-75 CE Forum of Vespasian, or Templum Pace
(“Temple of Peace"), erected after the
bloody taking of Jerusalem and the end
of the Jewish War.
112 CE Forum of Trajan

6.51 Figure ground: Imperial forums

ROCK-CUT TOMBS

The idea of making rock-cut tombs is an
ancient one. Hittite rock-cut sanctuaries,

for example, date back to 1250 BCE. Rock-
cut tombs can be even found in Italy dating
from the Etruscans. The custom was brought
eastward by Darius I, whose own tomb

(486 BCE) was carved out of the cliffs near
Persepolis. The rock-cut tombs in Lycia on
the southern coast of Turkey date from the
4th century BCE; on the front of many of them
are temple facades in miniature. Though
rock-cut architecture was made in imitation of
traditional buildings, construction techniques
were very different. Masons had to start from
the top so that the discarded stones did

not fall on the heads of their compatriots or
damage the new building elements. Working
from the top down required a different type
of planning and thinking; since it was not
possible to go back up for finishing touches,
one horizontal layer had to be completely
finished before the workers moved to the
segment below. This applied even for interior
spaces, which had to be chiseled from the
vault to the floor. The technique was used
not only for tombs but also for Buddhist and
Hindu temples, and later even for churches.
A large necropolis of rock-cut tornbs exists in
Cyprus near the town of Paphos. Several are
designed in the form of an impfuvium.

Rock-Cut Architecture
Some of the main sites, by date.

1450 BCE ombs
700 BCE ombs
500 BCE ombs
486 BCE omb of Darius

312 BCE-106 CE Tombs

300 BCE-200 CE Tombs
250 BCE Buddhist caityas
100 BCE Buddhist caityas
100 cE Buddhist caityas
100 CE Houses
400 CE Buddhist caves
480 CE Buddhist caves
600 CE Hindu temples
650-750 CE Hindu temples
700-900 CE Hindu, Buddhist,
and Jain caves
900 CE Churches
1200 CE Churches

6.53 Plan and Elevation,
Lycian chamber tomb

a

6.55 /mpluvium of a rock-cut tomb, Paphos, Cyprus

Thebes, Egypt

Cyprus and Lycia, Turkey
Etruria, Italy
Persepolis, Iran
Petra, Jordan
Cyprus
Eastern India
Western Ghats, India
lorthwestern India
Tiermes, Spain
Dunhuang, China
Ajanta, India
Elephanta, India
Southern India

Ellora, India
Cappadocia, Turkey
Lalibela, Ethiopia

6.56 Rock of Naqsh-i-Rustam, near Persepolis, Iran

To Mediterranean ports

Nabataean cities

6.57 West Asia, 1 CE

Petra

he Romans tried repeatedly to control if
not defeat the Parthians, the great warriors
on horseback who controlled the deserts

of western Asia. Their struggle lasted some
three hundred years, over the entire period of
their empire. In 113 CE, the Rornan emperor
rajan even successfully overran the Parthian
capital, Ctesiphon, but could not really hold
it. This led the Romans to do an end run
around the Parthians by making friends with
the Nabataeans in Jordan, who controlled
the routes to the south and to India. The
Nabataeans were middlemen in the trade

of luxury iterns, including frankincense,
myrrh, gold, and camels, which they bred
extensively. They moved in caravans and
maintained a nomadic ethos that did not
require the building of permanent houses.
Eventually, however, the Nabataeans
established several cities that linked Petra
with the Mediterranean ports of Gaza. To
secure their connection, after 106 CE the
Romans, instead of invading the Nabataean
area, offered them Roman citizenship, with
its much-coveted privileges.

6.59 Water channel, Petra

To Africa, India and China

To Silk Route

To Babylon

To frankincense producing areas

he Nabataean architectural legacy is best
preserved in the city of Petra, meaning “rock”
in Greek. On this site, ternples, theaters, and
hundreds of tombs—all cut into the rock of
the steep mountains that surround the Petra
Valley—still stand in testament to this largely
forgotten culture. It is located in the area of
Jordan called Edom, meaning “red,” from
the color of the Shara Mountains that ring
the Petra Valley, which is only accessible
through a 1.6-kilometer-long canyon. The
site was fitted with well-developed systems of
water control and storage, including rock-cut

6.58 Detail: Khasneh al Faroun, Petra, Jordan

cisterns and ceramic pipes bringing water
from remote cisterns that trapped the water
of flash floods. These innovations enabled
the city to prosper. The Romans even built a
colonnaded resort with a theater and swiming
pool.

The extravagant tombs that the
Nabataeans built for themselves as
showpieces of architectural luxury are a
testament to their important position in global
trade. Architecture in Rome, because of its
location, tended to be relatively conservative
architecturally, whereas in the forrner


6.60 Khasneh al Faroun, Petra

Hellenistic areas, there was always a sense of
experimentation; there, Roman architecture
became less “Roman.” This was certainly
true in Petra. These were no temples,
however, but tombs, the most abundant of
which date from the early decades of the
Ist century CE. Their facades reveal a range
of cultural influences. Some are framed by
pilasters and topped with stepping “crow’s-
feet” ornamentation, a motif of Assyrian
and Babylonian origin. Others are massive,
largely unadorned facades with small, clearly
delineated entrances recalling an Egyptian
pylon. Petra was thus a combination of
caravan meeting center and memorial site,
unique in the architectural world.

The beautifully preserved, deep-pinkish
facade of El-Deir is a showpiece of the
highest order. Its eight columns hold an
astonishing upper floor with a fhofos at the
center, flanked by what seem to be the
pieces of a broken porch front, the whole
then “framed” by protruding walls.

Khasneh al Faroun was probably built

for King Aretas Ill (87-65 BCE), but most
scholars date it to the 1st century CE.
Standing an astonishing 30 meters high, it
recalls the massing and intercolumniation

of Hellenistic temples. Twelve columns,

six on the lower level and six above, are
capped with Corinthian capitals and highly
ornamented moldings and friezes. The
upper colurnns are shorter than the lower,
but from the perspective of a viewer on

the ground, they seem well proportioned.
The spaces between the attached columns
contain high reliefs depicting Nabataean
deities and animals. The griffins that decorate
the frieze are derived from Mesopotamian
lore. The facade’s culminating feature is

a round tholos, standing largely free and
framed by broken pediments. Once past the
entrance, the spaces are left plain, since
they were largely tomb spaces. In 363 CE, an
earthquake destroyed many buildings and
crippled the vital water management system,
forcing the abandonment of the site.

By) 25m

a ra |

6.61 Plan and facade: Khasneh al Faroun, Petra

6.62 Northern palace at Masada, Israel

NORTHERN PALACE AT MASADA

Another striking example of Roman architecture
is Herod's Palace (30-20 BCE) at Masada,

a mountaintop fortress city rising above the
shores of the Dead Sea in the Judaean Desert,
20 kilometers southeast of Jerusalem. This
palace is a synthesis of Roman and Hellenistic
design principles. The main residential part of
the palace is at the top of the acropolis, while
the rest of it descends down the steep northern
slope of the cliff in a tour de force encounter
between architecture and nature. On the upper
terrace, rooms were grouped around a large
hall that opened onto a semicircular pavilion

or balcony, offering a fine view over the almost
vertical drop of the cliff. Steps led down to the
middle terrace, dorninated by a rotunda and
used, perhaps, as a dining room. Behind it,
carved out of the cliff face, was a library and
an enclosed room, possibly a treasury. Below
that was another terrace, with a hypostyle hall
and a bath complex. Herod built several other
spectacular structures. The so-called Herodion,
south of Jerusalem, built around 24 BCE as both
a palace and a fortress, lies atop an 80-meter-
high semi-artificial hill. Two concentric walls
contained the palace.

6.64 Masada, Israel

TAXILA: THE GANDHARAN
COSMOPOLIS

In the period from 150 BCE to 100 CE,

the Gandharan region of the upper Indus
Valley—now in Pakistan—was ruled by the
Shakas from Sogdiana and the Parthians,
who took over this region from Alexander's
governors. The Shakas and the Parthians
adopted Buddhism, cultivated Hellenistic
workers, and brought their own Persian

and Central Asian backgrounds to the

mix, creating an architecture that was an
international synthesis of varying tendencies.
Located on a major tributary of the Indus
River, the Gandharan capital city, Taxila (also
called Sirkap), was positioned at the meeting
point of three trade routes, one extending
east to the Indian heartland, a second west
to Bactria and Persia, and a third to Central
Asia and the northern path of the Silk Route.
Taxila was rebuilt several times, until an
earthquake in the 1st century CE prompted a
complete rebuilding.
The urban layout of Taxila is rigidly
rectilinear in plan, with a 700-meter-long
street running through its center. The whole
was bounded by a high wall. Dense courtyard
housing of various sizes is organized in
blocks around a main street. A number

of religions seem to have commingled in
Taxila. The city was celebrated in the ancient
world as a prestigious center of learning,

and for the next eight hundred years or

more Buddhist shrines continued to be built
here. One of the city blocks was given over
to what is known as the Apsidal Temple,

6.67 Plan of Taxila

which is like a caitya hall of the type that
was pervasive throughout South Asia at the
time. But this temple was constructed as
a freestanding object. Sitting in the middle
of an open courtyard and measuring about
40 by 75 meters, the temple was raised on
a high plinth and accessed by a large axial
stair. The stair was flanked by two stupas on
square bases. (Only the bases survive.) To
the southeast of the city, on another plateau,
is the large Dnarmarajika Stupa. The mound
on which it sits is surrounded by a multitude
of monks’ cells.

North of the city, on a high rocky
outcrop, is a Jandial ternple, a Greek
peristyle temple complete with a pronaos,
naos, and opisthodomos. The base of this
temple, however, is thicker than structurally
necessary, promoting speculation that there
may have been another superstructure above
the main walls and that the temple may have
been a fire ternple of the Zoroastrians.

" a
bemenm mma)

pm

6.65 Plan of a Jandial temple

50m

pret mene
. a

Xiongu khanate ? s,

se

ae

Route to West Asia

Taklamakan Desert o
iJ oN nme” ¢,
* tat

ts

we

Extent of the
Han Empire

Tibetan tribes

6.68 Qin dynasty, China

QIN DYNASTY, CHINA

After almost two hundred years of civil

war, China was unified by the short-lived

but supremely despotic Qin dynasty
(221-206 BCE). The first ruler of the
dynasty, Ying Zheng, renamed himself Shi
Huangdi (“First Emperor") and justified his
ruthless suppression of opposition on the
grounds that he had a divine mandate to
reunify China. After victory over the last of
his enemies, Shi Huangdi put in place a
centralized bureaucracy and administration
that could account for the diverse sections
of the empire. The systern of writing was
standardized, as was the language. A single
currency was introduced—a copper coin with
a hole in the middle so it could be strung

on a string. Shi Huangdi also connected the
existing defensive fortifications in the north
of China to form the first Great Wall to fend
off invading “barbarians” from the north.
Despite these accomplishments, Shi Huangdi
was unpopular in his time; he raised taxes,
deprived the nobility of power, was ruthlessly
intolerant of those who opposed him, and
suppressed the writings of alternative
philosophers. Although Shi Huangdi’s
short-lived dynasty was controversial, Qin
(pronounced “chin") is the origin of the
Western name China (“land of the Qin”). The
Chinese themselves referred to their domain
as the Middle Kingdom.

Mewes t®,

Gobi Desert
am,

7 .,

oun ay
ee Long (Great) Wal es
Hee a nnenenas'

Yellow Sea

Qin dynasty

The ideal of a unified China, which was to
persist throughout Chinese history, can be
contrasted with the histories of South Asia
and Europe, where, even though emperors
were periodically able to conquer large
territories, the idea of a single, unified empire
was always keenly contested. It was only as
a consequence of European colonialism in
the 18th and 19th centuries that India, for
example, became a single nation.

The Qin capital, Xianyang, about 28
kilometers west of present-day Xi’an,
was built in a very unusual manner as a
microcosm of the Chinese empire. Each
time the Qin conquered a warring state, the
palace of the enemy was destroyed, and
a replica was built on the northern bank
of the Wei River, facing the new palace to
the south. These replica palaces were then
connected by covered walkways and filled
with musicians and singing women from
the vanquished states. The emperor also
resettled over one hundred thousand people
from these conquered states to Xianyang.
This policy was meant to reduce the
possibility of rebellion by placing dangerous
elements within the purview of the emperor.

Though the Qin palaces were destroyed in
dynastic wars, they are described extensively
in the literature, and excavations in the late
1970s discovered that these palaces are
quite similar to those descriptions. One of
the most impressive was the palace of Qin
Shi Huangdi himself. It seems to have been

Fas China Sea

a two-level structure, with the upper level
imposingly raised 6 meters above the lower.
The upper level is L-shaped and extends 60
meters east to west and 45 meters north to
south. At its center was the principal hall,
with a large pillar right at its midpoint. A
smaller hall to the southeast is thought to
have been the emperor's residence. The L
shape suggests that another, similar complex
was to be syrnmetrically placed to the east.
According to a description:

[He] had palaces constructed in the Shanglin
Gardens, south of the Wei River. The front
palace, Epang, was built first.... The terraces
above could seat 10,000, and below there
was room for banners [20 meters] in height.
One causeway round the palace led to the
South Hill, at the top of which a gateway was
erected. A second led across the Wei River to
[the capital]*

When Shi Huangdi died, his ambitious
building program in Xianyang had not been
completed. The Han dynasty then proceeded
to destroy it.

*Sima Gian, Selections from Records of the Historian,
trans. Yang Hsien-yi and Gladys Yang (Beijing: Foreign
Languages Press, 1979), 179.

BA
6.69 Terra-cotta warriors in the Tomb of the First
Emperor, near Xi’an, China

Tomb of the First Emperor

The Tomb of the First Emperor is located in
Lishan, just south of Xi’an. Sited on a plain
with a wall of mountains framing its southern
view, it is probably the largest and most costly
tomb in history, even cornpared with the
Egyptian pyramids. Its outer perimeter wall,
6 meters thick and constructed of rammed
earth, encloses an area of approximately

2 square kilometers. The main entrance is
on the east. Within the perimeter there was
a second walled enclosure with four more
gates, one on each of the four sides.

Outside the eastern entrance,
archaeologists have uncovered more than
8,000 life-size terra-cotta figures, grouped
in battle order, rank by rank, some mounted
on horse-drawn chariots, others in infantry
groups armed with spears, swords, and
crossbows {although the spear shafts, bows,
and other wooden objects have decayed
away). Vault no. 1 is the largest, measuring
60 by 210 meters. In eleven parallel trenches
there are over 3,000 terra-cotta foot soldiers
arranged as an infantry regiment, facing away
from the emperor's tomb. In the eastern
gallery are bowmen and crossbowmen in a
formation of three rows, making a total of
almost 200 sharpshooters. Most were armed
with actual crossbows with a range of 200
meters. Archaeologists once believed that
each warrior had individual traits—that they
were portraits of the emperor's guard of
honor—but it now seems that there are about
one hundred different types of faces.

Vault no. 2 contains a formation of chariots
and cavalry with supporting troops, all turned
toward the east. There are 1,430 warriors and
horses divided into four groups. Vault no. 3
seems to be the headquarters of the terra-
cotta army, with a commander along with 68
officers. This vast buried army was meant to
accompany the emperor in death and protect
him. Other vaults contain acrobats, musicians,
and craftsmen.

The 76-meter-high mound remains
unexcavated but recent tests have shown that
it is a building of extraordinary dimension and
design, covered completely over by tons of
earth. The building consists of two bracket-
shaped structures of rammed earth that
tower over a large central room that serves
as the tomb chamber. The Shiji contains a
description of this burial monument. For a
long tire it was thought to be an exaggeration,
but now seems to be quite plausible:

| Seneeeeeee sien
1 Gate

Outer wall

Gate

Qin excavations and building had been started
at Mount Li, while after he won the empire, more
than 700,000 conscripts from all parts of the
country worked there. They dug through three
subterranean streams and poured molten copper
for the outer coffin, and the tomb was filled with
models of palaces, pavilions, and offices, as well
as fine vessels, precious stones, and rarities.
Artisans were ordered to fix up crossbows so
that any thief breaking in would be shot. All the
country’s streams, the Yellow River, and the
Yangtze, were reproduced in quicksilver and

by some mechanical means made to flow into

a miniature ocean. The heavenly constellations
were above, and the regions of the earth below.
The candles were made of whale oil to insure the
burning for the longest possible time.*

*Sima Gian, Selections from Records of the Historian,
trans. Yang Hsien-yi and Gladys Yang (Beijing: Foreign
Languages Press, 1979), 186.

Excavated vaults —“

containing terra-cotta
warriors

6.70 Site plan: Tomb of the First Emperor

ES 0 500 m

ARAN

6.71 Section through vaults: Tomb of the First Emperor

Pa
ii ne a
¢
te
QO
Taklamakan Desert

ates

Gobi Desert

see"
% Bahai Guif
.
:
5
Yellow Sea

Ochang'an

6.72 Construction of the Great Wall during the Warring States period, the Qin dynasty, and the Han dynasty

Great Wall of China

The empire created by Shi Huangdi had few
serious enemies to its south, and to the west,
the enormous Taklamakan Desert served

as an impediment to all but the hardiest

of traders. But to the north, the nomadic
Mongol tribes were, for the Qin and Han
dynasties, the quintessential “barbarians.”
The Mongols’ skill with horses gave them a
military advantage that would, under Chengiz
(Ghengis) Khan, not only yield China to them
but indeed take them to the very doors of
Europe. The Chinese response to the Mongol
threat was to reach for a radical option that
could only be mounted by a highly organized
empire—the creation of a vast defensive
wall, the wanti gangqeng (10,000-li-long
wall), popularly called the Great Wall. Small
segments had been constructed along the
northern frontier in the Warring States period
under the Zhou, but Shi Huangdi conceived
of connecting and extending these segments,
a work that would be continued by the Han
emperors. The resulting fortification is not a
single continuous structure but a network of
walls and towers.

Most of the Qin and Han sections of the
Great Wall were made of pounded earth and
paved with stones. Some parts, however,
were made of Chinese tamarisk and reeds
that were arranged in a checkerboard pattern
and then filled in with sand and stone. While
much of the ancient wall of Shi Huangdi

has disappeared, most of what was built in
the Ming dynasty (1368-1644), following

a route different from that of Shi Huangdi’s
fortifications, survives today.

To maintain its integrity, the Great Wall was
constantly patrolled, and signal systems
were set up to transmit messages from one
watchtower to another. It was, however, a
failed enterprise. Despite being repeatedly
reinforced, the Great Wall was easily
breached by northern nomadic civilizations,
many of which went on to establish
successful ruling dynasties in China, such
as the Jin, the Liao, the Yuan, and the Qing.
These supposedly “barbarian” dynasties, of
course, had less interest in reinforcing the
wall.
Extending from contemporary North

Korea all the way to the Jade Gate in

Gansu Province, the Great Wall had several
architectural components:

* Border towns: Of varying shapes and sizes,

these towns were small and defensible, af

complete with moats, walls, streets,

wellings, and watchtowers.

* Fortifications: Small forts, 50 to 150 square
meters in area and protected by moats and
high walls, served as military stations.

* Checkpoints: Two- to three-story

watchtowers were built everywhere the wall
encountered intersections or was open to
movement.

* Beacon towers: Watchtowers on .
platforms, frorn which lookouts could spot
approaching enemies and alert adjacent
towers by smoke signals, were located

about 130 meters apart. 6.73 View of the Great Wall of China

KUSHANS

Naneghat

SATAVAHANA EMPIRE

6.74 Post-Mauryan India

DEVELOPMENT OF MAHAYANA
BUDDHISM

Late in the 2nd century BCE, Asoka’s
Mauryan Empire began to disintegrate,
resulting in the formation of a series of
smaller kingdoms: the Sunga in the west, the
Satavahanas to the south, and in the north,
the Shakas. This transformation paralleled
an equally significant transformation within
Buddhism that had important implications
in the field of architecture. As originally
conceived, Buddhist monkhood was strictly
mendicant. Its members lived without
money and survived by begging; they

were not allowed to erect shrines, acquire
property, or deify the Buddha. This form

of Buddhism was subsequently referred to
as Hinayana (or the “Lesser Vehicle”). In
time, as Buddhism began to receive royal
patronage and its practitioners became more
diverse, a more monastic and populist form

of Buddhism, known as Mahayana (or the
“Greater Vehicle”) emerged that required the
establishment of institutions where monks
could live and study.

The transformation can be tracked
through the four great Buddhist councils
called to reconcile differences in
interpretation. King Ajatsatru convened the
first Buddhist council in the 5th century
BCE, soon after the Buddha’s death, in
order to record the extant sayings of the

Buddha (sutras) and to codify the rules of
mendicancy. Continuing conflicts between
the Hinayana and Mahayana schools of
Buddhism prompted the convening of the
second Buddhist council in 383 BCE, a third
in 250 BCE, and a fourth around 100 CE, at
which time three hundred thousand verses
and over nine million statements were
compiled and written in Sanskrit. These
became the basis of Mahayana Buddhism,
which soon began to flourish and spread into
Central Asia, China, Korea, and Japan.
Significant parts of the Mahayana
credo were articulated by Nagarjuna, the
2nd-century Indian philosopher and the
most influential Buddhist thinker after the
Buddha himself. Nagarjuna promoted what
is known as the Middle Path, a compromise
between the ascetic and the worldly sects
of Buddhism. He argued that Asoka, as a
virtuous Buddhist king, was a cakravartin
and should thus be considered to have

direct access to nirvana, or Buddhahood.
Nagarjuna’s definition of kingship served as

a model for generations of rulers throughout
Asia, including the 18th-century Qing dynasty
emperor Qianlong and today's Dalai Lama.

KUSHANS
texia®
> a Tibetan Plateau
PARTHIA \
fo Mathura A ©
f Pataliputra
{ Patan ‘
| SPAKAS @
Ajunta @) sancti SUNGA EMPIRE
Junnar
Sa
© amaravati

SATAVAHANA EMPIRE

Indian Ocean

@Anuradhapura

Sanchi Complex
The Buddhist sanctuary known as Sanchi
was founded by Asoka and flourished for
thirteen centuries. The complex is located
near the ancient town of Vidisa, along the
fertile river valleys of the southern trade route
(or dakshinapatha). It is located on a hill
that rises sharply above the valley, making
its stupas distinctly visible from afar. The
surrounding hills are also surmounted by
stupas, all of which establish the area as a
sacred landscape. Originally the stupas were
plastered and painted, and on festival days
gaily decorated with flowers and other ritual
offerings. Large groups of visiting monks and
laity alike came to Sanchi in processions.
Stupas started out as reliquary mounds, or
caityas, which can denote any sacred place—
such as where a funeral pyre or consecration
had occurred; they were usually marked off
by a wooden railing. Asoka had the Buddha’s
bodily remains divided into eight parts and
distributed throughout his empire as relics,
with their locations marked by ceremonial
mounds (stupa means “piled up”).


6.75 Stupa II at Sanchi, near Bhopal, India

Built by the thousands, stupas became the
dominant symbol of Buddhism. Conceptually,
a stupa is a cosmological diagrarn linking
the body of the Buddha to the universe.
The fundamental elements of a stupa are
present in the oldest of Sanchi’s stupas,
Stupa II (ca. 100 BCE). The central mass
consists of an earthen hemispherical mound
faced with fired bricks, with a shallow berm
(or medhi) ringing its base. This round
structure is then surrounded by a stone
balustrade (or vedika) that replicates a
construction out of wood. Both the interior
and exterior surface of the vedika are
carved with shallow reliefs and medallions
depicting scenes and events of Budchist
significance. The vedika has openings on
four sides, aligned to the cardinal directions.
These are accessed not on axis, however,
but at right angles, through entrances whose
openings face counterclockwise. The cross-
axis of the cardinal directions, coupled with
the directional openings, form a space-

time cosmological diagram, or mandala,

in the form of a svastika (or “swastika”).
The directions represent space, and the
entrances, replicating the movement of the
stars, represent time. The purpose of the
vedika is to also give spatial definition to the
ritual counterclockwise circumambulation of
parikrama. A Buddhist monk, or a pilgrim,
in performing the parikrama, engages in

a haptic reenactment of the fundamental
order of space and time, and in the process,
brings his or her body into harmony with that

>

larger order. In Buddhism, as in Hinduism,
parikrama, along with the mandala and the
svastika (unrelated to its Nazi appropriation),
are still fundamental to architectural
expression.

Stupa |, known as Mahastupa, or Great
Stupa, is essentially a magnification of Stupa
Il in plan and has a diameter of 36 meters.
An Asoka pillar defines its southern entrance.
At the top of the stupa is another vedika—
the harmika—that is inaccessible and serves
only symbolic purposes. In the middle of the
harmika is a finial, with three stone discs of
iminishing size, called chattris, balanced on
a columnar support. The harmika and the
chattris collectively denote the stupa’s vertical
axis, echoing Asoka’s pillar and completing
the casmic connections of the stupa. The
other innovation at the Mahastupa are the
monumental stone gateways called toranas.
he foranas, imitating wooden construction,
consist of two vertical pillars supporting
three horizontal bars that are slightly bent at
their center and that project well beyond the
posts. The beams end in volutes that connote
the sacred scrolls, the treasured objects of
the Buddhist sanghas. Like the vedikas,
the surfaces of the foranas are elaborately
lecorated, depicting Buddhist themes and
events, completing the classic stupa as we
know it.

6.78 East torana, Great Stupa at Sanchi

6.79 Area plan of Sanchi

Sanchi enjoyed extensive patronage and grew
into a large monastic complex of Budchist
learning and worship that included subsidiary
structures where the monks lived. Over time,
a number of small stupas were added to the
complex. The more important the person
whose relics were contained in a stupa, the
closer that stupa was to the Mahastupa.
(During excavation in the mid-19th century,
most of these relics were removed.)

The Hindus also recognized this site as
important, and one of the oldest Hindu

stone temples—from the 4th century CE—is
found there, close to the southern entrance
of the Mahastupa. A relief on the northern
torana of the Mahastupa depicts a large
ceremonial procession, complete with
musical instruments and offerings and led by
elephants, on its way to the Mahastupa. One
has to imagine Sanchi thus—not as a remote
monastery populated by mendicant Buddhist
monks totally disassociated from ordinary life,
but as a bustling center of religious activity
where the monks and their patrons enjoyed
extensive contact and communication.

500 m

To
6.81 Plan: Stupa complex at Sanchi

6.80 Steps leading up the Great Stupa, Sanchi


“my

bob Pe ete

¢——Chaittris

When the stupa was adopted in
China, the all-important chattris were
transformed into the tall pagodas of
East Asia (fusing, perhaps, with the
Chinese watchtowers of that time).

Torana

|
Vedika Od Medhi
b ite | Th

6.82 Plan and elevation: Mahastupa at Sanchi

Abhayagiri Vihara

A monastic complex designed around
similar principles to Sanchi was founded

in the 2nd century BCE on the island of Sri
Lanka. Known as the Abhayagiri Vihara, it
was located north of the Sri Lankan capital,
Anuradhapura, and became, by the lst
century CE, a major Buddhist institution. At
its center was a huge dagoba 107 meters

in diameter and a colossal 120 meters

high. Around it were clustered an image
house, a series of assembly halls, general
purpose halls, a refectory with a communal
rice trough, bathrooms, and multistoried
residential dormitories, or viharas. In the 4th
century CE, Abhayagiri became the center
of Mahayana Buddhism, which opposed the
more officially sanctioned Theravada sects of
Sri Lanka.

6.83 Mahastupa at Sanchi

Ridge

To Sopara
"eeraey,

Junnar Caves

6.84 Junnar Caves area

Junnar Caves

Rock-cut architecture has a venerable history
dating back to the Egyptians and Abu Simbel
(1264 BCE). It was a key architectural method
in West Asia. The Lycians in Anatolia were
also its masters, as were the architects in
Petra. It was used for the first time in India
around 250 BCE, and it is quite likely that

the technique travelled there along the trade
routes. But whereas Lomas Rsi Cave in the
Barabar Hills (ca. 300 BCE) was an open
cavity, the new caves were of two types: a
caitya, or meditation hall, consisting of an
apsidal hall focused on a stupa, and a vihara,
or living quarter, consisting of a number of
cells organized around a rectilinear, columnar
court. By the Ist century BCE, rock-cut
Buddhist architecture became increasingly
elaborate in concept and execution. Such
structures were excavated all over South
Asia, but in particular in the passes of the
Western Ghats, a mountain chain in western
India running some 45 to 90 kilometers
inland from the Arabian Sea. Their purpose
was not remoteness, however, but rather to
be close to the trade routes—and indeed,

it was along the trade routes that a growing
culture of Buddhist sites arose. The largest
concentrations of caves are in Bhaja and
Pitalkhora in western India. Because they are
man-made, rock-cut structures, they should
not actually be called caves, but this is how
they are often referred to in India.

Tra
Rag ole
heme OUte
"teen,
Junnar Caves "ay,
‘te,
J “Nees,
unnar Maen Sanchi
Ait
River bdattld
© Junnar Caves

ry =

6.85 View of Junnar Caves, near Naneghat, India

Caitya, which in Sanskrit means “that which
is worthy to be gazed upon,” indicates a
sacred place or object. According to texts
from about 200 BCE, wandering Indian
ascetics often gathered near cajityas to

beg alms from local religious pilgrims

and to pay homage to the deities residing
therein. Later, the term caitya assumed

the distinctive meaning of a meeting place
or Buddhist pilgrimage site, probably with
some temporary wood structures for visitors.
Beginning in the 2nd century BCE, caityas
were carved directly into the rock bluffs in

a style that clearly alludes to these wooden
prototypes. Over time, and more generally,
the caityas were rectangular spaces that
defined the stupa at its rear.

Ni

Ss
— Guntupalli, India
Lenyadri, India . 9 al w= --b. 20m

6.86 Plans of caftya halls: Lenyadri and Guntupalli, India

6.87 Plan of caitya halls at Tulija Lena,

Junnar, India

6.88 Cross-section: Caftya hall at Bhaja,

Maharashtra, India

6.90 Interior:

Caitya hall at Bhaja

6.89 Entrance to the rock-cut Buddhist shrine and vi#ara, Cave 12, at Bhaja, Maharashtra

The Tulija Lena (100-25 BcE)—one of some
200 rock-cut temples in the area around
Junnar—is significant because a caitya hall
there is completely round in plan. The caifya
hall at Bhaja, Maharashtra (100-70 BCE), is,
however, a more classic example in that the
stupa chamber, with its parikrama path and
antechamber, is fused into one large space
while maintaining the distinctive presence
of the parikrama path by creating a long,
U-shaped colonnade that extends the entire
length of the hall. The pillars are octagonal
but otherwise unadorned. As is the case with

Caitya Hal

vihara

6.91 Plan: Caitya hall at Bhaja

all Buddhist rock-cut architecture, the caitya
hall is carved out to faithfully imitate wood
construction, complete with ribs, inward-
leaning columns, and traces of joinery.
Ribs of real wood added to the stone vault
complete the image. Nonetheless, there is
a good deal of debate about what kind of
wooden architecture is represented here,
since there are no horizontal bearns as might
have been expected. The meaning of these
spaces is also unclear. The hall is more than
just a shelter over the stupa built in rock-cut
form, but possibly a type of memorial space,
with the stupa—which is not built, but carved
out of the rock—perceived as a living entity.
The entrance of the hall is in the form
of a large opening with a horseshoe-shaped
top, reflecting the vaulted ceiling of the
hall. Around the central opening one sees
a number of miniaturized faux building
facades, representing perhaps a city or
palace, complete with carved human figures
leaning over railings.

‘

Early Mayan (pre-250 ce)

Pacific Ocean

6.92 Urbanization of the Americas, 1 CE

THE MAYA

Shaft Tombs of Teuchitlan

At the turn of the millennium, Central
America was dominated by the Zapotecs,
who had replaced the Olmecs, now in serious
decline. In the Yucatan Peninsula, in the
meantime, the Mayan culture had begun to
take root, developing monumental platform-
and-pyramid complexes in the Mirador

asin and Tikal. At the edges of these great
civilizations, in the high lake valleys of
western Mexico, we find a relatively minor but
fascinating civilization at Teuchitlan, around
the slopes of the extinct volcano Tequila. The
remains today consist of funerary shaft tombs
accompanied by corresponding surface-

evel ritual architecture created as integral
parts of small chieftain settlements, the
largest of which probably had about twenty
to thirty thousand inhabitants. Though burial
chambers were a constant in western Mexico,
significant here is that no pyramids or images
of the usual deities have been found. The
origin of this particular culture and the
reasons for their autonomous architectural
development are not well understood. Ancient
West Mexico (edited by Richard Townsend)
contains some of the more recent studies.

Gulf of Mexico

Mayan expansion 7]

Se
a,
*.,

‘
A AK

For the residents of Teuchitlan, funerary
tombs had a critical part in establishing

the connection between the living and their
ancestors. They were used by hereditary
chieftains and their families and became the
symbolic center of the society’s communal
life. The earliest type of tombs (1500-

800 BCE) consisted of a round opening
surrounded by a low platform, frorn which a
short, stepped passage led into the mortuary
chamber. Such small tombs from all periods
are found everywhere in western Mexico.
Little is known of the tombs from the period
between 800 and 300 BCE, since none have
been scientifically excavated, although tombs
are found throughout the lake-basin district.

North @ Hopewell

r ) Teuchitlan
Central e Zapotecs

@ Pre-Classic Mayas
South

6.93 Trade in the Americas, 1 CE

n the period 300 BCE to 200 CE, the shaft
tombs used by hereditary chieftains and their
families became the symbolic center of the
society. Carved into volcanic tuff, the tombs
are generally boot- or bottle-shaped. Vertical
shafts are cut between 1 and 21 meters
low the surface before opening into one

or more side chambers in which the dead
were interred, along with a large offering of
ollow ceramic figures, shell jewelry, obsidian
jewelry, ground stone, and other items. There
is evidence that the tombs held burials from
different times and were therefore reopened
as necessary. A ceramic model from one

of the tombs shows the house of the living
above and the house of the dead below.

6.94 Model of a temple sited
on an elevated platform

Of the shaft tombs of the period between
300 BCE and 200 CE, the largest, at El
Arenal, has an 18-meter shaft and three
burial chambers. Two other shaft tombs are
located within the same ceremonial area.
On the surface, the shaft emerged at the
center of a circular stepped mound that was
surrounded by an elevated circular patio, at
the edge of which were eight to twelve evenly
spaced rectangular platforms. Made of rubble
and packed earth, the larger complexes of
the later phase (300-800 CE) range from 28
meters in diameter at Potrero de las Chivas
to well over 100 meters at Guachimonton,
the largest of the Teuchitlan ritual sites. The
circles were often found in groups of two or
three, with some of the circles overlapping.
Ball courts were also found in association
with these circles. Later, in the period from
300 to 800 CE, shaft tombs became less
important, and huge surface circles, along
with ball courts, came to dominate the
construction, to the point that their burial
chambers are as yet undiscovered.

6.95 Plan and pictorial view:
Shaft tomb at El Arenal, Mexico

6.96 Site plan: Guachimonton precinct at Teuchitlan, near Ameca, Mexico

6.97 Plan and section: Central circular structures of the Guachimonton complex at Teuchitlan

The graves of El Arenal, like most shaft
tombs, have been looted or destroyed. One
that has been excavated intact at Huitzilapa
is a shaft tomb 8 meters deep, with two |
burial chambers, several burials, and West plaza
about sixty thousand artifacts. The tornb

sits at the western end of the 50-by-200-
meter settlement. At the eastern end is a
large, elongated ball court. The center of

the settlement is dominated by a religious
complex consisting of eight platform mounds

surrounding a circular pyramid. This complex

abuts another, smaller circular complex to

its west consisting of four platform mounds

fronting onto a square court with a small

circular pyramid in the middle. The shaft °. bobo at

tomb is located in one of the mounds. Low
abutments indicate that the four platforms
were linked together in a ring at their base.
The shaft tapers about one-third of its way
down and then opens into two domical
chambers, oriented north-south, which are
entered through narrow openings and stairs.
Within, six skeletons, one of which is clearly
that of the chieftain, are laid out with their
heads toward the entrance, surrounded by
offerings.

6.98 Site plan: Huitzilapa, near Guadalajara, Mexico

Clay models found with the offerings
testify to the self-consciousness of the
designs, linking community festivals to the
order of the cosmos, the rhythms of the
seasons, and the cycle of life and death.
The circle replicates the encompassing ring
of the horizon; cardinal and intercardinal
orientations are established by pyramid
stairways along axes related to the path
of the sun. The models show a tall mast
rising from the central pyramid, which in
mystical parlance would be the axis mundi,
connecting the apex of the sky to the central
point of the earth’s surface and to the
underworld nadir. These sites were also the
location of observations and rites on the day
of the summer solstice, the annual time of
the sun’s zenith passage, the beginning of the
rainy season, and the renewal of the earth’s
fertility.

6.99 Pictorial view of Huitzilapa

Nakbe
The Mayan civilization, initially centered
on the coastlines of Guatemala and El
Salvador, spread northward between 250,
and 900 CE into the Yucatan Peninsula.
At its peak, it was one of the most densely
populated and culturally dynamic societies
in the world. Many of the pre-classical sites
declined by the 3rd century CE, leaving the
cities in northern Guatemala dominant. The
Mayas developed a religious philosophy
controlled by a professional priesthood built
around the importance of astronomical
manifestations that were part of the eternal
struggle between the powers of good and
evil. The benevolent gods brought thunder,
lightning, and rain, and insured abundance,
whereas the malevolent ones brought death,
destruction, hurricanes, and war. The religion
developed into a worship of time in its various
manifestations; it was highly esoteric in
nature, requiring priests, rathernaticians,
and prophets. Dancing was an important
aspect of religious ceremonies, as was the
giving of sacrifices. These ranged from food
offerings and ornaments (like feathers and
shells) to the practice of human sacrifice.
This specialized production and
dependency on foreign trade might have
been the reason for both the success and the
eventual demise of the Mayas. Trees were
felled to fuel the kilns in which limestone was
burned. Deforestation, it has been suggested,
led to a gradual erosion of both land and
wealth. By 350 BCE, a centralized elite was
able to control large labor populations whose
rapid rate of production was aided by the
development of standardized construction
modules and faster stonecutting techniques.
It is during this period that monumental
Mayan architecture—at a scale never
seen previously—emerged in the Yucatan
Peninsula. An abundance of massive
architectural assemblages, ranging from 40
to 72 meters high, are found in the Mirador
basin. Since they are located in marshes,
all the major building groups were raised on
large platforms that were then connected by
elevated causeways.

Located in the Petén region of Guatemala,
habitation at Nakbe started around 1400 BCE,
reaching its height between 600 and

350 BCE. Its central area was constructed on
a massive man-made platform surmounted
by three mounds. The mounds contained
clusters of temples, with the tallest structure,
at 50 meters, on the west platform; the one
on the east platform was 30 meters high.
Nakbe was linked by causeways made of
white crushed rock to adjoining settlements,
including the one at El Mirador, its rival to the
north.

In general, the organization of early
Mayan ceremonial complexes was devoted to
creating distinct visual hierarchies by means
of a system of interconnected raised platform
terraces surmounted by ternples. The central
ceremonial complex at Nakbe consists of
two major, connected, built-up platforms (the
eastern one 32 meters high, and the western
one 45 meters high), on top of which the
principal structures are clustered.

6.100 Stela 1, the hero Twins, Nakbe, Guatemala

Bae
East platform

is

}

Causeway

6.101 Site plan of Nakbe

The eastern platform has two parts. One

is a cluster of low-platform structures on a
terrace, creating a court that is anchored on
its west side by a large freestanding pyramid.
The other part has a larger pyramid, which
is visible from the court, but whose access
was restricted to priestly use. Thus a complex
ceremonial whole was forrmed—with multiple
hierarchically organized spatial and visual
centers—that was used for a variety of
ceremonial functions.

Across the causeway is the western
platform, which consists of three terraced
courtyards, the highest of which supports the
large pyramid; as with the others, access is
restricted through the small courtyard in front
of it. Since the function of Mayan pyramids
was to support the temple, they were always
flat-topped. The pyramid itself consisted of
tightly cornpressed layers of stones and clay
sealed by a brick casing.

El Mirador

Just north of Nakbe, El Mirador (Spanish

or “lookout”) was an early Mayan city that
reached its cultural high point between

150 BCE and 150 CE. Though the city

was spread out over an area of 16 square
ilometers, the center was a crowded
constellation of sacred and secular buildings.
Here the platforms have been built up
successively over time, comprising the largest
set of platforrns found anywhere in the
Mayan world. The entire site was dominated
y the so-called El Tigre, a gigantic building
complex covering 5.6 hectares, in which the
emerging Mayan typology of the triple-surnmit
structures can be seen. These generally
consisted of a steep platform mountain
having at its summit two smaller buildings
facing each other in front of an axially placed
stepped pyramid temple. Archaeologists
believed that this arrangernent represented
the three stars in the constellation of Orion—
known as Alnitak, Saiph, and Ligel—within
which was supposed to burn the fire of
creation.

6.102 Reconstruction of El Tigre, El Mirador, Guatemala

iWe¢ South gateza"!

6.103 Site plan: The west group at El Mirador

200 m


6.104 El Tigre, El Mirador, Guatemala, as it stands today

7.1 Pont du Gard (Roman aqueduct), Nimes, France

INTRODUCTION
In the year 200 CE, Rome, Chang'an, and
Teotihuacan were the world's megacities; all
three were the capitals of vast empires. Cities
at this scale impacted the world even in far-
off places. They required an extensive trade
in luxury items, with everything embedded in
a system of revenue production, collection,
and control, not to mention an army and
territorial mastery. Above all, there had to be
an imperial awe. And in this respect, the idea
of “tradition” in both Rome and China was
not a phenomenon emerging naturally over
time. It had to be enforced and re-enforced
from the top down, against the rising tide of
social and economic transformations.
Between 100 and 300 CE, the Roman
Empire in particular grew into one of the
greatest and most extensive empires in
the world. For centuries, it had traded with
the Celts to the north, mainly exchanging
metals for Roman wine, but once Rome had
conquered the Celts and Romanized them,
the Romans discovered that the Germanic
tribes to the east were much more difficult
to pacify. The expansion of the territory
paid off, however, in the short term. Wealth
was lavished on temples, palaces, baths,
aqueducts, libraries, courts, streets, theaters,
and amphitheaters. The development of
Roman architecture, the most extensive
urban architecture of any civilization to that
date, reached from England to North Africa
and from Spain to the Levant, and would

have a profound impact on subsequent
developments throughout Europe and beyond
for centuries to come. The Han dynasty

in China was also building cities, palaces,
and tombs on a massive scale, helped by
remarkable advances in technology and
mining. But because their architecture was
all built out of wood and tamped earth,
comparatively little has survived the ages.
Their western capital, Chang'an, served as
the Silk Route’s eastern terminus.

Both Rome and China, in facing the
rapid changes that came with expansion
and cross-cultural contact, came to place
strong counter-emphasis on tradition, which
was instrumentalized as a condition of state
control. Traditions were promulgated and
enforced as a way to define the principle of
stability. Augustus, the first emperor, claimed
that he needed to create an empire precisely
to restore Roman tradition to its former
glory. And in China, tradition was imposed
and self-imposed on the Chinese through
Confucianism, which promoted security and
predictability for the elites.

Linking China and Rome were the
Parthians, a horse-based tribal society of
former nomads who established themselves
as a ruling elite in Mesopotamia and Central
Asia. Since they were not an architecture-
oriented culture, they allowed local cults to
continue. But they were keen traders and
played an important part in maintaining
the Silk Route; their capital, Hecatompylos,

Serai

a
Palmyra

Mogadishu

(O eee

. s
seme” Bukharal

wel ON
peneneeen™

Selucia a

one

+

+

axS
oonene, WL Calicut y+

oo eve of
mi % i
- Arabian Sea ‘

he
om:
Satavahanas °s

f%

Indian Ocean

7.2 Trade routes across Asia, 2nd and 3rd centuries CE

became one of its prime stopping places.
The Parthians eventually lost control of the
lranian highlands to a new lineage that
came to be known as the Sassanians, who
unified their control under the heading of
Zoroastrianism. They built numerous cities,
many of them circular, presumably to give the
inhabitants a defensive tactical advantage.
Among these was Firuzabad, built under
Ardashir | (r. 224-42 Ce). It had a diameter
of 2 kilometers, with two roads dividing it
into four districts, which in turn were divided
into five smaller sectors and thus ordered
the entire city in twenty sectors. The detailed
planning seems to have continued in the
surrounding landscape. The Sassanians
also built enormous citadels, such as the
Falak-ol-Aflak Castle (226-651 CE), situated
on the top of a large hill within the city of
Khorramabad, Iran. This gigantic structure
measured approximately 300 by 400 meters
and had twelve towers and massive walls.
The religious innovations taking place
in various parts of Eurasia, in combination
with the cross-Asian circulatory system
that was now abuzz with traffic, led to
important transformations in western Asia
with long-term ramifications beyond its
immediate geographical range. The old
Mesopotamian religions with their complex
pantheons were superseded by Hellenistic
and Iranian mystery cults, by sun cults,

by Zoroastrianism’s fire worship—and by
Christianity, itself an outgrowth of Hellenistic
sensibilities. Generally, these new religious
practices were more personal than their
forerunners. Another emerging religion,
Mithraism, was increasingly practiced

by the soldiery in the far-flung provinces

of the Roman Empire and would impact
Christianity. Buddhism, which has to be
understood as part of this search for ethical
self-transformation, was also developing
rapidly, moving deeper and deeper into China
and Southeast Asia in the form of monastic
schools located along the trade routes.

In Central Asia, the nomadic Yueh-chi
from Mongolia established the Kushan
Empire (1st century BCE to 3rd century CE)
that stretched from parts of Afghanistan and
lran to Pataliputra in the central Gangetic
Plains in the east and down to Sanchi in the
south, the location of the greatest Buddhist
sanctuary of the time. Though nomadic,
they quickly adopted the typical cross-Asian
organization of society, where they, as the
aristocratic warrior class, were on top. Below
them were the merchants, and below the
merchants were the artisans and peasants.

The Kushans understood the uniqueness
of their geographical location in the former
Graeco-Bactrian world. They had three
basic agendas: to actively promote trade
along the Silk Route; to promote artisanal

Dunhuang
or

MONGOLIA

* Han Empire
i
4

production of luxury goods; and finally, to
promote the expansion of agriculture in the
otherwise mountainous and arid lands. India
exported spices like pepper, ginger, and
saffron, as well as sugar, dyes, perfumes,
and gems. Trade was a hugely lucrative
business for Kushans, who augmented
this with commodities that they produced,
like bronze, tin, and glassware. The new
rulers also developed local industries like
silversmithing for jewelry and ironsmithing for
weapons. And finally, they made miles and
miles of canals to irrigate mountain slopes
and valleys. One of these is the Zang Canal,
located in Surxondaryo, Uzbekistan, which
drew water from Surkhan River. There were
similar canals along the Amu Darya. The
water irrigated the vineyards the Kushans
planted, as wine, the drink of the Greeks,
was now an important luxury export to India.
This astonishing burst of activity, far from
the traditional centers of civilization, resulted
in an empire that was unique. It became a
melting pot for people and ideas from India,
Persia, China, and even the Roman Empire.
At first the Kushans absorbed the
remnants of the Greek culture of the
Hellenistic kingdoms, becoming at least partly
Hellenized. They even spoke Greek. Some
of the elites adopted Zoroastrianism from
the Persians, others embraced some form of
Hinduism, and yet others became Buddhist.


Whereas their first coins depict the Kushans
dressed in heavy coats and big felt hats
appropriate to the steppe, later coins show
them dressed in Greek togas or lightweight
tunics. The first documented translation
efforts by foreign Buddhist monks in China
were in the 2nd century CE, probably as a
consequence of the expansion of the Kushan
Empire into the Chinese territory of the Tarim
Basin. Their most lasting contributions to
architecture were the stupas that they began
to erect along the trade routes. Few have
survived, but the Kanishka Stupa—built for
anishka | (ca. 127-40 Ce}—on the outskirts
of today’s Peshawar, Pakistan, was described
y Chinese pilgrims in the 7th century as
the tallest stupa in all of India. It rose to
about 200 meters and contained three bone
ragment relics of the Buddha, which have
now been transferred to Mandalay, Myanmar
(Burma). Only a sturip remains of the
original building. Hans Loeschner suggests
that it might have appeared similar to the
stone relief from Butkara III in Swat Valley,
which shows a stupa placed on a tall square
base. In the corners there are four pillars with
lions at the top, similar to many of the Ashoka
pillar with lion capitals, such as the one at
Vaisali, India.

One of the major impediments on the Silk
Route was the Taklamakan Desert, a vast oval
desert surrounded by mountains. However,
rivers running down from the mountains
provided enough water for caravans to move
around the edges of the desert from one
oasis to another. One of these was Khotan,
the center of a small kingdom. The Chinese
pilgrim Xuanzang passed through Khotan
around 644 CE on his way back from India to
China and wrote:

This country is renowned for its music;
the men love the song and dance. Few of
them wear garments of skin and wool; most
wear taffeta and white linen. Their external
behavior is full of urbanity; their customs are
properly regulated. Their written characters
and their mode of forming their sentences
resemble the Indian model; the forms of
the letters differ somewhat; the differences,
however, are slight.... There are about a
hundred sangharamas [monasteries/nunneries]
with some 5000 followers, who all study the
doctrine of the Great Vehicle.*

*Styu-ki Buddhist Recards, vol. 2 (London, 1884), 309.

7.3 A stupa from a cave mural in China

During this time, the southern maritime trade
routes from Egypt by way of the eastern
coast of Africa to India, Indonesia, and
China were beginning to develop into a trade
network as important as the land-based Silk
Route. The Romans, seeking to circumvent
the vicissitudes of the cross-desert trade,
saw places like Petra as veritable port cities
linking trade to India and beyond. And
like Petra, Aksum in modern Ethiopia had
become by this time a significant regional
force, trading with India and, northward,
with the Roman Empire. In summary, it
can be said that the 3rd century CE saw the
maturation of a new world order, namely
that of transregional, transcontinental trade
interdependency, especially in luxury goods.
It was a world order that would continue to
escalate with the emergence of the great
Mongolian Empire in the 13th century.

In all of this, it is important to remember
that the trading world that stretched
from Rome through India and China was
extraordinarily narrow. It did not yet include
Southeast Asia; Africa, apart from the
Ethiopian and Mediterranean coasts, was
largely on its own, as was the Siberian north.

In Peru, one sees regional states
emerging: the Moche in the north and, in
the south, the Nazca, who produced large
pilgrimage centers such as Cahuachi,
where mysterious patterns on the ground

later appeared, celebrated today as
the Nazca Lines. The purpose of these
elaborate designs—whose full impact can
only be appreciated from the air—remains
unresolved, as do questions about the
nature of the Nazcas’ religious practices,
to which they seem related. In Mexico, the
superpower of the region was unquestionably
Teotihuacan, the capital of an empire that
encompassed most of Central America and
that was the center of a trading network
extending from the Mississippi Delta to the
Peruvian coast. Teotihuacan was the largest
and most influential city of pre-colonial
America. All subsequent architecture in
Central America was impacted by its legacy.
In the Americas, the Hopewell Culture
came the first large-scale culture in
lorth America, spreading a web of cities
and villages along the Ohio River. It was
a unique culture in that it specialized in
ceremonialism. The Hopewell controlled
jand rich in salt, flint, and pipestone, and
people from far away would come to gather
or mine these materials. But to do this, they
jad to bring gifts and participate in elaborate
ceremonial exchanges. The Hopewell built
jarge enclosures, hundreds of meters across
and shaped in various ways. They also lined
the rivers and streams with ancestor mounds,
producing a complex, sacred landscape.


Nazca ©
Huaca de la uns®

cccinuacén

acpewer

Rome

(OO)
on™

seainck OO) Chang'an
Ctesiphon

Timgad

Karli

Aksum © ©

Anuradhapura

™

Roman Republic
509-27 BCE

A Miletus
A479 BCE-250 CE

Roman Empire
27 BCE-393 CE

A Forum of Augustus A Forum of Trajan A Pantheon

20 CE 112 CE 126 CE 212-16 CE
A Ephesus A Hadrian’s Villa
270 BCE-420 CE 118-34 CE

ATemple of Jupiter at Baalbek
Begun ca. 10 CE

A Library of Celsus at Ephesus
115 CE

Parthian Empire
247 BCE-224 CE
ATakht-i-Suleiman
ca. 300 BCE-110 CE
Aksum Prominence
Ist centuriy CE

0 200 CE

Kushan Empire: Central Asia and northern India
2nd century BCE to 3rd century CE
<1 Amaravati Stupa
ca. 3rd century BCE

A Caitya Hall at Karli
ca. 2nd century CE

Wang Mang Interregnum
9-25 CE

Eastern Han Dynasty

25-220 CE 25-220 CE

A Mingtang-Biyong Ritual Complex
ca. Ist century BCE-1st century CE

A Han Tombs
3rd century BCE to 3rd century CE

Teotihuacan Culture
ca. 150 BCE-650 CE
A Pyramid of the Sun
ca. 200 CE

Moche Culture
ca. 200 BCE-700 CE
A Huaca del Sol and Huaca de la Luna
ca. 100 CE

Nazca Culture
300 BCE-200 CE

Hopewell Culture
200 BCE-500 CE

A Bath of Caracalla

A Baths of Diocletian

298-306 CE

A Diocletian's Palace
300 CE

Sassanian Empire
224-651 CE

400 cE

Satavahana and Ikshvaku Dynasties: Central and southern India
2nd century BCE to 4th century CE

A Jetavanarama Stupa
3rd century CE

Sixteen Kingdoms Period: North China

A Pyramid of the Moon
ca. 250 CE

Slavic tribes

Largely uninhabited desert

7.4 Trade routes in Europe and western Asia, 2nd and 3rd centuries CE

ROMAN EMPIRE

The Roman Republic (509 BCE-27 BCE)
focused largely on the Mediterranean,
especially once Rome took over Greece

in 146 BCE. But with the Gaulic Wars and

the conquest of northern territories, Rome
could combine trade over both sea and land.
And though this was perhaps the vision of
Caesar, the process of fusing everything into
a single imperial unit, rather than a network
of unequal principalities, would ultimately

be cornpleted by Caesar's successor, the
emperor Augustus. The land/sea combination
was the first such empire at that scale. By the
2nd century CE, the empire extended north
all the way to England. Under Hadrian, North
Africa was absorbed. Inroads were made

into western Asia in order to secure trade
links to the East. The eastern reaches of the
empire were defined by older cities like Petra,
Antioch, and Alexandria as well as by newly
expanded cities like Palmyra and Duros
Europus.

The development of cities was now at its
peak, and the consequences can be seen
throughout Europe and the Mediterranean.
The list of Roman foundations includes
Aosta, Bordeaux, Florence, London, Mainz,
Mantua, Paris, Milan, Silchester (Hampshire,
England), Trier, Cologne, Turin, Verona, and

Vienna, to name only a few. Many cities, like
Florence, Milan, Paris, and Trier, still carry
the imprint of the Roman grid to this day.
Though the paradigm for the city was the
castrum, or military camp, which was divided
by two intersecting main streets, the cardo
(north-south) and decumanus (east-west), this
model was used mainly in the initial phases of
the colonization in Europe and North Africa.
In Europe, though some of the Gaulic cities
remained in use, many, because they were
on hilltops, were evacuated by the Romans,
who preferred valleys and river towns, which
were easier to defend and more amenable

to Roman practices of camp organization.
Bibracte, for example, was abandoned and
the new city of Augustodunum, now known
as Autun, was built in the nearby valley. The
castrurm model, however, was rarely used

in the East, where cities were already well
established. There, the Romans simply added
to what they found. Regardless of whether the
castrum model was used or not, the Roman
method of creating cities can be compared
with that of the Chinese. The Chinese were
specialists in megacities, concentrating huge
populations and bringing a large spectrum

of activities into the confines of the city walls.
Chinese cities were largely composed of one-
or two-story houses and were thus not very

dense. The Romans specialized in compact,
small-scale cities networked across the
landscape. This allowed for easy expansion
and was a critical element in their success.
The Romans became experts in water
management, building extensive aqueducts,
many of which have lasted into the modern
world. The Pont du Gard in modern-day
southern France and the equally impressive
Acueducto de Los Milagros in Mérida, Spain,
are testamients to the boldness of these
designs. The water fed not only great fountains
but also magnificent public baths, which were
among the largest public buildings in the world
at the time.

North Africa is an excellent place to study
Roman urban concepts; it supplied the
capital with staple crops and luxury goods.
Hadrian was eager to develop this area and
offered free tenancy and a period of tax
exemption to anyone who would agree to
reside permanently on marginal land and put
it under cultivation. It was a successful policy
that encouraged the establishment of rural
trading centers, many of which developed
into urban environments. In some places
a new town was founded, like Timgad, a
gridded city roughly the size of Florence; in
others, such as at Leptis Magna, an existing
Phoenician city (east of Tripoli), the planners
adopted a flexible and additive approach.

Roman cities were more differentiated
than Greek cities, which were usually
defined by a central public area and temple
precincts. A Roman city had streets, squares,
fountains, baths, gates, memorial columns,
and public buildings that formed a type
of armature around which the rest of the
city grew. At the core of the city was the
forum, the political and economic center of
the city's activities. Public ceremonies and
announcements took place there, and around
it were ranged temples, offices, jails, butcher
shops, and law courts.

At Palmyra and Ostia we can see the
attempt to graft this armature onto places that
had been founded at an earlier date, when

they were more towns than cities. Djemila,

in Algeria (96 CE), is typical; its elongated
shape is a result of the terrain. The first part
of the city to the north shows a relatively
systermatized layout, with the forum at the
center of the town along the main road. But
when that proved inadequate, a new forum,
temple, and theater were built in a southward

7.6 Plans of three Roman towns drawn at the sample scale and orientation
»

\

Baths
7.5 Principal temple of Djemila, Algeria \ ty
Capitolium
= Forum

extension that followed the curves of an existing road. Though
Timgad (100 BCE) is often given as a typical example of the rigorous
application of the grid, the original town soon outgrew its borders. In
fact, the elements of the armature that were originally left out of the
design—the baths, the gates, even a capitolium—were grafted onto
the fabric of the city once it had proven its success. A new arch, the
Lambaesis Gate, demarcated the limits of the development. These
urban extensions show a willingness to negotiate with the landscape
and existing features such as roads. In some places, the Romans
were even willing to work within the Hellenistic design mold; the
most spectacular examples of this are at Ephesus and Miletus. es

CO Theater / °

“ Timgad

7.7 Main road of Timgad, Algeria

Harbor

7.10 Theater at Ephesus

Mountains

Floodplain
Aegean Sea

Mountains

7.9 Area plan of Ephesus

Ephesus

Ephesus, a small town and religious center
on the shores of the Cayster River near its
mouth on the Turkish coast, was settled in
the 9th century BCE and began to develop
nto an important port. Because the river
was silting over, the city was abandoned and
rebuilt at its current location 2 kilometers to
the east around 270 BCE. It was designed
not from the top down, as was Pergamon,
but horizontally, in a protected, curving valley
that opens in dramatic fashion onto the new
harbor. By the end of the 5th century CE, the
port of this city, just like that of the first one,
silted up and the city fell into disuse. Today
the harbor is 5 kilometers inland.

When the Romans took over the city in
the first century BCE, they began the process
of Romanization, adding temples, baths,
fountains, paved streets, and libraries. When
Augustus becarne emperor in 27 BCE, he
made Ephesus the capital of the Roman
holdings in western Asia Minor. Ephesus then
entered an era of prosperity, becoming both
the seat of the governor and a major center
of commerce. According to Strabo, it was
second in importance and size only to Rome.
The Library of Celsus (ca. 115 CE) was built
to store 12,000 scrolls and had an elegant
facade with four sets of marble column pairs
that framed aediculae and windows.


Ephesus rebuilt

1 Theater
2 Agora
3 Stadium
4 Fountain
5 Gymnasium
6 Temple of Domitian
7 State agora and odeum
8 lymphaeum
9 Library of Celsus
10 Temple of Hadrian
11 Gates of Heracles
12 Gymnasium of Vedius
13 Pollio Fountain
14 Temple of Serapis
15 Palace of the Proconsul
16 Baths of Scholastica
17 Arcadiane
18 Marble Way
Miletus

ca. 270 BCE
100 BCE
ACE

54 CE
86 CE
90 CE
96 CE
00 CE
02 CE
15 CE
20 CE
50 CE
50 CE
50 CE
70 CE
300 CE
370 CE
395 CE
420 CE

Miletus, about 40 kilometers to the south of

Ephesus on the western coast of Anatolia,
went through three distinct phases. First it
was a Greek colony; then it was a quasi-
independent city-state, prospering during
Hellenistic tirnes; and finally, it became

part of the Roman Empire. It was known as
a religious destination as well as a health
resort, and as an exporter of wine. The
Roman designers worked sometimes with,
and sometimes against, the established
pattern; some of the older buildings, like the
Bouleuterion (175 BCE), were preserved,
while others were destroyed. The Romans
inserted an intricate web of public buildings,
streets, gates, and spaces that linked the old
arbor with the new extension to the south.

The dates show the pace of construction.

w

ON AO B

10
11
12
13
14

Miletus founded
lorthern street grid
Temple of Athena
Theater

Rise to prominence
Bouleuterion

orth agora
Gymnasium
Stadium

South agora
mperial era

Baths of capitol
Harbor stoa, redesigned
Processional way
lyrnphaeum

Baths of Faustina
Temple of Serapis

479 BCE
470 BCE
450 BCE
450 BCE

75 BCE
70 BCE
50 BCE
50 BCE
50 BCE

50 CE
50 CE
50 CE
50 CE
70 CE
250 CE


The Roman Theater

Almost all Roman cities had a theater used
for both popular and religious purposes. In
the days of the republic, the Romans were
somewhat skeptical of theaters—which were
common in Greek cities—and concerned
about their potentially corrupting influences.
One decree forbade sitting at theaters, since
it was deemed more manly to stand. As a
result, theaters built during the republican
period were temporary structures built of
wood. The first permanent theater was
ordered by Pompey in 55 BCE. Its design was
what could be called transitional; it included
a temple of Venus at the top of the seating
area so that the rows of seats appeared to be
steps leading up to the temple. Gradually this
subterfuge fell away once theaters were built
in the colonies, where the emphasis was on
the theater as a public amenity.

Whereas Greek theaters were carefully
and strategically inserted into the natural
landscape and often had dramatic views, the
Roman theater was conceived as an urban
architectural element, its magnificence and
splendor a token of Rome's imperial status.
The slope of the seating was steeper than in
Greek theaters, possibly for acoustic reasons.
Initially, Roman theaters were hollowed out of
a hill or slope, as at the theater at Aspendos,
a Roman colony in Turkey. Over time,
however, Romans viewed their theaters as
regular urban structures. All of the theaters
built within the city of Rome were made
without the use of earthworks. Also unlike
Greek theaters, the auditorium, though not
roofed, was covered with awnings or velaria,
which could be stretched out from tall poles
to provide shelter from rain or sunlight. The
buildings were usually semicircular. The stage
building (scaenae frons) was usually three
stories high, with the theater divided into the
stage (orchestra) and the seating section
(auditorium). In Rome, few theaters have
survived the centuries. Arausio, the theater
in modern-day Orange, France, is a good
surviving example of a classic Roman theater,
as is the theater at Aspendos, though of
course they are missing all their ornamental
grandeur.

tm Ld]
LPP TTTT CTT ECCE CT
a 40m

i 4 t -—-+

7.12 Plan: Roman theater at Aspendos, Turkey

7.13 Roman theater at Aspendos

40m

7.14 Pantheon, Rome

The Pantheon

Hadrian (76-138 CE) had, of all the
emperors, the deepest personal interest

in architecture; he was also a poet and a
painter—as well as a competent commander.

His reign was generally a peaceful one, =
except for the role he played in the Bar-
Via Rectus

Kokhbar Revolt in Judaea. Reneging on = of Nero
his promise to let the Jews rebuild their Cie
destroyed temple, he planned to replace it Temple of Had

emple ol jaqran
=

Imperial forurns

with a temple to Jupiter and turn Jerusalem
into a Roman city, the Aelia Capitolina,
named after his own name, Aelia, and that
of the Roman god Jupiter Capitolinus. The
resulting revolution was brutally repressed.

a

Stadium of Domitian

Hadrian's effect on architecture was felt in
all corners of the empire, including Rome,
where he built numerous buildings, but none
more significant than the Pantheon (126 CE).

It survived largely because it later served S

as a church. Although it has lost its original

marble cladding and lacks the impressively Theater of Marcellus
dimensioned court that once framed the . {)

entrance of its facade, it is still an impressive

building. However, what one sees today

from the outside is nothing like the original,

which was not a freestanding building but

embedded in the urban fabric. Its principal 7.16 Campus Martius
view would have been from within a long,
colonnaded forecourt.


7.17 Oculus of the Pantheon

The building was sited in an area north of
the old city center known as Campus Martius
(“Field of Mars") that, before the founding of
Rome, had been used for pasturing horses
and military exercises. During imperial

times, it became the site of Rome’s urban
expansion, with baths, theaters, and temples,
including a large open courtyard building
known as the Saepta Julia, where Romans
voted.

While the classical ce/fa had always been
a dark and mysterious place oriented east
to the rising sun, this building rejects that
tradition. Its bold, domed interior space was,
for the Romans, an innovation. It derives
conceptually from Greek and Egyptian
mathematical interest in spatial geometry—
concepts familiar to Hadrian, who had lived
in Alexandria, a city famous as a center of
learning. It was Archimedes, a Greek, who
had solved the problem of measuring the
volume of the sphere and cylinder in relation
to each other. By way of contrast, Romans
contributed practically nothing to analytical
geometry. In that sense, the building is, one
might almost say, un-Roman.

Smaller domed oculus structures had
been built earlier, for bathhouses, like the
one that still stands at Baia, on the north
shore of the Bay of Naples. These places
might have been a good place to work out

technical issues, but they were certainly not
models in the symbolic sense. The octagonal
room in Nero’s palace brings us closer, in
that it ended in an oculus and descriptions
emphasize its syrnbolic purpose. Perhaps
seventy-five years later, with Hadrian, Rornan
architects had an emperor who, like Nero,
had a verve for architectural experimentation
and an interest in the Hellenistic East, where

7.18 Interior of the Pantheon

sun worship first came into its own in Egypt
and Syria. Here, Jupiter is here represented
not by a statue but by the abstraction of light
itself.

Against the vertical alignment of the
half-spherical dome is added the startling
dynamic of the sun’s rays as they move
slowly through the space like a searchlight,
illurninating one by one elements of the
architectural interior—sometimes the floor,
with its pattern of orange, red, and white
marbles brought in from all over the ernpire;
sometimes the orange marble columns;
sometimes the coffering of the dome itself.
The building probably had an astronomical
dimension, but nothing about that is known
for certain.

Unfortunately, no Roman text has yet
been found that explains the interior in
respect to the arrangement of the divine
statues, the ritual practices undertaken
in the building, or even the symbolism of
the oculus. But it is likely that the building
alludes to the unity of the divine and the
imperial realms. Apart from sun temples that
were beginning to be built in Syria (where
Hadrian was the governor in 117 CE), there
are mystery cults that emphasized light
and darkness, like the Eleusinian Mysteries
practiced in Greece, into which Hadrian had
been initiated. In that sense the building
can be perceived as an import of Eastern
religious ideas into the very heart of Rome.


7.19 Section elevation: Pantheon

Originally, a flight of five steps as wide as the
entrance portico led to the floor level of the
interior. The monolithic shafts of the facade
are of gray Egyptian granite; the four inner
columns are reddish Egyptian granite; ani
the capitals Pentelic marble. The porch leads
to a barrel-vaulted entranceway, flanked by
niches. Between the porch and the rotunda
are areas for stairways to reach the spaces
that honeycomb the cylindrical structure.
he threshold is defined by a huge block of
Portasanta marble. The walls, carved out by
alternating square and round niches, forrn
four axial connections through the center
space.

The niches of the interior are screened
y columns and flanked by pilasters of
yellow-orange marble under a continuous
entablature. The apse is marked by
reestanding columns, which interrupt the
entablature running along the back of the
niche. The dome presents itself on the
interior as successive rings of coffering that
diminish in size and depth as they near
the oculus. They end, however, not at the
mouth of the oculus but well short of it,

7.20 Dome detail: Pantheon

leaving a smooth, platelike area around the
opening. The concrete surface of the dome
visible today is not what contemporaries
saw, however. The edges of the oculus, and
the coffering as well, were probably gilded,
with rosettes filling the centers of the coffers
and creating a much more ephemeral and
less structural impression than what can be
observed today.

Though the Romans are often praised for
structural innovation, they could easily make
structure subservient to architectural vision.
The lower half of the coffering, in fact, bears
no relationship whatsoever to the structure
behind it. In that sense, the architects were
willing to work with the illusion of structure,
or at least wanted to separate the visual
vocabulary of a dome’s “celestial” structure
from the hard reality of the structural support.
Even the coffering was designed from an
optical point of view. The steps are shallower
on their lower edge and steeper on the higher
so as to appear the same height when viewed
from the center of the floor.

The lower part of the structure is brick-
faced concrete, with voids serving to reduce

the overall weight. Massive curving vaults
direct the forces to the ground. For the dome,
only concrete was used. The pour, made
against a temporary wooden formwork, had
to be seamless, placed bottom to top without
pause in order to guarantee the cohesion
of the whole. Organizing the production of
the concrete, its immediate transport to the
level of the dome, and its distribution to the
right places by people carrying small batches
was quite a feat. The width of the wall at the
bottom is 6.15 meters. It thins to only 1.5
meters at the level of the oculus, which is 8.3
meters across and open to air and weather.
Despite the powerful evocations of the
building, Hadrian's experiment would not
be repeated. Though Roman architects
continued to work with domed spaces, as in
the Baths of Caracalla, the dome-and-oculus
as imperial message was never repeated.
The original intermediary frieze was
replaced in 1747 with one far less delicate in
proportion. In the early 20th century, a small
section of the original frieze was rebuilt based
on Renaissance-era drawings.


Hadrian’s Villa

Hadrian’s other major contribution to
architecture was an extravagant villa complex,
a miniature world that he built for himself
(118-34 CE) at the top of a hill about 25
kilometers east of Rome. It is not a single
building, but a series of interconnected
structures and gardens. Unlike the Palace of
Domitian, with its compressed orderliness,
the villa returns to the more freewheeling
texture of Nero's palace. There are dozens of
distinct elements separated from each other
in the landscape and yet linked in surprising
ways, so that the whole design unfolds only
gradually. Some of the parts were meant

to evoke memories of distant lands from
Hadrian’s far-flung travels. The residential
parts were to the north. To the south was the
stadium, followed by a series of baths ending
in the spectacular structure known as the
canopus, which was lined with copies of the
caryatids of the Erechtheum in Athens.

The whole was meant to evoke the
international—and particularly Greek and
Egyptian—flavor of Hadrian’s trips. In that
sense the villa was a collection of memories
and allusions. The canopus, for example,
refers to a particularly bright star that was
often used in navigation by Mediterranean
sailors. It appears in numerous Greek
legends and was also the name of an
Egyptian port near the mouth of the Nile.
The canopus at Hadrian’s Villa is designed
as a long lake decorated along its edges with
columns supporting alternating arches and
lintels. The Shrine of Serapis (Serapeum) on
the southern end of the complex was built
against a steeply sloping hillside, creating
the impression of a grotto or miniature gorge
with a waterfall at the back. It was dedicated
to Serapis, the syncretic Hellenistic-Egyptian
god who was the protector of the city of
Alexandria. With water fromm an aqueduct
above flowing through the gorge and around
a crescent-shaped masonry reclining seat
toward the long, riverlike pool, diners on
the curved bench seats would have had a
cool and enjoyable meal, even in the heat
of summer. A small sernicircular pool where
food could be floated back and forth further
added to its charm. The vault’s surfaces were
covered with blue and green mosaics. And
the walls of the exedra were decorated with
semicircular niches that held statues.

Canopus

N.

7.22 Canopus, Hadrian's Villa

7.23 Plan: Island Villa, Hadrian’s Villa

7.25 Plan: Piazza d’Oro, Hadrian’s Villa

7.24 Island Villa, Hadrian’s Villa

The so-called Island Villa, surrounded by a moat and a colonnade, is
among the many astonishing elements of the villa. Access across bridges
leads into an intricate architectural composition of concave and convex
curves. The apparent symmetry at the center, typical of the spatial
imagination of Roman architects, feathers out toward the perimeter,

as if the architect had less and less control over the more marginal
volures—in a sense a metaphor for the Roman Empire itself. The two
bedroom suites were on the east side; the dining room on the south.
The western side was taken up by a small bathing area. At the center of
the compressed peristyle court was a fountain, its sound filtering its way
through the roorns.

The Piazza d’Oro, another element in the villa, was another tour de
force of spatial imagination. It consists of a large, nearly square peristyle
court, with a pool at its center. At the far end is a pavilion, or nymphaeum.
Its main room is composed of rounded “walls” turned concave and then
convex to form a flowing, four-armed space. These were not walls in the
strict sense, but curved colonnades that allow one to view through thern
to the adjoining spaces. The room was open to the sky. The four ancillary
spaces at the corners are all identical. The concave side leads to rooms
with fountains in the floors, whereas the one on the principal axis leads to
a curving space, the back wall of which is lined with fountains. Hadrian's
Villa shows the Roman spatial imagination at its best. Order is balanced
against complexity, as is architecture against landscape.

Lo -L et

bt. -

7.26 Fornix system of the abularium

Roman Vertical Surface
Since the Egyptians covered their temple
walls with irnages or historical reliefs, there
was no opportunity for architects to think of
the wall as anything other than a definer of
space. In Greek architecture, walls were often
hidden behind columns, and even though
the Greeks invented the pilaster in the form
of columns in antis, and sometimes even
articulated walls with shallow panels, they
never saw the wall as anything other than
a wall. But by the tire of the Colosseum,
Roman architects were beginning to
experiment with complex articulations of the
vertical surface. For the first time, the wall
became an architectural element per se. The
technique of framing arches within engaged
half-columns supporting an entablature,
called the fornix system of ornamentation
(fornix meaning “vault” or “arched room"),
dates back to about 150 BCE. The Romans
also invented the aedicule, a combination of
niche with flanking columns connected by
either a pediment or arch. In addition, they
developed the dado, a boxlike stone under
the column that allows it to be elevated.
The amphitheater in Nimes, France,
recapitulates the there, as do numerous
triumphal arches, such as the Arch of Titus
(81 CE) in Rome. Eventually, aediculae and
niches were added to the vocabulary, as can

7.27 Arch of Septimus Severus, Rome

7.28 Arch of Trajan at Timgad, Algeria

be seen at the Arch of Trajan at Timgad (10
CE), a path-breaking design. The central arch
is flanked by smaller arches surmounted by
aediculae flanked by their own columns. The
two sides are then organized by enormous
columns that reach to the top of the
aediculae and that, with the help of imposts,
rise to a level where the arches can spring
over them. The two side elements are united
by an entablature that is reduced to a thin
projection. It is perhaps a bit awkward, but
certainly kinetic.

To get a sense of the level of
experimentation that this opened up for
designers, one can turn once again to the

+—— Entablature

-——* Arched connectors
between broken entabla-
ture segments

Aediculae

Engaged columns.

Dado

rock-cut tombs of Petra in southern Jordan.
The so-called Palace Tomb, for example,
which has been variously dated to the
second half of the 1st century CE or early
2nd century, shows a stratified design, with
the lower register of four doors framed by
round-headed and pedimented aediculae
with unusual, abstracted capitals. The whole
is tied together by an unbroken entablature
on which rests a row of half-columns, the
last ones being pilasters; above that is an
accordion-style entablature with the pilaster
order shadowing its way through to the

top. The Tomb of Sextius Florentinus is
particularly refined. Above the lower register

is a pilaster order and a second set of
capitals. This interpenetration of horizontals
and verticals shows a capacity to see in the
x- and y-axes simultaneously. Such a degree
of visual cornplexity would not recur until the
Italian Renaissance.

During the 2nd century CE, richly
elaborated architectural fronts that had once
been associated with the prosceniums in
theaters sprouted forth in public spaces. This
is true of the facade of the Library of Celsus
at Ephesus (115 Ce), which stands on the
western end of a marble courtyard and is
approached by a flight of nine steps. The
three entrances, with large windows above
them, are flanked by four niches that contain
statues personifying the virtues of Celsus,
Roman senator and proconsul of Asia. In
front of the facade are four double-story pairs
of columns; the capitals of the lower story

are Corinthian, and those of the upper story,
lonic. In a further display of design skill,
the architect changed the pairing between
top and bottom. At the top, the columns
are brought together with pedimental and
rounded arches spanning the gaps. The
end columns stand almost free against the
facade.
Such displays were more than just
architectural excess. They conformed to the
Hellenistic desire for imrnediacy and were
meant to express the qualities and generosity
of the patron.
At the nymphaeum of Nimes, France,
the columnar elements form an exoskeleton
against which presses the mass of the walls.
The search for complex and imaginative
formations reaches a climax at the stage
for the South Theater in Gerasa, Jordan
(modern-day Jerash). Though the first floor
has been reconstructed without the second
floor, it shows a row of paired columns on a

socle forming a screen in front of pedimented
doorways with aedicu/ae between them. A
similarly well-thought-out scheme prevails at
the court of the Temple of Zeus at Baalbek.
Two Corinthian columns in antis work with
two pilasters to create the semblance of a
screen unit. The aediculae, roundheaded

at the bottom level and pedimented at the
top level, are squeezed in between the
pilasters, practically hiding the wall surface
behind. The theme continues in the large
niche behind the columns. The whole is tied
together by a single unbroken entablature.

Entablature

Pedimented niches
Columns in antis

Roundheaded aediculae

Pilasters

7.31 Facade detail: Court of the Temple of Zeus, Baalbek, Lebanon

7.32 Plan: Agora Baths at Ephesus

Roman Baths

Although wealthy Romans had baths in their
townhouses and country villas, the heating of
a series of rooms, or even an entire separate
building especially for this purpose, was
usually reserved for public bathhouses, which
were available in cities and towns throughout
the empire. These baths, called fhermae,
were owned by the state and often covered
several city blocks. Entrance fees were quite
reasonable and within the budget of most
free Romans. The area in these baths that
was actually covered with water was relatively
small, for the bulk of the structure was filled
by exercise spaces, lounges, and places to
stroll. Since the Roman workday began at
sunrise, work was usually over a little after
noon. At about 2 or 3 PM, men would go

to the baths, staying for several hours of
sport, bathing, and conversation, after which
they would be ready for a relaxing dinner.
Republican bathhouses often had separate
athing facilities for women and men, but

y the time of the empire, the custom was

to open the baths to women during the early
part of the day and reserve ther for men
rom 2 PM until closing at sundown.

The baths were secular spaces not
associated with altars or divine patronage.
Some of the thermal or mineral baths,
jowever, might be associated with local
river nymphs or the gods of medicine. Baths
offered an environment that was both sensual

and social. Some baths had lecture halls and
ibraries. The origin of these institutions goes

back to the beginning of classical culture and
the emphasis placed on physical fitness by
the Greeks; bathing was viewed as a part of
the hygienic rituals associated with sports.
Gymnasiums, in which sports and education
were combined, were reserved primarily for
the sons of citizens and as a place for military
training. Under Alexander the Great, however,
the baths of Greek gymnasiums became a
more social environment—and the Roman
bath even more so. In fact, few citizens

were so poor that they could not afford

the entrance fee. Aware of the beneficial

role these institutions played in the health,
education, and entertainment of the people,
the Roman state allocated considerable
resources to their maintenance. Some of
these baths, like the Baths of Caracalla and
the Baths of Diocletian, were enormous
structures, the largest public buildings in the
world. Their lavish interiors were decorated
with trophies, inscriptions, and sculptures
reflecting the reach and power of the
emperor.

The Baths of Caracalla (212-16 CE) are
recognized as the best developed example of
the Roman public bath. The main building
(200 by 114 meters) was set in an enclosure
(328 by 400 meters) that contained cisterns,
running tracks, gardens, libraries, and shops.
The facade was relatively austere and had
only a few doors; by contrast, the internal
Spaces were open and sunny. The main
pool was the natatio, or swimming pool.

WBaths of Agrippa

i Ke, e Baths of Sura
_ 47 Baths of Decius

aN

7.33 Interior scale: Baths of Caracalla, Rome

Though it had no roof, the towering walls
on all sides provided cooling shade in the
afternoon. The frigidarium was at the center
of the composition. It was covered by three
cross-vaults that soared above the level of
the surrounding rooms. Clerestory light would
have filtered down into the space. The right
and left rooms led to the pa/aestrae, the
exercise courts. Then came the tepidarium,
with small plunge baths of warm water

on both sides. The climax was a circular
caldarium 35 meters across, with large
windows in the walls. Heat was supplied by
hypocaust ducts from below.

\

Baths of Diocletian’,

ve

Baths of Constantine

* Baths of Trajan

Baths of Titus ~.

[e) lkm

ts

7.34 Locations of the baths in Rome

There are eight major public baths in Rome;
they covered a significant proportion of the
city by the time of the end of the empire:
25 CE Baths of Agrippa
64 cE Baths of Nero
80 CE Baths of Titus
104 cE Baths of Trajan
ca. 100 CE Baths of Sura
212-16 CE Baths of Caracalla
ca. 250 CE Baths of Decius
298-306 cE Baths of Diocletian
320 CE Baths of Constantine

Theater

Parts of the Roman Bath
1 Apodyterium: Dressing room/locker room “5
2 Caldarium. Main hot room
3 Frigidarium: Main cold-water hall, often
containing several unheated pools
4 Natatio. Large unheated swimming pool
Palaestra: Exercise yard
6 Tepidarium: Warm room and bath, often a 7.35 Plan: Baths of Diocletian, Rome
type of “heat lock” between the ca/darium
and frigidarium

wo

1.

7.36 Plan: Baths of Caracalla


Diocletian’s Palace

n 166 CE, Germanic tribes breached Rome's
rontier along the upper Danube, and in

172 CE, the Moors from northern Africa
invaded Spain. In 253 CE, the Franks from
the middle and lower Rhine regions began to

n 257 CE, the Goths raided Greece and Asia
Minor. Although the empire was under siege,
there were also problems within Rome itself.
n the decades before Diocletian (r. 284—
316 CE) became emperor, there had been
no fewer than twenty successive emperors
proclaimed by the senate, and at least as

many usurpers and pretenders. To restore
order in Gaul and to prevent usurpation of
the throne, Diocletian drastically changed
the governance of the empire, a move

that had profound historical implications

for the rest of Europe. He split the empire
into two, and then into two again, with his
friend Maximian serving as co-regent in the
western part of the empire. The four rulers
had their respective capitals at Nicomedia,
Greece; Mediolanum (modern Milan); Treveri
(today's Trier, Germany); and Sirmium (in
modern-day Serbia). Diocletian governed
the Asiatic part of the empire and Egypt
from Nicomedia, using the Persian model
of rulership, implementing other territorial
partitionings of the empire, and separating
military from civilian administration. Initially
these efforts were successful. In 296 CE,
Britain was restored to the empire; in 298 CE,
the Persians were subjugated, and the
Germans were expelled. Although previously
somewhat tolerant of Christianity, which was
growing in momentum, Diocletian issued an
edict in Nicomedia in 303 CE in which he
prohibited it. This brought about numerous
executions, the confiscation of property,

and the destruction of churches. On May

1, 305 CE, he abdicated and retired to the
palace he had prepared for his retirement in
Split (Spalato) on the Bay of Aspalathos, on
the coast of what is today Croatia.

Diocletian and Maximian both built
sumptuous palaces. The Piazza Armerina
(Villa Romana del Casale) by Maximian,
located in eastern Sicily near Catania, follows
some of the conventions of Hadrian's Villa,
though with less overall compositional
quality. The various elements seer to be
stuck together relatively arbitrarily around
a large open courtyard. Nonetheless, the

jaunch intermittent attacks on northern Spain.

Slavic tribes

Germanic tribes
Huns

Trever@)

Praetorian prefecture of IIlyricum

Mediolanum

Split@®

Praetorian prefecture
of Italy and Africa

Praetorian prefecture of Gaul

Oricomedia Armenia

Praetorian prefecture
of the East

Largely uninhabited desert

7.37 Reorganization of the Roman Empire into four praetorian prefects, ca. 405 CE

60-meter-long corridor, for example, depicts
incredibly elaborate hunting scenes, and
even animals such as panthers, lions, and
antelopes being loaded onto ships destined
for Rome, where they would be shown in the
great armphitheatres.

In contrast to Piazza Armerina,
Diocletian's Palace in Split, Croatia, is part
fortified camp, part city, and part villa. It is,
unlike the purposeful casualness of Piazza

composition is not without order. From a
curved entrance courtyard, the visitor turns
right into a series of slightly disjointed spaces
leading up to the audience hall at the east.
The composition is tied together by a type

of “street” running north and south linking
the principal elements of the program. The
composition looks relaxed, and purposefully
so, as if it were built up over time. The villa
contains spectacular floor mosaics. The

Guest rooms—

—Triclinium

20m

3 A fo)
L L.. a t-2 0 be

7.38 Plan: Piazza Armerina, Sicily

Emperor’

7.39 Plan: Diocletian's Palace at Split, Croatia

Armerina, a fully planned, symmetrical
statement in the form of a slightly irregular
rectangle (175 by 216 meters) protected by
walls and gates, with towers projecting from
the western, northern, and eastern facades.
Only the southern facade, which rose directly
rom the sea, was unfortified, with a long
colonnade running the whole length at the
top level. The decumanus that links the east
and west gates divides the complex into two
alves. To the south were the emperor's
quarters, both public and private. On the
other half are kitchens, stables, and storage.
The streets are lined with colonnades.
Between the main crossing and the imperial
apartments is a separate rectangular zone

for the temple and the mausoleum, an
octagonal, domed structure. The plan of

the villa is powerful in its abstraction and in
its zoning of functions. The weakest part is
probably the area of the imperial apartments,
which are reduced to a lining up of spaces
on the great terrace. From east to west, there
are the private suites with a bath, the basilica
throne room, a large reception hall, and
triclinium, followed by kitchen and service
rooms.

*

fe *
9° Wetten’s apartgptnts 9” a
fiynaeceum,* ** ”
@ e aoe

- Aaa
“Mausoleum

ye

7.40 Relative size of
Piazza Armerina and
Diocletian's Palace

bebidas

7.41 Section through the mausoleum at Diocletian's Palace

r
CYPFUS  & Baalbex
Mediterranean

7.42 Location of Baalbek, Lebanon, West Asia

Baalbek

The supreme deity of the Canaanites was El,
the sun god who also carried the bull as an
attribute. The fertility goddess Ashera was his
companion. Worshippers were not allowed to
pray directly to the couple but could use the
mediating influence of their son, Baal, the
master of rain, tempest, and thunder. This
was typical of the Hellenistic era, which saw
the emergence of several sons of deities. The
principal site of the worship of Baal was near
a natural rock fissure some 15 meters deep,
at the bottom of which was a small rock-cut
altar. Since the altar was difficult to access,
another one was constructed above it on the
hill. This was then augmented with protective
gates and towers. Eventually a temple was
added, built on a high undercroft. The
Temple of Jupiter, the final temple on that
site, was begun during the reign of Augustus
(27 BCE-14 CE); it was constructed on a
scale unknown in Rome until then. Some

of the foundation stones weighed 800 tons
and are some of the largest stones ever used
in Roman times. Nonetheless, the ternple
was not as big as some of the enormous
Hellenistic temples, such as the one at
Dydima, which sat on a podiurn 17 meters
high, with columns reaching another 22
meters. (Large size was valued in the colonies
but looked down upon by the homeland as a
sort of barbaric excess.)

Temple of Jupiter -

Temple of Venus &..

7.44 Pictorial view: Sanctuary of Jupiter Heliopolitanus

The temple's entrance was demarcated by
two buildings: a conventional U-shaped
propylaeum that was plugged into the front of
the temple (3rd century CE) and an unusual
hexagonal building (2nd century CE). The
latter had an open courtyard surrounded

by porticoes with rooms against the walls
that served various functions. It had a
showpiece facade that was a building in

its own right. Though symmetry was seen
as part of the natural order of architecture,
architects plugged different “buildings” into
each other to produce creative and unusual
structures like this one. Trajan visited the
shrine around 115 Ce to consult the oracle
before attempting to conquer the Parthians,
and it may even have influenced him in the

design of his forum back in Rome. In 195 CE,
Septimus Severus (r. 193-211 CE) bestowed
upon Baalbek the title jus ftaficum, moving
it up to the most prominent class of Roman
cities. Construction at the site continued
during the rule of Caracalla (211-17 CE), a
member of the Syrian dynasty of emperors.
Nearby is the Temple of Venus (3rd
century CE), an extraordinary building
composed of a round cella with a porch.
The cella on the exterior is ornamented by
columns attached to a scalloped entablature,
creating a dynamic play between the round
and rectilinear geometries. The building
is a testament to the ongoing formal
experimentations typical in the eastern part
of the Roman Empire. Building activity in

Baalbek was still taking place when Emperor
Constantine declared Christianity the official
religion of the Roman state in 330 CE, thus
putting an end to one of the largest and
longest building projects in the Levant.

Inner Asia was defined by specific
ecological realities. In the frozen north there
lived First Society people who specialized in
hunting and fishing. Along the vast steppe
region that spans thousands of kilometers
east to west and that in essence linked
China to Europe, there clustered dozens of
interrelated horse-centric tribes, who lived as
traders and raiders. The closer these people
got to the Silk Route, the more one tribe or
another wrested control of the flow of wealth.
Boundaries and allegiances were transitory
across the vast distances of deserts and
mountains. The Parthians and the Kushans,
for example, were continually fighting not
just an east-west battle for supremacy over
the trade routes but also a northern battle
against steppe newcomers. On the western
edge of this great continuum, in what is now
Germany and eastern Europe, there was a
robust pocket of the only agropastoralists in
the entire northern tribal belt. Once the Celts
in France had becorne Romanized, this group
of former kinsmen also came to feel the
pressure from the nomadic steppe people.
They were driven westward and finally broke
through the Roman defenses to settle in
Europe between the 4th and 6th centuries
CE. From the perspective of the Romans and
Chinese, all of these people were barbarians,
living in villages instead of cities; living by
raiding instead of farming; and housed in
yurts and thatch instead of stone, brick,
and mud brick. A description of the Huns
by the 4th-century CE historian Ammianus
Marcellinus describes them as such:

The irony was that the great urban
civilizations of Eurasia were dependent on
this vast community of horsemen; they were
the oil in the Eurasian economic engine.

None of them plough, or even touch

a plough handle; for they have no
settled abode, but are homeless and
lawless, perpetually wandering with
their wagons, which they make their
homes; in fact, they seem to be people
always in flight. Their wives live in
these wagons, and there weave their
miserable garments; and here, too,
they sleep with their husbands, and
bring up their children ... nor, if asked,
can any one of them tell you where

he was born, as he was conceived in
one place, born in another at a great
distance, and brought up in another
still more remote.

7.45 Temple of Venus, Baalbek

7.46 Cella of the Temple of Bacchus, Baalbek

<n

THE PARTHIAN EMPIRE

The Parthians took over the Hellenistic
Seleucid Empire; originally they were nomads
from northern Iran and Central Asia, but
because of their trading skills, the Parthian
Empire (247 BCE-224 CE) became the glue
that held together the vast Central Asian trade
networks. They brought with them, however,
little in the way of architectural culture, and
so for the most part adopted the Hellenist
structures before them, blending them with
their own particular aesthetic. As a result,
there is remarkably little to show for some five
hundred years of Parthian rule. Remaining
consummate and feared horsemen, they
governed as a military elite, leaving, by

and large, the local administrations intact.
here were, as a consequence, several
regional capitals. Though warfare with the
Romans and with nomadic invaders from

the north was more ar less constant, the 2nd
century was a time when the caravan cities
of Palmyra, Hatra, and Mesene (forrnerly
Characene), situated at the confluence of
the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers, grew in
wealth and influence. It was also a time in
which, given the lack of centralized authority,
different religious practices began to flourish
simultaneously. Iranian sun, fire, and mystery
cults took the place of ancient Mesopotamian
practices. Christianity, Judaism, and various
baptismal sects expanded into Mesopotamia.
Strong relations between the Parthians and
the Chinese resulted in envoy exchanges.

7.47 Horse statuette of Parthian warrior

When the Chinese envoy arrived at the
Parthian border, he was greeted by an escort
of twenty thousand horsemen. Parthian elites,
on the whole, adopted Zoroastrianism (see
400 CE), an emerging religious practice based
on fire worship. This they fused with certain
Hellenistic practices, creating fire sanctuaries
dedicated to specific divinities, saints, or
angels. Parthian fire altars served as regional
and national pilgrimage sites. One such site,
Takht-i-Suleiman, in western Iran, around
the rim of an extinct volcano with a lake at
its core, was frequently visited by the royal
elites. The most important Parthian founding
was Ctesiphon (see 400 CE), on the east
bank of the Tigris at its confluence with the
Diyala River, 32 kilorneters south of Baghdad.
Originally a garrison city, it developed into

a regional capital, as it was situated on the
so-called Royal Road, which connected

Susa with Anatolia. It is not clear when
Ctesiphon became important, but it seems
that the spoils of a large campaign against
the Rornan Empire in 41 BCE were invested
in the new capital, which had become the
winter residence of the kings after 129 BCE.
The Romans sought to take the city and did
so in 116, 165, and 198 CE, but in 224 CE,
Ardashir overthrew the Parthian monarchy
and established the Sassanian Empire, with
Ctesiphon remaining one of its capitals.

AKSUM
By the 4th century BCE, the area of what
is today northern Ethiopia had come to
enjoy a strategic position in the developing
sea trade routes between Africa and
points east in Arabia, India, and even
China. With the decline of Kush, perhaps
because deforestation led to the loss of
wood for smelting, this area, controlled
by the Aksumites and with its own vast
forest reserves (now, of course, completely
nonexistent), was primed to become a
regional powerhouse. Though Aksum was
an inland capital, its port cities, Adulis and
Matara, were cosmopolitan centers. The
rulers imported silver, gold, olive oil, and wine
while exporting luxury goods of glass crystal,
ivory, brass, and copper. Other important
exports to the Greek and Roman world were
frankincense, used in burials, and myrrh,
which had important medicinal properties.
Both these highly valued products were
obtained from the resin of particular trees
that grew mainly in the mountainous regions
of Aksum and southwest Arabia. The quality
of Aksumite metalwork in gold, silver, bronze,
and iron attests to the skill of their craftsmen.
The significance of Aksum in global trade
should not be underestimated. With the
Romans eager to seek alternative trade routes
to the East to get around the Parthians, they
had developed relationships with Petra.

, oe To Egypt
g

is
re
1D
=
WS ay
wer 8
ae
tm ate, o Meroé
.
J“
o
menne?™
one
on
we
To Africa on
e
?
epee”

Aksum, much like Petra, was a part of

this southern trade network and should be
understood in the context of developments in
India. There is little of the original Aksum left
today, apart from some impressive stelae, the
largest being King Ezana’s Stele, erected in
the 4th century CE and named after the first
monarch of Aksum to embrace Christianity.

It is decorated at its base with a false door
and apertures resembling windows on all
sides. The city was originally impressively
located in a gap between two prominent rock
outcroppings. The remains of a vast palace
and a smelting factory have recently been
uncovered.

Across the Strait of Hormuz lay the
Himyarite kingdom, or Himyar. It had
formerly traded in frankincense, but the
decline in demand for that product led to
trade in ivory exported from Africa to be sold
in the Roman Empire. Ships from Himyar
regularly traveled the East African coast,
where Himyar exerted a considerable amount
of political control over the trading cities.
Himyar was independent until taken over by
the Aksumites in 525 Ce. Aksum remained
a strong empire and trading power until the
6th century, when deforestation led to its
decline (much as it had in Kush}—a decline
accelerated by the rise of Islam and the
resulting shift in trade routes. The area's arid
geography today gives little indication of this
once lush and forested territory.

7.48 Area of Aksumite influence, 200 to 500 CE

The Aksumite religion was related to
Mesopotamian and Arabic religions insofar
as it was polytheistic: Deities were perceived
as controlling the natural forces of the
universe. In the 4th century CE, King Ezana
converted to Christianity and declared
Aksum a Christian state—the first Christian
state in the history of the world. The city
contained several large palaces that, unlike
the more rambling palaces of western Asia,
tended to be highly symmetrical. They were
approached by broad staircases that led to a
forecourt with more stairs leading to a central
throne or reception room. Construction
material was stone and brick, probably
covered with plaster. The roofs were wooden.

7.49 Plan of an Aksumite palace

Kushan Empire

Western
Satraps © sanchi
@aiaria
Satavahana
Empire
Jaggranath
Amaravati
Arabian Sea

7.50 Satavahana Empire, 200 BCE-250 CE

AMARAVATI STUPA

In the 2nd and 3rd centuries CE, South Asia
was dominated by two major dynasties: the
Satavahanas, who controlled central and
southern India, and the Kushans, who,
although having recently migrated to the
region, ended up ruling a vast area stretching
from Central Asia to northern India. The
Kushans were Mongolians who emigrated
to Gandhara in response to the building of
the Great Wall by the Qin. It was a mutually
reinforcing combination since both had
their roots in trading communities. Both
were predominantly Buddhist, although

the Satavahanas were already witnessing

a re-emergent Hinduism and the Kushans
continued to practice aspects of their older,
shamanistic beliefs. The Satavahanas called
themselves the dakshinapath-pati—“the
rulers of the southern trade route"—which
linked Egypt, controlled by the Romans,
with the Han rulers of China. The route
went from ports along the Indian Ocean

to the west, across India in a northeasterly
direction, to ports on the Bay of Bengal.
Buddhist monasteries became catalysts

for this mercantile development, serving as
resting places and transition points for the
traders. The most farnous of the Satavahana
merchant constructions, the Amaravati
Stupa (3rd century BCE), was dismantled

Bay of Bengal

in the 19th century, its artwork distributed
to the museums of Europe. Like the earlier
ones at Sanchi and Bharut, the Amaravati
Stupa, when first built under the Mauryas,
was a simple mound, but it was significantly
enlarged under the patronage of the
merchants. The elaborately carved railings
and gateways that have been preserved
depict scenes of a bustling city. Turban-
wearing people fill every panel; musicians
play for well-endowed dancers; richly
adorned women lean from barrel-vaulted
balconies; horses, bullocks, and elephants
crowd the streets, along with oxcarts. In the
distance, large ships with open sails are
ready to take to the sea.

7.52 Carved slabs from the Amaravati Stupa, near
Guntur, India

7.53 Longitudinal section: Caitya hall at Karli

CAITYA HALL AT KARLI

By the 3rd century CE, caitya halls were

eing built in several places in India. One of
the largest and most impressive was made
in 120 CE at Karli, on the western Deccan
Plateau. About 40 meters deep and 12
meters wide, the Karli sanctuary is fronted

y a recessed entrance of stone screens that
as holes in it, indicating that originally, a
larger wooden construction had been added
to complete the building. Just beyond the
screen, on the left, is a large pillar carved
rom the same matrix as the rest of the

cave. The end wall of the entrance portico
displays a stamped-out, repeated set of
jorseshoe-arched building motifs that sit
atop a plinth composed of life-size elephants,
as if they were supporting the weight of the
superstructure. The central panel of the
cave entrance is dominated by male-female
couples, known as Mithuna couples, holding
each other affectionately with a distinctive
touch of sensuality. According to one source,
Mithuna couples represent “the notion of the
individual's reintegration with the universal
principle.” The entrance panels also contain
bodhisattvas, but these were carved in the
late 5th century CE, when the iconography
was “modernized.”

Karli is famous for its interior, in part due to
its sheer size, but more so because of the
balanced and measured nature of the overall
composition of its elements through which Karli
brings the caitya vocabulary to one of its finest
resolutions. It is hard to imagine that this is a
rock-cut building, carved in essence frorn the
roof downward. The columns (fifteen on each
side) have fluted, bell-shaped capitals on which
rests a plinth that supports Mithuna couples on
elephants looking down into the space.
Compared to earlier caitya sanctuaries,
the width of Karli’s central space is much
more generous in relation to its height and
depth. The Karli stupa at the rear is no longer
the incidental center of a crowded array of
elements, but the focus of a hierarchical
composition. The stupa itself is relatively
simple in form. An unadorned hemisphere sits
atop a slightly tapered base, ornamented with
carved vedikas. At the same time, it is much
bolder than most earlier stupas, as its chattri,
rising from a rectangular base, or harmika,
expands into mushrooming tiers of horizontal
bands. But then it suddenly projects into
space on a high vertical stambha, upon which
sits the final chaftri that becomes the focus of
the entire composition. The chatiri catches the
light in the dark surroundings and appears as
a horizontal flash in the vertical composition.
(The chaittri denotes the umbrella of the
Buddhist ideal under which the monk finds
shelter and faith.)

AL

7.54 Plan: Caitya hall at Karli

7.55 Interior: Caftya hall at Karli

ANURADHAPURA

Sri Lanka may have been far from the Silk Route, but
it nevertheless contributed to trade in an important
way, since it was the primary regional source of gems,
such as rubies, that served as lightweight and easily
transportable currency. The island was also a source
of pearls, from its western shores, and cinnamon,
from the wet southern regions, the latter particularly
important as incense in Hindu rituals. Most of

these luxury goods could be produced with minimal
governance by shore-based communities. With the
arrival of Buddhism in the 3rd century BCE, however,
the drier and more sparsely inhabited northern part
of the island was turned into a rice-paddy village
world dominated by powerful, palace-centered elites
with strong mercantile interests. They transformed
rivers into a series of interconnected shallow lakes,
one feeding into the next, ending in a final, large
lake restrained by a massive dyke. With sluices

and canals, the water was then used to irrigate rice
paddies. The first of these systems was followed by
many others over subsequent centuries. Soon Sri
Lanka was exporting not only rice but also its hydro-
technological know-how throughout Southeast Asia.
Anuradhapura was at the center of this effort and
was, in fact, boldly built right below the dam of one
of the first of these great artificial lakes. The Malwaty
Oya River connected Anuradhapura to the city of
Mahathia (modern-day Manner), a major port, trading
with India, Rome, and Southeast Asia.

n the context of this booming economy that drew
in traders from all around, a sapling from the original
Bodhi tree frorn Boch Gaia, India, was brought and
planted in the palace compound at Anuradhapura,
transforming the city into a spiritual center in its own
right, one which has retained this status to this day.
Of past grand palaces of wood, only the foundations
and the stone columns of ground floors rernain,

but these are sufficient to give an indication of the
impressive scale of these lofty, multistoried buildings.
The city has at least five major stupas, each with its
own monastic complex: Thuparamaya (245 BCE);
Ruvanvelisaya (140 BCE), which stands 90 meters
high; Lankaram (85 BCE); Abhayagiri (final form 4th
century CE); and Jetavanarama (ca. 280 CE), the
largest stupa of them at all, at 115 meters in diameter
and originally 120 meters high. The stupas were
placed in square, walled compounds. The Sri Lankan

architects developed an unusual stupa type, which
was protected by a wooden domed roof supported on
stone columns. It is typified at the Thuparamaya. The
core was built in 245 BCE, but the superstructure was
added in the 7th century CE.

7.58 Pictorial section: Thuparamaya Stupa

Funerary mausoleum
of Emperor Gaozu ' |

I
]
_

Qin Xianyang

Changle Palace

\e -Mingtang-Biyong Ritual Hall

co {
iN
\ Ritual building complex \
0 XQ 5 km
es ee ae

7.59 Plan of Han Chang’an. The word chang’an means “eternal peace.”

HAN DYNASTY CHINA

By the turn of the millennium, the Han
dynasty (206 BCE-220 CE) ruled an area
larger than the Roman Empire. The Han
abandoned Shi Huangdi’s absolutism for a
more balanced philosophy of governance,
even though they held on to the Qin idea of a
unified and centralized China. Emperor Wudi
(141-86 BCE) established new commanderies
in Korea, and his conquest of Ferghana and
neighboring regions in 101 BCE gave China
control of the trade routes running through
the Taklamakan Desert, its gateway to the
west. In return for its silk and bronze, China
received wine, spices, woolen fabrics, grapes,
pomegranates, sesame, broad beans, and
alfalfa. Under the Han, poetry, literature, and
philosophy prospered, and the voluminous
Shiji C’ Historical Records"), written by Sima
Qian (145-80 BCE), set the standard for later
government-sponsored histories. By 100 CE,
trade along the Silk Route began to flourish,
with caravans reaching Luoyang almost every
month. International diplomatic exchanges

became common, including those with
Emperor Andun (the Chinese name for the
Roman emperor Marcus Aurelius Antoninus)
in 166 CE. By the 3rd century CE, paper was
widely used in China, replacing bamboo,
wood, and silk slips. Paper was exported
to Korea and Japan in the 7th century, and
then to Europe, most likely through Central
Asia and Arab intermediaries, in the 12th
century. The existence of water clocks,
sundials, astronomical instruments, and even
a seismograph in 132 CE attest to the Han's
technological and scientific sophistication.

To the north of Han territories were

the Xiongnu, who established an empire
(209 BCE-93 CE) that stretched beyond

the borders of modern-day Mongolia. The
Xiangnu were part of another nomadic
confederation known as Xianbei. By the 3rd
century CE, these various confederations,
known by the Chinese as “barbarians,” were
instrumental in establishing the eastern part
of the Silk Route. So important was this

to the Han worldview that they built their

new capital, Chang’an, at the far western
edge of their traditional territorial control. To
populate the city, around 200 BCE the Han
forcibly relocated thousands of clan families
in the military aristocracy to this region. The
purpose was twofold: First, it kept all potential
rivals close to the new emperor; and second,
it allowed the emperors to focus their energy
on defending the capital frorn invasion by the
nearby Xiongnu. This astonishing break of
geographical ties was also the first step in the
creation of an artificial—one might even say
universal and divine—imperial culture.

The site was just to the south of the by
then destroyed Xianyang, the old palace
city of the Qin. The Han even used one of
the Qin palaces, the Xingle Palace, as its
core, optimistically renaming it Changle
(Long Joy”) Palace. The shape of the new
city, with its twelve gates, was irregular, this
having to do with its siting along the river
and with certain astrological imperatives.
About half of the city was filled in with huge
palaces connected by two-story passageways
with bridges crossing the streets. The
passageways that linked the palaces allowed
the emperor to move among the palaces
unseen. As the city grew, a suburb developed
to the east. To the west of Changle Palace,
the Weiyang Palace was constructed, with an
immense audience hall. (The word weiyang
means “maintaining the dignity of the law.”)
Because the emperors lived there, this
building had a particular prominence. Like
the Qin palaces, these gigantic Han palaces
were built of wood around a solid earthen
core. The Han also constructed a major
palace complex west of the city at Shanglin
Park, along with an artificial lake, the
Kunming Chi. The lake, which symbolized the
world's oceans, had at its center the statue
of a whale. Very little survives of the vast
wooden constructions of the Han. However,
funerary objects placed in royal tombs often
contained models of structures for use in
the afterlife. These models show multistory
timber-frame watchtowers with corner piers
and upper levels generally smaller than the
lower ones, resulting in tapered profiles. At
each level, widely overhanging roofs and
balconies were supported by elaborate
bracket sets and braces.


Mingtang-Biyong Ritual Complex
If the Qin capital was designed as a
microcosm of the Chinese empire, nearby
Chang’an was designed to represent nothing
less than the heavens themselves. For the
Qin, rituals tended to include disparate
rites from China’s far-flung geography.
According to the Shiji, the sacrificial rituals,
known as zhi, were meant to be performed
on high grounds in forested areas, where
offerings were made to the four deities of the
directions, represented by the colors white,
azure, yellow, and red. The Han multiplied
the Qin rituals and offered sacrifices to the
gods of heaven and earth, mountains and
rivers, the sun and the moon, and the stars
and the planets, and they built artificial
replicas of natural altars in the capital itself.
All of this coincided with the emerging
notion of imperial power. Unlike in Europe,
where absolute power was an extension of
aristocratic privilege and military might, the
emerging Chinese tradition interpreted the
power of the emperor as dependent on the
will of the divine. His actions were seen as an
integral part of the cosmic order. It was thus
incumbent upon the emperor to perform a
certain set of rituals in order to demonstrate
that he was the rightful emperor—to validate
his own position within the system, and at
the same time, to validate the system itself.

a
cnn a

The circular moat of Biyong that defines its
outer perimeter is bridged by paths coming in
from the cardinal directions and heading into
a square enclosure, in the center of which,
on a round terrace, was the main bi-level
sacred hall, the Mingtang. The walls of the
four outer chambers were painted with colors
associated with each direction: east, green;
south, red; west, white; and north, black. The
structure was aligned with the mausoleum

of Emperor Gaozu, the founder of the Han

Annular moat (Biyong)

7.60 Plan: Mingtang-Biyong Ritual Complex,
near Xi’an, China

He was seen as the Son of Heaven, operating dynasty, which was located on the north side hh nn aie

with the Mandate of Heaven (tianming). This of the Wei River. (See plan on page 225.) ae ~ abs 3 3 pees “3 “e

mandate did not require that the emperor o vet . oe ipod ett

be of noble birth, and several dynasties a Fea sod a BD

were, in fact, founded by people of common aoa be 7; o 8 8

birth. If, however, there were trouble of any o Be i Bright Hall t . aoe

sort, bad weather, a drought, or an invasion, : ae a {Mingtang) * : 4 °

these might be signs of divine disfavor that a8 tll ; i ao

could lead to unrest. If the emperor was se Ss 2 a ¢
, weep OPT tie Bt.

overthrown, this was seen as his having : i bay bod,

lost the Mandate of Heaven. A successful dopant h a a dh Boece my oh

rebellion was thus interpreted as evidence Bw we ee ah

of that divine approval had passed on to the

successive dynasty. In principle, the system

was an incentive for rulers to rule well and oN

justly. The practice was a different matter.

In Chang’an, the ritual structures that
were at the core of this mandate were to the
south of the city. They were known as the
Biyong (“Jade Ring Moat”) and Mingtang
(“Bright Hall,” 141-86 BCE), and were
designated as the intersection of heaven
(circle) and earth (square), oriented around
the four cardinal directions.

7.61 Plan and elevation: Central structure of Mingtang-Biyong Ritual Complex

The building is a diagram of Chinese imperial
philosophy. The human realm was seen as

a land mass surrounded by water, with the
empire in the center, and with peripheral
territories occupied by barbaric people at the
edges. At the conceptual center of it all was
the emperor, who ruled by divine mandate
and was the Son of Heaven. Frorn this spot,
the calendar was regulated and its knowledge
disseminated.

Over the span of centuries, numerous
such complexes were built in the various
capital cities. Few have survived apart from
the Altar of Heaven at the Ternple of Heaven
Complex in present-day Beijing. It was built
in 1420 during the reign of the Ming dynasty
Emperor Yongle and is a circular platform
on three levels of marble stones. Twice a
year the ernperor and all his retinue would
leave the Forbidden City to encamp near
the altar. Ordinary Chinese were not allowed
to view this procession or the following
ceremony. After a highly prescribed series
of preparations, the emperor would pray to
heaven for good harvests. The ceremony had
to be perfectly completed; it was thought that
the smallest of mistakes would constitute a
bad omen for the whole nation in the coming
year.

7.62 Pictorial view: Central structure of Mingtang-Biyong Ritual Complex

7.63 Altar of Heaven, Beijing, China

Gulf of Mexico
OE Tajin
Tula
©@ ‘eotinuacan Mayas
© Monte Alban Tikal

Pacific Ocean

7.64 Influence of Teotihuacan’s empire

TEOTIHUACAN
Teotihuacan was the largest and most
impressive of America’s cities until modern
times. Located in the highlands of central
Mexico, Teotinuacan existed for a period
of eight hundred years, growing from a
large village of about 6,000 people into
a metropolis of 150,000 to 200,000
inhabitants around 600 CE, with an
urban core extending across 20 square
kilometers. It was the center of an empire
that dominated the culture and politics
of even the furthest Mayan city-states
and kingdoms. Third-century inscriptions
on stelae at Tikal and Copan record that
Teotihuacan controlled their dynasties. They
may have also influenced the mound cultures
of the Mississippi. In spite of its size an:
magnificence, little is known of Teotihuacan’s
multiethnic inhabitants. Evidence of a writing
systern is only just corning to light, most of it
seemingly destroyed when the city fell. The
city was a type of “forward capital,” insofar
as it was an exposed outpost on the northern
edge of the Mesoamerican cultural realm.
Beyond it to the north stretched the ari
wastes of the Mexican plateau. The Aztecs
were to eventually master that plateau with
their water systerns.

The Maya called the city Puh (“place
of the reeds"), but the name Teotihuacan,
“the place where men become gods,” was
given to it later by the Aztecs, who built
their own capital, Tenochtitlan, farther to the

@ Copan

south a millennium later. (The original name
is not known.) By the time of the Aztecs,
Teotihuacan, by then abandoned, was already
a place of legend and mystery. Today, there
are many ongoing debates about the nature
of the city and the purpose of its structures.
Though at its height Teotihuacan was roughly
contemporary with the early stages of the
Mayan cities located to the south, there were
distinct differences between the cultures
and, so it seems, only minor evidence of
interaction.

Archaeologists believe that a four-chambered
cave, discovered by local residents in the
early years of the 1st century BCE, marks
the beginning of Teotihuacan’s rapid
growth. Caves played an integral role in
the Mesoamerican religions; they were
considered places connected with the origin
of gods and ancestors, as well as portals to
the underworld, the world of demons and
other potent beings. The Teotihuacan lava
cave may have held particular significance,
as its four lobes could represent the four
parts of the Mesoamerican cosmos. It
became the center of a spiritual landscape
and a focal point of fire and water rituals.
But whether this was the beginning of clan
cohesion or a convenient prop for territorial
control is not known. In the 2nd century CE,
Teotihuacan’s largest pyramid, the Pyramid of
the Sun, was built directly over the cave.

The city, most of it laid out between
150 BCE and 150 CE, was organized into
quadrants, with one avenue running east-
west and the other, more important one,
running north-south. The latter, called the
Avenue of the Dead by the Aztecs, was
aligned with the sacred mountain, Cerro
Gordo, and pointed approximately 15 degrees
east of north. The width of the avenue varied,
ranging from 40 to 95 meters. A large, long
channel underneath the avenue gathered
rainwater from neighboring architectural units

ae Pw

7.65 Citadel of Teotihuacan, Mexico


. 2 hq, Pyramid of the Sun

‘3
3
®
a
a
‘S
o
|
=
g
Ea
L

0 ikm

and drained it into the Rio San Juan. The
Pyramid of the Moon, facing south, defined
the northern end of the avenue, along with
the Pyramid of the Sun, facing west, about
a kilometer down the avenue. The east-west
street was not exactly 90 degrees to the
north-south avenue, but lay 16 degrees, 30
minutes north of west, once again for reasons
having to do with astronomy. Farther south
there was a great sunken plaza known as
Ciudadela.
The Pyramids of the Sun and the Moon,
echoing the shapes of the mountains
surrounding the valley, were constructed by
hauling millions of cubic meters of sun-dried
bricks, all without the help of wheels and
beasts of burden. Beneath the pyramids
are earlier structures, perhaps the tornbs
of Teotihuacan rulers. The first to be built
was the Pyramid of the Sun. One of the
largest structures in the ancient Americas,
it was 215 meters square and some 63
meters tall. The profile as it exists today is
misleading and a product of the imagination
of its reconstructors in the early part of the
20th century, who were eager to make it too
pyramid-like. It originally consisted of four
stepped platforms surmounted by a temple
and an Adosada platform, which was built
over what was the pyramid'’s principal facade.
Its exterior was originally covered with a thick
layer of smooth plaster and was probably
painted red.

7.66 Area plan of Teotihuacan

Pyramid of the Moo

7.67 Plan: Central zone of Teotihuacan

The Pyramid of the Moon at the northern end
of the Avenue of the Dead was completed
around 250 CE. Recent excavations near the
base of the pyramid staircase have uncovered
the tomb of a male with numerous grave
goods of obsidian and greenstone, as well as
sacrificial animals. One of the most significant
tombs yet discovered at Teotihuacan, it might
indicate that even more important tornbs lie
buried at the heart of the pyramid. At the foot
of the Pyramid of the Moon, there is a plaza
(204 by 123 meters) surrounded by platforms
that in ancient times were stuccoed, painted,
and topped with temples. A low platform at
the center of the plaza and visible from all the
surrounding platforms served as an important
ritual site.

o) Citadel


7.68 The feathered serpent god (Quetzalcoatl), Teotihuacan

Temple of the Feathered Serpent

After the Pyramid of the Sun and the Pyramid
of the Moon were completed, construction
shifted to the south, where a large ritual
complex and palace compound called the
Ciudadela—a sunken plaza large enough

to hold most of the city’s inhabitants—was
centered on the Temple of the Feathered
Serpent (Quetzalcoatl). Completed in the
early 3rd century CE, the ternple is flanked

by two apartment compounds where the
city’s rulers may have lived, as well as fifteen
smaller stepped pyramids—three at its back
on the west, and four each on the other three
sides.

The initial construction phase of the
Temple of the Feathered Serpent appears to
have been marked by several mass burials
of people who were apparently sacrificed,
their hands tied behind their backs, during
the construction of the pyramid. They seem
to have been killed as part of a warfare cult
that, according to archaeoastronomers,
was regulated by the position of the planet
Venus in the heavens during its 584-day
celestial cycle. The Temple of the Feathered
Serpent may have marked the first use of
the distinctive Teotihuacan architectural
profile known as ta/ud-tablero, in which a
rectangular panel (the fablero) sits atop a
sloping panel (the fafud).

The surfaces were decorated with murals. All
the platforms at Teotihuacadn have this profile,
and its presence at other sites is generally an
indicator of Teotihuacan influence throughout
Mesoamerica. The balustrade and fab/eros
of the Temple of the Feathered Serpent
featured large, tenoned serpent heads with
low-relief bodies upon which elaborate
mosaic headdresses appear at intervals.

The headdresses, with their prominent

eyes and fangs, were integral to the military
iconography at Teotinhuacan and were used
throughout Mesoamerica.

7.69 Detail: Temple of the Feathered Serpent

By 200 CE, all major construction at the

site had been completed, and the Puh
Empire attended to building and improving
the city's residential areas. Teotihuacan’s
complex urban grid was filled with single- and
multifloor apartment compounds. This grid,
the only one known in Mesoamerica before
Tenochtitlan, the 14th-century Aztec capital,
implies a high degree of social control.

From 200 to 600 CE, Teotihuacan
continued to flourish, with long-distance
trade becorning an important factor in its
prosperity. But its success did not last.
Around 750 CE the city burned to the ground,
possibly torched by invaders frorn the city of
Cacaxtla, 210 kilometers to the east.


Moche

© Huaea del Sol / Huaca de la Luna

Nazca

© Cahuachi

Pacific Ocean

7.70 South America civilization, ca. 200 CE

MOCHE AND NAZCA CIVILIZATIONS
Two South American civilizations rose
simultaneously in Peru during this time:

the Moche on the north coast, and the
Nazca in the south. (They are known by the
current names of the rivers in whose valleys
their ruins are located.) Very little is known
about their political and social organization.
The Moche were, however, outstanding
metalworkers, and both the Moche and the
Nazca were potters and weavers.

The Moche Valley on the northern
Peruvian coast had been occupied for a
long time. The largest of the pre-Moche
settlements were made by the Salinar
(450-200 BCE). The period was one of
turmoil, and for that reason large protected
cities developed, one of which, known as
Cerro Arena, sprawls for 2 kilorneters along a
ridge on the south side of the Moche Valley,
overlooking a trade route. Its two hundred
structures made of quarried granite range
from small one-room residences to elaborate
twenty-room buildings. Strangely, the Salinar
seem not to have built any ceremonial
structures.

About 100 CE, construction began on
the ceremonial complexes of Huaca del Sol
and, 500 meters away, Huaca de la Luna,
in the center of the Moche Valley. About
ten thousand people are believed to have
lived in the neighborhood of these two huge
platform mounds. As was the tradition in

North C) Hopewell
© me
Central
QC) Teotihuacan
South QC) Moche

7.71 Urbanization of the Americas, ca. 200 CE

Mayan structures, Huaca del Sol, sited along
the river, was successively expanded; it was
rebuilt in eight stages, the last in 450 Ce.
Little remains of their gigantic pyramid (345
by 160 by 40 meters), apart fromm one edge.
But an analysis of the adobe shows that each
brick had a mark on it, generally believed to
be that of the bricks’ builders and suppliers.
This indicates the presence of a complex,
highly organized building guild or similar
social organization.

ag wee
~
a
tet me
Huaca de la Luna
a
oO font
te Gk -
Huaca del Sol . 7


In building this giant structure, the builders
decided not to construct a single piece, but
instead placed segments next to each other,
thus improving its resistance to seismic
activity. In an earthquake, the independent
sections might collapse, but the overall
structure would remain intact. The sides of
the stepped pyramid were decorated with
colorful patterns and images. The whole
was topped by small buildings that forrned
a sacred precinct. The original name of the
structure is not known.

Nearby is Huaca de la Luna, sited at the
northern base of a tall mountain. Built in
six stages, its extension (290 by 210 by 22
meters) consisted of three platforms and four
plazas. It is generally believed that Huaca
de la Luna served as the region’s paramount
shrine and the setting for ceremonies of
human sacrifice. In an enclosure behind the
temple, archaeologists found the remains
of over forty men, their bones buried in a
thick layer of sediment, indicating that they
were sacrificed during periods of heavy
rain. Sacrifices in periods of drought were
also evident. The principal deity behind
this practice was a half-human, fanged god
often shown holding a ceremonial knife in
one hand and a severed human head in the
other. The city’s main buildings were located
in the plain between the two temples.

Andean metalworking reached its
height at this time. It had developed from a
long-standing metallurgical tradition of the
Lambayeque region, with its gold, silver, and
copper mines. Gold had a special status,
not as money, but as a symbol of power.
Smiths developed elaborate techniques for
making and working the alloys, including the
equivalent of electrochemical replacement
plating: they dissolved gold in acidic solutions
so that it would attach to copper surfaces,
thus creating stronger and longer-lasting
alloys with shiny golden surfaces. The metal
was used by priests in headdresses and as
ornaments, and possibly on the surfaces of
buildings as well.

By the 7th century, the site had begun to
be abandoned. It is thought that a thirty-year
drought, in combination with devastating
mountain floods, weakened the legitimacy of
the Moche rulers.

7.73 Examples of figures from the polychrome friezes on the courtyard walls at Huaca de la Luna

7.74 Massing of Huaca del Sol

7.75 Aerial view: Nazca ground drawing, Peru

Nazca Lines

Though the origins of the Peruvian cultures
are far from clear, it seems that the Nazca
culture dates back to around 3000 BCE. It
was an oasis culture at the edge of a shore
desert. The oasis allowed a thriving culture
to develop. Citrus fruit and manioc were
grown on the plains; corn was grown at

high altitudes and stored in massive silos.
The Nazca traded up and down the coast,
as indicated by the presence in gravesites
of a special oyster shell that came from
Ecuador and was used by the elites as sacred
ornamentation. At first the Nazca people
made rock art, as was common to many
cultures worldwide, but then, making use

of the terrain, they began to draw figures in
the desert. Though large, these images were
easy to make by scraping or removing the
dark volcanic stones from the otherwise white
surface of the desert.

At first it was thought that the lines were
astronomical in nature, but more recent
excavations have shown that the lines were
made to honor the gods as part of elaborate
shamianistic rituals that focused on ancestral
memories or weather deities. Though the
images can famously be seen from high
altitude, scholars are convinced that they
were actually meant to be seen from the
west-facing slopes of the hills that served
as viewing areas for the rituals that certainly
spanned many days and were possibly even
performed with torches at night. The lines
were not empty signifiers, but paths along
which ritual participants would walk in the
context of elaborate dance ceremonies.

The drawings were made in various

phases frorn about 500 BCE to about 400 CE.
At first the drawings showed figures with large

eyes; then there was a phase when animals
appeared, serving as orientation points

for shaman “flights.” Since the monkey,
hummingbird, and spider were not local to
the region but creatures from the rain forest

to the east, the images may have been meant

to communicate with these animals in the
hope of bringing rain.

7.76 Nazca ground drawing of a spider

7.77 A Nazca figure of a monkey

Beginning around 200 CE, the area was
drying out, and the desert began to spread
up the once green and fertile slopes. The
ceremonies that served as a struggle against
the drought seem to have gotten bigger and
bigger. Animal shapes gave way to huge
geometric and linear designs, the scale of
which indicates that all the Nazca people
were now involved in these efforts, not just
the shamans, possibly in order to add weight
to the ceremonies. People came to the
pilgrimage center of Cahuachi from far afield
to participate in these elaborate rituals.
Cahuachi owes its significance to
its geographical location: because of its
geological path, the Nazca River goes
underground midvalley and emerges at a
point just below Cahuachi. In a water-scarce
region, the reappearance of the river would
have been viewed as miraculous. Cahuachi’s
adobe platform mounds are much smaller
than those of their Moche neighbors, and
they cap some forty low-lying hills overlooking
the Nazca River. Even after the Nazca people
abandoned the city in the 5th century, it
remained an important site for rituals and
burials.

NORTH AMAZON SOCIETIES

Along the border between Brazil and Bolivia,
researchers have recently discovered
evidence of mounds, earthworks, and

even a ring of megaliths used for celestial
calculations, dating to about two thousand
years ago. The ring comprises 127 granite
blocks, each about 3 meters high. This
indicates that settled societies had by this
time penetrated the Amazon rain forest along
the various rivers where fertile floodplain soil
for agriculture was available in abundance.
The people who lived here seem to have

aN

specialized in planting fruit trees, capitalizing
on the rich soil quality to survive during the
dry season and in periods of drought. An
extensive network of low, water-controlling
dams indicates the practice of fishing on a
large scale. In fact, experts now estimate that
a significant portion of lowland forests in this
area was organized to benefit humans. It has
been suggested that the diseases that came
with the arrival of Europeans wiped out this
civilization, and that the forest consumed the
physical traces.

_ ani #
- NX

7.78 Cahuachi, major pilgrimage center of the Nazca culture, Peru

Cahokia

10th century © %

Mississippi River cultures
11th century

Gulf of Mexico

7.79 Hopewell Culture

OHIO’S HOPEWELL MOUNDS

he term Hopewelf refers to a culture that
lourished along the rivers of the northeastern
and midwestern parts of North America from
200 BCE to 500 CE. At its greatest extent,

the Hopewell Culture stretched from western
lew York (including the shores of Lake
Ontario) to Missouri and from Wisconsin to
Mississippi. The largest communities were
found in the Ohio region. The Hopewell were
not an agricultural society, but lived in the
traditional way of hunting, gathering, and
gardening. Their affluence, however, came
rom their location, which supplied salt, flint,
and especially pipestone, a highly prized soft
stone that was used by Native Americans

to fashion ritual smoking pipes. A man’s
smoking pipe was one of his most important
possessions, since the communal ritual use
of tobacco was an important social activity.
Groups would travel from far afield to the
Hopewell areas to mine and collect these
materials in exchange for things that they
brought, such as copper, obsidian, and craft
goods. The economy of the Hopewell thus

Great Lakes

Hopewell Culture
3rd century

Atlantic Ocean

7.80 Copper falcon and mica hand, Hopewell

Mound Group, near Hopewell, Ohio

revolved around the intense ceremonialism of
these exchanges. They built large enclosures
in which their elaborate dances and
ceremonies took place. One of the grandest
was Newark Earthworks, which was a large
enclosure along a bend in a river that was
defined by linear mounds. It was designed

in the shape of a water spider, which was
sacred because it could navigate between the
realm of the living and that of the ancestors.
It is likely that during designated times,
thousands of people would have arrived to
participate in the ceremonies held here.
Other enclosures in nearby settlements

were in the shapes of circles, ellipses, and
trapezoids.

7.81 Hopewell pipe

The Hopewell communities also built large
mounds to mark the sites of their elaborate
funerary rituals, usually along bluffs
overlooking rivers, creating long stretches of
sacred landscapes. At Mound City, as one of
the Ohio sites is called, there are about twenty-
three mounds, each built over the remains of
a charnel house. Charnel houses were used
for both cremation and for defleshing the body,
before the whole structure was burnt down.
The Hopewellians placed artifacts, such as

copper figures, mica, arrowheads, shells, and men
pipes, in the mounds. Lenpyy, Toe
a nea Mound 25
SS aa
North Fork Paint Creek SsveeoMRNULVEHLET oe
MMU a, rats Mitta yas

Prange OM)

Poe i

7.82 Plan: Hopewell Mound Group, near Hopewell, Ohio

: Circle ,
Mound City
Small Circle
°o
ey,
)
2
ie) 500 m

Ca be

7.83 Plan: Mound City

8.1 Basilica of Santa Maria Maggiore, Rome

INTRODUCTION

n Eurasia, the period between 200 and

400 CE was noted in particular by nomadic
incursions from the steppe regions of Inner
Asia. What prompted this exodus is not
nown, but the effects were clear. The
Roman Empire was soon overwhelmed by
people the Romans called “barbarians,” but
who were mostly agropastoralists—Saxons,
Huns, Visigoths, and Franks, arnong others.
n 441-442 CE, Saxons from Germany
invaded Britain. The Visigoths took a more
southerly route, invading Italy under Alaric |
and sacking the fabled city of Rome in 410,
settling down first in southern Gaul and
eventually in Spain and Portugal, where they
founded the kingdom of the Visigoths. The
Franks were moving to the west, to eventually
set up residence in the area of modern-day
France. Meanwhile, the Huns who came to
dominate central Asia, and unified under
Attila, invaded the Eastern Roman Empire,
which was beset by internal problems such
as famine, plague, and earthquakes. In

451 CE, Attila’s forces entered Gaul and later
northern Italy. Indeed, the modern world of
Europe was founded just as much on the
legacy of the Roman Empire as it was by
these various “barbarian” tribes who came

to claim its land as their own. At first their
contribution to architecture was minimal, as

these were chieftain cultures accustomed to
village life and village needs. Houses were of
wood and thatch. In some places they took
over an abandoned Roman villa from which
in fact the word village derives.

To protect the empire, Emperor Constantine
founded a new city, Constantinople, which
was built around a fusion of Christian and
pagan motifs. Had that approach survived,
Europe today would feel more like India,
with its numerous complex hybrid religious
practices. But upon Constantine’s death
in 337 CE, Christianity became an imperial
religion, as effective in stabilizing the urban
centers as in pacifying the encroaching tribal
peoples, whom the Christians called “pagans,”
a derogatory term meaning something like
country bumpkins, and from the Christian
perspective untouched by the grace of God.

A series of synods were held—from the First
Council of Nicaea (325 CE) to others in 381,
431, 415, and 553 ce—that attempted to
establish the principles for a unified state
church. Policy was one thing, enforcement
another. The Christianization of the empire
would turn out to be a massive undertaking
that would last some seven hundred years and
would require not just that “heathen” altars
and temples be meticulously destroyed, but
that competing perspectives on Christianity be
condemned as heresies and dealt with.

8.2 Towers of Silence, Yazd, Iran

n this world of religious intensification,
Christianity injected an altogether new
concept: the martyr. Since many Christians
ad died in Rome in the previous centuries,
that city became a pilgrimage site even
though it was by now little more than a
village, located in the extensive ruins of the
former world capital. People came from afar
to visit the cemeteries where the martyrs were
uried. To accommodate the influx, churches
were built, often directly over the tombs.

One of these was St. Peter’s. In contrast to
Zoroastrianism, Buddhism, and Hinduism,
which made structures that were more or less
open-air, these buildings, needing to enclose
throngs of pilgrims, were large indoor spaces.

The prototype came from the ancient Roman
basilicas, or law courts, which were usually
long walled and columnar buildings with
heavy timbered ceilings. The symbolism of a
building type dedicated to law was not lost on
the early designers of these churches. In a
world where security and lawfulness were at
a premium, the Church could provide both,
and with a message of divine deliverance

to boot. In Roman times, lawyers, judges,
and clients set up areas in the basilica’s
colonnades to transact business. There

were no separate rooms in the building, and
so there was a good deal of coming and

going. The apse at one end was often more
a ritual formality than a site of worship. In
the Christian basilica, the space was used
altogether differently. Though the space was
vast, its main purpose was to enclose the
devotees and focus on the apse, which was
now a highly charged space directly over the
tomb. There were not chairs or pews as there
are today. Furthermore, when there was no
service, the space would often be used by
merchants and traders.

St. Peter’s was at the time the largest
interior space in the world. Of all the
churches from that era that have survived,
only Santa Maria Maggiore (432-440 Ce),
though restored, gives us some sense of the
quality of the interior. The columns lining the
aisle were not custom made but taken from
Roman buildings, the art and technology
of making such columns having been lost.
The church was built in honor of the Virgin
Mary, who represented both the imperial
ideals of classical Rome and those of the new
Christian Rome.

In Central Asia, the story of incursions
from the steppe culture is not dissimilar,
except that here the deserts and mountains
belonged to various tribes of the nomadic
Huns, such as the Kidarites and Chionites,
who set up camp in Afghanistan and

Turkmenistan to control the mountain
passes between Persia and China. They
encroached into Chinese territory, forcing the
Jin dynasty to abandon its northern areas to
a series of small, regional potentates. The
Jin moved their capital to Jiankang, about
260 kilometers to the west of modern-day
Shanghai. The division of China into northern
and southern dynasties—parallel to the
division of the Roman Empire between east
and west—would last, in fact, until 581 and
the emergence of the Sui dynasty, which
for a brief time reunited China. But in the
meantime, during this period large nurnbers
of ethnic Han Chinese migrated to southern
China (below the Yangtze River). This
sinicization transformed the south from a land
of farming communities into an area with
increasingly large urban population centers.
In India, the Gupta Empire (320-550
CE) created a buffer zone for itself by
subjugating the Persians to the north and
the Kambojas to the east. But these efforts
did not last long. Soon northern India was
to be controlled by the nomadic Hephthalite
Empire (408-670 CE), which was centered
in Bactria in present-day Afghanistan and
for a while dorninated Central Asia. The
Guptas seemingly showed little predilection
for using horse archers, despite the fact

these warriors were a main component in the
ranks of their northern enemies. Nonetheless,
in the 5th century, the Gupta Empire was

the strongest urban civilization in Asia, its
prosperity producing a period of magnificent
accomplishments in sculpture and painting,
as well as in science and poetry. The Gupta
capital was Pataliputra, adjacent to modern-
day Patna; but since it was built out of wood
and on a river that frequently overflowed its
shores, practically nothing is left, even though
it was one of the largest cities in the world
during this time, dominating the riverine trade
of the Indo-Gangetic Plain.

Though shrines in India were then mostly
made of wood, this period includes the first
attempts to translate them into stone, such
as Temple 17 at Sanchi. Its similarities to
the Greek naos and porch are unmistakable.
Perhaps more important was that during
the Gupta period, popular worship was
given formal sanction; temples and images
dedicated to the various cults began
springing up everywhere, releasing a new
generation of architectural experimentation.
The old Vedic world, which was not ternple
based, was now developing into small-scale
shrine cults that would eventually cohere into
what we today call Hinduism.

In Europe, the contestation between
monotheism (i.e., Christianity) and the
ancient animism of the Romans and

their steppe invaders has parallels to the
contestation between Buddhism and Vedism
in India, except in reverse. In India, Vedic
practices carne to dominate because they
incorporated the figure of the Buddha into
their spiritual pantheon, mostly without
sectarian violence. This was not the case

in Europe, where Christianity, though it
incorporated some local practices such

as the Christmas tree, took an aggressive
posture toward the tribal religions. Unlike the
newly Christianized Roman Empire, where
the political and religious elites sought to
unify the religious message by identifying
and repressing heresies, Hinduism unfolded
in various directions, producing a complex
tapestry of religious and architectural
responses. Apart from Jainism and other
more stand-alone religions, there is Shaivism,
with its many different schools reflecting
both regional and ternporal variations

and differences in philosophy, as well as
Vaishnavism, which is often viewed as a
synthesis of the worship of the gods Vishnu,
Narayana, Vasudeva, and Krishna. While
Shaivism developed mainly in the south and
southeast; and Shaktism in eastern India

and in some parts of southwest Malabar;
Vaishnavism, with its emphasis on Krishna,
flourished mostly in the northern and central
parts of India.

This period includes the first efforts
to commemorate the pilgrimage site
dedicated to the life of the great Buddha.
The Mahabodhi Temple in Bodh Gaya was,
however, no stupa. Though the current
building is a 19th-century reconstruction, the
basic idea of the building seems clear, even
though its form may confuse an uninitiated
observer. Unlike the stupa at Sanchi, which
is a large hemispherical solid, this building
looks like a Hindu temple. It has a tall tower,
a shikhara, which would normally represent
the geometrical model of Vishnu’s mountain
residence. The enclosed fence-shrine around
the pipal tree, located just to the west of the
east-facing temple, has similarities to the
numerous sacred trees that are associated
with Hindu temples. The same goes for
the lotus pond, which is similar to the all-
important water elernent in Hindu temples
that represent the sacred ocean. Just as
Hinduism was adopting the Buddha as an
important deity on par with Vishnu and Shiva,
Buddhist architecture here represents a type
of syncretism of its own, combining different,
often seemingly contradictory beliefs into a

8.3 Giant Buddha, Leshan, China

new whole. The uniquely Buddhist elernent of
the Mahabochi Temple is the requirement for
circumambulation around the temple, which
is not a Hindu practice.

During this time we see the expansion of
Mahayana Buddhism along the trade routes
between India and China. As Buddhism
traversed the Kushan Empire (ca. 30-375 CE)
and the Hephthalite Empire (408-670 CE),
it came into contact with Hellenism and
its legacy in figural sculpture. The Buddha
began to take on human form and was
represented in various ways as standing,
seated, or even lying down. A grand example
is the standing Buddhas at Bamiyan,
Afghanistan, located at the intersection of
the Eurasian trade routes. There, colossal
rock-cut Buddha figures were carved out of
the cliff face and then dressed and painted
to give therm a lifelike appearance. Other
examples can be found at Unjusa, Korea
(a Buddha in a supine position); and at
Leshan, China, built during the Tang dynasty
(618-907 CE), a seated Buddha 71 meters
high. The largest Buddha statue in the world
is the Spring Temple Buddha in Lushan
County, Henan, China. The statue, finished
in 2002, stands 128 meters high. Hinduism

also occasionally adopted the colossal form,
as in, for example, the large reclining figure
of Narayana, the Vedic supreme deity, at the
Udaygiri Caves, quite likely carved in the 5th
century CE in the Gupta period.

At Dunhuang (Mogao Caves), located
at the western end of the Great Wall—
where the Silk Route splits into its northern
and southern arms, winding around the
Taklamakan Desert—Buddhist monks built
one of the largest cave cornplexes in the
world. It represents part of the movernent of
rock-cut technology from India into China.
Hundreds of caves, carved out of the sheer
cliff face, show Buddha, usually seated, but
sometimes lying down. The caves initially
served as a place of meditation for hermit
monks, but soon the priests who lived here
came to function as a publishing house,
copying sutras from India for distribution
throughout China. By the 8th century CE the
caves had become a place of pilgrimage in
their own right. One could compare Mogao

Caves with the martyrium churches in Rome.

Pilgrimage had been one way in which
humans accessed the divine, perhaps since
ancient times when shamans would go to
mountains to speak to the ancestors. But

with modern religions, pilgrimages became
increasingly focused around specific sites
and were increasingly part of the popular
imagination. Places like Mogao and St.
Peter's focused on the lives of holy men and
the messages they embodied. The fact that
one person died a natural death and another
did not produced different types of ethical
and moral stances.

The other major religion of the period
was Zoroastrianism, the state religion of
the Sassanians (ca. 230-650 CE), who
dominated the Persian heartland and
ruled from Ctesiphon, of which little of its
ancient splendor is left apart from the vast
central vault of a palace most likely built
around 540 CE. It is known that artisans
of the Roman provinces and masons frorn
Byzantium helped in the building. Marble was
brought in from Syria. Zoroastrianism, with
connections to both the Hindu and Christian
worldviews, stretched from West Asia to
western China. The architectural legacy
of Zoroastrianism is less secure since the
religion was later repressed by both Islam and
Christianity. Furthermore, most Zoroastrian
buildings, like the Sassanian palaces, were
built of sun-baked mud bricks that today are

little more than dried-out wall stubs. Their
surface decoration and painting have long
since vanished. Nonetheless, across the
deserts of Inner Asia, one can still find the
occasional ruins of fire temples and dakhmas
(“towers of silence”), where the dead are
left exposed to be consumed by vultures.
Zoroastrian tradition considers a dead body to
be unclean, with the corpse demon rushing
into the body and contaminating everything
that comes into contact with it. To preclude
this potential pollution, the bodies of the
dead are placed atop a dakhma, exposing
them to the sun and to scavenging birds. The
towers are usually circular and have a flat
unroofed surface with raised walls all about.

he surface is divided into three concentric
rings: the bodies of men are arranged around
the outer ring, women in the second circle,
and children in the innermost ring. Once
the bones have been bleached by the sun
and wind, which can take as long as a year,
they are collected in a pit at the center of
the tower, where—assisted by lime—they
gradually disintegrate. This ritual precinct
may be entered only by a special class of
pallbearers. Of the various dakhmas that
still exist, the now abandoned ones in Yazd,

lran, are the grandest. The large circular
enclosures at the top of the hill are visible
for miles, as were the circling vultures that
perched on top of the walls.

Japan, during this time, had its first
encounter with centralized government,
following the ascent of the Yarnato clan. In
this period, in terms of sheer scale, nothing
competes with the Kofun in Japan. These are
tomb mounds honoring elite personages that
are clustered in a vast, sacred landscape. In
plan, they have different shapes—keyhole,
square-keyhole, round, and square—though
the reason for the differences is not known.
There are over 220 of these tornbs built
first in the Nara Basin and later in the
Osaka Plain. The extraordinary quantities of
weapons and armor discovered at Nonaka
Kofun clearly indicates the relationship of
the elites to military power, which makes
sense given the uneasy tines in China. In
total, these structures constitute the most
extensive mortuary landscape in the world,
rivaled perhaps only by the Ming dynasty
imperial tombs of the 15th and 16th
centuries. Unlike the tombs of the martyrs
in Rome, these tombs were embedded in
the ancient shamanistic worldview. Perhaps

it might be valuable to cornpare these with
other earthwork mortuary constructions, like
the Egyptian pyramids, the great tumuli of
the Europeans (from the Sth millennium BCE
to the time of the Romans), the kurgans of
the steppe people in Central Asia, and the
mortuary mound of China's First Emperor.
They all belong to the same ancestor-cult
ethos, though some were made by tribal
cultures and others by powerful elites as

a way to cement and demonstrate their
authority. The Japanese Kofun tradition and
the Ming dynasty imperial tombs were the
last great examples of this worldview in the
form of monumental architecture.

Gupta Empire
ca. 320-550 CE
ATemple at Bhitargaon

400-50 cE
A Ajanta Caves

A Mahabodhi Temple

Late Gupta period

Mid-5th to late 6th centuries CE
ATemple 17 at Sanchi
Early 5th century CE

Sixteen Kingdoms Period
304-439 CE
A Mogao Caves
Ath to 14th centuries CE

China: Eastern Han Dynasty
25-220 CE

Parthian Empire Sassanian Empire
247 BCE-224 CE 224-651 CE
APalace of Ardashir APalace at Shapur |

Period of Northern and Southern Dynasties
386-589 CE

AYungang Caves
Mid-5th to late 6th centuries CE

Kushan Empire
2nd century BCE to 3rd century CE
A Bamiyan Buddhas

ca. 224 CE

200 CE

Funan City-States

ca. 260 CE

Pyu City-States

400 cE

6th century CE

600 CE

Sri Lanka: Moriya Dynasty

est. Ist century CE ca. 100 BCE-840 CE 463-691 CE
Sri Ksetra AOc Eo ASigiriya
Ist century BCE Ist to 7th centuries CE Sth century CE

Roman Empire Western Roman Empire

Merovingian Dynasty in Central Europe

27 BCE-393 CE 393-476 CE 482-751 CE
A Basilica at Trier ASt. Sabina A St. Stefano Rotondo
ea. 310 CE 425-32 CE 468-83 CE
A Basilica of St. Peter ASanta Maria Maggiore
ca. 320 CE ca. 432 CE
A St. John Lateran A Church of the Acheiropoietos
ca. 314 CE 470 CE

Church of the Prophets A
A465 CE

Byzantine Empire
330-1453 CE
ATomb of Theodoric the Great
ca. 520 CE

Church of Acheiropoietos A

470 CE

Japan: Kofun Culture
ca. 3rd century to 538 CE

Monte Alban Culture
ca. 500 BCE-900 CE

AJANTA CAVES

In 390 CE the Gupta king Vikramaditya
arranged the marriage of his daughter
Prabhavatigupta to Rudrasena Il, the prince
of the vassal state of Vakataka, through which
went the dakshinapatha, the southern trade
route. The Vakatakas’ gratitude for their
status as guardians of the dakshinapatha is
recorded in their lavish patronage of Ajanta,
the largest assemblage of Buddhist rock-cut
caityas (meditation chambers) and viharas
(dormitories) found anywhere in South Asia.
These caityas and viharas are collectively
called caves even though they are not caves
but rock-cut architecture.

Like the Sunga period Sanchi complex,
Ajanta was a kind of college monastery,
affording accommodations for up to several
hundred teachers and pupils. Chinese pilgrim
Hsuan Tsang (Xuanzang) notes that Dinnaga,
a celebrated Buddhist author of books on
logic, resided there. Though his books are
lost, the Ajanta Caves have survived; even i
their paintings are relatively intact. Though 8.4 The cliff edge containing the Ajanta Caves near Aurangabad, India
somewhat difficult to access, the location
alongside the dakshinapatha meant that the
caves could effectively serve the needs of
oth the Mahayana Buddhist monks and
their students; the names of many of the
jatter are inscribed within the caves. As
Mahayana practitioners, Ajanta’s monks were
allowed and encouraged to create Buddha
igures and thus to propagate the concept
that many had attained nirvana even before
the historical Buddha. Since virtuous worldly
acts were a way of attaining nirvana, or
Buddhahcad, the laity’s patronage of the
Ajanta monks helped them in their own quest
for nirvana.

The Ajanta Caves are located along the
sheer rock wall of a dramatic C-shaped
chasm carved by the Waghora River. The
Waghora, a mountain stream, forces its way
into the valley and forms in its descent a
series of waterfalls 60 meters high, which
must certainly have been audible to the
monks in the caves. The thirty-odd caves

vary from 10 to 33 meters in elevation ; * rn .
above the river. The caftya window, originally oe. 0 ‘ Loom \
jot \

an imitation horseshoe-shaped wooden : 4 bo fos
window, has now been transformed into an ; . \
abstract representation of the Buddha, with
a prominent topknot and elongated “ears”

reminiscent of the ears of earlier statues of
the Buddha.


8.6 Paintings from Cave 2 at Ajanta

The columns are richly sculptured with

floral and figural representations symbolic

of the gardens where the Buddha preached
and gained enlightenment. The column
capitals and bases bulge like the folds of

the corpulent Buddha. The stupas are also
richly ornamented, with Buddha statues
attached directly to their surfaces, presaging
the eclipse of the stupa as the primary
representational element, particularly in
China and Southeast Asia. The oldest caityas
(Caves No. 9 and 10, located almost in the
middle) were relatively simple, with an apsidal
colonnade marking the circumambulatory
route around a largely unadorned stupa at
the end. However, Caves No. 19 (450 cE)
and 26 (490 CE), from the reign of Harisena,
take on Mahayana overtones. Both have

an elaborate forecourt open to the sky, with
side chambers hewn directly out of the

rock. Unlike the great caitya at Karli, whose
entrance replicates a wooden assemblage of
caityas, these are covered by large and small
Buddha figurines and stupas. No longer
imitation-wood stage sets, they are symbolic
entities in themselves.

Guntapalli

The Gupta Empire, with its capital at
Pataliputra, is considered to be the
classical age of Hindu and Buddhist art
and literature. The arts, architecture,
science, and literature were given strong
support. The decimal system, which is still
in use, was an invention of this period.
Aryabhatta’s expositions on astronomy

in 499 CE, moreover, gave calculations

of the solar year and the shape and
movement of astral bodies with remarkable
accuracy. Though the empire was relatively
decentralized, one should consider the
Gupta, the Sassanian, and the Byzantine
empires as a continuous regional unit.

if TN geeeevavsz2ey
{ \
r o P Goal e e seagate
Lomas Rsi Kondivte wipers

( “Kondana

pole

N

Koy mo 4
0 HY > 2 os no 3a word > ro) Lop
a, lo x 2 re eu
ay 70 ¥

‘ | =
tl ga anoccoasgo sun 28h

Karli : : --

8.7 Comparative plans of caitya halls, hased on drawings by Christopher Tadgell

As Mahayana Buddhism became ever more
popular, it developed a more elaborate
liturgical practice that supported a richer
artistic program. Evidence of this can be
seen in Ajanta’s viharas, which served as the
monks’ residences. Over time, the viharas
at Ajanta changed from simple dwellings

for the monks to full-fledged ceremonial
spaces, but the basic form, a rectangular
colonnaded hall preceded by a portico and
surrounded by cells, persisted. The Ajanta
viharas have a broad veranda, the roof of
which is supported by pillars that open into
a central pillared hall averaging about 6 by
10 meters. The cells open to this hall. The
number of the cells vary according to the size
and importance of the vwihara. Some of the
cells associated with particularly significant
monks were transformed into shrines with
their own votive Buddha statues {as at
Caves No. 2, 6, and 17). Some viharas even
acquired multiple stories (Cave No. 6) and
circumambulatory routes (usually defined

by a colonnaded passage). As they began to
house more ceremonies, they also became
more ornamental and decorative, with images
depicting scenes from the life of the Buddha
and from Buddhist treatises painted onto the
walls. A certain nonmonastic sensuousness
pervades the images, which are not confined

8.9 Interior of Cave No. 26 at Ajanta

to designated panels. Despite the dim light,
every surface of the vwiharas was painted over.
Art, sculpture, and architecture, in other

words, comingle to create a seamless, sensory
experience. Structural expression is denied. Like
the imitation-wood construction present in the
older caityas, the essential symbolic message of
the Ajanta viharas was to display the profound
beauty of the life and world of the Buddha and,
at the same time, underline its character as

an illusion, or maya—a fundamental doctrine

of Mahayana Buddhist practice on the path to
nirvana.

8.8 Plan: Cave No. 2 at Ajanta

8.10 Interior of Cave No. 19 at Ajanta

8.11 Interior of Cave No. 2 at Ajanta

Qizil Caves

°
©) Taklamakan Desert gaur@)ana--0°"
of eoet” Mogao Caves

we,
e,
’ “wawee™

©

Bamiyan
" Hephtalites

H
H
‘
‘
5
Ly Tibetan tribes
‘.
‘.
‘.

Xe) “2 nta Caves

Lonavata Caves
Bay of Bengal

8.12 Buddhism in Central Asia

ESTABLISHMENT OF CHINESE AND
CENTRAL ASIAN BUDDHISM
By the 6th century CE, Mahayana Buddhism
had made its way into China and Korea,
and from there crossed into Japan. Never
accompanied by the sword, Buddhism was
spread along the trade routes, benefiting
from the symbiotic relationship between
monastic monks and itinerant traders. Traffic
between China and South Asia in the 7th
century CE was heavy. (In Chinese literature,
it is India—not Europe—that is referred to as
the “Western Kingdom.”) Besides silk, which
was the prime luxury commodity, South
Asian kingdoms imported camphor, fennel,
vermilion, fine leather, pears, and peaches
rom China. The Chinese, who were muc
more self-sufficient, seemed to be interested
mostly in Buddhism. The Han emperor
Ming-di was the first to officially invite
ndian Buddhist monks to China to translate
Budghist sutras into Chinese. In 64 CE, after
the long and arduous journey, Dharmaratna
and Kasyapa Matanga arrived in Luoyang,
the new Han capital, with a white horse laden
with sutras.
The Han emperor built a monastery for
them called the Baima-si (or the White Horse
Monastery). Although the current structure
dates mostly frorn the 14th century, Baima-si
is by reference the oldest surviving ternple
of China. In the millennium after the arrival
of Dharmaratna and Matanga, hundreds of

Yungang Caves

penne tay

Longmen Caves

East China Sea

astern Jin dynasty

Southern China Sea

Indian monks came to live in China. Not as
many Chinese traveled to India, although
those who did were very well known,

even in their own time, because they kept
extensive records of their travels and actively
interpreted Buddhism for the Chinese. These
include Faxian in the 5th century CE and
Hsuan Tsang (Xuanzang) and Yi Jing in the
7th century CE, both of whom made the long
and arduous journey to South Asia and back.
Although Buddhism spread rapidly across
East Asia, its translation into relevant Chinese
concepts took time.

Buddhism, however, was only one among
many competitive intellectual traditions
prevalent in China at the time. Not everyone
was convinced that Buddhism was an
improvement over local Confucian and
Daoist principles. Confucianists, for instance,
challenged Buddhism’s inability to set out
principles of an organized social and political
order—which was, of course, Confucianism’s
strength. (Buddhism, in contrast, is
introspective and personal.) Competition
between these two divergent philosophical
traditions remained a hallmark of Chinese
history for the next two thousand years.
There were several attempts at mediation—
most famously the Qing emperor Qianlong’s
creation of a Tibetan Buddhist model of
governance, with the emperor in a central

role, in the 18th century. In general, however,

Buddhism governed the temples and

monasteries, while the court still operated on
Confucian principles. As a result, East Asian
Buddhism has a flavor different from the
Buddhism of South Asia and even Southeast
Asia.
n 400 cE, Buddhism was supported

by the Northern Dynasties (386-581 CE).

In the Southern Dynasties (420-589 CE),
Confucianism was still dominant, even
though some learned monks attempted to
make Buddhist ideas compatible with Daoist
philosophy.


Mogao Caves

Carved out of the cliffs on the western bank
of the Dunhuang River, the five hundred or so
Mogao Caves document the first millennium
of Buddhism in China, frorn roughly 300 to
1350 CE. As one would expect, the caves
are located at an important junction in the
Silk Route, right at the western end of the
Great Wall. The Silk Route breaks into its
northern and southern paths at Dunhuang.
West of Dunhuang begins, or ends, one

of the most arduous parts of the journey,
through the harsh Lopnar and Taklarnakan
Deserts. Abandoned in the 14th century,
the Mogao Caves were rediscovered in the
early 1900s, yielding a spectacular find of
fifty thousand manuscripts in just one of
the caves. Intentionally sealed in the 11th
century, this cache held thousands of copies
of sutras, letters, contracts, poems, prayer
sheets, and various official docurnents. In
some cases, there were multiple copies of
the best-known sutras, handwritten with
brushes dipped in lustrous black ink on
paper, establishing that Mogao was a critical
center for the dissemination of Buddhist
knowledge. Large quantities of these
manuscripts were distributed to Japanese
and European museums before the Chinese
government intervened and took the rest to
the national museum in Beijing. The work
of properly translating these manuscripts
and understanding their significance is still
ongoing.

wall of Cave 285, Dunhuang, China

8.14 Section through cliff at Mogao Caves

The architectural significance of the Mogao
Caves lies as much in their individual
characteristics as in their collective presence
as a marvelous city of caves. Visible from
a distance in the arid landscape are three
to five tiers of caves carved into a long cliff
face, all fairly close to one another. Some are
small niches with room enough for a single
monk to sit in meditation, whereas others
have lofty ceilings and are large enough for a
procession of a hundred or so worshippers.
Changes in dynasties marked new beginnings
in different parts of the Dunhuang cliff. The
earliest caves were simple chambers with
niches and sculptures of the Buddha.

By the Northern Dynasties period, the
caves became more complex and took
the form of short corridors leading from
the entrance hall to a transverse chamber
with a simulated gabled roof. Opposite the
entrance, the principal Buddha image was
placed against a central pillar, allowing
the worshippers, as at Ajanta, to perform
parikrama, or circumambulation, around the
central image. Cave No. 285 (539 CE) has its
sidewalls lined with niches in which monks
could sit and meditate. Cave No. 428, the
bequest of the governor of Dunhuang, Prince
Jian Ping, (565-76 CE), is one of the most
elaborate of this period, with each of the four
niches of the central pillar featuring statues
of the Buddha and three bochisattvas. The
“gabled” roof is divided into panels by bands
painted brown that mimic the structure of a
wooden hut.
Like contemporary caves in South
Asia, most of the Mogao cave walls are
covered by paintings describing the life of
the Buddha and various manifestations of
Buddhist doctrine. The predominant colors
are blue, green, red, black, white, and gold.
Stylistically, the art is an amalgam of Indic,
Central Asian, and Chinese influences,
although the overall style is far more South
Asian than is later Chinese Buddhist art and
architecture.


-. 0 25m
ars bod deed

8.15 Partial plan: Yungang cave complex, near Datong, China

Yungang Caves the stupa, as at Ajanta. In China, as the ta
Some 1,000 kilometers east of Mogao, in emerged as the dominant form, the figure of
present-day Shanxi Province, the Yungang the Buddha was inserted into the pagoda,
caves were constructed in the late 5th to either as a single colossal standing figure or
early 6th centuries CE under the imperial with several at each level. (See the discussion
sponsorship of the Northern Wei dynasty of the Mu-ta and the Guanyin-ge in 1000 CE.)

(386-534 CE). Unlike the Mogao Caves,
which were inhabited by monks on a trade
route, those at Yungang were a new type
of cave, being built adjacent to the Wei
capital of Datong. They had only a small
resident monk population and were meant
for worship, primarily by the urban population
of Datong. A Northern Wei minister ordered
the construction of the first five of the
caves. These contained colossal statues of
the seated Buddha, in the manner of the
Bamiyan, and reflect Hellenistic ideas about
uman representation. In an environment
in which imperial patronage of the Buddha
was fiercely contested, these caves may have
een intended as representations of the five
lorthern Wei ernperors as a way to compete
with Confucian ideologies or even the self-
deified emperors of the Southern Dynasties.
While most of the caves at Yungang are
focused on the image of the Buddha, one
of the caves (No. 29) has a vertical column
rising from the floor to the roof, articulated as
a multistory tower with a series of projecting
eaves. Small images of the Buddha are
located between the floors. This is an early
manifestation of the Chinese pagoda (or fa)
conceived, in Mahayana Buddhist thinking,
as a magnification of the chattris of the South
Asian stupa. Under Mahayana Buddhism,
the esoteric abstractions of the stupa were
slowly replaced by a more graphic and literal
iconography. First, the figure of the Buddha
was considered to be equivalent to the
stupa, an idea that was often expressed by
superimposing a Budcha figure directly onto 8.18 View of some of the more than five hundred Mogao Caves

8.16 Cave No. 10, Yungang 8.17 Interior, Cave No. 10, Yungang


Kushans of Bamiyan

Bamiyan was at the center of the 5th-century
CE Eurasian world. Trade routes from China,
India, and West Asia came together in this
valley, located in the middle of contemporary
Afghanistan. The site was protected by a
large Buddhist monastery, with more than

a hundred caves of various sizes carved

out of the sheer cliff face of the nearby
mountains. In their midst, separated by about
1 kilometer, the Kushan emperor Kanishka
initiated the construction of two gigantic
Buddha statues, known as the Bamiyan
Buddhas. They were completed in the 4th
and 5th centuries CE, under the Sassanians.
Colossal Buddhas, never built in India, were
a Kushan invention that was widely imitated
throughout China, Korea, and Japan for
centuries to come. In March, 2001, the
Bamiyan Buddhas, among the first of their
kind, were destroyed by the Taliban, who
perceived them as idols.

The Bamiyan cliff rises sharply at the
northwestern edge of its wide and expansive
valley. To the north toward China and to the
east toward India, the valleys approaching
Bamiyan are narrow and sharp. The
traders coming upon Bamiyan would have
encountered a dramatic change in landscape.
The traders’ attention, however, would have
been focused on the imposing sandstone
cliff that rises sharply at the northwestern
edge of a wide valley. As seen from across
the valley, the 1.6-kilometer-long cliff,
pockmarked by the caves, rises to a peak in
the middle. Behind it, one after another, rise
successive layers of the Himalayas, with the
most distant ranges perpetually clad in snow.

Even from this distance, the Bamiyan statues
would have been clearly visible and would in
that sense have conversed with the distant
Himalayan peaks.

The bodies of two Bamiyans were first
cut directly from the stone and then molded
with a mixture of mud and straw to create
the folds of the robes, the hands, and the
details of the face. The drapery was made
by suspending ropes from the stone surface
of the upper body. At the base the ropes
were held in place by wooden pegs and then
covered over with mud plaster. The entire
surface was originally painted in gold and
other bright colors. The outward expression
of the statues, in particular the folds of
the garments, has a Hellenic character.
Precedents for colossal statues date frorn
pharaonic Egypt and the Roman Empire.
Most of the smaller caves at Bamiyan were
covered with paintings, very similar in style to
those found in the caves at Ajanta.

8.21 Bamiyan and environs

Black Sea S.
>

Byzantium Armenia

Takht-i-Suleiman ro}
Merv

Sassanid Persia

@*erararia Ctesiphon
@bersepolis

&

Arabia
&

Kushan Empire
@rila
Sunga Empire

Delhi ©
© Prayaga
© Sanchi

Persian Gulf

THE SASSANIAN EMPIRE

With the weakening of the Parthian rulers,
the Sassanians asserted themselves. They
were led by Ardashir | (r. 226-41 CE), a
descendant of a line of priests serving the
goddess Anahita in Istakhr, Persis (Pars).
Unlike his predecessors, Ardashir had a
strong interest in architecture and urbanism,
and founded numerous palaces and cities.

The Hellenistic tradition of monumental
architecture was revised and given its

own Persian perspective. Ardashir rebuilt
Ctesiphon, but little remains, as it was
constructed using traditional mud brick.
Elements of a palace made by Ardashir’s
successor, Shapur | (r. 241-272 Ce), imply
that the palace was a massive complex lying
about three-quarters of a kilometer from

the western shore of the Euphrates near a
large loop in the river. Facing west, the Tag-i
Kisra is an open vault flanked by massive
walls decorated bottom to top with blind
arcades, probably painted originally in vivid
colors. The vault, known as an iwan, was a
building innovation of the later Parthian era
that is found in these Sassanian palaces
and was to remain an important typological
element in Persian architecture. Only parts
of the impressive vault remain. Spanning 28
meters, it was probably the largest vault in
ancient history. It is thought that the arch
was built without wooden supports during its
construction. The thin, unfired mud bricks
are laid on a slant, the weight transferred

to the massive sidewalls. Architecturally,

the arch is a pointed ovoid peculiar to
Mesopotamia.

8.22 Central Asia, ca. 400 cE

8.24 The only visible remains of Ctesiphon today is the great arch, Taq-i Kisra, of Khusrau’s palace.

8.25 Firuzabad and its area, Iran

Visitors to the hall during the reign of
Khusrau | (r. 531-79 CE) tell that the vast
floor was covered with a splendid “winter
carpet” of heavy woven silk adorned with
gold and jewels. Its pattern was supposed

to represent a pleasure garden with running
brooks and interlaced paths. Though never
equaled, it became the model for garden
carpets. The carpet was confiscated by
Arab conquerors when they took Ctesiphon
in 638 CE. Scornful of the display of royal
luxury, they cut it up and divided it among
their warriors. But the idea of a carpeted floor
was soon to become a permanent fixture of
Islamic mosques. The desolate area of these
ruins gives little indication of the once lush
orchards and rose gardens that surrounded
the building.

Ardashir's capital was Firuzabad, located
in an easily defensible valley. At the front of
Ardashir’s palace was another open iwan,
flanked by side chambers. To the rear were
three domed rooms, and behind them, a
courtyard and garden. The palace lay to the
south of Ardashir’s planned circular city, over
2 kilometers in diameter, at the center of
which was a large tower that, so it is thought,
served as a Zoroastrian fire temple. The
Parthians established other cities as trading
centers, such as Hecatompylos (Sahr-e
Qumis) in eastern Iran, but little remains of
their past splendor.

Zoroastrian Fire Temples

It is presumed that Zoroaster (Zarathustra)
lived around 600 BCE, but no one knows
exactly when or where he lived or died; there
remain only traditions. And there is just

as much ambiguity about the fire ternples
that were built for the faith he developed.
Fire was ranked according to its uses, from
the lesser fires of potters and goldsmiths,
through cooking fires and hearth fires, up

to the three great symbolically perceived
eternal fires of the farmers, warriors, and
priests. Zoroastrianism was opposed to the
use of images, and during the Sassanian
period, cult statues were removed, although
anthropomorphized divinities remained.
Further, Zoroastrianism does not prescribe
worshipping in a temple. Traditionally,
Zoroastrians worship individually at home, or
in the open, facing a source of light. When
they wished to worship as a community,
they did so in open-air gathering areas
around a podium where a fire was lit. These
gathering areas were usually on hillsides

or hilltops. But as the rituals and practices
became canonized, the corresponding
religious architecture was standardized, and
a complex network of temples resulted. The
role of the fire in the religious services was
mainly symbolic and served the purpose of
consecration, much as the cross does in a
Christian context. Each king in the Sassanian
world had his own royal fire. There was a
prescribed ritual for reigniting the home fire
from the city fire and the city fire from the

8.26 Central fire at the atash-gai in Surakhani,
Baku, Azerbaijan

royal fire. Rituals, together with the rites of
purification, were in essence all part of state
bureaucracy. Some have drawn parallels to
the Hindu caste society and to Mandarin
China.

It is difficult to construct a clear
architectural history of the fire temples since
only about sixty ruinous examples remain for
the entire 1,200-year period from 550 BCE
to 650 CE. At their peak, fire temples ranged
from Azerbaijan to Osh, Kyrgyzstan, on the
Chinese border. Pockets of Zoroastrian belief
still linger at Stakhra, 20 kilometers south of
Persepolis, and even as far afield as Taxila
in Pakistan. Some of the fire temple ruins
belong to the Sassanian era (224-642 CE),
during which Zoroastrianism flourished as
the official religion, but others date to the
earlier Achaemenian, Seleucid, and Parthian
periods. Many fire temples were built in
the vicinity of geothermal springs. This is
certainly the case in Azerbaijan, where
burning eruptions of gas from the numerous
mud volcanoes still light up the sky today and
are linked to the fire temples at Nush-Dzhan-
Tepe, Adurgushnaep, Surakhany, Pirallahi,
Hovsany, Shakhdag, and elsewhere. An
important fire temple site is Takht-i-Suleiman
(Throne of Solomon"), near Mt. Zindan in
southern Azerbaijan. Tradition has it that it
was thought to be the birthplace of Zoroaster.
It is a spectacular site, consisting of the
much worn crater of a former volcano that
still spews out blasts of sulfuric air. Though
little remains today, descriptions indicate that

8.27 Fire temple in modern-day Iran

the temple was in use for several hundred
years, beginning from around the 5th century
BCE. It rose to particular prominence under
the Sassanians.

An early fire temple is located near Ani,
Armenia. It has four massive pillars and no
walls. At a later period the structure was
converted into a Christian chapel by the
insertion of curved walls between its four
columns. The massiveness of the columns
suggests a stone roof, but the shape of the
roof in the reconstruction is speculative.

8.28 A Zoroastrian fire ceremony

The demise of Zoroastrianism was sudden. To
the west, Christianity vigorously suppressed

it. Islam effectively chased it from the

realm, destroying its temples and dispersing
its congregations. Today, most remaining
believers live in Hindu areas in India, with

a large community, for example, living in
Mumbai. There are also residual communities
in Iran, where there are important fire
temples in Yazd, Kerman, and Tehran.

}

8.29 Possible fire temple at Ani, Armenia

8.30 Temple 17, Sanchi, near Bhopal, India

HINDU RENAISSANCE

As Buddhism was gaining new converts
across East Asia, India saw it gradually
waning. This transition took place during
the Gupta Empire, when Buddhist practices
began to fuse with the surviving Vedic
practices of pre-Buddhist times, creating

a new and well-organized religion that we
now call Hinduism. The Gupta revival of a
transformed Vedic Hinduism was a skillful
exercise in adaptation and invention. It

was not a simple revival of pre-Budchist
Vedic practices. Rather, Vedic institutions
were reinvented to serve the purposes of
their new champions. Old fire sacrifices
were transformed into courtly ritual; oral
Vedic literatures were rewritten to integrate
contemporary social and cultural norms; and
Vedic gods were supplanted by new, more
agential and personal gods—particularly
Shiva and Vishnu. Sanskrit became the
language of the court and the medium of an
official high culture that revolved around the
reinvented institution of the temple.

Though the new Hinduism challenged
Buddhism theologically, the latter’s
institutions and practices were assimilated
into the Hindu temple. Unlike the Mauryas
and the Han Chinese, the Gupta maintained
subject kings as vassals and did not
consolidate every kingdom into a single
administrative unit. This enabled them
not only to maintain and profit from the

trade routes that were still controlled by
the Buddhists but also to exploit Buddhist
institutions for Hindu purposes. Buddhist
practices were not prohibited—in fact,
their institutions continued to thrive. The
interblending of Buddhist and Vedic cultures
was described by Fa Hein, the famous
Chinese pilgrim to the Gupta state from
399 to 414 CE. He talks of a magnificent
procession of about twenty wheeled stupas
with figures of seated Buddhas attended by
standing bodhisattvas coming to the Gupta
capital of Pataliputra, where it was received
by the Hindu Brahmins and ushered into
the city with great cerernony. By this time,
the Buddhists were themselves routinely
making stone images of the Buddha. In some
instances, a Buddhist caitya hall would be
reused for Hindu gods. And in a stroke of
genius, the Buddha himself was deified as
another manifestation of Vishnu from the
Hindu pantheon.
The basic configuration of the Hindu
temple can be seen at the so-called Temple
17 at Sanchi and the Kankali Devi at
Tigawa, both from the early 5th century CE.
Both consist of a flat-roofed garbha-griha
and mandapa, linked by a simple stepped
stylobate and architrave. The garbha-griha
(literally “womb chamber”) is usually square
and unadorned. The mandapa is essentially a
place for the worshipper.

8.31 Section and plan: Temple 17, Sanchi

In Hindu worship, the antarala (doorway or
threshold) between the garbha-griha and a
mandapa marks the all-important moment
of transition at which the worshipper and
the deity come into direct visual contact
and enact the critical transaction called
darsana ("beholding of an auspicious deity”).
Indeed, the whole temple can be considered
a two-way portal between the worlds of the
worshipper and the deity. In essence, the
deity descends into the lingam or statue
while the worshipper ascends to the sacred
threshold. The deity is considered to be
a guest in the world of the worshipper. In
a ritual called puja, the worshipper offers
the deity food (and, at times, such gifts
as clothing and ornaments) on a tray. The
pandit, or priest, who stands at the threshold
and mediates the ritual takes the food fram
the tray and touches it to the mouth of the
deity. He keeps a portion for the ternple,
returning the rest, with some additional
special food from the temple, called prasada,
for the worshipper.
Another example of an early Gupta period
Hindu temple is the brick and mud-mortar
temple at Bhitargaon (400-50 ce). Here
the garbha-griha is surmounted by a large
tapering superstructure, called the shikhara.
The shikhara marks the vertical axis in the
form of the cosmic mountain. Its purpose
is to enable the worshipper to visualize the
order of the complete universe as described


Garbha-griha

Lingam

Mandapa

8.32 Plan: Mallikarjuna Temple, Aihole, India, ca. 8th century CE

by Hindu cosmogony. A shikhara, therefore, is a three-
dimensional model of the Hindu cosmos. All temples
culminate in a finial, the conceptual center of the
structure. From there, the “cosmos” splays outward,
cascading down the building along radial lines. The
actual geometries of the shikhara are determined

by its mandala, or astrological diagram. They can
best be understood, as Adam Hardy has recently
described, as complex assemblages of mini-temples,
or aediculae, intended to depict the composite nature
of the Hindu cosmos. Shikharas are conceived of

as solid and are for the most part, even though for
structural reasons some may have internal hollows.

8.33 Lakshman Temple, Sirpur, India

8.34 Three-dimensional model of the Hindu cosmos
Based on Adam Hardy, The Temple Architecture of India
(Hoboken, NJ: Jahn Wiley & Sons, 2008).

8.35 Mahabodhi Temple, Bodh Gaya, India

MAHABODHI TEMPLE

Bodh Gaya, the garden in Gaya near Patna
where the Buddha is said to have attained
enlightenment while sitting under a pipal
tree, is one of the most venerated pilgrimage
destinations of the entire Buddhist world.
The Mahabodhi (literally “Great Buddha”)
Temple at this site was begun by Asoka,

who ordered the construction of a simple
stone platform, known as the Vajrasana
(Diamond Throne”), to mark the spot where
the Buddha supposedly sat. In accordance
with the nonrepresentational requirernents

of Hinayana Buddhism, Asoka had no other
representation or temple built at the site.

The pipal tree itself is said to have been cut
down by zealots, first in the 4th century BCE
and then again in the 7th century CE. But

a sapling from the original tree, taken to Sri
Lanka by Asoka’s daughter in the 4th century
BCE, still thrives. In the late Gupta period, the
Mahabodhi Ternple (late 5th or 6th century
CE) was constructed next to the tree. The
temple has been renovated repeatedly over
time, and it is difficult to be absolutely certain
what part of it is original to the Gupta period.
Nonetheless, its contours today are not that
different from its description by Hsuan Tsang
(Xuanzang) in 637 Ce.

Hsuan Tsang recorded that the Bodhi Tree
was enclosed by a strong, high brick wall
(originally built by Asoka) 500 paces in
circumference. Rare trees offered shade,
while fine grasses, flowers, and strange plants
covered the ground. The main gate opened
east toward the Niranjana River, while the
south gate connected to a large lotus tank,
the sacred tank where it is believed that

the Buddha spent a week. The north gate
opened into the grounds of a large monastery.
Inside there were innumerable stupas and
shrines, built as memorials by sovereigns

and high officials. In the center of the Bodhi
Tree enclosure—defined by a stone vedika or
fence (like the one around the Great Stupa

at Sanchi)—-was the Vajrasana, sandwiched
between the Bodhi Tree to its west and, to its
east, the Mahabodhi Temple, 48 meters high
and 20 paces wide.

The temple was made of bricks coated
with lime. It had tiers of niches with gold
images, its four walls were adorned with
exquisite carvings of pearls, and at its top
was a gilt-copper stupa. Hsuan Tsang also
recorded separately that south of the Bodhi
Tree was an Asokan pillar more than 30
meters high. The Mahabodhi Temple is
today clearly similar to this description. It is

surrounded by four subsidiary shrines at its
corners that were added in the 19th century.
The central chamber houses the image of the
enthroned Buddha of the temple. The brick
shikhara contains another cella at the upper
level with a secondary image of the Buddha.
Along with the Bhitargaon Temple, the
Mahabochi Ternple is among the oldest
multistory brick temples in South Asia.
Although they went out of fashion in India
once stone temples began to be constructed,
it is also possible that the development of
the Buddhist pagodas in China may have
in part been inspired by Hsuan Tsang’s

description of this temple, which was widely
circulated. The temple is not dissimilar to
the Hindu temple Bhitargaon (400-50 CE),
and indeed the Buddhist use of Hindu forms
demonstrates the experimental overlap of
uring this time.

forms

1) Bodhi Tree.“

he

Lotus pond

8.36 Plan: Mahabodhi Temple

SIGIRIYA
On the island of Sri Lanka, in 477 CE,
Kasyapa Matanga assassinated his father,
Dhatusena, and usurped the throne. But
because his brother, Mogollana, challenged
his accession and escaped to India to
amass an army, Kasyapa Matanga left the
capital city, Anuradhapura, and built for
himself a defensible palace-fortress atop
Sigiriya—a striking tabletop rock rising 370
meters over the plain. When Mogollana
returned to Sri Lanka and defeated Kasyapa
Matanga in 495 CE, he reinstalled himself at
Anurachapura, leaving Sigiriya to became a
Buddhist monastery; it rernained active until
the 14th century.
The palace and gardens would have
ranked as among the most magnificent
at that time anywhere in the world. They

were constructed on three levels: atop

the impressively scaled rock, at midlevel

on a shoulder of the rock, and on the

plain surrounding the rock. An ingenious
stair, hacked out of the cliff, connected

the various levels. The top level, with its
commanding views was designed as a series
of interconnected pavilions, cisterns, pleasure
pools and gardens. Artesian wells supply
water year-round, thus making the whole
palace possible. The midlevel structures
were built around a series of rock-cut caves
that were used by the Buddhist monks.

At the base of the hill, a huge rectangular
garden, irrigated by a system of hydraulics,

is enclosed within ramparts and moats. A
man-made lake just to the south of the rock
feeds the moats and its related canals. The
lower garden is a Zen-like blend of a strict
geometrical plan overlaid by the boulders and
other natural forms that are sprinkled across

the site. Five gates regulated entry. Entering
rom the west, there was first a square
garden with a central island that was linked
yy Causeways and surrounded by L-shaped
pools. This was followed by a long garden,
divided into two levels that included pools with
fountains fed by shallow serpentine streams.
he sequence concludes at the stairs that
lead up the rock and through a boulder
garden leading to the gigantic rock-cut claws
of a lion—thus its name, Lion’s Gate. The
western face of the rock was covered by

paintings depicting the pleasures of royal life.
Most of these paintings were destroyed once
the palace became a monastery, so that they
would not disturb meditation.

8.38 View of Sigirya from the garden

8.39 Lion’s Gate, Sigirya

Jiankang been for highly effective irrigation systems
O----.,

o — a that distributed water from the numerous
” soc .
Eastern Jigtiynasty , streams. The Pyu constructed low weirs just
aceon i below natural bends in streambeds; these
Gupta Empire ae Beixthanod FO georning” Panyu a directed part of the water into diversionary
: . o

canals that then followed the contours of the
landscape to deliver water to the fields. The
Pyu established several major towns and
cities, the principal ones being Sri Ksetra
(Thayekhittaya), which controlled the trade
routes to the south; and Beikthano and Halin
(Halingyi, near Shwebo) in the north.
Men, Sri Ksetra, which translates roughly as
Mey, “affluent holy area,” is an oval-shaped city,
Keaan@-" controlling access to the Irrawaddy River
wed delta. The city is quite large—about 3.5
srivijaya Malays kilometers across—and was at its height
during the 5th through the early 9th centuries
CE. It has some of the earliest Buddhist
shrines in Burma. Bawbawgyi, located just
outside of the town, is 60 meters tall and
has a bell-shaped body that is hollow up to

Thayekhittara

i
:
:
:
Hy
'
:
o :
anot
« Thi ton® Mon
:
Li

indian Ocean

8.40 Trade routes in Southeast Asia, ca. 400 cE

THE PYU, MON, AND FUNAN Among the earliest Buddhist civilizations about two-thirds of its height. In this respect
Southeast Asia was influenced by two related to develop in that way were the Pyu, in the it differs from most stupas in Burma, which
factors: the Indianization of its culture and central and northern regions of Burma and are typically solid and cannot be entered.
the trade routes that ran from the Bay of usually dated from about the 1st century There is an opening at the base on one side
Bengal to southern China and around the BCE to the 9th century CE, and the Mon, who and another aperture high up in the opposite
Malaysian Peninsula. China, under the were located farther to the south in Burma wall. The interior contained a ceramic vase in
Han dynasty (205 BCE-220 CE), sought to and in Thailand. The Pyu controlled the which there were twenty sheets of gold and
control the southern Silk Route, which ran trade along the Irrawaddy River, which was silver embossed with excerpts from Buddhist
through the cities of Kunming and Dali to one of the prime routes between India and manuscripts. The exterior visible today may
Burma (modern-day Myanmar) and India. China. This area is quite dry, and agricultural not reflect the original, which was probably
Around 200 CE, the Chinese established production would have been poor had it not plastered and painted.

Pany (now Guangzhou) on the Pearl River

delta for the purpose of expanding this
system of trade routes, a policy furthered by
the Jin dynasty—especially because in the
4th century CE, northern China was largely
overrun by nomadic tribes. The Jin capital at
the time was Jiankang (present-day Nanjing).
The Indianization of Southeast Asia, which
began in the 1st century CE in Burma and
reached the southern coast of Vietnam by
around 300 CE, was a complex process that
involved both Buddhism and Hinduism.

With these new religions came a temple
architecture that intermixed Indian concepts
with local traditions of woodworking. Driving
this was a luxury trade in Southeast Asian
commodities: pearls, diamonds, and gold as
well as a long list of scented woods and other
forest products.

Palace

8.41 Area plan: Thayekhittaya (Sri Ksetra), Myanmar

Cologne

Otrier

Milan
tO)
Ravenna

rome

Mediterranean Sea

8.42 Roman capitals, 4th century CE

EMERGENCE OF CHRISTIANITY

When Constantine officially recognized
Christianity in 326 CE, it did not instantly spell
the end of paganism, and many traditions
were carried over. Nonetheless, Christianity’s
monotheism, with its stress on ethical values,
imparted an authenticity to religious practice
that previously had been equaled only

by Judaism, of which it was an offspring.
Initially, Christianity might have appeared to
be just another of the numerous Hellenistic
religions and cults, such as the cults of Isis
and Dionysus, Mithraism, the Gymnosophists
of Upper Egypt, and the Theraputae of
Alexandria. Few could have predicted the
way Christian beliefs would sweep across the
Western world as it spread in the footsteps
of Roman occupation and took hold in Rome
itself. Constantine, prodded by a dream,
converted on his deathbed. From then on,
the Roman title Pontifex Maximus signified
that the Roman emperor was simultaneously
the head of the Church and the vicar of
Christ. As for the Church’s competitors,

they were folded bit by bit into the Christian
world—or condemned as heresies. The
religious pluralism that flourished in the 5th
century CE, and out of which Christianity
itself had emerged, ended by the end of the
6th century CE. Judaism alone was given
some leeway, but it, too, was under pressure.
Christians were forbidden to marry Jews, and

Empire of Attila the Hun

Black Sea

Constantinople

Nicomedia

Antioch

synagogue building stopped for the most part.

Debates raged about the nature of Christ
and his cosubstantiality with God, about the
Trinity, about Mary, about the wording and
the nature of the Eucharist, and about many
other issues.

The choice of architectural style must
also have caused considerable discussion.
One thing was clear: it was impossible for
the new religious architecture to follow in
the footsteps of temple architecture. The
wide variety of building types from the early
days of Christianity are a result of the search
for a proper fit between architecture and
liturgy. In an earlier age, a tomb could not
possibly have been mistaken for a basilica or
a bathing establishment. Roman architecture
created clearly defined architectural
environments for the various urban functions.
But by the 3rd century CE, distinctions were
rapidly disappearing and being reformulated,
as with Maxentius’s “basilica,” which was
modeled on an imperial bath building. In
early Christian architecture, when house-
churches were no longer needed, this trend
accelerated as various forms were studied
and reevaluated for their compatibility with
developing liturgical needs.

The impact of Christianity on Roman
buildings was, of course, a negative one.
The imperial forums were abandoned, and
more often than not, stones from Roman

buildings were fired in large kilns to make
lime for mortar. As late as 1606, Pope Paul V
demolished the Temple of Minerva in the
Forum of Nerva to obtain building material
for the construction of a fountain. Christian
fanatics went to Baalbek to destroy idols, but
they were initially beaten back; pagan rituals
continued there until about 380 CE. But bit
by bit, the Christian emperors tightened their
grip. The sanctuary at Baalbek was eventually
destroyed and its remnants redesigned as a
relatively humble church. The liquidation of
sculptures was so complete that not a single
example has survived. So devastating was the
destruction of the pagan world that it took a
thousand years, until the 15th century, before
interest in its existence was anything more
than fleeting.

To add to the complexity of the times,
when Constantine left Rome in 326 CE and
formally dedicated Constantinople as the
“new Rome” in 330 CE, the city of Rome
became a backwater almost overnight.
Constantine founded his new city not so
much as a Christian one, but rather as a
place where Christianity and paganism could
coexist. This was not possible in Rome,
where Christians demanded complete
allegiance from their sovereign. Seen from
the perspective of Rome, the construction
of Constantinople was a disaster. But seen
from the perspective of the eastern provinces,
it was a natural re-ascendancy. Unlike the
European parts of the empire, which were
spread out and had many different tribes
laying claim to various regions, the east was
naturally cohesive. The division of the empire
had other consequences as well, for suddenly
there was not one capital, or even four, but
actually six: along with Constantinople, there
was Antioch, Nicomedia, Milan, Trier, and
Cologne, all of which were now refurbished
as imperial residences. Milan was an imperial
residence from 353 CE onward and suddenly
became a major architectural center. Five
new churches were built; three of them stand
to this day, at nearly their full height.

In 380 CE, however, Ernperor Gratian
made Trier his residence, bringing the flow
of money to the north. Emperor Honorius
favored Ravenna and transferred the Imperial
See there in the early 5th century CE; it
became the residence of the Christianized
Ostrogoths under Theodoric (490-526 CE)
and his successors. Sumptuous new

8.43 Plan: Basilica at Trier, Germany

uildings were soon on the drawing boards.
Of Constantine’s considerable building
activities in Constantinople, however,
ittle remains. Most of what is known of
the architecture from this early period of
Christianity derives from the remnants that
ave survived in Syria and Egypt, and in
Jerusalem itself.

Without an imperial presence, Rome
ad to fend for itself. In 410 CE, the city was
sacked for three days by a band of Visigoths.
The emperor of the West, Honorius, sat
elplessly in Ravenna, and the emperor
of the East was even farther away, in
Constantinople. For protection, the Romans
ired Odoacer, a German chieftain, but in
476 CE, he proclaimed himself king, defeated
the Roman general Orestes at Piacenza, took
Ravenna, and deposed Romulus Augustulus,
arely more than a child, who was the
ast official emperor of the West until the
coronation in 800 CE of Charlemagne.

The Roman administration of Italy
continued to function under Odoacer, who
retained the chief officers of state. In 488 CE,
Zeno sent Theodoric the Great, king of the
Ostrogoths, into Italy to expel Odoacer. In
493 CE, Odoacer consented to a treaty and
was invited to a banquet where he and his
officers were assassinated, leaving Theodoric
master of Italy. Theodoric eagerly imported
the most skilled masons and mosaic artists
from the east, while adopting the conservative
Roman basilica-style plan for his churches.
But this did little to calm anxieties in
Constantinople, and in 534 CE, Justinian
sent an army to bring Italy and North Africa
into his sphere of control. In 536 CE, even

Rome was taken, but in 568 CE, the Visigoths
were back and laying waste to northern
Italy. As water poured into Rome from the
aqueducts that had fallen into disrepair, the
unused land reverted to swamps, spreading
malaria that made large parts of the area
surrounding Rome into the disease-ridden
plain that it remained until the 20th century.
In 680 CE, the bubonic plague broke out.
Rome’s population dropped from about a
million at the time of the Roman Empire to
as low as thirty thousand by the 6th century
CE. The large parts of Rome that were now
abandoned or used as farms came to be
called the disabitato ( “uninhabited areas").
It has long been held that early Christian
architecture evolved out of the atrium, or
tablinium, of the Roman houses where early
Christians met. Admittedly, until the 4th
century CE, Christian architecture as such
did not exist, as services were held in houses
and in catacombs. But the argument that the
basilica emerged out of the Roman house,
persistent in ecclesiastical circles, creates
the illusion of a linear evolution of form that
the physical evidence does not support. The

basilica that imposed a pattern on church
buildings by Constantine was the Church
of St. John Lateran, transformed from an
imperial palace in Rome in 314 CE. For this
church, the basilica was a logical choice.
Though little of the original building is left,
its form is well established. It consisted of
five aisles, the central one higher than the
others to let in light from a clerestory. Two

rows of fifteen huge columns created the
75-meter-long colonnade. The whole was

50m

8.44 Cutaway view: St. John Lateran, Rome

8.45 Interior: Basilica at Trier

covered with a wooden roof. At the end was
a large apse where the clergy would sit.
They were separated from the populace by a
columnar screen. The transept that one sees
today is a medieval addition. There were no
columnar embellishments, and the facade—
indeed, the entire outer surface—was of little
architectural significance. In fact, it would
be several centuries before the idea of a
representative facade, which had previously
been nurtured by the Romans, would return
as an important design element in Western
churches.

Though the exterior of the building might
seem primitive, the interior was opulent. The
roof beams shimmered in gold foil, and the
walls were ornamented with mosaics high
above the red, green, and yellow marble
columns of the nave. Seven golden altars
and offering tables stood in the sanctuary,
which was lit by chandeliers of gold and
silver. A hundred years later, Rome saw
the construction of St. Sabina (425-32 CE),
a mature and stately replica of St. John
Lateran. Its larger windows show a greater
familiarity with masonry construction.

Martyria

Though the city of Rome was no longer a
political or economic power, it became an
important religious and pilgrimage center
much like Jerusalem, for it had the burial
places of St. Peter, St. Paul, and other
martyrs. In making their tombs an important
part of veneration, the notion of a dark and
uneventful Hades, and the idea of death

as a privileged realm of pharaonic afterlife,
were obliterated. Tombs were perceived

as a site of reawakening on the day of the
Last Judgment, when all of humanity was to
be judged. Visiting a tornb was in a sense
an anticipation of this event. The cult was
to become such a strong part of Christian
religious folk practice that a church's
possession of even a piece of a saint's or
martyr's body, such as a finger, displayed in
a reliquary, bestowed an aura of sanctity to
the edifice. This went so far that body parts
and even entire bodies were snatched away,

such as that of St. Mark of Venice, which was

taken from Alexandria.

The precedent for this type of veneration
can be found in Buddhism, which, around
the lst century BCE, had already begun
reliquary practices—certainly an innovation
in the history of religion. This folk practice,
which apparently arose spontaneously, was
soon recognized as a boon by the Church
establishment, as it attracted the pious,
and as such was a public demonstration of
Christianity’s validity. Indeed, the new notion
of history made by simple people doing
heroic things—far different from history
as mythology or history as royal lineage—
would have a profound impact on later
developments.

St. Peter’s in Rome

Since many of the graves in Rome were

at the outskirts of the city or in cemeteries
outside the walls, the Christianization of
Rome created an entirely new geographical
profile previously unheard of in the history

of Western urbanization. The city and its
image were no longer dominated by a forum,
agora, or palace, but rather by the dozens

of monasteries, baptisteries, and churches
scattered in clusters in the farthest reaches of
the city and its environs. Whereas the Church
St. John Lateran in Rome is a basilica that
ad been established by imperial fiat as the
ficial ecclesiastical seat of the pope, the
ishop of Rome, it continues to serve as the
litical, religious, and administrative center
the Church.

eaypgazaea

St. Peter’s

Constantine founded the original church over
the tomb of St. Peter around 320 CE. Though
a basilica, St. Peter's had a slightly different
shape than St. John Lateran, reflecting its
status as a martyrium. A broad flight of stairs
led to the atrium, built on a vast platform over
the sloping ground. The platform itself was
constructed over a Roman necropolis, with
the tops of the various tomb structures cut
off and the interrnediate spaces filled in. The
church itself, because of its use, was 112
meters in length—considerably longer than
St. John Lateran. The nave can be described
as a covered street with colonnades on both
sides. The columns were not built for the
church but were taken from pre-Christian
Roman buildings. The nave became a place
where those who could afford the cost could
be buried, and the floors were soon carpeted
with graves. Part street, part graveyard, and
part sanctuary, on feast days it became

the site of boisterous family celebrations (a
practice that was eventually banned).

St. John Lateran

8.46 Christian sanctuaries outside the city walls of Rome

Transept
-
Narthex

8.47 Plan and cross-section: St. Peter's, Rome

Atrium

50m

. 8.48 Pictorial view: St. Peter’s

oe,

The rather dark nave, illuminated only by
high clerestory windows, led not to an apse,
as at St. John Lateran, but to a large transept,
which was a unique space. At its focus, over
the tomb of St. Peter in the crypt below and
just in front of the apse, was a bal/dachino,
or canopy, resting on four columns. Though
today the nave-and-transept combination
might seem common, that was not the case
in the 4th century CE. The transept only
became ubiquitous after the Carolingians
made it a central part of their churches in the
9th century CE. At St. Peter's, the transept
differentiated the more popular martyrium
church from an imperial basilica like St.
John Lateran. The building’s significance
lies in part in the difficulties involved in its
construction. The use of concrete had by
that time been forgotten, and vaulting was
thus impossible. The art of stone masonry
itself was diminished; even for a building
commissioned by the empercr, the colurnns
had to be taken from Roman buildings.
Despite these limitations, and perhaps even
because of them, the building achieved
directness and majesty—it was one of the
first buildings in the evolving Mediterranean
world that was meant from its inception to
highlight the mass appeal of the new religion.
This was no dark and intimate “house of the
gods” in the Hellenistic tradition, nor was it a
place of personal reflection in the Buddhist
sense. Rather, it was a space in which large-
scale communal ritual overlapped with the
message of irnperial glory.

See] pio

8.49 Plan: Baptistery at Ravenna, Italy

First Baptisteries
In Antioch, St. Babylas (378 CE) was
composed of four aisle-less arms with timber
roofs converging on the center square. A
baptistery was built against one of the side
arms and a sacristy against the other. These
were, of course, new types of spaces, and
they challenged the architectural form of
the basilica, which was in its Roman days
a structure without side rooms. Fitting
these spaces into the basilica scheme was B
to become a main design problem in the
coming millennium; at St. Babylas, they are
simply stapled to the side of the building.
At St. John in Ephesus (450 CE), they are .
bent around the northeast corner, whereas
at St. Mary in Ephesus (400 Ce), they were
appended to one side of the atriurn.

Baptism is one of the seven sacraments
every member of the Christian community
is subject to—as well as the first and most
important one. Without being baptized, even
an innocent baby may, after death, remain in
limbo, as it has not been cleansed of original
sin (according to St. Augustine). Because
baptism symbolizes entry into the community
of the Church, baptisteries were given special
architectural importance. Some baptisteries
were square, others rectangular; some had
apses, others none; some were vaulted,
others not. Soon, however, baptisteries
became recognizable architectural elements. I
The baptistery at Ravenna (400-450 Ce) Iq ua

8.50 Interior: Baptistery at Ravenna

aptistery

8.51 Plan: St. Babylas, Antioch, Syria

1s]
/ Bdpistery

has an octagonal plan that came to be
emulated throughout Italy and elsewhere. The
baptistery at Nocera (5th century CE), east

of Naples, has a cupola that rises directly
from a circular drum buttressed by the walls
and arches of an ambulatory defined by
column pairs. It is similar to St. Costanza

in Rome (330 CE), which was, however,

not a baptistery but rather a tomb that was
converted to a church in the 13th century.

4

50m

F Bl spe

8.52 Plan: St. John, Ephesus, Turkey

8.53 Plan: St. Mary, Ephesus

©

Ravenna

Orome

Salonica ©

Mediterranean Sea

8.54 Eastern Roman Empire

POST-CONSTANTINIAN AGE

Splitting the Roman Empire into four parts
under Diocletian in 293 CE was envisioned
as the creation of a partnership that would
increase responsiveness in case of a local
crisis within the empire. When the Christian
emperor Theodosius reformalized that
division into east and west one hundred
years later, in 395 CE, it ultimately led the
empire into a schism. The rapidly shrinking
importance of the western empire forced

it into dependency on the East—and not
without a good deal of resentment. Rome
was sacked in 410 CE by the Visigoths and
again in 455 CE by the Vandals, who had
set up their kingdom in North Africa. And
when central and northern France was lost
to the Franks after 460 Ce, northern Italy
was opened to invasion by various groups,
including the Ostrogoths; they converted
under Theodoric (495-526 CE), who set up

his rule in Ravenna. In the East, the Christian

empire remained relatively unscathed.

Nonetheless, the 5th century CE was very
different from the Constantinian age that
preceded it. The unity in theology and in
architecture that Constantine had sought
to impose on his dominions broke down,

leading to an era in which each region began

to develop its own particularities.

Black Sea

consiantinople

CILICIA
Alahan @
©

SYRIA

© Gerasa

In the East, martyria became large
freestanding structures. In the West, martyrs’
graves were enclosed within churches. The
architects in some places preferred columns,
in others piers. Some architects used
transepts; others did not. The location of
rooms like the sacristy, the archives, and the
library added further variations.

The Church of the Acheiropoietos in
Salonica (470 CE) is almost classical in its
clean lines and broad cormmand of space.
The White Monastery (Deir-el-Abiad, ca. 440
CE), not far from the city of Suhag in Egypt
(about 500 kilometers south of Cairo), takes

8.55 Plan: White Monastery (Deir-el-Abiad),
near Suhag, Egypt

Qalat Siman

Ctesiphion

on an Egyptian flavor in its compact, boxlike
shape; its various rooms include an unusual
triconch at the head. The narthex is placed
not to the west, but along the south, with

the baptistery at one end. The Church of the
Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs in Gerasa,
Jordan (465 CE), is a brilliant essay on the
theme of a square within a square. In Rome,
St. Stefano Rotondo (468-83 CE) ernbodies a
complex intersection of cross and rotunda. St.
Stefano notwithstanding, the Roman churches
tended to be the most conservative. St. Sabina
(425-32 CE) and Santa Maria Maggiore (ca.
432 CE) preserved the Constantinian tradition
of a colonnaded basilica.

Chapel of St. Catherine

at Siena ft

* Schola Cantorunt
*

8.56 Plan: St. Sabina, Rome

Burgundians  Ostrogoths

Visigoths

Mediterranean Sea
Vandals

8.57 Ostrogoth and Visigoth territories

TOMB OF THEODORIC THE GREAT

The Ostrogoths, a tribe from the Russian
steppes, had moved into Europe and settled
in northern Italy. They established a relatively
short-lived state under their king Theodoric
the Great (454-526 CE) that included, at its
zenith, Italy and the Balkans; its capital was
at Ravenna. In 402 Ce, Ravenna had become
the capital of the Western Roman Empire.
The transfer had been made primarily for
defensive purposes: the city was surrounded

8.59 Plan and section: Tomb of Theodoric the Great

by swamps and marshes. But the move
failed to hold back the Germans, who took
the city. This led the Byzantine emperor
Zeno to commission Theodoric to conquer

Italy. But once installed

, Theadoric created

his own kingdom and purposefully sought
to revive Roman culture and government as
best as he could. Theodoric converted to

a form of Christian belief called Arianism,
which held that Jesus was not equal to
God, as mainstream Christians believed,

but somewhat lesser. TI

his caused a major

controversy and increased the rift with

the Byzantines. Theodoric commissioned

architects to build a pa

lace that, though it

has not survived, is known through frescoes

to have had a colonna
columned, pedimented
The calm manner in

ed front with a four-
center.
which the large ashlar

stones and arches are articulated in the tornb

that Theodoric built for

imself (ca. 520 CE}

suggests the presence of Syrian stonemasons.
It is located 1 kilorneter from the center of
Ravenna, beyond the ancient town walls, in
an area used as a graveyard by the Goths.
Though the foundation was of concrete, the
construction itself is of dry masonry, indicating
that no mortar or cement was used. The lower
story forms a decagon containing, in each

of its sides, a recessed rectangular niche

with an arched head. Internally, it has the
shape of a cross with equal arms. The upper
floor is similar, except that it has a circular

8.58 Tomb of Theodoric the Great, Ravenna, Italy

interior. It is thought that the upper floor had

a continuous balcony all the way around,

the colurnns resting on the top of the wall

of the lower part. Since there are no stairs
leading to the upper floor and traces of an
access stairway have never been found, it is
presumed that the upper room was the funeral
chamber, to which the remains of the king
were perhaps brought by a temporary stairway.
The dome, 10 meters in diameter, consists of
a huge single piece of Istrian limestone with
twelve handles on the top, used, no doubt, to
lift the stone into place.

8.60 Mosaic depicting the palace of Theodoric the Great in his palace
chapel of San Apollinare Nuovo, Ravenna

Sea of Japan

Honshu
Japan
Inland Sea China Korea Japan
Shikoku Pacific Ocean
<yushu
8.61 Japan, Sth century cE
KOFUN PERIOD: JAPAN The horizontal strip at the top of the The first set of these tombs, which date to
In the late 5th century CE, Japan’s Yamato rectangular portion was used for rituals and the late 3rd century CE, are in Sakurai, Nara,
clan managed to wrest control over much ceremonies. These vast and costly structures where the imperial capital was located. A
of Honshu and Kyushu islands, thereby were, in essence, platforms that guaranteed second group was then built on the Osaka
establishing Japan's first royal family, a that the spirit of their owners, as viewed from Plain a bit further to the west. Since these
bloodline that has continued unbroken to this a shamanistic perspective, would have clear structures are surrounded by moats, the area
day. The Yamato centralized the government access to ancestor spirits. was subject to vast canalization to channel
and, most importantly, organized the the water to the various tombs.

production and collection of rice. Each new
king built a new palace and was buried in his
own huge earthen tornb. The tombs that the
elites built for themselves, known as Kofun,
were usually in the shape of a keyhole.

e round part held the tomb. They were
generally 100 meters long, with the largest,
the Hashihaka Tomb in Nara, measuring
almost 280 meters. The round part was
designed as a truncated cone that intersected
with an elongated stepped pyramidal form.
je reason behind the complex geometry is
not known; dozens of variations exist. The
wooden coffin was usually buried directly at
he summit, often in a pit lined with stone
jabs and rocks. Later, stone coffins were
used, and, finally, in the late Kofun period,
stone chambers with horizontal entrance
passages were constructed. These allowed
reentry into the chamber, leading to their
development as family repositories with
multiple burials.

t!
sl

8.62 Aerial view: The burial mound of Emperor Nintoku, Osaka, Japan

8.63 A Aaniwa, or funerary statue

Today the mounds are overgrown with trees,
but originally the tops were filled with clay
figures, called haniwa, that both served as
substitutes for burial sacrifices and marked
the borders of the gravesite. The slopes
were lined with stones and ornamented with
cylinders 40 to 50 centimeters in diarneter
and about a meter tall, which served as
stands for weapons and armor. They were
also lined with clay soldiers and horses,
neatly arranged in rows, that were meant
to be guardians for the journey to the spirit
world. The appearance of horses and chariots
shows the dissemination of the steppe
imaginaries and the introduction of the horse
as a symbol of power. In southern India
this period sees the emergence of the first
ceramic horse statues, also having to do with
the arrival of a militarized elite, but whether
there is a connection or not is unknown.
Certainly the Chinese were already making
ceramic horse statues during the Qin dynasty.
Kofun tombs disappeared in the 6th
century CE, probably because of the
reformation that took place in the Yarnato
court with the introduction of Buddhism.

8.64 Reconstruction of Goshikizuka Kofun, Kobe, Japan

8.65 Mozu-Furuichi Kofungun in southern Osaka, Japan

e

i
Monte Alban’

ya
‘
‘

North

Gulf of Mexico
O Mayas
Central Teotihuacan
” Olmecs —El Mirador
ae oO Zapotecs
Sweeny
TAX Yapotecs} O Tairona, Colombia
South @ Moche, Peru (north)
Early Mayans (pre-250 ce) —— 3
A +
4 Mey, O Nazca, Peru (south)

Pacific Ocean

8.66 Urbanization of the Americas, ca. 400 CE

ZAPOTECS OF OAXACA

In a valley formed by the convergence of
three mountains 480 kilometers south of
Mexico City lies the dramatic and spectacular
Zapotec capital, Monte Alban. The entire
semiarid valley of Oaxaca was inhabited

by the Zapotec people from 1500 BCE up
until the Spanish invasion. By 1000 BCE, a
Zapotec elite had emerged, with connections
to the Olmecs in the north. By 500 BCE,

the valley had an estimated twenty-five
thousand residents, making it one of the
largest population centers in America. It

was supported by several types of irrigation
projects, including artificially terraced hillsides
watered by canals fed from permanent
springs. The ubiquitous forest of today is far
different from the tended former landscape of
the Zapotecs.

The Zapotecs believed that the universe
was divided into four great quarters, each
associated with a color—red, black, yellow,
or white. The center was blue-green, which
they considered a single color. The east-
west axis of the sun was the principal axis
of their world. Their religion was animistic.
They believed that everything was alive and
deserving of respect. As in Hindu cosmology,
the Zapotecs distinguished living things from
inanimate matter by the possession of a vital
force called pee, or wind, breath, or spirit.
Pee made things move to show that they
were alive—like a bolt of lightning, clouds

O

Tiwanaku, Bolivia

8.67 Trade in the Americas, ca. 400 CE

moving in the sky, a tremor of the earth, the
wind in one’s hair, and even the foam on a
cup of chocolate. Inanimate things could

be engaged with technology, but those with
pee had to be approached with ritual and
sacrifice, especially involving something
living, like a beating heart. Zapotecs
recognized a supreme being—without
beginning or end—with whom no human
came in contact. It was never represented.
Humans did, however, interact with natural
forces, the most powerful and sacred of
which were Cociyo (lightning), the angry face
of the sky, and Xoo (earthquake), the angry
face of the earth—two of the four quadrants.
Even time was alive and considered cyclical.
The Zapotecs had two calendars—a solar
calendar with 18 months of 20 days, plus 5
days to bring it to 365; and a ritual calendar,
or piye, composed of 20 hieroglyphs or “day
signs,” which combined with 13 numbers to
produce a cycle of 260 days.

Social structure was stratified into two
layers: the commoners and the nobility. They
had different origins. Commoners were born
of cormmoners; they lived, worked, and died.
Members of the nobility were descended from
venerated ancestors; they conducted wars,
brought home captives, and were buried in
tombs from which they ascended to the sky
to become “cloud people.” Men had multiple
wives, and under ideal circumstances,
primogeniture was the law.

8.68 A “dancing” figure showing the mutilated
remains of an enemy king

8.69 Xoo: Lightning and earthquake motifs in
Zapotec culture

Monte Alban

Around 500 BCE, the Zapotec elite
constructed a new administrative center,
picking a previously unoccupied escarpment
located dramatically in the heart of the valley
of Oaxaca. The valley is composed of three
sub-valleys that join together in the shape of

a Y, with the 400-meter-high, 4-kilometer-long

escarpment more or less in the center and
visible from miles around. The city, known
as Monte Alban, was built along the terraced
slopes. It has long since disappeared;
however, the ternple precinct at the top of hill
remains. Its oldest structure is the Ternple of
the Dancers (Monumento de los Danzantes,
ca. 400 BCE), which consists of a triple set of
platforms in the southeastern corner of the
site. It is decorated by a series of “dancing”
figures, so-called because they depict men
in strange, rubbery postures as if they were
acrobats of extraordinary ability. Despite the
name, they are probably not dancing. Given
their closed eyes and exposed, mutilated
genitals (a sign of ritual humiliation), these
figures are believed to represent the earliest
set of rulers subjugated by the Zapotec elite.
Between 100 BCE and 200 CE, Monte Alban
rulers expanded their control throughout the
Oaxaca Valley and constructed a grand plaza
by leveling an area of 300 by 200 meters. It
was oriented to the cardinal directions and
paved over with white stucco.

8.71 Aerial view of Monte Alban

8.70 Monte Alban, near Oaxaca, Mexico

The huge terraced platforms that are part of
palace enclosures are on the northern and
southern ends of the plaza. The northern
platform, which was repeatedly enlarged
and modified, has two sunken patios, each
with steps and platform mounds on axis.
The southern platform, which was smaller,
was built by incorporating older platforms
into its design. The period 200 to 700 CE
finds the Zapotecs at the height of their
prosperity, and this is the phase to which

most of the surviving structures can be dated.

In the center of the plaza is a group of three
conjoined buildings facing east-west; they
were indisputably the focal temples. While the
platform of the central temple has steps on
both sides, it actually opens only to the east
and consists of a double chamber separated
by a partial wall and columns. Later Zapotec
temples had two chambers: an outer, less
sacred chamber to which worshippers could
come, and an inner, more sacred chamber
where the priests performed their rites. Those
rites included burning incense and both
animal and human sacrifice. Priests also
performed autosacrifice, offering their own
blood by piercing parts of their body. Some
rituals involved the use of hallucinogenic
mushrooms and other drugs.

There are three large complexes on the
western side of the plaza, known as L, M,
and IV, consisting of more platforms, ternples,
and enclosed forecourts. One platform
contains an internal stairway leading to the
top of the building; the stairway is reached by
an underground tunnel that passes beneath
the plaza to the central range of buildings,
allowing the priests to reach them unseen.


: ros
: nen
atom oY cand
North platform = *  *

ro : Main plaza :
ok . i
Mound Wootten Ole 4
are -
pate 3 o
wt .
1 eT
rota to uw
i, no
rye : :
oo la.
Mound L» ff ~ wav . 1
a, ~ Temple of the Dancers +

eo.

0 150m

7 8.72 Site plan: Grand Plaza of Monte Alban

One structure detached from the main group,
Building J, is a rarity in Zapotec architecture:
it is set at a 45-degree angle to the site's
main axis. Its ground plan resembles an
arrowhead, with the steps forming the blunt
end. It opens to the northeast and may have
been oriented to the bright star Capella and
used for astronomical purposes. A vaulted
tunnel crosses the front part of the structure
and leads upward.

Monte Alban re-creates the Zapotec
conceptual order on several different scales.
It is primarily the place of privilege at the
center of the cosmological landscape. The
complex also replicates, on a diminished
scale, the very relationship of the escarpment
on which Monte Alban was built to the larger
valley of Oaxaca, with the main ceremonial
temple in the middle surrounded by a
“mountainous” ring of platform mounds. The
sunken patios in the north platform repeat
the order of a valley surrounded by pyramids,
again with a central platform. Unlike the
artificial mountain volcanoes of the Olmecs,
the Zapotecs created here a miniaturized
landscape that is both a sacred geography
and its representation.

8.73 Ball court, Monte Alban

9.1 Interior: Hagia Sophia, Istanbul, Turkey

INTRODUCTION

The economic world of 600 CE was restricted
in scope. India and China were prospering,
however, and Southeast Asia, Korea, and
Japan were emerging as economic forces.
That narrow part of the world produced

perhaps 90 percent of the architectural
innovations of the time. Europe was in a state
of disarray as its lands were being carved

up by various tribes—the Visigoths, Franks,
Lombards, Saxons, Avars, and Danes, among
others. Most of these were agropastoral

village societies that produced small fortified
settlements of wooden construction. This
left the eastern part of the former Roman
Empire, Byzantium, as a relatively isolated
hotspot of cosmopolitan, urban life.
Byzantium had a leader of extraordinary
charisma, Justinian (482-565), who violently

suppressed dissent while pursuing a policy
of Mediterranean conquest. During his rule

a host of astonishing buildings appeared:

the Church of the Holy Apostles (534), SS.
Sergius and Bacchus (ca. 535), the Church
of Hagia Irene (ca. 530s), and a 140-meter-
long cistern. But nothing compared to the
Hagia Sophia, which was begun around 532.
This remarkable building, its inner finish
considerably diminished today, was the
greatest engineering marvel of the age. The
dome, the first to rival that of the Pantheon,
was completely of brick, concrete having

by now become a lost art. But its structural
sophistications were designed to be invisible
to observers, who marveled at its gilded inner
surfaces shimmering in the mottled light from
distant windows and suspended candelabras.

9.2 Interior of St. Hripsime Temple, Echmiadzin, Armenia

The Byzantine Empire, however, was not on
sure footing. A “black death,” the Plague

of Justinian (541-542 ce), killed perhaps

40 percent of Byzantium’s inhabitants

and caused the deaths of up to a quarter
of the human population of the eastern
Mediterranean. Vast stretches of territory
were left uninhabited. The long-term effects
were enormous. Justinian’s death in 578 CE
added to the problems of an empire that was
in more or less continuous battle with the
Persians and then the Arabs. The withdrawal
of large numbers of troops from the Balkans
to defend the southern borders opened the
door even more for the southward expansion
of Slavic peoples into the Mediterranean
zone. In 568 CE the Lombards invaded Italy
with little opposition from Byzantium, and
thus began the fragmentation of Italy. By
650 CE Byzantium had lost all of its southern
provinces and could from then on only bask
in its former glory.

Throughout this period, the Armenians,
remote from the pestilence of the ports,
were pushing ahead with an amazing
building campaign. They alone in the world
were still building high-end stone masonry
buildings with techniques from the Greeks.
These buildings include the Church of Saint
Gayane and the Cathedral of Mren, both
from the 630s and both three-nave domed
basilicas with an octagonal drum resting on
four internal pillars. But the greatest of these
Armenian buildings was Zvartnots Cathedral
(643-652 CE), located at the edge of the city
of Echmiadzin. It had an extraordinary plan.
he core consisted of four lobes emanating
rom triangular-shaped piers. The whole was
surrounded by a thirty-two-sided polygon,
which appears circular from a distance. Its
elevation is not known, but it is surmised to
ave risen three stories. Apart frorn copper,
the Armenians had little to offer economically,
so most of their wealth came from overland
trade. They were an important, stable lin
tween East and West. One could compare
them with the Srivijayan Empire in Southeast
Asia, which served as the link between India
and China.


Meanwhile, the Persian Sassanians in the
lranian heartland were no longer in a position
to contribute to the building arts. Their land
was in disarray largely because of rigid social
stratification, the increasing power of the
provincial landholders, and a rapid turnover
of rulers, all of which allowed the restive Arab
tribes to seek greater autonomy. By 640 CE,
the Arabs, newly united by Islam, began
to assert themselves and make impressive
territorial claims. By 651 CE, the Sassanian
Empire had collapsed and was replace by the
Rashidun Islamic caliphate (632-661 CE),
which soon stretched cross a vast territory
from Afghanistan to Morocco, and which was
succeeded by the even more wealthy and
powerful Umayyad caliphate (661-750 CE).
In India, the situation was altogether less
volatile. Despite the decline of the Gupta
dynasty in the 6th century CE, the newly
emerging small kingdoms all tried to assert
their regional control, leading to a period
of prolific temple building. One of these

kingdoms was the Pallavas in the south.
The Pallava’s wealth was generated from
trade to the east through their port city of
Mamallapuram, a sacred city and pilgrimage
site. Mamallapuram came to host an amazing
sequence of rock-cut temples carved along
the slope of a nearby hill, connected to an
artificial (though now largely dry) channel that
represents the Ganges River. It was designed
as a model of the Hindu sacred landscape
and so was just as much a religious as an
economic destination, as was typical in the
Hindu world.
In 700 CE in Mamallapuram, one of
the first stone-built buildings in India, the
Shore Temple, was constructed. It is a
type of elaboration of Dharmaraja Ratha,
located about 5 kilometers away, which was

not stone-built but one of several rock-cut
experimental temples known cumulatively
as Pancha Rathas (ca. 650 CE). These were
carved, one next to the other, to study, so it
seems, different potential ternple forms. The
Pancha Rathas experiment is unique in the

history of architecture. But what prompted
the change from rock-cut to built-up? Was
there some connection to the Armenians,
who were the best stonemasons in the world
at the time, and who in these times of trouble
were certainly leaving their homeland looking
for work? Or was it a more homegrown
transformation?

9.3 Shore Temple, Mahabalipuram, India

During this time, the process known as
Indianization was expanding India’s economic
reach into Southeast Asia, which was slowly
being transformed into a series of regional
rice-producing centers. Indianization
describes a process where monks, engineers,
and officials created temple/city communities
that slowly drew converts from among the
locals, who eventually created nascent
states. In Myanmar (Burma) along the
Irrawaddy River, we see, for example, the

rise of the Sri Ksetra kingdom, which was
settled by adherents of Theravada Buddhism,
indicating a close connection to Sri Lanka,
one of the earliest centers of rice paddy
irrigation in the world. The lucrative trade
also led to the creation, around 500 CE,

of the Srivijayan Empire near present-day
Palembang, Sumatra, in Indonesia. The
Srivijayan controlled the Straits of Malacca,
through which all ships traveling between
India and China had to pass. Along with

the Srivijayan, other states emerged, such

as Dvaravanti (more or less in modern-

day Thailand), the Chenla (more or less in
modern-day Cambodia), and the Champa
(more or less in modern-day Vietnam),

each of which was beginning to develop an
extensive rice-producing export economy and
an architecture of sacred landscapes to go
along with it.

Based on the regional strength of this
economy, T’ang dynasty China built one of
the greatest cities of the time, Daxing. The
first cities of China were what one might call
palace cities linked to a court culture and the
needs of the court. The development of the
centralized imperial government in the Han
dynasty (206 BCE-220 CE) and later in the
T'ang dynasty (618-906 CE) gave rise to large
capital cities that were metropolitan in nature,
with population concentrations of one million
or more people. These megacities have to
be seen somewhat differently from cities in
other places of the world. The concentration
of large populations into a city was a way

to keep power under imperial control. This

is true for many large cities, but unlike the
ancient city of Rome—which expanded over
time into a dense urban labyrinth with almost
no planning, despite what one might assume
about the Romans—the Chinese capitals
were designed from the outset as a spatial
imprint of imperial rule. They were low in
density, composed mainly of mud-brick and
thatch structures with gardens, pigsties, and
animal pens. In many parts the city would
have appeared as a compressed village.

For this reason, when there was a change
of imperial control, capitals were usually
destroyed and depopulated. Hundreds of
thousands of people were displaced and
resettled in new capitals. This created huge
temporal disruptions in Chinese history.

With the collapse of a single unifying

power, as during the Three Kingdom period
220-265 CE between the Han and T'ang
dynasties, three new capital cities were built.
This gave the Chinese a lot of experience

in designing cities at a great scale. The
history of the Daxing site is complex, for
Daxing is actually the third capital city on
that site. The first city, Xianyang, to the

north of the Wei River, was founded by the
Qin dynasty (221-206 BCE). Because the
city lay south of the Jiuzong Mountains and
north of the Wei River—both sunlight-rich
(yang) orientations—it was named Xianyang,
meaning “fully yang” or “the side that is full
of sun.” When the city was destroyed in a
flood in 202 BCE, the new capital, Chang'an
(“Perpetual Peace”), was built to the south of
the river by the Han dynasty. It was destroyed
in 24 BCE. Subsequent dynasties moved the
capital to Chengdu, Pingcheng, and Luoyang.
During the T’ang dynasty (618-907 CE),
Chang'an was made the capital again, this
time at a scale that was grand even for the
Chinese. It was not sited over the ruins of the
old city, but just to its south. Its name was
Daxing (“Great Prosperity") (680-904 CE).
Colloquially, it was called Chang’an, leading
to some confusion, but it was built ex nihilo.
Very little is left of Daxing except for a few
pagodas. It is a sad fate for one of the great
cities of history. Today the sprawling modern
city of Xi'an lies over the ancient capital.

One of the few remnants of Daxing is the
Giant Wild Goose Pagoda (649-683 CE) that
was originally built at a height of 54 meters

9.4 Sacred Grove at Futarasan Shrine, Nikko, Japan

and had a rammed earth core with a stone
exterior facade. After it collapsed, it was
rebuilt in brick (704), although an earthquake
in 1556 reduced its height frorn ten stories
to seven stories. One of the pagoda’s many
unctions was to hold sutras and figurines
of the Buddha that were brought to China
rom India by the Buddhist translator and
traveler Hsuan Tsang (Xuanzang). To feed
the population, the Chinese built canals that
inked in the north-south direction its various
east-west flowing rivers. The Sui dynasty
(581-618 CE) made major contributions
to that effort. It was not just rice that was
rought in from the south, but also vast
amounts of bricks and lumber.
The arrival of Buddhism in Korea in the
4th century and in Japan in the 6th century
rought with it the arrival of the monumental
architectural forms that had been developed
in China. Monks, architects, engineers, and
even bureaucrats arrived hand in hand. One
of the earliest Buddhist structures in Japan
is Yakushi-ji (Healing Buddha Temple), built
in Fujiwara-kyo, Japan's capital in the Asuka
period (538-710 CE), when Japan was ruled
by great clans and their extended families.
But whereas the story often focuses
on Buddhism, since that left a relatively
permanent architectural record, the
emergence of Japan must be viewed in
larger geopolitical terms. It paralleled the
emergence of Southeast Asia as a rice
producing/exporting area. In both cases,
rice was elevated into the status of a deity,
and in both cases powerful leaders emerged
who mastered the politics necessary to
control the intermixed realities of devotion,
production, storage, and trade, while at the
same time living at the behest and blessing
of deities whom they served. But whereas
by the 9th century the Khmer in Cambodia
would force the forest to yield to the needs
of a Hindu-based agricultural worldview, in
Japan an assimilation occurred between the
still-new rice-centric culture and the ancient

local traditions associated with Shintoism.
Shintoisrn was not replaced; it simply
expanded to include a new and powerful
deity known as Inari, the rice god. Rice
granaries, elevated on platforms, became a
form of sacred architecture, and with the rise
of imperial clans the granary rose to the level
of state symbol, with no building representing
this better than the Ise Shrine.

The word Shinto, which can be translated
as “the way of the gods,” was coined in the
19th century to identify it as a religion distinct
from Buddhism. Prior to then Shintoism was
so fundamental to Japanese life and culture
that it had no name apart from the names for
the various cultic procedures, ceremonies,
and shamanistic rituals. It was a belief system
that stretched back to early humanity and
was characterized by the worship in Japan of
kami, which can be defined as the “spirits”
of mountains, rivers, lightning, wind, waves,
trees, and even rocks. Kami and humans
exist in a shared continuum. Nonetheless, the
kami, as innate supernatural forces residing
in all things, are above the actions of man.
Certain localities, such as sacred groves,
or special stones are viewed as particularly
propitious for the meeting of humans with
the spirit of kami and are therefore held to
be sacred. There are several such groves still
existing in Japan, such as the 20-hectare
wooded area Atsuta-ku in the city of Nagoya.
Unlike modern monotheistic religious
practices, Shintoism does not require those
respecting its premises to be believers or
practitioners. There are no sacred writings,
nor is there an organized theory of death.
The spirits of the dead go to the mountains,
above the sky, below the earth, or beyond the
horizon. Living beings from this world may
visit those from the other worlds in border
areas such as cliffs, caves, and coastlines.
The deceased generally do not become
kami unless there are special circumstances
associated with their death.
Shinto's earliest formation has left no
architectural expression at all. But this
changed in the 7th century with the arrival
of Buddhists and their highly developed
architectural culture of temples and shrines.
Shinto devotion learned the lesson and so
was born the transformation of the village
granary, already sacred, to imperial symbol.
Most famous of all is the Ise Shrine. Located
in a sacred forest, it was seen as integral to
the imperial cult and serves in that capacity
even today. It is not one building but several
related structures all connected to a complex
set of calendric rituals. Only the ernperor and
the priests were allowed entry. The buildings
were unique in that they were required
to be rebuilt every twenty years using the
sacred trees from the holy mountain at
the base of which the shrine sits. For that

reason, we have a clear indication of ancient
architectural practices. Since this is the only
building in the world of such prominence
that is repeatedly rebuilt in this way, it poses
a question about the nature of time and
architecture. In a sense the buildings are
permanent, not in terms of their material but
because of the ritual rebuilding requirements.

ASS. Sergius and Bacchus

527-36 CE
A Hagia Sophia
532-37 CE

A St. Vitale, Ravenna

538-45 CE

Byzantine Empire
330-1453 CE

A Zvartnots Cathedral
Begun 643 CE
A St. Hripsime Church
7th Century CE

India: Rise of regional states
500-1300 cE

A Vishnu Temple at Deogarh

Early 6th century CE

A Five Rathas
7th century CE

A Shore Temple at Mamallapuram
700-728 CE

A Cave of Shiva at Elephanta

540-755 CE

400 CE

A My Son
Ath to 14th centuries cE

Period of Northern and Southern Dynasties
386-589 CE
A Songyue Temple Ta
523 CE

Kofun Culture
ca. 3rd century to 538 CE

600 CE 800 CE

T'ang Dynasty
618-907 CE
A Daming Palace
Begun 634 CE
A Wild Goose Pagoda
7th century CE

Asuka period in Japan
ca. 538-710 CE
A Horyu-ji Temple
7th century CE

Nara period in Japan
710-794 CE

A Ise Shrine
Rebuilt every twenty years since ca. 690 CE

Britannia
Saxons
Lombards, 690 ce Magyars
Frankish Avars, 680 ce
kingdom
Bulgars, 920 ce Khazar
khanate
Kingdom
of Italy

Arabs, 732 ce

9.5 Justinian Europe, showing movements ca. 600 CE

AGE OF JUSTINIAN

The time period between Constantine

the Great (272-337 CE) and Justinian
(483-565 CE) was one of consolidation. For
Justinian, the Romanum Imperium was to

be identified with the Christian ofkourmene
(the known inhabited areas of the world),
and the triumph of Christianity was as

sacred a mission as the restoration of Roman
supremacy. To this end, he reintroduced
Roman law, but with the dogmatic primacy
peculiar to the Christian religion. All other
religions were denied legal protection. Pagan
temples were torn down and strict laws
passed to consolidate and unify the Christian
domination of the empire. In 529 CE,
Justinian closed the Academy in Athens,
largely to stem the multiplication of ideas and
theories in theological debates and to enforce
a unified doctrine. Many of its scholars had
to seek refuge in Persia, taking with them the
fruits of Greek learning.

Justinian was able to recover Italy and
Africa. Bridges, fortifications, aqueducts,
churches, markets, and whole cities sprang
up in the wake of his conquests. But the
situation was tenuous. Eastern Europe was
still in turmoil, with the Avars and Bulgars
moving into Greece and the Lombards
into northern Italy. The newly Christianized

Byzantine Empire

x

Persians
620 ce
Umayyad caliphate

Frankish kingdom, along with Italy, formed
only a thin civilizational wedge into a still
barbaric Europe. Newly developing, however,
were trade links up the Volga River into the
Russian steppe, facilitating trade that had
become disrupted by the advances of the
Islamic armies.

An excellent example of Justinian’s
architecture can be seen in Constantinople
in the church dedicated to Sergius and
Bacchus, two soldiers in the Roman
army who were martyred in the early 4th
century CE and became the official patrons of
the Byzantine armies. Certain changes to its
environs should, however, be kept in mind.
The building, now a freestanding structure,
was originally part of a larger complex that
included Justinian’s private residence and
palace. Furthermore, the slightly thicker walls
to the south belonged to another church
dedicated to St. Peter and St. Paul, begun in
518 CE and built by Justinian’s uncle, Justin
|. When Justinian became Caesar in 525 CE,
he appended the new construction onto that
one.

The two churches were connected at
ground level by means of three large arched
openings that later changed into windows
when the Church of SS. Peter and Paul
was removed. (Such church composites

were not uncommon in the East, though
they were rare in the West.) The narthex on
the west extended across both churches,
which shared a common atrium in front.
To the north was a monumental entrance,
presumably from the former palace, creating
a cross-axis from north to south linking

the two buildings. For reasons unknown,
the Church of SS. Peter and Paul fell into
disrepair and was demolished; by the 16th
century, it was gone, as were most of the
remnants of Justinian’s palace.

SS. Sergius and Bacchus's original context
is important, as it explains sorne of the
curious—and also sometimes overlooked—
aspects of its design. To provide an entrance
for the priests from the southwest into the
apse at the back of the church, the eastern
facade was tilted a bit, with the space left for
a porch perhaps still visible in the setback
of the facade at that corner. The resultant tilt
impacted the orientation of the apse and thus
of the central nave. To the west, the tilt was
not implernented because the narthex had to
align with the Church of SS. Peter and Paul.
The plan is distinguished by its extraordinary
openness. Unlike Western churches, whic!
channel the churchgoer into the nave from
the west, here is a system that permits more
fluid pathways into and through the church.
Another remarkable feature of the plan that
applies to both SS. Sergius and Bacchus and
the Hagia Sophia is that there are no separate
rooms to the right or left of the altar—rooms
for the preparation of the sacred meal and
where the bishop cons his garb. Such
spaces, the prothesis and the diaconicon,
respectively, are typical in later Byzantine
churches, but they are not present in early
Justinian ones. The result in both buildings
is that the central structure holding the dome
is freed from the surrounding architecture in
a way that is uncharacteristic of Byzantine
design.

It would be a mistake to project current
medieval liturgical uses in Greek Orthodox
churches onto these spaces, even though
there are clearly numerous similarities. In
Justinian’s day, the populace gathered closely
around the ambo in the nave. In addition, the
preparatory rites of the prothesis (in a room
for the preparation of the sacred meal) for
the First Entrance that are common today
were not practiced; the entrance ritual was


To Justinian’s Palace

&
PY gee a

4 Bec serait afgyBacchus

Ly
a
dey ar

Atrium Raraanal

Church of SS. Peter and Paul

9.6 Original context for SS. Sergius and Bacchus, Istanbul

more straightforward but also grander. The
people gathered in the courtyard, and there
they made their offerings of bread and wine
to the church. Once the bishop had blessed
the entrance and had himself entered, he
was followed by the deacon, who carried a
bejeweled and bound volume of the Gospel—
which stood for Christ himself—accompanied
by candle-bearers, incense-bearers, and
a subdeacon carrying a cross. The rest
followed. The First Entrance had numerous
symbolic meanings, including the rejection of
disbelief, and signified the first appearance
of God and the conversion to faith. In Rome,
the order is reversed: the priests enter
first and await the arrival of the bishop. In
Constantinople, the bishop would go past the
ambo and into the sanctuary—defined by the
short barrier of the iconostasis—to the altar
where the Gospel would be placed, and then
to a semicircular tier of benches called the
synthronon, where he would give the initial
blessing signifying the glorification of Christ.
If the emperor, who was the head of the
Orthodox Church, was present, he would
arrive earlier than the bishop and join him at
the narthex, at the head of the procession.
His honor guard, consisting of soldiers and
cross-bearers, would have preceded him into
the church to define the path. After leaving

Narthex
5
Ez
aN
t%
1 —.-L-—_ —_
ie} 20m

9.7 Plan: SS. Sergius and Bacchus

a gift of gold at the altar, he would proceed
to the south aisle, where his throne was
located. The interaction between emperor
and priesthood was an essential and defining
moment in the integrity of the ernpire and
the Church, with their meeting and common
participation in the ceremony a sign of the
unity of the earthly and divine realms. At SS.
Sergius and Bacchus, the emperor’s spot was
in the northeast of the gallery, from where he
could overlook the proceedings.

Today, a table or niche on the north
side serves as the prothesis, but there is
no evidence that this custom existed in
Byzantine times. It seems that the act of
bringing offerings of bread and wine by the
congregation started outside the church,
in a special room of a building called the
skeuophylakion that was used to hold
the sacred vessels in which the food was
transported. In other words, during the
service, the wine and bread brought by the
congregation was prepared out of sight and,
in the process, “became” the flesh and
blood of Christ, and was then carried into
the church. The bishop made his entrance
already vested—thus the absence of the
diaconicon, a room where the bishop dons
his garb, which came only later. The atrium
served as a place for people to gather. The

|
€ Z

: Sanctuary

narthex was a more formal space used to
organize the procession once it had arrived.
Once the procession had commenced,
the congregation could also enter, which it
did by streaming into the space from the
various entrances, in a manner of popular
commotion.

Following the blessing, the readings took
place from the altar and from the ambo,
the Gospel having been carried to the armbo
with great solemnity and excitement. After
the reading and the sermon came the Great
Entrance, or as it was called at that time, the
Entrance of the Mysteries, during which the
Eucharistic bread and wine were transferred
from their place of preparation to the place
of offering on the altar. The bread and
wine were brought in through a side door.
The space inside the church was used to
segregate men from women, but exactly how
this was done remains unclear.

9.8 Narthex: Hagia Sophia, Istanbul, Turkey

Hagia Sophia

The Hagia Sophia (“sacred wisdom,”
532-37 CE) in Constantinople was, from the
date of its opening, considered one of the
greatest buildings in the Western world. Little
is known for certain about its predecessor,
which was dedicated by Constantine in

360 CE but damaged in civil strife. For the
new church, Justinian called in Anthemius of
Tralles and Isidore of Miletus, who produced
a daring and lofty domed structure still largely
intact today. Sheathed in marble and gold,
its splendor made it one of the most talked-
about buildings in the Christian world. One
visitor, Procopius, writing in the 6th century,
when the building was newly finished, stated,
“The dome must surely seem not to rest
upon solid masonry but to cover the space
beneath with its golden dome suspended
from heaven.” Some skeptics thought

they had been right when an earthquake
destroyed the dome in 557 CE, barely twenty
years after its dedication. But Justinian,
undaunted, had a new dome built, though
the second one was more steeply pitched.

bi Le i

9.9 Exterior: Hagia Sophia

The structural system is simple but ingenious.
A 30-meter square forms the center. At the
corners, piers rise up to support four arches,
between which are pendentives that hold

a dome scalloped with forty ribs. Windows
line the base of the dome, making it seem
to float. The east and west arches are closed
off with a screen of columns and windows.
The undersides of the east and west arches,
however, seem to have blown away, allowing
one to look into vast, three-apsed buildings
on both sides. The only difference between

9.10 Spatial composition: Hagia Sophia

east and west is that on the eastern side,
the final 8 meters of the apse boldly project
from the perimeter wall that otherwise, like a
box, contains its precious spatial cargo. The
apse that projects frorn the wall is known as
a synthronon and is where the bishop sits.
The deep galleries on the north and south,
which form spacious corridors parallel to the
nave, help create the sense of drama that
pervades the building. From a structural point
of view, they serve to divide the buttressing
into segments.

The vaults, made of brick, are thin and
lightweight. There is still considerable
uncertainty about the statics that govern the
building’s integrity, because the semi-domes
are too thin to be of much assistance. But
the combination of supporting half-domes,
quarter-domes, and massive piers were
enough, and in the days before computers
and earthquake impact studies, the audacity
of the system is remarkable. Later, from the
8th century on, various types of buttresses
were added to the exterior to prevent
problems.

The use of windows is similarly complex.
The window at the east end of the apse,
the lights along the base of the dome, and
those on the north and south all allow light
to stream directly into the nave. But the
other windows are all invisible from the
nave and produce various backlit qualities.
For example, under the north and south
tympana, the colonnaded columns stand in
the shadows, backlit from the windows in the . : ‘
outer wall. The large windowless openings
under the supporting arch at the west end
are filled only with grille work. Impressive
as the complex structural system of the oy
Hagia Sophia is, the architects made every

<4
effort to make it all appear effortless. The
marble cladding and the mosaics would —
have obliterated any sense of oppression or ik i > ae - 7 a 1
weight. From the dark-gray marble of the rd x det ep aa hb -
pavement, the green marble with white veins, ie 4 i # *
dark-blue marble with yellow veins, and Al 3
reddish columns, to the silver and gold o : Atrium he 5 A Apse a
the mosaics, the eye moves from surface to Bs os 8
surface as if structure simply did not exist. mt = | g ro
The first dome was covered with a gold RB
k k o | eo eo =P .°
mosaic. The second one had a large figure ‘ e o 8 2
of a cross embedded in its decoration. The ¥ # x

windows were filled with glass tinted blue,
red, green, brown, yellow, and purple to add
to the effect. The light was thus a subdued
one. Even the patterned marble floor, unlike Baptistery

the floor of the Pantheon, denies a sense of
stability and has been described by ancient
commentators as a wavy sea. Though a good

many of the marble panels have survived, few
of the mosaics have, since most were taken
down or plastered over during the building's
conversion to a mosque. (The Hagia Sophia
was secularized in 1935.)

7].
Gye

=
be
os
be
fe
ia

9.11 Plan and section: Hagia Sophia

Despite its inner drarna, the building from
the outside, with its staggered heaping

of volumes, does not give the visitor the
expectation of such a grand interior space. In
fact, once one passes through the narthex,
the space rises forcefully, creating the feeling
of being at the bottom of a vast canyon, with
the church floor a type of stage on which the
Entrance of the Mysteries was performed.
ighttime illumination must also have been
impressive. From the base of the dome, brass
chains swept down to support a metal ring
equipped with flat silver disks pierced to hold
glass vessels for oil lamps. Within this vast
candelabrum hung another, smaller crown

of lights, while higher up, a great silver disk
acted as a reflector.

The church was sited just north of the
palace complex at the terminus of the main
avenue that ran through the city. Apart
from the Hagia Sophia, very little of the
palace survives today. The atrium, where
congregants gathered, is also no longer
extant.

‘ a

No
\ ~ 5 . ) 9.12 View of the semi-dome, Hagia Sophia

\ y Golden Horn

ava
wo
i

Galata
~ ‘ Bospt
SA aspharus
~
\ N Ae Le
ae _
of + 7 \darbor aa) Ancient
eo ae NL acropolis *,
ho ; ‘ ./
wo . . . . »
‘ 1 . 7 : }
Constantine's Forum * ‘Hagia Sophia % 7
4 Pr eae, ee - Cron

mee : Hippodrome
Vo a.
i
Harbor ‘Of Julian :
H eo =
Len

Sea of Marmara

i af 9.13 Palace area of Constantinople


9.14 Detail of capital, Hagia Sophia

Byzantine Capitals

There are two types of capitals used at the
Hagia Sophia: composite and lonic. The
composite capital that emerged during the
late Byzantine Empire, mainly in Rome,
combines the Corinthian with the lonic.
Composite capitals line the principal space of
the nave. lonic capitals are used behind them
in the side spaces, in a minor position relative
to the Corinthian or composite orders (as was
their fate well into the 19th century, when
buildings were designed for the first time
with a monumental lonic order). At the Hagia
Sophia, though, these are not the standard
imperial statements. The capitals are filled
with foliage in all sorts of variations. In some,
the small, lush leaves appear to be caught
up in the spinning of the scrolls—clearly,
different, nonclassical sensibility had taken
over the design. At SS. Sergius and Bacchus
and other churches of the time, we see the
full emergence of this experimentation.

2

Post-Renaissance classicism in Europe
dismissed these efforts as radically outside
the norm of the “classical” tradition. But

the classical tradition was more open to
experimentation than one might at first think.
Furthermore, after the fall of the Roman
Empire, in which standardized models were
often used, local craftsmen were invited

to test their skills. That many of these
craftsmen were using northern motives or
were themselves Christianized Visigoths is
more than obvious. The Visigoths invaded
Byzantine territories in the 5th century, with
many of them staying on to be conscripted
into the Byzantine army. They tended to use
vine and plant motifs for their ornamentation,
as can be seen in their belt buckles. Most of
the Visigoths eventually went on to settle in
southern Spain.

The capitals at St. Vitale in Ravenna show
wavy and delicate floral patterns similar to
decorations found on belt buckles and dagger
blades. Their inverted pyrarnidal form has the
look of a basket. At the Basilica Eufrasiana
in Parenzo, Croatia, along the Adriatic Sea,
we find a double-tier design, with birds at
the corners and delicately carved grapevines
below. At Salonica, Greece, we encounter
capitals that also consist of abstract curved
patterns, in conjunction with some that
have leaves that look as if they are being
tossed around by the wind. The capitals at
SS. Sergius and Bacchus have a delicate
stenciling that allows the swirling tendrils of
acanthus to stand out against the blackness
of a deeply cut background.

Zz

9.16 A Visigoth ornament

9.15 Examples of Byzantine capitals


NS ~

Black Sea

© Constantinople

Byzantine Empire

Mediterranean Sea

9.17 Byzantium and Armenia

ARMENIAN ARCHITECTURE

The area defined by the Caspian Sea to the
east and the Black Sea to the west was an
important geographical hub. Merchants could
unload goods from China on the shores of the
Caspian, where they would be taken through
Armenia to the Black Sea, from which almost
any destination in Europe was reachable. The
trip from China to Rome would have gone
through fewer contested territories in the year
600 CE than it does today; the location was,
however, the cause for both the rise and the
fall of the Armenian kingdom. Descended
from the Urartu, the Armenians were in turn
controlled by the Persians, by Alexander

the Great, by the Romans, and then by the
Persians again. Despite all this, the Armenian
desire for autonomy was strong, and the
period between the 4th and 9th centuries
saw Armeria at its creative best. In the 6th
and 7th centuries, with Arab regions to the
south and Viking areas to the north still in
disarray, Armenia was a safe link between
East and West. But by the 10th century,

with the expansion of Islam and Christianity
into large, far-flung yet interconnected
domains, trade increased—to the detriment
of Armenia, which was able to survive only
until 1375.

Huns and Alans

Caspian Sea

Echmiadzin (Vagarshapat)

Persian Empire

The significance of Armenia in the history
of architecture lies, once again, in the high
quality of its stonework. In Constantinople,
stone had given way to brick. (The Hagia
Sophia is basically a brick building.) The
use of concrete, furthermore, had been
forgotten by this time. Only the Armenians
had maintained the classical Hellenistic
tradition of clean surfaces, volumetric
complexity, and a strong focus on a compact,
object-like effect of the building in space.
This would have an important impact on the
later development of church architecture

in Europe, when Armenian masons were in
demand in the west, particularly in France.

9.18 Typology of Armenian churches

The history of Armenia’s Christian
architecture begins in 301 CE, when

Dertad III (the king of Armenia under Roman
suzerainty) was converted to Christianity

by St. Gregory the Illurninator, a native
Armenian who made Christianity the state
religion. In general, the Armenian liturgy
resembles that of the Eastern Church, except
that its language is classical Armenian

rather than Greek. The distinctive look of
Armenian architecture developed quite
rapidly. Buildings tended to have forms

that were simple and solid-looking. From

the earliest date, they were volumetric and
planimetric masterpieces. Furthermore, the
carving and placement of the stones was
excellent; indeed, at the time, these buildings
would have been far superior to other stone
buildings in Europe and Asia. Though
Byzantine architecture introduced the dome
as an important potential element in Christian
architecture, the Byzantine dome was not
visible externally. Armenian architecture, by
way of contrast, pushed the dome up over
the mass of the building. Though the dome
itself was covered with a light wooden conical
roof, the silhouette achieved would have a
profound impact on future church design.

he Armenian word gmbet, usually
translated as “dome,” means more precisely
“the vault of heaven.” The vision of Gregory
the Illuminator (b. 239 CE), the patron

saint of Armenia, also played a part in the
acceptance of the domme. He wrote that he
saw a figure of light descending from heaven
associated with a magnificent building that
had the form of a dome on four columns.


9.19 St. Hripsime, Echmiadzin, Armenia

St. Hripsime

One of the most refined examples of
Armenian architecture can be found in
Echmiadzin. St. Hripsime was the second
church built by St. Gregory the Illuminator
during the first quarter of the 4th century. It
was replaced in 395 CE by a small chapel.
The present edifice was built in 618 CE. The
building is constructed of dark, ash-colored
tufa bonded on the interior with concrete-like
mortar. The whole rests, like a Greek ternple,
on a stepped stylobate. The small windows
emphasize the mass and solidity of the
structure.

The interior is organized on a quatrefoil
plan, with niches in the cardinal directions.
In addition to these, there are niches on

the diagonal corners, creating a fluid and
dynamic interior space. The diagonal niches,
having the form of three-quarter cylinders,
may also have been intended to strengthen
the abutment of the dome. They give access
to four subsidiary chambers that flank

the eastern and western niches. Though

the building is biaxially symmetrical, the
eastern apse is emphasized by the raised
altar section that protrudes into the central
space. Barrel vaults intervene between the
axial niches and the central square. These
vaults, which are wider along the main axis,
accentuate the east-west direction. The
whole composition is bound together to form

9.20 Plan: St. Hripsime

a well-proportioned rectangle with large
triangular recesses on the exterior that impart
a rhythmic impression of the composition.
The dome rests on a sixteen-sided windowed
drum that has twelve windows at its base.
Four of the windows are now obscured by
small cylindrical towers that were added

later as buttresses. The entrance porch on
the west is also a later addition. The beauty
of the St. Hripsime edifice derives from the
simplicity and harmony of its different parts.

9.21 Interior: St. Hripsime

9.22 Zvartnots Cathedral, Echmiadzin, Armenia

Zvartnots Cathedral

Among the many inventive designs of
Armenian churches during this period,

one stands out particularly: the Church

of Zvartnots near Echmiadzin. Begun in

643 CE after Armenia's recovery from an
Arab invasion in 640, it served for a time as
the seat of the Armenian church. Though
only the foundations and colurmns remain,

it can be reconstructed with reasonable
accuracy. From the outside it consisted of
three telescoped cylinders, 37 meters across
at ground level. The external walls were
enlivened by blind arcades. The cylindrical
exterior disguised a remarkable interior.

Four wedge-shaped piers framed four large
exedrae, three of them composed of six
columns and the fourth closed off to form
the apse. The piers rose to form arches

that supported a dome on squinches. At

the ground floor, the space between the
exterior and interior served as an ambulatory,
in essence producing a building within a
building. As with all Armenian churches, the
windows were small but well integrated into
the composition. Here, however, the interior
was proportionally quite tall, unlike most
Armenian churches, which seem to strive
for a balance between the horizontal and
vertical. The church was recognized in its day
as a marvel. There are clear similarities to the

church of SS. Sergius and Bacchus (527-
36 CE) in Constantinople. But that building,

a brick structure, apart from the columns,
was squat and was integrated into a palace
compound. Zvartnots, by contrast, was not
only larger in footprint and built of stone,

but designed to be clearly visible against the
landscape. Furthermore, the carving of the
capitals and detailing of the arches was of the
highest order.

VISHNU DEOGARH AND ELEPHANTA
After the collapse of the Gupta Empire,

the Gangetic Plains were controlled by

the Hephthalite Empire, which originated

in the area that is now Afghanistan and
urkmenistan, and soon dominated central
Asia. The power vacuum left most of India to
racture itself into numerous small nations,
such as Harshavardhana (606-47 CE)

in the north, and, moving southward, the
Chalukyas, the Pallavas, the Cholas, and the
Pandyas. During this period, with Buddhism
marginalized, Hindu architecture in South
Asia entered an experimental phase, and
rock-cut temples competed for prominence
with the new structural-stone and brick
temples. Although an invasion of north India
by the Huns dispersed the Buddhist monks
from Kashmir, they continued to prosper in
major universities such as those at Nalanda,
Ujjain, and Sirpur. Typical for the syncretism
of the time, Sirpur had shrines dedicated

to Hindu deities such as Shiva and Vishnu
adjacent to compounds dedicated to the
Buddha. One of the oldest statues of a female
deity, Haritiki, has been found at Sirpur.

An interesting comparison can be made
between two 6th-century Gupta period
temples: the Shiva shrine on Elephanta
Island, a rock-cut structure built by Shaivite
monks for their own use, and the Dasavatara
Vishnu Temple at Deogarh, a brick-and-stone
structure built for a large devotee population.


9.23 A Hindu mandala

Elephanta is a Hindu shrine adapted from
the older Buddhist rock-cut structures,
while Deogarh is a new invention—a shrine
constructed with stones to appear as if it is
monolithic (i-e., rock-cut). The latter has a
representational mountain as its shikhara,
while the former has a real mountain in
which it is embedded. Both begin with a
square garbha-griha, but while Deogarh
would have had originally held an image of
Vishnu, Elephanta still has the Shiva Lingam
at its center. From the middle, four axes
radiate out, defining access paths. Deogarh,
however, is accessible only from the west (the
direction of Vishnu) and has three implied
doors (ghana-dwaras, literally “blind doors”)
along its remaining cardinal directions.

Elephanta is open on all four sides,
though east is its primary direction of access.
Deogarh’s main shrine is at the center of a
nine-square mandala, with four subsidiary
shrines interlocked at its corners. Elephanta
has a much more complex geometry, with four
sets of nine-square mandalas interlocking to
define two major axes of access, one from the
west and the other from the north. The north-
south axis, aligned with the main entrance,
terminates in three gigantic Shiva sculptures
in deeply recessed niches. This triptych,
much celebrated in the annals of art history,
occupies the entire width and height of the
end wall, and, compared to the rough-hewn
character of the rest of structure, was carved
with greater care.

a. | 9.25 Vedic altar, the origin of
: | the Mandala diagram

Ss

9.26 Plan: Vishnu Temple, Deogarh

9.27 Garbha-griha, Cave of Shiva, Elephanta, near Mumbai, India

The cerebral exploration of interlocking
geometries based on mandala diagrams
was to become the defining characteristic of
Hindu temple form in the centuries to come.
Mandalas are derived from original Vedic
altars and are used in both the Hindu and
Buddhist religions as diagrams to map the
cosmos for astrological observations. These
diagrams are abstract, without scale, and
can take any number of forms derived from
a combination of superimposed squares and
circles.

ia) 20m
woes a i

9.29 Plan: Cave of Shiva, Elephanta


9.30 Five Rathas, Mamallapuram, India

THE FIVE RATHAS

Contemporary with the Chalukyas, with whom
they had frequent commerce, the Pallavas
were one of the most distinguished dynasties
of South Asia. The second Pallava ruler,
Narasimhavarman II, built at Mamallapuram,
one of India’s largest port cities of the time,

a series of monuments that made it one of
the great spiritual hubs of India. The hill
overlooking the shore was transformed into a
“model” of the Hindu universe. A channel of
spring-fed water, “the Ganges,” was created,
winding its way down the slope and passing
numerous finely carved rock-cut temples. At
the bottom of the hill, the channel opens into
a waterfall that spills over a large and richly
decorated bas-relief rock face known, fittingly,
as the Descent of the Ganges.

The rulers, however, were eager to
experiment with temples that were not rock-
cut, but built up from stone. For this, so it
seems, they held a competition, asking their
designers to produce models from which
temples could later be constructed. The
results are known as the Five Rathas (mid- to
late 7th century). They are a group of five
miniaturized rock-cut temples accompanied
by life-size sculptures of a bull, an elephant,
and a lion. Every temple is a thought of as

a miniature, or model, of the Hindu cosmic
order. And the “decorative” module of a
temple on a shikhara is also a miniature

of the temple of which it is a part. In other
words, on every scale—from the mini-temple
on a shikhara, to the temple itself, to the full-
scale reality of the Hindu cosmos—the same
form repeats itself, as in fractal geometry.
Beyond being a symbol of cosmic order,

the temples also project to the worshipper a
sense of personal wholeness.

9.31 Elevation of Dharmaraja Ratha,
Mamallapuram

9.32 Shore Temple at Mamallapuram

Shore Temple at Mamallapuram

The Shore Temple at Mamallapurarn
(700-728 CE), so called because it
overlooks the Bay of Bengal, is one of the
oldest structural stone temples in southern
India. It is attributed to the Pallava king
Narasimhavarman II. Originally, it was part of
a series of temples that belonged to a former
port city that has long since disappeared
into the waves, leaving the building isolated
on the beach. The temple is modeled on

the Dharmaraja Ratha, one of the Five
Rathas, located a few kilometers away. The
Dharmaraja Ratha, a rock-cut structure, is

in turn clearly modeled on a wooden temple,
suggesting that as with the ancient Greeks,
here a stone building replicates a wooden
one. The superstructure of the Dharmaraja
Ratha is a series of stacked planes, each a
representation of a sacred city. The Shore
Temple expands on that theme, with each
rising layer representing the intensification of
the divine.

The temple is actually an amalgam of
three different shrines, and in this respect is
quite unusual. The main shrine is dedicated
to Shiva and faces east. The second shrine,
with a smaller shikhara, is also dedicated
to Shiva, but faces west. Between the two,
attached to the back wall of the smaller Shiva
shrine and entered from the east, is a small
third shrine with no superstructural presence,
dedicated to the reclining Vishnu.

The Vishnu shrine, probably the oldest on the
site, is on axis with the larger Shiva shrine,
although there is no direct communication
between the two. The Shore Temple’s
configuration of the two Shiva shrines,

which are separated and yet linked by the
small Vishnu shrine, represents an effort to
balance the multiple competing liturgical
requirements. Most later Hindu temples,
dedicated to more than one deity, are lined
up hierarchically or organized radially around
a dominant center.

Although most of the exterior arrangements
of the temple have eroded, there is ample
suggestion that water may have been
channeled into pools in the temple and may
indeed have also entered into the Vishnu
shrine—which would have been appropriate,
since the reclining Vishnu figure is described
in mythology as lying in the primordial ocean.
The shikharas are similar to those of the
nearby Five Rathas, with a strict pyramidal
outline and a pilastered wall. The individual
tiers of the Shore Temple's shikharas have
been kept distinct and separate, with the
deep overhanging eaves casting dark shadows
without blurring the levels. Both shikharas
resolve themselves into octagonal capstones
with long finials. Just to the north of the
temple, there is a sacred pool that replicates
the primordial ocean. Because of climactic
changes, it is no longer filled with water.

9.33 Plan and section: Shore Temple at Mamallapuram

oo

’

’

;

H

:

:

:

1

1

‘
‘ ae
‘, Dvaravanti kingdom
+

y Lopburi

9.34 Zone of development in Southeast Asia, 600 CE

SOUTHEAST ASIA
Between 300 and 600 CE, there was a
marked transformation of the Irrawaddy and
Mekong river hinterland in areas that are
today Thailand and Cambodia. River water
and floodwaters were brought under control,
and increased centralization allowed for the
exercise of authority. In the Mekong River
area, barays were created. These water pools,
formed by large enclosed dikes, were flooded
naturally by the Mekong River, and after the
floodwaters receded, retained water in the
basins for irrigation during the dry season.

By means of this hydroengineering, rice
production increased and new cities sprang
up.

Among the larger of these new cities were
Nakhon Pathon and Lop Buri in Thailand,
and lsanapura and Shrestapura in Cambodia
and Laos. All were carved out of the jungle
and surrounded by newly created agricultural
zones. It is clear that the Southeast Asian
hinterland was becoming interconnected with
trade routes that worked their way both east-
west and north-south, with China consequently

gaining in importance. Politically, the area was
divided between the Dvaravanti in Thailand,
the Chenla in Cambodia, the Charnpa along
the Vietnamese coast, and the emergent
Srivijaya kingdom in Malaysia and Indonesia.
These kingdoms were heavily influenced by

Indian religious ideas. The Dvaravanti were
Buddhists, whereas the Chenla, developing

a

South China Sea

Sambor Prei Kuk temple complex

ver

NE Sen Ri

4
[2]
<
2 Stu
Soe
io a
‘a!
—

from the Furnan, were Hindus. This
Indianization was not met by a similar cultural
movernent from China, for complicated
reasons that have something to do with
China's complex trade policies. Furthermore,
the idea of temple-cities—which were relatively
small in scale and had developed in India as
an economic unit that could be stamped onto
the landscape—found no parallel in China,
where cities were large administrative entities
that could not be easily replicated in foreign
lands, much less in the dense rain forests
of Southeast Asia. By contrast, the temple-
city that developed in India was a perfect
instrument of agricultural/economic expansion.
In 618 CE, for example, the Chenla king
Isanavaram | (r. 616-35 Ce) established
lsanapura—the suffix pura means “city"—as
the capital of his kingdom, 20 kilometers
northeast of Kompong. (The city is now called
Sambor Prei Kuk.) It was about 2 kilometers
square and contained approximately 150
temples, all dedicated to Shiva or one of his
numerous forms. Though the city has not
been thoroughly studied archaeologically,
the brick temples show considerable
sophistication. Among the three main
temples, one—called the North Group—
consists of a 100-meter-square platform
about 1 meter high on which rest five shrines,
a standard prototype for Hindu temples that
represents the five peaks of the mythical Mt.
Meru, the abode of the gods. The central
shrine contained the Shiva Lingam, but
unlike most shrines, it is open on all four
sides. It rests on a terrace about 50 meters
square. Small shrines define the corners. The
whole is contained by an enclosure wall.

9.36 Plan: Prasat Sambor (North Group), Hindu
temple complex of Sambor Prei Kuk, Isanapura

My Son

The idea of a sacred landscape also took
root in the Champa kingdom. The coast of
Vietnam that it controlled had for centuries
been developing as an important regional
economic zone, its numerous bays and
inlets accommodating trade with Chinese
and Indian vessels. Initially, the Champa, as
a set of federated cities, were closely tied

to Chinese cultural and religious traditions,
but in the 4th century CE there was a

strong infusion of Indian culture. Sanskrit
was adopted as a scholarly language, and
Hinduism—especially Shaivism—became the
state religion. Toward the end of the century,
in a somewhat unusual move perhaps
reflective of Chinese notions of kingship,

a valley known as My Son (69 kilometers
southwest of Da Nang) was set aside for
religious purposes and as a memorial site
dedicated to the noble achievement of the
royal dynasty. My Son (“Beautiful Mountain”)
is located near the Thu Bon River and to

the west of Indrapura, now known as Hoi
An, a city that at that time possessed a large
harbor and was an important trading center.
The valley, hidden from the plain and with
only one entrance, is surrounded by hills
and mountains. The site was envisioned as a

sacred one. The highest mountain of My Son,

the Rang Meo, or “Cat's Teeth Mountain”
(800 meters), symbolized Mt. Meru, the
residence of the god Shiva, the main deity
worshipped by the Champa.
The earliest temples, built from wood,
have not survived. Brick masonry was
introduced toward the end of the 7th century.
The temples all followed a similar Indian
model: a square ground plan with a platform

and shrine proper, and a high, stepped roof.
The external surface was often plastered
and painted. Eventually, stone was also
used for decorative purposes around lintels
and door jambs, as well as for columns and
pilasters. There is a blind portico facing
east, also lavishly ornamented. The interiors
are plain, with small niches for lamps. The
Shiva Lingam, symbolizing the divine force,
was situated on a plinth in the center. A
decorated frieze connected the tower with
its roof (suarloka). Each tower had three
stories, forming a stepped pyramid that
represented Kailasa, the abode of Shiva.
Many of the roofs were originally covered
with gold or silver leaf. In front of the ka/an
stood a smaller gate tower (gopura), built
from brick, with stone pillars. Most of the
temple complexes also had long buildings

9.38 My Son temple

(mandapas) with tiled roofs adjacent to the
gate towers, used for religious ceremonies. In
many cases there were smaller, two-roomed
temples (kasagraha) around the kalan for the
worship of lesser deities. Each cornplex was
surrounded by a thick wall of brick, but these
have almost entirely disappeared over the
centuries.

As was the case in all Hindu temples,
only the Brahmin were allowed to enter the
cella, or inner sanctuary, and minister to the
god with food, music, and other offerings.
Pilgrims could pray outside, leaving their gifts
with the religious authorities.

Daming Palace

Turk Koguro/Parhae
Silla
Tibetan changan® Luoyang
Yangzhou
nena © Tang dynasty Yellow Sea
Ba
rhanssha
Nan-Zhao
Guangzhou
Bay of Bengal

9.39 T’ang dynasty, China

SUI AND T’ANG DYNASTIES

The Sui (581-618 CE) and the T'ang
(618-907 CE) succeeded in establishing
centralized dynasties that made determined

South China Sea

Daxing (Chang’an)
Located at the terminus of the Silk Route,
Chang'an ("Forever Peace”) was first

investments in public works—in particular

the building of canals and roads.
engineering achievements can be
segmental stone-arch bridge they
the Jiao River near Zhaozhou on t
north-south trade route. The Jiao
more than 40 meters wide at this

heir

seen in the
built over
je main
River was
point. The

steep approaches of their older, semicircular

bridges were impractical for whee

led vehicles,

established by the Han dynasty in 200 BCE.

But in 24 CE, in the
Chang'an was loote

a provincial city; Luoyang was reestab

as the Han capital.

however, Chang’an experienced a revi

as a center of Bud
in the 6th century, tl
Sui dynasty reestab

middle of the Han reign,

, burned, and re

n the 4th century

ist learning. And
e first emperor o

uced to
ished
CE,

val

late

the

ished Chang’an as an

imperial capital. The Sui rebuilt the city a

while their post-and-lintel technology was not
sufficiently advanced. The problem of sinking
stone piers into the swiftly flowing river made
a multiple-arched structure impractical. Li
Chun, the engineer of the Zhaozhou Bridge,
constructed it using a series of twenty-eight
adjacent arcs, each containing forty-three
wedge-shaped stone vousscirs tied together
with nine reinforcing iron rods to pull the
stones together. Over the next four centuries,
T'ang engineers constructed bridges using
not only the segmental arch and open
spandrel construction but also arched,
suspension, and cantilever technology.

few kilometers soutl

of the old Han city and

| Palace City

Imperial City

9.40 Plan: Chang’an, the T'ang capital, China

In 750 CE, Daxing (Chang’an), with a million
residents, was the largest city in the world.

A stela inscribed in 781 CE documents the
introduction of Nestorian Christianity by Syrian
priests in 635 CE. The last of the Sassanian
princes, Firuz, found refuge there around 670
CE. Manichaeism arrived with the Persians
leeing Islam around 694 CE. However,
Chang'an remained predominantly a place of
Buddhist scholarship. Thousands of Buddhist
scholars and pilgrims, such as Faxian, came to
ive in Chang'an, with its hundreds of Buddhist
monasteries. In 840 CE, the Japanese pilgrim
Enin found monks from southern and northern

called it Daxing ("Great Prosperity”). This was
the city that, under the T’ang, was to become
famous as China's urb primus of the 1st
millennium CE. Developing both external and
internal trade was a high priority under the
Sui, and then the T'ang linked Chang'an with
Luoyang, Yangzhou, Chengdu, Guangzhou,
Youzhou, Bianzhou (now Kaifeng), and
Mingzhou (now Ningbo). Guangzhou and
Mingzhou were ports that serviced Korea and
Southeast Asia, respectively. An ancient form
of bill of exchange known as feigian (“flying
money”) was introduced by the T'ang.
Merchants who sold their goods in Daxing
could get feiqian drafts with which they could
draw money in other places.

ndia, Sri Lanka, Kucha (from the 7
Basin), Korea, and Japan—as well

arim
as China—

uilding pagodas, temples, and monasteries.
he Wild Goose Pagoda of Hsuan Tsang
(Xuanzang) was constructed in the 7th century
to hold all his manuscripts. Enin also noted
that among the city’s prized relics were four
teeth of the Buddha, from India, Khotan, and
Tibet—and the fourth, reputedly, from heaven.
During festivals honoring these dental relics,
each monastery was bedecked with offerings
such as medicines and foods, rare fruits

and flowers, and various kinds of incense.
Individual donations were cormmonplace.

One donor gave a hundred bushels of rice
and twenty bushels of millet; others provided
biscuits or cash.


9.41 Wild Goose Pagoda, Xi'an, China

Chang'an became a model for city planning,
not only for later Chinese capitals like Beijing
during the Ming and Qing dynasties but also
for the capital cities of Korea and Japan,
such as Nara, Heian-Kyo (Kyoto), and
Kydngju. Construction was overseen by the
engineer and planner Yuwen Kai (655-612
CE). Kai had already engineered the Grand
Canal (605-6 CE) to facilitate the transport
of grain from the alluvial southern plains

to the relatively impoverished (but militarily
strong) northern areas. Although overscaled,
Chang’an’s master plan was based on Zhou
period descriptions of the Wangcheng ideal
city (see “800 BCE"). But whereas ancient
texts described the model city as surrounded
by a square wall, with the emperor's palace
at the center of the city, the market to

the north, and the temple to the imperial
ancestors and the shrine of the earth to the
south, the planners of Chang’an placed the
palace—Daming Palace (“Palace of Great
Brilliance”)—in an enclave outside of the
square, along the north wall. The Taiji Palace
(“Palace of the Supreme Ultimate"), which
consisted of palaces and halls for imperial
meetings, was located at the north end of
the central north-south axis, occupying no
less than 5 percent of the entire city. Just
south of it was the Imperial City (offices of
the government and national ceremonial
halls). The Imperial City, which was the
administrative heart of the empire, was also

where the emperor conducted his ritual
sacrifices at the imperial ancestral temple

and at the imperial heavenly altar.

The rest of the city was divided up on a
grid pattern. Enclosing an area some 8.65
kilometers by 9.72 kilometers in size, the
city’s outer walls were punctured by three
gates, one each on the western, southern,
and eastern walls. The southern gate,
Mingde, was the main entrance and opened
onto a monumental street 220 meters wide,
while the streets leading from the other gates
measured about 140 meters wide.

Water played an important part in the
design, with several streams running through
the city. One went through the west market
and another through the east market.

There were five transport and sanitation
canals running throughout the city—which
had several different water sources—that
delivered water to city parks, the gardens
of the rich, and the grounds of the imperial
palaces. The canals were also used to
transport crucial goods throughout the city.

The residential part of the city was divided
by east-west and north-south avenues into
108 neighborhood blocks called fangs.

The roads were lined with water drainage
channels on both sides, and shaded by rows
of trees. The residential areas were further
accessed by alleys. In spite of its population,
the colossal spread of the city ensured that
the density of the fangs was not very high,

especially compared to that of Teotihuacan
and Rome at their heights. The fangs
contained temples, commercial buildings,
public parks, and housing. Each fang was
a mini-city with its own inner transportation
network, walls, gates, and corner towers.
There were two major cornmercial areas in
the outer city, referred to as the west and
east markets, each occupying two fangs.
These markets were the subject of many
literary descriptions, often devoted to the
global range of goods available there. The
areas around Quijan Lake and the Xingging
fang were famous scenic districts. In the
southeastern part of the city was a ward
that was home to a large monastery with
ten courtyards and the Wild Goose Pagoda
(652 CE). This same city ward also had a
large bathhouse, an entertainment courtyard,
and an additional monastery, as well as a
mansion that had its own bathhouse. The
Wild Goose Pagoda had five stories, with

a rammed earth core and a stone exterior
facade. When this collapsed, the structure
was rebuilt in brick in 704 CE, which with
renovations still stands today, one of the
few surviving edifices from that period. The
building had special significance, since it
held the the sutras that were brought to
China from India by the noted Buddhist
translator and traveler Hsuan Tsang.

Daming Palace

The authority of the emperor was represented
by the palace, constructed axially at the head
of the city. In the long reign of Gao Zong
(650-83 CE), the power of the emperor was
further magnified by the creation of another
palace beyond the boundaries of Chang'an.
The Daminggong (gong means “palace”),

or “Palace of Great Brilliance,” is in its

own special compound covering 3 square
kilometers. It was organized axially in a series
of interconnected courts forming a four-part
complex:

1. Entry square, about 500 meters square

2. Hanyuan Hall (Hanyuandian) in front
(south side) of the entry square

3. Xuanzheng Hall at the back (north side) of
the square

4. Northern third, containing the emperor's
court, reception areas, residences,
gardens, and temples

9.42 Pictorial view: Hanyuan Hall, Chang’an (Xi’an), China

First in Daming Palace’s axial sequence was
the Hanyuan Hall, or the “Enfolding Vitality
1lkm Hall,” the main gate where imperial rites
were performed. This huge, imposing gate
faced a gigantic square where ceremonies
with a large number of participants and
spectators were held. Fifty-eight meters
wide, the Hanyuan Hall, quite large in itself,
had a vast stair at its center, the Dragon-
Tail Way, that was a classic example of the
Chinese horizontal elongation of space. The
Xuanzheng Hall gate's 11-by-4-bay structure supported a
double-hipped roof and was flanked by high
pavilions on either side that were raised,
on their own bases, higher than the main
hall. Three hundred meters beyond was the
Xuanzheng (“Political”) Hall, from whose
Lo. oe sides extended walls that defined the palace
Danfeng Gate complex. Here the emperor held court on the
first and fifteenth day of each lunar month.
Beyond its arcades lay all the main offices of
the imperial bureaucracy. Two gates led to
the internal compound of the palace, which
consisted of a series of pavilions strung
together by rectilinear arcades. Beyond the
palace lay the Taiye Pond and a large open
area with pavilions and garden compounds.
West of the main palace area was the Linde
(Unicorn Virtue”) Hall, which was used
for banquets and less formal receptions. It
consisted of three interconnected structures
that abut one another on their long sides to
form a larger complex 58.2 meters wide and
86 meters deep, accompanied by a panoply
of surrounding arcades and pavilions. Literary
sources record that theatrical performances
were held in the arcades and polo matches
9.44 North-south section: Hanyuan Hall took place in front of the first hall.

Hanyuan Hall

9.43 Plan of Daming Palace, Chang'an


9.45 Songyue Temple Ta, Dengfeng, China

Songyue Temple Ta

Architecturally, the Chinese translated the
South Asian stupa into the ta (or pagoda, a
Portuguese-derived word). While the stupa
is a round earthen mound, the fa is a tower.
Both the fa and the stupa serve the same

purpose: to house a buried relic at their core.

The stupa emphasizes the fullness of the
mound's body and focuses on the mystery
within its earthen core; the fa magnifies
the vertical axis and makes a display of the
many levels of heavens inhabited by many
Buddhas.

Though the forrn may have been inspired
yy Han Chinese watchtowers, the fa never
unctioned as such. Rather, it served as
a beacon visible from a distance. The ta
was no mistranslation, however; it was how
the Chinese chose to represent the stupa.
his may be because stupas began during
a phase of Buddhism that deemphasized
representation, while the fa emerged after
the establishment of Mahayana Buddhism,
which permitted representation. The ta, in
fact, symbolizes outright the multi-heavened
cosmology of Mahayana Buddhism. In the
stupa, this cosmology is referred to through

the small chatiris (umbrellas) at the summits.

The ta, essentially, is a chattri magnified
to huge proportions. Even Hsuan Tsang
(Xuanzang), who had seen and carefully

recorded innumerable stupas in India,
specifically chose the form of a ta when
building his own monastery in Chang'an, the
Wild Goose Pagoda (652-704 CE), a seven-
story, 20-meter-high structure originally made
of mud and brick.

The Songyue Temple Ta (523 CE), in
Dengfeng, Henan Province, is China's oldest
and largest surviving ta. Located in the
middle of a river valley, it is a twelve-sided,
40-meter-high polygon consisting of fifteen
bodhisattva levels, surmounted by an obtuse
finial. The whole is made of brick, including
the corbelled overhanging eaves of the
main body. The overall form is parabolic,
with a slight suggestion of entasis. The
unornamented lower story of the base has
an entry facing south. The second story is
slightly cantilevered, with engaged columns at
the corners and lotus-bud capitals that seem
to be of Indian origin. The four sides face the
cardinal directions and have openings leading
to a central space; the other sides have
arched niches, like the Mahabodhi Temple
complex in India. The arches are decorated
with lion motifs.

The Songyue Temple Ta was originally
plastered, possibly white, and would have
stood out against the hills. As it is, the
pagoda, along with others with which it
forms a family, sits in dramatic relation to

0 10m

9.46 Plan: Songyue Temple Ta

its surroundings. Unlike most later pagodas,
the Songyue Temple Ta is inaccessible. The
individual stories—much too small to ever
have been intended for human occupation—
are entirely representational, complete with

a door and two windows carved into each of
the twelve sides at each story.

Korea

Japan
China

9.47 Location of Nara and Ise Jingu

NARA PERIOD: JAPAN

By the 8th century CE, the various clans of
Japan had cohered into a single political

unit under an emperor; the northern islands
were the last to be brought into this unity.
Rice was the principal commodity. Japan’s
native religion at the time was Shintoism, a
form of animism in which every aspect of
nature was revered. There were no creeds

or images of gods, but rather a host of kami,
or sacred spirits. Kami were both deities and
the numinous quality perceived in objects

of nature, such as trees, rocks, waters, and
mountains. The kami are still venerated at
more than one hundred thousand Shinto
shrines throughout Japan and are considered
to be creative and harmonizing forces in
nature. Humans were seen not as owners of
nature, or above and separate from it, but as
integral participants in it—and indeed derived
from it. The Buddha was received as a “great
kami,” but a kami could also be attributed

to the spirits of deceased emperors, heroes,
and farnous persons. In the 6th century,

the emperor came to be deified as a living
kami, and his divinity surpassed that of other
kami. One honored kari in the form of food
offerings, music, dance, and the performance
of traditional skills such as archery and sumo
wrestling. Ceremonial purity was strongly
encouraged, and bodily cleanliness was an
absolute necessity.

Sea of Japan

oe” ‘
ie
Oise Jingu _

Pacific Ocean

Only priests could approach the kami

during special rites, since they alone were
the mediators between the human and

the kami. The earliest Shinto sanctuaries
were simple piles of boulders or stones that
marked the sacred places where the kami
were thought to reside. Kami could also live
in a constructed shrine, usually a simple,
unadorned structure before which there stood
a detached portal, known as a torii.

Ise Jingu

The unification of Shinto’s animism with

the spirit of the emperor set the stage for a
remarkable building, the Ise Jingu (“Shrine”),
dedicated to the tutelary karni of the
Japanese imperial family. It has no parallel in
the entire history of global architecture. Every
20 years for the last 1,500 years, the shrine
has been rebuilt, identical to the one before,
but with virgin old-growth timber.

The Ise Jingu that stands in Japan today
was built in 2013. In a sense, then, it is
practically new. Yet, at the same time, it can
be dated to the year 690 CE. The sacred
necklace of magatama (jewels representing
the soul spirit, which enter the body of the
possessor) is the symbol of succession from
the sun goddess and is the ernblem of the
emperors of Japan even today. This necklace
is kept at Ise. As such, Ise Jingu is Japan’s
most revered shrine.

Jse Bay

Wedded Rocks»
eek:

9.48 Location Map: Ise Jingu, Ise, Japan

Set deep in a sacred forest at the mouth

a river valley south of the town of Ise, the
shrine consists of two primary structures—the
Inner Shrine (Naiku) and the Outer Shrine
(Geku)—as well as a wide array of lesser
sanctuaries distributed around a narrow,
verdant coastal plain on the east coast

of the Kii Peninsula in southern Honshu.
The area, relatively warm even in winter,

is crossed by the fast-flowing Isuzu River.
Naiku is dedicated to Amaterasu Omikami
(“Heaven-llluminating Great Kami”), the
traditional ancestral deity of the imperial
house, and Geku is dedicated to Touke
Okami (“Abundant Food Great Kami").
Originally unconnected, the two were joined
into an institutional unit in the 9th century. Of
the two, the Inner Shrine became the more
important, its complex now containing about
120 separate shrines, including a number of
tiny sanctuaries dedicated to the spirit of a
single rock or the deity of a bubbling spring,
as is Shinto practice.


9.49 Area plan: Ise Inner Shrine

The path to the Naiku is carefully scripted,
marked today by a series of torii (derived
from the Sanskrit forana, for “gate”). One
accesses the precinct by crossing the Uji
Bridge, which is constructed from fragrant
cypress wood, over the sacred Isuzu River.
From the bridge, the pilgrim proceeds to the
right along a broad street covered with gravel
and flanked by carefully tended gardens. The
path eventually turns east and rises up the
gentle slope through another torii, surrounded
by a forest of sacred cedars and zelkova
elms. Finally, the path curves to approach the
Naiku from the south. The double platforms
on which the temple rests is terraced out
over the sloping site and supported by giant
stones.

9.50 South gateway to the Ise Inner Shrine

The final approach is made by way of
twenty-one stone steps that bring one to

the top of the terrace and the outermost
fence. A fine silk curtain hanging across the
entrance and moving in the breeze is all
that marks the beginning of the prohibited
zone. The innermost shrines are open only
to the temple priests or the imperial family,
and even then only in a highly regulated
and hierarchical fashion. The ernperor has
access to the innermost shrine, the Shoden,
and the rest of the family's distance from the
Shoden is a measure of their distance from
the throne. Everyone else worships from the
outside. The Naiku contains three structures
organized axially—the central shrine, the

Shoden; and, behind it on either side, the two

treasuries. The 15-by-10-meter Shoden is
raised off the ground by columns set directly
into the ground (without a foundation). It

is a meticulously crafted and ornamented
wooden structure three bays wide and two
bays deep, built entirely without nails. It has
a deeply thatched reed roof and an entrance
on its long side accessible via an external
flight of stairs. The building, though empty,
is modeled on a granary and is the symbolic
residence of the rice kami.

Straight, squared timbers are used for

the rafters that descend sharply from the
ridgepole. The side gable ends have no
openings. At the middle of each gable end is
a freestanding solitary pillar that supports the
ridgepole.

a7 tom

9.51 Elevations and plan: Shoden, Ise Inner Shrine

9.52 Kami shrine, Ise, Japan

9.53 Inner precinct of the Ise Inner Shrine


a
a]!
Shoden |!

| Inner mec | | :

1 a ee =

i|

Alternate site

ie) : 60m

9.54 Plan: Ise Inner Shrine

The elaborate ritual process of rebuilding the
Ise every twenty years is known as shikinen
sengu (“the transfer of the god-body to
a new shrine in a special festival year").
The reconstruction alternates between two
adjacent sites. While one site is in use, the
other is left empty, covered by white gravel.
When the floor of the previous Shoden is
relocated, a small wooden pillar, known
as the shin-no-mihashira, or “heart pillar,”
is left buried in the old shrine compound,
and a small shed, the o/-ya, is built over it
to protect it from the elements. The lumber
consists of hundreds of trees that are taken
from a sacred grove in the mountains and
transported to the site with much fanfare and
reverence. The old lumber, still sacred, is
disseminated to be used in the repair of other
Shinto shrines around Japan.

The idea of renewal might also be tied
to Shinto beliefs and could be described as
the desire to show reverence to the Great

Kami by revitalizing its earthly residence.

In a metaphysical sense, a belief in the
transience of material objects as opposed

to the permanence of form—a metonym for
the nature of the kami—is ritually enacted.
Most fundamentally, perhaps, the rebuilding
renews the social contract with the imperial
family, the core of whose legitimacy lies in the
long line of its unbroken ancestry.

Following is a simplified list of the ceremonies
that are required to make the transfer from
the old to the new sanctuaries:

2005

* Ceremony to offer prayers to the kami
who resides at the foot of the mountain
in order to obtain permission to enter the
mountainside and to cut the sacred wood

2006

* Ceremony to mark the start of pulling the
timber into the sanctuary

* Ceremony marking the arrival of the wood
to be used for the shikinen sengu

2008

* Ceremony to offer prayers of consolation to
the kami who dwells at the site where the
new sanctuary is to built

2012

* Ceremony to erect the first pillar for the
main sanctuary building

* Ceremony to install metal plates to ward off
evil spirits, under the gable at either end of
the main sanctuary’s roof

* Ceremony to lift the ridgepole of the main
sanctuary building

Ceremony for the thatching of the roof

9.55 Sacred enclosure,
Ise Inner Shrine

2013

Ceremony to place the white pebbles
on the sacred ground around the new
sanctuary
Ceremony to place the sacred wooden box
for holding the symbol of the kami in the
main sanctuary
Ceremony to purify tl
sacred water
Ceremony to celebrate the completion of
the sanctuary building, and to offer prayers
to the kami who dwells at the foundation of
the newly reconstructed sanctuary to make
the ground stable

Ceremony to confirm that the newly made
clothing offered to the kami by the emperor
is in accordance with tradition

Ceremony to decorate the inside of the
building with a part of the new apparel and
sacred treasures

Ceremony to transfer the symbol of the
kami from the old to the newly constructed
building

Ceremony to serve the first sacred food to
the kami in the new building

Ceremony by the imperial envoy to offer
sacred silk to the kami

e building with

Ceremony to transfer sacred treasures from
the former sanctuary to the new one
Ceremony by court musicians

9.56 Elevation: West precinct of Horyu-ji Temple, Nara, Japan

Horyu-ji

Following the so-called Taika reform
(645-49 CE), the Japanese royalty came to
prefer the Chinese rather than the Korean
precedents to culture and architecture. This
is reflected in Horyu-ji (/f means “terrple”) at
Nara, built late in the 7th century, where the
axiality of the components was abandoned.
The golden hall and the pagoda were

placed next to each other, the height of one
balancing the width of the other. The cloister
was wide enough to give both sufficient
breathing room. The eastern wing of the
precinct has one extra bay to accommodate
the width of the golden hall. This created a
dynamic balance between the verticality of
the structures and the general horizontality of
the forms. Inside the golden hall is the triad
of the Buddha Sakyamuni with two attending
bodhisattvas, made by the celebrated
sculptor Kuratsukuri no Tori in 623 CE to
commemorate the death of Prince Shotoku.
The Four Heavenly Kings were made around
650 CE by the sculptor Yarnaguchi no Atai
Oguchi.

The five-by-four-bay proportions of the
hall make it appear alrnost square. It is a two-
story structure with two deep, overhanging
eaves, upturned at the ends, complemented
by a shallow porch eave on the lower level
that was built later. It sits on a low base, with

smal

stairs on all four axes and a hipped

gable roof marking the crest. As in Greek

archi
woot

itecture—and in most contemporary
len temples—the columns at Horyu-ji

display entasis, with their greatest dimension
in the middle and their smallest at the

top.

The middle gate roughly repeats the

organizational scheme of the golden hall, but

ona

simpler scale. It is four bays wide and

three bays deep, and because it has a row

of co

complex slightly off axis.

umns down the center, one enters the

Bell tower
(shoro)

repository
“L {kyoza)

° 0 30m

+
bed bo. G -- 0
t
L

9.57 Plan: West precinct of Horyu-ji Temple

9.59 Courtyard of west precinct, Horyu-ji Temple

9.58 Section: Pagoda, west precinct, Horyu-ji Temple

The five-story pagoda of the west precinct

- East precinct

is based on the three-bay square module.
In the center is the ceremonial axis mundi
column, which is presumed to be spliced
somewhere in the middle. Each succeeding
story recedes as it rises. They culminate in

200
a tall finial with a traditional arrangernent m

consisting of an upside-down bowl and lotus
flower, preceding the seven chattris of the
upper worlds, and finishing with water-fire

9.60 Plan: Horyu-ji Temple complex

and illumination finials. The original precinct
was expanded by extending the northern
end of the enclosure to include a lecture hall
{kodo) in the early 8th century.

800 CE

10.1 Umayyad Mosque of Damascus, Syria

INTRODUCTION

The period between 800 and 1000 CE saw
dramatic transformations across the African/
Eurasian world. Most significant among
these were the expansion of Islam across
northern Africa and the further development
of Indianization in Southeast Asia. Just

as Indianization tightened the maritime
economic connection between China and
India, Islamization unified the land-based
connections from Baghdad in Iraq to Cordoba
in Spain. The water highway and the desert
highway redefined the very paradigm of
African and Eurasian civilization. To this must
be added another sweeping change, the
Buddhafication of northern China, Korea, and
Japan. Normally, these transformations are
viewed as separate and are treated as such.
From a global perspective, however, they

are interlocked, and together they set the
foundations for the modern world.

To put all this in architectural terms, the
Mosque of Cordoba in Spain (begun in 784)
is contemporaneous with Borodudur (ca.
800) in Indonesia and Todai-ji (ca. 730)
in Japan, each the result of the respective
processes of Islamization, Indianization, and
Buddhafication. In other words, the new
emirate of Cardoba, the Sailendra dynasty
in Java, and the Nara in Japan were similar
in that they were important new links in
the transcontinental economic system. For

the first time in history, the furthest points
east were connected to the furthest points
west. Contemporaneous also was an array of
new, large, planned cities: Baghdad in Iraq,
Hariharalaya (“City of Shiva and Vishnu") in
Cambodia, Samye in Tibet, and Heijo-kyo in
Japan, all of which would soon rival more
established urban centers like Chang’an
and Constantinople. In this crosscurrent of
cultural exchange and tension, architecture
was not simply copied and exported but
underwent a wide range of innovations.

As far as the development of Islam
was concerned, nothing like it had ever
been seen in human history. Christianity,
by comparison, despite repressions during
the Roman Empire, eventually in the 4th
century became an imperial religion, and it
spread in jumps and starts. The nomadic
groups that had swept into Europe settled
and converted, often en masse. In 863, for
example, the Bulgars (who settled in modern-
day Bulgaria) converted by the thousands,
allowing Byzantium to develop trade relations
with its northern neighbor without conquest.
Buddhism spread differently, namely along
trade routes, and was almost totally peaceful.
But Islam, with its fervor and expanding
military strength, worked its way to North
Africa and beyond with astonishing rapidity,
reaching southern Spain in 711.

10.2 Borobudur, Java, Indonesia

It was not just the excitement of religion that
drove this powerful force. Islam's expansion
was funded by the extraordinary wealth
coming from India and Southeast Asia.

With the deterioration of the northern Silk
Route across Inner Asia because of regional
infighting and a warming period that dried up
springs and wells in the Taklamakan Desert,
ndia had become the 9th-century global
powerhouse. India was unique in the world
in that it had a dual capacity to unify trade in
ulk items, such as lurnber and grain, with
trade in luxury goods, such as gold, silver,
diamonds, and gems. The Silk Route may
ave been named for a commodity that came
rom China, but just as important now—if
not more so—was what was coming out of
ndia and Sri Lanka, namely gemstones like
rubies, sapphires, emeralds, and diamonds.
Hsuan Tsang (Xuanzang) (602-64 CE, a
Chinese Buddhist monk and scholar, traveled
to Sri Lanka and reported seeing a ruby on
the spire of the temple at Anuradhapura
whose magnificence illuminated the sky.
Ratnapura—literally “Gem City”—is the
capital of Sabaragamuwa province and even
today is a hub for gem traders. India also
exported sugar, cotton, and ivory. This vast
diversity of exports differentiated India's
economy from that of China, which tended
to focus only on silk, bronze, and porcelain

as export commodities, and produced a
complex, interwoven import-export ecology
that was unique in the world. There is no
doubt that India was the richest and most
politically stable area at the time, and that
this area with its various kingdoms served as
the motor to the Eurasian economic system.

Across India and Sri Lanka, hundreds
of sacred sites were being established.
Hinduism, or some variant of it, was now
adopted by almost all of the regional powers,
with rock-cut architecture reaching new
heights. Though the Elephanta Caves rank
high arnong these accomplishments, the
most impressive of all was Kailasa Temple
in Ellora, India, which was built by the
Rashtrakuta dynasty. Carved inside and
out in a rock-cut manner, Kailasa is without
doubt one of the greatest examples of that
technique in the history of architecture.
Designed to recall Mount Kailash in the
Himalayas, it was dedicated to the god Shiva.
But rock-architecture with its eight-hundred-
year history in India was soon to be a thing of
the past. The 9th century saw the transition
to stone masonry temples.

Though Indian influence through
Buddhism had worked its way north into the
mountains, its more important orientation
was eastward in the process known as
Indianization, which had begun some four

centuries before. Merchants, bringing with
them Buddhist and later Hindu monks and
priests, had actively set out to transform
Southeast Asia from a village economy to

an economy driven by state bureaucracies,
trade, and rice production. The Indianization
of Southeast Asia was not met by a
Sinicization from the other direction. Chinese
cities were massive enterprises designed

as a means to consolidate power. It was

a model that was impossible to replicate
without complete control of the surrounding
land. In India, however, cities were often
built around temples and their economies
and bureaucracies. It was a model that
could be easily replicated since it was
designed to grow from village-scale to city-
scale. And indeed, this economic/social/
religious package was eminently successful
in transforming the region into one of the
world's major economic hotspots. Pyu (in
modern-day Myanmar), along the Irrawaddy
River, had already developed as a rice-
exporting Buddhist state in the 5th century
and, based on precedents from the Gupta in
India, was beginning to develop its unique
form of Buddhist stupas. To the south on
the island of Java, the Srivijayan Empire was

rising to become an important regional force,
but of a new sort that did not need huge
armies or expensive flotillas. Trade and tolls

generated from the ships going back and
forth from China and India were the source of
its wealth. Its rulers, eager to accommodate
both Buddhists and Hindus, built huge
sanctuaries for the devotees of both

religions. Of these Borobudur was the most
spectacular, and certainly ranks as the most
impressive architectural accomplishment of
its age. It was innovative in many ways. Built
entirely of stone, it fused the Hindu idea of

a sacred mountain with the Buddhist idea

of a sacred mandala, becoming nothing less
than a three-dimensional mountain/mandala
that epitomized the tight relationship between
Buddhist metaphysics and mathematics. In
850, the Srivijayan built a parallel building,
ut dedicated to the Hindu deity Shiva.

nown as Prambanan, it was unlike any
temple in India, rising from the misty valley
loor like a steeply cliffed, craggy mountain.

In Cambodia, at the eastern front of the
ndianization process, there was an even
more startling transformation as the forests
were clear-cut for vast rice paddies fed not
y monsoon floods but by water from large
barays—kilometer-long artificial lakes that
were designed to hold water for the dry
season—water that could then be tapped to
create a second growing season. The Khmer,
who were largely Hindu, had perfected this
technique and were now the veritable kings of

rice, becoming the bulk supplier of the grain
to both China and India. They had little to
offer in terms of luxury items, apart from rare
feathers and lumber. Everything else they had
to import, including bronze, cooking vessels,
and gold and silver for their buildings. All

this depended on mastering the landscape.
Hariharalaya (“City of Shiva and Vishnu”), a
perfectly square city some 2 kilometers on a
side, with its own vast baray, was a testament
to this new, extreme economy. It was without
doubt one of the greatest urban experiments
of the age. Located deep in what had been
forest, it was designed as a brand-new,
sacred Hindu landscape with a great temple
dedicated to Shiva. At its geometrical center
was a step temple, Bakong, which was not
just a temple on earth but a new spiritual
center of the world. This great experiment

in hydrology and religion was to develop into
what is now colloquially known as Angkor, a
vast sprawling city of temples, palaces, and
canals, the size of modern-day Boston. The
vast deforestation of the surrounding area
would eventually have negative effects, but
for the time being, the wealth of the Knmer—
rooted precariously around a single export
product—made it into a regional powerhouse.

It was, one might say, new wealth.
The rise of Southeast Asia occurred at
the same time as the T’ang dynasty’s loss

of Chinese control over the northern trade
routes, and indeed Southeast Asia benefited
greatly from this disruption. The great
metropolis Chang'an, the nominal capital of
the T'ang, was in decline and the empire was
increasingly ruled by local military governors
and warlords. The problems in the north
meant that large numbers of people were
leaving there for the more stable south. In the
7th century, northern China held 75 percent
of the country’s overall population; by the
9th century that number was reduced to 50
percent. There was also, in this turbulent
time, an atternpt to turn the clock back to
ancient, pre-Buddhist religions. In 845,

the emperor shut down 4,600 Buddhist
monasteries along with 40,000 temples and
shrines, forcing 260,000 Buddhist monks
and nuns to return to secular life. Not even
the Roman repression of the Christians

was on this scale. The repression was so
vast that few buildings from this era have
survived into modern times, apart from the
Nanchan Temple (782 CE) and the Foguang
Temple. The issue was not religion as such,
but the attempt by the government to keep
Buddhist monasteries from becoming a type
of alternative government, with their own
power structure and fundraising capacities.
As is often the case, what may have seerned
like a good idea on paper had terrible


10.3 Dome of the Rock, Jerusalem

consequences, in this case the destruction
of the social network, which only further
weakened the T’ang and led to their ultimate
demise. There can be no doubt that the
spectacular rise of the Khmer to the south
and of Japan to the east, both rice suppliers,
had much to do with the weakening of the
Chinese economy, which forced the Chinese
to become rice importers.

The irony was that Buddhism was gaining
strength in—and transforming—Mongolia,
Korea, and Japan, precisely because of
its capacity, like most modern religions, to
organize society around a set of common
ideals. In Tibet, the new city of Samye (775)
was laid out as a circular, mandala city with
a square ternple complex at the center. But
in Tibet, and elsewhere as it moved north,
Buddhism encountered resistance—not from
the government elites but from below, from
the deep-seated attachment to shamanism,
which had roots in ancient social norms. In
Tibet, a ruler named Lang Darma (r. 838-
842) persecuted Buddhists, and after his
death Buddhism declined. And when it was
revived in Tibet in the late 10th century, it was
a different Buddhism, one that had adopted
shamanic and folk elements. In many cases,
Tibetan Buddhist religious functionaries took
over the roles normally held by the shaman.
Buddhism won support by converting the
spirits of wind and earth into various types
of protector figures. In Japan also there was

a type of rapprochement with shamanistic
worldviews as Buddhism and Shintoism
developed hybrid forms. In all of this,
Buddhist architecture went through a critical
period of experimentation. As to the stupa,
what in India had been just a roundish
mound was now taking on a wide variety of
shapes, to eventually become a tower.

Japan during this century was now
emerging as a geopolitical force with the
founding in 708 of Heijo-kyo, its first
permanent capital. That it was modeled
after Chang’an was no accident, for it was
designed as the ambitious eastern terminus
of the Silk Route, and indeed, it hosted
merchants from as far off as India. The
political times were, however, unsettled, with
Japan suffering from a series of disasters and
epidemics. In the context of these problems,
Emperor Shomu, doing the opposite of the
Chinese, who were suppressing Buddhism,
issued an edict in 741 to promote the
construction of provincial Buddhist ternples
throughout the nation. Of these, Todai-ji
served as the central administrative temple
for the other provincial temples. Todai-ji
contains the largest bronze Buddha statue
in the world, a testament not just to the skill
of the artisans but to the wealth and indeed
bravura of a new generation of Japanese
rulers.

This cross-regional economic zone from
Japan and China through Southeast Asia to

India produced a huge outlay of trade and
wealth. The emerging Islamic caliphates
extended the reach of this wealth westward.
An early mosque was Umayyad Mosque of
Damascus in Syria (715); it was built on the
site of a former Roman temple complex that
had been previously converted to a Christian
church. The design is conditioned by these
earlier realities; the Corinthian columns on
the interior, for example, were taken from
the ruins of the Roman temple. A mosque

is designed for congregational worship. At
some moments it is filled and at others quite
empty. Borobudur was designed to facilitate
the search for nirvana. Apart from sutras that
individuals know by heart, there is no sacred
text that guides a devotee. A mosque is
designed to orient the believer to Mecca and
is a place where the imam can hold forth on
the Qur'an.

In Jerusalern, the Umayyad built a
particularly innovative structure, the Dome
of the Rock (691). Though one of the holiest
sites in Islam, it is not technically a mosque.
It was built around the rocky apex of a hill,
from whence Mohammed is said to have left
the earth to commune with the divine during
one of his dreams. It was probably built
by Byzantine masons, and its architecture
and mosaics were clearly patterned after
Byzantine churches, though its great dome,
now gilded, was of wood and not heavy brick.
This building is unusual in that one can enter

its perimeter, but not set foot in the interior
space, the floor of which is the exposed rock
itself. It is unique in the world in this respect.
One can compare it with Borobudur, another
uilding designed as a sacred destination.
That building, once one reaches its apex, has
at the top a massive stupa that is, of course,
inaccessible except to the mind’s eye. At the
Dome of the Rock, the central space is also
inaccessible, though it is defined not by a
solid mass but by a soaring, domed space.

After the fall of the Umayyads, who ruled
rom Damascus, the next Muslim dynasty,
the Abbasid, built a new capital, Baghdad
(founded 762), located just north of the
former Sassanian capital of Ctesiphon.

Like Hariharalaya and Samye, this city too
was an example of theocentric urbanism.

f Hariharalaya was the city of Shiva and
Vishnu, and Samye was the Buddhist
mandala of enlightenment, Baghdad was a
deliberate reminder of an expression in the
Qur'an referring to paradise. Baghdad was
soon to become one of the great cities in
central Asia; by the 10th century, the city’s
population was over a million.

The Abbasids, despite their wealth, were
not able to control the vast Islamic regions,
and thenceforth the history of Islam became
a history of regional powers, often with
conflicting theological perspectives. One of
these new powers was the Tulunids, who
became the first independent dynasty to

rule the newly Islamic Egypt. The Tulunids
built the impressive and well-proportioned
Mosque of Ibn Tulun (879). It was intended
as the focal point of Ibn Tulun’s capital, and
in fact was built next to Ibn Tulun’s palace
(no longer extant). Its design featured a large
courtyard with one covered hall on each of
the four sides, the largest being on the side of
the qibla, the direction to Mecca.

Europeans were not a particularly
significant part of this global economy.
Admittedly, the feudal system had stabilized
things following several centuries of turmoil,
but it was built around the principle of
economic regionalism, as opposed to cross-
continental economic interdependence. A
strengthening monastic culture enhanced
stability, but whereas in India the Hindu
temple was an economic unit, often
associated with a city and with the ideals of
wealth, the European Christian monastery
was by definition anti-urban and committed
to the ideals—if not the practice—of poverty.
St. Augustine and other theologians saw the
city of Rome as decadent, which explains
to some degree the need for remoteness
and isolation. There are similarities with
Buddhism, but Buddhism emphasizes the
personal attainment of nirvana, whereas in
Christian monasteries, attainment of a state of
blessedness was a distinctly cormmunal effort
enforced by a set of complex regulations
handed down from higher authorities. We

are fortunate to have a surviving plan of a
monastic compound at St. Gall in Switzerland
that serves as a plan/diagram of the inner
workings of the monastery. The plan lays out
a complex spatial organization delineating
secular and religious zones as well as the
different activities that define the monk’s daily
life.

The status of Europe was soon to change
with the rise to power of Charlemagne as
head of the Franks, who had just converted
en masse to Christianity. Building for
himself the Palace of Aachen in what is now
Germany, Charlemagne was able to unify
the Franks and bring his rule in alignment
with papal ambitions, creating a new entity
called, on paper at least, the Holy Roman
Empire. Since the Franks were largely simple,
agropastoral villagers, it stands to reason
that the sumptuous palace at Aachen was
designed by imported architects, most likely
from Armenia and Constantinople, since they
were the most skilled stonernasons in the
world at the time.

But Europe was in no position to benefit
from any of the transcontinental wealth
that was flowing to its south along the
Mediterranean. Large-scale Viking attacks
devastated the northern territories and
extended along the coast of France. Even
Rome was sacked by the Saracens in 846.
As a whole, Europe was, therefore, a rather
backward place architecturally, as most of

10.4 Church of San Salvador de Valdediés, Spain

its buildings were made of wood or stone
rubble, compared to the advanced stonework
of Borobudur or the Hindu temples of India.
One need only look at the churches of San
Salvador de Valdediés and San Julian de
los Prados, both in Spain, to recognize the
difference. These are hardly world-class
structures. Windows are small and unevenly
spaced. Most of the building is made from
stone rubble. Compare it to the well-formed
proportions and meticulous stonework of the
Armenian church of Saint Hripsime, or to the
Shore Temple in Mamallapuram, India, or the
Bhringesvara Shiva Termple in Bhubaneshwar,
India, both of which demonstrate meticulous
stonework and complex curving surfaces.
That said, one has to remark again on a
fundamental issue. Borobudur is a building
that is experienced outdoors, meaning
there is no inner space. It is a custom-built
mountain; the same can be said of the Shore
Temple in Mamallapuram. There is an inner
sanctum, but it is not a public space. Neither
of these buildings center on a congregational
ethos. The Mosque of Ibn Tulun in Cairo
certainly does, but it too is in essence an
outdoor building. Though there is a roof over
part of the structure, apart from the perimeter

wall there are no inner enclosures. Christians

alone—with an architecture that draws on its
sources in the Roman basilica—had by now
developed the idea of a completely enclosed
indoor space, with structures built of wood
and stone. These early churches were not,
however, for the people. Most Christians, if
they did worship regularly, did so in more
modest buildings. The early stone-built
churches were for the elites and the nobility,
for whom Christianity brought a special
standing in the community.

Think of the 9th century this way: The
wealth-generating horizon of rice and high-
end luxury goods was restricted to a narrow
east-west belt that curved frorn southern
China through Southeast Asia and India to
Baghdad and Cairo, with heavy emphasis
on India. Adding dirnensionality to this
was a radical intensification of architecture
and engineering around the production of
rice in Indonesia, Cambodia, Korea, and
Japan. The combined energy of this trade
produced inextricable changes at the various
peripheries, where the first states, Japan to
the east and Tibet to the north, arise. Soon
arrows would be pointing even further afield,
to Scandinavia and southward across the

great Sahara Desert. Within two hundred
years these “peripherals” would be firmly
connected to the larger transcontinental world
of economic wealth.

n all of this, one must not forget that
northern and Inner Asia, separated from the
south by vast stretches of trackless deserts,
forest, and tundra, were still inhabited

by First Society cultures. But even here
things were by no means static. In northern
Canada the Dorset hunting culture was being
replaced by a highly skilled, oceangoing,
seal-hunting culture known as the Thule

and later as the Inuit. They would develop

a unique architectural form known as the
igloo. An even more significant transformation
was taking place in the southwest of

the United States, where corn had been
introduced around 100 BCE. Beginning in
the 7th century, the Hohokam began to

build extensive irrigation networks along the
lower Salt and middle Gila Rivers. They were
the only American culture to use irrigation
north of Mexico. They also integrated corn
with the development of native plant species
like mesquite to develop an extensive and
complex agro-spiritual landscape that would
culminate in the construction of sacred ritual


cities in Chaco Canyon between 803 and
1130. By this time, corn was also starting to
make its appearance in the eastern part of
North America, with dramatic implications to
come in the subsequent centuries.

In Mexico, after the collapse of
Teotihuacan around 600 CE, competition
ensued among several important political
centers in central Mexico, leading to the
emergence of the Toltecs (ca. 800-1000).
They constructed a vast ceremonial center
with a large stepped pyramid, known
as Tula de Allende. To the south, in the
Mayan heartland, two great cities emerged:
Palenque in Mexico and Copan in Honduras.
Meanwhile in Bolivia, of the various regional
powers that emerged in previous centuries,
Tiwanaku rose to particular importance.
Around 700 CE, three centuries into the
existence of Tiwanaku, all construction efforts
were suddenly concentrated on making what
was to become the largest structure in the
Andes: the Akapana, an astonishing building,
carved so precisely from stone that even
today it elicits a sense of wonder. It was to the
Americas what Borobudur was to Eurasia, the
most advanced stone building in the world.
For its construction, the earlier monuments

10.5 Toltec Temple of Tlahuizcalpantecuhtli
(“Lord of the Morning Star”), Tula, Mexico

of the city were torn down and their stones
reused. It was a huge, multifaceted platform
mound or stepped pyramid of earth faced
with cut andesite, a hard volcanic rock, with
a sunken open chamber at the summit. It
was ultimately left unfinished when the city,
for unknown reasons, was abandoned.

Umayyad Rule
651-750 CE
A Dome of the Rock

632-91 CE

South Asia: Pallava Dynasty

to 740 CE
AKailasnath at Ellora
600-1000 cE
A Mahavihara of Nalanda
6th to 7th centuries CE

A Umayyad Mosque

Abbasid Caliphate

750-1258 CE

A Great Mosque of Samarra
852 CE

A City of Baghdad
ca. 762 CE, capital of Abbasid Caliphate
4 Great Mosque of Cordoba
706-15 CE 784-87 CE
Chola Dynasty
ca. 860-1279
A Virupaksha Temple
733-44 CE
A Rajasimhesvara Temple
Early 8th century CE

A Somapura Vihara
7th century CE

600 CE 800 CE

Pre-Angkor Period in Cambodia
ca. 550-802 CE
A Borobudur

A Samye
787-91 CE
Silla Dynasty A Buseoksa Temple
668-935 CE 676-1000 cE
T'ang Dynasty
618-907 CE
A Chang'an: The T’ang Capital A Nanchan Temple
581-906 CE 782 CE

Merovingian Dynasty in Central Europe Carolingian Dynasty

482-751 CE 751-911 CE
A Abbey of Fulda
790 CE
Abbey Church of St. Riquier A 4 Palatine Chapel
Completed 799 CE 792-805 CE
Mayas: Dynastic City-States
ca. 250-900 CE
A Palenque A Copan
ca. 600-800 CE ca. 600-900 CE
ATikal Temple Complex
700-900 CE
Southern Andes: Peak of Wari and Tiwanaku cultures
6th to LOth centuries CE
<4 Tiwanaku

First settled 1000 BcE

A Bakong Temple
ca. 760-830 CE ca. 811 CE

1000 CE

Angkor Period in Cambodia

802-1431 CE

A Phnom Bakheng
ea. 900-921 CE

A Candi Prambanam

835-56 CE

A Foguang Temple

857 CE
Holy Roman Empire
962-1806 CE
A St. Gall
816-36 CE

Londgn Cologne

Mainz
Paris ®

O} FRANKISH EMPIRE

Nantes® @rours

SAXONS

KHAZAR KHANATE

Lyons@
Bordeaux® 2
oraeaux Black Sea %.
Marseille %
SPAIN @©Constantinople 8 ARMENIA
@dledo DUCPIY OF BENEVENTO . . ia apamarkand
Ummayad emirate Byzantine Empire
Aliantic Ocean Mediterranean Sea SYRIA
Berbers © @Beghdad PERSIA
tipoi® Alexandria @ Damascus
1O} Jerusalem
IFRIQIYA — Srusiat %,
Abbasid caliphate Bs
EGYPT Medina Cn
%, Opadr
8 @mecca
. aye ARABIA .
10.6 Islamic territories, ca. 800 CE Arabian Sea

RISE OF ISLAM

Arabia, on account of its extreme climactic
and geographic conditions, was at the
periphery of the great cultural centers of the
age. It was mainly inhabited by nomadic
Bedouin Arabs who served as traders or
lived off the land’s meager resources. The
center of Arabian religion, which focused on
nature and heavenly bodies, was in Mecca.
Mohammed (ca. 570-632 CE) began a bitter
and prolonged struggle with Arab tribes and
their polytheism, advocating instead a brand
of monotheism based on universalist and
egalitarian sociopolitical ideas that conflicted
with traditional tribal politics.

Born in Mecca, Mohammed was an
orphan raised by his uncle. When he was
forty years old, he retreated into a cave
near Ramadan, where he received his first
illumination. After further revelations, he
began preaching monotheism. Successful in
attracting followers, he eventually conquered
Mecca and transformed it into Islam's holiest
city, which all adult Muslims are required to
visit at least once in their lives. He died in
632 CE after having converted most of Arabia
to the new creed. Beyond being a prophet,
Mohammed was also a farsighted statesman,
a political arbitrator, and a gifted military
commander, setting the stage for a fusion of
religion and politics that was to define Islamic
culture for centuries to come. By 711 CE,
Muslim Arab armies were attacking northern
India to the east as well as North Africa to

the west, and by the end of the 9th century,
Islam had grown into the largest political
entity west of China.

Since Mohammed made no arrangements
for a successor, dissension arose after his
leath as to how to govern this vast territory,
and the conflict between the Abbasids
and Umayyads created a divide in Islam
that persists to this day. The Abbasids,
lescendants of Mohammed's uncle,
al-Abbas, based their claim to the caliphate
on the theological aspects of their rulership.
he Shiites joined with the Abbasids in
the 8th century, as they, too, believed that
the caliphs ruled by divine designation
and thus possessed spiritual authority. The
Umayyads also saw themselves as heirs to
the Islamic state but interpreted the caliphate
as a constitutional necessity working for
the temporal welfare and protection of
the community. The conflict between the
theological and political interpretation of
rulership continues to be contested. It was
initially the Umayyads who were dominant,
governing from their capital in Damascus.
Able administrators, they ruled for a brief but
important period over the whole of the Islamic
realm—the only tirne that it was so unified.

Muslims do not require a building, or
even a consecrated space, to worship;
rather, Islam is based on five “pillars,” the
most important being the five daily prayers
performed while facing Mecca. The month
of Ramadan is also important; during that
time, Muslims commune with themselves,

give thanks to God through fasting, and
make donations to the needy, fulfilling the
commandments of the third pillar.

The typical mosque has a courtyard
through which one enters and that contains
a well or fountain for washing the hands and
feet. In the first centuries of Islam, the hall
of worship was, in most instances, a space
consisting of rows of columns so that the
congregation could face the gibla wall—a wall
that stands at right angles to a line drawn to
Mecca. The imam, or prayer leader, stands in
front of a mihrab, or niche, in the middle of
the qibla wall. In some mosques, the bay just
in front of the mihrab is elevated and roofed
with a dome. To the right of the mihrab is a
stepped pulpit, the minbar, made of wood
or stone, from which the imam can deliver a
sermon (khutba), usually on Friday. Almost
all mosques have a minaret from which
the faithful are called to prayer. There is no
prescription as to where these should be
located or how many there must be.

Tarik Khana (ca. 760 CE) in Damghan,
northern Iran, is one of the oldest extant
mosques. Its rectangular shape encloses a
courtyard and prayer hall. Massive round
brick columns almost 2 meters in diameter
support arcades of tunnel vaults. The Aksa
Mosque in Jerusalem (702 CE) shows
the development of an axis and transept
emphasizing the qib/a that becomes even
more pronounced in the El-Hakim Mosque
(991 CE) in Cairo.

Umayyad Mosque

Though the Arabs were initially illiterate,
their conquests put them in contact with a
multitude of civilizations, many features of
which they began to assimilate, much as

the Romans had done with Greek and Asian
cultures—except that the Arabs’ transition
occurred with astonishing rapidity and
determination. From the Indians, who at that
time were leaders in the field of mathematics,
they adopted numbering systems; from

the Persians, skills in construction; from

the Byzantines, skills in vaulting; and from
the Armenians, skills in stonemasonry. The
center of this learning was Damascus, built
up by al-Mansur, an Abbasid caliph, who
lavished the wealth and power of the new
empire on the city.

Later, Caliph al-Ma’mun ordered a library
to be built to house translated books from
Greece, Byzantium, and India, as well as
the growing collection of works by Arabic
scholars. Known as the House of Wisdom
(opened 1004 CE), it became the most
outstanding single repository of knowledge
since the Great Library of Alexandria.
Libraries were set up in other cities as
well. Soon Arab scholars were making
breakthroughs in everything from medicine
and chemistry to optics and philosophy. In
807 CE, Sultan Harun al-Rashid (766-809
CE) sent Charlemagne a brass clock with
a moving ball and brass horsemen who
stepped out of windows on the hour. There
was then nothing remotely similar in all of
Europe.

The Umayyad Mosque in Damascus
(709-15 CE), another monumental work of
Islamic architecture, was built on a religious
site dating back to an ancient Aramaic
temple dedicated to the god Hadad. The
Romans built a Temple of Jupiter on the
site, a building that was, in the 4th century,
transformed into a church (the Cathedral of
St. John) situated on the western side of the
temple. The church was then incorporated

into the design of the mosque, which consists
of three parallel ranges of space facing onto a

large, enclosed courtyard.

After the Islamic conquest of Damascus in

661 CE during the reign of the first Urnayyad
caliph, Mu’awiya ibn Abi Sufiyan, Muslims at
first shared the church with Christians. The
caliph eventually negotiated with Christian
leaders to take over the space; in return,

he promised that all the other churches

in the city would be safe and that a new
church, dedicated to the Virgin Mary, could
be erected. Darnascus itself was completely
rebuilt in the shape of a rectangle bisected
by a Hellenistic-inspired colonnaded road
running north and south and crossing at the
center, where the principal buildings were
positioned.

The plan of the mosque is a 97-by-156-
meter rectangle with three gates that connect
the building to the city from the northern,
eastern, and western sides. The mosque is
defined by three halls, or riwaqs, that run
parallel to the qib/a wall. They are supported
by two rows of stone Corinthian columns.
Large and classically proportioned arches
support a second, smaller colonnade, on
which the massive wooden beams of the roof

Byzantine church

10.7 Courtyard, Umayyad Mosque, Damascus, Syria

Court (sahr)

rest. The location of the mihrab is enhanced
in the center by the octagonal, 36-meter-high
isr Dome (“Dome of the Eagle”). In the
eastern part of the mosque, a small marble
structure between the columns of the riwaq
olds the tomb of St. John the Baptist, who
in Islamic tradition is known as the prophet
Yahya. The building was richly outfitted

with marble paneling and mosaics. In the
eginning of the 8th century, Caliph al-Walid
ibn Abd al-Malik addressed the citizens of
Damascus thus: “Inhabitants of Damascus,
four things give you marked superiority over
the rest of the world: your climate, your water,
your fruits, and your baths. To these | wanted
to add a fifth: this mosque.” Originally, the
mosque was abutted by a palace on its
southern flank, with a special entrance next
to the mihrab.

a ae s i
: td Prayer hall : 2
Minrab Mme wn, ~ i, 17
py
! -
m0 60 ; _ “OO °
Fae a a ' i oda

10.8 Plan: Umayyad Mosque

10.9 Plan: City of Baghdad, Iraq

Baghdad

The Umayyad dynasty, which had its center
in Damascus, fell in the mid-8th century. The
new rulers, the Abbasids (r. 758-1258 CE),
eventually became the champions of Sunni
orthodoxy—a policy that helped ther to
unify an increasingly cosmopolitan Muslim
empire. They constructed a new capital city,
Baghdad, to the west of Damascus and on
the banks of the Tigris River. Engineers from
the entire Islamic world were called to the site
to help in its planning and construction from
762 to 766 CE.

The layout, one of the most remarkable
examples of town planning in history, was a
simple circle about 3,000 meters across. The
walls were built of bricks and ornamented
with colorful tiles. Two rings of residential
zones lined the inside walls, leaving a vast
area open in the middle for the palace
and mosque. The walls were punctured by
four gates. Though there are other smaller,
regional examples of circular cities, this was
by far the most elaborate. The city prospered,
and with a population of about two million, it
became a center of science, literature, and
art, like Damascus. However, nothing of the
city remains: it perished as a consequence
of numerous sieges and inundations. The
Abbasid dynasty ended when Baghdad fell to
the Mongols in 1258.

Mosque

Courtyard for state occasions:

Reception hall

Apartments with courtyards -~

Made possible by the wealth of the Abbasid
rulers, palaces of great size sprang up
throughout the region, such as the fortified
Palace of Ukhaidir in the desert about 200
kilometers south of Baghdad. It consists of

a rectangular enclosure approximately 175
by 170 meters, with a gateway at the center
of each of the round towers at the corners
and semicircular towers spaced regularly
between them. The main entrance led to an
autonomous royal enclave (approximately 60
by 80 meters) positioned close to the north
wall. It had a large courtyard and a barrel-
vaulted iwan throne room, behind which was
the royal apartment. Around that complex
were four residential suites, each with its
own courtyard. The palace possessed its
own mosque; a bathhouse was located in
the southeast of the complex. In the space
between the palace and the outer walls, there
would have been gardens. Though today only
the mud brick of the interior construction
remains, these surfaces would have been
lavishly decorated with carved stucco and
paintings, often of flowers and vines arranged
in panels.

Main gale ———_______,

10.10 Plan: Palace of Ukhaidir, Iraq

Great Mosque of Samarra

In 836 CE, the Abbasid capital was moved
to Samarra, some 40 kilometers north of
Baghdad. Samarra soon ranked among the
greatest of the early Islamic cities. Though
it remained the capital only until 892 CE,

it prospered for centuries, reaching an
area of 50 square kilometers. The caliph’s
residence itself took up 173 hectares on

a cliff overlooking the Tigris River. Equally
impressive were the two mosques, the Great
Mosque of al-Mutawakkil (848-52 CE) and
the Mosque of Abu Dulaf (860 CE), both
designed to look like desert fortresses. The
bastioned walls of the Great Mosque of
al-Mutawakkil measured 240 by 156 meters,
and for centuries it was the largest mosque
in the world. There were sixteen doorways
that fed into the vast interior. On the inside,
four hypostyle structures (one prayer hall
and three porticoes) were arranged around
a large courtyard. Unlike in Damascus,
where the three minarets were placed in
the corners of the enclosing wall and one
in the middle of the wall, here the minaret
was a freestanding element placed on axis
in front of the principal north entrance of
the mosque. It had a helicoidal shape that
reached 50 meters to the summit, with an
external staircase.

10.11 Minaret, Great Mosque of Samarra, Iraq

10.12 Plan: Great Mosque of Samarra

Though contemporary texts are silent
about the architectural articulation of these

mosques, they may reflect the evolution frorn
a more egalitarian society of early Islamic
times to the more hierarchical society of

the Abbasid period, when Persian ideas of

kingship were increas'

ingly adopted by Islamic

rulers. Another reason for the silence may

be that the mosque as an institution was less

attached to the ruler t

an to the ulama, or

religious leader, indicating a split between

religious centers like t
palaces, which were t!
power.

ese and the desert
e centers of secular

150m

France
Atlantic Ocean

Salamanca

Tortosa
Spain (Al-Andalus) ©

@roledo @valencia
@isbon

@Cordova
Osibrattar

Maghreb

10.13 Spain (Al-Andalus)

Great Mosque of Cordoba

Arab forces occupied Alexandria in 643 CE
and crossed the Straits of Gibraltar in 711 Ce.
From there, they made forays over the entire
Mediterranean into Italy and France, driving
out the monks frorn Monte Cassino, south
of Rome, in 883 CE. By the mid-7th century,
however, the Muslim world had lost any real
political unity: the Abbasid caliphate began
to disintegrate, and in the mid-10th century,
rival caliphates established thernselves in
Cairo and Cordoba. Originally, the Spanish
territories were administered by a provincial
government established in the name of the
Umayyad caliphate based in Damascus. But
when that dynasty was overthrown, its last
surviving member, Emir Abd al-Rahman I,
fled to Spain. Under him, Cordoba became
the quasi-autonomous capital of a vibrant
Islamic culture. By the end of the 10th
century, it had becorne the largest city in
Europe, with a population of about one
hundred thousand. It was also an important
center of Arabic learning, making crucial
contributions to European civilization.

The first building of significance designed
under Abd al-Rahrman | was the Great
Mosque of Cérdoba (784-87 Ce). Only the
southwest part, the original prayer hall, still
survives more or less unaltered. The mosque,
modeled loosely on the Urnayyad Mosque in
Damascus (706-15 CE), included a walled-in
courtyard opening onto a hypostyle structure
consisting of twelve bays with ten columns

Mediterranean Sea

10.14 Roofscape, Great Mosque of Cordoba, Spain

each. The columns taken from Roman
buildings were chosen for their whitish tone.
The capitals are spoils taken from destroyed
churches and Roman civic buildings. Indeed,
the unusual siting of the mosque at the
perimeter of the city may be due to its being
built over the ruins of a Roman warehouse.
The principal shape of the arches above

the columns is, however, unique—a high
horseshoe arch with a nested free-spanning
arch below it. The voussoirs, alternately of red
brick and white stone, create dramatic three-

10.15 Dome structure, Great Mosque of Cordoba

dimensional diagonal vistas. The building
signals that the rulers had corne to terms with
certain aspects of the existing architectural
tradition, which they incorporated with great
ingenuity into their design. The horseshoe-
shaped arches are thought to have been
adapted frorn the remains of local Visigoth
architecture. The minaret, topped with a
domed pavilion, was one of the first tower
minarets in Islam. The mosque does not face
Mecca, but the reason is not clear.


— oe

10.16 Hall of the Great Mosque of Cordoba

Over time, the structure was lengthened

and widened, but always with reverence for
the initial design. The addition of al-Hakam
Il (964 CE) is the most elabaorate of the
extensions. Unlike the previous extension
that featured white columns, this one
featured black and red columns placed in
an alternating scheme. Craftsmen made
capitals on a simplified Corinthian model.
Al-Hakam II's addition also included a

new mihrab with a remarkable set of three
domes added to the last bay. The central
dome is spectacular. Unlike Roman domes,
which were primarily spatial elernents, or
Byzantine domes, which were props for
spatially ambiguous mosaics, this dome
emphasized a combination of geometric
logic and decorative detail. It seems to rest
on the square base as an elevated building
supported by column bundles from which
spring a set of intersecting arches that in
plan form two intersecting squares. The result
is an octagonal frame that holds a petaled,
umbrella-shaped dome, trimmed in white

at its base. This is not a dome in the sense
of a unified object, but a series of spatial
layers that act horizontally and vertically. Light
filtering in through the screens of the lower
register of arches contrasts with the dark
niches at the corners. The mosaics, executed
by Byzantine craftsmen, complete the design

with plant and vine motifs.

oe

10.17

~

Addition of al-Hakam Il, 962-66 cr

t
ey
Fa
*)
ta,
‘7
/ i.
- ra
te, "
Pte
sy

/ ‘
7 *
Mih ®
ihrab ‘sy
i
ts!

10.19 Plan: Great Mosque of Cordoba

ere /
f
"ee, 3
"A
Fo
_

Entrance facade, Great Mosque of Cordoba

10.18 Great Mosque of Abd al-Rahman I, 784-848 cE

Ss

Further additions, 987 cc

50m

10.20 Site plan: Temple Mount, Jerusalem

Dome of the Rock

With the Islamic conquest of Palestine and
Jerusalem in the third decade of the 7th
century, Caliph Abd al-Malik brought in the
best masons and craftsmen available to design
the Dome of the Rock, or in Arabic, the Haram
al-Sharif (“Noble Sanctuary”), which is today
the oldest Islamic building to have survived
intact in its original form. Completed in 691
CE, it encloses a huge rock at its center, the
highest point of Mt. Moriah, from which,
according to tradition, the prophet Mohammed
ascended to heaven at the end of his Isra’

(or Night Journey) to Jerusalem. In the older,
Jewish tradition, this is the Foundation Stone,
the symbolic underpinning upon which

the world was created, as well as the place

of Abraham's binding of Isaac. This same
location is also where numerous important
events in the life of Christ are believed to have
occurred. The site is therefore holy to the
Jewish, Christian, and Islamic religions.

The building, which is Byzantine in
conception and Sassanian in ornamentation,
can be entered on all four points of the
compass. The central space, however, is
inaccessible. The dome reaches 20 meters

across the rock and is borne on a drum

that rests on a double system of pillars and
columns, the middle one circular, the outer
one octagonal. The two rings, composed of
piers and columns, are rotated so that the
four piers of the inner ring face the arches of
the outer octagonal ring, creating a dynamic
interplay between square and circular
geometries.

10.21 Dome of the Rock, Jerusalem

The dome and drum are not of brick or stone,
but of wood. The dome is covered today with
golden copper-alloy plates, and the drum with
shimmering mosaic patterns of blue, red,
green, and gray. The interior, in the Byzantine
manner, was decorated with mosaics, with a
marble veneer in the lower section. Though
technically not a mosque, the building is
much more. It is not only a geometrical and
paradisiacal enclosure and a celebration of a
spot of particular reverence but also a parallel
to the Ka'aba in Mecca. Unlike that building,
which can be circumambulated but not
entered, this one can indeed be entered—yet
because of the presence of the rock, the
center of the building remains inaccessible.
Furthermore, one gazes not at a rock, but at
the peak of the mount; the architecture thus
creates the feeling of suspending the viewer in
space around that peak.

The history of the building site has been
much debated. It was first consecrated by
the Israelites when they built the First and
Second Temples. After the Second Temple
was razed by the Romans in 70 CE, Emperor
Hadrian built a temple to Jupiter there that
was perhaps connected to an octagonal
structure that served as the foundation of

the Dome of the Rock—but this has not yet
been archaeologically proven. The crusaders
consecrated the building as a Catholic church,
but with their defeat, the site reverted back to
Islam.

Es-Sakhra

0 30m

10.22 Plan and section: Dome of the Rock

10.23 Mahavihara at Nalanda, Bihar, India

MAHAVIHARAS AT NALANDA
Mahavihara (literally “great vihara”)
was the term used to designate the
huge Buddhist universities that were
established by the Guptas in the 5th
century and that flourished until the
12th century. The most famous of these
was Nalanda. Almost every Buddhist
pilgrim to India made a stop at Nalanda.
Mahaviharas like Nalanda were
multidisciplinary universities devoted
not only to the preparation of Buddhist
practitioners but also to the study of
secular disciplines. Officially established
by the Gupta king Kumara Gupta |
(415-55 CE), Nalanda boomed in the
reign of Harshavardhana. Nalanda had
more than two thousand senior monks
and about ten thousand disciples.
heravada, the school of Buddhism
followed mainly in Sri Lanka, Burma,
hailand, and Cambodia, developed
ere. Besides the various schools

of Buddhism, including Hinayana,
Mahayana, and Tantric, courses on the
ndo-Aryan Vedas, hetu vidya (“logic”),
shabda vidya (“grammar”), and chikitsa
vidya (medicine) were also taught at
jalanda. The Chinese pilgrim Hsuan
Tsang (Xuanzang) spent most of his time
at Nalanda studying law.

Stupas

100 m

Aryabhatta, the 5th-century astronomer
and mathematician (b. 476 CE in Kerala,
India) came to Nalanda as a boy to study
astronomy. He was one of the earliest
people to support the theory that the earth
is a sphere, preceding Copernicus by a
millennium. His main work, known as the
Aryabhattiya, was translated into Latin in
the 13th century. It included methods of
calculating the area of a triangle, the volume
of a sphere, and square and cube roots.
Aryabhatta also wrote about eclipses and
proposed the sun as the source of moonlight.
Another 7th-century Indian astronomer,
Brahmagupta, calculated the circumference
of the earth as 5,000 yojanas, or about
36,000 kilometers, only 4,000 short of its true
distance. The number zero, called sunya,
(meaning “void” or “empty") was invented
at this time. Sunya passed into the Arabic
as sifr, meaning “vacant.” In about 1200 CE,
this word was transliterated into Latin, but
its original meaning was lost, resulting in the
word zephirum (or zephyrum).
Nalanda consisted of ten quadrangles
covering 14 hectares, all lined up in a block
and packed next to each other. Made of
brick, each vihara, 50 to 60 meters long,
had a central courtyard (some with a shrine)
ringed by two or three stories of cells for the
monks, who lived about thirty to a floor. The
viharas faced a row of freestanding stupas
(sometimes described as caitya temples)
also made of brick, each with long central
stairways leading to a platform on which
stood the main shrine, with subsidiary shrines
at the corners. In its time, the street between
the viharas and the stupas would have been
packed with monks and their disciples.
After Harshavardhana, the Pala kings
of Bengal maintained Nalanda for four
centuries, until the 11th century. In fact, the
surviving ruins date frorn the Pala period. The
Palas were also the patrons of several other
monastic universities, such as at Vikramsila
and Somapura. So numerous were the
vibaras that the name of the modern state
in this region, Bihar, is a contraction of the
Sanskrit for “Land of the Viharas."

. 10.24 Plan: Mahavihara at Nalanda

Pyu city-

states
Rashtrakura
dynasty
Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal
Ellora
Pallavas
Pattadakal (@)

Pandyas

Lambakannas

10.25 India ca. 800 CE

RAJASIMHESVARA AND VIRUPAKSHA
TEMPLES

While India was ruled by a series of diverse
kingdoms, the competition in south India
between the Chalukyas and the Pallavas
intensified. Victorious kings routinely carried
the other’s masons and temple builders back
home with them. The consequence was a
cross-fertilization of temple design. As a temple
inscription notes, the Rajasimhesvara Temple
(700-730 CE)—built by the Pallava king in his
capital, Kanchipurarn—was the model for the
Virupaksha Temple (733-44 CE), built by the
Chalukyan queen at Pattadakal. Workmen from
Rajasimhesvara also worked on the Virupaksha;
the two make for an interesting comparison.

Le. 4 eh dt

10.27 Plan: Rajasimhesvara Temple

Basic Vocabulary of Hindu Architecture
Garbha-griha: Literally, “womb chamber”;
innermost sanctum

Lingam: Literally, “phallus,” but also “mark”
or “sign”; the symbol for Shiva. (Shaivite
temples face east; Vaishnavite temples face
west.)

Shikhara: Literally, “mountain peak”; the
rising tower of north Indian temples
Gopuram: A monumental tower at the
entrance of south Indian temples
Pradakshina: Circumambulation

Prasada: Literally, “palace”; temple precinct
Mandapa: A pillared hall in front of the
temple and sometimes connected to it; if a
temple has more than one mandapa, each
is allocated a different function and given a
name to reflect its use.

10.26 Rajasimhesvara Temple, Kanchipuram,
India

cs oe

10.28 Plan: Virupaksha Temple, Pattadakal, India

The two temples’ similarities involve

their size and organizational type, rather
than their appearance and formal order.
Though most Hindu temples face east,
Virupaksha, being a Shiva temple, faces
west. The garbha-grihas of both temples

are surrounded by a well-defined and fully
enclosed parikrama path, but Rajasimhesvara
jas nine subsidiary shrines arrayed in
constellation around it, while the Virupaksha
establishes the presence of subsidiary
shrines through articulations of the outer wall.
Both have attached mandapas, but while
Rajasimhesvara’s two enclosed mandapas
set up a single longitudinal axis, Virupaksha’s
single mandapa is fully pierced and sets

up a cross-axis with spatial dynamism.

Both temples are located with their own
precincts of roughly equivalent size, and

oth have large entrance gopurams. But
while Rajasimhesvara's precinct is packed
with a phalanx of subsidiary shrines, and in
act has the beginnings of a second precinct
enclosure also made of subsidiary shrines,
Virupaksha’s precinct has only an episodic
collection of subsidiary shrines attached to

it and breaks to respond to the cross-axis of
the mandapa. The Virupaksha, being a Shiva
shrine, also has the requirement of a Nandi
pavilion for Shiva’s bull; the pavilion sits as a
separate element in its forecourt.

Unlike earlier Hindu temples in which the
garbha-griha is framed by its plinth and
precinct walls, here the outer frame and the
inner garbha-griha are locked into each other
by means of spatial intermediaries, including
the mandapa, that allow for both axial and
circumambulatory readings. Overall, the
geometric order of the Virupaksha is more

10.29 Virupaksha Temple

articulated than that of the Rajasimhesvara,
as is evidenced in the ordering of the twelve
freestanding columns of the mandapa

that are extended into the edges, either by
pilasters or by columns, and arranged to
clear the path of the cross-axis. The inner
columns of the Rajasimhesvara, by contrast,
are laid out by a simple arithmetic geometry.


KAILASNATH AT ELLORA

Control of the Deccan Plateau was wrested
from the Chalukyas around 750 CE by the
Rashtrakutas, who ruled for about two
centuries, until 973 CE. The Rashtrakutas
quickly established their military superiority
and captured the all-important trade routes
that connected the western region to the

rest of the subcontinent, in particular, the
dakshinapatha, or southern route. On the
dakshinapatha at Verul (contemporary Ellora),
the Rashtrakuta ruler Krishna | ordered the
construction of what was to become the
largest rock-cut temple ever. Fifty meters
wide, more than 90 meters deep, and 20
meters high, Kailasnath is in the middle of
the 3-kilometer-long wall of basalt that has
thirty-four caves carved out of it (twelve are
Buddhist, seventeen Hindu, and five Jain,
dating from 600 to 1000 CE). Kailasnath

is conceived as a representation of the
mythological mountain abode of Shiva,

Mt. Kailash. Unlike the Buddhist rock-cut
structures that essentially had always been
elaborations of a cave, Kailasnath is an
independent entity, a freestanding colossal
sculpture revealed from the matrix. Since it is
still surrounded by the rock from which it was
hewn, there is a palpable sense of excavation
to Kailasnath, as if it were still a work in
progress.

ie) 50m
boa ah 1 4

10.31 Longitudinal section: Kailasnath, Ellora

10.32 Plan: Kailasnath, Ellora

10.33 Cross-section: Kailasnath, Ellora

Two “victory towers” have been left on either
side of the mass of the Nandi chamber.
They not only provide the vertical axis of
the composition, but their length also visibly
measures the mass of the rock that has
been excavated. From outside, the temple
is almost entirely obscured by its two-storied
entrance gopuram (flanked on either side
by Shaivite and Vaishnavite figures) on

the west that leads, through a vestibule,

into the main space. The ground floor is
dominated by the immense presence of

the excavated mass, since the body of the
temple at this level is mostly solid and cannot
be entered. Toward the back, the perimeter
is ringed by a colonnade of square pillars
whose only purpose seems to be to support
the overhanging rock. In the midst of an
elaborate sculptural program, the lower
rock mass of the main shrine has life-size
elephants carved into it, as if they were
supporting the temple above.

10.34 Detail: Temple of Kailasnath, Ellora

Access to the main level of the temple is from
a pair of symmetrical stairs on the west that
emerge into the entrance vestibule of the
shrine. The mandapa has sixteen columns
clumped into groups of four, creating a
cruciform central space that opens into
smaller porches on the north and south.

The garbha-griha has no inner parikrama;

it is instead on the outside, defined by five
subsidiary shrines. Bridges connect the main
shrine with the Nandi chamber and the
entrance gopuram as well. The shikhara—or
tower—of the main shrine has a four-tiered
pyramidal shape resolving into an octagonal
finial. The subsidiary shrines use the same
vocabulary. Toward the north, on the cross-
axis with the mandapa, there is another
rock-cut ternple, Lankesvara, complete with a
sixteen-pillared mandapa and garbha-griha,
that almost rivals the main shrine. And to the
south there are two additional shrines, also
rock-cut, one of which extends almost 25
meters into the rock.

Most discussions of Kailasnath’s
construction process assume that gigantic
trenches were dug into the rock to clear out
the main mass of the temple; this would have
been followed by a process of excavating
and sculpting. A counterintuitive possibility
is suggested by the subsidiary shrines—in
particular the one to the north—which are
excavated so deep into the rock; the same
process might have been employed for the
main shrine. Since Kailasnath is derived from
rock-cut cave ternple precedents, excavating
the sacred cave and then, in an act of
superseding the infinity of the mountain
around the traditional caves, “uncovering”
the exterior in the form of a complete temple,
makes sense conceptually as well. There
would have been no room for error, since

rock cannot be replaced. Making the temple
had to have been an act of skilled and
deliberate craftsmanship. The Rashtrakutas
would, of course, also have been very
familiar with the constructed temples of

the Chalukyas, their predecessors, and the
Pallavas and Pandyas, their contemporaries
to the south. The reason for their decision to
dedicate the full extent of their resources to
the creation of a gigantic rock-cut structure
is unknown, but it must have had to do with
reasserting the value of the traditional way
of making a monumental ritual structure in
the face of the imminent modernity of the
structural stone temple.

10.35 Detail: Temple of Kailasnath, Ellora

SAMYE, TIBET

A century after the introduction of Buddhism into
Tibet, King Trisong Detsen formally established
Buddhism as the state religion by building the
Samye Monastery. Its full name is Bsam yas

mi ‘gyur Ihun grub gtsug lag khang, or the
“Temple of Unchanging Spontaneous Presence”
(founded 775 CE, constructed 787-91 CE).

The first Tibetan monks were ordained here,
and it was the seat of Tibetan Buddhism until
the establishment of the Potala Palace by the
fifth Dalai Lama in the 17th century. Located

in the Chimpu Valley just south of Lhasa, the
monastery was laid out in the form of a mandala,
with a circular perimeter wall about 300

meters in diameter; the main ternple, the Utse,
representing Mt. Meru, is in the center. The wall
is topped by 1,008 tiny chortens with gates at
the four cardinal points. The four continents in
the ocean around Mt. Meru are represented by
temples at the cardinal points, each flanked by
two smaller temples to symbolize islands. The
Utse has three main stories, each of which was
designed in a different traditional architectural
style—Indian, Chinese, and Tibetan. The first
floor is dominated by the main assembly hall;
the second is basically an open roof area where
monks and locals carry out the craftwork for the
temple; and the third is the palace of the Dalai
Lama, with a small anteroom, throne room, and
bedroom. Four chortens at the corners of the
Utse are brightly colored black, white, red, and
green. Each has stairs and small chapels. There
is a nyima (“sun”) temple in the north and a
dawa (“moon") temple to the south. Though all
Buddhist temples are modeled on an imaginary
mandala, this one has the mandala as its basic
plan, writ large in the landscape.

10.37 Samye Monastery

8 : 200 m

10.38 Plan: Samye Monastery

10.39 View of Borobudur, near Yogyakarta, Indonesia

INDONESIA AT A CROSSROADS
By the 9th century, the entire region of
Southeast Asia had begun to cohere as a
series of relatively stable states linked by
trade and religion. Guangzhou was the
primary entry point into China. Kunming,
a quasi-independent state (to become the
ingdom of Dali) was the primary land-based
entry point. Particularly important was the
development of trade around the Straits of
Malacca. Ships no longer unloaded at Kedah
ior the portage across the peninsula. With the
sea route now becoming the norm, Sumatra
and Indonesia quickly became a strategically
important area. The rulers of the Srivijaya
Empire made their wealth less on export than
on transit tariffs, since almost all shipping
trade had to go through the Malacca Straits.
The Hindu-Budchist kings of 9th-century
ndonesia used their new wealth to catapult
their kingdom into a conceptual center of
the Hindu-Buddhist cosmological universe.

Within the short space of a hundred years,
they built not only one of the finest Buddhist
stupa shrines ever, Borobudur, but also, a
scant 20 miles away, one of the largest and
most complex assemblages of Hindu temples
of the time, the Prambanam complex.

o
PYU CITY-STATES ” LO) Kunming TANG CHINA ra
gg . BY é
= f g in 1 + Pear! River g
Ss Ff & % %,
8 : § ze : te Guangzou” Weg, i
g (o4 5 A (O} Fan aye”
Beikthano-Myo"™"% s f Hanor
=
a
BEF aso
MON STATES % Onn
H @rcanapure South China Sea
u
Re eeenernnet®™ : A
CHAMPASKINGDOMS
H
e

O

"%
'e
re
hay
ey
%,

+ MALAYS

*% *
. SRIVUAYA EMPIRE |

%
%,
%,
%,
"e,

Loro Jonggrang

10.40 Rivers and cities of Southeast Asia

Empty room

Main stupa

Arupajhanas: Realm of
formless meditations

Rupadhatu: Realm of forms ay ;

tt ett

Kamadhatu: Realm of desires ——--——>

Borobudur

The great “cosmic mountain” at Borobudur
(ca. 760-830 CE) was started in the reign

of the Shailendra king Indra and completed
in that of Samaratunga. Though based on
earlier experiments, Borobudur is unique in
its formal organization and articulation. It is
approximately square in plan (122 meters
north to south and 116 meters east to west),
and it is roughly aligned to the cardinal
directions. The plan follows a typical Buddhist
mandala diagram, with a biaxial symmetrical
order composed of a series of jagged terraces
giving way to round ones in the middle.

To make the building, the architects
chopped down the top of a sizable hill,
leaving a stepped-shape stub on a terrace.
On the face of the rock, the designers
basically added a layer of stone to create the
effect of a terraced mountain.

Borobudur is at one level a quintessential
stupa, having been built onto a solid mound;
at another level, it is a three-dimensional
pedagogical diagram. The building is neither
a temple nor a monastery. Rather, it is
something of a mountain-scaled university to
which one goes not to invoke divine beings
but to participate in a didactic journey, to
learn—by moving through its spaces—a
progression of lessons by means of which the
successful student can attain a state of bodhi,
or perfected wisdom, just as the Sakyamuni
Buddha did 2,500 years prior. The essential

10.42 Aerial view of Borobudur

10.43 Plan: Borobudur wy

experience consists of an orchestrated
sequence of four galleries followed by three
terraces, preceded by one large plinth, or
pre-terrace. The first four terraces are square,
and the latter three are round. The whole
culminates in the central stupa, which is
completely solid and cannot be entered.

As the Buddhist pilgrim approaches it, the
complete profile of Borobudur is clearly
visible, its levels of galleries and rounded

stupa terraces placed hierarchically around
the central stupa, forming the outline of a
gently swelling mountain. The destination,
the central stupa, seems evident. As the
pilgrim gets closer, however, the central
stupa disappears and seems to retract into
the monument, and it is replaced by a forest
of smaller stupas and sculptures on a more
human scale. Since nirvana is not a place or
a thing, it has no physical dimension that can
be described. Rather, it is an inner state that
must be achieved by the pilgrim by means
of a personal journey. As governed by the
mandala, this journey must be completed by
a pilgrim in sixty conceptual steps.

The journey begins by circumambulating the
four lower galleries, which have two rows of
sculpted panels on each side, recounting
sequentially stories from the life of the
Buddha. These narrow galleries are staggered
to block all lines of sight, in order to focus the
pilgrim's attention on the panels. Only after
having cleared these four levels can pilgrims
ascend to the round upper levels, where
there are no enclosing walls. Instead, they
encounter the bell-shaped hollow stupas,
each one of which contains a different
sculpture of the seated Buddha displaying
one of the mudras, the characteristic
symbolic gestures of Buddhism. The
openings on the lower stupas are diamond-
shaped and large, while those on the ones
above are square, smaller, and fewer in
number. While each side of the candi
(“temple”) in the lower level is one step, each
bell-shaped stupa takes a whole step toward
the end. At the final stage, pilgrims arrive

at the stupa, whose solidity symbolizes the
shunyata, or “nonpresence,” aspired to by
the Buddhist pilgrim who seeks nirvana. The
lowest terrace of Borobudur, probably added
to stabilize the structure, was constructed at
a later date; it hides a row of friezes behind
it. One of the unresolved controversies
surrounding Borobudur is whether it was
originally planned with a large stupa in the
middle that would have dorninated the whole
edifice.

The Shailendra kingdom also constructed a
series of Hindu temples, the most impressive
of which is Candi Prambanam, known
popularly as Loro Jonggrang (“Slender Virgin").
Built around 850 CE, Loro Jonggrang's three
central shrines, facing east, are dedicated to
the Hindu trinity, Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva,
with Shiva at the center. Three subsidiary
shrines, for the corresponding animal
“vehicles,” or vahanas, of the temple deities,
face westward, toward the main group.)

The shrines sit on a platform, accessible
from all four sides. Around the platform, 224
small shrines are arrayed in concentric rings,
with extra widths for passages leading to the
center. A wall encloses the complex with
access gates on each side. Prambanam's
shrines are articulated as two-story structures
divided by a band of molding. Their profiles
are most like those of the Pallavas of southern
India, which emphasize slender verticality with
distinct and clear horizontal layers, as in the
Shore Ternple. Prambanam's two-storied base,
however, is significantly taller than its South
Asian precedents. The plans and tripartite
elevational orders of Hindu and Buddhist
structures of Southeast Asia were—probably
quite purposefully—very similar. The two
cosmologies were often articulated in parallel
as well. As a consequence, it is not unusual to
mistake a Hindu temple for a Buddhist one,
and vice versa, especially in conternporary
Cambodia.

HINDU KINGDOMS OF CAMBODIA

In 802 CE, Jayavarman II, who had united
the various Chola kingdoms in Cambodia
and southern Vietnam, became king and
supreme ruler over his vast new territory.
The coronation ceremony took place on Mt.
Mahendraparvata overlooking the Angkor
Plain. It was, for the region, a new type of
ingdom. The traditional trade route from
unming had gone through Burma and
through cities on the Irrawaddy River, like
Biethano-Myo. And the shipping lanes that
developed around 400 CE hugged the coast
to the benefit of cities like Oc Eo. The Khmer
controlled a large inland area that they made
fertile with their irrigation technology. In a
century, it was to make them the wealthiest
ingdom in Southeast Asia. The rise of the
hmer was also spurred on by the trade
tween China and India. The rule of the
Song dynasty (960-1279 CE) conforms

quite closely with that of the Khmer, and

with the Chola in India (860-1279 CE). Both
China and India exerted powerful economic
influences in the Southeast Asian areas,
although, from a cultural point of view, it

was India that won out, with its variants

of Buddhism and Hinduism spreading
throughout the region. To the east, in
Vietnam, were the Champa, whom the Khmer
tried several times to conquer in order to gain
access to their ports. To the south was the
Srivijaya Empire, founded in the 8th century
on the island of Sumatra, which controlled
the Straits of Malacca. Also to be factored

in is the Dali kingdom in Yunnan Province

in southern China. From 900 until 1253 Ce,
when it was conquered by the Mongolians
and brought back into the fold of the Chinese
Empire, it was an autonomous state; with

the disruptions of the trade routes that came
with the Mongolian expansion into Asia, the
southern route, which went right through

the Dali heartland, proved to be a viable
alternative. The Khmer sold specialty iterns
such as spices and wood to the Chinese, in
exchange for metal items such as bronze
pots, as well as silver and gold. Above all,
however, they were producers of rice, and it
was in fact rice as bulk exchange item that
drove the founding of the cities at Agkor.

10.44 View of Bakong Temple Mountain, near Siem Reap, Cambodia

oO

2” Mahendraparvata (Phnom Kulen}

Indratataka (Sea of Indra)

2nd City: Yasodharapura

Phnom Bakheng, 889 ce

10.45 Area plan: Angkor, Cambodia

Siem Reap River

Ist City: Hariharalaya
Bakong Temple, 881 ce

Great Lake


10.46 Section through Temple Mountain at Bakong Temple

ie) 200 m
bk-t - 4

10.48 Plan: Bakong Temple and its precinct

Hariharalaya

The first city that was laid out, called Hariharalaya,
was designed as a perfect square about 3
kilometers on a side. The name Hariharalaya

is derived from the name of the Hindu deity

Harihara, who was prominent in pre-Angkorian
Cambodia. The name Harihara, in turn, is a
composite of hari (meaning “the Hindu god
Vishnu”) and fara (meaning “the Hindu god
Shiva”). The name thus means something like
“the City of Vishnu and Shiva.” The city was not as
dense as medieval European cities, since its built-
up areas were interspersed with gardens and small
fields. It was however, an extremely orderly layout,

with the areas surrounding the city dedicated to
rice cultivation.

That Jayavarman II chose this site to the
north of the Great Lake for his capital was no
coincidence. Apart from a steady supply of water
for rice growing, the place was seen as a local holy
land that, with relatively modest enhancements,
could be transformed into the holy land of the
Khmer. Angkor spiritual geography, as would
have been typical in Indic mythology, was defined
around three primary elements: the mountain, the
river, and the ocean—or Mt. Meru, the Ganges
River, and the Indian Ocean. Each had its own
translation in the local Angkor geography.

Mahendraparvata (Mt. Meru)

Mt. Meru, the abode of the gods, lies at the center
of the physical and spiritual universes. For the
hmer, its incarnation was Mahendraparvata,
“the Mountain of Indra, the King of Gods.” Known
today as Phnom Kulen, it is located about 25
ilometers to the northeast of Angkor. Jayavarman
| built several temples on the mountain to house
the lingam. It was also from this mountain that
the stones for the Angkor temples were quarried.
n that sense, the stones possessed a spiritual
charge.

Siem Reap (Ganges River)

mountain is the source of the Siem Reap

iver, which in its numerous offshoots drains most
the plateau before reaching the Great Lake. It

is the water from this river that feeds the complex
system of canals and barays. The river was
identified with the goddess Ganga.

won

ndratataka (Sea of Indra)

The “ocean” was built in Jayavarman Il’s city
immediately after he became king. This vast
baray, the largest of its kind at the time, was
called Indratataka, or “Sea of Indra,” and was 3.8

kilometers long and 0.8 kilometers wide.

Bakong

Jayavarman || may have founded the

city, but his state temple was some 20
kilometers away, back in Phnom Kulen. For
this reason, his court remained at Phnom
Kulen until 802 CE, when he finally moved
to Hariharalaya. The next king, Indravarman
| (“Protected by Indra”), built a new state
temple, but in the very center of the city. The
temple (881 CE), which had long avenues
extending from it in the cardinal directions,
sat in a moated enclosure that would have
contained palaces and royal storehouses.
Dedicated to Shiva, it measures 900 by 700
meters and consists of three concentric
enclosures separated by two moats. The
innermost enclosure, which measures 160

by 120 meters, contains eight towers and
the central temple, which has a single tower
on its top platform. The plan of the ternple
is square and consists of five levels. Though
not complicated compared to subsequent
temples, the design is quite refined. The
levels become successively shallower, and
the staircase narrows as it ascends. The
culminating tower is thought to have replaced
the original one, since its architectural style
corresponds to that of the 12th-century
temple city Ankgor Wat.

Stone was used for the platforms,
whereas brick was used for the architectural
parts. The brick was covered with bas-relief
carvings in stucco depicting scenes frorn
Hindu mythology. Large stone statues of
elephants are positioned as guardians at
the corners of the three lower levels of the
pyramid. Statues of lions guard the stairways.

What often makes Khmer temples seem
ien to Western perceptions is that they
re not set against the landscape. They
re both a form of architecture based on a
complex application of geometry and site
lanning, and a constructed landscape; all

stoue2n oo

ese temples are not only set in a sacred
landscape but are themselves copies of the
symbolic landscape of mountain and ocean.

he moats that surround the temples do not
serve a protective purpose but represent
@ primeval oceans in which the treasure

of immortality was hidden. The water also
visually echoes the temple's image, making
the temple-mountain appear linked with

its inverted reflection. On a practical level,
these waters are integrated into the baray

ot
2
Fs
5

Soa & fn
& "sg x

amen

” 85 ero

8 ow

g Peres -

oc a a
wa?

&

va owe

50m

10.49 Plan of Phnom Bakheng, Siem Reap, Cambodia

system, literally nourishing the land. This
mutually reinforcing relationship between a
symbolic landscape and its real-life model is
continuously at play in these temples.

The temple represents a combination of

these five principles:

1. The sacred mandala/mountain/ocean of
Shiva and the Hindu pantheon

2. An intensified model of the sacred
landscape in which they are sited

3. The home of the god(s)

4. The omnipotence of the king

5. The economy of the Khmer people

Around the year 900 Ce, King Yasovarman |
(“Protected by Glory”; r. 899-917) created
yet another new city, along with a new state
temple and a new and significantly larger
baray. The city, Yasodharapura (“Glory-
Bearing City”), was, like its predecessor,
perfectly square, but it was much larger:
about 4 kilometers on a side. The new
state temple, Phnom Bakheng, located

at the center, was known originally as
Yasodharesvara—the “Lord of the One Who
Bears Glory.”

It is also referred to in inscriptions as Phnom
Kandal (“Central Mountain"). Yasodharesvara
is built on top of a sizable 60-meter-high rock
outcropping, the top (and perhaps even the
slopes) of which had been shaved down to
suit the design. Whereas Bakong was more
of an artificial mountain than a real one,
Bakheng was a mountain augmented by a
temple to become a type of super-temple/
mountain. The whole was surrounded by a
moat measuring 650 by 436 meters. Avenues
radiated out in the four cardinal directions
from the mount, with a causeway running in
a northwest-southeast orientation from the
old capital area to the east section of the new
capital’s outer moat and then, turning to an
east-west orientation, connected directly to
the east entrance of the temple. The temple
faces east, measures 76 meters square at

its base, and is built in a pyramid form of

six tiers. At the top level, five sandstone
sanctuaries stand in a quincunx: one in the
center and one at each corner of the level’s
square. The quincunx represents the five
peaks of Mt. Meru.


Among the various temples that were built
during this period was Buseoksa Temple
(676-1000 CE), which was the center of Silla
Buddhism. It was established by the monk
Uisang, the founder of the Consciousness-Only
School, an idealistic system of thought in which
sense perceptions have no objective reality.
Instead, it is the mind or the consciousness

of the perceived that holds and contains the
universe. Buseoksa, or “Temple of the Floating
Stone,” is so named because of a large

rock beside the western hall that appears to
float above the stones underneath, perhaps
symbolizing its defiance of gravity.

The monastery rests on a forested slope
defined by a series of terraces accessed by
paths, stairs, and gatehouses. There are 108
steps between the Cheonwangmun Gate and
the Anyangmun Gate, the number of steps
representing redemption from agony and evil
passions through 108 cycles. The Anyangmun
Gate is actually a pavilion floating out over the
edge of a terrace; the terrace is entered from
10.50 Buseoksa Temple, Gyeongsangdo, Korea underneath. Anyangmun means “entrance to
heaven,” and the gate is the culmination of the
spiritual path. With spectacular views into the

KOREAN BUDDHISM As Mahayana Buddhism evolved in India valleys and landscape beyond, it sits opposite
By the end of the 7th century, the Silla and China, several different sects accessible the Muryangsujeon Hall, with its Buddha; it
dynasty (668-935 CE), which had initiated only to initiates evolved in Korea as well, dates from about the year 1000. (The temple
the introduction of Buddhism into Korea, particularly those influenced by Tibetan and was burnt by the Japanese in 1593 and
controlled most of the Korean Peninsula. It Chinese esoteric or Tantric Buddhism. restored from 1969 to 1973.)

defeated the Kaya Federation in 562 CE, and
thanks to an alliance with the Chinese T’ang
court, it also succeeded in conquering the
kingdoms of Paekche in 660 CE and Koguryé
in 668 CE, thereby unifying Korea for the
first tire under a single kingdom, with its
capital at KyOngju. Even after the Chinese
troops had withdrawn into Manchuria, the
Silla maintained close ties with Tang China
through trade and diplomatic exchanges.
The Silla made Buddhism the state

religion, causing it to spread rapidly as far
as Japan. Nonetheless, the introduction

of Buddhism into Korea was met with

some resistance, which was only resolved
when native gods were in essence seen as
apparitions into which Buddhist gods had
temporarily projected themselves. Certain
shamanistic gods, for example, were made
into bodhisattvas incarnate. A similar tension
persisted in Japan between Shinto traditions
and the new modern Buddhist concepts.

10.52 Site section: Buseoksa Temple

10.53 Main hall, Nanchan Temple, Wutaishan, Shanxi Province, China

FOGUANG MONASTERY

The Nanchan and Foguang monasteries, built
during the Sui and T’ang periods and located
far north of the capital on Wutai Mountain in
Shanxi Province, are among the few wooden
monasteries to have survived into modern
times. The Foguang Temple (857 CE) was
the more ambitious construction of the two.
Unlike the three-bayed hall of Nanchan, with
its simple hip-and-gable (xieshan) roof, the
Foguang hall is seven-by-four bayed and has
a roof format known as first-class hip style.
The columns divide the hall into an inner and
outer cao (“space”). Just as they transformed
the stupa to a fa, or pagoda, the Chinese
also transformed the monastery format;

in this case, it clearly derived from the
palatial architecture of the time. Monasteries
generally consisted of a Buddha hall

framed by a courtyard within a colonnaded
enclosure, with a north and a south gate.
The larger ones had east and west gates as
well. The courtyards were named after their
principal buildings—for example, the pagoda
courtyard, the chan (“meditation”) courtyard,
the vanaya (“discipline”) courtyard, the purea
(“land”) courtyard, and so on. The overall
styles of Nanchan and Foguang temples,
however, are very similar, with low-pitched
roof slopes, deep eaves, and dominating
brackets.

The Foguang Temple almost did not survive.
In 845, as part of the persecution, the
original 5th-century structure, an important
stop for Buddhist pilgrims, was burned to
the ground, with only the small yet elegant
Zushi pagoda surviving from the ternple’s
early history. Twelve years later, however, in

857, a woman named Ning Gongyu provided

funds for a reconstruction led by a monk

named Yuancheng. (The current building is a

reconstruction from the 1970s.)

Chinese wood roofs are described by the
number and types of bracket sets and

beams deployed. While bracket sets are a
complex addition to the number of horizontal,
vertical, and diagonal composite elements,
called dou-gong, the beams are designated
by their position and the number of rafters
they span. Dou-gong bracket sets differ

in size and number depending on their
position and location, the size of the roof,
and the stature of the building. Bracket

sets of this complexity never developed in
ndia, Mesopotamia, or areas to the west,
where walls played a more important role in
the structural stability and expression of a
uilding. In the West, wood bearns needed to
e attached with skill, but architects did not
ave to worry about a building twisting, which
is a common problem with structures set up
on columns or posts. The brackets keep the
top part of the building stiff against rotational
forces while supplying enough flexibility in
case of earthquakes. The technology was
developed early on by the Chinese, but it was
yy no means static. It went through several
developmental stages. By the 15th century,
engineers had learned how to simplify the
racketing systems and began using them
more for the purposes of tradition than out of
structural necessity.

Lever arm (ang}—*
Bracket arms (gong)—
Bearing black (dau) ~~

Columns

10.54 Detail of bracket system: Main hall, Foguang Temple,
Wutaishan, Shanxi Province, China

10.56 Pictorial view of a dou-gong bracket set

10.57 Site plan and section: Foguang Temple, Wutaishan, Shanxi Province, China

EUROPE AND THE CAROLINGIANS
Around the year 800 CE, the architectural

hot spots were in Indonesia, China, and

the Islamic world. In Europe, the situation
was still bleak. Stability had improved
somewhat with the Christianization of the
Franks when Clovis | adopted Catholicism in
Reims, France, around 496 CE; as was then
the practice, all the Franks then adopted
Catholicism as well. The king of the Visigoths,
Theodoric |, along with other Germanic tribes,
inally stopped the invasion of the Huns in
alons, France, south of Reims, in 451 CE.
ut the onslaught of steppe tribes was not
ver yet. With their families and herds, the
ombards had moved into northern Italy.

e Ungars and Bulgars were on the move

Ss well, dispersing into Greece, and some

eoRpoz

4c

ven into Italy. This meant that a huge swath
f territory, from the tip of Greece northward
| the way to the Baltic Sea, was still in a

a2oon

state of flux. The settlement of the Franks,
who had moved into France from the lower
Rhine only a few centuries earlier and who
were now starting to farrn the land previously
nown by the Romans as Gaul, was the only
bright spot.

Though they had been Christianized

by the 7th century, the Franks had rarely
ad periods in which there had been just
one ruler. Furthermore, southern Spain

jad been lost to the Islamic armies, as

jad the Christianized areas of the eastern
Roman Empire in Syria. The Armenians,
with their vibrant architectural culture, were
also dispersed, many fleeing westward to
Constantinople and Italy. Byzantium itself
was under continual threat of invasion by
Islamic armies, and even the Mediterranean
was largely controlled by Islamic ships.
onetheless, the Franks eventually
consolidated their hald to become the

jominant force in Europe. Together with the
Byzantines, the Christian civilizational area
formed a tenuous U, from Denmark down
through France and Italy, around Greece, and
nto Anatolia. The invasion of northern Italy by
the Lombards threatened to cut Italy off frorn
France, but in 774 CE, Charlernagne, by then
king of the Franks, conquered the Lombards
and brought them into the Christian fold.

The Frankish, Italian, and reduced Byzantine
areas now formed the core of the Christian
world.

Charlemagne (747-814 CE), was by all
accounts an unusual rman. The eldest

child of Pepin the Short (r. 751-68 CE), he
introduced new financial regulations, took a
serious interest in scholarship, and promoted
the liberal arts at his court. With all this in
mind, Pope Leo III realized that in order for
Europe to survive, he would have to share
power with Charlemagne. Thus was born

the idea of the Holy Roman Empire. To their
mutual benefit, it in essence had two rulers:
a religious one and a secular one, the military
power of the latter protecting the existence
of the former. On Christmas day of the year
800 CE, in Rome, Leo crowned Charlemagne
emperor of the Holy Roman Empire. It was a
unique arrangement for its age, and one that
would have long-term consequences. The
title would be handed down and fought over
for centuries and officially dissolved only in
1806.

Long before Charlemagne’s coronation,
the Carolingian Church had established a
close relationship with Rome, but it was only
with the coronation that the Roman liturgy
became the norm. For this, Charlemagne
turned to the monastic rules of St. Benedict
(489-543 CE), who had lived three centuries
earlier. He had formulated his rules during
an age in which temporal rule had broken
down. As a counterbalance to the chaos,
Benedict envisioned the monastery as a
devout Christian family of men. The monks’
waking hours were devoted primarily to
worship and manual labor. But over the
centuries, the system was inconsistently
applied. Charlemagne reaffirmed the rules
as a way to regularize monastic life from
the patchwork of devotional practices it had
become, while simultaneously bringing the
Church closer to imperial policy by making it
the basic financial, territorial, and educational
institution of the land. Christianity, which had
formerly lived within the limited confines of
what was left of the Roman Empire, was now
becoming a broad European phenomenon.

A new unified era was thus created. The
seat of religious power was still in Rome,
however, and therein lay a peculiar ambiguity
about the location of power that was to beset
European politics for centuries and would not
be resolved until the Enlightenment in the
18th century. But at the time of Charlemagne,
the careful balance between the secular

and the religious was still perceived as a
mutually beneficial cooperation. The type of
government Charlemagne set up developed
into a feudal system, with a strict hierarchy
linking serf, landlord, and count to the king.
(It did, however, lack a firm centralized
administrative structure.) Charlemagne
moved from place to place to assert and
expand his authority. The result was an
important expansion of architectural works
that imprinted his rule on the landscape.

In Italy, just north of Rome, he rebuilt the
monastery at Farfa as a southern outpost of
the empire, while to the east, he relied on the
monasteries at Lorsch and Fulda.

Plan of St. Gall

A 9th-century plan for a medieval monastery
at St. Gall in Switzerland provides direct
insight into the organization of the medieval
monastery. Drawn with red lead on smooth
calfskin, the plan provides a remarkably
comprehensive snapshot of an institution of
about forty buildings inhabited by about 110
monks, with an equal number of laypeople
who served as support staff. The site is
organized into three zones: to the west, at
the bottom of the plan, are the areas open to
the lay population; the monastery proper is in
the middle zone; and to the east, at the top,
are the garden, infirmary, and cemetery. To
the left of the road that accesses the church
entrance, a reception hall and a dormitory
for pilgrims was foreseen. To the north of
the church there were special buildings

for the abbot and novices. St. Gall was a
nave church, with no transept. Its rounded
entrance was flanked by freestanding towers.
hese were not bell towers—those were a
later developrnent. At the top of one tower
was an altar to St. Michael, and on the other
was an altar to St. Gabriel, the celestial
guardians representing the forces of light
against those of darkness and evil.

Though the draughtsman did not show
the thickness of the walls, he did show doors,
chimneys, and ovens and labeled each room.
He even labeled the vegetables that were
planted in the garden, such as onions, leeks,
radishes, and fennel. The monk’s cloister,
the spatial core of the plan, was an open
yard about 30 meters square, with arcaded
walks giving access to surrounding buildings
such as the dormitory, the refectory, and the

10.58 Detail of a portion of the plan of St. Gall

store
north
with

house for the wine and beer kegs. The
walk, broader than the rest and fitted
enches, was used as a chapter house

for daily meetings. It was connected to the
east wall of the church by a special entrance
that allowed the monks access to the altar,

whic

was screened off from the public.

The plan was drawn using a module of 40

Carol

ingian feet, the numeri sacri, as that is

the
altar.

imension of the crossing of the church's
The church length was five times that

amount, or 200 feet, and the depth of the
side aisles half that amount, or 20 feet. By
means of further halving, the draughtsman
arrived at 2.5 feet, the smallest base measure
applied in the plan.

10.59 Plan of St. Gall, St. Gallen, Switzerland
. Church

1

2. Tower of St. Michael
3. Tower of St. Gabriel
4. Guest lodgings
5. Abbot's house

6. Cloister

7. Monks’ dormitory
8. Monks’ refectory
9. Kitchen

10. Brew house

11. Novitate and infirmary

12. Henhouse

13. Granary

14. Monks’ garden

15. Monks’ orchard and cernetery
16. Sheep, goats, and cows

17. Unknown function

18. Workshops

10.60 A drawing of what the
monastery at St. Gall might have
looked like according to the plan

10.62 Plan: Abbey Church of St. Riquier

St. Riguier

In the 9th century, a series of large abbey
churches were built northward frorn Italy as
a way to spread the message and influence
of the Church of Rome. These buildings
tended to be stark and simple volumetrically.
Windows were small, round-headed, sparsely
ornamented, and positioned high in the

wall. Walls were built of coarse or loosely
finished stone that required a good deal of
thickness for stability. It was an architecture
that did not tax the spatial imagination yet
one that yielded stable, solid forms and dark,
mysterious interiors. The transept, a minor
element in the 5th-century basilica churches
of Rome, became integral to the design. But
vaulting at the tirne was to a large extent a
thing of the future: most Carolingian buildings
had wooden roofs supported by trusses.

The Abbey Church of St. Riquier in
northern France, not far from Amiens, though
it is no longer extant, can be reconstructed
from descriptions and old views. Completed
in 799 CE, it followed the basic plan, with

10.63 Interior of the dome, Palatine Chapel, Aachen, Germany

towers soaring from cylindrical bases. The
external appearance was of clear geornetry,
solid walls, and small windows. The building
was accessed in the Roman manner via an
atrium as well as transept entrances. The
atrium stood in front of a massive structure
surmounted by a cylindrical tower. The
monastery had a population of about three
hundred monks and one hundred novices,
in addition to the servants and serfs. The
abbey was dedicated to the Holy Trinity and
was connected to two smaller sanctuaries
dedicated to St. Benedict and the Virgin
Mary, all connected by walls and porticoes.
Conforming to the new liturgy, there was a
processional path through the church, which
was designed to allow the various altars to be
visited in sequence. (The church contained
a collection of twenty-five relics.) This
processional movement through the church
was to become a mainstay of medieval
religious practice. Also new was the addition
of an autonomous spatial zone behind the
altar that accommodated the monks. This

church-behind-a-church, or choir, was to
become an important element in the church
design of the Middle Ages. Also significant
was the design of the tower over the transept
crossing.

Palatine Chapel

Aachen had been founded by the Romans
as a spa because of its thermal springs. It
was laid out as a square with baths, a palace,
and a garrison. Destroyed in the 5th century
during the invasions by the German tribes,

it was more or less abandoned as a ruin.
Because the Frankish kings moved their
court from place to place, they had no need
for a capital complex, but when Charlemagne
came to power in 768, he decided to settle
down in order to govern his kingdom from
one place.

The architect, Odo of Metz, kept the basic
layout of the Roman roads that divided the
site into four parts. To the north he placed
a basilica/council hall and to the south the
Palatine Chapel, connected by an enclosed

at
l

o Paiscrsrsraoo

mamma mmor

Inner court

all TL

an
eoN

Gallery

Gallery

o

hi

Outer court

gallery. The chapel consists of a tall octagonal
shaft of space surrounded by annular
galleries. Unlike earlier buildings in which
the walls were of stone rubble stuccoed
over, here the whole is designed with
elaborate marbles augmented by mosaics.
The craftsmen were certainly brought in
from Byzantium or Armenia, along with the
columns and marbles that came, with the
Pope’s permission, from Rome and Ravenna.
At the ground floor, the octagon is defined
by plain undivided arches, the voussoirs
decorated gray and white, holding a cornice
that separates the lower zone from the upper
arches. Above the cornice, openings consist
of elegant arcade screens set between tall
arches leading up to a groin vault. To fight
the lateral thrusts of the 16.5-meter-wide,
segmented dome, the architects added
lateral vaults at the gallery level that seem
to have been inspired by observing Roman
theater construction. The design, in its simple
organization of piers and columns, has the
appearance of a Carolingian attempt to revive

Moo ommmoes

© Geua saa F
7 . ° Atrium ig *

Te 4 * vt Ravenna, with which this building most
@ o085 once pee > + y¥ certainly sought to compete, although at St.
L — ea E wa, 4 Vitale the shimmering and curved surfaces
ie

Bea
ag
Westwork
ft
oa:

ra i Roman aesthetics. The use of variegated
marbles for the paneling and the voussoirs
also reflect an awareness of St. Vitale in

+h
s\ 5
rr

create a more ephemeral effect. Nonetheless,
gore at the Palatine Chapel we see the beginnings
of an internal facade and of the search
fer_pul to bring unity to the various architectural
elerments—the openings, cornice lines,

revetments, and columns—while stil
providing for liturgical needs. The king sat
in the west on the upper level, on a throne
made of white marble plates. He had a view
on the three altars: that of the Savior right in
front of him, that of the Virgin Mary on the
first floor, and that of Saint Peter in the far
end of the western choir.

As the burial place of Charlemagne and
the setting for imperial coronations, the
Palatine Chapel became, in time, a dynastic
shrine and an icon of imperial power. It
was likely also viewed as an incarnation
of the heavenly Jerusalem: it cannot be a
coincidence that the circumference of its
inner octagon comes to 144 Carolingian feet,
just as the walls of the heavenly Jerusalem
described in the book of Revelation core to
144 cubits.

10.64 Plan: Palace complex at Aachen, Germany

10.65 East-west section through the Palatine Chapel

Gulf of Mexico

eo Itza

® Uxmal “A

* vorthern lowlands

aX
4 A Gord,
», Palenque, .

ss Mirador

\ Tonina~ ou
Vw A © A@ Southern lowlands
a \ Yaxchilan

NS i
. a

Pacific Ocean

10.66 Mayan sites

TIKAL

Tikal’s recorded history begins in 292 CE,
when Balam Ajaw (“Decorated Jaguar”)
came to power. At its peak around 700 CE,
Tikal was home to about eighty thousand
people. Surrounded by cornfields cultivated
with intense labor, the houses of its residents
were spread evenly over a 16-square-
kilometer area. They were clustered into
groups of about four to seven, all raised

on high platforms and organized around a
courtyard. A high level of civic organization
and hydraulic engineering was critical to
Tikal’s survival. The swampy land had to be
sectored by raised causeways that provided
access to the cultivable land and also allowed
for travel and transport. For dwellings, more
permanent stone platforms had to be built,
and for fresh water, stone-lined cisterns were
constructed. Tikal was built on a set of hills,
located on the watershed between the Gulf of
Mexico and the Caribbean Sea. Perched at
the high point of the region, therefore, Tikal’s
temples enjoyed a commanding view of their
surroundings.

Though the central buildings of the Mayas
were used for ceremonial and religious
functions and also sometimes as markets,
the city itself was spread out in the form of
an urban settlement. The Mayan cities were

Guif of Honduras

organized around neighborhoods, each with
its own residences for the elite. Whereas
the priestly class and ruling elite lived in the
palaces associated with the shrines, the rest
of the Mayas visited the centers sporadically
for distinct ritual purposes. Though temples
were constructed with specific orientations
and functions in mind, ceremonial centers
as a whole were not expanded according
to preplanned rules or geometries, giving
them a somewhat ad hoc appearance. There
may, of course, have been reasons for the
slightly disjointed and angular arrangement
of buildings and open plazas, but these have
been lost to time.
The North Acropolis, Tikal’s oldest
complex, was “reskinned” many times. When
a ruler of some significance died, he was
buried in the acropolis, and a new stone layer

was added to it. The new mass was carefully
set to ensure that the addition did not
damage the older structure. Small vaults were
built for the burials, each with its own shrine.
Stairs provided access to these chambers for
ancestral rites, which had to be performed by
later rulers. A section through the acropolis,
therefore, is a veritable textbook of Tikal’s
thousand-year history. The plaza is a flat
stone platform approached by climbing six
wide steps. A set of stelae describing Tikal’s

North
oO Mayas
Central @ Teotihuacan
O Zapotecs
oO Tairona, Columbia
South

@ Moche, Peru (north)

O Nazca, Peru (south)
O Tiwanaku, Bolivia

10.67 Urbanization of the Americas, ca. 600 CE

rulers and dating their achievements are
lined up along its northern edge. Temples |
and || were constructed simultaneously from
734 to 736 CE by Yik'in Chan K’awiil. (K’awiil
also built Temples IV and VI.) The Tikal ruler
Jasaw Chan K’awiil | died in 734 CE and was
buried beneath Temple | in a spectacular
ceremony.
Unlike most Central American platform
mounds, whose colossal size completely
dwarfs the shrine that sits atop them, the
shrines of Tikal dominate their substructures.
The width atop the shrine of Temple | is just
a little less than that of the structure's base.
This makes for an extremely steep profile. As
a consequence, the visual focus of the entire
composition is the shrine’s entrance, which
is wider than the steps leading to it. Nowhere
else in Central American architecture does

one find this particular set of architectural
proportions at work. Unlike the clay and
stone interiors of earlier Mayan pyramids,
the interior of this one was built with large
blocks of stones, carefully and accurately
fitted in the supporting walls. To keep water
from leaching into the interior, the surface
was sealed with mortar. The brickwork that
covered the entire pyramid served more for
decoration than for protection.

Nes Ge
- .
Fa a,
=~ ©
- tO km
- , , a
‘
1. ,
, ra

ee : ..
S a “ * E Le a . | .
wo . oO" . Great Plaza a — n
. Central Acropolis + To

e -
.- ~
io
+ Fe a)
- Nk
fa
r .
t G

10.68 General plan of Tikal, near Flores, Guatemala

North Acropolis ,

wor!
~ Fic Temple I

oot

C 6 : . 300 m 10.70 Plan: Central zone of Tikal

Southeast of the Great Plaza is the so-called
Central Acropolis, which held the royal courts
and residences. It consisted of a series of
courts connected at the corners, with simple
adjoining buildings sitting on platforms. The
palace courts, although they adjoined the
central ceremonial complex, were visually
screened off from their surroundings. They
were entered at the corners. Tikal's urban
core is a spectacular assernbly of more
than a hundred stone temples. The Mayan
engineers constructed Tikal’s base by
building up the higher zones into platforms
with mud and stone. Three zones in the
middle were linked over time by causeways
to form a triangle. Additional causeways
connected to adjoining platforms and the rest
of the urban area.

The largest of these zones is focused on
a giant stone platform, the Great Plaza. To its
north is the North Acropolis, which faces the
Great Plaza. Its eastern and western ends are
anchored by the so-called Temples | and II,
respectively. Farther west and slightly to the
south is Temple III, and even farther west,
connected by a causeway, is Tikal’s largest
temple, the 70-meter-tall Temple IV.

Astronomy determined the location of the
main temples. They are linked by sightlines.
Standing on top of Temple | looking west,
the peak of Ternple III marks the setting of
the sun at the equinoxes. From the same
position, a sightline to Temple IV marks
sunset on August 13, the day the world
began, according to the Mayan calendar.
Farther north, two adjacent platform
mounds, called the Twin Pyramid complex,
are oriented exactly along the cardinal
directions. Their collective steps add up to
365, corresponding exactly to one calendar
year. They were constructed at the end of a
twenty-year period of the Mayan calendar,
signifying the successful cornpletion of that
period.

10.72 Plan and section-elevation: Temple | (Temple of the Great Jaguar), Tikal

10.73 Temple of the Inscriptions, Palenque, Chiapas, Mexico

MAYAN CITY-STATES
In the 8th and 9th centuries, the Mayan
city-states of the Yucatan dominated the
peninsula. In the period from 600 to 750 CE,
the city of Palenque, located in the foothills of
the Chiapas altipiano, began to expand under
the leadership of the king Pacan and his two
sons. Palenque is set into the hillside and laid
out to take advantage of the contours and
natural cleavage formed by the Otulum River,
which passes through the city; water from it
was diverted to the Palenque’s central palace,
the city's most remarkable building, via a
long corbel-vaulted tunnel. The Palenque
architects set corbeled vaults parallel to

one another, which not only created greater
interior spaces, unlike the solid masses of
most Mayan buildings, but also stabilized

the whole structure. This is one reason
Palenque’s buildings have aged so well. Their
rooftop ornamental superstructure was also
made as a roofcomb, which further reduced
the structure's overall weight.

Palenque’s palace sits on a broad platform
that is centrally located to visually command
the site. On one side, the palace dominates
the edge of the Otulum River; on the other,
its platform and profile define the edges

of Palenque’s central plaza. The palace
complex opens toward the hills, although
the monumental stairs are on the north and
west sides. This indicates that access to the
palace, as one might expect, was carefully
regulated. The interior is dominated by two

© courts that take up half the complex and are
. separated by a long double-vaulted building
Us that was the palace's original core. The
Palace

south half of the palace is labyrinthine, with
a dense network of interconnected chambers.

cowhabe
ey

Temple of the
Inscriptions.

}, Femple of the Sun
~., Temple of the
* Foliated Cross

ie) 300m +

* 10.74 Plan of Palenque

10.75 Aerial view of Copan, Honduras

Visually, the palace’s most recognizable
structure is the four-story tower that rises
just outside the west courtyard. It is unique
in Mayan architecture, and its purpose is
still undetermined. To the southwest of the
palace complex is the so-called Temple of
the Inscriptions (683 CE), which is famous
because its foundation contains the tomb
of K’inich Janaab Pakal. Unlike most tombs
in the base of pyramids (as at Tikal, where
they are completely interred within their
superstructure), Pakal’s tomb remained
accessible from a stairway at the top of the
temple. In the access stairway can therefore

be found the explicit spatialization of one of
the cardinal ideologies of Mayan religious
practice: that rulers and generations to come
ruled because of their connection to their
ancestors, and that honoring and maintaining
an ongoing relationship with those ancestors
was Critical to their being and welfare. The
stelae on Pakal’s sarcophagus show him
passing through the underworld in the
process of becoming an ancestor. During the
8th century, the city came under increasing
stress, in concert with most other classic
Mayan city-states, and there was no new
elite construction in the ceremonial center.
Palenque was eventually abandoned.

Copan
Located in a mountain valley of the Copan

River on the western edge of Honduras,
Copan is the southernmost of the major
Mayan cities. One of the largest Mayan
centers, Copan was the capital of a state
covering several hundred square kilometers
between 400 and 820 CE. The site is

about 600 meters above sea level, above
the jungles and rain forests of the lowland
Mayas. Although occupied for about two
thousand years, the main visible buildings
were built in the period between 600 and
900 CE. The excavated ruins cover about 16
hectares and consist of the main acropolis

and five plazas. Like the ancestral complex
of Tikal, the main structure at Copan is an
agglomerative megacomplex, built over a
period of six hundred years, consisting of a
gigantic platform with an assorted collection
of masonry temples, palaces, ball courts,
plazas, tombs, carved stelae, and altars,
dating mostly from 695 to 800 CE.

Like Monte Alban in modern-day Oaxaca,
Mexico, the surrounding mountains of the
Copan River valley offered rich possibilities
for dramatic landscape alignments. In
particular, the Copan ball court, which sits
between the main plaza and the acropolis,
is aligned so that a view through it, which is

10.76 Ball court, Copan, Honduras

also the main view from atop the acropolis,
seems to exactly echo the angles of the
steep hills beyond. The Copan main group,
as is typical of Mesoamerican ceremonial
centers, is oriented to the cardinal directions
along the longer north-south axis, with the
heavier concentration of built-up terraces
and palaces to the south and a main plaza
to the north. The main plaza is entered from
the east. A subsidiary plaza leads into the
vast rectangular space of the main bounded
plaza, with a low, three-level platform mound
in the middle. A ball court and subsidiary
platform abut the south end of the main
plaza, just before a monumental set of
stairways leads up to the higher levels of the
royal complex. A platforrn pyramid sits in the

middle of the high terrace, which is edged by

a series of palaces and tombs. The northern
edge of the main plaza extends out into a T,
forming another pyramid. The steep western
stairway is a famous hieroglyphic stairway
whose 2,200 glyphs relate the story of the
last Copan dynasty.

’ u
etal ey aA

¢
nod AL

Main court

: phalia
Hieroglyphic Count ai

10.77 Plan of Copan

Oca jamarca
Chan Chan

Ochavin

Pachacamac@) puari Empire

Ocuzco

[0] Nazca

Pacific Ocean

10.78 Huari and Tiwanaku empires

TIWANAKU

Tiwanaku lies in a highland valley in the
southern Andes 3,660 meters above sea
level, near the south shore of Lake Titicaca.
Inhabited from roughly 1000 BCE to 500 CE,
it was not only the capital of a network

of cities but also the regional ceremonial
center, maintaining its preeminent position
until about 1000 CE. It was not so much
the city that was important but the lake,
which was seen as the place of origin from
whence the primeval couple were sent out to
call mankind forth from the springs, rivers,
rocks, and trees. Lake Titicaca was known
as a taypi, a zone of convergence between
the principles of urco (the west, high, dry,
pastoral, celestial, male) and uma (the east,
low, agricultural, underworld, female). If
Tiwanaku was the central representation

of the taypi, the elite who lived there were
viewed as the guardians and representatives
of this sacred order.

The ceremonial center was surrounded by
an immense artificial moat filled with water
diverted from the Tiwanaku River, which
evoked the image of the city’s core as an

Lake Titicaca
[O) Tiwanaku

Tiwanaku Empire

island. The level of the lake itself would have
been higher. Now the ruins are 10 kilometers
from the shore, but the shore would have
been closer to or possibly at the very foot
of the site, which featured several temples,
gateways of monumental scale, platforms,
and sunken courts. The two most important
structures are the Akapana (ca. 700 CE) and
the Puma Punku, which was built somewhat
later.

The Akapana was a low-terraced platform
mound with a base 200 meters square
and a height of 17 meters. It is an earthen
mound, faced with a mixture of large and
small stone blocks. Vertically placed stones,
approximately 3.5 meters on center and
joined with characteristic Andean precision,
mark the edges of the six terraces that work
their way up to the summit. The topmost
terrace was covered by a thin layer of
bluish-green gravel, brought in from the
Quimsachata mountain range just south of
Tiwanaku. On the summit was a sunken
court with a complexly engineered drainage
system connecting it to the Tiwanaku River
and ultimately to Lake Titicaca. Associated
with the Akapana are four temples—the

semi-subterranean, the Kalasasaya, the
Putuni, and the Kheri Kala. Like the other
platform mounds within Tiwanaku, it has

a central sunken court. The Akapana is
axially linked to the Kalasasaya—a large,
terraced platform (measuring 120 by 130
meters) with a megalithic staircase on the
south centered on the Portal of the Sun,
and a monumental stone sculpture, the
so-called Ponce Monolith. The Kalasasaya
had its own central sunken court. On the
morning of the spring equinox, a sunbeam
bisects the semi-subterranean temple and
appears in the center of the Kalasasaya’s
staircase. But how exactly these buildings
functioned as astronomical observatories is
unknown. In front of the northwest corner of
the Kalasasaya is a small structure known
as Chunchukala, which has a hole in one
of its walls similar to the shape of a human
ear, which permits one to hear sounds that
are made far away. This “sound amplifier”
must have something to do with the oracular
nature of the ceremonies performed here.

10.79 Megalithic entrance to the Kalasasaya Mound, near La Paz, Bolivia

Even more spectacular is Puma Punku
(“Puma Door,” ca. 536-600 CE), which - a ~
was built to the southeast. It is an earthen
platform mound with three levels of stone-
lined terraces and retaining walls. Its walls
are thought to have been adorned with
polished metal plaques, brightly colored
ceramics, and fabric ornamentation. One
ascends to the top terrace through a series of
huge gates. The top, as at the Akapana, has
a sunken courtyard with a ternple overlooking
it, though its final form is not fully known.
The stonework is some of the best in the
world, prompting many discussions about the
techniques used to cut and polish the stone.
One stone slab measures 7.81 meters in
length and weighs 131 metric tons. There are
many such slabs with precisely cut niches
and revetments.
This great city and its temples were
abandoned rather abruptly some time around
1000 CE. Scholars speculate that an extended
drought led to political instability. Purna
Punku was abandoned before it was finished.

10.80 The Akapana, the main temple of Tiwanaku, near La Paz, Bolivia

ace’

Aqueducts Rectangular Knolls

paves!

Central knoll

1
10.81 Site plan: Guayabo, Costa Rica
QUIRIGUA GUAYABO
Cauac Sky became king of Quirigua in South of Mexico, in Costa Rica,
725CE, while it was still a part of the state of archaeologists have uncovered traces of a
Copan, but after he defeated and captured significant urban settlement near the town
Eighteen Rabbit, king of Copan, in 738 CE, of Guayabo. Human occupation of the site
Quirigua became independent. The city, dates back to 1000 BCE, but the most recent
which rests in the floodplains of the Motagua studies reveal that Guayabo reached its
River, has at its core a gigantic rectangular peak from 300 to 700 CE. The culture was
plaza, oriented north-south and studded influenced by the Mayan’s and belongs to
with some of the largest Mayan stelae and the southernmost edge of what is known as
monoliths ever discovered. Its main platform Mesoamerica. The city consisted of large,
mounds and palace group are clustered at its | conical wood-and-thatch houses with several
south end. A freestanding, solitary pyramid internal stories built on stone foundations.
sits off-center at one end of the great plaza; Paved roads connected the city to the fields
its other side lines up with a much smaller, and the aqueducts that brought water into
better defined plaza, with a ball court in its the city center.

center. A monumental flight of stairs at the
southern edge of this ball court plaza leads to
the main set of terraces and platform mounds
that support the principal palaces. The Jade
Sky Palace at the southernmost and highest
point of the complex lines up on axis with

the great plaza, forming its visual terrninus,
although access to it is carefully regulated.
Both the palaces front their own private
raised plaza, which they share with another,
the so-called Palace 1B5. The embankments
and shape of the western edge of the
acropolis indicate that the Motagua may have
flowed along its edge at one time, so that the
palaces would have directly overlooked the
river.

10.82 Pictorial view of Guayabo

1000 CE

11.1 Courtyard of a caravanserai

INTRODUCTION

The difference in Africa and Eurasia between
800 and 1200 CE is huge. By 1200, a band
of economic wealth had spread from Japan
in the east to Spain in the west and from
Sweden in the north to Ghana and Ethiopia
in the south, with even the east coast of
Africa as far south as Zimbabwe becoming
connected to the great continuum of trade.
Old-wealth worlds, like those of south China,
India, and Constantinople, were now linked
to the new-wealth worlds of the Japanese,
the Khmer, and the Islamic caliphates.
Added to this were emerging-wealth worlds
like those associated with Ghana, central
Europe, and the Vikings. Even the remote
islands of Hawaii had now been settled by
intrepid oceangoing people. This vast realm
of connectivity would separate urban and
village cultures frorn the residual pockets of
First Society people and the haves from the
have-nots for centuries, a division that would
be markedly transformed only in the modern
era.

The critical element in this story is the
competition between the traditional, land-
based route that went through Afghanistan
and the Taklamakan Desert and the southern,
sea-based route, the importance of which
had begun to be apparent already in the 7th
century. On the ocean, ships could carry
well-calibrated loads, tariffs could be levied
at docks, and state bureaucracies could
organize labor and production. To transport

goods along the northern route was a riskier
operation. Vast stretches went through
unclaimed or lawless territories. Foods could
perish in the heat; delicate porcelain objects
could shatter when repeatedly loaded and
unloaded. Furthermore, as goods moved,
their price increased incrementally but
steadily as they passed from hand to hand.
Inner Asia, apart from some mined resources,
carpets, and leather goods, had little to offer
as trade. For these and other reasons, the
southern route, with its cargos of lumber,
rice, Sugar, pepper, and cinnamon, had
begun to take precedent over the traditional,
land-based route. The world was also
undergoing a perceptible warming period. In
some areas this meant long growing seasons,
but in Inner Asia it meant the drying out of
wells and streams, making cross-continental
travel difficult. The consequences were
visible at Chang'an. In 904, the T’ang dynasty
abandoned the once-great city and forced its
million or so residents to move to Luoyang,
the new capital on the east coast. The T'ang
dynasty itself would come to an end in 907.
The steppe region between the 6th and
Oth centuries was in continual flux as one
nomadic culture after another tried to assert

control over the fabled Silk Route. In the

Oth century, the area saw the arrival of
various Turkish tribes from Inner Asia, the
irst of which created the Ghaznavid dynasty
(977-1186), which was ruled by a clan of
urkish Sunni Islamic generals who wrested


11.2 Step well, India

control of the region from the Zoroastrian
Sassanians. With their cousins now ruling in
Persia, the Turks to the north began to move
south into the region in several waves over
the next century, building up to the moment
when Seljuk converted to Islam around 985
and headed south to defeat the Ghaznavids
and take over Persia, adopting its cultural
perspectives. The newly formed Seljuk
Empire soon controlled a vast area stretching
from the Hindu Kush to eastern Anatolia and
from Central Asia to Persian Gulf. All told,
the impact of the various Turkish tribes was
profound, for they had accomplished a rather
important geopolitical mission, relinking the
economy of the Indianized world with the
economy of the Islamic world. In doing this,
they added security to the northern routes
across the steppe. Once this great economic
continuum had been established, it would
remain Africa's and Eurasia’s prime economic
engine until the age of colonialism made it

obsolete.

More quickly than one could imagine, areas
peripheral to this continuum were pulled
into its orbit. Tibet was now an independent
region linking India and China. The Vikings
set up camp on the Caspian Sea, linking
the east-west trade with their networks to
Russia, Scandinavia, and other parts of
Europe, making the Normans the envy of all
the Europeans. The port of Pisa was bustling
with trade from Cairo. For the Europeans it
was indeed a breakthrough moment. And
in Africa, trade routes manned by new
formations of camel-centric cultures were
forged across the desert to Ghana for its salt
and gold.
The Seljuks were in a way the right
people at the right time with Isfahan, almost
at the geographical center of this expanding
universe, rising to be one of the great
entrepot cities of all time. They founded the
Great Mosque of Isfahan, rebuilding an earlier
mosque and creating, in fact, a new typology,

the four-iwan mosque, so called because its

vast central courtyard was faced on all sides
on axis by a large open space, the iwan,
roofed by elaborate muqarna vaults with their
complex geometric faceting. The building's
columns, vaults, and walls are made almost
entirely of brick. When the Seljuks arrived in
Anatolia, however, they began to use stone,
following the local tradition of advanced
stonework. With Konya as their new capital,
the Seljuks built hundreds of caravanserai to
facilitate trade. Sultan Han, not too far from
Konya, was particularly elaborate. With a
single, richly ornamented entrance, it was a
place where caravans could be refurbished,
animals rested, and drivers afforded a good
rest and haircut. From the 11th to the 13th
centuries, hundreds of caravanserai were
built or refurbished, significantly improving
the flow of trade.

India in this period, prospering as it had
for centuries because of its trade to the
east, saw the rise of numerous religious
temple institutions, the intensification of

agriculture, and the expansion of commercial
activities and networks. The Rajputs rose

to prominence in the northern part of the
subcontinent, and the Cholas in the south.
The Cholas became the first and really

the only Indian empire with a strong naval
presence, sending ships to Malaysia and
Indonesia to assert their regional dorninance.
They began to build a new capital city,
Gangaikonda Cholapuram, of which little
remains today apart from an impressively
scaled Shiva temple. As for the Rajputs,
their sumptuous palaces were often graced
y elaborate step wells, where the ladies of
the court could gather in the cool shade.
One of the most impressive was Rani-ni-
Vav (ca. 1050) at Anhilwara (modern-day
Patan), Gujarat, India. It was a vast, sunken,
paradisal retreat. To the south, the Chandela
Rajputs produced a remarkable set of
temples dedicated to the Tantric school of
Hinduism. The Tantric practitioner seeks

to use prana (energy flowing through the
universe, including one’s body) to attain goals
that may be spiritual, material, or both. This
rand of Hinduism had developed around
300 CE. Of the over eighty-five ternples that
were built by the Chandelas, only about
twenty-five now stand in a reasonable state
of preservation, scattered over an area of
about 20 square kilorneters. The Lakshmana
Temple and the nearby Kandariya Mahadeva
Temple (1050) are the most refined. They
rest on a high terrace and are accessed by
an axial staircase that leads to an elevated

interior floor with balconies. Their external
surfaces portray tantric practice, including
the sex acts that were seen as a natural way
to access the supra-mundane through the
mundane.

Jainisrn was another important subsect
of Hinduism, its origins dating back to about
the 5th century BCE. It prescribes a path
of nonviolence toward all living beings and
emphasizes spiritual independence and
equality between all forms of life. Jains make
considerable efforts in everyday life not to
injure plants any more than necessary. Of
their numerous temples, the Vimal Vasahi
Ternple (1031) on Mt. Abu is a masterpiece,
made completely out of white marble. The
ceilings feature engraved designs of lotus
buds, petals, flowers, and scenes from Jain
and Hindu mythology. In the sacred city of

Bhubaneswar, the rulers built a similarly
refined temple, the Lingaraj. Lingaraj means
“King of Lingam,” a being worshipped by
devotees of both Shiva and Vishnu. In Sri
Lanka, King Vijayabahu I, who defeated the
Chola invaders in 1070 and reunited the
country, declared Polonnaruwa the capital
city and began a major reworking of it. By
the 12th century trade and agriculture were
flourishing, with advanced irrigation systerns
being developed to provide water during the
dry season.

Farther east along the trade routes is the
land of the Khmer. Hariharalaya (known now
more colloquially as Angkor) had by this time
become nothing less than a boomtown—a
religious rice-growing industrial complex—
with new city districts being built, along
with bold new temples, to accommodate
a population approaching a million. The
temples at the core of all this include Phnom
Bakheng (900), Pre Rup (960), Banteay
Srei (967), and Phirmeanakas (980). Each
represented an economic unit unto itself. The
Angkorites fully understood their geopolitical
situation. They expanded their power
northward to connect to China and to better
control access to the overland trade routes.

In China, given the restless expansion
of the northern steppe cultures, the T’ang
gave way to the Song dynasty (960-1279),
who retreated south of the Yangtze River to
establish a capital at Lin’an (now Hangzhou).
Soon, Hangzhou rose from a middling city
of only regional importance to become one
of the world’s largest and most populous
cities. Arab, Persian, and Korean merchants
lived there. The Chinese also underwent
a population boom, with the population
doubling during the 10th and 11th centuries.
This growth came through expanded rice
cultivation in central and southern China,
which was developed to offset imported
rice from Southeast Asia. With Buddhism
repressed, imperially sanctioned temples
reemerged, drawing on ancient animistic
belief systems; one of these was the Sage
Mother Hall (ca. 980-1100), built around
a sacred spring. Buddhist pagoda towers
continued to be built, but in the countryside
rather than within a city’s walls, largely to
avoid competition with the attempt by the
imperial authorities to impose their cosmic-
derived ideology on the city.

To the north, the new Mongolian-based
overlords did not lack architectural ambition.
On the contrary, the Liao dynasty (907-1125)
employed captured carpenters to build the
impressive Yingxian Timber Pagoda (1056),
also known as Mu-Ta, meaning “Timber
Pagoda.” Since timber buildings are so
vulnerable to the vicissitudes of time, this
building, one of the oldest surviving in China,
gives us valuable insight into a structure built
completely without nails.
The Mongolianization of northern
China secured Buddhism in this area and
strengthened its position in Korea and Japan,
where Buddhism underwent yet another of
its numerous transformations. Less a religion
than a path to religion, Buddhism tolerates
and even welcomes different experiments
in making that path possible. One of these
is known as Pure Land and is based on the
premise that the way to let go of the worries
of daily life is to imagine a land of beauty that
surpasses all other realms. Since a devotee
did not need to live in meditative isolation,
Pure Land appealed to a more general
public. In China, Pure Land practices never
became a stand-alone sect, but in Japan,
Pure Land came to exist independently as
one of several sects. The earliest surviving
example of a temple dedicated to this new
sect is the Phoenix Hall (Byodo-in) in Kyoto.
Unlike a Christian church, where images
of paradise might be painted on the walls,
or an Islamic garden, where paradise was
imagined through poetic inscriptions, here
paradise was presented in situ, with the
building itself, reflected in a pond, being the
focus of meditation. The Phoenix Hall can be
compared with Kandariya Mahadeva Temple:
Both reach out to people who are not priests
or ritual experts. Both are buildings that bring
the supplicant past the everyday into a higher
realm through meditation and ritual practices.
For both, the building serves not just as a site
of ritual but as a visualization for meditation.
Meanwhile, Constantinople had become
the largest city in Europe, with a population
of about a half a million. To its north, the
conversion of the Bulgarians, Serbs, and
Rus to Orthodox Christianity brought some
stabilization to the restless area, even
though it did not stop a major Rus attack on
Constantinople in 941, probably over trading
rights; the Rus used a navy of ten thousand


11.3 Sage Mother Hall, Jinci Temple, Taiyuan, China

vessels to devastate the Asiatic shore of the
Bosporus. But Islamic armies controlled

the Byzantine’s eastern border, and Islamic
navies controlled much of the Mediterranean.
Adding to the increased isolation of the
Byzantines was the final separation of the
eastern and western churches in 1054.
From then on, the Christian church had

two distinctly different rules of authority,

one emanating from Rome and the other
rom Constantinople. One of the few major
architectural commissions of the time was
the church of Christ Pantokrator (“Ruler of
All," ca. 1120, now the Zeyrek Mosque) that
was commissioned by a Byzantine empress.
It had a library and a sixty-bed hospital, and
was home to over eighty monks. But if the
destiny of the Byzantines was on a downward
slope, the Russians to the north were in
expansion mode. Now almost completely
Christianized, they linked the Silk Route
with northern Europe and Scandinavia.

Kievan Rus had by now established itself as
an important regional powerhouse. Several
churches were built, such as the Cathedral
of St. Sophia, the Holy Wisdom of God in
Novgorod, and the Church of the Tithes or
Church of the Dormition of the Virgin (ca.
990) in Kiev.

Farther south, in the Islamic world,
were the Fatimids, who belonged to the
Ismaili branch of Shi'ism and claimed to be
descended from Fatima bint Muhammed,
the daughter of the prophet Mohammed. In
909, the Fatimids established the Tunisian
city of Mahdia as their capital, and when they
conquered Egypt in 969 they established
Cairo as the capital. They were known for
their exquisite arts; there are many surviving
traces of Fatimid architecture, the defining
example being the Al-Azhar Mosque (972)
and its associated university. It was the first
university in the East and perhaps the oldest
in history. The Fatirnids used it for official

pronouncements and court sessions. Initially
built as a prayer hall with five aisles and a
modest central courtyard, the mosque has
been expanded multiple times. Though

none of the original minarets or domes has
survived, the plan, despite the later additions,
is unmistakable. It was a rectangular box
with a doorway in each of the walls other
than the quibla wall. The columns were taken
from various Roman or Byzantine-era ruins.
The plan features an axial hallway that cuts
through the grid in front of the quib/a, thus
giving it special prominence in the plan.

To the east, along the Mediterranean, the
Almoravids, a Berber Sunni dynasty frorn
Morocco, formed an empire in the 11th
century, founding their capital at Marrakech
in 1062. The Almoravids were crucial in
maintaining Islamic control over southern
Spain when they defeated a coalition of the
Christian, Castilian, and Aragonese armies
at the Battle of Sagrajas. This enabled them

11.4 Speyer Cathedral, Speyer, Germany

to control an empire that stretched 2,000
kilometers north to south. Their rule was
relatively short-lived. They failed to quell

the Masmuda-led rebellion initiated by lbn
Tumart that led to the rise of the Almohads.
The Almohads—who were also Sunni—came
from Tin Mal, a village that became the
spiritual capital and the artistic center of the
Almohad Empire.

For the first time since the fall of the
Roman Empire, Europe was being connected
to global horizons. The region was the
equivalent of what today would be called a
developing area. The Saracens had been
driven beyond the Pyrenees; the Slavs had
been forced back to the Oder River; the
Magyars had been expelled from Germany
and Italy; Danes had become Christians. With
the relative relief, regional lords surfaced who

established themselves and claimed their
own sovereignty. Abbeys, usually in rernote
locations, were still important political sites,

such as the Abbey of Sant’Antimo, begun
before 1118 just south of Siena. More than
just an abbey, it was an institution that had
authority over thirty-eight churches, from Pisa
to Grosseto, and controlled about a thousand
farm estates throughout Tuscany. Built of
white stone, it was sited in a field purposefully
planted with tarragon, an herb that is rare in
Italy but frequently used in French cuisine,
and as such an indicator of the building's
connections to Charlemagne. But the
architecture of Sant’Antimo was increasingly
a thing of the past. Boxy churches with

small windows, primitive stonemasonry, and
wooden-beamed ceilings were giving way

to more ambitious designs. The transition
began with the Ottonians in Germany. They
sought to define themselves as extending
the imperial lineage of Constantine and
Justinian. They even brought in artisans
from Constantinople, and the results show
themselves at the Church of St. Michael

(ca. 1010) in Hildesheim, made of cleanly
dressed stone. The building was up the hill of
the nearby market town and was indicative of
a closer relationship between the Church and
daily life. The style of building, with its clearly
legible geometries and volumes, including
tube-like towers, is known as Romanesque,
largely because it derives consciously from
the Roman basilica with naves, side aisles,
and wood roofs.

In Italy, the Tuscan region, profiting
from the flow of goods brought to the
Mediterranean by Islamic traders, was at
the start of a building boom, with the port
city of Pisa leading the way. Pisa built a
cathedral (1063-1180), a large baptistery
(1152-1363) and a tower, the famous
Leaning Tower of Pisa (1173-1372), all of
which was rounded off with the addition of
the Campo Santo, also known as Camposanto
Monumentale (“monumental cemetery”),
an expansive, rectangular cloister (begun in

1278) that is said to have been built on a
shipload of sacred soil taken from Golgotha,
Israel, and brought back to Pisa from the
Fourth Crusade. The ensemble was one
of the great religious sites in Europe at the
time. The building was paid for by the spoils
taken from Mahdia, a Tunisian city that was
the capital of a regional Islamic power. It
was attacked by Pisa and its allies and then
forced to pay a high ransom—a sign of the
growing dominance of Christian powers in the
Mediterranean.

One can compare Pisa with St Mark’s
Basilica in Venice that was consecrated
in 1084. The latter is clearly Byzantine in
conception, with its great billowing vaults
covered with golden mosaics. The Cathedral
of Pisa is “Latin” in conception, essentially
copying the basilica model that came out
Rome with columns running down the
aisles. Whereas St. Mark’s was a brick
building and more interior than exterior, the
buildings at Pisa were surfaced all around
with shimmering white marble ornamented
with thin horizontal bands of black stone.
Such revetment has a tradition that goes
back to Raman times, and indeed, some of
the stones were scavenged from Roman-
era ruins. It is clear that the patrons wanted
a building that in its extravagant exterior

11.5 Pueblo Bonito

finish would herald itself as a freestanding
monument of their success.

The Romanesque style of St. Michael
and the Cathedral of Pisa was, however,
being creatively transformed in Germany
and France, as is already visible at Speyer
Cathedral (consecrated in 1061). There
we see a building that is not only taller
but has a whole new interior organization.
Instead of the nave being a wall held up as
a variation of columns or arches, here the
piers have partially melded into the wall.
On the surface of the pier, two columns are
placed on top of each other, almost as if
they were a single very tall column. The top
of the column connects directly to a rib of
the vaulted ceiling that then connects to a

vertical pier on the other side of the nave.
The eye could move up across and down in

a single sweep. The ancient and venerable
prototype of post and beam has now been
replaced by an aesthetic of a completely
different order. The idea of a column as

an independent architectural entity would
only make its return in Europe only with the
Renaissance. The Normans in England made
particularly important contributions. They had
left northern France to conquer England and
then sailed around Spain to conquer southern
Italy and Sicily. There, they encountered
Arab architects and Byzantine artisans. The
impact is clearly evident in the difference
between the cathedral at Cefalu (1131)

and the later cathedral at Monreale. The


former is a veritable fortress with a dark and
gloomy interior. The Cathedral of Monreale
(1174-85), commissioned by Henry II
(r. 1154-89), has an interior with golden
mosaics that completely cover the walls of the
nave, aisles, transept, and apse. The mosaic
cycle is second only to the Hagia Sophia in
size, and much better preserved. In the apse,
a magnificent portrait of Christ Pantocrator
(Ruler of All”) gestures in blessing and
gazes serenely off to one side. The Normans
brought their Arab craftsmen back to
England, and quickly their architecture began
to transform, as can be seen in Durham and
Canterbury Cathedrals. At the piers, what
had been two columns placed one on top of
the other at Speyer now becomes a single,
tube-like column rising from the floor to the
base of the vault. The result was a revolution
of sensibilities that was to contribute to the
emergence of the Gothic style.

In the Yucatan Peninsula the Mayan
civilization was at its height. In the valley
of Oaxaca the Zapotecs continued to build
new cities, moving their political center from
Monte Alban (ca. 700 BCE-700 Ce) to Mitla
(ca. 700-1400 CE), transforming the fortified
village into a major religious and economic
hub. The city was still being expanded when
the Spaniards arrived and destroyed it in

the 16th century. To the north, the Toltecs
were in the process of building a powerful
new dynasty destined to define the form

and shape of the cultures that the Spanish
conquistadors encountered five hundred
years later. But this was not happening in
isolation. Trade with the Southwest Puebloans
was now well established, in particular
because of the turquoise mines in their
territory. Turquoise, not readily available

in Mexico, was a prized commodity, as

it was used for sacred masks and other

ritual objects. The Puebloans, in the arid
landscapes of the Southwest, had developed
a thriving agricultural communal lifestyle, with
people living in dwellings made of stone and
mortar that allowed for two-story construction.
Settlements had round, belowground kivas
that were used for ceremonial purposes.
Some kivas were as large as 17 meters in
diameter. The Puebloans were not centralized
into kingships as the Mayans were, but
constituted an association of clans unified
around powerful cornmunal and seasonal
activities, at the core of which was Chaco
Canyon. Roughly 9 kilometers long, it
contained several ceremonial sites, though
how they functioned individually and as a
group is not known. The complex contained
the largest buildings in North America until

the 19th century. Meanwhile, Peruvians were
undergoing transition; the kingdoms of Wari
and Tiwanaku had died out, to be replaced
by dozens of smaller regional powers, among
which were the Chimu, with their capital at
the city of Chan Chan, a large adobe city in
the Moche Valley. The culture arose around
900 CE in roughly the same territory where
the Mochica had existed centuries before.
The city is composed of nine independently
walled citadels that housed the elite and their
ceremonial rooms, burial chambers, temples,
and reservoirs. Most of the city’s population—
artisans and farmers—lived outside the
quadrangles in modest quarters of less
durable construction. As with most Peruvian
cities, it was at the center of a vast network of
canals that irrigated the surrounding land.

Toltec-Chichén City-State
ca. 1000-1200
AMitla AUxmal
750-1521 800-1000

Pueblo Cultures Mississippian Cultures
ca. 600-1600 ca. 800-1600
A Cahokia A Pueblo Bonito A Serpent Mound
ca. 700-1300 Begun 920 ca. 1060
Fatimid Caliphate Seljuk Empire
969-1171 1037-1157
AGreat Mosque of Isfahan A Al-Azhar Mosque A Mosque of Tinmal Sultan Han >
8th to 16th centuries 970-72 CE 1153-54 1229
800 CE 1000 CE 1200 CE

South Asia: Rise of regional states

ca. 500-1300
A Rajarajeshwara Temple ASun Temple at Modhera A Lingaraja Temple
Late 10th century 1022-27 ca. 1100
A Khandariya Mahadeva Temple

Lakshamana Temple A A Jain Temples on Mt. Abu

ca. 950 1000-1025 AParakramabahu Palace 10th to 16th centuries
12th century
Tang Dynasty Northern Song Dynasty Southern Song Dynasty
618-906 CE 960-1127 1127-1279
A Dulesi Monastery Alron Pagoda
ca. 984 1049 AMu-Ta Yingxian Timber Pagoda
Japan: Late Heian Period Byodo-in A 1056
ca. 900-1185 1053
Byzantine Empire
330-1453
Cathedral of Ani A A Sanahin A Church of Christ Pantokrator
989-1001 10th to 13th centuries 1118-43
Kievan Russia AChurch of the Tithe
ea. 860-1240 989-96 CE
Ottonian Dynasty
936-1024
St. Michael in Hildesheim A A Speyer Cathedral A Abbey Church of St. Foy
1001-33 1040-1137 Begun 1050
Norman rule in England A Canterbury Cathedral A Durham Cathedral
1066-1154 1042-1185 1093-1133

Italian City-States
Late 11th to early 16th centuries.
A Cathedral of Pisa Baptistery of Parma A
1063-1180 1196-1270
A Santiago de Compostela
1075-1128

if of Mexic
Gulf of Mexico OcCrichen ttzs e@ Pueblo Culture
Uxmal @) North | |
© Meyapan r } Cahokia/ Mississippi cultures
TOLTECS f MAYAS © Zapotecs
Nene
sane . Central © Toltecs
Monte Alban % ‘ e@ Post-Classical Maya
ZAPOTEC: . “ie ON
Mitla Shy,
ue © | Tairona, Columbia
Yn Ye
7 , “Ame
Gia, “
Soe
com Chimor, Peruvian shore
® South

Pacific Ocean

11.6 Urbanization of the Americas, ca. 1000 cE

MAYAN UXMAL

Uxmal was one of several Mayan city-states
competing for territory, but by 900 CE it had
become the regional capital and most likely
the largest of the Mayan cities. A network

of stone roadways, called sakbehoob,
connected Uxmal to Nohpat and Kabah.
Chichen Itza was a major ally. Uxmal’s elite
lived in a sprawling palace complex located
on the area's highest ground. A stone wall
with regularly spaced openings enclosed the
area. At the southern end of the complex,
built into a small mound, was the main
platform mound, wedged between a gigantic
platform with the so-called Governor's Palace
to its east and a series of rectangular courts
to its west. The platform mound faced north,
its broad stairs visible from a great distance.
The northern edge of the palace complex
was dominated by a huge quadrangular
palace, called the Nunnery (890-915 CE).
To its immediate east, the largest structure,
a steep platform mound with a rare oval-
shaped base, was the so-called Ternple of
the Magician. Scores of other buildings,
arranged in quadrangles of various size and
shape, were distributed through the complex;
most were residential units, and a few were
platform mounds. Similar structures outside
the wall were dispersed across a much larger
urban residential area. The currently used

names for many of the structures were
coined by the conquering Spanish and
do not indicate the actual functions of the
buildings.

Chan-Chaak-K’ak’nal-Ajaw (9th
century), who ruled the city, commissioned
the Governor’s Palace, the Nunnery
quadrangle, and very likely a rebuilding
of the Temple of the Magician. The latter,
originally built in the 6th century, was
reconstructed at least four times. While the
exact reasons for its unusual shape are still
uncertain, its dramatic profile dominates
the setting, contrasting with the orthogonal
geometries of the Governor's Palace and
the Nunnery quadrangle. Its limestone core
was originally covered with smooth plaster
and painted red with accents in blue,
yellow, and black.

E

tuners

Chachapoyas, Peruvian mountains
Aymara kingdoms, Bolivia
Mapuche, Chile

0000

11.7 Trade in the Americas, ca. 1000 cE

mm, North group

yo
tad

“* Nunnery

oe

Ras Temple of the Magician
Cemetery group ies

Ball court

0 ; 200 m

Pyramid of the Old Woman

11.8 Uxmal palace complex, Mexico

11.9 Temple of the Magician, Uxmal

The Governor's Palace, standing as a clearly
defined entity in its own right, was both the
royal residence and a sort of council house.
Its huge terrace was linked to the main
platform mound at the corner, signifying
their continuity. Although the platform was
accessible only from the west, from the
middle of the complex the main structure

of the Governor's Palace, an astonishing
100-meter-long building, faced east, away
from the center, and overlooked a distant
vista from across a vast platform. The rising
sun would have brightly illuminated its
twenty-four rooms, which were clustered into
three compartments. Narrow passages with
steep triangular roofs separated them. Each
room was a set of two, one opening onto the

front, and the other behind it, against a blank
back wall. The broad frieze on the Governor's

Palace is its chief glory. Made from over
twenty thousand individual stones depicting
serpents, thatched huts, masks of the rain
god Chak, human busts, and geometrical
motifs, the frieze is a kaleidoscope of Mayan
mythology. A gigantic stone sculpture
above the main entrance shows Lord Chak
on a throne surrounded by serpents. The
friezes on the four buildings of the Nunnery
quadrangle together depict the Mayan
cosmography, or the order of the universe
as conceived by the Uxmal. The southern
building—also known as the /tzam nah, or
“conjuring house”—bears the icons of the
Lords of Xibalba, the underworld.

he south building of the Nunnery
quadrangle aligns axially with the ball court,
the symbolic gate to Xibalba. The eastern
frieze depicts the cyclic thernes of world
creation, while the western frieze depicts
scenes of war, sacrifice, death, and rebirth.
ogether, the eastern and western friezes
symbolize the diurnal and annual journeys,
or “lives,” of the sun, and its compact with

building, erected on the highest platform
of the quadrangle, has a frieze that depicts

11.11 Ball court at Uxmal

the earth, inhabited by humans. The northern

11.10 Plan: The Nunnery quadrangle at Uxmal

celestial figures symbolic of the world of
“heaven.” In the middle of the quadrangle
stood a stone column, representing the
wakaj-chan, or “world tree,” and an altar
representing the first stone of the cosmic
hearth.


© ONEOTA

\
‘ wa.
\ Wintersyilte

‘

\

Nen-71

\ Emeratd -

eT eee

Gulf of Mexico

Pacific Ocean

MAYA

@P2enae

11.12 North America and Mesoamerica, ca. 1000 cE

CAHOKIA

By the 11th century, Hopewell Culture cities
had fallen on hard times. The new power
centers were now farther west along the
Mississippi River. This change coincided
with the emergence of a chiefdom society
that adopted a comparatively large-scale,
intensive, maize-based agriculture. It had
taken about a thousand years for corn
cultivation to make it this far north, and
its impact was quite dramatic. For the first
time there is a clear settlement hierarchy
and the construction of truncated pyramid
mounds, with temples or burial buildings
atop such mounds. Soon a network of larger
and smaller city cultures developed in a large
triangular area down the Mississippi River at
its western edge and eastward into Georgia am
along other rivers. : 2 oo
One of the most important of the new .
cities was Cahokia (ca. 700-1300). Its j ‘
residents benefited from the Mississippi's : im :
alluvial deposits as well as from the trade that '
brought copper from the upper Great Lakes, )
mica from the southern Appalachians, and + - vs
seashells from the Gulf of Mexico. Twenty , . 2
thousand people lived in Cahokia at its peak
in the 12th century, making it the largest city
north of Mexico.

At the center of its vast religious precinct was
the so-called Monks Mound. Begun around
1000 CE, it was surrounded by terraces

and smaller mounds roughly on axis. It

was a huge mound—30 meters high, 291
meters long, and 236 meters wide—made

by carrying tons of earth a basketful at a
time. The Cahokians, who seemed to have

11.13 Aerial view: Cahokia, near St. Louis, Missouri

‘
& Bree!

wo

; Oiiroaidn.

iDDLE lay Wa ane “SoyH APPALACHIAN
fowah MISgISSIPPIAN

3

bronduie Ocupptliges

j ‘
KO} ‘ @©-’
Ss, ae 7
. rate _

Lake Jackson

L esau EMINE MISSISSIPPIAN

known of Central American advances in
astronomy, built several calendrical circles
with posts of red cedar. A circle of 24 posts
was enlarged to one of 36, then to one of
48, and finally to one of 60. Their last and
largest circle was built to an arc of only 12
posts, but if completed, it would have had
72 posts. At the equinoxes, the post marking

sunrise, due east, aligns perfectly with the front
of Monks Mound. Because the city was located
in the Mississippi floodplain and not on the
surrounding bluffs, the city was designed to be
partially flooded during the spring flood season.
It is thought that elaborate ceremonies were
conducted at that time with people arriving from
up and down the Mississippi. But whether the
city was controlled by a single chieftain-priest

or was shared by several groups is not known.
The city was abandoned in the 15th century.
Overhunting, environmental degradation because
of the overplanting of corn, and social conflict
may have all played a part. Whereas Mississippi
cultures in Ohio faltered, they continued to thrive
farther south in Georgia and Alabarna until the
arrival of the Europeans.

SERPENT MOUND
In Ohio, where there had once been the
Hopewell Culture, a new and more modest
culture emerged, known by archaeologists as the
Fort Ancient Culture (1000-1650). Settlements
composed of circular and rectangular homes
constructed of twigs and thatch and situated
around an open plaza were enclosed by
stockades, suggesting an increase in the level
of conflict that perhaps accounted for the
breakdown of the Hopewell Culture. Settlements
were rarely permanent, usually shifting to a
new location after one or two generations when
the resources surrounding the village were
exhausted. The diet was composed mainly of
maize, squash, and beans, supplemented by
hunting and fishing in nearby forests and rivers.
Though this culture was a step down from
Hopewell Culture, it nonetheless managed to
construct sore remarkable earthworks, including
Serpent Mound (ca. 1060), in Adams County,
Ohio. The mound consists of a low berm made
of stones and compacted clay placed on a
promontory that rises 30 meters over a small river.
Measured along its coils and curves, it stretches
400 meters. The head of the serpent was placed
at the crest of the bluff. Several theories have
been proposed as to the meaning of the mound.
For some American tribes, the serpent was
considered evil, but for others, it was thought of
as beneficial. In all cases, however, the snake
was considered a potent force. (The Hopi snake
dance was used principally as a prayer for rain.)
Astrological alignments have been proposed,
and indeed, the snake's head is aligned to the
summer solstice and the various curves to other
celestial events. The village was located across
the river from the mound.

11.14 Serpent Mound, Adams County, Ohio

sO.

OY

en aS

pe My a
\

sor

“ yileg os
ny aie

11.15 Plan: Serpent Mound


PUEBLO BONITO

Modern borders encourage viewing the
ruins of the southwestern United States
separately from those of Mesoamerica. In
reality, the settlements in places such as
Chaco Canyon and Mesa Verde made up the
northern frontier of the Mesoamerican world
and were not separated from its influence.
However, because of their unique climatic
circumstances, the Puebloans developed

a very self-defined culture. By 600 CE, the
area came to be occupied by three distinct
groups: the Hisatsinom (also called Anasazi)
to the north and the Mogollon and Hohokam
to the south, the latter seemingly having
originally been Mayas. They had begun to
change from a migratory farming culture to
a sedentary one. One of the reasons for the
change was the adoption of corn, not just as

a food but as a principal deity. The Puebloans

integrated corn with a range of local plants
that they also cultivated. The result was
a rapid increase in population beginning
around 700 CE due to improved weather
conditions and more copious rainfall—the
dry and arid conditions of today were not
those of the 9th century. By 1100, there were
twelve major Pueblo cities and hundreds of
small clutches of houses—one of the most
impressive urban structures north of Mexico,
bespeaking a high level of social organization.
One of these groups has traditionally
been known as Anasazi, but since that is
a Navajo word meaning “ancient enemy,”
the Pueblo people prefer to use the Hopi
word Hisatsinom, meaning “the old ones.”
What they called themselves is not exactly
nown. The largest Hisatsinom settlernent
was Pueblo Bonito (Spanish for “beautiful
town”). Located beneath a massive cliff, part
of which has since caved in, the city had a
D-shaped plan, with masses of rooms and
circular ceremonial structures called kivas

surrounding two large plazas. The rows of
rooms each rose one story before stepping
ack from the one below, giving the whole
an impression of a terraced amphitheater.
ndeed, it has been suggested that one of
the city’s functions was to provide a place for
viewing ritual dancing.

ee

geal. , "

11.16 Pueblo Bonito, Chaco Canyon, New Mexico

Kivas, a local building type with a very long
history and broad distribution, were an
essential part of the Hisatsinom culture and
architecture. They originated as circular
storehouses, often nothing more than deep-
pit houses, plastered on the inside with
smooth adobe. But they soon became sermi-
subterranean temples, serving as communal
spaces for the performance and viewing of
ritual dances. Each kiva was the province of
a social unit, and there were several kivas in
each village. They were only for men; women
were allowed in only on special occasions. In
Pueblo Bonito, among the regular-size kivas,
were two that were over 18 meters across

Bluffs

Ty

2 oe
\ Pueblo Bonita //

and that probably served the entire city.
Though these kivas were built aboveground,
the subterranean effect was maintained by
constructing rooms all around and filling in any
empty space with earth. Kivas were equipped
with a central fireplace, a low masonry bench
around the wall, and four wooden posts. Some
kivas had an underfloor ventilating system and
a subfloor vault to the west of the fireplace.
Their flat roofs had a smoke hole in the

center and served as an entrance by means
of a ladder. The sandstone masonry walls at
Pueblo Bonito consisted of a loose rubble

center-faced on both sides with artfully placed
sandstone bricks.

ne Chace Canyon

So Amp

200 m
—+

11.17 Site of Pueblo Bonito


Construction of Pueblo Bonito began in about
920 CE, and the city was modified over the
course of three centuries. Early research
attempted to relate its construction directly
to more contemporary Pueblo architecture,
whose structure reflects the social order

of its inhabitants. The evidence, however,
indicates that this was not the case at Pueblo
Bonito. Nonetheless, its construction would
have required a complex coordination of
labor and materials. Tens of thousands of
pine beams, used for wall supports and roof
structures, came from a forest 90 kilometers
away. Pueblo Bonito’s overall orientation is
north-south, which became typical of all
structures erected by the Hisatsinom, but
the architecture integrates the midpoint

and extremes of the cycles of the sun and
the moon into its layout. Though the highly
disciplined architecture could suggest

a strong hierarchical social order, the
Hisatsinom are believed to have had a fairly
egalitarian society. Pubelo Bonito was one of
several large constructions in Chaca Canyon.
Its purpose is not known for sure, but it is
thought that the site was a ceremonial center
for people who travelled from far afield for
certain calendrical events, the canyon itself
being a type of sacred site.

50m 11.18 Plan: Pueblo Bonito

The Hohokam also soon began to design
cities, such as Casa Grande (in Arizona,

ca. 1100), having developed canals to bring
water to their fields. Archaeologists have
discovered hundreds of miles of these canals
in the Gila River valley, as well as the Salt
River valley of Phoenix and elsewhere. By the
13th century, long periods of drought brought
that culture to an end and changed the social
landscape of the region. They were replaced
by the Pima and Tohono O'odharm tribes. It
was the Pimas who called their predecessors
the Hohokam, meaning the “vanished ones.”


Mediterranean Sea

Fatimid Egypt

11.20 West Asia, ca. 1000 CE

SELJUK TURKS
Turks in the 10th century were a pastoral
people living in Central Asia east of the
Caspian Sea. Abandoning their homeland,
they moved into Afghanistan and Iran.
Accepting the faith of Islam along the way,
they created a number of Turkish-Islamic
states, one being the Ghaznavids, who
settled in what is now western Afghanistan.
Another tribe, the Seljuks (named after a
tribal leader), drove further westward, into
lran, Syria, and eventually the ethnically
diverse Anatolia, held nominally by the
Byzantines. The Seljuks consolidated t
power over eastern Anatolia in 1071; tl
presence was a major factor in bringing about
the Crusades. Despite the problems with
the Crusaders, the Seljuk period was one of
relative calm, with Persia seeing one of its
most prosperous periods.
The stability and success of the Seljuk
regime was the achievement of the politically
skilled Vizir Nizam al-Mulk, a cultured
Persian, a brilliant administrator, and a
significant political philosopher, whose Book
of Government, or, Rules for Kings is a classic
of Islamic literature. At its peak, the Seljuk
Empire spanned a region from northern India
to the Aegean Sea, allowing the ancient trade
routes of Anatolia to be connected with those
to China. The strengthening of the Silk Route
not only brought in enormous wealth but also
promoted the development of industries, like
the manufacture of paper. Paper originally

elr
ein

Black Sea

%
B.
%

g

>

Territory regained by Byzantiui
during the First Crusade

Kashmir
L. Seljuk sultanate Shahis
Crusader states
Qarmatis
3
“be Sumras
a
Sn
Solankis

ks
%

had to be imported from China, but in the 8th
century, it was being produced in Baghdad
and Damascus and exported to Europe.

The Seljuks distinguished themselves
from earlier Islamic societies by their strict
military hierarchy and attendant financial and
landholding prerogatives, which were closed
to all but a few exceptional local recruits. The
principal elements of their political program
were the mosque; the madrasa (Arabic for
“school”); the ribats and khanqgahs, which
were the Sufi lodgings; and the mausoleum,
which commemorated their deeds.

The Seljuk architecture of Iran is
characterized by elaborate brickwork and
the development of the four-iwan plan. The
Seljuk rulers in Anatolia used a vocabulary
characterized primarily by stonework. Tiles
were important decorative elements of Seljuk
architecture. The technology for tile-rnaking
emerged out of a century-old tradition in
lran and lrag, which was brought to Anatolia
by the Seljuks. The tiles consisted of an
underlying paste with a high silicate content,
over which a thick mixture containing kaolin
and feldspar was spread. Monochromatic
tiles were used for fill and borders; others
were designed as large custom-made plaques
for a particular place in the composition.

During Seljuk times, textile and leather
exports were also important, as they were
shipped to both Europe and the East. Once a
year there was a vast commercial fair called
Yabanlu Pazan (“Bazaar of the Foreigners”)

held for forty days not far from Kayseri, in the
center of Anatolia, at a place where several
caravan routes converged.

11.21 Seljuk design

Representations of the human form are
banned in Islam, but images of birds

and animals as well as sphinxes and
centaurs—often linked to ancient totemic
worship still prevalent in Anatolian
lands—were frequently embedded in the
composition of Seljuk art. Calligraphic.
inscriptions of Qur’anic verses were often
used along the cornices or to frame portals.

Sultan Han
Among the finest and most characteristic
of Seljuk buildings are the caravansaries
(derived from two Persian words meaning “a
palace for caravans"), or hans, constructed
during the 13th century to encourage trade
throughout the empire; several dozen of them
survive in good condition. These buildings,
some 119 of which are known to have been
erected, were made to shelter and protect
not only the caravan drivers but also their
camels, horses, and donkeys, along with their
cargoes, and to provide needed services.
Though caravan resting places had existed
for centuries, this was the first large-scale
systernatization of mercantile transport across
a desert. The services offered were free of
charge for the first three days. One of the
basic rules was that travelers who came to
the establishment were to be treated equally,
without regard to race, creed, or social status.
Though plans of caravansaries vary,
they were typically square or rectangular
buildings with thick stone walls and a large
courtyard in the center surrounded by one-
or two-story arcades; they accommodated
bathing services, storage, a treasury, and
stables, and had rooms for physicians,
cooks, blacksmiths, and musicians as well
as drivers. Though the exterior walls were
plain and devoid of decoration, the portals
were often elaborately embellished with
bands of geometrical designs and Qur’anic
inscriptions. At the center of the caravansary

was usually a small mosque or prayer room,
raised aboveground level on a stone platform.
At the far end of the courtyard, opposite the
main portal, was a large vaulted hall, usually
with several aisles. Lit by narrow windows
in the stone walls, it served as a shelter for
goods and men during bad winter weather.
The Sultan Han, the grandest caravansary
of all, covering 4,500 square meters, is
west of Aksaray, a center in the Cappadocia
region on the Konya Highway. Designed by a
certain Muhammet of Syria, the doorway is
particularly spectacular. Made of marble, the
outer frame is covered with a delicate floral
pattern. The tympanum over the door, which
has an abstract geometrical pattern, looks
as if it were eaten away by the encrustations
of an open conically shaped stalactite vault.
There are two parts to the design: a courtyar

——T$

ST Y—_I

aqaoo0

o

0
aoo

gmBaoga

a
f*

a
Q
oagqaa
a

oa
o gag gqoao90
eaaquecye ac
S 0 25

11.24 Plan: Sultan Han, Kayseri

ie

a a a0
ao oa oan
a
a Ga

ad

11.23 Entry portal, Sultan Han, Kayseri

building and a hall. The courtyard building
contained a bath and kitchen, and a room
for special dignitaries. At its center was an
unusual, square-shaped mosque. The large
hall at the rear, entirely covered in vaults,
consisted of one principal aisle and two
symmetrical side aisles. There are windows
at 4 meters high in each of the bays. The
animals remained in the raised areas closest
to the sidewalls; the middle was reserved for
the travelers and communal functions. In
this building we see the strong tradition of
advanced stonemasonry that goes back to
the Armenians and earlier.

aq

mo o4

a

[)
i]

m8

a

Goa

(OE

ots

11.25 Development of the Great Mosque of Isfahan, Iran

Great Mosque of Isfahan

The Great Mosque of Isfahan (Masjid-i Jome,
or Friday Mosque), in the northern part of
the city, was one of the most influential of
all early Seljuk religious structures. Though
the building is known as a four-iwan type
because the iwans face each other across
an open courtyard, the building is, in
actuality, the result of numerous architectural
transformations. The primary building
substance dates to a mosque built in the
840s CE that stood over an even earlier
mosque, built in 772 CE, which in turn was
built over the foundations of a Christian
church. The mosque was a conventional
hypostyle-courtyard mosque, typical of early
mosques. But beginning around 870 CE, it
was thoroughly revised. The central space
was reduced somewhat by the addition of

a new facade running around all four sides.
An elegant qibla dome was built and, to the
north, an annex with a domed sacred area,
the original purpose of which is not precisely
known.

In the time of Sultan Sanjar (1096-1157)
four iwans were added to the courtyard, in
essence imposing them on top of the older
systern. The old columns were thickened
or removed, as was required; the original
columnar rhythms are still best visible in the
areas to the right and left of the northern
iwan. In the 1350s, buildings were joined
to the outer flanks of the structure, a
madrasa was added to the western flank,
and a musalla (a temporary place in which
worshippers congregate to perform their
prayers) to the eastern one, to name only
the most prominent changes made to the
building over time.

In its original pre-Islamic form, the iwan was
a type of stage for the enthroned king, but
the Seljuks used it for several purposes; in
a madrasa, for example, it was a lecture
room. At the Isfahan mosque, the iwans are
grand portals, becoming the very symbol of
the mosque on the other side. The Isfahan
iwaris are not identical. The main one, at
the southwest, leads to the dome in front of
the qibla. The side jwans have no particular
relationship to the spaces behind them and
lead nowhere except through doorways at the
sides.

11.26 Courtyard, Great Mosque of Isfahan

To the north, the iwan with its barrel vault
points in the direction of a haram—a special
sanctuary where contending parties could
meet to settle disputes—which had originally
been freestanding on three sides but was
eventually roofed over and connected to the
neighboring buildings. The particular reason
why the mosque orientation was interrupted
by the use of the four iwans is not known, but
the building is an ideal space composed of
principal elements, with the iwans a symbolic
armature arranged in precise relationships to
each other.


11.28 Close-up of mugarnas, Great Mosque of Isfahan

11.29 Plan and elevation: Great Mosque of Isfahan

11.27 fwans, Great Mosque of Isfahan

a hy pe

11.30 Gok Madrasa, Sivas, Turkey

First Madrasas

f the caravansaries were the central element
of the Seljuk economic policy, the madrasa
was an important element of Seljuk political
ideology, initially serving to promote the
slamization of the Anatolian population,
which until the 13th century had been
predominantly Christian. The madrasa served
subsequently to enforce and unify the Seljuk’s
Sunni beliefs. The madrasas were thus an
important element in the campaign against
the Shi'ite Fatimids of Egypt. Though many
mosques had spaces and annexes that were
used for classes as well as for residences for
students and teachers, separate institutions

for higher studies were still relatively rare
prior to the Seljuks.

ie)
be at 4

11.32 Plan: Ince Minare Madrasa, Konya, Turkey

11.31 Courtyard, Madrasa al-Firdus, Aleppo, Syria

Madrasas were built in almost all parts of
Asia Minor, but their origin is unclear. Some
link it with the Buddhist vihara—and given
that the eastern areas of Islam had been
saturated with Buddhism for centuries, there
is sore plausibility to that argument. Another
possibility is its association with the courtyard
house, a tradition that goes back to ancient
times. A madrasa was usually founded by a
sultan or nobleman, who would generously
endow it to meet its expenses. As with the
caravansaries, the Seljuk madrasa followed

a standard form. They were rectangular,
compact, and relatively windowless,
appearing as solid objects in the landscape.

Portals, however, were often grandly and
richly carved. Most, like the Ince Minare
Madrasa (1260-65) in Konya, Turkey, had

a central courtyard lined with classrooms
around a central iwan opposite the entrance.
Others, like the Madrasa al-Fridus (1235-41)
in Aleppo, Syria, had no iwan.

11.33 Plan: Madrasa al-Firdus, Aleppo

MUGQARNAS

Muqarnas, also called stalactite or
honeycombed vaulting, are one of the most
common features of Islamic architecture
between the 11th and 15th centuries. They
appear around the Islamic world, including
South Asia, in a variety of materials, including
brick, stone, stucco, and wood. The term’s
origin and meaning, as well as the historical
development of the form, are not known

for certain and are much debated. They
originally developed out of squinches that
eased the transition between the square
and circle of a dome, but they became an
articulation of the fascination among Islamic
artists for complex geometrical patterns,
which were being applied to the surfaces of
doors and window moldings. Though they
do not have an explicit symbolic value, they
allude to the geometry of the heavens and
the wonders of God's creations.

An early example is the Shrine of Imam
Dur, in Samarra, Iraq (1085). The building
consists of an elongated cube on which rests
a series of octagonal tiers that telescope
and rotate toward the final dame. Among
the more developed examples is the dome
(qubba) of al-Barubiyyin in Marrakech,
Morocco (1117), another early example
of a complex dome structure. Its eight-
pointed star seems to almost float free
from its enclosing frame. The four corners

Bd WG S2 er eee et
11.34 Mausoleum of Koutloug Aka, Samarkand, Uzbekistan

have muqarnas of their own, producing a
dynamic three-dimensional effect. One of
the most spectacular of these domes is in
the Alhambra palace in Granada, Spain, over
the Hall of the Two Sisters (1356-59), which
projects both chaos and order at the same
time.

11.36 Two-dimensional fan-shaped
radial mugarnas quarter vault design
from the Topkapi Scroll

11.37 Section: Shrine of Imam Dur, Samarra, Iraq 11.38 Plan of gudba, al-Barubiyyin, Marrakech,
Morocco

Toledg Valencia

Seville @® cordoba

@res
Marrekech@) @siiilmasa

Almoravid Empire

@houdaghost

11.39 North Africa, ca. 1000 cE

THE FATIMIDS

The Fatimids, who had established
themselves in Tunisia, eventually lost
Algeria and points to the west. But they
were successful in their expansion to the
east, sweeping through the Nile Valley,
across Palestine, and into southern Syria
to control a considerable part of the Middle
East for more than two hundred years.
Most Egyptians at that time were Sunni
Muslims, whom the Fatimids—Shirites of
the Ismma’ili sect—opposed. The Fatimid
caliphs, who considered themselves to

be divine rulers sent by God to ensure

the prevalence of Islamic justice, refused
to recognize the legitimacy of the Sunni
Abbasid caliphates ruling frorn Baghdad.

It was the Fatimid vision and mission to
convert the whole Muslim world to its faith
and overthrow the Sunni caliphate. One of
its principal architectural expressions was
the construction of the city of al-Qahira,
which became the heart of the modern city
of Cairo, a few kilometers to the north of the
old early Islamic town. At the core of the
city, which was bisected by a main road,
was a palace district with an east and west
palace separated by a large square; nearby
were the office of the state bureaucracy and
the military. Though descriptions testify to
the sumptuousness of the Fatimid palaces,
little of that palace architecture survives,
but a sense of Fatimid era architectural

Kairouan %
Sousse

Fatimid caliphate

Black Sea

Mediterranean Sea

Alexandria

Cairo@®

@Aleppo

Homs
Damascus

yerusaiem

Fatimid caliphate

skills can be gained by studying the facade
of the Aqmar Mosque in Cairo (1125).
Based loosely on the triumphal arch motif
from classical times, it has a central portal
flanked by tall niches that are surmounted
by mugarna panels and by blind niches. An
inscription runs across the top. Moldings and
decorative friezes are used to tie the parts
together.

Al-Azhar Mosque (970-72 CE) was built
to the southeast. Though it has been much
renovated and enlarged, the mosque still

&

;

— T ecave ‘ot Amr ibn al-As

—Romans/Early Christians.

 Al-Azhar Mosque

x

@ Medina

z
S

g @Mecca

maintains its North African hypostyle hall
with wooden roofs. A striking feature is its
central axis, which breaks the rhythm and
emphasizes the qibla. The minaret is placed
on axis on the south side of the courtyard.
The mosque in its final form, with various
functions appended to its rectangular hall,
almost became a city unto itself. The building
consists of an open courtyard with the main
prayer hall to the east. The western part of
the building contains several madrasas, or
schools. An ablution hall is to the north and

West palace
and garden —,

-— Palace area

SS Easbalace

Greek quarter # Turkish quarter

11.40 Cairo and environs

11.41 Al-Azhar Mosque, Cairo

student rooms to the south. The building is
named “the radiant” in honor of the prophet
Mohammed's daughter, Fatima al-Zahra, from
whom the Fatimid dynasty claims descent.

In 1005, Al-Azhar was endowed by the
Fatimids with thousands of manuscripts
that formed the basis of its collection and
its learning. In 1009, however, the newly
founded al-Hakirm Mosque became the
sole location for the caliph's sermons. The
Ayyubid dynasty (1174-1250) and then
the Mamluks (1250-1517), who later took
the reins of power, and who were Sunni as
opposed to Shi’a, showed differing degrees
of deference to the Fatimid mosques and
provided widely varying levels of financial
assistance to the school and to the upkeep
of the mosques. With the change of power,
Al-Azhar became a Sunni institution, much of
its manuscript collection was dispersed, and
professors were forced to find other means
to earn their livings. Al-Azhar nevertheless
remained a place of learning throughout this
period, and private lessons were often still
offered. Today, Al-Azhar remains a deeply
influential institution in Egyptian society and a
symbol of Islamic Egypt.

11.42 Interior of Al-Azhar Mosque

0 30m CS
tb 1 ra
11.43 Plan: Al-Azhar Mosque

Ghaznavids Chauhans
Pratin,
Shahi Solantis tag
Mt. Abu “Op,
ran @he @kKhajuraho
Modhera as &
° chande ra
Somnath ge se
© os x ©
Bhubaneshwar
Chalukyas
Bay of Bengal
Rg
Arabian Sea &
. ingaikondacholapuram
raring PD gai jacholapura
PB.
‘dyag

11.44 South Asia temple sites

RISE OF THE RAJPUT KINGDOMS
Between 800 and 1000 Ce, the Gurjara-
Pratiharas from the west, the Rashtrakutas
from the Deccan Plateau, and the Buddhist
Palla kings from the east were locked in

a battle for control of the central Gangetic
Plains. Kanauj, through which all of the
major trade routes south, east, and north
passed, was the prized possession. The three
contenders, by turn, had all managed to
capture Kanauj, but two centuries of warfare
weakened all three to such a degree that
they all eventually collapsed. The resultant
power vacuum in northern India led to a
series of new kingdoms. Some of these, like
the Chalukyas, were former vassal states
that now declared independence. More
significantly, a large number of semitribal and
tribal communities that had previously been
subjugated emerged as kingdoms in their
own right. These are known collectively as
the Rajput kingdoms because of their shared
caste identity (raj-put means “royal son”).
Among these, the Solankis (western and
central India), the Chandellas (north-central
India}, and the Orissans (east and central
India) were eminent temple builders. The
capital of the Solankis, Patan, was the largest
city in India and the tenth-largest city in the
world.

Most of the tribal communities were of

the lowest caste, so their new kings had

to acquire the Kshatriya, or warrior caste.

To accomplish this, the kings laid claim to

a mythical lineage and, more importantly,
began to build and support temples as a way
to legitimate their rule. The result was one

of the largest temple-building campaigns in
India, with new forms coming into being.
Regional deities and gods were accepted into
the expanding Hindu pantheon, and worship
was conducted in regional languages. Other
than the introduction of Islam, which was yet
to come, the patchwork of regional identities
that is modern India was established at this
time. Contemporary India still has twenty-two
official languages (and over five hundred
ialects) with clear geographical divisions.

It is therefore useful to think of India as one
joes of Europe: as an interrelated network
of distinct regional areas. While the various
regions share certain cultural aspects,

their identities are as diverse as those of
European countries. The sare applies to
their architecture. To think of a unified Indian
architecture is as useful and as useless as
thinking of “European architecture.”

Rani-ni-Vav at Patan

Access to and distribution of fresh water
played a critical role in all of Indian society,
where water had both an economic and a
symbolic value. But Solanki wells were no
simple affairs. The step well called the Rani-
ni-Vay, or “Queen's Step Well,” was built

at Anhilwara (Patan) in the 11th century,

in memory of Bhimdev | (1022-63) by his
widowed queen, Udaymati. It consists of a
long stairway leading down to the water table.
The entire excavation is lined with a multi-
tiered colonnaded “facade” supported by
elaborately carved stone colurnns and beams.
It was partially roofed, with light filtering even
into the deepest parts 28 meters below the
surface. The reason for such splendor was
that the Rani-ni-Vav (rani means “queen”;
vav, “well”) served as a supplementary
palace for the queen and her attendants. The
natural temperature of the earth, combined
with the evaporative effects of the wind
passing over the water, turned the step well
into a subterranean world of cool repose
during the blistering summer months. Since
the well went so far down, its walls had to

be buttressed against implosion. This was
achieved by building heavy stone buttresses
at the well’s mouth and bracing its interior.

In a more symbolic sense, the step well was
also another version of the ghats of Varanasi
or the water tank of the Sun Ternple at
Modhera, except that the step well was fully
inhabitable. Much of Solanki architecture
was eventually destroyed by invading Islamic
armies. The Rani-ni-Vav survived intact
because it was intentionally filled in with earth
by the retreating Solankis.

11.46 Rani-ni-Vav, step well at Patan

Sun Temple at Modhera

Of the various Rajput kingdoms, the Solankis,
who ruled in Rajasthan and Gujarat, were
among the most zealous temple builders.
They traded not only with the other kingdoms
of South Asia but also with Central Asia.
Though principally worshipers of Shiva, they
claimed lineage from Pandu, a mythological
king during ancient Vedic times. Through that
connection, they legitimized their tradition

of solar cults. The Solanki royal temple,
dedicated to Surya, or the sun, was made
from golden sandstone in a tripartite axial
arrangement. The main shrine is in the

west, a rectangular water tank in the east,
and a mandapa in between, all integrated
into a single composition. The mandapa is
connected to the steps surrounding the water
tank by a freestanding gateway, or forana,
that marks the top of a flight of steps. While
the aesthetic expression of all the ternple’s
elements is in itself quite remarkable, it

is the delicate richness with which all the
columns, brackets, cusped and wavy arches,
and roofs are carved that stands out. Their
distinction lies in how they function optically
to connect the building’s elements. Standing
on the western edge of the tank and looking
eastward toward the main ternple, the view
seems to be of one building composed of the
steps leading upward to the mandapa. But
the conical top belongs to the shrine in the
distance, and the entrance of the mandapa is
actually the torana in the foreground.

Ramakunda pool

11.48 Plan: Sun Temple at Modhera

11.50 Ramakunda pool, Sun Temple at Modhera

11.49 Detail: Sun Temple at Modhera

the edge of the tan

the conical dome a
base of the inverte

hat this effect is deliberate is evidenced
by the access steps,
element excavated from the ground between

which are a separate

and the torana, thereby

establishing an optical connection between
the two. There is also an echo effect between
the implied triangular profile of the temple
and the inverted V of the steps, and between

ove and the steps at the
V, which widen out into

the tank. The entirety creates an uncanny

reflective effect, even when there is no water

present.

11.51 Lakshmana Temple sikhara

Chandellas

In a brief period of about 175 years, the
Chandellas, who called their kingdom
Jejakabhukti, built more than eighty temples
in and around their capital of Khajuraho
(ancient Khajjuravahaka). The crispness

of their architectural forms and the close
continuity in their order and language

11.52 Lakshmana Temple at Khajuraho, India

indicate that there must have been a core
group of architects, or perhaps even a
single architect-in-charge. Two of the main
royal temples of the Chandellas were the
Lakshmana (ca. 950 CE) and the Khandariya
Mahadeva (1000-1025).

Dedicated to Shiva, the Lakshmana
rises on a high platform, ensuring that, like
all other Khajuraho temples, it is visible in
the surrounding flat countryside from afar.
Independent subsidiary shrines are located at
the four corners of the platform, suggesting
a sense of enclosure and defining a sacred
precinct without the actual existence of a
wall. Access is highly dramatic, via an axially

it} 10m

Pore wk 4

placed stair to the platform and another set
of stairs to the ternple. The profile of the
temple was itself something of a “stairway
to heaven.” The temple consists of three
mandapas preceding the main shikhara. The
mandapas are articulated in horizontal layers,
while the main shikhara emphasizes the
vertical. One of the key architectural issues
is that the mandapa is no longer just a flat
roofed box in front of the temple: it now has
its own pyramidical roof that competes with
the shikhara of the main shrine. From this
time on, one of the main characteristics of
Hindu temples is their silhouette.

One distinguishing feature of the
ajuraho ternples is the manner in
hich their architects orchestrated the
ront elevations—not mathematically or
geometrically, but perspectively. The front
levations of the mandapas are designed
so that at eye level they all appear to nestle
nto each other perfectly. (This is similar to
the design of the Sun Temple at Mochera.)
The objective was not just aesthetic. The
superstructure of every Hindu temple is

Pas

Ss

@

conceived as a model of the universe; its
purpose is to disclose to the believer the
inherent order and beauty of that universe.

11.53 Plan and section: Lakshmana Temple

11.54 Khandariya Mahadeva Temple, Khajuraho, India

Khandariya Mahadeva Temple

The Khandariya Mahadeva Temple
(1000-1025), like the Lakshmana, sits on

a high platform that it shares with another,
smaller ternple, the Jagdambi, dedicated to
the goddess Parvati. There are no corner
shrines, so the profiles of the Khandariya

and its partner are silhouetted against

the sky without distraction. Balancing the
composition between the two temples is

a small shrine resting on its own plinth.

At 30 meters, including the 4-meter-high
platform on which it rests, the Khandariya
rises higher than all the other temples,

but its strength lies not in its size, but in

the quality of its architecture. Its profile

is designed to represent the rhythms of a
jagged mountain range, both in its outlines
and in the composition of its parts. Unlike the
Lakshmana, the Khandariya’s four mandapas
are articulated with distinctive mini-shikharas
that cluster around the main shikhara. These
mini-shikharas produce the sense of a rising
wave while still being fully geometrical.

he slight widening at the base, the strong
horizontal protrusions of the porches, and the
tightly bound faceting at the intersection of
the shikhara and the mandapa make for an
extraordinarily powerful composition. Because
of their height, the porches give the visitor

a sense of elevation above the quotidian.

he interior of the sanctuary, however, is
appropriately deep and dark, like a cave.

Unlike many Hindu temples, the Khandariya
is lit by large openings located well above eye
level. The effect is particularly spectacular

in the circumambulation route, where the
light coming from a high source casts dark
shadows between the folds of the sculptures,
bringing them into sharp relief. The openings
are furnished with platforms and steps for
attendants and musicians.

he Khajuraho temples are famous for
their so-called erotic sculpture. Sexual acts
of almost every kind are carved with the
same attention to detail and fullness as

all the other sculptures, underscoring the
Chandellas’ interest in Tantrism. This sexual
sculpture, while present in abundance, is
neither highlighted nor hidden; it is both an
important part of the assemblage and a part
of the wider variety of life depicted in the
sculptural program.

15m
1 1 4

lan: Khandariya Mahadeva Temple

11.56 Elevation: Khandariya Mahadeva Temple

11.57 Tantric sculpture from
Khandariya Mahadeva Temple

Tantrism etal consists of an empty quadrangular enclosure
The Chandella Rajputs, who were Gond ST pth on surrounded by sixty-four small shrines, each
tribesmen brought frorn obscurity into the with its own individual pyramidical shikhara;
caste through the bhakti cults, rernained the main opening is on one of the smaller
invested in aspects of their old animism—. ‘ sides to the north. The center of the Chausat
particularly in the rites associated with , Yogini is visibly empty or open, in contrast to
female fertility. Their practices therefore a typical Hindu ternple dedicated to a male
found sympathy among Tantra (anglicized deity, in which the dominant ternple would
as “Tantrism”) practitioners, who held that be in the middle. Unlike the Vaishnite and
veneration of the female deity was critical Shiavite temples, the Chausat Yogini Temple
to attaining nirvana. Tantrics believed that is oriented north-south.

through ascetic practices and esoteric rituals

they could use the inherent divine power | i
(prana) that flows through the universe - ne
(including one's own body) to attain spiritual 11.58 Plan: Chausat Yogini Temple at Khajuraho, India
goals. For this reason, Tantric worship

makes elaborate use of mantras, or symbolic
speech made up of words or phrases that

are repeated over and over. Tantric practices
required secret initiations by a guru or leader.
A woman had to be present at every ritual
because the female was the initiator of the
action; the male could only be activated
through union with a female. Routinely
condemned by more orthodox Hindus, the
antrics gained widespread acceptance
among the nobility of the time, particularly
the Rajputs. Tantrism was also an important
force in contemporary Buddhism.

An example of an early Chandella Tantric
structure is the Chausat Yogini Temple
(mid-9th century), located 1 kilometer from
hajuraho. Its name literally means the
“temple of sixty-four wornen saints.” One of
many such temples found in northern India, it

11.59 Chausat Yogini Temple

11.60 Geometric evolution of an Orissan temple plan (after Andreas Volwahsen)

Vastu-Shastras

In the 10th and 11th centuries, a series of
technical manuals was published under
such titles as Vastu Shastra (“Construction
Treatise") and Shilpa Shastra (“Sculpture
Treatise”); they provide insight into the highly
codified language of termple design and
construction. From these texts we know that
a temple's overall design was handled by a
chief Brahmin, known as a sutradhar. He
based his work on an astrological diagram
called a mandala, a graph that mapped

the positions of stars, planets, deities, and
the sun with respect to a particular site.

Its design is based on the overlay of a
square and a circle. The sutradhar chose
from hundreds of mandalas, depending on
the deity of the temple and the religious
persuasion of the community. The temple's
actual form was derived through a series of
geometrical maneuvers designed to express
the potency of the various planets and
deities occupying the grid of the mandala.
Radiating lines, the weight given to the
primary directions, and special triangles all
determined the location of the building's
various parts. A complex system of faceting,
known as rathas, determined the detailed
articulation of the temple's surface. The
purpose of the rathas was to enable multiple
deities to share a single surface—in the
vertical and horizontal plane—by suggesting
superimposed layers. The final form was
inevitably a heavily faceted pyrarnid. Once
the design had been determined, it was

relayed to the master builder, whose craft
was handed down through oral tradition.
Sculpture and paintings were then finished
by independent shrenis (“artisans”).

The cosmic order expressed by a temple
offers a vision of a pyramidal universe
cascading downward in conceptual waves
from a single point of origin that in itself is
without form or substance. The objective of
the worshipper, in apprehending this vision,
was to devote himself or herself to ascending
to that formless center, a task assisted by
devotion to the temple’s resident deity.

Mastaka

Pida

Bada

11.61 Orissan temple elements

Mastaka

Gandi

Bada

Orissa and Lingaraja Temple

Another important kingdom was Orissa,
located in eastern India south of Bengal,
whose fertile rivers and ports were key to its
wealth. Over the centuries, various dynasties
ruled from its capital, Bhubaneshwar,

which came to be home to about seven
thousand Hindu temples, many of which
were distributed around a sacred pool. A few
hundred still stand. As Hinduism matured,
the ruling dynasties grew in power, and their
ritual practices became more and more
elaborate, the temples of Bhubaneshwar grew
in size and complexity. The temples were
unique, as the mandapa was given its own
pyramidical roof that had to be harmonized
with the rising shikhara of the garbha-griha
(which the Orissans call rekha deu/). The
emergence of this atternpt at integration is
seen at the Rajarani Temple (ca. 1000 CE).

11.62 Rajarani Temple, Bhubaneshwar, Orissa, India

Jagmohan Rekha deul

“ Rathas are the
projections and recesses

11.63 Plan: Rajarani Temple that form the pagas.

11.64 Lingaraja Temple, Bhubaneshwar, Orissa, India

f

if

Rekha deul

Jagmohan Nat-mandir Bhog-mandapa

11.65 Plan and elevation: Lingaraja Temple

bap

11.66 Site: Lingaraja Temple

As the “king” of the Bhubaneshwar temples,
the Lingaraja (literally, “Phallus King,” ca.
1100) was distinguished not only by its size
but also by the presence of a row of three
jagmohans. The rituals that would normally
have been conducted in a single hall were
here separated, enabling several rituals to
occur simultaneously and creating the sense
of a mini-pilgrimage in their performance.
These jagmohans—a primary jagmohan,
a nat-mandir (“dance hall”), and a bhog-
mandapa (“collective ritual performance
hall” )}—were about the same size, though
each has a distinctive plan suited to its
function. The jagmohan has a fully articulated
exterior, making it a shrine in itself. The nat-
mandir is airy and open so that its activities
could be seen and heard in the surroundings.
The bhog-mandapa duplicates the jagmohan
and was probably added later to facilitate
rituals by larger groups that could not
access the innermost shrine. The Lingaraja’s
37.5-meter-high rekha deul, which dominates
the silhouette, has a distinctive profile, first
rising almost vertically and then, only toward
the top, curving inward, before yielding to a
recessed neck that supports a wide amalaka
resting on the backs of lions (an indication of
royal patronage).

The Lingaraja sits in the middle of
a quadrangular compound dotted with
numerous small subsidiary shrines that
were added over time to the main sequence
in order to increase its potency. This
proliferation is cornmon in active Hindu
temples and is described as the parivar
(literally, the “farnily") of the main shrine,
which is expected to change and grow in
time as does a prosperous family around a
reigning patriarch. Though the Lingaraja is
now decommissioned, the nearby Jagannath
Temple in Puri, also built by the Gangas in
the 12th century, is still in use, and as a
result, its parivar has grown. The compound
is now completely saturated with subsidiary
shrines, many built recently.


11.67 A Teaching Session (detail from a Shravanabelagola painting)

Jains

Many of the ministers employed in the
Rajput courts were neither Hindus nor
Buddhists but Jains, who were often

the best financial experts and bankers
available—an unintended consequence

of their religion. Jainism originates in the
teaching of Mahavira, a conternporary of

the Buddha from the 6th century BCE. (Jain
is a corruption of the Sanskrit word jina,
meaning “conqueror,” the title given to
Mahavira in Jain texts.) Like the Buddha,
Mahavira preached a doctrine of asceticism
and meditation, but Mahavira insisted that all
forms of life were equivalent and that respect
for life was essential for the purification of
the human soul. Strictly ascetic Jains, known
as Digambaras (“sky-clad,” or naked), were
thus expected not only to be vegetarians

but also to eat only a fruit or vegetable that
had broken off its plant of its own accord.
Root vegetables like potatoes and beets

that entailed killing the whole plant were

also prohibited. Nor could Jains be farmers,
since working the land inevitably harrned
insects and worms. As a consequence, they
turned to professions such as jewelry making,
trading, and banking and were thus highly
sought after by the courts. They also often
became great librarians and patrons of the
arts.

Like the Mahayana Buddhists of Central and
East Asia, the Jains built colossal monolithic
statues of their Tirthankars (literally, “ford
finders,” or “those who cross the river of
human misery”) and spiritual leaders. In
966 CE, Chamundaray, a Jain minister of the
Ganga dynasty, built at Shravanabelagola,
Karnataka, a 17-meter-high statue of a naked
Gomteshwara Bahubali, the first man said
to have attained enlightenment through Jain
practice. It sits on top of a hill visible from
a distance. Every twelve years the statue is
covered with milk, yogurt, ghee (clarified
butter), and saffron, as well as with gold
coins.
Like the Buddhists, the Jains challenged
Hindu caste hierarchy and refuted Vedic
orthodoxy, particularly the Brahmin’s claim
to privileged access to higher knowledge.
So Jain ideas and institutions, like those of
the Buddhists, were severely attacked by
the Hindus in the 9th and 10th centuries.
Followers of the Shaivite and Vaishnite bhakti
cults blamed them for negating life and
being too abstract and impractical for the
common man. But unlike the Buddhists,
who wilted under the critiques and eventually
disappeared from India, the Jains managed
to survive the rising tide of Hinduism (and
later iconoclastic Islam), in part because of
their economic and political clout.

11.68 Statue of Gomteshwara Bahubali

oday there are almost three million Jains in
ndia, mostly in the western provinces and in
arnataka. That Hindu India today is largely
vegetarian is mainly due to their influence.
he Jains believe in the leadership of twenty-
four Tirthankars who, after having totally
conquered vices such as anger, pride, and
desire, are said to have appeared on earth
to show Jains the way to the true religion.

he original twenty-four Tirthankars were
expanded to fifty-two and then seventy-four
after the 12th century.


~ Entiance to site + <

6om

ro

11.69 Plan: Jain Temples at Mt. Abu, Rajasthan, India

Jain Temples at Mt. Abu

From the 10th through the 16th centuries,
Jain ministers employed in Rajput courts

used their wealth to build a set of five temples
at Mt. Abu, Rajasthan, 170 kilometers north
of Ahmedabad. Known collectively as the
Dilwara Temples after a nearby town, they

are clustered on a hill located on the high
plateau summit of the mountain. Each ternple
sits high off the ground on its own terrace
and is accessed on its flank by steps spilling
out from a multitiered porch. The plans are

modeled on Hindu precedents, with a main
garbha-griha preceded by a mandapa. The
central deity of the site is Adinath, one of
the Tirthankars; shrines to all the Tirthankars
were added to each temple later on. As a
result, the individual temples came to be
surrounded by a quadrangle composed

of rows of mini-shrines. The mandapas

of the mini-shrines were joined to form a
cloister. Into the residual space between the
quadrangle and the temple, the architects
inserted a pavilion held up by highly ornate
columns of lavish sculptural detail. The
temples, of local white arasa marble, are

carved as if made of wood. The columns and
ceilings of the open pavilion are the climax of
the sculptural program.

2b Adhinath Temale

“in
ey,
O%
“iy

Luna Vasahi Temple

At the Vimala Vasahi, twelve multifaceted
piers, linked by flying arches, hold up a
domed ceiling. Sixteen female figures,
personifying various aspects of learning, are
attached in a ring around the perimeter. The
exterior wall, by contrast, is restrained in its
ornamentation, masking the rich articulations
of the interior.

11.71 Dilwara Temple at Mt. Abu

11.70 Interior, Vimala Vasahi Temple at Mt. Abu

Pala
; Odda
“ven Kalinga ra
Bay of Be f ‘
Western Chalukyas © ay oF Benge i
Vengi H
‘
Chola. Kanchipuram \
i ‘
Thanjavur Gangalkonda Cholapuram i
Naapattinam !
ae if
a, i
Hi
}

11.72 Chola and its economic sphere of influence

CHOLAMANDALAM

India’s south came to be dominated by a
single power, the Cholas, who combined
military strength with an effective strategy of
wealth generation and governance to bring
about a social and economic revolution of
their own. Building for themselves a new
capital at Thanjavur, they eventually came

to control all of peninsular India, becoming
the largest power on the subcontinent. They
lost no time in embarking on an aggressive
campaign of temple building, not only to
spread Shaivism but also to consolidate their
economic base. Raja Raja Chola | (r. 985-
1004) turned his attention to the trade routes
and soon brought the Arabian shipping lanes
under his control. Sri Lanka became a vassal
state. His son, Rajendra | (r. 1014-44),

with his eye on the lucrative sea trade with
China, sent his fleet to conquer Malaya and
Shrivijaya, leaving the Cholas the controlling
superpower of Southeast Asia. The Cholas,
who called their sphere of influence the
Cholamandalam, the “Chola Vision-World"
possessed the largest naval force India was to
have until modern times.

The Cholas chose the image of Shiva
Nataraj, who orders the movement of the
world with his dance, as their representative
royal deity. The temple itself was an

extension of the royal ordering of the world.
The word “temple” in Tamil is Kovil (kov
meaning “god-king,” # meaning “home");
it connotes both temple and palace and
thereby serves a range of functions, from the
religious to the judicial. For every economic
unit (like a village or a district), the Cholas
built a temple. While the temple's basic
endowments of agricultural land or villages
were made by the king, the actual land

for the building was donated by the local
elite. Donations for building materials were
made by the merchants. Provisions such
as images, lamps, and oil were obtained

11.73 A typical Chola temple town

through individual donations. Temples were
also run like a corporation. They had the
authority to make land grants and to invest
their assets as they considered fit. They even
became banks, with major contributions and
investments inscribed on the walls of the
temple for all to view. In this way, the Chola
temples became the financial centers of the
community. Village assemblies were held

in them, and they were often responsible

for the education of upper-caste boys.

The temple’s administration, however, was
controlled by the king, and Brahmins were
the only ones allowed to conduct rituals.
Temples maintained a huge permanent staff
that included musicians, artists, artisans,
and dancers (including devadasis, women
dancers dedicated to the temple for life.) The
community's cultural institutions, in other
words, were also the preserve of the temple.

Dakshinameru (Rajarajeshwara Temple)

While regional temples served the more
quotidian purposes of governance, Rajaraja I's
royal ternple at Thanjavur, the Chola

capital, embodied a vision of kingship at

the scale of an empire. Rajaraja | projected
himself as a cakravartin, a king destined

to bring order to the world, a demigod in

the grace of Shiva Nataraj. He called his
temple Dakshinameru, the “Mt. Meru of

the South,” distinguishing his world from
that of the north. (Dakshinameru is now
generally known as the Rajarajeshwara or the
Brinadeshwara Temple). Major cerernonies
of royal initiation and legitimation were

held there, linking deity and king. The daily


rituals of the deities mirrored those of the
king, including his morning round of the
sacred enclosure and his sunset retreat to
his bedroom. Dakshinameru maintained a
staff of six hundred devadasis, treasurers,
accountants, record-keepers, watchmen,
musicians, readers of texts, and craftsmen of
every sort—in addition to scores of Brahmin
priests. To this day it remains the largest
temple in India.

Situated next to a river that was channeled
to form a moat symbolic of the cosmic ocean,
its outer enclosure was built like a fortress.
lt was entered on axis through a five-story
gopuram. A second, three-story freestanding
gopuram, set on a long, low platform, gave
access to the main quadrangle. The towering,
sixteen-story mass of the main shikhara
dominates the view, with pilasters, piers,
and attached columns articulating the entire
surface. In the interior, the circumambulation
route that goes around the massive lingam RO en,
in the garbha-griha is repeated on the on
upper story, which is inhabitable. This is a -
rarity in Hindu temples, an allusion to the : ~~

idea that Rajarajeshwara offered access _.
to the realm of the gods. The ground story : Y
(which symbolically corresponds to the

earthly realm) is articulated as two stories,

indicating more than one celestial dimension 7 Palace
of the royal temple. The main temple is

preceded by two cojoined, dimly lit hypostyle

halls: the antaraia, or vestibule, where the _ Moat."
priest would be, and the mandapa. In the of

mandapa, the columns are exquisitely and
intricately carved—showing the potential
for refinement—whereas in the antarala,

the columns are left as massive and plain
monoliths: the first manifestation of form
emerging out of the formless.

50m

11.76 Plan: Dakshinameru (Rajarajeshwara Temple)

POLONNARUWA
By the end of the 12th century, the northern
part of Sri Lanka, with its elaborate system of
artificial lakes, dams, and canals, constituted
one of the most sophisticated hydro-
engineering landscapes in the world. Along
with exporting pearls and gems, Sri Lanka
had become one of the leading maritime
ports in South Asia. Following a period of
conflict with empires frorn India, eager to
wrest control of its markets, the old capital,
Anurachapura, was replaced by a new one,
Polonnaruma, where the king built his palace
compound directly to the west of a massive
artificial lake. An extensive pleasure garden
and audience hall were placed directly on top
of the 2-kilometer long dyke that held back
the water, an indication of the ruler’s supreme
confidence in the engineered landscape.
Among the numerous shrines, pools, and
gardens, Vatadage (which means “circular
relic house") was one of the most important
constructions. At its core is a conventional
stupa, about 5 meters high and painted
white. It is located, however, within a walled
cylindrical chamber of brick, the whole
resting on a high, finely decorated stone
plinth, with access via four cardinally oriented
stairs. The circular wall, which was probably
stuccoed and painted, is ornamented on the
outside by an elegant blind, columnar stone
screen. This screen, along with a ring of tall
stone columns on the inside of the chamber,
has led to conjecture that the whole structure
was once roofed over. It is an unusual design
found almost exclusively in Sri Lanka. One
can imagine the building as a stupa that
has been encased in elements symbolic of a
palace.

11.77 Pictorial view: Parakramabahu Palace, Polonnaruwa, Sri Lanka

TIT Resse El Rel ae +R bod eT

peat

of

sep
L
Ne

30m a

L a re ¢

11.78 Plan: Parakramabahu Palace

This would conform with the largely
theocratic world view of the ruler, who was
the arch-protector of the spiritual legacy of
the Buddha. The building is surrounded by a
low stone wall that permits only one entrance
rom the north, further setting it off from its
surroundings. By thus enclosing the stupa,
the designer took it out of the public realm,
oth physically and visually, and indeed this
uilding probably housed for a while the
tooth of the Buddha, a venerated relic that
came to be associated with the king and the
legitimacy of his rule. The cylindrical brick
structure that surrounds the inner stupa is
similar to a water tank, ruins of which can

e found in various parts of the kingdom. Is
it then possible to see the Buddha relic as
lessing and protecting the great hydrological
systems that defined the success of the
ingdom?

11.80 Polonnaruwa stupa

ae

BR En pre

i

at Mahal Prasad

Bodh Tree, Shrine

te

0 50m

t ee ee er |

11.79 Plan: Polonnaruwa stupa complex

"


Liao

@Dading
@bicoyang

Korea
Dongjing (Kaifeng) @) Yellow Sege*"*
’
/
; ; Song dynasty / +
Tibetan kingdoms / Japan}
Lennie,
FO) Chengdu Lin’an (Hangzhou) @e-" ee /
“ON } East China Sea ~77-~" -
f t /
F, ‘
d {
“ \ Quanzhou@)
a iar ° i ’

o

i Guangzhou “Taiwanese tribes
Kingdom ofiDali @ a

!
t
i Dai Viet
\

N,
.,
..

11.81 Song dynasty China

SONG DYNASTY CHINA

The Song dynasty (960-1279) reunited most
of China proper. The Song period divides into
two phases: Northern Song (960-1127), and
Southern Song (1127-1279). The division
was caused by the forced abandonment

of north China in 1127 by the Song court,
which could not push back Jin invaders. As
to Chang’an, the Uyghurs helped recapture
the fabled capital from rebels, but they
refused to leave until the emperor paid them
an enormous sum of tribute in silk. The
abandonment of northern China was caused
in part to floods in 858 along the Grand Canal
that inundated vast tracts of land and terrain
of the North China Plain; in 873 a disastrous
harvest shook the foundations of the empire
and made it all the more dependent on
imported rice from Southeast Asia. Whereas
the Northern Song capital was moved to
Dongjing (now Kaifeng); the southern capital
was established at Lin’an (now Hangzhou).
Though much weakened, the economy

was still powerful, and the use of a new

type of early-ripening rice from Southeast
and South Asia created abundant food
surpluses. Confucianism was reinforced, and
foreign relations were established with India,
Indonesia, and Fatimid Egypt.

ra

The 11th-century Song dynasty cities were
the largest and most complex cities in the
world. Among these, Dongjing, with close
to a million residents of diverse faiths, was
perhaps the largest. Unlike the cities of the
Tang, Song dynasty cities were more than
just administrative centers; they also served
as a locus of trade, industry, and maritime
commerce. Dongjing lay at the intersection

Sage Mother Hall

“
f
Spirit Bridge.
72
af
’ Offering hall
i / Lotus terr:
f hee oe
fo¢
co

ace

of four major canals connecting to other
cities and feeding into the Yellow River.
Because the city was not divided into activity-
specific wards, merchants could set up shop
anywhere they pleased. Paintings from the
time reveal that all the major streets and
intersections were alive with activity. (A Song
scroll, Upper River during Qing-Ming Festival,
contains a detailed description of bustling
Dongjing.)

Though Chinese authorities often
preferred highly regulated cities, Dongjing
shows the development of more flexible,
wardless cities such as Lin’an, a center of
culture on the southern coast of China during
the 10th and 11th centuries and—following
the defeat of the Song by the Jin in 1123—
the capital of the Southern Song dynasty.
Song cities were very cosmopolitan, with

jarge populations of non-Chinese merchants.
he new concept of a cultural entertainment
area, a wazi, became popular, especially

with the creation of night markets. The Song
created extensive road networks between
their large and small cities. The use of paper
money facilitated the mercantile economy.

he cultivation of tea and cotton became
widespread; gunpowder was used for the first
time.

One of the leading scientists and
statesman, Shen Kuo (1031-95), a
mathematician, astronomer, cartographer,
and encyclopedist, also served as finance
minister. Through experimentation with
suspended magnetic needles, Shen
discovered magnetic declination toward the
North Pole—and the concept of true north,
a revelation that made the compass useful
for navigation. He also wrote extensively
about movable type printing, which had
been invented by Bi Sheng (990-1051).

O

11.82 Site of Sage Mother Hall, Jinci Temple, Tayjuan, China

Under the Song dynasty, Daoist and
Buddhist traditions became closely aligned.
But it was Confucianism, influenced by
Buddhist practices, that reemerged as a
major ideological force. Though having
different emphases, the two were not seen as
discordant.

Sage Mother Hall

Song cities, as had been traditional since
the Han dynasty, had elaborate open-air
sacrificial altars used for imperial sacrifices
to the heaven, earth, sun, and moon. There
were also magnificent roofed ci, temples with
columnar interiors that were constructed for
commemoration and veneration, often in
connection with Confucian learning. During
the Song dynasty, such structures also served
as sites of imperial sacrifices. One of these
was the Jinci, built at the site of three springs
that had been worshipped since ancient
times, and famous in Chinese literature for
its pastoral beauty. It is located at the base
of a mountain 25 kilometers southeast of
Taiyuan, an important regional city. Whereas
most Chinese temple compounds followed

a conventional pattern of south-facing

halls preceded by courtyards, the entirety
framed by a wall with a gate, this sanctuary,
dedicated to the springs’ spirit, was built with
the landscape in mind. Though numerous
buildings have been added to the site over
time, it originally consisted of a southeast-
oriented series of buildings and bridges

that crossed two canals, all set between two
springs with the Sage Mother Temple set
directly behind the middle and third one.

he sanctuary was seen as a celestial court
reigned over by a supreme goddess. For that
reason, the Sage Mother hall (1038-87) at
the apex of the composition was built in the
imperial style: it has a timber-framed, double-
eave hip-and-gable roof with dramatic, five-
puzo eaves.

Since the Sage Mother was seen as
important in providing rain as well as spring
water, the lotus terrace, the first structure in
the sequence, was, so it is thought, the site
of ritual offerings and ceremonies dedicated
to rain. This open-air platform is followed
by a roofed offering hall that leads to the
remarkable Spirit Bridge, which traverses
one of the springs. It actually consists of
two bridges that cross each other at 90
degrees, meeting at the center. They are set

in front of the hall itself, which is a single-
story building; but because it was built with
an encircling veranda with its own set of
brackets, it appears as if it were two stories.
he eight dragons of gilded wood that wrap
themselves around the front columns are a
marker of the Sage Mother's identity as water
goddess and as a provider of rain. Columns
were eliminated to allow for more room in
the veranda, where it is two bays deep. The
wall of the open U-shaped enclosure of the
shrine has embedded within it, as is typical,
the columns that support the roof. The inner

walls, which were completely painted with
themes associated with the goddess, had
life-size statues of attendant women standing
along them. The Sage Mother is clothed in
elaborate robes but is in a seated Buddha
position—no accident, as hers was meant to
compete with Buddhist shrines.

11.83 Detail, Sage Mother Hall

11.84 Section: Sage Mother Hall

ia) ibm
- - 4

11.85 Silhouette, Iron Pagoda, Kaifeng, China

The Iron Pagoda

The architecture of the fa, or pagoda,
developed rapidly under the Song. Pagodas
had first emerged during the Han dynasty
(202 BCE-220 CE) as wooden structures, and
then during the T'ang dynasty (618-907 CE)
as stone and brick buildings that could

more easily survive lightning strikes. Though
Buddhism in China had waned after the

late T’ang period, during the Song dynasty
Buddhist pagoda towers continued to be
built—often in the countryside instead

of within city walls, perhaps so as to not
compete with the cosmic-imperial authority
that was represented by the cities’ drum

and gate towers. An exception to this is the
lron Pagoda of Youguo Temple in Dongjing
(present-day Kaifeng), which gets its name
not because it was made of iron but because
the color of the building resembles that of
iron. It is an octagonal brick structure about
57 meters high built around a solid core,
with a spiral staircase circulating between
the core and outer shell. The use of brick
allowed the architects to achieve an elegant,
thin shape that would not have been
possible in wood, even though the building
was designed to imitate a wooden structure
with densely positioned eaves (miyan) and
wooden brackets (dou-gong). The glazed
bricks on the exterior are richly decorated
with images of the Buddha, monks, singers
and dancers, flowers, lions, and dragons and
other legendary beasts. Under the eaves, 104
bells ring in the wind.

LIAO DYNASTY

A tribal clan known as the Khitan created the
Liao dynasty (947-1125), which stretched
from Korea and Mongolia in the north to
Beijing in the south. The Liao was the first of
China’s several so-called foreign dynasties. In
response to the dual nature of the area—with
nomads to the north and settled Chinese
populations in the south—the Liao created a
double government, building a series of cities
through which this duality was expressed. Its
capital, Shangjing (“Supreme Capital”), near
the modern city of Lingdong, was located at
the headwaters of the Shira Muren River, a
site hallowed by the Khitan people. It served
as the administrative center of the empire
and included a commercial district, called the
Chinese city, made of permanent materials;
the ruling Liao, however, continued to live

in their traditional yurts in their own part of
the town. Eventually, more than thirty walled
cities were built, including four subsidiary
capitals for the four regions of the empire,
serving as centers of commerce; the southern
capital was a predecessor of Beijing. The
cities were square (or almost square), with

a separated walled palace city within the

city adjacent to the north wall. The Liao
embraced Buddhism with such vigor that it is
estimated that 10 percent of the population
were monks and nuns. Nonetheless, most
Khitan still adhered in one way or another

to the traditional animistic religion in which
the sun was worshipped. Thus, the Khitan
emperor faced the east, where the sun rises,
rather than the south, as Chinese emperors
did.

Though the Khitan accommodated
themselves to the Song dynasty architectural
and urban traditions—as they had no such
traditions themselves—they transformed
Chinese building conventions to develop their
own style. The buildings they commissioned
were made by Chinese and Korean
craftsmen. Nonetheless, their buildings were
in many respects different, if not superior, to
those of the Song. Whereas the Song aspired
to a clarity of structure, the Liao reveled
in the complexity of brackets and joinery
that made their buildings more durable
and lent ther a majestic tone. One of their
innovations was to remove central colurnns in
he halls to allow more space for the statue of
he Buddha. This partially explains the need
for a more complex roof structure, which
had to span greater distances. It was during
the reign of the sixth Liao emperor, Longxu,
also known as Shengzong (971-1031),
that the most Liao wooden architecture was

t!
t!

constructed.

Mu-ta

More than one hundred early pagodas from
the Song, Liao, and Jin dynasties have
survived into modern times because most
were made of brick. Of the timber buildings,
few have survived, apart from the Liao
structure known as the Yingxian Timber
Pagoda, built in 1056. It is often referred to
simply as Mu-ta, or the “Wooden Pagoda.”
The Mu-ta was built to commemorate
Xinzong (1031-55), the seventh Liao ruler.
Access to the 67-meter-high ta was through
a monastic enclosure with a monumental

11.86 Site plan:

mountain gate (shanmen) and a large,
55-meter-long forecourt that is no longer
extant. The building was elevated on four
“moon terraces” (yuetai), each with a pair
of side stairs. The yuetai were a standard
feature of Liao buildings but at the time were
not used in Song architecture.

The lowermost story of the building
consists of three independent rings of
wooden pillars. The smallest pillars in the
outermost ring support the lowest eaves. The
two interior rings form the inner and outer
cao, with a giant seated Buddha figure in the
center. With the exception of the lowermost
level, where the columns are encased in a
wall to create an enclosure, all the upper
stories are open. There are three primary
levels, each being a temple unto itself and
each with a Buddha statue.

A skyscraper of sorts in its day, the Mu-ta
was one of the most advanced structural
achievements of its tire. Like the Guanyin-ge
of Dulesi Monastery, each story of the Mu-ta
is a separate structural entity (none of the
pillars rises more than a story) tied together
by fifty-four different types of bracket sets.
On the exterior, each story of the Mu-ta is
represented by eaves, held up by a neat
arrangement of structural dou-gong. In
the interior, however, the structure is held
together by a complex mesh of posts and
beams, radial dou-gong, and cross-bracing
that ultimately fashions a thick nest in the
form of a torus between the external skin and
the central space. It is this mesh of cross-
reinforcements that has enabled the Mu-ta
to endure for a millennium unharmed by
numerous earthquakes.

Dulesi Monastery

In about 984 CE, Hebei, a Liao nobleman
from Jixian, built a Buddhist monastery,
Dulesi (“Solitary Joy”), dedicated to Guanyin,
the bodhisattva of compassion and mercy.
Dulesi Monastery was rebuilt several times,
but its central structures, the main gate
(shanmen) and the prayer hall (Guanyin-ge)
are original to the Liao. (The suffix —ge refers
to multistory buildings that are accessible
only from the front and that, like this one,
house colossal statues.) Thirty meters
separate the shanmen from the Guanyin-
ge. The line of sight is such that the top of
the roof of the 22-meter-high Guanyin-ge is
distinctly visible from the entry portal of the

11.88 Dulesi Monastery, Jixian, Hebei Province, China

shanmen, allowing the entire structure to
assert its full impact upon entry. As in the
Mu-ta, each story of the Guanyin-ge is a
distinct structure wedged into the one below.
It is a three-story building, though on the
outside it appears to have only two stories

so that Guanyin’s eyes can be seen through
the upper-level windows when one enters the
compound.

Wood roofs are described by the number
and types of bracket sets and beams
deployed. Bracket sets are classified by the
number and complexity of their horizontal,
vertical, and diagonal elements. Beams are
designated by their position and the number
of rafters they span. In the shanmen, four
four-rafter beams and four two-rafter beams
hold up the roof. The structure uses an
astonishing twenty-four different types of
bracket sets, the most complex ones at the
corners. The building is raised on a polished
stone base about 1 meter in height. The
plan is divided by columns into an inner,
triple-high space and a circumambulatory
vestibule, known as the outer and inner
wai and nef cao, respectively. The second-
floor ambulatory is accessible by stairs.

In addition, the Guanyin’s eyes align with

a masonry pagoda—the White Pagoda
(reconstructed 1058) located 350 meters
away on axis. This visual connection was a
reinterpretation of the Mahayana Buddhist
practice of superimposing statues of Buddhas
on stupas to emphasize the commonality
between the two.

Located just outside their cities, Liao tombs
consisted of multichambered underground
burial vaults and several aboveground
platforms on which descendants could
perform sacrifices to appease the spirits of
the dead. Accessed by a long “spirit path,”

a paved road leading to the tornbs, they
were flanked by larger than life-size statues
of mythical and real animals and other
ceremonial objects meant to guard and guide
the spirits. Interiors were painted to imitate
the interiors of tents and wooden structures.
Curiously, the Liao tombs all contain one
panel with the painting of a woman in the act
of stepping through a door; their meaning

11.89 Section through Guanyin-ge, Dulesi Monastery

ays
Ve

€
,e 2, J

* pe! --
4 Guanyin-ge i

44

—

Shanmen

11.90 Plan: Dulesi Monastery

remains unclear. Bodies were drained of fluids
and filled with vegetable products, embalmed,
and often covered with a suit made of fine
metal.

The Liao dynasty began to decline in the
12th century. In 1120, the Song made an
alliance with the newly founded Jin dynasty
and attacked the Liao regime. In 1125, the
last emperor of Liao, Tianzuo, was captured by
the Jin army, ending the Liao dynasty. The Jin,
who were related to the Mongolians, turned
out to be more formidable than the Song
anticipated, and they soon controlled much of
the former Liao area in northern China.

Sea of Japan

Japan

© Kyoto
© Nara

Pacific Ocean

11.91 Japan: Location of Kyoto and Nara, Japan 11.92 Phoenix hall at Byodo-in, near Kyoto, Japan

PURE LAND BUDDHISM n 1053 a nobleman, Fujiwara no Yorimichi The Taima mandala depicts the Buddha
Around the year 1000 CE, as power shifted (990-1074), converted a preexisting villa in seated on a C-shaped platform on a lake
from the upper classes to the aristocracy, Uji, near Kyoto, into a transcription of the surrounded by bodhisattvas. Built on an

a new form of Buddhism known as Pure aima mandala. This visualization is known artificial island in a lake, the Phoenix hall
Land Buddhism came to dominate Japan. as the Byodo-in, the “Ternple of Equanimity.” replicates the Taima mandala in plan,
Since Pure Land Buddhism was open n Buddhism, byodo (“equal”) refers to the with winglike extensions on the right and
to all, it offered a means by which the condition of possibility that is open to all. left. The Phoenix hall was meant to be
Japanese aristocracy could gain access he Phoenix hall (Hoo-do) is all that remains viewed primarily from across the lake, as a
to Buddhist teachings without having to of the original temple. Hoo are mythical visualization for a devotee to focus on during
live in monasteries. Originally developed phoenix-like birds, sculptures of which top meditation.

in India in the 2nd century CE, Pure Land the roof of the hall.

Buddhism was based on the concept that a
devotee could attain rebirth in a sukhavati
(“equanimous or pure land”) of his or her
choice by following a designated set of
personal meditations. These meditations
were to focus on a particular set of
visualizations—a set of prescribed scenes
that took the worshipper to that place through rr ~
a series of steps. Its core teachings were
contained in the “Visualization Sutra,” a
sermon believed to have been given by the
Buddha to the virtuous Lady Vaidehi, who
sought to be released from her world full of
material attachments and demons. Because
of its association with Lady Vaidehi, Pure
Land Buddhism was promoted, in particular,
by women. Pure Land visualizations were
usually depicted in paintings, sculptures, and
mandala diagrams. The act of transcribing
sutras and redrawing visualizations was
enough to earn a devotee merit. These
transcriptions were ultimately done as
architecture by remaking plans implied in
mandalas into real buildings. This made the
temple itself into an object of worship.

Ce
.f $,
d 1
. . 11.93 Plan and elevation:
# ® Phoenix hall at Byodo-in
Bore
aod 0 15m


“ ee
™~ bers Seen ene,
5. i \.. Novgorod
. Pa
ry oo
Hy r
Smee!
ss, Kiev
.
Holy Roman Empire an
Ss
a
Kingdom of }
Hungary ae
oonene?
i
a
Ny a . Black Sea
H ar ne
se 8yzantium
“Waa, agra,
. Byzantide Empire os
H ‘ ; :
4 ° .
‘ AS << ‘
wey. pened or Seljuk sultanatey
Mediterrafemrsta =. i ’
‘Samanet™

Fatimid caliphate

11.94 Byzantium and eastern Europe, ca. 1000 cE

BYZANTINE REVIVAL

By the year 1000 CE, the Byzantine Empire had
rebounded under Basil II, due to successful military
campaigns and a restructuring of its administration.
Among the reasons for its new success was the rise of 11.95 Interior, Church of Christ Pantokrator
trade with Novgorod and Kiev, which created a circular
trade flow that included Armenia while avoiding still-
volatile central Europe. Church building also began

to rebound. Formally, littke changed: the central
element was still a dome resting on four columns
placed in a square. New, however, was the desire to
create compound churches by adding new ones to
older ones through opening a passageway between
them and uniting thern by means of a new narthex.
This can be seen at the Church of Christ Pantokrator
(known in Turkish as Zeyrek Camii), a complex of
three churches (1118-43) in Constantinople that was
completed by Emperor John II Kornenos. The south
and north churches were built first by Empress Eirene.
After her death, John decided to join the two churches
with a third dedicated to the archangel Michael that
also served as a mortuary chapel for his family clan,
the Commenus. Over the centuries, many Byzantine
emperors were buried there. The building thereby
became much renowned in Constantinople. It was,

as was customary, associated with a monastery and

a hospice—in this case one for old men. The south
church is a four-column type. The columns, now gone,
were of red marble. The north church is similar, with a
dome carried on a high drum. The middle church also
had a dome, creating a complex labyrinthine interior.
The building was made of brick with a plastered wall
that was painted.

11.96 Plan: Church of Christ Pantokrator, Constantinople, Turkey

Kievan Russia

Centralization of power under the Rurikovichi
dynasty, of presumably Norse origin,
accelerated the decline of the patriarchal
clan organization in Kievan Russia and

gave rise to the development of a trading
class ruled by noblemen. Kiev soon became
the center of a great waterway system

of rivers, principally the Dnieper, linking
Scandinavia and Byzantium. This allowed
for a consolidation of trade routes—the
Dnieper and the Volkhov Rivers connecting
the White Sea to the Black Sea, and the
Volga River connecting the Caspian Sea to
the north, serving as the highways of the
age. Trade in furs, hides, wax, honey, wheat,
spices, metals, and fabrics contributed to
the increase in the wealth of the cities along
these routes. Though the Hungarians made
an alliance with the Latin Church, the Slavs
and Rus converted in the 10th century to the
Eastern Church centered in Constantinople.
he decision, according to legend, was
inspired by the beauty of the Hagia Sophia
and the elaborateness of the religious rituals

as reported back to Russia by emissaries sent

to compare the two religions. The connection
to Byzantium is borne out architecturally:
the first masonry structure in Russia, the
Church of the Tithe in Kiev (989-96 CE), was
erected by Byzantine masons. Though little
of it is preserved, 20th-century excavations
revealed fragments of mosaics and fresco
decorations and allowed for a reconstruction
of the plan—an inscribed cross—that served
as a prototype for Russian medieval masonry
churches. Another important church of the
time was the Hagia Sophia in Novgorod, a
stone building consecrated in 1052 by the
Novgorod prince Vladimir Yaroslavovich. The
church became a main center of Christian
spirituality in northern Russia. Though
influenced by Byzantine architecture,
Russian churches began take on a unique
style. Unlike Byzantine churches, which do
not have particularly pronounced silhouettes,
Russian churches often had domes set high
on tall drums. Furthermore, four domes were
set in a tight cluster around a central one.
The churches were bulky with small windows,
making the interior all the more mysterious.
A narthex helped negotiate the transition
between outside and inside.

Vladimir-Suzdal was a principality that
succeeded Kievan Rus as the most
powerful Rus state in the late 12th century;
it lasted until the late 14th century. Its
fortification possessed a so-called golden
gate (1158-64), one of the best-preserved
instances of the ancient Russian city gates.
It was modeled on similar golden gates in
Jerusalem, Constantinople, and Kiev. It is
probable that the masons were invited from
Byzantium, as they used Greek measures
rather than Russian ones. The structure
was topped with a church dedicated to the
Deposition of the Virgin’s Robe.

11.98 Elevation: Church of the Tithe (Desyatinaya), Kiev, Russia

11.99 Golden gate, Vladimir, Russia

11.97 Plan: Church of the Tithe (Desyatinaya)

Armenia -
An important influence on Byzantine architecture
came from the direction of Armenia. During ‘
the period of the Arab caliphate (654-861 CE), ¢ —»
all church building in Armenia had stopped, Loy
ut when its independence was regained, . .
Armenia saw a reawakening of its architectural
culture until 1045, when it was invaded from |
the north by the Turks. But in 1080, Prince bo ae
Ruben founded a new kingdom in Cilicia and Nope
Armenia (sometimes known as the fourth be
Armenian kingdom). The close relations this
ingdom established with European countries
played an important role during the Crusades.
ntermarriage with European crusading families
was common among its aristocracy. Many
French terms entered the Armenian language. To
the north of this Christian realm was the empire
of the Khazars, and to the south, the Islamic
caliphate of Baghdad.

By the 10th century, Ani had risen to become
one of the leading cities of West Asia. Located
on what is now the border between Turkey
and Armenia, it is sited on a long promontory
defined by the Akhurian River. Its defensive
walls were built in 963 CE, but the city quickly
outgrew them to reach a population of about
one hundred thousand. Though the city was
taken by the Byzantines in 1045 and then the
Seljuks in 1064, it was restored to local rule

under Zak’are Mxargrjeli in 1199 and flourished as 0 30m
until being sacked by the Mongolians in 1236. So ie 4 ane = +t
Its chapels and churches numbered in the . 11.100 Plan and elevation: Cathedral of Ani, Armenia

hundreds. The Cathedral of Ani (989-1001)
deserves to be listed among the principal
monuments of the tire because of its pointed
arches and clustered columns and piers. It
was spectacularly sited at the center of town
on a bluff overlooking the Arpa and Akhurian
Rivers. The architect responsible for the building
was Trdat, whose fame was such that he was
summoned to Constantinople to repair the dome
of the Hagia Sophia, which had been damaged
by an earthquake in 989 CE. Continuing the
tradition of Armenian architectural innovation,
Trdat rested the dome of the Cathedral of Ani
on a drum with four pendentives descending
between the arches, which rest on four piers.
Smaller arches span the side aisles. Because
the dome is independently supported, the rest
of the structure is larger than the size of the
dome would permit. This creates a more airy
relationship between dome and perimeter than
was the case in earlier Armenian churches,
which were more compact.

11.101 Cathedral of Ani

11.102 Plan and section: Sanahin complex, Lori, Armenia

11.103 Interior of Sanahin church

Sanahin Complex
A well-preserved monastic compound, Sanahin
(also known as St. Amenaprkitch), 2 kilometers
southeast of the town of Alaverdi, is an example
of an Armenian monastic institution. Unlike
Byzantine aggregates, in which buildings tend to
fuse into each other, the complexes in Armenia
maintained volumetric and functional clarity. The
churches (begun 934 CE) have between them
a barrel-vaulted corridor, or academia, where
pupils could sit on stone benches while the
teacher walked up and down the space, as was
the custom in peripatetic schools. Appended to
the front of both churches are gavits, dating from
about 1210, which came to be used around that
time. In these vaulted spaces, novices could assist
during Mass. Their principal utilization, however,
was as meeting halls; and laws and ordinances
were carved on the internal walls. They also
served as places to bury nobility.
The Church of the Holy Cross on the island
of Aght’amar (consecrated 921 CE), originally
unencumbered by ancillary buildings, makes its
impression through symmetry and equilibrium.
Unlike Byzantine churches, which were composite
in nature, Armenian churches aimed to maintain
a tight bond between interior and exterior. The
sacristy and the vestry, instead of being separate
spaces to the right and left of the altar, are
therefore embedded in the mass of the wall.
The interior, however, was never just a reflection
of outer form. The church, as is also typical of
Armenian architecture, presents the buildings
in simple elernental forms: cubes, cylinders,
cones, and pyramids. The dome is conical on the
outside but hemispherical within. Walls are made
of an aggregate of pebbles and mortar much like
concrete, and dressed with blocks of closely fitting
pink sandstone. The plan, with its four apses,
is known as a tetraconch, even though the east
and west exedrae are deeper than those on the
north and south. The exterior is decorated with
bands of bas-relief sculpture depicting biblical
scenes. The lighting on the interior is indirect, and
the windows are small. The main light source is
around the drum, above which the dome seems
to float, as if it were on a ring of light. The wide
side apses swell the space outward at ground
level, with small concavities at the corners,
between the piers, adding further illumination.
The entire interior was originally painted with
religious scenes.


OTTONIAN GERMANY

For several decades under Charlemagne (742-
814 Ce), virtually the entire Western world—
such as it was defined at that time—had been
rought together into a single political entity
governed by a hornogenous group of bishops @ Medeburg
and judges, scions of the dominant families.

But with the division of Charlemagne’s empire @ era

after his death, Viking raids in the north, and

Muslim incursions in the south, the quality of Osvever

ife in Europe deteriorated. Communities were Holy Roman Empire
scattered, libraries destroyed, and monasteries

ruined. By the year 1000 CE, however, the @conaves

situation had begun to improve, partially because

yy then the feudal system had been established

throughout most of Europe. Society fell roughly

into three groups; the serfs, attached to the land;

the members of religious establishments; and

the aristocracy, who had hereditary power and

collected the taxes and took responsibility for the

military protection of the land. 11.104 Holy Roman Empire

The balance of power shifted from France
to Christianized Germany under the Ottonian
dynasty (919-1024). The princely realm of
Germany, like that of France, had no capital
city in the modern sense. Rulers moved from
place to place, adjudicating legal cases as they
went, trying to hold together the network of
relationships on which the kingdom depended.
The absence of a capital city differentiated the
European notion of governance at that time from
almost every other state in the world.

The Ottonian rulers seem to have admired
the life and culture of Constantinople. Mothers
and wives of the aristocracy were often Greek
princesses, and the emperor took over the
Eastern notion of basileus, or sovereign,
complete with the concomitant conception of
authority and its emblems of power—the golden
cape and the sphere held in the right hand.
These Eastern connections brought with them
artisans as well as Byzantine and Armenian
architects and stonemasons, whose quality of
workmanship had a positive impact on Ottonian
architecture. Near Quedlinburg in Gernrode
stands the only fully preserved church from the
early Ottonian period, the Collegiate Church
of St. Cyriakus. Different from Carolingian
architecture, Ottonian churches, though still
volumetrically powerful, demonstrate much
more skilled stonework, along with a desire for
verticality. Like Carolingian churches, Ottonian
ones consisted of volumetric masses.

@lildesheim

ee i a LE

11.105 St. Cyriakus, Gernrode, Germany

As a way to cement imperial control over their
territory, the Ottonian kings combined the
founding of monasteries with the founding of
market centers. But the uncluttered external
surfaces and the integrated relationship
between the crossings and transepts of

St. Cyriakus in Gernrode (960 CE) and

St. Michael in Hildesheim (1001-33), for
example, impart to these buildings a complex
simplicity that earlier Carolingian churches,
such as St. Riquier, lacked. St. Michael

was sited not far from the newly developing
market city of Hildesheim, defined by its
broad street onto which the shops faced. The !
church was not in the city proper, as that was
not yet very common; instead, it was in its
own precinct outside of town. Unlike Roman
churches, the entrance of St. Michael was
broadside, from the south, leading up from
the marketplace.

Bo od vd

vase wh i : aw whe

nant Lok a cal

wl bet a is be

Stretching between two almost identical
transepts, the nave has a ratio of 3:1, the
rhythm established by piers with two columns
interspersed between them. The building,
which has no westwork, reflects the gradual
reduction of its importance. The crypt, with

its ambulatory, is at ground level, with the Fat) coma 7 Lhe soe ona oD
high altar located above. The cloister to the do Qu 2 wm ths QO
north has been lost over time. The roof was On w a h . g

supported by wooden trusses. Oa 6.4 v4 a} aeamoames
i) 13

a RW pOooooood a

\s \St. Bartholomew
Ne ‘ 11.106 Plan and section: St. Michael in Hildesheim, Germany

St. Michael

12th-century expansion

Le 11.107 Medieval Hildesheim


[Peso

Socccsccuees
D Upoovccgsoeast.

DY Crovevccet and
t= Sacseeanaag,

Wpe

40m -
i ‘ a 4 aoe
‘ ps4

11.108 Plan: Speyer Cathedral, Germany

Speyer Cathedral

Despite the problerns of the times, increased
trade and competition among cities led to

a rapid increase in architectural production

manner was the Speyer Cathedral, begun
around 1040, with the vaulting cornpleted
around 1137. Abandoning the squat

compositions of Carolingian and Ottonian

and to an experimentation with new forms.
Particularly important was the introduction
of stone vaulting. The implications were

architecture, the nave elevation of Speyer
was defined by a series of high arches
reminiscent of a Roman aqueduct. Windows

profound—sopatially, structurally, and
symbolically. To support the vault, the
builders could have decided to build thicker
walls, but instead they interpreted the side
aisles as structural buttresses for the vault,
transforming the interior of the building into a
tripartite space visually coordinated with the
vaults over the aisles.

One of the earliest churches built in the new

at the top brought light into the nave. Even
more significant was the presence of a single
attached column that rose some 32 meters
from the floor to the base of the vault—higher
than any other vault at the time. The crossing
is defined by an octagonal tower. The tall
proportions allow the building to seem more
compact and controlled, and to some eyes,
more Roman, especially when compared to

11.109 Abbey Church of St. Foy, Conques, France

The word cathedral derives from a Greek
word that designates a professor’s chair
from which a lecture was given. Early
Christian bishops used a cathedra not only
as a symbol of their power but also as a
place from which to preach, even though
that practice was eventually abandoned.
The first use of the word in regard to
architecture dates from around 800 CE. A
cathedral, in that etymological sense, is thus
an elaborate framing device for a bishop’s
chair. Some ancient chairs still exist, such
as the so-called Chair of St. Peter, which is
preserved in the Vatican Museums.

Hildesheim's static arrangement of volumes.
There can be no doubt that the third Abbey
Church of Cluny, begun about 1088, was
erected in open rivalry to Speyer. The interior
nave of Speyer has since been rebuilt, but St.
Etienne in Nevers (1063-97) is more or less
comparable.

Despite its innovations, Speyer can also
be seen as the end stage of the Romanesque
style, for at that very same time, a remarkable
new development was taking place at the
Abbey Church of St. Foy at Conques, begun
around 1050. As at Speyer, the tall, soaring
barrel-vaulted nave creates the impression
of a single structure, as opposed to a box
with a roof on it. As at Speyer, the high side
aisles serve as buttresses for the vault. And
as at Speyer, the nave, at least in the lower
part, combines its structure with arcaded
openings. But the architects of St. Foy
added buttresses on the outside to further
strengthen the walls. Though small, they
are enough to affect the clear differentiation
between wall and colurnn that defines
Carolingian and Romanesque architecture.

The wall begins to look more and more like a

series of piers.
odo
ge 3

CO beaod o © oth
Ggoaoad SPO beg tg

Ps oeodod Gorn’ pF
CO PPPre ¢ oes in

11.110 Plan: Abbey Church of St. Foy

Durharn

Irish kingdoms
England

Lincoingy

Oty
@ Gloucester
London

©

North Sea

cantertuny Yor

Atlantic Ocean

THE NORMANS

In 911 CE, Charles the Simple validated the
Norman possessions around Rouen, France,
which the Normans had begun to occupy in
the 9th century. The Normans, with amazing
adaptive energy, renounced paganism and
absorbed local customs and language.

They also furthered the development of the
Romanesque style, of which the Cathedral
of Caen is the prime example. In 1001,
Richard Il, duke of Normandy, invited

the Italian abbot William of Volpiano—
accompanied by a colony of Benedictines,
with their well-established traditions of design
and masonry construction—to restore the
Abbey of Fécamp. Soon a uniquely Norman
style developed that incorporated Norse
decorative motifs while drawing on the
Islamic influences brought to England and
France from the Norman holdings in Sicily.

A warrior people from the northern French
coast, the Normans overran England and
southern Italy and settled in Scotland, Wales,
the Byzantine Empire, and (after the First
Crusade) the Levant. Norman power was
extended by strategic marriage alliances. In
a series of waves, the Normans conquered
parts of southern Italy and Sicily (1061), and
then England, following the Battle of Hastings
(1066). The new rulers transformed the entire
religious, mercantile, and political geography
of England. But their holdings were far-
flung, from England and northern France
to southern Italy and Sicily; the Normans
consequently became a clearinghouse of
different stylistic and cultural trends that
bridged many classic divides.

Oczen

France

© Rouen

11.111 Norman England

Most importantly they transformed the
village- and agrarian-based geography of
the Saxons into one based on towns in the
middle of large farming districts or boroughs,
with castles at their centers to serve as the
basic instrument of government. Unlike in
Germany, where castles were generally on
defensible ridges or mountains, in England,
where mountains are not a prominent
geographical feature, they were built at the
core of the urban layout. Town markets
were created and an aristocracy took shape,
promoting an international luxury trade in
commodities such as fine cloth and wine. It

has been estimated that about four to five
hundred new towns were laid out in this
manner, creating a pattern of urban centers
that was to survive virtually unchanged until
the Industrial Revolution and, in parts of
England, survives even today.

The Normans introduced not only a
strong mercantile society but also a change
in the notion of kingship. Roger the Great,

in the chronicles of the time, is represented
as the royal deputy of Christ. The small
Saxon churches that dotted the English
landscape could no longer measure up to
such grand claims. Most were torn down,
and in their stead the Normans designed a
religious landscape around powerful state-
supported bishoprics, each of which needed a
sumptuous cathedral. Architects and masons
were brought in from the continent, as were
successive waves of continental monks—
Benedictines, Augustinians, Cistercians,
Cluniacs, and Carthusians—who were just as
important from an economic point of view as

rom a religious one, as their well-organized
farms produced surpluses for the markets.
The Cistercians, for example, were associated
with irrigation and large-scale sheep farming.
By the end of the 12th century, six hundred
new monastic institutions of varying practices
ad been set up.

Durham Cathedral
Durham Cathedral is important for its
architectural features, specifically its rib
vaulting (the first of its kind in England),
its pointed arches, and its high standard of
masonry. Durham shows the specific Anglo-
Norman style as a blend of the English
decorative tradition with Norman architectural
skills, and it marks the transition from a more
monumental and simple scheme, as is seen
in Gloucester Cathedral (begun 1089). The
choir and the nave of the three-aisled church
were built between 1093 and 1133, but the
west towers were not completed until 1220.
In comparison with the nave of Gloucester,
which also has heavy round columns carrying
the arcades, Durham, in the manner of
Speyer, introduces the idea of attached half-
columns that guide the eye to the ceiling.
The loftiness of these churches had always
been a feature of Romanesque architecture;
what is novel here is the structural openness
of the walls. A basic principle of Norman
building was the reduction of solid walls to
a thick but open skeleton of arches. The
arches were not just interruptions in the wall;
they were defined in a regularized way, with
surrounds framed by attached half-columns
and horizontal string courses. The openings


do not deny the weight and mass of the wall,
as would become the tendency later, but
rather, illuminated fromm behind, they seem
to release their load gradually as the wall
ascends.

The columns are decorated with zigzag
and chevron motifs and make extensive use
of color, specifically black and red, which was
an influence from Islamic architecture that
came to the country through the Crusades
and the Norman-Arab connections in Sicily
and northern Africa. Geometric patterns and
other features of the inner decoration can
later be found in other cathedrals in northern
England, suggesting that the same masons
moved on to work in Scotland.

ia

Durham Cathedral is considered a forerunner
of what is now called the Gothic style, largely
because of the fusion of the ribbed vault

and the pointed arch, which are considered
essentially Gothic features. The building
does not have buttresses and so appears
from the outside quite boxy, unlike later
Norman cathedrals such as Canterbury
Cathedral, where buttresses contribute to

a vertical articulation. The so-called Galilee
Chapel (1153-95) in front of the west
facade is unique, with its five parallel halls
and longitudinal arcaded walls without any
subdivision into bays. This layout resembles
one encountered in Islamic mosques and
once again shows the cross-fertilization of
ideas introduced from the Mediterranean.

- Ca
fi peed =A be I aaa
peed @ Gag SoS # fl
pe Roan ens
Moe we ;
fi8 Boag Sage
Tt —a.
To ts Dey
BOS eee gs [ ts a ee
i a ot
fs hoop A 50
ps Ppows N24
| : Boa
Coton 2 Pm
a . Seda, = f Saree

11.114 Plan: Durham Cathedral

eel

|
|

11.115 Nave of Durham Cathedral


Canterbury Cathedral

Among the new bishoprics, Canterbury was
the most important, as its bishop served as
vice-regent of the king. When Canterbury
Cathedral was destroyed by an accidental fire
in 1067, one year after William the Conqueror
landed on the south coast of England,
Lanfranc, the first Norman archbishop of
Canterbury, initiated a rebuilding that was
based on the new cathedral of St. Etienne

in France. When a fire destroyed the choir

in 1174, the architects, William of Sens and
William the Englishman, erected a new choir
and a presbytery that doubled the length

of the church. The newer part existed on a
higher elevation, with the stairs serving to
separate the more sacred areas to the east.
The project shows how England adopted
French construction techniques—specifically
the flying buttress and the six-partite vault—
while the nave itself remained from the time
of Lanfranc. (The nave was, however, rebuilt
in the late 14th century.) The church houses,
among other sacred objects, the relics of St.
Thomas, which were originally placed at the
center of the round chapel at the eastern end
of the building. The cloister and monastic
buildings are placed on the north—instead
of, as is more frequently the case, on the
south of the church. Compared to Durham
Cathedral, which has no buttresses, giving

it a resolute boxy form, the wall surface at
Canterbury has more vertical articulation.

11.117 Partial section: Canterbury Cathedral 11.118 Interior vaulting: Canterbury Cathedral

Cefalii Cathedral

When Roger d’Hauteville conquered Sicily

in 1060, he found a culture that had been
under Arab influence since the late 9th
century. The Normans not only availed
themselves of the practical and technological
innovations of the Muslims but also integrated
Muslims into their administration and army.
Soon Apulia, Capua, Sicily, and finally parts
of northern Africa carne under Norman
domination. As a consequence, the Normans
controlled the trade route to the Bosporus.

11.121 Aerial view: Cefalii Cathedral, Sicily, Italy

11.119 Site Plan: Santa Maria Nuova at Monreale, Sicily, Italy |

The first major Norman church in Sicily was
built at Cefalu (begun 1131); it followed a
typical early Norman footprint, with a nave
with side aisles, a wooden ceiling, and a
massive transept in the east. It is a heavy and
somber building that contrasts sharply with
Santa Maria Nuova at Monreale (from the
Latin mons regalis, “royal mountain"), south
of Palermo on the slopes of Monte Caputo,
that was started only a hundred years after
CefalU. Islamic influences are apparent

in the outside decoration of the apse,

with its intertwined arches and terra-cotta
ornamentation. The Great Mosque of Cordoba
(10th century) and the Bab Mardum Mosque
in Toledo (around 1000 Ce) show similar
interlocking arches. The cathedral also shows
Byzantine influences, such as the exquisite
mosaics that cover the interior walls of the
cathedral and are second in quality only to
those in the Hagia Sofia in Istanbul.

This stylistic synthesis is also evident in
the areas of western Italy that the Normans
controlled. Amalfi became a seafaring
republic, rivaling Genoa, Venice, and Pisa,
from the 9th to the 11th centuries. At
its height it had trade representatives in
Mahdiya, Tunisia; Kairuan (Cairo); Alexandria;
Beirut; Jerusalern; Antioch, Syria; and
Constantinople. At the Cathedral of Amalfi, the
original Norman building underwent various
expansions, including the Cloister of Paradise,
which is clearly influenced by Islamic motifs.


11.122 European pilgrimage routes

PILGRIMAGE CHURCHES
The 11th and 12th centuries saw a growth
in the popularity of religious pilgrimages,
usually to sites where miracles were believed
to have occurred. Pilgrims sought out these
churches mainly for the relics they housed,
which were thought to emit a benevolent or
curative aura. Possessing relics—a finger,
a foot, or even a head of a saint—became
central to a particular church's identity, and
churches vied with each to collect as many
such relics as possible. Major ones were the
tomb of St. Peter in Rome, the tomb of St.
James at Santiago de Compostela, and the
Church of the Holy Sepulcher in Jerusalem.
Most pilgrims traveled of their own volition,
but some pilgrimages were acts of penance
imposed for exceptional misdeeds. The trips,
exhausting and often dangerous, became
the source of stories and ballads, such
as Geoffrey Chaucer's Canterbury Tales.
Other accounts give us some of the earliest
descriptions of church architecture in the
West.

The most venerated pilgrimage site
was the Holy Sepulcher in Jerusalem. The
original church, constructed by Constantine,
was consecrated in 335 CE to protect a
tomb thought to have been that of Christ.
Constantine’s church was torn down by
the Persians. The Crusaders then began a
church that, with changes and additions, is
the basis for the church as it stands today.

Ma,
s.

To Jerusalem”

Originally, the entrance from the main street
led to a courtyard and then to a basilica with
two side aisles. This opened onto an inner
atrium (the holy garden) and the rotunda
(the anastasis), which had a conical roof.
The shrine itself, a rectangular structure, was
destroyed by fire in 1808; the current one
dates from shortly thereafter.

Descriptions of the Holy Sepulcher from
visitors led to the construction of models
in the West, such as St. Bénigne at Dijon
(1001), Neuvry-St.-Sépulchre (1045), and the
Church of La Vera Cruz in Segovia (1208).
As none of these replicas are alike, it is clear
that a precise imitation was not as important

¥

oa
ooog
oe

power G Oo 0e 6

11.123 Plan: Santiago de Compostela, Spain

as other features. Among these copies is the
frequently restored Church of San Stefano at
Bologna. Erected in the 5th century, it was
rebuilt in 1180 in the shape of a dodecagon.
The tomb chamber has an altar on top and is
approached by two staircases.

The churches begun in the 11th century
were significantly different from their
Romanesque counterparts. Whereas in the
earlier churches the nave was for the public
and the apse for the monks or priests, the
newer churches, which had sacred relics,
were built for movement through the church
and around the back of the high altar, where
many of the relics were displayed.

11.124 Plan: Church of the Holy Sepulcher, Jerusalem

Burgundy
Marquisate of

Verona
Kingdom of
Lombardy Verona@) Venice \ ws
cenea Modena @) S iN Croatia
© Romagna S
isa Florence
req © Pentapolis eaegpacto
Marquisate of Tuscany @siena =
=
Duchy of —S
Spoleto
Corsica
Papal States Principality of
@Pome Benevento

. Principality of

Duchy of Amalfi Salerno.

Amalfi “Salerno

Sardinia
Byzantine Empire
Sicily

11.125 Italian states, ca. 1000 CE

TUSCANY

Charlemagne traveled to Italy only four times,
each trip lasting less than a year, setting

a precedent of absentee monarchism that
persisted for centuries. This allowed north
Italian states, seen by the kings as the
southern fringe of their empire, to survive

as neither independent nor fully integrated
into the empire. Nevertheless, their cities
were bustling places. Lucca was growing

so fast that houses were being built along
the approach roads; soon a good portion

of the population lived outside the walls in
so-called bourgs. And between the cities,
villages—called variously vici, foci, casatia,
or villae—came to be established. As a
result, monasteries—with some exceptions—
were unable to develop the hold on the

local population that they had in northern
Europe. To be sure, the cities did not look
very impressive. Roman civic buildings

and ternples had been left to rot, or they
were used as quarries. Churches built after
600 CE were small. Only a limited amount

of farming occurred within city walls. The
forums had lost their civic value and become
marketplaces. In 1006, a series of disastrous
famines and plagues killed thousands of
people. The weak centralized power of the
emperors combined with the rising status

of the cities; consequently, more and more

11.126 Modena Cathedral, Italy

power was ceded by the emperors to the city
bishops in order to maintain control.

The bishops of Modena, Reggio,
Bergamo, Cremona, and other places were
given unprecedented powers. In 904 CE, the
bishop of Bergamo, for example, was granted
the right to build city walls and to rebuild
them with the help of the citizens. The result
of this transfer of authority was dangerous to
the imperial state, as bishops were not able to
maintain their hegemony over urban society.
Cities now began to vie with each other,
however, in the construction of cathedrals
and baptisteries that showed off the wealth
of the city and the status of the church. The
principal churches during this time were in
Venice (begun 832 CE), Pisa (begun 1063),
Modena (begun 1099), Cremona (begun
1118), Verona (begun 1139), and Siena
(begun 1196).

The architect of the Modena Cathedral was
Lanfranco, called mirabilis artifex, mirificus
aedificator ("marvelous creator, wonderful
builder”), about whom, however, little is known
except that he came from Como, where a
school of builders had been established.
Compared to other Romanesque buildings
of the time, Modena Cathedral is lighter and
the lines stripped to their essentials. The
building was clad in white Istrian stone and
articulated by blind arcades. The central

division is emphasized by a rose window

and a baldachino-style central portal. The
rose window on the facade was added in the
13th century. The work is ornamented with
sculptures by the stonernason Wiligelmo; it
depicts, among other things, Adam and Eve
working the land to gain redemption. The
portals also portray biblical and mythological
events, including monsters and centaurs that
warn not only of the diabolic threats awaiting
man outside the city of God but also the
threats that corne from outside the Christian
world, a reminder that Sicily had already fallen,
first to Islamic troops, then to Arab colonizers.
The archbishop's palace and administrative
center was connected to the cathedral by
means of a private passage. The building was
commissioned by Queen Matilda di Canossa
(1046-1115). One of the most powerful
women of the Middle Ages, she had a fortress
in the heart of the Emilian Apennines and was
a strong supporter of papal policy against the
emperors. Matilda ruled over Tuscany, which
extended from Siena and Pisa to Modena

in the north. She commissioned, or had a
hand in the commissioning of, several other
buildings in the Po River valley, including the
Rotunda of San Lorenzo in Mantua (1083) and
the Benedictine abbey of San Benedetto in
Polirone (1077), as well as Cremona Cathedral
(1107-17) and Piacenza Cathedral (1122).


11.127 Detail: Cathedral of Pisa, Italy

Cathedral of Pisa
Construction on the Cathedral of Pisa began
in 1063 after the victory of the Pisan fleet
over the Saracens near Palermo. Pisa could
now atternpt to fulfill its ambition to becorne
the Venice of the western Mediterranean
and to develop a greater visual presence.
The cathedral was consecrated in 1118,
but it was completed only after considerable
alterations in the 14th century. Stylistically it
is a variation of the Mediterranean basilica
plan, with influences from Armenia, Syria,
and Islamic architecture. The building
also had imperial Lombard overtones,
especially in its facade, with its four registers
of freestanding gallery work. The granite
columns in the nave were taken from Roman
temples on the isle of Elba; the capitals range
from imperial Roman to Byzantine temples.
The walls have marble paneling inspired
by Byzantine practice, and the shape and
manner of construction of the dome, rising on
the inside from very high and narrow pointed
arches, looks Islamic.

The building does not follow the trend
of the great pilgrimage churches, in which
structure and surface were becoming
increasingly unified. In fact, it defied that
trend in its celebration of surface. The
elegant and costly marble sheathing that
wraps around the exterior has little if any
correlation to inner structure. The massive
volume of the building becomes light and airy
even though the openings are few and small,
in the typical Romanesque manner. The plan
is also far different from French cathedral

11.128 Cathedral of Pisa

architecture, which aspired to a unity of
form and structure. Here the double-aisled
nave is intersected by a transept formed by
two single-aisled minor basilicas, set front to
front, with a domed crossing between. Each
of the minor cross basilicas is provided with
an apse of its own. The plan is thus a type of
composite of basilicas that, on the exterior,
gives the illusion of a nave with transept.

Baptistery

11.129 Plan: Cathedral of Pisa

Camposanto

The baptistery in front of the cathedral was
begun in 1153. In 1173, the foundations
were laid for the campanile, known now

as the Leaning Tower of Pisa. In 1278, the
tombs that cluttered the area around the
church were gathered together and placed
into a separate structure, the Camposanto, to
the north of the church.

~
~ Campanile

Baptistery of Parma

Parallel to the ernergence of the Italian
urban cathedral was the urban baptistery,
conceived as a bold freestanding structure
in the piazza in front of or next to a church.
The typically octagonal shape had its roots
in early Christian mysticism and imperial
Roman symbolism. By the 10th century,
with the revival of learning, carne a rise in
numerology—a science of its own at the
time, built on the numbers embedded in the
concept of the Trinity, the twelve apostles,
the Holy Spirit, the number of perfection (3 x
4x 5), and so forth. The number 8 and the
octagonal form were especially important.

In an inscription on the cathedral baptistery
in Milan, the connection between number,

geometry, and architecture is aptly expressed:

He erected an eight-choired temple for use
by the saints, and an octagonal font is worthy
of its number. This number proved fitting

for the elevation of a housing of the holy
baptism, which gave back to the people true
deliverance, raising them again in the light of
Christ, who loosened the bonds of death, and
[who] from their graves raised the lifeless.

Architecturally, the most significant
baptisteries are at Florence (1060-1150),
Pisa (1153-1265), and Parma (1196-1270).
The Baptistery of Parma, modeled on the
Rotunda of the Anastasi in Jerusalem, has
corners that look like giant-order piers, with
loggias and a blind arcade on top spanning
the interstices. The lower level consists

11.131 Baptistery of Pisa, Italy

of generous arched openings and blind
arches. The eight great piers and the sixteen
columns on each register are standard
referents to the Holy Sepulcher in Jerusalem.
Although the imposing mass of the building

is Romanesque, its sculptural decoration
reflects French Gothic elements. This is most

clearly seen in the prominence accorded the
Virgin Mary—the main portal is dedicated to
her—and in the changed representation of

Christ from a severe judge to a more humane
figure, which was the sign of the new

religious mentality. 0 1Om

11.132 Baptistery of Pavia, Italy

11.133 Plan and section: Baptistery of Parma

12.1 Angkor Wat, near Siam Riep, Cambodia

INTRODUCTION

To argue that the 13th century is the
threshold of the modern world might seem
strange at first, but imagine the economic
world of Africa and Eurasia and think back a
mere few hundred years. The southern route
from Japan and China through Southeast
Asia to India was now booming. At the head
of it was the bustling Song dynasty seaport at
Quanzhou—sorme 600 kilometers south of the
ong capital at Hangzhou—with its extensive
ipbuilding industry and its innovative dry-

S

S|

dock system. Enormous naval ships were
built that could carry a thousand soldiers.
The Song, despite the loss of the northern
areas to the Jin, still produced over 100,000
metric tons of iron a year, using coal instead
of charcoal in its blast furnaces. Much of this

iron was reserved for military use in crafting
weapons and armor, but some was used to
fashion the many products needed to fill the
demands of the growing dornestic market. On
the Quanzhou docks were bales of silk and
crates of porcelain for the international luxury
markets in Asia and Europe, but also tons

of copper and iron needed for ritual objects
in the temples in Southeast Asia. When
Marco Polo visited the city, he commented
on the ships filled with boxes of pearls (most
probably coming from Hepu in southern
China) and jewels. The city was ringed by
walls, and the surrounding countryside was

ined with canals to control flooding from the
Jin River. The Song elite, fueled by wealth
rom global trade, brought the villa garden

to spectacular and ostentatious heights.
Emperor Huizong (1082-1135) had a garden
called the Basin of the Clarity of the Gods, a
jarge artificial lake surrounded by terraces.
To pay for all of this, the Song used a new
monetary device, paper money. It worked at
irst; printing money was easy and cheap. But
the results soon led to a series of inflationary
cycles that were to haunt the Chinese until
they eventually abandoned paper money for
silver.

The flow of trade between China and India
benefited Southeast Asia and the Khmer
more than anyone else. They consolidated
power in Cambodia to control overland
access to the independent kingdorn of Dali,
which functioned as a type of inland port into
southern China. The Khmer built vast barays
(large, man-made lakes) fed by kilometer-long
canal systems to accelerate the production
of rice, their prime export commodity. The
barays were linked to gigantic religious
complexes, the most elaborate of which was
called Vara Vishnuloka (now more commonly
known as Angkor Wat), one of the grandest
of the many Khmer temples and on par in
detail, engineering, symbolism, and sheer
bravura of scale with Borobudur.

But squeezing more and more rice from the
sandy soil of central Cambodia was a risky
enterprise dependent as much on managing
the intricate canal systerns as on the weather.
Ultimately, deforestation would exact its price.
A series of devastating floods would bring
the civilization to its knees, and by the 15th
century the city of Angkor had all but been
abandoned to the forest; but in the year 1200
this was not foreseen.
In India, two of the leading entrepét
cities were Kalinganagar (modern-day
Srimukhalingam), the capital of the Eastern
Ganga dynasty, located on the eastern coast;
and Nabadwip of the Sena Empire, located
north of modern-day Kolkata on the west
bank of the Bhagirathi River. The economy
was booming and construction of large-scale
temples was a regular occurrence. These
include the Hoysala Empire’s Ishvara Temple
(1220) in Arasikere and the enormous
Konark Sun Temple of the Eastern Ganga
dynasty. The latter was built in the form of the
chariot of the Sun God, Surya, and supported
by twelve pairs of elaborately carved stone
wheels, some of which are 3 meters wide,
that are “pulled” by seven pairs of stone-
carved horses. At the nearby sacred city of
Puri, elaborately decorated, three-story-high
chariots of wood dedicated to Lord Jagannath

(“Lord of the World”) are pulled each year
down a sacred road between two sets of
temples, a ritual that probably began in the
9th century CE. Konark temple, by contrast,
does not move, but stands as a type of mega-
model of the divine solar chariot. Visible for
miles around (though the main tower has
since collapsed), it asks the question at what
scale a building exists. Most buildings, even
if large, are built to a scale comprehensible
to the human, but this one was designed at
something that might plausibly approximate
the scale of the divine. Angkor Wat, by
comparison, is also huge, yet despite its

size, it seems to have been designed as a
scaled-down model of a divine mountain.
These structures recall the Egyptian hypostyle
hall and the columns modeled on papyrus
bundles, scaled at the dimension of the
divine.

To the northwest of India was the Turkish-
based Khwarazmian dynasty in present-day
lran, which ruled from Urgench, Uzbekistan.
The Syrian geographer Yaqut, who lived
in the city in 1219, considered it to be the
most extensive and the richest of all the
cities he had seen. Khwarazmian architects
developed a double-domed cupola that
featured extensive use of patterned brickwork
and carved terra-cotta. Sadly, not much is left

of this once impressive city, as most houses
were of mud brick.

One of the Ghaznavid generals established
a sultanate in northern India, setting up
his capital in what is now Delhi. There, his
descendants built the mosque known as
Quwwat-ul-Islarn (Glory of Islam) on the site
of a former Hindu temple. The architects
used colurnns from the temple, but not as
a sign of respect. Quwwat-ul-Islam is best
known for its tower of victory, Qutb Minar
(begun 1192), celebrating the Muslim
conquest of India. Henceforth, Islam would

be an integral part of the northern Indian
subcontinent.

It was not just South Asia, from India to
southern China, that was boorning; Africa
was opening up to international trade. Since
around 6000 BCE, the Sahara Desert had
been an unbreachable barrier between the
Mediterranean and lower Africa. But the
camel was introduced by the Arabs in the
8th century CE and camel-based cultures
arose that moved east-west and north-
south. Driving this trade was the discovery
of vast salt deposits in Niger that are still
being mined today. More important was the
discovery of gold in Ivory Coast, in the upper
reaches of the rivers that flowed down to the
Atlantic. The rise of the empire of Ghana

in modern-day Mali was a consequence.

In 1252, the Florentines almost certainly
used gold from Ghana when they struck

their first gold coin—the florin, a coin that
was to dominate large-scale transactions in
Europe for several centuries. The trade routes
went through Timbuktu and Djenné, the
southern reach of Islam. Mosques were built,
monumental in nature, out of mud and with a
sense of form and proportion unlike anything
seen before. The Djenné mosque is set up on
a vast platform next to the city’s market. Its
tall, sparsely fenestrated walls are stabilized

y rippling buttresses set between towerlike
forms. From Mali, trade routes pointed to the
Atlantic Ocean, leading to the rise in modern-
day Nigeria of the Yoruba kingdoms of Ifé and
Oyo. Though little remains of its architecture,
fé is known for its naturalistic bronze, stone,

and terra-cotta busts, which reached the
peak of artistic expression between 1200 and
400 cE.
The great mediators of the Sahara
Desert were the Tuareg, who were nominally
slamic, and who developed a unique type of
residence that could be disassembled and
placed on a camel's back. Their houses can
e corpared to the gers (sometimes also
called yurts) of the Mongolians sore 9,000
ilometers to the east. The camel trains

in Inner Asia connected to both the Viking
boats leading northward to Scandinavia,

and past Cairo to the Tuareg people of the
Sahara Desert leading to Ghana, creating a
new system of overland trade networks that
connected north and south and east and west
over vast stretches of inhospitable territory
for the first time in history. The Vikings and
the Tuareg were the avant-garde of the

great expansion of trade into the north and
south, respectively. The stave churches in
Scandinavia, built when the Vikings converted
to Christianity, can be discussed together
with the great mud mosques at Timbuktu
and Djenné. Trade ships of Indian and Arab
merchants were common sights off the coast
of East Africa. The Arab traders established
Islam early on, the result being a new and
unique culture in East Africa known as
Swahili. From the 13th to 17th centuries, the
town of Gedi, for example, on Kenya’s coast,
was a thriving Swahili cormmunity, with its
inhabitants trading with people from all over
the world. Findings from archaeological digs
include beads from Venice, a Ming vase from
China, an iron lamp from India, and scissors
from Spain. The new affluence explains the
emergence of several East African kingdoms,
in particular in Ethiopia, when King Lalibela
built a city with an astonishing set of

“SS 12.2 Lalibela, Ethiopia

churches, some of the last great examples of
rock-cut architecture in history. Lalibela, as
the city came to be called, was designed as a
religious destination, attracting pilgrims who
still flock to the city today. One can compare
the site to Kailasa Temple, Ellora, built some
four hundred years earlier, and indeed it is
possible that Indian rock-cut specialists were
directing the work at Lalibela. Both sites are
models of sacred landscapes. Kailasa Temple
models Mt. Meru and the Ganges River;
Lalibela models Jerusalem and the River
Jordan, a river that does not run through
Jerusalem.

Further south is Zimbabwe, another
source of gold. The Zimbabweans were
Bantu agropastoralists who had pushed
southward from their ancient homelands in
Cameroon to colonize the great savannas of
Africa, pushing the aboriginals into the forests
and deserts. They set up large chiefdoms that
traded ivory, gold, animal pelts, and tortoise
shells.

The Mediterranean world was an
economic engine unto itself. In Egypt, the
Turkish Mamluk sultanate served as a
hinge between two continents, and to the
west, Cordoba, Spain, flourished like never
before. The Mamluks built some of the
most astonishing mosques to dot the Cairo


12.3 Tomb of Sultan Qalawun, Cairo, Egypt

cityscape. They are not the usual rectangle,
but take the shape of the urban block and
were designed to capture views along the
streets. The domes are masterpieces of
ornament and geometry, rising majestically
over the tombs of the dynasty rulers. The
Tornb of Sultan Qalawun, one of the great
artistic and architectural achievements of the
age, is one of several tombs, schools, and
mosques lined up along one of the principal
roads in the city, producing an architectural
ensemble unique in its time.

The Islamic rulers in Spain were not to
be outdone. Though being pushed out by
the Christians, they constructed one of the
world's most beautiful palaces, the Alhambra.
With its slender columns, terraced gardens,
water fountains, and elaborate vaults
inscribed with poetic references to paradise,
there was nothing else like it.

The rest of Europe, long a global
ackwater, was now beginning to prosper
as well. Infrastructure was being improved
for the first time in centuries. For example,
ridges were being constructed, such as
Pont Saint-Bénézet at Avignon to connect
the city to the trade routes north—routes that
led deeper into into France, where various
towns were given special prerogative to hold
fairs. These included Provins, together with
royes, Lagny, and Bar-sur-Aube. Merchants
converged here from all over Europe and
the East to sell their wares. The towns also
came important centers of banking; the
Provins denier, for example, was one of the
few currencies accepted widely throughout
Europe.


Christian monasteries established in the 13th
century number close to one hundred, and
indeed the 13th century saw an extensive
uilding boom in churches, monasteries,
and cathedrals that yielded the Gothic style,
which featured tall proportions, external
uttressing, thin stone vaults, and elaborate
decorative work. Examples include the
cathedrals at Amiens and Cologne. In
England, the new style can be seen at the
cathedrals at Oxford, Wells, Salisbury, and
Lincoln. This architecture separated structure
rom space, putting the former on the outside
of the building, so that the interior could take
a unified form. Without doubt, these were the
most spectacular interior spaces the world
jad ever seen.

The 13th century saw dramatic changes
in the Christian worldview, with the image of
oth Christ and Mary changing considerably.
The figure of Christ nailed to the cross
ad usually been portrayed as stiff and
remote. Now his body softens and droops;
is suffering becomes more realistic. A
similar change took place with Mary, who
emerged at the center of a cult featuring
er and the baby Jesus. For the first time,
Christianity opened itself up to women, and
indeed the church began to canonize an
increasing number of wornen. The cult of
the Virgin Mary was inspired by the writings
of theologians such as Saint Bernard of
Clairvaux (1090-1153), who identified her
as the bride of the Song of Songs in the Old
Testament. The Virgin was worshipped as
Queen of Heaven, and as the intercessor for
the salvation of humankind. This movement
found its grandest expression in the French
cathedrals, many of which are dedicated
to “Our Lady.” Entire cities, such as Siena,
placed themselves under her protection.

Chartres Cathedral is an example of the pull
of this form of worship. Even though its host
city had a population of only about 7,000
and was not well located with respect to trade
routes, it was the center of a miracle cult
associated with the Virgin. People flocked
there from far away.

The consequences of the Virgin Cult
were profound, for most of the religions
of the day were still largely controlled by
men, with male saints. Even Buddhism still
had a resolutely male-centric perspective.
But while the cult of the Virgin Mary put
a fernale in the upper reaches of sanctity,
the 12th century also saw the emergence
of courtly love as expressed in songs and
poems. Castles may still have been designed
around functional requirements, but they
were now host to elaborate courtly activities.
One of the main problems, however, was
that with the Viking threat now over, soldiers
roamed the landscape looking for “work.”
The Church sought to intervene in the
resultant conflicts by emphasizing the value
of peaceful activities as sanctioned by the
martyrs, whose spirits abided in the form of
relics. Thus, saintly relics became an integral
part of devotional practice, and the attendant
populism produced a whole new religious
architecture based around pilgrimages to
visit relics. The wealth that these pilgrims
generated was enough to finance numerous

cathedrals whose prime purpose was to serve
as stations on the way to the Cathedral at
Santiago de Compostela, Spain, built over the
site where the remains of St. Jarnes were said
to have been found in the 9th century. These
churches include Vézelay, Le Puy, Arles,

and Saint-Gilles. In the northern countries,
the Hanseatic League was created as a
commercial and defensive confederation of

merchant guilds and their market towns that
dominated trade along the coast of northern
Europe. It stretched along the Baltic Sea from
Novgorod to London, with its primary focus
being Ltlbeck and Hamburg, both of which
were to become important economic hubs in
the next centuries.

As a response to the new excess in
wealth and power, there arose a monastic
movement, the Cistercians, that aimed to
restore the principles of poverty. Cistercian
monks purposefully sought out unwanted
areas and reinstated the principles of
work and devotion. Soon the Cistercians,
spreading all over Europe, became a political
force to be reckoned with by the emperors
and bishops. The Cistercians rejected
the airy Gothic spires, stained glass, and
sculptural elaborations for an architecture
that was intentionally simple. For the first
time in history, we see an anti-architecture
architecture, the best surviving example
being the Abbey at Fontenay (1118), France.
(The Shinto Shrine, by way of comparison,
was designed as a building with an archaic
quality that was to be preserved through
its periodic rebuilding.) Fontenay Abbey
was meant to evoke simpler times and to
serve as an accusation against architectural
extravagance.

In Italy, during this period there are the
first stirrings of a political transformation
that would have huge consequences as the
centuries progressed. The cities of Verona,
Padua, Vicenza, and the Republic of Venice
created the Lombard League (1164) in
an atternpt to assert their independence
from imperial German control. Their efforts
succeeded to the extent that, in 1183,
the German Empire signed the Peace of
Constance with the Italians. The treaty

gave the cities local jurisdiction over their
territories and the freedom to elect their own
councils and to enact their own legislation.
The cumulative result was that a new and
remarkable society emerged with a mix

of aristocrats and urban merchants. Most
important of all, a new designation arose
known as the popoio ("people"). For the first
time since the days of ancient Rome, Italy
had a political class, which was to play an
increasingly large role, even conceptually,

in modern history. The architectural
consequences were immediate. Cities

built town halls, the first such structures in
modern history. They also built a new type
of public space called a piazza, while at the
same time competing to build large urban
cathedrals. The wealthy built increasingly
large private palaces. Some of the cities
became great military powers, particularly
Venice and Genoa, which built up vast naval
empires in the Mediterranean and Black
Seas. Padua was one of these cities as well.
After a devastating fire in 1174, it rose to
particular prominence. An impressive town
hall, called Palazzo della Ragione (“Palace
of Justice”), was built at the center of town
with a huge assembly hall, some 81 meters
long and 27 meters wide. Vaulted in wood

like an upside-down ship's nave, it was at the
time the largest interior space in Europe, and
possibly in the world. Its long side faced the
town square and was lined by a two-tiered,
arched loggia. A university was also founded
(1222) in Padua, and it was to become

one of the leading academic institutions in
Europe, especially in law. Town halls were
built in various cities across northern Italy:
Palazzo della Ragione in Bergamo (ca. 1190),
Broletto in Como (ca. 1215), Palazzo del
Popolo in Todi (ca. 1220), Palazzo Vecchio in
Florence (ca. 1300), and Palazzo dei Consoli
in Gubbio (ca. 1340). In Siena, an enormous
town hall, the Palazzo Pubblico (begun
1297), was built in front of a magnificent
semicircular piazza. Siena is one of the best-
preserved Italian cities from this era, frozen in
time because of the Black Death that coursed
through Italy in the 14th century, killing off a
large proportion of its population.

If the northern Italians were slowly getting
out from under the feudal system, in Japan
feudalism was just getting started. The
Kamakura period (1185-1333) marks the
governance of the Karmakura shogunate,
whose first shogun, Minamoto no Yoritomo,
established its headquarters in Kamakura.
Lords required the loyal services of vassals,

12.4 Town Hall, Padua, Italy

who were rewarded with fiefs of their own.
The fief holders exercised local military

rule. But their rule was not spread over

all of Japan: to the north, during the 12th
century, the Northern Fujiwara, who ruled
over the Tohoku region, created a capital city,
Hiraizumi, to rival Kyoto to the south. Despite
its lack of high-quality rice-growing areas,
the Fujiwara derived their wealth from gold
mining and horse trading, and as middlemen
in the trade in luxury items from continental
Asian states. The Northern Fujiwara also
developed an ambitious Buddhist temple-
building program on Mount Kanzan, not far
from Hiraizurni, which consisted of temples,
pagodas, repositories, and gardens. Known
as Chuson-ji, it featured a large pagoda at
the top of the mountain with small reliquaries
every 100 meters along Osho Kaido, one of
the main roads that connected the northern
provinces with Edo (modern-day Tokyo)

to the south. Jodo-shu (“The Pure Land
School”). Though its teachings first became
prominent in China in the 5th century CE,

it was brought to Japan by a monk called
Honen, who gathered disciples from all walks
of life, developing a large following, notably
women, who had been excluded from serious
Buddhist practice up to this point. One of


12.5 Sanju-sangen-do, Kyoto, Japan

the buildings that has survived and that

best represents the Pure Land School is the
temple Sanju-sangen-do (“Hall of 33 Bays”)
in Kyoto (1164). A linear building a whole city
block long, its numerous doors could open
onto a large courtyard to allow devotees to
admire the thousand life-size statues of the
deity Kannon that stand on both the right and
left sides of the main statue, a bodhisattva of
compassion. The emergence in Buddhism of
a feminine deity related to compassion and
motherhood also has many parallels with the
emergence in Europe of the cult of the Virgin
Mary.

It was in this extraordinary context that
Asia saw perhaps the most remarkable
event of all, the invasion of the Mongolians.
In the previous century, it was the Turks
who had mastered Central Asia; now it
was their comparatively poor cousins of
the steppe to the east. In 1220, the unified
Mongolian army crossed the Syr Darya
River, beginning their invasion of Central
Asia. The Mongolians defeated the Song
dynasty in 1279, allowing Kublai Khan to
establish his own Yuan dynasty. By 1280,
the Mongolians had created the largest
empire ever seen in history. Masters of
rapid equestrian attacks, the Mongolians
were at first eager to confiscate goods

and haul them, along with thousands of
captive artisans, back to their camps in
Mongolia. But because the history of their
invasion was almost completely written

by the conquered—there are no surviving

accounts from a Mongolian perspective—we
have to take a more balanced view. The
Mongolians were consummate traders and
basically continued what the Seljuks and
Turks had already begun. They also put
their unique stamp on the cross-continental
trade, not only developing Sarnarkand

but also purposely demoting the southern
route. The heady days of the Khmer and
Pagan were over, and indeed the entire
region went into steep decline. Angkor Wat
was soon abandoned and given over to the
forest, to be rediscovered only at the end
of the 19th century. In India, the loss of the
southern route to China had the effect of
creating infighting, with a noticeable drop
in architectural production in the early 14th
century.

The first Mongolian capital was
Karakorum, a vast city of yurts in western
Mongolia, but Karakorum was too far from
the center of political gravity in China,
so the khan commissioned the building
of a new capital city, Shangdu (meaning
“Supreme Capital” and also called Kaipingfu),

some 1,200 kilometers to the southeast
of Karakorum. It was designed by the
Chinese architect Liu Bingzhong (1252)
in a profoundly Chinese manner, with an
outer city and an inner city, and a roughly
square layout. In 1264, Kublai Khan gave Liu
Bingzhong the task of designing yet another
capital city that today is more commonly
known as Beijing. It was broad in scale, strict
in planning and execution, and named Dadu.
It had large areas that mimicked the open
steppe where the Mongolians could ride their
horses and live in their yurts.

Consider all the areas just discussed, and
then take everything that is not included:
the rain forests and deserts of central and
southern Africa; northern Asia and Siberia;
and Australia. These regions would remain
more or less independent from this economic
continuum until the arrival of the colonial
age or even later, but now that Europe and
the northern and eastern parts of Africa were
part of the global economic continuum, the
map began to stabilize. Within this area, the
historical narratives are still of war, conflict,
and disruption, but they are just as much
about power, personalities, and religion
as about the need to control trade routes,
markets, and sites of production in a rapidly
changing landscape.

Khmer Kingdom: Angkor Period

802-1431
A Angkor Wat

802-1220

A Lokesvara Temple
Completed 1191
Kingdom of Pagan

802-1431

AAnanda Temple A Shwezigon
1090-1105 Late 11th century

Japan: Late Heian Period
ca. 900-1185

Kamakura Period

1185-1333
A Itsukushima Shrine
6th to 13th centuries
Northern Song Dynasty Southern Song Dynasty
960-1127 1127-1279
@ Yingzhao Fashi published
1103
1000 CE 1200 CE

India: Hindu States
10th to 12th centuries

A Quwwat-ul-Islam
ca. 1192-1315

Zagwe Dynasty
ca. 1137-1270
A Great Zimbabwe
ca. 1250-1450

Holy Roman Empire

A Churches of Lalibela

Nanbokucho Period

1336-1392
Yuan Dynasty
1279-1368
A Dadu
Rebuilt 1264

1400 CE

Delhi Sultanate
1210-1526

A Sun Temple at Konark

Late 13th century

Mamluk Sultanate
1250-1517
A Mosque of Djenné

13th century 13th century

962-1806
A St. Denis AChartres Cathedral ASt. Croce, Florence
1144 1194-1220 Begun 1294
Crusades A Notre-Dame, Paris A Notre-Dame of Reims Black Plague
1096-1270 1163-1250 1211-90 1347-52

A Fontenay Abbey

Founded 1119 1220-35

Olaf Tryggvason, King of Norway A Borgund Stave Church

995-1000 12th century
Toltec-Chichén City-State
ca. 1000-1200
AtTula AChichén liza
ca. 950-1150 ca. 7th to 13th centuries

A Amiens Cathedral

A Exeter Cathedral
1280-1300
A Palazzo Publico, Siena
1297-1310

Nasrid Sultanate
1298-1492
A Alhambra
13th to 14th centuries

Furthest extent of

Khmer Empire, ry
ca. 1200 ee | a

Andaman Sea Angkor

A
Srivijaya cities *
A

12.6 Southeast Asia, ca. 1200 CE

VRAH VISHNULOK (ANGKOR WAT)
The Song dynasty (960-1279) in China

and the Chola in India (847-1249) exerted
powerful economic influences in Southeast
Asia, even though it was India that won out
from a cultural point of view, with its variants
of Buddhism and Hinduism spreading
throughout the region. Another factor in the
area’s geopolitics was the Dali kingdorn in
southern China's Yunnan Province. From
900 CE until 1253, when it was conquered
by the Mongolians and brought back into
the fold of the Chinese empire, it was an
autonomous Buddhist state and served as
part of an overland route to southern China.
Its primary city, Kunming, had long been the
main stopping point along the route to India
by way of Burma. The disruptions of the Silk
Route that were the result of the Mongolian
expansion into Asia made this alternative
route especially important. In the 9th
century CE, Dali, a nearby city, took control
of Kunming, unified the area, and built new
temples and palaces.

A more distant development was the
integration of the East African coast into the
circuits of Arab and Indian traders, which
created a continuous fabric of ocean ports
from Africa to China. These regional and
global events were highly advantageous to
the Khmer, who were now at their height
militarily and economically; they sat at the

“To Malaysia and Indi
@ lo Malaysia and India
-

ae,

To Guangzhou a

12.7 Vrah Vishnulok (Angkor Wat), near Siem Reap, Cambodia

center of north-south and east-west trade

in addition to having become one of the
great rice producers in all of Asia. They had
mastered rice production in the forest by
cutting down the trees and establishing large
rice-producing fields watered by an extensive
system of irrigation canals. They could
produce rice twice a year, basically making it
into a bulk commodity to be sold to India and
China.

By the 11th century, Yasodharapura, the
Khmer capital located just north of the Tonle
Sap Lake, had grown into a major city with
about a million inhabitants; it was certainly the
largest city in South or Southeast Asia, and

maybe the second or third largest in the world.

King Rajendravarman (r. 944-68 CE)
extended the city to the east with the
construction of new temples. King
Suryavarman | (r. 1001-50) added new
palaces to the north and a vast new baray
some 7 by 2 kilometers to the west. He
also created a large new temple, Baphuon
(ca. 1060), just outside the gates of
Yasodharapura. Baphuon became the center
of a new square city, about as big as, and
overlapping, Yasodharapura. But all these
temples paled in comparison to the one
now known as Angkor Wat, built by King
Suryavarman II (1113-50).

Royal palace Preah Khan ;
Angkor Thom—4- t East baray 7 [
° Baphuon{—4-4 7 {
West baray t | a
— — Bakhéng

12.8 Area plan: Vrah Vishnulok (Angkor Wat)

— Angkor Wat

For its construction, a large part of
Yasodharapura had to be cleared. The
temple's probable original name, Vra
Vishnulok, was dedicated to both Vishnu
and Suryavarman himself; its garbha-griha
once held a statue of Vishnu represented
as a facsimile of Suryavarman. There
is much that is still unknown about the
temple—archaeological work on the
Khmer civilization is still in its infancy. The
building’s astrological notations (such as
the columns on its balustrade, which are
equal in number to the years in a Hindu
age), as well as its esoteric astronomical
measurements, are still being decoded.
It is therefore generally assumed that the
building is a map of cosmological space
and time as understood by the Khmer.
The outer surface of the shrine did not
look as it does today. Along with its four
corner towers, it is presumed to have been
gilded and would have shone brightly,
especially when illuminated by the western
sun. The stone would have been covered
with a thin layer of stucco and painted.
A causeway in the form of a raised path
9.4 meters wide and 350 meters long
leads across the “ocean” and then across
an open field to the front of the temple
compound. The causeway terminates at
the bottom of an elevated cruciform altar
in front of the entrance to the temple. This
was as far as commoners could go. Both
the causeway and the altar are edged by
a balustrade designed as long serpents,
a reference to Shesha Naga, the celestial
serpent with seven heads. A critical role
in the story of the cosmic ocean is played
by Shesha, for it is on the coiled body of
Shesha that the sleeping Vishnu dreams
the universe. While he was dreaming, a
lotus on a stalk emerged from Vishnu’s
navel, on which sat the god Brahma, who
actually created the universe. The word
shesha means “remainder,” and Shesha
is supposed to be made of what remains

after each cosmic cycle comes to an end.
The destruction of everything produces a
remainder, which is the critical scaffold
from which the “dream” of life comes into
being. The Shesha Naga was one of the
most prominent symbols of the Khmer.

Cruciform gallerie:

Crugiform cloister—_

>

‘First enclosure _/

\____ second enclostire
Third enpiGaure

/

100m
4

12.9 Plan: Vrah Vishnulok

i Enclosure wall

500 m ,

12.10 Compound of Vrah Vishnulok

12.11 Third enclosure gallery, Vrah Vishnulok

After the Naga altar is a three-portaled gate
that gives access to the third enclosure. The
spaces beyond this were reserved for royalty.
Along the walls of this enclosure, facing
outward and protected by a colonnade, bas-
reliefs tell of the various manifestations of
Vishnu; they are interspersed with illustrations
of the life and family of Suryavarman II. This
is where the primary symbolic message of the
temple—Suryavarman II as a manifestation
of Vishnu—is made clear. Unlike Buddhist
structures, in which one moves clockwise,
the narrative works counterclockwise, starting
from the northwest corner. The bas-reliefs
were painted in strong hues and would have
been visible from the ground below through
the colonnade.

From here one moves up through the
different levels, each a smaller version of the
cosmic order of ocean and island precinct,
one “world” resting on another. Unlike
Bakong (see “800 CE"), which consisted
of a series of terraces, the vertical scale of
Vrah Vishnulok escalates and intensifies
as it nears the central precinct in the final
level, which looms above and is accessible
only by a long and very steep flight of steps.
It contains the central shrine, the climax of
the whole arrangement: a tower that rises
43 meters above the floor of its gallery (that
is itself 23 meters higher than the level of

the moat). It is surrounded by four smaller
corner towers. The main garbha-griha, with
its statue of Vishu/Suryavarman II, was

originally accessible from all directions. There
was also a 23-meter-deep well at its center
into which offerings could be thrown. Wells,
found in most Khmer temples, are not only

a connection to the water-based authority of
the Khmer rulers but also an inverted mirror
of the cosmic mountain symbolized by the
tower.

The influences of the 9th-century CE
Temple of Prambanam are obvious, except
here the various peaks are tied into a
single, extraordinarily complex composition.
Furthermore, movement into the structure
is not only axial but also from the corners,
which gives Vrah Vishnulok a more
multidimensional aspect than earlier temples.
But the use of square piers and Greek and
Persian decorative motifs in the galleries
indicate that Vrah Vishnulok’s details might
also be viewed from within the sphere of
Hellenism. The cruciform structures known
as libraries that flank the causeway seem

particularly Hellenistic, right down to their
use of attached pilasters on the entrance
porches. A good deal of scholarly work still
needs to be done to properly understand this
building's importance as it relates to the flow
of architectural thought through South and
Southeast Asia.

Angkor Thom and Preah Khan

In 1181, King Jayavarman VII converted to
Buddhism and embarked on a rebuilding of
Yasodharapura. He relocated its center from
Bekong to a new temple called Indrapattha,
known today as the Bayon, located just
outside the old city walls. Instead of the
whole body, only the face of the Buddha
was graphed onto the many towers of the
temple, a reinterpretation of Mahayana
Buddhist practice. The gigantic face
sculptures give Bayon a unique, enigmatic
character. Jayavarman VII's new city, known
today as Angkor Thom, was smaller than
Yasodharapura—3 kilometers square instead
of 4—and it probably served primarily as a
palace compound, since it incorporated the
palaces that had been built there by previous
kings. Among the other astonishing buildings
erected by Jayavarman VII is a Buddhist
university to the north of the city, originally
called Lokesvara but known today as Preah
Khan. At its height, the Lokesvara temple
complex had one thousand students and
teachers. Surrounded by a moat, this huge
complex comprises a vast axial network of
corridors, chapels, libraries, and pavilions,
unified by the two axes that lead through
numerous thresholds to the central sanctuary.
The principal inner surfaces were covered
with stucco (some traces still remain) and

12.12 Quasi-Hellenic details in the interior
of the Library at Vrah Vishnulok

were presumably painted with didactic
images in vibrant colors. One of the more
interesting structures is a two-story building
with round columns, perhaps dating from the
13th century.

Environmental degradation as a result of
deforestation led to a rapid collapse of the
Angkor aqua-engineering systems in the
middle of the 14th century. The dangers
of a single-cormmodity economy were now
apparent. Without its steady flow of rice,
the economy collapsed, and the inhabitants
abandoned the city. The kingdom was easily
sacked by the Thais and its vast wealth
plundered. The collapse of the Khmer
was also a consequence of the rise of the
Mongolians, who organized their trade routes
through Samarkand, much to the detriment
of Southeast Asia.

12.15 Plan of Lokesvara temple complex

12.14 Area plan: Lokesvara temple complex

trok
mh > 1
#%South temple

60m


Lian

Shwezigon Pagoda in background)

KINGDOM OF PAGAN

The Khmer and the Kingdom of Pagan were
the principal powerhouses of Southeast

Asia. In the 12th century, the Pagan came

to dominate the Puy cities and ruled over an
area roughly equivalent in size to modern-day
Myanmar (formerly Burma). Its capital was

at Arimaddanapura (“City of the Crusher of
Enemies”), now known as the city of Pagan.
For two centuries, Pagan waged war with the
Cholas in peninsular India while maintaining
a close but carefully guarded relationship
with India's eastern kingdoms. Unlike the
hmer Empire, which was first Hindu and
then Buddhist, or the Srivijayan Empire,
which was both Buddhist and Hindu, the
Pagan practiced Theravada Buddhism, a
traditional form that spread from Sri Lanka.
Between the 12th and 15th centuries, Pagan
ings constructed more than two thousand
structures, stupas, and temples. Despite
their Buddhism, the Pagan kings, like the
hmer, adopted the Hindu idea, modern for
its time, that the Buddha was a manifestation
of Vishnu and that a virtuous king could also
e a manifestation of Vishnu. Unlike Khmer
temples, however, the temples of the Pagan
ings were not dedicated to themselves as
manifestations of Vishnu, but to the Buddha.

12.16 View of Pagan, near Nyangu, Myanmar (Ananda Temple in left foreground;

“~yS

100 m
a

ia
12.17 Site plan: Shwezigon Pagoda

Arimaddanapura was located on a bend of
the Irrawaddy River to the west of an extinct
volcano that had significant symbolic import.
The earliest buildings were terraced stupas
derived from Indonesian prototypes. The
Shwezigon Paya (the word paya can be
translated as “pagoda,” “stupa,” or “zedi"),
for instance, is a solid-core stupa that rises
steeply, like a stepped pyramid, through five
square terraces, culminating in a stupa form
so completely merged with the umbrellas

of its chattri above that the base forms

an almost conical shape. Steep flights of
steps at the center of the base’s four sides
gave pilgrims access to the terraces that,
like those at Borobodur, contain didactic
panels depicting tales from the life of the
Buddha and other Buddhist texts. Though
the stupa is intended to be conceptually
solid, there is within it a complex network

of narrow, interconnected corridors that
were designed to enable postconstruction


. ae
12.18 Shwezigon Pagoda, Pagan

12.19 Elevation and plan: Shwezigon Pagoda

donors to gain merit by paying for dedicatory
tablets embedded in its walls. The temple is
presumed to have contained an important
relic in its core, but it has not yet been found
and is presumed stolen. Since the stupa was
considered an extension of that relic, latter-
day worshippers hoped to gain nirvana by
embedding objects in its “force field.”

Around 1100, soon after his ascension to
the throne, Kyanzittha (1084-1113) began
construction of several large stupas, among
them the Ananda Temple (1090-1105).
Though it has the customary square
terraces, complete with glazed terra-cotta
didactic tablets and corner stupas, it has
no external staircases. From the square,
ground-level substructure, the building rises
in an escalating rhythm to the base of the
superstructure and shikhara. In this building,
the didactic galleries have been incorporated
into the body of the temple in the form of two
tall concentric ambulatories that are entered
through broad, spacious porches at the
center of each side. In no other Pagan temple
is there so extensive a program of Buddhist
education. Light comes through the thick
walls into the outer ambulatory from high
windows in a regular rhythm. Passageways
cut directly in front of the windows allow
light to filter further in. Nonetheless, at the
core, the illumination is still rather sparse,
and the atmosphere is meant to contrast
with the light that comes dramatically into
the space from hidden clerestory windows.
This light illuminates the Buddha statues
located in niches in the central core, facing
out in all four directions. The clerestory light
illurninating the innermost sanctum is a
distinct Pagan invention. Almost all of the
stupas were made of bricks produced locally
from the alluvial soil.


Korea
Japan

Sea of Japan

Kyoto [O}

China

Pacific Ocean

Itsukushima Shrine

Seto inland Sea

12.20 Location of Kyoto and the Itsukushima Shrine, Japan

SANJU-SANGEN-DO

In Japan, frequent wars, natural disasters,
and attempted Mongolian invasions in 1274
and 1281 created a feeling of instability,
which the Buddhists associated with the
predicted end of the reign of Buddhism. This
led to a period similar to that of the rise of
the bhakti cults in South Asia. Charismatic
Buddhist monks traveled the countryside
popularizing Pure Land Buddhism, which
promised enlightenment for anyone who
devoutly repeated the name of the Amidaba
Buddha.

An arresting example of the architecture
of Pure Land Buddhism was built in Kyoto
in 1164 by Taira no Kiyomori (1118-81), an
important general. Known as Sanju-sangen-
do (“Hall of 33 Bays”), the structure was
120 meters long, an entire urban block,
and designed to display a thousand life-size
statues of the thousand-armed Kannon (a
bodhisattva goddess of mercy), five hundred
on either side of a large central Kannon
image. The statues are arranged in multiple
rows and densely packed on bleachers rising
toward the back wall. Twenty-eight additional
“attendants,” many of them directly derived
from the contemporary Hindu gods of India,
are lined up in front. The forest of statues,
which can be presented to the public through
large doors, makes a strong impression.

Kannon statues

I t

12.21 Sanju-sangen-do, Kyoto, Japan

E:

Kannon statues

12.22 Plan of Sanju-sangen-do 12.23 Interior: Sanju-sangen-do

12.24 Itsukushima Shrine, Hiroshima Prefecture, Japan

ITSUKUSHIMA SHRINE

Shintoisrn had by no means been weakened
by this period. In fact, Taira no Kiyormori

also built a Shinto shrine on Itsukushima,
one of the many islands in the Seto Inland
Sea. A sacred site since the earliest times,

it was home to Ichikishima-Hime-no-Mikoto,
the kami “who ensures safety at sea,” and
her two sisters. The original shrine dating
back to the 6th century CE was rebuilt on a
grand scale in 1168. In the main sanctuary,
Kiyomori presented thirty-three illustrated
scrolls of the Buddhist Lotus Sutra to the
shrine, making Itsukushima a seamless
blend of Shinto and Buddhist practices

and architecture. The shirine is located

on a island, which could be approached

only by the devout. Even today, though it is
now open to the public, there are certain
restrictions. A solitary vermilion torii stands
nee-deep in the sea at high tide, with the
green mountain island as a backdrop. At high
tide, it appears to float, and it is then that

its Shinto character merges with Pure Land
Buddhism's ideas, which would describe it as
loating on the infinite ocean on a lotus plant.
he beach shrine, built into a protected cove,
is connected by a roofed passageway that
zigzags between the two sides of the inlet.
he passage, with its changing views, frames
the dynamic relationship between water and
land as the tide rises and falls.

There are two sanctuaries: the honsha (the
main shrine housing female deities), which
faces out toward the water, and on the east,
roughly perpendicular to it, the maro-do jinja
(the shrine for male guest deities) facing
west, or inland. The timber columns are all
coated with vermilion lacquer and are a study
in simplicity.

Torii gates have both Buddhist and Shinto
associations. A torii is a reinterpretation of
the Buddhist torana, or gateway. In Shintoisrn
a torii also symbolizes the call to the god
to come forth and grant the worshipper’s
prayers. Another meaning of torif is “bird
perch,” a term referring to a mythological
story in which the gods attempt to lure the
sun goddess, Amaterasu, from the cave in
which she had hidden with the sounds of
songbirds.

\
NON

..Dais for Noh performances

12.25 Site plan: Itsukushima Shrine

ronen

aes a There are several estates in Suzhou, which
ao “ became an important center for China's

Bejing enssner, silk industry during the Song dynasty. The
Jin dynasty ee Garden of the Master of the Nets dates

from this period. (Its name came from a
subsequent owner of the garden.) It has

Nanjing three sections focused around an inner
garden designed to enhance and intensify
Song dynasty suctou® the essential qualities of the landscape and
Chengdu Hangzhou achieve a perfected, “natural” experience
that was, nonetheless, imbued with didactic
Dali kingdom messages. In that sense the garden was
KUNMING semen, both a visual and literary experience. The
aa eae rene gnezhou Song dynasty period, known for its literary
East China Sea achievements, was one in which storytelling
became a popular form of entertainment.
The stories told by professional entertainers
were printed in storybooks, called huaben,
which later inspired China's longer didactic
12.26 Song dynasty China novels dealing with the battle between the
virtuous and the unscrupulous that teach
the consequences of behavior. This was
SOUTHERN SONG DYNASTY lower peaks, called Ten Thousand Pines, are related to the ideals of Confucianism and,
The Mongolian Jin and Jurchen dynasties to also visually “borrowed.” Interspersed in the during the Song dynasty, neo-Confucianism,
the north cut off trade along the Silk Route, garden are about forty structures, including an aggregate of Buddhist metaphysics and
forcing the Song to move their capital to verandas, lodges, towers, platforms, and Confucian ethics that taught that through
Hangzhou, south of modern-day Shanghai, rustic huts, all linked by pathways that move reason and study, the whole world could be
their former capital, Nanjing, having been up and down and wind around, framing the understood.
devastated by Jin dynasty raids. This move architectural structures within and against
forced the Song to give up lucrative farming each other and the landscape.

land for a terrain of mountains, lakes, and
rivers that was inhospitable to widespread
agriculture, making them dependent on
imported rice from Southeast Asia. The Song
thereupon created a vibrant maritime trading
network to India. Ships were built, harbors
improved, and warehouses constructed.

As wealth poured in, powerful mercantile
families began to establish large estates
distinguished by elaborate private gardens.
A garden at Dezhou, for instance, was
renowned for its four distinct landscapes.
Another garden had an artificial lake, with
an island emerging from marshes and
surrounded by artificial mountains and piles
of rocks on which a palace was built. Little
West Lake, a private garden in Lin’an, went
so far as to “borrow” the views of an actual
mountain outside its boundaries, splicing its
view into its composition. The same is true
for Genyue (1117-22), a Northern Song
garden in Bianliang (modern Kaifeng) that is
focused on a high peak, Longevity Mountain,

in its northeastern corner. A multitude of 12.27 Garden of the Master of the Nets, Suzhou, China

ae.
‘tes
t
&

a so

Hh

12.28 Hierarchy of the dou-gong (bracket system) according to the Yingzhao Fashi

Yingzhao Fashi

The Song emperor Huizong (r. 1100-1125)
was an enthusiastic patron of the arts. A
catalog of his paintings, the Xuanhe Huapu,
published in 1123, lists over six thousand
works in his collection. Art academies were
established in his reign, which saw an
increased interest in ancient history and
culture; collecting antiques also became
popular. Huizong also commissioned the
New Yingzhao Fashi (1103), a detailed
manual of architecture and construction.

It was called the “new” Yingzhao Fashi
because the previous one, dating to the
T'ang, had become outdated. The manual
was not, however, intended as an aesthetic

or philosophical document, but rather to help

the imperial administrators regulate, and
reign in, the construction industry.

Aesthetically, architecture under the Song

and the Jin (and later under the Yuan) had
become very ornamental and complicated.
The size of the dou-gong decreased with
respect to the overall column heights, but it
increased in complexity and showmanship.
The placement of columns was even
occasionally disrupted to accommodate
more ambitious spatial arrangements. While
all these transformations made for a much
richer and more expressive architecture,

it also resulted in a great deal of waste

and corruption. Because construction was
controlled by powerful guilds that carefully
guarded their knowledge, passing it on only
in oral verse, buildings routinely ran over

budget. The imperial court found that it could

not reasonably predict the cost to complete

buildings. Furthermore, the high demand

for timber was causing rapid deforestation

in the Song territories, and with the northern
forests in the control of “barbarians,” the
court feared that it would soon run out of
timber. The New Yingzhao Fashi aimed

to solve both these problems. Li Jie was

an intellectual, a painter, and an author of
books on geography, history, and philology.

In addition, as a superintendent for state
buildings in the Ministry of Works (Gong

Bu), he had carried out several building
projects, which made him an ideal person for
the job. For three years Li Jie systematically
interviewed leaders of the construction guilds,

documented their building principles and
processes, and added his own rationalizations
and explanations. He finally presented his
findings in 1105 in the form of regulations
that the government administrators could
use to monitor construction expenditures. Li
Jie’s Yingzhao Fashi consists of thirty-four
chapters organized into five parts: basic
data, regulations, labor work, materials,

and drawings. Each part is subdivided into
the following fourteen sections: moats and
fortifications; stonework; structural carpentry;
nonstructural carpentry and joinery (doors,
windows, partitions, screens, ceilings,
staircases, etc.); wood carving; turning and
drilling; sawing; bamboo work; plastering,
painting, and decoration; brickwork; brick
and tile making.

The Yingzhao Fashi described eight types
of buildings but was concerned primarily with
imperial and governmental buildings, and not
with buildings for commoners, since only the
former would be paid for by the administrator.
Most of the drawings are plans (determining
the basic size of a building), sections
(determining quantities), and wood sections
(instrumental in determining costs). All these
were regulated by a proportioning system,
known as the cai-fen. A cai was 10 fen, and a
Zu-cai was 21 fen. The standard proportions
were in the ratio 2:3. Thus a standard wood
section would be 10 by 15 fen.

12.29 Detail of a garden scene from the Song dynasty

London,

Ox

Atlantic Oceart

Alexandria™,
Mamluk sultanate *,

MONGOL EMPIRE

By 1206, Temtjin, called Genghis Khan
(“Mighty Ruler”) had united the dispersed
and infighting Mongolian tribes, sending his
armies south and west to create an expansive
empire. Following his death in 1227, his son
Ogedei advanced even farther west, taking
Kiev in 1240. Kublai Khan, another grandson
of Genghis, completed the conquest of China
in 1279, establishing the Yuan dynasty.

The result was the largest empire in history,
covering 20 percent of the earth’s total land
area and holding sway over a population

of more than one hundred million. Though

it was not to last, it had important and
numerous long-term effects.

Many accounts of the Mongolians focus
on their ferocious fighting style and barbarous
looting of cities, palaces, and libraries.

But most of the information that has been
handed down about the Mongolians was
written by the people who were conquered
and who were not inclined toward more
neutral assessments. One of the reasons for
the Mongolians’ success was their military
style. Most armies fought with slow masses
of soldiers. Many soldiers were farmhands
with minimal skills and training. Mongolian
soldiers, all excellent horsemen, had not
only mastered a dynamic mode of attack but
were also seasoned to cope with the brutal
conditions of the steppe. A diet of meat
and yogurt made them taller and stronger
than many of their enemies. Furthermore,

Moscow

~s.Nizhni Novgorod

Kazan--

unlike in the West, where there were small
groups of elite soldiers and large masses

of untrained combatants, the armies of the
united Mongol tribes consisted of the entire
adult male population under the age of sixty.
Living in tents designed to allow the soldiers
to follow the movement of their grazing
horses, they had no urban culture and

were interested primarily in the trappings of
movable wealth, which they distributed with
democratic evenhandedness to all the tribes.
When Genghis Khan died, he was buried in
a secret, unmarked location in the desert of
Mongolia, according to Mongolian tradition.
(A team of archaeologists have recently
located a site in Mongolia that is most likely
Genghis Khan's tomb.)

The ger (“dwelling place"), the Mongolian
yurt, was easily transportable and yet solid
enough to withstand ferocious winds. The
basic element is an expanding wooden lattice
that forms the circular walls. Poles from the
sides rise up to connect to a compression
ring, thus forming the roof structure. A
band of rope is drawn around the top of
the wall to bind it together. A fireplace was
set out in the center. The wood structure is
then covered with various amounts of felt,
depending on climatic conditions. (Felt was
made by pounding and rubbing wool—the
Mongolians had no weaving skills. In fact,
all their clothing was bartered for, bought, or
came from war booty.) The yurt’s entrance
faced south. The altar and place of prestige

Mongolian heartland
1206 ce

Japan

Yuan dynasty

East China Sea

12.30 Mongol Empire, ca. 1200 CE

were placed on the north, facing the
entrance. Living, cooking and eating took
place in between. The whole structure could
be assembled or disassembled in a day and
packed onto camels for transport.

Yuan Dynasty China

When Kublai Khan (1215-94), Genghis’s
grandson, ascended the throne of China, he
chose the Chinese name Yuan (“original” or
“prime”) for his dynasty. By 1279, with the
surrender of the last of the Song territories, all
of China was under the Yuan. The Mongols
divided society into four classes, with the
highest reserved for thernselves and the
lowest for the southern Chinese from the
former Song regions. Outsiders enjoyed the
middle status in China, between the Mongols
and the native Chinese, to the great irritation
of the Song. Lamaist Buddhists—from Tibet
and Nepal—and Daoists found particular
favor with the Mongols, much as they had
with the Mongolian-related Jin two hundred
years earlier. Muslims were welcomed and
happily tolerated at the western border.
Under the Yuan, one of the oldest mosques
of China, the tomb of Tughlug Temur, was
built in 1363 in Huocheng, Xinjiang.

The Mongolian capital was Karakorum,
and it was from there that Genghis Khan
would rally his troops. Genghis’s son and
successor, Ogedei, erected walls around
the city. Though nothing remains today, we
know from descriptions that the city was


square, with gates in the cardinal directions,
and that it had Arab and Chinese quarters,
several temples and mosques, and even a
Nestorian church. When Kublai Khan claimed
the throne of the Mongol Empire in 1260,

he relocated his capital first to Chengdu and
later to Dadu (present-day Beijing). While the
Yuan introduced global civilization to China
and modernized its military and its economy,
they had no architectural culture. As a result,
in building the new capital city, they adhered
to the planning principles described in the
Rituals of Zhou, which was a good political
move, as it made them appear considerate
of Chinese tradition. They also ordered the
construction of numerous altars and temples
throughout China dedicated to ancestors and
local deities.

Dadu (from the word fa-tu, or “Great
Capital”) was known to the Mongolians as
Khanbalig, the “City of the Great Khan.” It
was square with an orthogonal arrangement
of streets typical of earlier Chinese capitals.
The urban center, consisting of a palace
and imperial quarters, was located south
of the city center, with residential areas
predominantly occupying the northern part.
The name for the palace was ta-nei, or “great
interior.” It was surrounded by a 6-by-5
kilometer area reserved for the Mongolian
overlords, who camped there in their yurts. To
the south, in a separate rectangular precinct,
was the “outer city” for the native Chinese,
who lived in houses. A vast building served
as the official site for ceremonies. Within it,
Kublai Khan, like the Liao kings before him,
lived in resplendent tents traditional to the
Mongolians. Marco Polo, a visitor in his court,
describes Kublai Khan's palace built in the
Chinese manner:

You must know that it is the greatest palace
that ever was. The roof is very lofty, and the
walls of the palace are all covered with gold
and silver. They are adorned with dragons,
beasts and birds, knights and idols, and other
such things. The hall of the palace is so large
that six thousand people could easily dine
there, and it is quite a marvel to see how
many rooms there are besides. The building
is altogether so vast, so rich, and so beautiful
that no man on earth could design anything
superior to it. The outside of the roof is all
colored with vermilion and yellow and green
and blue and other hues, which are fixed with
a varnish so fine and exquisite that it shines
like crystal and lends a resplendent luster to
the palace as seen for a great way around.

Geomancy required that the palace face
south against the slope of a hill, but since

no hill was on the site, one was made—the
Green Hill, about 100 meters high and 2
kilometers in circumference. It was planted
with trees from every part of China and is
thus a type of map of the Chinese world.
Surrounding the hill was an enormous Divine
Menagerie—a park for deer, stags, and other
animals—with paved roads that led to a large
lake with islands and pavilions. Little apart
from the landscaping survives today, since

it became the site of the vast Forbidden

City, which was built after all the Mongolian
buildings were torn down. Two particularly
critical issues for the new city were water
and grain: for such a big city, it was located
far from the fertile grain regions in the south.
These two problems were solved by the
construction of a canal frorn the nearby Pei
Ho River to the east, which allowed grain to
be brought directly to the city gates.

The Grand Canal that wound its way
northward from the fertile grain-producing
areas of the south to the large cities of
the north was one of the most important
engineering works in the world. The goal was
to make the movement of goods and grain
independent of ocean transport. The first
canal was begun in 613 BCE. In 206 BCE,
the Lingqu Canal, which connected the

Xingjiang and Lijiang Rivers, was constructed.

Another 200-kilormeter section, completed in
589 cE, linked the newly constructed capital
of Luoyang (Dongdu, or Eastern Capital)
eastward to the confluence of the Wei and

Gy Tonghai Canal

Dadu (Beijing) (Yuan)

Yongil Canal
(Sui and Yuan)

Yellow Sea

- Old course of
the Yellow River L20-Lai Canal
(Yuan)
Jizhou Canal

Luoyiang Kaifeng

Bian Canal
(Song)

Yangzhou Canal
(Song and Yuan)

Jiangnan Canal a
(Sui, Song, and Yuan)"

Hangzhou

12.31 Chinese canal system

Yellow Rivers, thus overcoming the silting that
plagued them. The Yuan dynasty continued
these efforts, streamlining stretches of the
canal by eliminating bends and consolidating
the Jizhou and Huizong river systems,

thus reducing the distance to be traversed
from the southern end of the canal to the
capital, Dadu, by alrnost 700 kilometers. The
Ming dynasty (1368-1644) also committed
large resources to canal maintenance and
construction, keeping the canals clear of
obstructions so that ocean transport was

not required for grain distribution. The
development of water locks and dredging
techniques kept the canals in working order.

j_____{_Green Hill (Coal Hill)

u 4 L
12.32 Plan of Yuan Dadu, Beijing

Grand interior of Honyi Palace

Tonghai Canal

DELHI

In the 12th century, South Asia was
transformed by the arrival of the Islamic
armies. They were led initially by Qutb-ud-Din
Aibak, a Ghaznavid general from Afghanistan,
who defeated the Rajput king and took over
his territories in north India in 1192. His
efforts were superseded in 1296 by Ala-
ud-Din Khilji (r. 1296-1316), who seized
Ranthambhor, Chittorgarh, and Jaiselmer
from the Rajputs and crushed the Solankis
and the Pramars, going far south to conquer
the fortress of Devagiri from the Yadavs.
Historians do not all evaluate the Islamic
rulers’ relationship to their Hindu subjects
equally. Islamic rulers often massacred
Hindus and systematically destroyed and
desecrated Hindu ternples. However, the
Hindu population as a whole continued to
thrive under Islamic rule, merging with it in
many ways at the level of popular culture
and thus underlining the more tolerant and
even enlightened aspects of Islamic rule—
particularly that of the Moghuls. (One of the
eventual consequences of these underlying
tensions was the partitioning of South Asia
into India and Pakistan in 1947 by the British
on the eve of their departure, an act whose
ramifications are still in play.)

Qutb-ud-Din Aibak established his capital
in Lahore but then moved to central India,
taking over a Chauhan settlement called
Tomar to build Qila Rai Pithora, the first
capital on the site of modern Delhi. Delhi was
reestablished as a capital seven times on new
sites in the same general region. These are:

a

. Qila Rai Pithora, by Qutb-ud-Din Aibak

(1192)

2. Siri, by Ala-ud-Din Khilji (1296-1316)

3. Tughlaqabad, by Ghias-ud-Din Tughlagq

(1321-25)

4. Jahanpanah, by Muhammad bin Tughluq

(1325-51)

Feroz Shah Kotla, by Firuz Shah Tughluq

(1351-88)

6. Purana Qila, by Sher Shah Sur (1538-45)
Shahjahanabad (now referred to as “Old

Delhi”), by Shah Jahan (1638-49)

Early in the 20th century, Edwin Lutyens
added New Delhi into the mix. All these are
now integrated into modern Delhi.

r

| L
\geotorti
oe

ie) 2km

b ---- 3

12.33 Seven capitals of Delhi, India

wen

yng

Tughl

N

jaqabad


500 m
‘

se

12.35 Plan: Tughlaqabad, Delhi, India

/ Tomb of Ghias-ud-Din Tughlaq

Island fortress of Tughlag

Tughlaqabad

Ghias-ud-Din’s Tughlaq's city, Tughlaqabad
(1321-25), was the largest of Delhi’s fortress
cities and a remarkable piece of engineering.
To site his city, Tughlaq picked an irregular
plateau that was difficult to work because

it was very rocky but had the advantage of
jutting prominently above the gentle westward
slope of the floodplain of the Yamuna

River. Tughlaq delineated his fort, which

was made with local stone, in the shape

of an irregular parallelogram with frequent
circular turrets. The ground dropped quickly
around the fort. Within, on the southwest
side, he built his palace, enclosed within
another fortified rectangle. At the junction

of the palace and the rest of the fort was a
sub-palace, a separate defensible entity in
itself. One of the Yamuna River's drainage
canals originally went right past the southern
walls of Tughlaqabad; Tughlaq converted
this canal into an artificial lake by building

a dam linking a rocky outcrop just south of
the city to the city itself. Tughlaqabad thus
had valleys on three sides, and a lake toward
the fourth. Within this lake Tughlaq built yet
another fortress, in the form of an island,
linked to the main fort by a 220-meter-

long elevated causeway. The lower level of
this island fortress consisted of a network

of arched rooms with carefully controlled
access. This was the treasury. On the roof

of the treasury, Tughlaq built his tornb,

a spectacular visual in the middle of the
lake. There were additional hidden tunnels
and causeways in the palace complex,
adding to the secretive nature of the whole
construction.

Quwwat-ul-Islam

The mosque of Quwwat-ul-lslam speaks
unambiguously of its iconoclastic ambitions.
It was begun in 1192 by Qutb-ud-Din Aibak,
who placed it on the rise of land in the center
of the city, the site of a former Hindu temple,
and used as his raw material the stones
from the city’s twenty-seven Hindu and

Jain temples. The pillars from the temples
were used at times upside down or placed
one on top of the other to raise them to the
necessary height. The main qib/a wall, on
the west, consists of five corbelled ogee
arches, presumably made by Hindu masons.

i ike 4

i

a

4

12.36 Temple columns, Quwwat-ul-Islam, Delhi, India

Qutb’s successor, Iltutmish (r. 1211-36)
extended the qibla wall of the Quwwat-ul-
Islam Mosque by three bays on either side
and built a colonnade that enclosed the Qutb
Minar on one side and his own tomb on the
other. IItutmish’s was the first Islamic tomb in
India. Built just west of the gib/a wall, a small
structure with a square base transforms into
an octagonal dome on squinches.
A hundred years later, Ala-ud-Din Khilji
(r. 1296-1316) decided to expand the
complex by doubling the length of the gibla
wall to the north. He also started construction
of monumental minar, intended to be twice
the height of the Qutb Minar, but which was
never built beyond its first story. In 1311, Ala-
ud-din Khilji constructed a gate, called Alai
Darwaza (“Gate of Allah”) to the south of the
mosque. This elegant cubic structure, with

the proportions of a Roman triumphal arch,
was constructed by Indian masons taking
directions from their new Islamic rulers. A
central arch dominates each facade. To the
sides of the arches, windows in the lower
register and blind windows above articulated
in red sandstone are set against a white
sandstone background. The dome sits atop
squinches in a plain interior illuminated by

small deep windows. The Alai Darwaza,
exhibiting influences derived frorn Seljuk
artisans, was among the first monuments in
South Asia to signal the arrival of a distinctly
South Asian Islamic architectural way of
building, which was eventually perfected by
the Moghuls.

Eegpemsdbomoed

irst enlargement (12 rola)

Qutb una)

Jmancoonmny

k

100 m
ot

PN OD

12.37 Plan and section: Quwwat-ul-Islam

12.38 Alai Darwaza gate, Quwwat-ul-Islam

Alai Darwaza gate

Pivme)
poe
pape . (he aasmetaretarives
1
oc id
a a
g
th vy
0 x
: = hoa
a |
g :
Itutmish’s 4
oc a]
v
fo 0
q
T
u
i
vf ;
4 ot
an fu &
Original 22 .  bo-ag
symmetrical a an oa
plan (1200) Bo-+ oriee
= “0
rae q
q
a
t
1
Fi}
a.

Holy Roman Empire

@Rome Byzantium
®
Cérdoba 7
Tunis Seljuk Empire
Fes frner™ oon.
es mere A Tripoli Damascus @ a Baghdad
Marrakech 1 Almoravid Empeife ee. : @
Lee \ .
LOTR tang }
“ Hi “Sonaraf Desert
re @laghaza i A \ jedina
i N ‘
fo SS N é } ie Ayyubid sultanate \, @Mmecca
~. ‘Ti ktu aan)
’ Cran at}
\
Gor tS . “, Aden
Koumbi Saleh @pjonng “eck ©'OQ--7
Mali Empire Kano ¢ H
Yoruba tribes v !
Z
i
a
Kongo Mombasa @)=

@q indian Ocean
Bantu Kilwa om
Atlantic Ocean

Mozambique:
“9

Great Zimbabwe @)___-"

Kalahari Desert

12.39 Africa, ca. 1200 CE

Its palace is situated on the rocky promontory
of an island in Mso Bay. Husuni Kubwa,
which means “large fortified house” in
Swahili, had several courtyards for different
functions, with a distinct progression from
private to public. The king's private courtyard
had a sunken pool with an audience court
next to it. There was a protected harbor to
the west.

North Africa was dominated by the
Ayyubid sultanate in Egypt and the
Almohads in Morocco and Spain. The once
powerful Ghana Empire was in decline. The
Almoravids, constituted of Saharan Berbers,
had taken control of the trade routes through
the Sahara and captured Koumbi Saleh,
the capital of Ghana, in 1067. By the 13th
century, however, a new power emerged:
the Mali Empire. Centered to the north of
Ghana, it was composed of several states that
took control of the gold mines. Before the
discovery of gold in the Americas, almost half
of the gold in Europe care from Mali. The
Mali Empire also controlled the salt trade in
that region.

AFRICA

Prior to the 13th century, southern and
eastern Africa were remote outposts in the
global trade networks. But in the 1200s,
the East African coast developed into an
extensive trading zone linked to Arabian
and Indian port cities and thus became

the major distribution center for the African
continent. East Africans sold gold, ivory,

and slaves in exchange for metals, rice, and
other commodities. One consequence of the
cultural exchange was the emergence of the
Swahili language, which combines African
and Arabic linguistic elernents.

Preeminent among the ports at this time
was Kilwa, off the south coast of Tanzania.
It was established in the 11th century by
believers of Shirazi Islam, an East African
variant of Middle Eastern Islam. The rulers
controlled the sources of gold in nearby
Mozambique. (In the 16th century, this
provoked the interest of the Portuguese,
whose subsequent arrival spelled the end of
African control of the trade routes.)

Ay

NN

Mso Bay

Port

South court

0 30m

12.40 Plan: Palace of Husuni Kubwa at Kilwa, Tanzania

Mamluk Sultanate
The Mamluks, who ruled Egypt from 1260
to 1517, were not Arabs; instead, they were
originally Turkish, Kurdish, and Mongolian
slaves who had been raised as fighters in the
army of the Ayyubids, who were themselves
Kurdish Turks from Syria. The word Mamluk
comes, in fact, from an Arabic word meaning
“the owned.” But with the collapse of Shi'ite
Ayyubid rule in Egypt, General Baybars
al-Bunduqdari (r. 1260-77) established
Mamluk dominance over Egypt, pushing
back the Mongolians as well as the Christian
Crusaders in the Levant and Syria, and
regaining control over the holy cities of Mecca
and Medina. Under the previous Ayyubids,
the center of power had been in Damascus,
but under the Mamluks, Cairo’s importance
was restored; indeed, from a geopolitical
perspective, Cairo was the prime link between
India and Europe. Though a military elite,
the Mamluks were savvy traders, establishing
ties with Venice and Genoa as well as
with Constantinople. Mamluk bureaucracy
consisted mostly of Coptic Christians and
Jews, who had filled such administrative roles
for centuries.

During the 13th and 14th centuries
at least five major madrasas were built in
Cairo along a street close to the sultan’s
palace. Each of these was associated with
a mausoleum. Normally, tombs, even for
the rich, would be located outside of the
city, but if the sultan gave an endowment
to a madrasa he was granted an exception.
Each madrasa is thus associated with
a sultan’s tornb. The buildings, sitting
shoulder to shoulder, constitute one of the
more important street environments of the
age. As madrasas had to face Mecca, all
the structures abut the street at about a
10-degree angle. The architects showed great
adeptness at integrating the program into
the complex and cramped urban site. Most
impressive is the Tornb of Sultan Qalawun
(1284-85). Though the life of a sultan was
continually beset by the possibility of internal
rebellions testing his authority, he proved to
be a capable ruler open to trade even with
the Christians with whom he was fighting.
He made trade alliances with the Byzantine
Empire, Genoa, and the Kingdom of Sicily.

The plan echoes the octagonal plan of

the Dore of the Rock. The wall of the
mausoleum is divided into a series of pointed
arched recesses, the hoods supported on
marble columns. The portal, a remarkable
piece of Gothic marble work, is a trophy
seized from a church in Acre, the last
Crusader stronghold in Palestine. The tomb
chamber is an almost square plan, with four
piers and four columns arranged in the form
of an octagon supporting arches that in turn
raise a high drum and above that, a dome.
The rose granite pillars have Corinthian

capitals. The walls are richly decorated with
marbles and mosaics. At the mausoleum’s
rear there was a hospital. The madrasa,
which specialized in Sunni jurisprudence,
has its own courtyard with student cells.
Another important monument from this era
is the Mosque of Sultan al-Nasir Muhammad
(1318), built in the great citadel that protects
the city. Though conventional in plan, the
columns and capitals are mostly spoils taken
from other buildings, including churches and
even the ruins of ancient Egyptian buildings.

Madrasa of Sultan al-Nasir

Mops Muhammad
>
/
’ a
/ a
2 Tomb of Sultan Qalawun
f i
sg /
“Lp
SS.

Madrasa of Sultan Qalawun

12.41 Cairo madrasas

~~ Tomb and madrasa of
* Sultan al-Salih Ayyub

12.42 View of dome, Tomb of Sultan Qalawun, Cairo, Egypt 12.43 Tomb of Sultan Qalawun

Ge, a

12.44 Plan: Tomb of Sultan Qalawun 12.45 Interior: Tomb of Sultan Qalawun

30m
be

12.46 Bieta Giorgis, Lalibela, Ethiopia

Lalibela

The collapse of the Aksumite Empire around
400 CE left the Horn of Africa in the hands
of various regional forces, but in the 13th
century, the return of commerce to the
shores and the transformation of Ethiopia
into a Christian kingdom visited by pilgrims
from far afield brought prosperity back to
the region. The Zagwe dynasty (founded ca.
1137) capitalized on this, reaching its peak
under King Lalibela (r. ca. 1185-1225),
who is credited with building a set of eleven
churches cut out of solid red volcanic rock
in his new capital city, Roha, now called
Lalibela (340 kilometers north of Addis
Ababa). The city is located on a high ridge
above the Takkaze River. Under threat from
the forces of Islam from the north, the Zagwe
had retreated into these ridges, from which
they continued to control the Red Sea ports
that linked central and southern African trade
routes to the shipping lanes to India and
beyond.

The ridge, despite its height over the valley,
had the added advantage of featuring several
artesian springs that had both agricultural
and symbolic value. The churches are
highly unusual in their overall conception.
Not only do they constitute a holy land unto
themselves, but they are also a type of map
of the holy city of Jerusalem, which King
Lalibela had never seen, but imagined from
descriptions in the Bible. The churches are
divided into northern and eastern groups by
a rock-cut channel called Yordannos (“River
Jordan”). Bieta Madhane Alam is the largest
and most impressive of these churches.
The lack of documents makes the history
of rock-cut architecture difficult to trace, but
given that it had a strong presence in India,
where Hindu and Buddhist sanctuaries were
built out of the side of cliffs from 200 CE
to at least 900 CE, it stands to reason that
the techniques and indeed perhaps even
some labor came from India, where the
tradition was dying out. There is no firm way

coista-micel A |

Denagel

12.47 Partial plan: Rock-cut churches of Lalibela

of proving this, but the relatively sudden
appearance of this form of building in
Ethiopia lends credence to the argument.
Indeed, the narrative of Lalibela, namely
that it is organized around a sacred river, in
this case the “River Jordan,” has parallels
to places like Mahabalipuram in southern
India, where temples were organized around
a “River Ganges.” Each of the churches is
associated with a square water tank filled by
the pressure from an artesian spring. These
tanks are planted with papyrus to emulate
the Nile River. They are not baptismal pools
in the conventional sense; rather, they
symbolize fertility. During Easter, the site
attracts pilgrims from far and wide.

Because the churches are carved down
into the bedrock, the level of these pools,
governed by the pressure of the water in
the rock, had to first be determined, as that
then determined the height of the individual
church. Of the twelve churches, Bieta Giorgis
(St. George), carved into the shape of a


cross, is situated somewhat apart from the
other churches to the west. Following a deep,
narrow trench, visitors descend in a wide
arc past a sacred spring, to its ground level.
The building is approximately 12 meters
in height, length, and width and rests on a
triple-stepped platform. Though carved out
of the living stone, it mimics a conventionally
constructed building, replete with window
framing, vaults, and delicately chiseled
acanthus leaves and gargoyles. The interior
has a cruciform floor plan with a dome above
the sanctuary in the eastern arm of the
church.

Rock-cut architecture continued on as
a living tradition in Cappadocia, Turkey,
where churches and even residences were
carved out of the rock, probably for defensive
reasons. The first churches of Cappadocia
date to about this same period. Lalibela and
Cappadocia are the last great examples of
rock-cut architecture in the world.

12.50 Cappadocia, Turkey

+ Rabat: ns

12.51 Great Zimbabwe, Masvingo, Zimbabwe

Great Zimbabwe

The Great Zimbabwe (“Great Palace”) is

a fortress complex dating frorn the 10th
century; it is located on top of a granite bluff
as well as in adjacent valleys in Zimbabwe,
not far from Masvingo. The complex housed
a large population as well as the royal

court, markets, warehouses, and religious
shrines. The number of ruins in its vicinity
is substantial, but they have yet to be
thoroughly studied. The kingdom acquired
its wealth from the abundant gold reserves
in the region and from the good agricultural
land. These drew Indian and Islarnic traders
down the eastern coast of Africa. The
traders set up ports that usually became
independent kingdoms. Most of the goods
from Zimbabwe were brought 400 kilometers
to the east to the port town of Chibuene,
Mozambique, where archaeologists have
found the remains of structures that served
to smelt gold, probably obtained from
Zimbabwe. Other commercial settlements,
including Sofala, became important centers
for the Arab, Persian, and later Portuguese
trade in slaves, gold, ivory, and other
commodities.

At the heart of the Great Zimbabwe is the
palace itself. The Karanga ethnic group,
whose ancestors are now thought to have
built the structure, called it Mumbahuru,
meaning “House of the Great Woman.” The
building was not constructed as an isolated
object in space but as an extension of the
natural landscape. The blocks of the walls
that define this structure were skillfully laid
without mortar and ranged from 1 to 5
meters thick. Curved walls are stronger than
ones with corners, which is partially why it
has survived the ages. Its oval-shaped walls
enclosed a large area, within which were
other stone-wall enclosures that contained an
outdoor living space (kgotla), a garden, and
a place that was presumably used to keep
livestock. The kgotia is also a place where
descendants can establish communion with

one another and with their ancestors. The
visual focus of the building is a 6-meter-wide
by 10-meter-high conical tower, the original
purpose of which remains unknown. The
palace was sited between two rock outcrops.
At their summits are thick, curving stone
walls placed in relationship to large boulders,
indicating that the area was a sacred
landscape.

Hil complex (acropolis)

Va ley complex

Great Enclosure

307

12.52 Site plan: The Great Zimbabwe

ae le -

12.53 The wall of the Great Zimbabwe

12.54 Sankoré Mosque, Timbuktu, Mali

12.55 Mosque at Djenné, Mali

. 0 100 m
bo\ bee Het 12.56 Site plan: Mosque at Djenné

Mosques of Mali

Timbuktu was one of Africa’s leading cities
as well as one of the intellectual and spiritual
centers for the propagation of Islam. It has
three great mosques—Sankoreé, Djinguereber,
and Sidi Yahya—which form part of an
Islamic university. By the 14th century, many
books were written and copied there. The city
lies at the intersection of the east-west and
north-south trans-Saharan trade routes and
was (and still is today) an important market
for rock salt. The Djinguereber Mosque (first
built in 1327) is the oldest of the mosques.
Except for a small part of the northern
facade, which is of limestone, the building is
made entirely of sun-baked mud bricks called
ferey that are coated with a mud plaster to
give the building a smooth, sculpted look.

he thickness of the walls depends on their
eight. There are three inner courts, two
minarets, and a hypostyle hall with twenty-
ive rows of pillars that creates a space for
two thousand people.

Thirty-five kilometers to the southwest of
Timbuktu is Djenné, which was not part of
the Mali Empire but an independent city-
state. It is the horne of a large mosque that
was first built in the 13th century, though

the current structure dates from around

907. The qibla is dominated by three large,
boxlike minarets jutting out from the main
wall, and eighteen buttresses. Each minaret
contains a spiral staircase leading to the

roof topped by a cone-shaped spire with two
ostrich eggs. The logs that protrude from the
uilding serve as scaffolding but have clearly
een integrated into the design. Half of the
mosque is covered by a roof, and the other
alf is an open-air prayer hall. The mosque’s
roof is supported by ninety wooden pillars.
Roof vents allow hot air to rise out of the
uilding. These buildings require continual
maintenance, in which the entire community
participates in preparation for the annual
festival.


Parisa _ Clairvaux

Pontigny® ©@Morimond

La Ferté’ Citeaux

12.57 Area of Cistercian monasteries

FONTENAY ABBEY

Against the backdrop of 11th-century
religious populism and the increasing

laxity of the religious elite, especially in the
monasteries, a countermovement sprang

up, headed by St. Bernard of Clairvaux. He
urged a return to the austere rules of the
early monastic days of St. Benedict, who had
conceived of the church as a workshop for
prayer. Among the most prominent of the
new reform orders were the Carthusians,
founded in 1084, and the Cistercians,
founded in 1115. The Cistercians had

four so-called daughter houses: Clairvaux,
Morimond, Pontigny, and La Ferté. These in
turn promoted the creation of other daughter
houses—so many, in fact, that by the close
of the 12th century there were 530 Cistercian
abbeys in Europe, forming a powerful
monastic network. Though Cistercians had

a large number of recruits from the feudal
nobility, one of the reasons for their success
was that they conceived of manual labor

as a form of prayer, and therefore opened
their doors to artisans and peasants. The
workmanship in their buildings—even in
places that are normally not visible, like
certain roof sections—was therefore executed
with attention to the minutest detail. Such
details were not meant for the eyes of men
but for the all-seeing eye of God.

12.58 Interior: Fontenay Abbey, near Montbard, France

The monasteries were organized as a farm,

with all the monks participating in the chores.

Cistercians soon became known for their
innovations in farming and herding. Their
vineyards in Burgundy and the Rhineland
became legendary.

Under St. Bernard's influence, all the
details of monkish existence were rigidly
prescribed, and there were frequent
inspection visits. Cistercian monasteries
were not sited along pilgrimage routes but in
inhospitable, often swampy and inaccessible
land. They had no crypts or towers and were

12.59 Monastery, Fontenay Abbey

built on rigorous geometrical principles,
sometimes by the monks themselves. They
had simple vaulted naves; lighting was dim
and limited by rule to only five candles. Wall
surfaces were clean and simple. Sculptural
embellishments were forbidden. The capitals
of the columns were kept as plain as
possible. Bold proportions and architectural
bravura were not tolerated; even ornamental
pavements were frowned upon. The plans
had square east ends in defiance of the
ambulatory design of the great cathedrals.


Even though they were slow to explore its
possibilities, the Cistercians’ adoption of

the ribbed vault around 1150 was an act of
major architectural importance because they
disseminated this feature across Europe. The
building that best represents the Cistercian
aesthetic is the Fontenay Abbey near
Montbard, in the département of Céte-d'Or
in France; founded in 1119, it is the oldest
ensemble still in existence. Since there is no
clerestory, the interior gets most of its light
from facade windows and from windows at
the crossing and in the sanctuary. A tunnel
vault with transverse arches defines the
space of the nave. The building, though

its design was controlled by a proportional
systern, was conceived in opposition to the
technical virtuosity and decorative program
of the great cathedrals. On account of the
tunnel vault, the nave possesses remarkable
acoustical qualities. The refectory was placed
in the customary Cistercian position opposite
the fountain house on the south side of the
cloister, with its axis perpendicular to the
church.

Several factors determined the
monastery’s location. Because it was remote
from cities, distractions were few. But the
Cistericans were not idle monks, and this
particular monastery was based around
metal production: it was just as much an

12.61 Plan: Fontenay Abbey

Pilgrim's lodge entrance

12.60 Area plan: Fontenay Abbey

industrial complex as a monastic one. Ore in
the rocky hills just to the east of the monastery
provided the raw materials, and a small but fast
stream that ran through the valley could drive
the forge’s watermill, which in turn powered

a gigantic hammer that pounded the metal.

The tools that were made at the forge not only
served the monks but were also sold in the
surrounding region. Apart from the large forge,
one of France's most productive at the time, the
complex included the monastic compound itself,
a hostel for pilgrims, and an herb and medicinal
garden.

12.62 Interior: Fontenay Abbey

12.63 Kaupanger Stave Church, Norway

MEDIEVAL SCANDINAVIA

The conversion of the Norse and the Swedes
to Christianity was not due to missionary
activity, as in Ireland, but came about
through the efforts of the local kings. Olav
Trygvason, for example, who was king toward
the end of the 10th century, was the first to
build churches in Norway, probably with the
help of a master builder brought over from
the British Isles. Gradually, however, local
craftsmen, with their shipbuilding skills, were
drawn in. The churches are very distinctive.
A low wall of flat stones raised the building
above ground level. The rest of the church
was in wood, with columns and planks, the

two basic structural elements, all dovetailed,
pegged, and wedged—never nailed. At the
bottorn of the columns, a sill beam was
designed with a groove in it into which the
lower ends of the wall planks fit. To tighten
the structure above, a continuous belt of

cross-braces was sometimes added. Some
churches had porches on at least three sides
that served as a place for processions to
gather, or where lepers, who were otherwise
excluded from the sanctuary, could listen.
The interiors were very dark, with small strips
of light occasionally forcing their way from
openings in the west gable or from peepholes
in the walls. Religious services were intimate
and illuminated by candlelight. Small gold-
covered reliquaries, often looking like small
churches, held bone fragments from saints
and would have shimmered on the altar in
the dim light.

12.64 Borgund Stave Church, Norway

Particularly distinctive were the elaborately
carved portals decorated with motifs of

vines and coiled serpents. The portals were
originally painted in black and white and
vibrant shades of red and green; the visual
effect of the buildings would have been more
pronounced than today. The buildings were
imbued with symbolic import. The portals,
for example, represented the defenders of
the faith and were narrow so that the devil
could not accidentally accompany one into
the church. Once totaling in the hundreds, as
these were village churches, today there are
only about twenty of these unusual buildings
extant in various states of authenticity.

sees

12.65 Plan and section: Borgund Stave Church

~— The word stave, from the Nors stavr, refers to the
load-bearing posts that make up the structure.

10m

Lincoln
Kingdom of Greater Poland
England
London® @canterbury @Cologne
Exeter® Kingdom of
> @Amiens Bohemia
Caen® a" @Reims
Chartres
Bourges Holy Roman Empire ‘
Atlantic Ocean ges® Kingdom of Hungary
Kingdom of
the Franks @Modena
. Florence
Kingdom of Kingdom of Boiona
Leon Aragon
Kingdom of Rome®
Kingdom of Castile Mediterranean Sea Papal
Portugal States

12.66 Europe during the High Middle Ages

EUROPE: THE HIGH MIDDLE AGES
During the 13th century, the skyline of
European cities underwent a profound
change as the spires and towers of
some six hundred major churches and
cathedrals marked the location of cities
in the landscape. This energetic building
activity was driven by a combination of
religious fervor and increasing wealth.
Income from the selling of indulgences by
the Roman Church was an important source
of financing. It was a dubious practice that

in the 16th century was to awaken the ire

of Martin Luther and eventually lead to the
Reformation. Another source of income

was sending relics on tours. The bishops of
Chartres, for example, sent the cathedral’s
relics as far away as England to solicit
contributions.

The shift in focus dates to the Synod of
Arras (1025), during which it was decided
that sculptural programs could serve to help
the illiterate visualize what they could not
understand through the written word. Statues,
once used only sparingly, and usually in
relation to aristocratic worship practices, now
stood row upon row along church facades.
Compared with the Norman facade of St.
Etienne (1067-87) in Caen, France, with its
small windows and imposing, solid-looking
wall of stone, the Basilica of St. Denis, with its
broad and decorated portals, seems to almost
float above the ground. The church was
begun by the Normans but was transformed
by Abbot Suger (1081-1155). Actively
engaged in France's political life, Suger

played a leading role in running the kingdom
while King Louis VI was away on a Crusade.
He wanted cathedrals to accommodate large
crowds that could then move easily past the
relics. He thus created for St. Denis a space
behind the high altar known as a chevet
(French for “headpiece”), where the church’s
more precious relics could be displayed.

It served not only to display the relics but
also to reinforce the spatial significance of
the high altar. Suger also redesigned the
cathedral’s facade, introducing a triple portal
that served as a symbol of the Trinity. The
Trinity had become important to theological
speculation in the second quarter of the

12th century, and its reinstatement signified
support for an orthodox interpretation of the
Bible and for papal authority. The tyrnpanum
over the central door of St. Denis was the
most important element of the facade, as

it portrays Christ sitting in judgrnent. The
sculptures were once again a concession

to the unlettered, for few in the general
population at the time could read and write.
In this, St. Denis reflects a change in religious
attitudes. Whereas Romanesque cathedrals
were designed primarily for the elite, St.
Denis and later cathedrals were buildings
meant to appeal to the popular imagination.
On a more elevated plane, Abbot Suger held
that the religious experience was one of
transcendence, symbolized by disembodied
light. The rose window in the center of the
facade, for exarnple, was one of the first of
its kind—a grand wheel of light and color.
The function of the facade, so Suger held,

was to foretell the program of the interior.
For Suger, the use of precious materials

in the furnishings of the church was also
important, as it served as a presentiment of
the splendors of heaven.

For all these reasons, St. Denis broke new
ground and is thus heralded as initiating the
Gothic style. For the first time, features such
as cross-rib vaulting and flying buttresses
(although present in prior churches)
were combined into an integrated stylistic
statement along with sharply pointed spires,
a rose window, clustered columns, pointed
arches, and a stress on luminosity.

wl _.

[
ae
ablk

oa

7

r

Pas

aA RRA Sa Ae Veo
a cH
Norman-era building

PL LAL _IL

¢
* a ¢t
ak @
i &
12.67 Reconstruction: Basilica of St.
Denis, France, at the time of Abbot Suger

mu

New facade

50m

at

12.68 Plan: Chartres Cathedral, France

Cathedral Design

In the 13th century, cathedral building was
by far the largest construction enterprise ever
attempted in Europe. Chartres Cathedral, for
example, was able to hold more than eight
thousand people. Technologically complex
and often dangerous, construction frequently
took many decades and sometimes hundreds
of years. Unlike Carolingian churches, with
their imposing westworks, and Ottonian
monastic churches, which were associated
with market towns and might not have had

a facade at all, the facades on this new
generation of cathedrals served as sacred
thresholds to a mystic interior.

Among the various aspects of church
design that changed during this period was
the emergence of the interior elevation of
the nave as an architectural unit in its own
right, with architects seeking to balance the
interplay of horizontal and vertical elements.
At Notre-Dame in Paris (1163-1250),
there are four discrete horizontal levels: the
ground-level arcade, over which run two
galleries—the tribune and the triforium—
above which runs an upper, windowed
story or clerestory. The windows of these
cathedrals were not transparent but filled
with stained glass, bringing into the interior
a muted, shimmering light. To obtain the
soaring height that the Gothic age aspired
to, flying buttresses made their appearance.
While they achieve the desired result on the
inside, they tended to pose a problem on the
exterior. At first the flying buttresses were
purely structural supplements, as at St.-

Germain-des-Prés, where they were added as
reinforcements around 1180, but thereafter
they were integrated into the plan from the
start. Flying buttresses consist of a tower that
supplies the necessary counterweight and
an arch that transfers the lateral loads to the
tower. Because of the flying buttresses, a
church interior could become a spatial unit,
although this occurred at the expense of the
exterior’s legibility.
The epitome of the new style was Chartres
Cathedral (1194-1220), where on the outside
the nave is almost completely obscured

behind an intimate tangle of buttresses.

The interior, on the other hand, is almost
canyonlike. The nave elevation has only three
levels, permitting a strong vertical extension
of the bays. To compensate for the added
height, two flying buttresses, one over the
other, bring the load to the tower. The vaults,
another important Gothic element, were
composed of stone ribs with thin brick vaults
in between, stretched like taut skin. The east
end, with its rounded ambulatory, is modeled
on St. Denis but goes further, adding five
semicircular chapels. The piers were also
innovative. Earlier piers often were composed
of a cylindrical core at the level of the arcade
and thin colonettes above. Here a continual
line from the vault to the ground reduces

the visibility of the column at the arcade
level. Proportion and geometry were used
throughout to organize all of the elements,
from the small to the large. The length of the
church, for example, is related to the transept
in a ratio of 2:3; the length and width of the
transept is 1:2.

The town of Chartres was, at the time,
quite small, but among the wealthiest in
Europe, with an important trade in textiles
and metalsmithing. However, financing for
thé cathedral came not only from the local
region but from nearly all sectors of France,
as St. Marie of Chartres had almost attained
the status of a national deity.

12.69 Partial interior elevation and section: Chartres Cathedral

ro

12.70 Plan: Amiens Cathedral, France

Amiens and Bourges Cathedrals

The development of the Gothic style was far from
linear. The Cathedral at Bourges (1195-1214), begun
only one year after the one at Chartres, follows a
slightly different model. Unlike Chartres, with its clutter
of buttresses, the slope of the buttresses at Bourges
corresponds to the steep slope of the roof, a rather
ingenious solution that, along with the absence of a
transept, allows the nave to be read on the outside as
a unified form. The chevet at the end rises in three
stages, with small high-peaked chapels seemingly
suspended between the buttresses’ piers. The interior,
with its tall arches, is not as canyonlike as Chartres
because the tall arches create the illusion that the wall
of the side aisle is the actual side of the nave.

At Amiens Cathedral (1220-35) the architects
were more conservative than at Bourges, following
the model of Chartres, with its calmer interior and
soaring verticality. Amiens’s impression of verticality
is further enhanced by the integration of the crossing
piers into the overall design of the nave'’s facade.

The division of the upper window into four segments
rather than the usual two increases the impression

of verticality. Its tall nave arches and high clerestory
windows combine elernents of Chartres and Bourges
while to some extent preserving the unity of the nave.
The calm effect of the interior combines well with the
luminosity of the chevet. A comparison of the sections
of Amiens and Bourges shows that the interior of
Amiens creates a greater vertical effect, which is due
to the lower arches along its nave and the absence

of a second aisle, and is aided by better illurnination.
The consequence is that the buttresses of Amiens
needed to be much higher to offset the weight, which
annihilates the corporeal presence of the building that
is still legible at Bourges.

ie) 20m

12.71 Half-section: Naves of Bourges and Amiens Cathedrals

12.72 Amiens Cathedral

12.73 Gothic compound pier

Whereas Romanesque churches had round
columns in the nave, in Gothic churches from
Speyer onward, columns that were composed
of a columnar core with colonettes attached
to it began to appear. The colonettes facing
the nave continue upward to reach all the
way to the vault, whereas the colonettes on
the inside become part of the ribs of the
vaults in the side aisles. As a result, Gothic
supports were neither columns nor piers;
rather, they were columnar bundles working
not only in the vertical dimension but also

in plan, as they would seer to be squares
rotated 45 degrees, creating diagonals
through the building.

Notre-Dame of Reims

By the second decade of the 13th century,
the space of the church had changed from a
place emphasizing the enactment of liturgical
processes into a more public space where
relics could be viewed and worshipped. On a
philosophical level, the discussion changed
from issues of liturgy to an emphasis on the
transcendent and dematerialized quality

of light (God) and geometry (the ordered
universe). Robert Grosseteste, an English
theologian and Bishop of Lincoln, who read
Greek and was familiar with Arabic scientific
commentaries, argued that all of human
knowledge stemmed from the spiritual
radiance of light. Rose windows appeared in
almost every church, sometimes opening so

12.74 West front, Amiens Cathedral

wide that they touched the frarnework of the
buttresses, as at France’s Auxerre Cathedral
(completed ca. 1234). Along with these new
ideas was the emergence of the cult of the
Virgin Mary. The mother of Christ, Mary had
until then played a minor role in the Christian
liturgy; she now captured the popular
imagination, and we begin to see her image
standing alongside those of the saints. At the
Cathedral of Notre-Dame of Reims (1211-
90), figures of Mary were visible in every part
of the church, standing in not only for the
saints but also for the Christian church itself.
The building was, in comparison to Amiens,
more airy in its detailing. The tall windows
right and left of the rose window, which allow
a view through the building, make the upper
part almost seem weightless. The rosette
barely fits in the narrow space allocated to

it, and indeed the nave, though similar to
that of Amiens, is considerably narrower in
proportion.

12.76 Section and plan: Cathedral of Notre-Dame of Reims

‘® tay:

*

.
sey

ae

&
Y

Jt

Se

Foie cet er serene


12.77 Entrance facade, Exeter Cathedral, England

Exeter Cathedral

The transition from the Romanesque to

the early Gothic lies to some degree in

the systematization of the nave elevation
and in the integration of the nave with rib
vaulting. By 1300, architects, increasingly
confident, began to explore the decorative
qualities inherent in structure, creating
styles that historians variously call
Decorated, Perpendicular, or Flamboyant
Gothic. Scholars have long wondered if the
emergence of this new stylistic direction
coincided with increased contacts with the
East. It is known, for example, that England's
Edward | (r. 1272-1307) sent an emissary
to Persia. At any rate, Exeter Cathedral
(1280-1300) shows a decorative unity and a
ullness that earlier cathedrals did not have.
he lower facade has become a veritable
curtain displaying the figures of the saints.
(The innumerable saints often have a special
day allocated to them, and a child born on a
specific saint’s day would often receive that
saint’s name.) The gallery of saints at Exeter,
with its abstract crenellations, stands as an
almost independent screen in front of the
building. On the inside, the crisply folded
geometries of early 13th-century vaults have
been replaced by the rippling shapes of fan
vaulting, the origin of which is not known.

12.78 Tierceron vaulting, Exeter Cathedral

Buildings in this style do not represent

a deterioration of the Gothic style, as is
sometimes held; rather, they demonstrate a
desire to integrate decoration and structure.
One factor that contributed to the change was
the fashion for more luminous interiors and
more frequent use of white or clear glass,
which enhanced the subtleties of a building's
surface treatment. Furthermore, in England
at least, cathedral builders did not aspire to
the great heights that were typical of French
churches, preferring instead wider windows,
lower buildings, and taller steeples. Early
14th-century English cathedrals therefore
tended to have more coherent and yet more
dynamic silhouettes. This can be seen at the
presbytery of Gloucester Cathedral (ca. 1350).
Unlike those parts of the building that were
already finished, the new extension, actually

a structure unto itself, has huge windows
that are clearly visible on the outside. The
buttresses are kept tight to the body of the
church. On the interior, facing the apse, the
lightness and paperiness of the architecture
has been so deraterialized that nothing is
left except a thin filigree grid of supports.
The new direction received its grandest
manifestation at the Cathedral of Milan
(begun 1387), a wide building with a vast
orchestration of vertical elements in white
marble, reaching a crescendo in an octagonal
tower that rises almost magically from the
center of the building.

+
oe

Se ee

ye Mh A he

se cco

ee fee

7+ -
tee & 2
hee so 2 Gar

oe aw!

—y ee a
ee ig tte og
pK
Ba war & Sree 6 A

~ ae’
ree a ane
hitb 2 ea ‘

“es “ee <

“est one .

rue en

da acee dL

0 30m

12.79 Plan: Exeter Cathedral

12.80 View of Gubbio, Italy

Italian Town Halls

In Italy, in the wake of faltering imperial
control, a population explosion, and an
expansion of markets, the artisans, guild
members, and merchants known collectively
as the popofo banded together with men of
rank and property to dominate the political
system. The rise of the popofo was rapid. In
Milan, in 1190, the popofo, the main source
of communal revenues, were entitled to

only one-fifth of government positions. By
1198, they were the dominant political force
in the city. Often the first acts of the popofo
were to pass tax reform, systematize the law
courts, and set up controls on public monies.
Beginning with Pisa in the 1080s, Bologna in
1123, and Florence in 1138, these fledgling
city governments laid the groundwork for an
urban consciousness that was to becorne the
hallmark of Italian politics for the next two
centuries. The formal acceptance of this new
arrangement came in the form of the Peace
of Constance (1183), a much overlooked
treaty that paved the way for the modern
notion of civic governance. With the German
emperors no longer in a position to assert
their power, they gave the northern Italian
cities the right to elect their own consuls, to

govern their own lands, and most importantly,

to make their own laws.
Central to the new notion of governance
was a town hall in front of a public piazza

(campo) where people could assemble. There

was often also a special building for the head
of the militia and police. For the first time
in centuries—perhaps since the days of the

12.81 Town Hall, Gubbio

Romans—buildings were conceived and
constructed as an ensemble with a public
space. The earliest town halls date to the
end of the 12th century and are at Brescia,
Verona, Modena, Pavia, and Bergamo. These
were followed in the 13th century by town
halls at Volterra, Todi, Como, Ferrara, Siena,
and Gubbio, among others. Most of these
halls followed a simple prototype: a large
meeting hall on the upper floor, with large
windows facing the piazza and a balcony
from which proclamations could be read.
The ground floor was often open or had a
loggia where silversmiths, gold traders, or
other highly skilled craftsmen and merchants
could work under the direct protection and
supervision of the city. In the urban complex
of Gubbio, the town hall and palace face
each other across a piazza that is raised on
a high undercroft looking out over the valley
below. The new town halls were coordinated
urbanistically with the cathedral buildings that
were begun first at Pisa in 1063, followed by
Modena in 1099, Verona in 1139, and Siena
in 1196. The situation was, however, rarely
peaceful. Milan, Brescia, and Piacenza were
often at war with each other, as were Pisa,
Genoa, and Lucca.

Siena

In the 13th century, Siena, one of the

most important cities in Italy, controlled

the southern Tuscan wool industry and
dominated the trade routes between France
and Rome. It was also home to Italy’s richest
banks. Siena’s power reached a zenith with
the defeat of a much superior Florentine
army at the battle of Montaperti in 1260.
The city then embarked on unrivaled urban
redevelopment, building a cathedral, a
campo, and the town hall. The campo was
constructed more or less at the center of the
city, on unclaimed land that sloped steeply
into a ravine. A large terrace was built over
the ravine to form the campo. At the steep
end, a town hall was constructed—the
Palazzo Pubblico (1297-1310)—with four
stories facing the campo and elegantly
proportioned reception and councilor rooms,
many decorated with frescoes recounting
important events in the city’s history. The
curve of the piazza is lined with a continuous
row of palace fronts, most dating from the
14th century. Opposite the town hall is

the Loggia della Mercanzia (1417), for the
merchants. The Duomo (1196-1215) a few
blocks away dominates the town’s silhouette.
As was common in Italy, areas of towns were
organized around mendicant churches.

In this case the principal ones are San
Domenico (1226), Sant'Agostino (1258), and
San Francesco (1326-1475).

12.82 Aerial view: Piazza del Campo, Siena, Italy 12.83 Palazzo Pubblico, Siena

The city’s prosperity carne to an abrupt halt
with the arrival of the Black Plague, which
reached Siena in 1348; by the end of that
year, two-thirds of Siena’s one hundred
thousand citizens had succumbed. The city
never recovered; what we see today is a
snapshot of a late medieval Italian city.

se

lazzo Publica If
a an
i

12.84 Plan: Piazza del Campo, Siena

—_”

f
i

12.85 Nave of St. Croce, Florence, Italy

Mendicant Orders
At the beginning of the 13th century,
the Roman Church saw its theological
interpretation and hierarchical structure
threatened by a series of so-called heresies,
several of which revolved around an
interpretation of the Gospels that held that
access to the divine was through personal
emulation of the deeds of Christ rather than
through the complex liturgical demands of
the church. Small wonder that this reading
of the Gospels displeased the church
fathers, who initially felt threatened by it. St.
Francis of Assisi was on the verge of being
branded just such a heretic in 1206 when he
abandoned his privileged worldly life, became
an ascetic, and preached the gospel of
poverty. But Pope Innocent Ill, eager to bring
the poverty sects under his control, allowed
St. Francis to preach and informally approved
his efforts in 1209 (and then officially in
1223), hoping to avoid a possible schism.
Thus was born one of several mendicant
orders that radically transformed church
history and was to lead, some centuries
later, to the Reformation triggered by the
preachings of the German monk Martin
Luther.

In the early Middle Ages, reclusive
monastics preferred their monasteries in
the quiet isolation of the countryside as
a counterweight to what they saw as the
decadence of Roman cities. As a result,
inhabitants of cities and villages often had
to walk long distances to go to a church

and were thus remote from the cosmic
principles that united thern as members of
the Christian faith. The mendicant orders
responded by setting up their monasteries

in the hearts of cities or just outside their
gates to make themselves humbly serviceable
and approachable; in many places,

religious services were both physically and
conceptually within reach of the majority

of Christians for the first time. Mendicant
monasteries were not sites of calm reflection
as Cistercian monasteries were, but served
more as dormitories for the monks, who
would leave in the morning to perform various
duties. The Franciscans became specialists
in architecture and construction, helping to
build fortification walls and infrastructure. The
Dominicans, another mendicant order, were
known as doctors, lawyers, and teachers,

and many became well-known philosophers.
They were also closely associated with the
development of Scholasticism during the

13th century and were prominent at the
great universities of Europe. In a sense, the
13th century can be seen as the second
Christianization of Europe. If the first was
fought in the name of (often forcible)
conversion and was largely dynastic in
structure, the second was based on broad
outreach and popular appeal.

Because mendicants had sworn an oath
to poverty and consequently had no money,
their churches were usually built for them by
citizens. At first many were simple structures
or converted barns. By 1250, there were

12.86 Plan: St. Croce

Franciscan communities in alrnost every city
in France, Germany, and Italy. Mendicant
churches were by definition simple and
austere. The great ebullient forms of the
cathedrals were spurned. The Dominican
Church in Toulouse (1275-92), for example,
had no flying buttresses and was built entirely
of brick. At the Franciscan church of St.
Croce (begun 1294), the architect Arnolfo di
Cambio spurned vaulting and re-created the
vast emptiness of Constantinian naves in a
spare Gothic idiom. In many Italian towns,
mendicant churches to this day are large
plain brick buildings.

s
JAG
‘

12.87 Dominican Church, Toulouse, France

Kingdom of Navarre
Leon ;
Kingdom of Kingdom of
Castile Aragon
Kingdom of
Portugal
Nasrid sultanate
Cérdoba Mediterranean Sea
Seville

Tangier @)
[O) © Fes

Rabat

Atlantic Ocean

12.88 Nasrid sultanate

NASRID SULTANATE AND THE
ALHAMBRA

In 1260, the Mongolians destroyed Aleppo
and Damascus, massacring fifty thousand
inhabitants. With the Arabian heartland

in turmoil, there were only two places

in the Islamic world where architecture
could develop: northern India (whic!
would eventually come under the sway of
the Mongolian Tirnurid) and the Spanish-
Moroccan area, which was far rernoved from
Central Asia. The latter was extraordinarily
prosperous, even though by the 11t
century the unity of Spain and Morocco, as
established by the Almohads, had dissolved.
he various rulers, caught up in civil wars,
ecame increasingly vulnerable to Christian

t was in this context that the Emirate of
Granada emerged, whose ruler built for
imself the Palace of Alhambra (Red Castle),
aid out in 1238 by Mohammed | (r. 1238-
73). It is first and foremost a fortification,
defined by a defensive wall circuit mediated
y towers and gates atop a natural acropolis
surrounded by rocky terrain and the River
Darro, which guards its northern side. The
citadel looks down on and protects the city
that developed to its north on the far side of
the rising slopes on the opposite side of the
river.

The Alcazaba, the triangular citadel on
the westernmost tip of the complex, enclosed
within its own wall circuit, exemplifies the
military aspects of the complex. It served as

© ® @cranada

armies and indeed were slowly losing ground.

©

Algiers

Dominion of the
Almohades

an armory and was heavily fortified with a
watchtower. The palace was located just to
the west of the citadel against the northern
edge of the protective wall. It was entered by
a gate at the eastern end of the southern wall
circuit. A second entrance, Bab al-Shari‘a,
the “Gate of Justice” (sharia is the Arabic
term for the body of Islamic religious law),
stands at the western end of the same wall
and is noteworthy for the carving of an
outstretched hand in the keystone and that of
a key above the portal. Various interpretations
have been made of these symbols, which are
probably intended to demonstrate the rulers’
authority. The palace has views down to the
town and the distant landscape.

Given the decline of Mohammed |’s
fortunes—indeed, the palace lasted only
ninety years before it was taken by the
Christians—the architects had to make do
with limited means, and the palace, despite
its opulence, was actually quite small.
Furthermore, stone was limited to columns
and important ornaments, while much of the
decoration of the walls and even the vaults
was in the form of intricately carved and
painted stucco (sadly reduced to all-white in
the reconstructions). These designs combine
geometric patterns, naturalist floral motifs,
and a highly developed style of calligraphy
through which Qur’anic verse and poetry
became a visual art. The elaborate forms
seen on the palace walls are often stylized
script mirrored and transformed into an
angular or curvaceous composition.

12.89 Column capital, Court of the Lions,
Granada, Spain

12.90 Court of the Myrtles, Alhambra

The original purpose of most rooms can

be extrapolated from the inscriptions on

their walls. The palace was designed as a
dense network of rooms, mediated by two
large patio-gardens placed at right angles

to each other and defining two separate
areas, a public/political zone and a private
zone. The Court of the Myrtles, with its long
reflecting pool, served as the center of the
political activities. It focused on the Hall of
the Ambassadors, a square room with a high
and richly ornamented ceiling. The Court of
the Lions, by contrast, was the private court
for the queen and a place for banquets. It
was the more elaborate of the two courts.
Delicate rose-white columns with subtle axial
connections set up a colonnade around the
entire court, which has four channels of water
representing the four “rivers of paradise”
extending cardinally within the columnar
portico to a fountain held up by stone lions.
Ashlar stones were used at the gates and

to reinforce the corners of the walls. The
outside walls were stuccoed and sometimes
painted to simulate stone or brick. The
marble columns are sometimes structural,
sometimes decorative. The whiteness and
thinness of the columns give them an elegant
quality unknown even to the ancient Romans.
Though the shafts of the columns were left
plain, the capitals were painted in bright
colors. The harsh, white marble flooring of
the Court of the Lions visible today is a recent

addition. Originally the court was more of a
garden planted with ornamental orange trees.
Representation of the human form is
forbidden in Islamic religious buildings,
but geometrical designs are commonplace.
Squares and rectangular formations produced
by the rotation of a radius from the base of
the bisecting hypotenuse form the basis of
most of the Alhambra’s construction, in both
plan and elevation. The two-dimensional
ornament covers the colorful tile work that
rises up from the bottom of the wall to about
4 feet. Geometric complexity is particularly
evident in the ceiling of the Hall of the Two
Sisters, an intimate banqueting room.

Bab al-Shari’a (Gate of dusticel dn '

J
0 200 m
| rr on ons

Bab al-Ghadur (Gate of the Seven Floors) £*)

12.92 Plan: Alhambra

Palace complex

12.91 Gate of Justice, Alhambra

As the muqarnas rise to the cente
vault, they obliterate the structura

r of the
character

of the space even though they are governed

by an intricate and complex geom

etry of their

own. The mixture of hard and soft shadows

makes the vault seem strikingly etl

ereal.

From 1492 to the 18th century, the
Alhambra was the residence of the Spanish
governors. In the 16th century, Charles V

constructed a massive palace for
that was grafted onto the fabric of
structure; the grandeur of the origi
architecture contrasts strongly wit!
militarism of the newer building.

imself

the old
inal Islamic
the dull


12.94 Geometric motif, Alhambra

? Ad
JON My

Hall of the Two Sisters ae my {|

wii
Pa
+B
1s
[3
as)
=
ns fn 2 :
=f ®
j & U Court of the Lions if
= j
(? :

iS
‘.
;

pant

2

12.93 Hall of the Ambassadors, Alhambra Hall of the Abencerrajes

12.95 Plan: Court of the Lions, Alhambra

Hall of the Ambassadors

Golden Room

Mirador

ws
Afr ahs Hall of the Two Sisters

Hall of the Kings

Court of the Myrtles

50m

L See ee oy

12.96 Plan: Palace complex, Alhambra Court of the Lions

— oo
td 7

ait

Gulf of Mexico

Toltecs |
Tula
Teatinuacan
eons ee,
“ *,
Zapotecs “sana,

Pacific Ocean

12.97 Mesoamerica, ca. 1200 CE

TOLTEC EMPIRE

From the Sth to the late 12th centuries,

the Toltecs, with their capital at Tula,

located farther north than any previous
pre-Columbian Central American capital,
were the determining force of the region,
taking over the role that had once been
Teotihuacan’s. They adopted an aggressive
militaristic stance and practiced human
sacrifice extensively. No subsequent dynasty
failed to claim Toltec ancestry. Their myth of
Quetzalcoatl (the “Plumed Serpent”) was the
likely cause of the Aztec’s acceptance of the
Spaniard Hernan Cortés in the 16th century,
when the latter’s arrival was mistaken as the
prophesied return of Quetzalcoatl.

Tula had a population of about forty
thousand by 1100 CE. The Toltec architects
designed within established methods, such
as placing buildings around large plazas,
using many-tiered platforms as bases,
building newer structures atop older ones,
and painting colorful motifs on building
surfaces. Their main sacred complex sat on
a high artificial terrace, with the central plaza
occupying an area 100 by 100 meters partly
enclosed by pyramids, palaces, and ball
courts. The substructure to Tula’s pyramid
was covered with thick white stucco, which
may have symbolized the underworld.
Although the temple at the top of the pyramid
was destroyed, the stone columns that
supported the roof still remain; they were
carved with images of Toltec warriors. Unique
to Tula was the Coatepantli, or Snake Wall—a

Chichén Itza

Mayas

12.98 Giant Toltec figures at Tula, near Tula de Allende, Mexico

freestanding structure that encloses a
passageway north of the base of the pyramid.
Both sides of this passage are carved with
identical friezes—bands of geometrically
stylized snakes framing the central panels
and depicting partly skeletonized men
apparently being devoured by serpents.
Only two other coatepantli representations
are known to exist—at Tenochtitlan and
Tenayuca—suggesting that they were a
feature of Mesoamerica only from 900 to
1500 CE.

a i
Td
‘

Ball court

Ball court

12.99 Site plan: Tula

CHICHEN ITZA

The architectural ideas of Tula were
reproduced and refined in Chichén Itza, the
main city-state of the Yucatan Peninsula

in the 12th century. Because the city is
very far from Tula, the mechanics of the
influence between the two are still a subject
of discussion. The sudden efflorescence

of Toltec architecture in Chichén Itza has
led some to speculate that the exiled Toltec
ruler, Topiltzin Quetzalcoatl, ray have settled
there. Although sacrifice and a militaristic
stance were central to the Itza elites, their
ceremonial complex was much more about
the cosmic calendar and its measurement
and meaning.

The complex is organized around two
cenotés, the Mayan word for the deep,
water-filled sinkholes that the Itza associated
with the underworld. These sinkholes are
scattered across the Yucatan. The name
Chichén fiza, in fact, means “the opening
of the wells of the Itza.” Since the soil and
rock in the region is porous and does not
hold water well, the eerie underground
pools had both a practical and a religious
meaning. Of the two in the city, the southern
one was used for drinking water, and the
northern one, connected to the surface by a
ceremonial path, was used for sacrifices. The
main structure, however, was the caracol,
or observatory; it is circular, on a trapezoidal
base, and raised on a rectangular platform.
Its walls have tiny openings that allowed the
priests to track the movernent of various

a

“sn,
ics

Caracol {observatory}

— wd

Temple of the Wall Panels

stars and, in particular, the planet Venus.
The northern complex is designed around
an impressive biaxially symmetrical platform
mound, known as the casti/fo. It hides within
it an older platform mound, whose temple
was accessed by a single stair. The temple,
complete with its sacrificial sculpture, the
chacmool, was carefully interred in the
reconstruction, or the symbolic “reskinning,”
of the platform mound.

Besides being a sacrificial temple, the
castillo also functioned as a solar calendar.
It has 91 steps on three sides and 92 steps
on the northern side, for a total of 365
steps, one for each day in the solar year.

It is almost exactly aligned to the cardinal
directions to enable the observation of solar
events on solstices and equinoxes. The
castillo’s best known calendar effect occurs
on the equinoxes, when the balustrade of
its northern stairway casts seven isosceles
triangles as shadows that link together to
form the body and tail of a serpent, with its
head sculpted at the base of the stair. This
is presumably a depiction of the ceremonial
descent of Kukulkan, the Itza’s name for
Quetzalcoatl, from the sky.

Kukulkan's descent is also presented
in the Temple of the Warriors, marking
the western edge of the plaza, a structure
remarkably similar to the one in Tula. A forest
of pillars, carved with warriors and originally
roofed over with perishable materials, forrns
a long pre-chamber, presumably to restrict
access to the main pyramid, where the rulers

Xtoloc cenoté* a ae tl
¥ @ Court of the. peters of the Warriors

tie

- “4 Ball cour

Main plaza
fH
ae

“ae al Venus platform
i Castillo

1,000 Coluntn:

3
Ball court

i

would have held audience. A single flight of
stairs leads to a temple whose threshold is
marked yet again with a chacmool and two
columns depicting Kukulkan’s descent. In
the back is a bench where the king may have
sat as captives were sacrificed against the
chacmool.

12.101 €astilfio, Chichén Itza

o 4s €Platform of the Skulls

eon 4
ail Sacred cenoté

300m
U 1 1

12.100 Site plan: Chichén Itza, Mexico

On the western edge of the plaza is the city's
principal ball court, the largest known in pre-
Columbian America. It is 146 by 36 meters,
its hoops 8 meters high, making it almost the
size of an American football field—so large
that it is hard to imagine its being used for
sport; it may, in fact, have been intended to
depict a more ceremonial ball court of the
gods. There are several other smaller ball
courts in Chichén Itza.


12.102 Ball court at Chichén Itza

The impaled heads of defeated warriors
were displayed on a special construction in
the middle of the plaza, just east of the ball
court. At the middle of the northern edge of
the plaza lies the entrance to the path that
leads to the sacred cenoté. As was the rest
of the Yucatan, Chichén Itza was suddenly

abandoned in the middle of the 13th century,

for reasons that are still not fully understood.
However, the castilfo and its path to the
sacred cenofé continued to be used by local
inhabitants until the Spanish conquest of the
region.

12.103 Temple of the Warriors, Chichén Itza

The chacmooi was a Tula invention. These
post-Classical Mayan stone statues depict a
human figure reclining face up, its legs drawn
in, its elbows on the ground, with its upper
back raised and its head turned to a near
right angle. It holds a vessel, disk, or plate

on its stomach, where offerings may have
been placed or sacrifices carried out. (It is
presumed that the hearts of sacrificed victims
were placed in the vessel.) Although the
origins of the chacmoo/ are undetermined,
they proliferated during Tula times. Twelve
have been found at Tula, fourteen at Chichén
Itza, and two more in the Aztec capital,
Tenochtitlan. The ancient name for this type
of sculpture is unknown.

12.104 Caracol (observatory), Chichén Itza

12.105 A chaemool, Chichén Itza

1400 CE

INTRODUCTION
The year 1400 more or less marks the end
of the great migratory conquests from the
Russian steppes into Europe. The arrows
on the maps showing the Gauls, the Huns,
the Turks, the Mongolians, and other tribes
from the steppes are no longer there;
the Eurasian world for the first time in a
thousand years was not beset by migratory
invaders. Civilizations responded by building
walls, from the Long Wall in China to the
Roman Wall at Limez. Then, as now, the
impact of these walls was more symbolic
than functional—they defined limits and
joundaries, rather than successfully keeping
the “barbarians” at bay. The impact of the
invaders had not been all negative; within
a short time period, the respective tribes
ad adapted and started to make their own
contributions, from the Huns in eastern
Europe, who converted to Christianity; to the
Yuan in China, who merged their Buddhist-
shamanistic ways with Confucian thoughts
and manners; to the Khanates in West Asia
who adopted and transformed the new ways
of Islam. The steppes invaders also cleaned
up and linked the short- and long-distance
land-based trade routes, particularly along
the Silk Route, so that within a brief span
of time, renewed civilizational and aesthetic
imperatives were underway.

It is perhaps a great irony of history
that the famous European oceangoing
explorations and migratory conquests
also began in this century, beginning with
Columbus’s unexpected encounter with
the Americas. The colonial age ultimately
decimated the commercial viability of the
Silk Route, but remember that the initiative

to search for an alternative ocean route to
India and the East was not initiated as a
great voyage of “discovery.” Rather, it was
the Spanish crown’s desperate effort to find
an alternative to the high prices charged by
the new gatekeepers of the Silk Route, the
Ottomans. Spices from the trade route were
necessary not for occasional exotic fare, but
to preserve meat. Ferdinand and Isabella,
bankrupt from their long wars against the
Moors, financed Christopher Columbus, an
Italian, to counter the forces of the Ottoman
Empire that, in collaboration with the northern

Italians, had a stranglehold on Silk Route
trade. The Ottomans, upset over the loss of
Andalusia, were particularly hostile to the
Spanish. The northern Italian city-states and
universities, in correspondence with those of
the Islamic world, had long known that the
world was round and thus that a sea route to
India from the West was a near certainty. The
only remaining doubt was about its distance.
Geometry suggested that no 15th-century
European ship was robust enough to
undertake that journey. It was only an error in
translation that convinced Columbus that he
could reach India in about the half the time
that it would have actually taken. While his
Italian compatriots, who profited significantly
by the Silk Route spice trade, were not
interested financing his missions, Columbus
found his backers in the Spanish, who were
willing to take an unlikely gamble.

Some scholars date from 1492 the
Anthropocene age, the present geological
period in which human activity has come to
lecisively affect climate, the biosphere, and
geology. One marker of its onset is the titanic
encounter, engineered by humans, between
the microbes of Eurasia and the Americas
that occurs at this moment. While 95 percent
of the 20 million or so inhabitants of the
Americas died from exposure to Eurasian
iseases, particularly smallpox, a negligible
number of Europeans died from American
iseases, mostly syphilis. It seems that the
long commerce between the distinctive
communities of Eurasia and Africa, and
the even longer tradition of close living with
animals, had made Eurasians much more
resilient to disease than their American
counterparts. The Black Plague, for instance,
had just ravaged its way across Eurasia,
killing almost 10 percent of the population
from China to Europe, which of course
countered the effects of global trade—but it
also ultimately improved the immune systems
of the survivors.

This microbial imbalance, aided
of course by Spanish and Portuguese
determination to exploit, perrnanently negated
any counterfactual possibility of a grand
merger of civilizations, producing instead
an essentially unilateral history of conquest
and colonization. This was a significant loss
because the American civilizations, at that

time, were booming. By the middle of the
13th century, most of North America was
inhabited by dozens of tribes whose villages
dotted the landscape. Meanwhile, in Central
America, the Toltecs had been displaced by a
new migrant group from the north, known as
the Mexica (from whom comes the modern
name Mexico), who settled into the central
valley of Mexico, establishing new cities.
After two centuries of conflict, the city of
enochea concluded a military alliance with
the Acolhua of Texcoco and the Tepanecs
of Tlacopan, forming a powerful bloc linking
most of central Mexico. Their capital was
enochtitlan, the site of contemporary
Mexico City, a dramatic city on an island
within a lake, connected to the mainland
by causeways. Cortés’s descriptions of
enochtitlan, even as it was being decimated
by disease, were depicted in one of the most
circulated woodcuts of the time in Europe.
Farther south, the Chimu kingdom
controlled the territories of coastal South
America in the 13th and 14th centuries. Here
they had exploited the arid climate to build
the largest city ever made purely from adobe,
an ancient type of sundried brick made of
clay, sand, and water with some straw mixed
in. In the middle of the 15th century, the
Chimus were displaced by upstart rulers
from the highlands of Peru, the Inca, with
their capital in Qosqo (Cuzco). In their short
life before they fell to the Spanish, the Inca
dominated the trade routes of coastal South
America, constructed long rope bridges, and
built roads and cities with some of the most
intricate and precise random rubble masonry
ever to be seen in history. The Incas did not
use the wheel, and the llama was their only
real beast of burden, and it seems a not very
hardy one at that. But their techniques of
weaving, which were also complex systems of
accounting and timekeeping, and their grasp
of the interrelated mechanics of land and
water—what today might be called ecology—
enabled them to build cities that were not just
spectacularly sited but also integrated into
their natural context in ways that we are only
beginning to fully understand. Their concepts
of terracing, water management, and mass-
based building evidence an epistemic
universe that is still beyond our grasp.


The Italian world of the 15th century,
retrospectively dubbed the Renaissance,
was transformed by the Ottoman capture
of Constantinople in 1453, led by Mehrned
Il. Propped up mostly by the Venetians
who benefited significantly by funneling
their trade through the strait of Bosphorus,
old Byzantium ultimately fell to the ever-
expanding reach of the Ottomans. After
dominating Silk Route trade into Europe

for centuries, the loss of Constantinople
precipitated the decline of Venice. But that
also opened up opportunity for the other
cities of northern Italy, such as Florence
and Siena, which now began to actively flex
their economic muscle and to contemplate
independence and self-determination. The
Medici family came to dominate the banking
systems of Europe and controlled a major
share of the Silk Route trade into Europe.
Numerous scholars and artisans fleeing
Constantinople found new employment and
audiences in the houses of northern Italy.
With them came the old knowledge of the
classical world that had long been preserved
in the Islamic world, and which found,
alongside the castigation of the Church,

a receptive audience in the city-states of
northern Italy.

Reacquaintance with classical
knowledge imported from the Islarnic world
ignited the search for more—which was
found in the old lost libraries of Europe,
particularly Switzerland. These, then,
were the circumstances that led to the
intellectual expansion and reimagining of
human possibilities that we now call the
Renaissance. This is the milieu in which
Brunelleschi, Alberti, Leonardo da Vinci,
and their ilk emerged as scholars and
original thinkers. As they reread old Greek
and Roman texts, they faced the standard
problem that all modernities face—that is,
how to reinvest in the past in a way that
suits the needs, purposes, and imaginaries
of the present. Theirs was a Christian
world that no longer knew concrete, and
it was perhaps fortunate for them that the
Italianate orthodoxy prohibited adoption of
the styles and structural achievements of
the Gothic cathedral, so they found space
to test ways of adopting pagan Greek and
Roman intellectual, artistic, and building
design concepts for new, “modern” Christian
projects. Thus we get the proliferation of
urban cathedrals in new formal typologies,

some with new structural inventions to meet
grand ambitions, such as the gigantic dorne
of the Duomo in Florence. The Italians also
began investing in their cities, building not
only grand palazzi but also urban amenities,
such as the Foundling Hospital in Florence,
to counter old Christian biases against cities
as dens of disease.

Meanwhile, the bounty of gold and
silver extracted from the Americas enabled
the Spanish crown to not only consolidate
its hold at home but also to curry favor in
Rome. In competition with the northern
city-states, the papacy undertook a vigorous
new reconstruction of the Vatican building
in an attempt to bridge the gap between
their ancient world order and the newfangled
knowledge of the time. This is when artists
such as Bramante and Michelangelo received
their grand papal commissions and built their
formidable aesthetic reputations.

Competing with the authority of Rome,
as usual, was France, whose King Francis
| quickly seized the opportunity to build
a strategic alliance with the Ottomans to
create a new gateway to the Silk Route for
Europe. He also patronized the northern
Italian cognoscenti to populate his own court,
famously having Leonardo da Vinci move
to France to spend the last years of his life
there. Fear of disease prompted the French
court, unlike nobles in the Italian walled
cities, to live a largely rural life, building
country chateaux where they sought to
control their lands and armies via vast and
busy networks of communication. Later, these
networks and protocols of communication
and governance would also prove useful in
organizing French colonies in the New World.

The Mongol invasions transferred the
center of the Islamic world from its original
base in West Asia further to the east, in the
new post-Mongol kingdoms of the Ottomans
in West Asia, the Safavids in Persia, and the
Timurids in Uzbekistan and Afghanistan.
The outlines of what we recognize today as
the complex forces at play in the West Asian
geopolitical sphere—from Afghanistan to
Egypt—were established at this tirne.

The Ottomans were tribesmen who
negotiated the border between the Christian
world of Byzantium and the pre-Mongol
Islamic states and who took advantage of
the post-Mongol chaos to unite various tribes
and establish a new state. “Ottoman” is the
anglicization of the House of Osman, which

is known in modern Turkish as the Osmanli
Empire. Osman Gazi ben Ertugrul (1258-
1326), the founder of the Ottoman Empire,
was yet another of the central Asian migrants
who came from Turkmenistan in the middle
of the 14th century to fight in local Anatolian
battles. Osman’s descendants captured
Balkan territories, united local tribesmen, and
put a decisive end to the Crusades.

Although Mehmed II firmly instituted
Sunni Islam in Constantinople after capturing
itin 1453, he also aggressively adopted
Byzantine courtly life, administrative policies,
and aesthetics across his empire. There was
broad tolerance of non-Sunnis and even
non-Muslims, and by the 17th century the
Ottomans controlled most of the Arabic Islamic
world along with the Balkan regions and
Greece. Istanbul became the largest city in
the world outside China. With this power, the
Ottomans engaged in a vigorous process of
building mosques along the trade routes; the
mosques were Byzantine by formal reference,
with a focus on domes and minarets.

To their east the Ottomans were in
competition with the Safavids of Persia,
who were also taking over from Mongol
regents. The Safavids established descent
from Safi al-Din, who was actually a mystic
Sufi. But the Safavids aggressively adopted
Shi'ite policies, including zero tolerance of
nonbelievers. The Safavids governed their
territories directly, and as a consequence,
unlike the Ottomans, they were unable to
expand their territories, but they maintained
a firm grip on those they did control.

Within their realms, the Safavids undertook
construction of mosques and palaces of
exceptional beauty.

To establish a counterclaim to the
Ottomans as the locus of the Islamic world,
Timur, who claimed direct descent from
Genghis Khan, not only launched a major
invasion of West Asia but also embarked on
a major building campaign in his capital,
Samarkand. With new bazaars, caravanserais,
and mosques, Samarkand’s location at the
usual crossroads of the Eurasian traffic
between China, India, and West Asia made
it into one of the most cosmopolitan cities
of the time. Samarkand’s mosque achieved
a distinctive style by marrying the dome
(lifted on a high drum) with the jwan, while
adorning every surface with blue tile patterns
that reflected the sun and helped keep the
buildings cool.

The competition for influence between
Samarkand and the Ottoman caliphs was
mirrored in the geopolitics of South Asia,
with the Southern “Deccan” Islamic kings
working hard to establish their fidelity to the
distant Ottornan sultans (which is why they
are known as the Deccan sultanates), while
those further north in the Indo-Gangetic
Plains leaned toward Timur (who invaded

in 1398) and the khans. The northerners,
however, had to compete heavily with Hindu
kings and repeatedly suffered reversals

in fortune, so that their architectural
accomplishments, though spectacular, were
few and far between. The Deccan sultanates,
on the other hand, enjoyed relatively steady
reigns, which, in competition with each other,
generated a fascinating plethora of diverse
architectural achievements, all of which
happily married imported Ottoman styles with
local building techniques and styles in the
service of new Islamic courtly and liturgical
functions. Although the Portuguese found

a sea route to India around South Africa in
1496, just four years after Columbus's fateful
discovery, new European presence in India
was restricted to trading and building coastal
seaports.

Meanwhile, in Southeast Asia, the Khmers
had gone into decline, and while their grand
sites were largely abandoned, the idea of
great ernpires was now firmly established in
the Southeast Asia peninsula. The Majapahit
and the Thai established new kingdoms that
continued the Khmer rereading of Hindu and
Buddhist institutions and temples, in dialogue
with those of Sri Lanka and eastern India.

At the eastern end of the Silk Route, the
Chinese were undertaking a revival of their
own. After three centuries of “foreign” rule
by the Mongolian Yuan dynasty established
by Genghis Khan, the Han Chinese Ming
came into power in 1368. Although at first
the Ming sought to consolidate a rural base,
they quickly converted back to controlling
the empire from their capitals with the help
of their bureaucracy. The Ming actively
projected the Yuan as foreigner-barbarians
and worked hard to revive old Confucian
practices. And yet, as we see time and
again in history, the Ming did not hesitate to
“modernize” the past and adopt practices of
the Yuan that they found expedient. Thus,
for instance, initially the Ming built a brand-
new capital at Nanjing as per tradition,
proclaiming the establishment of a new

order. But then the third Ming emperor,

Zhu Di (r. 1403-24), moved the main
capital back to Dadu, the old Yuan capital,
which was still flourishing, now renaming

it Beijing (meaning “Northern Peace”).

Here the Ming built the Forbidden City as
we know it today, incorporating a complex
taxonomy of sight, visibility barriers, and
access mediated through gates, courtyards,
axial pavilions, and supporting quarters.
Outside the Forbidden City, the Ming built
the twin Ternples of Agriculture and the
Temple of Heaven Complex, which connected
the terrestrial realm to the celestial one.
While they criticized the Mongols for living
in “tents” in the imperial cities, the Ming
sought to revitalize their own old building
techniques, emphasizing the development of
the bracketing system along with techniques
of glazing in construction and lacquering in
furniture.

By the middle of the 15th century, the
Ming had built up a stable government
based on renewed cultivation and trade,
with a population estimated at between 120
and 200 million people. They cultivated the
supportive Joseon dynasty in Korea and
invested heavily in undertaking global sea
voyages to explore first Southeast and South
Asia, and then the ports of East Africa and
West Asia. These seem to have been voyages
of arbassadorship rather than of conquest,
so the sense of the usual threat from
across the Long Wall quickly occupied the
government's attention at the cost of further
naval exploration. Later, the Ming empire was
to significantly benefit from the discovery of
the Americas, as vast quantities of gold and
silver were used to purchase Chinese goods
to be shipped back to Europe. Peppers were
added to Sichuan cuisine, and the mass
cultivation of potatoes and corn enabled large
populations to be fed.

With the development of water-powered
pounding mills, China had captured the
energy of water by the Ist or 2nd century CE.
This, together with the later invention of a
water-turned wheel for irrigation, gave China
an economic lead, beginning in roughly
1000 CE and continuing over the next 500
years. During these centuries, the Chinese
economy achieved levels of productivity that
Europe only started to attain in the 1500s. It
was therefore not surprising that when trade
began between China and Europe, fueled
by American silver brought to China by the

Europeans, the Chinese economy was more
productive than those of Europe.

But colonial contact proved to be a
double-edged sword; as the Chinese
economy became more dependent on
overseas currency, it also became susceptible
to it, and the Spanish (and Japanese) used
silver control policies to squeeze the Ming.
Considering the kind of trade taking place
across the world in the 1600s and 1700s
and the fact that Chinese finished goods
were going to Europe in return for silver, this
shouldn't be too great a surprise, especially
since the first real urban commercial
dynamism within Eurasia had taken place
in China several centuries prior, in the Song
dynasty.

Across the East China Sea, the Japanese
also sought a revival of older world orders
and older ties. Another unsuccessful attempt
by the monarchy to regain control in 1333
prompted the new shogun (military dictator)
Takauji, as a gesture of reconciliation, to
reinstate Kyoto as the imperial capital and
to reestablish connection with the Chinese
Song dynasty, which had been severed
since Kublai Khan's unsuccessful invasions
of Japan in 1274 and 1281. Out of this
reconnection emerged the signature Zen
school of imperial Buddhist practice, which
invented the miniaturized, abstract meditation
gardens born from the necessity of building
“nature” out of confined urban lots. Thus
came into being the singular beauty of sites
like Ginkakuji and Kinkakuji—the Golden and
the Silver Pavilions—built for retiring shoguns
in their search for the extraordinary.


Aztec State
ca. 1248-1521
A Tenochtitlan
ca. 1325-1521

Inca Empire
ca. 1200-1532
<4 Chan Chan
ca. 1000-1400

China: Yuan Dynasty
1279-1368

@ 1492
Columbus arrives in America

A Machu Picchu
15th to 16th centuries

A Qosgo
15th century

Ming Dynasty
1368-1644
A Forbidden City
1420-1908

Joseon Dynasty AGyeonghok Palace A Changdeok Palace

1392-1910 1394
1200 CE 1400 CE
Japan: Kamakura Period Nanbokucho Period
1185-1333 1336-1392
A Kinkakuji
1397

Black Plague in China
1330s 1346-51
A Bibi Khanum Friday Mosque
1339-1404

Delhi Sultanate
1210-1526

1405-12

Muromachi Period
1392-1573
A Ginkakuji
1482-90

Black Plague in western Asia and Europe

Timurid Dynasty
ca. 1370-1507

A Friday Mosque of Gulbarga

1367

A Jami Masjid of Ahmedabad
1423

Ottoman Empire

1281-1923

Egypt: Mamluk Sultanate
1260-1517

AComplex of Sultan Hassan
1356-63

Conquest Period
1500-42

1600 CE

ATopkapi Palace A Beyazit Medical Complex

Begun ca. 1459

Completed 1488

A Mausoleum Complex of Sultan Qaithay

1472-74

Italy: Papal and Autonomous City-States
12th century to 1870

A Cathedral of Florence
Begun 1294

AMedici Palace
1444-ca. 1460

1472-94

France: Valois Rule
1328-1589

ASt. Peter's Basilica
Begun 1506
A Sant'Andrea at Mantua

AChateau of Chambord
Begun 1519

Kutchin -
4 Inu t
\\
Tlingit
Beaver
Cree
Betla Coola é
x Blackfoot
Kwakiutl { Chippewa
aan Algencuir
a : Vuran
Coos Nee Pierce Iroc uois
. Mian Leni Le
Shoshone rn ° ent Lenape
Po . é Osage Shawnee
Navajo Comanche sy
Hopi Rueblo : Cherokee
Apache. Natchez
Calusa
Adlex ‘
Arawak Taino
> oe
Mixtec Maya a
Zapotec Miskito
Ngabe“S —Taironas “¥
c ~ Wayuu Warac
Paed se
Yareridérii
; ~
Maciushi
©.
ds
AW ara 7 fhe
Quechua 5
Cyari
| !
Mapuqie
13.1 The Americas, ca. 1400 CE
Oo New England cultures
North O Mississippi cultures
© — Hopis and Navajos (Southwestern U.S.)

Central @
fe)

3°
fe)

Triple Alliance (Central Mexico)

Post-Classical Mayas (Southern Mexico)

Tairona (Columbia)
Chimor (Peruvian shore; conquered 1470)

South @ Incas (Peru)

fe)
13.2 Trade in the Americas °o

Mapuche (Chile)

Amazon cultures (Brazil)

THE AMERICAS

he Americas in the 15th century were

far different from the Americas in the

17th century after about 90 percent of

the continents’ population had died of
disease. In the 15th century, from eastern
Bolivia through Peru to Central America

into the western United States, eastward to
Mississippi and Georgia, and north to what
is now New England, there was what the first
Europeans sailing down the coast of New
England described as an almost continuous
fabric of habitation. There were major cities
that served as capitals of empires, like Qosqo
in Peru and Tenochtitlan in Mexico; there
were secondary cities that served as regional
centers, like Chan Chan in Peru; Oraibi, a
Hopi city in the United States; and other
large cities in Georgia. In between, there were
thousands of smaller villages. The spread

of diseases was so rapid that some cultures
disappeared even before they themselves
encountered the Europeans. There is
considerable debate about the specifics of
this terrible loss of life and culture, but the
basic parameters of the tragedy are not in
dispute.

Hopis

In the 14th century, the Native Americans

in North America were largely seminomadic,
except for the major city-dwelling areas in
the Mississippi/Georgia region extending

to the Atlantic coast, and in the Southwest

in areas controlled by the Hopis, who had
been town dwellers for many centuries. The
Hopi village of Old Oraibi in Arizona was
founded around the year 1100. Clearly, the
Hopis’ notion of urban culture had much

in common with earlier urban cultures in

the area dating back to the Hisatsinom and
Hohokam. In the period frorn 700 to 1130
CE there was a rapid increase in population
in this area due to consistent and regular
rainfall. In the late 13th century, however, a
severe drought, which seems to have put an
end to the nearby Hohokam culture, forced
the Hopis to abandon the smaller villages and
consolidate their population in larger urban
centers. When the Spanish arrived, nine
major towns existed: Sikyatki, Koechaptevela,
Kisakovi, Sichomovi, Mishongnovi, Shipaulovi,
Shungopavi, Oraibi, and Awatovi.


Atlantic Ocean
Mexico

fenachtitlan

Aztec Empire Mayas

Chimu

Pacific Ocean

@Chan Chan

Machu Picchu
QW oosco

Hopi is a shortened form of Hopituh Shi-nu-
mu, “The Peaceful People” or “Peaceful Little
Ones.” The name reflects a concept deeply
rooted in the culture's religion and spirituality,
and even in its view of morality and ethics.
To be Hopi is to strive toward a state of total
reverence and respect for all things, to be

at peace with these things, and to live in
accordance with the instructions of Maasaw,
the Creator or Caretaker of Earth. The Hopis,
like most Native Americans, assume the
souls of the dead go to another part of the
universe, where they have a new existence,
carrying on everyday activities as if they
were still alive. Village life revolves around

a series of ceremonies that are performed
not only for the benefit of the village but also
for the entire world. These ceremonies take
place according to the lunar calendar and
are observed in each of the Hopi villages.

As with all Pueblo cultures, most of the
ceremonies take place in kivas. Puebio is a
Spanish word derived from the Latin word
populus (people), and in this case means
“village.” Hopi cities were located at or near
the edges of north-south running, flat-topped
mountains known as mesas. The difficulty of
transporting water up to the towns kept their
populations small, but their location did allow
for protection, with access paths to some
pueblos purposely following narrow ravines.
Houses were made of stone and mud and
were often several stories high. The walls
were constructed of undressed stones bound

Inca Empire

with mud plaster. Wooden beams rested on
the tops of the walls to form flat roofs, which
were strengthened with grass thatching, a
layer of plaster, and a covering of dry earth.
The upper apartments were reached by
outside ladders.

Acoma Pueblo was founded in the 12th
century by the Acomas, who controlled a

large area to the south and east of the Hopis.

Though seminomadic, they eventually began
to develop pueblo towns in the Arizona
canyons. In the 17th century, the Navajos
built even more pueblos, especially in their
homeland in the northwestern corner of New
Mexico, as part of their defenses against the
Spanish invaders.

13.5 Pueblo architecture, Arizona

13.3 Urbanization of the Americas, ca. 1400 CE


New England Societies

By the 14th century, the area in the United
States known as New England was home to
dozens of Native-American tribes. The area,
when seen from a larger temporal perspective
of the Americas, had been only relatively
recently settled, perhaps as a consequence
of the decline of Ohio’s Hopewell society a,
around 500 CE, the population of which ‘
dispersed in various directions. By the 16th st : ey “¢ ,
century about 100,000 people lived along < .
the coasts, estuaries, rivers, and lakes from ‘ po
Maine to the Carolinas in settlements and

villages organized around tribal affiliations. Te : ho :

Contrary to European belief, the area was i, a

not a sparsely populated wilderness. Armed ° 13.6 An Iroquois village
conflict was not unknown between the tribes,

though such conflict was less about territory

than about prestige. The absence of pigs

and sheep—as was true throughout the moats and berms, such as were used in the larger villages
Americas before the arrival of Europeans— and cities farther south in Alabama and Georgia, were
meant that there were no fences, something not used. In 1616, an epidemic brought by Europeans
the colonists misread as implying that the decimated 90 percent of the population on the Eastern
Native Americans had no concept of land coast in about three years. The result, from the European
ownership. perspective, was a pristine land relatively untouched by
Villages were led by a sachem, the humans. Plymouth Colony was established in 1620, for
equivalent of a chief or king. Each tribe example, in an area that had been severely depopulated.

had slightly different habits depending
on location and circumstances. Some
were seminomadic, moving from winter to
summer; some were not. Some planted
in organized fields; others relied more on
hunting and fishing with supplemental
agriculture. Trade was important, as it
allowed a certain degree of specialization
and exchange between areas. The forests
were tended and underbrush cleared so as to
improve hunting. Trees were pruned to create
orchards of hickory, chestnut, and walnut,
which produced edible and nutritious nuts.
The area around the village would have been
cleared for corn.

lroquois villages were organized around
clusters of houses (wefus) made of poles,
with bark serving as walls. In winter the
weius were covered with rush mats that were
impervious to water; in summer they were
covered by thin sheets of flexible chestnut
bark. A low fire burned in the middle and
was vented through an opening in the
roof. The structures were well suited to the
environment; one early colonist noted that
they were warmer and less leaky than the
houses of the English. The villages were
protected by palisades of wooden poles, but 13.7 A wetu


13.8 Pictorial view: Templo Mayor, Tenochtitlan, Mexico City whe,

Tenochtitlan
The fall of the Toltec capital of Tula (located
about 100 km north-northwest of Mexico
City) led to the founding of a number of
semiautonomous urban centers around
Lake Texcoco. The city of Tenochtitlan (now
Mexico City) was founded by one of these
groups, the Mexica, on an islet in the western
part of the lake in the year 1325. By the
14th century, war between the states had
become systemic, leading in 1428 to an
alliance between three of them that becarne
the basis of the Aztec Empire. (Historians
shy away from the term “Aztec” because it
only came into use in the 19th century.) At its
height, the empire stretched across central
Mexico from coast to coast. In 1521, the
Triple Alliance was defeated by the Spanish
conquistacores and their native allies under
Hernan Cortés, who described the city before
he destroyed it; his text and drawing were
presented to the Spanish king and widely
circulated in Europe, thanks to the printing
press. Cortés told of a city of 200,000
inhabitants on an island in the middle of a
lake, connected by causeways to the shore.
Gigantic stone towers dominated the city’s
center, at the intersection of the causeways.
The Mexica were originally poor and
peripheral to the political world of that region,
but under their general Tlacaélel, who
masterminded the Triple Alliance, the Mexica
altered their identity and religious worldview.
Politically, they modeled themselves after
the Toltecs and claimed descent from
Teotihuacan, in order to appropriate their

imperial claims. In terms of religion, they saw
the sun as engaged in a violent and perpetual
struggle for existence, a struggle that had to
be nourished by human sacrifice. Several
thousand were killed every year in ritual
sacrifices. Though later European conquerors
purported to be shocked at this, Europe in
the 17th century was in fact a significantly
more brutal place; tens of thousands of
people were hanged, quartered, burned, or
irmpaled—often in great public spectacles—
uring the various wars of religion.

The Mexica settled next to a swamp,
but were able to drain the area to create a
O-square-kilometer lake with an island-city
at the center that was linked to settlements

on the mainland by three raised causeways.
It grew to become an enormous city, much
larger than any European city of the time. A
gridded network of streets and canals teemed
with boats transporting goods and people to
its markets. Two aqueducts brought fresh
water into the city. The ceremonial center
consisted of two stepped pyramids rising
side by side on a huge platform painted red
and blue; nearby were palaces painted a
dazzling white. Not far away were schools
for sons of the nobility, houses for priests,

a ball court, an intimidating tzompantti

(skull rack) displaying the severed heads of
the sacrificed, and several other pyramids
and temples, all surrounded by protective
enclosures.

The main temple (Templo Mayor) had
large incense braziers, with serpent heads
and cauldrons on all four sides in front

of it to receive offerings. It rose in four
platforms, representative of the celestial

levels of the cosmos, until it reached the

top level with its two temples dedicated

to Tlaloc and Huitzilopochtli. Two parallel
stairs led separately up to the summit.
Huitzilopochtli, whose temple was to the
south, was the Mayan warrior god who fought
is brother Centzon Huitznahua and his sister
Coyolxauhqui immediately after birth. He
defeated them and threw their dismernbered
dies down the mountain, a sacrifice
marked by a round tablet at the foot of the
stairs. Between 1325 and 1521, Templo
Mayor was reconstructed seven times, with

the older temple encased intact within each
new larger building. Of all these, the second
building has survived intact, including its two
temples, complete with the stone to which
prisoners were tied before being sacrificed.

Like their predecessors, the Mexica were
dedicated observers of the sun, the stars, the
cycles of nature, the passing of the seasons,
and the death of plant and animal life. And
like their predecessors, their architecture
and rituals were intended to maintain the
integrity of the cosmic order. The science of
observation was certainly very sophisticated,
though today it is still incornpletely
understood. Templo Mayor pointed 7 degrees
south of east, so that on the equinoxes

the sun rises exactly between the temples

of Tlaloc and Huitzilopochtli. A monolithic
calendar stone 1.2 meters thick, 3.6 meters
in diarneter, and weighing over 24 tons was
found in 1790 under the main square. On its
face is a representation of the sun god.

13.10 Plan: Templo Mayor complex, Tenochtitlan, Mexico City

13.11 Chan Chan, near Trujillo, Peru

13.12 Plan: Rivero Citadel at Chan Chan

Incas

In the coastal valleys of northern Peru, the
collapse of the Wari kingdom around the year
1000 led to the emergence of the Chimu
(850-1470; also called the Chimor), who

in time came to control the entire northern
coast of Peru from the modern border of
Ecuador to Lima. Their capital, Chan Chan,
was spread out across a large plain of the
coastal desert. Because Chimu kings after
they died were not considered legally dead,
new kings built new palaces, which would
remain the extended family’s base after

that king in turn died. But Chan Chan was
soon subsumied into the world of the Incas.
Not much is known of the prehistory of the
Incas except that, like the Mexica, they were
originally a small peripheral kingdom that
became much more successful than those
around it. The Incas borrowed the Chiru
approach to royalty, with the exception that
their king, or inca, was divine. One of their
incas, Pachakuti, who ascended the Incan
throne in 1438, quickly built an empire that
brought the area of present-day Peru, Bolivia,
northern Argentina, Chile, and Ecuador under
Inca control. He did this by means novel to
the South American political scene. In the
previous era, regional expansion had been
limited given the difficulty of marshalling
large armies and moving thern from place to
place—there were, after all, no horses. The
Incas expanded by more or less peacefully
assimilating neighboring areas into their
regime, offering stability and inclusion in
exchange for services. Soon they were able
to command enormous teams of people—
many purposefully displaced from their
homelands—to build roads and palaces,

and work in craft industries and on farms.
Consolidation of the empire was more or less
complete by 1520. There was no money, no
markets, and no land ownership; all land
belonged to the king. It was a centralized
systern akin to modern socialism, except that
the ruling inca was a god. The result was that
in just over a hundred years the Incan empire
became the most powerful the Americas had
ever seen, before they were conquered by the
Spanish and depopulated by disease.

13.13 Plan: Upper temple area, Qosqo (Cuzco), Peru

Their capital was Qosqo, located in the
western fringe of the Peruvian highlands.
Four major roads of the empire terminated

in its center, the Plaza of Cusipata. Under
Pachakuti, the first of the great Inca rulers,
Qosqo was transformed from a village of
clay and straw into a city of stone. Wedged
tween the Tullumayo and Huatanay Rivers,
the city’s plan notionally formed the body of
a puma or jaguar. The head was represented
y the fortress, the heart by the central
plaza, and the tail by the confluence of the
two canalized rivers. The Chunchulmayo,
urther south, was called the “gut river,” as it
represented the belly of the puma. The Plaza
of Cusipata was surrounded by the main civic
structure of Qosqo, the palaces, and three
temples dedicated to the Sun (Qorikancha),
the Creator (Kiswarkancha), and the Thunder
(Pucamarka). The plaza was filled with pure
white sand taken from the coast, and across
the facades of the palaces were enormous
plates of polished gold, reflecting the setting
sun. The plaza was the center of the Inca
cosmos, with the four highways radiating
from it demarcating the four sectors of the
empire. Also radiating out from the city

was a spiderweb of forty-one crooked spirit
paths that connected holy features of the
landscape, like springs, caves, shrines, and
stones. The Inca calendar counted forty-one
weeks, each eight days long.

Qosqo seems to have had no defensive wall,
but at its “head” on the hilltop overlooking
the valley is an impressive structure,
Sacsayhuaman, presumed to have been a
fortress. It could also have been a ternple to
the sun, a water reservoir, or all of the above.

It has three platforms, one on top of the other,

followed by a triple row of toothed walls made
from gigantic blocks of granite. The walls
were precise works of engineering. Some of
their granite blocks weighed up to 200 tons

13.15 Aerial view: Qosqo

Edge of mountain plateau

and were shaped on site to fit exactly to their
neighbors. Why such precision was demanded
remains unknown. In many instances, the
massive stones simply shield the body of

the earth. In all cases, water was drained
with great care, with individual stones being
shaped and aligned to create a ceremonial
series of water spouts and channels. There
was also a large circular meeting plaza with
ceremonial buildings perched at the lip of the
cliff overlooking the city.


13.16 Site plan: Machu Picchu, Peru

Machu Picchu

Machu Picchu, 70 kilorneters northwest of
Qosqo (Cuzco), is located between two steep
peaks, 2,750 meters above a gorge carved
by the Urubamba River. It is the only Inca
settlement to have survived intact, having
been completely missed by the Spaniards.
It was probably inhabited late into the 16th
century, when it was gradually abandoned
and forgotten. There are other Inca sites

in this remote area, but these have yet to
be fully explored or understood. Some two
hundred buildings arranged on a series of
parallel terraces on both sides of a central
plaza constitute the core of the small
settlement that housed at most about a
thousand people.

Access to the site was difficult; it was a
long trek up the steep gorges and entry was
possible only from one carefully guarded
checkpoint. Because it was a magnificent
site for solar and stellar observation, some
have argued that the city was a royal retreat
or perhaps even a special temple reserved
for the elite. Key to the success of the site
was the artesian spring that supplied the
inhabitants with water year-round. The genius
of Machu Picchu lies in the terracing and
partitioning of the site, which fills a roughly
east-west-lying saddle between the two
peaks. The saddle rises sharply in the south,

x_Urban sector
Ne

and after a crest and a short flat plain slopes
gently down toward the north and the east.
It resembles a wave, with a stable spot at its
precarious top. To shore up the land and to
create spaces to build on, the Incan planners
constructed terraces carefully, following the
contours. At the eastern end, there is a sector
of terraces, presumably for cultivation, with a
complex network of irrigation channels.

A long central plaza, gently terracing down
toward the east, sets the stage. On either side
of this plaza, accessed by a cornplex network
of streets and stairs, lie the main buildings,
most of which are single-room dwellings,
clustered around courts when possible, but
usually arranged along narrow pathways
limited by the terrace widths. They are all
made of the characteristic finely fitted stone
masonry, with wedge-shaped windows and
monolithic lintels, and equipped with water
drainage and harvesting systems. The granite
used in the construction was quarried locally.
Gable ends testify to perishable roofs long
gone. There is, however, no evidence of any
adobe construction, suggesting a highly elite
and ceremonial function for the city. Nestled
within this network are some surprising
anomalies: a semicircular, turret-like structure
unexpectedly abuts the residential fabric, and
a series of baths line the central north-south
pathway.

13.18 Passageway: Machu Picchu

The high southwestern edge of the saddle

is reserved for a temple, accessed by a long
stair from the east. At the foot of the stair
lies what is assumed to be a temple, with
three C-shaped rooms looking into a central
court. At the top of the stair lies the main
temple, the sacred center, dedicated to the
sun. Three steps into an antechamber lead
up to the final terrace, at the center of which
lies a huge granite monolith known simply as
the Intihuatana, or the “Hitching Post of the
Sun."

The Intihuatana stone is something of a
miniature Machu Picchu, with a series of
small “terraces” culminating in a dramatic
outcrop, resembling the peak just beyond.
Intihuatana stones are believed to have
once been dispersed throughout the Incan
world, but they were destroyed by the
Spanish, who considered them idolatrous.
Their exact meaning is uncertain, but they
were likely miniaturized replicas of a sacred
peak to which the sun could be imagined to
be tethered by a rope, enabling its circular
journey through the upper and lower worlds.
Perhaps Machu Picchu's peaks were as close
as the Inca thought they could get to that
sacred peak.

13.19 Machu Picchu as it stands today

Cod

13.20 Close-up of the urban sector of Machu Picchu

Republic of Venice

Vicenza © once

Padua
Republic of
Genoa .
Florence Urbino
Republic of Florence Pienza
Cort
Republic orton
of Siena Papal States
@Rome
@Naples
Sicily

13.21 Italy, ca. 1400 CE

REPUBLIC OF VENICE

The Black Plague (1350-1425) carried off
35 to 65 percent of the rural and urban
population of Italy. Only a handful of
European cities rebounded, among which
were Venice, Florence, Milan, Naples,

and Genoa. If one followed the Silk Route
westward across Asia, through the lands

of Timur and the Ottomans, one would

come to the European gateway, Venice.
Almost all goods traveling to Europe had

to pass through the port of Venice, which
controlled coastal trade south through the
Aegean Sea to Cyprus, and north into Asia
via Constantinople. Taking advantage of four
centuries of living at the edge of papal Italy,
Venice had marshaled its port location to put
itself at the center of Mediterranean trade.
By 1423, the state budget of Venice was
equivalent to that of France and England. The
city, a thalassocracy, was ruled as a republic
after its last autocratic doge had died, its new
form of government being fiercely republican.
Over time, Venice acquired considerable
Mediterranean trading posts, including Crete,
Cyprus, most islands of the Aegean, and
coastline stretches of Dalmatia, in addition to
terra ferma properties such as Bergamo and
others up to Lake Garda and beyond. This
expansion of its territory naturally put Venice
in opposition to the objectives of the Ottoman
Empire and the Mamluks of Egypt.

Ca’ d'Oro (1428-30), named after the
gold leaf of its exterior detailing, was
among the best of the palaces built along
Venetian canals. The palace was built for
Marin Contarini, a Venetian aristocrat and
one of Venice's leading cloth and spice
merchants.

13.23 Ca’ d’Oro, Venice

The facade of Ca’ d'Oro consists of three
superimposed galleries. Whereas the
tracery of the loggias on the piano nobile
and second floor had quatrefoil openings
over the columns, the lower colonnade is
noticeably more classical with its simple
rounded and pointed arches. Though the
exact origin of the quatrefoil shape is not
known, the form was used on the Doge’s
Palace next to the Basilica di San Marco
and was clearly meant to show its owner’s
status as a member of the merchant elite.
Throughout the facade, at corners and
edges, and defining various architectural
elements, decorative bands make the
facade appear as if it were almost a curtain,
woven into place. The building, like almost
all structures in Venice, had to be set on
thousands of oak piles sunk deep into the
sand and mud of the lagoon.


Ottoman Empire
Black Sea
Edirne @)
@Bursa
Aleppo
Mediterranean Sea eo”

Damascus @) ©
Cairo ©

Jerusalem

a @ Medina
g

% @ Mecca

13.24 West Asia and the eastern Mediterranean, ca. 1400

OTTOMAN EMPIRE
Central and western Asia in the early post-
Mongolian era were dominated by three new
powers—the Fatimids in Egypt, the Timurids
in Persia, and the Ottomans in Anatolia. The
latter replaced the Seljuk Empire, which had
been weakened by Mongolian attacks. The
Osmanlis, or Ottomans, as they came to be
known in English, were a Turkish tribe that
captured Bursa from the Byzantines in 1326
and used it as their capital. In 1371 they
reached Serbia, and in 1453 they conquered
the main prize, Constantinople, bringing the
Byzantine Empire to an end. The Ottomans
were soon so strong that no single European
country could challenge their position,
despite repeated coordinated attacks through
the following centuries.
Ottoman mosques were not designed as
introverted, walled rectangular enclosures,
as they had been under the Seljuks. Instead
they took up the theme of the dome from the
Byzantines, resting it on a square structure
that was entered through a three-bay loggia

expanded with side rooms, vestibules, and
loggias. Sometimes the dome was given an

is Yesil Cami Mosque in Bursa (1412-19).
From an ornate marble portal a visitor passes
a low, square vestibule that leads by way of
a short barrel-vaulted corridor to the central
all. The main prayer hall, or wan, behind

Baghdad

with a minaret to one side. This prototype was

enclosed forecourt. One of the best examples

Bukhara

Caspian Sea

Samarkind

@istanan

the hall is raised from the central hall by four
steps, the side iwans by one step each. Both
domes sit on belts of “Turkish triangles” that
negotiate the change frorn square to circles.
At the center of the main hall, which has an
oculus, is a pool. The royal family would have
ascended the stairs near the entrance to gain
access to the royal box. It is cornposed of two
sections: a domed antechamber that opens
onto a barrel-vaulted rear chamber that, in
turn, looks onto the interior of the mosque.
Whereas Seljuk buildings tended to be

Madrasa

Hammam

ie)

13.25 Section: Yesil Cami complex, Bursa, Turkey

conceived as static rectangular objects that
were brought into relationship to each other
only by way of addition, Ottoman structures,
from early on and in step with the advanced
architectural thinking of the 15th century in
India and Italy, were designed as institutional
complexes that brought the building and
public space into dialogue. At the Yesil Cami
Mosque, the various parts of the institution—
the madrasa, imaret (hostel for pilgrims),
hamam (bath), and térbe (tomb)—are
integrated into the city.

Cami .

(mosque) s

ee Imaret

¢}
tenet

Mausoleum

50m

1 4 ‘ ;

13.26 Site plan: Yesil Cami complex

13.27 Beyazit Medical Complex, Edirne, Turkey

Beyazit Medical Complex

In the spring of 1484, the thirty-seven-year-
old Ottoman ruler, Beyazit II, on his way

with his army to the Balkans, ordered the
construction of the Beyazit Medical Complex
(completed in 1488) in Edirne (close to

the modern border between Turkey and
Bulgaria). The five principal elements of the
composition were carefully walled off because
of the number of horses, mules, and camels
that would have been grazing nearby on the
shore of the river. The buildings form an
irregular U-shape, with the mosque and its
court at the center, facing in the direction of
the street. The mosque is square in plan, half
the width of the 50-meter-broad courtyard.
he dome, lofty and rising dramatically over
the entrance, was illuminated by a large

central wheel carrying three tiers of oil lamps,
all suspended by a single chain from the
center of the dome. Flanking the mosque are
two square fabhanes (temporary lodgings)
with nine domes, each tabhane having

four corner rooms opening onto iwans off a
central court. This plan is distantly related

to concepts from Central Asia. The minarets
are set in the angle corners of the tabhanes
protruding from the walls of the courtyard. It
is generally thought that these spaces served
as temporary lodgings for members of the
dervish orders. Beyazit had mystical leanings
and was described as a man who loved
simplicity, peace, and retreat. The dervish
orders were also increasing in number in the

13.28 Courtyard, Beyazit Medical Complex

15th century. To the east of the mosque were
two buildings that served as refectories and
kitchens. The hospital on the western side

of the complex is a hexagonal structure, with
its own small courtyard and forecourt. The
hexagon was domed, and had a fountain in
the center to soothe the nerves of the ill. It

is quite possible that musicians played here
or possibly that the ill rested on the long,
carpet-covered sofa in the principal ‘wan,
which forms a stage at the far apse end of
the hexagon. The whole complex employed
167 people and was staffed by three doctors,
two eye specialists, and two surgeons, as well

dentist.
as a aenus' o
xy
oe
Precinct
¢
of
Ce

os, + Couriyard »
a ‘4 £ ourtyard
‘ sf", Hospital and asylum “ey”
rn Sha + », y

Waa %,
re
As

ie) 50m

a

13.29 Plan: Beyazit Medical Complex.

13.30 Topkapi Palace, Istanbul, Turkey

Topkapi Palace

On May 29, 1453, Sultan Mehmed II captured
Constantinople after a fifty-three-day siege.
For the Europeans it was a major defeat, as

it brought to an end the Byzantine Empire
and all that it represented. For the Arab
armies it was a long-sought-after prize, as

it provided them with a major metropolis.
Almost immediately, work was begun on

the construction of mosques and other
buildings, including the vast Topkapi Palace
(begun 1459) that served as the main royal
residence and seat of the imperial Ottoman
administration from the second half of the
15th to the mid-19th century. The palace

was in the middle of a roughly triangular
shaped site that was surrounded mostly by
water on the north and east, while to the west
a high wall separated it from the rest of the
city. Its plan could be seen as a haphazard
aggregation of buildings. But this would not
be accurate, since it was planned according
to a logic related to the definition of a sultan.
He was seen as being beyond any relation

of reciprocity, and ceremonies stressed

the unbridgeable gap between master and
subject, thus the insistence in this palace

on the privacy of the sultan. The Moghuls,
elaborating on Timurid and Mongolian models,
had more accessible private zones, much as
in Europe, where the ruler could entertain
guests. The Topkapi Palace, however, with its
clearly delineated boundaries, was designed to
instill a sense of sanctity and respect as much
as fear and awe.

The main entrance of the palace was just
behind the Hagia Sophia, now converted
to a mosque. The Imperial Gate, the first of
three main ceremonial double gates, led to
the first court, which contained workshops,
storage areas, dormitories, kitchens, a bakery,
and baths. It also contained a mint and
various offices of the government. This court
served as a waiting area for dignitaries as
well as a staging area for processions and
special ceremonies. Visiting ambassadors
had to walk past the thousands of richly clad
soldiers and courtiers standing in mandatory
silence, an intimidating backdrop for
diplomatic negotiations. The courtyard was
also used for executions, which the sultan
could observe from a window in the Tower of
Justice.

At the second gate, the visitor would
have had to dismount to gain access to the
next court, called “the arena of justice,” and
the beginning of the palace proper. It was
uncluttered by freestanding buildings an:
unified by a continuous marble colonnade. It
housed the Tower of Justice, the Council Hall,
and the treasury clustered at the far left corner
of the court. A loggia, raised on a platform in
front of the Council Hall, overlooked the space.
On the inside of the hall, from the back, the
sultan could watch the proceedings frorn
behind a curtained window. The hall was low
and unassuming, because it was modele
on a tent known as the “consultation tent,”
which was used by the imperial council during
military campaigns.

The Third Gate (The Gate of Felicity) was
especially sacred. On particularly important
occasions, the sultan would greet visitors
under its airy canopy. Behind the gate was
the Chamber of Petitions, a square, one-
story structure that served as an audience
hall, a building technically within the private
precinct but still conceptually a part of the
second courtyard. The third court was raised
on high retaining walls, with the land sloping
down below it toward the north. The throne
room was located at the far left corner. The
buildings in this court were designed to take
in the vistas of the surrounding landscape.
The sultan, from his belvedere, could watch
his flourishing capital and the port. The
residential quarter was located to the east
of the second and third courts in a compact
mass huddled close to the walls of the court.
Special areas housed pages and slaves—
males, females, and eunuchs—who were
all part of the sultan's retinue. This quarter
also housed the harem. In the northernmost
corner were the royal apartments.

Topkapi Palace is not organized along
an axis, nor are the buildings grand in
the traditional sense. Rather they are
organized through diagonal vistas and angled
approaches, with the open areas of the
courtyards meant to contrast with the ad hoc
intimacy of the residential quarter.


Carriage gate
to the harem

Hagia Sophia | ~

‘Third courtyard.
Cy. Ira courtyare “7 ;
. _ Library of Ahmed Ill _,

>

ot
‘

Sea of Marmara

Council Hall
“ Tower of Justice

13.31 Site plan: Topkapi Palace, Istanbul

Arena of Justice

4,» Gate of Salutation

ws
's,
3:

100m

13.32 Plan: Topkapi Palace

13.33 Throne room, Topkapi Palace 13.34 Detail, Topkapi Palace

ITALIAN RENAISSANCE
The term Renaissance (from the French
renaissance, “rebirth”) was coined in the
19th century to describe the cultural and
intellectual changes that took place in Italy
during the 15th century. Inspired in part by
the arrival of scholars fleeing Constantinople,
who had preserved old classical knowledge
in contact with the Islamic world, the Italians
began to uncover and study Roman and
Greek texts and buildings to relearn what had
been lost to Europe in the Middle Ages, and
then to find ways of applying this learning to
their own times. One of the most influential
discoveries of this process, for instance, was
the discovery of perspective, the appearance
of which had been approximated by painters
like Giotto di Bondone (1267-1337), but
which was first described mathematically by
Leon Battista Alberti (1404-72) in 1435. With
perspective began the process of locating the
human eye, both literally and conceptually,
at the center of our epistemic universe.
Ultimately, one can argue, this led to the
European Enlightenment of the 18th century.
Although the Renaissance is linked to
what is called, also retrospectively, the Age
of Discovery, we must remember that the
initial voyages of discovery by the likes of
Christopher Columbus, Vasco da Gama, and
Amerigo Vespucci were sponsored not by the
Italians, or the Ottomans, or the French—the
new centers of the Mediterranean world—but
by the Spanish and the Portuguese, who
were at the edges of the intellectual revolution
that was the Renaissance. For the Spanish
and the Portuguese, the voyages were at
the outset motivated singularly by economic
imperatives: to find cheaper routes to the
spice trade with Asia, or “the Indies.”
Whereas in painting there is a clear
progression that demarcates the Renaissance
from the Middle Ages, the difference in
architecture is less obvious. Medieval
practices continued to intermingle with
classically inspired ideas for a century.
Nonetheless, the interior of the Pazzi Chapel,
begun by Brunelleschi in 1429 but finished
by other architects, set the tone for a type
of architecture that emphasized the use
of columns, pilasters, and entablatures,
all unified by a proportional system
that governed the heights, widths, and
intercolumniations of the pilasters. Though
the detailing of the columns and bases was

inspired by Roman buildings, Brunelleschi
was still not using the orders in their
distinctive categories of Doric, lonic, and
Corinthian. That ernerged only somewhat later
and was first insisted upon by Leon Battista
Alberti in his treatise De re aedificatoria
(1452), now known as the fen Books on
Architecture. Renaissance architecture is
thus just as much about changes in practice
as about the emerging theories of the
discipline. Key was the discovery (ca. 1415)
of a copy of a manuscript of Vitruvius’s 7en
Books on Architecture in the library of St.
Gallen in Switzerland. Alberti studied the
manuscript and used it as an inspiration

for his own work. Covering a wide range of
subjects, from choice of materials to the
history of architecture and from different
types of buildings to the philosophy of
beauty, Alberti’s treatise was written not
only for architects but also for patrons eager
to understand the logic of representation
through buildings.

13.35 Plan and section: Pazzi Chapel, Florence, Italy

13.36 Interior of the Pazzi Chapel

There are other phenomena that are
part of what is understood by the words
“Renaissance architecture.” The difference
between the architect and the craftsman was
now accepted, and architectural drawings
were now more common. Sebastiano Serlio
(1475-1554) wrote a treatise, of which
five books were finished, that was more
visual than Alberti’s treatise, which had
no illustrations. Serlio's book had dozens
of drawings, showing a variety of built and
unbuilt projects. It was enormously popular
among the many patrons and architects
eager to emulate the splendors of antiquity.
Questions about the nature of ancient
Roman architecture and about the
proportional systems that the Romans used
were not easy to resolve and led to a wide
range of interpretations. Some architects, like
Brunelleschi, were less Roman than others,
and, in fact, it was only with Neoclassicism
in the 18th and 19th centuries that rigorous
adherence to antique models was seen as
a virtue. Nonetheless, the Renaissance did
require a rigorous attention to proportion,
and as a result, facades become flatter
and volumes more regularized. The vertical
dimension began to be articulated by
horizontal layers of columns, entablatures, and
cornices. Niches and aediculae now entered
the architect's vocabulary as secondary
elements to be placed between pilasters.
Windows were framed and often pedimented.

,

13.37 Cathedral of Florence, Italy

Cathedral of Florence

The Cathedral of Florence, begun in 1294,
was among the last of the great Italian city
cathedrals to be built. The plan, designed

y Arnolfo di Carnbio (1232-1300), was
unusual, calling for a broad nave leading

to an octagonal, domed apse. The design
specifications for the building explicitly
anned exterior buttresses so as not to
reference the French cathedrals, and the
craft of Roman concrete had been long
forgotten, yet the city council wanted a dome
as wide as that of the Pantheon in Rome.

he Florentines were temporarily stymied, but
construction continued.

Finally, in 1418, a competition was
announced, among the earliest public
competitions in the history of architecture.
Brunelleschi won by proposing an ingenious
systern by which the dome could be
constructed with only limited use of wooden

woe
a

13.38 Plan and section: Cathedral of Florence

scaffolding. To deflect the lateral thrusts,
Brunelleschi made a curving rib-lattice
structure of brick laid in herringbone fashion
to ensure cohesion; a large metal chain

laid at the base of the dome protected
against outward expansion. This solution

did not require a support structure during
the initial construction phase because each
vertical extension of the dome as it was
being built, and as it spiraled closer to the
center, would cohere with what was below.
A centering platform was constructed only
in the last phase, but it was suspended from
the partially completed dome. The dome
terminated with an oculus about 7 meters

in diameter, surmounted by a heavier than
normal lantern (built in 1446) whose weight

guaranteed that the ribs were in compression.

The ingenious design rested not only on the
manner in which the dome was built but on
the combination of the double dome, which

reduced the weight; the lantern, which added
compression to the dome helping coherence;
and the chain at the base, which protected
against lateral forces.

Double-shelled dome construction of
course had a long history in the Islarnic
world, as for instance in the mausoleum of
Oljaytu (1302-12) in the city of Soltaniyeh,
lran. Although such examples may not have
provided direct precedent, it is clear that
the concept was in circulation in Eurasia at
that time. Double-shelled domes dominate
subsequent architecture in innumerable
variations, such as those of the Mughal
tombs in India.

Florentine Loggias

The narrow streets of Italian cities consisted
of hard materials, stone and brick,

and because many of these cities were
confined by city walls, open spaces were

at a premium. Parks and gardens did not
exist. Loggias, roofed over open outdoor
spaces, were highly valued and served both
functional and symbolic purposes. Unlike
an arcade, which covers pedestrian traffic,

a loggia is a place to assernble rather than
to traverse. The Loggia dei Priori (now called
Loggia dei Lanzi; 1376-82) was to serve
visiting dignitaries and ambassadors, and
even permit the celebration of coronations
and marriages of distant kings. It was
constructed perpendicular to the entrance of
the Palazzo della Signoria, or the town hall,

and consisted of three lofty arches rising from

a stepped platform. The columns, sitting on
a short, ornamented plinth, are composed
of pilasters bound together into one massive
shaft 10 meters in height, terminating in a
rich and beautiful capital of the Corinthian
order. This was probably the first attempt to
re-create the Corinthian order since the time
of the Romans.

Another type of loggia was for public
services, like the one next to the Baptistery,
which was used by the clergy to give out
alms. But the most spectacular loggia was
the one at the Foundling Hospital (Ospedale
degli Innocenti; 1419-24; finished 1445),
built by the Silk Guild, one of the most
important guilds in Florence. Ever since
1294 the guild had committed itself to the
care of infants (innocenti). Though it had
set up wards and hospitals, this building
was specifically for abandoned children. A
special door was built in the facade with
a rotating panel so that a child could be
deposited anonymously. By the year 1640,
more than 1,600 infants and children lived
there, along with 40 priests, nurses, and
administrators. The loggia that constitutes
the building's facade was designed by
Brunelleschi, and even though its prototype
was medieval, its style was markedly new.
The columns, modeled carefully on classical
precedent, are the earliest examples of
archaeologically correct Corinthian capitals in
the 15th century. However, had Brunelleschi
wanted to be more truly Roman, he would
not have set the columns on thin plinths only

13.39 Foundling Hospital, Florence, Italy

5 centimeters high. The facade consists of a
long unbroken entablature. The arches are
semicircular rather than pointed. Rondels,
depicting babies in swaddling clothes,
decorate the spaces between the arches. The
vaults, also spherical, were originally covered
with a sloping wooden roof. The attic level
was added later.

’ * ~
Basilica della 2 “Yt d
San Lorenzo Santissima Annunziata } + ~
The drama of this building, begun in 1421, AY

’

turns on the question of appearances. The
stark contrast between the pietra serena
(dark stone) and the whitewashed walls,
creating the impression of a structural system
in which the pilasters are meant to be read
as load-bearing, though in reality they are

not. Unlike French and English Gothic
architecture, where the load-bearing function
of architectural elements disappeared in
column clusters, here the difference is clearly
spelled out between what carries the load—or
at least seems to carry it—and what does not.
Even so, this is not a pure Roman-inspired
building, for the prototype for the colonnaded
nave is found in the early Christian basilica.
The restraint and orderliness of the nave was
also akin to Franciscan churches of the late
13th century, and the Latin cross plan, with i a

13.40 Plan: Piazza Santissima Annunziata

13.41 Plan and section: San Lorenzo, Florence, Italy

square chapels on the side, harkens back to the
Cistercians. In that sense, one can see this as

a complex fusion of early Christian, Cistercian,
and Franciscan motifs, but built according to
classicizing rules. Working within the constraints
of that classical systern forced Brunelleschi to
confront the problem of “turning the corner,” one
of the persistent issues in classical architecture.
On inside corners, only a few leaves of a pilaster
are visible, implying the presence of a structural
support hidden in the wall. Furtherrnore, the
giant-order pilasters, in turning the corner
between the transept and the nave, are partially
obscured by the lower-order ones. Yet another
problem is that the pilasters along the wall stand
higher than the colurnns, because the floor of
the chapel is three steps up from the floor of

the nave. This means that they should have
been thinner, but that would have looked odd.
To solve the problem without raising the nave
columns on bases, Brunelleschi had the pilasters
reach directly to the entablature; but on the
columns in the nave, he added a dosseret above
each capital to equalize the distance. They

are decorated with patterns that reduce their
structural appearance.

Nonetheless, the idea of freestanding
columns, arches, spherical vaults, and the use of
classically inspired capitals, lintels, and cornices
was quite revolutionary for the time.

13.42 Nave of San Lorenzo

r= TTY? OPIS PT wat “y

13.44 Plan and section: Medici Palace

1 ey ioe
ip tts
A & _
via”
; ath exe
| 30m

13.43 Medici Palace, Florence, Italy

Medici Palace strange effect in combination with the heavy
The Medici family, eminent bankers who cornice. If the outside has a deliberately
built a fortune off trade on the Silk Route— medieval aspect, the plan shows a new type
particularly from silk itself—were the de of architectural thinking. The courtyard is
facto rulers of Florence. Medici Palace arcaded on three sides, connecting on the
(1444-ca.1460) was designed by Michelozzo _ fourth side to a reception loggia by means
di Bartolomeo Michelozzi (1396-1472), of which one can gain access to the garden
though heavily influenced by Brunelleschi's behind the palace. Because of its scale,

principles. The building is not what might be elegance, and built-in loggia, the courtyard

called classical or Ronan, for it continued the — has the appearance of a private piazza,
prototype established in the 14th century of which is what it was. Interesting here is the
three-story buildings. This one, however, is relationship between the courtyard and the
topped by an enormous classically inspired staircase, which leads up from the right side
cornice that was meant to optically tie the of the courtyard; the staircase allows direct
volume together, though it makes the top floor access to the reception rooms on the piano
appear to be almost crushed. The ground nobile so that privileged visitors could avoid
floor is heavily rusticated in imitation of the the lower floor’s service areas. The location
fortresses built by Emperor Frederick II in and character of this staircase—which

the middle of the 13th century. The windows introduces an asymmetrical element into the
have round-headed openings with strongly composition of the plan—was to become
marked voussoirs placed symmetrically in another issue that Renaissance architects
the design; a string course separates the were to struggle with. Family bedrooms were

ground floor from the piano nobife. The story usually on the third floor, while the attic
above that is entirely smooth, creating a rooms were allocated to the domestics.

13.45 Rusticated facade, Medici Palace

13.46 Elevation: Rucellai Palace, Florence, Italy

Rucellai Palace

Wool merchants, the Rucellai family held
important political posts in Florence under
the Medici. Their palazzo was designed by
Leon Battista Alberti, a scholar with a law
degree from the University of Bologna. He
worked as an advisor and official in the papal
office, a position that was, in essence, his
day job. His real passion was studying the
classics, producing treatises on topics that
were of interest to him, such as painting and
architecture, as well as writing dozens of
small plays.

The Rucellai Palace (1446-50), designed
by Alberti, gave the Florentines their first
taste of a truly “humanist” facade. It is,
however, more show than reality, because
this facade is little more than a stone veneer
placed over a medieval palace. Nevertheless,
it was a portent of things to come. All
three horizontal zones of the facade are
articulated by pilasters that, together with the
unbroken entablatures that mark the different
stories, form a grid over the entire surface.
Window openings are placed within each
intercolumniation. There were, of course,
no readily available models of a multistoried
Roman building, so in some sense this is a
conjecture.

13.47 Rucellai Palace

The initial design called for five bays; later,
further bays were added to the right side of the
facade. The pattern of the voussoirs, stones,
and pilasters are grooved out of the variously
shaped stones of the veneer. Unlike at San
Lorenzo, where the pilasters appear as part
of the structural system, here the pilasters, ; Bantistery » Xf
being of the sarne material as the wall, read . °
less forcefully and as less “real.” On the other ey os
hand, what is dernonstrated is a desire to — 7 “Rucellai Palace
unify the facade in its two-dimensionality. A. 4" Be
coherence of this kind had until then been
reserved for church facades and not been
applied to palace design.

Renaissance architecture struggled to
strike a balance between the real and the
suggested. This played itself out in the
facade, which was an unheard of “design
problem” in the Middle Ages. Even though
the relationship between the facade and
what was behind it remained important, the
facade from then on was an architectural
issue all its own. At its best, it symbolized
and summarized the three-dimensional
architectural program of the building it
represented.

Piazza di Santa Maria Novella

*duomo

Piazza della Signoria

13.48 Site: Rucellai Palace

Sant'Andrea at Mantua
At Sant'Andrea at Mantua (designed ca.

1470, built 1472-94), Alberti abandoned the
long tradition of side-aisled churches for a
single barrel-vaulted nave with side chapels.
Such a broad, open space could be easily
justified for a church that was to hold large
crowds of pilgrims during the annual showing
of the blood of Christ. The blood, actually a
dried substance held in a vial, is located in
the crypt beneath the church and is retrieved
during the ceremony through an opening

in the floor. If the contents of the vial turns

to liquid, it is seen as a good omen. The
facade, one of the first true church facades
of the Renaissance, faces onto a small piazza
and is based on the theme of a Roman
triumphal arch. The theme of triumph is
carried into the interior elevations of the nave.
Alberti’s use of the giant order was novel

for the Renaissance. The problem was how
to coordinate the facade with the height of
the barrel vault of the nave behind it. Alberti
made no attempt to compromise the two
disparate elements in the front, so he created
an arched opening that shields the upper-
level window. The barrel vault on the interior
was another Albertian novelty. Since there

Bs 613.49 Sant'Andrea, Mantua, Italy

are no side aisles, the arches set between
the giant order of the nave elevation simply
open onto side chapels, which are also
barrel-vaulted. The giant order, though not
itself structural, at least marks the presence
of buttress piers that support the vault.
Integrating the buttressing into the building
in this way shows Alberti’s talent in exploiting
structural elements for spatial organization.
The same is true for the minor order pilasters
in the side chapels that, together with the
ribs, mark out the geometry of the space.
This is far different from Brunelleschi's
“structural system,” which is basically applied

Piazza Sant'Andrea ~ ,

13.50 Section: Sant'Andrea

to the wall’s surface. Strangely, the unity of
the two scales at Sant'Andrea is avoided to
some degree on the facade, where the lesser
order is pulled away from the giant order by
a few centimeters, perhaps to accommodate
the necessary width of the opening, thus
once again showing some of the difficulties
of working with the classical system. It is not
known if Alberti’s design called for a dome.
he current dome (built 1732-82) was
designed by Filippo Juvarra. The building,
apart from the facade, does not set itself

ree from the maze of its medieval urban
surroundings.

Piazza Broletto

Piazza d’Erbe

Oo. 40 m
ar f

13.51 Plan: Sant'Andrea

OE SUEDE TESTED MEE

mi

Villa Medici

Though urban palaces were the norm for
the elite, the Medici were among the first

to create a villa that was not just a fortified
stronghold. As ubiquitous as this building
type became over time, in the 15th century
it was quite unusual. One of the important
aspects of villas are the gardens, and their
inclusion into the design was something of

a novelty. During the Middle Ages, gardens
as places of pleasure were rare; in the tight
maze of medieval cities space was restricted
by city walls, leaving little room for pleasure
gardens. Furthermore, because of their
association with pleasure, gardens were
frowned upon. No doubt, visitors telling of
the great gardens at the Alhambra in Spain
played a part in establishing their legitimacy.
At any rate, by the middle of the 15th
century, the idea of having a place outside of
town, perhaps in the hills where it was cooler
in the summer and where the family could
gather, became the norm for the elite. The
word villa to describe these places came into
use only in the late 16th century, when the
villas themselves became more elaborate.

In the 15th century, they were still—at least
partially—working farms that supplied the
family, but that were also outfitted with a
manor house and garden.

Impacting this development was the revival
of the old Rornan notion of the bucolic
country retreat as a place where one could
enjoy music, poetry, and good company
and play the gentleman farmer away from
the mercantile world of the cities. A treatise
that Alberti wrote entitled Villa helped define
the parameters of this lifestyle. For the new
elite, the villa served more practical goals as
well: the artworks, sculptures, gardens, and
buildings were all very much part of a system
of wealth and prestige.

One of the several villas used by the
Medici family, the Villa Medici at Poggio a
Caiano was among the most important of
that period. Standing on the top of a small
hill a few kilometers west of Florence, it had
a wide view over the plain between Florence
and Pistoia. Originally a fortress, it was
rebuilt, beginning around 1485, into a villa
by Giuliano da Sangallo. It also seers to be
the earliest attempt to re-create a classical
vila suburbana as described in texts by
Pliny and Vitruvius. The villa rests on a large

vaulted platform containing the service rooms

and spaces needed for the farm. It is a two-
story building with an H-shaped plan, set
sideways to the axis. The whole, including its
gardens, was frarned by an enclosing wall.
The curved double staircase replaced the

13.52 Villa Medici, Poggio a Caiano, Italy

initial design, which had a straight stairway
leading to the top of the entrance platform.
Functionally, the main rooms are aligned
along the central axis with a large, barrel-
vaulted room at the center, straddling the two
arms of the H. There were apartment suites
with antechambers and bedrooms located at
each corner. The loggia, with its temple-front
design at the entrance, was built for Giovanni
de’ Medici (son of Lorenzo, 1475-1521), who
became Pope Leo X. The building was often
used as a summer residence by the Medici
family and increasingly for official receptions
and the welcoming of important personalities,
such as Charles V, who stayed there in 1536.
In the 1570s, frescoes alluding to the history
of the Medici family were added to the walls
of the great hall.


13.53 Tempietto of San Pietro, Montorio, Rome

Tempietto of San Pietro
Architecture, with its equipoise of harmonic
relationships and strict geometry, revealed the
perfection and omnipotence of God’s truth
and goodness, according to the Renaissance
architects. In this quest they found inspiration
in part in the circular ternples of the Romans,
which inspired, for instance, the Ternpietto
of San Pietro in Rome (1499-1502), a
martyrium commissioned by Ferdinand
and lsabella of Spain. Designed by Donato
Bramante (1444-1514), it is a small gem. A
ring of Doric columns topped by a balustrade
surrounds a cylindrical volume that rises
over the one-story-high colonnade topped
by a dome. The crypt gives access to the
site where St. Peter was said to have been
crucified. It is missing a circular courtyard
that was meant to have been built around it.
The dome is such a ubiquitous element of
the classical European tradition that it is easy
to forget that it was initially a revolutionary
innovation. Its history as a symbolic form
begins with churches in Armenia, where
domes signified the heavens. Armenian
churches had tall dome structures visible

from outside the building, but the dome itself
was rarely expressed as such and instead
was usually hidden underneath a conical
external form. Similarly, the dome of the
Pantheon was impressive from the inside,
but had no exterior legibility. The dornes

of Islamic mosques and tombs were often
hidden behind frontispieces.

By contrast, the dorne of San Pietro in
Montorio is not only the culmination of the
composition, it was also designed to be seen
and comprehended from both the outside
and the inside. Later domes, like the one
over St. Peter's Basilica in Rorne designed
by Michelangelo Buonarroti (1475-1564),
were derivatives of this idea, even though for
structural—and aesthetic—reasons, the outer
and inner domes were rarely built as a single
unit, but instead as two domes.

13.54 Plan: Chateau of Chambord,
near Blois, France

FRENCH CHATEAUX

In France, the 15th century and the first

half of the 16th century was a period of
relative economic weakness compared to

the situation in Italy. The Black Plague had
killed thousands, and due to the Hundred
Years’ War large tracts of farmland were left
fallow. Furthermore, the struggle between the
aristocratic classes had left the royal finances
in disarray. High taxes fed a spirit of revolt.

A turning point in France's fortunes came
with the ascension of Francis | (r. 1515-47),
who, though not a particularly astute military
planner, did capture tracts of land in northern
Italy, and in the process became a great
admirer of Italian art and learning. In 1516
he invited the renowned Leonardo da Vinci to
spend the rest of his life in his court, offering
him his own little palazzo, Clos Luce, near
the royal castle at Amboise, to which it was
connected by an underground tunnel.


13.55 Chateau of Chambord

An urban culture such as was familiar

to Italians did not exist in France. The

kings did not even live in Paris, which was
not to become the capital until the 17th
century. Instead, in a tradition dating back

to Charlernagne, they moved from place to
place, living in an assortment of chateaux,
usually close to hunting grounds. Whereas

a villa is primarily a summer residence, a
chateau is the residence of the lord of the
manor—a country house for nobility and
gentry. It is also often associated with a forest
preserve used for hunting, an activity that
only nobility were permitted to engage in.
Between 1527 and 1547, Francis | built no
fewer than seven chateaux near Paris. Some
were hunting lodges; others were places of
residence. Chambord (1519-47) was the
largest and most elaborate chateau of its age;
it was so huge that it was uncomfortable to
live in, and Francis himself inhabited it for
only a few weeks. It is believed that Leonardo
da Vinci had a hand in its design, but since
Leonardo died in 1519, in the year it was
begun, he could only have been involved in
its planning stages. Construction went on
even though the royal treasury was empty.

The building consists of a square castle, or
donjon, with round towers at the corners,
the whole structure framed by a larger,
rectangular building, still partially unfinished.
The donjen is not in the center but on the
inside of the square court, clamped against
the northeastern side of the larger structure.
The double helical staircase that rises
through the center of the building, and which
is attributed to Leonardo, leads to the roof
of the building, a world unto itself. With its
complex coves and turrets and views of the
hunting grounds, it was used as a place for
social events and outdoor entertainment.

In a layout that was unique to the French,
the central residential structure had four
apartments, one in each quadrant.

13.56 Staircase, Chateau of Chambord

MAMLUK SULTANATE

The Mamluks of Egypt (to be distinguished
from the Mamluks of Delhi; mamiuk means
“slave” or “owned,” so these are kingdoms
created by former slaves) maintained a
turbulent rule from Cairo—battling the
Mongols, trying to conquer Cyprus, and
balancing a peace with the Ottomans. With
a ready supply of well-trained masons,

the Mamluks extended and enhanced the
tradition of Fatimid palace architecture,
establishing a series of important religious
institutions along the main road leading to
the citadel of Cairo. The greatest example

is the Complex of Sultan Hassan, a colossal
project begun in 1356. It contains a
cruciform congregational mosque with four
madrasas and a mausoleum of an imperial
scale, as well as an orphanage, a hospital, a
bazaar, a water tower, baths, and kitchens.
It was meant to house some four hundred
students. The religious spaces are organized
symmetrically to fit into the awkward site,
which is defined by two major streets. The
portal of the complex, rising 37 meters high,
is crowned by a mugarnas cornice. The
decorations include such Chinese motifs as
chrysanthemums and lotus flowers. The open
central court was paved and has a fountain
at the center. The four madrasas are located
in the corners between the arms of the
iwans; each has its own small courtyard. The
southeast iwan, the largest of the four, was
spanned by an enormous vault, considered
at the time one of the wonders of the world.
The mihrab and surrounding qib/a wall

are paneled in marble slabs of contrasting
colors. Doors flanking the mihrab lead to the
tomb beyond. In it, the walls are paneled
with marble and the muqarnas of the dome
are gilded, and the whole is illuminated by
hundreds of specially designed glass lamps.

The building not only makes maximum use of

the site but redefines the Central Asian four-
iwan mosque, making it more intimate yet
also more monumental.

13.57 Courtyard door (left) and entrance portal (right), Complex of Sultan Hassan, Cairo, Egypt

Madrasa

Main, ivan 4

Madrasa

Mausoleum Sie

) or
Yh

i} 30m
fi f

13.58 Plan: Complex of Sultan Hassan

13.59 Complex of Sultan Hassan

Mausoleum Complex of Sultan Gaitbay
The capacity of the designers to impose
order onto complex urban sites was a unique
aspect of Mamluk architecture in Cairo.
No two buildings are alike, testifying to the
fluid irnagination of the architects. But the
asymmetry of these buildings was not always
a matter of necessity, as one can see at
the Mausoleurn Complex of Sultan Qaitbay
(1472-74). Sultan al Ashraf Qaitbay (r. 1468-
96) was known for the efficient manner in
which he ran the country and the stability
he created. He was particularly interested
in architecture, promoting more than sixty
projects, not only in Cairo but also in Mecca,
Medina, Damascus, and Jerusalem. The
mausoleum complex, with no other buildings
surrounding it, houses a madrasa and the
burial qubba of the sultan. Architecturally,
it balances the minaret tower on the right
with an open loggia on the left. The dome
is made up of three separate elements: the
square-planned building at the bottom; an
intermediate volume with vigorously shaped
scrolls at the corners that make the transition
to an octagonal platform; and finally the
dome, resting on a drum on that platform.
Compared to the simple windows on the body
of the building, some designed to look like
they were carved out of the wall, the dome
was given a particularly refined and elaborate
decoration in which two patterns, an
interlaced geometric star pattern and a floral
arabesque, are combined. On the interior
is found pietra serena paneling, a surface
treatment similar to those found in northern
SS

Italian churches.
CS Ks
iS °° CAS we

13.60 Dome, Mausoleum Complex of Sultan Qaithay, Cairo, Egypt

. . Ag Entry
SSF Covered courtyard “ aa 2 .
2

Vestibule

Prayer room

oP ie) 15m

a oo

13.61 Plan: Mausoleum Complex of Sultan Qaithay
3

TIMURID DYNASTY

The occupation of Persia by the Mongolians
and the fall of Baghdad in 1258 unleashed

a period of disarray and confusion. One of
the earliest post-Mongolian states to ernerge
was created by the Turkish-speaking Timur
(1336-1405), who proudly claimed descent
from Genghis Khan. An ambitious and
notably cruel commander, Timur defeated the
Mamluks of Egypt, the early Ottomans, and
the Delhi sultanates to create an empire that
unified Persia, lraq, Transoxiana, and parts of
South Asia. While not themselves heterodox
or Shi'ite, the Timurid rulers accorded
respect to the Shi'ite figure of Ali, the
prophet Mohammed's son-in-law, whom they
considered the founder of their civilization’s
mystic brotherhoods. Furthermore, with a
generosity unthinkable in later generations,
Empress Gohar Shad built her Shi'ite subjects
a splendid shrine in the city of Mashhad, still
now a major pilgrimage center in modern
lran. Timur set up Samarkand, already a
major metropolis along the Silk Route, as his
capital. It soon possessed large suburbs with
fountains and canals. In the factories, the
citizens wove silk and cotton, worked leather,
and decorated copper; Chinese craftsmen
produced here the first paper outside of
China itself. The 13th-century population
exceeded half a million.

Consistent with Timur’s passion for grand
structures, imposing appearances became
the main priority of his architectural program,
with the facade developing into a virtual
freestanding architectural form. High drums
and external domes stabilized by brick ribs
were often placed over the structural inner
domes. The combination of portal and dome
produced buildings of great spatial drama,
such as Samarkand’s biggest mosque, known
as Bibi Khanum Friday Mosque (1339-1404)
which was entered through a high portal with
round corner towers, its arches spanning
nearly 19 meters. The principal elements of
the plan—the entrance portal, the mosque,
and the lecture halls—are all enlarged into
monumental forms and then framed by
the repetitive elements of the mosque. The
colossal entrance portal protrudes from the
exterior wall, with two minarets projecting
out even further. The cylindrical shafts of the
minarets, rising from the ground rather than
emerging from the top of the iwan, and sitting
on decagonal socles, provide the earliest
surviving example of minarets flanking a

13.63 Bibi Khanum Friday Mosque

is} 60m
13.62 Plan and pictorial
view: Bibi Khanum Friday
Mosque, Samarkand,
Uzbekistan


portal. Behind this lay a spacious courtyard, at
the back of which stood the dome-covered main
uilding of the mosque, towering 44 meters

in the air. The basic plan is the four-iwan type
that had been developed in an ad hoc way in
sfahan some four hundred years earlier. But
this building was a unit frorn the very start, and
its hypostyle hall forms the connective tissue
olding together the monumental elements.

Of a similarly grand scale is the Ulugh Beg
Madrasa in Samarkand (1417-20), which
opens up to the main square on axis to the Bibi
hanum Friday Mosque. It is one of the largest
madrasas in Central Asia, with an enormous

entrance portal flanked left and right by dome-
covered lecture halls with four axial niches.
Slender round minarets mark the corners. The
square courtyard has four jwans and a large
mosque at the rear, with additional lecture halls
to the right and left. The building became the
prototype of many later madrasas. The domed
corner rooms served as classrooms, while the
court was enclosed by two stories of individual
cells. The four colonnaded fwan porches,
axially disposed and deeply recessed, served as
meeting and discussion areas. The walls were
decorated with marble panels and blue and
purple bricks.

The Timurids developed a new type of

dome support. Instead of the square hall and
octagonal squinch, which had been developed in
Islamic architecture over the previous centuries,
the dome was set on two pairs of overlapping
arches. The dome was thus smaller than in

the older system, but the whole now had a
dynamic plasticity, both outside and inside. This

technique had originated in Armenia, where it
had been known since the 12th century. From
there it spread to Russia, and it is quite possible

that captured Russian or Armenian building
masters might have been responsible for this
aspect of Timurid architecture.
Though decorative tiles were use
Islamic architecture from early on and had

n

also been developed by the Seljuks, the
complete sheathing of buildings in colored tiles,
characteristic of Persian architecture today, dates
only from this period. Prior to the 13th century,
most monumental decorations were made of
stucco that was painted or gilded. Only under
the House of Timur in the late 14th century

did the various ornamental motifs appear,

fired in cerarnic tiles, that utterly blanketed the

structures. Though the color blue predominates,
the range of possible colors was quite wide,
including turquoise, white, yellow, green, brown,
aubergine, and black.

13.64 Ulugh Beg Madrasa, Samarkand, Uzbekistan

13.65 Timurid dome of Bibi Khanum Friday Mosque


@ Delhi
Delhi sultanate

Rajput@rnre"

@Anhmedabad
Gujarat

@ subarea

Arabian Sea

Hindu states

13.66 India, ca. 1400 CE

DECCAN SULTANATES

In 1400 central India was controlled by

a familiar patchwork of diverse regional
kingdoms, but this is the first time that most
of these were ruled by Islamic kings, known
as the Deccan (Southern) Sultanates. Most
of the Deccan sultans were affiliated with
the Ottomans in Turkey for political reasons.
Qutb-ud-Din Aibak’s Mamluk dynasty
(1206-90) had controlled the entire Indo-
Gangetic Plain of northern India from their
capital in Delhi. Their successors, the Khilji
dynasty (1290-1320), did spectacularly
better and brought central India—that is, the
entire Deccan Plateau, from Gujarat in the
west to Pandua in the east and Gulbarga in
the south—under their control. The Khilji’s
successors, the Tughlaqs (1320-1413),
however, were unable to manage this vast
empire and bungled a series of ill-conceived
administrative projects. Timur, the Mongol
sultan of Samarkand opposed to the
Ottomans, took the opportunity to launch

an invasion in 1398, and decimated the
sultanates. He did not stay to rule, however,
and in the ensuing chaos, the governors and
regents of the Deccan Plateau, many of them
Khilji appointees, declared independence,
establishing the Deccan Sultanates. The
sultans took pains to distinguish themselves
from the weak court in Delhi and instead
turned to West Asia, not only for trade but
also for occasional help in shaping their
material culture and architecture.

Pandu
Bengal
Orissa
Bay of Bengal
Pandua

Shamsuddin Ilyas Shah (r. 1342-1358) was
one of the regents of the Deccan Sultanes
who declared independence in the area of
Bengal and established his own dynasty. The
llyas Shah dynasty constructed a new capital
in Pandua, where it built a set of unique
mosques and mausolea.

The Shah dynasty sultans started out
building fairly conventional stone-clad
buildings. But stone is scarce in Bengal, and
it rains incessantly. Brick had always been
the local material of choice, as can be seen in
the Buddhist monasteries of the Pala kings.
Even mosques such as the Adina Mosque in
Pandua (1364) were made of brick and then
clad in stone. So in 1425, when the Sultan
Jalal al-Din Muhammad Shah (r. 1414-32)
began construction on his mausoleum, he
decided to make it out of brick. This square
building with corner turrets and an octagonal
room surmounted by a hemispherical dome
has an unusual twist to it. Inspired by the
curved roof of local vernacular bamboo-and-
hay structures, Muhammad Shah's architects
incorporated a curved cornice into the profile
that not only helps shed water but also gives
the mausoleum a unique shape. The Pandua
curved roof became iconic; from this time
onward all significant Bengal buildings began
incorporating the curved cornice, creating
a uniquely Bengali style that was imitated
around South Asia in later centuries.

Jami Masjid of Ahmedabad

In 1398, Ahmed Shah (r. 1411-42), a former
governor of Gujarat, declared independence
from the Tughlaqs, and in 1410, he founded
Ahmedabad on the Sabarmati River as his
new capital. Anrnedabad went on to become
prosperous, particularly under Fath Kahn
Mahmud (1459-1511), who expanded the
kingdom in all directions. Under the Delhi
sultanate and the Tughlaqs, it had been
standard practice to dernean demolished
Hindu temples by reusing their columns,
upside down or in pieces, to hold up a

new mosque. The curious characteristic of
Ahmed Shah's architecture is the manner in
which this mark of repression became the
expressive language of the new architecture.
For his new Jami Masjid (Friday Mosque),
built in 1423 in Ahmedabad, Ahmed Shah
embraced the new aesthetic created by the
demeaned Hindu columns and authorized
the construction of new colurins not

unlike the ones that were pillaged, thereby
legitimizing this new architectural hybrid.


13.67 Inner court, Jami Masjid of Ahmedabad, India

fala sab tm rt ae ae na ed a pe
ene nae
“ ie) 30m
1

rn re L L

13.69 Plan: Jami Masjid of Ahmedabad

13.68 Court arcade, Jami Masjid of Anmedabad

13.70 Section through main prayer hall, Jami Masjid of Anmedabad

13.71 Interior arcade, Friday Mosque of Gulbarga, India

Friday Mosque of Gulbarga

In Gulbarga, the capital of the Bahmanid
sultanate (1347-1542), Sultan Muhammad
| remained strongly aligned with the
Ottoman sultans. He preferred his imported
architecture as puritanical as possible. He
used Rafi bin Shams bin Mansur, an architect
from Iran, to build his Friday Mosque (1367).
Without any courtyard or iwan, the mosque
with its central hall (66 by 54 meters) is
covered with sixty-three small cupolas; the
qgibla wall to the west features a high dome
surrounded by twelve smaller, lower domes.
An unusual aspect of the interior is the
extremely wide span of the arcades, with
very low imposts that were to become more
common in south Indian Islamic architecture
later on but were unheard of at this time.
There is a Persian mood and even a basilica-
like feel to this mosque.

13.72 Plan, section, and pictorial view: Friday Mosque of Gulbarga

Mongolia

gttra
aay Arca z
te, gett treay
Tyystte * ©
+ 2 - anu (Beijing) Hansung (Seoul)
oe Joseon dynasty
.
we o™ Wudang Kyoto
Tibet :
Yingtian (Nanjing)
Ming dynasty China
Pacific Ocean
Burma

13.73 Ming dynasty China

MING DYNASTY CHINA
In 1368, Zhu Yuanzhang defeated the last
Mongolian Yuan emperor and established
the Ming (“bright” in Chinese) dynasty. The
Ming (1368-1644) were Han Chinese and
projected the Mongolian Yuan as foreign
barbarians, reviving the “insider-outsider”
conflict signified by the Long Wall. And yet,
even as they tightened controls over the
citizens and reinforced Confucian practices,
they also continued the modernization
programs of the Yuan and expanded their
urban centers. Initially, the Ming established
a new capital at Nanjing, in accordance with
tradition; but then the third Ming emperor,
Zhu Di (r. 1403-24), known by his royal
name as the Yongle Emperor, broke with
tradition and moved the capital back to
the city of Yuan Dadu, renaming it Beijing
(meaning “Northern Peace”).

Zhu Di was a controversial emperor.
Relentlessly ambitious, he exterrninated his

rivals ruthlessly and often doled out cruel
punishments to criminals and detractors. At
the same time, he consolidated Ming rule
and undertook massive building projects.
To revive Confucianism he ordered the
transcription of all known classical texts
into a single volume, sometimes referred to
as the Chinese encyclopedia. He repaired
and reopened the Grand Canal, the

1800-kilometer-long 6th-century CE canal
connecting Beijing to Hangzhou. Running
north-south, against the predominant east-
west direction of the rivers of China, the
Grand Canal was a critical transportation
highway and had been neglected by the
Yuan. Beijing, the capital, was located in
northern China, in an area that was not
nearly as fertile or as irrigated as the lands of
the south. But the army and emperor were
situated here to defend against invaders
from the north, the primary direction from
which they came. Thus, while the demand
for grain was great in the north and
particularly in Beijing, grain production was
more than 1,500 kilometers away. But while
the south produced a significant surplus

of grain, until modern times grain was
always very expensive to transport because
it has great bulk and degrades easily. The
Chinese solution was to create a water-
based transportation highway, the Grand
Canal, which served all kinds of commercial
traffic. Zhu Di vociferously denigrated the
Mongolians. At the same, he was protective
of all non-Confucian religions and was most
likely himself a Buddhist. Muslims enjoyed
significant freedom in his time, and after the
death of Timur (who had sworn to invade
China) he maintained diplornatic missions
with the rulers of Samarkand and the
Safavids of Persia.

Muromachi Japan

Edo (Tokyo)

Forbidden City

The Forbidden City, the enormous palace
complex built by Emperor Zhu Di in Beijing,
is still one of the most celebrated icons of
imperial China. Consisting essentially of one
long south-to-north axis, this palace-cum—
governmental cornplex functioned through

a series of thresholds, each of which gave
access to different levels of government.

At its center were the diptych of the Hall of
Supreme Harmony and the Hall of Preserving
Harmony, with the diminutive Hall of Central
Harmony in the middle. Beyond these, at
the core of the imperial compound, was the
Palace of Heavenly Purity—the residence

of the Son of Heaven and the conceptual
center of the empire. Since the emperor
embodied both the authority of government
and its justice system, access to him had to
be both carefully circumscribed and, at the
same time, projected well beyond his actual
physical presence. This, in essence, was the
dual purpose of the Forbidden City.


13.74 Meridian Gate, Forbidden City, Beijing, China

The Palace of Heavenly Purity consists of
three pavilions on axis, on an I-shaped,
single-stepped marble platform, preceded by
a terrace facing south. It is surrounded by

a wall. Sixteen pavilions, housing the royal
concubines, extended beyond this innermost
sanctum to the east and west. Imperial
gardens and additional palaces for members
of the royal family make up much of the
remaining structures. South of the palace,

a set of three halls perched on a three-step,
|-shaped marble platform repeated the order
of the innermost palace. This second set of
buildings is the terminus and focus of the
public sequence of the Forbidden City, and
the conceptual center of the empire.

13.76 Section: Hall of Supreme Harmony, Forbidden City

The emperor met daily with his officials in
the Hall of Supreme Harmony. Only the
highest officers had access to this hall, which
was also the emperor's throne room. The
halls behind it, the Hall of Central Harmony
and the Hall of Preserving Harmony, only
served supporting functions. Although the
height, spans, and ornamentation of the Hall
of Supreme Harmony are magnificent, the
impact of the hall comes from the manner
in which the deep overhang of the roof
projects its presence into the vast space of
the courtyard that precedes it. Here grand
spectacles and marches could be staged.

In front of the emperor all supplicants had
to kowtow—that is, they had to prostrate

Temple of Heaven
aa

Outer city |

: . (
Temple of Agriculture i
a

Es ene

i

0 3km

13.75 Plan: 15th-century Beijing

themselves, facing north. Only the emperor
faced south, looking down upon them—an
arrangement magnified by the orchestration
of the roof and the courtyard. The Forbidden
City housed the imperial bureaucracy and its
millions of records. The daily communiqués
that arrived from the most distant parts of
the empire were catalogued, interpreted, and
presented to the emperor and his counselors
for action when necessary. The offices of the
bureaucracy were located in the corridors on
either side of the Hall of Supreme Harmony.
Five marble bridges symmetrically straddle
the Jinshahe, or “Golden Water River,” that
winds its way around the Forbidden City. Just
beyond them, farther south, lies the imposing
Meridian Gate, the designated entrance into
the Forbidden City, which aligns with the
city’s enclosing wall and moat (with turrets

in the corners). This was where high-ranking
civil and military officials gathered to wait

for the emperor and where large triurnphant
ceremonies were conducted.

Palace of Heavenly Purity

++—— Hall of Preserving Harmony
; - Hall of Central Harmony
t—— Hall of Supreme Harmony

i

i

| I

} 4 - Gate of Supreme Harmony

r

—4

Meridian Gate

Altars of Soil and end Ancestral Temple |

§ Obs es

MM” Gate of Uprightness (Duanmen)

as)

Chengtian (Tian‘an) Gate

500 m

. enone oa ee ae weet

13.77 Plan: Forbidden City

13.78 Hall of Supreme Harmony, Forbidden City

The U-shaped form (with five entrances

and a tall platform with high pavilions) of

the Meridian Gate connected the Forbidden
City to the palaces beyond. The Gate of
Uprightness, or Duanmen, was followed by
Chengtian, from where the emperor issued
imperial edicts, and then finally by the Great
Ming Gate, or Da Mingmen, the main entry
into the imperial city. As a visitor travels along
the main axis of the Forbidden City toward its
center, the elevation increases, each increase
being an indication of the power of the
emperor. The first three gates rise high above
the ground on imposing blank walls, giving
the viewer the impression of being far below
the zone of privilege. Beyond the Gate of
Supreme Harmony, where the view opens up,
with the Hall of Suprerne Harmony is raised
handsomely as an object in space on its
three stately terraces, and the highest point
in the Forbidden City is attained. The south
view from the top of the third terrace was the
emperor’s privileged view, enabling him to see
over the walls. From here all the gates and
the length of the city could be apprehended
in a single glance. Color played an important
role. The podiums on which the buildings
stood are a brilliant white; the wooden pillars
are a dull red (whose coloring agent also
serves as a preservative); finally, the roofs are
tiled in imperial sun yellow.

That these palaces survive is itself of
historical significance, as it was ancient
practice in China for new dynasties to burn
the capital of the former dynasty. This is one
of the reasons there are so few historical
structures, apart from temples, in China
today. But in 1616, when the Manchu set
up their dynasty on the ruins of the defeated
Ming, they did not destroy the capital. For
five centuries, therefore, from about 1420
to 1908, the city was the hallowed seat of
twenty-four emperors. The buildings that
we see today are not the original Ming-era
buildings, but most are relatively accurate
reconstructions made by the Qing dynasty in
the 17th and 18th centuries.


Mt. Wudang

Zhu Di, the Yongle Emperor, believing that
his ascent to the throne had been aided by
Zhenwu, a mythical Daoist warrior, in 1412
dispatched some 300,000 workers to Mt.
Wudang, Hubei, where the Daoists believe
Zhenwu attained immortality. Mt. Wudang is
in an area of precipitous cliffs and dramatic
views, often covered in mist. Its thick forest
s filled with caves, springs, and grottoes.
Zhu Di’s workers built a 60-kilometer-long
pilgrimage path made of stone that winds

its way up to the peak, aided by thirty-nine
delicately constructed bridges. Along the way
are nine temple complexes, two monasteries,
and thirty-six hermitages, sore perched over
and along cliffs. The Purple Heaven Hall,

Mt. Wudang’s largest monastery, is farther
up the slope. Two terraces (only one short

of the Forbidden City’s Hall of Supreme
Harmony) elevate the elegant double-eaved,
hip-and-gable, five-bay hall. One of the

main martial arts schools of China, Wudang
kung fu, is associated with this area. Five
hundred meters higher, the route culminates
at Tianzhufeng (“Heavenly Pillar Peak”), on
the top of Mt. Wudang. Here sits the small
Golden Hall (1416) with its roof and the
prominent parts of its three-bay structure
executed in bronze. Within is the statue of the
barefoot, long-haired Zhenwu, surrounded
by his Daoist retinue. Above them, a bracket
set more complicated than any found in

the Yingzhao Fashi was built to signify their
stature and royal favor.

Temple of Heaven

Periodically, determined by a set calendar,
the emperor was required to travel out of

the Forbidden City to altars located at the
southern edge of the city. Thus a balance was
etween the imperial authority of
the Forbidden City and the celestial authority

maintained

of heaven. The Imperial Ancestral Temple
and the Altar of Soil and Grain, located just
beyond the Meridian Gate, to the east and
west of the major axis, were the oldest of the
structures. The Altars of the Sun and Moon
were located to the east and west of Beijing,
and the Altar of Earth to the north.

The sout
important altars of all, in the Temple of
Heaven complex: the Altar of Agriculture,
intended to ensure the timely cycle of
production, and the Circular Mound Altar,
the enabler of the Emperors’ mandate. The
Circular Mound Altar, also called the Altar
of Heaven (Yuan Qiu Tan) is a three-tiered
circular platform (the circle representing
the shape of heaven) located in a square
enclosure (the square symbolizing the
earth). The altar, basically a type of ritual
platform, was illuminated by hundreds of
lanterns, and incense burned everywhere.

In the middle, facing south, was a tablet
representing heaven, moved there especially
for the emperor's visits from its resting place
in the Imperial Vault of Heaven just beyond
to the north. Before it, the emperor prostrated
himself and kowtowed to the heavens more
than fifty times in a carefully scripted ritual,

was reserved for the most

witnessed by all present, that only he could
perform. Heaven's displeasure with the
emperor, manifested by bad omens and
natural or political catastrophes, was always
considered a sign of the withdrawal of his
mandate to rule.

Just north of the Mound Altar is the
Imperial Vault of Heaven, and farther north is
the Hall of Prayer for Good Harvests (Qinian
Dian). Elevated on three terraces of white
marble, this temple has a triple set of conical
roofs over a round space that is unique in
Chinese architecture. The sacrifice there
occurred on the winter equinox, and the
emperor prepared for the event by fasting
for three days, living in the Abstinence
Palace located at the western edge of the
complex. At three in the morning on the day
of the equinox, the emperor traveled to the
Circular Mound Altar, approaching it from the
south—that is, facing north, in the position of
a supplicant. The Abstinence Palace is one
of the few Ming buildings made with stone
vaults. Only the buildings for the dead (the
Ming tombs) and this one were considered
“unworthy” of a wooden roof, yet they were
built with extraordinary care, showing that
though stone architecture was not a tradition
in China, it could be produced very skillfully.

Kitchens and slaughterhouses

ors

Hall for Prayer far
Good Harvests

Main outer = Main inner
gate - gate

Abstinence Palace _ :
me Imperial Vault of Heaven

4 "97h
on Circular Mound Altar
. ' +. v4 i
: 7 “<4 :
a * :
re Thy * = . ~ . a
2
= i) 1k
Soy tl lea 4 ™m 13.80 Temple of Heaven complex

13.82 Circular Mound Altar, Temple of Heaven complex

Dabao-en Temple, or the Porcelain Tower of
Nanjing

The Porcelain Tower of Nanjing (Dabao-en
Temple) was designed during the reign of
Zhu Di, the Yongle Emperor (r. 1402-24),
shortly before its construction in the early
15th century. The Yongle Emperor followed
traditional rituals closely and held many
popular beliefs. He did not overindulge in the
luxuries of palace life, and used Buddhism
and Buddhist festivals to help calm civil
unrest. He stopped the warring between the
various Chinese tribes and reorganized the
provinces to best provide peace within his
kingdom. Yongle was said by Ernst Faber to
be an “ardent Buddhist.”

In 1403 the Yongle Emperor, after
experiencing a vision of the Avalokiteshvara
Buddha, invited Deshin Shekpa, the fifth
Gyalwa Karmapa of the Kagyu school of
Tibetan Buddhism, to Nanjing. The visit of
the Buddhist Karmapa revalidated Buddhism
in Ming China and helped the Yongle
Emperor secure a popular base for his
rule. To mark this visit, the Yongle Emperor
ordered the construction of the Dabao-En
Temple, or the Temple of Giving Thanks,
which was made of wood and covered in
brightly colored porcelain. The tower—30
meters in diameter, rising 79 meters in 9
stories—was part of a massive Buddhist
monastery on the banks of the Qinhuai River
in Nanjing. One of the tallest structures in
China, the tower was illuminated at night
by larmps, which, reflected by the porcelain,
gave it a luminescent quality that earned
the building an international reputation.
Extensively described by Western emissaries,
the Porcelain Tower, as it came to be known
in the West, inspired the blue-tiled roof of
the Trianon de Porcelain built by Louis XIV
in 1675. The tower was destroyed during the
Taiping rebellion in the mid-19th century.

JOSEON DYNASTY

n 1392 Yi Songgye, with the aid of the

Ming dynasty, seized the Korean throne

and established the Joseon dynasty (also
nown as the Chosun dynasty), which

jasted until 1910. Korea was known under
the Joseon as Daejoseonguk (the “Great
Joseon Nation”). Though the Mongolians
were defeated, aspects of Mongolian culture,
ere as elsewhere, remained embedded in
‘orean society. As in China, Confucianism
was reestablished as the state religion. A
new capital, Seoul, was built, situated not far
rom the peninsula's largest river and at the
focal point of overland transportation routes.
Several palaces were built in Seoul, the most
important being Gyeongbokgung (“Palace
Greatly Blessed by Heaven"—gung meaning
“palace”—in 1394) and, a kilometer to the
east, Changdeokgung (“Palace of Prospering
Virtue,” begun 1405, rebuilt 1592). For

the siting of the palaces, the surrounding
topography was carefully studied from the
standpoint of both Confucian ideology and
feng shui. Feng shui was also very much

respected in the making of the principal
roads connecting the main gates of the

city by way of the four cardinal directions.
Straight lines were not always the rule, as
can be seen in the east-west and north-south
thoroughfares, which are slightly curved.

According to feng shui, a building should
face southward and should have mountains
on the left and right, symbolizing an azure
dragon and a white tiger, respectively.
Changdeokgung was thus situated in the
north sector of the city, in the foothills

of Paekak Mountain, facing south to the
northern mountain peak called Nam
Mountain. The deity on Paekak Mountain was
female, whereas the deity on Nam Mountain
was male. Paekak, which symbolized royal
authority and was the most highly valued

in terms of feng shui, was closed to the
common people and protected from any
private use. Nam Mountain, however, was
open to the common people. Because

there was no natural mountain to the east
of the palace, an artificial hill was created

to compensate for the shortcoming in
topography. In its original form, the palace
had about five hundred buildings. They were
burned during the Japanese invasions of
1592. About ten 19th-century reconstructions
exist. Changdeokgung had a public portion
(toward the south) and a more private part
(toward the north) consisting of several

stroll gardens strung together by a series of
carefully composed follies for repose. One
of these is particularly farnous. Organized
around a shallow quadrangular water tank,
with a high ridge on one side and several

13.83 Plan: Changdeokgung, Seoul, Korea

small pavilions distributed along the tank's
edges on the other three sides, the folly is
skillfully understated, as if it were nothing
more than a reinforcement of natural
elements already present in the landscape.
The throne hall (injongjon), facing east and
surrounded by its own wall, was a large two-
story building built in 1405. It sits on the top
of a series of low stone platforms that seem
particularly well proportioned in respect to
the slope of the eaves. Stone tables in the
courtyard indicate where each rank of official
should stand for formal ceremonies. The bays
are 5 meters square except for those on the
central axis, which are 6.7 meters square.
The throne sat on a high platform at the back
of the middle bay. It was connected in the
north to the government building, where the
king worked, and in the south to a portrait
hall, or Sonwonjon Shrine, where the former
kings’ portraits were enshrined. On each
king's birthday a memorial rite was held
there, emphasizing the principle of continuity.


13.84 Kinkakuji, Kyoto, Japan

MUROMACHI JAPAN

After two centuries of domination by
aristocratic regents and military rulers,
Emperor Godaigo (r. 1318-39) enlisted

the help of Ashikaga Takauji (1305-58) to
reclaim the court in 1333. But when Godaigo
refused to name Takauji as shogun after his
victory, the latter forced the emperor into exile
(1335) and placed his own representative
on the throne. As shogun, Takauji made
two decisions that changed the course of
Japanese history: he reinstated Kyoto as
the capital and reestablished links with the
Chinese Song dynasty, links that had been
broken since Kublai Khan’s failed attempt
to invade Japan in the 13th century. Profits
from the China trade were important to the
shogun’s power. Song culture infused itself
into Japanese society and with that came a
blending of cultural elements that laid the
foundation for a form of Buddhism known
as Zen, the Japanese pronunciation of the
Chinese kanji for chan. Chan, in turn, was
a transformation of the Sanskrit dhyan,

or meditation. Zen emphasizes sustained
meditation rather than visualization as the
way to nirvana. The Zen monasteries were
built in the traditional Karayo style.

13.85 Site plan: Kinkakuji

oe

Water!

fall

N

FY

i

4

|


Kinkakuji

In 1394, the Muromachi shogun Ashikaga
Yoshimitsu (1358-1408), Takauji’s grandson,
gave up his government position to become
a monk and retired to his private estate,

the central focus of which was a three-story
viewing pavilion known as Kinkakuji, or the
“Golden Pavilion.” It sits at the edge of a
carefully designed reflection pond. The first
story contained a public reception room

with a loggia along the water that served

as access point for pleasure boats, its

clearly defined wooden structural elernents
contrasting with the white plaster walls. The
second floor served as a place for private
discussions; it was protected by the gentle
sweep of an upward-turning eave. The views
of the landscape from the balcony were
carefully designed, as was the rest of the
estate, with small islands in the foreground
framing and enlarging the background. As

in China, the surrounding distant landscape
was also incorporated into the visual
composition of the garden. Finally, the third
story, Yoshimitsu's private refuge, resolves
the pavilion in an upward-turning roof with a
pronounced swell that culminates in a bronze
phoenix finial. Yoshimitsu originally wanted to
gild the pavilion (thus its title), but for most
of its life it remained in wood. In 1950, the
pavilion was destroyed by a mad arsonist.
When it was reconstructed in 1955, its upper
two stories were gilded to honor Yoshimitsu’s
original intentions.

13.87 Section: Kinkakuji

ry °
wo a
is}

bed

13.88 Plan: Kinkakuji


Ginkakuji

Ginkakuji (“Silver Pavilion”) was built as a
retirement villa by Yoshimitsu’s grandson,
the shogun Yoshimasa, in 1482. Yoshimasa
intended to cover two stories of his pavilion
with silver, but this intention was never
realized. In Yoshimasa’s original design,

the two-story pavilion stood at the edge of

a pond set off against small bridges, tiny
islands, and exactingly planted and pruned
shrubs, all designed to generate carefully
framed views that recalled descriptions from
Japanese literature. Ginkakuji’s fame lies in
the additions made by Zen Budchist monks
during the Edo period in the 17th century,
the palace having been turned over to Zen
Buddhists after its patron’s death. Since
sand had to be stored on site to maintain
the gardens, the Zen monks decided to

use it to build two sculpted mounds next to
the pond and in stark contrast to it. One is
low and carefully raked to form a plateau,
and it is called the Sea of Silver Sand, so
named for its appearance in moonlight. The
other mound rises as a perfectly shaped,
truncated cone, arresting at first glance

if only for its sheer size. The cone evokes
the profile of Mt. Fuji, but may also refer

to the sacred mountain in the middle of a
Buddhist mandala. From different points of
view around Ginkakuji, the cone, uniform in
color and outline from all directions, functions
as an object of constancy in the changing
panorama. The two mounds set in play a
drama of visual tension, the exact meaning
remaining open to interpretation This type
of meditational paradox is typical for Zen
Buddhism.

In a sense, Ginkakuji is more successful
as a Zen garden than Kinkakuji. The
assembly of its views is more restrained and
subtle, and since they are bound by a much
smaller space their experience is far more
intimate and irmmediate. Together, however,
they define the aspirations of the Muromachi
warrior aristocracy as it changed under the
influence of the Song and Zen.

30m

bo

13.90 Site plan: Ginkakuji


Vietnam
Lan Na
Lan Sang

Ayutthaya Kingdom

Bansko

Ayutthaya
@Angkor

@Phnom Penh

Gulf of Siam

South China Sea

Malaysia

13.91 Southeast Asia, ca. 1400 CE

AYUTTHAYA

The collapse of the Knmer Empire, combined
with the related unraveling of the Srivijayan
Empire in Malaysia, reduced the importance
of Southeast Asia in the global economy.

The Majapahit Kingdom, which ruled frorn
Java, and the Thai kingdom, with its capital
in Ayutthaya, were the two dominant forces,
both maintaining strong trade links with India
and China.

The Thai kingdom was not a single,
unified state, but rather composed of
self-governing principalities and tributary
provinces owing allegiance to the king.

The name of the capital city derives from

the Hindu holy city Ayodhya in northern
India, which is said to be the birth place of
the Hindu god Rama. King Ramathibodi,
who established Ayutthaya, was Buddhist,
however, and made Theravada Buddhism
the official religion of the state, indicating the
close continuity between Hindu and Buddhist
practices at the time.

The kingdom’s wealth derived not only
from its control of trade routes but also from
its introduction of a new strain of rice. Thai
farmers had traditionally planted the glutinous
rice that is still the staple in the north and
northeast regions of the country. But in the
floodplain of the Chao Phraya River, farmers
turned to a variety of rice—so-called floating
rice—a nonglutinous grain introduced from
Bengal. It grew faster and more easily,
producing a surplus that was sold abroad,

Champa

13.92 Ayutthaya temple complex

even to China. An extensive set of canals
was dug to bring the rice from the fields.
Though inland, Ayutthaya was essentially a
port located on an island of the Chao Phraya
River at the intersection of the Lopbur and
Pasak Rivers. The island was crisscrossed
by a network of canals that ran alongside

a rectilinear road system. Over time, five
hundred temples, stupas, and palaces were
built on this island by successive generations
of kings. Initially, Ayutthaya’s temples derived
their form from the architecture of the
Khmers, but at a smaller scale and with a
more deliberate staging of ancillary parts.
The central stupa of Wat Rat Burana (1424)
was not only surrounded by a geometrically
configured cosmos of stupas, but also had
colonnaded arrival halls to its east and west.

Ramathibodi II (r. 1491-1529), immediately
after his coronation in 1491, initiated the
construction of a spectacular triple-stupa
funerary structure, Wat Si Sanpet, to contain
the remains of his father and brother; the
third structure, built by his son after his
death, contained his own remains. These
three stupas, with their tall spirals on bell-
shaped bodies, copied the Pagan prototype.
An arrival hall to the east and a cruciform
temple to the west frarned the centerpiece
of this unique compound, which was also
surrounded by numerous small stupas,
each with its own small funeral temple

for the extended families of the kings. As
such, Wat Si Sanpet was a singularly royal
precinct, and, atypically, had no residential or
meditation halls for Buddhist monks.

is) 50m
Cet. tea ia

13.93 Site plan: Wat Si Sanpet, Ayutthaya temple complex

1600 CE

In the 17th century, the Eurasian world, from
Japan to western Europe, was a contiguous
economic power bloc connected by well-
established cross-country and coastal trade.
From one end to the other, wealth and ideas
traveled in the baggage or minds of traders,
migrants, and armies. This was the Old World
order that was now increasingly undermined
by the newly arising, more efficient ocean
trade. Eventually, sometime in the 19th
century, the efficiencies of the ocean routes,
the unprecedented advantage of untrammeled
access to the American continents, and
industrialization would make colonial Europe
the unrivaled power of the world. Until then—
until the complete collapse of the Silk Route—
the power centers of Eurasia still dominated
the old economies of the world.
Imagine a traveler in 1652 starting a trip
through Europe and Asia to study the latest
levelopments in the field of architecture.
Starting in Japan, he is led through the
Ninomaru Palace in Nijo Castle, located in
the heart of Kyoto, the capital of shogunate
Japan. He then visits the austere Katsura
Imperial Villa and is introduced by his hosts
to the newly developed intricacies of the Zen
tea ceremony. Crossing into Korea, he visits
the Gyeongbok Palace in Seoul, led there by a
Mongolian commander serving in the Manchu
empire, which had reduced Korea to a vassal
state. Traveling into the heart of Manchuria
through Mukden, its capital, he visits the then
still relatively recent Forbidden City that is
being refurbished by the new Manchu rulers
who had just taken over Beijing. The times are
just stable enough to travel to the nearby and
equally forbidden Ming tombs. On the way, he
discusses with his guides the pros and cons
of the Ming Chinese international seafaring
voyages, compared to the new ones being
undertaken by the Europeans, and whether or
not they should be resumed. He then works
his way southward into the highland plateau of
Tibet to visit the dramatic Potala Palace, built
on a steep rocky crest for the fifth Dalai Lama,
whose supporters had carved out an important
political territory in the Lhasa Valley. After a
tricky passage through the high Himalayas,
he descends down into the fertile plains of the
Ganges River. He now travels through areas
controlled by the Timurid descendants of the
Mongols, the Mughals of India.
He makes his way past Man Mandir, one
of the grand 16th-century palaces of the city

ARCHITECTURE OF THE EURASIAN POWER BLOC

of Gwalior in central India, and on to Delhi
and its expansive palaces. He inspects the
great planned city, Fatehpur Sikri, capital of
the Mughal Empire from 1571 to 1585, laid
out by Akbar himself, and then heads up
the Yamuna River to see the just-completed
Illumined Tomb, later to be known as the Taj
Mahal. Here he hears of new Portuguese
settlers living in a small coastal town called
Goa, having arrived there from the sea using
a route never known before. He then heads
north through the Khyber Pass to Kandahar
and crosses into Persian territory, following
the trade routes, where he sees the vast
urban extension of Isfahan with its enormous
city square, sumptuous mosques, and broad
royal gardens. Here he meets traders from
as far away as England, India, and China.
From Isfahan, he crosses mountains and
deserts into areas newly controlled by the
Ottomans and, following the old Seljuk
caravan routes, makes his way to Antioch on
the Mediterranean, where he boards a ship
to Constantinople. This city, taken by the
Ottomans in 1453, is in the process of being
rebuilt by its new lords. He admires the great
Hagia Sophia, but his guide points out to him
the superiority of the mosques recently built by
Mimar Sinan (1489-1588), the great architect
and engineer. The defeated Byzantine Church,
he hears, has joined the Roman Catholic
Church and is building Italianate churches in
Kremlin, but is no threat to the Osmani. New
Constantinople is thriving! But in the streets he
also hears murmurs of competition from new
ocean routes to the Indies.
It is in Constantinople that he meets the
tribesmen of central Africa, and he learns of
their conversion to Islam and the thriving trade
they now carry on with the states of northern
Africa. He makes a mental note to visit the
great adobe mosques of which they speak.
From Constantinople he departs on a
merchant ship for the somewhat faded port of
Venice and is told there of economic hardships
and of Dutch competition from the New World,
in spite of which he is led to see the latest
churches by one Andrea Palladio, a renowned
scholar of antiquities, whose main projects he
is told are on the mainland, built for the newly
prosperous farming communities of Vicenza.
He then follows a group of pilgrims to Rome,
a city awash in Spanish gold and silver, mined
from the Americas. The Pope is building a
fancy new piazza on the old Roman Capitoline

Hill to impress the visiting Holy Roman
Emperor, Charles V. He is also still working
hard on St. Peter's Basilica, determined to
build a structure that exudes its claim as the
sole center of Christendom, after the loss
of Constantinople. Palazzi and churches
galore are under construction, building the
reputations of artists and architects. This is
the Counter-Reformation world of the Italian
Baroque, where the search for the orders of
the Renaissance has given way to the Baroque
pleasures of formal invention, and where the
old papal authority of Rome is struggling to
reinvent itself in the face of the challenges of
e Protestants.
In Rome our traveler also visits Il Gesu,
the church of the men called Jesuits, from
whom he hears of their churches in the far-
flung corners of the New World, and of the
plight and devotion of the natives there. But
our traveler also hears of newer claimants to
the New World, so he heads to Amsterdam,
a world metropolis with neither grand palaces
n
Pp
H

jor dominating churches but with a bustling
ort, testimony to Dutch mercantile prowess.
le visits the new city hall and bank with the
world maps inlaid in marble on the floor. The
Protestant movement is well under way here,
and he takes time to visit his first Protestant
churches, plain and austere, and is told of
terrible religious wars.

Finally our visitor makes his way to
France, where old money is still building rural
mansions such as the Chateau de Chambord
of Francis | on the Loire River, whose double
helical staircase may have been designed by
Leonardo da Vinci. Our traveler also visits the
Place Royale in Paris, stopping along the way
to admire the great cathedrals. And finally, he
crosses the English Channel, and visits the
newly built Banqueting House. It is one of the
first buildings in England to be designed in the
modern Italianate manner, and the structure
represents an ambitious but—from the point
of view of the Chinese, Mughals, Ottomans,
and Dutch—still relatively marginal power, for
England's major export commodity is still wool,
and its foreign policy is still driven more by
piracy than by politics.

Standing at the cliff shores of England, he
looks across the Channel toward France. But
then a galleon returning from the New World
catches his eye; he looks across the Atlantic,
and wonders what that world across the waters
must be like.


Momoyama Period

Tokugawa Shogunate

1573-1615 1603-1867
A Ryoanji Temple A Nijo Castle
ca. 1480 1601-03 A Katsura Rikyu
Begun ca. 1615
China: Ming Dynasty
1368-1644
A Ming Tombs A Potala Palace
1409-1644 1649-94
Mughal Dynasty
1526-1858
Humanyun’s Tomb A A Fatehpur Sikri A Taj Mahal
1565 1569-74 1632-53
A Buland Darwaza A Gol Gumbaz
1573 1627-56
1500 CE 1600 CE 1700 CE
Ottoman Empire
1281-1923
A Suleymaniye Mosque
1550-57
Russian Empire
1547-1917
A Cathedral of the Archangel Michael
1505-09 A Church of the Ascension
1529-32
Migration and establishment of the Dogon people
15th and 16th centuries
Italy: Papal and Autonomous City-States
12th century to 1870
A St. Peter's Basilica A Sant'Andrea al Quirinale
1506-1615 1658-70
A Campidoglio A Villa Rotunda
Begun 1538 Begun 1566
A Il Gest
1568-84
; ; A Fort William
A Elmina Castle A Santo Domingo Begun 1699

Begun 1482 1547-60

Netherlands: United Provinces
1581-1795

France: Bourbon Rule
1589-1792

England: Elizabethan Age

1558-1603
A Wollaton Hall
1580-88

A Zuiderkerk
1603-11

A Place Royale
Begun 1605

A Amsterdam Town Hall
Begun 1648

A Banqueting House

1619-22

Sea of Japan

Korea ws = @pan

Pacific Ocean

Shikoku

14.1 Tokugawa Japan

TOKUGAWA SHOGUNATE

By the early 17th century, the shogun
commanders had unified and pacified the
country after a century of upheaval and

civil war. They continued to patronize Zen
Buddhism and reconstructed the major
shrines and temples of Kyoto, such as
Nishihonganji, Choin-in, and Kiyomizudera.
In 1577, the shogun Oda Nobunaga
(1534-82) sent his trusted lieutenant and
subsequent shogun, Hideyoshi, to construct
a castle in Hirneji, some 150 kilometers west
of Kyoto, to control the routes connecting
the newly acquired western territories. Two
gently sloping hills overlooking the north end
of Japan’s Inland Sea serve as the locus of
the castle compound, which consists of a
honmaru (inner citadel) and its defensive
terrace. Resting on the top of a sloping stone
base some 14 meters high, the main tower
(known as the Great Tenshu) rises seven
floors, a wooden skyscraper of its time.

he entire structure is held together, from
basement to the uppermost seventh story,

by two massive pillars, which pass through
and lock together each level of the building.
he east pillar is made from a single trunk of
silver fir 28.4 meters tall, while the second is

a composite. This technology was taken from

pagoda designs. Mastlike pillars at the center,

known as the shinbashira, or “heart pillars,”
hold the structure together. The Himeji,

in fact, is a type of bulked-up, inhabited
pagoda—a symbolic allusion that certainly
would not have escaped a visiting warlord.

Honshu

Kyoto
© ye
@dHimeji Castle

Ise Shrine@®

4

Its exterior elevations consist of a carefully
orchestrated rhythm of triangular and flaring
gables, creating a visual signature for the
Tenshu that eventually came to be imitated
in all subsequent castles built in Japan.

The walls are white, whereas the roofs are
covered with gray tiles embellished with white
plaster to secure them against the winds.

14.3 Himeji Castle, Himeji, Japan
The suffix -jo means “castle” in Japanese; Himeji Castle is thus known as Himeji-jo.
(The suffix -// means temple.)

14.2 Elevation of Great Tenshu, Himeji Castle


In Japanese, the relationship between
power and architecture is often codified
in language. Mon, or gateway, is part
of the word kenmon, which describes

a person of authority. It literally means
“oower gate.” The word mikado
(“honorable gate”) is used in reference
to the emperor. A Ainmon, or “prohibited
gateway,” could only be used in the
imperial palace where access was
restricted. By the 9th century CE, the
building of gates had already been
forbidden to people of low rank.

Nikko Toshogu
t is testament to the power and ambitions of
the Tokugawa shoguns that Tokugawa leyasu,
soon after his death, was deified as a tutelary
ami, or a living spirit, of Japan in 1617. As
such, leyasu was considered divine and on
par with the emperor. As is appropriate to a
ami, leyasu was buried high on the sacred
mountain Nikko. His mausoleum and shrine,
nown as the Nikko Toshogu, was built by
is grandson, lemitsu (1604-51), the third
and most powerful of the Tokugawa shoguns.
The Toshogu occupies the side of a hill and
was built in the gongen-zukuri form, with
extended verandas carried on bracket sets
and paired triangular and cusped gables at
the front. The access gate opens onto an
irregularly shaped compound with a series
of subsidiary buildings. From there the
path tends to the left before turning north
again to face the main shrine somewhat
up the side of the hill. A torii marks the
path that leads to the first terrace. Another
stair through another gateway leads to the
second terrace. From there, twelve steep
steps lead up to the Yomeimon, the gate
of the inner shrine. This was as far as the
daimyo—the feudal overlords—were allowed
to go to pay obeisance to leyasu. Only priests
and members of the Tokugawa family were
allowed to enter the shrine itself, just as the
imperial family had sole access to |se’s inner
shrine.

In the Yomeimon, the visitor encounters
a spectacular display of color and structure.
Two layers of highly ornamented bracket sets
support a balcony and a tiled Heian-style,
hip-and-gable roof. The pristine surfaces
of the frame, painted with white lime, are
accented with gilded metalwork. Phoenixes,
peonies, dragons in clouds, and imaginary

14.4 Yomeimon, Toshogu Shrine, Nikko, Japan

Inner shrine

Forest

Forest

birds of paradise compete for space with
twenty-two figural compositions depicting
Chinese themes. Shinto guardian angels sit
on each side of the entrance, and a sculpture
of Zhou Gong Dan, the Duke of Zhou, cited
by Confucius as the paragon of the virtuous
ruler, is placed directly above the front
entrance. The Nikko shrine is a three-part
construction, with the worship hall (haiden)
connected to the main hall (handen) by the
ishi no ma, or stone-floored corridor. The
shrine’s decoration is more restrained and
dominated by a single woodshop tradition.
Forked finials (chigi) and billets (katsuogi)
ride on the ridge of the honden, as was
typical of all Shinto shrines.

14.5 Plan: Toshogu Shrine

Nijo-jo

If Himeji embodied the military authority

of the shogun vertically, Ninomaru Palace
(1569) in Nijo Castle (1601-3), located in
the heart of Kyoto, was designed to stage
that authority socially through a carefully
orchestrated syncopation of waiting rooms
and meeting halls. Built by the shogun
okugawa leyasu, Nijo-jo was the palace
where all the generals of the region had to
come to pay obeisance. From 1624 to 1626,
the palace was redesigned in preparation for
a visit by the emperor Go Mizuno in 1626,
the first visit by an ernperor to a shogun’s
palace. The new design was coordinated by
Nakai Masatomo, the master carpenter by
title responsible for government projects in
Kyoto.

A high stone wall with a moat surrounds
the 500-by-400-meter site and contains two
compounds, each within its own perimeter
walls: one for a castle (now destroyed)
and the other for the palace. The palace
was capped by a series of massive clay-
tiled roofs joined at various angles. Most of
the woodwork was left unpainted. Entry is
through a gate in the southern compound
wall that leads into a courtyard with two
further gateways, one to the stroll garden on
the left and the other to the palace, directly
ahead but just off axis. The wall behind the
gate steps back, suggesting the presence of
hidden depths to the court, whereas the wall
to the garden is angled, using perspective
to create the illusion of a larger space. The
Tozamurai (waiting rooms and government

14.7 Garden entrance to Nijo Castle

Site of donjan + Bs

ie}
L

a

200 m
a

14.6 Plan: Nijo Castle, Kyoto, Japan

offices), the Shikidai (secondary audience
space), and the Ohiroma (main audience
Space) are the palace’s three main buildings.
Added to these are the Kuroshoin, meant for
informal audiences with the shogun, and the
Shiroshoin, the royal residence. There was
also a service building in the back (at the
north) with kitchen and baths, connected to
the main structure by a network of corridors.
In plan the palace functions as a series of
layers organized by a diagonal spine—a
corridor that defines the edge between the
garden and the internal spaces.

The main spaces of the four buildings are
connected to this corridor. Movable screens
can be used to close or open any part of
the palace or its corridors. Every plank of

this garden corridor was fitted with tiny iron
springs that distinctly creaked, even at the
lightest of steps, so that when the screens
were closed the occupants of the internal
spaces would always know if anyone was
outside, or if the shogun approached.

A visitor entering through the Kuramayose
would be brought to one of the three waiting
rooms of the Tozamurai. With the view of
the garden screened off, the visitor would
be confronted with a large painting of life-
size crouching tigers and panthers lurking in
bamboo groves. Here the hustle and bustle
outside could be heard but not seen as the
visitor waited to be called for his audience.
This was the theater of intimidation. Most
visitors would have their audience in the

14.8 Garden of Nijo Castle

o

14.10 Ninomaru Palace

Pasty
Shikidai (assembly hall} ;

ie) 50m

boat ttt

14.9 Plan: Ninomaru Palace, Nijo Castle

: Tozamurai (antechamber)}
Be uicedabse gg

Shikidai with one of the shogun’s councilors.
The room, long and narrow and offering
only a partial view of the garden, focused
on the councilor, who would sit at one end.
Behind him the knotted branches of two
large pine trees, evergreen and symbolic of
the perennial authority of the shogun, were
painted with bold strokes jumping freely
across the structural elements in defiance of
any containing frarne. The three spaces of
the main audience hall, the Ohiroma, were
organized in an L-shape to build in visual
hierarchy. The visiting councilors sat in the
gendan no ma (lower chamber), separated
from the jodan no ma (upper chamber) by
a single step. Lower-ranking visitors sat out
of sight in the third chamber. The shogun
entered from the north and sat in the middle
of the northern half of the jedan no ma,
facing south. There was thus considerable
distance behind him and the visitors.
Behind and to his east was the chigidana
(“staggered shelves”), gilded in gold, with
a painting marking the place of authority.
Directly behind him was a display space with
a twisted bonsai pine, its highest branch
rising vertically on center. When all the
screens were shut, backlight from the sun
would illuminate the shogun against the
screen. Directly to the shogun’s left, on axis,
was an elaborately decorated door; above
him, the coffered roof was raised; and to his
right, if the screens were open, he would
be able to see the island in the middle of
the lake—the only spot in the entire palace
from which this was possible. Thus, although
the shogun sat on the floor on a mat at a
spot that was not distinguished in any way,
it was staged from every direction so that
the moment he occupied it, his significance
immediately became clear.


14.11 Suminoe pine, Katsura Imperial Villa, near Kyoto, Japan

Katsura Rikyu (Katsura Imperial Villa}

n contrast to the Shogun military
commanders who, in developing their
political ambitions, created surnptuous
displays of power, the older aristocratic
families, now largely disempowered, began
to adopt an introspective and pseudo-rustic
aesthetic influenced by the ideals of Zen
Buddhism. The most celebrated example

of this new aesthetic—now considered by
many modern architects to be the essence
of Japanese architecture—is the Katsura
Detatched Palace, also known as the Katsura
mperial Villa. It was built by the nobleman
Hichijonomiya Toshihito (1579-1629) and

is son Toshitada (1619-62). Underlying the
design is the ceremonial teahouse. In the
7th century, serving and drinking tea had
come the center of lavish rituals at courtly
ceremonies, with the focus on the display

of quality tea ware and the presentation
ceremony often upstaging the tea itself. In
the latter part of the 16th century, Sen no
Rikyu (1522-91), a patron of the Zen monks
in Ginkakuji, transformed the ceremony

into a simple, precisely choreographed, and
highly personalized exercise known as wabi-
cha. His famous dictum was “one moment,
one meeting.” The goal of his ceremony,
which contrasted with the extravagance

of the shoguns, was to be free from all
distractions—past and future—and to lead to
a state of immediacy. Rikyu designed one of
the first known neo-rustic teahouses, Taian, in
Yamazaki, south of Kyoto,

ut the form found

Pd ban - 4

its ultimate expression at the Katsura Imperial “~" 44.12 Plan: Taian Teahouse, Yamazaki, Japan
Villa, a 7-hectare estate on the western bank
of the Katsura River, located in a suburb of
Kyoto. The main building comprises three
interlinked shoins (or sections) referred to as
the Old, Middle, and New Shoins, staggered
at the western edge of an irregularly shaped
pond with several islands. The Old Shoin,
farthest to the north, was built by Prince
Toshihito and the other two by his son, Prince
Toshitada. The New Shoin, along with a

Front gate ¢”

Shoiker Sally ae

~ 0

cM bon 4

60m

14.13 Site plan: Katsura Imperial Villa

14.14 Garden gate, Katsura Imperial Villa

special gate and access path, was built on
the occasion of the Emperor Go Mizuno's
visit to Katsura in 1663. Seven teahouses are
distributed in the garden in a semicircular
arc and linked by a stroll path. In its outlines,
therefore, Katsura is nothing more than a
nobleman's country villa with a stroll garden,
but it was also an ideological statement about
the superiority of aristocratic society.

14.15 Plan: Katsura Imperial Villa

The palace has two main entry gates. The
entrance into Katsura is through a simple
bamboo gate located at the far end of

an austere but immaculately constructed
bamboo fence. Nothing of the interior is
visible from the outside. Even upon entering,
the view is carefully screened by a hedge.
Katsura’s next gate was built for imperial
visits. Yet it, too, was patently unassuming
and opened onto a straight, unedged gravel
path lined with trees, leading to yet another
gate. From there the gravel path turns right
for 50 meters or so, the longest stretch of
straight path at Katsura. Although the entire
garden is to the left and the villa ahead,
the view down this imperial approach is
carefully screened by bushes and trees.
Small openings reveal views of the garden,
a glimpse of the main teahouse, a look at
the boathouse, a bridge over a water view.
When a visitor reaches the villa, there is a
sharp turn to the left and a view along a
promontory, edged by a thick hedge, with
a miniaturized Suminoe pine tree. The
framed view of the tree draws attention to,
and blocks the view of, the garden beyond.
The miniaturization of the tree also makes
the promontory seem longer than it is and
introduces the notion of self-consciously
constructed symbolism in the landscape.

q

Af]

ea Pavilion (Gepparo}

14.16 Stepping-stones, Katsura Imperial Villa,
near Kyoto, Japan

sy,
OM eyyet
r
Kesata garry

14.17 Garden path, Katsura Imperial Villa

To the right of the promontory, over an
arched wood and earth bridge, is the Central
Gate, a visitor's first encounter with the
architecture. A simple freestanding wall with
a rectangular opening extends out to the west
from a subsidiary building which contains
the commoner’s entrance. The gravel path
terminates with a single large, uncut stone

at the threshold, followed by four dressed
stones arranged in a square. From there, a
loose arrangement of uncut stepping-stones
crisscrosses the straight path made from

cut stones and signals one of the signature
themes of Katsura’s walkways: the studied
orchestration of stepping-stones to generate
a haptic and tactile experience. From the
Central Gate, stepping-stones lead to the
entrance of the Old Shoin, called the Imperial
Carriage Stop. Here, another freestanding
wall with an opening, projecting out from the
Old Shoin to the north, offers an alternative
route, a second carefully staged path leading
east to the Gepparo, the teahouse closest

to the shoins. The stepping-stones winding
through the opening have the quality of
mysterious footprints and invite the visitor to
follow them. The final step up into the Old
Shoin is another uncut stone dramatically set
against the straight lines of the wooden steps
of the entrance porch. Another of Katsura’s
signature themes is the elaboration of the villa

as a simple hut. Every entrance into the villa
is from large uncut stones, and every exterior
post on the garden side sits directly on a
stone foundation. All the wooden posts and
beams were left unpolished, sorne with their
bark intact.

J. Bee.

The geometry that governs the plan of the
three shoins is derived from the dimensions
of the tatami and the sliding shoji screens
covered with translucent rice paper. The
spaces are orchestrated as a series of
interconnected rooms, with all the important
rooms facing east onto the garden. The
supporting rooms are to the west and are
connected to secondary structures. The
Middle and New Shoins are connected by
an intermediate section called the Music
Room. An external veranda runs along the
eastern edge of the villa, edged by sliding
screen doors that can be opened and shut to
modulate the light and to connect the exterior
and the interior.

The spatial and visual focus of the Old
Shoin is an east-west cross-axis formed by
the pantry, the Spear Room, and its main
space (the “second room”) with an external
bamboo deck called the Moon-Viewing
Platform. (The Katsura River was known as a
scenic place for moon viewing in August.) A
miniature stone pagoda in a clearing on the
southern edge of the Island of Immortals is
the view’s stable point amid a dense arboreal
landscape. Its focus is the still water of the
pond, which at night reflects the rising moon
in the east, and by day, the trees along its
irregular edges. In autumn the trees are
ablaze with color, and in winter, white with
snow.

14.18 Detail: Katsura Imperial Villa

|
|
|
Le

14.19 Interior of Tea Pavilion (Shokintei), Katsura Imperial Villa

Katsura’s “main event” is the stroll garden.
Its design is credited to Kobori Enshu (1579-
1647), a tea master and garden designer,
though this is not certain. Many walks are
possible. The main walk circumambulates
the pond in a clockwise direction, beginning
to the north of the Old Shain, winding
around the shore, to the main teahouse (the
Shokintei), on to the large island with the
Shoiken and Orindo teahouses, then across
the riding ground and moss garden, and
back to the Middle Shoin. It is the journey,
rather than the destination, that is important.
Much of the path is made of stepping-
stones of uncut rock. Although each stone
is completely horizontal and never more
than a comfortable stride from the next,
they do not form a continuous walkway and
can suddenly make unexpected twists and
turns. This forces visitors to become aware
of not only where they are walking, but of
the very act of walking. When the dressed
stones of the straight paths surrounding the
shoins meet the stepping-stones, the latter
dance around and through the former with a
studied irreverence. But when they encounter
the cascade of pebbles—the “sand” of the
shore—they march through them like a
determined walker on the beach. Sometimes
they seem to have inherent purposes: the
stepping-stones march straight across the

a

\
14.21 Plan: Shokintei, Katsura Imperial Villa

14.20 Ceiling structure of the Gepparo, Katsura Imperial Villa

wet moss garden next to the Middle Shoin;
whereas the straight path is forced to skirt
around the edge. At other times, they seem
more functional. Along the way, stone
lanterns mark places of rest. One of the
most famous uses of such a lantern is at the
terminus of the spit of land that projects into
the pond. The lantern, known as the Night-
Rain Lantern, marks the terminus of the path
not to be taken.


Uighur Mongol Jurchen
oy
ran, ata ays? t
“ty, settee
rays os Beiine®
: S
Td o Seoul Korea
MN
Cugyeng Kaifeng
Tibet oy ® Yangzhou
2 Avan Nanjing,
Chengdu@® Hangzhou® East China Sea
Changsha@
Fuzhou@)
Guangzhou.
Burma
Siam South China Sea

14.22 Ming dynasty China

MING TOMBS
So efficient was the Ming bureaucracy that
the fact that the reportedly indolent and
pleasure-seeking seventh Ming emperor,
Wanli (1573-1620), seems not to have
affected the prosperity of his empire. Official
ceremonies and presentations were simply
made to an empty throne in his stead. A
large proportion of Wanli’s time, along with
an estimated eight million fae/s of silver, was
spent in the design and construction of his
tomb, which began in 1585, when he was
only twenty-two years old. Much more than
personalized egocentric attempts to guarantee
an afterlife, tombs, and in particular royal
tombs, were an integral part of the Chinese
cosmology. Spirits of dead ancestors of even
the common people had to be fed and cared
for, or else they were liable to visit misfortune
upon future generations. The emperor's
death, however, was particularly special, as he
became part of heaven itself, and his tomb’s
architecture represented that transition. Many
of China’s royal tombs, going back to that of
the First Emperor, Shi Huangdi, have still not
been excavated.

The thirteen Ming tombs, of which only
Wanli's has been excavated, are among
the most famous and best preserved. They
are clustered in the valley of the Tianshou
Mountains, about 80 kilometers northwest of
Beijing.

Japan

Pacific Ocean

The first Ming tomb built here was that of
the third Ming emperor, Zhu Di, known as
the Yongle Emperor, in 1409. Zhu Di moved
the Ming capital to Beijing and built the
Forbidden City. The Ming, continuing T’ang
and Zhou funerary practices, designed their
tombs to consist of three parts—a long Spirit
Path leading up to the tomb, a shrine for
ceremonies and sacrifices to the dead, and
the burial mound itself. However, unlike their
predecessors, the Song, the Ming did not
build a separate Spirit Path for each tomb;
instead, they clustered all their tornbs in a
single valley off one Spirit Path with a single
approach. The Ming also did away with

the practice of sacrificing for the emperor's

“accompanying” concubines and servants
and therefore did not need a separate
chamber for them.

ore" Changping

14.23 Area plan: Imperial Ming Tombs, near Beijing

The Yongle Emperor appropriated an area
of about 330 square kilometers, which
was defined by a perimeter wall that
encompassed a large area, including a
valley, the base hills of a mountain range,
and rivulets feeding into a river running to
the south. This area was protected by a
prohibition against the cultivation or cutting
of trees; a village was established near the
entrance to house the people employed
to maintain the land. About 1 kilometer
beyond the pai jou was the Great Red Gate,
the official entrance to the tomb grounds.
(Pai lou is the generic term for gateways
commemorating people who have led
virtuous lives.) The building, square in plan,
has a solid base cut through with tall tunnel
vaults in its axes that, at their center, frame
a huge 10-meter-tall monolithic stele held up
on the back of a tortoise. Poems, written by
later emperors in praise of their ancestors,
were carved on the stele. At this gate, the
emperor dismounted and proceeded on
foot. Just to the side of the gate, there was a
pavilion, no longer extant, where the emperor
and his retinue of about 1,000 attendants
rested and changed into the appropriate
robes. From there, the emperor began his
long walk down the Spirit Path.

As in earlier tombs, the main feature
of the Spirit Path is its array of statues
of mythical and real beasts and eminent
nobles and generals, aligned on both sides.
Twelve pairs of animals and six pairs of men
symbolize an eternal guard, arrayed in the
same manner in which the honor guard was
prepared in the Forbidden City for ceremonial
occasions. The animals are in pairs, one
resting and one standing. At the end of this
segment of the Spirit Path there is a small
three-portal gate, the center portal of which is
blocked to prevent the passage of evil spirits.

After passing through the sides of the
gate, the Spirit Path continues in a gentle
curve to the left and leads to a triple bridge
across the river, straight to the Yongle
Emperor's tomb. Subsidiary paths to the
other tombs fan out from the main path like
the branches of a tree. The tombs are a long
distance from the main entrance, a walk of
almost 6 kilometers from the pai fou. This
walk, through a flat plain filled with carefully
chosen fragrant trees, was often the subject
of painting and poetry. As in the Forbidden
City and Chinese imperial architecture in

14.25 Spirit Path, Ming Tombs

14.26 Spirit Path, Ming Tombs

14.24 Drum Tower of Spirit Path, Ming Tombs

general, the path, as a monumental extension
of space in the horizontal axis, was made at
a scale appropriate only to the ernperors. The
horizontal extension of space was considered
to be the measure of a building's significance.
The Spirit Path thereby repeats the axis of
the Forbidden City. But in another sense, it is
the Forbidden City, with its fake mountain at
the northern end, that copies the sacred axis
embodied in the Spirit Path.

Conceptually, the Ming tombs are a
part of the same spatial-symbolic order
of the Forbidden City and the Altar of
Heaven. This order is in part feng shui but
is mostly a spatialization of a social and
spiritual order focused on the emperor;
the symbolic order of Beijing was designed
to enable the institution of the emperor,
as a governmental and spiritual center, to
e functional and visible. In the tombs,
jowever, there were no quotidian needs, no
citizenry to be governed. Here, it was only
the reigning emperor and his relationship
with the ancestors, represented in the city
yy the empty space of the Altar of Heaven,
which had to be spatialized, making for the
purest representation of the intersection of
the terrestrial world and the heavenly one.
Each succeeding emperor was expected to
visit the tombs of his predecessors on each
of the anniversaries of their deaths. Site
selection was critical. The Yongle Emperor
picked a site for his tomb that nestled at the
ase of the intersection of two low mountain
ranges at the end of a hilly spur that points
into a valley. This fit the dictates of feng shui,
which required that two mountain ranges (the
tiger and the dragon) provide a protective
backdrop to the site to block evil northern
spirits. (In the Forbidden City, the mountain
is represented by the small artificial hill just
beyond the north wall.)


14.27 Axial approach to the Ming Tombs, near Beijing

As he did at the Altar of Heaven, a visiting emperor
would have approached the site from the south, the
direction of supplication. The entrance was marked by a
stone ceremonial gate with five portals, composed of six
monolithic columns adorned with animals derived from
syncretic sources representative of the Ming Chinese
world—native Chinese, Buddhist, and Indic. Unlike the
Chinese convention that gave every important building or
structure a name that was then written on a tablet over
its central entrance, the tablet on this particular gate was
left empty, for it would have been inappropriate, so it was
held, for mere mortals to announce the presence of the
“sons of heaven.”

14.29 Stele guarding the entrance to the tomb of Emperor Wanli

Tumulus

\
j

_ ao
4 : Stele pavilion atop stele tower

ie)

bet

14.30 Plan: Tomb of the Yongle Emperor (Changling)

150m
4

14.31 Plan: Tomb of the Emperor Wanli (Dingling)

The thirteen tombs consist of a sequence
of rectangular enclosures for rituals and
sacrifices, terminating in a round or oval
burial mound. The enclosures signify the
terrestrial and the circular mound, the
heavenly. Where the wall of the last enclosure
and the wall of the circular enclosure meet,
one finds a Stele Tower with a pavilion on
top of the base that gives access to the
mound. Most of the tombs have only one or
two enclosures, and only the largest three—
Changling, Yongling, and Dingling—have
three.
Changling, the oldest and largest, begins
with a triple-entrance gate leading into an
enclosure that originally held a structure in
which the emperor and his retinue could
adjust their clothes. This led through a gate
into the main court for sacrifices, which

contained the Hall of Heavenly Favors—
almost identical to the Hall of Supreme

,— Protective screen

Harmony in the Forbid
the emperor to be hono

len City—enabling
red in death as he

was in life. Three marble terraces support

the great hall (67 by 30
stairs leading to it. Insi

meters), with three
le, sixty columns,

each nearly 13 meters

igh and made from

a single trunk of old-growth timber called
machilus nanmu, support a double-eaved

Side chamber

Side chamber

14.32 Underground chambers at Dingling

roof without any diagonal struts. The dou-
gong on the exterior is ornamental, not
structural. The coffered ceiling is painted
in blue, green, red, and gold. The Hall of
Heavenly Favors and the Hall of Supreme
Harmony are the two largest halls in China.
The tomb mounds are defined by fortified
earthen mounds with 3-meter-wide walls,
buttressed on the outside to hold in the
earth with no visible entry markers. They are
planted with thujas and oak trees (since the
roots are believed to be able to nourish the
dead). At the apex of the hill, one finds a
small tumnulus in the shape of a cone or long
ridge. The tumulus is only representational;
the actual tomb is far below the surface.
Seen from the approach axis, the stele gate.
the mound, and the mountain profiles are a
part of one symbolic entity. The tumulus o

Emperor Wanli’s tomb, for example, lines up
directly with the peak beyond. The approach
to the offering table, which stands just in
front of the base of the stele tower, is not flat
but actually a series of transitions marked by
gates and thresholds.

The tomb of Emperor Wanli, located 27
meters below the surface, consists of three
sacrificial enclosures and four interconnected

barrel-vaulted chambers. Three run parallel

to each other and one at right angles at

the head, and that is the main chamber.
Whereas the side chambers were empty and
probably intended for concubines and family
members, the central one contained three
thrones for ritual objects. The burial casket
of the emperor, the empress, and the highest
concubine (elevated to empress when her
son became the next emperor) were found
intact in the main burial vault.

The vaults were all made of pure white
marble, polished smooth. This tradition,
which goes back to the tombs of the Han
emperors, shows that although the Chinese
had certainly mastered masonry skills,
they chose to use them only for their tomb
structures. One of the few places where a
stone vault was used in a building above the
terrain was in the Fasting Palace of the Altar
of Heaven, where the emperor prepared
himself for the all-important calendrical
rituals. That room was, in essence, a type of
tomb, for the emperor was expected to use
it to purify himself through abstinence and
fasting.

14.33 Potala Palace, Lhasa, Tibet (China)

POTALA PALACE

Buddhism was introduced into Tibet by
Mahayana monks travelling from India and
Nepal in the 8th century CE. By the 10th
century, Nepal had begun to thrive as a
regional power, capturing significant territories
in Mongolia and China. The growth of Tibet
was, however, checked by the Chinese well
into the 15th century. Although China's non-
Han dynasties—the Liao and, in particular,
the Mongol Yuan—supported Tibetan
Buddhism, they made sure the Tibetans

were politically subservient. The Ming paid
only lip service to Tibetan Buddhism since
their focus was on the revival of a Confucian
and Daoist state. As a consequence, Tibetan
Buddhists split into a number of competing
sects, variously identified by the color of their
habit as the red, white, and yellow sects. But
when the Ming dynasty began to lose power,
the Uigher Mongols under Altan Khan, the
descendants of the erstwhile Yuan dynasty,
converted to the Tibetan yellow sect; after
that, Tibetan Buddhism or Lamaism spread
quickly among the Mongols of Central Asia. In
1641, Altan Khan's grandson, Gushri Khan,
defeated all the other Tibetan sects and
proclaimed Ngawang Losang Gyatso (1617-
82), the fifth Dalai Lama, not only the spiritual
head of Tibetan Buddhism but also, for the &
first time in Tibetan history, the political head /“ ’
of Tibet. Just then the Mongolian Manchus
had taken over from the Ming, and one of A .
their first diplomatic acts was to invite the fifth Moss L's ie }

One of the fifth Dalai Lama's first acts was

to establish a new capital and build a new
palace that was identifiable as the seat of
both the spiritual and political power of the
Buddhist world. This was the Potala Palace, a
vast and majestic palace-mausoleum located
on a hill in the middle of the valley of Lhasa,
Tibet's “forbidden city.”

The Lhasa River is a tributary of the
Tsangpo, which becomes the Brahmaputra
when it swings south around the Himalayas
and into India. At an elevation of 130 meters
above the valley, two steep, rocky outcrops
tower above a widened riverbed at the bottom
of a ravine. On the higher and larger of these,
known as Red Hill, sits the Potala Palace,
360 meters long, 110 meters wide, and
reaching a maximum height of 170 meters.

It is oriented east-west, with the front facing
south toward the inner city. The setting is
dramatic. A jagged towering mountain range
forms a towering bowl. In the middle, the
rocky outcrop and the swiftly flowing Lhasa
are at the center of what literally seems like
the roof of the world.

Frontal stairway}

yards":
‘

100m

fb

14.34 Plan: Potala Palace

Dalai Lama to the Chinese court, where he
was received with full honors.

The Potala Palace is

the sacred center

of Tibetan worship. It signifies Mount
Meru, the conceptual organizing center
of the Buddhist cosmos. As such, the
palace is just as much a pilgrimage site

as a royal residence.

Since it was meant to be defensible, the
palace’s primary massing is that of a fort.
Thick, battered brick walls, painted white,
rise steeply from the rock surface in a series
of terraces that take over the entire summit of
the Red Hill. The walls step back and forth to
accommodate the changing contours and to
generate openings for the access paths.

Solid and impenetrable at the bottom,
the walls’ higher reaches are punctuated by
dark windows, which are few and simple at
first but, at higher elevations, become larger
and more richly embellished. The walls are
topped by a prominent red coping. The
visual terminus is a series of small, golden,
Chinese-style roofs that are not so large as to
be the solitary focus but prominent enough
to ensure that the eye comes to rest on them,
providing a speck of metallic brilliance in
a landscape dominated by gray rock. Long
ramps, visible frorn the distance, wind their
way up the side of the hill. Their slow ascents
mark ther as self-conscious processional
paths, leading to a place of pilgrimage.

14.35 South elevation: Potala Palace

The current palace was built in two major
phases. First the main ramparts and the
western part of the main palace, known
as the White Palace, were built. This was
partially rebuilt and a Red Palace was
constructed that became the primary
residence of the Dalai Lamas.

The White Palace houses large ceremonial
halls for prayers, rooms for visiting dignitaries,
and offices, while the Red Palace houses the
audience hall as well as burial stupas for the
dalai lamas. The roof of the palace opens
onto a flat terrace where there are Chinese-
style pavilions, gilded in copper, one for each
dalai lama. At the foot of the Potala Palace, a
square walled enclosure contains a network
of governmental buildings.

Access to the Potala Palace begins at the
end of the lower quadrangle, at a column
erected to mark the completion of the Red

Palace. The first ramp
structures in the west,

leads to subsidiary
ut then it switches

back and heads up toward the White Palace.
After another switchback, it comes to a point
where the entrances into the palace, which
have been hidden until now, suddenly reveal
themselves, nestled between the staggers

of the walls. A stair to the east leads to the
entrance of the White Palace and another,
directly opposite, to the Red Palace. The
high walls of Potala Palace itself are at hand,
and for the pilgrim this is the first arrival
threshold; several more follow. The usual
entrance is through the White Palace. A tall
rectilinear opening, with three open stories
above, leads into a dark space with four
columns.

14.36 Section through Potala Palace


From there the path turns left, proceeds
down a narrow corridor, turns right, and
arrives at a small curved court, where the
second threshold to the palace is located.

A flight of stairs and a two-column vestibule
lead to another corridor, from which a left
turn drops one into the eastern courtyard,
the ceremonial arrival space of the Potala
Palace. This is the pilgrims’ third and final
threshold. This courtyard is surrounded

yy a two-story enclosure and dominated

yy the canted mass of the White Palace at
the northwestern corner. A central stairway
leads into the six levels of the White Palace,
ighlighted by characteristic Tibetan
windows made from brightly painted wooden
rames and elaborately carved sunscreens.
he elaboration and size of the windows
increase with each story, the highest one

terminating in the cornice. Internally, the
main structural frame is made from wood,

. with rooms organized around a courtyard on
14.37 Potala Palace, Lhasa, Tibet (China) the upper levels. This mode of construction
and elevational representation is typical of
Tibetan architecture, a consequence of its

long intercourse with Nepalese architecture
and culture.

The Red Palace contains pillared prayer
halls and the salt-dried and embalmed
remains of eight dalai lamas, marked by eight
white stupas called chortens. The largest and
most elaborate of these is the stupa for the
fifth Dalai Lana.

Kalachakra Chapel

14.38 Plan: Third floor of the Red Palace, Potala Palace

Harmuz

Oj

Jeddah Np,

£ Dhofar,

*s. Aden

Africa

Mombasa

Indian Ocean

14.39 The voyages of Zheng He

VOYAGES OF ZHENG HE

The first Ming emperor, Taizu, also called

the Hongwu Emperor, sponsored a series

of naval voyages between 1405 and 1433,
with at least seven of those traversing the
“western ocean,” which could be either the
Indian or Pacific Ocean. The voyages were
commanded by Zheng He (1371-1435),

a Muslim eunuch from China's Yunnan
Province whose father and grandfather had
made the hajj to Mecca and who, therefore,
knew of Islamic cartographic advances.
Zheng He's mission was not economic but
diplomatic, seeking to establish ties with other
nations. Some of the voyages had as many

as three hundred ships and 27,000 sailors

in all, and they reached as far as Mombasa

in Africa. Fantastic descriptions of the fleet
are still evident in temples in Ayutthaya in
Thaland.

14.40 Ming dynasty treasure ship in comparison with Vasco da Gama’s Sao Gabriel

Great Wall

Asia
Beijing Japan
Changsha, Kyoto
Nanjing s N ki
aps ’, Nagasaki
Ming China ¢ Fast China Sea
oe Pacific Ocean
Mogul Empire Chittagong Quanzhou
Siam “
Ayutthaya :

Palembai nr, .
yy

Maldives

Surabaya

The Chinese economy was integrally tied

to trade, and these voyages were meant

to expand China’s trading horizon. The
Chinese also traded with the Dutch, who
controlled Java, as well as with the Spanish
and Portuguese. It is estimated that as much
as one-third of all the silver extracted from
South America was brought to China to pay
for porcelain, silk, and other luxury goods.
To feed this export economy, huge kilns
were built at Jingdezhen in Jiangxi Province,
which produced an estimated 100,000 small
ceramic pieces and 50,000 larger pieces
annually. Still preserved as ceiling decorations
in the Santos Palace in Lisbon are 260
Chinese plates and bowls.

Philippines

In 1449 the Mongolians ambushed an
expedition led by Emperor Zhengdong, wiped
out the Chinese army, and captured the
emperor. Stability returned only in 1457 when
Zhengdong recovered the throne. The Mongol
threat, yet once again, shook the Ming court.
They resolved to disband the expensive
explorative sea voyages and to concentrate
instead on fortifying against the Mongolians.
In 1474 the Ming general Wang Yueh insisted
on and received approval to extensively
rebuild the Great Wall. Almost forty thousand
troops were set to work to build not only

vast segments of the wall but also its
accompanying fortifications, signal towers,
and stockades. The Ming Great Wall occupies
the rest of the last range of hills before the
mountains level off in the northern deserts of
Mongolia. And so the long-term possibilities
of Zheng He's naval expeditions were traded
for the immediate and urgent securing of the
Great Wall system.

—-- ¢ 1605: Death of Akbar
—* 1530: Death of Babur

erty

aon
Kabul
i Qrawar *s
¢ Kandahar (O} * a,
: Lahore @pehhi aoe
ss,
@*e err
Fatehpur sikt® Patna@)
Bengal
Ahmedabad qenneneCalcutta
Arabian Sea Gujarat Foas ‘y
! OF
BombayOns,. ‘ oe
Decca .
B
@r Bay of Bengal
Goa®

Calicut @'s

Madurai [O}
indian Ocean

14.41 Development of the Mughal Empire

MUGHALS

The Delhi sultanates, with their various
competing interests, fell prey to an outside
conqueror, Babur, a descendant of the Timur
ine. He established the Mughal dynasty

which, by the time of his death in 1530,
stretched from the Deccan to Turkestan.
Babur’s oldest son, Humanyun, lost the
throne in 1540 to Sher Shah Sur, an Afghan
and former ally who, though he ruled for only
ifteen years, established a centralized system
of administration on the foundations of which
jater Mughals expanded. Humanyun regained
the Delhi throne by 1555 but died a year
later. He was succeeded by the eighteen-year
old Jalal-ud-Din Akbar (1556-1605), who laid
the foundation of—and consolidated—the
Mughal Empire. His grandson Khurram Shah
Jahan (1628-57) was the beneficiary. The
former was an uneducated and idiosyncratic
idealist, the latter an indolent and cultured
aesthete; both used their vast wealth for two

of the finest architectural creations of South
Asia: the city of Fatehpur Sikri and the Taj
Mahal.

Humayun’s Tomb

Humayun’s principal wife, Begai Begum,
brought in Mirak Mirza Ghiyas, a Persian
architect living in Bukhara, to design her
husband's tomb (1570). It was located to
the east of a tomb designed for one of Sher

ce 1707: Death of Aurangzeb

14.42 Humayun’s Tomb, Delhi, India

Shah's noblemen in 1547. Hurayun’s Tomb
was to become the prototype that influenced
the design of the Taj Mahal some fifty years
later. Faced with red sandstone, it sits in the
middle of a large, square garden divided into
quadrants by causeways, which are further
divided into nine smaller sections in the
manner of the chahar baghor four-garden
plan of Persian provenance. Set into the axis
of each causeway is a water channel with
small, square lily ponds at the intersections.
The eastern wall was built directly on the
Yamuna River. (Over time, the river moved
farther to the east.) Its main gate was on the
south, although entrances were built in the
center of all four walls. The tomb has two

platforms, a low first platform with chamfered

ends, followed by the second main platform,
which contains secondary arcaded and
vaulted chambers.

Isa Khan's Tomb

14.43 Plan: Humayun’s Tomb

Stairs from the central arch lead to the upper
platform. The tomb itself is an octagon with
eight surrounding chambers on two levels.

A bulbous dome, covered in marble, sits

on a high drum. Passageways connect

all the chambers, an unusual feature that
may be associated with the Sufi practice

of circumambulating the burial chamber.

A tombstone marker indicating the actual
tombstone below sits under the main dome
and is raised on gigantic piers. The entire
interior is plastered and painted in white and
a delicate orange-red that closely matches
the red sandstone used on the exterior.

Ti aes S Tome

‘—Babur's Tomb

290 m

Fatehpur Sikri _N\ eo
Begun in 1561 and abandoned a mere fourteen ‘ F , ee

i
years later due to lack of water, Fatehpur Sikri’s / S

origins lie in Akbar’s close connections with _
Sufiism. Salim Chisti, a Sufi mystic, lived on
a stony escarpment 48 kilometers west of the aan : NS *
capital, Agra. Akbar traveled to Salim Chisti on y .

foot to beg for the gift of a son, who was born an Palace precinct :
a year later. To give thanks and to live in close / , 5 CF ios /
proximity to his mentor, Akbar decided to build . -

a new mosque and palace complex on the long
and narrow stony escarpment, known then
simply as Sikri (from shukri, or “thanksgiving” in

Persian). soy °
. . we com 0 1km
The first structure built at Fatehpur Sikri was iN ues mt
¢

the Jami Masjid, or Friday Mosque. Because & may,
the mosque had to be oriented due west, it is we Vv
at an angle to the escarpment. The multiple
courts of the royal palace that were built next
were also are aligned with the Jami Masjid rather
than with the escarpment, so that the whole
complex staggers down the axis of the ridge.

The spatial implications resulting from the shift
in orientation are immense. All the courts are

14.44 Site plan: Fatehpur Sikri, India

Diwan-i-Khas

interlocked with skill. Because the centers of the

courts are not aligned with each other axially, as

is the case in most courtyard-based complexes,

it makes for a dynamic diagonal sequencing

of spatial experience full of unexpected spatial :
expansion and contraction. Axial expectations

are manipulated to heighten the surprises. For

instance, the view into the Pachisi Court from

the center of the court at Birbal’s House aligns

with one of the arms of Anup Talao. This sets up

the expectation that Anup Talao must also be

the center of its court. Walking straight down the

axis into the Pachisi Court, however, reveals that

Anup Talao is instead at one end of its court, : noe
revealing the diagonal character of the axis. : nr “t bese st

Court of Public
> Audience

Jadh Bai
"Palace

14.45 Plan: Palace precinct, Fatehpur Sikri

14.46 Anup Talao, Fatehpur Sikri

4

Buland Darwaza

*
«
f
¥

Royal gate

bee eerveneeee

14.47 Exterior elevation: Buland Darwaza, Fatehpur Sikri, India an © 100 m
4

Buland Darwaza

The Buland Darwaza (1573) is an ingenious
work at the intersection of architecture and
urban design. It was built in the Jami Masjid
of Sikri, which until the late 19th century
was the largest mosque in South Asia. The
165-by-133 meter Jami Masjid has a huge
courtyard, with gates on three sides and, to
the west, the qib/a wall, centered on an iwan
with a central dome flanked by two smaller
side domes. The mihrab and the western wall
are elaborately decorated with inlay work of
stone mosaic and glazed tiles with azure blue
and gold inscriptions. Except for the qibla
wall, the rest of the rosque is made of red
sandstone with occasional marble inlay. The
sandstone, faceted like wood, is used in the
columns structurally and not as cladding,

an innovation that gives to the colonnade a
delicacy denied to clad stone piers. Indeed,
structural red sandstone columns are used
throughout Fatehpur Sikri, and where thicker
walls were necessary, they were all clad with
the same red sandstone (with the occasional
marble and semiprecious stone inlay), giving
the entire complex a unified impression.

In 1573 Akbar rebuilt the southern gate
of the mosque after his much sought-after
victory over Gujarat. Renamed Buland
Darwaza, or Victory Gate, the 54-meter-
high gate is so tall that it ran the risk of
overwhelming the qib/a wall of the mosque, to
which it is just an entrance. The skill of Sikri’s

ee Fee ee a

designers is evident in their handling of the 14.48 Plan: Jami Masjid, Fatehpur Sikri
building's section, which ensures a majestic
reading on the outside but not on the inside.
First, they exaggerated the external height
of the Darwaza by building a lofty flight of
stairs in front of it to take advantage of the
mosque’s location at the very edge of the
escarpment. Its impact on the mosque

is mitigated by the stepping down of the
section; while the exterior elevation rises to
the full height, the interior elevation finishes
below the height of the gibla iwan.

exterior tenor

14.49 Section: Buland Darwaza


14.51 Ground-floor plan, section, and upper-story plan: Diwan-i-Khas, Fatehpur Sikri, India

Diwan-i-Khas
Akbar’s Diwan-i-Khas is a singular building in
the history of architecture. It was conceived
by Akbar, who was an exceptional and,
in many senses, a very modern thinker.
Although he was illiterate, he was very
curious about the empire he had just created.
He surrounded himself with philosophers
and aestheticians, and searched for a
philosophical and religious practice that
could, to his mind, resolve the multiplicity
of and contradictions among beliefs in his
world. Akbar constructed a new syncretic and
pluralistic cult, or religious practice, called
the Din-i-llahi, or Divine Religion, with a fairly
generic creed of abstinence, meditation,
beneficence, politeness, and mystical
monotheism. In 1582, at Fatehpur Sikri,
Akbar officially proclaimed the birth of Din-
i-llahi and called a general council meeting
of members of all faiths to resolve all their
religious differences. The core of Din-i-llahi
was Sulh-i-kul, or tolerance of all thoughts
that benefit mankind. Akbar proposed
himself, as a unique ambassador of God, as
the central institution for resolving religious
differences.
The concepts of Din-i-llahi are manifested
in the Diwan-i-Khas, the royal audience hall.
It is the solitary object-in-space building in
the main court, a two-story square box with
four chattris at the corners, made entirely out
of red sandstone. A deep overhanging chajja

i

|
~ ~
14.52 The emperor’s seat, the conceptual center
of Diwan-i-Khas

14.53 Emperor's seat, Diwan-i-Khas

casts a prominent shadow over the upper-
story elevation. At 13.18 meters, the width of
the building is the same as its height taken to
the top of the chattris, making it symbolically
a perfect cube. The drama of the Diwan-i-
Khas is its interior. In the double-height space
of the interior, located in the center of the
overall volume and supported by a single
pillar with a mushroom top of sandstone
brackets, is a round platform that seems to
hover in midair. It is connected at the corners
with narrow bridges forming a cruciform
pattern. A balcony runs around the interior

at the seconc-story level. It functioned as an
idiosyncratic audience hall, with the emperor
listening to supplicants from above and
consulting with ministers from the various
philosophical and religious positions sitting
at the ends of the bridges. The emperor’s
position, held up by a single column, was at
the very center of the building, both in plan
and section. Indeed, the emperor would sit at
the very center of the cube and conceptual
sphere implied by the building. This is a
spatialization of the position occupied by the
emperor, who was at the center—that is,
equidistant for all philosophical positions—in
Din-i-llahi. As a direct spatialization of a
philosophical ideal, the Diwan-i-Khan can

be described as a theoretical project. It had
no known precedent and was never copied
again.


14.54 Taj Mahal, Agra, India

Rauza-i-Munavvara (Taj Mahal)

Having inherited a vast and prosperous
empire, Shah Jahan (1628-58) enjoyed
the dividends of peace. He was dedicate
to poetry, art, literature, and most of all to
architecture, expending vast resources to
build palaces, mosques, and tombs all across
his empire, especially in Delhi, where he built
a brand-new city called Shahjahanabad. In
the latter half of his reign, however, the bu
of Shah Jahan's energies were devoted to
the creation of the funerary tornb for Mumtaz
Mahal, his favorite queen and granddaughter
of the fabled Nur Jehan. The tomb was
nown to the Moghuls as the Rauza-I-
Munawara {or the Illumined Tomb), because
of the luster and transparency of its marb!
Later it was also referred to as Rauza-|-
Mumtaj-Mahal, which the English contracted
to Taj Mahal in the 19th century.

Mumtaz Mahal died unexpectedly in

631 while giving birth to her fourteenth
child. Twenty-thousand workmen labored for
ifteen years on her tomb. On every death
anniversary of Mumtaz, Shah Jahan staged
the Urs celebration at the Taj Mahal. (Urs
celebrations involve prayers and song in
praise of the deceased, usually a saint.) The

k

©

first Urs occurred on June 22, 1632, even
before the tomb was completed. Shah Jahan
was also buried on Mumtaz’s right, feet facing
south, and closer to the Ka’aba, as required
by Islam. The Taj Mahal thus is truly the tornb
of both Mumtaz Mahal and Shah Jahan.
Controversy surrounds the question of

who was the architect of the Taj Mahal.
The historical records list several people
responsible for the tomb, or parts of it. Ismail
Khan from Turkey may have designed the
dome. Qazim Khan frorn Lahore cast its gold
finial. Chiranjilal, a local lapidary from Delhi,
was the chief sculptor and mosaicist. Amanat
Khan from Shiraz was the chief calligrapher.
Other specialists included sculptors from
Bukhara, calligraphers from Syria and Persia,
inlayers from southern India, stonecutters
from Baluchistan, and so on. Thirty-seven

men can be counted in the creative nucleus.
In this sense, the Taj Mahal was a global
project. Yet given that Shah Jahan personally
supervised the design and approved every
aspect of the project, he must be recognized
as its chief architect.

Although the bulk of the building
material is from South Asia, the Taj Mahal’s
ornamental materials came from all around
Eurasia. Its marble and red sandstone carne

‘ J
Agra Fort’ <

Hy
on? Rigs

[‘y" Mahal

14.55 Area map of Agra

from the hills of Makrana, near Jaipur,
Rajasthan. From central Asia came nephrite
jade and crystal: frorn Tibet, turquoise;
from upper Burma, yellow amber; from
Badakhshan in northeastern Afghanistan,
lapis lazuli; from Egypt, chrysolite; and frorn
the Indian Ocean, rare shells, coral, and
mother-of-pearl. In addition, topazes, onyxes,
garnets, sapphires, and bloodstones were
among the forty-three types of precious and
semiprecious stones from all around India
were used.

The main tomb is on the southern bank
of the Yarmuna River on a vast platform, 103
meters square and 7 meters high, erected
on arches. To its west stands a diminutive
mosque, made of sandstone, with three
modest marble domes. To its east is an
identical structure, placed there to provide
symmetry. Reflected in the wide waters of
the Yamuna, which flows slowly in Agra,
the Taj Mahal seers to be an apparition of
domes and minarets rising above the plain.
The side usually depicted today is actually
the building's rear; the Mughal emperors
accessed it from the water, arriving by
means of a special barge. It docked at the
northeastern edge of the platform, from
which a stair leads up to the tomb.

Land-based access to the Taj is from its
southern garden. The simple and discrete red
sandstone walls of its perimeter betray little of
the drama that awaits inside. A small gate in
the middle of the wall leads into a quadrangular
enclosure with spaces for maintenance workers
and shops. Stepping out beyond the wall is

the main gate of red sandstone and marble,

a rectangular iwan surmounted by a string of
closely spaced chaittris. In the center, a single
large pointed arch opens onto the entrance bay
that telescopes down into the actual entrance
arch itself. From here the main body of the Taj
Mahal is perfectly framed.

The tomb sits at the end of a 300-meter-
square garden divided into four quadrants (each
twice subdivided into further quadrants) known
as the char bagh (meaning “four gardens). It
is a representation of the Islamic Garden of
Paradise. Four channels, representing the four
rivers of Paradise, flow out from the center. The
Islamic Garden of Paradise is a reinterpretation
of the Garden of Eden from the Old Testernent.
Deciduous and evergreen trees fill the garden.

Once through the gate, the full frame of
the Taj Mahal jumps into focus. The tomb of
Mumtaz Mahal and Shah Jahan is placed at the
end of the 92-meter-square garden that serves Cone ‘ ax
as its foreground. Even at that distance the {
Taj Mahal fills the frame. The backdrop, given
the hidden presence of the Yamuna River, is
empty—or, rather, always filled by the color of
the sky. Water channels, with fountains down
their middle, are wide and generous. They
reflect the tomb and further magnify it. The
slender three-story minarets create an implied
cube that contains the Taj Mahal, making the
tomb three-dimensional. The double dome of
the tomb, however, rises above the minarets,
so that it is only the dome and the outer dome
(conceptually the dome of heaven) that rise
above the frame created by the minarets.
he translucent white marble that covers the
entire surface of the tomb absorbs and reflects
the light. In the mornings and evenings, it has
a reddish hue; during the day, it is a subdued
white with a slight bluish tinge; and on moonlit
nights, it is a brilliant white. On bright days,
the light blurs the edges of the tomb, making
it shimmer. Since every surface is covered in
the same white marble, even the shadows are

id

softened. At dusk and dawn, the Taj Mahal f coott

appears to float weightlessly, an ethereal, 4 k

uncanny apparition. “Ty 0 200 m
IY oe 4 , ! 1

14.57 Site plan: Taj Mahal, tomb of Muntaz Mahal

14.58 Taj Mahal, Agra, India

Double dome

oe Bg? Se
cya giGs Site
cy edi Ba

14.61 Plan with mass and space rendered as figures, Taj Mahal

.

14.59 Faux tombs of Mumtaz and Shah Jahan, Taj Mahal

In plan, the Taj Mahal’s central chamber is
surrounded by four corner spaces connected

by corridors to permit circumambulation. At the
ground-entrance level are the tomb markers of
Mumtaz and Shah Jahan, with the actual burials
in a crypt directly below (accessible by a stair).
The section reveals that the outer bulbous dome
is raised exceptionally high on a drum well above
the inner dome, so that the volume contained

in the upper dome is actually equivalent to

the volume below. Because of the high drum,
the outer dome rises well above the central

iwan of the elevation, making it the undisputed
center of the composition (unlike, for instance,
Humanyun’s Tomb, where the side chambers
compete with the central dome, making the
overall structure more squat than tall). The side
iwans are considerably lower; they are faceted
only on the outer side, and not on the inner as

at Humanyun's Tomb; and the articulation of all
horizontal elements has been decidedly subdued
in favor of the vertical. Indeed, a distinguishing
characteristic of the Taj Mahal's massing is that
in elevation, all the elements are clustered and
hierarchically arranged to ensure that they do
not compete with each other and instead build
up the centrality of the main dome. Even the
chattris are clustered right next to the central

dome, almost as if they were supporting domes
themselves. Drawing an imaginary line along
the edges of the central dome and the chattris
yields a triangle or pyramid, framed by the four
minarets.

VUJAYNAGARA

The brothers Harihara and Bukka escaped ~
from captivity under Ala-ud-Din Khilji, to - .
establish a new kingdom in the mid-14th 3 . weet ie Q we
century that resisted the rising tide of Islamic fo. tee fh.
rule for 250 years. Consolidating Chalukyan, Manmatha tank
Hoysala, and late Chola territories,

Vijayanagara built up its wealth by investing

in Cholan decentralized ternple-based

administration and by irrigating new lands. A

complex of canals, ducts, small dams, and

aqueducts irrigated the surrounding lands,

brought water to the city, and fed the palace’s

tanks and baths. A network of roads radiated

outward from Vijayanagara. Commerce

between the Portuguese, who captured Goa c poo en!
in 1510, and Vijayanagara was particularly ws Q 400m
important. 14.62 Site plan: Vijayanagara Temples, India

The capital was located to maximize
defense. Rocky hills that were difficult to
traverse and the impassable Tungabhadra
River provided defense from north and west,
the primary directions of a potential attack.
The city itself was located on an uneven
plateau, and the urban area was built into the
gullies and valleys of the terrain.

Vijayanagara’s temples and palaces were
aligned to the cardinal directions, but three
long market streets emanating from the
temples are all mysteriously aligned about
2 degrees south of east. The main temples
are freestanding on the southern bank of
the Tungabhadra, but the palaces and the
city are enclosed in a fortified wall. The
palace complexes are bound in their own
enclosures. A “hundred-columned hall” and
a huge platform, the Mahanavami Dibba,
were designed to stage frequent ceremonies
for the presentation of tribute by vassals. An
elaborate ceremonial tank and bathing pool,
both fed by aqueducts, were part of the main
palace. The tank was in fact disassembled
from an unknown location, probably
Chalukyan, and reassembled in Vijaynagar. A
long passage way sliced between two palaces
gave public access to the Ramachandra
Temple, the oldest and most sacred temple in
Vijayanagara.

Unpassable rocky land

&
p32] Mahanavami Dibba,
a

4 “| — Royal tank
- Great bath é

vf Access passes to “4
4 Ramachandra Temple

ia) 500 m

L ony i aos

ip

14.64 Site plan: Vijayanagara Palaces

Waterfront bathing grats

Virspassha | ngam

of 14.66 Market street in the landscape, Vijayanagara

Market stroes

ay 0 80m

14.65 Plan: Virupaksha Temple, Vijayanagara, India

The Virupaksha, Vijayanagara’s most Fr
important temple, started as a small
10th-century shiva shrine, with nearby ghats
on the Tungabhadra. Over time it grew into a
gigantic urban complex in itself, extending to
both the water in the north and the market
street to the east. The nandi enclosure

was added in the 15th century; the open
mandapa, surrounding cloister, and the two
gopurams were built early in the 16th century
by Krishnadevaraya (r.1509-29), Vijayanagara
main period of growth. Krishnadevaraya also
formalized the tank and expanded the ghats.
All the subsidiary shrines were integrated into
the complex over time. The Virupaksha, like
all other temples, opens into a long market
street, effecting a direct connection between
commerce and religion. All the temples also
visually connected with each other and with
significant hilltops that themselves had small
temples on them.

14.67 Royal tank with aqueduct, Vijayanagara

Bidar

Gulbsren © @Wondo

Bapur@y
sos @ Vijayanagar

Chandragiri

vetlore®
®

Gingee

Bay of Bengal

Thanjavor@)

Madural®

14.68 Bijapur, Vijayanagara, and the neighboring region

BIJAPUR

An alliance of the armies of Golconda,
Bijapur, Bidar, and Gulbarga defeated and
laid waste to Vijayanagara in 1565. The
Bijapur dynasty, founded by Yusuf Adil Shah
(r. 1489-1510), benefited the most from

the fall of Vijayanagara. Yusuf built Bijapur
into a citadel with 10 kilometers of walls

and six gates. Whereas his buildings were
rather austere, those of Ibrahim Adil Shah II
(r. 1580-1627) are surnptuous and celebratory.
Ibrahim II lavished attention on the tomb and
mosque complex he originally built for his
wife but that eventually held his own tornb
and those of the rest of his family as well.

The mosque and mausoleum square off on a
single platform placed asymmetrically within
a larger enclosure. The freestanding mosque
has five arches three bay deep, with a bulbous
dome over the central bays. A deep parapet
supported by closely spaced brackets rounds
out at the corners in a profusion of brackets;
these spin tall, thin minarets that culminate

in small bulbous domes—almost complete
spheres—supported like balls on a bed on

a bed of flower petals. The central dome
similarly appears to be a complete sphere,
supported by tall lotus petals. The four corner
minarets define a spatial field twice the height

14.69 Tomb of Ibrahim Il, Bijapur, India

0 100m

Coe a te

14.70 Section and plan: Tomb of Ibrahim Il, Bijapur

14.71 Gol Gumbaz, Bijapur, India

of the primary building, at the center of which
is the central dome with its own miniature
corer minarets. Ibrahim Il’s tomb, on the
east side, abuts the edge of the compound.
Although it has seven arches on each side

in a varying rhythm of widths, the tomb’s
overall vocabulary harmonizes with that of the
mosque.

The most unusual of Bijapur’s buildings
is the Gol Gumbaz, the largest single-
chambered building ever constructed. It
was a tornb built by Ibrahim I\'s successor,
Muhammad Adil Shah (r. 1627-57), for
himself. Eight intersecting pointed arches,
springing from two rotated squares, support
both a round platform and the gigantic
hemispherical dome. Built of horizontal brick
courses cemented with thick layers of lime
mortar, the dome is 3.5 meters thick at the
base. It has six small openings, and a flat
section at the crown. Its supporting walls
are largely plain and unornamented. The
main entrance to the west, and there is an
unoccupied niche in the eastern wall. In the
middle, directly below the intersections of the
arches, is a simple platform with the tombs
of Muhammad and his family at the center.
Outside there are four corner turrets, more
like stubs, with simple domes.

ISFAHAN

In Persia, throughout the 16th century
various dynasties vied for control, with the
Safavids (who originated in Azerbaijan), led
by Shah Ismail | (1501-24), finally winning
out in 1501. The population of Persia until
that time had been chiefly Sunni, but Ismail
enforced adherence to the Shi'ite sect

and began a campaign of conversion and
unification. He also sought to retake what
had been lost between 1501 and 1587 to
the Ottornans. Close ties with China and
Europe were characteristic of the period. Iraq
remained united with Persia until 1653, with
the Shiite pilgrimage centers prospering.
Under Shah Abbas (r. 1587-1629),
Isfahan—located almost in the center of Iran,
between Tehran and Fars—was made the
capital in 1598. It was rebuilt into one of the
largest cities of the world and the focus for all
the artistic energy in the country. Transferring
the capital away from the insecure borderland
to the center of the country was part of
Abbas's policy of state consolidation. Isfahan,
with a population of about half a million,
soon became a grand cosmopolitan center
visited by English and Dutch merchants and
European artists and diplomats—the latter

hoping to secure alliances with the Safavid

14.72 Section: Gol Gumbaz, Bijapur

court against their cormmon enemy, the
Ottomans. A famous rhyme, /sfahan nesf-
eh jahan (“Isfahan is half the world”), was
coined in the 16th century to express the
city’s grandeur. The new layout exemplified
the most extensive urban planning in the
world west of China.

Previously, the central square of the city
lay next to the old Friday Mosque, believed
to have been built on the site of a Zoroastrian
fire temple. Though many of the old buildings
in that area were restored by Abbas, he
instructed his planners to create a new urban
center to the south of the old city center and
named it Naqsh-e Jahan (“Design of the
World”). It consisted of a vast, rectangular
open space that served as the city’s new
civic and commercial center. To its west
was a monumental boulevard, Chahar Bagh
Avenue, some 4 kilometers long, with canals,
fountains, and trees, and flanked by palaces
of the nobility. The boulevard stretched
across the Zayanda River over a 300-meter-
long multitiered bridge that connected the
city to several garden estates (chahar bagh
means “garden retreat") to the south. These
estates were large, walled enclosures with
pools, promenades, and pavilions. The
central element in the composition—and the

14.73 Main square of Isfahan, Iran

ink between the commercial district and the
avenue—was the Imperial Palace in its own
walled precinct, the Naqsh-e Jahan garden.
The new square—still today one of the
jargest in the world (512 by 159 meters)—
was the symbolic center of the Safavid
dynasty and its empire. It was used for
festivals, markets, and games of polo. At
night, fifty thousand earthenware lamps
ung from poles in front of the buildings to
illurninate the square. It was designed with
two stories of shops around its perimeter.
The long, modular facades decorated with
polychrome glazed tiles were broken only by
the monumental entrances to four buildings:
the Masjid-i-Shah Mosque in the south, the
Sheikh Lotfollah Mosque in the east, the
Ali Qapu Palace in the west, and the Great
Bazaar to the north. A royal mint and a
royal caravansary were also included in the
ensemble, as well as baths and a hospital.

14.74 Plan: Isfahan, Iran :

To Old City of
ja ity at,
Friday Mosque’ y

Can

<
ie Old Maidan
ange o-

Ali Qapu Palace —, ate ong
\ s

Chahar Bagh

600 m .
a .

14.75 Masjid-i-Shah Mosque, Isfahan, Iran

The Masjid-i-Shah Mosque, begun in 1611,
is set at a 45-degree angle to the square so
as to face in the direction of Mecca. Its main
portal mirrors the entrance to the bazaar to
the north. The mosque uses the four-iwan
scheme, with a central courtyard 70 meters
square and surrounded by two-story arcades
noted for a calm balance between volumetric
organization, decorative detail, and unifying
symmetry. The plan is, in fact, distinguished
from many other such buildings by its
unusual concern for such symmetry.

The domed sanctuary is flanked by
rectangular chambers covered by eight
domes that serve as winter prayer halls.
These halls lead to rectangular courts
surrounded by arcades that also serve as
madrasas. The entrance portal is a tour de
force of tile decoration, executed in a full
palette of six colors (dark blue, light blue,
white, black, yellow, and green). Glittering
tiers of muqarnas fill the half-dome, some
panels of which are decorated with stars and
vines scrolling from vases.

Sheikh Lotfollah
Mosque

Masjid-i-Shah Mosque

14.77 Plan: Main square, Isfahan

France Austria Poland Russia
@Budapest
@Mohacs
Q
&,
Rome Black Sea %
Constantinople, ©? bilisi
@Naples ® Sinope @Trezibond
@pursaangora
© @smyrna Ottoman Empire @Tabriz
Algiers © @Aleppo
Tunis Mediterranean Sea
© @Pamascus @Baghdad
Tripoli RO) jerusalem
Alexandria
Cairo

14.78 Ottoman Empire

. os,
°F Courtyard + mm.
- oa
a &
MLA,

ar

14.79 Plan: Suleymaniye Complex, Istanbul

a
arn Mosque
7 aa Ped ie
"+ Ww’ Suleyman | Mausoleu
. ‘,

Qt

6 So Ty Sn Se bee Go by be or by oe Be

&

100 m

EB so

SULEYMANIYE COMPLEX
The Ottoman sultan Suleyman | (r. 1520-66),
also known as Suleyman the Magnificent,
not only expanded the reach of the Islamic
armies but also sought to turn Constantinople
into the center of Islamic civilization through a
series of building projects, including bridges,
mosques, palaces, and various charitable
and social establishments. He had the
benefit of an extraordinarily gifted architect,
Mimar Sinan (1491-1588), a contemporary
of both Michelangelo and Andrea Palladio,
with whom he is often compared. Sinan
constructed nearly two hundred buildings
in Constantinople alone, changing the face
of the city and thereby creating its unique
silhouette of mighty domes and slender
minarets. As an officer in the military and
a trained engineer, Sinan assisted in the
building of defense works and bridges, and
converted churches into mosques. With the
capture of Cairo, he was promoted to chief
architect and assigned the task of putting an
Ottoman stamp on that city.
Though Sinan was consumed by the
ambition to create a domed building modeled
on the style of the Hagia Sophia, his signature
achievement was to fuse Seljuk features,
with their emphasis on portals, with the stone
mastery of Anatolia and the structural logic
of the Byzantine domes into a seamless and
novel unity. This is nowhere better expressed
than in Sinan’s masterwork, the Suleymaniye
Complex, begun in 1559, commissioned by
Suleyman the Magnificent in the wake of his
military successes in Iraq and the Balkans.
The walled complex (216 by 144 meters)
was terraced up a hill to take advantage of
the view overlooking the Golden Horn to the
north, and it contains, among other things,
four madrasas, a medical madrasa and a
hospice, a caravansary, a bath, and a bazaar.
The spatial composition of the mosque is
obviously modeled on the Hagia Sophia,
and in this it was similar to a trend already
epitomized by the designer of the Beyazit
Mosque (1501-6), except that with Sinan as
the architect, the composition is considerably
tighter.


14.80 Elevation and section: Suleymaniye Mosque, Istanbul

The building is also, in many respects,
very different from its Justinian model. It is

dominated by a dome 48 meters high, with
two flanking half-domes on the principal east-
west axis and arches on the cross-axis. The
weight descends to the ground by means
of four massive columns of granite. On the
exterior, the forecourt has a colossal portal
with a tympanum framed by half-columns
and minarets at the corners. Construction
was organized by a court management
office that, in consultation with the sultan,
planned and oversaw the building project.
Workers were Muslims as well as Christians
and were organized according to their

skills. The decorative tiles were made in

Iznik, the carpets in Anatolia and Egypt,

and the colored and clear glass (the latter

a technological innovation of the time) in
Venice; the limestone and granite came fromm
the quarries on the Sea of Marmara, and the
lead for the window grilles and doors from the
Balkans.

While the Hagia Sophia was dark on the
inside and designed to have a mysterious
effect, Sinan's building is lit from floor to
dome in equal measure and pervaded by a
sense of clarity and discipline. The windows
are numerous and wide, and since the
galleries are pushed back, sunlight entering

through the windows of the sidewalls

reaches directly into the central space. The
architectural volumes are clearly legible and
enhanced by a corbelled gallery at the level
of the springing of the arches (sornewhat
similar in effect to the arch style at Santa
Maria del Fiore in Florence), thereby unifying
the central unit underneath the domes. By
comparison, at the Hagia Sophia, the surface
mosaics and gilding tend to blanket the form.
Sinan’s mosques served as models for Sultan
Ahmed’s mosque, built by Mehmet Agha,

a student of Sinan; it is known as the Blue
Mosque (1606-17).

14.81 Vaulting in the Suleymaniye Mosque

14.82 Suleymaniye Complex

b

a 6
‘ + Cathedral of the Archangel Micheel
pel \Santunciaton Cathedral .
A ieemtin palace se Fa
fo Amory mo

*

14.83 Plan of the Kremlin, Moscow, Russia

KREMLIN’S NEW CHURCHES

The Byzantine Church, in a desperate move
to relieve Turkish pressure on Constantinople,
agreed to reunite with the Roman Catholic
Church (Union of Florence, 1439). The
Russian Church, a delegate of which was
present at the signing in Florence, chose,
jowever, to repudiate the treaty and to
maintain the Russian Church as defenders
of the Orthodox faith. This sense of renewal,
along with the consolidation of central
Russian lands in the face of the disintegrating
Mongol Empire, spurred an unprecedented
uilding campaign, especially under Ivan III
(r. 1462-1505). Despite the Russian
insistence on a decoupled relationship with
the West on matters of church doctrine,

van Ill sent an envoy to Italy in 1475

to seek out Italian architects who could

assist in the planning and execution of his
various construction projects. None was
more important than the redesigning of the
Kremlin, the hilltop fortification compound at
the center of Moscow that the city rulers had
used as their place of residence since the
12th century.

The most important Italian architect to
arrive was Aristotile Fioravanti (1420-85),
who had worked in the service of Francesco
Sforza in Milan. He designed the Cathedral
of the Assumption or Repose of the Virgin
(Uspenskii Sobor), a church that became the
location for the crowning of Russian rulers
and the investiture of the patriarchs of the
Russian Orthodox Church. Though the design

rhedral of the Assumption fy +

fe

14.84 Cathedral of the Assumption, Moscow

was Closely monitored by the Russian clergy,
ever on guard against any possible heresy *
or the slightest sign of “Latinity,” the church
brilliantly fuses Italian and Russian motifs.
The cathedral was designed as an open
nine-square grid added to the front of the
iconostasis, which was incorporated into the
gridded system. Pilasters thicken the walls to
give the volume a typical Italian flavor. The
strict lines of the cornices darnpen the profile
of the semicircular zakomary gables. The
groin vaults support tall drums and gilded
domes. The typically Russian pentacupolar
silhouette brings the Italian and Russian
elements together. Fioravanti’s technical
expertise allowed him to provide better-
finished limestone walls and better bricks and
mortar, yielding a thinner but more durable
structure.

One of the final churches begun by
Ivan Ill was the Cathedral of the Archangel
Michael (begun 1505) on a site 100
meters to the south of the Cathedral of the
Assumption. It was to be used as the burial
site for Russian rulers. The architect, Aleviz
Novyi, had arrived in Moscow in 1504
after completing a palace for the Crimean
khan, Mengli-Girei, at Bakhchisarai. He was
possibly Alvise Lamberti da Montagnana, a
student of Mauro Codussi, the noted Venetian
architect. The architecture clearly reflects a
Venetian style, as opposed to the Lombard
style of Fioravanti. The facade is of a
standard tripartite division, whereas the side
facade has an ababa rhythm.

14.85 Plan and section: Cathedral
of the Assumption

Instead of unadorned piers, as at the
Cathedral of the Assumption (in the city of
Vladimir, 1158-60), there are two registers
of pilasters, some of the earliest examples of
the neoclassical style in Russian architecture.
Much like the Cathedral of the Assumption,
there is a fusion of khanate and classical
motifs, especially in the series of shell arches
that form the crown of the building.

Indeed, it was the intent of Ivan’s
architects to remain firmly rooted in the
Russian tradition, and classicism was
therefore sublimated into regional idioms to
maintain, for political purposes, a continuity
with the past. Thus, here were the beginnings
of the dialogue between classicism as a kind
of universal idiom and regional expression—a
dialogue that persists into the present in
various forms.

Church of the Ascension
Following lvan IV's conquest in 1554-6 of
the Khanate of Astrakhan at the mouth of the
Volga on the Caspian Sea, one of the most
important Eurasian trading arteries came into
Muscovite possession. Just as importantly, 8 oo. See -
the conquest gave a boost to the Russian 14.86 Church of the Archangel Michael, Moscow
Orthodox Church, which had been facing
challenges to its wealth, institutions, and even
to its doctrines from various religious groups.
The new churches being built at the time are
known as tower churches and have become
some of the more distinctive examples of
Russian architecture. One of the most noted
examples is the Church of the Purification
(latter half of the 17th century), which
was built in Aleksandrova Sloboda, in the
compound from which lvan himself ruled.
Built over an earlier structure, it consists
of a two-story polygonal arcade supporting
tiers of kokoshniki (a decorative form), an
open octagon, and on top, a tent roof with
cupola, soaring to a height of 56 meters. The
uilding thus moves away from the religious
traditions embedded in the pentacupolar
motif toward a dynastic message, reaching its
apotheosis at the Church of the Ascension at
olomenskoe (1529-32) some 10 kilometers
southeast of the Kremlin in Moscow. This

was a two-tier arcaded church reached

y external staircases, on top of which

rose an astonishing structure consisting

of the body of the church, three tiers of
lattened kokoshniki, and an octagonal drum
supported by a tent tower on top.

14.87 Church of the Ascension, Kolomenskoe, Russia

Berber tribes

@ Jpozon

Asante

i Benin

Remnant states of
Mali and Songhai

Bornu Empire

Bantu peoples

Conga|states

South Atlantic Ocean

14.88 Africa, ca. 1600

DOGON OF MALI
nthe 17th century, the African continent
elow the Islamic north consisted of
a complex web of social and political
organizations. Some societies, like the
Asante, Yoruba, and Tutsi, maintained
large states; others, like the Mbuti and Efe
of central Africa and the Kalahari Desert,
continued a life of hunting and gathering.
Despite the tendency to see African society
as a collection of self-contained and self-
supporting tribes, in reality, various groups
ad long and extensive contacts with one
another through trade. Neighboring societies
may in fact have borrowed elements of each
other's rituals over the centuries, making
it impossible to trace the precise origin
of particular rituals. During the 1700s,
aggressive Islamization from the north deeply
impacted and changed West African nations,
such as the Bambara, but full Islamization,
still a matter of political friction to this day,
was never achieved; often, a hybrid religious
culture wasa created instead.
Western Africa was for a while dominated
y the Mali Empire and then the Songhai,
oth of which had strong trade connections
to the north. But when the latter were
defeated by Moroccan forces, the area was
eft to various regional powers, and the center
of political and economic gravity moved to the
coast (to the Asante kingdom in Ghana and,
farther east, to Benin, in the modern state of
igeria) and eastward to the Bornu Empire in
iger. The Mossi retained control of the Mali
eartland in central Burkina Faso.

Mamluk\sultanate

Funj sultanate

Ethiopia

Efe and Mbuti

Tutsi

&
gs
=
&
go
s

14.89 Dogon communal structure, Mali

Between the 12th and 17th centuries,
difficulties with the Mossi and with Islamic
slave raiders forced several groups in Mali

to move east, to more defensible positions
along and below the Bandiagara Cliffs, a
150-kiloreter-long sandstone escarpment

in south-central Mali. The name Dogon was
given to these people by the French in the
early 20th century, even though they are

not a homogeneous group but a mosaic

of different cultures, as is clear from their
language, which consists of numerous
dialects. In their new homes, the Dogon
encountered a preexisting culture, the Tellem,
whom they accepted into their society.

Even today, the Teller are the smithies for
the Dogon, and they are responsible for
making the important ancestor statues that
are commissioned by Dogon elders for their
ceremonies. The Tellem are held in awe
because of their magical powers, but they are
seen as lesser in the highly stratified society
of the Dogon. Despite differences, the various
groups have lived in rernarkable peace over
the centuries.

In Dogon society, an individual's status is
determined by position within family groups
and by hierarchies based on age and rules

14.90 Dogon houses, Mali

of descent. Religion involves the worship

of ancestors as well as spirits. The Dogon
believe, however, in one god, Amma, who is
all-knowing and all-powerful and who upholds
the balance between the living and the dead.
Each clan has its own altar (taba) to Amma.

The Léwé cult, dedicated to agricultural
renewal, is the principal cult that reenacts
the departure from the ancestral homeland.
Its main symbol is the snake that comes

out of the earth of the ancestors and that
accompanies the tribes on their journey.
These and other ceremonies are overseen by
priests. All the rites and ceremonies involved
masking, performed by males personifying
supernatural beings and speaking their
special language.

Dogon society is spread out over a vast
area of cities, villages, and clan compounds.
Some of the larger cities have more than
5000 inhabitants and are composed
of densely packed compounds. These
compounds (called ginna) have different
typologies, but they mostly consist of walled
enclosures and squarish towers topped with
conically shaped straw roofs. Another type
is composed of two rectangular volumes
separated to make a courtyard with an
entrance at one end and a cylindrical kitchen
at the other. In the cliffs, the compounds
have a more compressed, beehive-style
arrangement. All cormpounds have granaries,
divided up for different purposes. They are
usually tall cylindrical structures with a door
at the top and small portals below.

The word ginna also applies to the house
of the oldest in the clan, who descends
from his clan's ancestral founder. The house
will be larger and more cornplex than the
others in the compound and will be based
on the symbolism of the number one and
the number seven, which is the sum of the
female number four and the male number
three. At the social apex is the priest (hogon),
whose house is appropriately large and
visible, its facade painted with totem images.
Civic buildings are known as toguna. They
are basically artificial forests composed of
high piles of sticks and straw held up on
posts of wood, or sornetimes stone. They
are low to the ground, so it is not possible

to stand up under them: they are places for
sitting and talking.

14.91 Plan and section: a typical Dogon housing cluster

14.92 Plan of a Dogon city

14.93 Villa Foscari, Mira, Italy

PALLADIO

Venice’s opposition to the Ottomans,
accompanied by the opening of the new
ocean trade routes, resulted a dramatic
decline in its share of the spice trade from
the Silk Route. Genoese ships, preferred

by the Spanish, replaced the Venetian
galleys; Antwerp had become Europe's
most important port, and Portugal, using

its new shipping lanes around the Cape of
Good Hope, had brought the cost of pepper
down considerably. In 1505, for example,
pepper imported frorn Venice over the old
route cost 20 Flemish groats per pound,
while Portuguese pepper cost only about 16
groats. For a while, Venice managed to hold
on to its economic position largely because
of its mainland farms. {It has been estimated
that by 1630 about 35 percent of patrician
income came from Venice’s mainland
estates.) But eventually, the long-maturing
crisis approached a climax, and by 1670
Venice was a shell of its former self.

In the interim brief window of opportunity,
Andrea Palladio (1508-80) rose to
prominence, designing most of his buildings
not in Venice where trade was in decline, but
on the farming mainland, in Vicenza. Palladio
was trained as a mason, but under the
influence of the humanist poet Giangiorgio
Trissino, who became his first patron,
he visited Rome with Trissino and made
extensive studies of the ancient buildings,
publishing his findings in 1554 in the treatise
Le antichita di Roma. In 1545, he was given
his first major commission, the rebuilding of
the Basilica in Vicenza.

The villas Palladio designed for the great
Venetian farming families were far different
from those of the popes in Rome or the
Medici in Florence, which were designed

for urban grandness and privacy. Palladio's
villas were working farms that had to
simultaneously be both functional and
dignified by access to the orders of antiquity.
This made Palladio a protomodernist, in

that he created buildings for cormmon use.
Among the numerous villas he designed, the
most distinguished are Villa Barbaro (1549),
Villa Foscari {La Malcontenta, 1560), and
Villa Emo (1599). All except Villa Barbaro
have splendid, elevated temple-front facades
giving access to a great hall. Their layouts
are always symmetrical and simple, and
the rooms, too, are governed by simple
proportions (1 by 1, 2 by 3, 3 by 4, etc.).
Windows and internal doorways are often
aligned, adding even more cohesion to
the interiors. Villa Foscari became a model

for palaces, villas, and houses throughout
Europe and the Americas. The inner planning
was based on a large cruciform hall that

reaches from front to back. Its dramatic
temple front, very three-dimensional,

faces the Brenta River. Being so intimately
connected with this gentle river imparts a
special atmosphere of practicality to the villa.
Not only could its owners easily cormmute to
the Venetian lagoon, but its farm products
could be transported to market. The villa was
commissioned in 1550 and has in modern
times again returned to members of the
Foscari family, who have carefully restored it.

elie goto ad

oink

Kee woke eis oll

14.94 Plan and section: Villa Foscari

14.95 Villa Rotonda, near Vicenza, Italy

Villa Rotonda

Villa Rotonda (1566), though having

many of the attributes of a working farm,
was designed for the papal prelate Paclo
Almerico as a type of retirement estate. The
building’s design is unusual for Palladio; it
is symmetrical around both axes and stands
on the top of a low hill artificially enhanced
with retaining walls. At the center of the
building was a rotunda—criginally planned
with an open oculus—with identical suites
of rooms at each of the four corners. Each
of the four facades had a temple front.

he principal material was brick covered
with stucco painted white. Given its cost in
times of economic stress, stone was used
sparingly, reserved for the capitals and for
the ornamentation around windows. The
villa, elevated on a basement disguised by its

he entrance facing the northwest loggia is
recessed into the hill so that from the villa
looking back over the entrance, one sees the

o the north are orchards going down toward
a river. Cut out of the woods to the south is a
giardino segreto, which can only be reached
rom the basement. Only on the east side is

he view of the landscape unobstructed.

stairs, is itself built out on an artificial terrace.

chapel on the opposite side of the small road.

14.96 Site plan and section: Villa Rotonda

14.97 Villa Trissino: From The Four Books
on Architecture, Andrea Palladio

Palladio was the most systematic and
systern-conscious of the great Renaissance
architects, as evidenced by his The Four
Books on Architecture (1570). Leon Battista
Alberti and Sebastiano Serlio had been
forerunners with treatises of their own, but
Palladio’s approach was different. Alberti,

in his Ten Books on Architecture (1452),
attempted a cormprehensive study of the

ield of architecture and dealt with everything
rom the different types of buildings to where
est to get building materials. There were

no drawings. Serlio, in his Five Books on
Architecture (first volume appearing in 1537),
jad plenty of drawings, but his purpose

was to show how the classical systern could

e put to use to generate an almost infinite
variety of plans. This was in contrast to
Palladio, who emphasized the systematization

of the ground plan and its relationship to the
section and elevation of a building. Whereas
Serlio’s treatise allowed the patron a wide
variety of options, Palladio’s designs were
much more circumscribed. Yet what made
Palladio’s architecture so influential was that
despite its rigor it never produced uniform
or boring buildings. Method and system did
not overshadow creativity. Also important

for Palladio was the relationship between

the building as an object and its broader
framing. Courtyards and perimeter walls were
14.98 Plan and section-elevation: Villa Rotonda integrated into the composition.


BAROQUE ITALY

The Baroque style emerged in Rome
essentially as a counterstatement to the
Reformation; the architects who had
contributed most to bring it to its ripe

and full-fledged characteristics were
Giovanni Lorenzo Bernini (1598-1680) and
Francesco Castelli Borromini (1599-1667).

t is important here to differentiate Roman
Baroque from European Baroque. Baroque
Rome waned after 1648 under Pope
Alexander VII. From that time forward the
papacy was no longer a major power in
European politics. With the ascendancy of
France and Austria, the Baroque style began
to change, assuming a more urban form and,

insofar as it was now also applied to chateaux
and princes’ castles, acquiring elements
such as public parks and waterworks.
Approaches often extended far into the
landscape with elongated perspectives.

In France it is exernplified by the Place
Venddme in Paris and the Chateau de Vaux-
le-Vicomte (1656-61) by André Le Nétre; in
Austria, by the castle of Schénbrunn Palace
(1695). Eventually the Baroque became

an architecture of the late 17th-century
European capitals—Rome, Paris, London,
and Vienna—giving to these cities a profile
that remains very much part of their identities
today. On the negative side, many venerable
old buildings of the Middle Ages were

given new Baroque facades or makeovers,
their interiors upgraded to conform to the

“modernizing” trend of the Baroque.

The decade of the 1620s was a
particularly promising moment in church
politics. The heroes of the Counter-
Reformation (many of them Spanish) were
canonized—Charles Borromeo in 1610;
ignatius de Loyola, Francis Xavier, Filippo

eri, and Teresa of Avila, all in 1622; and
Gaetano da Thiene in 1629. This, in itself,
was a signal for new churches and chapels to
e built, in honor of the new saints.
In church architecture, the Greek
cross, which was sometimes favored in the
Renaissance because of its syrnmetry, was

rejected for the conventions of the Latin
cross, which was liturgically more satisfying
for Counter-Reformation purposes, as it

allowed for a clear separation between clergy

14.99 Palace of the Senators, Campidoglio, Rome

and laity, this being one of the distinctions
between Catholic and Protestant churches
of the time. The preference, as established
at Il Gesu, was for a longitudinal nave
unencumbered as much as possible by
side aisles. Transepts were minimized or
nonexistent, allowing the use of rectangles
and ovals, which also helped to create a
sense of community that these churches
were to inculcate. Baroque architects
preferred curves to straight lines, deploying
niches, walls, pilasters, and attached
columns in a seamless way that made
architecture seem pliant and rubbery—not
framing the liturgical but part of it. They also
had an appreciation of rhythmic movement
through space, and intensified visual
dynamics with the use of painting as well
as sculptural putti (winged babies), which

often inhabit the higher reaches of the space,

sitting on ledges and entablatures. While in
medieval cathedrals stained glass modulated
the light, Baroque churches had plain glass
devoid of tracery and the windows were often
unseen, designed to create a mysterious

and diffuse light. One often finds a Baroque
church quite luminous upon entering—
without first noticing any windows at all.

Campidoglio
The European 16th century was marked in
the main by the Reformation and Counter-
Reformation triggered by a recalcitrant
monk in Germany. When Martin Luther
(1483-1546) nailed his Ninety-Five Theses
to the church door in Wittenberg in 1517,
he only wanted to reform corruption in the
Catholic Church. He had no idea that he was
about to change the course of history. The
rebellion against the church spread and soon
embroiled Europe in terrible wars for most
of the next two centuries. Additional reform
movements emerged—such as the Calvinists,
who believed in a form of predestination—but
the various versions of counter-movements
are for the most part surmmed up as
“Protestant,” a word derived from “protest.”
The response of the Catholic Church was
called the Counter-Reformation, in which
architecture played an important role, with
great emphasis put on representation.
Following the embarrassing sack of Rome
by the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V's
troops in 1527, Pope Paul III (Alessandro
Farnese; r. 1534-49) initiated a series of
bold building campaigns to restore a sense of
prestige, chief among them the construction

14.100 Facade, Capitoline Museum, Rome

of a piazza on Capitoline Hill, the nominal site
of the Roman Senate. Though the area was
of no particular importance to the political
ideology of the papacy, Paul Ili wanted the
Campidoglio to impress Charles V on his
visit to Rome in 1536. The papacy, after all,
depended significantly on the beneficence of
the Holy Roman Emperor, who had recently
redoubled his wealth with riches looted from
the Americas.
Michelangelo Buonarroti (1475-1564)
was put in charge of the transformation
(begun 1538). He transfigured the disorderly
complex into a symmetrical composition
with a trapezoidal piazza and three palace
ronts. The Via Sacra crossed the piazza,
then descended a broad gentle stairway also
designed by Michelangelo. In the name of
symmetry, Michelangelo added a building,
nown as the Palazzo Nuovo (1646-50),
with no programmatic requirements. This
uilding, serving only as a framing device
for the piazza, was erected by Carlo Rainaldi
according to Michelangelo's designs.
Although it looked like a habitable palazzo,
it was in reality little more than a facade.
For the first time Michelangelo used the
giant order for the pilasters supporting an
unbroken entablature, with a balustrade
above the cornice to lend monumentality to
the facade.

14.102 Location map: Piazza del Campidoglio

14.101 Plan: Piazza del Campidoglio, Rome


14.103 Aerial view: Piazza del Campidoglio, Rome

The trapezoidal shape of the piazza was
unusual, and even though it was predicated
to some degree by the existing context, it
introduced a new and more dynamic notion
of public space than had been common in
the Renaissance, which tended to favor more
static rectilinear schemes. At the center of
the piazza is a shallow oval indentation, out
of which rises a slight swelling of the ground,
its surface ornamented with a rotating
twelve-pointed blossom pattern hinting at a
zodiacal symbolism. The ideological content
of the piazza was brought to the fore by

the sculptural program. A sculpture of the
emblem of Rome, a she-wolf nursing the
twins Romulus and Remus, was placed

over the entrance of the Palace of the
Conservators. The most prominent sculpture,
however—indeed, the centerpiece of the

piazza—is an equestrian statue of Marcus
Aurelius, which was reluctantly incorporated
into the scheme by Michelangelo. It is one
of the best-preserved bronzes from Roman
times and had been brought up from the
Lateran Palace to emphasize the new civic
nature of papal power. It escaped being
melted down only because it had been
mistaken by the Church as representing
Constantine the Great, held to have been the
first Christian emperor. But now in the 17th
century, after the Renaissance, the pope
bolstered his power by identifying himself,
with a pagan Roman emperor. Michelangelo’s
ambitious project took several centuries to
complete—the final flooring was put in only
in 1940, under Mussolini, to Michelangelo's
design.

soy pee
* Y
- at ee:
1
“A ere
7 * F '
. tog : ot
{4

14.105 Partial facade: Piazza del Campidoglio

14.106 Model for St. Peter’s Basilica, Rome, made by Antonio da Sangallo the Younger

St. Peter’s Basilica

The decisive loss of Hagia Sofia in
Constantinople to the Ottomans in 1453
made St. Peter’s in Rome the solitary center
of the Christian world. This, accompanied
by new wealth from the Americas, the
rediscovery of classical orders, and the
usual papal ambitions, instigated a colossal
rebuilding of St. Peter's that took almost two
centuries to complete in its core, and was
ongoing even into the 20th century.

In 1505, Pope Julius Il decided to tear
down and rebuild St. Peter's, appointing
Bramante, who had just finished designing
the Tempietto of San Pietro in Montorio.
Bramante (who worked on the project from
1505 to 1514) made a series of plans, some
of which still survive, allowing a close look
at his design progress. The buildings he
proposed were suitably ambitious; his first
plan (ca. 1505) shows a four-sided building
sitting in a large courtyard open on all four
sides. Each arm of the Greek cross ended
with an apse projecting outward from the
surface of the building. Four large towers
were to rise from the corners. Bramante’s
building had remarkably little wall surface,
with the architectural structure being a

14.107 Medal showing Bramante’s intentions
for St. Peter’s Basilica, 1506

residue between the spaces. The center was Og.
defined by a semispherical dome resting Paeae] i by A
on columns. The building had no front, but %
was meant to be approached from all sides.
The Greek cross format exerted a strong
fascination for Renaissance architects both
as an icon, as it was for the Eastern Church,
and as a materialization of the mathematical
leals. One of the important champions
of the centralized church was Leonardo
da Vinci, who experimented with a wide
range of possibilities, most consisting of a
square, almost cubical box with apses on
all four sides. In some, the apses take on
complex shapes that allow for different formal
arrangements between primary and ancillary
spaces. All are surmounted by a dome,
usually a replica of the Duomo of Florence.
Little was done, however, until the
project fell into the hands of Michelangelo
Buonarroti. By then the decision had been
made to transform the building into a
combination centralized-longitudinal church.
By that time the piers of Bramante’s building
had been erected, and Michelangelo had
to use them. He did, however, tear down
some of the walls that had already been
constructed.

14.108 Plan of St. Peter's Basilica by Bramante

14.109 Plan of St. Peter’s Basilica hy Sangallo

14.110 St. Peter’s Basilica, Rome

Compared to Bramante's, Michelangelo's plan
is strikingly simpler. No longer was there a
proportional declination of space from large
to small. Instead, there was a single square
with four apsidal ends to the Greek cross.

A longitudinal orientation was created by

the addition of a colonnaded portico across
the front. The correlation between inside

and outside was obscured, however, by the
fattening of the mass to the right and left

of each of the external apses, creating the
appearance of a continuous succession of
pilasters. In comparison with Bramante’s
design, which was intended to be read from
the top down, its form dissolving into filigree
patterns of niches, columns, and vaults,
Michelangelo's building strives from the
bottom upward, with the strained relationship
between the outside shape and the dame
hinting at the mystery of the divine presence
within. The walls were not the result of
volumetric elements added together, as they
were for Bramante, but a dynamic balance
between form, structure, and space, with an
alternating rhythm of dilation and contraction.
Bramante’s building would have appeared as
a static mass, while Michelangelo's appears
as an undulating cliff surface that moves both
toward and away from the center, especially
when seen from the rear.

14.111 Dome of St. Peter’s Basilica

Michelangelo died without seeing his dome
visualized. Giacomo della Porta, who inherited
the project, changed Michaelangelo’s intent
and created an ogival form akin to the Duomo
of Florence. He also raised the dome unto a
higher drum so that it could be seen better
from the piazza in front of the building. The
windows between strongly buttressed fins are
disguised by attached column pairs. When
Michelangelo died, the front facade had yet
to be designed. A series of architects were
put in charge of the work, but until 1605

the front of the old basilica, astonishingly
enough, was still in place and was serving as
the entrance. Finally, a facade designed by
Carlo Maderno was built, which elaborated
on the themes of Michelangelo’s building.
The success of its composition is debatable.
The aediculae appear as if they barely fit in
their respective spaces; the enormous attic
story looms over the facade; and of the five
entrances, three have the lintels favored by
Michelangelo, and two are round-headed,
appearing awkward and small.


14.113 Section: St. Peter’s Basilica

14.114 Interior, St. Peter's Basilica 14.115 Facade: St. Peter's Basilica

14.116 View from the dome, St. Peter's Square, Rome

n 1626 Pope Urban VIII called upon
Giovanni Lorenzo Bernini to begin work on
the great baldachino over the papal altar of
St. Peter’s. So impressed was he that in 1629
e appointed Bernini the official architect of
St. Peter’s. But the scheme to redesign the
grand piazza in front of St. Peter's (1657-66)
came from Alexander VII. A number of

actors had to be taken into consideration.

he old entrance to the Vatican was 120
meters northeast of the portico and had to be
retained. Also, a covered processional way for
state visits to the pope had to be constructed,
and the loggia for the time-honored papal
blessing over the central entrance had to

be kept within view of the greatest possible
number of people, especially for the Easter
celebration. finally, there was a great Egyptian
obelisk that had been brought to Rome in

37 CE that had to be moved to its present site
(which occurred in 1586). Bernini’s solution
was to create and interlink two piazzas: a
trapezoidal one in front of the church and

a great oval one opposite the facade. The
trapezoidal space consists of corridor wings
connected to the facade of St. Peter’s. In this
way the basilica seems to be brought forward
and its height accentuated.

14.117 Bernini’s geometric solution for laying out
St. Peter’s Square

14.118 Aerial view of St. Peter’s Square

After experimenting with a circle, Bernini
eventually made the piazza an oval. Yet
the space is so vast that it is perceived as i
circular, with the preexisting obelisk serving

as its center, and that may indeed have been

Bernini’s intent. The colonnade consisted of Sactisty St, Peter's Basilic
two rows of column pairs that were designed

to flare out from the center; and with the side

arms being farther from the center, circularity
was emphasized. The solid strength of the
columns contrasts with the verticality of the
slender (if mismatched) Corinthian columns.
of the facade.
The site program required an important

asymmetry in the plan to accormnmodate a
suitable entrance into the Vatican Palace.

hyeore
ease

Bernini solved this by incorporating the

entrance into the northern colonnade. The
entrance opens to the Scala Regia (1663-

66), which serves to bring dignitaries up to de’:
the papal palace. The aisled and vaulted Ss
stairway is an architectural triumph over the

awkward siting. Though the space provided
was neither straight nor wide nor adequately
lit, Bernini overcame each obstacle by using

tricks of perspective that resulted in an
impressive and dignified approach to the
papal apartments.

When Bernini died in 1680, the
connection of the great oval to the street
leading up from the Tiber River had not yet
been determined. Bernini had planned a
building that would partially close off the
piazza, creating a greater sense of enclosure,
but it was never built. In 1935, under Benito
Mussolini, the area was cleared out and given
its current monumental design.

200 m

14.119 Site plan: St. Peter’s Square

14.121 Plan: Scala Regia

14.120 Colonnade, St. Peter’s Square

14.122 Sant'Andrea al Quirinale, Rome

Sant’Andrea al Quirinale

Up until the late Middle Ages in Europe,

ittle if anything was known of architects or
leading masons in respect to their life and
training. By the early 15th century, however,
the leading artists and architects began to
come into focus. Biographies of Fillippo
Brunelleschi were written, indicating his

level of farne. Michelangelo and Leonardo da
Vinci were already famous by the end of their
ifetimes. Giorgio Vasari (1511-74) compiled
the first history of Renaissance artists in

is Lives of Seventy of the Most Eminent
Painters, Sculptors, and Architects. But no
artist of his time achieved as much popular
fame or as many accolades as Gian Lorenzo
Bernini (1598-1680). When he was called
to Paris by Louis XIV to submit a design for a
contemplated new east wing for the Louvre,
people lined the streets to see his carriage
pass by.

The core architectural works of Bernini
are San Tarmmaso da Villanova at Castel
Gandolfo (1658-61), Sant'Andrea al Quirinale
in Rome (1658-70), and Santa Maria
dell’Assunzione at Ariccia (1662-64). All
three have simple geometrical plans based
on the architect's unqualified reverence

14.123 Plan and section: Sant'Andrea al Quirinale

for the Pantheon. Although Sant'Andrea
is a transverse oval, its referent remains a
classical one. The building had to be pushed
back to allow for a small piazza in front of the
church where carriages, which had become
increasingly large over time, could pull up
to the front. (The courtyard has since been
removed.)

The church sits directly opposite the
Palazzo del Quirinale, which initially was
an official apostolic residence but now is
the home of the president of modern Italy.
Intended as part of a monastic complex
set up by the Jesuit order to train novices,
the building was dedicated to recently
appointed saints of the Jesuits—Andrea
Avellino, Francis Xavier, Stanislaus Kostka,
and Ignatius Loyola. It was thus, in Bernini's
eyes, a type of pantheon of the Jesuits.
The massive Corinthian pilasters form the
entrance, out of which projects a curved
entrance canopy. The convex curve of the
projecting porch is cradled in the middle of
a concave-shaped piazza that mirrors the
shape of the central oval in the interior. On
the interior, a series of niches fill the body of
the wall, with the central apse dedicated to
St. Andrew and marked by flanking pairs of

marble columns. The other four saints were
positioned in the squarish niches on both
sides of the principal cross-axis.

The color scheme and the use of light are
striking. The Corinthian pilasters that mark
out the principal spatial configuration are in
white, whereas the spancrels, lesser pilasters,
and freestanding columns on the side of the
central apse are covered in delicate, white-
speckled, rose-tinted marble. Light from a
concealed window streams down into the
apse, illuminating a spectacular picture frame
supported by cherubs and solar rays, all in
gold. The dome over the oval glistens with
golden decorations evoking the heavenly
space to which St. Andrew ascends. It is
patterned between the ribs by finely worked
hexagonal coffers. Perched over the windows
at the base of the dome are figures of putti
and the fishermen who were St. Andrew's
companions.

Il Gest

The major institution set up by the Church
to fight the Reformation was the Society

of Jesus, also known as the Jesuits. It was
formed in 1534 by Ignatius Loyola (1491-
1556), a Basque, and six of his followers, all
students at the University of Paris in France.
Loyola, a major force behind the Counter-
Reformation, founded the Society of Jesus
“to enter upon hospital and missionary work
in Jerusalem and to go without questioning
wherever the pope might direct.” The
principal difference between the Jesuits and
other orders that had traditionally emphasized
communal religious devotion was Loyola's
relaxation of a prescribed monastic life and
an emphasis on a more active apostolic
mission. Prayer and meditation had to be
balanced with service and teaching. The
Jesuits hoped to unify religious teaching with
academic learning. Classical learning with
bible studies was required. By 1575 they had
established fourteen educational institutions
in France with about one thousand members
and with some of the colleges having a
student population of more than eight
hundred. The Jesuits also set up colleges

in India, Africa, and the Americas. In 1592,

14.124 Plan and facade: II Ges, Rome

when Cardinal Odoardo Farnese visited the
Jesuit college in the Piazza Altieri in Italy,
twenty-seven languages were being spoken in
the refectory.

Marguerite of Austria—wife of Octavio
Farnese, the nephew of Alessandro Farnese
(Pope Paul |I|)—paid for the building and
for the use of the pope's architect, Giacomo
Barozzi da Vignola (1507-73), to design Il
Gesu, the Jesuit mother church, in Rome.
The site for the church was a prominent one,
just below the Campidoglio at an important
intersection of the papal route through the
city. Vignola’s design was eventually modified,
however, by Giacomo della Porta, whose
facade was finished in 1577. In its plan
and structure, Il Gest’ was more influential
than any other Roman church of the late
16th century, although the Jesuits’ colonial
churches continued to develop in their own
way. In response to the Counter-Reformation’s
call for simplification, Il Gesu has a simplified
plan with no narthex, a single nave without
aisles, and transepts that are abridged. The
interior walls were also sparsely adorned. Side
chapels, sold to individual families, ensured
proper endowments.

The facades of Jesuit churches spelled

out the transition to the Baroque. New
formal problems were tackled and solutions
proffered that were soon to be taken up by
the great Baroque architects. For exarnple,
here we see for the first time in Il Gesu the
lower order, based on the theme of pilaster
pairs elevated on high dadoes, with a similar
dado zone separating the upper and lower
orders. The central axis is emphasized by
framed niches, as well as by the attached
columns to the right and left of the door.

14.126 Longitudinal section: Il Gest

14.125 Entrance facade: II Gesil

( ——Native American §

@Sante Fe NN settlement area SI

Acoma® . ES
New Mexico @St. Augustine g Atlantic Ocean

i 7 Gulf of Mexico mn . S

16 = 2

&

+ @New Spain °
Mexico City "“ ”

Mexica Empire att
time of conquest

Caribbean Sea

Santiago® J

14.127 The Americas, 1600 cE

SPANISH INVASION OF AMERICA
Following a series of plagues in 1362,
1363, 1367, and 1374, the expensive
campaigns of Ferdinand V and Isabella | of
Castile (r. 1474-1516) against the Moors
jad so decimated the Spanish treasury
that a century and a half of great cathedral
uilding had come to a halt. Unable to
afford the highly taxed merchandise and
spices delivered overland by way of the Silk
Route, the Spanish by the end of the 15th
century were willing to risk sailing westward
to open up a sea route to eastern markets.
Christopher Columbus's discovery of the
Americas in 1492 created excitement and
ope, although initially it brought little to
the Spanish coffers. Matters improved only
when Charles V (1500-58) was crowned Holy
Roman Emperor in 1519. The huge empire
of the Incas in South America, subdued by
Francisco Pizarro, yielded more gold than did
the conquest of Mexico by Hernan Cortés.

lot content with robbing the Incas of their
gold, the conquistadores began searching

for gold, using tens of thousands of slaves.
Rich deposits of silver were found in the

Portuguese territory
Caracas

Panama City New Granada .
. Guiana
Spanish territory e ce
,
Peru
Lima@® "***7+.,,
Cuzco,
Pacific Ocean ©
Potosi #
Inca Empire at i
time of conquest —_
a Plata

Buenos Aires

Fs
:

city of Potosi in present-day Bolivia in 1545
and at Zacatecas (in what is now Mexico)

in 1548. By 1650, Potosi was the largest
city in the Americas, with a population of
160,000. Soon Spain became the world’s
leading silver producer (the Spanish crown
received one-fifth of the silver) and ultimately
produced 50,000 tons of silver, a quantity
that doubled the previously existing stock

of silver in Europe. The result was that the
entire economic structure of Europe, and
indeed the world, had to bend to this new
reality. Vast quantities of silver were used to
buy goods from China, where silver was the
official currency. And it was not only silver
that contributed to Spain’s newfound wealth;
the salt flats in Portugal and in the Caribbean
belonged to the Spanish crown as well, and
they delivered most of the maritime salt
consumied in the West.

The money from these enterprises filtered
its way through the European markets, even
though Europe's commercialization and
industrialization based on the New World
were still a while away. Along with the wealth
came food; tomatoes, potatoes, peanuts,

cocoa, maize, pineapple, chile peppers,
vanilla, and tobacco were all American foods
that were introduced into the European and
eventually the global diet by colonization.
For a long time before the potato and tomato
became a staple of European cuisines, they
were thought to be poisonous. Inversely,
wheat, rye, oats, coffee, lemons, oranges,
millet, yarns, cotton, indigo, tea, rice,
bananas, some beans, and other products of
the Eurasian and African worlds were brought
to the Americas, along with horses, sheep,
pigs, goats, chickens, donkeys, rats, rabbits,
cats, dogs, and guinea hens, most of which
were introduced as part of the transplantation
of farming and animal husbandry systems. A
few American animal species were introduced
to Europe as well, particularly the llama and
the turkey—the latter eventually making it
back to the Americas, at least in name. But
it was arguably the “gift” of the European
diseases—particularly smallpox, influenza,
typhus, chicken pox, cholera, and measles—
that truly tipped the scales in favor of the
Europeans, as these diseases wiped out the
native populations and yielded the American
continents to relatively easy and inexpensive
colonization. The native Americans seerned
not to have had any diseases that impacted
the Old World.

Spain ruthlessly exploited its new
American colony, an effort that went
hand in hand with the forced introduction
of Christianity. At the center of Spain's
colonial system was a form of feudalism,
in which Spanish settlers (encomiendos)
were entrusted with large tracts of land,
the encomienda, along with a population
of not more than three hundred Indians.
The natives retained possession of the land,
which, however, officially belonged to the
crown of Castile. The encomiendos were
given the right of taxation and were allowed to
demand labor services from the population.
According to a papal bull of 1493, the
Spanish encomiendos were supposed to keep
order and convert the Indians under their
care to Catholicism. This, at least, was the
theory; in practice, the system soon became
corrupt and a tool for oppression and slavery.
The encomiendos introduced European
beasts of burden, farming techniques,
and manufacturing processes, along with
extensive mining facilitated by an unlimited
supply of forced labor. New towns were

created to support the encomienda economy
and to connect it to the ports. A Spanish
colonial town was laid out on a regular

grid with a plaza in the center. Church and
administrative buildings usually faced onto
the plaza.

Hard on the heels of the conquistadores
were Catholic friars—Franciscans,
Dominicans, and Augustinians—with the
assignment to claim the natives for Christ.
They built churches, and in an effort to
facilitate the task of converting the indigenous
people, often intermixed the conventions
of church liturgy with local pre-Columbian
practices. The friars were also the first to
actually defend the rights of the natives
as children of God. Central to that effort
was Bartolomé de Las Casas, a former
encomienda turned Dominican friar who
vehemently protested the encomiendos’
cruel and harsh treatment of the natives to
the Spanish crown. “Are they not human,
children of God, deserving of our protection?”
demanded de Las Casas. In response, the
Spanish crown enacted a series of laws
that prohibited the enslavement of the
native peoples. But soon after, the viceroy
was assassinated, and the new laws were
withdrawn. The Spanish referred to their work
as “conquest,” but from the perspective of
the natives of pre-Columbian America, it was,
of course, an invasion.

Atrios
The Spanish-American churches built by the
friars emphasized simplicity and directness.
Straighforward boxes with thick walls, often
buttressed on the exterior, provided a sturdy
frame for the Franciscan house of God.
Windows were few and usually very high. The
walls were unsegmented and left bare, or
were at best painted with simple illustrations
in a style not unlike that of the pre-Columbian
platform mounds. A simple stone table,
raised up by a few steps, served as an
altar, behind which might be a reredos—an
ornamental screen—often painted with
pictures illustrating Christ’s trials.

The real innovations were on the
exterior. To accommodate large groups of
worshippers, the friars developed the concept
of the atrio, a large open court, walled along
the edges, that used the facade of the
church as a backdrop; there was an outdoor

chapel to conduct Mass at the west end.

In its entirety, the atrio was reminiscent of
the plazas that fronted the pre-Columbian
pyramids which were familiar to the native
population. Within, the friars devised
processions, complete with stopping places
for the Stations of the Cross that began at the
church and rotated counterclockwise around
the atrio. The so-called stations were altars
that represented the events that occurred

as Jesus was brought to his crucifixion in
Jerusalem. Worshipers would stop at each,
thereby reenacting the way stations of
Jesus's suffering in a form of spatial prayer
that had also become common in Europe
uring this time. Hundreds of such atrio
churches were built by the Franciscans in
the 1560s and 1570s, with some of the
classic examples at Cuernavaca, Cholula,

prrtrtere

Capilla

14.129 Example of an atrio

and Atlatlahucan. The Catholic Church,
however, became very uncomfortable with
some of the lenient practices of the friars,
which they held to be unorthodox. The atrio
churches contravened the basic principle of
the house of God as a building with a roof.
The friars also favored processional activities
that often incorporated certain pre-Columbian
songs and dances. Catholic icons often
resembled older native images. All this made
the Church in Rome nervous, opposed as

it was to such hybridizations. In 1574, the
monk’s sacercotal privileges were revoked,
the building of monasteries was stopped,
and the airio churches were declared unfit
for service. Their spirit, deeply ingrained in
native consciousness, nevertheless, survived
within the Latin American church, imparting
to it its unique character.

14.128 Plan: Example of an atrio

want to lob the ball high, as it would merely
plunge into the earth. Instead, the cannonball
was shot low to the ground so that it would
ounce and ricochet through enemy lines.
Artificial sloped terraces known as glacis were
uilt around the fort to expose attackers to
cannon shot. When combined with ditches
and bastions that provide raking angles, the
geometry of an 18th-century fortification
comes quite complex, as can be seen in
Fort Manoel (ca. 1682). It was located on
Manoel Island in Marsamxett Harbor to the
northwest of the city of Valletta, in Malta.
Fort Manoel was used as a model for forts
uilt throughout the world, particularly by the
glish and the French. For example, the
English Fort Commenda, in Ghana, begun in
1686, is a similarly advanced but somewhat
simpler version. These forts would remain
the norm for the next two hundred years,
COLONIAL FORTS until the advent of aerial bombardment. One
To enforce the policy of extraction as well as of the most complete 17th- to 19th-century
to protect ports and trade routes, colonial ° Bry fortification systems still extant can be found
powers embarked on a worldwide fort- in Valetta, Malta.
building campaign. Many hundreds, if not
thousands, were built—sixty alone along
the West African coast. Unlike the old forts
of Europe, which were set up to defend

14.130 Elmina Castle, Elmina, Ghana

against marching armies and long sieges,
colonial forts were designed to withstand
raids, assaults, and bombardments of short
but potentially intense duration. They did not
have much manpower to defend them, so
they had to be built to withstand attacks, to
enable clear line of sight for firing at enemy
vessels, and to hold prisoners securely.

Portugal's Elmina Castle in Ghana, on a
promontory overlooking the mouth of a river,
set the pattern for subsequent buildings.

The rectangular castle was located in the (0) 20m °
protected core of a set of perimeter walls. A , ,
church and an administrative center faced 14.131 Plan: Elmina Castle

each other across the inner courtyard.
Corner bastions projected past the surfaces
of the building so gunners could protect the
entrances and flanks. In 1637, it was taken
by the Dutch, who rebuilt and expanded it
as a slave collection point. By 1700, new

Enemy>

technologies and military strategies required

a different type of fort. Success no longer lay
in the height of the walls but in the ability

to shoot sweeping fire from within the fort
while deflecting mortar and cannon shot
coming from outside. Fort cannoneers did not

fy EO

14.132 Section through fortification, Elmina Castle

14.133 Plan: Fort Commenda, Ghana

Fort William, the British fort in Kolkata, was
started in 1699 to protect passage on the
Hooghly River, which was navigable from
the ocean. The original fort faced the river
to receive the ships sailing from the Bay of
Bengal. In 1758, the fort was rebuilt to face
all directions. An irregular tetragon, the fort
had corner turrets where the guns were
mounted, most of them facing the river.

he riverside wall was solid masonry with
occasional embrasures for heavy guns, while
the main entrances opened toward the east,
facing the mainland. Within, the soldiers’
arracks, armory, and governor's palace
were irregularly placed. The land around
Fort William was cleared for unobstructed
sightlines. This allowed for the spectacle of
the Esplanade, the main street on which the
large houses of the colonists were staged.

AEP.

apeucitsa, —

14.135 Plan: Fort William

AMSTERDAM

Though Holland had the fastest-growing
economy in Europe at the time, having
become the mercantile hub of the Spanish
Empire, this was not reflected in its
architecture. Because the Dutch were for
the most part Calvinists and their beliefs
dictated simple structures, they did not
build churches until they had gained
independence from Spain. Following the
destruction of Antwerp by the Spanish,
Amsterdam, a relatively unimportant city until
1579, quickly became one of the leading
international ports of Europe, developing

a cityscape that included the town hall in
Dam Square (now the Royal Palace), the
Westerkerk, and the Zuiderkerk, as well as a
large number of canal houses commissioned
by leading mercantile families. Dutch naval
power began rising rapidly in the late 16th
century, and the Netherlands became the
leader in global commerce during the second
half of the 17th century. Its principal rivals in
the contested ocean routes for sugar, slaves,
and spices were initially the Spanish and

the Portuguese, but by the end of the 17th
century it was the English who had risen to
naval preeminence.

he first church in Amsterdam specifically
built for the Protestant community was the
Zuiderkerk (1603-11). It is a simple six-

bay rectangle that is pseudo-basilican in
plan: although it has a nave and side aisles,
it has no apse, thus reflecting the more
community-oriented nature of its religious
services. The minister gave his sermons
from a pulpit attached to one of the columns
more or less in the midst of the congregation.
Music and especially communal singing
were important parts of the liturgy. There

is no crypt, since relics and their worship
are not part of the Protestant religion. The
building has a wooden vault with a tower
squeezed into one of the corners. Although
the building is relatively simple, the tower

is as extravagant as any of that era. On the
interior, the columns are dark and contrast
with the whitewashed walls in a manner that
was Clearly meant to imitate 15th-century
northern Italian Renaissance churches.

In this way the style harkened back to an
ideal of a simpler late Medieval or early
Renaissance life, presumed to have been
untainted by the grandeur and corruption

of the church of Rome. The Zuiderkerk was

e fi Nieuwekerk a
7 7 a Dam Square ~”

Town hall © *

u
RS
. =

14.136 Plan of Amsterdam, Netherlands 1

followed by the Westerkerk (1620-31), which
created a more unified whole with a clear
division between the main axis—with the
tower serving as entrance—and the cross-
axis with the pulpit.

ee *

Y

k
Se a a

14.137 Zuiderkerk, Amsterdam 14.138 Plan and section: Zuiderkerk

°

—~

o—t4 tear

« r

a »
. whe
Pi a e
. : *
2 i
- wee

.
Ly jeaaees

14.139 Plan: Amsterdam Town Hall (Burgerzaal)

Amsterdam Town Hall

Early in the 17th century, with the formation
of the British and the Dutch East India
companies and the establishment of French
Port Royal in Nova Scotia, newer powers
entered the global colonial fray to compete
with the Spanish and the Portuguese. For the
Dutch, recently liberated from Spain, their
colonial efforts began with the fur trade, but
quickly gained a mercantile, banking focus.
tt was not gold that the Dutch were to extract
rom the colonies but cocoa, tobacco, and
sugar—addictive cash crops that could be
grown in vast quantities and transported
overseas with few losses, and which would
ring more profit than all the bullion of
the Americas combined. In this way the
Dutch, with the French, were responsible for
transforming the Americas into a cash-crop
economy that exploited the unique advantage
of the vast stores of “empty” land that fell
into European hands. In the long run, it

was this mercantile economy that flooded
European markets with vast amounts of
cheap consumable products and transformed
modern European culture, putting it on the
path to rationalization, industrialization, and
the Enlightenment.

First floor

Ground floor

14.140 Amsterdam Town Hall (Burgerzaal)

In Amsterdam—the new center of the

Dutch world and a city dedicated to making
money—palaces, monasteries, and castles
were not part of the cultural fabric. Instead,
rows and rows of townhouses faced onto

a relatively straight arrangement of parallel
streets and canals. By the end of the 17th
century, the city’s population had grown

from 20,000 to 200,000 in the span of just
over one hundred years. The city’s exchange
bank, Wiselbank, founded in 1609, was for a
long time the largest public bank in northern
Europe. By the end of the 17th century, over
16 million Dutch florins were on deposit

in its vaults—including the florins of other
European governments. The bank was on the
first floor of the new town hall (begun 1648),
designed by Jacob van Campen. On the
facade of the building, a statue of Atlas lifts
the globe on his shoulders above a pediment
in which the nations of the world offered

up their goods to an allegorical Amsterdam.
Inside, the marble floor of the huge barrel-
vaulted town hall, or Burgerzaal, lit from the
sides by two courtyards, was inscribed with
maps of both the heavenly and the terrestrial
worlds. Though the building is almost 100
meters long, its facade looks like two palaces
stacked on top of one another.

Amsterdam's town hall was as an expression
of the city’s ascension in world politics, and
it presaged the role civic architecture was to
have in future European urban profiles. The
town hall was one of the first applications of
Italian Renaissance style to a monumental
civic structure, and it was in many respects
to remain the model for town halls well into
the modern era. The building faced onto
one of the few public squares of the city,
called the Dam, which had as its focus a
tall square building known as the Wage

(or the public weigh-house). Here and in
the nearby markets, as a description put it
in 1664, almost the whole world seemed

to be assembled to buy and sell—Poles,
Hungarians, Frenchmen, Spaniards,
Muscovites, Persians, and Turks.


14.141 Place Royale, Paris

PLACE ROYALE

When Henry IV came into power in France
in 1589, Paris was hardly the city that it

is today. Despite the nominal authority of
the crown, France essentially functioned
as a highly decentralized confederacy of
autonomous provinces. Paris had suffered
several setbacks, such as the absence of
the kings, who preferred to live in their
countryside chateaux, and the general

downturn of the economy in the 16th century.

In Paris, there was not even a royal palace.
With an estimated population of 20 million in
the 1600s, France was, however, the most
populous country in Europe and the third
most populous country in the world—only
China and India had greater populations.
Despite a massive increase in urban
population, France remained a profoundly
rural country. Economically, the glut of gold
and silver from the Americas had led to
inflation and a vast underclass that would
haunt French politics for another century.

In deciding to make Paris a capital city
and the seat of a newly forming centralized
nation-state, Henry IV initiated a series of
urban projects that were also intended to
boost the city's economic condition. One
such project was the triangular-shaped Place
Dauphine (1609-14), designed to provide
accommodations for bankers and merchants.
To make its importance highly visible, it
was located at the westernmost tip of the
lle de la Cité; its narrow entrance formed,
however, a tranquil and enclosed precinct
within. Another experiment in urban design

14.142 Plan: 17th-century Paris

and mercantile enhancement was the Place
Royale (today the Place des Vosges), begun
around 1605 on open land at the edge of the
city. It was originally planned with three sides
for shops and apartments and the fourth for
a range of workshops for the manufacture of
silk. Though some silk was still imported from
China, much of it now came from Vigevano,
Italy, where silk production was mastered in
the late 15th century. Henry IV was eager

to reduce France's dependence on foreign
production, but French silk production

never succeeded because of the climate,
and eventually the whole square became a

residential address attracting the cream of
Parisian society. Presiding over the square at
both ends were special pavilions for the king
and queen, as the square was intended as a
setting for royal pageants. It was inaugurated
in 1611 when a masque and a tournament
were held there in celebration of the marriage
of Louis XIII to Anne of Austria. As a setting
it was well suited to the nobility and the rich
bourgeois who had taken up the fashion of
strolling and riding in carriages. Originally,
therefore, the square was not paved but
covered with a lawn and fenced in, an idea
unknown to the Italian Renaissance.


North Sea

Bolsover
Nottingham ©
England

London

Greenwic!

14.144 Elizabethan England

ELIZABETHAN ENGLAND

Though England, too, benefited from the shift

away from the Mediterranean to the Atlantic,

its growth in the first half of the 16th century

had been hampered by complex internal

conditions, poor management, and restrictive

policies. Its maritime economy consisted

mainly of fishing, smuggling, and plundering.

It was at best a regional force. This began to

change during the reign of Queen Elizabeth |

(1558-1603). She adopted modern notions

of management, transforming feudal

magnates into officeholders. Overseas foreign on
investments resulted in a growing propertied
class, with wool and textiles becoming an
increasingly large part of the economy, along
with the production of lead, salt, and soap.
The population increased from 3 to 4 million
between 1530 and 1600, providing a large
reservoir of potential indentured labor. The
English destruction of the Spanish Armada in
1588 established the country as a sea power
and opened up an opportunity for the English
to pursue Atlantic trade, putting them on a 6
path to becoming the colonial superpower of

the world.

14.145 Plan: Wollaton Hall, near Nottingham, England

25m

Wollaton Hall (near Nottingham, 1580-88),
the home of an important coal magnate,

was already a splendid showcase for the

new industry. It sported at the top a special
“prospect room” that had no particular
purpose other than to show off its towering
fenestration. This type of fenestration can

be contrasted with that of Titchfield Priory
(Hampshire, 1537-40), which still has Gothic
medieval windows in the surviving gatehouse.

14.146 Wollaton Hall, near Nottingham, England

English architecture, however, had a long
way to go. Houses were relatively plain and
rugged, and showed no fine paintings, apart
from portraits. Nonetheless, the change in
English culture was rapid and profound.
Old houses were set out with chimneys,
walls were paneled, windows glazed, and
old timber-framed buildings were faced with
stone. A particularly important innovation

at the time and one that affected the
development of Elizabethan-era architecture
was the use of coal in glass firing. And
here, once again, immigrants played an
important role. Jean Carré, who was from
the highly contested area of Lorraine and
whose patent for plate glass was granted

in 1567, was attracted to England along
with other glassmakers from Lorraine. Soon
furnaces were being built in scattered parts
of the country, and prices began to fall
almost at once. The market responded with
enthusiasm.

14.147 Interior, Banqueting House, London

Freee ew

I:

Yo nmeand

14.148 Plan and elevation: Banqueting House

Banqueting House

nigo Jones’s second visit to Italy from

613 to 1614, during which he studied the
buildings of Andrea Palladio in particular,
prepared the young architect for his most
ambitious project, the Banqueting House.
he first Banqueting House, appendaged

to the Royal Palace in London, was built in
581 and served for dining and theatrical
entertainment. A second one was built in
606 but was destroyed by fire in 1619.

he Banqueting House designed by Jones
in 1619 was less a place for banquets than
a royal audience hall, reflecting a greater
emphasis on royal authority. This was the first
public structure in the mature Palladian style
in England. At the ground floor, the windows
between the pilasters are an alternating
sequence of triangulated and segmental
pediments, while at the upper floor the
windows are all unpedimented, yielding an
intricate yet calm design. The central three
bays are emphasized by the use of attached
columns, and the corners by pilaster pairs.

14.149 Church of Santo Domingo, San Cristobal de Las Casas, Mexico

The whole is raised on a low rusticated
basement that matches in height the
balustraded frieze on top. The building's
importance lies in the symbolic significance
of its Italian motifs—an attempt to extend the
architectural language born during Europe's
mercantile revolution in the 15th century.
But whereas Italian architecture developed
in a culture of regional princes and rich
merchants, it was now being associated with
the centralization of the state. European
sensibility was slowly transforming from more
regional to more global.

CHURCH OF SANTO DOMINGO

One of the largest Spanish churches from this
era is the Church of Santo Domingo in San
Cristobal de Las Casas, Mexico. Built between
1547 and 1560 on the orders of Bishop
Francisco de Marroquin of Guatemala, its
present 17th-century facade is typical of the
Mexican Baroque. The imperial double eagle,
the coat of arms of the Emperor Charles V,
can still be seen above the central portal and
on the sides. The interior is lavishly decorated
and contains a number of sculptures and
wooden altars covered with gold leaf.

The city San Cristébal de Las Casas was
laid out on a grid according to the principles
of the Law of the Indies, a series of laws that
regulated social, political, and economic
life in conquered areas. The grid facilitated
land exploitation. A commons was always
established in a city’s center, in front of a
church or cathedral. (The Church of Santo
Domingo, however, was founded separately,
to the north of the city center.)


14.150 Plan: Dry garden at Ryoanji, Kyoto, Japan

RYOANII

The Zen monks invented the dry meditation
garden as a practical necessity. Earlier
Japanese garden design had been based on
Song Chinese examples, which were built on
large estates with long stroll paths that had
views created from the natural landscape
and constructed ponds, islands, mountains,
and even rivers, complete with waterfalls.
While the miniaturization of natural elements
was a part of the design strategy, these

gardens relied on size for their effect. In the
15th century, however, when the shoguns

began to reduce plot sizes to accommodate
larger populations in their cities, such
full-fledged gardens were impossible. The
newer generation of gardens, made by Zen
masters, were designed around the principle
of carefully staged views. In the process, they
created dry gardens, so called because they
employed abstract means of representation—
using, for example, white pebbles and moss
to signify large bodies of water. The Zen
monks particularly enjoyed creating visual
koans, or quizzical conundrums, that could
be meditated upon.

. :

14.151 Dry garden at Ryoanji

Ryoanji, the Temple of the Peaceful Dragon,
contains the most famous of Japan’s dry
gardens, created around 1480 by an
unknown designer on the estate of Hosokawa
Masamoto, located in the northwestern
foothills of Kyoto. The southern half of the
estate contains a pond with an island and a
circumambulatory stroll path, to which was
added a rectangular dry garden with a bed of
white gravel, carefully raked to form east-west
running bands. Within it were placed fifteen
natural stones, clustered in five groups. The
gravel around therm is raked in the manner
of ripples in a pond. The precise meaning

of this koan is left open to interpretation.
Perhaps the white field is an ocean and the
rocks islands. The rocks could also stand

for a tigress leading her cubs across a river.
Ultimately, the garden is not meant to convey
a singular interpretation but to serve as an aid
to meditation, with the empty space between
the stones just as important as the stones
themselves—perhaps even more so.

1700 CE

INTRODUCTION

By the early 18th century, cities like
Samarkand, Bukhara, Aleppo, Istanbul,
Venice, and Florence, once at the heart of
Eurasian trade, were becoming increasingly
marginal to the new world economy centered
on the maritime ports established by the
European colonial powers. This phenomenon
was global, spawning major new metropolises
such as Hong Kong, Shanghai, Singapore,
Bombay (now Mumbai), Calcutta (now
Kolkata), Madras (now Chennai), Cape
Town, St.-Louis (Senegal), Rio de Janeiro,
Buenos Aires, Boston, and New York. It is
not surprising, then, that the architectural
survey of this time shows a world in which
some areas were rapidly transforming under
the modernizing sway of colonization, while
others, in spite of the colonial frenzy, still
clung to the old ways as long as possible.
This tumult of transformation centered on

the Americas. Two hundred years after their
conquest by the Europeans, the indigenous
civilizations of the American continents

had been almost completely destroyed. In
their stead, a brand-new and revolutionary
system of wealth generation was invented—

the hacienda, or plantation, where vast
tracts of land were used to grow a single

or a few crops that could be shipped back
to Europe for profit. Plantation culture not
only transformed America; it also drastically
impacted Africa, where an infrastructure was

built to support the slave trade—including the
development of internal exploitative cultures
to facilitate the capture of slaves. Slavery

put in place the hard divisions of racism in
America, particularly after it was legalized into
a race-based, hereditary institution in the late
17th century.

The plantation economies had the most
transformative effect on Europe, where the
massive influx of colonial wealth and goods
radically remade urban culture. As colonial
merchants plied European streets with coffee,
sugar, tobacco, and tea, they created new
urban institutions, such as coffeehouses,
along with new building types, such as
bourgeois apartments (or Adte/s), parks, and
theaters. This urban culture, which in so
many ways still exists today, was instrumental
in the rise of the bourgeoisie and preliminary
to the discourses and ferment that led to
the European Enlightenment in the late 18th
century. If today the coffeehouse is essentially
a place of recreation and quiet study—

perhaps the new library of our times—it is
interesting to look back and see that it started
as a site of novelty and exploration, a place to
experience the new products of the colonial
world.

The massive size of the colonial
plantations, and the correspondingly
massive volume of products that were
grown, processed, shipped, distributed, and
consumed—along with all the economic side
eddies that this system generated—created
an economic engine of unprecedented scale
for Europe. It required a reimagining of
governance and management that resulted
in a new administrative culture focused on
rationalization and efficiency. Although the
Spanish were first in this reorganization, the
French soon took the lead. Jean Baptiste
Colbert, a renowned workaholic who served
as the minister of finances from 1665 to
1683 under Louis XIV, took upon himself
the task of overhauling and rationalizing the
French government and bureaucracy. His
administrative machinery gave the French,
and subsequently the Dutch and English,
who followed suit, a decisive advantage over
the Spanish and Portuguese in the colonial
competition.

Rationalization and efficiency, as the new
administrative mantras of the times, also
affected the culture. In architecture, the
ongoing adaptation of the styles of antiquity
for modern purposes was subjected to
rationalization. The culture of science began
to assert itself, particularly the questions of
astronomy necessary for naval navigation.
Although reason—beyond rationalization—
had yet to become the dominant discourse
of philosophy, its ideas were already being
addressed in works such as those of
Galileo and Copernicus. The push toward
science was furthered in particular by the
innumerable nautical and territorial maps
that had to constantly be made and updated;
the success of the colonial missions relied
on their accuracy. As countries carefully
guarded their knowledge of new cartographic
information, it is no surprise that the French,
Dutch, and English disputed the location of
the prime meridian.

The European upper classes largely
expended their new wealth building
fantastic new palaces and the like, the
most celebrated example being Louis XIV's
extravaganza at Versailles. The fusses and
frills of the Baroque continued to hold court

in these palaces, as they did in the numerous
Baroque churches and abbeys that were built
across Europe. The Russians, under Czar
Alexander, forced their way to the Baltic Sea
in search of a viable port. Here, instead of
launching a massive colonial campaign to
compete with the British and French, they
built a massive new capital city called St.
Petersburg, founded in 1703 and modeled
after French and Italian Baroque precedents.
St. Petersburg was a project both heroic

and extravagant, a self-conscious attempt

to “catch up” with other countries that

were considered more advanced by simply
importing their culture and knowledge via a
massive systematic transfer—thus mistaking
symptom for cause. Such efforts would be
repeated many times over in years to come,
particularly by nations that were late to the
colonial enterprise.

In England, the revolution wrought by the
creation of the Church of England continued
to play itself out with the radical Puritan
call for de-Catholicization, which for a short
while starting in 1688 even resulted in the
overthrow of the monarchy. Its subsequent
restoration resulted in the prosecution of the
Puritans, many of whom then left for New
England to join descendants of the Mayflower
passengers. In the new world they sought to
build their Puritan churches with renewed
vigor, but their congregations included
dissenters, such as Roger Williams, who
left to found his own colony in Providence,
Rhode Island, with religious toleration as
one of its cornerstones. In keeping with
their larger ethic, the Puritans, like the
adherents of the Church of England, followed
the austere renderings of a neo-Palladian
architecture that relied on proportion and
order for effect, rather than on style and
gesture as in the Baroque style.

By the early 18th century, the Whigs had
emerged as a force in English politics; they
were strong supporters of English mercantile
expansion (with protections in place) and
advocates of constitutional monarchy. It was
under the Whigs, and in their wake, that Sir
Christopher Wren built his neo-Palladian
churches in the aftermath of a great fire. The
English picturesque garden now emerged—
influenced though it was by descriptions of
Chinese gardens—as an irregular landscape

with distributed follies that sought to unite

the experience of the peripatetic visitor with
surrounding nature. These gardens, along
with philosophical propositions such as cogito
ergo sum (| think, therefore | arm), were at the
genesis of the Enlightenment’s autonomous
subject.

The African slave trade was going full
steam in the 1700s. Most of the slaves came
from West Africa, and as a consequence,
social structures in the region were
devastated.

Meanwhile, the mineral wealth extracted
from America continued to find its way
across the Pacific to China, where it was
exchanged by the Chinese for luxury goods
such as porcelain and lacquerware. In the
17th century, China was in transition from
the rule of the Ming to the Qing dynasty.

The Ming, unable to capitalize on their early
gains, had overprinted the Middle Kingdom's
paper currency (the world’s first), which led
to serious inflation. In consequence, silver
began to circulate as the de facto currency of
the realm, which promoted coastal piracy.

Into the gap stepped the Manchu,
Jurchen Mongolians from the northeastern
frontier of China, who took over Ming China
without a major battle and formed the Qing
dynasty. Although theirs was still the largest
economy in the world by far, the Qing quickly
realized that they desperately needed silver
to stabilize the currency. They also had to
legitimize themselves as rulers, since they
were a small and foreign minority. Not only
did they manage to stabilize the currency,
but they were also able to establish—first
under the rule of the Kangxi Emperor and
then under his grandson, the Qianlong
Emperor—an administrative order that
merged Confucian and Han Chinese systems
with a transnational Manchu perspective that
was keenly aware of the wider world beyond
the Middle Kingdom. With their wealth, the
Qing vastly expanded their borders, built vast
and lavish palaces and gardens, established
new cities, and, most importantly, renewed
infrastructure. They also produced a new
and comprehensive manual on building
construction.

Even though a great quantity of Qing
architecture still stands, it is not best served
by a detailed analysis of its formal properties.

Formal orders and the quest for their
perfection were an obsession in Europe at
that time, but in China these things had been
settled for some time and were no longer the
defining question. Rather, the focus was on
standardization, efficiency, and integration
with the larger administrative machinery of
the empire.

Qing China functioned as an efficient
pre-modern empire and quickly became the
cynosure of European intellectuals. Colonial
ships carried missionaries to China, who
settled there and subsequently produced
detailed accounts of life and order under
the Qing. These illustrated accounts made
their way to Europe, where they were
avidly read and citied by Enlightenment
thinkers, particularly those who were keen to
demonstrate nonreligious moral and political
orders. It is in this sense that European stroll
gardens such as Stowe in England, which
were trying to establish the new human
subject who was comfortable in nature rather
than differentiated from it, can be seen as a
reading of Chinese garden precedents. The
Qing bureaucracy, or jinshi system, based on
open competitive exams, was the role model
of the European civil services. On the Chinese
side, the Qing invited the Jesuits to court to
learn from them and even built one of their
palaces in European Baroque style.

The Koreans, strong supporters of the
Ming, were forced to recognize the Qing
authority in China; but once they did, they
quickly adopted to it.

In Japan, the Tokugawa shoguns were
also in the midst of redefining their culture
at this time, creating a world that followed
a strict code of behavior. The Bakafu code,
as it was known, was in many respects
astonishingly modern, as the rising middle
class sought ways to articulate institutions
suitable to its needs despite the restrictions
placed on it by the shoguns.

The original colonial project to find an
ocean route to the Indies for the spice trade
continued to be pursued by several European
powers—the Portuguese in particular, but
also by the Dutch and the French—via
private companies with monopolistic charters.
The Portuguese built forts across the Amazon
delta, and then across South and East Asia.
In this way, the Portuguese colonial port

network established the first infrastructure of
today's global cities of Asia. The Dutch did
the same, but their focus was on the fertile
spice islands of modern-day Indonesia. The
French, too, built trading posts worldwide,
but their main interest, in competition with
England, was in New England, Canada, and
along the Mississippi. In these areas the
French traded in fur, a commodity with a vast
market in the frigid lands of northern Europe,
where there were few forests left.

In India, European colonial cornpanies
traded and built ports with the consent of the
Mughals, who remained formidable through
the 17th century. Aurangzeb (r. 1658-1707)
vastly expanded the Mughal Empire, bringing
erstwhile vassal states directly under Mughal
control. But unlike his predecessors and his
Qing contemporaries in China, Aurangzeb
adopted a much less tolerant attitude toward
the diversity of India's peoples and cultures,
and consequently his death in 1707 initiated
a series of revolts. Shuja-ud-Daula in northern
India, the Nawab of Oudh in Bengal, the
Sikhs in Punjab, the Rajputs in Rajasthan,
and the Marathas in the Deccan wrestled
for power. At the same time, European
colonizers began to build on their coastal
footholds and start to acquire hinterlands. As
a result, though this was a turbulent period
in India, from a cultural and architectural
perspective it was also a time of tremendous
exploration. Jaipur, a beautiful new city, was
laid out by Sawai Jai Singh, a former Mughal
general, along an important trade highway.
The Sikhs, a reformist movement, took
root in northwestern India and established
a formidable kingdom. Darbar Sahib
(“Golden Temple”) in Amritsar was their
most important shrine. The Mallas of Nepal,
meanwhile, enjoyed relative immunity from
these global events next door, but their royal
square in Patan embodied its own global
history.

In contrast to the energy on both sides of
the Atlantic, in China, and in India, building
activity in West and Central Asia slowed
down. The Ottomans held strong throughout
the 17th century and in 1683 laid siege to
Vienna again (after the first unsuccessful
siege of 1529) but were conclusively
defeated. In 1722, the Safavids of Persia
were overrun by the Afghans. During the 18th

century, the Ottorman Empire continued to
reign from Istanbul, but it was now buffeted
by the new wealth of the Atlantic trade. As
in China, vast amounts of silver began to
be smuggled into the Ottoman Empire, and
a significant black market emerged. The
resultant inflation destabilized their realms
and rebellion ensued. The Mamluks of
Egypt, their most prized possession, declared
independence in 1768, and thereafter the
Ottoman Empire began to go into decline.
Most books dealing with Islamic
architecture end around 1750, after which
time architecture that is retrospectively
described as purely Islamic was no longer
done on the same scale. Instead, new
building forms emerged as a consequence of
the Islamic world grappling with the colossal
changes taking place around it. The result
was hybridized architectural forms, a mix of
divergent influences—an alternate modernity
of its own kind.

Central America: Viceroyalty of New Spain
1535-1821

France: Bourbon Rule

1589-1792
A Hétel de Sully A Hatel des Invalides
1624-29 1671-76
AVersailles AL'Observatoire de Paris
1661-1778 Begun 1671

The Baroque Era
Late 16th to early 18th century

Sir Isaac Newton's Principia published @
1687 1696

1600 CE 1700 CE

England: Stuart Rule
1603-1714
ASt. Paul’s Cathedral
1675-1709

Qing Dynasty
1644-1911
AWhite Stupa, Beihai
1651

Mallas of Nepal: A Durbar Square
Rebuilt 17th century

Japan: Edo Period
1615-1868
A Sumiya
1670s

South Asia: Mughal Dynasty
1526-1858
A Meenakshi Sunderesvara Temple
1623-59

A Place Vendéme
Laid out 1702

A Sans Souci
1757

AWinter Palace A Vierzehnheiligen
ca. 1730

1743-72

@Thomas Savery invents the steam engine
@ Abraham Darby produces high-quality iron
1711

1800 CE

@ Benjamin Huntsman develops the
crucible method for making steel 1740

Hanoverian Rule
1714-1901

AStowe Gardens

Begun ca. 1712
ASt. Mary Woolnoth

1716-24

AChiswick House
1723-29

A Stratford Hall Plantation
1738

A Shirley Plantation
1738

ATouro Synagogue
1759-63

AYuanmingyuan
1720s

Ottoman Empire: A Nurosmaniye Mosque
1749-55

Europe

North America ®rort amsterdam Lisbon@ @Madrid
So. Hormuz
& ®
Sp West Indies Babrai®
© %
Mexico City Eng Africa Goa
ou Lesser Antilles calcu
© Cochin @)
Central and South America & Elmina Colombo
& @Mombasa
Lima® &
S. g @Luanda
Lisp. @4 Paz e
ety, @potosi ® ania Sofala
"Prin, &
Santiago ©

15.1 World colonialism

COLONIALISM
By the end of the 17th century, what had
begun as risky sojourns to distant lands in
search of less expensive spices developed
into a struggle among the various European
nations for control of coastal trading posts
across the globe and with them, wherever
possible, the hinterland that supplied those
ports. The principal competitors were
Portugal, Spain, Holland, France, and Britain.
For the first two centuries of its history
(roughly the 16th-18th centuries), the
colonial project was focused on the
competition to exploit and develop the
Americas. Spain, Portugal, and then
France, England, and Holland all competed
aggressively for a piece of the American pie—
first for its mineral wealth and then, more
profitably and impacttfully, for its land. At the
same time, all these European powers except
Spain also developed trading ports around
the rest of the rest of the globe, particularly
along the coasts of South, Southeast, and
East Asia. But at this time, these ports had
only a fraction of the value of the American
territories. It would not be until the 19th
century—as most of the colonies in the
Americas became independent and European
wealth, particularly that of England, increased
exponentially with industrialization—that the

Buenos Aires

colonial enterprise became fully global.

Initially, the Portuguese focused on
developing the Amazon coast, and the
Spanish conquistadores maintained their
aggressive focus on annexing the territories of
Central America and Andean South America.
But then, as the gold and silver began to
run out, they invented the plantation and its
hacienda culture focused on the large-scale
production of sugar, coffee, and cocoa using
indentured labor. Most of the mineral wealth
was gone or tightly controlled by the time the
French, Dutch, and British got into the game,
so they too ultimately focused on exploiting
the plantation economies. At first the British,
Dutch, and French developed footholds in
the New England area, far from Spanish
territories, and competed mostly for fur trade
with the indigenous people. But as these
footholds evolved into full-fledged colonies,
they gained economic strength with the
establishment of tobacco plantations, most of
them British, in Virginia and territories farther
south.

Before colonial plantations, in Europe
sugar was a highly luxurious commodity
accessible only to the upper classes, coffee
was an exotic Arabic drink, and cocoa was
mostly unknown. The plantations enabled
sugar to be sold on the streets. Together with

coffee, cocoa, and tobacco, this chartered
an urban addictive culture that is still with
us. The plantations powered mercantile
capitalism, the core of which was the large-
scale, cheap production of a single crop
destined for mass consumption. Racial
slavery was its by-product.

The plantations were massive, as land was
essentially “free.” Large tracts of land under
single control meant that large amounts of
cash crops could be produced efficiently.

The principal problem was the availability

and supply of labor. At first European settlers
worked the land themselves, encouraging
locals to migrate. But this quickly became a
poor economic proposition, although there
was a massive migration of Irish populations
(forced frorn Ireland by the policies of

James II} to the Caribbean and Virginia. In
1619 the Dutch brought slaves from Africa to
North America to work on the plantations. The
native American populations had already been
decimated, and native slaves often escaped,
disappearing back to their tribes. But African
slaves, in a completely foreign land with

no hope of ever making it back to their
homelands, were both more reliable and more
easily obtained, with a steady stream of ships
bringing new slaves to American shores. This
is what led to the African slave “solution.”


Europe

Lisbon@ @Macrid
@Hormuz
Bahrain India
Africa Goa
gaia
Cochirt
EY Gemina YY Coe bo
¢ @Mombasa
x
So @Luanda
oo .
Bahia Sofala®
€

World colonialism (continued)

Initially, policies of the Spanish crown
identified the locals as heathens and sought
to destroy or convert them. By this system
conversion was a process of acceptance;
however exploitative it was, it provided
potential paths to freedom. When the first
Africans were brought to the Caribbean in
the 1520s, they too were given the option
of conversion. Racial slavery—the idea
that African labor could be owned, and
that children of African women inherited
the slave identity of their mother and were
slaves regardless of their father—was only
developed as an institution on the British
tobacco plantations of Virginia around
landmark court cases in the middle of the
16th century. After that, the African slave
trade increased significantly.

Slavery had existed across Eurasia and
Africa since the beginning of history. The
Egyptian pharaohs, the Greeks, Romans,
Phoenicians, Persians, Seljuks, Indians, and
Chinese all practiced slavery in various forms,
particularly as it concerned subjugated and
conquered peoples. In Africa, too, slavery
preexisted colonial trade. But the new
colonial model, dependent on cheap labor,
magnified it to such a degree that the history
of Europe, Africa, and the Americas was
irrevocably altered. It is estimated that more

than 20 million people, and possibly as many
as 40 million, were forcibly removed from
Africa; all the colonizing powers participated.

The legacy of the plantation system
was unambiguously negative and had
consequences that are still playing out today.
In Mexico, even by 1910, 70 percent of
all arable land was held by just 1 percent
of the population, and similar situations
existed in South American countries. Almost
every country or region that was colonized
by the plantation system had to struggle
later to create secular, scientific, and
cultural institutions on par with those of the
Europeans.

While critics of the slave trade could be
found everywhere—particularly in England—.
from its earliest days, all European powers
exploited the plantation and its system of
slave labor. The situation in New England
was arguably somewhat better: There
were no large chiefdoms, as there were in
Louisiana and Georgia, to stand up to the
invaders, and this allowed settlers to nourish
the illusion that they were occupying virgin
territory. In addition, the influx of Europeans
was extraordinarily diverse. By 1700, from
Maine to Virginia, villages and towns had
a mixture of Dutch and English Puritans,
French Calvinists, Catholics, Swedes,

Japan
China ;
Nagasaki
Macau
©
Southeast Asia
©
©
® Amboina
Batavia
Australia

Spanish Jews, and English Anglicans. By
the early 1700s, a traveler would have found
courthouses, schools, churches, roads, and
two universities—Harvard, founded in 1636,
and Yale, founded in 1701. Although New
England ships participated and profited
extensively in the slave trade, slave ownership
itself was relatively unusual. This New
England exceptionalism in colonial America
set the stage for conflict with the southern
British settlements.

While the colonial project in the Americas
quickly became a settler project, in most
of the rest of the world the Europeans were
primarily interested in setting up trading
outposts. The Portuguese expanded from
their ports along the Amazon coast by quickly
establishing ports on the coasts of India,
China, and points between in Southeast Asia.
The English, French, and Dutch followed
the Portuguese lead, developing competing
ports on the Bay of Bengal coast of India, in
southern China, and at intervals along the
route through the Straits of Malacca. The
Dutch focused their interests in Indonesia,
and the English exploited their superior naval
navigation skills to claim the territories of
Australia and New Zealand, although it was
the Dutch who first discovered them.

Outside of Australia and America, European
colonial enterprise at this time focused on
trade with local powers. Colonial forts, with
their backs to their hinterlands—where

they depended on treaties for their safety—
faced their guns toward the sea to ward off
attacks from competing European ships.

Old European rivalries and alliances were
replayed on these distant shores, and it

was not unusual for European war treaties

to dictate the loss or gain of distant colonial
forts. The Asian powers, particularly the
Mughals in India and the Ming and Qing
dynasties in China, quietly tolerated and
profited from these coastal activities, as long
as the Europeans stayed within the terms of
their treaties. It was the old Eurasian world as
usual, but now along ocean-faring seaways.
Ultimately, this seemingly small change would
tilt the balance decisively in favor of the
European colonists.

The largely Arabic and Islamic countries
of West and Central Asia were of limited
interest to the colonial powers. The Ottoman
Empire was seen primarily as a convenient
ulwark against czarist Russia. Persia was of
even less consequence to the Europeans and
slowly shrank under Russian pressure. The
area did not receive any strong interest from
Europeans until the discovery of oil in the
20th century.

15.2 Hacienda Tabi, Mexico

It is no accident that just as the colonial
project was unfolding and flooding Europe
with great wealth, the 18th century saw

a philosophical movement emerge that
challenged the arbitrariness of power and
attitudes toward “primitive cultures.” Known
as the Enlightenment, it tried to imagine
alternative civil and institutional models in
tune with new thinking about the rule of law,
even though it did not reject colonialism

as such. Its successes and failures in
that respect are still being debated. The
Enlightenment ideals were widely discussed
in the cities of France, England, an

Germany, though they were also tested,
contested, and remade in the colonies.
Though usually described as “European,” the
Enlightenment can in fact be considered a
global colonial construct.

15.3 Pictorial view: a typical hacienda

Haciendas

The hacienda system is thought to date to
1529, when the Spanish crown granted
Hernan Cortés the title of Marquis of the
Valley of Oaxaca, in the present-day state

of Morelos, Mexico. The grant included all
the Native Americans then living on the

land and the power of life and death over
them. The Native Americans, like the slaves
who soon arrived from Africa, were bound
to a particular hacienda for life, as were
their descendants. By the 18th century, the
system, stretching from Mexico to Argentina,
was the primary means of export production
and in some cases the core of urban
developments. The hacienda was developed
throughout the Americas, and later other
parts of the colonial world developed the
plantation system.

Haciendas came in various sizes, and
some were gigantic. Peotillos, 55 kilometers
from San Luis Potosi in Mexico, for example,
controlled an area of 193,000 hectares. The
word hacienda comes from an Old Spanish
term (facienda) derived from the Latin focere,

which means “to make something,” and most
haciendas specialized in one or two products,
always an export-based cash crop. In areas
where water was abundant, sugarcane was
grown, which gave rise to rum and liquor
production. Other haciendas focused on
livestock, cacao, coffee, tobacco, cotton,
rubber, and a variety of woods. Since the
hacienda was often remote from metropolitan
centers, it had to accommodate a wide range
of functions. It had its own marketplace,
cemetery, and jail. Layout followed a common
scheme involving courtyards for different
purposes: for the workers and their families,
for workshops, and for warehouses. The
main residential building fronted onto a
plaza, known as a patio de campo. The link
between the patio de campo and the more
restricted private areas of the master was
through a corridor known as a zaguan.

15.4 Plan: Brazilian hacienda, Santa Catalina

15.5 Example of a Brazilian hacienda

In Brazil, the development of sugar and
coffee plantations generated a proliferation
of fazendas (the Portuguese equivalent of
haciendas) as early as the 17th century in
the northeast of the country. As in other
places, the high death rate of the native
population created a need for African

slaves, and eventually over 3 million were
brought to the country. Thus a new type of
construction was added to the architecture of
the fazendas—the senzaia, or slave quarter,
which was divided into small spaces to house
the slaves and their families. The symbolic
and economic center of the fazenda was

the large patio where the coffee was dried.
he master's house was located on one side
of the square, usually positioned on higher
ground overlooking the entire area.


@raris Vienna
Lecce
0)
Mediterranean Sea
Cairo

15.6 Africa, West Asia, and Europe, ca. 1700

New European Colonial Urban Culture

The expanding middle class, with its
ravenous taste for novelty food items and
luxuries supplied by the colonies, rapidly
reshaped European culture. The diet
changed considerably, with tomatoes,
potatoes, and corn becoming the new
staples; chocolate, imported from the
Spanish Americas, became a luxury item;
and sugar from the Caribbean became an
indispensable consumer good in a very
short time. Coffee, however, came to Europe
first from Africa by way of Arab traders. It

is thought to have been first produced in
Ethiopia and Yemen. The drink caused a
great deal of controversy in the Islamic world,
because some authorities thought coffee
was intoxicating and therefore should be
forbidden. As a result, its consumption was
initially associated with subversive political
activity, perhaps because it was drunk in the
new all-male coffeehouses, where intrigue
might be brewed along with the beverage.
From the beginning, then, the social
significance of drinking coffee derived from
the fact that it was consumed in public by
an exclusively male clientele in this new kind
of establishment, the coffeehouse, usually
located on major commercial arteries. The
coffeehouse of Ipshir Pasha in Aleppo (1653)
is a rare early coffeehouse to have survived to
present times. It consists of a courtyard and
a covered hall, with windows overlooking the
street to the south. Domes of varying shapes
cover the hall.

®

©
Aleppo

@Mecca

Mokha
@

15.7 Kaffeehaus Jiingling, Vienna, ca. 1838

The end of the Turkish trade monopoly over
coffee came in 1616, when the Dutch East
India Company illegally exported and planted
seedlings in Java and elsewhere. Fromm
these plantations vastly larger amounts of
coffee could be manufactured and exported
at cheaper prices, flooding the market.

The French subsequently founded coffee
plantations in the Caribbean, leading to a
rapid expansion of the drink’s popularity.

The first Parisian café was opened in
1672. The Kaffeehaus Juengling in Vienna,
from about 1750, had a completely glazed
two-story wooden facade overlooking a piazza
provided with tables and illuminated by a
large lamp (such outdoor lighting being at the
time quite a novelty). By 1800, there were
more than three thousand coffeehouses in
England.

Tobacco was brought to Europe by the
Spanish army, and smoking was eventually
taken up by men of the upper classes who
were under the impression that it enhanced
their reasoning capacities. Thus, along
with coffeehouses emerged gentlemen's
smoking rooms. The European habit of
simultaneously drinking coffee and smoking
stems from this era, when mass-produced
colonial products transformed European
culture. Sugar in particular starred in the
newly emerging rituals of consumption. It was
put into tea and coffee (first in France, so it
is thought), thus combining—with a piece
of chocolate—a culinary experience that
was both addictive and gave consumers a

sense of cosmopolitanism and global access.
Professional sugar bakers of the time, called
konditors in southern Germany, often created
a whole “sugar course,” in which an entire
meal was replicated in sugar for the guests to
view and nibble on before it was taken away
and the real meal served. No European city
was complete without its Konditorei serving
sweets to ladies on cozy couches, forming
the counterpoint to the bars for men, where
coffee and liquor were consumed standing
up. These socializing habits formed in the
days of colonialism still continue today.
Mealtimes also began to change to
accommodate the transformation of taste.
Until then, the principal meal, dinner, was
served at midday, but the custom of drinking
tea and eating chocolate in the afternoon
caused it to be shifted to later in the evening.
It soon became the custom to start the day
with coffee and chocolate, a repast now
called breakfast. Whereas coffeehouses
were associated with boisterous male
conversation and business deals, tea became
domesticated into a ceremony presided over

largely by women, who often served it on tea
sets made of silver or porcelain, both colonial
commodities. (In 1717, 300,000 kilograms
of tea were imported; 1.4 million kilograms
were imported by 1742.) Furniture was
designed to accommodate the new rituals,
including high-backed padded chairs and a
“conversation chair” that allowed one to lean
back in a more relaxed position.

15.8 East Facade of the Louvre, Paris

THE LOUVRE AND THE HOTEL
After the English defeated the Spanish
Armada in 1588, France acquired the
formerly Spanish Isle of Bourbon for use
as a commercial base in the Indian Ocean;
took over the mouth of the Senegal River in
Africa, where it became involved in the slave
trade; and set up sugar plantations in the
Caribbean. French fur dealers also settled
Canada, founding Quebec City in 1608, and
traveling south down the Mississippi until
they reached its mouth, where they founded
New Orleans in 1718. The first major colonial
export from North America was fur. (Large
animals had been hunted out of existence
in Europe centuries before.) Fur became the
new fashion requirement for the elites. The
money flowing into France, however, created
an inflation that made the poor significantly
poorer. For the elite, however, it brought
unimaginable wealth, which was spent in
lavish constructions beginning around 1660.
Unlike previous French kings, who had
preferred to live in rural chateaux, Henry IV
(1553-1610) periodically moved the court
to Paris. To accommodate him, Louis Le
Vau (1631-70), France’s leading garden
and chateau designer, took over the job of
updating the Louvre, an old 12th-century
fort, into an urban palace. He worked in
collaboration with Claude Perrault. In 1664,
a competition was held for the east facade
of the Louvre, and the final design was a
synthesis of the ideas of Perrault, Le Vau, and
possibly others. Given the project's complex

“Hétel des Invalides

15.9 Paris in the age of Louis XIV

history and the number of architects involved
in the final design, it is an astonishingly
successful building. The high ground floor,
with its narrow, minimally detailed windows,
serves as a podium for the main floor, with
ranges of coupled, freestanding columns
that form a screen for the building behind,
creating a linear loggia. A central pedimented
projection was integrated, with the columnar
screens to its flanks. Unpedimented
“pavilions” with pilasters instead of columns
define the far ends. Such an arrangement

Oo | lkm

Place Vendéme

Place des Victories

S Oe Place Royale

8

was quite novel. It could be compared with
Palazzo Porto-Breganze, designed by Andrea
Palladio (built by Vincenzo Scamozzi, 1575),
which is more unified in appearance; or the
Villa Barbaro (1549-58), where the pieces
are more differentiated. The Louvre is also
significant in the history of technology. The
columns carry straight entablatures that are
actually a series of disguised arches held
together in part by tie rods.

With Henry IV's move to Paris, the wealthy
wanted to live as close as possible to the
Parisian court, however temporarily. The
result was the H6te/, a temporary lodging
designed around a specific set of spaces. A
porte cochere allowed carriages to enter the
cour d’honneur, where the ritual of arriving,
dismounting, and entering was played out.
The stables were located to one side of the
courtyard, along with special rooms for the
carriages. The corps de fogis (principal living
quarters) faced the court. To the rear of the
corps de logis was a garden, perhaps with

a gallery, a long windowed room for taking
in the views and conversing. Visiting rooms,
ballrooms, and dining rooms, part of the
appartements de parade, were on the main
floor. The family living quarters, which were
usually above, consisted of an antechamber,
in which to meet visitors; the bedroom
(chambre); and sometimes a more private
room for conversation or study, known as
the cabinet. Servants lived under the roof. In
the arrangement of the elements, syrnmetry
was preferred, at least for the entranceway
and courtyard, with much creativity going
into establishing the necessary imprint in
the often irregular urban sites with which
the architects had to work. One of the best
examples is the Hotel de Sully (1624-29)

by Jean du Cerceau. It was lived in by
Maximilien de Béthune, Duc de Sully (1560-
641), superintendent of finances under King
Henry Ill and later Henry IV's prime minister.

15.10 Plan: Hétel de Sully, Paris

15.11 Hotel de Sully


o.., 10m

15.12 First floor plan: Hétel Crozat, Paris

15.14 Place Vendéme, Paris

Most of the early 17th-century Hétels, though
located near the Royal Palace, were built
wherever land was available and were thus
relatively isolated from each other. As the
century progressed, architects sought to
integrate hotels into real estate packages
known as royal squares. Though these
squares were called royal, they were usually
built on the initiatives of private individuals
or municipalities—even though the climate
for their creation was fostered by the king—
and they therefore had to be consonant
with the principle of royal dignity. The first
in Paris was the circular Place des Victoires
(1684-87), with an equestrian statue of

the king in the middle. This was followed
by the Place Vendéme (commissioned in
1677), whose facades were all designed by
Jules Hardouin-Mansart (1646-1708) and
his disciple Pierre Bullet. Both héte/s have
rooms in a remarkable variety of sizes and
configurations; but typical of French design
was the absence of corridors (except in the
servants’ quarters) to link the rooms, which
were organized sequentially along the main
facade.

15.15 Chateau de Versailles, France

CHATEAU DE VERSAILLES

The bulk of Henry IV's building expenditure,
jowever, was on his extravagant rural
residence, the Chateau de Versailles, an old
unting lodge about 20 kilometers southwest
of Paris. The redesign of the building into

a grand palace by Louis Le Vau and Jules
Hardouin-Mansart went through several
phases, beginning in 1661 after André

Le Nétre had begun work on the gardens
and fountains. The architects solved the
problem of what to do with the old building
y wrapping a new building around it. The
original palace still stands, but it is embedded
within the fabric of a new structure that
consists of a series of forecourts, creating

a telescoping U around a central court at
the top of a gently sloping hill. Processional
avenues leading to the chateau were central
to the spectacle and ceremony of the design.
Three avenues lead through the countryside
to the front gate, but only the central and
northern avenues lead to Paris; the southern
avenue, 1 kilometer long, was added for the
sake of symmetry. Arriving carriages passed
through the first gate and were stopped at
the second; from there, all but the most
distinguished had to proceed on horse or
foot to the last gate, which led into the inner
courtyard.

: Basin of Apol lo

. . Gardens

Avenue de Paris

15.16 Plan of Versailles

r cemtivres

@ Hall of Mirrors

t

oan

“Tt

—i..
King’s bedchamber

‘
4 Queen's apartments §

hah em oe =H “Ts
served as a throne room

Route taken
by dignitaries

15.17 Development of the Palace at Versailles during Louis XIV's reign

On the ground floor of the palace were
apartments, mainly for the royal guards
and administrators. One room to the

right, however, was specially prepared

for the reception of important visitors. It
contained the grand double Stairway of the
Ambassadors, resplendent with colored
marble and wall paintings. The stairway led

to the principal reception rooms where the
king lived. There were no corridors. The
apartments were arranged enfilade—that

is, the doors of the rooms were lined up to
provide a vista along the length of the suite.
At the heart of the composition was the king's
bedroom, located at the conceptual center of
the palace’s universe. The bedroom was not a

private room, but a place where the king met
friends and even important dignitaries.

rrethiitee met nem oom

«
msepapso| 4:
we ©
aS 4 LB
oo o@ .
a2 "
tee a
—a < 8 3
bev BR

&

t

e

{

L

e

a

&

At first the gardens were designed for
traditional uses, like walks and pleasurable
conversation, but Louis XIV introduced the
idea of the garden celebration, or féfe, which
included horsemanship events, banquets,
plays, music, and fireworks. These events,
recorded in publications, were part of the
king's publicity and propaganda apparatus
to enhance the fame of Versailles. A century
later, however, they served contrary to their

15.18 Hardouin-Mansart’s chapel at Versailles

purpose as the same propaganda was used
to trumpet the extravagance of Versailles and
whip up revolutionary fervor against royalty.

15.19 Hall of Mirrors, Palace at Versailles

15.20 Aerial view of St. Petersburg, Russia

ST. PETERSBURG

Of the many Baroque projects of the period,
none rivaled that of St. Petersburg in scale
and complexity. At the start of the 17th
century, Russia was a backward country,

at the mercy of conflicting forces. There
were urban riots in 1648, a revolt in 1662,
a rebellion in 1669, and an uprising in
1668. Czar Peter Alexeyevich Romanov |
(1672-1725), known as Peter the Great,
reestablished order, modernized Russia,
and pulled the country out of its isolation.
Singlehandedly, he turned the Orthodox
Muscovite state into a secular, Westernized
empire—against considerable opposition
from many levels of society. This was realized
through massive forced-labor enterprises

as well as a series of wars that consumed
as much as 90 percent of the state budget.
The result, however, was an empire that
stretched from the Baltic to the Caspian
Sea. After his victory over Sweden in a war
that lasted twenty-one years, Russia could
again sail down the Neva River to the Gulf
of Finland. To safeguard his access to the
Baltic Sea, Russia built the Peter and Paul
Fortress, the cornerstone of which was laid
in 1703. The project eventually grew into one
of the biggest building sites in Europe. Forty
thousand peasants were conscripted, along
with Swedish prisoners of war.

Work had progressed far enough by 1712
for relics from the Vladimir-Suzdal Monastery
to be sent to the St. Alexander Nevsky
Monastery, named after the 13th-century
national hero St. Alexander Nevsky who
received his name after beating the Swedes
on the Neva River. St. Petersburg now had its
founding myth and was an instant religious
as well as secular center. To speed things
along, Peter, in 1714, even forbade masonry
construction throughout the rest of Russia

to ensure a supply of qualified workers and
materials for St. Petersburg.

lkm

15.21 Plan: St. Petersburg

15.22 Winter Palace, St. Petersburg

15.23 Winter Palace, St. Petersburg

The completion of Versailles in 1710
prompted imitation by other European
royals. Peter the Great’s Winter Palace in

St. Petersburg was initially a modest affair
designed by Domenico Trezzini in 1711, but
it was quickly expanded. Its present form
began to take shape in the 1730s, designed
by Bartolomeo Rastrelli, who imagined its
twin facades—facing the square on one
side and the Neva River on the other—as
relentless Elizabethan Baroque facades,
250 meters long and broken only by two
symmetrical projecting bays. The windows of
the lowest story are taller than the rest, and
each window is separated from the next by
pilasters. In plan the palace is an elongated
rectangle, with an enclosed court. Most of the
building was used for courtly functions, with
the apartments of the royal farnilies situated
toward the back, looking onto an enclosed
garden. Catherine II greatly enlarged the
Winter Palace when she asked the French
architect Jean-Baptiste Vallin de la Mothe,
who designed the Imperial Academy of

Arts in St. Petersburg, to add a new private

wing, where she amassed an extensive art
collection. This came to be known as the
Hermitage. The storming of the Winter Palace
in 1917 was a signature moment of the
Bolshevik Revolution, valorized extensively in
Soviet painting, literature, and film.

England

London
Oxfordshire ®
Germany
Paris
Vienna
Versailles
France
Bay of Biscay
Italy
Ligurian Sea
Spain @Rome

15.24 18th-century Europe

RATIONALIZATION AND THE AGE OF
REASON

While the Spanish thought that stockpiling
gold and silver was the way to build wealth,
the French, Dutch, and English, focused

on economic efficiency as a means of
wealth generation. Their success lay in
combining absolutism with highly rationalized
governmental processes and investment in a
national knowledge base. The rationalization
of the national economy was the undertaking
of Jean-Baptiste Colbert (1619-83), one of
Louis XIV’s chief advisors. He was responsible
for many of the bureaucratic innovations
that, though cumbersome, created the

base for France’s economic prosperity and
particularly its ordering of colonial territories
and extraction processes. Thanks to Colbert,
there was a new understanding that there
was a nexus between global trade and the
national economy. Colbert also appreciated
that economic power was dependent on
knowledge. He therefore commissioned
extensive studies of, for exarnple,
shipbuilding, navigation, and armaments to
ensure that the French fleet remained the
strongest in the world. He also founded the
Royal Academy of Science (1666) and the
Academy of Architecture (1671), among
other institutions, to serve and advise
government administrators and ministers.

In economics, rationalization is defined
as the act of bringing order to ad hoc
workflows by defining appropriate rules
or processes. It is thus not surprising that

Netherlands

15.25 Observatoire de Paris, France

rationalization is linked to the so-called Age
of Reason, for the scientific work of early
scientists and philosophers of this age was
also the search for the underlying processes
and rules that defined the apparent ad hoc
phenomenon of the world. Galileo and Tycho
Brache were both looking for mathematical
explanations for the movements of planets.
Both knew René Descartes (1596-1650),
the French-Dutch philosopher, with his
famous declaration of the primacy of reason,
“cogito, ergo sum" ("| think, therefore |
am”). Condemned by the Catholic Church,
which purported to rule by God's design,

the rationalist world was conceived in the
crucible of the colonial experience. One saw
the publication of René Descartes’s Discours
de la méthode (1637), Thomas Hobbes's
Leviathan (1651), as well as the Théorie

de la construction des vaisseaux (Theory

of the Construction of Ships, 1667) by the
Jesuit priest Pierre Hotte, a professor of
mathematics who sought to improve the art
of shipbuilding. The slide rule, the barometer,
the thermometer, and the compound
microscope all came into being in the first
half of the 17th century. Generally speaking,
17th-century science stressed mechanics as
a governing principle in the same way that
governments began to stress and extend their
bureaucratic reach, both ultimately promising
efficiencies of production. The world was
suddenly filled not only with agency but also
with the means to control and define agency
and to give it spatial extension and measure.

Observatoire de Paris

Colbert realized that key to colonial
dominance was precise knowledge of
astronomy. For this purpose he initiated the
construction of the Observatoire de Paris

in 1671, through which ran the French
Meridian, the basis of French nautical maps
that was in competition with the meridians at
Greenwich and Antwerp. Although Greenwich
was adopted as the international reference in
1884, the French continued to use their own
until World War | absolutely necessitated a
single reference.

The Observatoire’s architect was Claude
Perrault (1613-88), whose brother Charles
was secretary to Colbert. A fervent believer
in the exalted position of his times, Perrault
was familiar with Greek and knew Latin. His
1673 translation of Vitruvius's Jen Books
on Architecture was authoritative and well-
annotated, and became the standard work
on architecture in Europe. Though Perrault’s
own taste influenced the illustrations, he
attempted to adhere as much as possible
to the information in Vitruvius’ text, setting
an example for accuracy and attention to
detail that was to become an essential aspect
of the neoclassical mentality. His images
emphasized the undecorated aspects of
antiquity, resisting the temptation, prevalent
at his time, to dwell on ornamentation and
decoration. A particularly heated debate
revolved around the question of whether
the perception of beauty was a result of
custom or a spontaneous response. Perrault

15.26 Courtyard, Hétel des Invalides, Paris

argued that beauty was not a fixed property
to be revealed by the artist but a variable
depending on custom, pointing out, for
example, that one can find neither two
buildings—nor two authors—that agree on all
subject or always follow the sare rules.

The Observatoire was quite austere by
the standards of the day. There were no
orders, no columns, and no pilasters. Simple
string courses demarcating the stories and
openings are either slightly recessed from
the smooth wall surface or surrounded by
barely projecting moldings. Each side of
the octagonal corner towers was aligned
with the sun's position at solstices and
equinoxes, and the eastern one was unroofed
for the use of a telescope within. The
building was put together with the greatest
skill, and the staircase, with its complex
three-dimensional curving surfaces—all in
stone—still astonishes today. The roof was
used as a platform from which astronomical
measurements could be made. A hole in the
center of the floors of the main chambers
allowed the sun’s zenith to be calculated.

Hétel des Invalides

Hospitals had first appeared in Europe

as a by-product of pilgrimages and of the
Crusades. There were several important
hospitals in Italy. The Knights of St. John
were well known for their hospitals on
Rhodes and elsewhere. By the 18th century,
however, hospitals were flooded not only
with the thousands of soldiers who fought in
the alrnost endless cycle of battles, but also

by the poor and the indigent, who formed

an increasingly large lower class. Plagues
and epidemics added to the problem. In
Paris, a cholera epidemic in 1519 and the
plagues of 1580, 1596, 1606, and 1630
struck down thousands. But because
hospitals remained associated with religious
orders and charitable institutions, there

was practically no distinction between a
hospital, a pesthouse, and a poorhouse.
Conditions were so terrible that the sick were
often unwilling to leave their houses for a
hospital, concerned that while they were
sequestered, their property would be pillaged
or their income threatened. To combat these
conditions, Henry IV decreed the construction
of the Hépital St.-Louis (begun 1607). It was
outside the city walls and easily accessible
from major roads. The wards consisted of
wide, open corridors with patients’ beds
placed against the walls. Four of these
corridor buildings were linked to form a large
courtyard.

At the end of the Thirty Years’ War in
1648, much of Europe was flooded with
former soldiers, many of whom had lived
their entire adult lives in the military and
had difficulty adjusting to civilian life,
suffering from a form of PTSD. The Hotel
des Invalides (1671-76) aimed to address
this problem in that it served as a military
retirement dormitory. Behind its moat and
expansive entrance lies a large court, while
ranges of buildings to the right and left are
grouped around smaller courts. The north

0 50m
15.27 Plan: Hotel des Invalides

facade is articulated in typical French fashion
by central and end pavilions that project
forward. Apart from the entrance porches,
there are no columns or pilasters on the main
facade. The court has two stories of arches
on piers relieved only by the pedimented
pavilions at the center along the axis. There
were special areas for sick and wounded
soldiers, for pauper soldiers, and a barracks
for older veterans. There were surgery areas
and large mess halls where soldiers ate, with
their officers at the head table.

Hospitals in England, built from public
funds, tended to be simpler and less
generous by comparison. There was
considerable ambivalence among the English
upper classes and Tories about spending
money in a way that many thought would
seem to reward poverty. Chelsea Hospital
(begun 1682) shows, however, the first
awareness of French innovation regarding
the problems of former soldiers. Designed

yy Sir Christopher Wren, the cells were
placed in ranges, back to back. At the end
of the range, a larger room was set out

for the sergeants. Instead of an enclosed
quadrangle, the wards faced each other
across a courtyard open to the Thames
River, with a great hall and chapel linking the
wards at the far end. The hospital's governor
and lieutenant governor lived in detached
pavilions at the corners. The differences
tween the two hospitals speaks volurnes
about the English and French attitudes about
society and hierarchy at the time.


15.29 Elevation and plan: Vierzehnheiligen

«
a

15.30 Nave of Vierzehnheiligen

Johann Balthasar Neumann and the New
Neresheim
Largely rural and possessing only three towns
with a population over 100,000, Catholic
Bavaria in southern Germany had not only
withstood the Reformation but was also
resistant to the aristocratic urban Catholicism
of nearby Austria. Here a few architects
assisted by painters, stucco workers, and
sculptors created a unique style of church
architecture, without a dome. Johann
Michael Fischer (1692-1766) and Johann
Balthasar Neumann (1687-1753) were the
most prolific architects. Neumann's most
extraordinary work is perhaps the Church of
Vierzehnheiligen (1743-72) at a Franciscan
monastery near the town of Bamberg,
Germany. It had become a pilgrimage church
in the mid-15th century, following what was
said to be a miraculous apparition.
Neumann's last and most
comprehensively conceived major project
was the church of Neresheim (1747-92).
It was integrated into the fabric of a
Benedictine monastery and includes at
its choir end an old tower from an earlier
Romanesque church. Oval and circular vaults
are supported on an undulating frame of
columns, pilasters, arches, and piers. Though
the space may read as decorative and plastic,
Neumann was an officer in the engineering
corps, and his buildings were just as much a
testament to his engineering as to his design
skills. He used wall piers or short sections

of wall turned at right angles to the nave as
primary load-bearing elernents, eliminating
the necessity for a solid continuous outer
surface. Notwithstanding the cheerful
interior, the exterior shell of the church was
relatively plain. The oval at the crossing is
placed lengthwise to the longitudinal interior,
stretching between the part of the church
that was used by the community and the
choir at the rear reserved for the monks. The
oval is counterbalanced by smaller ovals that
evoke the tradition of the transept without
interfering in the spatial liturgical rituals,
which did not require such spaces. The ovals
are connected by curving vaults that leave

one in doubt as to how they work structurally,
with light from the large windows visually
dissolving the borders of the different spatial
elements.

BS

eee -

15.31 Site plan: Abbey of Saints Ulrich and Afra, Neresheim, Germany

15.33 Interior: Church of Neresheim

t ’ t 4
s a ‘
no . *
4
i
27 es
Ae
/
fo
“Uy ae
og © ic

aii moan Ode
Ft in a
t

Ie
Peco coc!
df 7 gy

ie) 20m |

CHINA AND THE EUROPEAN
ENLIGHTENMENT

The Jesuits, with their emphasis on
education, were at the forefront of bridging
the Chinese and European worlds. In 1601,
the Italian Jesuit Matteo Ricci (1552-1610)
arrived in Beijing and established a Catholic
mission. For the next two centuries the
Jesuits, as well as members of other Catholic
orders, built close links to the Qing court
while converting approximately 250,000
Chinese to Christianity. Because of their
strong interest in education and their own
high levels of education, many Jesuits
became trusted members of the Qing court
and were given important positions, such as
control of the Board of Astronomy.

These Europeans wrote home detailed
accounts of what they saw, which were
published as books, usually in French or
Latin, in Paris, the European center of
Jesuit activities. These included Confucius,
the Philosopher of the Chinese (1687);
Description of China (1735), in 4 volumes;
the long series Fdifying and Curious Letters,
in 34 volumes (1702-76); General History
of China, in 13 volumes (1777-85); and
Memoirs on the History, Sciences, Arts, etc.,
of the Chinese, in 16 volumes (1776-1814).

The Chinese political system was studied
and cited by many European thinkers,
such as Voltaire (1694-1778), Francis
Quesnay (1694-1774), and Gottfried Leibniz
(1646-1716), at a time when Europeans
were beginning to develop alternatives
to monarchic and church procedures in
their own political systerns. The German
philosopher Leibniz, who was considered
an “expert” on things Chinese, argued that
a truly universal new civilization could be
achieved by merging the best elements
in Chinese and Western culture. He
published this argument in a little book of
1697, Novissima Sinica (Latest News from
China). Of particular interest to European
philosophers was the concept of the
mandate—the idea that the emperor ruled
only by divine mandate, and that when things
went wrong, it was a signal that the mandate
had been revoked. As Derk Bodde has
argued, the European Enlightenment thinkers
particularly admired China as a land where
governmental power was negotiated not

through the traditions of a feudal aristocracy,
as in Europe, but by the mandarins, a group
of highly educated scholars, who gained their
official positions only after proving their worth
by passing a series of state-administered
examinations. It became their aim to create
an “enlightened despotism” that would rule
for the benefit of the people as a whole,
rather than merely for a small, privileged
group. They argued this concept, particularly
in the work of the economists known as the
Physiocrats, whose leader, Francis Quesnay,
wrote The Despotism of China (1767) as an
example of a truly enlightened despotism.
Quesnay influenced the ideas of Adarn Smith
(1723-90), the seminal thinker of modern
economics.

The most famous of the Enlightenment
thinkers to learn from Qing China was
Voltaire, for whom China was the one country
where the ruler was also a philosopher
(Plato’s “philosopher-king”). He was
impressed by the idea that the Chinese were
not forcing their own religious ideas upon
other people. “One need not be obsessed
with the merits of the Chinese,” he wrote in
1764, “to recognize ... that their empire is in
truth the best that the world has ever seen.”
In 1755, Voltaire wrote the play The Chinese
Orphan, adapted from an old Chinese play,
as a rebuttal to Rousseau's (1712-78) “back-
to-nature” theories that decried history, the
arts, and other cultural constructs on the
grounds that they corrupted the natural
goodness of human nature. By contrast,
Voltaire argued that superior civilizations can
overcome barbarism, citing the example of
the Chinese civilization's triumph over the
invading Mongols.

The Gongyuan and the Jinshi

Of particular importance amongst the
administrative buildings distributed around
the Forbidden City was the Gongyuan, or the
Examination Yard, where the highest exams
for entering the imperial bureaucracy were
held. Admittance to the Mandarin cadres
required three levels of examinations: first

in local counties, second in the provincial
capitals, and the final in the national capital,
held only once every three years. Those who
passed this final weeklong exam earned the
title jinshi (known in English as Mandarin).

The Gongyuan was a huge walled enclosure,
inside of which were thousands of small brick
cells laid out in straight rows. This eliminated
cheating. Still, candidates were searched,
carefully supervised, and not permitted to
leave until the exam ended. The exams
demanded high standards of literary style and
calligraphy, as well as detailed knowledge of
the Chinese classics.

From the Gongyuan, the lucky few who
passed were allowed into the Forbidden
City, where they participated in a daylong
exam in the first of the great halls, which
was attended by a large assembly of civil
and military officials in full regalia. Of these
examinees, the top three finalists were
presented directly to the emperor and allowed
to exit from the central gate first, followed
by all the others who had passed the tests.
The jinshi, who might have started out as a
peasant's son, was quickly were incorporated
into the imperial administration.

In the 18th century, as the European
Enlightenment thinkers were looking for more
egalitarian, merit-based models to replace
the orders of the Church and the court, they
turned to the Chinese jinshi system. The idea
of a civil service that would be selected via
competitive exams open to anyone derived
from studies of this Chinese bureaucracy.
The first written civil service exams were
held in European universities in 1702. The
French established their civil service in 1791,
after the French Revolution. The British
established their civil service exams in 1806,
initially only for recruitment to the British East
India Company. The United States began
to require exams for some administrative
positions after 1885. Contemporary licensing
exams, such as those required to be
registered as an architect, structural engineer,
lawyer, or chartered accountant are also a
legacy of the original Chinese system.


15.34 Stowe Gardens, Buckinghamshire, England

Stowe Gardens and the Temple of British
Worthies
Along with lacquered tables and teaware,
European merchant ships brought home
folios and travel accounts of Chinese gardens.
Sir William Temple, an aristocratic British
essayist writing on the gardens of Epicurus
in 1685, extoled what he called the Chinese
concept of sharawadgi, or irregular landscape
scenery carefully arranged, in critique of
the axial symmetries and carefully pruned
formal orders that characterized European
gardens at that time. Temple is credited
with originating the concept of the British
picturesque stroll garden of the 18th century,
which, like the Chinese garden, relied on
irregular movement, artfully placed follies
and pavilions, borrowed scenery, and studied
asymmetry for effect.

William Kent’s “Elysian Field" of 1738
at Stowe House exemplifies this trend.
Elysium, a Homeric description of the garden
where worthy souls found eternal life, was
transformed into an instrument of nationalist
consciousness in the form of the stroll
garden at Stowe. In combination with neo-
Palladian follies, and with the invention of the
ha-ha trench that enabled seamless visual
continuity between the designed garden and
its larger surrounding environment, Stowe
Gardens offered a new vision of nature and of
man’s place in it—an alternative to that of the

Bible, in which earth was naturally barbaric.
It also projected a vision of harmony between
nature and the “natural” proportions of the
classical orders.

The English nationalist garden emerged
with the early 18th-century rise of the
Whigs, trenchant critics of the Tories and
strong believers in constitutional monarchy.
No clergymen or saints were arnong those
chosen to be represented in the Temple of
British Worthies at Stowe. Rather, the Elysian
Field honored poets such as Shakespeare,
John Milton, and Alexander Pope; architects
such as Inigo Jones; and explorers such
as Thomas Cook, among others. Over the
next two centuries a large number of follies
were added and destroyed, including a Shell
Bridge, a Grotto, a Season's Fountain, a
Temple of Friendship, a Chinese House, and
others.

200 rs

15.35 Site plan: Stowe Gardens

15.36 Temple of British Worthies, Stowe Gardens, Buckinghamshire, England

Key to the success of Stowe and gardens
like it, such as that at Chiswick, was that
they could be experienced not only by their
owners and friends but also by a wide range
of personages drawn from the upper and
middle classes. At the time, garden tourism
was on the increase and already an important
part of upper-class social life.

Stowe conceptualized a new, secularist
vision of English nationalism. This idea of
a harmonic natural landscape, however
artificially contrived, designed around a
dignified, civilizational armature, arguably
also parallels the English colonial experience
in the Americas. The French initially
encountered strong resistance from the
Indians and never had enough colonists to
suppress them, so they began to study and
analyze their habits to gain their cooperation
in trade and then lead ther into conversion.
The British experience was different. Except
in the Carolinas, they faced little organized
resistance among the Indians, who were
less socially unified than those in the
French settlements in Canada and along the
Mississippi River. Whereas contact with the
Indians led the French to study and question
the origins of civilization, the English, at least
those back home in their gardens, began to
muse on the mythological underpinnings of
European identity and its role in the larger
global theater that was only just beginning

to fit within a single frame. It may have
been in the English gardens, with their often
pedagogical and ideological emphasis, that
the first traces of what later was termed
Eurocentrism began to appear.

Sans Souci

he first detailed accounts of Chinese life
that arrived in the 1520s were written by
missionaries sent to China, India, Indonesia,
and Japan. In 1585 Pope Gregory XII
instructed the Spanish priest Juan Gonzalez
}e Mendoza to set down all that was known
about China. The History of the Great and
Mighty Kingdom of China, and the Situation
Thereof was the first widely read treatise on
the subject; de Mendoza mentions palaces
and gardens, and describes houses so grand
that they reminded him of Rome. But these
bits of information were (and remained)
saturated with myths and legends. The first
book with a more substantial content was
The History of That Great and Renowned
Monarchy of China (1655), written by Alvarez
Semedo, who had spent twenty-two years in
China. This was followed by a book by the
Dutchman Jan Nieuhof, who took an interest
in Chinese architecture. As a European
accustomed to palaces in stone, he did not
understand the Chinese custom of wooden
architecture for its palaces and therefore
found it lacking. But he did produce several

15.37 Temple of Ancient Virtue, Stowe Gardens

15.38 Temple of Modern Virtue, Stowe Gardens

engravings of pagodas and palaces that
fascinated his readers.

Soon European courts began to adopt
certain Chinese themes in their gardens. In
1675, for exarnple, Louis XIV built the Trianon
de Porcelain, which, though in shape and
form Western, had a roof with blue-and-white
patterned tiles, creating what was thought
to be a reasonable approximation of the
porcelain pattern used on the famous pagoda
at Nanjing.

ikem

15.39 Sketch of Sans Souci by Frederick the Great, 1744

J

15.41 Chinese Teahouse, Sans Souci

ee 15.40 Chinese Teahouse, Sans Souci, Potsdam, Germany

he building did not last long, in part
because of leaks in the roof, but it set in
motion a series of Chinese-styled pavilions, or
what the Germans called Porzellankammern,
the most farious being the Chinese Teahouse
at Sans Souci palace in Potsdam (1757),
built by the Prussian emperor Frederick

the Great (Frederick II). The palace, which
served as the emperor's summer retreat, had
a vast park that contained several pavilions,
one of which was the Chinese Teahouse.

he gilt columns, which support the roof, are
in the form of palm trunks opening out in
luxuriant sprays of shoots as they meet the
entablature. Life-size gilt Chinese figures sit
at the base of the columns, playing musical
instruments and engaging in animated
conversation. Chinese pavilions, as well

as Turkish tents, soon became common

in pleasure gardens of the time. Chinese
porcelain was also making its way through
the markets of Holland, adding more fuel to
the fire, with members of the gentry creating
collections of their favorite pieces.


Tibet

India

15.42 Qing dynasty China

QING BEIJING

The Ming dynasty’s rule in China came
undone in the 17th century. The reign of
Zhu Yijun (known as the Wanli Emperor, r.
1573-1620), who gained the throne at the
tender age of nine, proved to be disastrous,
as he was incapable of dealing with the vast
and complex administrative machinery that
managed the empire. The consequence was
inevitable; power brokers and local lords
used the opportunity to carve out competitive
mini-empires for themselves as the emperor
became increasingly reclusive. Lawlessness
increased, and Japanese and even Chinese
pirates frequently raided coastal towns. At
the same time a huge influx of illegal silver
was arriving from the Americas by coastal
routes. Indeed, the Chinese demand for silver
was at the core of the growth of mining in
South America. Silver became the alternative
to Ming printed currency, which resulted in
drastic inflation. The price of grain rose, and
the poor went hungry and were unable to pay
taxes. Vigilante bandit groups began to roam
the countryside. Finally, a farnous bandit,

Li Zicheng, or the “dashing prince,” made
camp outside Beijing in 1644. In response,
the Ming army commander, who had been
sent to defend the northeastern border where
the Manchu were assembling to attack,

Qing dynasty China

Manchuria
@Belling Korea Japan
° ee (Tokyo)
Pyoungsan Academy ®kyoto
®Nagasaki
@Shanghai
Pacific Ocean

Amoy (Xiamen)

Canton (Guangzhou) fo}

Macau

made the fateful decision to instead invite
them to enter the Middle Kingdom to defeat
Li Zicheng. Thus, in 1644 the Manchu took
over the Ming dynasty without ever having to
fight for it.

The Manchu, who ruled under the title
of the Qing, were Jurchen descendants who
took on the Mongol title “khan.” Although
only a million strong in a kingdom of 250
million native Chinese, the Manchu proved
equal to the task of governance, and
quickly established stability. One of their
first acts was to establish a strong regulatory
framework for coastal trade. With that in
place, they moved to establish internal order.
The core of Manchu administrative policy
was to simultaneously adopt established
Confucian and Ming courtly practices
while accommodating regional differences.

They maintained a strong grip on central
administrative control, but like the Mongols
and the Yuan before them, they tolerated
multiple religious and cultural practices. They
settled into the Ming capitals, built similar
tombs, restored and expanded the palaces
and administrative wings, and, in Beijing,
undertook a reorganization of the inhabitants,
pushing the old Han Chinese to the south

to make room for their own bannermen.

The Qing also built scores of new towns and

administrative centers around the Middle
Kingdom, making sure to distribute their own
clansmen in these areas. The Dalai Lama was
invited back, and stupas were built to mark
his visit.

The Qing had a strong appetite for
silver, which they used to mint currency.

For geographical reasons, China was poor

in minerals. They had some gold, very little
silver, and some copper. And yet at the same
time they had a vibrant economy that was
very commercial in that it relied on active
exchange of goods. Centuries before anyone
else, during the Song period, the old Chinese
solution had been to print money. Printed
currency worked very well until the Yuan

and particularly the Ming did what many
governments in trouble do—they overprinted
their currency, which resulted in loss of
public confidence in the printed currency.
The Qing solution to this was to mint
currency in silver. After they exhausted the
silver supply in Japan, South America’s silver
became the main source. It was transported
to China on European vessels. Between 1500
and 1800, South America produced about 85
percent of the world’s silver; about 40 percent
of it went straight to China.

The Qing also embarked on a remarkably
successful military campaign that resulted
in the largest territorial expansion the Middle
Kingdom had ever seen. The island of Taiwan
(1683), Inner and Outer Mongolia (1697),
Dzungharia (1757), and East Turkestan
(1759), besides their own Manchurian
homeland, became territories. Korea was
made a vassal state in 1637, and Tibet a
protectorate in 1751. Part of this aggressive
expansion involved the genocide of the
Dzungharia tribes, about 600,000 strong;

80 percent were killed on orders by Qing
and Mongolian soldiers, and more by a
subsequent outbreak of smallpox.

To accommodate the vast diversity that
the Middle Kingdom now incorporated, the
Qing, particularly in the sixty-one-year rule of
the Qianlong Emperor (r. 1735-96) developed
a pan-Asian conception of empire, a model of
unity in diversity similar to that developed by
the English after they became a major world
power. Confucians, Buddhists, Muslims, and
even Christian visitors were accepted and
accommodated, and at the same time kept
in check and abeyance. All decrees were


issued in multiple languages. Underlying

it all was deep investment in Tibetan
Buddhist ideology, with its long history of
accommodating multiple Asian peoples and
histories. The Qianlong Emperor thought of
himself as a chakravartin, the Buddhist ideal
of royalty based on the canonical memory of
Emperor Asoka.

The 268-year reign of the Qing was
dominated by the sixty-year rule each
of two monarchs: the Kangxi Emperor
(r. 1662-1722) and his grandson, the
Qianlong Emperor (r. 1736-95). Their reigns
set the course that created the political,
economic, and cultural legacy that was
ultimately inherited by contemporary China.
Their reigns, in this sense, defined the early
modern period of China.

Crowned when he was only eight years
old, the Kangxi Emperor's objective was to
settle the uncertainties stemming from the
end of Ming rule and overcome deep-rooted
biases against foreigners. He quickly began
to recruit Han scholars from southern China
with the explicit goal of melding Manchu
political authority with Confucian ideology,
while incorporating Ming courtly and
administrative processes and protocols.

Nanjing was demoted by the Qing to a
regional capital, which made Beijing the all-
important center of the empire. The Qing
also expanded their own historical capital,
called Mukden, in the northeast, building a
new palace, tombs, and all the institutions of
governance. But Mukden never rose to the
status of a full-functioning capital. The six
ministry buildings for Personnel, Revenue,
Rites, War, Punishments, and Works; the
Hanlin Secretariat; the Censonrate; the
Directorate of Astronomy; and the Offices
of Sacrifices and Ceremonies were all
located in the Inner City, immediately south
of the palace. The living areas around the
Forbidden City were reserved for the so-called
Eight Banners (“Eight" referred to the
Jurchen tribesmen who had come together
to form the Manchu army). Subsequently,
the Eight Banners simply became the eight
elite armies that the Qing came to rely on—
to which Han and regional Chinese were
liberally introduced in time.

After this, Nanjing became a center of
Jesuit missionary activity; it was once the
home of the Christian missionary Matteo
Ricci and by this time was more open to

Western influence than Beijing. For instance,
it was Nanjing painters who first incorporated
Western ideas of shading and perspective in
their depictions of local scenery.

Unlike all previous Chinese dynasties,
the Manchu did not automatically burn and
pillage the Ming capital and establish a
new one at another location. Instead, they
reoccupied the Forbidden City at Beijing.
One of the Emperor's first decrees was to
rebuild the parts of the Forbidden City that
had been burned by the retreating Ming.
His only specification was that ducts be
built into the Hall of Supreme Harmony so
that heat could be pumped into it. To stamp
their identity onto the city, the Manchu
renamed all the major gates and pavilions
and changed the ceremonies associate:
with the Ternple of Heaven to reflect the
new Manchu cosmic order. Non-Manchu,
Han Chinese men were required to shave
their foreheads and wear their hair in a long
ponytail called the que. Differences between
the Qing and the Han also played out in the
urban fabric. In 1649, the Northern City, the
traditional heart of Beijing, was reserved only
for Manchu. As a consequence, all the Han
Chinese had to move into the Southern City,
which had always been underdeveloped,
but it developed into the commercial heart
of the city as a consequence of the influx.

Ningshougong

lew temples and monasteries were built.
Theaters, teahouses, shops of all kinds, guild
alls, academies of classical learning, and
public buildings were constructed. As wood
came scarce, many of the residential and
other secular structures were made from
stone and brick.

By the middle of the 18th century, over
forty new palaces had been built in the
Forbidden City and in the privileged areas
to its northwest. Unlike the Ming emperors,
who confined most of their court activities

to the Forbidden City and concentrated

all major activities in Beijing, the Qing

were avid travelers and built palaces and
temples in distant parts of their ernpire.

One of best-known Qing palace complexes

is the Ningshougong (“Palace of Tranquil
Longevity,” 1698-1772), built by the Qianlong
Emperor Ningshougong. Conceived as a mini
Forbidden City within the Forbidden City, it
consists of two sections: first a set of three
ceremonial pavilions (the Gate of Tranquil
Longevity, the Hall of Imperial Supremacy,
and the Palace of Tranquil Longevity),
followed by a denser living quarter consisting
of a series of small and larger buildings
arranged around a network of garden courts.
he entire palace was completely screened
rom the rest of the Forbidden City.


15.44 Beijing and environs

Beihai

In 1651 the Qing Shunzhi Emperor invited
the fifth Dalai Lama to visit Beijing, as the
Ming Yongle Emperor had before him. To
commemorate the visit, Shunzhi ordered

the construction of three Tibetan-style white
stupas, two of them in the Imperial City. One
of these is the bell-shaped White Stupa, the
gigantic landmark of the Western Park or
Beihai. East of the Forbidden City but within
the city walls, Beihai had first been developed
by the Yuan and the Jin, and under the
Ming, waters were dammed to create three
artificial lakes, with an island in the middle
lake. Shunzhi placed the White Stupa on the
highest point of the artificial hill on the island,
so that it was clearly visible from a distance.

Yuanmingyuan

The area to the northwest of Beijing was

a largely flat plain with a gentle gradient
toward the southeast, where the Yuan, Jin,
and Ming had built summer retreats. The
Qing converted these into huge garden-
palace complexes, exploiting the numerous

springs and rivulets that traverse the area.
Waterways and reservoirs were built to
ensure a perennial flow and distribution

of water. The largest of these gardens was
the Yuanmingyuan (“The Garden of Perfect
Brightness”; yuan means “garden”), built
in the 1720s. Although its palaces and
pavilions were similar to the axial courtyard
structures of other palaces, such as those
in the Forbidden City, their distribution and
layout is more relaxed. Entered from the
south, the Yuanmingyuan was dominated
by a palace with a small lake in front and

a larger lake in back to frame it. The back
lake had nine islands, each designed with
its own pavilions, palaces, and scenic spots.
North of this complex was a dense fabric

of secondary buildings, laid out in a closely
packed system of interconnected islands. The
eastern half of Yuanmingyuan was composed
around the large Fuhai Lake, in the middle

of which were three small interconnected
islands, representative of the three mythical
Islands of the Immortals, supposedly located
in the East China Sea. Fuhai Lake was also
surrounded by a string of nine connected
islands with pavilions and hills designed for
scenic views and strolls. Yuanmingyuan had
350 buildings organized into 123 building
complexes. Furthest east was the Chunjua
Garden, with a palace in the middle of a
large island. Emperor Qianlong added a long
horizontal strip to the north, for which he
commissioned six European Baroque-style
palaces, designed by the Jesuit missionaries
resident in his court.

15.45 Pyoungsan Academy, near Hahoe Village, Korea

JOSEON DYNASTY OF KOREA

In Korea, the elite of the Joseon dynasty
(1392-1910) had long supported China’s
Ming dynasty, but as Ming influence waned
in the 17th century, the Manchu forced the
Joseon to shift alliances. Following Manchu
establishment of the Qing dynasty in Beijing
in 1644, the Joseon and Manchu developed
strong links.

The Koreans adopted the Chinese
bureaucracy, as did the Japanese, complete
with the system of exams. Pyoungsan
Academy, picturesquely located along a
bend in the Nakdong River in south-central
Korea, was a private Confucian high school
for the sons of that region's yangban elite
(the yangban, meaning “two groups,” were
civil and military officials). The academy
was erected in honor of Ryu Seong-ryong,
who served as the prime minister during the
destructive invasions led by the Japanese
feudal lord Hideyoshi. The building, modeled
on a chéngjas—a pavilion that members
of the yangban class had begun to erect,
often along a stream or river at a particularly
attractive scenic spot—is an enclosed
precinct rising up on a gentle slope.

15.47 Section: Pyoungsan Academy

The visitor passes through a gate with a

vista up the slope under the chéngjas and
into the main court above, where the path
leads. The view centers on the spot where
the teacher would sit, with windows providing
views into the landscape. Flanking the court
are student quarters. Access to the chédngjas,
which seems to almost float above the earth,
is along a simple, narrow, elevated wooden
plank. Behind the school is the shrine in

a separate enclosure and, to one side, a
library. The caretakers’ house is in a separate
enclosure attached to the walls of the school.
The teacher did not live at the school but in
the nearby village.

15.46 Site plan: Pyoungsan Academy

25 rr

MALLAS OF NEPAL

lepal was the midpoint along the north-
south highway linking Tibet to India. Buddhist
monks traveling through here spread

ndian- and Tibetan-style Buddhism in Nepal,
creating a unique blend of the two. After
slamic invaders occupied northern India

in the 10th century, fleeing Hindu priests,
royalty, and merchants added a new Hindu
layer to Nepalese culture and civic polity.

n the 13th century, these Hindu kings
established the long-lasting Malla dynasty,
which ruled Nepal until 1482, after which it
was divided into three independent kingdoms
run by related Malla dynasties, with capitals
in Patan, Kathmandu, and Bhaktapur. In the
17th century, the Mallas of Patan renovated
and reconstructed their main royal court,
known as the Durbar Square. Its oldest
structure, the Manidhara Fountain, was

built in the 6th century CE as a rest area for
pilgrims. Under the Malla, the square grew in
importance when royal palaces and temples
were added to it. The eastern edge of the
square was lined with a string of palaces
abutting one another. On the western side

an irregularly shaped open space is home

to several freestanding temples. Dispersed
throughout are many small shrines. At its
northern end, just beyond the palaces, the
Manidhara Fountain forms its own urban
place. It is the delicate balance between
structure and space that imparts to Durbar
Square its unique urban character.

Manidhara Fountain
is) 20m

15.49 East-west section looking south: Durbar Square

15.48 Durbar Square, Patan, Nepal

Cara Narayan Temple

Biswanath Temple

id

7

[os os ee

15.50 Plan: Durbar Square

15.51 Facsimile of Tobei Kamei’s block print of the Shimabara geisha district, Kyoto, Japan

KYOTO’S ODO! AND SHIMABARA

A ten-year civil war (1467-77) between
various lords that ended in stalernate

also left Kyoto abandoned and a wreck.

At its conclusion, a new shogunate was
established, inaugurated by some of the most
famous of Japan's shoguns—Oda Nobunaga,
Toyotomi Hideyoshi, and Tokugawa leyasu.
The ensuing peace was a period of rapid
reconstruction, military consolidation, and
economic development that enabled trade
and commerce to thrive, in particular with
China. The Dutch and Portuguese also
established trading ports in Japan, although
the Chinese ships were given priority since
the silver trade with European merchants
was blamed for the instability that imperiled
Ming China. The shoguns' vision of Japanese
society, like that of Qing China, was thus
hostile to the laissez-faire ambitions of

the new mercantile world and responded

by tightening the strictures of the Bakufu
code, a highly ceremonial, hierarchical

code of conduct that prescribed everyone's
designated place in the social fabric.

Like the Qing, who had to both align
themselves with and distinguish themselves
from the Han-dominated Confucian China
that they ruled as a minority, the Japanese
shoguns also had to thread the needle of
distinguishing their authority as de facto
heads of state frorn that of the emperor and
the imperial order that was still nominally
the social center. And so, the Tokugawa

redesigned the imperial capital, Kyoto, to
meet the strictures of the Bakufu code and to
efine their own identity.

Pre-shogunate Kyoto's primary urban
ivision lay between the imperial spaces and
all the rest. Temples, the houses of nobles,
shops, and entertainment areas could all be
found in the same neighborhoods. Kyoto's
shogun appointed governor, an erstwhile
Buddhist priest named Maeda Gen’i (1539-
1602), built a new north-south thoroughfare
that cut through the old blocks, just as
Hausmann would later do in 19th-century
Paris. This opened up new street frontage,
which was occupied by commercial
establishments and houses. The street was
also used to stage important processions

in visually competitive displays of strength
between the shogun and the emperor.

In 1591, the shogun Hideyoshi defined
the borders of the city by building an earthen
rampart 9 meters at the base, between 3 and
6 meters high, and topped by a wood and
bamboo fence called the odo. A mini-moat
6 to 18 meters wide was excavated outside.
The world within the odoi was called the
rakuchu, or the urbanized world, and the
rest the rakugai, or the outside world. All
farms of internal enclosures and fortifications
were then demolished, erasing all signs of
the localized authorities. Some of the major
Buddhist temples were moved to outside
the city walls, especially to the eastern hills.
The members of the warrior class were

15.52 Plan: Sumiya, Kyoto, Japan

made to settle right next to the Nijo Castle
and the Kyoto Governor's Palace, located
just north of the castle. The members of the
aristocracy were relocated to the peripheries
of the imperial palace. Special quarters for
the lowest classes—the ea (“the stained”)
and the finin (“the nonhumans" )—were
designated at the margins of the city.

yoto's prostitutes were a constant threat
to the Bakufu code, since they conducted
their business in the mixed public space
of the street. In 1640 they were confined

to a single area that came to be called the
Shimabara. Located in the southwest corner
of the city far from its core, it was enclosed
with its own wall complete with a moat, the
purpose of which was not to prevent anybody

from coming in but to keep the prostitutes
from leaving. A single gate on the east side
controlled all movement in and out. With the
merchants, warriors, and aristocrats sharing
the same space and the same prostitutes,
the Shimabara quickly became a place of
sanctioned transgression. The more exclusive
establishments of the Shimabara, the ageya
(“pleasure houses") catered to clients

with high tastes. Accordingly, these places
adopted architectural forms and decorations
normally prohibited to those of lower-class
status that were here appropriate to the high
status of the clientele. This double standard
was managed by making the exterior simple
but creating individual spaces in the interior
that were modeled on the residences of


15.53 Sumiya, Kyoto

the upper classes, and even those of the
shoguns. Indeed, to respond to the varied
status and tastes of the clients, the interiors
were often extremely eclectic, with individual
entertainment rooms right next to each other
uilt in completely different styles.

The only surviving example of a
17th-century ageya is the Sumiya ("Place

of Peace and Long Life”), controlled by the
jakagawa family, who administered it for
thirteen generations from its very beginning
in 1641. From the street its facade is simple
ut cleverly designed. The outer walls of both
its ground and upper story are recessed by
alf a bay and fronted by wooden screens
that ensured no one could look in, but that
the guests could see out. They were also
removable, so that when street entertainers
came calling or during festivals when the

streets of the Shimabara became one big
theater, the guests of the Sumiya could look
straight out without hindrance.

In the interior are a range of styles taken
from those of the military mansions, town

homes, and teahouses. They were, however,
willfully decorative and colored with great
variety and exaggeration. The main reception
rooms for guests were located behind the
exterior facade on the eastern edge of the
uilding. This position corresponded to the
typology of the houses of rich merchants. As
in Shinden-style palaces such as Ninomaru at
ijo Castle and the Katsura Imperial Villa, the
entertainment rooms located near the garden
were stepped back to ensure that each room
ad a special relationship to the garden, with
individually framed openings designed for
each space. The second floor had smaller

rooms for the more intimate relationships
tween the geisha and her clients.

roe wnt at ina unnsa} meee

15.54 Architectural drawing of street in Edo (Tokyo) with shops, 1876

EDO (TOKYO)

In 1603, the first Tokugawa shogun decided
to rule from a new city, Edo (now Tokyo).
Conceived as a spiral, with accommodations

with
both security and symbolism in mind, with
its thirty-two major gateways guarding the
various lines of approach to the center. Their

made for geography, it was develope:

locations were correlated with the twelve

signs of the zodiac, integral to the Chinese
astrological and calendrical system. The
populace was not allowed to freely intermix,
and each class was placed in different
sections of the city. The vassals were located
to the northeast of the castle. Lower-ranking
samurai were located in a section all to
themselves; the merchants and artisans lived
in the outermost, southwest parts of the city.

Silver brokers lived in one neighborhood, gold

brokers in another, and so forth.

|

Pam
Kinkakuji /

¥

A
‘y

Odoi (earth rampart)

Shimabara

: co
| Imperial Palace;
, i

\y Ginkakuji

Nijo Castle }

ig

q
|

4 i

0 ‘ 3km

15.56 Plan of Kyoto, Japan

Nepal

Patan® MALLAS

Agra
Jaipur@® ®

Calcutta/Kolkata ©

(England)
Mughal Empire
Bombay/Mumbai @)
Marathas at war Golconda
with the Mughals—— Bay of Bengal
& ,
ie) Madras/Chennai
@ (England)
Arabian Sea NAYAKS.
manne © Pondicherry
Fra
Madurai @ (France)

Dutch rule coast
of Sri Lanka

15.57 Mughal Empire, India

_-—Thousand-Pillared Hall

Tirumalai’s Caultri

~ Chitra Gopuram

Lotus Tank

100 m

15.59 Site plan: Meenakshi Sunderesvara Temple

15.58 Meenakshi Sunderesvara Temple at Madurai, India

NAYAKS OF MADURAI
The Nayaks, though nominally under the rule
of Delhi, continued the Chola and Vijayanagar
practice of treating ternples as surrogate courts.
In fact, the temples of Madurai and Tanjore
became veritable cities unto themselves.
Their gates were rarely closed, and urban
life moved in and out at will. The Meenakshi
Sunderesvara Temple (1623-59) has two main
shrines, the larger one dedicated to Shiva in the
manifestation of Sunderesvara (“the beautiful
one”) and the smaller to his wife Meenakshi
(“the fish-eyed one”). Nonetheless, the temple’s
main deity is Meenakshi, a local regional
goddess who is important to the Tamils. Though
she was married to Shiva after the rise of the
bhakti cults, she maintained her dominance over
the populace. Spatially this duality is represented
in procession. Although Sunderesvara’s shrine
has a well-defined axis leading to it, it is
Meenakshi’s more informally defined access
path that has the important historical locations
along it, most importantly the Lotus Tank—the
mythical origin of the ternple—and a corridor
with painted panels depicting stories from
Meenakshi's life.

As it grew, the ternple became a series
of enclosures that nestle a diverse array of
functional and ceremonial spaces, such as
pillared halls, open courts, inhabitable corridors,
and shrines, all designed to accormmodate the
temple's diverse civic and religious functions.
In addition, it has markets, private shrines,
places for resting, dwellings for priests, and
ceremonial sites; a museum was added recently.
Chief among the rituals is an elaborate annual
procession meant to be visible to all, particularly
the lowest castes, who were not allowed into

15.60 Plan: Urban core of Madurai, India

the temple. This procession celebrated
Meenakshi’s divine wedding to Sunderesvara
(Shiva). Over a nineteen-day period in

April and May, Meenakshi is taken out in
procession in a mobile structure, into the
crowded city streets, where she ceremonially
defeats all the gods and earthly kings in one
battle after another until she finally meets
Sunderesvara, whom she almost defeats
before suddenly realizing she is prophesied to
marry him.

Seen from a distance, the Meenakshi
Sunderesvara Ternple’s silhouette is defined
by its gopurams, or gateways, the highest
ones reaching 50 meters. Made of brick,
they are largely solid and are ornamented
with a myriad of vividly painted mythical
deities and creatures. The gopurams

dis

15.61 Gopuram of Meenakshi Sunderesvara Temple at Madurai

increase in height the farther they are from
the center. The gold-covered shikharas

over the shrines are actually the temple's
smallest superstructures. In part, the
gopurams' function is to announce the
temple's presence to the city, and when seen
from a distance, they create a visual wave
radiating out into the landscape. In other
words, the mandalic universe that is usually
condensed into the figurative representation
of a Hindu temple's shikhara was, under
the Nayaks, expanded so far outward that

it encornpasses the geography of the entire
city itself. And because Madurai sits in a
river valley surrounded by a ring of low-lying
hills, the hills can be imagined as the next
layer of gopurams, implying mythical unseen
mountains beyond.

ie) 15m

: 1 1

15.62 Section: The summit of a gopuram

JAIPUR

The Mughal emperor Akbar’s policy to
subjugate the Rajputs was to offer them
conciliatory alliances, preserving their cultural
and political independence, subject to a
military tax; and to invade only if they rejected
that offer. The Rajput king Raja Bharmal of
Amer was the first to accept this alliance,
which enabled his state to prosper during the
Mughal tenure. Amer was one of the critical
ports on the highway from Agra to the Kutch
coast, so its defense and the taxes that it
generated were important for the Mughals.
For their loyalty, Amer maharajas were often
appointed viceroys to Mughal territories such
as Malwa in peninsular India.

After Aurangzeb’s death in 1707, the then
maharaja of Amer, Sawai Jai Singh, realized
that the Mughal Empire was beginning to
break down, and went on an aggressive
campaign to modernize and weaponize
his own state. In particular, he modernized
his forts’ defenses to better withstand
artillery and invested in large ammount of
artillery as well, with a massive reserve of
ammunition—at the cost of cavalry, which
was the traditional strength of the Rajputs.
Because of this militarization, Amer quickly
emerged as a strong and stable regional
power, highly protective of trade routes and
commercial activity, and in the waning days
of the Mughals attracted a large amount of
migration from Mughal cities.

In 1727, Sawai Jai Singh felt sufficiently
secure that he moved his palace out of the
big fort at Amer and down the hill onto an
open field, where he already had a built a
large garden. This was quite a risk, for the
location of the new city made it vulnerable
not only to artillery but even to a strong
cavalry attack. Jai Singh’s solution was to
build a fort on the hillock immediately behind
the new city, called Nahargarh, to which the
royal farnily at least could retreat in case of a
sudden attack. Nahargarh had the particular
advantage of an artesian spring, around
which a fantastic asymmetrical tank was
built. But as it happened, Nahargarh never
had to be used.

Jai Singh called his new city Jaipur, and
he put the architect Vidyadhar, the head of
his imarat, or building department, in charge
of building it. Vidhyachar is the first recorded

0
L

15.63 Plan of Jaipur, India

individual town planner in South Asian
history in charge of building a brand-new
city (although Mughal court names are also
documented as being in charge of various
projects, such as Fatehpur Sikri).

Fortunately, Vidyadhar proved equal to
the task. He first built a master plan for the
city expanding outward in blocks from the
existing garden. This gave him five additional
Squares—one short, since the Nahargarh
hill butted into the garden in one corner.

To compensate, Vidyadhar added another
neighborhood square, called a chokri, at the
other end of the city. Around the boundary
of the new city he built a wall—not strong
enough to hold back artillery fire, but high
enough to designate the urban boundary
and to control access through designated
gates. Since the city stood on an important
trade route, controlling access was vital to
collecting octroj (taxes).

Within the city walls, Vidyadhar invested
heavily in building the drainage infrastructure
of the city and, more importantly, in
constructing rows of markets along the main
arteries of the city. By building up the street

~2r .
nea ae

edges of the main avenues, Vidyadhar was
not only able to construct a unified street
picture, he also immediately had a large
amount of commercial street-front property
available for sale, which attracted merchants
fleeing the declining Mughal cities. Behind
the main streets, the interiors were built up
around the settling populations, who largely
clustered around trades. Street intersections
were cut at the corners to create chokris. The
street section of the shopswas set up such
that people could gather on shop rooftops
and view the street processions that were
commonpace then as today on festival days.

In the 19th century, all of Jaipur’s main
streets were painted a uniform color—a pink
pigment derived from the local sandstone—to
welcome a visiting colonial prince. This added
significantly to the strong urban street picture
of the city. Sawai Jai Singh patronized Jesuit
priests alongside Islamic scientists and Hindu
and Jain scholars in his court. He had an
extensive library, and is famous for building
the most accurate observatories in the world
of the time, called Jantar Mantar.


France

Austria

Poland Russia

Vienna®

Venice

Qrre go
Algiers Tunis °s

15.64 Ottoman Empire

NUROSMANIYE MOSQUE, ISTANBUL
Faced with the transforming world economy,
the Ottomans allied themselves with the
French against England, Austria, and Russia.
Although the Ottomans had lost their military
advantage in Europe, they continued to

e very strong financially. In fact, around
700, they dominated the life and culture

of the eastern half of the Mediterranean,
controlling a vast territory that stretched

rom the Persian Gulf to Algeria. In 1703
Ahmed III moved the capital of the Ottoman
Empire back to Istanbul (it had been in
Bursa), which precipitated a major building
com. Instead of following the Suleyrnaniye
canon established by Sinan, the architecture
looked to external influences to generate new
architectural expressions. For this reason,
18th-century Ottoman architecture is often
described as being Westernized. But as
scholars have noted, it is better thought of
as an early modern architecture in which

Sinan’s “classicism” was hybridized with

European—and particularly French—Baroque

architectural sensibilities and then mixed
together with Persian and Indian precedents,
the latter especially in palaces and gardens,
such as the Sa’dabad Palace and the
garden at Kagithane, Istanbul. This arnalgam
contrasts with Russia’s more aggressive
attempt to modernize the state through the
singular importation of French taste.

Otranto, |
‘ Or

@Budapest

Black Sea No

- tanbul--— @Sinope \

\

7 NS Ankara
+» Salbigika ®

@fonya 4
@Adana
Praia

‘ @Aleppo

f
Damascus
©

ae ra, “@OJerusalem
Aloxandriey
Cairo

\ a _ @edina

{@Mecca

Mahmud I's Nurosmaniye Mosque (1749-55)
combined a standard centralized domed plan
with an unusually wide, highly fenestrated
facade under a massive arch. A tightly
clustered sequence of engaged pillars with
capitals that unexpectedly merged with the
cornice are complemented by European
Baroque details such as scrolls, shells, cable
and round moldings, engaged pillars, and
fluted capitals.

%
%
>

%

Chaigiran

9
Tabriz

Basra

15.65 Nurosmaniye Mosque, Istanbul

z-.

wy

15.66 St. Paul’s Cathedral, London

THE ANGLICAN CHURCH

In 1536, in order to annul his marriage to his
Catholic Spanish queen, Catherine of Aragon,
the English king Henry VIII dissolved the
Catholic monasteries and abbeys and created
the Church of England, or Anglican Church,
with himself as its head. However, this new
church maintained many liturgical similarities
to the Catholic Church, a fact that came to
be vociferously opposed by the Puritans,
who, influenced by Protestants such as the
Calvinists, wanted a purer form of worship
freed of all Catholic influence. The Puritan
influence in Parliament became so strong
that during the English Civil War (1642-51)
they executed Charles | in 1649 and set up
the Puritan Oliver Cromwell (1599-1658)

as ruler of a self-proclaimed Protestant
Republic. This was, however, a short-lived
revolution, and in 1660 the monarchy was
able to reinstate itself. The Puritans found
themselves marginalized in English society,
and many left to join their cornpatriots already
settled on the shores of New England.

In 1665 a great fire destroyed most of
central London, including eighty churches.
The rebuilding of the churches became

an opportunity to place a strong Anglican
imprint on the city. Dominated by the landed
gentry, the Anglican Church effectively
functioned as an extension of the interests

of the ruling class. Sir Christopher Wren, an
English nobleman trained as an astronomer,
was asked to design almost all of these
churches. Wren studied contemporary
French architecture but seemed to have been
more impressed with Italianate examples and
literature, particularly Palladian simplicity.
Anglicanism placed considerable emphasis
on the dignity of the service as prescribed

in the Book of Common Prayer, but unlike
Italian Counter-Reformation churches, which
emphasized the spectacle of devotion, Wren’s
churches possess some of the simplicity

and openness of Protestant churches. The
color palette of their interiors was restrained;
almost everything was white, with a few
accents like gilded column capitals, string
courses, and rosettes set against the dark
wood of the altarpiece and furniture. Large
windows brought in ample light.

After the destruction of St. Paul’s Cathedral
in the Great Fire of London, many wanted
to rebuild it in the old Gothic style. Wren,
however, envisioned a building up to date
with European neoclassical sensibilities.
Several plans and revisions were made,
including one known as the “great model,”
which had highly original, large concave
exteriors. It was rejected for a more
conventional plan. The church fathers
accepted the modern exterior but insisted on
a medieval-style section, with low side aisles
and a tall nave.

The building (1675-1709) is in the
shape of a cross, with the dome, one of the
largest in the world, over the crossing. It is
surrounded by three galleries on different
levels. To disguise the low side aisles, Wren
created a blind second story that also
concealed the buttresses holding up the
vaults. Without the false second story, the
dome would have looked astonishingly out
of scale. Even so, it looms large, resting on a
ring of columns with eight cleverly disguised
buttresses. On the interior is a giant pilaster
order for the nave and a lower order for the
secondary spaces, modeled loosely on St.
Peter's Basilica in Rome.


Saal

io : . wit \ ah:

ak

[> oe ° a een \\ New cathedral
~~ Old cathedral” ‘ : . a a A catenary arch is the mirrored upward
~~ toes me projection of a suspended chain. It is the
\} most ideal form of vault, as it supports
itself without the need for buttressing.

CA | - This form of curve was derived from the
15.67 Site plan: St. Paul’s Cathedral, London
mathematics of Jacobus Bernoulli.

But unlike Michelangelo's lower drum, which ™

fits compactly onto the body of the building,
St. Paul's drum is both lofty and airy, rising
almost incomprehensibly out of the center
of the building. While Michelangelo's lantern
appears as a bundle of forces collected into
a relatively tightly wound package, Wren’s
lantern sits serenely on top of the dome as a
small centralized tempietto.

The semispherical dome (flattened on
top) consists of a wooden frame with a lead
surface supported by an invisible conical
masonry structure. Below that is an almost
spherical vault. To create the impression
of height so that the inner and outer dome
appear to match, the colurnns supporting the
dome lean toward the center.

During the Baroque period, the dome
became one of the dominant theres for
churches and even for secular buildings, like
the U.S. Capitol. There are several variations,
but unlike Palladio’s dome, which has no
drum, most post-Renaissance architects
preferred the model set out by Donato
Bramante, which was a dome resting on
a short drum. Wren’s dome for St. Paul in
London is clearly an adaptation of Brarnante's
theme.

15.69 Section through dome of
St. Paul’s Cathedral

15.68 Dome, St. Paul’s Cathedral

St. Mary Woolnoth
The most imaginative of the English architects
of the early 18th century was undoubtedly
Nicholas Hawksmoor (1661-1736), Wren's
apprentice. Wren shared with his apprentice
an interest in the architecture of Asia Minor
and in the then still barely known architecture
of Greece and Egypt. But if Wren had an
eye for compositional unity, Hawksmoor
aimed to bring the elements of architectural
composition into dynamic interrelationship.
He pried features out of their expected
contexts.

The strangeness of Hawksmoor’s
buildings is a result of a design process
that emphasized esoteric historical and
philosophical meanings. In that sense,
Hawksmoor spoke to a generation of
designers that attempted to distance itself
from amateur architects and questioned
the normative production of aesthetic ideals
as public spectacle. His St. Mary Woolnoth
(1716-24) is an astonishing building when
compared with the stiff linearity of the English
Palladian style that was starting to make its
presence felt. The double-tower front facade
appears to be two buildings stacked on top
of each other, the entirety surmounted by two
symmetrically placed small bell housings.
In the lower zone, the voussoirs around
the openings are connected to horizontally

15.70 St. Mary Woolnoth, London

banded rustication grooves that continue
even around the corner columns. Over this
structure, Hawksmoor placed a “base” on
which rests an entablatured blind portico.

It would be wrong to read Hawksmoor’s
architecture as simply playful or baroque,
however. He was not just playing with formal
composition but also citing less well-known
references from antiquity. Not adhering
to the limited Palladian interpretation of
the antique, Hawksmoor studied buildings
such as the Roman tomb of the Julii at St.-
Rémy, France. The two columns flanking
the entrance are esoteric references to the
Temple of Solomon, the reconstruction of
which preoccupied many architects of the
time, including Wren. Anglican theologians
of the day were also interested in the Second
Temple of Solomon as a way to reconnect
to both biblical authenticity and the ethos of
early Christianity. The upper portico was a
reference to the Mausoleum of Halicarnassus,
one of the seven ancient wonders of the
world, which had been destroyed but for
which Hawksmoor made a sketch based on
descriptions by Pliny and Vitruvius. In this
way, Hawksmoor opened a brief window to
the possibility that antiquity could be a source
of architectural heterogeneity—contrary to the
rush to exemplify, as with the spread of the
Baroque style throughout colonial Europe.

15.71 Plan and section: St. Mary Woolnoth

15.72 Stratford Hall Plantation, near Montross, Virginia

WHIGS AND THE PALLADIAN REVIVAL
By the early 18th century, the older
puritanical interests of England had been
channeled into the rise of the Whig party,
which, with Robert Walpole as prime minister
under kings George | and George II, pursued
a policy of aggressive mercantile capitalism
focused on protecting British interests in
the colonies, accompanied by anti-Catholic
and anti-slavery policies, and a strong
anti-Tory push for constitutional monarchy.
Continuing the Whigs’ puritanical leaning,
the Georgian architecture of this time was
overtly simple and understated. Walls were
usually of unadorned brick, and windows and
doorways were framed in wood painted white.
Facades were symmetrically arranged around
the ground-level entrance or, on occasion,
accessed by a short flight of steps. Grander
houses might have a portico, pilasters, or
corner quoins.

The Georgian style was England's
first truly national style; it was unique to
England and its colonies and arose out of
the Protestant ethic of nondemonstrative
simplicity. Functional and serviceable, it was
adopted by the newly emerging mercantile
class, which was heavily involved in coal and
agricultural ventures, not only in England but
also abroad. Unlike the French aristocracy,
the English upper classes actively invested in

the colonies. Stratford Hall Plantation (1738)
in Virginia, at the head of a large estate that
grew tobacco for export to England, was
designed for Thomas Lee, a businessman
in the Virginia colonies and for a time acting
governor of the state.

Palladian Revival architecture blossomed
after the 1715 publication of Vitruvius
Britannicus, written by the Scottish lawyer
and architect Colen Campbell, who
proclaimed the superiority of antiquity over
what he argued were the affected and
licentious forms of the Baroque. The work
of Inigo Jones, in his eyes, should have
been held in just as high an esteem as that
of Palladio. Vitruvius Britannicus, together
with the publication of the three volumes
of The Architecture of A. Pailadio (1715,
1717, and 1725) by the Venetian Giacomo
Leoni, sparked a movement that invested
a great deal of energy in substantiating the
lea of the primacy of the natural law of
proportion, still a rather novel idea in English
design practice. Facade, plan, and volume
had to be unified into a formal whole. Yet
despite this penchant for abstraction, the
external detailing had to adhere closely to
Palladio’s own works—thus the frequent
use of rusticated bases, pilastered upper
elevations, and pedimented entrances in the
emerging Georgian style. Palladio’s legacy

15.73 Plan: Stratford Hall Plantation

ore an aura of authority and exclusion,
yet, being of farming origin, also played into
the Whig ideology of the time. Moreover,
Campbell's treatises offered relatively cheap
ut prestigious models to imitate. The printed
distribution of plans, plates, and treatises
elped to further Palladianisrm, a style that
could be easily taught, mastered, and copied.
The Palladian movement reached its
eight in the hands of Richard Boyle,
otherwise known as Lord Burlington (1694-
1753), an influential Whig politician. Upon
inheriting a fortune from his grandfather,
and after trips to Italy in 1714 and 1719, he
began his career as a gentleman architect,
hoping to promote neo-Palladianism as a
nationally accepted style by influencing the
Office of the Works to pick candidates of his
choice for cornmissions. The most important
of his buildings was his own Chiswick House
(1723-29), which was not actually a house
but rather a pavilion to house his library and
entertain friends. Its basic model is that of
Palladio’s Villa Rotonda, though the facade is
modeled on the Villa Foscari, which faces the
Brenta canal in the Veneto. Certain features
were also taken from Vincenzo Scamozzi,
such as the obelisk chirnneys, the octagonal
rather than circular main hall, and the string
course at the balustrade level that wraps
around the entire building.


15.74 Plan and elevation: Chiswick House

Palladian motifs also becarne common in

the palaces on the Strand, a long street that
ran along the north side of the Thames River
and linked the old walled city of London, the
country's economic capital, with Buckingham
Palace (though it was still relatively modest at
that time) and Westminster, the symbolic and
political capital of the country. With Greece
itself firrnly under Ottoman control, Palladian
orders took on the authority of a prime source
of classicism and influenced many designs,
including that of Thomas Jefferson for the
University of Virginia.

15.75 Chiswick House, near London

Touro Synagogue, Newport

The Puritans in New England sought to
establish a new church in the New World.
Religious tolerance and separation of church
and state were not part of their core ideology,
which produced many dissenters, including
Roger Williams. A severe critic of the Church
of England, Williams, influenced by the
Puritans, moved to Boston to join the Pilgrims
but quickly found them lacking as well. In
particular, Williams's contact and friendship
with the Native American tribes ran counter
to the policies of both the Crown and the
settlers. In response, Williams founded his
own colony in Providence, Rhode Island, in
1636, with religious tolerance as one of its
pillars.
n 1740, Rhode Island resident Peter
Harrison went to England to receive formal
training as an architect. By using pattern
books, taking grand tours of Italy, and
learning drafting skills, Harrison became
America’s first trained architect and a strong
advocate of the principles of neo-Palladianism
as the appropriate expression of the new
ideals of the time. In Newport, Rhode Island,
Harrison built the Redwood Library (1748-
50) and the Touro Synagogue (1759-63),

the latter cornmissioned by descendants of
Sephardic Jews who had been expelled from
Spain, Portugal, and France with the Muslims

in the 15th and 16th centuries. The members
of the small congregation were attracted to
Newport because Rhode Island’s founder,
Roger Williams, had guaranteed religious
freedom there. Harrison drew on the Bevis-
Marks Synagogue of London (1701), which
was a simple box with surrounding galleries
on three sides; it, too, was designed for a
Sephardic cormmunity. The twelve colurmns
supporting the women’s galleries on the
interior represent the twelve tribes of Israel.
hey are each made of a single tree trunk;
the lower ones are lonic, and the upper ones
Corinthian. There were no pews. Instead, the
floor at the center was reserved for a table
for the reading of the law. The men sat along
the perimeter on the ground floor, and the
women above in the balconies. The building
has a sense of intimacy and openness that
Harrison had not been able to achieve in

the King’s Chapel in Boston. Harrison, a
staunch loyalist, ran afoul of the American
revolutionaries, and his house and library
were burned by them in 1775, soon after his
death.


15.76 Great House of Shirley Plantation, near Hopewell, Virginia

Shirley Plantation, Virginia

If Georgian neo-Palladianism was associated
with some of the most progressive thinkers
in New England, it was also, simultaneously,
the style of choice for the great houses of
the slave-based plantations of Virginia. Early
in the 17th century, the British tobacco
plantations relied on indentured workers and
convicts for labor, but this system had limited
economic viability. Meanwhile, tobacco
started to become a lucrative cash crop

as most of the male population of England
egan to smoke daily. This led to a labor
crisis, and an indentured labor rebellion in
1675 pushed Virginia to pass a new series of
jaws that legislated slavery into the institution
that made it infarnous. First, Virginia slave
jaws linked slavery to race: only Africans
could be enslaved. Second, they specified
that all children born to an enslaved mother,
regardless of the father, would also be slaves.
his made slavery hereditary and made
children, often even those with white fathers,
enslavable. It was as a consequence of the
Virginia laws that slave trade really took off,
with slave populations multiplying tenfold.
Virginian owners also invested in keeping
slave families together and maintaining

their health to maximize the production of
children.

The plantation mansion shared a kinship with
Palladio’s villas in that both were based on
farming. Shirley Plantation, settled in 1613,
was Virginia's first and largest plantation. Its
mansion, called the Great House (1738),
was made from locally prepared brick in
Flemish bond. It had a two-story portico with
Doric columns on two sides of the house, so
as to present an entrance for both visitors
arriving by the James River and those arriving
y land, on the plantation side. Inside the
mansion a “flying” or square rigged staircase
rose three floors. The house was surrounded
y eleven supporting buildings, also of brick,
arranged symmetrically on a 4-meter grid.

wo immediately in front were the laundry

and kitchen, designed to syrnmetrically
match and stage the mansion. Others
were the storehouse, the icehouse, the

smokehouse, the dovecote, and stables.

The slaves lived in the Great Quarters,
about 1.5 kilometers from the mansion.
These dwellings were duplex wood-frame
cabins, about 6 by 12 meters, arranged in a
simple row. Each duplex had a double brick
chimney that served both sides. The Shirley
mansion has been continuously occupied by
the Hill Carter family since 1738. Ann Hill
Carter married Henry Lee in the mansion's
parlor in 1793; they were the parents of
Confederate general Robert E. Lee.

15.77 Plan of Shirley Plantation showing location of mansion, fields, and Great Quarters of the slaves

1800 CE

INTRODUCTION
The start of the 19th century was a watershed
moment in the advent of modernity. In 1800,
the world’s wealth was about the same it had
been a millennium before; China's wealth
was greater than that of the entire Western
world; and less than 2 percent of the world’s
population lived in cities. Today, a little over
two centuries later, the world's wealth has
increased more than sixteenfold; the West's
share of that wealth is almost 75 percent; and
about 50 percent of the world’s population
lives in cities.
Momentous events around 1800
unleashed this radical transformation. The

European Enlightenment, particularly its
emphasis on nature, science, reason, and
egalitarianism, circulated in the colonial
world and eventually captured the global
imagination. Two major social revolutions—
the American and the French—translated
the Enlightenment into political form, creating
new democracies that charted the path,
however circuitous and fitful, that led to the
decline of the monarchic institution, which
was replaced by that of the nation-state.
And at the center of it all, the Industrial
Revolution, particularly the invention of the
cotton gin, transformed a global mercantile
economy into a mass-manufacturing
industrial economy, which made consumer
goods the new focus of the global economic
system. One of its lesser consequences was
a global building boom, and with it the steady
emergence of a new sensibility regarding the
purposes and forms of architecture.

But that was still in the future; in its time
this entire transformation was more gradual
and fraught with contradictions. Europe was

still oriented primarily toward accumulating
wealth from far-flung global territories; its own
historical identity was as yet episodic, and its
sense of manifest destiny only just beginning
to emerge. Thus the call for egalitarianism,
for instance, cohabited with the defense of
slavery and colonization: Jefferson’s home

in Virginia was both a model of Neoclassical
utopianism and a site of slavery. As a
consequence of the fractures between ideality
and reality, the Enlightenment was slow to
catch on. The establishment of democracies
was met with trepidation and uncertainty,

japoleon fought to sp

alance the House of

Enlightenment.

taken the principles o
raternity toa much b

was opposed by the a

irst quarter of the 19tl
attles were waged ac!

read the ideals of the

French Revolution, yet also crowned himself
monarch. The U.S. Constitution sought to

Representatives with

the Senate and Supreme Court; and England
and Prussia worked hard to oppose revolution
yy adjusting monarchy to the ideals of the

Revolution in France—which had

liberty, equality, and
joodier extreme than

revolution had done in the United States—

lied forces of England

and the Prussian Empire. For most of the

century, determined
ross Europe to choke

the cry of the French Revolution in its

cradle. Napoleon and

his armies forced

change not only in France but also in Italy,

Austria, and Germany.

The United States,

caught in the middle, tried to steer a neutral

path—although its tra’
to England, while the |

itional allegiance was
ikes of Jefferson and

Benjamin Franklin were ardent defenders of

new French ideals.

The utopianism of the Enlightenment was

generally ternpered, if

not co-opted outright,

by the lingering traditions of aristocratic
privilege. This produced an architecture
generally known as Necclassical, the history

of which took many tu

rns and in some

cases retreated toward more conservative

stances. Nonetheless,

traces of a more

vigorous and austere Neoclassicism, such
as that pursued by the French architects
Claude Nicholas Ledoux and Etienne-Louis
Boullée, are to be found throughout Europe
from 1800 onward. Classicism, which had
started during the Renaissance as a quest to
relearn from a lost past, now emerged as a
claimant to a privileged cultural imperative,
the roots of which came to be castigated

as Eurocentrism. The liberation of Greece
from Ottoman occupation in 1829 spawned
a vigorous neo-Greek movement not only

in the United States but also in Germany
and Scotland, as well as in British India.
Architects began to stress not the willful play

of forrns that Baroque

architecture enjoyed,

but a reasoned and principled revival of

original classical idiom
Competing with cla

5.
ssicism, there emerged

with most nations seeking a balance

between representative democracy and a
continuation of the rule of the privileged.

a new interest in nature and the non-classical
heritage—that is, the Gothic. The Romantics,
particularly in England, sought alternative

narratives from the past in a quest to define a
more specifically English heritage. In Berlin,
the capital of the Protestant Prussian Empire,
the architect Karl Friedrich Schinkel (1781-
1841), influenced by the likes of Goethe

and Schiller, looked to create a more austere
classicism as an expression of nationalism.
The German Romantic movement envisioned
nature as a manifestation of the divine.
Painter Caspar David Friedrich created
meditative landscapes that hover between
mysticism and a sense of melancholy

and solitude. Goethe and Schiller linked
nationalism to the ideals of ancient Greece,
giving the German movement a different
tenor than the nationalism of France, which
emphasized the idealization of political
institutions and social arrangements. And in
the United States, the gentleman architect
Thomas Jefferson designed a university

in Virginia based on the best classical
information he had access to, while Charles
Pierre L'Enfant laid out the capital of the
world's first modern democratic republic in
Washington, DC, an urban vision that used
axial planning to merge urban spectacle with
the idea of the balance of powers.

At the same time, classicism was
challenged by more trenchant critiques
that sought evermore pristine origins for
architecture—in nature, primitive civilizations,
or universal “science.” The French Jesuit
priest Marc Antoine Laugier converted
the theoretical clairns of the political
philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau into
new architectural theory. If nature made man
noble, then for Laugier it was the “savages”
of America who represented that nobility.
Other “authenticities” were also sought; J. L.
Durand looked to interrogate the orders of
antiquity to extract their underlying geometric
principles, rather than just accept them as
privileged points of origin. Eugéne-Ermmanuel
Viollet-le-Duc was the first to use steel as an
exposed material, while Etienne-Louis Boullée
published a series of theoretical works
embodying the thinking of men of reason
such as Isaac Newton.

In the wake of the American Revolution,
Latin American colonies in Central and South
America also began to declare independence.
The failed Haitian slave revolution against

the French (1791-1804) was first, and far
ahead of its time. When Napoleon invaded
Spain and Portugal in 1808, their Latin
American colonies used the opportunity

to give the Latin American independence
movement some momentum. The Portuguese
monarchy relocated to Brazil during
Portugal's occupation by Napoleon. After the
court returned to Lisbon, the viceroy, who
remained in Brazil, declared independence
successfully in 1822. In general, however,
the Latin American transition to nation-states
was tumultuous, and it would take almost half
a century before a series of long civil wars
settled down enough to permit the creation

of stable administrations. For two decades
these erstwhile colonies tried unsuccessfully
to fashion a united federation. Eventually they
settled on the separate nations of today's
South America.

When the U.S. Declaration of
Independence and Constitution were written,
their authors, with all their idealism, likely
believed slavery was on the decline and
would to die a natural death. Tobacco fields
were exhausted from overuse, slave revolts
were endemic, and financing for plantation
expansions was becoming increasingly
scarce. Not wanting to confront the Southern
states that produced a majority share of
the plantation wealth of the newly minted
United States, the Founding Fathers left the
topic of slavery untouched, at the mercy of
the forces of history. And as history would
have it, the Industrial Revolution—which
itself had to rely on water, coal, and steam
for power—revitalized the economic value of
slavery like never before. As the demand for
raw cotton skyrocketed, the slave plantations
of the American South prospered—even as
the earliest industrial manufacturing towns of
England, such as Manchester and Liverpool,
created a new industrial working-class culture
that pointed to the end of rural, agricultural
civilization. With industrialization came
industrial infrastructure—factories, ports,
warehouses, and shipyards, all built at the
speed and size of utility, using the materials
closest at hand—as well as the first public
institutions designed to deal with urban
citizenship: hospitals, prisons, and lunatic
asylums.

In the midst of this fundamental
transformation in thought, political ordering,
and economic production, the European
powers also commenced a colonial expansion
project of a kind that had never been seen
before. England led the way. The “loss”
of America to independence meant first
and foremost that British traders no longer
enjoyed monopolistic rights and had to pay
market price for American products. While
this was still quite a viable proposition, the
English government decided on a policy of
aggressive expansion in the Old World to
offset the American losses. Unlike the first
period of colonization, when the Western
European powers were looking for alternatives
to the Ottoman and northern Italian
stranglehold on the spice trade; now, in the
late 18th century, the European powers were
on the ascendant, flush with wealth from the
plantation trade in the American colonies and
powered by the Industrial Revolution. British
warships in particular sailed the deep oceans
largely unchallenged.

The big colonial story of the tirne was
the unexpected ease with which the English
were able to take over most of the Indian
subcontinent in just a few decades, after two
centuries of trying and succeeding only in
building coastal ports. As the Mughal Empire
declined, the officers of the British East India
Company became increasingly bold and
began to find spectacular success in their
confrontations with local rulers. All this took
place precisely when the main cadres of the
British forces were being repeatedly defeated
by George Washington’s revolutionary
forces, with some help from the French. The
contrasting performances of the two armies
possessed the British public imagination,
and the British government decided to
develop India as the counter-colony to the
United States. In 1773 the Crown appointed
the first official governor general of India to
oversee the operations of the private British
East India Company, and with that began
the so-called Raj, the British effort to bring
the best of the Enlightenment to India while
pursuing an aggressive mercantile policy to
feed the British mill and trade objectives.
Calcutta (now Kolkata), once a swamp, was
transformed by the newfound wealth of the

British East India Company into a massive
port city that—if only in its pretentions—tried
to vie with London by building plastered
colonial governmental structures and
mansions.
Meanwhile, East Asia, particularly China,
continued to advance economically. China
under the Qing dynasty extended its borders
the old-fashioned way, conquering Tibet,
urkestan, and Mongolia. In size, population,
production, and raw wealth, it had no equal.
ts bold-thinking ruler, the Qianlong Emperor,
aimed to create a pan-Asian empire, unified
around the Indic origin ideal of chakravartin.
He declared several religions and languages
official. (Napoleon did the same after the
French Revolution.) The Qianlong Emperor's
purposeful use of imitation in constructing
is new capital city, Chengde, was driven
y the ideological innovation of constructing
a vision of China as the center of a pan-
Asian world. He also undertook a massive
agricultural reform policy that involved the
relocation of over 5 million Chinese peasants
to Sichuan Province. The Chinese peasant
was technologically advanced for his time
and highly mobile, not quite as wedded to his
land as the stereotypical provincial Western
farmer. Later in the century China would
come to be viewed stereotypically in the West
as tradition-bound and moribund, but in
1800 China was still the object of global envy.
Apart from China, Europe, and the
European-controlled colonies, there were
two other areas that continued to develop
architecturally but in very different ways—
Japan and Thailand. In Japan, the Tokugawa
shoguns, witnessing the havoc caused by
the influx of silver in China, airned to strictly
regulate access by the expanding colonial
world; only sore Chinese and occasional
European vessels were allowed into the port
of Nagasaki. At the same time, Shogunate
Japan tried to transform itself internally,
developing a “modern” architecture of the
middle class for Kabuki theater. Thailand,
which was never colonized, was, by contrast,
more than willing to open itself up to Western
influence, unifying borrowed elements into
regionally developed forms of practice. In that
sense the story of 19th-century urbanism
has to include not only such new cities such

as Washington, DC, and the redesigning of
such older cities as Berlin, London, Paris,
Dublin, and Athens; but also Bangkok, the
newly founded capital of Thailand, which
provides a glimpse of modern Southeast
Asia architecture in a city that was neither
colonized by the Europeans nor closed off in
the name of tradition.

Napoleon was first to liberate the Jews in
Europe. With that, and with the establishment
of various Jewish reform movements, there
was a global movernent to build synagogues,
an activity that had long been suppressed.

ATash-Khovli

1830s
South Asia: Mughal Dynasty
1526-1858
A Jantar Mantar A Hawa Mahall
Completed 1734 A Darbar Sahib 1799
1764
Japan: Edo Period
1615-1868
A Kanamaru-za
1835
China: Qing Dynasty
1644-1911
A Imperial Palace at Chengde A Putuo Zongcheng Temple Opium War
1703-80 1771 1830-1842
A Wat Pra Kaew
Completed 1784
1750 CE 1800 CE 1850 CE
Neoclassicism
Mid-18th to mid-19th centuries
A Strawberry Hill A Shelburne House A Government House Writers’ Building p>
Rebuilt 1749-77 Begun 1763 Begun 1803 1870
ASte. Genevieve A Bibliothéque Nationale AValhalla
1757 1788 1830-42
A Salt Works of Chaux A Pére Lachaise
1775-79 1804
Schauspielhaus A A Altes Museum A St. Madeleine Church
1818-21 1823-30 1845-51

Royal Scottish Academy A ATennessee State Capitol
1835 1845-59

A Beth Elohim Synagogue

1840
A Bibliothéque St. Geneviéve
1845-51
Industrial Revolution
17th to 18th centuries
England: Hanoverian Rule French Revolution Napoleonic Wars Victorian Era
1714-1901 1789-1799 1795-1815 1830-1901
American War of Independence — Haitian Slave Revolution
1775-1783 1791-1804
Joseph Bramah invents the water closet. @® A Suffolk House of Correction A Pentonville Prison

1778 1803 1844

Russia TASH-KHOVLI
By 1800 the old land-based Silk Route was
so completely in decline that one of the ways
in which profit was extracted from it was by
raiding, enslaving, and reselling traders who
still plied that route. Khiva became the site
of a notorious slave market. The city (now
in Uzbekistan) is split into two parts. The
outer town, called Dichan Kala, was formerly
protected by a wall with eleven gates. The
inner town is encircled by brick walls whose
foundations are believed to have been laid
in the 10th century. In the 1830s, Alla-Kulli-
Khan built a palace, Tash-Khovli (“Stone
Country Estate”) in the eastern part of the
inner city, just to the west of a large market.
This complex has three yards arranged in a
U with secondary spaces filling in the gaps.
16.1 Khiva, former capital of Knwarezmia The southernmost is the receiving yard,
where important visitors would be met; in
the middle is a yard for entertainment; and
the last and most private yard was occupied
by the harem. Typically, the outside walls
of the palace were left plain, but the walls
of the courtyards were decorated with blue
wv and white majolica tile. The wooden pillars
a have distinctive bulbous bases carved with
~ geometrical and plant decorations, and the
ceilings are painted in a golden-red color.
In 1873, the Russians, eager to control the
trade routes to the south and east, took the

Astrakhan@)

Ural Sea
Q
%
Ls
in
&
Tabriz, ®

@ Bukhara

Tehran ®@

Persia

sy

city and created a quasi-independent state
+t under their control.

16.2 Area plan: Tash-Khovli, Khiva, Uzbekistan

16.3 Courtyard: Tash-Khovli . Z UAE Aten

JAIPUR AND THE END OF THE
MUGHAL EMPIRE
The Mughal Empire was at its largest under
Aurangzeb (r. 1658-1707), who annexed
all the Deccan Sultanates. After his death in
1707, however, the empire quickly began to
crumble. Taking advantage of the situation,
a number of Mughal governors, particularly
the Rajput ones, either moved toward
independence or declared independence
outright. The prosperity of South Asia
actually increased at this time with growth in
trade, including from the newly established
European trading ports. If modernity can
be understood as the forward thrust of
transformation and as the production and
exploration of the possibilities of the new in
negotiation with the values of the status quo,
then this was indeed a period of modernity.
Sawai Jai Singh Il (r. 1699-1743) utilized
this opportunity to secure more autonomy for
his own Kingdom of Amer (Jaipur). Since the
10th century, Amer had existed as a fortress
town guarding an important pass on a trade
route linking western India to Delhi. Amer
palace, located halfway up a hill, consisted
of a series of interconnected courtyards
protected by a fort. Three additional forts,
strategically placed on adjoining hilltops,
guarded the city. But in 1727, Sawai Jai
Singh felt sufficiently secure to establish a
new capital on the unprotected plain, on the
site of one of his garden palaces. Designed
with the help of the architect Vidyadhar,
Jaipur abuts the Amer hill on one side. The
city was laid out on a grid to create a series
of square neighborhoods divided by major
arterials. Public amenities and market hubs
were located at the intersections, called
chokris. The main east-west street was laid
out to visually align on axis with temples
located on nearby hilltops. To entice settlers,
Sawai Jai Singh ordered that shops be
constructed along the entire length of main
streets so that the main arteries of the city
were well defined. A consistent street section
was maintained and, to a visitor, the city
appeared to be well inhabited and complete.
The strategy worked, and Jaipur was fully
inhabited in twenty-five years.

16.4 Amber Fort, Amer, India

16.5 Jantar Mantar, Jaipur, India

.
ey

ve
cl

wee oom mm
ere em meee

ce ee ee

20m
J he 24 be

16.7 Plan and section: Hawa Mahall, Jaipur

There is a theory that Jaipur was based on a
nine-square mandala. Although not verifiable,
the story is given credence because Sawai
Jai Singh was an avid follower of Hindu
astrology. In fact, to obtain the most precise
observations of the planetary bodies, he built
state-of-the-art observatories in Jaipur, Delhi
(built for the Mughal emperor), Varanasi,
Ujjain, and Mathura. Sawai Jai Singh’s
observatories were based on similar ones
built by Ulugh Beg in the 15th century

in Samarkand, only these were larger,

and since they were spread apart, their
observations could be cross-referenced for
greater accuracy. Named Jantar Mantar, they
make for a stunning, astonishingly modern
sculpture park. (Jantar Mantar is a corruption
of yantra, which means “instrument.”)

In 1799, Sawai Jai Singh's grandson,
Sawai Pratap Singh, built the Hawa Mahall,
considered to be one of Jaipur's signature
monuments. The Hawa Mahall (“Wind
Palace”) gets its name because, as a palace,
it was considered to be insubstantial—or
made of wind. It earned this title because
the structure is essentially a five-story-high
screen wall. Constructed at the edge of the
palace complex, facing the street, it was built
to enable the women of the royal household
to watch festival processions on the street
while remaining unobserved themselves.
Designed by Lal Chand Ustad, this structure
derives from elements of Mughal palaces
and mosques that often contained screened
sections for women. At the Hawa Mahall,
however, Ustad transformed the concept
into a grand urban structure. Sawai Pratap
Singh also constructed a palace on one of the
artificial lakes of Jaipur.

yc

rk

16.8 Darbar Sahib, Amritsar, Punjab, India

DARBAR SAHIB

In the 18th century, the Sikhs, under
Maharaja Ranjit Singh (r. 1801-1839),
expanded into an empire encompassing the
region of the five tributaries of the Indus, or
the Punjab (literally, “five rivers”). Founded
by Guru Nanak in the 15th century, Sikhism
was a mix of Islamic Sufi concepts and
Hindu bhakti ideas. Critical of some Hindu
practices, it eliminated idol worship and caste
distinction and emphasized the unity of God
and the necessity of an intimate experience
with the divine. The Sikhs offered themselves
as an alternative to both Islam and Hinduism
and accepted converts from both. Sikh
involvement in the political affairs of the
Mughals was complex; they fell in and out of
favor with the Mughal court at various times.
In 1699, Guru Gobind Singh (1675-1708),
the last of their gurus, formalized the Sikh
religion, enjoining the faithful to defend it by
arms if necessary.

Darbar Sahib, or Golden Temple, built in
Amritsar in 1764 during the reign of Maharaja
Ranjit Singh, had long been an important
place of Sikh pilgrimage and learning. It was
here that, in 1604, Guru Arjan Das installed
the Granth Sahib, the Sikh holy book after its
compilation. It sits in the center of a square
sacred pool, 150 meters on each side, that
is surrounded by a marble walkway (for
ritual circumambulation), which in turn is
separated from the outside world by buildings
that house the various functions of the
institution, such as its administrative offices,
galleries, and dining halls. A causeway leads
from the Darbar Sahib to the edge, where
one finds a three-story structure with a single

ome, the Akal Takht, where the highest
priests have their offices. Every morning the
Granth Sahib is cerernoniously carried from
the Akal Takh to the Darbar Sahib to be
installed; it is returned in the evening. Among
the several affiliated structures that lie outside
the compound is the Guru-ka-langar, a three-
storied building where 35,000 people are fed
jaily at no charge.
The Darbar Sahib itself has doorless
entrances on all four sides as an indication

of the building's accessibility to all. No formal
rituals are conducted here, but hymns are
sung day and night. The lower story of the
main structure is made of marble, whereas

the upper story and domes are covered with
plates of gilded copper. An off-center low
fluted dome is partially obscured by a high
parapet with four chattris at the four corners.
Its ornamentation and formal outlines are
based on Mughal precedents, though the
easy informality of their orchestration gives
the Darbar Sahib a fluidity of expression
associated more with complex Hindu and
Jain temples than with the stately tornbs

and mosques of the Mughals. It is a unique
structure, a product of one of the most
determined attempts to bridge the differences
between Islamic and Hindu thought to create
a new synthesis.

D.
ie) 100m

boa

16.9 Area plan: Darbar Sahib, Amritsar

16.10 Wat Pra Kaew, Bangkok, Thailand 16.11 Wat Pra Kaew

WAT PRA KAEW
By the late 18th century, the history of
architecture becomes largely the history of

European architecture, of European colonial oe = se eS NL _ _ - i Sy
architecture, and of Chinese architecture. —__ -! i
Islamic architecture was on the wane, as - wane

was noncolonial architecture in India and 4 —
elsewhere. There was one important and
remarkable exception: Thailand. Thailand, or
Siam, emerged as an important regional force i eo) 2
in the 14th century under King Sukhothai, J SS STH J
who controlled the area roughly covered by ~ Te -
modern Thailand. His capital was the island 7 i ps

city of Ayutthaya, about 100 kilometers north ae o*
of Bangkok. Though the Thai culture was
largely Indic in origin (Ayutthaya is Thai for
Ayodhya, the sacred capital of Lord Rama),
the Thai learned their Sanskrit and scripture
from the Khmer of Cambodia, building
several Angkor-inspired ternples and stupas
in Ayutthaya. The Chinese admiral Zheng
He came to Ayutthaya and left behind a
Chinese princess and her attendant, whose
descendants still survive in Thailand as

a distinct community and worship the
princess and the admiral in a temple at

Ayutthaya. In the mid-15th century, the Thai __

sacked Angkor, and then in 1782, under TT an 0 50m |
King Rama | (r. 1782-1809) of the Chakri no sR Rs

dynasty, established as their capital the city 16.12 Site plan: Wat Pra Kaew

of Bangkok, or Ratanakosin, on the Chao

16.13 Golden stupa, Wat Pra Kaew

Phraya River. The new Royal Palace was
created as its symbolic core in a compound
a few hundred meters from the river's edge.
Looking beyond the borders there was
Cambodia, with Phnom Penh as its capital,
and Vietnam whose capital became Hué in
802 under the Nguyen dynasty.

In the eastern section of the compound,
a special structure was created to house the
Emerald Buddha, a jade Buddha dated to
434. Much venerated, it was brought to
Bangkok in 1778 from northern Thailand.
he compound is defined by a rectangular
perimeter colonnade, with projections in the
east and west, that contains a continuous
wall fresco, painted on dry plaster, narrating
the story of the Ramayana, the Hindu sacred

text. At the center of the compound, on a
raised platform running east-west, are three
huge closely spaced buildings, a golden
stupa, a square sutra repository, and a temple
structure known as the Royal Pantheon.

Also on the platform is a large stone model
of Angkor Wat. Rama | had wanted the
entire abandoned structure from Cambodia
to be transferred to Bangkok, but when his
emissaries returned with descriptions of its
immensity, he decided to settle for a model.
Angkor Wat is itself, like any Hindu temple, a
model of the cosmos, and as such the model
is almost equivalent, in its philosophical
significance, to the original.

The close proximity of these buildings is not
due to lack of space. Each building in well-
established Mahayana Buddhist symbolism
is a representation of the other, and the
proximity of each was intended to keep them
from being seen as autonomous structures;
instead they were to be viewed as substitutes
or even as metaphors for each other.
Whereas the stupa is completely gilded,
the other two buildings are lavishly decorated
on the outside with mosaics made of red,
blue, and green tiles as well as fragments
of glass and mirrors. The Wat Pra Kaew
(“Temple of the Emerald Buddha”) stands
to the south of the platform. It has a single
interior space undivided by partitions,
with the Buddha placed at the far end in
a resplendent setting, high above human
height, enshrined in a small golden ternple.
The walls are covered with frescoes, and the
roof trusses are made of wood.
The building, and indeed the entire
architectural ensemble, was one of the
most important of its time in Southeast
Asia, reflecting the cosmopolitan taste of
its patron. The tiles on the outside of the
building are done in a Persian style, while
the mosaics were made by Byzantine
craftsmen, and the Buddha hall is a type of
Sistine Chapel, its walls painted with religious
murals. The placement of the Buddha on

top of a golden structure appears almost
Baroque. This should not be interpreted as

a sign of “Oriental” eclecticism in the face

of the rigorous historicism of the European
Enlightenment, but rather as a modern
fusion of different elements into something
unique. Thailand was never colonized—a
rarity in that part of the world—and thus

its rulers had the freedom to explore and
develop contemporary architectural ideas that
were denied those countries placed under
colonial imprint. Whereas native architectural
traditions began to dry out or became
fossilized with the introduction of European-
style buildings in India, for example, such
traditions continued to develop with a sense
of freedom in Thailand, unfettered by any
colonial overlords’ offended eyes.


16.14 Print from the €arceri series by Giambattista Piranesi

NEOCLASSICISM VS. ROMANTICISM
The term Neoclassicism, in wide use today,
was actually invented in the mid-19th
century. Until then, critics, theorists, and
artists called it simply the “true style” that
challenged the fluctuations of taste and,
particularly, the extravagances of Baroque
space. The heady mercantile era of the
preceding century gave way to a desire

for something perceived as authentic and
stable. At its best, Neoclassicism shared the
Enlightenment's spirit of reform, whether it
was scientific advancement in the Age of
Reason or the new political philosophy that
stressed the principles of a socially regulated
uman action. But Neoclassicism was

also connected to Eurocentrism, the idea
that European heritage conferred special
standing in the history of civilization. Although
leoclassicism was originally a broad
movement encompassing all the arts and the
umanities, by the middle of the 19th century
it had mostly died out except in architecture,
where it survived into the 20th century.

pe
B NAn exw

The Adam brothers were already successful
architects when Robert Adam (1728-92)
made his first European trip. In Rome he
met and befriended Giambattista Piranesi
(1720-78), whose etchings of dilapidated
Roman scenery were then wildly popular.
Copperplate engravings were all the rage at
the time, but Piranesi elevated the art into an
iorn all its own. Scouring the often malaria-
infested Roman campagna for pictorial

possibilities, Piranesi created etchings
of haunting intensity, bringing into view
unexpected and revealing angles, with broken

stones, crumbling bricks, collapsed vaults,
and overgrown facades. This was a Rome far
different from the one imagined in England,
where it was embedded in a rhetoric of
order and manliness. Piranesi envisioned

a cataclysmic end of time, with nothing left
to show for Rome's erstwhile grandeur. The
Colosseum is an empty crater, the foundation
wall of Hadrian's Tomb a vast battered cliff.

a ore ss

16.15 Drawing made from a Piranesi print of Roman ruins

Adam and Piranesi represented the two
sides of the Romantic movement. Both
admired the heroic, but from different
political perspectives. Adam saw the Roman
past as the legitimization of European—and
particularly English—civilizational supremacy
in a diverse global world, while Piranesi
rendered it as a meditative reflection on the
short-sightedness of the powers currently in
charge. Whereas Adam privileged a sustained
investment in the “eternal principles” of the
“true style"—that is, classicism—Piranesi
pointed toward a more conflicted reading of
history, one less sure of its certainties and
more mindful of its losses.

In the European colonial environment,
where global realities had increasingly
become part of upper-class life,
Neoclassicism, as the work of Adam
demonstrates, provided a language of
stability and order that also reinforced the
search for European self-understanding in
the wake of the colonial experience. But
Neoclassicism, as a language of self-mastery,
was also a language of the master over
the production of others. Neoclassicism
thus all too easily legitimized ernpire as a

16.16 Entrance facade: Shelburne House, London

structure imposed over colonialism, harboring
an underlying, suppressed contradiction
between a civilizational ideal and the political
expediencies that were necessary to realize
that ideal.

Adarm’s belief in the “true style” meant
a rigorous investment in accurate antique
precedent, not Renaissance transmissions.
He sought to create a totally integrated
architectural and spatial environment. The
facade of Shelburne House in London
(begun 1763) comprised a seven-bay, three-
story central block with a four-colurnned
pedimented temple front. It is a combination
of Palladio’s Villa Foscari and his Palazzo
Thiene. The central temple front is set
between two-story, three-bay pavilions. A
rusticated, false-arcaded ground floor unifies
the composition. The ornamentation of the
frieze was taken from the Temple of Concord
in Rome. Some of the most important people
in London society gathered at the Shelburne
House, among them Benjamin Franklin
and David Hume. Much of the house
was demolished in the 1930s. The eating
room was rebuilt and is in the Metropolitan
Museum of Art in New York.

i iy!
dnt

16.17 Interior: Syon House, London

16.18 Plan: Syon House


16.19 Strawberry Hill, Twickenham, England

The Romantics, in opposition to the
Neoclassicists, invested in the Middle Ages,
rather than Rome, as the more authentic and
more emotional home in antiquity. Horace
Walpole (1717-97), builder of Strawberry
Hill (1749-77), used the term Gothic
picturesque to define this style. Walpole was
in many respects a counterculturalist. His
principal passion was writing Gothic novels,
such as The Castle of Otranto. He also

wrote a four-volume history of art entitled
Anecdotes of Painting (1761-71), as well

as an essay entitled “History of the Modern
Taste in Gardening” (1771). Upon the

death of his farnous father in 1745, Walpole
settled at Strawberry Hill, an estate of sorne
16 hectares at Twickenham, southwest

of London, set among fashionable villas
overlooking the Thames River and near the
residence of his friend, the poet and garden
enthusiast Alexander Pope. Rather than
delve deep into classicism, Walpole was
among the first English intellectuals to amass
a vast collection of objects from around the
world, building in essence one of the first
museums. To hold and display his collection
he expanded the existing house and built a
library, an armory, a gallery, a “star chamber,”
a “tribune,” a sort of shrine, a china closet,
bedrooms in several colors, and an oratory.

16.20 Interior: Strawberry Hill

The structure itself was made in a kind of
an experimental Gothic idiom, searching not
for a singular expression but playing with
the collaging of forms. There were towers,
battlements, and stained glass rescued from
demolished buildings.

While Robert Adam was an ideologue and
consummate tasternaker for the metropolitan
gentry, Walpole created a willful aesthetic
environment reflecting his personal choices.
Strawberry Hill became celebrated in its
time; after 1763 Walpole even began selling
entrance tickets. The house became a
showpiece, while Adam's work represented
the profession of an ideal. Adam and
Walpole represent the paradoxes associated
with emerging modernism: in the former,
professionalism, or at least the beginnings of
what might be called a professional practice;
and in the latter, the deliberate and self-
conscious search for personal expression in a
diverse world.

a or

¢

Existing house j

&

Spode 3

iL

ie) 10m
— an

16.21 Plan: Strawberry Hill

16.22 Reproduction of the frontispiece to Marc-
Antoine Laugier's Essai sur l’architecture, from
Allegory of Architecture Returning to its Natural
Mode! by Charles Eisen

Laugier, Rousseau, and the Noble Savage
Whereas in England, Neoclassicism was
generally seen as the proper environment

for the elite, the tone in France was

more strident, assuming a subtext of
antimonarchism driven in part by an
emerging interest in rationalism and legalism
and a desire to rethink the role of civic
institutions. In architectural circles, all this
came into the open with the publication

in 1753 of Marc-Antoine Laugier’s Essai

sur architecture. Translated into English

in 1775, it was a flashpoint of discussion
about the nature of architectural production.
Unlike Leon Battista Alberti's 7en Books on
Architecture, Andrea Palladio’s Four Books
on Architecture, and Claude Perrault's French
translation of Vitruvius, Laugier's work pointed
not to a classical past, but rather to an earlier,
“rustic” past.

Here we have the beginnings of
primitivism in modern art and architecture.
Laugier wrote neither as an architect nor as
a gentleman connoisseur. He was a Jesuit
priest and impassioned crator, in a clirnate of
approaching revolt. Unlike previous writers,
Laugier frowned on the use of pilasters
as “fakes” that did not contribute to the
actual solidity of the object. Even though his
image of the ideal building was not based
on Roman models, Laugier admired the
Maison Carrée at Nimes, France, as the most
perfect building of antiquity: “Thirty columns
support an entablature and a roof which is
closed at both ends by a pediment—that is
all; the combination is of a simplicity and
a nobility which strikes everybody.” But
critically for Laugier, unlike Adam and the
other Neoclassicists, it was not the classical
temple as such that needed to be imitated,
but that which lay behind its design, the
original “rustic hut,” or cabane rustique, as
he called it (widely mistranslated into English
as “primitive hut"). This hut, according
to Laugier, consisted only of columns,
entablatures, and pediments. Vaults, arches,
pedestals, and pilasters were not part of that
system and, he argued, should therefore not
be used. Even arcades, another important
element in classical architecture, were listed
by Laugier as “abuses.”

Laugier's book was highly controversial.
He argued that architecture should not be
seen as representing a magical transition

from the worldly to the heavenly, as had been
implied by the Baroque style, or a search for
classical truths in the architecture of Greece
and Rome, but rather as a medium that told
nothing less than the story of the “origins” of
mankind—all mankind. This is why Laugier
is often cited as one of the key precursors
of the discourses of modern architecture,

still more than a century away. These origins
had to remain embedded in architecture.
They were similar to the notion of grace—a
sign of divine approval that for Catholics is
embedded in the human soul.
n this sense, Laugier’s argument echoed
the 15th-century debate between Bartolomé
de las Casas and Juan Ginés de Sepulveda in
Madrid on the question of the status of Native
Americans. The Jesuits had studied and
written about the life and work of the Native

Americans and had lived more with ther in
the farthest reaches of the Americas than had
any other colonists. While Walpole collected
objects from around the world to glean in
them meaning from the world's civilizations,
Laugier's hut sought to bring home to Europe
what the Jesuits had learned from people,
who in their eyes were not “primitive” as in
barbarians, but “noble” primitives. It was this,
the Jesuits argued, that prepared them for
Christ.
Influencing Laugier's writings was the
just-published Discourse sur fes arts et
Jes sciences (1750) by Jean-Jacques
Rousseau (1712-78). In this astonishing
book, Rousseau critiqued what he saw as
the naivete of the Enlightenment’s careless
atheism. Not only had reason in the hands
of the more powerful crushed individual
liberty, but it had also replaced simple
virtues with a labyrinth of false truths. The
arts and sciences did not lead to knowledge
but to hypocrisy, and civilization led to class
division, slavery, serfdom, robbery, war, and
injustice. The only real progress, he argued,
was moral progress. It was a powerful and
controversial critique of everything that the
French intelligentsia had built up over the
previous century. Rousseau, a native of
the Calvinist city of Geneva, marveled at
the civilizational and devotional virtues of
Swiss farmers and Native Americans. It was
Rousseau who coined the farnous term the
noble savage to describe the innate nobility of
people like the Iroquois.


16.23 Section: St.

St. Geneviéve

Genevieve, Paris

Jacques-Germain Soufflot (1709-80) saw
in Laugier’s argument the opportunity
for experimentation. The dome of his St.

Genevieve (Paris,

1757)—now known as the

Panthéon—was derived from Bramante’s
San Pietro in Montorio and is Baroque in its
overscaled relationship to the building on

which it rests. Th

e church, as a centralized

Greek cross, fulfilled a Renaissance
aspiration. Novel, however, and influenced by

eoclassical tem
capitals modele

the interior, Souft

jas a structural ré

grid established

Laugier, was the clean-cut, though gigantic,

ple front with Corinthian
on the Pantheon in Rome,

though with six rather than eight columns. On

lot adhered to Laugier's call

for an architecture in which every element

ationale. There are pilasters,

ut they are clearly linked to the structural

y the columns. The vaults

ave a billowing

he building was

the 19th century.

ightness and are illuminated

rom the side through large windows,
concealed on the exterior behind a parapet.
he contrast between the building’s severe,
cliff-like exterior and the luminous, airy
nterior was meant to be a literal evocation
of the Enlightenment's transformative power.

originally attached at its rear

to a monastery but was made freestanding in

16.26 Site plan: St. Genevieve

16.27 Barriére de la Villette, Paris

Ledoux and Boullée

Claude Nicholas Ledoux and Etienne-

Louis Boullée are often called revolutionary
architects, but this is based on their
architecture rather than their politics. Both
architects straddled the fence in the French
Revolution, even though they set in motion
much of the aesthetic that for a short

while governed the sensibilities of the age.
Boullée probably made the transition to the
postrevolutionary world better than Ledoux.
He built little after the Revolution, but his
place was more secure, and it was his vision
that young architects in the Academy of
Architecture, where Boullée taught, aspired
to emulate. After the French Revolution, the
history of Neoclassicism took many turns,

fusing with the Greek Revival in Germany and

Scotland and blending in with the eclectic
stylistic preferences of the Victorians. Despite
all this, traces of a vigorous and austere
Neoclassicism as pursued by Ledoux and
Boullée could be found throughout Europe
from 1800 onward.

Claude Nicholas Ledoux (1736—
1806) designed a series of gates and
tollhouses for the French crown before the
revolution—forty-five buildings in all—to
mark the boundary of Paris and to impress
approaching visitors. The stations also
served as toll collection places for a much-
hated tax on the importation of salt (which

had become very expensive) into the city.
Like Christopher Wren’s churches, each of
Ledoux's gatehouses was different from the
next and in its own way varied and forceful.
A few are still extant, including the Barriére
de la Villette (1785-89), which provides a
good sense of Ledoux’s austerely simplified
architectural vocabulary. The central drum
is supported by column pairs that serve
as a screen holding the arcaded bottom
of a cylinder, which is basically a circular
building around a cylindrical light well at its
core. Windows are without moldings and
ornamentation is held to a minimum. The
wide and low pediment—compared with the
more historically accurate pediment of St.
Geneviéve—and the astonishing, domeless
drum are far outside the norms of classicism,
but Ledoux, probably more than any other
architect of his generation, was seeking to
redefine architectural typology from top to
bottom.

Ledoux also designed various buildings
for the Salt Works of Chaux (1775-79),
located in the east of France in the Franche-
Comté region between two villages near the
forest of Chaux, not far from Besancon. The
nearby forest supplied the wood needed to
fire the kilns in which the salt was extracted
from the brine. The factory replaced a
previous installation that consisted of little
more than a ramshackle assortment of

SAma,

a
@
&
i
ff
rd

ft

Fe

‘

16.28 Column of Director's House: Salt Works
of Chaux, Arc-et-Senans, France

sheds. The brine was brought to the site
from its source kilometers away by means.
of wooden pipes. Ledoux's plan called for a
semicircular arrangement of buildings with
the house of the director at the center and
the salt-extracting buildings to both sides.
The circumference is occupied by storage
buildings, with the main entrance to the
facility in the circle directly opposite the
director’s house. The salt trade was among
the grimmest aspects of life in 18th-century
France; the forcible imposition of a tax gave
rise to widespread smuggling and robbery,
as salt was very much cheaper outside the
country. The security of the salt works was
therefore essential. The entrance contained
guardrooms and a small prison and is
marked by a dense peristyle of six baseless
Tuscan columns, with a squat attic above.
Along the walls are openings out of which
flows, in a sculptural mass, the thick, saline
water. The columns, with their alternating
round and square stones, were quite novel.
Interpretations vary, but it seems that Ledoux
wanted to show them as if they were in the
process of being formed. This is perhaps
the first architect-designed factory in history;
what Ledoux hoped to demonstrate was the
advantage of a rational and comprehensive
solution to an industrial problem elevated to
the level of the symbolic. Salt was produced
there until 1895.

More than any other architect, Etienne-Louis
Boullée (1728-99) managed to straddle
these complex political times. He won
widespread acclaim during his lifetime for his
series of inspired drawings that seemed to
envision a postrevolutionary world. Boullée’s
buildings have simple geometrical shapes,
are monumental in scale, and often serve
as backdrops for uncluttered, neo-pagan
devotions. His project for the Bibliotheque
Nationale (1788), though often classified as
an example of the Neoclassical sensibility,
has actually no standard classical features
on the surfaces except for the entablature
and the frieze of garlands. The main
entrance, guarded by two large figures of
Atlas, gives admittance to a vast barrel-
vaulted space boldly slit open at the top.
The books are arranged on shelves against

16.29 Salt Works of Chaux, Arc-et-Senans, France
the walls of continuous terraces on the two

Ty ewe th Ee ene : - wae sides of the interior of the building. Even

, ; more spectacular is Boullée’s cenotaph
for Sir Isaac Newton (1784). A sphere that
represents the earth on the outside is on the
inside a planetarium, with small holes forming

ee the constellations. The entrance leads to a
passageway that opens onto a shrine at the
base of the inner void. Boullée’s structures
are always grand, both inside and out. For
a theater, he designed a building within a
building, a Pantheonesque interior placed
inside a vast structure that was itself encased
ina dome.

16.30 Plan: Salt Works of Chaux

16.31 Boullée’s idea for the Bibliotheque Nationale 16.32 Facade: Bibliotheque Nationale

16.33 Ledoux’s pyramid building, a project
for a cannon forge

16.35 Ledoux’s project for an agricultural lodge

16.36 Ledoux’s House of Circles, a project for an artist's studio

16.37 View of the Cemetery of Pére Lachaise. Paris

Napoleonic Cemeteries
After the French Revolution, Napoleon sought
to rebuild not only France but all of Europe
along Enlightenment lines. He eventually
succumbed to his overreaching ambition,
making enemies of the Austrians, Russians,
and English, who were all eager to keep
Napoleonic ideas as far as possible from
their domains. The impact of the Napoleonic
era was, however, profound, bringing into
parlance concepts like liberty and justice,
abstractions that were presumed universal
and strong enough to replace the defunct
and self-serving regimes of the aristocracy.
Napoleon proved that nations could function
without the paternalism of kings and princes.
Socially, he introduced many Enlightenment-
influenced notions—the Napoleonic Code
of 1804, for example, brought about the
emancipation of the Jews in many of the
lands under his control; it also modernized
the school system.

One of his important contributions to
architecture was in cemeteries. Prior to
then Napoleon, the well-to-do were buried
in or near a parish church. The poor were
buried in paupers’ graves. As for soldiers,
they were easily dispensable figures, often
fighting as conscripts or mercenaries. They
were buried in unmarked graves on the
battlefield. But in Napoleon's army, death
in battle took on a new dignity, a notion that
would gain in importance in the Romantic
period to come. Consequently, military death
achieved an honorable connotation that it
had not had since antiquity. As a result of

these changes, the cemetery known as
Pére Lachaise, which was laid out in 1804
outside of Paris, was open to all citizens.
Graves, however, were to last for only

five years unless the plot was bought by
the deceased's relatives, who were also
required to endow certain architectural
features of the cemetery. The cemetery
was among the first examples of a “garden
cemetery,” laid out with trees, bushes, and
winding paths; it had a central esplanade
ending in a funerary monument. Pére
Lachaise became the model for cemeteries
all over the world: the Glasgow Necropolis
(1820), the South Metropolitan Cemetery
at Norwood in London (1830s), and the
Mt. Auburn Cemetery in Cambridge,
Massachusetts (1831), are just a few
examples.

16.38 Mt. Auburn Cemetery, Cambridge,
Massachusetts

16.39 Plan: Cemetery of Pére Lachaise

16.40 Horizontal combinations from Durand’s Précis

Jean-Nicolas-Louis Durand

In France, the Romantic movement had
many representatives among painters.
Théodore Géricault (1791-1824), for
example, used dramatic compositional
techniques to bring out the themes of
heroism, suffering, and endurance. In
architecture, Romanticism was slower

to develop. This was largely because
architecture in France, unlike in England and
Germany, remained under state sponsorship.
For that reason, post-Napoleonic French
architecture maintained the course of
Enlightenment rationalism. The most
important proponent of this tendency was
Jean-Nicolas-Louis Durand (1760-1834),

a pupil of Etienne-Louis Boullée and a
professor at the Ecole Polytechnique
(founded in 1794) whose work set the tone
for more than a generation. The purpose

of the Ecole Polytechnique was to graduate
engineers capable of meeting the needs of
the revolutionary armies as well as providing
plans for civilian public works in the remote
corners of the new republic. No such school
existed in England, where the evolution of
taste, remaining in the hands of the elite,
was decentralized and thus often eclectic.
Durand's book Précis, first published in
1802, became a reference book used
throughout Europe for half a century. In

it, he rejected the standard Neoclassical
emphasis on historical relationship between
contemporary architecture and classical

antiquity, and instead argued that even
classical antiquity needed to be regularized

according to the eternal principles of
geometry. Durand was opposed to historical
classicism that only copied surface classical
elements but that in plan was anything

but rationalClike the Capitol Building in
Washington, DC, for example. He wanted
the plan to be laid out on a grid and the
function clearly expressed. “To please,”

he wrote, “has never been the purpose of
architecture.” Instead, the architect should
provide “public and private utility,” while
aiming to serve “the well-being and the
maintenance of individuals and of society.”
Durand’s designs for walls, following Laugier,
were freed from pilasters, moldings, quoins,
and rustications. This was not stripped-down

MDE

aoe e ae ae we

“ “Nagas

i i a a a

classicism, but rather a linking of architecture
with nature and reason. The square, which
has no dominant axis, constituted Durand’s
ideological and figural building block, serving
to link the colurnns in a grid and stabilizing
the architectural formation. Like an ideal
military unit, a building had to reflect order,
clarity, and hierarchy. Rationalism and civic
dispassion had to be evinced to demonstrate
architecture's independence from aristocratic
whim. In this respect, Durand represents a
break from insistence on tradition and literal
historicism. Unlike Picturesque and Romantic
notions of history as the ground on which the
future projects itself, Durand’s architecture
was strikingly “modern,” insisting on the
primacy of program in the service of the
state.

‘one oan a 7
Ber: nell-rean wall ew Hts Bln ml

16.41 A design by Durand

16.42 Virginia State Capitol, Richmond

16.43 Plan, main facade, and section: Monticello plantation, near Charlottesville, Virginia

Jeffersonian Neoclassicism

When the sons, daughters, and grandchildren of

the European settlers revolted against English rule,
what had started as a search for economic freedom
became one of the Enlightenment's greatest moments.
Historically, in their search for antecedents, the
American taste-setters saw themselves as paralleling
the early Roman Republic rather than the Roman
Empire. It was a subtle but important distinction,
based more on fantasy than historical accuracy. The
style of French postrevolutionary Neoclassicism was
picked up in particular by Thomas Jefferson (1743-
1826), the drafter of the Declaration of Independence
and the third president of the United States, who

left a lasting imprint on American architecture

of the period. Having lived in Paris for five years
(1784-89) as ambassador to France, he came to
admire philosophical developments in Europe, which
instilled in him the idea that architecture was directly
related to social reform. He was also the consummate
gentleman architect, amassing a library of 130 books
on the fine arts—certainly the largest in the United
States at the time. As an amateur architect, Jefferson,
together with Charles-Louis Clérisseau, fused the
styles of Laugier and Adam in the design of the
Virginia State Capitol (1785-92). It was modeled on
the Maison Carrée of Nimes, one of the few Roman
buildings that was accepted by Laugier as true to the
standards of the “rustic hut.”

Monticello

Thomas Jefferson designed most of Monticello,

his plantation and primary residence, himself. He
designed the house along neo-Palladian lines,

with a prominent pedimented portico fronting an
octagonal rotunda dome as the centerpiece. Within,
Jefferson devoted most of his attention to his library
and living room, reserving the central space as a
kind of a museum for the waiting guests, where they
were regaled with displays of Jefferson's scientific
experiments and re-creations of objects from Lewis
and Clark’s expedition through the Western territories
that had been acquired from Napoleon in 1805
during Jefferson's presidency.

Tobacco was the primary product of the Monticello
plantation. Jefferson was a slave-owner, and, unlike
George Washington, did not free his slaves on his
death—except the children of Sally Hemings, his
domestic help slave, with whom he almost certainly
had six children. Hemings’s family lived under the
kitchen at Monticello, and the rest of the slaves lived
in cabins along a prominent lane called Mulberry Row.
Jefferson died about $130,000 in debt; his daughter
sold Monticello and the slaves to settle his estate.

SS

16.44 LEnfant’s plan for Washington, pc

16.45 Floor plan: U.S. Capitol, Washington, DC

WASHINGTON, DC

The design of Washington, DC, was the first
attempt to spatialize a new capital city as

an embodiment of the nation-state. Charles
Pierre U'Enfant, a French engineer who
served in the American Revolutionary War,
worked at the direction of George Washington
to prepare the plan. While Jefferson had

a more modest vision for the capital,
L'Enfant, presumably reflecting Washington's
conception, designed something more
grandiose—a city for the ages.

Over the base pattern of the urban grid,
L'Enfant imposed a Baroque-style web of
avenues that is surprisingly idiosyncratic
and that adjusts to the landscape and to the
turns of the Potomac River. Together they
form fifteen squares, intended to be divided
among the states. Over this, he imposed a
third order, with the Capitol Building and the
White House not facing each other across
an open mall but placed at the ends of an
L, with the capitol at the longer arm of the
east-west-facing L. The intersection of the

two arms lies along the Potomac so that the
two buildings, backing their way into the urban
fabric from the river's edge, achieve a sense of
parallel prominence when approached from the
riverside—one of the major ways by which the
city would have been accessed at the time.
LEnfant's design calls to mind the
gardens of Versailles because the grand
avenues of the former are like the allées
of the latter. However, the Capitol and the
White House are also connected by one of
several diagonals—Pennsylvania Avenue is
a Baroque device first articulated for Rome
under Sixtus V in his atternpt to link the great
pilgrimage sites of that city. In that sense the
city blends aspects of Versailles and Rome,
bringing the Counter-Reformation ideal of
the freestanding monumental building into
line with the notion of a city as a landscape
traversed by grand ceremonial approaches.
The siting of both the Capitol and the
White House away fromm the river’s edge
and fronted by lawns derives from English
country house prototypes. It might also point

to the Hétel des Invalides (begun 1671) in
Paris, which, unlike the Louvre, was set at
90 degrees to the Seine River at the end of
a park, connecting building and river. (At
St. Petersburg, the Winter Palace, which is
modeled on the Louvre, sits alongside the
Neva River.)

Uenfant was dismissed from service
in 1792, and he left for Paris with all his
drawings. The plan as executed was based
on the drawings of Benjamin Banneker, a
former slave and self-taught astronomer.

The U.S. Capitol Building, begun in 1793,
went through several stages involving the
architects William Thornton, Henry Latrobe,
and Charles Bulfinch, in that order. It was a
difficult building to design, since there was
no clear prototype for a building with such a
complex program. In the Thornton plan, the
House chambers and the Senate chambers
were placed right and left of a great rotunda
that was envisioned as a museum, with
niches sheltering statues of revolutionary
heroes. The building seamlessly integrated

16.46 The U.S. Capitol today

wee eee ete

ie) 20m
tL. d F

16.47 Plan and elevation: Massachusetts State House, Boston

allusions to a mythical Roman Republic, to
universal geometries, and to great historical
events. The entrance was defined by a
temple front with eight columns, modeled on
the Pantheon, flanked somewhat unusually
by columnar porches. Though the building
was symmetrical on the exterior, it was not on
the interior, where there was no attempt to
balance the two chambers. This went against
the Neoclassical tendencies of the time. The
building, set on a high ground-floor plinth,
was topped by a Pantheonesque dome
resting on an octagonal drum—higher than
that of its Roman model, so it would be easily

visible from the surroundings. Beginning
in 1855, the west front of the Capitol was
rebuilt and a new dome, held up by a steel
frame, was designed to rest on a high drum.
Compared to the conventions established by
Michelangelo's dome for St. Peter’s in Vatican
City, the dome is far out of proportion to the
building below. Perhaps it is this strangeness
that keeps the building from looking like a
cathedral and imparts to it an unmistakable
uniqueness.
Bulfinch, when left to his own devices, as
at the Massachusetts State House (1795-98),
was closer to the tradition of Palladio and
Inigo Jones. Sited prominently on a hill, the
state house is a brick structure with white
woodwork and trim in the Georgian manner,
but modeled loosely on Palladio's Pallazo
Thiene and Robert Adam's Shelburne House.
The upper floor is accessed by parallel stairs
that flank the central space. A broad loggia
with paired pilasters provide vistas down
to the city and harbor. The wooden dome,
originally painted gray to make it look like
stone, was gilded in the 1890s. The style of
the building is known as Federal, referring to
buildings designed between 1780 and 1830
in the United States.


Norwegians

Finns
Swedes
Estonians
Great Russians
Scots Danes Latvians
White Russians
tsp English Pulch Poles
8 Flemish — Germans
Czechs
Slovaks Ukrainians
French Austrians
Hungarians
Croats Romanians
Serbs
Basques Ktalians Bulgarians
Portuguese Catalans
Spaniards Greeks
Turks

16.48 19th-century Europe

NATIONALISM

Nationalism is presently such a ubiquitous
concept that one forgets that it is actually

a modern concept, springing from the

end of the Napoleonic wars. As important

as Napoleon Bonaparte was in spreading
the ideas of liberty and justice throughout
Europe, the consequences of decades of
war left Europeans in desperate need of
stability. In 1813, Europe's diplomats met

in Vienna to discuss the political future of
Europe in the hope that the borders could be
stabilized. The Vienna Congress stipulated
that countries were to create constitutions,

if they had not already done so—a promise
some rulers broke to create stronger bonds
between the aristocracy and the bourgeoisie.
Prior to the Vienna Congress, that bond was
achieved mainly through the antiquated
custom of marriage, which only tended to
splinter and fragment the political landscape.
It was hoped that countries with fixed
national boundaries and with a working legal
infrastructure would avoid war or have the
means and recourse to avoid it. Though the
ideals proved to be elusive, there is no doubt
that the Vienna Congress helped create the
modern notion of a nation-state, and it was
certainly successful in determining the future
national boundaries in Europe—boundaries
that drive European politics to this day.

16.49 Church of the Savior on Blood,

St. Petersburg, Russia

The new spirit of nationalism found an

easy alliance with Romanticism. For the
nationalists, history was more than just a
gentleman’s pastime. State boundaries had
to make sense historically, linguistically,
geographically, and now ethnically, and this
led to an interest in local history and the
development of regional antiquarianism.
Russia experienced a revival of the Russian
language (until the defeat of Napoleon, the
Russian aristocracy had spoken mainly
French). In Germany, there was a fascination
with the medieval and with the imagery

of the forest, as well as with the ancient
Greeks, with whom many Romantics felt

an affinity. Romantic nationalism also
emerged in Scandinavia as a protest against
Russian occupation and took the form of a
revival of Nordic mythology. Apart from the
development of national languages, Romantic
nationalists were interested in folklore and
local customs, even if these had to be
enhanced. A case in point is the “discovery”
of Beowulf in a single manuscript, first
transcribed in 1818, after the manuscript
had lain as an ignored curiosity in scholars’
collections for two centuries. Beowulf quickly
came to be seen as an English national epic.
In architecture, Romantic nationalism was
slower to take hold due to the entrenched
dominance of Neoclassicism, but as the

century progressed, more and more examples

could be found. One such, the Church of

the Savior on Blood in St. Petersburg (1883-
1907), was clearly meant to give impetus to a
revival of Byzantine forms.

In recent decades, with the post-Cold
War multiplication of new countries,
Romantic nationalism has become a global
phenomenon. Though it heralds the farmer
and the workers, it often develops into an
aesthetic that appeals to upper-class tastes.
As a result, Romantic nationalism is generally
a conservative response in the context of
the lower classes and a seemingly liberal
response in the context of the upper classes.
The traits are clearly identifiable: passion for
one's country combined with a feeling—fact-
based or not—of past injustices at the hands
of others. The past that Romantics point to is
often bucolic and pre-modern—a cleaned-up
fiction more than a reality.

16.50 Neue Wache, Berlin

Altes Museum
During the 17th century, the electors of
Brandenburg expanded their territory so that
by the end of the century Prussia had grown
from a regional principality to a major state.
And with the defeat of Napoleon at Leipzig
in 1813, it became an important European
power. Despite the difficulties with France,
infatuation with Napoleonic ideas led to a
generation of German thinkers who hoped
to retool the Enlightenment to fit the German
context.

Energetic reformers, including the noted
scientist Wilhelm von Humboldt, head of
Prussia’s department of education and arts,
helped transform Prussia into a progressive
state by abolishing serfdom and curtailing
the privileges of the nobility, introducing
agrarian and other social and economic
reforms, and creating an exernplary systern
of universal education. Among the leading
literary figures in Germany at the tirne were
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749-1832)
and Friedrich von Schiller (1759-1805),
who wanted to link German nationalism to
the ideals of ancient Greece. This gave the
German movement a different tenor than the
nationalism in France, which emphasized the
idealization of political institutions and social
arrangements.

The person who gave architectural
shape to Romantic neo-Greek ideals was

ie

16.51 Schauspielhaus, Berlin

Karl Friedrich Schinkel (1781-1841). He
completed his training as an architect in
1803 in Rome, where he met Wilhelm von
Humboldt, with whom he became friends. It
was Humboldt who helped secure Schinkel’s
position in the Prussian bureaucracy; one
of his first public projects was the design

of the Neue Wache, or New Guardhouse
(1816-18), a monument to the new citizen's
army of Prussia. Until then, the only
significant Neoclassical building in Berlin
was the Brandenburg Gate, inspired by the
Athenian Propylaea. The Neue Wache is an
austere building with a Doric porch flanked
by two tower bases (rather than towers) that
make the building appear to be a temple-
gate combination. The tympanum shows the
Goddess of Victory controlling and deciding
a battle. The interior is a simple square room
without a dome but with a round skylight at
the center.

A few of Schinkel's other prominent works
included a theater, the Schauspielhaus
(1818-21); the Altes Museum at Berlin
(1823-30); Schloss Glienicke (completed
1827); and the Bauakademie (1831-36).
No other architect in Europe, with perhaps
the exception of John Nash, wielded so
much influence. Schinkel’s most visible
commission was for a public art museum
(1822-30) sited very prominently opposite
the Schloss, or Royal Palace, in the very

heart of Berlin. Now called the Altes
Museum, it embodies Schinkel’s commitment

to monumental civic architecture as a vehicle
of the Enlightenment’s cultural irnperative.
Though museums were beginning to appear,
most were refurbished palaces; the building
type, as an institutional element in the

urban landscape, did not yet exist, as up
until this period art collecting had largely
been an aristocratic privilege. Schinkel
designed the building as a great block with

two interior courtyards
The surmounting Pant

and a central space.
eonesque dome,

clamped into the frame of the building, was
not visible from the front; instead, the front
consists of a row of columns, like a great
Greek stoa, elevated on a platform above the
surroundings. At the top of the stairs, before
entering the rotunda, there is a loggia with
large open-air staircases to the right and left
of the principal axis. Art works were exhibited
in long rectilinear rooms with column pairs
forming a passage down the middle. This
was not a temple or sanctuary, but rather

a type of civic warehouse resembling an
agora, with the central space fitted out with
statues. The gallery spaces were designed
for perambulating and conversing about art
as much as for looking at it. The plan was
clearly influenced to some extent by Durand’s
call for the systematization between structure
and program.


%,

16.52 Altes Museum, Berlin

| oe 4 ee we ew we ek

Li

ee ee

Qo 30m 16.53 Plan: Altes Museum

16.54 Section: Altes Museum

16.55 Map of Calcutta, ca. 1850

Redrawn from 1842 map in the David Rumsey Historical Map Collection

COLONIAL CALCUTTA: THE
ESPLANADE
While the Americans were building
Washington, DC, as their new federal capital,
and while Napoleon's armies were bringing
France's revolution to the rest of Europe,
the English began their counterproposition
to these movements by beginning the large-
scale construction of what effectively became
their capital in colonial India.

The early days of the English colonists
in India were far from idyllic. Calcutta (now
Kolkata) was awarded to the British by
the Mughals because it sat on one of the
least desirable pieces of land—a marshy
swampland. Cholera, typhoid, malaria, and
tuberculosis were endemic. Particularly
feared were the monsoons, when flooding
increased health risks exponentially. But the
deep waters of the river Hooghly enabled
ocean-faring ships to travel 96 miles inland,
and Calcutta developed into a busy port. By
the 1780s the British East India Company
army had become so large that only military
personnel were allowed to reside within the
fort, and new public buildings had to be
constructed outside the fort. A huge open
space was created all around the fort to
maintain defensive sightlines. This made the
avenues lining the edge of the Maidan, as
the open space was called, into prime sites
for new mercantile and civic establishments.
As Calcutta grew in prestige and wealth,

two-, three-, and even four-story mercantile
establishments quickly filled in the avenue’s
edges, creating a continuous facade around
the Maidan. Very visible and meant to be
seen, monumental loggia, pilasters, and

the occasional pedimented portico rubbed
shoulders with one another, as crisp, white,
Italianate and Neoclassical buildings lined
up to announce the English presence,
forming what was called the Esplanade.
Little of the Esplanade was made from
stone, however. Most of it was brick-based
indigenous construction with a generous
coating of painted chunar plaster. The chunar
looked good and shined in the sun but had
to be constantly repaired, especially after
the monsoons, when it often peeled away,
exposing the “sham” of the buildings—
and by implication, of their nouveau riche

occupants—much to the chagrin and
derision of colonial commentators from the
homeland. (This discourse of pride and
shame as a function of appearance lingered
around colonial architecture to its very end.)

Writers’ Building

Faced with huge financial losses with the
impending American independence, the
English parliament focused its attention on its
colonies in the East, particularly in India, and
found that in spite of its political successes
and ample displays of wealth, the British
East India Company was nonetheless badly
in debt, according to the banking statements
in London. Its officers were accused of
corruption and profiteering, and in 1773,
the company was reorganized in the hopes
of establishing accountability. A governor

16.56 View of chunar Calcutta from the Esplanade, ca. 1850

ks

16.57 Writer’s Building, as originally built and as reskinned, Calcutta

general was appointed to ensure that
besides becoming profitable, the company’s
administration over its territories was just
and in consonance with British ideals. A fair
government in India was necessary not only
to legitimize colonization but to also to soften
protest back in England. Thus was born the
ideological project of colonization.

Warren Hastings, the first governor
general of India (1772-85), was a capable
and responsible administrator. He increased
revenues exponentially (mostly from
opium production, set for export to China),
expanded territories, and, most importantly,
ruthlessly enforced a strict administration
with detailed accounting. Hastings’s approach
to the problem of “just governance” was
supremely pragmatic. It was imperative that
the English learn local languages, customs,
and systems of government, he proposed,
because that would enable them to know
the people better and to govern them with
those systems. In 1784 he created the Asiatic
Society of Bengal, with William Jones as its
president, to study and translate the culture.
For Hastings, Indian culture and civilization
was a real and living thing that he was not
interested in transforming or reforming, only

dads surf 4 7

in governing—which he was wont to do with
personal discretion and an iron hand.

His signature building was the gigantic
secretariat and training school he had
built for the clerks of the British East India
Company. Known as the Writer’s House
(1780)—the “writers” were the clerks—this
interminably long three-story structure lines
one entire length of Calcutta’s water tank.
Given that it was the writers who enabled the
rationalization of the company's presence in
India, it is only fitting that their domain was
a remarkable essay in rationalization and
functionalism, with a single cornice running
the entire length of the perimeter, interrupted
only slightly by the central facade. It was
designed by a civil architect, John Fortnom,
and Thomas Lyon, a carpenter and amateur
architect.

St. John’s Church

At the turn of the 19th century, English
colonial policy changed again, this time
influenced by the Enlightenment's critique
of the arbitrariness of power. Warren
Hastings was impeached by Edmund Burke
(1729-97), who argued that parliamentary
oversight was not enough: there had to be

a social contract attached to the principle of
divine sanction; the purpose of the colonial
administration had to be consonant with
the “eternal laws” of good governance. For
the Tories, good governance was ensured
by the abiding prestige of the king and his
aristocracy. Lord Charles Cornwallis, the new
governor general (1786-93), in an attempt
to replicate European aristocracy in India,
created a new class of landowners called
zamindars.

The results were disastrous. In the Mughal
administration, land had been collectively
owned at the village level, and zamindars
were only tax collectors. Now that they owned
the land, they could sell it in response to
market opportunities. The peasantry were
completely disempowered. Enterprising
company officers exploited the opportunity,
making quick fortunes. Colonial architecture
was called upon to signify the new “eternal
laws.” The Writer’s Building was reskinned
and acquired Doric porticoes. St John's
Church (1787) built was based on the late
Georgian high steeple of St. Martin-in-the-
Fields in London. A sirnple box (a three-bay
nave and galleries) with a Tuscan portico
and a stone steeple and spire, its symbolic
importance equaled that of King’s Chapel in
Boston as a visible reminder of the authority
of church and king. And this time it was
made from real stone, and not just chunar.

16.59 Government House, Calcutta, India

ave

Based on a map in in the David Rumsey Historical Map Collection

Government House
By 1800, a new generation of company
officers under the influence of the Romantics
took issue with the Whig-backed zamindari
systern. They admired the Indian village

(the country’s ancient urban culture
notwithstanding), thus enhancing the
impression in Europe that the distinction
between Europe and the colonies was a
difference between cities and villages. They
placed their faith in the paternalistic figure

of the British officer, a man with great and
concentrated authority who was highly paid
but barred from obtaining any profit from
company activities—and who was expected
to be educated, enlightened, knowledgeable,
and sympathetic. The highest British officer
was the governor general.

In 1798, when Lord Richard Wellesley
replaced Cornwallis as governor general, he
began construction of a new Government
House (1803) to embody his authority. Its
design, prepared by Charles Wyatt, was
created with spectacle in mind. With a tall
Pantheonesque central dorne, each side of
the facade is symmetrical and complete,
and stands as an idealized object in space.
The strict Neoclassical portico set up on
a broad and imposing staircase sealed its
identification with the eternal principles of
Vitruvius, even though the entire structure
was made in brick and chunar, not Italian
marble. However, as Chattopadhyay has
argued, the Government House's interior—
unlike Kedleston Hall, which was segmented
into rooms for privacy—was divided by

perforated colonnades designed to ensure
that the retinue of servants had constant, but
screened, access to all spaces. Cornwallis's
wife complained that the Government House
had no place she could call her own.

yours
rast
bertea
ao i
“4a 4
forded
ray
Ra |
ee
Pe
bet,
Nees ey
a3
rd 1
rer)
ro8,
bend

enema! ren
tart iia
rirt vp oot
tea Bayan ol
BN wa
aN .
Drtawe edi b
- rorqos
aor dos
ees
S

wa

Peng

veleok
VAL yall}
Poennd wlin

GREEK REVIVAL
Although today the Parthenon is one of the
most revered ancient buildings in Europe,
its artistic prominence only slowly came
into focus during the 19th century. In 1805,
when Thomas Bruce, 7th Earl of Elgin,
who had purchased the Parthenon frieze
rom the Ottomans, first approached the
British Museum about buying the pieces,
@ encountered hesitation on the part of the
authorities. A few years later, when Charles
Robert Cockerell took the sculptures from
the temple of Aegina, the English showed
no interest in their purchase, and he sold
them to Ludwig | of Bavaria, where they now
form the kernel of the Glyptothek Museum in
Munich.
The fascination with Greece received
a boost when hostilities ended between
England and France in 1814, allowing
Europeans to flock to Greece in
unprecedented numbers. The country
came all the more alluring in the 1830s,
following the liberation of Greece from Turkish
occupation. In 1830, England, Germany,
and Russia signed the London Protocol,
which recognized the independence of
Greece. The Germans and the Bavarians
placed themselves in charge of the military
operation that eventually freed Greece from
the Ottoman Empire in 1833, putting Otto
von Wittelsbach on the throne, his reign
guaranteed by the European powers. The
impact of the liberation of Greece on the
European consciousness was profound.
It breathed new life into the Neoclassical
movement and into Enlightenment notions
about freedom and progress. As a result,
Neoclassicism, once associated with the
heavy-handed world of imperial institutions,
was now linked to the optimistic and
progressive world of bourgeois industry.
Neo-Greek architecture took on a more
strident form near Regensburg, Germany, at
Valhalla (1830-42), designed by Leon von
Klenze (1784-1864) as a hall of fame for
German luminaries. Klenze, who had studied
in Paris under Jean-Nicolas-Louis Durand,
also designed the Glyptothek Museum
(1816-30) in Munich with an archaeologically
correct Greek front and a Roman-style
interior, following Durand’s methodology.

16.60 Plans: Comparison of Kedleston Hall, Derbyshire, England, and Government House, Calcutta

16.61 St. Madeleine Church, Paris

Valhalla, sited on a bluff over the Rhine
River, was a relatively correct Greek-styled
temple placed on a series of terraces.

Ludwig | also sent Klenze to help design
Greece's new capital city, Athens, located

to the largely uninhabited west and south
sides of the ancient Acropolis. It becarne the
first capital city built to reflect the fusion of
Enlightenment and Romantic ideals. The neo-
Greek movement was relatively short-lived

on the Continent, where it had to compete
with other styles. But in Scotland, where the
economy had rapidly developed in the middle
of the 19th century due to its expanding hold
on cotton trade and shipbuilding—Glasgow
ships accounted for 85 percent of Britain's
total tonnage—the country was eager to
express itself as autonomous, even though

it was part of England. The Greek style was
thus an important expression of its national
romantic fervor, as can be seen in the Royal
Scottish Academy building (William Henry
Playfair, 1835) in Edinburgh, and St. Vincent
Street United Presbyterian Church (Alexander
Thomson, 1857-59) in Glasgow.

Tennessee State Capitol

The most impressive examples of the

Greek Revival were in the United States,
where a particularly strong connection was
made between Greece and America's own
newfound nationhood. This was not a case of
history simply being imported into the open
landscape of the Americas. The Americans
saw their nation as the land of opportunity,
where they could return to classical values

16.62 View of Valhalla, near Regensburg, Germany

without encumbrance of custom. The
Modern Builder’s Guide, which appeared
in 1833 and ran through five editions until
1855, presented detailed engravings of
the classical orders and their sources in
ancient temples. The Greek Revival in the
United States expanded on the Hellenistic
leanings of the architecture of the so-called
Federal Era (1780-1830), but unlike the
Federal style, which was best expressed
in the great houses of the well-to-do, the
Greek Revival was applied to institutional

16.63 Royal Scottish Academy, Edinburgh

and governmental buildings, including the
Patent Office in Washington, DC (1836), with
a copy of the front of the Pantheon as part
of its facade; the Old Shawneetown Bank
(1836) in Old Shawneetown, Illinois; the
James Dakin Bank of Louisville (1834-36) in
Louisville, Kentucky; the Market Hall (1840)
in Charleston, South Carolina; and William
Strickland’s Tennessee State Capitol (1845-
59) in Nashville, Tennessee, which combined
a temple with a huge version of the Greek
Choragic Monument of Lysicrates in Athens.


16.64 Old Shawneetown Bank, Shawneetown, Illinois

These were not isolated examples but part
of a wave of neo-Hellenism that lasted for
decades and that stretched up into Canada;
it can be felt in even humble buildings as far
away as Oregon. When the Native Americans
in the western half of New York State were
conquered, place names were literally

taken out of the /iad; today one can travel

to Ithaca, Troy, Syracuse, Athens, Rome,
Carthage, and even to Homer without ever
leaving the state. In Nashville, Tennessee, a
full-scale replica of the Parthenon was built in
1897. It was not painted in the vibrant colors
of the ancient Greeks but remained white,

as the neo-Greeks preferred. The columnar

16.66 Tennessee State Capitol, Nashville

16.65 Market Hall, Charleston, South Carolina

Grecian mode was also easily adopted for
plantation houses, especially in Mississippi
and Louisiana, where circumferential porches
had been customary since the 18th century.
Oak Alley (1836), the home of planter
Alexander Roman, near Vacherie, Louisiana,
is a well-known example of this mode.

The massive encircling columns support a
continuous veranda on the second-floor level,
and the twenty-eight columns are matched
by an equal number of live oaks that line

the formal approach to the house from the
Mississippi River, literally playing out the
relationship between nature and form—and
reinforcing the ideology of elitism.

16.67 Metcalfe Hall, Calcutta, India

Metcalfe Hall

From 1800 onward, great surveys were
conducted to map every bit of land in
colonial India, so that landholdings could

be transferred to individual peasants. But
this system could not be strictly enforced,
since land was held collectively in village
trusts. As corruption again grew, the critics
of the Romantics arose: the new liberals
who, from 1828 to 1856—the period of the
governorships from Lord William Bentinck to
the Earl of Dalhousie—drew inspiration from
the Bentharite utilitarians. They believed
that human nature was intrinsically the same
everywhere and that it could be brought forth
by education, law, and free trade. For them,
passing on English civilization to the Indians,
whose civilization was seen as defective, had
a singular objective. They saw themselves

as custodians of the Indian civilization until
the Indians were sufficiently “civilized” and
self-disciplined to maintain it themselves.
This task was commonly characterized as the
“white man's burden.”

In architecture the favored style was now
the Greek Revival. Since the liberation of
Greece from the Turks in 1830, English and
continental archaeologists had been poring
over Greek ruins, measuring, copying, and
studying them in great detail. Building from
these accurate style sheets became the
new clarion call of the 1840s. Sir Robert
Smirke designed the British Museum in
London (1823-47) in studied classicism. In
Calcutta, C. K. Robinson designed Metcalfe
Hall (1840-44) as a fine Greek Revival
building, with thirty huge Corinthian columns
supporting a massive entablature.

INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION

By the second decade of the 19th century,
industrialization in England began to have
global implications. A whole new society was
being created, taking shape in a new type

of city and new types of political and power
relations. Unlike the great metropolises of
old, factory towns like Manchester, Leeds,
and Liverpool were not urban to begin with.
There was no core of elegance—no great
boulevards, no parks, churches, palaces,

or cultural institutions. And yet these were
cities competing in size and population with
the likes of London and Paris. Manchester,
nicknamed Cottonopolis because of all its
cotton mills, became the second-largest

city in England after London. The industrial
city was a novel urban landscape of people,
traffic, and commerce—with a level of
squalor never witnessed before. There was no
urban planning; there was no sewage system;
and water delivery was haphazard. Typhoid
and tuberculosis outbreaks were common.
Air pollution from the foul smells of factories,
sewage, and slaughterhouses was a given. (In
London, the stench fram the Thames River
was so severe that work in the Parliament
building, which is located right next to the
river, was often impossible.) The cramped
conditions of the workers were startling; life
expectancy was twenty-eight years. During
the Napoleonic wars, the government paid
little attention to these problems, and even
after the war, despite growing unrest, the
conservative Tory Party was resistant to
change.

16.68 View of Manchester factories depicted in a painting by William Wylde in 1857

When the Whig Party gained a majority in the
830 elections, things began slowly to change.
The Reform Bill of 1832 reapportioned city
istricts to reflect changes in the population;

it also liberalized voting qualifications and
lefined the idea of democracy as we
understand it today, even though voting rights
were, for a long time, still reserved for men
only. The Factory Acts of the 1830s reduced
the hours of child labor; the Mines Act of 1842
prohibited underground work for all women
and for boys under the age of ten; and the

en Hours Act of 1847 limited the workday
for women and young people to ten hours.
Despite these improvements, factory life
remained dire and a major point of contention
and political strife. Efforts were made to control
sanitation. In the 1860s, Joseph Bazalgette,
chief engineer of the Metropolitan Board

of Works, designed an extensive series of
underground sewerage pipes to that diverted
waste downstream of the population center.
The modern notion of infrastructure was
therewith born, and the system was soon
expanded to include electricity and water.

The most important change to the
landscape was the emergence of the factory—
in particular cotton and clothing factories
located near streams used drive waterwheels.
Established in 1771, Arkwright’s Mill at
Cromford {just south of Matlock Bath) was
the world's first successful large-scale cotton-
spinning mill based on waterpower. Arkwright,
who has become known as the father of the
factory system, built the village of Cromford in
order to house his mill’s workforce. By 1790,
the main buildings had been completed.

The buildings were uniform in look, mostly

brick or

rectangular blocks of unadorne
stone with wooden floors and usually four to

six floors high. The power from the waterwheel
was distributed through the building by means

of a system of shafts, gears, and beltings.
From the main shaft on each floor, power was
distributed to smaller shafts. Belts from the
shafts drove the individual machines. The
longer the shaft, the more vulnerable it was to
breakage. The maximum length was about 30
meters, which limited the overall length of the
mills. The problem of mechanically distributing
power over long distances was solved with the
introduction of wire rope, introduced around
1850. The developrnent of electrically powered
machines at the end of the century allowed
factories to be designed with greater flexibility,
and they no longer had to be placed next to
rivers.

At first these factories provided for local
markets, but by the 1830s factories were
oriented toward national and international
markets. The early small factories employed
families, relying often on the labor of children;
larger factories often employed young
women, usually between the ages of thirteen
and twenty-five. Their lives were highly
regularized, most living in boardinghouses
that had strict rules of behavior. The scale
of production can be best demonstrated
by numbers: In 1860, England laid 27,000
kilometers of new railroad track, compared
to 16,000 kilometers in France. By 1870,
England controlled one-third of the world’s
overall production. English factories had
39.5 million cotton spindles in its factories,
compared with just 5 million in France.


16.69 Jedediah Strutt’s North Mill, Belper, Derbyshire, England

Albert Dock

The English ports of London and Liverpool
constituted cities unto themselves. The
London docks at midcentury, which were
continually being improved and expanded,
employed 30,000 people. Liverpool witnessed
a series of expansions cementing its status
as a global commercial power. By the 1890s,
it had become the second-largest port in
England, after London. It now became
England's main slave port. Cotton, tea, rice
tobacco, sugar, and grain passed through
this port—as did immigrants. Specialized
docks were built to house different types

of merchandise, from palm oil, cocoa, and
cotton to ivory and timber.

The Albert Dock (1846) in Liverpool, built of
cast iron, brick, and stone with no structural
wood, was the first fireproof warehousing
system in the world. It also had the world’s
first hydraulic warehouse hoist system. Sited
around a rectangular basin, the inner side
had a ground-level colonnade of hollow
cast-iron columns filled with masonry, with

warehouses on the floors above. Tall windows

allowed cranes to load and unload from
and to the floors. To make the building fully
fireproof, the cast-iron columns and beams
supported shallow brick-arched floors. At

a cost of £700,000, the Albert Dock was
probably the most expensive structure

in the world of that time. But within two
decades, the entrance was too small for the
ships, which had kept getting larger, so it

16.70 Aerial view: Albert Dock, Liverpool, England

was converted to a warehouse. Next to the
dock was a new customs house (no longer
extant) designed by John Foster, with a grand
and severe lonic pedimented temple front
(modeled on the Pantheon, but with lonic
capitals) with a Renaissance style dome at
its core.

16.71 Albert Dock

16.72 Eastern State Penitentiary, Philadelphia

Panoptic Prisons

As the ideas of the Enlightenment were
adopted in the new industrial cities of the
19th century, the definition of criminality
changed considerably. In the 18th century,
criminals, the insane, the poor, and the
indigent—all the “unwanteds”—were
thrown together in large halls and corridors.
The Lunatics Tower in Vienna (1784) was
nothing more than a cylindrical fortress.
Overcrowding, filth, and brutal conditions
made them into exceptionally terrifying
places. In England around 1819, there were
220 capital offenses, ranging from murder
to stealing bread. With the Enlightenment
came the atternpt to refine the law, but it was
not so much the terror of the prisons that

so appalled the early 19th-century moralists
as the fact that humanity could, in essence,
be placed outside the reach of the moral
life. A connection had to be made between
the reform of the body and mind of the
prisoner and the legitimacy of the state. This
engendered the first modern jails, such as
the Virginia Penitentiary (1798) by Benjamin
Latrobe and the Suffolk House of Correction
in Bury St. Edmunds, England (1803), where
the governor's house was at the prison’s
center to demonstrate the new force of law
that now ostensibly protected the prisoners
from abuse while enforcing its own code of
behavior.

16.73 Suffolk House of Correction, Bury St. Edmunds, England

These new prisons were designed with
isolated cells for the inmates grouped along
open corridors of buildings that were like the
spokes of a wheel, giving rise to the name
panoptic prison. An exemplar of the panoptic
system can be found at the Eastern State
Penitentiary in Philadelphia (begun 1821),
organized according to a philosophy set out
by the Pennsylvania Quakers that presumed
that isolation would promote monastic self-
reflection. Prisoners lived in a cell and could
go outside into a small private courtyard.
They were allowed out only for infrequent
baths or medical emergencies. Visits were
permitted only from officials. Masks and the
use of numbers rather than names ensured
anonymity if inmates had to be removed
from their cells. Even the sewer pipes were
arranged to prevent communication frorn

wn

cell to cell. All the while, the prisoner's every
movement was observed, either through

the corridor or from the towers during
exercises. Prisoners who were able were
allowed to choose to perfect a few skills,
such as shoemaking, basket-weaving, and
broom-making; it was thought that these
humble activities would reconnect them

with the principle that service to society

was the primary reason for existence. This
systern was much admired despite the fact
that it soon became obvious that quite a few
inmates went insane. Its English equivalent,
the Pentonville Prison in London (1844),
designed by Jeremy Bentham, had five
radiating arms extending from a central hall,
from which the prisoners could be observed.
Pentonville became the most copied prison in
the world.

16.74 Plan: Pentonville Prison, London

c
|
|
net

aint eet

Looe

_ me
ETOH

af

{ue
.

it]

~dloukU GL.

ae

ka

Yo

fos hy xe
. I oF
| Fed _
' - lpn onde  ~
i rio. . Zl
is) im
bet tt 3
16.75 Sampson Kempthorne’s 1835 proposal for a “square” plan workhouse t
Workhouses Workhouses carne in different formats. Most
Many English cities had so-called workhouses were exercises in social geometry: square or
that gave the poor work but also served as rectangular, with courts that separated the
religious boarding schools. The institutions men, women, and children; and a chapel,
were run by a parish as a type of charity infirmary, and administration offices at the
work. From the perspective of their patrons center. By the 1830s there was a good
they were designed as “large, spacious and deal of opposition to workhouses, given the
we may say fairly elegant buildings,” but the hardship and brutality that they engendered.
truth was far different. Frederick Engels wrote Though the government periodically
the following in his 1845 Condition of the attempted to reform their practices, their
Working Class in England: existence ended officially only in 1929. ° 20m

Below the bridge you look upon the piles
of debris, the refuse, filth, and offal from
the courts on the steep left bank; here
each house is packed close behind its
neighbor and a piece of each is visible,
all black, smoky, crumbling, ancient,
with broken panes and window-frames.
The background is furnished by old
barrack-like factory buildings. Here the
background embraces the pauper burial-
ground, the station of the Liverpool and
Leeds railway, and, in the rear of this, the
Workhouse, the “Poor-Law Bastille” of
Manchester, which, like a citadel, looks
threateningly down from behind its high
walls and parapets on the hilltop, upon the
working-people’s quarter below.

spices en
ro

16.76 Plan: Bridge Street Workhouse, Manchester, England

16.77 First-floor plan: A Shaker communal house

SHAKERS

The growing dissatisfaction with the grand
Enlightenment aspirations about the unity of
reason and nature spawned a generation of
utopian thinkers, social philosophers, and
cultural critics. Chief among these in France
was Claude Henri de Rouvroy, Comte de
Saint-Simon, an aristocrat, an officer in the
American Revolutionary War, a real estate
speculator, and a journalist. His writings,
including Memoire sur la science de ’homme
(1813), De fa réorganisation de fa société
Européene (with Augustin Thierry, 1817), and
Le nouveau Christianisme (1825), were highly
influential. He advocated a serni-mystical
“Christian-scientific” socialism envisaged
around an elite of philosophers, engineers,
and scientists who would tame the forces

of industrialization by means of a rational
Christian humanism. Though Saint-Simon
had adherents in Europe and even influenced
the thinking of Karl Marx, his rmovement to
create new communities was rarely brought
to fruition. In the United States, on the other
hand, utopian ideals found a ready audience,
with the founding of utopian communities
reaching its height around 1840. Why? Many
utopian thinkers were U.S. citizens, but a
substantial minority were emigrants from
England, France, Germany, and Scandinavia.
For most, the ideal was a small tidy village
with a range of craft industries.

16.78 Interior of a Shaker house

The Shakers aimed at nothing less than
transforming earth into heaven. They were
celibate, and their daily work and religious
rituals were designed to foster a belief in
both the earthly sphere, envisioned as a
rural settlement, and a heavenly sphere,
envisioned as a New Jerusalem. Between
1780 and 1826 the Shakers founded twenty-
five settlements from Maine to the Ohio
frontier. Communities were organized into
communal households called families, which
consisted of thirty to one hundred persons.
Shaker communities adopted names such as

City of Peace, City of Love, Holy Land, and

Pleasant Grove. Discipli

ne was not imposed

but was a condition of divine respect. For

example, anyone who sI

jouched or nodded

off was required to make a public apology.
Law also required that one sleep straight.
Furniture reinforced the requirement for

posture; chairs were ligl
tall backs.

Shaker life was high
women were responsibl
the house, whereas the
workshops. Drawers wel
recessed into walls so a

t and sturdy but had

ly regulated. The
le for sweeping
men cleaned the
re often installed
Ss not to collect

dust or create clutter. In the houses, an

invisible boundary sepa
rooms on the west from

rated the men’s
women’s rooms on

the east. Double sets of stairs and doors
articulated the division between male and

female brethren. The furniture, clothing,
and even the buildings themselves were
made by members of the community, who
were therefore physically surrounded by
the handiwork of other believers. Despite
these constraints, Shaker rituals involved
dance and pantomime. Imaginary garments
were donned; and “visitors” appeared with
particular messages to tell. Mernbers who
never raised their voices would suddenly
begin singing, shouting, and whirling in dizzy
spirals—hence the name of their sect.

The well-built and prosperous Shaker
villages greatly enhanced the credibility of the
communitarian strategy for social change.
But the Shakers’ unwillingness to engage in
heavy industry eroded their prosperity after
the Civil War, and their numbers declined
sharply—due in large part because of their
belief in celibacy and the resulting lack of
descendants.

AUGUST WELBY PUGIN AND THE
ENGLISH PARLIAMENT BUILDING
It is perhaps not coincidental that the two
most important architectural theoretical works
of the time came not from secularists but
from secularism's—and industrialism’s—
critics: Marc-Antoine Laugier and August
Welby Pugin (1812-52). Pugin’s father,
August Charles, Comte de Pugin, fled France
during the revolution and, as an authority on
the Gothic style, took up work in the office
of John Nash, who had to accommodate the
growing demand for Gothic-style architecture
even though he personally found it
troublesome. The younger Pugin was already
saturated in Gothic architecture and had even
converted to Catholicism as the only true
religion. With little hope for a cornmission,
he set about writing Contrasts, which he
published in 1836 at his own expense
because no publisher would agree to put
out such an explosive work. The book made
his reputation, and soon commissions for
chapels, churches, and even private houses
came his way. “The history of architecture
is the history of the world,” he wrote, and,
turning to the work of his own day, he asked
whether “the architecture of our times, even
supposing it solid enough to last, handl[s.
down to posterity any certain clue or guide
to the system under which it was erected?
Surely not.... It is a confused jumble of
styles and symbols borrowed from all nations
and periods.” At stake was not just a style,
he believed, but the history of civilization.
Industrialism, greed, and secularism hai
isolated man from his fellow man.
Contrasts set the tone for a critique o
industrialism that focused not on repairing
the inequities that it precipitated by means
of law and politics, but by proposing a
quasi-utopian alternative—one harkening
back to the Middle Ages, for Pugin a time
during which a vibrant social conscience had
existed that he felt had since been lost. The
architect, he argued, should therefore not just
adopt any style the client wanted. That would
be equivalent to encorsing the arbitrariness
of the modern world. Contrasts has a plate
showing a town as Pugin imagined it in 1440,
and another one showing it again in 1840.
The former portrays a coherent city with
intact walls and a church in the foreground;

16.79 A plate redrawn from Pugin’s Contrasts, showing a town in 1440

16.80 A plate redrawn from Pugin’s Contrasts, showing the same town illustrated above in 1840

the latter shows a cluttered river, a jumble
of church spires and smokestacks, and

in the foreground a prison; the church

is still there but now overgrown and
neglected. It was an accusation against
rationalism that remains embedded in

the image of modernity to this day, easily
retrieved by those who see modern life as

a downward spiral into ethical and moral
decline. Architecture had to be based on
principles (and in this he was the child of
the Enlightenment), including the use of
local materials in accordance with local
traditions. This was what made “true”
Gothic different from what he saw as the
shallow Gothic of Horace Walpole or, worse,
the cald rationalism of the Neoclassicists.
Only Gothic, he argued, could provide the
moral compass that one should expect from
a Christian society.

Despite Pugin’s conservatism, he should
not be seen as naively antimodern. His
convictions in respect to regional traditions
and local climate, as well as his belief in
“honest” construction, were all taken up
by modernists once the Gothic imperative
had played itself out. One of his arguments
against Italianate architecture was that it did
not suit England. A building, he maintained,
had to show its various purposes, and this led
to an appreciation for asymmetry and to an
emphasis on articulating the differing parts
of a building, an argument that modernists
would later take up as well.

It was because of this growing confidence
in the legitimacy of the neo-Gothic as a
genuinely English format that, after the old
palace at Westminster burned in 1834, a
parliamentary committee decided to rebuild
in the Gothic style. Two hundred years earlier,
a similar body had decided to rebuild old St.
Paul’s in the Neoclassical style.

A competition for the commission for the
new Parliament building was announced; it
was eventually given to Charles Barry, who
worked closely with Pugin. Few can deny the
brilliance of the plan, with its lucid hierarchies
that differentiate between public and private
areas and the grandeur of the approaches

to the great octagonal hall that separates

the House of Lords to the north from the
House of Commons to the south. An internal
spine, which allows for a special sovereign’s
entrance at the southeast corner of the
building, was buffered by a number of open-
air courts that allowed light into the various
rooms. Offices, libraries, and meeting rooms
were lined up along the principal facade
toward the river. The exterior-—done almost
uniformly in a soft, yellowish limestone—
was designed in a Perpendicular Gothic

style that replicated the taste of the 15th
century. Despite the monotone treatment of
the building's external mass, Barry was able
to introduce picturesque elements to the
skyline through the asymmetrical positioning
of the vertical elements—the Victoria Tower,
the lantern over the octagonal room, and

the spectacular Big Ben, Parliament’s now-
jamous clock tower. The debates that swirled
around this building concerning the role and
purpose of architecture were remarkable. The
istory of modern architecture is intertwined
with the history of polemics, beginning with
Charles Perrault's attack on beauty, carried
forth by Marc-Antoine Laugier’s attack on the
classical orders, and extended into the 19th
century by Pugin, the greatest defender of
the Gothic at the time, who envisioned the
uilding as a showcase of the Gothic style, a
moral and aesthetic exemplar. Neoclassicism,
with its cosmopolitan allusions that had met
the expectations of the old elite, had here
given way to a style that was associated

not only with the new moralists but also

with the monarchy of Queen Elizabeth |
(1533-1603), whose rule was increasingly
considered to be a golden age in which
England saw the first flush of its global power.
In other words, Neoclassicism, though once
the favorite language of colonial authority,
was increasingly seen as too generic and
undifferentiated—as too Continental—to
differentiate England, which was now the
single most powerful colonial empire in the
world, from its competitors.

16.81 Houses of Parliament, Westminster, London

16.82 Plan: Houses of Parliament

Thames River

NOOB WNE

. Clocktower

. Westminster Hall

. Chamber of the House of Commons.
. Central hall

. Chamber of the House of Lords

. Royal gallery

. Sovereign's entrance

EUGENE-EMMANUEL VIOLLET-LE-DUC
The mid-19th century saw the rapid
expansion of the middle class, the fitful
demise of the influence of the landed gentry,
and the rise of a professional class. The

Geological Society upgraded its membership
from the “interested” gentry to one based
on merit and scholarly accomplishment.
Arguments that fossils were planted in the
ground by God, still a viable theory in the
1830s, were no longer accepted in 1850.

In architecture a similar revolution was
taking place, led by a generation of theorists
that included Eugene-Emmanuel Viollet-le-
Duc (1814-79) in France, Gottfried Semper
(1803-79) in Germany, and John Ruskin
(1819-1900) in England. Though different
in many respects, each tried to rethink the
principles of rationalism and technology, and
all were writing at the same time. Ruskin's
Stones of Venice appeared first in 1851, on
the same date as Semper’s Die vier Elemente
der Baukunst. Viollet-le-Duc’s Dictionnaire
raisonné de larchitecture francaise du Xle au
XVe siécle, which was published in several
editions, first appeared in 1854. Without
doubt, the period represented a turning point
in architectural discourse. Viollet-le-Duc was

a strong advocate of the modern material
of iron. Unlike other architects of his time,
who were giving cast iron a Gothic flavor to
appease the demands of the followers of

16.83 Oriel Chambers, Liverpool, England

August Welby Pugin, Viollet-le-Duc made no
such demand.

Neither was he advocating the
technological rationalism of Sir Joseph
Paxton in the Crystal Palace in London. Cast
iron, and then iron, had emerged relatively
quickly on the architectural scene, but
the application proper to its aesthetic was
not yet obvious to mid-century architects.

In the 17th and 18th centuries, Baroque
architects, because of the large domes

and complex lighting effects, operated in a
realm between architecture and technology.
Neoclassicism, with its emphasis on image,
made significantly fewer technical demands
on the architect. But with the introduction
of cast iron, that changed rapidly. The
catalogues of architectural components
published by the design offices of British
foundries began to grow thicker, and it was
a short step from adding cast-iron balconies

(excellent examples of which abound in the
French Quarter of New Orleans, Louisiana) to
designing entire houses and structures out of

cast iron.

By 1850 some were arguing for a
congruence between material and form,
as can be seen in the remarkable Oriel
Chambers (1864) in Liverpool, England, by
the architect Peter Ellis. The thin cast-iron
frame holds glazed bay windows with no
concession to ornamentation. At the time, it

was not well received; architects preferred to
use cast iron mainly for floor supports. In that
sense, the general approach of Quatremére
de Quincy, who taught at the Ecole des
Beaux-Arts, still prevailed. He critiqued the
use of exposed iron in anything other than
industrial buildings, setting a tone with long-
lasting consequences. Iron received strong
support, however, from the Romantics,
who saw it as an opportunity to escape
the strictures of the classical orders and
to introduce a more local or regional flavor
to architecture. Viollet-le-Duc tried to hold
a middle ground, arguing against both the
academy, with its Neoclassical allegiances,
and the autonomy of rational engineering.
For him, rationalism was a question not of
numbers and efficiency but of style—a style
that emerged from a thorough familiarity with
the history of architecture and with the visual
and functional needs of the program.
Viollet-le-Duc's approach is best
exemplified in his design for an iron armature
for a concert hall (1886), which even today
strikes one as astonishing. Using the idea of
a buttress but inverting it and placing it on
the inside instead of the outside, he holds
up a steel frame that in turn supports a thin
masonry roof.

16.84 Viollet-le-Duc’s design for a concert hall

16.85 Abbey of Vézelay, France

ARCHITECTURAL PRESERVATION
Today, architectural preservation is a major
part of the architectural profession, but

that was not always the case. Medievalists
were especially concerned about the bad
conditions many cathedrals were in, and the
first preservation efforts were concerned with
medieval buildings. Viollet-le-Duc played a
large part in this movement, having been
asked in 1835 to restore the Romanesque
Abbey of Vézelay in France. This led to
restorations at Notre-Dame in Paris, Mont
St.-Michel in Normandy, and the town of
Carcassone in Provence. Whereas John
Ruskin advocated a restoration that preserved
only the building's status quo, Viollet-le-
Duc advocated a more aggressive form of
preservation that included the possibility of
rebuilding and even extending a building in
the same stylistic manner. At Carcassone,
the high-pitched roofs and the Cathedral of
Vézelay are basically his designs. In France,
many cathedrals had been damaged during
the French Revolution or had fallen into
disrepair. On some buildings, Baroque and
Neoclassical additions had been added.

In dealing with such complex situations—
and given that a medieval church might
have taken centuries to complete and thus
exhibited numerous styles—his approach
was not to pick a particular time and restore
it to that moment, but rather to synthesize
the building and make the restoration a

completion. This put a lot of power in the
hands of the designer; the final result might
have been a building that could never have
existed prior to that moment. To advance his
cause, Viollet-le-Duc made extensive studies
of medieval building practices—not only
so that the restoration could be accurate,
but also to show how this knowledge could
ensure the conceptual and perceived
authenticity of the new parts of the building.

16.87 Restoration in Carcassonne, France, by Viollet-le-Duc, begun in 1853

16.86 Viollet-le-Duc’s analysis of a Gothic column

eRe EOL
fal Bld el

16.88 Bibliotheque Ste.-Genevieve, Paris

BIBLIOTHEQUE STE.-GENEVIEVE
Among those who argued in favor of the

use of iron in France was Henri Labrouste
(1801-75). His Bibliotheque Ste.-Genevieve
(designed 1843, built 1845-51), with its
slender columns and billowing domes,
coexists with stone walls, themselves without
any trace of classical columns and pilasters.
The distinction between the two floors is
made on the outside by a thin entablature,
with a continuous row of garlands suspended
beneath it. Below, the wall is punctuated by
relatively small, Romanesque-style round-
headed windows. Above, from end to end,
runs an arcade, with pilasters forming a
regular rhythm across the facade; it is
distinctly Roman in flavor. The lower two
thirds of the arcade are filled in to allow for

a window in each bay. The whole is topped
by a stripped-down cornice, lightly decorated
in a neo-Greek manner. The building thus
makes numerous historical references, but is
in no way historicist. Labrouste attempted to
create an idiom that, through its reductivist
aesthetic, could demonstrate a fluid
connection between the old and the modern.
To indicate the iron used on the interior for
those with a keen eye, Labrouste articulated
the end bolts of the tie rods with round
panels nestled between the archivolts. The
building also has a Picturesque component,
for inscribed on the panels in the arcades are
the names of the authors of the books on the
shelves within.

16.89 Transverse section: Bibliotheque Ste.-Genevieve

In Labrouste'’s hands, iron was a significant
enrichment of the architect's toolbox. In the
vestibule, for example, the tall and solid piers
contrast with the spindly cast-iron arches.
But these arches were meant to evoke

the branches of a sacred grove, an image
reinforced by wall frescoes that show treetops
over the busts of famous literary figures.

The vestibule thereby becomes a reference
to the fabled Elysian Fields. Because
Labrouste's position was not in line with the

2 epee

T
WO

more conservative tastes of the academy, his
career did not advance as fast as did those
of his contemporaries. His use of iron as a

eT

form of vaulting became more common in
the next decades and was used, for example,
at Notre-Dame de la Croix (1870) in Paris.
The building is sited with its back against the
urban fabric and its long facade facing into
the open square that flanks the Pantheon.
Semper made an equally bold argument:
that the origins of architecture lay not in the
Greek post and lintel and not even in the
need to add a roof to the post and lintel, as
Laugier had argued. Architecture began, so
he argued, with weaving and the fashioning
of clothes. From weaving a basket, primitive
humans learned how to weave branches
into walls and then close off the gaps with
mud. From pottery, they learned how to
make tiles and bricks. Thus, the beginning
of architecture has less to do with myth
and archaeology than with anthropology.
It was a radical rethinking of the question, 16.90 Plan: Bibliotheque Ste.-Geneviave

OE ne


“~

wan
se

er OR Os

16.91 Swiss Polytechnical School, Zurich

much discussed at the time, about the
origins of architecture. For Semper, nature
was not an abstraction producing regular
geometries that needed to be emulated; nor
was it a biological force in the sense that
Gothic architects understood it when, for
instance, they modeled their vaults on tree
ranches. Instead, nature was wrapped up
with our basic human instinct for making
things, which Semper understood as having
oth economical and moral components.

At the Great Exhibition of 1851, he lavished
praise not on Sir Joseph Paxton’s amazing
technologically driven design of the Crystal
Palace but on the display of houses from
Trinidad, whose production yielded glimpses
of an early stage of cultural developrnent
efore industrialization derailed the processes
y which craft develops form.

His theoretical opinions aside, when it
came to architecture, Semper drew heavily
on motifs from the Roman Baroque, using
rusticated ground floors and pilastered upper
floors. This is apparent in his design for
the Swiss Polytechnical School (1858-64)
in Zurich, where the domed rotunda, used
as a reading room, is placed not at the
center of the composition, as might have
been expected, but along its facade as a 16.92 Caribbean hut, by Gottfried Semper
dramatic accent to the entrance. It leads to a
central hall defined by a restrained classical
vocabulary.


yd

nO

v

<- Cc
Nz Vv
x Wu
Sond Ta

16.93 Examples of Kabuki makeup

KANAMARU-ZA

The cultures of Korea and Japan, influenced
no doubt by the strict regulations of Qing

China, were also highly

controlled. One of

the inevitable manifestations of a ritualized

and regulated social order, as Miche

Foucault wrote based on his studies of similar

conditions in Europe, is
creation of spaces of sa

the symptomatic
nctioned exclusion,

or heterotopias—that is, sites where the

prohibited is provisiona

West, these include prisons, hospitals,

mental asylums, fairs, a

ly allowed. In the

nd carnivals. In

Kyoto, the Shimabara district of prostitution

was such a site. A para
of strict regulation was t
a theatrical form called
Kabuki connotes “out-o
“shocking.” This type 0’

lel consequence

je emergence of
abuki. The word
-the-ordinary” and
theater was a mix of

the acrobatic, the cornical, and the sensual
with theatrical special effects—a fusion that

had developed in the SI

imabara district and

had already been banned by the shoguns
in 1652. However, the scandal associated

with the notorious Kabu
popularity. In the Shima

ki only assured its
bara, high officials

interacted with theater people who, though

beautiful, accomplished

, and expensively

dressed, were otherwise viewed as social

outcasts.

Vv
as
.

\
we

}

+

16.94 Facsimile of Nishimura Shigenaga’s énterior of a Kabuki Theater

The earliest theaters were ternporary
structures similar to those used for special
public Noh performances, except that they
were more plebeian than the high-class
stages of the Noh. The Kabuki stages were
fenced-off outdoor areas focused on a
temporary stage with a gabled roof. Their
placement was casual and improvised, taking
advantage of already existing situations or
props, such as the Sumiya’s removable
screens that enabled the street to suddenly
become a stage for the audience seated in
its front rooms. The stages became more
permanent when a wooden wall was added
ind the stage. As Kabuki becarne popular
more elite audiences, a separate space
for them above that of the commoners in the
form of raised boxes (sajiki) was added along
the sides. These early theaters were equipped
with dressing rooms, viewing boxes, teahouse
additions, and corollary entertainments.

The mature form of the Kabuki theater
emerged in the late 17th century. With a solid
wall running around the perimeter, it had only
a single entrance, low and small, to regulate
access. Only one person at a time could
enter or exit, and then only by bending, as
one entered a teahouse. The facade had shoji
screens and wooden slats to control sight
lines. A small tower with a drum, vertical
banners, and platforms extending into the
streets furnished a framework for advertising.
There was no lobby. The audience entered
directly into the main space, known as the

doma, which was basically an open lawn. In
front was the main stage, roughly 12 meters
square. To the sides, lifted on stilts, were

the cubicles, with passages behind to admit
the higher-class clients. The stage and the
cubicles all had individual gabled roofs. The
stage roof was held up by corner pillars with
the gable end facing the audience, as in Noh
stages. The stage, however, had an extensive
backstage area, including side wings of
different sizes, and an extensive preparation
area almost twice as large as the stage itself.
he backstage was independently roofed.

he seating was divided into individual
spaces, called masu, by means of low
wooden separators arranged in a grid. By the
740s, ever-larger Kabuki stages were built
throughout Japan. Over time, the entrance
facades became more elaborate, with up

to three entrances—two large ones for the
elite and a smaller one for commoners. An
angled raised corridor led to the stage front.
he stage became equipped with a revolving
segment that could be used to execute quick
scenery changes. There are only a few extant
Kabuki theaters from the 17th and 18th
centuries, among which the Kanamaru-za
(1835) is the best preserved.


16.96 Interior of Kanamaru-za, Kotohira, Japan

16.95 Pictorial view: A Kabuki theater

similar to Karamaru-za

16.97 Kanamaru-za, Kotohira

16.98 Plan: A Kabuki theater


awe Manchuria
: Chengde,
; , ® Japan
‘ ® P:
an Beijing Korea
“ Tibet Kyoto or
s, ‘@®
fe Kotohira
- - Qing dynasty China @Shanghai
sy Pacific Ocean
A Xi
india Arey ¢ iamen)

16.99 19th-century China

QIANLONG’S UNIVERSAL VISION
Though China increased its export of tea

by more than 50 percent in the first third

of the 19th century and quadrupled its

silk exports, Chinese traders showed little
interest in European merchandise. Indeed,
they demanded hard currency payment in
silver. The result of this asyrnmetrical trade
relationship was that by 1800, almost half of
the Spanish silver mined in America ended
up in Chinese coffers. England, meanwhile,
was having serious financial problems and
began to force Chinese traders to accept
opium in exchange for tea, a policy they
pursued so relentlessly that by the end of the
19th century, the Chinese economy went into
a long-lasting tailspin. This is arguably one

of the great civilizational tragedies created by
European colonialism.

Back in the 18th century, the eventual
reversal of China's fate would not have been
conceivable. At that time, China under the
Qianlong Emperor (r. 1736-96) was the
largest and richest empire in the world, and
from the Chinese perspective, trade with the
new European mercantile world had to be
severely regulated to minimize disruption.
Qianlong saw himself as a pan-Asian
emperor, not dissimilar to his contemporary
Napoleon Bonaparte, who pursued a pan-

Canton (Guangzhou)
©

European ideal. And like Napoleon, he

was a military cormmander of great skill. In
ten campaigns between 1755 and 1790,
Qianlong expanded the Chinese empire to
its greatest extent ever, bringing Mongolia,
Chinese Turkestan, and Tibet under his
control. Ruling over such a diverse population
and being a ruler of foreign origin himself,
Qianlong aspired to establish a model of
governance both pluralistic and moral.
Qianlong’s grandfather, the Kangxi Emperor,
who was of Manchu origin, had chosen to
practice Tibetan Buddhism in private, even
though his governmental policy was based
on Confucian ethics. Unsatisfied by this
arrangement, Qianlong sought to project
himself as a chakravartin—a “universal

United States

England

Americas[]

Africa

ruler’—under the guidance of Rolpay Dorje,
a Tibetan monk who became the grand lama
of Beijing in 1736.

Qianlong tried to fit this role by casting
himself as the mediator between the
different peoples of his vast kingdom. To the
Tibetans, Qianlong represented himself as
a reincarnation of Manjusri, an important
Tibetan bodhisattva. To the Mongols, he was
always one of their own, steeped in their
traditions. And, most importantly, to the Han
Chinese he ensured that he was renowned
as a great scholar and patron of the arts.
Qianlong spoke several languages, and the
court was Officially polyglot: edicts were
issued in at least three languages. He also
commissioned compendia of all the great
literary works of the time, and the number
of ancient Chinese paintings and artifacts
collected during the Qianlong Emperor’s
reign was unprecedented. The collections
of the national palace museums in both
Beijing and Taipei were largely formed under
the Qianlong Emperor and are the largest
repositories of important Chinese artifacts
extant today.

As chakravartin, Qianlong offered a
complex, multinucleated conception of
empire and universality that contrasted with
the European Enlightenment—based colonial
model of empire and universal modernity
unfolding at the same time. Although there
were some crossovers, such as the influence
Chinese social orders had on Enlightenment
thinkers such as Voltaire, the English-
European model eventually overwhelmed
Qianlong's model, largely due to the rising
tide of European prosperity. The policies of
China today, with their rush to prosperity
and global influence, could arguably seek to
reinstate Qianlong’s pan-Asian vision.

Russian Empire

Qing dynasty China

% Central Asia, Korea

mpire Japan

India Indonesia

16.100 Eurasian trade diagram, ca. 1800

Chengde
As part of that pan-Asian vision, Qianlong
staged Chengde as the symbolic capital of
this new world (while government continued
to be run from Beijing). Originally built as a
royal summer residence, Chengde, located
north of the Great Wall—outside the wall—
affirmed the universality of Qianlong’s rule.
In addition to building a road from Bejing
to Chengde that continued into Mongolia
and a dam to control the Wulie River that
ran through the city, Qianlong enlarged the
palaces and gardens, and founded several
temples in surrounding areas, including the
Puningsi (1755), the Puyousi (1760), the
Anyuanmiao (1764), the Pulesi (1767), the
Putuo Zongcheng (1771), the Shuxiangsi
(1776), and the Xumifushoumiao (1780).
The Chengde temples, dedicated to a
range of Confucian and Buddhist deities,
are drawn frorm—and meant to represent—
various parts of the empire. Together they
form an arc that can be taken in at once
from the main hill north of the palace. A self-
conscious visual ensemble, Chengde was a
veritable microcosm of the Qing Empire, a
map of the land. But Chengde was also an
ordering of that map according to a Buddhist
mandala. A critical feature of Chengde’s
landscape is a 60-meter-high rock formation
called the Qingchui Peak. Wider at the top

oo
Qed

Shugiangsi

ae

rey Putuo Zongcheng fuingsi
”;

imifushoumia

than at the bottom, Qingchui looks like a
huge pillar perched unbelievably at the
summit of one of the eastern hills. Using the
Qingchui “pillar” as the center, all the local
Tibetan Buddhist temples and the palace
complex can be interpreted as “facing”
Qingchui, not literally but by the geomantic
logic of Chinese and Tibetan landscape
architecture. In this reading, Chengde as a
whole was a mandala, with Qingchui standing
in for Sumeru, the sacred mountain at the
center.

The palace had three main groups of
halls: the Main Palace (Zhenggong), the
Pine and Crane Studio (Songhezhai), and
the Eastern Palace (Donggong). The Main
Palace, the principal living quarters, had nine
courtyards representing the nine divisions
of the celestial sphere. A wall enclosed a
4-square-kilometer area with several discrete
landscape zones. The lake district had an
island with buildings and courtyards that
housed officials and was used for private
activities. North of the Garden District was a
site known as the Garden of Ten Thousand
Trees, which was laid out beginning in 1703
and improved for decades. It contained a
Prairie District that was meant as a type of
replica of the Mongolian steppe. Though
used for horse races, military exercises,
and fireworks, it had important political and

\
\ ® \

yous ia 3
we

-

Xx

de ,
16.101 Qinqchui Peak at Chengde,
Hebei Province, China

ceremonial functions as well. On special
occasions, the Qing created a simulated
Mongolian campsite, complete with yurts.
The twelve ternples, of which only
nine survive today, were designed as
representations of other temples. The Pulesi
(“Temple of Universal Happiness,” 1767), for
instance, is a hybrid building that merges the
Tibetan conceptual order with Chinese formal
expression. In appearance, the Pulesi is like
the shrine at the Temple of Heaven in Beijing;
it is a round temple with a double eave and
conical roof. In plan, however, it replicates a
Buddhist mandala with a series of stepped
terraces. Chengde’s most visible structure,
the Putuo Zongcheng (1771), is a small-scale
replica of Lhasa’s famed Potala Palace. Like
the Potala, the Putuo consists of a series of
low white buildings rising up the side of a

hill, culminating in the central red structure,
the Dahongtai (“Great Red Terrace”), with
the golden temple's roofs projecting over the
summit. But the Putuo is not a pure copy.
he original Potala’s massive white walls
enclosed a small courtyard. The walls of the
Putuo, by contrast, enclose the Great Red
errace, within which stood a huge Chinese-
style temple pavilion more suitable for royal

receptions than a hidden spiritual practice.

Dahongtai

Se ecetioe aeateaeal

poe een me

16.106 Diagrammatic comparisons of the Potala Palace at Lhasa and the Putuo Zongcheng at Chengde 16.107 Site plan: Putuo Zongcheng
Based on drawings by Anne Chayet

Qingyi Garden

One of Qianlong's additions was a new
garden, originally called Qingyi Garden
(1750-64) and now known as the Summer
Palace. It was designed as a series of palaces
and pavilions around a large oval lake that

is separated from two smaller lakes by long
narrow islands. A stroll path goes around the
lake and across all the small islands. In the
middle of the main lake is a small artificial
island, connected to the edge on the east by a
long, arched, graceful bridge. The north edge
of the lake is dominated by a huge palace and
a Buddhist shrine complex, raised high on a
solid stone platform, on axis with the central
island. In the west, the horizon is filled with a
series of long mountains with distinct peaks. A
pagoda and several pavilions were built on the
crests of the peaks.

Chinese gardens were intended to evoke
the order of nature distilled to its essence. The
design skill lay in ensuring that every element
functioned in a way that was harmonious
with the whole from the perspective of
viewing sites along the strolling paths. A
garden's quality was described as a function
of its scenic spots, which were thought of
as embodied poems and three-dimensional
paintings. Symmetry was abhorred.

At the same time, all the expectations
and conveniences of a royal palace and
seat of government were to be fulfilled.

There are three palpable visual foci at the
Summer Palace: the island in the middle of
the lake, the Buddhist shrine at the northern
edge, and the tall pagoda on the hills in the
west. Although the Buddhist shrine is the

largest element, the island is in the middle
and constantly attracts the eye. Yet while
walking around, the pagoda in the distance
always remains in view, becoming the best-
remembered part of the garden.

The compositional ideas were derived
from principles described in texts such as
the Ji Cheng’s Yuan Zhi (“Gardening”),
written in the early 17th century. Ji Cheng
invoked design concepts such as “suitability,”
“refinement,” “simplicity,” and “changeability
or unexpectedness,” which were to be used
to create places that have qualities such as
“the real and the false,” “assembling and
spreading,” “unevenness and neatness,”
“connecting and separating,” “open and
closed,” and “level and solid.”

Longevity Hill

“Sa

te
Temple of ase

uw

16.109 Plan of Qingyi Garden

16.110 View from pavilion: Qingyi Garden

16.111 Touro Synagogue, Newport, Rhode Island

SYNAGOGUES

Until the end of the 15th century, most Jews
lived within the footprint of the old Roman
Empire, whether in Trastevere in Rome, in
Spain, or in Thessalonica in Greece. This
was the result of the great diaspora imposed
on the Jews by the Ronan emperor Titus,
after his victory over the Jews and the
destruction of the Second Temple in 70 CE.
Beginning with the Christian era, restrictions
were imposed on Jews wherever they lived.
hey were not allowed to own land and were
excluded from affairs of the military, thus
denying them access to aristocratic privileges.
Since banking was one of the few trades
they were permitted to engage in, Jews were
able to create a network that transcended
local rivalries, and in that capacity were often
protected by kings and princes, who used
them as private bankers. In Venice, Jews
were allowed to come to the city principally
because of their banking associations. They
were assigned to live in an area known as
the ghetto, a term from then on used to
designate where Jews were required to live.
An exception was in Lithuania, where, frorn
316 onward, Jews had a surprising amount
of freedom.

With their expulsion by the Spanish in

1492 and by the Portuguese in 1496,

the Sephardic Jews were forced to seek
sanctuary in Poland, Amsterdam, Venice,
Greece, Istanbul, and even Rome. In
Amsterdam, a Sephardic synagogue was
built in 1675 that has remained largely
unchanged, and is today one of the few
tangible remnants of Amsterdam's once-
thriving Jewish community. It is a large
rectangular brick building, with large round-
headed windows on all sides that emphasize
its vast interior space. It became the model
for several later synagogues, including

the Bevis-Marks Synagogue in London
{1700) and the smaller Touro Synagogue

in Newport, Rhode Island, the oldest
synagogue in the United States. Jewish life
in Germany improved slightly in the 18th
century when courts invited Jews to come
and serve as financial agents. In 1714, King
Frederick William | of Prussia permitted the
construction of a synagogue in Berlin.

16.113 Plan: Sephardic synagogue, Amsterdam

16.114 Interior: Beth Elohim Synagogue, Charleston, South Carolina

The fate of Jews significantly improved
under Napoleon, who passed a number of
measures supporting the position of Jews in
the French Empire and Austria—and, just
as importantly, in conquered countries. He
abolished laws restricting Jews to ghettos

or to certain professions. In 1797 when he
invaded Italy, he threw open the gates to the
ghettos. In 1807, like his conternporary Qing
emperors of China, he sanctioned several
religions as “official”—a first for a European
ruler; these included Judaism, Roman
Catholicism, Lutheranism, and Calvinism.
As a result of Napoleon's initiatives, Jews in
other lands sought and eventually received
emancipation in Germany in 1848, in Great
Britain in 1890, in Russia in 1917, and finally
in Spain in 1930.

The response by Jews to German
emancipation was a building boom of
unprecedented proportion. During the
19th century, more than two hundred
large synagogues were built. It would be
shortsighted to see synagogue architecture
as part of the general European trend
toward eclecticism. Synagogue eclecticism
was a direct response to the new freedom
from restrictions on what could be built.
Furthermore, most of the architects were
non-Jews who brought their own, often
romanticized, expectations of what a Jewish

space should look like. Gottfried Semper
(1803-79) designed a synagogue in Dresden
(1840) that was on its exterior Carolingian-
Romanesque, presumably to emphasize the
aspirations of assimilation, but on the inside
there was an order of columns with deep
impost blocks copied from the Alhambra at
Granada.

The emergence of the Reform Judaism,
intended to appeal to urban Jews, had
a major influence on synagogue design.
Reform Jews stressed the universal teachings
of Judaism but also sought to modernize
rituals that were difficult to maintain in a
modern world. Reform Jews held that Jewish
people were not in a state of permanent
exile but were contributing members of their
community and nation. They considered
every house of worship a temple, as holy
as the original temple in Jerusalem. Pews
were permitted, and prayer was in German.
The organ was introduced. The first Reform
synagogue was opened in Seesen in central
Germany in 1810 and was called a “temple,”
in keeping with Enlightenment ideals. Some
synagogues took up the classical theme and
were designed almost literally as temples,
as in the Seitenstettengasse Synagogue
in Vienna (1826) and the Beth Elohim
Synagogue in Charleston, South Carolina
(1840).

16.115 Beth Elohim Synagogue, Charleston,
South Carolina

16.116 Tempio Israelitico, Rome

Others were in keeping with the general
19th-century preoccupation with history and
were developed along Egyptian and Byzantine
lines, as, for example, the Princes Road
Synagogue (1874) in Liverpool, which is a
type of Norman Gothic with Oriental touches;
and the Tempio Israelitico (1882) in Florence,
whose prayer hall is almost square, with
galleries on three sides supported by colurnns
with Moorish cusped arches. Every inch of
surface is covered with patterns and colored
designs of abstract Islamic configurations,
creating a soft reddish-golden atmosphere.
Synagogues, like mosques, did not display
human figures.

16.117 Princes Road Synagogue, Liverpool, England

1900 CE

INTRODUCTION

As the 198th century wore on, the forms,
institutions, and modes of representation that
can be retrospectively identified as being
modern or modernist eventually started to
coalesce. But that was a long time coming.
By the middle of the 19th century,

the new nation-states of Europe and the
Americas were jockeying with each other

to envision and establish the institutions

and the accompanying social, political,

and economic practices of modernity. The
burgeoning colonial industrial economy
fueled slow but steady growth. British
supremacy on the sea continued to flourish,
and by the end of the century England was
the dominant global force, controlling land
all around the world. As other European
nations scrambled to compete with the
English, the rest of the world began to adapt
to, and challenge, the new global imperatives
of the colonial world. At the same time,

the social costs of industrial concentration
became more apparent—devastation of old
rural economies; development of massive,
subsistence-level working classes; and rapid
growth in urban populations—creating cities
that were woefully underprepared to deliver
the services that were suddenly expected

of them. The consequent urban upheavals,
accompanied by a chorus of criticism from
the likes of as Ruskin, Morris, Marx, and
Engels, were met with the establishment of
a series of new urban institutions designed
to cope with the new city. For the first time,
what we now recognize as public-sector
works—such as hospitals, fire stations,

law courts, and the like—were undertaken
by European municipal bodies. Soon,

these bodies began also to take pride in
their work and in their cities and began

to build larger public works that sought to
establish the identity of the city as a civic
space. Particularly celebrated were railroad
stations that moved the people and goods
necessary to the new economy; law courts
that signified the new, more public-minded
jurisprudence of the city; and museums that
catered to new conceptions of an educated
citizenry. New public societies that debated
the meaning of the public, such as libraries
and athenaeums, began to be established;
and as the ultimate democratic civic space
accessible to all, the large urban park in the
midst of the city became a central part of the

urban experience. This was especially true
in the United States, spearheaded by the
creation of Central Park in Manhattan in the
1850s, designed by the landscape architect
Frederick Law Olmsted in collaboration with
Calvert Vaux, a European-trained architect.
Central Park, former site of immigrant slums
and squatter settlements, soon came to
embody the idea of massive public works as
the signature mark of a prosperous city, even
though it would still take more than half a
century before the park was fully established
as the heart of the city.

In terms of architectural expression, the
18th-century Enlightenment ideal—which
held up a restatement of the Greco-Roman
classical ideal as the specific European
heritage that best expressed the new
institutions of modernity—for the most part
continued to hold sway. Classicism and
classical revivalism, however, had their
critics. The proponents of the Arts and
Crafts movement in particular felt that the
true expression of an architectural style
must be derived only from expressions of
handwork, as in the past, and favored a more
Gothic-inspired vocabulary. Early modernist
opinions that eschewed all styles were also
beginning to surface. An important flashpoint
in this debate was the first world’s fair ever
held, the Great Exhibition of 1851 in Hyde
Park, London. Eventually remembered as
the Crystal Palace Exhibition on account
of the massive temporary pavilion of stee
and glass that was designed for it by the
engineer Joseph Paxton, this event was
intended to showcase the global derman
for British goods. Instead, Arts and Crafts
enthusiasts used it to stage a political
demonstration showcasing the shoddiness of
those goods and extolling in their place the
exotic handcrafted indigenous goods of the
colonies. The demonstrators called on the
British Empire to protect crafts and a craft
ethic in England, as in its territories.

The Arts and Crafts revolution, as a
consequence, became one of the first truly
global transformative movements, intended
to revolutionize lives by rethinking livelihoods
and ways of working. In the United States,
the ethics of Arts and Crafts, if not always its
aesthetic, permeated the complete array of
architectural explorations, fueled in part by
a nascent sense of American exceptionalism
that sought to generate an original American


architectural expression. The craft-based
ideal, though still significantly derivative of
European styles, catered to this desire. The
strong sense of rustication and the attention
to detail and ornament that can be found in
work by H. H. Richardson as well as some
early work by McKim, Mead & White can
be understood in this context. And certainly
the bungalow, which began as a white
man’s domestic space in colonial India but
then spread through the colonial world, and
particularly the United States, as the symbol
of the good life, was widely proselytized as an
expression of the craft aesthetic.

Concomitantly, Arts and Crafts enthusiasts
also built the first set of design schools
in colonial India as part of their effort to
preserve and revive the crafts against the
standardization that was the staple of the
colonial Public Works Department. In the
process they invented a new architectural
style that sought expressly to modernize
Mughal building and aesthetic traditions,
known as the Indo-Saracenic. This was
particularly popular in some of the so-called
princely states, such as Jaipur, where a
former military engineer, Colonel Swinton
Jacobs, organized the massive Jeypore
Portfolio of Architectural Details as something
of a catalogue of Indic styles curated for
reuse. The Yankee blockade of the Southern
ports during the American Civil War
(1861-65) prompted the British to source
its raw cotton from western India, which had
suitable volcanic soil for cotton production;
this resulted in the establishment of Bombay
(now Mumbai) as a major port. The Suez
Canal was cut by the British primarily to
shorten the passage from Bombay to the
cotton mills of Manchester. The cotton trade
brought new wealth to Bombay, whose new
architecture, to suit the extant Arts and Crafts
trends in England, was of course built in the
Venetian Gothic style.

In a different register, however, the
critiques of strict classicism also led to
eclecticism—that is, appreciation and skillful
reuse of the vast diversity of architectural
styles from European history and beyond.
The eclectic assertion that architectural
languages were more a question of materials
and aesthetics than of political ideology
was fueled in particular by the rise of the
architect, in the late 19th century, as an

independent professional, riding on the
coattails of similar movements by doctors
and lawyers. The move to professionalize
was centered in Paris. In spite of England's
dominance in the 19th century, Paris was
the more influential center of the new

urban culture of the times. Its center was
thoroughly rebuilt during the Second Empire
under Napoleon Il and became the model
for urban redesigns in Europe and around
the world. Argentina’s exports, for example,
may have largely gone to England, but when
it came to designing streets and public
buildings, Argentina’s elite turned to Parisian
models. The French Beaux-Arts, as a voice
that combined bourgecis elegance and

professional expertise (also known as the
Second Empire style), was an international
movement in its own right. Although the
Ecole des Beaux-Arts had already been in
existence for almost a century, in the late
19th century it became a central powerhouse
for architectural thinking, moving the
discourse away from the drawing rooms and
boudoirs of the gentlemen architects of the
past. Its compositional strategies—strongly
axial, eclectic, and focused on the production
of the framed spectacle—came to embody
the expressions of the new urban world

that was emerging at the time. Beaux-Arts

aesthetics were widely adopted not only in
Europe and North America but also in many
other parts of the world, including Japan,
Argentina, and China, as the international
standard of the global-colonial world.

One influential manifestation of the
Beaux-Arts ideal was the City Beautiful
movement. It began with Chicago-based
architect Daniel Burnham's iron-fisted
production of the spectacle of the extremely
successful Chicago's World's Fair of 1893.
With the buildings all painted in white,
Burnham's vision permanently imbricated
into the modern sensibility the suggestion
that monochromatism, and particularly white
monochromatism, successfully liberated
architecture from the weight of history and
suspended it in an eternal present where
it was only the composition that mattered.
When the National Mall in Washington, DC,
was redesigned according these principles
in 1901, the Burnham vision became a
movement and was adopted by cities across
the United States. In 1905 Burnham also

prepared a proposal for Manila, which had
just become a U.S. territory.

By 1900, European territorial expansion,
with its larger global sphere of influence,
was at its very height. English successes
in Southeast Asia and China, along with its
continued domination of India, initiated a new
sphere of economic migration between those
areas that paid some small local dividends
for the colonized populations—as in the
example of the Chettinad mansions—while
driving most of the profit back to London. The
British also built out an extensive utilitarian
infrastructure orchestrated around railroads
to enable the extraction of raw materials,
and to distribute the manufactured goods.
The imperial Public Works Department
commanded a mini-army in its own right.

But the centerpiece of the new European
colonial expansion was the tragic land-grab
of the African continent. Largely defenseless
against European armaments, Africa had
hitherto been protected by the sheer lack
of knowledge of its hinterland. As accurate
cartography revealed its true size, all the
major European powers rushed to claim
African territory by any means they could.
The African land-grab epitornizes the
proverbial heart-of-darkness at the center
of the colonial 19th century. While the
old colonial powers—the English, French,
Spanish, Portuguese, and Dutch—continued
to dominate distant shores, the remaining
European nations, the latecomers to the
colonial game, in particular the Germans,
Belgians, and Italians, rushed to grab the
lands that were still “available,” mostly in
Africa. Africa was literally divided up at a
conference held in Berlin in 1884. Even
so, there were battles. South Africa was a
particularly contested prize, with its newfound
mineral wealth, which pitted the earlier Dutch
settlers against the British.

Late in the 19th century, Germany under
Otto von Bismarck had been particularly
determined to catch up with, and surpass,
England and France in wealth and power.
Bismarck pushed through a process
of aggressive industrialization that saw
Germany's output rival that of England in
less than a generation. By the early 20th
century, Germany was a significant power
to be reckoned with. Somewhat free of the
long discussions of style and modernity that


had dominated earlier discourses in places
like England and France, late 19th-century
Germany sought to embody its own vision of
an incipient modernism. Thus, the factories
of Peter Behrens, the Deutsche Werkbund,
and the new uses of concrete looked to
American factories for inspiration, rather than
to Beaux-Arts academies.

Germany's success at bootstrapping itself
without the advantage of a far-flung colonial
empire (and without the vast reserves of
a United States) made it into a model for
other parts of the world that were looking
for non-colonial models of growth. Japan in
particular took Germany as its role model.
Anticipating a colonial incursion, and tired of
the old practices of the Bakafu code, Japan’s
elite orchestrated a revolt against the reigning
shogunate. The consequent so-called Meiji
Restoration of 1868 aggressively worked
to import Western knowledge, skills, and
institutions to Japan, launching it as
an industrial and economic power. The
Meiji Restoration positioned Japan as a
counterforce to European colonial expansion,
thereby transforming Japan into a colonial
power in its own right.

Inescapably, the watershed event of
these tires was World War |. Germany, in
collaboration with the Old World empires—
the Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman—went
to war with a world that had grown powerful
on colonial riches. The consequence was
a long stalemate, and a particularly bloody
one because of the extensive use on both
sides of new industrial technologies to
develop weaponry. The fallout of World
War | perrnanently eradicated all vestiges
of the preindustrial, pre-colonial world
and ultimately even spelled the death of
the colonial world. Thenceforth, industrial
technologies and capital reigned, and the
whole world decisively advanced toward
nation-statehood. Architecturally speaking,
these transformations put modernity, and
the continued search for a distinctive new
architectural modernism, firmly in the driver's
seat. The 1926 competition for the new
League of Nations embodied the contentions
of this new world order.

After World War |, the United States’
emergence as the global economic
superpower of the 20th century seemed
assured. Its industrial might, vast natural and

land resources, and sense of opportunity
gave it a decisive edge. Besides its industrial
forms, the new skyscrapers of its cities like
Chicago and New York, although dressed

in various neoclassical garbs, had already
demonstrated the possibilities of new
materials, structures, and ways of living.
Frank Lloyd Wright shone forth as the main
American figure with a comprehensive vision
of how to articulate a new architectural order,
complete with ornamentation, based on new
materials and his own vision of a land-based
agro-rural lifestyle. Working in a milieu that
was almost completely isolated from the early
modernists of Europe, Wright began to outline
his vision first in Wisconsin and then in the
American Southwest and Japan, searching
for what he was to later describe as a
comprehensive, “organic” aesthetic order that
integrated all aspects of design—painting,
furniture, architecture, ornamentation,
landscape, and even urbanism. His sources
were diverse—Richardson and Sullivan

by direct influence, the American prairie

by context, the Celtic world by personal
connection, and the pre-Columbian and
Japanese realms by affinity. Divorced from
the European modernist milieu, Wright
constructed an alternate modernist universe
whose potential may still be unfulfilled.

The early 20th-century American
architectural academy, however, was still
dominated by the Beaux-Arts teaching model,
as it was in Europe. This was decisively
challenged on multiple fronts, especially by
the establishment of the Bauhaus in Germany
in 1919, led by Walter Gropius; the irruption
of a diverse range of modernist idiorns to
express the communist ideals of the new
Soviet Union after the Communist revolution
in Russia and, emanating from Paris starting
in 1917, the Cubist-inspired writings and
projects by the Swiss-born architect and
painter Le Corbusier.

Determinedly seeking to reboot design
discourse in Germany, Gropius’s Bauhaus
was initially strongly influenced by early
modern German and Viennese discourses, in
particular Art Nouveau and Expressionism.
With figures like Johannes Itten central to
the teaching staff, early Bauhaus looked to
diverse sources, including a kind of emotional
mysticism, to find a path to a new modern
aesthetic. But soon after it moved to Dessau

in 1925, Bauhaus became rigorously devoted
to a strict machine aesthetic, ernbodied in
particular by Gropius's design of the new
school building and dormitory.
The Soviet world was by far the most diverse
and experimental, actively seeking to invent
new forms, idioms, and ideologies for what,
at that time, seemed like a brave new frontier
for humankind. Pushing modernist ideas to
their limits, the Soviets assembled themselves
into loose groups under intentionally avant-
garde titles such as the Constructivists,
the Suprematists, and, by contrast,
the Rationalists. Their explorations and
propositions advanced many new frontiers in
architectural thinking, the diversity of which
has only recently begun to be fully accounted
for.

But the loudest and most distinctive
bell announcing the birth of a new era was
sounded in Paris by Le Corbusier, who,
in the 1920s, published his ideas of a
focused agenda for a new modernism in
a series of books and conceptual projects,
the most influential of which was Vers une
Architecture, translated into English as
“Towards a New Architecture.” Vers offered a
succinct vision of modernism, delineated into
clear principles, aphoristic assertions, and
tabulated principles, such as the “five points”
of a new architecture. Le Corbusier skillfully
backed these up with dramatic theoretical
projects, such as replacing the architectural
fabric of Paris with crystalline towers, which
quickly captured the international imagination
and sparked strong reactions, catapulting Le
Corbusier into iconic status.

™

Rio de Janeiro

on pc ©” Angeles

New York © Chicago

Stockholm

“8 OF
Barcelona (O) Helsinki

Paris

Dessau ©
fo, vienna Moscow Tokyo
so") Kyoto
cairo® ©

Shanghai
New Delhi

Mombasa @uniai

oo"
sandung®

National Gallery, London A
1834-38

A Crystal Palace

1850-51
A St. Pancras Station

1863-76

A Galleria Vittorio Emanuele II

1865-67

AVictoria Terminus

1878-88

A Central Park
1853-83

ATrinity Church
1872-77

A Paris Opera House
1861-75

A AI-Rifa‘i Mosque
1869-80 and 1906-11
1850 CE

American Civil War
1861-65

ACornell University
Founded 1865

A Reliance Building
1890-95

A Bandung Institute of Technology
1920

A Shanghai Bank
1923-25
AWrigley Building
1920-24

A Boston Public Library 4 Pennsylvania Station

1888-95

1904-10

A Mubarak Mahal

1899
1900 CE
World War | Great Depression World War II
1914-18 1929 to late 1930s 1939-45
A Winslow House ARobie House
1893 1908-10
A Gamble House ATaliesin AHollyhock House
1908-9 Begun 1911 1921
A Isaac Bell House
1882-83
A Maison Tassel AGlass House AMoller House
1892-93 1914 1927-8
ACasa Batllé
1904-6
A 25h, rue Franklin
1902-4
A Einstein Tower AKeith Arcade
1917-21 1927
A Stockholm Public Library
1920-28
AWoodland Cemetery Chapel
1918-20
A Friedrichstrasse Office Building
1921
ATatlin’s Tower
1919
A Bauhaus, Dessau
1924-26
AVilla Savoye

1928-31

1950 CE

PUBLIC SECTOR A

In London, prior to 1850, grand public

buildings were rare, a

guildhall or market house from the 17th

century that had esca

of 1666. It was only in the 1820s that a
civic presence made itself noticeable again,

with the new Privy Co

Trade Building (1822—
Office (1823-28) by Robert Smirke, and
the British Museum (1823-46), also by
Smirke. But the amount of civic architecture

was still meager at be:

improvements were largely haphazard and
impromptu affairs—London was basically run
as a medieval corporation, with dozens of
committees and organizations defending their
turf and rarely working in unison. In 1855,

in an attempt to rectify the situation, the
government created the Metropolitan Board
of Works to improve the process by which
decisions regarding the commissioning and

building of public buil

The result was immediate. In fact, most
public buildings in Great Britain, whether

RCHITECTURE
part from an occasional

ped the conflagration

uncil and Board of
27), the General Post

st, and metropolitan

dings could be made.

i AN iii itil i

municipal offices, post offices, fire stations, 2 WAM TRULY a: rnd aga aang a ada

schools, or libraries, date from after this
time. Among the most important Victorian-

era governmental buii

bureaucratic face on the empire were the

Admiralty (proposed

Kensington Museum (1857), Colonial Office
(1870-74), Home Offi

Law Courts (1871-82
1906), and New Pub

1908). The massing of these buildings
usually in a Renaissance-

tended to be heavy,

GM i WAG ETAT AA
dings that put a new
852, built 1887), South
ice (1870-75), New

), War Office (1898-
ic Office (completed

Italianate manner, wit!
and voussoirs, such a

(1863-68) and the New Government Offices

(1868-78).

well-articulated quoins
s at the India Office

17.3 Manchester City Hall, England

Cities began to compete for the top architects
for their town halls, railroad stations, and
commodity exchange buildings. Manchester,
the great port city infamous for its gritty

mills and open sewers, took the lead in the
attempt to reform its urban image. Its grand

a ee oe city hall was designed by Alfred Waterhouse
tod ad —

tr - st (1830-1905) in a restrained Romanesque
&
4 bk
ber TR

modeled on the Parliament Building in
London. The city of Leeds followed suit in
1858 with a city hall designed by Cuthbert
Brodrick. Four law courts were placed at the
corners. Offices for the lawyers were located
between the front and back facades. The
building opened with much fanfare—even
Queen Victoria attended—and soon became
the center of civic life in Leeds. Its design
featured a monumental Corinthian order with
unpedimented entrances on all sides. It is
reminiscent of the Grand Theatre building
(1773-80) by Victor Louis in Bordeaux, and
indeed its attempt to recall the virtues of the
Enlightenment are quite evident. Different
from the Grand Theatre, however, was the

7 ie) 25m addition of a huge tower modeled on the

‘ in : : Hellenistic mausoleum at Halicarnassus,
which, oddly, was surmounted by a slightly
Rococo domed top. This eclecticism, which
was later to be much critiqued, was, however,
part of the exuberance of this new industrial
era, which was seeking freedom from a
slavish commitment to history.

style, with a tall bell tower purposefully
r

+

—,

17.4 Plan: Leeds City Hall, England

17.5 Grand Theatre, Bordeaux, France

17.7 Elevation-section: London Law Courts

London Law Courts

The Victorian era on the whole was still tied
to the Picturesque ideal that architecture had
to be linked creatively to the past in order

to dignify the present. But the Victorians
tended to be less attached to the purity

of Roman or Greek prototypes than the
generation of Robert Adam and John Nash.
They experimented with historical styles that
resonated with the increased archaeological
erudition of the time and with the diverse
philosophical persuasions of their clientele.
George Edmund Street (1824-81), who
designed the London Law Courts (1870-81),
for example, used an early medieval style,
not August Welby Pugin’s high Gothic.
Street chose this style for its more stern and
primitive associations. He and many of the
young architects of the time were enthralled
with the ideals of Gallic toughness. What
today might be seen as medieval, they saw
as Saxon. The Saxons were not known

for their architectural accomplishments,
however, and here the added problem is that
the precedents are more Franco-Norman
than English.

With four different systems of circulation,
the Law Courts building was quite complex
and mirrored the new and expanded horizons
of law. It had eighteen courtrooms, two of
them larger than the others for the more
prominent trials. A private corridor for the
bar circled the building between the courts
and the central hall. Judges were provided

Judges’ corridor

Bar corridor

— Jury room

17.8 London Law Courts

with their own corridor circuit, one-half level
higher than that of the bar; it ran behind the
courtrooms and gave direct access to the
raised daises on which the judges sat in the
courts. A circumferential corridor running
just under that of the judges accommodated
attorneys and had its own doorways into the
courtrooms. The public, considered to be
troublesome and boisterous, was segregated
in its own corridor, which connected to the
upper galleries of the courtroom. The large
portal opening onto the Strand was used
only infrequently for ceremonial purposes.
One entered the building at specialized and

“a

pa]

Ak

monitored entrances that led to staircases
and thus to the proper corridors. The great
hall was not the central element of the
circulation system but was used only by
those already inside the building. Given

the tight packing of rooms and corridors,
ventilation was a major concern, and so
spaces and gaps were left in the compasition
to allow for outdoor ventilation and ventilation
shafts. Whether the building lived up to its
ideology of transparency or obfuscated it

in a labyrinthine system remains a topic of
discussion.

Judges’ entrance

Quadrangle
Se
a Sj =

fer
—

40 imi
a

17.9 Plan: London Law Courts

New development

S
3,
%
2
ft rs
a, B
Train station * : A

Bahnhofstrasse 7

i
is Old city -

ai

17.10 Plan of Zurich, Switzerland

‘0 200m

RAILROAD STATIONS

For most people in England and Europe,
iron, a new material, was best seen in the
spectacular railroad stations of the time.
Representing a new culture of mobility

and exchange, these buildings were not

only marvels of engineering but also new
and imposing additions to the urban
environment. Civil engineers began to
compete with architects as arbiters of taste.
St. Pancras Station in London (1863-76),

for example, contained a volume of space
within its 80-meter span that defied anything
architecture could have striven for previously.
he large steel members were brought to the
construction site by the railroad itself. In front
of the shed, facing the city, was a building
that contained baggage facilities, waiting
rooms, and offices for various functions. By
the 1880s, terminals in England, Germany,
France, the United States, and even in

the colonies, such as Victoria Terminus in
Mumbai (1888), had becorne the symbol of
the age, leading one commentator to write
that train stations were to the European 19th

century what monasteries and cathedrals had
been to the 13th century. Railroad stations
significantly changed the orientation and
configuration of many cities, as railroad lines
usually had to go near cities rather than
through them because of the trains’ smoky
steam engines. Many of these peripheral
railroad stations subsequently developed

into urban hubs in their own right, with

boulevards and rectangular urban blocks.

In Paris, for example,

17.11 Anhalter Bahnhof, Berlin, Germany

were the Gare de Lyon

(gare is the French word for “station”), the
Gare du Nord, the Gare de l'Est, the Gare

d’Austerlitz, the Gare
Gare St. Lazare, all o
economic and social

The rise of the rai
England can be furth:
fact that railroads we
competition with eac

Montparnasse, and the
which changed the
environment of the city.
road station in

er explained by the

re private companies in
other, and therefore

needed grand structures to distinguish them

from their competitor:
differences in the sty!

s. Although there were
les of the front building,

with its portico and waiting rooms, the

main prototype of shed-and-front building
until well into the 20th
r Bahnhof (1872-80) in
sic example of the type.

remained unchange
century. The Anhalte
Berlin is another clas

raat

a

po te RO ES. 4
r f 7

n the colonies, where the English were
monopoly owners of the railways, the stations
were projected as symbols of civilizational
advancement enabled by colonial rule.

he Public Works Department of colonial
ndia, staffed by officers of the trained
English Corps of Engineers, took great pride
in designing not only the large terrninus
stations but also the thousands of smaller
stations that were needed throughout India
for material extraction and transportation of

goods and people. While the larger stations
were equipped with wide spans and rich
decoration, the smaller ones were built

using standardized and rationalized design
schemes both to optimize functionality and to
project a sense of militaristic order.

50m"

17.12 Section: St. Pancras Station, London

17.13 Finnish Athenaeum, Helsinki

THE ATHENAEUM
By the turn of the century, the idea of
associations—citizens coming together
around a particular set of common
interests—had become a social movement
unto itself, reaching into the middle class.
The theoretical underpinnings of this
development can be found in the writing of
Alexis de Tocqueville (1805-59), the French
philosopher and social scientist. He argued
that associations were an important part of
a healthy civil society. Given the contrary
propensity for isolation in the modern world,
society needed to be bound together, he
argued, not through the abstract authority of
the state but through voluntary associations,
educational institutions, newspapers,
and even commercial and manufacturing
associations.

Building on the older mercantile culture
of coffeehouses, the new associations of
the 19th century tended to be pro-urban,
seeing the city, despite its faults and ugliness,
as the symbol of civilization and the place
where the virtues of polity, politeness, and
urbanity could be exercised and maintained.
Associations took many forms: some were
social, others political; some secular, others
religious. Among them were the Natural
History Society, the Mechanic's Institute, the
Architectural Association, the Royal Victoria

Gallery for the Encouragement of Practical
Science, and a rich array of musical groups,
library societies, and philosophical and

charitable organizations.

Before the public library came the

athenaeum. Inspired by Hadrian's
Athenaeum in Rome, which was meant to
emulate the culture of learning associated
with ternples dedicated to Athena,
19th-century athenaeum societies sought to
promote a culture of literary and scientific
learning focused on books, poetry, criticism,
and the like. Their roots were in the
Enlightenment, probably in the 1798 literary
magazine called the Afhenaeum that was
started by the brothers August and Karl
Friedrich Schlegel, pioneers of Indo-European
studies and active advocates of the German
Romantic movement.

A wide diversity of athenaeums sprang
up all over Europe and the United States.
Rather than stick to a specific visual heritage,
athenaeums sought to be very current and
in tune with extant intellectual cultures.
They were modern-day temples of Athena.
Many were designed in the Italianate
manner, while others were Greek Revival.
Some were a mix, such as those in London
and Boston. The Wadsworth Atheneum in
Hartford, Connecticut, is the oldest in the
United States and exhibits a fascinating
blend of diverse architectural idioms. Its
original building, designed by Alexander
Jackson Davis and Ithiel Town in 1842, was
a neo-Gothic building complete with turrets

and a crenelated roofline. Besides a large
fine arts collection, this building housed

the beginnings of what later became the
Hartford Public Library and the Connecticut
Historical Society. In 1910 and 1915, two
new wings were added to house the growing

art collection, one in Tudor Revival style and
the other in a more Italianate Renaissance
mode, both designed by Benjamin Wistar
Morris. In 1934, the museum chose a strong
modernist idiom for its new wing—the first
museum in the United States to adopt
modernism—making the entire structure an
eclectic assemblage.

The athenaeum was an international
movement, with institutions appearing in
the United States, in England, and in other
parts of Europe. The Finnish Athenaeum
(1887) in Helsinki, designed by Theodor
Héjer, demonstrates the emerging scale and
importance of these institutions. The facade
is decorated with statues and reliefs along
with busts of the architect Bramante, the
painter Raphael, and the sculptor Phidias.
On the third floor, the caryatids that support
the pediment symbolize the four classical art
forms: architecture, painting, sculpting, and
music. Between the second-floor windows
are reliefs that represent Finnish and
international artists.


i
17.14 National Gallery, London

NATIONAL MUSEUMS

Before the European Enlightenment, history
was more often than not explained as
mythical genealogies, and as a sequence

of great kings, queens, and military events.
But beginning in the Enlightenment,

history began to be perceived in terms

of a civilizational dynamic and verifiable

data. The original fixation on Rome and
Greece expanded into a fascination with
global history—particularly that of Egypt,
Mesopotamia, China, and India—with nations
such as England, France, and Germany
seeing themselves as the protectors and heirs
of antique values. With William Jones’s 1786
discovery of the linguistic continuity between
Sanskrit and Greek and Latin, comparative
histories, along with theories of “originary”
nations, also began to circulate.

The national museums that now came
into being exemplified the Victorian’s desire—
and capacity—to master the logic of the
expanding concept of history. The Louvre
was among the first of these new museums,
aving been transformed in 1793 from
a private royal collection into a public art
museum open to all citizens free of charge.
Subsequently, Napoleon transformed the
Louvre into an instrument of the state to
strengthen the link between national identity
and the history of civilization. The idea of
the national museum was taken up by the
Prussian king Friedrich Wilhelm II, who built
the Altes Museum in Berlin in 1829. By
the end of the 19th century, the European
Enlightenment conception of nation and
empire was inextricably intertwined with
museum displays and exhibitions.

17.15 French-Egyptian Museum, Cairo

The discovery of dazzling, forgotten ruins,
such as those found at Angkor Wat by

the French in the 1860s, became almost

a competitive sport arnong nations. The
principle of these discoveries was “finders
keepers,” with the finders becoming more
famous than their discoveries: the Elgin
Marbles, from the frieze of the Parthenon,
were named not after the temple but after
the man who had dismantled them and sold
them to the British Museum—Thomas Bruce,
the 7th Earl of Elgin.

The span of time encompassing the
construction of the National Gallery in London
(1861), the Kyoto National Museum (1898),
the Estonian National Museum (1909), and
the National Gallery of Art in Washington,

DC (1931), demonstrates the expanding

role of history in the construction of national
ideologies. At the same time, museums were
built in the colonies to stress the legitimacy
of the colonizer’s presumed civilizing mission
and to enable native peoples to recognize
themselves as differentiated subjects under
the overarching and unifying umbrella of
empire. India’s Government Museum of
Chennai (1851) and Prince of Wales Museum
in Mumbai (1914), as well as the French-
Egyptian Museum in Cairo (1858), are but a
few examples of the complex aspects of the
history of colonialism.

In most cases, these museums were
conceived as Neoclassical structures,
because the claim to classicism and its
associated principles of order and system
were so central to the concept of nationalism
in the 19th century. The National Gallery

of England had an octastyle ternple front.
The imprint of Neoclassicism was so strong
that even in the 20th century, modernism—
apart from a few exceptions—could do little
to challenge it, at least in Europe and the
Americas. In Europe, until the advent of
postmodernism there were few examples of
museums not built in a Neoclassical style.

17.16 Prince of Wales Museum, Mumbai, India

17.17 Sir Joseph Paxton’s sketch
for the Crystal Palace, London

WORLD’S FAIRS

The first industrial exhibition was held in
France in 1801 to search for buyers of
products during an economic depression
that followed the French Revolution. The
English also had such fairs, but on a smaller
scale. The success of these fairs led Henry
Cole (1808-82), a leading advocate of the
necessity for improvement in industrial design
and well-known through his Journal of Design
and Manufactures (1849-52), to argue

that what was needed was not a national
exhibition but a large international one that
could assemble the best goods from the
world over and, at the same time, showcase
England's unique influence in the global
economy. The fair he organized was held in
1851 and took place in a building that came
to be called the Crystal Palace.

he Crystal Palace was designed

and engineered by Sir Joseph Paxton,

an innovative designer of steel and glass
greenhouses. Unlike Henri Labrouste’s
Bibliothéque St.-Genevieve with its custom-
detailed iron elements, or St. Pancras Station
with its massive beams, the Crystal Palace
was composed of thin, lightweight elements
that were mass-produced and assembled
on-site. Tension wires kept the structure from
falling over. The effect was of a building that
seemed almost to be woven; compression
and tension forces were brought into the
open as no other building had ever done
before. Paxton also understood that the

17.18 Plan: Crystal Palace

structure had to be inspiring and so designed
its central element in the form of a long nave
filled with exhibits, trees, and gardens. On
display were the first English mass-produced
machines and products, alongside intricate
handcrafted products from the colonies. The
contradiction between the two reflected the
intellectual mindset of the time. The industrial
bosses marveled at the engineering and mass
production; the Arts and Crafts enthusiasts
pointed to the colonial products as evidence
of what was lost to England. John Ruskin
and Qwen Jones decried the building and
its industrial contents as representing the
superficiality of modern culture, while
extolling the colonial products for their
beauty.

No one had ever seen such a spectacle.
The fair was a phenomenal success:
6 million people visited in the six short
months the exhibition was open. The fair’s
unprecedented triurmph set the stage for
a seemingly endless series of repeats:
the Great Industrial Exhibition of Dublin
(1853), the New York Crystal Palace (1853),
the International Exhibition of London
(1862), the Dublin International Exhibition
(1865), and London's Colonial and Indian
Exhibition (1886). There were still others:
the international exhibitions in Paris in 1855,
1867, 1878, 1889, and 1900; the Centennial
Exhibition in Philadelphia (1876); the World’s
Columbian Exposition in Chicago (1893),
and the World's Exposition at Melbourne,

Australia (1880). And then there were
countless exhibitions held in the colonies and
in non-European countries: in Calcutta and
Jaipur, India (both in 1883); in South Africa
(1887, 1893); in Belgiurn (1894); in Jamaica
(1891); and in Guatemala (1897). A cultural
history of these exhibitions would map out
the core topics of 19th-century modernity,
including the mass-production of space and
goods; the spectacle of display; the rituals of
consumption; and the relationship between
capital, nationalism, imperialism, and
entertainment.

manta

17.19 Interior: Crystal Palace

17.20 Memorial Hall of Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts

GLOBAL ARTS AND CRAFTS
MOVEMENT

No Victorian-era theorist was as widely read
and discussed as John Ruskin. Ruskin
preferred the simpler Italian medieval

style to the more complicated northern
Gothic, because form, he argued, should

be determined by the material of which

it consists and of the way in which it is
constructed. The early medieval period,

he felt, embodied this ethos. Unlike Pugin,
Ruskin was not opposed to the use of

iron, but he much preferred conventional
materials. Disturbed by the rawness of
industrialism, he wanted to bring a new
awareness to the aesthetic intensity of the
architectural surface. The fact that a wall is a
series of layers, he argued, should be shown
as distinctly as possible on the surface. He
was not opposed to thin walls, for example,
but wanted the thinness to be expressed in
the paneling or in the use of a checkered
pattern. Ruskin also asked his readers to
rethink their attitude to the past, looking not
at the question of proportion and order in
the neoclassical sense, nor at the question of
Roman versus nen-Roman motifs, but rather
at the physical and material rationale that
underlies architectural reasoning.

Ruskin's concern for the visual led him to
prefer monolithic columns. He rejected the
use of piers and buttresses, as they interfered
with the visual impact of a form. Mass was
not to be constricted by cold geometry;

rather, it was something to be molded freely
with simple and grand outlines. He very rarely
dealt with interiors and thus rarely asked
questions about program and function. For
Ruskin, the shape of a building—as would
have been significant for Durand—was less
important than the architect's attitude toward
designing it; and a building's tactile surface
and detail were just as important as the plan.
After Ruskin, a generation of architects
began to design in a way that they thought
conformed to his vision of the constructed
world. This entailed a shift away from the
enforced medievalism of Pugin to a more
inventive style for which there is no particular
name apart from the term Ruskinian Gothic.
Among those who worked in this direction
was the firm of Deane and Woodward,
which designed the interior of the Museum
of Natural History at Oxford University
(1853) using exposed Gothic-styled iron,
demonstrating its expressive qualities down
to the rivets holding the elernents together.
The industrial feel is offset by individually
designed capitals with inventive floral motifs
and the use of column clusters to create a
light, transparent appearance. In the United
States, one of the best examples of Ruskinian
Gothic is Memorial Hall (1865-68) at Harvard
University in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Housing a theater and dining hall, it was
designed by William Robert Ware and Henry
Van Brunt. Most of the building is in red brick
accented in a lively manner with yellowish

17.21 Museum of Natural History, Oxford, England

limestone. The roof is stripped in grays,
whites, and reds, with a massive tower rising
over the ensemble.

In this context, a movement sprang
up that defined a middle ground between
socialism and capitalism. Known as the
Arts and Crafts movement, it appealed to
individuality, novelty, and good taste; but it
refined these tendencies into a social and
philosophical position that revolved around
the critique of what many saw as the ethical
vacuum at the center of England’s mercantile
culture. The concern of the Arts and Crafts
was not with the end product of design, and
certainly not with efficiency, but with the
processes shaping the design—there had to
be an intimate connection between design
and production. This position was to have
significant influence on later modernists,
such as Henry Van de Velde, Hermann
Muthesius, Adolf Loos, and Walter Gropius.

Arts and Crafts artists were, for the most
part, resistant to making connections to
industry, as they were frustrated by what they
perceived as the drift toward mechanization.
Perfection of finish, symmetry, and precision
were suspect, since they represented the
denial of the human element. But just
ecause the movement critiqued capitalism
and industrialismn did not mean it was a
riend of the socialists, who for their part
paid little regard to the Arts and Crafts
movement; the socialists’ weapons were the
trade unions, not guilds of bookbinders and
urniture makers. In reality, the Arts and
Crafts appealed more to the disenfranchised
ourgecisie, social utopians, and upper-class
aesthetes than to members of the working
class. In this it was, in essence, an extension
of Victorian ideals that tried to educate the
middle class on the question of taste. Ruskin,
for example, created a museum in Sheffield
that contained carefully assembled objects
intended for the edification of local laborers
and schoolchildren; it displayed paintings,
sculptures, prints, and casts.

Prep

17.23 Government Secretariat, Mumbai, India

Arts and Crafts in India: Indo-Saracenic Style
The Arts and Crafts movement became quite
widespread, reaching Belgium, France,
Germany, the United States, and even some
of the English colonies, particularly India. in
fact, some Arts and Crafts enthusiasts, like
John Lockwood Kipling (father of the author
Rudyard Kipling), moved to India to dedicate
themselves to the cause of preserving and
promoting Indian crafts. Kipling promoted a
new journal on Indian crafts and even started
a school to train young craftsmen.

Late in the 198th century, Gothic Revival
architecture, with its overt message of English
nationalism, seemed increasingly out of place
in India. It was now clear to the English that
India had an architectural history that was
as deep as it was complicated. With scholars
now studying Indian art and architecture,

a new generation of architects began to
experiment with a style that came to be
known as Indo-Saracenic, which adapted
the architectural vocabulary of Islamic or
“Saracenic” architecture to create buildings
such as town halls, libraries, and schools.
The Indo-Saracenic paralleled the attempt in
Egypt to create a neo-Mamluk style. Part of
the Indo-Saracenic ideal was lodged in the
colonial stereotype of the putative “decline”
of Indian civilization. The English claimed
that they had succeeded in conquering India
because Indian civilization in general had

Vt

gone into decay. One of the chief proponents
of this idea was James Fergusson, the first
historian of Indian architecture. Without any
understanding of the functional or conceptual
basis of Indian architecture, Fergusson
classified and evaluated Indian buildings
based on their formal properties and
proposed that Indian architecture periodically
went into decline and that it had thus to be
revived by contact with foreigners.

For John Ruskin, the crucial index of
decline could be mapped by differentiating
between Indian craft and Indian art.

While craftsmen, working in their native
“innocence,” were seen as a positive example
for the English, the Indian arts had, in his
opinion, gone into a decline accompanied

by a downslide in morality. Fearing that

this decline might be due to the corrupting
influence of Europeans, his prescription was
to educate Indian craftsmen in European
aesthetics while preserving and reviving their
craft traditions. European art with Indian craft
in the service of modern colonial buildings
was, therefore, the 19th-century recipe for a
“modern” Indian architecture.

17.24 Victoria Terminus, Mumbai

At this time Bombay (Mumbai) emerged as
the primary port of British India, especially
after the opening of the Suez Canal in
1869. The Northern blockade of Southern
cotton during the U.S. Civil War (1861-65)
suddenly made Bombay the prime exporter
of Indian cotton. New wealth made for new
civic buildings. For the most part, colonial
architects continued to believe that the
English national style of architecture was

still the appropriate style for the buildings

of British India; and in Victorian England,

in the wake of Pugin’s critiques, Ruskinian
Gothic was championed as the special
preserve of Great Britain and its global
colonial culture. All of Bombay's major

civic structures were Ruskinian Gothic: St.
Clair Wilkins’s Secretariat (1867-74) and
his public Works Offices (1869-72) were
followed by John Begg's Post and Telegraph
offices (1871-74), and finally by the Law
Courts (1871-78) by Colonel J. A. Fuller.
Sir Gilbert Scott designed the University
Hall (1869-74) with a semicircular apse
and a rose window in the French decorative
style of the 15th century. His design of the
nearby library was completed with a clock
tower (1878) 80 meters high, modeled after
Giotto’s campanile at Florence. With high-
pitched roof, crenellations, towers, dormers,
and Venetian arches, all these buildings
assembled in a row defined Bombay’s image
as a distinguished colonial outpost.

The most spectacular of the Gothic Revival
buildings was F. W. Stevens's Victoria
Terminus (1878-88), the grand terminus and
offices of the Central Railway. The design
derives from Gilbert Scott's St. Pancreas
Station in London, although with its fanciful
Gothic detailing, polychromatic stone,
decorative tile, marble, and stained glass,
it arguably exudes a certain un-English
exuberance and excess, symptomatic
perhaps of growing English interest in
Indian ornamental details. The largest
British building in India at that time, Victoria
Terminus was a success with the English
public and, quite appropriately given the
city’s success as a center of import and
export, immediately became the iconic image
of Bombay.

One of the most celebrated atternpted
translations of Arts and Crafts ideals into
the practice of architecture in India was
undertaken by Colonel Swinton Jacobs. An
engineer by training, Jacobs worked in the
“princely state” of Jaipur, in Rajasthan, for
more than forty years, frorn 1867 to 1912.
(Princely states were nominally independent
but governed by local rulers who were subject
to the oversight of the British Empire.) Jacobs
believed that draftsmen trained to accurately
copy full-size details from examples of
Indian architectural history would come to
appreciate the intrinsic quality of their own
culture. His Jeypore Portfolio of Architectural

17.25 National Art Gallery, Government
Museum of Chennai, India (formerly the
Victoria Technical Institute Building)

17.26 Sample drawing from the
Jeypore Portfolio of Architectural Details

Deiails (1890) was a collection of individual
folio sheets that a craftsrman could look at
and study. All the examples, however, were
drawn from Islamic architecture.

17.27 Mubarak Mahal, Jaipur, India

A building often attributed to Jacobs but
probably designed by one of his personally
trained disciples, Lala Chiran Lal, was the
Mubarak Mahal (1899), located within the
palace compound of Jaipur. A ceremonial
reception hall, the Mubarak Mahal was also
a museum comprising a two-story cubic
volume with projecting porches. It is a case
study in Indo-Saracenic ornamentation:

on the upper story, a fanciful filigree of
carefully executed embellishment outlines
the cantilevered balcony that runs around
the entire perimeter of the structure, and on
the lower story individual bays, conceived as
display cases, self-consciously stage distinct
ornamental details. The entire program,
layout, and proportions and divisions of the
structure—in short, its aesthetic—derived
from the European tradition. Only in its details
was it Indian.

Robert F. Chisholm (1840-1915)
belonged to the generation of professional
architects who believed more in exploring
their professional freedom than in following
designs from ideological strictures. It was this
search that led him inevitably to eclecticism.
His unbuilt design for the Bombay Municipal
Hall competition, for example, called for a
three-story volume with a large central dorne
that was based on the Taj Mahal. Chisholm
did not hesitate to open up the dome at
the base with tall arched openings that
necessitated an internal structural system
made of steel. Smaller dares on octagonal
bases terminated the corners of the main

cubic volume. The corners were further
emphasized by the suggestion of turrets
created by faceting the edges, with a string
of moldings close to the ground that flare

out slightly at the base, as, for instance,

in the Hindu Victory Tower at Chittorgarh.
The overall conception of the massing is
reminiscent of Henry Hobson Richardson’s
Trinity Church in Boston. The centerpiece of
the elevation changes at every level: a porch
supported by paired columns on the ground
floor, surmounted by a narrow balcony on
the second floor and finished with a wide,
double-height arch surmounted by a Bengal-
style drooping roof integrated into the cornice
ine. No part of the design was left untouched
by careful attention to detail.

Arts and Crafts enthusiasts and the
ndo-Saracenics did not make much of an
impression on the local Indian maharajas
in their personal commissions. Sawai Ram
Singh (r. 1835-80) brazenly continued to
have his workmen build imitation, hybridized,
European-style buildings, such as his Town
Hall in Jaipur. Singh was a wily character. He
had used the typical colonial misrecognition
of his relationship with his feudatories to
his advantage, making his feudatories, who
usually served as checks on his authority,
submissive to hirn on the basis of the
representation he had among his English
backers. For maharajas who, like the babus,
had no paternalistic project in mind, the
identifiable style of power was European.

17.28 Jaipur Town Hall, India

17.29 Robert F. Chisolm’s winning entry for the
Bombay Municipal Hall

Saat

17.30 Gamble House, Pasadena, California

Arts and Crafts in California
In California, Arts and Crafts underwent its
most vigorous transformation and its longest
period of vibrancy, fusing with Spanish-
Mexican motifs as well as elements from
the Italian Mediterranean and the Far East.
Linked to its development was a public
school system strongly committed to manual-
arts education and in particular to the belief
that the union of head and heart through
handicraft yielded therapeutic benefits. Local
libraries organized sketch clubs and hosted
exhibitions of local craft production.
Elements from the local landscape and
flora were also quite strong in the California
Arts and Crafts. Whether depicting golden
poppies, the Torrey pines, the redwoods, or
the sublime majesty of the Yosemite Valley,
California’s Arts and Crafts artists extolled
the state’s natural beauty and were much
more intimately associated with the outdoors
than their counterparts in England and the
northeastern United States. Many of their
houses exploited the fine views and outdoor
living afforded by the natural settings. These
Arts and Crafts houses featured deliberate
blurring of interior and exterior space through
the use of decks, pergolas, porches, and
terraces. The English-style medievalism in
these houses gave way to an aesthetic of
primitivism embodied, for example, in the
writings of Jack London, author of The Cait
of the Wifd (1903). London's own house
in Sonoma’s Valley of the Moon was a
prime example of Arts and Crafts domestic
architecture: redwood, timber with bark left

on, huge halls, and giant fireplaces. The
Gamble House by Charles Sumner Greene
and Henry Mather Greene (Pasadena,
California, 1908-9) is an excellent example
of the use of Japanese motifs. The stepping-
stone path across the yard, the battered
retaining wall, and an airy elevated porch
are all inspired by Japanese precedents. The
house rests on a broad terrace that extends
the space of the living rooms outward toward
the gardens and lawns. The house also

was designed in relationship to the existing
majestic eucalyptus trees. Inside, from lamps
to furniture to carpets, not a single detail

is left unattended. As was cornmmon in Arts
and Crafts, but rarely achieved on this scale,
furniture, built-in cabinetry, paneling, wood
carvings, rugs, lighting, and leaded stained
glass were all custom-designed by the
architects.

17.32 Interior: Gamble House

he plan was unusual. A hall with a staircase
bisected the entire building, with the living room
and den on one side and the dining room,
kitchen, and a guest bedroom on the other side.
he principal upstairs bedrooms had sleeping
porches overlooking the garden. Unlike Shingle
Style houses with their steeply pitched roofs,
the roofs here are very flat, seeming to float over
the building; the shadows frorn the overhangs
emphasize the horizontal layering of space. On
the interior, the heavy wooden beams were left

exposed, but they were smoothed and polished
to bring out the material's yellowish warmth. The
ceilings are plain white in the Japanese style and
stand out against the wood framing. Art Nouveau
touches on the lamps, stained glass, and rugs
add a layer of urban sophistication. The house
was designed as a retirernent residence for David
and Mary Gamble of Cincinnati, Ohio. David,

a second-generation member of the Procter &
Gamble Company, a leading soap manufacturer,
had retired in 1895.

9 lon

17.31 First-floor plan:
Gamble House


17.33 Plan of Central Park, New York City

CENTRAL PARK

Building on the Romantic associations with
nature as integral to the development of
citizenship, by the early 19th century urban
parks were widely recognized as an important
indicator of a city's livability. Although not
included in the original Commissioners’
Plan of 1811, New York City’s Central Park
(1853-83) was not only the nation’s first
and largest urban park, but it also became
the model of American landscape design.
Won in an open competition, Central Park
was the very first commission of the famous
landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted
(1822-1903). Olmsted began his career

as a journalist and was influenced first by
his dispatches from Europe, where he was
particularly impressed by the new urban
parks, such as Birkenhead Park in England
by Joseph Paxton of Crystal Palace fare,
and subsequently by his travels in the
South, where he carefully documented and
commented on the adverse effects of the
slave economy.

Central Park was championed by Andrew
Jackson Downing, an advocate of landscape
design and a famous critic of industrialization
and urbanization, as well as a mentor to
Olmsted. Downing (1815-52), influenced
by Picturesque ideas as well as the growing
moralism of the early Victorian era, saw
in landscapes more than just beauty. He
saw the garden as something more than a
convenient stage for setting up monuments
to heroes, as it was at Stowe Gardens in
Buckinghamshire, England. Landscape, so
Downing held, strengthened character and
supported the integrity of the farnily. The
intimate house garden, he argued, served
as a civilizing and protective veil around the
house and helped it to blend as naturally as
possible into the landscape. At the time, the
area around most large cities in the United
States had been radically deforested to make
way for farms. In 1845, when Henry David

Thoreau lived for two years in solitude next to
Walden Pond in Massachusetts in an attempt
to immerse himself in nature, the pond was
one of the few areas for many miles around
surrounded by trees. Downing believed that
one could bring nature to the city in the form
of parks, but only if they were big enough to
simulate a landscape—albeit one that had
been tamed and brought into balance with
human needs.

When Downing was killed in a stearnboat
explosion on the Hudson River in 1852,
Olmsted joined with Calvert Vaux to submit
the competition entry for the park. Vaux was
an English architect who had come to the
United States to work with Downing. The
3.4-square-kilometer park, in the heart of
Manhattan, was built on land occupied by
free slaves and Irish immigrants, who were
forcibly evicted. The park was not raw nature,
but a carefully constructed vision of it. This

involved vast amounts of cut and fill work, the

planting of millions of trees, the construction
of thirty-six bridges, and the creation of
meadows, forests, hilltop lookouts, castles,
sheep farms, skating rinks, and eateries.

In keeping with the Romantic Picturesque
tradition, a flock of pedigreed Dorset sheep
were maintained in a specially designated
meadow. Two major reservoirs stored water
for the city. Underneath was an elaborate
drainage system.

Olmsted and Vaux were at constant
loggerheads with the park’s commissioners
to ensure that the park was maintained as a
democratic space accessible to all. Although

first years, it went into severe decline around
the turn of the century. In 1934, Robert
Moses cleaned up and restored the park as
part of his drive to transform New York City.
Olmsted, Vaux and Company, founded
in 1861, also designed parks in Milwaukee,
Wisconsin; Buffalo, New York; and other
cities. The firm was inherited by Olmsted's

Central Park attracted 10 million visitors in its <)

sons, John Charles Olmsted (1852-1920)
and Frederick Law Olmsted Jr. (1870-1957),
who developed it into one of the largest and
most influential landscape firms of the time.
They designed numerous well-known projects
such as Acadia National Park, Yosemite
National Park, and Atlanta’s Piedmont Park,
as well as the complete park systems of cities
such as Portland and Seattle.

17.34 Plan of Manhattan

How the urban fabric was
cleared to make way for
the Avenue de l'Opéra

}
in

ia) 200 mi
: ‘

17.35 Plan of Haussmann’s Paris b>
/ cS Theatre Francais

17.36 Street view: Haussmann’s Paris

PARIS AND HAUSSMANN
After Napoleon's defeat in 1815, the
monarchy was restored in France and
lasted in various forms until 1848, when
another major popular revolt in the streets of
Paris—immortalized by Victor Hugo in Les
Miserables—led to the establishment of the
Second Republic. Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte
was elected president of the Second
Republic, and in 1852 a plebiscite was held
that gave him supreme power, with the title
of emperor, as Napoleon III (1808-73). He
promptly canceled the independence of
parliament and rolled back advancements
that had been made in the name of universal
suffrage, free press, and education. Public
institutions were strictly supervised, the
teaching of philosophy in the high schools
was suppressed, and the power of the
government was increased.

Initially, the fortunes of France seemed
restored. The country emerged victorious
in the Crimean War (1854-56) and then
went on to build the Suez Canal (1854-69).
Napoleon II| was eager to translate these
successes into architectural form and, even
more, to make Paris into the “capital of the
19th century.” His agent of change was
Georges-Eugéne Haussmann (1809-91),
whose vision for Paris, like Napoleon Ill’s, was
unmistakably big. Unlike earlier urban design
approaches—as in Rome under Sixtus V,
and in Washington, DC—that used straight
boulevards in relationship to major buildings
such as palaces and churches, Haussmann’s
new streets were laid out according to
pragmatic and economic considerations.
They had to be built, however, by destroying
large parts of medieval Paris and displacing
thousands of inhabitants, mainly from the
lower classes.

17.37 Paris Opera House, France

Though there was some atternpt to integrate
the new streets with the old, little was spared
and entire neighborhoods were wiped out.
The new streets were lined with apartments
and provided with sewage pipes and gas
lines. To forestall conflagrations, the use of
stone for buildings, once the privilege of the
rich, was now common throughout the new
parts of the city. Haussmann’s Paris would
become the model for cities around the
world, such as Buenos Aires, Cairo, Rome,
and Saigon. “Haussmannization,” which
impeded effective blockading of streets, is
sometimes blamed for the suppression of the
Paris Commune in the street revolts of 1871.
One of the centerpieces of the new Paris
was the Opera House (1861-75), set at the
intersection of several radiating streets. It
was designed by Charles Garnier (1825-98),
a young architect who was only thirty-six
years old when he won the competition.
Earlier, he had won the Prix de Rome,
demonstrating that even a workingman’s son
could gain access to the new professional
class. Garnier’s design combines the double
columnar colonnade from the Louvre with
elements from Michelangelo's facade on the
Campidoglio, blending the royal symbolism

that would have appealed to Napoleon III with

the republican symbolism of Michelangelo's
work. The front, when taken as a whole,
could also be seen as a very wide triurnphal
arch. In this way, the building successfully

negotiated the complex political situation of
its times without referring to Rome or Greece
in any direct way. Like the London Law
Courts, this building had multiple programs
and circulation systems. The impressive
front entrance was for the public arriving on
foot. Those arriving by coach entered on the
right-hand side. Performers and members
of the opera administration entered at the
rear. There was a special side entrance for

\

17.38 Grand Staircase: Paris Opera House

the emperor, to which he could roll up in his
coach and go directly indoors. Structurally the
building is of steel, but the steel is rendered
invisible by stone and brick. The staircase
that lies between the entrance narthex and
the theater is itself a three-dimensional
theater intended to allow opera goers to see
and be seen, the encounters themselves
constituting an elaborate social ritual.

17.39 Ground floor plan: Paris Opera House

WE aaa as acca
Galleria Vittorio Emanuele Il +

17.40 Galleria Vittorio Emanuele II, Milan, Italy

THE PASSAGE

Besides train stations and industrial fairs, the
building type that perhaps best epitomized
the Industrial Revolution and its new culture
of mass consumption was the shopping
gallery. These buildings were places where
one could see firsthand not only the wealth
of the global marketplace but also the use

of new building materials, metal and glass.
At the beginning of the 19th century, most
shops differed very little from those of
medieval times—a window or counter faced
the street, and there was a small enclosure
where business could be transacted. The

fall in the price of glass made large shop
windows possible, and they appeared at

the end of the 1820s in Landon, Paris, and
lew York. In Paris, shopping streets—called
galeries or passages—were soon designed
with rows of shops under a single glazed roof.
By the end of the 19th century, passages

or their equivalents could be found in most
European cities. At first they were on a single
loor, but soon they were built on two or
more levels. They provided security for shop
owners as well as convenience for shoppers:
most 19th-century cities were noisy and
chaotic, and the streets unpaved. Passages

offered protected enclaves for bourgeois
patrons.

Marking the zenith of this building type
was the Galleria Vittorio Emanuele II in
Milan, a building that became a symbol of
the young nation. Its entrance was located
facing the piazza in front of the Duomo,
the facade of which had only been finished
in 1806. The planning of the piazza had
Stalled for decades, but it was revived with
the unification of Italy in 1859. Almost
irmmediately the designing of the galleria was
put into motion, and when it was opened
in 1867, it was seen as an engineering and
urban marvel.

The building, whose four wings meet at
a great, glasse
on the interior,
existing structures around it. There are seven
floors, not including the cellar, with a network
of concealed intersecting supports that

dome, is completely regular
ut it dovetails with the older

allow for a flexible use of space. Staircases
are located at the rear and are accessible
through courtyards so as not to disturb

the visual unity of the facades. The main
staircases are located at the reentrant angles
of the crossings. The third floor is reserved
for club rooms, offices, and studios, while the
uppermost floors are residential. More than
just a shopping arcade, this building is an
urban entity in itself.

17.43 Galeries St. Hubert, Brussels

ECOLE DES BEAUX-ARTS
Throughout the 19th century, Europe's
prime school for the study of architecture
was the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris.
Though intended for French citizens, it was
by the end of the 19th century visited by
students from around the world, creating a
cadre of devotees who spread the school's
pedagogical system and architectural style to
places around the globe. Its influence could
still be felt in American architectural schools
well into the 1940s. The Beaux-Arts was
originally founded as the Académie Royale
d’Architecture in Paris in 1671 by Jean-
Baptiste Colbert, minister of Louis XIV, who
envisioned it as a place that would create
the talent necessary for the king’s cornplex
building program. The French Revolution
ended the royal acadernies, but in 1803,
architectural education resumed, mainly
to prepare students for state-sponsored
architectural competitions. The founding
of the Société Centrale des Architects in
1840 made architecture into an academic
profession similar to law and medicine. The
Société ended the aristocratic system of
patronage. It was also the death knell of the
gentleman architect (though that tradition
had always been stronger in England than in
France). This is important to note, because
even though the academic style of the French
was much criticized by the moderns of the
20th century, the Ecole elevated architecture
to an autonomous and structured discipline.
With that autonomy came new and
complex theoretical questions about the
nature of architectural production. Should
one use new materials like steel and glass?
And if so, how? What is the relationship
between the identity of a nation, its history,
and its architecture? By mid-century these
issues became quite divisive. On the one
side stood defenders of idealized classicism
such as Quatremére de Quincy; on the other
were the Romantics such as Henri Labrouste,
with their flexible understanding of history.
The conflict broke into the open with the
appointment of Eugene-Emmanuel Viollet-le-
Duc in 1863 as professor of the history of art
and aesthetics. He supported the use of iron
in buildings, which many French architects
resisted.

[ paeean S-Seiemnentbeememenrs om pikerkoisiiiieten aun memmnern ath cammeees coon
1 _ : :

epdee eek

1
t
t aw
t T rT
if
1
{
bee
o-a
Se a
pera aif, sence
ee ees .
7 ot i
t i
! 5
1 :
i t
Ss '
ef peppers: -

ae Peerereees
1!

L:

roc r
!

Tt:
. 1

so. te

Me or

34 —41-4

bce ved PRET |

” ee)
ah eb a
: 1
: i
L
: -
: 1
? ‘
: pan
wreptgee Pe ake a

Berens

ovah.

17.44 Design for a supreme court, Henri Labrouste, awarded the Prix de Rome in 1824

His appointment was short-lived, however,
and by the 1880s the school became known
as a champion of an eclectic style that
was Picturesque in its massing but that,
nevertheless, remained committed to the
tradition of clean and rectilinearly organized
plans. Students who were enrolled in the
school received much of their education
outside of its walls. In fact, their principal
learning took place in the atelier. The senior
members of the field all employed students
as cheap labor; in return, they educated
them in the principles of design. Naturally,
quality varied, as did style, and students
therefore tended to choose those with

whom they felt most compatible. Lectures
were given at the school, yet attendance
was voluntary, and no course examinations
were given. Advancement depended on
winning points in the monthly cornpetition in
composition, construction, perspective, and
mathematics.

For a student, the pinnacle of success
was winning the annual Prix de Rome,
permitting him to live and study at the
Villa Medici for one year. The competition
took place in three stages and lasted for
several months. Students had to develop a
twelve-hour sketch (or esquisse) solving a

design problem that had been set out by

the professor of theory,

leading to a more

substantial presentation (or charrette),

named for the carts in

which the students

carried their material to the school. The

authors of the best eig!

t were then given

about three months, usually until the end
of July, to develop a projet rendu (finished
drawing). It was from these that a winner was

chosen. Drawings mad
of the competition cou
measured 5 meters in

Of particular irnport

le for the final stage

id be very large; some
length.

lance to the Beaux-Arts

conception of design was the ground plan.

It had to be functionally

clear and formally

coherent, and it was usually composed

of intersecting rectang

les organized

symmetrically along a central axis. There

was a strong desire to

alance buildings

with courtyards and sol

ids with voids. The

arrangement of spaces—the differentiation
between primary and secondary—was known

as the parti.

17.45 Athenaeum for a capital city, Henri-Paul Nénot, awarded first prize in 1877 by the
Ecole des Beaux-Arts in a competition for assembly rooms, a library, and a greenhouse

Beaux-Arts plans have a set of unique
characteristics:

1. Symmetry is stressed, and where there
is asymmetry, it must be worked into the
larger whole.

2. Axiality is important; the most important
spaces must be on axis and clearly
emphasized in space and proportion.

3. Cross-axes are used to distribute and
organize the program.

4. There should be a clear hierarchy of the
major and minor parts of the program.
There should be no hidden spaces, but a
gradation of importance.

5. At the center of the composition should be
a great hall, the dimensions of which relate
to the building's overall proportions.

6. Repeating elements should be unified to
support the overall planning.

7. The relationships between open and closed
spaces and among buildings, courtyards,
and surrounding gardens should be
resolved into an integrated whole.

8. The decorative elements should be in
accordance with the programm. Civic
buildings should show restraint; opera
houses, ebullience.

Henri Labrouste’s proposed design for a
supreme court from 1824 and Henri-Paul
Nénot's design for an athenaeum from 1877
exhibit similar characteristics. Nénot’s project
is designed around an assembly room that
opens onto a grand longitudinally placed
plaza that provides the outer dimension for
the scheme. The assembly room is placed
at the end of a series of halls to emphasize
its importance. Secondary reading rooms are
placed to the right and left of the main halls.
The asymmetrical elernents are balanced,

and the gardens, which frame the entire
building, are integrated into the scheme. The
building, set off from the boulevard by its
grand plaza, is sited at a street intersection
and is the culminating axial element of that
street. Yet the presence of all these elements
alone does not necessarily declare the
building as an example of Beaux-Arts. The
design for the U.S. Capitol (1793) by Charles
Bulfinch, for example, is Neoclassical but
has an asymmetrical interior with an oval
space rather awkwardly lodged between the
rotunda and the senate chamber. From the
perspective of a Beaux-Arts architect, this
would be unacceptable.


CHETTINAD MANSIONS

After the fall of the Cholas in the 14th
century, the Chettiars, originally gem dealers,
ship chandlers, and salt merchants in the
Chola Empire, settled in about seventy-five
villages around a single ternple near present-
day Karaikudi in south-central India, in an
area called Chettinad. They were among

the first local communities to befriend the
new English traders, and in the late 19th
century they spread into Southeast Asia—
particularly into Burma, Malaysia, Indonesia,
and Ceylon—becoming wealthy money
lenders and diamond merchants and often
working as official agents of the British East
India Company. After World War II, when

the British withdrew, the Chettiars were
deported in large numbers from the newly
independent countries of Southeast Asia;
some returned to India, and many others
settled in the United Kingdom. Through

the late 19th and early 20th centuries,

the Chettiars repatriated significant sums.

of money back to their Chettinad villages,
resulting in the construction of thousands of
mansions. Designed to look European on the
outside, they were on the interior distinctly
more local, with a touch of the Indonesian in
feel and design. The exteriors of the typically
two-story structures were often Italianate

in style, with columns, and entablatures in
painted stucco on brick. Inside there was
usually a long impfuvium-style courtyard with

columns made of Burmese teak, polished or
lacquered in black or blue. Some columns
were of Italian marble. The interior space
was dominated by a high-pitched roof that
dramatically sloped into the central courtyard.

17.47 Courtyard, Chettinad House, Tamil, India

17.48 Sultan Hassan, Al-Rifa‘i, and Mahmoud Pasha Mosques, Cairo

COLONIAL MODERNISM
hough the history of non-European
modernism is generally thought to begin
early in the 20th century with the spread
of Art Deco (along Mumbai's Marine Drive,
or instance), it actually commences in
the second half of the 19th century, often
still under the shadow of colonialism.
he interrelated concepts of a “colonial
modernity” and a “colonial modernism’—.
as the global crucibles of the genesis of
modernism—are only just beginning to be
theorized and understood.

This was true for Egypt, one of the
first Arab countries to atternpt to reinvent
itself by means of modern ideas. The neo-
Mamluk style began to develop when Egypt
proclaimed itself independent from the
Ottoman sultanate in 1833 and needed an
image that was both modern and Egyptian.
Sa‘id Pasha (r. 1854-63), Muhammad ‘Ali's
son and third successor, and especially
Isma‘il Pasha (r. 1863-79), his grandson,
were the architects of Egypt's freedom
from the Ottomans. Isma‘il was fascinated
by French culture, so much so that he
adopted French manners in his personal
life and encouraged his entourage to follow
suit. He also was an impatient modernizer
who wanted to turn Egypt into an extension
of Europe, despite adverse economic
circumstances. The country’s foreign debt,
however, spun out of control. Bankruptcy was
declared in 1879, leading to its occupation by
the British in 1882.

Isma‘il's passion for Europeanization can

be understood as mimicry or as local
modernism, as in any other part of the
world. Inspired by his visit to the Exposition
Universelle in Paris in 1867, he tried to turn
his own capital into another Paris, complete
with wide, straight avenues planted with
trees, planned gardens, pavilions, and all
the amenities of modern city life, such as
theaters, cafés, and even an opera house.
He commissioned his minister of public
works, Ali Pasha Mubarak, a member of the
academic mission of 1844-49 to France and
one of the most influential figures in modern
Egyptian history, to draw up the city’s new
master plan.

With the exception of two boulevards—
Shari Muhammad ‘Ali and al-Sikka al-Jadida
(New Avenue or Shari’ al-Muski)—that
cut across the old city's dense fabric and
required the razing of many medieval
structures, the new city extended westward
toward the Nile along a north-south axis, with
streets radiating from central squares to form
star patterns a la Haussmann. This Parisian-
style Cairo was built in haste to impress the
European monarchs who had been invited to
Egypt for the inauguration of the Suez Canal
in 1869—among them Empress Eugénie,
wife of Napoleon Ill.

After the English set up a puppet state
in 1882, the neo-Mamluk style, also known
as neo-lslamic, remained dominant, relating
contemporary Egyptian architecture to a
glorious phase of its history. One of the

17.49 Plan of Cairo, ca. 1874

monumental examples, as studied by Nasser
Rabbat, the noted scholar of Islamic history,
is al-Rifa‘i Mosque, constructed in two
stages, between 1869 and 1880, and 1906
and 1911. The first stage was designed

and supervised by the Egyptian architect
Hussein Fahmi, the second by the Austro-
Hungarian Max Herz, with others hired as
consultants and interior designers. The plan
is a rendering of Beaux-Arts ideas: axiality,
the rationalization of the spaces, and the
interlocking of solids and voids.

17.50 Plan: Al-Rifa‘i Mosque

17.51 Trinity Church, Boston

HENRY HOBSON RICHARDSON

By the late 1830s, the Greek Revival had
become without question the adopted style
of the United States, and it remained so up
to the Civil War. The simplicity, ideological
coherence, and the ease with which its forms
could be copied in brick and wood by local
carpenters contributed greatly to its success.
It had little competition from the Gothic

style, which in the United States, unlike in
Europe, had few major representatives. The
result was a fluid movement from the Greek
Revival to a French-derived style known

as Second Empire. With its compositional
emphasis on vertical pavilions and classically
derived ornamentation, the Second Empire
remained an important subcurrent until well
into the advent of modernism. In the 1880s
and 1890s, a group of architects began to
chart their own way, however, bringing out
latent ideas of the Picturesque while trying
to match this aesthetic with the needs of
rising the mercantile class. These architects
were Frank Furness in Philadelphia, Louis
Sullivan in Chicago, and Henry Hobson
Richardson in Boston. All developed very
distinctive approaches. Furness brought to
the United States many of Viollet-le-Duc’s
ideas about integrating iron into design.
Sullivan stressed bold simplicity combined
with rich ornamentation in his buildings. And
Richardson's work from the late 1870s to the
mid 1890s came to be seen by many as a
style unto itself.

When Richardson (1838-86) was young he
had intended to become a civil engineer,
but he switched to architecture while
studying at Harvard. In 1859, he began

to study at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts and
remained in Paris for five years. Because
of his Parisian training, Richardson was
well suited to serve the needs of the rising
Class of new businessmen who wanted to
see their success endorsed by the currently
fashionable style of cosmopolitan Paris. But
by the 1870s, Richardson was increasingly
drawn to the English medieval style and to
the Picturesque, attempting to synthesize
their disparate and even contradictory
aspects. Richardson's plans, for example,
maintain the clarity typical of the Beaux-
Arts, while his attention to the tactility and
color of the building’s stone surface evoke
a tactility more in line with Queen Anne
style and Ruskinian Gothic. Richardson

closely collaborated with landscape architect

Frederick Law Olmsted on many of his
projects.

In 1872 Richardson achieved national
prominence by having been selected to
build Trinity Church in Boston. It was set
on a triangular site, designed in a soft
pink limestone accented by dark brown
stones for the columns, entablatures, and
cornices. Though a small building, the
generously scaled windows of the facade,
compared to the small windows of the
tower, make the composition seem both

hag ~~

reese mo tence

= Parish house =

a ae.

Church,

201m

is}

17.52 Plan: Trinity Churc!

17.53 Porch, Trinity Church

<= >

17.54 Winn Memorial Public Library, Woburn, Massachusetts

intimate and dynamic. Trinity Church's
porch, facade, and crossing tower step
back in clear volumetric hierarchy. The
porch, added after the building’s completion
but built to Richardson’s specifications,
was modeled loosely on the church of

St. Trophime in Arles, France, whereas

the tower, very wide and spanning the
entire width of the nave, was modeled on
French and Spanish medieval buildings,
including the 12th-century tower of the
Cathedral of Salamanca in Spain. Though
the building's style, in its massing and
detailing, is neo-Romanesque, its plan is

a Latin cross, with an apse at the eastern
end. The focus of the church is the tall and
airy crossing of the interior which is one

of the best preserved examples of the Arts
and Crafts style, consciously infused here

with a neo-Byzantine element. The interior,

though relatively dark, is permeated by

the muted light of stained glass windows

in red, blue, and brown tones that wash

against the wall's golden surfaces. Originally,

a huge candelabra hung from the center

of the crossing. Overall, the building is an

excellent example of a blend between the

neo-Romanesque and the Arts and Crafts

movement.
Richardson was fortunate that his.

mature career coincided with the rise of

the American public library movement.
The flowering of public education and the
spread of interest in cultural developments

in England and the United States led to the
creation of many towns’ lending libraries. It
was a highly successful experiment in making
the printed word accessible to a general
audience—a unique idea in the world at

the time. Richardson's libraries have a loose
exterior picturesqueness meant to contrast
with the clarity of the plan, as, for example, at
the Winn Memorial Public Library in Woburn,
Massachusetts (1876-79).

The plan is organized around a barrel-vaulted
longitudinal library space with book-lined
alcoves along the sides. It is adjoined by a
transept-like reading room, at the head of
which is a picture gallery and an octagonal
museum. The building is entered from the
side along a tall tower with Gothic-style
tracery in its upper ranges. For the walls,
Richardson, meticulous in his choice of
materials, ordered red sandstone from a
quarry in Massachusetts. The column bases
and horizontal bands are of a cream-colored
sandstone from Ohio, all set on a granite
base. For the ornamental carvings of the
capitals and corbels, Richardson brought in a
Welsh sculptor.

\O

17.56 Plan: Winn Memorial Public Library

at.

Kechen

:

Din 9g “oom
Becrea~

me

Hall
Lisaing rocm

Eis

Porch

i. oa dom

17.57 Typical bungalow floor plan

THE GLOBAL BUNGALOW

One of the most visible manifestations of the
global colonial economy was the development
and spread of the bungalow. The bungalow
(the word derives from the Bengali word
bangla) was first used by the English
colonists in India as a type of garden and
plantation house. Most had a single ridge roof
that overhung the house, creating a porch
called the verandah (originally a Hindi word).
The verandah served as an intermediate
space where colonizer and colonized could
interact. In tropical climates it was also the
most comfortable space of the house. In
time, bungalows added an entrance porch,
which had to be large enough to receive a
carriage. The interior space was designed
around a central room with bedrooms directly
off to the sides, and toilets and kitchens in
the back so that they could be serviced by
the local staff. Servant quarters were built

at a distance in the back of the garden.

The colonial bungalow spread as a type
throughout the tropical colonies in the late
18th and early 19th centuries.

As a symbol of the good life, the bungalow
was exported back to England and soon
could be found in the United States as well,
in the form of the detached, single-family
residential dwelling that could be easily
built on small parcels. Climate and lifestyle
dictates did not allow the core properties of
the colonial bungalow to be exported, but its

17.58 Typical block of bungalows

image was variously translated as it spread.
The noncolonial bungalow was usually a
single-story house (though sometime it

had two floors) of modest scale, with a low
overhanging roof and a porch running along
its front. Many subcategories evolved. The
California bungalows—which were among
the earliest in the United States, dating from
about the 1880s onward—cormmonly have
wood shingles, horizontal siding, or stucco
exteriors, as well as brick chirmneys. The
so-called Chicago bungalow, which was
popular between 1910 and 1940, was often
made of brick. In many cases, the bungalow
was inexpensive to build and did not need
an architect. Furthermore, with its space-
saving layout, it appealed to middle-class
owners who could not afford live-in servants.
The kitchen was compact and located next
to the dining room. The walls were usually
wallpapered, whereas the trim for the doors
and windows was dark-stained oak.

In the 1880s, the bungalow became
associated with the Arts and Crafts
movement, and indeed many bungalows
were built in the so-called American
Craftsman style, which was a reaction against
the overdecorated aesthetic of the Victorian
era. Though the Arts and Crafts emphasized
the handmade over the mass-produced,
and some early bungalows followed in this
aesthetic, the bungalow was soon nothing
less than an industrialized product. In fact,

by the turn of the 20th century, an entire
house could be ordered through catalogues;
the bungalow was then shipped by rail

or boat to be assembled on-site. Doors,
windows, and built-in furnishings such

as bookcases, desks, and folding beds
could also be purchased from mail-order
catalogues. The bungalow was spread as part
of the suburbanization of the American city,
with whole bungalow districts appearing in
many U.S. cities.

SHINGLE STYLE
Unique to the United States, and parallel
to the Arts and Crafts movement, but more
closely allied with the Queen Anne style,
was the development of what is now called
the Shingle Style. Houses designed in this
manner—often as summer homes for the
New England elite—show an inventiveness in
plan, with elements not merely touching each
other but seeming to pass through or overlap
with each other. The firm that developed this
style more than any other was McKim, Mead
& White (founded 1879), which eventually
became one of the leading design firms in
the United States.
William Rutherford Mead (1846-1928),
who had an affinity for the Renaissance,
and Stanford White (1853-1906) had little
formal training, but they worked their way
up as apprentices. Charles Follen McKim
(1847-1909), by contrast, had studied at the


a SS
17.59 Isaac Bell House, Newport, Rhode Island

Ecole des Beaux-Arts. Between the three they
produced a style of architecture that brought
out the best in each of them. One of their
innovations in their Shingle Style homes was
to take the rooms of the servants’ quarters
out from under the attic and place thern

in a compact block or wing, against which
the more openly designed living rooms of
the first floor were contrasted. This can be
seen in the Isaac Bell House (1882-83) in
Newport, Rhode Island, where the staircase
was situated in a large room that served as a
circulation center and as a spatial extension
of the neighboring study and drawing
rooms. This makes it different from the more
controlled and boxy spaces of Arts and
Crafts houses. Even though it was common
to raise the first floor above the level of the
ground, the use of porches made the house
appear as if were resting on an elevated
terrace, protected from the sun and rain by
generously proportioned overhangs and roofs.
The vertical surfaces of the houses were
completely clad in wooden shingles, using

a variety of possible patterns to differentiate
certain elements like the gable front. The
interior surfaces were usually covered with
dark wooden paneling in combination with
stucco, usually wallpapered but sometimes
left plain.

In contrast, the Watts Sherman House (1874)
in Newport, Rhode Island, by Henry Hobson
Richardson, is closer to the Queen Anne and
the Arts and Crafts styles. The rooms are
arranged in a more formal way and less open
to the hall, and the servants lived in the attic.
The overall massing is much more complex
than the more volumetrically simple Isaac
Bell House.

plat

—
ak
€
Sx
]
ol

17.60 First-floor plan: Isaac Bell House

The Shingle Style began to fade in the late
1890s, by which time U.S. architects who
had trained in Paris at the Ecole des Beaux-
Arts were returning home with a notion of
architectural space that did not conform

to the style’s relaxed openness. The new
preoccupation with monumentality in the
United States met the expectations of the
more class-conscious elite and ultimately

put an end to Arts and Crafts and its related
aesthetic phenomena. McKim, Mead & White
played a dominant role in this shift, becoming
the leading representative in the United
States of the Beaux-Arts neoclassical style.

17.61 First-floor plan: Watts Sherman House, Newport, Rhode Island

CAMPUS ARCHITECTURE IN THE
UNITED STATES

The Land Grant Act of 1861, signed into law
by President Abraham Lincoln, had a major
impact on the history of U.S. education. It
stipulated that each state was to have its own
university, paid for by the sale of government
land. No such educational policy had ever
been atternpted before, and no one could
have foreseen its consequences in shaping
advanced education in the United States.
Despite differences from state to state, the
early schools (known as land-grant schools)
shared certain basic goals, including the
promotion of practical education, the right
of education for all social classes, and the
reedom of students to choose their course
of study. By the 1870s almost every state
ad one such university. Among the earliest
were Cornell University in Ithaca, New York,
and the University of California, Berkeley.

By the turn of the century, dozens of

private universities had also been built, and
ecause of the rapid professionalization of
the sciences in the 1880s, a new generation
of technical institutions emerged. The
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT),
founded in 1863, was among the first, but
soon there were also the Illinois Institute of
echnology (1890); the Carnegie Technical
nstitute (1900), which later became
Carnegie Mellon University; and the California
Polytechnic State University (1901). The net
result of this combination of public, private,
and technical universities was a university
system unique in the world.

17.62 View of Ithaca, New York, in 1882, showing the early campus of Cornell University

In terms of architecture, many U.S.
universities looked to English precedents,
such as Cambridge and Oxford, but toward
the end of the 19th century, the upper
classes began to see higher education in a
broader context as a maturing experience.
This led to the design of campuses with
sports facilities, dormitories, and a parklike
atmosphere such as the rural environs
Jefferson specifically chose for the University
of Virginia.

Universities built in this period by the
top firms in the country are still today some
of the most impressive accomplishments of
that era. Designs came in three basic styles:
Georgian, neo-Gothic, and Neoclassical. The
Georgian style, leaning on the tradition of
Harvard University, had individual buildings,
usually raised in brick, arranged around a
quad or “green,” as at Cornell University.
Differing from that was the neo-Gothic style
that offered an integration of life, study,

and sports; examples can be found at
Princeton University in New Jersey and at
the University of Chicago, where there was
no central quad but a loose arrangement of
buildings in the landscape. The Neoclassical
was also frequently used—as for example

at Columbia University in New York City,
with its centerpiece, Low Memorial Library,
designed by McKim, Mead & White (1903);
the University of Michigan (1904-36) by
Albert Kahn; and MIT (1913-16), designed
by William Bosworth, with buildings arranged
around a central axis, and a domed library
modeled on the Pantheon at the symbolic
head of the composition.

17.63 Early plan for the University
of Chicago campus


bn

17.64 Floor plans: Maison Tassel, Brussels

ART NOUVEAU’S MAISON TASSEL
Though Westerners had purchased Chinese
and Japanese tea sets, plates, and bowls

for well over a hundred years and had tried
to imitate certain Chinese building types

like the garden pavilion, Art Nouveau artists
were stimulated by Japanese art, with its
sinuous ornamental patterns. Indeed, the
movement is named after d'Art Nouveau, the
shop of Siegfried Bing, a Parisian importer
of Japanese art and himself the owner of
one of the important private collections of
japonaiserie. In London, James Whistler

was a brilliant promoter and adaptor of the
Japanese style. He and others admired, in
particular, the work of Kitagawa Utamaro,
whose woodcuts were known for their curving
lines, asymmetrical distribution of masses,
and boldness of composition. Furthermore,
the idea of coordinating a painting, its frame,
its artistic effect on the room, and even the
shape and proportion of the whole room,
already put forward by William Morris, was
reinforced by the perceived coordinated unity
of Japanese architecture. For Art Nouveau,
exclusive purity of style was not important.
Japanese themes could be fused with

Greek, Celtic, and—after Knossos had been
excavated in 1900—Minoan motifs.

Though Art Nouveau expressed itself in
the surface, it was far from superficial. In its
rejection of depth and perspective and its
insistence on flatness, it foreshadowed future
dialogues on the validity of the representation
of illusionary depth. Nature was no longer a
remote system of regulating realities, as it was
for the Enlightenment, but a sensuous play
of living forms. Biological forms were eagerly

embraced. Ornamentation was no longer a
sin but the means by which one could reach
behind the static world of appearances. A
door handle by Victor Horta (1861-1947)
loops in and around itself like a piece of soft
candy, one strand of which springs out into
space to almost accidentally form a handle.

Art Nouveau had parallels with the Arts
and Crafts movement in England, but there
were important differences. Whereas the
Arts and Crafts movement aimed to heal
the alienation that had arisen between
man and his products as a consequence
of industrialization, Art Nouveau stressed
creativity. While the products promoted
by Arts and Crafts were by no means
inexpensive, the movement carried with it
spiritual and therapeutic connotations and
a back-to-the-land naturalness that was
ostensibly accessible to all; Art Nouveau
appealed mainly to the wealthy.

Victor Horta, active in Belgiurn, was
probably the greatest of the Art Nouveau
architects. In Maison Tassel (1893), Horta
brought out the expressive quality of iron,
which he used both inside and outside of
the house in the form of ribbons that appear
weightless, spiraling and twisting into space.
Since the floors were supported for the most
part by iron columns, rooms could open into
one another and be distributed in a novel

manner. Horta rejected the standard Brussels
building type, with the staircase to one side of
the building. Instead, the staircase, combined

with a lightwell, is placed at the center. This
allowed hirn to vary the elevations of the

floors in the front and back, with four floors
in the front along the street and three in the

17.65 Section: Maison Tassel

back, and the main roams oriented in the
center. Interpenetrating space, as well as
the use of mirrors to enhance the feeling of
space, make the interior seem a world unto
itsel-—a sanctuary from outside life.

17.66 Maison Tassel

RISE OF PROFESSIONALISM

Medicine and law were among the first
fields to be professionalized, starting around
1860. Architecture lagged behind, long
considered to be more of a gentleman’s
occupation. By the middle of the 19th
century, the professionalization of the field
was gradually winning converts, especially
since the Beaux-Arts system was so
successful. In England, The Royal Institute
of British Architects (RIBA) was founded in
1834, and with it came increased attention
on the education of the architect, with the
RIBA sponsoring lectures and publications
on a variety of subjects. Professionalism
discouraged ad hoc, on-the-spot solutions

in favor of precise architectural drawings.
This is clearly demonstrated in the case of
William Butterfield (1814-1900), who is
often associated with the aesthetics of John
Ruskin. The first church he built required
only nine drawings; but for the chancel of St.
Mark’s Dundela in Belfast (completed 1891),
the contract was accompanied by about
forty drawings, including working details and
fittings down to the boot scrapers. The new
prerequisite for explicitness such as detailed
specifications and drawings had its effect on
the contractual relationship between client,
architect, and craftsmen. By the middle of
the 20th century, a building of any magnitude
would require perhaps one thousand
drawings, accompanied by a detailed
specifications.

In the United States, the American
Institute of Architects (AIA) had already
been formed in 1836. But, interrupted
by the Civil War and handicapped by the
very immensity of the far-flung continent
and the commensurate communications
difficulties, architectural professionalism did
not really blossom until after the World's
Columbian Exposition of 1893 (also known
as the Chicago World's Fair). The exposition
buildings, designed on a monumental scale
and integrated into a master plan, served
to demonstrate what professional architects
could accomplish. These architects included
AIA leaders Daniel Burnham, Richard M.
Hunt, Henry van Brunt, and Charles F.
McKim.

00k of

17.67 View of an architect's office

The Tarsney Act passed by Congress that
year established the requirement for limited
competitions for federal commissions, with
institute members advising the treasury
secretary, the federal official responsible for
governmental building appropriations. Though
the Tarsney Act was never fully implemented,
the status of the professional—as opposed to
an architect working as an employee of the
government—was increasingly secure. By
1895, the AIA had more than seven hundred
members. In the first decade of the 20th
century, Daniel Burnham's architectural firm
was the world’s largest and had become,
as discussed by the historian Mary Woods,
the model for countless later firms that
utilized global business techniques. This new
professional class had little patience with the
mid-century battle between classical and
medieval revival styles. That does not mean
that Hunt, for example, who was schooled at
the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris and who
was a major advocate of architecture as a
profession, was indifferent to style; rather,
he had left the sectarian debates for a more
fluid and individualist appropriation of the
architectural vocabulary of the time.

INTERNATIONAL CITY BEAUTIFUL
PLANS
The exceptional success of the Crystal Palace
exposition in London of 1851, attended by
an estimated 6 million visitors, triggered a
series of imitation events around the world
designed to showcase their global reach. The
Exposition Universelle of 1867 and 1878
in Paris boasted 15 million and 16 million
visitors, respectively, while the Centennial
Exhibition in Philadelphia in 1876 had 10
million. Finally, at Paris's 1889 Exposition
Universelle, the Eiffel Tower reported 32
million visitors—and in response, the United
States launched the Columbian Exposition of
1893 in Chicago, ostensibly to celebrate the
four hundredth anniversary of Christopher
Columbus's arrival in America.
Designed by Daniel Burnham, the
Columbian expo ushered in the golden era of
Beaux-Arts design and planning in the United
States, with carefully detailed Neoclassical
buildings orchestrated along long and
dramatic axial lines, all designed to generate
a spectacular sense of the civic.

Inspired by the exhibition, city fathers
around the country began to draw up
plans following some of its principles in a
movement that came to be known as City
Beautiful. These cities included Cleveland,
San Francisco, Chicago, Detroit, Baltirnore,
and St. Louis. Although few plans were


17.68 Boston Public Library

actually implemented in their totality, those
that were completed were very influential. In
1900, Congress formed a special committee
to redesign Washington, DC. Committee
members included Daniel Burnham,
Frederick Law Olmsted Jr., and Charles F.
McKim of McKirn, Mead & White. Their plan
created the National Mall as we know it now,
with the Lincoln and Grant Memorials, along
with Union Station, which was designed by
Daniel Burnham. The plan also cleared slums
and established a new citywide park.
Pennsylvania Station in New York City
(1904-10) featured a block-long Doric
columnar screen, a drive-in unloading
street, a central waiting room modeled on
Diocletian’s baths in Rome, and a steel-
and-glass hall and circulation platform
leading down to the various levels. The
building was designed by McKim, Mead
& White, one of the leading champions of
the Beaux-Arts. Another example of their
work is the Boston Public Library (1895),
which faces Richardson’s Trinity Church
across Copley Square. Drawing on Henri
Labrouste’s Bibliotheque St.-Geneviéve in
Paris, its arcade, set up on a high base, has
the names of famous authors etched into the
spandrels. With its use of exquisite marbles
and mosaics, it was one of the finest U.S.
public buildings at that time. Its monumental
entrance leads up to the main barrel-vaulted

reading room, which spans the entire length
of the building, and its central courtyard

is surrounded by an arcaded gallery in the
manner of a Renaissance cloister. The library
also features thin tile vaults by the Catalan
master builder Rafael Guastavino.

In 1898, the Philippines was acquired by
the United States following its victory over the
Spanish forces in the Pacific. This gave Daniel
Burnham an opportunity to internationalize his
urban vision in the form of plans he made for
Manila and Baguio, though these were also
not fully implemented. Nonetheless, Burnham
acquired a formidable reputation in the
Philippines and around the world.

THE SPO MIT NN PLAN

Bietios .

WHE eb} a Le

17.70 Plan of Washington, DC

THE MA

LL

“,

Columbian Exposition

Walter Burley Griffin
Newly united in 1901, Australians, under
Prime Minister Edmund Barton, were looking
for a style suitable to express their national
aspirations. Some atternpts at transforming
an Arts and Crafts— and Art Nouveau—
derived interpretation of Australian flora
and a Richardsonian-derived idea of civic
buildings (such as Edward Raht’s Equitable
Life Assurance Society Building in Sydney,
1895) were finally rejected in favor of a
more progressive modernism, as can be
seen in the design of Canberra, Australia’s
new national capital. The winning entry
of the 1912 competition was by a young,
little-known architect from Chicago, Walter
Burley Griffin. Strongly influenced by Frank
Lloyd Wright's houses and Daniel Burnham's
master plans, Griffin called himself a
landscape architect to emphasize what he
claimed was the organic derivation of his
design. His proposal also drew on the City
Beautiful Movement insofar as it featured a
picturesque ordering of the landscape with
intersecting axial geometries. He proposed
to use the irregular basin from the site to
create a series of interconnected water
tanks and even a lake, showcasing the
main government center and capital. The
rest of the city was spread out axially, with
star-shaped intersections forming the highly
visible civic centers and nodes of residential
suburbs.

Although Canberra was not developed
until after World War II, Griffin created a

17.71 Lucknow University Library, India

successful practice in Australia, designing
several houses and institutional buildings.
His architecture was derived largely from
Wrightian sources, particularly the latter's
California houses. Griffin's Creswick
Residence in Castlecrag (1926), his ten-story
office building in Melbourne, and the Keith
Arcade (1927), also drew on the decorative
motifs of local flora.

In 1935, Griffin took an opportunity to design
a library in India and left Australia. His last
set of buildings, therefore, are in Lucknow,
India, where he unexpectedly died in 1937.
As in Australia, Griffin tried to invent a new
architectural vocabulary—this time suitable
for modern India. He did not try to copy
Wright so much as to translate Wright into a
new national style and an alternative to both
the Beaux-Arts and European modernism.

17.72 Walter Burley Griffin’s plan for Canberra, Australia

TRE
THREE MAGNETS.

_—- "

17.73 Ebenezer Howard's “Three Magnets” diagram

THE GARDEN CITY MOVEMENT

By the late 19th century, the great new
industrial Victorian cities of the world like New
York had, despite their significant financial
success and clout, become overcrowded,
dirty, and violent. Many in the middle and
upper classes preferred to turn their backs
on the city for the comfort and security of the
suburbs, with their socially and economically
stratified neighborhoods. The results shaped
the debate about the nature of a city. On one
hand, there was the uncomfortable density
of life, the cagey interaction between the
classes, and the persistence of poverty and
grime; but side by side with these negatives
were the benefits of urbanity: the centers of
learning, the theaters, the libraries, and the
concert halls. For every theory that decried
the city as an uncontrollable behemoth, there
were those who were deplored the blandness
and false security of the suburbs.

It was in an attempt to solve this
controversy that Ebenezer Howard wrote his
book Tomorrow: A Peaceful Path to Real
Reform (1892), republished as Garden Cities
of To-morrow (1902). The city suggested
therein was to have the virtues of both
the city and the suburbs, but in a highly
controlled way that controlled or abolished
the contested extremes and made for
pleasant surroundings. Howard's garden city
was not a suburb but a type of mini-city with
a core and a perimeter. It was not meant
to be fully dependent on a nearby great
metropolis as a suburb would be, but it was

aicuLtunal LAND
pomtcUlrumg,

__ _ GOuLeeg

Comvacescent
Mowe

N.B.
OiaGram_ONLy.

PLAN CANNOT BE ORAWR:
UNTIL SITE SELECTCO

17.74 Ebenezer Howard's diagram of the garden city concept

no mere village either. The size was set at
a comfortable 6,000 acres, which were not
owned by individual citizens but held in a
trust. The town was to consume only 1,000
acres at the center, where there would be a
park with public buildings, surrounded by
shops. Running all around this central park
would be a wide glass arcade or “crystal
palace” where purchases could be made.
The population of the town was to be kept
at 30,000. Factories, warehouses, and the
like, fronting on a circular railway, were

on the outer ring of the town, and beyond
that were the farms. Since there was no
land ownership, the town was run as a
corporation. The rents would provide income
for the company, which would then be
invested back into the community.

Howard's vision did not arise in a vacuum.

There had been already several attempts
to create somewhat similar towns, but most
of these were factory towns built by factory
owners who wanted to convenient access to
the workforce. The societal benefit in such a
solution was the creation of a stable working
class. The “company stores” often associated
with such schemes were run by the factory
owners. Port Sunlight (1888), for example,
not far frorn Liverpool, was founded by the
owners of a soap manufacturing business;
in addition to factory-owned stores and
businesses, the town had schools, churches,
and training centers.

Letchworth (1903) north of London, was
the first garden city to be actually built on

Howard's model. Though it did not develop
altogether as planned, it was not a failure, as
many had predicted it would be; it attracted
factories like the Spirella Company (1912),
which manufactured corsets. Ultimately, the
Garden City movement produced more than
thirty communities in England. Howard’s book
also shaped the development in England of
the so-called New Towns built after World
War |. Canberra, the Australian capital, was
also influenced by Howard's design concepts.

Village

g *Resideritial '
pS *
Rae KD

Ny Green belt
Sy Village \S%

N\ ie} 1km
, us

2
Ney
NC

17.75 Plan of Letchworth, England

17.76 Municipal Theater, Rio de Janeiro

INTERNATIONAL BEAUX-ARTS

Between 1870 and 1910 the global economic
situation changed considerably. England
was at such heights that its slide was not
immediately noticeable, but by 1900,
England had to share its economic power
with the United States and, increasingly, with
the economic might of Germany. The rise of
Germany was not accidental. Its educational
system was first rate: by the end of the
century, Germany possessed a literacy rate
of 99.9 percent, an educational level that
provided Germany with engineers, chemists,
opticians, skilled workers for its factories,
skilled managers, knowledgeable farmers,
and skilled military personnel. In comparison,
literacy in Britain, France, Norway, Sweden,
and Australia was 30 to 50 percent. France
was certainly the world’s cultural leader, but
by 1880 it produced only 7.8 percent of
world manufacturing output, and by 1900.
this had dropped to 6.8 percent; that year,
Italy had only a 2.5 percent share of the
global market. Meanwhile, Germany’s output
had risen to 13.2 percent due to its greatly
expanded heavy industry; this, ominously,
gave it military capabilities that in time led to
World War |.

The most important rising economy of the
time, however, was that of the United States,
which grew considerably beginning in the
last decade of the 19th century. Following
the Civil War, the United States had already
begun to industrialize on a massive scale.
Raw materials were plentiful. Coal was

England

Germany

Australia Q

Rio de Janeiro

Buenos Aires
South Africa
Mumbai
Shanghai O
Japan q

17.77 Global trade diagram, ca. 1900

found in abundance in the Appalachian
Mountains. Large iron mines opened in the
Lake Superior region of the upper Midwest.
Steel mills thrived in places where these two
important raw materials occurred together
or in proximity. Large copper and silver
mines opened, followed by lead mines and
cement factories. The largest salt reserves
in the world were found in New York and
Pennsylvania. Mass-production methods
developed at a fast pace.
American-engineered tall buildings,
complete with Beaux-Arts cladding, went
up from Buenos Aires to Shanghai. U.S.-
designed bridges were soon appearing in
New Zealand, Taiwan, Manchuria, Japan,

Mexico, and South America; and by

1910, skyscraper components produced

in the United States were shipped to East
Asia, South Africa, and Central America.
Milken Brothers, a leading U.S. steel firm,
established branch offices in London, Mexico,
Havana, Cape Town, and Sydney, erecting
office buildings, mills, and factories with steel
framing.

With the global economy centered on
England and the United States, formerly
peripheral countries underwent an economic
upturn of their own, as materials and
products could now be advantageously
exported. This modernization at the global
periphery, however, went hand in hand
with the increasing disempowerment of
the underclasses. In South America, the
new upper class may have had factories

built with American steel, but on matters of
the material culture, they more often than
not flaunted the latest of French fashions;
French urban design was also imported

as a visible substantiation of their policies.
One of the consequences was that Beaux-
Arts eclecticism, with its associations with
the professional class, developed into an
international movement. There were few
major metropolises that were not touched by
this phenomenon.

These global realities left their most
dramatic imprint in Argentina and Brazil,
with most of its exports of beef, wool, and
wheat supported by heavy investments
from England. Rio de Janeiro, during its
Republican phase from the 1880s to 1910s,
was significantly rebuilt under its mayor,
Pereira Passos, who came to be regarded as
the “Haussmann of the Tropics,” relying on
architects such as Ricardo Severo (1869-
1940), who was greatly influenced by Beaux-
Arts academicism. The Municipal Theater
(1905) by the Brazilian architect Oliveira
Passos was designed to be reminiscent of the
Paris Opera.

The building of these structures coincided
with the development of pubic hygiene
and the introduction of electrical and gas
services. As in Egypt, where debate still
rages today as to the Egyptian authenticity
of the neo-Mamluk style, in Rio de Janeiro,

a camp developed in 1910 that argued that
Brazil’s true national style was the early
19th-century Portuguese colonial architecture

17.78 Presidential Palace, Havana

because those structures were built by local
craftsmen, whereas the late 19th-century
buildings belonged to a more alienated age.
Today some ascribe Rio’s urban difficulties
to the aggressive modernization of the city
under Passos. Others praise him for his
foresight.

The former Presidential Palace in Havana,
Cuba, was designed by the Cuban architect
Carlos Maruri and the Belgian architect Paul
Belau. It was inaugurated in 1920. Modeled
loosely on the Palazzo Madama (1718-21)
in Turin, Italy, by Filippo Juvarra, it sports an
eclectic addition.

SKYSCRAPERS

If there is one building type that represents
the confluence of new materials, new
strategies of construction, and new attitudes
to capital and representation in the early
20th century, particularly in the United
States, it is the skyscraper. It did not appear
suddenly, for it took considerable time for
its function, production, design, and even
its purpose to be synthesized. The most
significant contributing factor was the
improved quality of steel, which allowed
prefabricated elements to be brought to the
construction site and erected with relative
rapidity. The technology of steel framing was
well established by 1890; in fact, during
construction, many buildings of that time
would look as modern as buildings of today.

Questions about how to design the steel
frame were, however, the least problematic
part of the building. Elevators needed to be
improved and their operation guaranteed. The
same was true of the plumbing, electrical,
and heating systerns and the integration of
all these systems with each other. At the
1900 Paris Exposition, the designers of the
U.S. exhibition chose to emphasize just this,
using as an example the recently erected
eighteen-story Broadway Chambers Building
in New York City. The exhibition presented a
4-meter-high model of the building with an
exterior skin in plaster that could be removed
to show the underlying steel frame, complete
with mechanical systems, boilers, pipes, and
furnaces. It was an eye-opening lesson in an
emerging architectural ideal.

From a financial standpoint, the idea was
relatively straightforward. An investor, typically
a bank, insurance agency, or newspaper,
would finance the building and use it as
home office, occupying the lower, walk-in
floor while renting out the rest to business
tenants. Besides having a stately home
office, the owner would have made a good
investment in a booming rental market hungry
for representative office space. The owner
company’s logo would be affixed to the top of
the building and beam forth its message.

The Woolworth Building (1911-13) in
New York City, designed by Cass Gilbert
in a Gothic style, was at the time of its

construction the world’s tallest building. It
was built for Frank W. Woolworth, owner
of the famous five-and-dime chain. The
whole was sheathed in elaborate terra-cotta
tiles with equally elaborate Gothic-inspired
detailing. The interior lobby had mosaic-
covered vaults.

This commercialization of styles
resulted in an increased need to outdo the
competitor. Many early designers assumed
that a classical or Gothic front was still the
appropriate response, but in Chicago, which
in the 1890s had more tall buildings than any
other city in the world, a group of designers
were beginning to challenge that notion.
Among the most innovative was the firm of
Daniel Burnham & Company, which designed
the fifteen-story steel-and-glass Reliance
Building in 1894, with the principal design
credits going to John Root and Charles B.
Atwood.

Instead of the heavy cornice that is seen
in buildings like Dankmar Adler and Louis

Sullivan's Wainwright Building in St. Louis,
Missouri (1890), the Reliance Building is
topped with a thin square lid, and the top
floor, which houses machinery for heating
and other utilities, converts into a type of
frieze. Bay windows reach out into space,
giving the building an inner dynamic. The
insistent verticality of the Wainwright Building
has been replaced by a layered look; but
instead of appearing heavy, one floor almost
seems to float over the next, assisted in this
effect by the building’s spandrels, which are
lined with delicately ornamented white terra-
cotta tiles that give it an ethereal presence.

Wrigley Building

The Reliance Building was more the
exception than the rule. A look of modernity
in tall buildings was not insisted upon and,
in fact, went counter to the idea that these
buildings were meant to advertise old wealth
and culture. For that very reason, most

tall buildings after the World’s Columbian
Exposition were clad in historical styles. A
typical example is the headquarters building
of AT&T, the largest and most innovative

17.81 Reliance Building, Chicago

corporation in the United States, in New York
(1912). It was designed by the Beaux-Arts—
trained architect William Welles Bosworth, an
American who had also studied at MIT, one
of the first institutions in the United States

to model itself on the Beaux-Arts system of
education. Corporate representation at the
turn of the century was a form of modernity
in its own right. In that sense, the skyscraper
was similar to the train stations of the 1860s,
and much like the train stations of the period,
skyscrapers competed against each other in
size and lavishness.

It is often argued that Beaux-Arts
modernism survived so long in the United
States because of the hold that the system
had on acaderne—but that is not the
only reason. Beaux-Arts modernism had
become the language par excellence of
corporations eager to promote themselves.
Historical awareness and reference to great
architectural accomplishments of the past
were an integral part of this ambition. That
was the reason Bosworth chose to model his
columns in the lobby of the AT&T building
on those of the Parthenon and also why, at

17.82 Wrigley Building, Chicago

the top of the Wrigley Building (1920-24)
in Chicago, which was designed for the
well-known manufacturer of chewing gum,
the architects placed a reconstruction of
the Monument of Lysicrates in Athens
(334 BCE). Would Lysicrates turn over in
his grave, or smile indulgently? It was not
only the monument as a token of Athenian
sophistication that was at stake here but
also the fact that the French government
had just completed its restoration in 1887.
The clock tower presented the image that
capitalism wanted to make history whole
again by brazenly co-opting ancient history as
a consumer brand.

17.83 Casa Batllé, Barcelona

CASA BATLLO

Antonio Gaudi (1852-1926), despite his
obvious talent, was not a particularly good
student at the school of architecture at
Barcelona. The Beaux-Arts academic

styles and rationalization of construction

did not appeal to him; he preferred history
and economy. After a period in which he
apprenticed with various local architects, he
set out on his own. One of the characteristics
of his work was his use of color. His
architecture, more than any produced in the
20th century, must be experienced in person
in order to be fully understood. Le Corbusier
and Frank Lloyd Wright were consummate
colorists, but for Wright, color was a question
of patina, and for Le Corbusier, color served
spatial articulation. For Gaudi, color was

a tactile experience and sprang, as César
Martinell has pointed out in his research,
from the immediacy of folk sensibilities,
Mediterranean mosaic art, and Spain’s
Islamic past. Gaudi experimented with
colored stone and glass, polychrome glazes,
and broken tiles and plates, and exploited the
shadings of stone and brick.

Despite the seemingly impromptu character
of his buildings, Gaudi was very much a
perfectionist, working out every project

in great detail. The facade of Palau GUell
(1886-90) was completely redrawn twenty-
eight times, and some of its details changed
completely. This explains why it took him four
years to perfect the columns of the nave of
Sagrada Familia (1882-1926). The richness
of Gaudi’s forms might make his work seem
preeminently sculptural, but according to
him, his priorities were situation, measure,
material—and only then form. Already in his
first works, he was creating hyperbolic and
trumpet-shaped helical forms, but always

in combination with his refined sense of
construction. As a young architect, he could
imagine structural possibilities that seemed to
defy conventional wisdom. One worker once
waited hours after a particularly precarious-
appearing corbel had been constructed to
see if it would fall. It still stands today.

n the late 19th century, Barcelona had become one of the leading
Mediterranean ports, specializing in the trade of cotton and metal. The
wealth of the local bourgeoisie resulted in commissions such as the one
for the Casa Batll6 (1904-6) for Josep Batll6, a textile manufacturer,
which involved renovating an existing building. Gaudi modified the
inner court, introducing a staircase with a tautly undulating outline. The
facade shows wavy forms surfaced with ceramics in shades of blue. The
enigmatic, mask-like balconies and the stained-glass windows evoke
loral, animal, and geological motifs. The roof of glazed brick looks

ike the scales of a dragon pierced by the tower, which has at its top a
ead of garlic that morphs into a three-dimensional cross—perhaps an
allusion to St. George and the killing of the dragon, a story with much
local resonance. At the level of the piano nobife, the malleable forms
that seem to be made more of mud than of stone are held up by thin,
ony colonnettes “deforrned” in the middle and ornamented by vines.

17.84 Roofscape: Casa Batllo

WoL

17.85 Plan and section: Casa Batllo


FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT

The long and complex career of Frank Lloyd
Wright (1867-1959) can be divided into
several phases: from the time he opened

his office in 1893 to the Robie House
(1908-10); the Taliesin phase (1911-14); the
period from the design of the Imperial Hotel
to Falling Water (1934) and Taliesin West
(1938); and the period from the Johnson
Wax Administration Building (1936) to the
Marin County Civic Center (1957) and the
end of his life in 1959. His production was
vast and includes about four hundred houses
and a dozen or so other major buildings. By
the time Wright designed the Robie House in
Chicago, his style had become quite distinct
when compared to the Victorian mansions
that were then in vogue. Furthermore, unlike
other architects who changed style slowly or
at the behest of a client, Wright's break with
tradition was driven by a personal stylistic
development in search for ever greater
abstraction. At the Robie House, its Shingle
Style origins can still be seen in the service
rooms, which are packed into a massive
block against which the building rests. The
hip roofs have been flattened so that they
practically disappear. The fireplace has now
become the spatial and visual hub of the
building, freed from encroaching walls and
linked only to a staircase.

The house is screened against the street
and no staircase is visible; it seems almost
defensive while, at the same tirne the design
emphasizes the linearity of the street. The

bands of white stone parapets form a series
of striations that rise to meet the dark-
edged roof lines, with the bands of windows

recessive in the shadows. The main floor
opens onto a balcony that runs along the
entire southern exposure. And in good Arts
and Crafts fashion, every aspect of the house
was designed by Wright himself, from the
carpets to the light fixtures.

A comparison of the Robie House with
the Steiner House by Adolf Loos yields more
similarities than are obvious at first glance.
Both give the client an interior environment
that is intimate, richly detailed, and crafted
down to the last detail. Both are also abstract

17.87 Robie House, Chicago

17.86 First-floor plan: Robie House, Chicago

and mute to the outside world. The principal
difference, and one that was to remain a
difference between European- and American-
style modernism, is their relationship to the
outside. The American tradition, whose way
had been paved by the Shingle and bungalow
styles as well as by the philosophy of

Andrew Jackson Downing, was not averse to
incorporating porches and platforms into the
living space of the building, an idea relatively
rare in European domestic design until after
World War II.


Taliesin
After a trip to Italy in 1909, Wright began
to build at first a retreat and then a home
in Spring Green, in southern Wisconsin,
that came to be called Taliesin (1911-14).
The name refers to the Book of Taliesin, a
collection of poems and prophecies attributed
to a 6th-century CE Welsh court poet. The
building marked a significant departure
from Wright's earlier homes, which were
constrained by their suburban lots and
tended to be designed to move from formal to :
informal spaces. Taliesin, which sits on top of #3."

P : —
a broad hill with views in three directions and ae
had ample space to expand, was designed te
without this polarity. It was a highly personal
expression, but it was also infused with what
Wright thought was a uniquely American
receptivity to the landscape. It was not “on”
the hill, he claimed, but “of” the hill, for it
was not easy “to tell where pavement and
walls left off and ground began,” surrounded
as it was by low walled-garden courts
reached by stone steps. The house reflects
Wright's experiences in Italy, where he saw
for the first time the great Renaissance and
Baroque villas and gardens. It was, therefore,
not just a house but a country estate, house,
farm, studio, workshop, and family seat all
in one.

The house, low and horizontal, with on ‘*'? OY
ungabled hip roofs, rhythmically seems to 17.89 Plan: Taliesin East 2 < Cd
respond to the surrounding hills. The walls :
are of roughly dressed stone laid in textured
horizontal courses, as if partially natural and
partially manufactured. The house, with its
broad, hooded roofs, gave the occupants a
sense of being embedded in the landscape.

It was, Wright explained, a “natural house,”
by which he meant not that it was like a

cave or log cabin but that it was “native

in spirit.” Taliesin’s plan organization is a
geometric ordering of the landscape, with
each part joined to the next in a meandering
pattern of solids and voids that winds its way >
down the hill. The principal living block is a
rectangle that has been eaten into by voids or
expanded outward by terraces and rooflines.
Subtle shifts of alignments create a dynamic
within the house that is enhanced by placing
the access points to the rooms in their
corners.

In the 1930s, Wright built another home
and office for himself in the Arizona desert
called Taliesin West. He lived and taught .
there from 1937 until his death in 1959. - , 17.90 Site plan: Taliesin East \

0 100m Ni ay


17.92 Pretoria City Hall 2

~\

17.93 Site plan: Pretoria City Hall

AFRICAN LAND GRAB
Between 1870 and 1900, European powers
rushed to colonize Africa, and by the
early 20th century, much of Africa, except
Ethiopia and Liberia, had been colonized.
Since slavery was by then illegal, it was
the hunt for sources of raw materials and
expanding industrial markets that spurred
this scramble. Besides Britain and France,
Germany, Belgium, and Italy—countries
that had hitherto been denied a piece of
the colonial pie—rushed to stake a claim.
The competition was so intense that fears of
rampant inter-imperialist conflicts led to the
infamous diplomatic summit of European
powers known as the Berlin West Africa
Conference (November 1884—-February
1885). Designed to regulate the colonial
carving up of Africa, the Berlin Treaty drawn
up at this conference was made without any
African participation.

The discovery of gold in South Africa
in 1876, at a time when gold prices had
risen, was a boon for that country’s colonial
Dutch population, but it also attracted
the British, who were eager to control the
world gold market. In a bitter conflict, the
Second Boer War (1899-1902), the British
took possession of Cape Colony, Natal, and
Transvaal. In 1910 they officially created the
Union of South Africa. The English architect
Sir Herbert Baker (1862-1946) designed
numerous buildings in the new dominion,
including cathedrals, churches, schools,
universities, and the Union Buildings in
Pretoria (1910-13). The structure, in the
English monumental style, was planned as
the government center of the South African
nation and as a gesture of reconciliation with
the Boers after the terrors and disasters of
the war. It is convex, with the main program,
such as committee chambers, in the middle.
The two side wings represented the Boer and
the English part of the population; Africans
were not represented. (After the first free
elections in 1994, it became the residence
of the president.) Baker took the lessons he
learned in South Africa to New Delhi, where
he partnered with Sir Edwin Lutyens in the
design of British-ruled India’s new capital.

 \ . _

17.94 Kyoto National Museum, Japan

KYOTO NATIONAL MUSEUM
While colonization had already introduced
many parts of Asia to Europe and
modernization, Japan was the first country
to embark on a self-initiated process of
modernization and Westernization. This was
done under the Meiji Restoration (1868),
which reinstated the monarchy following
the demise of the last shogunate. Anxious
about possible invasion and conscious of
the weakness of the shogunate that had
aggressively worked to keep the colonists at
bay, the Japanese upper class forced the
return of power to the emperor and embarked
on a course of aggressive industrialization
and militarization. Delegations from Japan
were sent to European world exhibitions to
learn the latest technological developments.
Japan particularly cultivated a relationship
with Germany under Bismarck. The Japanese
also studied the Egyptian modernization
program under Isma‘il Pasha. Japan invaded
China and Taiwan in 1895, then parts of
Russia, and then annexed Korea in 1910.
The Kyoto National Museum (1897),
built in a French Baroque style, was meant
to mark the emergence of Japan onto
the world stage. This rapid introduction
of Western styles—even though it was
made as a way to compete in the rapidly
expanding global economy—engendered
a backlash from traditionalists. Nationalists
denounced Western customs and by World
War Il had forced the government to return
to a more traditional modality, at least in
outer appearance, for underneath the call
for tradition was a policy that continued the
modernization of Japan's military machine.

17.95 Hong Kong & Shanghai Banking Corporation Building, Shanghai

MYONGDONG CATHEDRAL

As with Japan, Beaux-Arts eclecticisrn
arrived in Korea largely through the opening
of its ports in 1876, leading to the building
of Myongdong Cathedral (1898) in the
Gothic style and the Toksugung Palace
(1909) in the Renaissance style. During the
1910 Japanese annexation of Korea, Japan
continued this Westernization, using Western
styles as a symbol of their own colonial
footprint. The Bank of Korea Headquarters
(1912) was built in a Renaissance style, and
the Seoul Anglican Church (1916) in the
Romanesque. Formal education in Western
architectural concepts and engineering was
first introduced to Korea in 1916.

HONG KONG AND SHANGHAI BANKING
CORPORATION BUILDING

Shanghai came into existence in the late
Song dynasty as a small town of merchants
and fishermen, but with the Treaty of Nanjing
in 1842, which followed China’s defeat

in the Opium War of 1841 by the British
forces in Canton, its character changed
radically. The Chinese were forced to open
their ports—along with other cities—to
British, French, American, and other foreign
occupants, who brought along with each of
the city's expansions new buildings, roads,
and management practices. By the 1920s,
Shanghai was called the Paris of the East.
The earliest buildings erected by Westerners
in Shanghai were a hybrid of Western and
Chinese motifs, of which the Francisco
Xavier Church in Dongjiadu (1853) is one
of the few remaining examples. Others,

like the Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking
Corporation Building (1923), with its broad
colonnaded neo-Grecian front, were more
properly Western. Built for the second-largest
banking house in the world in 1925, the
building represents the apex of Shanghai’s
commercial prosperity. Upon its cornpletion
it was advertised as the “most beautiful
building from the Suez Canal to the Bering
Sea.” Divided vertically into three portions

in classical proportions of 2:3:1, the base of
the first story centers on three arches that
carry above it three stories of six colonnades
topped by the pediment.

17.96 Myongdong Cathedral, Seoul, South Korea

17.97 United Shoe Machinery Company, Beverly, Massachusetts

CONCRETE
Portland cement was named after the tiny
island of Portland in Dorset, England, where

a desirable limestone used in its manufacture

was found. But by 1900, U.S. manufacturers
were outproducing the English. as well as
perfecting new ways to integrate concrete
with steel. By the end of the second decade
of the 20th century, the demand for cement
was staggering, as manufacturers competed
with each other for stronger materials.
Initially, concrete was thought to be
advantageous over other materials, since it
was believed that it did not require skilled
labor, and thus not a few early concrete
uildings are in the English colonies, such
as the Secretariat and Army Headquarters at
Shimla, India (1886). To build with a single
material with a single technique required
fewer specifications and less site supervision.
As it turned out, while pouring concrete did
not require great skill, the production and
quality control of the material itself required
ighly developed technical competencies.
What eventually spurred the broad
acceptance of concrete was not its cost (for
it turned out to be more expensive than one
thought) but its fire resistance. The problem
of how to attach the bars to each other was
solved in 1884 by Ernest Leslie Ransome,
superintendent of the Pacific Stone Company
of San Francisco, who patented a special
machine that could twist iron bars into the
necessary three-dimensional steel armatures.
Ransome'’s design for the United Shoe

Machinery Company (1903-6) set the tone for
this technique, which allowed for a continuous

band of windows from floor to ceiling.

The Kahn System of reinforced concrete
developed by Albert Kahn had, by 1907,
already been used in 1,500 U.S. buildings,
90 English ones, and dozens of others
around the globe. Kahn developed these
ideas for new large-scale manufacturing
enterprises, such as the Packard Motor Car
Company manufacturing plant in Detroit,
Michigan; the Dodge Brothers Motor Car
Company plant in Hamtramck, Michigan;
and the Pierce Arrow plant in Buffalo, New
York. He went on to build more than one
thousand buildings for Ford Motor Company
and hundreds for General Motors. In 1923,

he
Fo
the
wor!

exp

uilt a fifteen-story building in Detroit for
Motor Company, which was at the time
largest manufacturing corporation in the
ld.
n Spain, the young Antonio Gaudi

erimented freely with concrete, producing

forms that are still staggeringly fresh today,

asi
sky
Bari
an

con

n the strange vase- and bottle-shaped
ights of the Casa Mila (1905-10) in
celona. By contrast, the more rationalized
orthogonal vision for the use of exposed
crete was pushed by Auguste Perret

(1874-1954).

17.98 Dodge Brothers Motor Car Company, Hamtramck, Michigan

17.99 Plan: 25b, rue Franklin, Paris

Not as free and expressionistic a form-maker
as Gaudi, Perret argued that the visual
expression of concrete's load-bearing identity
were just as important as its structural
properties. Working in the spirit of Eugene-
Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc, Perret aimed to
integrate architecture and civil engineering,
rather than exploring its possibilities in ways
that others, such as Max Berg and Gaudi,
were doing. Perret, as a civil engineer, had
a deep distrust of architectural freedoms.
When asked to engineer a theater in Paris
that was designed by Henry van de Velde, he
complained that the building was structurally
inconsistent and forced Van de Velde to
resign. Van de Velde had originally been a
painter, and, in teaching himself to design
buildings, he had come to see architecture
as creatively autonomous from engineering.
It was Le Corbusier, his employee for a while,
who, more than anyone else, understood
and theorized the need to integrate the
innovations of structure with those of
living. The tension, however, between the
requirements of engineering and those of
design, which was here opened up, remains
a point of theoretical contention to this day.
Perret's 25b, rue Franklin, in Paris
(1902-4), a speculative apartment building
in a fashionable quarter of the city, aired
to demonstrate that concrete could be
adapted to domestic architecture in an
age when most thought it suitable only for
factories and warehouses. Due to concerns
about its weather-worthiness, the concrete
was, however, not visible on the outside.

17.100 25h, rue Franklin

Smooth, colored bricks covered the concrete
elements, while tiles depicting chestnut
leaves were applied to the thin brick walls
that filled the spaces between the columns.
Each floor consisted of a six-room apartment
with a bathroom, staircase, and elevator

at the rear. The five principal rooms were
arranged symmetrically around a central
salon. Despite the conventionality of the plan,
the design's novelty lay in the allocation of all

internal load bearing to slender columns.

17.101 Detail: 25b, rue Franklin


17.102 Section and plan: Moller House, Vienna

17.104 Loos Haus on Michaelerplatz, Vienna

17.103 Moller House, Vienna

ADOLF LOOS

A stonemason’s son, Adolf Loos (1870-1933)
was born in rural Moravia, 100 kilorneters
north of Vienna. When he was nine, his father
whom he idolized, died. Loos’s relationship
with his mother, Maria Hertl, was strained
at best, and when he was twenty-three she
cut him off from the family, with just enough
money for a passage to the United States. In
the United States, Loos was enraptured by
the Chicago exposition, American industrial
infrastructure, and the writings of Louis
Sullivan. After returning to Austria, he settled
in Vienna, where at first he evinced much
enthusiasm for the Secessionists. But then
he began to denounce Secessionist art

and architecture, along with other modern
decorators such as the Deutsche Werkbund,
for their moral degeneration. In 1908

Loos wrote a now-famous article entitled
“Architecture and Ornament” in which,
relying on Jean-Jacques Rousseau's critique
of civilization, he railed against the use of
ornament as a degenerate form of art not
suitable for advanced European cultures.

For Loos, ornament was appropriate in tribal
societies, where it played an important part
in social interaction, but for an advanced
civilization, ornament was no longer a
relevant form of communication. Loos was
not opposed to using the color and texture of
natural materials for their ornamental quality,
however. His opinions put a damper on his
career, but he did secure a number of jobs
leading up to the design for a commercial
building in Vienna in a style now called the

Wiener Moderne; popularly, the building is
called the Loos Haus (1909-10).

By the time Loos designed the Steiner
House (1910), even the residual classical
motifs of his earlier work were gone, leaving
only a pure white exterior. The building
certainly anticipates—and indeed was highly
influential in—the modernist aesthetic that
would become the norm from the 1930s
onward, although it differed markedly from
later functionalist buildings. Here the stark
exterior was meant to contrast with the lush
and almost sensual interior. “On the outside,
the building must remain dumb and reveal
all its richness only on the inside,” Loos wrote
in 1914.

The Moller House (1927-8) is
paradigmatic of Loos’s approach. Its facade
is simple and rather forbidding, with the
entrance, balcony, and windows bound
together into a tight compositional unit. Since
the windows on the top floor face the rear,
the number of windows on the facade is
limited. Despite the external symmetry, the
interior is labyrinthine. The living and family
rooms on the second floor are separated by
steps and framed openings to create a range
of areas, some more private than others.

The interiors of the principal rooms are richly
outfitted with light-colored wood veneers on
the walls and oriental carpets on the floors,
creating a sense of sumptuous elegance.

In this respect, though Loos is seen as the
harbinger of the modern movement, his work
maintained a strong allegiance to the Arts
and Crafts ideal of interiority and intimacy.

17.105 View of Ludwigshafen, Germany

THE FACTORY AESTHETIC

By the early 20th century, factory design

had changed considerably over the previous
century. The introduction of electricity in

the 1880s freed the factory floor from the
cumbersome system of pipes, gears and
belts that had driven the coal and steam
powered machines during most of the 19th
century. Advances in steel engineering
allowed factory buildings to become larger
and spaces wider. Glass was used extensively
to permit illumination. Skylights were
common, sometimes in saw tooth form or

as part of a Pratt truss. Flat roofs were also
adopted, since it was easy for fire to develop
in the old gable roof system, with its complex
wood supports. The development of concrete
provided a fireproof—although expensive—
alternative to buildings that were of brick,
stone, or terra-cotta. Standardized building
types became widely available in the form of
iron- and steel-frarned structures.

The late 19th century also saw the
emergence of a search for a factory aesthetic
once it became clear that the building
was—or could be—used for advertising.
Some factories had main buildings that were
in a type of Gothic or Romanesque—and
occasionally classical—style. The Yenidze
Tabakfabrik (1907-9) in Dresden, Germany,
bloomed forth in an Oriental style, even
using simulated minarets and a glazed
dome to conform to the branding of its
cigarettes. Usually, such buildings were
designed without an architect. But even
when an architect was involved, there was
a noticeable difference between the image
of the building that the architect designed
and the factory itself, designed by engineers.

17.106 Yenidze Tabakfrabik, Dresden, Germany

The latter was seen—at least until the advent
of modernism—as not really part of the
architect’s concern. The freedom engineers
achieved had resulted in a type of building
that was designed around the concepts

of function and utility. Decoration was
eschewed, but there was a desire to express
strength and stability. There was also a
contradictory desire for light, and the creation
of long steel and glass walls paved the way
for what later came to be known as the
curtain wall, used extensively in skyscrapers
in the 1950s.


i}
F x
ARG

17.107 AEG Pavilion, German Shipbuilding Exhibition of 1908, Berlin

DEUTSCHE WERKBUND

The transformation of Germany from an
agricultural society into an industrial one
and from a country with limited national
and military goals to a world power on par
with England occurred at an astonishing
pace. Between 1894 and 1904, the value
of Germany's foreign trade doubled, and

by 1913 Germany overtook Great Britain in
percentage of world industrial production—
and did all this without a colonial empire.
Large companies like Friedrich Krupp Werke
(munitions, cannons, steel, and ships),

the Allgemeine Elektrikitats-Gesellschaft,

or AEG (turbines, electric railroads, and
equipment for the new German navy), and
Siemens-Schuckert Werke (railroad and
electrical equiprnent) were supported by
the government through lucrative military
contracts and protected from international
competition by tariffs. Beginning in the mid-
1890s and continuing until the outbreak

of World War |, urban officials, functioning
under the tight control of the imperial
government and learning, belatedly, the
lessons of England and France, organized
special exhibitions to promote and glorify
German production.

Though the architecture and architectural
quality of these exhibitions varied, they were,
for those who noticed, a bold showcase
for innovation. German architects were not
hampered by the Beaux-Arts system, which
was never implemented in Germany. For
the Nordwestdeutsche Kunstausstellung in
Oldenburg in 1905, Peter Behrens designed
a highly abstracted and formal exhibition
layout with square structures, their surfaces
incised with simple geometrical forms; an
octagonal, domed garden pavilion; and a

rigorously symmetrical exhibition hall with a
central cubical space to which four smaller
skylight boxes were attached at the corners.
At the German Shipbuilding Exhibition

of 1908, Behrens built an octagonal,
baptistery-like structure for the AEG. The
high altar was actually a ship’s deck on
which stood a great searchlight, the most
advanced of its kind in the world and the
pride and joy of the German navy. At a
1910 exhibition of concrete manufacturers,
visitors saw Behrens’s all-concrete pavilion
for Zementwahrenfabrikanten Deutschlands
(German Concrete Manufacturing
Association).

At the 1914 Werkbund Exhibition in
Cologne, the dramatic Glass House by Bruno
Taut, who had a quasi-mystical fascination
with glass, was on display. It consisted of
two spaces: a type of crypt below, set within
a cylindrical concrete plinth, and a domed
space above. The crypt contained a pool at
its center, with water cascading down small
terraces decorated with pale yellow glass.
Access to the dome above was by means
of curving stairs at the top of the plinth, on
which rested a fourteen-sided structure of
concrete beams. On top of that structure,
Taut set the prismatic dome with a double
skin of glass—an outer protective layer of
reflective glass, and an inner layer of colored
glass—as if in a three-dimensional explosion
of light, color, and geometry. Apart frorn
the structure itself, all its surfaces were
made of glass, in keeping with the pavilion’s
purpose as an advertisement for the glass
industry. Walls were made of shiny glass tiles,
transparent glass bricks, and translucent
colored glass. Even the steps were made of
glass.

17.108 Tea kettle by Peter Behrens, 1909

17.109 Plan and elevation: Glass House,
Werkbund Exhibition, Cologne, Germany

t
r*

+
in hte eld |
wb .

17.110 Plan and section: Garnisonskirche, Ulm, Germany

17.111 Section: Breslau Jahrhunderthalle, Breslau, Germany

GERMAN CONCRETE

Even though Ford's factories brought to the fore the
radical modernity of reinforced concrete from the
point of view of civil engineering, the architectural
question still remained open. While the expressive
potential in concrete's ability to take any form
languished in England—suffering in part under
Ruskinian proscriptions—it flourished in France and
Germany. If the French contribution consisted of
attempting to integrate concrete into the conventions
of architectural practices, the Germans contributed
toward its engineering. One of the earliest uses of
concrete in a major public building in Germany was
the Garnisonskirche in Ulm (1906-8), a Protestant
church that, as its name implies, was made for
and by a military base. It was designed by Theodor
Fischer (1862-1938), a prolific architect and noted
educator, and one of the founders of the Deutsche
Werkbund. He argued for a contextual modernity,
and his work therefore seems more neo-medieval
than modern today. Nonetheless, the building is

a landmark in the history of modern architecture.
The body of the church consisted of a reinforced-
concrete skeleton with brick infill. The towers

are huge empty silos 55 meters high, with a bell
chamber suspended between them.

A second important building was the Breslau
Jahrhunderthalle (1913), which showed off
the virtuosity and elegance of concrete. Part of
a campaign by the city to define itself as the
“Metropolis of the East,” it was designed by Max
Berg, Frankfurt am Main's building department
director, to serve as both an exhibition hall and
assembly hall. The Jahrhunderthalle (literally
“Centennial Hall”) was an enormous building, with
an enclosed floor space of over 5,600 square meters
that could hold ten thousand people. Due to the
fires that had broken out at a building of the 1910
world's fair in Brussels, the builders decided to use
concrete—the first attempt ever to use the material
for a building on that scale. The structure consisted
of four large curved arches that formed a continuous
ring on which rested the dome. To provide a more
secure environment against weather, the glazing was
not laid in the interstices of the ribs. Instead, Berg
designed a system of stepped glazing applied to the
outside of the dome in the form of vertical windows
and horizontal roofs. From the inside, the small
horizontal roof planes disappear in the light that
streams through the vertical apertures of glass.

EXPRESSIONISM
Architecture before and after World War | was
surprisingly imaginative and experimental.
Expressionism, as it soon came to be known,
had begun to develop before World War |
in the work of Bruno Taut and a few others.
Particularly influential were the writings of
Paul Scheerbart, who in 1914 published
Glass Architecture, a book describing a
utopian architecture of colored glass in
combination with sparkling jewels and
enamel. The Expressionists, despite their
differences, all envisioned an architecture
as far removed from classicism as could
be imagined at that time. The old notion
that architecture reembodied the power of
the past gave way to a desire to create an
architecture that spoke to the irmmediacy
of perception and the psychology of the
beholder. As one commentator, Heinrich de
Fries, explained, “Buildings are in the highest
degree alive.... We can only guess at the
extent to which the art of spatial articulation
will one day transcend the art of pictorial
creation.” Expressionism rejected the duality
of interior and exterior, and of building and
landscape. It also opened architecture to
influences from the other arts—in opposition
to the Arts and Crafts movement, which had
hoped to integrate the artistic conception
within the framework of craftmaking.

The movement was particularly strong
in Prague between 1910 and 1914. In the
1880s, Czech artists, dissatisfied with the
poor standards of the Prague Academy of
Painting, departed en masse for Munich,
a leading center for the German Arts and
Crafts movement. Many others went to Paris,
where they encountered the work of Auguste
Rodin, whom many Czechs admired for the
spontaneity and expressiveness of his work.
Other sources of inspiration were found in
French Cubism, which began to be exhibited
in 1908. But despite the pictorial innovations
of Pablo Picasso and Georges Braque, the
possibility of a Cubist architecture was not
pursued in France until the arrival of Le
Corbusier in the 1920s—and certainly not
in Germany, where French developments
were generally viewed with suspicion. The
introduction of Cubism into architecture in
Prague was, therefore, path-breaking.

17.112 Pavilion of Commerce, 1908 Jubilee Exhibition, Prague

One of the leading architects among the
Czech Cubists was Jan Kotera (1871-
1923), a professor at the Prague School of
Decorative Arts, who actively collaborated
with Czech sculptors like Jan Stursa and
Stanislav Sucharda on his architectural
designs. He saw prismatic shapes as
appropriate to the intellectual vitality of the
modern age. For him, structure had to give
way to the logic of visual dynamics. This
was also true for Pavel Janak (1882-1956),
whose idiosyncratic interpretation of
Cubism led him to shift toward tapered,
slanted, and triangular forms. He argued
that the orthogonal architecture reflected
its dependency on matter and weight,
whereas the new Cubist style, with its angles,
expressed the active nature of the human
spirit and its ability to prevail over matter.
After World War I, with the downfall of the
aristocratic regime in Germany, Expressionist
architecture found one of its more realistic
voices in Hans Poelzig (1869-1936),
whose first major cormmission, the Grosse
Schauspielhaus (“Large Performance Hall”)
in Berlin, had a plaster ceiling, hung from
the rafters, that looked like cave stalactites.
Thousands of light bulbs, variously colored
in shades of yellow, green, and red, were
embedded in the vault so that the whole
thing resembled both a cave and, when the
lights were dimmed, a starry night sky. The
foyer was supported by a single column that,
like a fusion between a fountain and a plant,

spread successive rings of colored petals
—also illuminated by recessed colored light
bulbs—until it reached the vault above.

17.113 Pavel Janak’s study for a facade

17.114 Interior: Grosse Schauspielhaus, Berlin

Another important figure in the Expressionist
camp was Hans Bernhard Scharoun (1893-
1972), who rejected the crystalline shapes
of some of the other Expressionists in favor
of soft, rubbery forms. In his design for a
stock exchange building (1922), he warped
and bent space around the central lobby,
giving the appearance of a building that had
ingested the various aspects of the program.
In Italy, Expressionism took an even
stronger form under the name of Futurism,
initially a literary movement created by
Filippo Tommaso Marinetti in 1909—it was
his manifesto, Le futurisme, published in
Paris, that coined the name of the movement.
Marinetti was a keen follower of the Cubist
movement and even took a group of Italian
painters to Paris to show them recent work.
Soon, however, the Italians developed their
own distinctive style, significantly more
aggressive in tone in comparison to the quiet
utopianism of Scheerbart. The Futurists
were particularly enamored of technology,
speed, and machinery and expressed
this in their painting and poetry. They saw
the outbreak of World War | as a positive
development for the Italians and hoped it
would propel the young country into the
modern age. “Art,” so Marinetti stated,
“can be nothing but violence, cruelty, and
injustice.” The movement eventually came
to include architecture, and in a 1914
manifesto, Umberto Boccioni proclaimed the
movement's antipathy to the classical styles.

Ris

17.115 A drawing for a futurist Citta Nuova (“New City”) by
Antonio Sant’Elia

Boccioni argued instead for an architecture of

“dynamic awareness.” The leading architect
among the group was Antonio Sant'Elia
(1888-1916), who built little but who made
influential visionary drawings of massive
buildings with soaring heights.

In Germany, the Expressionists formed
several groups, such as the Arbeitsrat fur
Kunst (“Worker’s Council for Art”) and the
Novembergruppe (“November Group,”
named after the 1917 Russian Revolution).
In 1918, the November Group, in its first
manifesto, called upon Cubists, Futurists,
and Expressionists to join together in the
regeneration of Germany after its defeat in
World War |.

The architect most associated with
Expressionism was Eric Mendelsohn (1887-
1953 }, as famous for his drawings as for his
buildings. His sketches, many unrelated to
any commission, emphasized the building's
flowing silhouette. There are no pictorial
enhancements, no landscape features—just
the building without context, drawn in dark
lines on a white sheet of paper. Despite
his seemingly impossible and grandiose
ambitions for the field of architecture,
Mendelsohn was an extremely successful
architect, even during the 1920s, and was
one of the first professionally successful
modernist architects, employing as many as
forty people in his office.

17.116 A project for a stock exchange by Hans
Bernhard Scharoun

17.117 Einstein Tower, Potsdam, Germany

Mendelsohn was naturally drawn to concrete,
but the technology at that time was still rather
limited, and even though he first conceived
of the Einstein Tower in Potsdam, Germany
(1917-21), as a concrete building, it was in
actuality a brick structure with a concrete-
stucco exterior. The tower, his first major
commission, was built for the Astrophysical
Institute in Potsdam and is still in use today.
The building, surrounded by a forest, was
sited in a clearing on a plateau at the edge
of a drop-off. (The site is now somewhat
altered.)

The form of the building’s exterior in some
places seems to have been carved out; in
other places, it seems to have been molded.
In the vicinity of the windows, it seems to be
a soft encasement of a mysterious, angular
metallic structure within. In the approach
to the building, a set of steps leads to an
elevated deck that opens to the entrance
lobby, with one stair leading down and
another leading up the tower. The telescope
at the top of the tower transmits light to
instruments in the basernent laboratory.
Between the shaft and the base, to the
rear of the building, are study and sleeping
quarters for the scientists.

17.118 Interior: Einstein Tower

17.119 Section: Einstein Tower

a?

17.120 Plan: Einstein Tower


Court

Viceroy’s Palace

Race course

: +p Rallway station

N\ Old city
Ne

Park
Reservoir
\

Gd fort

2km

17.121 Plan of New Delhi, India, by Sir Edwin Lutyens, 1911

NEW DELHI

In 1911, at a coronation darbar (“court”)

in Delhi, India, George V announced his
decision to build a new capital for imperial
India, one that could unfalteringly display the
English determination to maintain British rule
in India in perpetuity. Calcutta had always
been the seat of the colonial government, but
this was an accident of history. The English
chose Delhi to ensure the identification of
the new capital with the onetime Mughal
seat of power. A debate immediately raged
over whether the architecture should
acknowledge an indigenous idiom or reflect
the conventions of colonial neoclassicism.
After intense lobbying by advocates of both
sides, Viceroy Lord Charles Hardinge decided
that a design that was “plain classic” with

a “touch of Orientalism" would be best. His

solution was not much different from that

of a century earlier, when a classical revival
had been advocated based on the eternal
principles of classical architecture. With that,
the colonial ideologues were back to where
they had started—except for the “touch of
Orientalism.”

New Delhi’s master plan and the design
of its principal building, the Viceroy’s Palace
(1921-27), was executed by Sir Edwin
Lutyens. The Secretariat buildings were
designed by Herbert Baker, who had just
completed the Union Buildings in Pretoria
to great success. The master plan reflected
Beaux-Arts academicism; a series of radial

spokes were elegantly stitched together over
85 square kilometers to create an expansive
vision of a capital city. Different classes of
bungalows appropriate for various levels of
officers were distributed around its expanse.
At its center was the grand east-west path,
King’s Way, with the Viceroy’s Palace and
Secretariat raised on a hill at its western
terminus. The other end of King’s Way was
marked by a diminutive memorial to the
unknown soldier, designed by Lutyens.

tr

17.122 Viceroy’s Palace, New Delhi

Although they had a personal falling out,
Lutyens’s and Baker's designs harmonized
well. Finished in red and yellow Rajasthan
sandstone, both sets of designs stress the
horizontal, utilizing the Indian chajja, or
overhang, to cast long, continuous shadows
that contrast sharply with the bright Indian
sun. Small chattris, campaniles, and domes
provide the vertical counterpoints. Baker,
ever more the imperialist than Lutyens, did
not hesitate to incorporate some elephants
and sandstone screens to make his designs
more “Oriental” in tone. But the general
impression of the entire viceroyal complex
displays the restrained and accomplished use
of a stripped-down neoclassical vocabulary,
arguably some of Lutyens’s and Baker’s best
work. Indeed, the greatest impact is from the
distance at the terminus of King's Way (now
called Raj Path), where the broad horizontal
sweeps off the complex effectively emphasize
the three domes and two campaniles.


Kilindint Harbor

17.123 Plan of Mombasa, Kenya

17.124 Old town, Mombasa

Warehouse district « if

2}

Residential

p 9s
“Bid! town i
as!

— Park area for whites.

“OM

. “Residential area for whites}

area for Africans

Mombasa Harbor

MOMBASA

With the exception of a few countries such
as Ethiopia, most of Africa prior to World

War | was still under colonial rule, with the
occupying powers primarily interested in the
extraction of goods. As a result, the principal
building projects were train stations, port
facilities, and urban layouts that separated
whites from blacks. Mombasa is an excellent
example. It had long been a busy port with a
complex multiethnic character. Its harbor, on
the eastern side of the island, had a narrow
entrance and afforded good protection. In the
16th century, the Portuguese had hoped to
control the city but were never able to assert
their domination over the sultan of Mombasa,
who reigned over the relatively independent
city until the middle of the 19th century,
when it became a British protectorate.

In 1887, the city’s administration was
relinquished to the British East Africa
Association, which envisioned it as the sea
terminal of the Uganda Railway (started in
1896). The aim was to connect the city with
Buganda (part of present-day Uganda), a
wealthy kingdom on the north shore of Lake
Victoria that the colonial powers were eager to
exploit for coffee and tea; white settlers also
hoped to set up cotton farms.

Construction of the line started at
Mombasa and reached Lake Victoria in 1901.
Indian traders set up corporations alongside
the British, dealing in rice and coffee in
particular. In the 1920s, Mombasa became
Africa’s leading harbor for kerosene and
gasoline. Because the old city was compact
and not very large, the rest of the island was
relatively free for development. The English
built a new harbor, Kilindini Harbor, on the
island’s west side, which could accommodate
berths for large ships. In 1926, Walton
Jameson, a town planning expert, laid out the
new colonial city. Predictably, the train station
was at the conceptual apex of the design. A
tri-pronged set of streets formed a business
center running eastward, connecting to
the old town. To the north and south of
the business center, the city was divided
according to race and class, with separate
African and Swahili quarters; the more elite
section was to the south, with its oceanfront,
and was separated from the business center
by a zone of schools, a golf course, parks,
and sports areas.


weg

17.125 Lister County Courthouse, Sdlveshurg, Sweden

ASPLUND AND LEWERENTZ

Sweden had been fortunate to escape the
ravages of World War I, and the comparative
postwar prosperity left the young Gunnar
Asplund (1885-1940) in an excellent position
to make a name for himself with his design
of the Woodland Cemetery (1918-20)

in Stockholm (codesigned with Sigurd
Lewerentz) and the Lister County Court
House (1917-21) in Sdlvesborg, Sweden.
The latter building is a simple rectangle with
a circular courtroom embedded in the plan
to the rear. From 1913 to 1914, Asplund

had taken a trip to Rorne, Ravenna, and
Sicily that brought him into contact with the
great architectural works of the past. He was
drawn less to the most famous monuments
than to simple medieval churches, nestled
against other buildings or silhouetted against
the open sky. Though he can be considered
a modernist, his interest in nonmachine
aesthetic monumentality has led many to
view him as a classicist, but such distinctions
are not clear-cut; Asplund’s work is, in

fact, a continuation of late 19th-century
Romanticism.
Under Asplund, Swedish national
Romanticism shed its overt allegiance to

the Middle Ages and sought out an abstract
formalism, as, for example, in the Stockholm
Public Library (1920-28), a building of
absolute functional clarity. It is composed of
a cylindrical reading roorn within a U-shaped
uilding, a restaternent of Schinkel’s Altes
Museum in Berlin—which was later restated

17.126 Plan and section: Woodland Cemetery Chapel, Stockholm

again in Le Corbusier's Assembly Building
in Chandigarh, India, and in James Stirling's
Neue Staatsgalerie museum in Stuttgart,
Germany. From the entrance, the visitor is
conducted upward by a dramatic but simply
designed staircase, framed by an Egyptian-
style portal. Within the reading room, above peo oTE
the three open tiers of books, rise the rough
surfaces of the cylindrical walls, ending in

a row of windows and a flat ceiling. On the
exterior, the facade is divided in two, with the
base almost as tall as the upper part. Dividing
the sections is an Egyptian-style frieze filled
with mysterious symbols that refer to learning
and the arts.

Asplund and Lewerentz designed the
Stockholm Exhibition in 1930, by which tirne
they had both expressly adopted modernism.
The exhibition's slogan, “Accept!”, was a
call to accept modernism in Scandinavian
life, including the mass factory production of L
food. 9

a

17.127 Plan and section: Stockholm Public Library

17.128 Hollyhock House, Los Angeles

FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT AND THE
MAYAN REVIVAL STYLE
By the early decades of the 20th century,
Frank Lloyd Wright’s interests in architecture
had become more eclectic. He began to
design a series of houses in California and
received his most important commission to
date, the design of the new Imperial Hotel
in Tokyo. What distinguishes this work is
Wright's attempt to revivify not European but
pre-Columbian sources. Wright had had a
childhood fascination with pre-Columbian
architecture, and it suddenly emerged in
this work in what is sometimes called Mayan
Revival style, although the references are
diverse and not limited to Mayan sources.
Hollyhock House, located in the
Hollywood section of Los Angeles and
constructed at the peak of exciternent over
the city’s role in the fast-growing motion
picture industry, was built for Aline Barnsdall,
a wealthy oil heiress and supporter of left-
wing causes. The basic diagram of the house
is relatively simple, laid out as a U opening
to the east, with the garden moving down the
slope. At the head of the U is the living room,
with the bedroom area to the south and the
more public rooms to the north, close to
the garage. The whole creates a complex
set of closed and open spaces operating
on different levels, with some of the roofs
accessible as terraces. The house was built of

stuccoed hollow tile and wood.

Wright prepared over seven hundred
drawings for the Imperial Hotel in Tokyo, a

250-room extravaganza that was lavished with

delicate and carefully articulated detailing.
Made from poured concrete, concrete block,
and carved oya stone, Wright's building was
a tour de force in modernist ornamentation
and integrated design, quite the counterpoint
to the contemporary puritanical injunctions
in modernist Europe of the likes of Adolf
Loos. It replaced a Meiji-era structure built

17.129 Interior fireplace, Hollyhock House

for international guests visiting Japan. The
hotel is famous for having withstood the
great Tokyo earthquake of 1923 on account
of its “floating” foundations, although a
series of other structural factors, such as the
quantity of steel in the overhangs, may also
have played a role. The hotel was damaged
during World War II, but Wright refused to
be involved in its repair and expansion after
the war. The building was demolished in the
1960s.

a

17.130 Plan: Hollyhock House

17.131 Bandung Institute of Technology, Bandung, Indonesia

DUTCH KAMPUNG

While the English controlled India and most
of the China trade, the Dutch retained their
hold on Indonesia, in spite of several English
and French attempts to dislodge them.
However, late 19th-century wars with the
French, the Acehnese, and the Javanese put
the Dutch colonial government deeply into
debt. In response, the Dutch set production
quotas, fixed prices, restricted travel, and
raised taxes. These policies were a disaster
and led to massive starvation in the midst

of burnper crops of export commodities. A
disgruntled young Dutch colonial officer,
Eduard Douwes Dekker, captured the
hardships of these years for the Dutch public
in the 1859 novel Max Havalaar. The ensuing
outrage back in the Netherlands forced the
hand of the colonial authorities, and in a
series of legislative changes starting in 1870,
the so-called Liberal Policy dismantled the
forced cultivation of export commodities

and opened the colonial economy to Dutch
private enterprise. The policy sparked a large
migration of Dutch to the East Indies, leading
to a forceful spatial assertion of European
identity against Indonesian and immigrant
Asian societies. Using the Garden City model,
the Dutch carved their colonial space out of
what they saw as the congestion and filth of
neighborhoods in the colonial towns across
Java and Sumatra, building Indian-style
bungalows set in spacious gardens with
outbuildings for kitchens and servants.

In 1901, the Dutch queen, Wilhelmina,
announced that the Netherlands would from
then on accept an ethical responsibility for
the welfare of its Indonesian subjects. This
announcement was a sharp contrast with
the former doctrine of profit-making. The
result, architecturally, was a search for hybrid
styles. In fact, the Indies-born but ethnically
Dutch architect Henri Maclaine Pont was
one of the progenitors of the Indische style,
an architecture dedicated to the fusion of
Dutch and indigenous approaches. Hendrik
Petrus Berlage, the noted Dutch architect,
characterized the challenge as one of pulling
together the universal qualities of Western
modernism with “the local spiritual aesthetic

100m

4.

17.132 Site plan: Bandung Institute of Technology

elements of the East,” an early interpretation
of what later came to be characterized as
“critical regionalism.”

An exemplar of this approach was
Pont's design for the Bandoeng Technische
Hoogeschool {Bandung Institute of
Technology, 1920). The twenty buildings
were laid out crossways to the site’s principal
axis in a Beaux-Arts manner. The wood
trusses of the buildings were left exposed on
the interiors of the halls in keeping with the
strictures of the Arts and Crafts movement,
while the roof form is a free interpretation of
the traditional Sumatran minangkabau roof
systern found in many regions of Southeast
Asia.

17.133 Interior: Bandung Institute of Technology

17.134 Theo van Doesburg’s color design for Amsterdam University Hall, Netherlands

DE STIL MOVEMENT
After World War |, Expressionism in Holland
gave way to a vibrant avant-garde culture that
focused on issues of abstraction and color; at
the center of it were Piet Mondrian and Theo
van Doesburg. The latter still had ties to the
Expressionist cause insofar as he advocated a
form of three-dimensional color environment.
As Van Doesburg explained in several essays
published in de Sti! between 1926 and 1928,
the essence of the countercomposition was
its opposition to the orthogonal character
of architecture and nature. Art, he argued,
in aspiring to the spiritual, must provide for
architecture an additional dimension—the
obligue—that architecture by itself was
not capable of creating, given that it was
shackled to weight and gravity. In that sense,
art, for him, was opposed to functionality as
well as to construction.

Van Doesburg was deeply influenced
by the work of painter Piet Mondrian. His
designs for a cinerna/dance hall, the Café
Aubette in Strasbourg (1926-28), which
involved broad compositions of colored
rectangles in relief, oriented at 45-degree
angles. Mirrors were placed between the
windows to reflect the ceiling and the three
other walls, all treated in a manner that
turned the architectural surface into a kind of
plastic relief sculpture.

One of the few examples of de Stijl
architecture is the Schroder House (1924),

designed by Dutch architect Gerrit Thornas
Rietveld, who lived and worked in Utrecht.
The client, Truus Schrader-Schrader, the wife
of a noted lawyer, wanted a house with as few
walls as possible. It is built at the end of a
block of conventional 19th-century attached
row houses, giving it views in three directions.
Rietveld exploited this to create a house in
which the volumes seem to be composed of
plains, some hanging free from the facade.
The principal colors were white and gray,

17.135 Schroder House, Utrecht, Netherlands

with red, yellow and blue serving as accents.
The ground floor was relatively conventional
but the upper floor had numerous movable
walls that allowed for spaces to be opened or
closed as desired.

Walter Gropius rejected Van Doesburg’s
position, as did architect Jacobus Johannes
Pieter Oud (1890-1963). They argued that
architecture needed to focus on social and
economic realities, rather than abstract
spiritual speculations.


17.136 Plans for Friedrichstrasse Office Building and glass skyscraper projects, Berlin

17.137 Friedrichstrasse Office Building project

FRIEDRICHSTRASSE OFFICE BUILDING
In 1921 a competition was held for a tall
office building along the Friedrichstrasse

in Berlin, and though Mies van der Rohe
(1886-1969) did not win, largely because

he flouted all the rules of the prospectus, his
design has entered the lore of skyscraper
history for its radical innovation. Mies began
his training with his father as a stonemason,
but his talent led him to Berlin, where he
worked for a while for Bruno Paul, one of
Germany's most influential Art Nouveau
architects, and then for the more modernist-
oriented Peter Behrens. The houses Mies
built during the 1920s were certainly
competent but hardly imaginative. They stood
in sharp contrast with his unbuilt work, which
was an evocative and imaginative expression
of the emerging modernist aesthetic. His
submittal for the office tower competition,
for example, shows a building composed
of three angular prismatic towers linked
in the middle by a circulation core, wit

to maximum capacity. Instead, the building
breaks apart the block into three separate
thirty-story towers that only at the buildings’
tangents touch the perimeter of the site. The
competition drawings showed the buildings
rising high above the haphazard townhouse-
apartment blocks.

This project, along with his contemporary
design for a country house in brick, placed
Mies firmly within the emerging modernist
movement that was aiming beyond
Expressionism, which was still the prevailing
post-World War | aesthetic. He joined the
Novembergruppe in 1922. The original
political motivation of the group by that time
had been lost, but the organization remained
important because of its architectural
exhibitions, of which Mies soon became the
director in charge. In a series of blunt and

an open cylindrical space left free all the
way from bottom to top. The steel skeleton
with cantilevered floor slabs was sheathed
completely in glass. The design reduced the
building to its fundamental elements: the
circulation core and the office pods. The core
that contains the stairways, elevators, and
lavatories constitutes a type of trunk clearly
visible in the plans. Mies did not, as was
conventional, see each floor as filling the site

17.138 Project for a brick country house

out his ambitions: “We

terse texts, he lai
refuse to recognize the problem of form,
but only the problems of building.” To this

he added, “Essentially the task is to free

the practice of building from the control of
aesthetic speculators and restore it to what

it should exclusively be: Building.” This
declaration of purpose was published in a
journal called G, which appeared in July
1923 under the editorship of Hans Richter,
El Lissitzky, and Werner Graeff, and which
announced its hostility toward romance and
subjectivity in art. Though these skyscrapers,
and the Brick Country House, had a minimal
investment in their structural logic, Mies, by
the mid-1920s, was moving toward a position
that placed structure—stripped of allusions,
illusions, and the raw realities of building—
into the center of architectural production.

|

*T
Ta—

i
i

17.139 Vladimir Tatlin’s sculpture Counter Relief

RUSSIAN CONSTRUCTIVISM
When Karl Marx, in the 1860s, critiqued
capitalist society and proposed an alternative
world controlled by the proletariat, he
assumed that change would take place
in industrialized Europe. But when the
revolution did come in 1917, it was in
the under-industrialized country of Russia
with a small working class. The Russian
Revolution capitalized on the prevailing
anti-czarist sentiment to forge a communist
vision that, like postcolonial modernist
attempts, sought to skip over the capitalist
age straight into communism. The Russian
avant-garde wanted a clean slate, seeing in
the new situation a singular opportunity for
manifesting the arts as politically purposeful
reality. Thus, the Soviet experiment, as long
as it lasted, was possibly modernism’s very
best opportunity to constitute and express
itself as a cross-disciplinary social, political
and aesthetic rovement. It therefore
catalyzed modernists across Europe and
beyond and became, for a while, the
sounding board of international modernism.
The Russian Constructivists sought
to push modernist claims to their limits.
The term Constructivism emerged at the
beginning of the 1920s and was closely
associated with the Society of Contemporary
Architects (OSA). This movernent was, arnong

the various tendencies, the closest to the

tenets of the European New Architecture,
and to the work of Le Corbusier in particular.
It was led by Moisei Ginzburg (1892-1946),
whose structures aimed to ernbody the ideals
of the new socialist order. For Ginzburg

and the Constructivists, art for art's sake

was dead: art now had to reflect the newly
established truth of the world. To sever

art and by extension architecture from

their subservience to the bourgecis class,
artists and architects had to draw their
aesthetic from factory production, given

that industrialization, now controlled by the
communists, would, so it was presumed,
become the springboard for a truly universal
human culture. Constructivism, though it
was grounded in an image of industrial labor,
was not a one-to-one translation of industry
into aesthetics, but it was the first modernist
aesthetic that admitted, and in fact glorified,
the mass-produced object. Constructivists
used the term faboratory work to describe
their formal investigations and to emphasize
their solidarity with both science and labor.
Laboratory work was, however, not to be
equated with the pragmatism of problem
solving, for the Constructivists, though they
admired utilitarianism, also spoke of the need
for a formal language that was imbued with
an aura of heroism.

Constructivism, the best-known movement
outside of Russia, is often, but mistakenly,
associated with the entirety of Russian
revolutionary art, but not all Russian art of
the time was Constructivist: there were also
Rationalists and Suprematists. The theme of
eroism was tackled in the work of a group
jeaded by a charismatic figure, Nikolai
Ladovsky, whose ASNOVA group (Association
for the New Architecture), founded in 1923,
attributed to the new forms of architecture
the power of acting in revolutionary ways on
the psyche of the masses. Also known as
Rationalists, they differentiated themselves
rom the Constructivists; despite certain
similarities, they intended to develop a more
purely scientific foundation for the aesthetics
of modern architecture.

The third major group, the Suprematists,
focused on fundamental geometric forms
such as squares and circles. In art, their
known representative was Kazimir Malevich,
who painted simple geometric shapes on his
canvases; in architecture, it was El Lissitzky
(1890-1941). Lissitzky, who designed
exhibition displays and propaganda works,
was also greatly influenced by the aesthetics
of the Bauhaus and de Stijl. Projects like his
Wolkenbigel, however, which had towers
supporting vast cantilevered buildings in the
sky, show his daring formal vision.

est-


Cylinde®

Pyramid

17.140 Drawing of the Monument to the Third Internatio

Tatlin’s Tower

Together with the Vesnin brothers and
Moisei Ginzburg, Vladimir Tatlin (1885-
1953) occupies a central position in early
Constructivism and became, along with
Malevich and El Lissitzky, an important
catalyst in the modernist movement of the
1920s. Tatlin studied art in Moscow and after
a long journey working on ships as a sailor,
he went to Paris, where he met Picasso
and other Cubists. During this period, his
work moved away from painting to begin
three-dimensional explorations into material
and gravity. Some of his more interesting
works were installed in the corners of a
room in a type of dialogue with the walls
and a diagonally redirected space—an
experiment with the formalist concept of
“defamiliarization.” Later in the decade, Tatlin
defined his efforts as aiming at synthesizing
the various branches of art with technology.
His artistic explorations and utopian

theory coalesced in his project for a huge
400-meter-high tower (designed in 1919)
that was meant to straddle the Neva River
in the center of Petrograd (St. Petersburg)
in celebration of the newly founded Third
(Communist) International. The monument,
of which a 5-meter-high model was

built, consisted of three volumes of glass
suspended in a vast double spiral structure
stiffened along its slope by a leaning truss.

The lower space, a cube, was to complete
one rotation per year on its axis to correspond
to the frequency of the Communist
International General Assembly meetings.
The second space, a pyramid, was to rotate
on its axis once per month, corresponding

to the meeting frequency of the Secretariat.
The third and smallest room, a cylinder,

was to rotate once per day to match the
daily operations of the International. It
contained, among other spaces, offices for

a newspaper that issued pamphlets and
manifestoes. Radio masts rose from the peak
of the monument, not unlike those at the
Eiffel Tower, which Tatlin's edifice emulated
implicitly.

The tower became a symbol of the young
Soviet Republic, and smaller versions of it
were carried in processions through Moscow
like religious objects and presented at various
exhibitions abroad. El Lissitzky was moved
to write that the tower was the modern
equivalent to Sargon’s ziggurat but created
in a new material for a new context. The
iron, he added, represented the will of the
proletariat, whereas the glass was a sign of
a clear conscience. Another commentator
saw the spiral as the symbol par excellence
of modern times, whereas the Formalist
Viktor Shklovsky called it, in semiclogical
terms, a monument “made of steel, glass and
revolution.”

17.141 Plan: Soviet Pavilion, Paris, France

17.142 Rusakov Factory Club, Moscow

Soviet Pavilion

‘onstantin Stepanovich Melnikov (1890-
1974), one of the most productive of the
Russian avant-garde architects, has been
jailed as one of the twelve great architects
of the contemporary world. He adamantly
refused, however, to be associated with

any ism, and his highly idiosyncratic ceuvre
featured works that radically differed from
each other. He built about twenty structures,
of which only a few survive. Like Tatlin,

e began his career studying painting but
widened his scope to include architecture,
graduating from the Moscow School of
Painting and Sculpture in 1917. He was
trained in a neoclassical style, as was typical
prior to the revolution.

One of his first major works was the
Soviet Pavilion in Paris, which was built for
the 1925 International Exhibition of Modern
Industrial and Decorative Arts; the displays
were designed by Rodchenko. Melnikov,
starting with a building made of pyramids
and spirals in a Tatlinian manner, eventually
created a startling angular composition with
a staircase running diagonally up and then
down the entire building. Though a relatively
small building, the staircase gave to it a
monumental cast. The structure was built
not of steel but of wood fitted in Moscow by
peasants wielding traditional Russian axes,

and shipped to Paris for assernbly by French
carpenters. The flying roof panels were
painted red, the walls gray, and the window
mullions white.

There was a debate in the USSR

at the time about whether the new

Soviet architecture should aspire to be
technologically advanced or reflect local craft
traditions. Melnikov favored the latter, but he
was more than flexible when it came to larger
commissions, such as the Rusakov Factory
Club (1927). Workers’ clubs had been
created after the revolution to elevate the
workers’ culture and literacy while providing
leisure places after their daily toils, but by

1924 most workers had shown themselves
to be less than zealous for such uplift. A new
generation of workers’ clubs came into being
that focused more on club activities than
ideology.

At a time when living space in Moscow
averaged 5 square meters per capita, the
clubs were one of the few places outside of
the factory where workers could congregate.
Melnikov went even further and interpreted
them as an expression of a group individuality
against the backdrop of urban anonymity.
Melnikov's Rusakov Factory Club is highly
expressive, despite the symmetry and
simplicity of its plan. The lecture hall that
was its main programmatic element was

- I !
17.143 Plan and section: Rusakov Factory Club

divided into three subunits that seemed to
break through the building's exterior and to
hover dangerously above the entrance. Each
auditorium box seated 190 people, and each
faced a large common stage. Three rooms for
club functions were located in a mezzanine
just below the seating.

17.144 Soviet Pavilion, Paris

SeOmeray -cOLO*
‘

5, st
on, 0
“Mare SEMEN TARY FORM a an

LALS in Tae PRELM

17.145 Diagram of the Bauhaus curriculum

THE BAUHAUS

In 1919 Walter Gropius (1883-1969)

was made the head of a new school of
architecture formed by the merger of two
older schools of arts and crafts. Significantly
less pragmatically oriented than the
Deutsche Werkbund, the Bauhaus sought
to engender a new unified pedagogy and
vision that unified the arts and crafts, in
collaboration with industry. Though nominally
a national school, the Bauhaus was always
cosmopolitan in orientation, open to all
students regardless of gender, nationality, or
previous qualifications. Initially the Bauhaus's
purpose was to produce a new “guild of
craftsmen,” but that does not mean it was
reactionary, for Gropius also wanted a school
that could unify the arts and close the gap
between industry and craft. In that sense,
unlike William Morris, who saw craft as a
bulwark against industry, or the Werkbund,
which was seeking an industrialized craft,
Gropius was seeking to discover the internal
ethos of industrial production itself. The
question was not just how to make things,
but how to perceive and experience things
as well. For that reason, Gropius brought in
painters, including Lyonel Feininger, Paul
Klee, and Johannes Itten. The celebration
of painters as form-makers reflected a
not-so-subtle shift away from the social
(and thus from the contentious political
issues of the time), toward the language of
abstraction and design. |tten was placed in

17.146 The Bauhaus, Dessau, Germany

charge of the basic course required of all
incoming students. Its purpose was to free
the students’ creative powers and guide
them toward a suitable direction in their later
studies.

In 1924, the reduction of funding from
Weimar, its host city, forced the school to
move to Dessau, where the Junkers aircraft
factory was located. Gropius used this
opportunity to reinvent the Bauhaus, purging
its faculty and stripping the curriculurn
of its more expressionistic and mystical
elements, to focus more single-mindedly on
an industrial aesthetic inspired in part by the
Junkers factory. Johannes Itten left and was
replaced by the Russian Wassily Kandinsky.

The city of Dessau helped finance a new
campus, which was designed by Gropius as a
signature, representative work. The program
of the Dessau building (1919-25) included
workshops, administrative offices, a lecture
hall, and a stage, as well as workroorms,

a canteen, and student accommodations.
Gropius divided the program into two major
elements separated by a road and connected
by a bridge. The bridge, fittingly, was where
Gropius had his office: to go from the
classrooms to the studio spaces, one had to
pass by Gropius's office. The building was
not particularly unified in the classical sense,
for each element had its own programmatic
logic. The dormitory at the east end stood

17.147 Joost Schmidt's poster for the
1923 Bauhaus exhibition in Weimar

cryrad
fie iad

17.148 Corner of the Bauhaus building, Dessau

awkwardly connected to the long, one-story
space that contained the lecture hall and
canteen, which in turn was linked to the
main building, whose two stories of studio
spaces were transformed into a glazed box.
The L-shaped area containing offices and
classrooms, on the other hand, was designed
with horizontal banding of white stucco that
contrasted with the windows. The only two
colors in the whole composition were white
and black.

In 1928, Gropius stepped down as head
of the Bauhaus and appointed Hannes Meyer
(1889-1954), a Swiss architect, to take over.
Meyer's socialist political allegiances led to
conflict with the government, and he was
forced to resign in 1930. The position then
went to Mies van der Rohe, who kept the
school afloat until it was officially closed by
the Nazis in 1933.

The Bauhaus, though it lasted only
fourteen years, became a lightning rod
for debates that enabled the furthering of
modern architecture in the brief moment
in time between the early 1920s and the
return of neaclassicism and nationalism in
the 1930s. Criticism of the school carne not

only from conservative factions but from
modernists as well. Le Corbusier, though
he would change his mind later, argued
that modern architecture could be taught

17.149 Pictorial view: The Bauhaus, Dessau

aesthetically, as it was allied primarily with
industry. For him, architecture should not
emerge out of decorative design. Similarly,
Theo van Doesburg, the Dutch artist, argued
that the Bauhaus, in emphasizing individual
creativity, had abandoned the all-important
search for a relationship between artist and
society. Despite these difficulties the Bauhaus
remained the leading school of modernist
design in Europe.

leaching block
Lai. UILE

wet DN,

sop

Workshops and studios

wt

tah

bebe

PN
_
J

17.150 Ground- and second-floor plans: The Bauhaus, Dessau

Workshops and studios

leaching block
seperereens ,

mln

as Library

Administration offices

H

ta
ea
2

C

4

Student housing

tet
i

i

r

17.151 Facsimile of sketches illustrating Le Corbusier’s Five Points toward a New Architecture

LE CORBUSIER AND VERS UNE
ARCHITECTURE

Due to the dominance of the Beaux-Arts system,
the innovations in design that were taking place
in other parts of Europe and in the United States
had only minimal resonance in France. For
modernism to develop it needed someone who
could break its cultural isolation and provide a
suitable alternative. That person was Charles-
Edouard Jeanneret-Gris, who later changed

his name to Le Corbusier (1887-1965). A
Swiss-born architect who worked briefly in the
offices of Auguste Perret and Peter Behrens,

Le Corbusier moved permanently to Paris in
1916, at the age of twenty-nine. Le Corbusier's
articles in L’Esprit nouveau, as well as his
epochal 1923 book Vers une architecture
(Towards a New Architecture), became the most
significant summary statements of the ideals of
the modernist movement to appear since World
War |.

Jeanneret began his career designing
houses in the Art and Crafts style in his native
city of La Chaux-de-Fonds in Switzerland. But
once in Paris, and after a travel tour to Turkey,
Greece, Italy, and other parts of Europe and
the Mediterranean in 1911, he allowed his
unique style to develop rapidly. He was strongly
influenced by the modern painters, particularly
the Cubists. In 1920, he took on the name
Le Corbusier. Vers une architecture outlined
Five Points toward a New Architecture: the
pifotis (stilts) that support the building, the free
plan with the only structural support coming in
the form of columns, the free facade, the strip
window, and the roof terrace. These features,
he argued, were based on structural properties
of reinforced concrete as well as the increasing
availability of mass-produced architectural
elements. They also allowed the architect to work
with pragmatic forms. The idea of the pilotis
was to remain with Le Corbusier throughout his
career. Inspired by Rousseauesque thinking
that invested undisturbed nature with an ideal
of plenitude, Le Corbusier’s pilotis were meant
to liberate the land from the oppression of a
building that interrupted its flow and rhythm.

Villa Savoye

In the 1920s, Le Corbusier designed a series of
houses in Paris and its suburbs that explored
and demonstrated the possibilities of his Five
Paints. The Maisons La Roche-Jeanneret (1923),
which now houses the Fondation Le Corbusier,
was a combined set of houses for two different
clients. Le Corbusier responded to the spatial

17.152 Villa Savoye, Poissy, Paris

demands of the different households by designing interweaving layers of
spaces, connected by a central court. The house was painted white, but on
the inside, walls were painted in a variety of soft hues of red, yellow, and
blue, as well as white.

His most influential work from this time was the Villa Savoye (1931) at
Poissy, a suburb of Paris, where the client owned a large parcel of land that
swelled up to a gentle hill. At its apex, Le Corbusier placed a cubic volume,
lifted on pilotis, a column-and-slab construction in reinforced concrete. The
walls were built of brick and stuccoed over. The plans on every floor were
customized to their functional requirements, and a simple strip window was
the centerpiece of the elevation.

The ground-floor plan was designed around the turning radius of the
client's automobile, which, after dropping off his employer at the entry
on axis with the center, was to be parked by the chauffeur in parking
slots located around the curve. (In Vers une architecture, Le Corbusier
ad praised the design of the modern French automobile as an aesthetic
achievement as great as the Parthenon.) Inside the front door and past the
chauffeur’s quarters, a carefully designed ramp rises up the middle of the
villa. Living spaces were arranged around the ramp on three sides on the
irst floor. A terrace fills up the rest. The ramp reverses direction and ends
on the roof, where a freestanding wall with a single window self-consciously
rames the landscape. Although Le Corbusier celebrated the automobile, he
also designed the building as a prornenade with experiences unfolding at
every turn. Once again, though the exterior was white (apart from the red
entrance door), some of the interior walls were painted in pastel hues of
eige, rose, and blue.

17.153 Expanded view of spaces: Villa Savoye

17.154 Villa Savoye

17.155 Lovell Beach House, Newport Beach, California

LOVELL HOUSE

Modernist architecture did not produce any
major inroads in the United States until the
1940s, with the arrival of Walter Gropius
and Mies van der Rohe. There are two
principal reasons for American resistance
to modernism: Beaux-Arts architecture
was still strong and taught in architecture
schools; and Frank Lloyd Wright, the
dominant American architect of the time,
was a trenchant critic of the Europeans’ boxy,
unadorned aesthetic.

Early examples of European modernist
architecture in the United States are thus
few and center on the work of two architects,
Rudolf Michael Schindler (1887-1953) and
Richard Neutra (1892-1970). Schindler,
whose work was very much underappreciated

at the time, was born in Austria but moved
to the United States in 1914. He found
employment in the office of Wright until
branching out on his own, setting the tone
for an architecture that had never been seen
in the United States with his Lovell Beach
House (1922-26). It was not a house in

any traditional sense; nor was it a house in
the Corbusian sense, with floor slabs and
columns. Instead, a series of five concrete
wall elements elevated the living quarters
high above the ground to catch the sea
breezes. The house appeared from below like
the underside of a bridge. The floors, roofs
and walls were built of wood.

The same clients commissioned Neutra to
design their principal residence (1927-29)
in the Hollywood Hills in Los Angeles. It
was built against a steep hill with views to
the city to the south. The entrance was at
the top level, where the family bedrooms
and sleeping porches were also located. A
staircase, enclosed on two sides by glass
and with spectacular views, led down to the
main floor and the living room, which faces
south. The guest room and kitchen were to
the north. It was the first completely steel-

17.156 Lovell House, Hollywood Hills, Los Angeles

tamed residence in the
prefabricated elements

extended balconies and
the upper floor suspen
eams above. The domi

and draperies were in s|
metal trim was gray and

United States, the
jolted together in less

than forty hours. The house was not a box,
jowever, but rather a complex structure with

sleeping porches on
ed from powerful roof
nant interior colors

were blue, gray, white, and black. Carpets

ades of gray. The
the woodwork black.

Potted plants softened ti

je hard lines. The

surface of the building was defined by glass

and white steel panels.

Lal a a
i
L

17.157 Plan and elevation: Lovell House

1950 CE

INTRODUCTION
By the middle of the 20th century, the great
expectations of the European Enlightenment
and its modernist institutions were being
pursued with greater zeal than ever—and
being widely critiqued for their contradictions
and failures. It was High Modernism’s heyday,
but it was also its watershed point: from mid-
century it went into steady decline, severely
challenged and eventually supplanted by
its postmodern critics in the late 1970s and
early 1980s.
The defining event of the era was, of
course, World War II. Although World War |
had been bloody and expensive, the ensuing
peace had given rise to the hope that the
utopian aspirations of modernism could
now be realized. Although the interwar
years were marked by political chaos and
financial instability—including the turmoil
of the Weimar Republic in Germany and
the Great Depression of 1929 in the United
States—they were also characterized by
grand projects that sought to finally deliver
on the social and aesthetic possibilities of
the industrial age. In architecture, significant
events of the time included Walter Gropius's
new school of design, the Bauhaus (founded
in 1919), Le Corbusier's books Vers une
Architecture (Toward a New Architecture),
first published in 1923, and City of Tomorrow
and Its Planning (1929); and Ludwig Mies
van de Rohe's Weissenhof Siedlung Exhibition
in 1927. The Congrés Internationaux
d’Architecture Moderne (CIAM), founded
in 1928, also played an important role as
it quickly grew into an organization with
dozens of members from around the world,
all committed to deploying the ideals of
functionalism and rationalism in building and
urban planning. Even in the early days of
the Soviet Republic, the social expectations
of modern architecture were broadly
vouchsafed, as in the Palace of the Soviets
competition of 1931. A major exhibition at the
Museurn of Modern Art in New York City in
1932 sought to codify this modernism as the
International style.
By 1935 Adolf Hitler in Germany and
Joseph Stalin in the Soviet Union had put
an end to modernism in their respective
spheres of influence. World War II brought
the utopian aspirations of the modernist
project to a screeching halt—not only by
putting a stop to construction, but even more
by undermining its grounding assumptions.

The fact that the model

rnist Western world,

instead of producing models of social
utopias, could just as easily create a model
machine for the Holocaust, provoked an

era of soul-searching a
tlessly pursing a
talism (from beton

consequences of relen
rationalist agenda. Bru

bout the collateral

brut, or “naked concrete”) emerged to define

a new expression for tl
aesthetic that was not
and gray, cognizant, it
inescapable brutality t

@ modernist work—an
pure and white but raw
was suggested, of the
at accompanied the

modern world. Le Corbusier himself was a
leading light of this project that was ultimately
embraced all around the globe, particularly
in the postcolonial world and Western
academia. Many of the new buildings on
U.S. university carmpuses were brutalist, such
as the University of California—Berkeley's
Wurster Hall (1964) and the University of
Washington's Gould Hall (1972).

Modern architecture, like other
forms of culture, was impacted by the
tumultuous1960s and its aftermath. Tearn
X, formed by a group of disgruntled CIAM
members, sought to rearticulate the identity
and aspirations of the modern movernent
into a more human-scaled, softer expression
that was more community- and region-based.
nstead of celebrating the machine, a more
climate-responsive architecture began to take
shape. Peter and Alison Smithson bridged the
rutalist and Team X carps. Maxwell Fry and
Jane Drew codified their work in Africa under
the rubric of Tropical Architecture. A group
rom England, Archigram, whose name came
rom the banner of the journal it founded,
promoted an architecture influenced by pop
art and a counterculture that was mobile,
lexible, transitory, and youth-oriented.
enzo Tange built the Yamanashi Press and
Broadcasting Center (1966) in Kofu, Japan,
and Denys Lasdun the Royal National Theatre
(1976) in London.
An indirect consequence of World War II
was that it finally dismantled the colonial
world. Beginning in 1947 with India, the
European colonies in Asia and Africa, one by
one, declared independence in the 1950s
and 1960s. Many of these newly independent
postcolonial nation-states adopted modern
architecture as the idiom with which to
build their new institutions of state, such as
Chandigarh in India, Brasilia in Brazil, and
Islamabad in Pakistan; these were followed
by a series of new African capitals, such as


Ibadan in Nigeria and Dodoma in Tanzania.
Even in communist Cuba, as in the early days
of the Soviet Republic, modern architecture
found a unique voice and form. Thus,
whereas modernism was highly contested
in Europe and the United States, it was
more readily embraced in places such as
Ankara, colonial North Africa, Latin America,
Australia, Japan, and India. In part this was
because in the former colonies, modernism,
with its claims to universality, represented a
path to modernity that, unlike classicism, was
not so strongly identified with Eurocentrism.
Of course, the formation of major global
institutions, such as the United Nations
with all its accessory bodies, also played a
major role in the worldwide dissemination of
modernism. Not only were the headquarters
of major UN institutions such as the General
Assembly in New York and UNESCO in Paris
designed in the modernist mold, but the UN
unded habitat consultants to travel around
the world and advocate for modernist urban
and rural planning models. At the vanguard
of this movement were visionaries such as
Buckminster Fuller and structuralist urban
thinkers such as Constantinos Doxiadis and
is Ekistics group based in Athens, Greece.
As part of this new global outlook, the new
postwar embassies of the United States, such
as Edward Durell Stone’s embassy in New
Delhi, were also built in modernist style.
European modernism, quite distinct
rom the homegrown modernism developed
y people like Frank Lloyd Wright, was
ushered into the United States through the
academies, in particular when Mies van der
Rohe began teaching at the Illinois Institute
of Technology in Chicago, and Walter Gropius
at Harvard University. As the American
economy boomed in the 1950s and 1960s,
private corporations eagerly adopted the new
style with its sleek outlines as the new symbol
of big business, eschewing their prewar
penchant for neoclassicism. The steel-and-
glass skyscraper quickly established itself
as the new symbol of corporate America,
supplanting the stone-clad tower epitomized
by the Empire State Building. Lever House
(1950-52), designed by Skidmore Owings
and Merrill (SOM), and the Seagram Building
by Mies van der Rohe, both in New York City,
set the tone. SOM specialized in designing
corporate headquarters in the United States
and abroad, and became one of the largest

architectural firms of the time. As the steel-
and-glass skyscraper became established
as the symbol of U.S. capitalism, even old
iconoclasts like Le Corbusier and Frank Lloyd
Wright came to be seen as anachronistic.
Post-World War II architecture also
saw the rise of the master-architect and
the prestige commission. Many of these
came to define the popular identity of the
modern movement, such as the town hall in
Saynatsalo, Finland (1952) by Alvar Aalto,
the Guggenheim Museum (1956-59) by
Frank Lloyd Wright, the Berlin Philharmonic
Hall (1956-63) by Hans Scharoun, and the
Sydney Opera House (1957-73) by Jarn
Utzon. A structure-based expression of
monumental architecture, exemplified by
the work of U.S.-based Eero Saarinen, made
for an architecture of distinctive profiles.
The standout figure of the late-modernist
period, however, was Louis Kahn. This
Philadelphia-based self-styled disciple of Le
Corbusier developed a distinctive body of
work that began as a discourse of “serving”
versus “served” spaces, but eventually
sought to reintroduce ideas of classical
monumentality into a modern architecture,
influenced in particular by his idiosyncratic
phenomenological reading of the antiquities
of Rome.
By the mid-1970s, the critics of modern
architecture were well entrenched. What
began as a critique of the perceived failures
of modernist urban schemes, evolved into a
scathing criticism of the formal orthodoxies
of modern architecture. Some architects,
like Aldo Rossi in Italy, hoped for a return
to history; others, like Robert Venturi and
Denise Scott Brown, sought out parody
and irony; whereas Peter Eisenman in the
United States and Oswald Mathias Ungers
in Germany aimed for a formalisrn more
rigorous than even that of the modernists.
The most enduring aspect of postmodernism
was its call for a heightened awareness of a
building's context—but how context was to be
defined was much debated, and varied from
Daniel Libeskind’s highly abstract Jewish
Museurn in Berlin (2001) to the efforts of
Prince Charles of England to reawaken an
interest in traditional styles. In the 1990s,
in opposition to the conservative tenor of
much architectural production, a group of
avant-garde architects, among them Rem
Koolhaas from Holland, called for a revival of

modernist forms and abstractions. Advances
in technology and computers also enabled
architects to build structures that in previous
decades would have been unthinkable. Frank
Gehry’s Guggenheim Museum (1997) in
Bilbao, Spain, with its curved titanium skin,
and the blue, bubble-shaped Kunsthaus
(2003) in Graz, Austria, by Peter Cook and
Colin Fournier, are noted examples.

MODERNISM
An inescapable problem in discussing
20th-century architecture is the definition of
such terms as modernity, modernization, and
modernism. For example, different artistic
fields—and even different practitioners—
tend to have contradictory understandings
of modernism. In the collages of Kurt
Schwitters, modernism might be used to
indicate fragrnentation; in James Joyce's
Finnegan's Wake, a heightened sense of
subjectivity is implied; and to understand the
music of Arnold Schoenberg, objectivity is
the precondition. In architecture, modernism
is associated with a radical break with past
forms. The ballast of literal historical allusions
is thrown overboard. In the late 1920s,
buildings by LeCorbusier or Mies van der
Rohe had white walls and simple forms, with
the emphasis on function and structure.
Explicitly codifying modernism as a style
was Philip Johnson's and Henry-Russell
Hitchcock's book, The International Style,
which followed on the heels of an exhibition
at the New York Museum of Modern Art
(1932). In the Weimar Republic between
1923 and 1933, there arose the term Neue
Sachlichkeit (“New Objectivity”); a critique of
the overemotional aspects of some forms of
Expressionism, it advocated clean lines and
matter-of-fact design. The word functionalism
also came into play, though this term also
had several connotations. For Mies van der
Rohe, the emphasis was on the clarity of
a building's form and detailing; for Walter
Gropius, it was on the building’s massing
and organization. For Le Corbusier, it meant
the use of concrete and of the free plan, as
defined by his Five Points.

The 1930s, and the period between
the world wars in general, was an era of
optimism for the modernists in Europe. After
World War | had cleared out the detritus of
history, a rational reordering of the world
seemed possible and desirable. Even small

18.1 Modern steel construction

projects were imbricated with an avant-garde
spirit—optimistic harbingers of things to
come. Iconic works from this ethos included
Gerrit Rietveld’s Schréder House (Utrecht,
Netherlands, 1924); Alvar Aalto’s Viipuri
Library (1927-35); Richard Neutra's Lovell
House (Hollywood, California, 1927); Karl
Ehn’s Karl-Marx-Hof (Vienna, Austria, 1927-
30); Clemenz Holzmeister’s Grand National
Assembly Hall (Ankara, Turkey, 1928); Le
Corbusier's Villa Savoye (Poissy, France,
1929-31); Ludwig Mies van der Rohe’s
German National Pavilion (1929); Johannes
Duiker’s Open Air School (Amsterdam, 1930);
and Lucio Costa’s and Oscar Niemeyer's
Ministry of Health and Education (Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil, 1936-46).

he politics associated with
modernization, though firmly anchored in
the Enlightenment project, have varied from
totalitarianism and elitism to republicanism
and radical democracy. An example of
modernization impacting aesthetics is

the Tennessee Valley Authority, which in

the 1930s redesigned a huge area along
the Tennessee River to create a series

of strikingly modern dams for electricity
generation. The tightest relationship between
modernism and modernization was to be
found in the days of the newly forming
Soviet Union, when there was, for a few

Koy

18.2 Norris Dam, Tennessee Valley Authority; Cling River, Anderson and Campbell Counties, Tennessee

years, a sense of excitement about the new
social promise of communism. El Lissitzky,
Vladimir Tatlin, and Konstantin Melnikov
were at the core of this development, which
also included Mart Stam, a Dutch architect,
as well as Max Taut and Hannes Meyer,
both Germans, the latter serving as head of
the Bauhaus for a few years before moving
to Moscow. For these men, and for like-
minded Constructivists, factory life had to
find its expression in cubist forms, open steel
structures, and the absence of historical
references.

The idea of integrating modernism,
modernization, and nationalism was
particularly attractive to the elites of some
non-European countries eager to create a
new idiom. These trends appeared early on:
in Turkey, as a pro-modernist state formed
by Kemal Atatuirk; in Tel Aviv, which was to
become one of Israel's leading cities after
nationhood was established in 1948; and
then in Brazil, which had been independent
since 1822, but which under Getulio Vargas
strove for national self-articulation. It was
most vigorously explored in post-World War II
South Asia, where several modernist-style
cities and capitals were built.

The works of Frank Lloyd Wright and Alvar
Aalto have a somewhat unusual position in
the discussions about modernism: both men

18.3 Chairs designed by Mies van der Rohe

are integral to its history, yet both were critics
of its ernphasis on functionalism, and both
held that architecture should not promote

a radical rupture with the past. They also
shared a stronger respect for the natural
landscape than most modernists of the time.

™

A Touba Mosque
1920s

oe"
@sio Paulo
©

Brasilia

Caracas

veexico City

St. Louis o” Angeles

New York @) Chicago Osan Francisco

©

Havana

Montreal
Londo
andion "
“=——® Paris
6,
Touba OF T

rone & ‘kyo
©, Osaka

@amia © nkara

Tel Aviv Islamabad
Ceprnsann
@oacea
Ahmedabad
Colombo

nye)

A Weissenhof Siedlung

1927

A Lovell House
1927-29

A 4D Dymaxion House
1928

A Barcelona Pavilion
1928-29

A Rockefeller Center
1929-34

A Pavilion Suisse A Unité d’habitation, Marseille

1932 1947-52
A Palace of the Soviets A Saynatsalo Town Hall
1931 1949-52
A Fallingwater A Yale University Art Gallery
1936-37 1951-53

A Health and Education Ministry, Rio de Janeiro

1936-46
A Casa del Fascio A Chapel at Ronchamp
1932-36 1955

A Esposizione Universale di Roma (EUR) A Brasilia

1937-42 1956-60
1950 CE
A Bata Shoe Factory ATWA Terminal
1937 1956-62
A Villa Mairea A Sydney Opera House
1938-41 1957-73

A Church of Christ the Worker

1958-60
A Illinois Institute of Technology Library Building A School of Architecture, Ahmedabad
1944-45 1965
A Japanese Pavilion, Paris Expo A Guggenheim Museum A Piazza d'Italia
1937 1956-59 1975-78
A Salk Institute A Centre Georges Pompidou
1960-63 1971-77
A Eames House A Heidi Weber House AAT&T Building
1945-49 1965 1980-84
A Farnsworth House A House for Dr. Bartholomew A Berlin Social Science Research Center
1946-51 1961-63 1981
A National Schools of Art, Havana A Chapel of Light
1961-65 1989
A Olympic Stadium, Tokyo A Magney House
1961-64 1982-84
A Sher-e-Banglanagar A Pyramide du Louvre

1961-82 1989

Ne

—Two houses by Le Corbusier

18.4 Site plan: Weissenhof Siedlung, Weissenhof, Germany

Weissenhof Siedlung
In the late 1920s, with the German economy
slowly gaining steam after the inflationary
crisis of 1923, housing projects sponsored
by municipal and state governments and
cooperative building societies had begun to
be built across Germany. To support these
efforts, the Deutsche Werkbund, at the time
under a pro-modernist leadership, sponsored
an exhibition of houses to be designed by
architects from all over Europe. Stuttgart was
chosen as the site because of the progressive
politics of its regional government. Ludwig
Mies van der Rohe headed the project,
which opened in 1927. What was presented
to the world was an entire housing estate
(or Siedfung) dedicated to avant-garde
European modernist thinking. Included in the
exhibition were buildings by Le Corbusier,
Walter Gropius, Adolf Loos, J. J. P. Oud,
Hans Scharoun, and Bruno Taut, among
others. Initially, Mies even hoped that Erich
Mendelsohn and Henry van der Velde would
contribute—a wish that did not materialize.
Mies organized the buildings into a
loose rectangular composition above a
broad, S-shaped road that followed the
slope of the land, with the taller buildings
at the top. To create a unified image, all the
architects had to employ flat roofs and white
facades. Included in the exhibition were
rowhouses, duplexes, single-family houses,
and apartment buildings. The Weissenhof

Siedlung marked a turning point in the history

of modernism.

Though the movement was hardly uniform—.
there were important differences among its
leading rembers—the exhibition created

for the public, and indeed for the architects
themselves, the appearance of a common
mission.

The building that Mies designed for the
exhibition, an apartment block, showcased
the earliest use of structural steel in an
apartment building in Europe. The steel
allowed Mies to create thin, non-load-bearing

18.5 Mies van der Rohe’s apartment block, Weissenhof Siedlung

walls on the interior. As would become

his custom, he combined the walls that
contained the water and plumbing pipes with
stairwell walls to create a core that repeated
itself on the various floors. This core is in

the shape of a two-pronged fork, with the
staircase between the prongs. The walls
contained the plumbing and water pipes for
the kitchens and bathrooms. It was a brilliant
and simple compression—and unification—of
structure, space, and function.


18.6 Two houses by Le Corbusier, Weissenhof Siedlung

Le Corbusier's building, by contrast, followed
the principles of his Five Points. It was
elevated against the slope of a hill and had
a roof terrace with a pergola and planters.
Much as in Mies’s plan, Le Corbusier's
interior is almost completely open, but in
Le Corbusier's case the partition walls do
not reach the facade. There are no rooms
in the conventional sense, but rather a
typically French enfilade organization along
the facade. The kitchen, bath, and toilet are
lined up against the far wall, which might
seem reasonable given the need for pipes
and ventilation. But the wall is suspended in
space and thus the pipes had to be hidden
in the floor.

Both buildings speak to the image of
the new, modern man. Mies’s building
organizes the service elements around their
unctionality, separating the bodily functions,
ike eating and bathing, from empty space.
Le Corbusier organizes the space around
culturally based hierarchies, while bathing
and cooking areas are whittled down and
placed in marginal spaces. Although the
jouses of the Sied/ung ( twenty-one in all)
were designed for the working class—the
intended beneficiary of modernist politics—
the actual cost would have been way out
of reach for most workers. This disparity
etween the avowed politics of the modernist
jouse and its actual consumption, only by
the rich elite, continues to dog it even today.

to]
Ll

Pu

4

toe |
rf +

f
# :
i 2 i
§ bid

T 2

«

mw
*
att

—
;

2

sari do
at

+

Piers

za

ae

15m

ns a Se

is)

18.7 First-floor plan: Mies van der Rohe’s apartment block, Weissenhof Siedlung

ie) 8m
to

Section 1 n or ce

18.8 Two houses by Le Corbusier, Weissenhof Siedlung

+

18.9 Hanna House, Palo Alto, California

Usonian Houses
Throughout the 1930s, Frank Lloyd Wright
continued to critique both the Beaux-Arts
and modernist styles. Instead, he tried to
infuse modernism with a national Romantic
sentiment—in his case holding out the ideal
of democracy rooted in a simple life closely
connected with the land. The traditional
city, which derived from Europe, he argued,
would eventually be replaced by a dispersed
network of habitation. Anticipating this, he
designed a futuristic Broadacre City (1932)
that was to cover 10 square kilometers.
Though Broadacre remained a utopian
project, Wright was able to realize certain
aspects of it with his Usonian houses. The
origin of the name Usonian is unknown;
but it is likely derived from U_S.onia, the
name for a reformed American society that
Wright tried to bring about for twenty-five
years. In the United States there had been
a long tradition of pattern-book houses that
could be constructed without an architect
by local builders, such as the Arts and
Crafts bungalows. Wright's Usonian houses
extended that tradition, except that what was
imitated was not so much the individual plans
as the general idea.
The Great Depression of 1929 had left
millions homeless in the United States, and
Wright was eager to show that his housing,
in contrast to that of a Weissenhof, could
accommodate the changed economic
conditions without loss of integrity. Wright
proposed a single-story house that did not
require expensive excavations for basements

or upper-floor framing. Steel, which was
expensive, was not used; instead, the houses
were to be made of wood, brick, local stone,
and prefabricated blocks. The bricks were
not covered with stucco and the wood was
left plain, thus reducing finishing costs. The
houses were sited not only to make optimal
use of the lot, but also to include as much
openness as possible frorn the living room to
the backyard. Heating was incorporated into
the concrete floor in the form of looped water
pipes buried under the slab. The elaborate
and expensive millwork needed to conceal
radiators in Prairie houses could thus be
eliminated.

Wright fused the dining and living rooms and
in some cases combined them into a single
space. This was a radical departure fromm his
earlier houses, and indeed from centuries of
tradition: because of noise, smells, and the
activities of servants, the kitchen was always
set apart from the dining room. But the
owners of these houses were not expected to
be wealthy enough to afford a maid. Wright
also wanted to create spaces that were
conducive to family conversation. The kitchen
was placed close to the carport as well,
minimizing the distance between the car and
the kitchen to facilitate the transportation of
groceries.

18.10 Plan: Bernard Schwartz House, Two Rivers, Wisconsin

18.11 Unité d'habitation, Marseille, France

Congrés Internationaux d’Architecture Moderne
From the early 20th century onward,
European architects banded together in
various organizations to define their position
and forward their cause in political and
cultural matters. The Werkbund, which
still exists today, was founded in 1907 in
Munich and had among its members Peter
Behrens, Walter Gropius, and Bruno Taut.
The Novembergruppe, formed in Berlin in
1918, though short-lived, was more clearly
pro-modern, seeing the postwar economy
as an opportunity to rethink social relations
and architectural expression. The group
that had the most important impact on
architectural thinking, however, was the
Congrés Internationaux d’Architecture
Moderne (CIAM, 1928-45), which came
into being as a result of the competition for
the design of the Palace of the League of
ations in Geneva, Switzerland, in 1927.
The competition turned into a contest
tween modernists and traditionalists, with
Le Corbusier's entry rejected in favor of a
Beaux-Arts project designed by Henri-Paul
Jénot. Though the membership of CIAM was
constantly changing—as were its priorities—
Le Corbusier played the dominant role in
it, along with Walter Gropius and the Swiss
architectural historian Siegfried Giedion.
From its inception, there were arguments
about which direction to take, but the group
managed to hang together for almost two
decades. Nonetheless, in the five congresses
eld before World War ||, CIAM shifted its

position from an organization that encouraged
a plurality of views about modern architecture
to one increasingly dominated by the ideas of
Le Corbusier.

The first congress, in 1928, produced a
manifesto known as the Sarraz Declaration,
named after the Chateau de la Sarraz in
France, where the group met. Twenty-four
architects signed the document, which
attacked the academies for their sterilizing
grip on the architectural profession; it instead
promoted an architecture based on practical,
economic, and sociological considerations.
The document held that modern architecture
had the obligation to satisfy not only the
material needs of the population but also
the spiritual and intellectual demands of
contemporary life. Modern urbanism, it
argued, should be based not on arbitrary
aesthetic principles but on a collective and
methodological land policy. This realism
was eventually replaced by a more utopian
ethos emphasizing the question of whether
architects should adopt a sociological
approach or a more formal one. The urban
designers with practical experience tended to
favor the former, whereas Le Corbusier, ever
the elitist, favored the latter.

At CIAM 3, held in Brussels, Le Corbusier
began to gain the upper hand in determining
the agenda and in promoting his Ville
Radieuse (“Radiant City"). At the fourth
CIAM congress, in 1933, the participants
published their conclusions as the Athens
Charter (so-called because the Congress

was held on board a ship that sailed from
Marseille to Athens). It committed CIAM

to rigidly functional cities, whose citizens
would be housed in high, widely spaced
apartment blocks based on CIAM planning
principles that called for the separation of
living functions. Greenbelts would separate
each zone of the city. Generally speaking, it
was assumed, as Le Corbusier phrased it,
that the positions adopted by CIAM would be
accepted by “an enlightened population that
would understand, desire and demand what
the specialists have envisioned for it.”

18.12 Le Corbusier’s vision for the residential quarter of the Radiant City

Pavilion Suisse

Le Corbusier reinvented the ideal industrial
city of the modern age. He published his
ideas in the form of several utopian proposals
to remake Paris, among which were The
Contemporary City (1922) and The Radiant
City (1933). Drawn frorn the viewpoint of a
bird or a plane, these cities erased a huge
swath of the existing urban fabric of Paris,
leaving only some of the more respected
monuments and churches in place. The

new city consisted of rows of identical
cruciform skyscrapers clustered around an
airfield in the center. In later schemes, he
showed housing organized in long, multistory
blocks that twisted and turned to create
bounded fields between their curves. Le
Corbusier also made a series of perspectives
from the human-eye level that showed a
continuous green landscape flowing under
the skyscrapers, built on stilts, as far as the
eye could see. The audacity of Le Corbusier's
proposals—particularly the impunity with
which he proposed to erase the historic city—
provoked loud reactions, both of praise and
horror. For his defenders, his urban designs
catapulted him into the role of the messiah
of a new industrial age. Le Corbusier was
never able to realize any of his sweeping
urban plans as he wished, even though some
of the suggested features eventually came

to influence urban planning the world over,
especially after World War II.

The Radiant City was an example of social
functionalism. Each apartment block was
equipped with a catering section and laundry

in the basement. The space between
the blocks was dedicated to sports and

leisure, and the roof was for gardens and
day-care centers. Transportation systerns
were designed throughout the city. All this
was part of Le Corbusier's critique of the
horizontal spread of the Garden City and the
wasted cornmuting time that engendered.

The Pavilion Suisse (1932), a student

dormitory that he was able to build at the
Cité Universitaire in Paris, was intended

as a showpiece for his vision. Two rows

18.14 Plan: Pavilion Suisse

=

j

18.13 Pavilion Suisse, Paris

of long and narrow rooms were arranged
around a central corridor, a plywood closet
separated the kitchen from the living area,
and the toilets and baths were shared. Most
importantly, the building was elevated off the
ground by columns that Le Corbusier called
pilotis.
At Marseille, Corbusier realized one of
several Unités d’Habitations (1947-52),
structures for up to 1,600 people designed
in the form of vertical village, complete with
an internal shopping street halfway up, a
recreation ground and children’s nursery on
the roof, and a generous surrounding area of
parkland made possible by the density of the
accommodation in the slab itself.


18.15 End court with sculpture, Barcelona Pavilion, Barcelona, Spain

Barcelona Pavilion

Mies van der Rohe’s German National
Pavilion, built for the 1929 Barcelona
nternational Exhibition, became an icon

of the madernist aesthetic almost from the
eginning. It was visited by people from all
over the world, showing a side of modernism
that many had not expected from Mies, who
was normally thought of as a defender of
arsh industrial architecture. Here they saw a
uilding that stressed the visual and sensual
aspects of surfaces and materials. The
uilding, which rested on a white travertine
platform, was entered from the west by a
path that led down a forested hill. The view
to the immediate left was of a nude female
statue by Georg Kalbe, standing in a pool of
water framed by walls clad in dramatically
veined green marble from the Greek island
of Tinos, contrasting with the green of the
forested hill above. The south-facing walls
would have received the bright Spanish sun,

contrasting with the cool hues of the interior
surfaces. There were no coors, only a set of
walls that defined spaces through which one
walked.
Not only was there the physical

impression of this free-flowing space but

also the visual sensation created by the
rich colors, the opulent surfaces, and the
dazzling play of reflections off the polished

materials; even the columns were encased
in highly reflective chrome sheathing. The
columns form a structural rhythm of two

rows of four, in syncopated relationship with
the walls, which are sometimes quite close

to the columns, sometimes farther away. It
is impossible to understand the columns as
part of a structural-rationalist systern; they
are, in essence, broken apart to stand in
dialogue with both the walls and the viewers
of the space. The minimalism of the design
draws on the elementarist compositions of
Kazimir Malevich and other Constructivists,
but Mies was no socialist. The building is,

in fact, meant to appeal to an elite clientele.
Mies was doing something similar to what
Adolf Loos had cone in the previous decade:
unifying a language of stark modernism on
the exterior with lush and sensuous materials
on the interior. But unlike Loos, whose

18.16 View from pool, Barcelona Pavilion

interiors were intimate, Mies’s are open and
mysteriously shimmering. The building does
have, however, a clear and identifiable spatial
focus defined by four different walls, the most
important one made of a rare marble called
onyx dorée, with veins that ranged from

dark gold to white. It was flanked by a wall

of milk-glass lit frorn within. In front of the
onyx wall was a table and, set side by side, a
pair of metal-frame chairs with white leather
cushions. Behind the chairs, through a wall
of green glass, glimmered the surface of the
pool. The view through the glass darkened
the marble rising behind the pool and
accented its veining.


18.17 Wall and column juxtaposition, Barcelona Pavilion

Visitors saw a series of conjoining and overlapping
visual planes, starting with the horizontal view of the
trees behind the building, framed by the roof and the
top of the Tinian marble wall, and then descending
through various layers to the floor of the building.
The floor, surfaced in white travertine and matching
to some degree the whiteness of the roof, created for
visitors a floating sensation interrupted only in the

central room, where the space in front of the great
onyx slab was covered by a thin black carpet. On
the opposite wall, the glass was covered by drapery
of scarlet silk. The central space was thus a type
of stage set, with its single column off to one side, a
standing at a respectful distance from the onyx wall.

18.18 Column detail: Barcelona Pavilion

Onyx wall 0 . , om

—— Statue by Georg Kolbe

18.19 Plan: Barcelona Pavilion

18.20 Le Corbusier's design for the Palace of the Soviets

Palace of the Soviets Competition

To celebrate the new Soviet state, Joseph
Stalin planned to build a huge Palace of the
Soviets in Moscow, Russia. A competition
was held in 1931 under the hopeful auspices
of the architectural community. It was
believed that Russia, as an emerging world
power, would continue the trend set by
Constructivists. Over 160 Soviet architects
and firms and 24 foreigners volunteered
designs; among the latter were Le Corbusier,
Walter Gropius, Hannes Meyer, Erich
Mendelsohn, and August Perret.

The competition was carried out in four
phases. The first, open only to the Soviet
architects, assisted in the formulation of
the exact functions of the palace and only
required that the building be conceived as
a “people’s forum” for mass demonstrations
and rallies. The results of this phase,
published and exhibited in Moscow,
established the guidelines for the second
stage of the competition, such as a large
auditorium to accommodate 15,000 people,
and a series of spaces to serve as a theater
and cinema.

The stipulations of the competition
stressed “monumental quality, simplicity,
integrity and elegance” and the use “both
of new methods and the best employed in

classical architecture." Le Corbusier’s design
was conceived in a Constructivist mold to

optimize the functional requirements of the
complex, but in a manner that created a
striking visual image, especially from above.
Unlike most of the competition entries,
which tried to squeeze all the functions into
a single mass, Le Corbusier distributed the
functions into two main volumes. The foci of
these volumes were the two wedge-shaped
auditoriums, neatly fitted into the irregular
site on the banks of the Moscow River. The
plans of two auditoriums (designed with
Gustave Lyon) were optimized not only for
sightlines and acoustics but also for ease of

access and egress. TI
the design was provi

e sculptural drama of
led by the auditoriums’

roofs, which were suspended from splayed

girders. The girders ot

the larger auditorium

were suspended by cables from a soaring
parabolic arch. This arch, much like Eero
Saarinen’s post-World War II arch in St. Louis
still to come, would have towered above

the Moscow skyline and would have, from
certain vistas, framed the bulbous domes

of the Kremlin within its curve. The arch

was intended as an inscription of modernity
on the skyline. It would have been the first
modern building with such an ambition, apart
perhaps from the Eiffel Tower, which had no

particular program and was conceived as part
of the preparations for the Paris World's Fair
of 1889.

The modernists, however, were to be
sorely disappointed when the top award went
to Boris lofan and Vladimir Shchuko for a
design that called for a towering wedding
cake concoction of enormous massing
and height. It was to be topped by a huge
apotheosis of Vladimir Lenin. Despite being
an expression of Soviet might, the edifice was
much closer in design to conternporaneous
icons of capitalism, like the Wrigley Building
(1920) in Chicago, than to Russian
Neoclassical architecture. In preparation
for the construction of lofan's building, the
Cathedral of Christ the Savior was demolished
in 1931. However, water from the adjoining
Moscow River began to flood the site, delaying
construction. By the outbreak of World War
Il, the steel skeleton was almost complete,
but in the course of the war, much of that
steel was melted down to make tanks to fight
the Nazis. Nikita Khrushchev abandoned the
project after Stalin's death in 1953 and had
the already existing structure converted into
a Moscow metro station and a giant public
swimming pool. Recently, the Cathedral of
Christ the Savior has been rebuilt at the site; it
was consecrated in August 2000.

ag va To
Asis fe

YoRT &

18.21 Lower plaza, Rockefeller Center, New York City

Rockefeller Center

By the late 1920s, New York had risen to
the level of a world metropolis. Dozens of tall
buildings had been constructed, including
new civic and institutional buildings.
Skyscraper architects had moved away from
overt historicism toward the elegant lines

of Art Deco, as at the Chrysler Building
(1928-30). The Chanin Building (1927-29)
went even further, with a neutral, gridlike
facade. Rockefeller Center, designed by
Raymond Hood and Wallace K. Harrison,
was nothing less than a city within a city,
composed of fourteen buildings between
Forty-Eighth and Fifty-First Streets in New
York City. At the core of the composition

was the seventy-one-story RCA Building
(1931-32), which faced onto a sunken plaza
defined on its flanks by low-rise buildings—
the British Empire Building and the Maison
Frangaise. The RCA Building was sheathed
in a yellowish limestone with aluminum

trim, with the windows arranged vertically

in slightly recessed strips to emphasize the
structure’s soaring qualities. In its complete
avoidance of references to a classical past, as
well as the thinness of its central tower, this
building, in many respects, paved the way
for the skyscraper aesthetic developed by the
modernists. Radio City Music Hall, containing
the nation’s largest indoor theater, was on
the next block. A cross street, Rockefeller
Plaza, introduced an innovative division of the
central parcel.

Though rarely emulated, the center was much
admired for its urban design implications.
The setbacks, which were required by zoning
regulations, were woven so fluidly into the
design that they seemed to be an organic
part of the building—a quality different from
that found at the RCA Building, the Chanin
Building, or even the Empire State Building,
with its stockier base. To emphasize the
building’s towering quality, the lower buildings
were designed to look more substantial—
almost like stone volumes that also help frame
the views of the tower.
Artists were brought in to create sculptures
and murals—themselves excellent examples
of Art Deco—for placement over the entrance
doors and in the lobby. These included Paul
Manship, who designed a gilded statue of
a recumbent Prometheus. The Mexican

socialist artist Diego Rivera was commissioned
to create a mural for the lobby, but when it
was discovered that it contained a portrait

of Vladimir Lenin and other anticapitalist
imagery, it was removed.

all buildings constructed in New York
City from 1920 to 1930 (partial list):

Standard Oil Building (1920-28)
Bowery Savings Bank (1921-23)
Barclay-Vesey Building (1923-27)
Ritz Tower (1925-27)

Paramount Building (1926-27)
Chanin Building (1927-29)
Chrysler Building (1928-30}

RCA Building (1929-31)
McGraw-Hill Building (1930-31)
Empire State Building (1930-31)

18.22 Rockefeller Center

i i K

— 49th Street =

18.23 Plan diagram: Rockefeller Center

Czechoslovakia

In many places in Europe, national
Romanticism hindered the advancement

of modernist architecture because many
nationalists saw modernism—and its
associations with industrialisrn and socially
progressive politics—as antithetical to the
idyllic past that was central to Romantic
ideology. This explains to sorne extent

why the first true example of modernism

as a state-sponsored aesthetic flourished

in Turkey and some other non-European
countries, where Romanticism was not as
firmly developed. Nonetheless, nationalism,
even in Europe, began to turn to modernism
as an expression of a country’s search for
autonomy and capitalist strength. One of

the first places where this new equation was
manifest was Czechoslovakia, which in 1918
emerged as an independent state from the
dismembered Austro-Hungarian Empire. The
small Central European country inherited
both a large portion of the former empire's
ethnic diversity and its economic strength.

In fact, Czechoslovakia became one of
Europe's most politically stable and democratic
systems during the restless interwar years.
This stability is generally attributed to Tomas
Garrigue Masaryk (1850-1937), the first
president of the republic and an internationally
respected scholar-statesman. Though

Czechoslovakian government officials never
gave state sponsorship to modernism, this
did not hamper the younger generation and
the educated and prosperous middle class
from seeing modernism as an articulation
of Czechoslovakia’s political emancipation

i |

18.24 Bata Shoe Factory, Zlin, Czech Republic

from the old Austro-Hungarian Empire. The
teaching of Otto Wagner disciples like Jan
Kotera and Joze Plecnik, who belonged to the
same generation as Josef Hoffman and Adolf
Loos, was immensely influential.

By 1937, the Bata Shoe Company had
become the world market-leader in shoe
production, becoming the first manufacturer
in Europe to mass-produce good-quality
shoes at an affordable price. The company’s
founder, Tomas Bata, invested in an extensive
building program, first in his hometown of Zlin,
where he located the company headquarters,
and later in factory towns that he and his
successor, Jan Bata, established on three
continents. Bata had factories and sales
organizations in thirty-three countries and
was at the time one of the most international
companies in the world. Bata systernatically
hired young Czech architects and engineers
with international experience. One of these
young professionals was Vladimir Karfik, who
had worked for Le Corbusier and Frank Lloyd
Wright.

The Bata headquarters, a seventeen-
story building designed by Karfik (1937),
was one of the first high-rise buildings in
Europe. It was built with a structural frame of
reinforced concrete on a module of 6.15 by
6.15 meters. This so-called Bata standard was
the basis for all Bata buildings, ranging from
factories and retail stores to various public
buildings. Contrary to traditional dispositions
in skyscraper design, three service pods were
located on the perimeter of the building. This
created an unobstructed rectangle measuring
80 by 20 meters organized as an open-plan

18.25 Bata Shoe Factory

office in which reconfigurable office modules
were the only spatial dividers. Electricity and
telephone networks with plugs laid in the floor
on a 3-by-3-meter grid facilitated flexibility in
space organization. The most striking feature
of the building was Jan Bata’s office in the
form of an elevator. The vertically mobile unit
allowed Bata to dock on every floor—thereby
going wherever he was needed. Bata was
also able to communicate with his employees

throughout the building by means of an
ntercom. The interior of the office elevator,
designed with wood paneling and double

windows, was well lit by natural light. Among
the most difficult tasks Karfik faced was how to
make a sink with running cold and hot water
possible and how to adapt the cabin to quick
temperature changes when moving in the
shaft.

By the end of the 1930s, European
modernism was not moving forward very well.
Gropius and Mies had all but disappeared
from the scene, and Le Corbusier received
few commissions, prompting him to seek
work outside of Europe, such as in Ankara,
Turkey; in Tel Aviv (then part of the Palestinian
Protectorate); and in Casablanca, Morocco,
which was a French colony. Though the
architects with whom he coordinated
in these cities are not well known, they
made major contributions to the cause of

modern architecture. Turkey and Israel

were particularly important in this respect,
since modern buildings there were part of

a highly visible nation-building effort, rather
than the fiat of a colonial administration as in
Casablanca.

18.26 Touba Mosque, Senegal

Touba
In 1887, Sheikh Amadou Bamba
(1853-1927), a Muslim mystic, founded a
homestead later called Touba in an isolated
place outside the town of Mbacké, in what is
now Senegal. He acquired a reputation as a
holy man, and soon followers began to seek
him out. He developed a form of Sufism,
known as Mouridism, according to which
the material world is not complete in and of
itself: matter, it teaches, is relevant to life only
insofar as it is infused by the divine. Bamba
perceived his mission as also a social one;
he wanted his adherents to return to the
“straight path” of Islam. So Touba became
a holy city in which everything frivolous—
laughing, dancing, drinking alcohol—was
forbidden.

At first the French colonial authorities
viewed Bamba’s growing popularity as
a threat to their authority and sent him
into exile, but since his position was one
of nonviolence, they released him and
eventually gave him their nominal support.
In the 1920s, Bamba launched the
construction of a large mosque; he was
assisted by thousands of faithful volunteers
in its construction. The reinforced concrete
structure, which has been continuously
enlarged, has three domes and five minarets,
the central one being quite tall and visible
for miles in the flat Senegalese landscape.
The roofs of the domes are green and blue,
and the walls are clad in a rose-tinted stone;

the interior is richly decorated. Bamba died
in 1927 and his successors finished the
building in 1963. It was only then that a
city was laid out on a grid plan, with broad
radiating streets ernanating from the central
square where the mosque is located.

The cemetery is located opposite the
mosque and thus at the city center, which for
Islam is unusual, since cemeteries are usually

placed outside of a city. Here the cemetery
functions as the gate to the hereafter and

is an important part of the Sufi mystical
experience. It was designed symbolically
around an ancient sacred baobab tree
(which died in 2003). On the qibla side of
the mosque is another tree, a palm tree,
that marks the spot where the first birth in
Touba took place. These trees are called
palaver trees by the locals. (Palaver derives
from the Portuguese palavra, which means
speech or discussion.) Since ancient times,
palaver trees have served as the heart of
community meetings and been at the center
of civic and religious functions; because

of their longevity, the trees are considered
the spiritual guarantors of a community's
life. The palaver tree tradition can be found
across central Africa. In Islamic areas, it is
the mosque that serves as the political and
social center of the Islamic community, which
can bring the mosque into competition with
this older tradition. Here, however, the old
and the new were fused, the ancient tradition
of the baobab tree blending with the Sufi
concept of a tree of paradise. Furthermore,
the tall minaret is itself meant to be seen as
treelike. Touba was recognized as a model
“peace city” by the United Nations Human
Settlement Division in 1996.

ie) 300 m
a enneey Co

18.27 Plan of Touba, Senegal

National Modernism, Ankara
The transition from the Ottornan Empire
to modernity was completed when the
Turkish Republic was founded by Mustafa
Kemal (also known as Atattirk) in 1923.
Atattirk adopted modern architecture
as the expression of this new secular
nation, starting what is now called national
modernism. In contrast to other localities,
such as Casablanca, where modernism was
imposed by colonial masters, in Ankara it
was a triumphant statement that announced
Turkey's independence. Atattirk’s ambition
was to achieve an industrialized nation based
on technical and scientific progress, with
institutions modeled after those in Europe.
Ankara, at that time a small town in
central Anatolia, was chosen as the new
capital since it was more or less in the center
of the nation. Its design in 1927 by the
German planner Hermann Jansen can be
considered, along with Canberra, Australia,
among the first in a long string of modernist
capitals that would include Brasilia, Brazil;
Chandigarh, India; and Islamabad, Pakistan.
The Austrian architect Clemenz Holzmeister
(1886-1983), for example, designed the
government district, including several
ministries, the presidential palace, and the
Grand National Assembly Hall. Despite the
plain cubic facades, the overall organization
was often indebted to classical principles

and vocabulary. Nonetheless, the purpose
was to visibly and progressively champion
the ideals of the new Republic of Turkey.
New schools, especially for girls; houses;
centers of popular education; and places for
physical education, recreation, leisure, and
entertainment were among the typologies
that became emblematic for the republic’s
stated aims. The Ismet Pasa Girls’ Institute
in Ankara, a vocational school, was designed
by the Swiss Ernst Egli in 1930. Modern
architecture and planning was also employed
for model villages, factories, and large
infrastructural projects such as the Cubuk
Dam outside Ankara (1936). The exhibition
hall in Ankara, which also served as an opera
house, was designed by Turkish architect
Sevki Balmumcu, who won the commission
in a competition. It was erected to showcase
the technological accomplishments of the
Turkish Republic, as were the structures built
for the Izmir International Fair.

Pa

National Modernism, Tel Aviv

During the British mandate over Palestine
(1920-48), modern architecture became
the dominant style among the Jewish
people there, who associated it not only
with socialist idealism but also with a tabula
rasa, free from the memories of the Jewish
diaspora. Modern architecture's claim to

18.28 Cankaya Presidential Mansion, Ankara, Turkey

el Aviv, when founded in 1909, was a small
suburb to the north of the Arab city of Jaffa.
Unlike Jaffa, with its mixed population, Tel
Aviv was designed by Jews for Jews. Its city
fathers welcomed the ethos of modernism,
and by the late 1930s the city had become
one of the few all-modern cities in the world.

With the transition to

sraeli statehood in

be founded not on cu
on natural parameters
light, topography, and
streamlined practicalit
the faster-spaced rhyt!

tural premises but

, such as heat, wind,
materials, along with a
y that accommodated
m of modern life, was

welcomed by Jews who were starting out to

reshape their lives. Thi

ere was no shortage of

architects, since many were fleeing European

fascism. Erich Mende

sohn, Alexander

Klein, and Adolf Rading were particularly

instrumental in consol

idating Zionist and

948, Tel Aviv became the model for future
development—especially since it was allied
with Israel's massive modernization project,
the blueprint for which was prepared by

tl

he state planning divi

ision headed by Arieh

Sharon, a Bauhaus disciple of Hannes
Meyer. Sharon's designs were of strict

rational modernism c!
symbolism.

leansed of all Oriental

In the 1960s, a new generation of
Israeli-born architects began to critique

modernist design concepts. Mendelsohn's
architecture—for instance, his Hadassah
University Medical Center on Mount Scopus
in Jerusalern (1936-39)—consists of plain
volumes, courtyards, and carefully punched
blank walls. It was invested with abstracted,
quasi-Oriental imagery, in contrast to

the whitewashed international modernist
architecture of Ze’ev Rechter’s Engle House
in Tel Aviv (1933), the city that came to
embody Israel’s modernism.

the allegiance to mo

ernism, seeking

instead ways to establish communal identity

using visceral ties wit

the past. Aligning

themselves with post-World War II criticism,

particularly the teach
Louis Kahn, their arc
expression in shaded
hierarchical layouts,

ing of Team X and
itecture sought local
communal spaces,
roken volumes, and

local building materials, as was evident in the
early example of Ram Karmi’s Negev Center

(1960).

18.29 Ground-floor plan: Japanese Pavilion, 1937 Paris International Exposition

Japanese Pavilion

The Japanese investment in industrialization
began during the years of the Meiji period
(1869-1912), which was characterized
not only by rapid industrialization and
mechanization but also by the complete
adoption of Western clothes, habits, and
manners. Germany under Bismarck was
the role model. In the years leading up to
World War Il, the country’s avante-garde
began experimenting with modernism.
Young Japanese architects traveled in
Europe or took up apprenticeships with
European architects; armong them was
Mamoru Yamada. He traveled to Europe,
spending a considerable amount of time
in Germany, after having completed the
Electrical Laboratory for the Ministry of
Public Works (1929), the only Japanese
work to be included in Hitchcock and
Johnson's International Style Exhibition of
1932. His later work, Tokyo Teishin Hospital
(1938), with its white tiled exterior finish,
large standardized windows, and minimal

ornamentation, is representative of Japanese

rationalist architecture of the prewar period.

A successful example of a modernist
Japanese design in Europe is the Japanese
Pavilion designed for the Paris International
Exposition of 1937 by Junzo Sakakura,

who had trained under Le Corbusier in

Paris from 1931 to 1936. Initially, he

had been commissioned to oversee the
construction of a traditional-style pavilion,
but he surreptitiously modified that design
to create a delicate structure of steel, glass,
and concrete that was well integrated into its
sloped and wooded site. The building was a
distinctly Japanese rendering of modernism.
Rather than the literal use of a traditional
Japanese architectural vocabulary, Sakakura
incorporated a steel frame that reinterpreted
the rhythms of traditional Japanese wooden
structures in a modernist manner.

18.30 Japanese Pavilion, 1937 Paris International Exposition

Villa Mairea

Alvar Aalto (1898-1976), a Finnish architect,
came to modernism more cautiously than
did the architects in Turkey and Brazil, where
national interests propelled modernism
forward aggressively. In Finland, a vibrant
national Romantic tradition was popular

at the time; it idealized village life, which

Alto linked, somewhat incongruously, with

is unbounded enthusiasm for Italy and in
particular for its rural towns. “The curving,
iving, unpredictable line which runs in
dimensions unknown to mathematicians,” is
the incarnation, Aalto wrote, of “everything
that forms a contrast in the modern world
etween brutal mechanization and religious
eauty in life.” This vision was embodied

in the Villa Mairea (Noormarkku, Finland,
1938-41).

The overall planning of Villa Mairea can be
seen as Wrightian, and early sketches show a
relationship to Wright's later Fallingwater. But
in terms of composition, Aalto’s design has a
more Cubist understanding of space— not in
an obvious sense, as in Pavel Janak’s work
in Czechoslovakia, but in the asymmetrical
tensions that exist in the plan between solid
and void and between the implied square
of the garden and the house, which is
clamped against one corner. But what could
be seen as Cubism can also be read as the
introduction of a temporal coefficient into the
design: the house appears to have grown and
expanded over time. Aalto also allowed for an


. yc 7 1 .
18.31 Villa Mairea, Noormarkku, Finland 18.32 Living room: Villa Mairea

overt regional gloss in his choice of the wood
for the exterior and the use of rustic wooden ;
rails for the balconies. These are, however, »
offset by steel railings that look like they've
been borrowed frorn a ship and contrast with
the smooth bamboo railings used for the
interior staircase.

Because of its almost eclectic fusion of
different motifs, Villa Mairea could be seen as
breaking the mold of modernist reserve. But
it could also be perceived as an extension of
the late 19th-century approaches of Greene
& Greene, Antonio Gaudi, Victor Horta,
and Adolf Loos. Though all the modernists 18.33 Pictorial view: Villa Mairea
had unique styles, Aalto was consistently
viewed as less beholden to rationalism and
functionalism because of his use of curved 7,
lines, contrasting materials, and a penchant xy
for picturesque massing. Aalto worked closely x e
with his wife, Aino (1894-1949), who was . ~ .
also Finnish. Much of the Villa Mairea’s
interior, in fact, was designed by her. They
collaborated on the design of chairs made
with bent plywood, a new technology at
the time and far different from the heavy
steel-frame chairs of most modernists. Aalto
was a CIAM member, attending the second
congress in Frankfurt in 1929 and the fourth
congress in Athens in 1933. His reputation
grew as a consequence of the Finnish
Pavilion at the 1939 New York World’s Fair, ye
and Baker House Dormitory (1947) for the 18.34 Ground-floor plan: Villa Mairea , “
Massachusetts Institute of Technology in LY
Cambridge. .

(1924-25). Here the ornamenting of the
building’s surface has given way to rustic,
horizontally coursed yellowish stones that
contrast with the smooth, stuccoed surfaces
of the balconies and roof lines. Windows are
hidden in recesses, with thinly mullioned
glazing capturing some of the spaces in
between the floor and roof to create indoor-
outdoor rooms.
. . When viewed from below the waterfall,
‘ ae ' the house seems to hover provocatively over
the site, its straight lines contrasting wit
the huge boulders, and the white balconies

~ goe j contrasting with the rich foliage of the forest.
° ny ) The stone walls that anchor the cantilevers
; ire f mimic the stratified pattern of the rock ledges
ve “, and rise up into the house in the form of

towers that anchor the composition and seem
almost like ancient ruins. Since the site is
quite remote, Wright built a separate servants’

18.35 Fallingwater, Bear Run, Pennsylvania

Fallingwater quarter and garage just up the hill from the
Edgar J. Kaufmann had made a fortune eo! Guest wing house. Today the site is much more forested
on his department stores. On the advice of < —4 wo5 than it was originally, concealing the building
his son, who was a student at the Taliesin . —— more than Wright probably would have liked.
School of Architecture, he engaged Wright -

in 1935 to design a family weekend and ; Hillside

summer retreat on their woodland property pe “-

at Bear Run in western Pennsylvania. (Their . ron yh

permanent residence was in Pittsburgh.) “ho ca rl case
Unlike the bread-and-butter Usonian .

houses, Fallingwater (1936) is a dramatic 4 iy L
statement on the possibilities of reinforced 7 . te . ws
concrete and demonstrates a very un-Aalto-

esque relationship to nature, expressed vA
most memorably by a triple set of deeply :
overhanging cantilevered terraces that

18.36 Site plan: Fallingwater

appear to float over a dramatic waterfall. The
Kaufmanns had wanted a house from which
they could look at the waterfall, but instead
Wright built them one that was literally over
the waterfall. A stair in the living room leads
down to the top of the waterfall and to a small
platform where people can sit and dangle
their feet in the water.

Wright's justifications for his design lay
in his conception of “organic architecture,”
a decidedly subjective term that for him
indicated a building integrated into its site
and context in the form of a sympathetic
counterstatement. The diagonal plan and
stepped section, for example, is a response
to the contours of the site, a point particularly
important to Wright and anticipated in part
in earlier projects like the Freeman House


18.38 Residential building, Rio de Janeiro, by Liicio Costa

Brazilian Modernism

After the economic crash of 1929, Brazil’s
export-oriented economy was shattered,
paving the way for President Getulio Vargas
(1883-1954), who, as a virtual dictator

(r. 1930-45), created a developmentalist,
state-sponsored program of modernization.
Much as in Kemal Atattirk’s Turkey, modern
architecture was to be the visible imprint

of his nationalist project. In 1930, the
young architect Lucio Costa was appointed
director of the Escola Nacional de Belas
Artes. Though Costa initially knew little about
modern architecture, he soon became its
leading advocate, bringing in a Russian
émigré, Gregori Warchavchik (1896-1972),
who presented his “modernist house” at an
exhibition that was opened to the public in
1930. It had a white, cubic volume (though
a parapet concealed a pitched, tiled roof)
that earned the architect a place in the 1930
CIAM congress.

Early in his own career, Costa had little
work and had spent his time studying
books on the architecture of Walter Gropius,
Ludwig Mies van de Rohe, and, most of
all, Le Corbusier. Le Corbusier himself had
built little other than his “white” houses,
but his books Towards a New Architecture,
The Contemporary City, and Precisions
were widely influential. In 1936, Gustavo
Capanema, the thirty-three-year-old minister
of education and health, took the bald
step of commissioning Costa to build the
ministry's official headquarters. Costa's
initial design was a merger of the two halves

of Le Corbusier's competition entry for

the League of Nations project (1927). His
final design, prepared in collaboration with
Oscar Niemeyer (in consultation with Le
Corbusier), was a fourteen-story tower set in
the middle of a rectangular site. Ten-meter-
high pifotis—much higher than Le Corbusier
had proposed—vehemently lift the structure
off the ground. On the cross-axis, along one
length of the site is the double-height block
of the auditorium and the public spaces. Its

most dramatic staternent was the use of a
curtain wall on the south side and a system
of brise-soleils, or sunshades, on the other.
Two towering curved shapes, covered with
blue tiles, functioned as vents and storage for
mechanical services. There was a restaurant
on the roof terrace as well.

Costa and Niemeyer also collaborated on
the design of the Brazilian Pavilion for the
New York World's Fair of 1939, whose slogan
was “The World of Tomorrow.” Costa wanted
a building that would stand out not for its
scale (the site was not big), nor for its luxury
(Brazil was still poor), but for its inherent
formal qualities. Simplicity and the suggestion
of direct functionalism was its message. The
two-story design lifted the main volume of
the pavilion above the ground and made a

statement out of its access ramp, whose large
sweeping curve seemed to forcefully wedge
itself into the upper floor. The ground floor
was partially enclosed and had freestanding
displays for national beverages like coffee,
maté, and guarana. The garden to the rear
showed off Brazilian flora. The upper floor,
with the main auditorium, had an exhibition
space with double-height steel columns that
partially supported a free-plan mezzanine. Its
facade had a brise-soleil, whereas the rear
was glazed from top to bottom. The building
became the icon for Brazilian modernism.

18.39 Ministry of Health and Education, Rio de Janeiro

Third-floor plan

Ground-floor plan

18.40 Plans: Ministry of Health and Education Building, Rio de Janeiro

18.42 Plans: Brazilian Pavilion, 1939 New York World’s Fair

a

C

a

uoy
-

\
*

\

18.41 Sdo Paulo Museum of Art, S40 Paulo, Brazil

Not everything in Brazil was European
modernism and structural expression. Lina
Bo Bardi (1914-92), for instance, designed
a house made of adobe and straw, and
Bernard Rudofsky, who lived in Brazil for
three years (1938-41) and later wrote
Architecture Without Architects, built a
house for Joan Arnstein organized around
five internal garden courtyards that extended
the spaces of the living room, dining room,
master bedroom, and children’s bedrooms.
Bo Bardi was one of the few
independently practicing women architects
among the early modernists. She was born in
italy. After graduating in Rome, she opened
er own office, was involved in the Italian
Communist Party, and after World War |
created an influential journal, A Cultura della
Vita, with Bruno Zevi. In 1946, she moved to
Brazil and became a citizen in 1951. There
she cofounded the journal Habitat with her
usband, the art critic Pietro Maria Bardi.
Her most important commission was for the
Sao Paulo Museum of Art (1947), a dramatic
Brutalist creation. Sited at the top edge of a
slope, she suspended the entire building in
the form of a box from enormous concrete
eamis in order to open vistas to the horizon.


of the Renaissance, and beyond that to

—— the Roman Empire. Members of the Italian
——————

Saetaray COT GL NRUSTE OL oe Movement for Rational Architecture (MIAR),
DE NAVIGATORI DL TRASMIGR ALORS

founded in 1928, looked for inspiration in
a a a a F | Greco-Roman classicism as well as in the
| a vernacular traditions of the Mediterranean

region.

a a a a F | F | a a | | Some of the most significant examples
of large-scale urban renewal requiring
demolition in Rome, Milan, Turin, Bergamo,

F | a | a a a and Genoa were overseen by Mussolini's

architect, Marcello Piacentini. He was also
responsible for two significant new urban
schemes: Citta Universitaria (1932-35) and
the Esposizione Universale di Rorna (EUR,
1937-42), originally intended as the site of
the 1942 Universal Exposition in Rome. The
onset of World War II eclipsed plans for the
exposition, but several pavilions were realized,
including Ernesto La Padula’s metaphysical
and iconic Palace of Italian Civilization
(1937-40). It was a glass box protected from
the outside by a facade that consisted of six
horizontal registers of identical arched loggias

ee
18.43 Palace of Italian Civilization, Esposizione Universale di Roma (EUR), Rome clad in travertine.

Fascist Modernism, Italy

With the end of the World War |, Italian
architecture entered a new phase of self-
awareness, especially in light of the rise of

Fascism following Benito Mussolini's coup

in 1922. Due to the strong nationalistic

impulse at the core of Fascist ideology, Italian
architects found themselves reflecting upon

the role of tradition in their architecture.

But this return to tradition, with its links to

national Romanticism, had a very different
character in Italy than it did in Germany.

Italy's implementation of a vast state- ,
sponsored building program that included

the construction of post offices, train stations,

civic buildings, and even small towns placed

the country closer in spirit to Turkey. For

many architects, the Fascist critique of

passivity seemed to legitimate modernism.

Italian Fascist architecture, therefore, did not

see itself as antithetical to clean geometries

and white surfaces. There was, however,

a fierce debate over the precise style that

was to best represent the Fascist ethos. As

a result, the avant-garde ideal of merging

life and art fused in Italy with the sinister rie
ambitions of totalitarianism, with artists fo
and architects drawing numerous parallels
between Mussolini and the great patrons

18.44 Site plan: Esposizione Universale di Roma (EUR)

18.45 Casa del Fascio, Como, Italy

Meeting room of the direttorio federale

Atrium

18.47 Ground- and first-floor plans:
Casa del Fascio

Among the many representatives of the
modernist movement in Italy, Giuseppe
Terragni (1904-43) was certainly the most
prominent. He studied architecture at the
Milan Polytechnic and became a member of
Gruppo 7 (founded 1926), which consisted
of seven architects unified in their advocacy
of rationalism and Fascism. Giuseppe
Terragni’s Casa del Fascio (1932-36) in
Como, designed as the regional headquarters
of the Fascist Party, is not, despite its white
boxy form, as ahistorical as it appears, for

it fuses the model of the socialist meeting
hall with the principle of an Italian palazzo
by adhering to the traditional courtyard plan.
The building was designed as a “house of
glass,” a descriptive term more apparent
from the inside than the outside. Some 20
percent of its surface is glass, with large
windows framing the city; the array of glass
doors between the piazza and the atrium
could all be swung open on demand. The
meeting room of the directorio federale
(provincial directorate) also overlooks the
central atrium through a glass wall. This
transparency symbolically implies that the
Fascist government wanted to be viewed as
accessible and transparent, and its leader
and the people to be seen as a single
continuum.

1
1’ ~Casa del Fascio

Interior-exterior mustering :
Area for outside rallies

+

Rally area for 160,

18.46 Site plan: Casa del Fascio

Unlike Le Corbusier’s idea of architecture,
which favored column grids, thin walls,

and horizontal windows, Terragni created a
complex, layered geometric architecture that
allowed the building to be axial in approach
and entry and yet have an interior of
interpenetrating asymmetries that fit together
almost like a puzzle. The plan is organized
with offices along the eastern facade and
meeting rooms along the opposite facade,
separated by an atrium. On the front there is
a balcony that faces onto the large piazza but
that allows speakers to address the crowds
inside the building as well. The spiritual core
of the building is the sacrario, or chapel,
which is dedicated to the fallen heroes of
the “Fascist Revolution.” It is located to the
left of the entrance foyer. To heighten the
impression of entering a sacred precinct,
Terragni made the floor level of the sacrario
slightly lower than that of the atrium. The
ceiling of the foyer is covered with black
marble, whereas walls are covered in red
granite. The main hall is defined by an open
structural system, with columns holding up
large concrete beams on which are placed
horizontal louvers that filter the light, while a
gap in the center allows a controlled beam of
direct light.


ie) 10m

18.49 Plan: Saynatsalo Town Hall

18.48 Exterior view: Saynatsalo Town Hall, Finland

Saynatsalo Town Hall More modernist in flavor is the Seinajoki Town uv ah : te
By the time Alvar Aalto designed the Hall (1958), where Aalto returns to the Cubist

Saynatsalo Town Hall (1949-52), his format, with its play of volume and solid, : ; oan

reputation was secure, largely due to the and of frame and opening. The site consists 1

acclaimed Finnish Pavilion at the Paris of two parcels straddling a busy road. Aalto ren

World's Fair in 1937. In this town hall he created an esplanade through the site, with

began to move away from the modernist- the buildings defining and expanding its

Cubist complexity of his early work toward spatial elernents.

the imagery of ancient Crete and medieval 18.50 Site plan: Saynatsalo Town Hall

Italy that had fascinated him as a youth. The
space, for that reason, is less a courtyard
than a civic enclave raised above the lower
slope. One enters it at a corner by means of
a staircase molded into the landscape. The
council chamber, visible through a gap, is
housed in a structure that is square in plan
and surmounted by a pitched roof that is,
apart from a razor thin line of dark flashing,
not visible from the ground, making the
volumes appear as abstract shapes. The
external surfaces are all of textured brick in
Flemish bond. The picturesque qualities of
the composition are obvious. The staggers,
angles, and shifts enhance the three-
dimensional quality of the building, as do the
windows of different sizes and proportions.

In some places, the brick, where it touches
the ground, rests on black tiles that cover the
foundation; in other places, the brick appears
to float effortlessly over the windows.

18.51 Town Hall, Saynatsalo

18.52 Illinois Institute of Technology Library Building, Chicago

Illinois Institute of Technology Library Building
International modernism in the United
States, and globally, would have developed
far differently had not some of its leading
proponents emigrated to the U.S. during
Hitler’s regime. Mies van der Rohe came
in 1937 to head Chicago's Armour Institute
of Technology (later renamed the Illinois
Institute of Technology). The same year saw
the arrival of Walter Gropius, who taught
at the Harvard Graduate School of Design.
Marcel Breuer came to the United States as a
well and began a collaboration with Gropius od
before launching his own office in 1941. The 18.53 Main-floor plan: IIT Library Building
publication in 1941 of the seminal Space,
Time and Architecture by the Swiss historian
and critic Sigfried Giedion was hugely
influential; his book gave intellectual and
historical depth to the modern movement.
Giedion argued that modernism was the only
style that was in tune with the times since
it could translate concrete, steel, and glass
into an aesthetic of clean surfaces and visual
transparency.

Mies was not only appointed head of
the architecture department of the Illinois
Institute of Technology (IIT) but was given the
commission to lay out the campus. It became
the first truly modern campus in history with
all buildings made of steel, brick, and glass.
The site was laid out on a 7.3-meter grid,
that being the dirnension of the standard

18.54 Crown Hall, IIT, Chicago

U.S. classroom. The grid system also
guaranteed that if only a part of the carnpus
were constructed, future architectural unity
could be preserved. The buildings were all
rectangular and more or less of the same
height but varied in shape, according to
program.

In designing the buildings, a new type of
space became central to Mies’s aesthetics.
Whereas in earlier decades, his spaces
flowed along walls and columns, here he
became interested in large, vacuous spaces
defined by a simple symmetry of form
and bounded at the perimeter by colurnns
conceived in rigorous geometrical order. Mies
realized the potential of these ideas in the
plans for his unbuilt library building (1942-
43), where, however, he did not abandon
his notion of a conceptual core, formed
here by the book stacks placed in a square
toward one end of the building and flanked
by bathrooms and stairs. This conceptual
mass was contrasted with an open courtyard
that was to be fronted by an interior waiting
room. The plan was flexible, but not “free” as
Le Corbusier would define it. It was layered,
thickened, and thinned. Since this was to be
a one-story building, the fire code permitted
the use of unencased steel, allowing Mies to
reveal the structural elements inside and out
with maximum clarity. Mies elaborated on the
theme again in the Crown Hall at IIT (1950-
56) and later in his career at the National
Gallery in Berlin (1962-67).


Farnsworth House

Of Mies van der Rohe’s few commissions
for private residences, the best known was
the Farnsworth House (1946-51) in Illinois.
Because the site, not far from a river, was
prone to flooding, Mies elevated the house
2.2 meters above ground level. Entrance was
gained by a broad flight of steps interrupted
by a large, open podium without railings.
Two sets of four columns support a roof
cantilevered at both ends. There are no
walls, but rather sheets of glass between

the columns that span from floor to ceiling.
The kitchen and bathrooms were unified
into a single core element set to one side

of the space to define two separate zones.
The floors of white travertine and the white
painted steel frame created a sense of grace
and refinement. The curtains were of natural
shantung silk and the woodwork of teak,
Mies being very luxury-conscious when it
came to the sparse interior furnishings. There
were difficulties, however, in actually living
in the house (Mrs. Farnsworth complained
of feeling like she was in a fish bowl). The
house nonetheless became the model for
several other experiments, the most notable
being the private residence designed by
Philip Johnson on his estate in New Canaan,
Connecticut (1949). The Johnson house used
steel for the posts but the roof was of wood,
which was significantly easier to construct
and repair. Johnson separated the bathroor
core from the kitchen, which he reduced to
the level of furniture.

18.55 Farnsworth House, Plana, Illinois

18.56 Plan and section:

Farnsworth House


18.57 Eames House, Pacific Palisades, California

Eames House

In the United States, John Entenza (1905-
84), editor of the influential Los Angeles—
based Arts and Architecture magazine, was
an important but much-overlooked sponsor
of modern architecture in America, bringing
the works of many artists and architects

to public attention. To combat the housing
shortage after World War II, he started a drive
to assemble well-designed houses rapidly
and inexpensively using wartime technologies
and materials. In January 1945, to speed

his project along, he invited architects to
construct prototype houses in Los Angeles

to explore the feasibility of his idea. Of the
twenty-four houses completed by 1966,

one of the most innovative was a project by
Charles and Ray Eames, a husband-and-
wife team who designed a residence for
themselves.

Born in St Louis and trained in
architecture at Washington University,
Charles had taught in Michigan, where,
at the Cranbrook Academy of Art, he met
Eero Saarinen, with whom he entered into

18.58 Eames House

a competition project—Organic Design in
Home Furnishings—that was sponsored

by the Museum of Modern Art in New York
City. The Eameses had initially conceived of
a pristine, Mies-like cube standing on two
slender steel columns, cantilevered out from
the slope of a hillside lot. However, in 1947,
they designed it to enclose more space using
the same amount of steel, and put it at the
perimeter of the site rather in its center. The
house, anchored by a retaining wall, nestles
against the hillside, parallel to its contours,
making it a statement as much about the site,
the location, and the inhabitants as about
the deployment of prefabricated industrial
materials. The house featured extremely

thin steel framing with exposed corrugated
metal roofing, and consisted of 18 bays—
each 2.3 meters wide, 6 meters long, and 5
meters high—that determined the rhythm of
the structure. Glazed panels—transparent,
opaque, or translucent, as the situation
lemanded, and occasionally interrupted by
painted panels in bright primary colors—gave
the house a vibrant and playful character.

The Eameses filled the house with a
collection of iterns they had accumulated
from around the world. They made a film
called House after Five Years of Living,
implying that their house was not so much
a designer display but an organic organism
with the patina of lived-in existence that
reflects the character and preferences

of the inhabitants. Other than designing
plans for houses, the Earneses designed
exhibitions, made films, and built toys and
furniture. One of their earliest successes
was a technique for bending plywood, which
was used in World War Il field hospitals for
making leg splints and, later, for chair seats.
They also designed a chaise lounge and
ottoman manufactured by the Herman Miller
Company, whose headquarters they also
designed. Their films were experimental and
conceptual; their best known film, Powers
of Ten, attempted to show a post-Einsteinian
universe.

18.59 Elevation: Eames House


18.60 Yale University Art Gallery, New Haven, Connecticut

Yale University Art Gallery

Louis Kahn (1901-74), like Wright before
him, developed an aesthetic outside of the
developing norms of international modernism.
But that does not mean that his work was
not influenced by modernism and its drive
to master abstraction. The Yale University
Art Gallery in New Haven, Connecticut
(1951-53) is remarkably unrhetorical with
horizontally marked brick walls defining

one direction and the aluminum glazing of
the windows defining the other. He placed
the building's programmatic needs within
this very simple framework by organizing
them into cylinders and rectangles. The

idea is not unlike the way Mies attempted

to unify secondary program elements into a
vertical spine, except that here they become
almost sculptural. Kahn was intrigued by
the interaction between humans and the
technical systems that service them—and
that are therefore an integral part of the
architectural world. So he chose to make a
virtue out of electrical wiring, outlets, lighting
ixtures, and ductwork, all of which are
allowed to remain visible. The entrance is
almost invisible from the street as it is on a
igher level and separated by a wall and a
set of stairs. Mies, more likely than not, would
ave made the entrance at street level with
lots of glass; Gropius might have made a thin
canopy. But Kahn's entrance is something
one finds somewhat unexpectedly—perhaps
ike in a medieval European town. Even

the steps seem to indicate a change in the
urban elevation. It is a subtle homage to the
power of a type of space that is both intimate
and urban. Kahn continually downplayed
entrances in his architecture, deemphasizing
the ceremonial aspect of approach. The
uncompromising bluntness of the building
foreshadows an aesthetic that came to be
known as brutalism, which was to take root in
the late 1960s.

Kahn studied at the American Academy
in Rome in 1950, followed by travels to Italy,
Egypt, and Greece in 1951. Unlike most
modernists, who rejected the architecture
of antiquity, he saw in it a struggle to
make the building hold its own against the
overwhelming grandeur of the landscape. For
this reason, he preferred the archaic Temple
of Paestum to the refined proportions of the
Parthenon. His study of Greek and Roman
architecture led Kahn to use simple but
arresting forms—and even symmetries—at a
time when these would have been frowned
upon by functionalists.

18.61 First-floor plan and section: Yale University Art Gallery

18.62 Brasilia, Brazil

National Modernism, Brasilia

In Brazil, modern architecture served as an
expression of national identity and reached
its zenith with the creation of Brasilia in 1956
(inaugurated 1960). A hinterland capital
had been proposed for Brazil since the late
19th century as a way to shift focus from the
coastal towns and create a geographically
accessible capital for the whole country.
President Juscelino Kubitschek, who
advocated rapid industrialization and who
made the decision to go ahead with the new
capital, invited the Brazilian-born and -trained
architect Oscar Niemeyer (1907-2012)

to design the main buildings and, after a
competition, Lucio Costa to prepare the
master plan. It was to be accessible mainly
by airplane, and thus was meant to be the
supreme manifestation in the processes of
modernization. Costa’s plan, which itself
looked like a plane, was based on the CIAM
principles separating habitation, recreation,
work, and circulation. Designed around two
axes intersecting to form a cross, Brasilia
was an automobile city. Long, high-speed
roads, with three multilane systems on

each axis and over- and underpasses at
intersections, were designed to enable rapid
transportation. A dam built across the River
Paranoa created long finger lakes around
the southern, eastern, and northern edges
of a U-shaped plateau on which the city
was located. The main monumental axis of
the city ran east-west, bisecting the plateau.

On the north-south cross-axis, arranged in
a gentle curve, were the main residential
units—the “superblocks"—organized in
three layers, with parking at the eastern
edge. Each superblock, 240 by 240 meters,
was conceived as a grouping of six-story
apartment units, raised on pilotis, with play
space for children within inner courts. Private
dwellings were nestled between the fingers of
the lakes in the north and south, and farther
inland to the west were the airport and the
train station.

The functional, ceremonial, and visual
focus of the city is the so-called Plaza of
the Three Powers, at the eastern edge of
the plateau. Approaching from the west, the
eleven towers of the ministries start a grand
procession culminating in the rectangular
blocks of the Foreign Ministry and the
Treasury, beyond which, at the center of the

eS

18.63 Site plan: Brasilia

nis
wilfes

i ‘Plaza of the

Commerce and banking
1

Three Powers

axis, is the National Congress. This building is
singular in the history of modern architecture.
It houses two major chambers, the larger
one for the Chamber of Deputies and the
smaller one for the Senate. The raked visitors’
seating of the round Chamber of Deputies
is expressed in the roofline in the form of an
upward turned bowl. The senate chamber
has a traditional dome over it. Together,
the saucer and dome, lifted clear above
the ground on a giant platform, make for a
memorable skyline, self-consciously designed
as the icon of Brasilia. Below, in two stories,
accessed by a ramp, are all the offices.
Farther east, in line with the ramp, rise
twin towers, linked by the walkway of the
Secretariat. They sit in the middle of a
rectangular reflective pool, at the eastern
edge of which is the climax of the whole
complex: a gigantic plaza, with the executive

Section through Senate chamber

Section through Chamber of Deputies

18.64 National Congress, Brasilia


;
jo

ip Cat| ca
te OM

[ae oe Cs os

GC?

18.65 Termination of the monumental axis, Brasilia

office of the president (the Planalto Palace)
and the Supreme Court at either end. One

of the multilane highways cuts through the
plaza next to the Planalto Palace, connecting
to the peripheral roads and the residence of
the president, the Palacio da Alvorada, at the
water’s edge.
hese three buildings, all designed by
Niemeyer, represent a monumentalization of
the Brazilian national modern style. All are
concrete slab structures, glazed all around
and sandwiched between deep overhanging
roofs and floor slabs. In the Planalto Palace,
a whole story lies below the ground slab,

and in the other two buildings the ground
slab lifts the main floor above the ground.
Within, the plans are more reminiscent of
Mies’s precise geometries than Le Corbusier's
sensuous curves. The colonnades lining the
expressive edges of the buildings (always
only on two opposite sides, except in the later
Foreign Ministry building, where they are on
all four sides) were designed as delicately
wrought curvilinear forms, expressive less of
their character as load-bearing members and

more as tie beams stretched thin by tension,
almost to the point of disappearing at their
edges. (Joaquim Cardoso did the structural
calculations.) In the Planalto Palace, the
colonnades face the plaza; in the Supreme
Court, they are located toward the side; and
in the Palacio da Alvorada they are turned
laterally, forming a string of inverted arches
across the facade.

Mery pe

Ministry of Foreign Relations J

hes Bey

After World War II, Brazilian modern
architecture became widely influential in the
development of modern architecture around
the world, though it had begun initially

as a derivative of European modernism.
Brasilia’s foreign ministry building was the
model for New York City’s Lincoln Center.
Oscar Niemeyer effectively became the chief
architect of the United Nations Headquarters

18.66 Ministry of External Relations, Brasilia

iQ 7 SG — National Congress
Ty
- oa Palace

Plaza of the Three Powers

(1947), also in New York City, after Le
Corbusier was removed from the project and
Wallace Harrison was appointed head of the
United Nations Board of Design. Harrison's
design of the Albany Civic Center (1962-68),
one of the largest modernist-style civic
centers in the United States, was inspired by
Costa’s and Niemeyer's Plaza of the Three
Powers in Brasilia.


National Modernism, Chandigarh
When India attained independence in 1947 it
was divided into two countries along religious
ines, resulting in the creation of the new
slamic nation of Pakistan. In that division,
the Indian state of Punjab lost its capital,
Lahore, to Pakistan, so Jawaharlal Nehru,
the first prime minister of independent
ndia, decided to construct a new capital,
Chandigarh. Like Brazil’s Getulio Vargas
and Juscelino Kubitschek, Nehru modeled
is development plans on Franklin Delano
Roosevelt’s New Deal and initiated a series
of state-sponsored industrialization projects.
His sentiment was expressly anti-nostalgic.
He wanted Chandigarh to be a “new city,
unfettered by the traditions of the past, and a
symbol of the nation’s faith in the future.”
When Le Corbusier joined the project

in 1952, the urban plan had already been
prepared by Albert Mayer, an American town
planner, on the principles of the City Beautiful
movement, with superblocks accessed by
gently curving roads. Le Corbusier shrunk
the superblocks into 800-by-1,200-meter
rectangular neighborhood units or sectors
serviced by a diminishing hierarchy of

roads and bicycle paths, according to CIAM
principles. Within these sectors, Le Corbusier
wanted to design multistory residential

units (perhaps like those in Brasilia, or in

his Unités d’Habitations, the first of which
had just been constructed in Marseille), but
that idea was immediately dismissed by the
officers in charge of the project who were
committed to a low-rise suburban image,
inspired in part by the sprawling cantonments
the British had built for their officers in
colonial India. The state housing, therefore,
was done not by Le Corbusier, but by his
cousin, Pierre Jeanneret (who was the project
architect), and the English husband-and-wife
tearn Maxwell Fry and Jane Drew (who had
been working in Africa), assisted by a team
of nine Indian architects and planners. Most
of the construction was made of load-bearing
exposed brick walls, accented by random
rubble-stone porticoes and concrete window
protectors, plastered and painted white.

|
i
'
|
1
|
|
i
i

400 m

18.67 Site plan: Chandigarh, India

18.68 Secretariat, Chandigarh

Le Corbusier's Capitol Complex for
Chandigarh (1951-62)—containing the High
Court, Assembly, and Secretariat for the
states of Punjab and Haryana—was located
at the northern end of the city on a vast
open plain, visually bound only by the distant
Himalayan foothills. The boundaries are
loosely defined by two adjoining 800-meter
squares that contain two 400-meter squares.
The vehicular roads are located sornewhat
below grade; the excavated earth was used
to create the artificial hills that screen the
Capitol from the rest of the city. An irregularly
shaped pedestrian plaza, linking the
Assembly and the High Court, studded with a
set of symbolic follies, forms the conceptual
center of the Capitol. The High Court, the
first building to be constructed, is contained
within a tight frame and endowed with a
second roof {with suspended arches) built 18.69 High Court, Chandigarh
above the first one to provide shade. Three
huge pylons create a monumental gateway
fronted by two reflecting pools. The building's
elevation has a rhythm determined by the
divisions of the nine courts. The elevation, in
fact, is almost the same as its plan. Although
made of cast-in-place rough concrete,

the High Court, with the pylons painted in
soft pastels, appears lightweight and airy,
particularly when reflected in the pools.

The Secretariat has a very different
character. In the context of the larger
composition, it functions as a backdrop to the
Assembly, taking the form of a long slab with
a dramatic roofline and a facade completely
composed of brise-sofeils. Staircases appear
as attached towers with small windows.

With its long double-loaded corridor, the
building was a restatement of Le Corbusier's
idea of a collective living solution, the Unité
d'Habitation. But while the Unité was raised
on robust concrete piotis, the Secretariat sits
directly on the ground.

18.70 Plan diagram and elevation: High Court, Chandigarh

18.71 Assembly Building, Chandigarh

Le Corbusier's Assembly Building (1953-63)
is a skillful essay in organization and
monumentality. On a trip to Anmedabad

in western India, Le Corbusier saw the

form of a hyperbolic paraboloid arch under
construction for a thermal power station and,
mesmerized, immediately decided to use it as
a motif in the Assembly Building. At this time
he was also working, in conjunction with the
mathematician and musician lannis Xenaxis,
on several projects in France, all of which
explored the sculptural possibilities of ruled
surfaces. For the design of the Assembly
Building, Le Corbusier seems to have literally
dropped the hyperbolic paraboloid arch into
a box. Around the hall, a forest of columns,
rising high into a black ceiling, created the
foyer. The three edges of the box were given
over to offices. Brise-soleils functioned as
the skin. On the fourth edge of the box, the
side facing the plaza, Le Corbusier built a
monumental portal, opposite to and facing
the portal of the High Court across the vast
plaza. A row of thin pylons holds up a free-
form roof that looks like the horns of a bull
in outline, giving the Assembly Building the
appearance of a majestic bull standing firm
on the vast Indian plain—quite in contrast to
Niemeyer’s palaces in Brasilia, which barely
touch the ground and seem to fly above it in
defiance of gravity.

Le Corbusier also gifted to Chandigarh the
Open Hand Monument, which he devised as
the city’ symbol. Standing in the Capitol, it is
a 23-meter-high sculpture of burnished steel.
While the aesthetic origins of the sculpture
are diverse, Le Corbusier articulated his most
ambitious hope for the Open Hand in a letter
to Nehru from 1955, when he proposed the
sculpture as a symbol of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM). Nehru's brainchild, NAM
was an attempt to propose a third alternative
to the divisive two-world—communist versus
capitalist—hegemony of the Cold War.
Although not adopted for NAM, the Open
Hand did become the symbol of Chandigarh
as a city embodying Nehru’s hopes for a
modern India.

YELL ILI LLG TES

=)

SSO eT

|

(
AA
MS.

sananask

o- . 20m

18.72 Section and plan: Assembly Building, Chandigarh

18.73 Notre Dame de Haut, Ronchamp, France

Chapel at Ronchamp
Le Corbusier accepted two commissions
from religious institutions. One was for a
chapel, Notre Dame de Haut at Ronchamp
(1955), in the Jura Mountains of eastern
France. The other for a monastery at La
Tourette (1957-60), near Lyon, France. Both
commissions were made by a reformist wing
of the Catholic Church trying to reestablish
the relevance of their institution in the wake
of faltering attendance. Appealing to the
younger generation by adopting modern
architecture was part of this effort. It was not
only a bold experiment but also demonstrated
that modernism could indeed create the kind
of inward-oriented atmosphere conducive to
contemplation. Although Le Corbusier was
not a churchgoing Catholic, he welcomed
the commissions because they allowed him
to experiment with symbolic forms, which he
had never done before in a European context.
The chapel, which astonished many
people when it was built, is a singular and
memorable edifice and stands today, along
with the Rosaire Chapel (1949-51) by Henri
Matisse, as one of the outstanding modern
religious expressions of the 20th century.
Fundamentally, the building is a sculpture;
its principal design element is the curve
deployed repeatedly to form a dramatic set of
intersections and trapped, cavelike spaces.
Three continuous walls, changing direction,
thickness, and height, create a volume
that defies the conventional expectations

18.74 Plan and section: Notre Dame de Haut

of facade and interior. Two convex curves
bulge out on the north and west, creating a
backside, while two concave indents to the
south and east represent the front. On top
of the walls, on columns hidden in the walls,
floats a thick, organic-appearing roof that
comes to a sharp point at one end. It has
been compared by some to a cushion, and
by others to a hat.

Three towers, clustered together with
hooded tops, rise above the roof, forming
vertical counterpoints to the general
horizontality and earth-bound appearance.
Light washes down into the inner space
of these towers and spills into the inner
sanctum. Each tower has a specific function,
serving as chapel, sacristy, and baptistery,
respectively. The west wall is punctured by
a series of irregularly placed, punched-out

windows of various sizes and depth that bring

spots of intense light into the interior. Inside,
the roof hangs like a sail over the nave while

sloping gently to the south toward the altar. A

statue of the Virgin Mary stands in an alcove
in the eastern wall and was designed so that
it can be rotated to face both inside and
outside, for those occasions when church
services are held outdoors. Near the church,
using stones from the site, Le Corbusier
constructed a small, stepped pyramid. The
church bells are placed in a steel-framed

structure to one side. Sited on the flat top of a

hill in a forested area of the Jura Mountains,
the building is reached by a gently curving

road that leads up the hill and passes a low
meeting and service building. From the top,
serene views range in all directions, imparting
to the church the aspect of a pilgrimage

site. (Indeed, on the site there once stood a
pilgrimage chapel, destroyed in World War Il,
that had been dedicated to the Virgin Mary.)

18.75 Interior: Notre Dame de Haut

18.76 Guggenheim Museum, New York City

Guggenheim Museum

After World War II, modern architecture's
insistence on a rationalized functional
aesthetic ran up against the need to express
monumentality, particularly in large civic
structures. Frank Lloyd Wright's design for
the Guggenheim Museum (1956-59) in
Manhattan was particularly innovative in this
respect, with a dramatic exterior form and
the large interior space at its center that is
formed by a curving ramp. The sides of the
building are fully occupied by this gently
spiraling ramp, designed to allow visitors to
view art continuously, without interruption.

It also enables everyone viewing the art to

be seen, an idea close to the sensibility of
Charles Garnier’s Paris Opera House. The
ramp, expanding in diameter as it ascends—
or shrinking as it descends, as the case

may be—generates an external profile that
contrasts sharply with the rectilinear geornetry
of the surrounding Manhattan blocks. Wright
defended the spiral by arguing that abstract
art no longer needed to be seen in the
traditional framework of rooms and walls. But
as innovative and controversial as Wright's
exhibition ideas were, there is no debate
about the building's impressive central space.
Accessed virtually directly frorn the street,

it was conceived as an extension of the
urban site. In that respect it constituted an
important breakthrough in the relationship

of modernism to civic space. Though the
Museum of Modern Art (1938-39) by Philip

Goodwin and Edward Durell Stone was
technically the first modern building in New
York, the Guggenheim was the city’s first truly
modernist civic structure.

The project went through several
permutations. At first the building was to be
a type of private gallery, showing the works
of Solomon R. Guggenheim, but later in
1952 the museum expanded its definition to
become something much broader, rivaling
the Museum of Modern Art as an institution
of experimentation and taste-making across
the whole range of modern art. The expanded
program forced Wright to make amendments
and concessions, but he did not change
his stance that flat paintings would be well
served by hanging against curving walls, and
the public's positive reception of the building
offset complaints by curators and painters.
The building was based on an innovative
structural system of radially splayed concrete
ribs that held the floor plates and came
together at the top to form the dome. While
the building soon became a Manhattan
landmark, the success of its functional
purpose—the display of paintings—remains
questionable and was never imitated. One
complaint is that the building competes by
claiming artwork status itself and thus may
distract from the display; another is that
visitors cannot really come to rest, as they are

is in motion on a ramp that urges movernent
rather than repose.

Technical Q

Tete sciences

KX? sciences
and administration

18.78 Diagram of ekistics and the sciences contributing to it

Ekistics

Constantinos Doxiadis (1913-75), former
chief town planning officer of Athens, Greece,
started his own firm in 1951] and after that
built in dozens of countries, including India,
Bangladesh, Ethiopia, France, Ghana, lran,
Iraq, Italy, Jordan, Pakistan, and Syria. His
was one of the largest international practices
at the time. Doxiadis introduced issues like
regional climate and geography into the
discussion of modernism at a time when such
considerations were still rare. He coined the
term ekistics, derived from the Greek ofkos,
meaning “house,” to refer to the science

of human settlements. Doxiadis aspired to
expand the scientific basis of architecture,
urban design, and planning in order to reject
arbitrary self-expression and monotonic
versions of rationalism and also to embrace
extratechnological and nonfunctionalist
concerns. He soon surrounded himself

with an international and interdisciplinary
group that included global visionaries (like
Buckminster Fuller and Margaret Mead),
architects, planners, and United Nations
consultants (such as Jaqueline Tyrwhitt

and Charles Abrams), economists and
environmental thinkers (including Barbara
Ward and Renee Dubos)—all of whom, to
some degree, supported Doxiadis’s vision.

His planning model was called Dynapolis,
a term signifying a dynamic city that would
change over time and allow its urban core to
expand continually in a unidirectional manner
in order to avoid congestion and do away
with the permanence and monumentality of
stationary city centers. The business district
and residential areas would also grow along
this axis, and industrial areas would be
pushed to the edges. This logic of functional
separation extended to the system of social
ordering, so that each residential sector
was broken down into smaller communities
arranged hierarchically.

The model of Dynapolis informed
many plans for urban restructuring—from
Baghdad, Iraq (1958), to Athens, Greece
(1960), to Washington, DC—and became the
basis for the creation of Islamabad, the new
capital of Pakistan (1960). Doxiadis designed
lslamabad's master plan and the prototypes
of the major housing types, but the design
of the individual buildings was assigned
to local and foreign architects. The master
plan was based on his concept of a moving
core—the idea that the commercial hub of
the city would continue to move and grow as
necessary, creating a linear city in its wake.

18.79 Islamabad, Pakistan: A growing dynametropolis


18.80 Sydney Opera House, Australia

18.81 Site plan and section: Sydney Opera House

Sydney Opera House

Jgrn Utzon's Sydney Opera House (1957-73)
was another early prestige commission.
Located right on the water's edge, with the
graceful curve of the Sydney Harbor Bridge
as a backdrop, Utzon's prizewinning entry
imagined a series of successive interlocking
shells of different heights hovering above a
vast stepped platform, conjuring an image
of ships’ sails through outright technological
virtuosity. Supported on 580 concrete piers
sunk up to 25 meters below sea level, the
shells are sheathed in white ceramic tile and
contain five performance spaces. Although
Utzon never completed the project himself,
it quickly became the signature project of
Australia and a national icon.

First generation of post-World War II
prestige buildings:

© Berlin Philharmonic Hall, 1956-63,
Hans Scharoun

¢ Sydney Opera House, 1957-73, Jgrn
Utzon

¢ Lincoln Center for the Performing
Arts, New York City, 1962-65, Max
Abramovitz, Pietro Belluschi, Philip
Johnson, Eero Saarinen, and others

e John F. Kennedy Center for the
Performing Arts, Washington, DC,
1964-71, Edward Durell Stone

¢ Tokyo Olympic Stadium, 1964, Kenzo
Tange

¢ Kimbell Art Museum, Fort Worth,
Texas, 1967-72, Louis Kahn

¢ New National Gallery, Berlin, 1972-
78, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe

¢ Palast der Republik, East Berlin,
1973-76, Heinz Graffunder and Karl-
Ernst Swora

¢ East Wing, National Gallery,
Washington DC, 1974-78, |. M. Pei


18.82 TWA Terminal, John F. Kennedy International Airport, Queens, New York

Eero Saarinen
Born in 1910 in Finland, Eero Saarinen
injected poetry into the structural possibilities
of reinforced concrete. Though Erich
Mendelsohn had attempted this in the 1930s,
he had built relatively little during a time
when concrete was still rather experimental.
Eero Saarinen's career ended prematurely
with his death in 1961, but in the short
space of eleven years, he had already worked
on nearly thirty projects in Europe and
the United States, some of which became
international icons and symbols of the United
States’ postwar identity as a technological
superpower. Among his works are the St.
Louis Gateway Arch (1948-64), the General
Motors Technical Center (1948-56) in Detroit,
and the TWA Terminal (1956-62) at New
York’s John F. Kennedy International Airport.
Saarinen’s 1947 competition-winning
entry for the Gateway Arch at St. Louis,
Missouri (1961-66), was conceived as a
huge structure located on the banks of
the Mississippi River. It was a monument
meant to match—if not exceed—in scale,
technological prowess, and symbolic stature,
Paris's Eiffel Tower. Because it represented
the gateway to the West, it was seen as a
dramatic reference to America’s origins,
putting St. Louis on the international map. A
catenary curve, the arch's span and rise are
both 192 meters. It consists of a double skin
of steel—stainless steel without and carbon
steel within—reinforced where required
by concrete. The two legs in section are

equilateral triangles, 16.5 meters to a side

at the ground tapering off to 5 meters at the
summit. A Museum of Westward Expansion
is located at the ground level, and a viewing

deck can be accessed at the top by elevator.

Saarinen’s TWA Terminal (1956-62) at New
York's John F. Kennedy International Airport
was conceived as a bird with wings spread

18.83 TWA Terminal, John F. Kennedy International Airport

and poised to take off. He designed the
terminal largely by using models rather than

drawings. It has no facade or right angles.
Instead, its captivating forms and undulating
interiors—along with its dramatic TWA-red
carpeted floors—were meant to evoked a
vision of grace and lightness.

18.84 Pictorial view: TWA Terminal, John F. Kennedy International Airport

Steel and Glass Skyscraper

Skyscrapers had long been the primary symbol of
the U.S. metropolis. In their early days, architects
sought out a great deal of differentiation, but by the
late 1920s, the look of tall buildings began to be
more standardized, with the exception perhaps of

a crowning element, like in the Chrysler Building
(1928). Skyscraper design underwent its most
dramatic change with Mies van der Rohe’s Seagram
Building (1958) in Midtown Manhattan, designed

in collaboration with Philip Johnson and built as the
headquarters for the Canadian distillers Joseph E.
Seagram & Sons. The thirty-eight-story building is

a vertical box with clean and sharp edges. Unlike
early skyscrapers, whose bodies were punctuated by
windows, here glass reaches from floor to ceiling and
serves as the skin of the building. The visible edge of
the floor plate is covered by bronze spandrels that give
a light horizontal zippering effect to the floors during
the day, when light reflects off the glass—an effect
even more pronounced at night, when the reflection
contrasts with the interior illumination.

Although the building seems to be all structural
steel and glass, this is not exactly true. Fire code
prohibited exposed steel, meaning that the steel
supports had to be covered in fireproof concrete.
Since this is not how Mies wanted the building to read
on the outside, he used nonstructural, bronze-toned
Ibeams running vertically, like mullions, down the
facades. These vertical mullions are equally spaced
across the entire facade. Together with the horizontal
spandrels, they create a pronounced grid pattern. This
surfacing does not extend to the ground, however,
allowing the building's real structure—the concrete-
encased beams—to be visible in the lobby. The glass
is not purely transparent, but tinted bronze, so that
in certain lighting conditions, the whole building—its
structure and its glass—seem to have a golden hue,
perhaps, it has been argued, subtly suggesting the
color of whiskey, one of the building owner's products.
nthe 1960s, Chicago's skyline began to change
as a consequence of the relaxation of height limits
previously imposed by the city. Many towers were

uilt, including several by Mies in his usual boxy style,
such as the Lake Shore Drive Apartments (1948-51)
and the Chicago Federal Center (1959-74). These
uildings stimulated a vibrant and still ongoing
discussion about the surface treatment of a tall
uilding. Some architects developed the grid pattern
y emphasizing different aspects of its composition;
others worked with the reflective conditions of glass.
Perhaps the culmination of the Miesian interrogation
of the surface was the John Hancock Tower (1976) in
Boston by I. M. Pei and Henry N. Cobb.

18.85 Seagram Building, New York City

18.86 Lobby, Seagram Building

4
Z
2

SO

EO!

Wh

DOSEN


////
Ys

\
QQ
///

MOXXM—>—>».

\\\

x
Z
x
xo
x
-
Ss

3

AAA

\\

y

18.87 Alcoa Building, San Francisco

\,

\\\
UL)

By the 1970s, Skidmore, Owings & Merrill
(SOM), founded in 1936, employed about a
thousand architects, engineers, and technicians
who provided complete planning, designing,
engineering, and construction services. It was
one of the world’s first multitasking architectural
corporations. The firm had seven principal
offices, located in New York City, Chicago, San
Francisco, Paris, Los Angeles, Washington, DC,
and Portland, Oregon. Commissions ranged

from presidential libraries to routine industrial 18.88 Business Men’s Assurance Company of America,
buildings. Though there was diversity in aesthetic v 3 Kansas City, Missouri

TUN
TTL //
TLL

Tih
LLY

So ae hs

production, perfecting t
making modernism the
for corporations was an

e Miesian paradigm and
language par excellence
important concept

behind the firm's reputation. This can be seen

in the headquarters of tl
Assurance Company of

Missouri (1963), situate

edge of a park. Unlike t

je Business Men's
America in Kansas City,
d outside the city on the
ie Miesian preference

for steel and glass, here the steel frame is clad

in white Georgian marble. The windows are set e
back to create a stark, minimalist effect. The i
Alcoa Building in San Francisco (1964) took this .
design idea one step further with its exoskeletal
cross-bracing, which both serves a structural

purpose and provides a symbolic message.

Although the unrelenting and uncompromising
abstraction of the cross-bracing seems to make

it mute and faceless, the absence of rhetorical
messages is belied by the idea that the form is

the expression not of technological efficiency but

of technological elegance.

18.89 Site plan and elevation: Business Men’s Assurance Company of America

18.90 Aula Magna, La Ciudad Universitaria de Caracas, Venezuela

Latin-American Modernism
In many parts of the Latin American world,
modernism was not so much a state-
sponsored nationalist sentiment as a search
for expression by the artistic avant-garde. It
was first propounded not by architects but
by poets and writers, including Rubén Dario
(Panama), José Asuncion Silva (Colombia),
Manuel Gutiérrez Najera (Mexico), José
Enrique Rodo (Uruguay), José Marti (Cuba),
Bienvenido Nouel (Dominican Republic), and
Luis Lloréns Torres (Puerto Rico). It was not
until the 1940s and 1950s that what is now
also sometimes called tropical modernism
emerged as the language of autonomy and
independence. Though strongly influenced
by Le Corbusier, this Latin American rendition
of modernism emphasized not only clean
lines but also the need for shaded surfaces,
wide windows, surrounding gardens,
and lightweight construction. Among its
proponents were Guillermo Gonzalez-
Sanchez in the Dominican Republic; Antonin
Nechodoma and Henry Klumb in Puerto
Rico; and Juan O'Gorman and Felix Candela,
among others, in Mexico.
La Ciudad Universitaria de Caracas
(1944-70), by the Venezuelan architect
Carlos Raul Villanueva, is one of the boldest
interpretations of modern architecture in
Latin America. Built as an autonomous urban

assemblage next to Plaza Venezuela, this
compendium of more than forty buildings was
developed over a period of radical economic,
social, and political changes. At the center

of the campus was a succession of spaces
where inside and outside merge seamlessly
into one another. Villanueva visualized a
system of flows and paths, or “movements,”
as a fundamental design criterion; it was
realized in his conception of the university's
covered plaza, with its large canopy of
irregular shape and varying height, protecting

18.92 Plan: Ciudad Universitaria de Caracas

18.91 Diego Rivera House, Mexico City

i |
MOLTO a fh

the shaded space within. Here Villanueva
incorporated the work of several avant-
garde artists of the time, including Fernand
Léger, Antoine Pevsner, Victor Vasarely, Jean
Arp, and Henri Laurens, as well as a group
of Venezuelan geometric abstract artists,
such as Mateo Manaure, Pascual Navarro,
Oswaldo Vigas, and Armando Barrios.

Pow wanes


<n fl =
18.93 Church of Christ the Worker, Atlantida. Uruguay

The high-tech structural achievernents of architects
such as Eero Saarinen and J@rn Utzon can be
contrasted with the work of the Uruguayan architect
Eladio Dieste, who had been practicing since the early
1960s. An engineer by training, Eladio Dieste made

his reputation building a whole range of structures,
from grain silos, factory sheds, markets, maintenance
hangars, fruit-packing plants, warehouses, and bus
terminals to a handful of churches of exceptional spans
and beauty. In most of his buildings he used Gaussian
vaults, which are self-supporting shells that stand

up not only because they are light but also because
they are bent or folded in such a way that they are
subject to limited lateral thrusts. Dieste also perfected
techniques of reinforced masonry with the objective of
minimizing the use of materials and maximizing the size
of openings.

Dieste’s Church of Christ the Worker, (1958-60) in
Atlantida, Uruguay, is a simple rectangle, with sidewalls
rising up in undulating curves to the maximum
amplitude of their arcs. The undulation enables the
thin walls to be self-stabilizing, much as a bent sheet
of paper does. At the top, the geometry of the wall is
merged with the continuous double curvature of the
ceiling (reinforced with tie-rods concealed in troughs).
The beauty of the forms is augmented by the subtle
interplay of light: while small, punched rectangular
openings diffuse light through the interior, a triple row
of baffles above the entrance, opening in opposite
directions, flood the space with indirect light. His
warehouse for the fruit-packing plant in Salto (1971-
72) consists of a series of large discontinuous double-
curvature vaults spanning approximately 150 feet. Not
only do the vaults make the span seem effortless, but
the glazed slits light up the vaults and space to create a
space of rare sensuality.

18.94 Section and plan: Church of Christ the Worker, Atlantida

18.95 School of Music, National Schools of Art, Havana

National Modernism, Cuba austere circumstances of Cuba—made of being examples of an individualism that

In 1961, two years after the Cuban especially acute after the blockade contradicted the increasingly influential
Revolution, Fidel Castro and Ernesto “Che” imposed by United States in October standardized models of the Soviet-

Guevara decided to transform the golf 1960—it conferred on the architecture functionalist style. This eventually led to the
course of the Havana Country Club into the sensuality and the eroticism that Porro project’s abandonment. Castro’s government,
an experimental project that would make claimed was prototypically Cuban. By however, has since initiated a process of

art available to all. The master plan for the 1965 the schools, still unfinished, began to restoration, with Gottardi, the only one of the
National Schools of Art (1961-65) was given generate controversy. They were accused three architects still in Cuba, as its director.

to the young Cuban architect Ricardo Porro,
who had just returned from exile. Porro
invited his Italian colleagues Vittorio Garatti
and Roberto Gottardi, in Caracas, Venezuela,
to collaborate. The three architects initiated a
unique process: the design and construction
of the schools occurred simultaneously with
the beginning of the schools’ academic
activities. Porro designed the School of
Plastic Arts and the School of Modern
Dance; Gottardi, the School of Dramatic Arts;
and Garatti, the School of Music and the
School for Ballet. Even though each has its
particularities, the five schools followed three
common guiding principles: first, a response
to the tropical landscape that allowed for an
intimate relationship between nature and
architecture; second, the use of earthen
materials produced on the island instead of
steel and cement; and third, the use of the
boéveda catalana, or Catalan vault, as the
primary structural system.

Though this ancient and versatile

technique required very little by way of els o 2° m
17

resources and materials and was chosen
partially in response to the economically

18.97 Site plan: National Schools of Art, Havana

18.98 Site plan: Salk Institute, La Jolla, California

Salk Institute

For Dr. Jonas Salk, the discoverer of the polio
vaccine, medical research was not entirely
the domain of scientists and administrators;
it belonged to the public, and in Louis Kahn,
Salk found the architect who could transform
that ideal into architectural form. The Salk
Institute building (1960-63) in La Jolla,

near San Diego, California, is close to a bluff
overlooking the Pacific Ocean. Three floors of
laboratories, completely open in all directions,
are separated by half-floors dedicated to
mechanical ducts. As was typical of Kahn,
the building went through several design
permutations before its final form was agreed
upon. In its final configurations it consisted of
two rectangular laboratory blocks separated

y a courtyard, with towers housing the
scientists’ study rooms projecting from the
jaboratories but sitting in the courtyard
space. Circulation towers were located on the
other side of the laboratories, aligned to the
study towers that were separated from the
laboratories by bridges to declare a physical
and psychological differentiation. Whereas
rom the outside the building is austere and
windowless, the courtyard, elevated one

loor above the level of the site, captures

the dramatic views toward the ocean. The
diagonal walls of the towers allow each office
to have an ocean view. Originally, Kahn had
envisioned the court as a lush garden, but in
1966, after seeing the work of Luis Barragan,

Kahn invited him to see the designs, and it
was Barragan who came up with the idea of
an empty plaza. The plaza is entered from
the east, through a quiet garden. A narrow
waterway slices through the courtyard on

its axis and ends in the quiet waterfall of a
sunken viewing terrace—an area of repose.

18.99 Salk Institute

18.100 Section and plan of laboratory buildings, Salk Institute

Ei

Bid

Ei

-

National Modernism, Bangladesh

Louis Kahn spent more than a decade
working on Sher-e-Banglanagar (1961-82)
in Dacca {as it came to be called after
Bangladesh became independent in 1971)
and almost went bankrupt in the process.
It was completed well after Kahn’s death in
1974, but when it was finished in the late
1980s, it instantly captured the attention

of the Bangladeshi populace and was
celebrated as a triumphant display of their
independence. What the Bangladeshi
citizens see is a closely clustered assembly
of monolithic concrete towers, slashed
open, with huge triangular, rectangular, and
semicircular openings. Together they form
the outer envelope—the serving zone—to
the central chamber of the parliament, with
the trusses of the gigantic roof structure just
visible from a distance.

The entrance to the building is from the
north, through a large square building with
grand staircases. The four buildings for
offices are packaged between this building
and the other axially placed elements,
which are the minister’s offices to the west,
lunchrooms to the east, and a mosque to the
south. The mosque, preceded by a circular
ablution space, is formed by four round
towers clamped against a rotated square; it
is tilted a few degrees from the axis in order
to orient it toward Mecca. Within, Sher-e-
Banglanagar, much as the Pantheon’s oculus,
is a studied essay in the use of natural light
to illuminate monumental spaces—solit,

60m

18.101 Plan: Sher-e-Banglanagar, Dacca, Bangladesh

spliced, and reimagined through a series of
cubist transformations. From the outside,
however, Sher-e-Banglanagar sits in silent
dignity, with a vast swath of land cleared all
around it, first to make a reflecting pool and
then a giant plaza. Unlike the great plazas
of Brasilia and Chandigarh, Bangladesh's
plaza became an instant success. Every day

thousands of people throng its vast expanse,

playing, picnicking, protesting, or otherwise
participating in the public affairs of civic
life. Kahn’s Sher-e-Banglanagar, like Le
Corbusier's Chandigarh, was his largest and

18.103 Interior: Sher-e-Banglanagar

18.102 Sher-e-Banglanagar

final project, and along with the Kimball Art
Museum in Fort Worth, Texas, and the Salk
Institute in La Jolla, California, certainly the
finest of his later work. Where the Kimball Art
Museum is about the invention of the section
and the very precise and subtle measurement
of light in its galleries, and the Salk Institute
is a singular and profound meditation on

the framing of a view, Sher-e-Banglanagar,
though of much cruder workmanship, is
Kahn's most complex essay on the interplay
of light and mass in a tightly controlled formal
order.

18.104 Totsuka Country Club, Yokohama, Japan

Metabolism
On the basis of the design for his
internationally acclaimed Hiroshima
memorial, Kenzo Tange (1913-2005) was
invited to attend the 8th CIAM meeting
eld in England in 1951, where he met
Le Corbusier, Siegfried Giedion, Walter
Gropius, and Jose Luis Sert, among others.
t was at this congress that the question
of the “urban core” was raised, rekindling
ange’s interests in urban planning. Tange
came a member of Team X after the
dissolution of CIAM in 1956 and presented
is design for the Tokyo City Hall (1957) at
their Otterlo, Netherlands, meeting in 1959.
0 this meeting he also brought Kiyonori
ikutake’s drawings for the reorganization
of Tokyo, which envisioned tall, circular
residential towers on land and factories
on giant cylinders in the bay. This was the
eginning of his interest in urbanization as an
organic system and led to the development of
Metabolism.
Tange presented his Metabolist concepts
at the World Design Conference held in Tokyo
in 1958. This conference was conceived as
an alternative to Tear X and was attended
by, among others, Kikutake, Kisho Kurokawa,
Noboru Kawazoe, Fumihiko Maki, Peter
and Alison Smithson, Jacob Bakema, Paul
Rudolph, Ralph Erskine, Louis Kahn, Jean
Prouvé, Minoru Yamasaki, Balkrishna V.
Doshi, and Raphael Soriano.
Unlike Team X, which approached urban
design and planning by trying to solve

18.105 Nichinan Cultural Center, Nichinan, Japan

problems at the human scale, the Metabolists
worked at the largest scale conceivable,
seeing their structures through a biological
metaphor as an expression of the city’s new
life force. Despite this large scale, Metabolism
was a philosophical proposition about
inhabiting the earth in harmony with the
forces of nature.

While Tange’s urban plans bore little fruit,
his architectural practice, patronized by
Japan's elite, flourished. With an uncanny
aesthetic sense rivaled by few who worked
with exposed concrete at such large scales,

Tange built a celebrated body of work in the
1960s and 1970s. The Totsuka Country Club
(1960-61) acquired its upward-turning profile
from Chandigarh’s Assembly; the Nichinan
Cultural Center (1960-62), with its forceful
fins, was a beast unto itself; and finally,

the Olympic Stadium in Tokyo was a stellar
display not only of the structural possibilities
of concrete and tensile cable but also of the
ability of structure to generate poetic forms
such as had been rivaled only by Santiago
Calatrava in the recent past.

ee

ee

iit ee

18.106 Site plan: Olympic Stadium, Tokyo

18.107 Trellick Tower, London

Brutalism

n the mid-1960s, numerous architects,

led by Kenzo Tange, became interested in
megastructures that consisted of simple,
large-scale repetitive structures packed with
program. Cultural contexts were meant to
play only a limited role in these buildings.
nstead, the buildings emphasized material
simplicity and secular anonymity. They spoke
of the ethos of managerial grandness and
implied a transnational utopianism. The
Foundling Estate in London (1973) has long
ines of housing stacked on massive piers.
Though structures like these were soon

maligned, they brought modernism to a new
pitch in their fearless acceptance of large-
scale realities.

Brutalism was particularly popular
among university administrators, and many
campuses in the United States have at least
one example of late 1960s Brutalisrn, such

18.109 East Building, National Gallery, Washington, DC

‘

18.108 Foundling Estate, London

as Kane Hall at the University of Washington,
Seattle, designed by Walker & McGough
(1969) and the Stratton Student Center at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in
Cambridge by Eduardo F. Catalano. Similar,
but much larger, is the Rand Afrikaans
University in Johannesburg, South Africa
(1975), designed by William Meyer, which
fused the latest trends in megastructure with
ideas that were seen as specifically African.
Trellick Tower (1967-73) by Erno Goldfinger
in London is similarly vast and imposing.

18.110 Herbert F. Johnson Museum of Art, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York

4

Chinese-born |. M. Pei (1917-) refined the
brutalist aesthetic by developing a distinctive
style that appealed to many city leaders
during the days in which museums and
cultural buildings were coming to be seen
as an established aspect of a city’s profile.
His Herbert F. Jonnson Museum of Art on
the campus of Cornell University (1970-73)
in Ithaca, New York, consisted of a set of
distinct vertical concrete masses holding
the main mass of the gallery high in the air;
huge panes of glass fill in the open volumes,
making the whole structure unexpectedly
transparent. Pei’s East Building, National
Gallery (1974-78), in Washington, DC,

has numerous brutalist motifs, such as

the stark masses, deep recesses, sharp
edges, and wide openings, but it was clad

in a white sandstone that foreshadowed a

new generation of elegant, modernist civic
structures.


18.111 A portion of Ron Herron’s Walking City

Archigram

Archigram was a publication, begun in 1961,
that quickly became known for its alternative
ideas. Short for “Architectural Telegram,”
Archigram was produced by the young English
architects Peter Cook, David Greene, Michael
Webb, Ron Herron, Warren Chalk, and Dennis
Crompton. The full Archigram group later
included Colin Fournier, Ken Allison, and Tony
Rickaby. Though the actual collaborations
between these architects were often sporadic
and difficult, the magazine's agenda called

for a holistic vision of the city and its parts as
a living, flowing, pulsing, flexible organism.
Challenging the grid established by Le
Corbusier, Archigram's texts, collages, and
comic book-style designs emphasized the

use of anything but 90-degree angles and
thematized the curving and twisting of Le
Corbusier's straight lines. Using bright colors, a
nonstandard format, and an explicitly cut-and-
paste style of assembly, Archigram delivered
visions of technologically advanced cities that
walked on four legs, so-called Plugin Cities
that could be stacked and changed like cords
in an outlet, and Instant Cities that could be
flown in and made to sprout like spring flowers
in the hands of any eager architect, critic,

or admirer. Though many of the Archigram
structures were unbuildable, Peter Cook’s
recently built Kunsthaus in Graz, Austria, with
its amorphous blue shape contrasting with the
traditional architecture around it, gives some
indication of the Archigram aesthetic and the
excitement that it can generate.

The work of one member of the Archigram
group, Mark Fisher, a student of Peter Cook
at the Architectural Association (AA) in
London, embraced the language and images
of the youth culture that was blooming in
England and abroad. His investigations into
inflatable technology led to the Automat in
1968. It was a user-responsive pneumatic
structure supported by internal bracing
cables, which, attached to high-pressure

jacks, allowed the structure to expand and

contract in response to a user's weight
requirements. Fisher improved the Automat
in his design of the Dynomat, the surface of

18.112 Peter Cook's Blow-out Village

which was controlled by a series of valves,
again responding to user interactions. The
structure could be deflated and folded to fit
in the back of a car.
In 1977, Mark Fisher was asked to design
inflatable stage props for the Animals tour
of the rock group Pink Floyd. During the
design process, Fisher created the theme of

two towering pneumatic icons. For the first
show, he also designed a bloated, inflatable
“nuclear family”—including 2.5 children.
The most memorable of the Animals tour
inflatables were the series of pigs, which
flew over the audiences’ heads, snorting
and ultimately exploding above and behind
Pink Floyd's stage. From his success with
Pink Floyd’s Animals tour, Mark Fisher went
on to develop many of rock and roll’s most
memorable sets, including Pink Floyd's Wall
and Division Bell sets and Lisbon’s Expo ‘98.


Buckminster Fuller

Among the modernists, the one who most
radically rethought the question of technology
was Buckminster Fuller (1895-1983). In
1929, at the age of thirty-two, Fuller decided
to study what he called the ecological
principles of life. His goal was to analyze
nature's resources and think of ways to
make ther available to all of humanity
through an informed, efficient, flexible, and
responsible attitude toward design. His key
concepts were synergetics, which is what

he called the underlying coordinate system
of both physical and metaphysical nature;
and ephemeralization, which essentially is
doing more with less. Unlike some European
modernists, who saw housing as primarily a
question of social needs allied loosely with
industrial realities, Fuller saw housing as
tightly interwoven with industrialization and
social utopian thinking.

What resulted in 1928, after a series of
experiments with large-scale towers and
multiple-family housing systerns, was the
project for a prefabricated, mass-produced
4D Dymaxion House, in which plumbing and
electrical networks, as well as appliances,
were contained in the central mast. The
house could therefore operate independently
of any utility network, which made it flexible
enough to be located anywhere in the world.
lt was enclosed by transparent, shuttering
walls rade of vacuum-pane glass, which
eliminated the need for windows. A specially
designed ventilation system made dusting
unnecessary, as air drawn through vents was
filtered and then heated or cooled as desired.
An in-home laundry facility was designed
to wash, dry, fold, and place clean laundry
in appropriate compartments. The entire
structure was to be mass-produced and
flown to its site by blimps, with installation
requiring only a single day. All of this, Fuller
estimated, would cost only slightly more than
a 1928 Ford or Chevrolet automobile. The
4D Dymaxion House, however, was never
realized.

18.114 Elevation and plan: 4D Dymaxion House

18.115 Elevation and plan of a geodesic dome

Fuller also had a great interest in geography
and produced the Dymaxion map (1941),

as an icosahedron that could be unfolded

in different ways. (The term Dymaxion

was derived from a mixture of dynamism,
maximum, and ions.) Frorn the advent of

the Dymaxion map to the geometries that

led Richard Smalley and others to the Nobel
Prize-winning discovery of carbon buckyballs
(the most symmetrical large molecules
known, they are named for Fuller, who was
affectionately known as Bucky), Buckminster
Fuller influenced a whole generation of
architects, scientists, and visionary thinkers.
He was one of the earliest advocates of
renewable energy sources—solar, wind, and
waves—and coined the term Spaceship Earth
to emphasize the fact that we live on an
ecologically interconnected planet.

18.116 U.S. Pavilion, Montreal Expo, Canada

Fuller's breakthrough discovery—and this
one was fully practical—was the geodesic
dome, which was designed to have the best
possible ratio of volume to weight. Fuller
determined that a network of triangular struts
arranged on great circles (geodesics) would
create local triangular rigidity and distribute
the stress in a manner that would result in
the most efficient structure ever designed.
Geodesic domes, in fact, become stronger

as they increase in size. Industry and the
U.S. military immediately saw the potential of
geodesic domes, and they were built by the
hundreds around the world. The U.S. Pavilion
at the 1967 Montreal Expo was, for example,
a giant geodesic dome.

18.118 Exterior view and plan: The Wichita House that Buckminster Fuller
developed with the Beech Aircraft Company of Wichita, Kansas

Counterculture Architecture

Beginning in the early 1960s and escalating
toward the end of the decade, numerous
young architects, builders, and artists—
mainly in the United States—began to seek
out alternatives to professional architecture,
building with sod or discarded building
elements and studying vernacular practices
around the world. They were part of a
broader counterculture of the times that
criticized the social norms of the age,
including the suburban lifestyle and the
exploitation of natural resources. Though
many of these people's names remain
obscure, their efforts were sometimes
spectacular, such as the house built by Bob
de Buck and Jerry Thorman in New Mexico,
a freeform maze of spaces gathered around
central shafts of concrete columns that are
actually the chimney flues. The structure
was decorated with hubcaps and built with
wood scavenged from construction sites. The
framing was plastered, giving it an organic
feeling. According to de Buck: “Tools not to
have: straightedge, square, level, plumb.”

18.120 A homemade dome

In 1965, an artist community called Drop
City was founded in southern Colorado and
attempted to combine innovative architectural
form with social utopianism. The original
founders were Gene Bernofsky, JoAnn
Bernofsky, Richard Kallweit, and Clark
Richert, art students and filmmakers from
the University of Kansas and the University
of Colorado. Their intention was to create a
live-in work inspired by the “happenings”
of painter and performance artist Allan
Kaprow and the impromptu performances
of John Cage, Robert Rauschenberg, and
Buckminster Fuller. Residents constructed
domes and zonchedra, using geometric
panels made from the metal of automobile
roofs and other inexpensive materials. The
property deed stipulated that the land on
which the commune was built was “forever
free and open to all people.” Eventually,

18.121 Structures in Drop City, Colorado

tensions and personality conflicts developed,
leading many of the occupants to leave.
Nonetheless, there were several attempts to
repeat the experiment, such as the Criss-
Cross artists’ colony in Colorado. Though
dispersed and fragmented, this movernent
played an important part in demanding

that architects developed greater ecological
awareness.

Another example of counterculture
architecture is a building that, once the
scourge of the neighborhood, is now a tourist
attraction. It was made by Art Beal, a garbage
collector for the town of Cambria, California.
Known also known as Captain Nitt Witt or Dr.
Tinkerpaw, he spent his life constructing a
residence on the side of a hill from salvaged
materials using only hand tools. The structure
is made from car parts, cans, shells, TV
antennas, driftwood, and local rocks.


Parliament

National theater

National square

Sports center

18.122 Master plan concept for Abuja, Nigeria

(Facsimile of the original drawing by Dr. Nnamdi Elleh)

National Modernism, Nigeria

World War II left England and France
considerably weakened. By the mid-1960s,
almost all of the English colonies in Africa
had achieved independence, including
Uganda in 1962 and Zanzibar and Kenya

in 1963. Most immediately embarked on

an aggressive campaign of modernization.
New capitals, schools, and hospitals had to
be built, but since traditional architecture

had been neglected, skilled builders and
craftspeople were rare. In 1945, in all of
Africa, including Egypt, there were only 26
cities with a population over 100,000. By

the 1970s there were 120 such cities, but
architectural development remained spotty.
After Nigeria’ s independence in 1960,
several modernists arrived in Lagos, including
the husband and wife team of Maxwell Fry
and Jane Drew, who designed the University
of Ibadan in the early 1960s, after having
worked in Chandigarh, India. The university's
nucleus is a series of connected buildings
consisting of a ring of residential colleges
arranged around a core of buildings devoted
to teaching and administration. Open
balconies, screens, and covered passageways
make use of prevailing winds. The plan can
be described as loosely hierarchical, with
sports and residential complexes at one end
and the class and administration buildings at
the other.

Parliament's space

By 1991 new oil revenues created wealth
and stability, and Nigeria’s capital was moved
to a new city, Abuja, located on the Gwanga
Plains in the middle of the country. Abuja’s
master plan (1976) was designed by Kenzo
Tange, blending Lucio Costa's airplane plan
for Brasilia with the circulation pattern of
Tokyo. Anthropomorphically conceived, it
had the shape of a body with head, torso,
arms, and tail. The head contained the three
principal government buildings, the torso
the main body of the city, and the arms

the conference center and theater. Though
it was designed as a site for a democratic
government, the head can be easily
barricaded in times of civil disturbances.

Abuja is currently far from complete.

18.123 Master plan for Abuja, Nigeria
(Facsimile of the original drawing by Dr. Nnamdi Elleh)

18.124 University of Ibadan, Nigeria

18.125 School of Architecture, Anmedabad, India

South Asian Modernism

The Brazilian government was toppled

by a military coup in 1965, arresting the
development of Brazilian modernism.
However, in South Asia, as in other parts

of the postcolonial world, a more regional
modern architecture continued to flourish.
The Indian team of architects that had
worked with Le Corbusier in Chandigarh
continued to build throughout northern India.
Aditya Prakash, for instance, was responsible
for designing many new campuses and
universities, such as those in Ludhiana and
Hissar in the 1960s. Shivnath Prasad, in

18.127 Plan and section: School of Architecture, Ahmedabad

18.126 Gandhi Ashram Museum, Ahmedabad, India

New Delhi, developed Le Corbusier's brutalist
vocabulary at the Akbar Hotel (1965-69) and
at the Sri Ram Center for Performing Arts
(1966-72). In Bangladesh, Mazharul Islam
used brick and concrete for his dormitory

at Jahangir University (1969). In general,
building was done with load-bearing brick
walls, with concrete lintels and slabs and
deep overhangs as protection from the

sun. Thus, unlike Brazil, where structural
innovation became an integral part of the
national modern style, architects in India,
related perhaps more to the work of Dieste

in Uruguay, developed a vocabulary using
exposed brick and concrete constructed

with simple technical skill and inexpensive
finishes.

Balkrishna V. Doshi (1927-) and Charles
Correa (1930-2015) were among the most
prominent Indian architects. One of Doshi's
successful early projects was the School
of Architecture in Ahmedabad (1965), a
reworking of Le Corbusier's design for the
College of Art in Chandigarh. Unlike Le
Corbusier’s design, which was closed off and

18.128 Section: Sangath, Ahmedabad, India

regulated by a very strict circulation system,
Doshi’s school maintained the principle

of north light, but he opened the building
up so that it operated as a multifunctional
space. Later in life, Doshi moved more in
the direction of Louis Kahn, asking more
fundamental questions of materials and
assembly. The design of Sangath (1979), his
own office, took on the work of rethinking a
climatic response from first principles. The
consequence was a structure that was just as
much below ground as above, with a series
of vaulted roofs (covered with broken china)
derived from the original shed that stood on
the site.

Correa extended Le Corbusier's fascination
with sunlight to create a series of houses
made of brick and concrete that used the
concept of sections as well as a pergola
roof to create microclimatic conditions. His
Parekh House (1967-68) in Anmedabad,
for instance, had two sections: one for the
summer and the other for the winter. The
distant influence of Kahn's Trenton Bath
Houses can be seen in Correa’s design for
the Gandhi Ashram Museum (1958-63),
intended to house artifacts and an exhibition
of the life of Mahatma Gandhi. Here Correa
used a 6-meter grid composed of I-shaped
brick piers to set up an interconnected
network of spaces—some open to the
sky, some covered but open, and some
fully enclosed—that showed an early skill
in developing courtyard-like spaces to

18.129 Sangath, Ahmedabad

advantage. Correa used a mud-tile roof, held
up on concrete beams, that drains rainwater
into channels in the concrete slabs. The
water is then collected in a central pond
through huge concrete gargoyles, reminiscent
of Le Corbusier's High Court in Chandigarh.
Operable wooden louvers enabled air
circulation in the enclosed spaces.

Correa’s later work developed his climatic
solutions for different sites and programs.

For his residential tower in Bornbay, the
Kanchenjunga apartments (1970-83), for
instance, he punched out double-height
spaces in the corners to create an open
feeling and to set up air circulation through
each apartment. His Kovalam Beach Resort
(1969-74) utilized the natural slope of the
ocean-facing hill to create a rhythm of rooms
and terraces open to the sky.

18.130 Plan: Gandhi Ashram Museum

But even in the United States, vast housing
blocks shot up that exacerbated post-World
War II social and racial tensions. This led

to the announcement of the “death of
modernism” with the destruction in 1972 of
the Pruitt-lgoe Housing Project (1952-55)
in St. Louis, Missouri, which opened to

a great deal of optimism but, because of
mismanagement and endemic racist policies,
became the very symbol of urban blight
and racial imbalance. Beginning in the late
1960s, architects began to return to the
question of context, history, traditions, and
form as a way to revitalize the purpose and
meaning of their profession. The protest
against modernism began in the United
States but quickly morphed into a global
18.131 Heidi Weber House (Centre Le Corbusier), Zurich movement that eventually dampened the

spread of international modernism.

POSTMODERNISM

The word postmodernism does not refer

to a particular definable style, and in this

it is very different from other designations,
like Georgian or Shingle Style or even the
International style, which, despite its multiple
meanings and origins in architecture, by the
1950s described a set of practices loosely
defined around the ideals of CIAM. But
what had seemed so promising in 1950

was by 1970 seen not only as constricting
but also as failing to live up to its promises.
More and more, critics began to associate
modernism with capitalism, bureaucracy,
and failed social housing. And for Europeans,
modernism after World War Il meant endless
rows of hastily built, drab housing blocks.
There were no Brasilias, Chandigarhs, or
Daccas in Europe, and few examples of
successful civic modernism. In the United
States, modernism was more successful. It
had made significant inroads in domestic
architecture, had thoroughly transformed the
corporate landscape, and even had a few
successful civic projects to show for itself,
such as the Lincoln Center (1956) in New
York City and Civic Center Plaza (1965-66)
in Chicago.

18.132 AT&T Building, New York City

Charles Jenck’s 1977 book The Language of
Postmodern Architecure sought to establish

a canon for postmodernism by linking
architectural vocabulary to structuralism,

or the study of the structure of language.
Michael Graves (1934-2015) was singled out
by Jencks. His buildings used color, stripped
down classical vocabularies, and applied the
methodology of the collage. Other architects
moved in the direction of social realism, such
as Robert Venturi (1925-) and Denise Scott
Brown (1931-), who were influenced by pop
art and who turned their gaze at highway
architecture and most specifically to Las
Vegas, Nevada. Charles Moore (1925-93),
by way of contrast, sought a deeper personal
commitment to architecture than that which
could be provided by a standard professional
practice. In his writings we see the
beginnings of an interest in phenomenology,
a movement that was to grow steadily in the
United States and abroad and that was linked
to a trend toward political conservatism in
architecture.

LAN

Moving from Philip Johnson to Charles
Moore, one can begin to recognize the
inherent and unresolved complexity of
postmodernism, for though it heralded a
release from the strictures of modernism

and was thus a liberating movement, it

also had conservative leanings, as was
brought to the fore by the phenomenologists,
who, in the United States and elsewhere,
began to replace the socially oriented
architects in acadernia. Those who wanted
to take up the issue of community-oriented
architecture often left the field of architecture
for the rapidly expanding discipline of

urban planning. Among the very early
phenomenologists, Christian Norberg-Schultz
(1926-2000) was strongly influenced by

the German philosopher Martin Heidegger
and argued for a regionally-based aesthetic,
whereas Moore argued that architecture
needed to integrate a sensitivity to landscape
with an aesthetic determined by psychology
and memory. At the opposite extreme from
phenomenology was psychoanalysis, which
among architects, unlike artists at the time,
received very little interest.

18.133 Piazza d'Italia, New Orleans

Certainly one of the most intriguing aspects
of postmodernism was its interest in irony.
No architecture before or after has allowed
the designer to experiment with cultural
and historical images with as free a hand
as postmodernism. Examples include the
Piazza d'ltalia in New Orleans (1975-78) by
Charles Moore; the AT&T Building in New
York City (1984) by Philip Johnson, the
National Collegiate Football Hall of Fare
(1967; unbuilt) by Venturi, Scott Brown &
Associates, and the Animal Crackers House
in Chicago (1976-78) by Stanley Tigerman.
Tigerman, influenced by inflated pop art
forms, built an addition to a house that looks
like a series of rollers that can be turned by
using the ventilators on the sides as knobs.
It is half industrial and half cartoonish in
character. Even more provocative were the
designs of the New York-based firrn known
as SITE (Sculpture in the Environment),
which received commissions from Best, a
forward-looking supermarket chain. In one
project, SITE peeled the brick facade from
the box, and in another, they designed the
facade to appear as if it were in a state of
decay and ruin. The irony was aimed at the
strangeness of suburban architecture. It was
the first firm to engage the question of the
shopping mall through criticism and humor
simultaneously.

wea

ee hdiadi

1

18.134 Plan: Social Science Research Center, Berlin

Robert Stern (1939-) also interrogated the
image of the American suburb in his Point
West Place office building in Framingham,
Massachusetts (1983-84), which in
essence placed an Egyptianesque facade
onto an otherwise generic office building.
James Stirling's project for the Berlin Social
Science Research Center (1981) begins
with an existing building; appended behind
it are buildings in the form of a collage—
an amphitheater, a castle, an octagonal
aptistery, and even a church. Through

this historicism, which relies on precedents
rom the classical to the Renaissance,
Stirling poked fun at a city that, unlike other
European capitals, only began in the late
18th century. This instant Europeanization of
Berlin was also meant to thumb its nose at
Europe's fascination with its own past.
Buildings like the Berlin Social Science
Research Center led many to criticize
postmodernism as a style without rules. But

there were many postmodernists who rejected
irony and the open-endedness of the design
process in favor of a claimed authenticity and
seriousness. This movement was particularly
strong in Europe. The German architect and
theorist Leon Krier (1946-), a particularly
strident critic of modernism, argued for a

new Hellenism; in England, Prince Charles
called for a return to pre-modern, homegrown

pt rapar ges pee ypeentats ahaa iet ora eer ag acy
aia * pbb a

Poe ween ag

English styles. In Italy, Aldo Rossi (1937-97)
argued for a typological coherence to
architecture and challenged both modernists
and postmodernists by staying within the
brutalist aesthetic. At the Gallaratese (1969-
73), a large apartment building project on
the outskirts of Milan, for example, Rossi
designed one of the blocks with a rhetoric

of extreme formalist stoicism. The result was
the emergence of an ethos of “regionalism”
which had many defenders since it allowed
for a criticism of modernism, on the one
hand, and of postmodernism’s penchant

for irony and arbitrariness on the other.
Regionalisrn was particularly strong outside
of the West, where it tapped into nationalist
and anticolonialist sentiments. But there were
also a handful of European regionalists, such
as the Swiss architect Mario Botta (1943-),
whose work drew somewhat vaguely on local,
historical forms. Nonetheless, his buildings’
plans remained in some sense modern, as
did their massing.

Whereas many of the more conservative
postmodernists attempted to orient
architecture back to its temporal, contextual,
and historical roots, Peter Eisenman (1932-),
along with John Hedjuk (1929-2000)
and a few others, rejected any softening
of architecture in the direction of culture.
Architecture, to maintain itself as a discipline,

18.135 House at Stabio, Switzerland

jad to remain aloof from cultural traditions
and bourgeois demands. Eisenman thus
created for his buildings a set of formal
constraints that had nothing to do with
unction or program. His radical formalism
ies at the opposite end of the spectrum
rom Robert Venturi’s pop contextualism.
lonetheless, both celebrated the disjuncture
of expectations in the understanding of what
is architecture. Eisenman’s architecture,
jowever, maintained a focus on the design
process by seeking out a self-referential
janguage that excluded the traditional priority
of client needs. For the design of a house
e created a type of game in which a cube
was cut, rotated, sliced, and otherwise
manipulated, so that what was left over was
the “house”: function, siting, weather, and
use were given no consideration at all. He
wanted to demonstrate that function is just
as flexible as form and that a “house” is a
semantic indicator of an architectural object,
not its typology. This is different frorn the
views of Rossi, who wanted functionalism to
bend to the primacy of type.


Postmodernism, through the influences of
pop art, also began to accommodate itself to
the new medium of signage and advertising.
The Centre Georges Pompidou (1971-77) in
Paris, designed by the firm Piano & Rogers,
was about “legibility.” It was originally to
have large billboards suspended frorn its
metal structure. The service conduits, too,
had to be legible. Air-conditioning ducts are
blue, electricity conduits are yellow; elevator
cables are red, staircases gray, and the

18.136 Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris, France

structure itself is white. Putting so much
emphasis on visual impact, postmodern
architects had little to contribute to the topic
of technology, but in his State of Illinois
building in Chicago (1979), Helmut Jahn left
elements of the structure exposed, especially
on the interior, to better reveal the workings
of the building, and experimented with new
forms of skyscrapers that foreshadowed the
skyscraper revival of the 1990s.

18.137 Peter Eisenman’s drawings for House Ill for Robert Miller

18.138 Chapel of Light, Ibaraki Kasugaoka Kyokai Church, Osaka, Japan

sul
URS ait

Gathering Space &

2|

18.140 Site plan: Ibaraki Kasugaoka Kyokai Church, Osaka, Japan

18.139 Section: Chapel of Light, Osaka, Japan

Postmodernism had such a profound impact
on the non-Western world that in the 1980s
and early 1990s it found itself reassessing
its claims to modernity and nationalism.
Japanese architecture, for example, moved
away from Metabolism and other forms of
modernist expression. Arata Isozaki (1931-)
became more literal in his references to
Japanese forms, whereas younger, self-
trained architects like Tadao Ando (1941-)
gravitated toward elemental forms that
stressed the interplay of light and materials in
the experience of minimalist, poetic creations.
His work became the hallmark of a new

and very successful Japanese aesthetic that
was highly modern and abstract and that
also found common cause with traditional
Japanese forms. His work in concrete, the
predominant material of his expression,

was immaculately poured. The Shingonshu
Honpukuji (“Water Temple,” 1991), for
instance, focused on an singular moment
where a stair descended through a round
pond with a smattering of water lilies. At his
Chapel of Light, the main chapel at Ibaraki
Kasugaoka Kyokai Church (1989), the altar
wall is composed of four pieces of concrete
that hover weightlessly next to each other

to create a luminous cross; at the rear, in
another tour de force, the slight gap between
the walls allows a blinding sliver of light to
penetrate the dark stillness.


Japanese postmodernism could be seen
as a highly refined form of modernism,
and not really as postmodernism at all,
since it is stripped of all except the most
basic of cultural references. But the

rise of postmodernism in other places

was significantly messier and was often
accompanied by the erosion of the secular
nation-state as the common reference
point for diverse communities. Since
postmodernism allowed alternative claims
to the conventions of nationalism, irony
was almost never brought into play: on the
contrary, the search was usually for some
form of regional authenticity based on
traditions. Just what constituted “tradition”
then became highly contested, particularly
in places like South Asia, where different
claims, due to India's complex past, could

be made upon history and its associated
aesthetics. For example, right-wing Hindu
nationalists demolished a mosque in northern
India in the early 1990s on the grounds that
it had been built on the foundations of a
Hindu temple a millennium ago; the incident

sparked religious riots. Similarly, the Islamic
world saw a resurgence of orthodox claims to
Islamic identity in cultural expression, forcing
the rollback of national modernism in places
such as Turkey and Egypt. Often, however,
the tendency to see everything before
modernism as traditional—that is, as firmly
established and permanent—has left a gap in
how to engage earlier aesthetic modalities in
the modern world.

A long list could be made of architects of
the postcolonial and non-Western world who
are searching for a way to resolve this issue
without resorting to, or endorsing, regressive,
nationalist politics. For the most part, such
architects, deeply steeped in the sensibilities
of modern architecture, have attempted to
reimagine their practices by referencing easily
accessible and often somewhat stereotypical
claims to mandalas, and other traditional or
iconesque construction systems. Others talk

of urban morphologies, place-making, and
even genius foci, a term that has its origins in
European Romantic philosophy of the early
19th century. More realistic was the work

of Hassan Fathy (1899-1989) in Egypt. He
utilized ancient design methods and materials
to create low-cost architecture. He also
trained locals to make their own materials

18.141 San Cristobal Stables, Los Clubes, Mexico City

and build their own buildings. Climatic
conditions, public health considerations, and
ancient craft skills also affected his design
decisions.
Geoffrey Bawa (1919-2003), an architect
from Sri Lanka trained at the Architectural
Association in London, engaged problems
of managing large land and water systems
while building with masons who know
nothing of modern building techniques.
He drew, nonetheless, on local solutions
and developed an aesthetic that is freely
eclectic in its expression. His house for Dr.
Bartholomew (1961-63) utilized a mixture of
locally available materials, including coconut
trunks, granite, and fired-earth tiles, as well
as concrete for the foundation. He also
introduced water pools, not only for cooling

but also to serve as visual beacons along a
circulation path.

In Mexico, Luis Barragaén (1902-88),
who had collaborated with Louis Kahn on
the design for the plaza at the Salk Institute
building, developed a design vocabulary of
simple forms, their elegance heightened by
the use of color. Somewhat like Ando, he
maintained a minimalist aesthetic insisting
on stark planes in studied juxtapositions. As
a consequence, his work has a strong poetic
appeal. In his own house, he differentiated
windows that were meant for framing a view
from those that just were there to admit light.
Barragan was little known in the world until a
retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art in
New York in 1975 made him farous.

18.142 Section and plan: House for Dr. Bartholomew, Colombo, Sri Lanka

18.143 Simpson-Lee House, Mt. Wilson, Australia

MAGNEY HOUSE

One of the most consistent explorations of

a localized modernism

was undertaken by

Australia’s Glenn Murcutt. Beginning with

a sensibility strongly im
van der Rohe’s minima

pressed by Mies
list architecture,

Murcutt's one-man practice has taken up
small projects in the manner of California's
Case Study Houses. His designs minimize

the use of material whi
effectiveness in controll

le maximizing their
ing climate. His

buildings disturb the land as little as possible

and are constructed as
A deep-seated knowle

efficiently as possible.
ge of the site and of

local conditions is cardinal to Murcutt’s ethic;

by choice, he has neve!

T practiced outside of

Australia, although he teaches worldwide.
Murcutt’s Magney House (1982-84),
located 500 meters from the southern
Pacific coast of Australia, has a masonry
the south to buffer
id ocean winds. By
facade is completely

wall 2.1 meters high to
the building against col
contrast, the northern

18.144 Marie Short House, Kempsey, Australia

glazed, though protected by retractable
louvers, to take in the light and views. A
continuous band of glazing about 2 meters
off the ground encircles the house to admit
ambient light and to make the sky visible
from inside. Above this, two asymmetrical
curves built with corrugated metal sheets
not only protect the glazing and collect water
that is stored in subterranean tanks but also
give the house its signature roof profile as

a “machine for living.” Two vents from the
kitchens hover above the roof like periscopes.
Taut, V-shaped steel struts hold the roof
overhang, calculated to keep the summer
sun out and let the winter sun in. The plan is
simple: a thin band of serving spaces to the
south are separated from the northern bank
of living spaces by a corridor, located exactly
where the gully collecting water frorn the two
roofs runs. Murcutt’s Simpson-Lee House
(1989-94) is built on the same principles but
with a very different expression.

7

18.145 Section: Magney House, Bingie Bingie, Australia

Globalization Today

19.1 Aerial view of Shenzhen Special Economic Zone, China

INTRODUCTION
The awareness that we live in a world of
global relationships is now itself global. Fifty
years from now, it is likely that the end of the
Cold War, the rise of China, and the onset of
global warming will be remembered as the
definitive events of the late 20th century, not
the spectacle of 9/11 or the rise of ISIS. Since
the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, the fruits of
victory in the Cold War for the capitalist bloc
led by the United States have taken the forrn
of globalization, or the determined push to
dominate global markets via the enforcement
of favorable trade and tariff regimes.
Unshackled by the structural reforms
initiated by Deng Xiaoping in 1978, China has
stepped up to the opportunity of globalization
to corner much of the market, pioneering the
concept of the special economic zone (SEZ),
an updated version of the colonial port treaties
that were once signed to enable special
places like Hong Kong to operate. Since the
mid-1990s, formerly Third World countries
have jostled to ernulate the Chinese economic
model, creating a new intermediate class of
nations in the global hierarchy. Today they are
known as the BRICS—Brazil, Russia, India,
China, and South Africa—but others, such as
Nigeria and Mexico, are clamoring to join in.

The keystone in the infrastructure of
globalization is the containerization that
has optimized international shipping in
an unprecedented way, accompanied by
massive purpose-built ships, automated
ports, and radically rationalized truck and
rail transport. None of this would have been
possible without the concomitant spread of
the new digital network, the Internet, which
has not only generated the sense of a self-
aware global community but has also enabled
instantaneous financial transactions across
national boundaries, transactions that power
the engines of globalization. To support this
network of global finance, a new empire of
global cities has emerged—maijor cities that
compete and collaborate to control global
finance. Generic infrastructural buildings
such as airports, airport malls, transit
systems, and convention centers are also
being built around the world to smooth the
movement of the agents of global finance.
Global self-consciousness has also been
spurred by two global crises: climate change
and terrorism. Two centuries of relentless
industrialization, powered by fossil fuels, has
produced more wealth than ever before but
has also ended up threatening the delicate
equilibrium that is the atmosphere of planet


19.2 Container ships in port, Seattle

Earth. Architecture’s role in this process

is certainly not without blame; buildings

are the largest consumers of energy in the
United States, for instance. But the new
crisis of terrorism can only be indirectly
indexed to architecture. In the face of the
overwhelming military might of today’s
dominant nation-states, insurgencies around
the world have found a way to use the power
of media—and more recently the Internet—
to globalize the impact of guerilla warfare,
originally a very localized and supplementary
military tactic. Architecture plays the role

of collateral damage in this war. More than
the destruction of habitats that conventional
warfare brings about, the bombing of iconic
architecture like the Twin Towers in New York
captures global attention, reminding us that
architecture, in spite of all its materiality and
massive capital expenditures, is ultimately
just as subject to its media image as a
supermodel. Architecture's supermodel-like
qualities have resulted, on the one hand, in
the fortification of significant public buildings
such as embassies with bollards, high-
perimeter walls, and other security features;
and, on the other hand, in a global obsession
with super-iconic buildings, recognizable
worldwide, designed by a dazzling class of
storied “starchitects.”

19.3 Bollards protecting the U.S. Capitol in Washington, DC

In spite of all the razzle-cazzle, the critical
architectural response to globalization is
characterized by uncertainty and constant
reinvention. Every year a new conference
announces the establishment of a new ism;

if it is Deconstructivism one day, it is the
lew Pragmatism the next, and then a New
egionalism the day after. New Urbanism

wo

is followed by New Landscape Urbanism,
lose on the heels of which comes Planetary
rbanization, accornpanied by the Global

occa

ities Network. In a sense, this is a sign

a rich discourse and the abandoning of
rthodoxies. And yet, while the certainties
modernism are routinely criticized, the
search for new ecological utopias is still a

aQo°0

professional obsession. And while it is the
unknown possibilities of technologically
imbued architecture that get the most press
and research funding, it is the postmodern-
like quests for identity, place, and local
empowerment that still find currency among
alternative designers.

If the psychological response to
uncertainty is preservation, it is no surprise
that the movement for preservation—or
conservation, as it is also termed—
has emerged as a major force in the
architectural community. Much more than
the old modernist distinction between
the new and the old, preservation today

is a multivalent movement that includes
strategies as diverse as building resilient
social networks and banking the world’s
seeds to ensure biodiversity in the future.
From World Heritage to DOCOMOMO to local
activist groups, preservation is enjoying an
unexpected renaissance. And in its midst,
the city—as the ancient, evanescent Greek
ideal of diverse communities sustained in

an egalitarian matrix—has emerged as the
focus of the civic objectives of professional
architects. In 2009 half the world's population
lived in cities, indicating the global trend
toward urbanization—a statistic that was
celebrated by both advocates and critics of
globalization.

There is no one equation that can
describe today’s architecture, in spite of the
whitewashing of the world that is implied by
the term globalization. Instead, the global and
the local have become so intertwined that
perhaps the neologism g/oca/ best describes
the world that architects design for today.
Rather than painting global architecture with
a single brush, we would like to suggest an
overlay of seven different global trends, each
coming to terms with contemporary reality
in a different way. And even though there
are overlaps, each is governed by a set of
circumstances, ideologies, and politics that
differentiates it from the others.

19.4 Map of the Global Cities Network

1

In 2016, construction activity around the
globe was worth over $7 trillion, constituting
about 10 percent of the world’s economy.
These numbers will only increase, expected
to grow to about $10 trillion by 2020, thanks
to the economic developments taking place
mostly in Asia, but also in Africa, Latin
America, and eastern Europe. Though a

vast proportion of these construction dollars
are filtered through large, anonymous real-
estate and engineering firms, whether owned
privately or by the state, there are a host of
large firms that provide architectural services
at this level. One of these, Kohn Pedersen
Fox Associates (KPF), founded in 1976 and
originally working mainly in the United States
and Europe, has in recent decades designed
the Tigamas master plan (1990), the Kuwait
International Hotel (1991), the Singapore
Arts Center (1992), the Tel Aviv Peninsula
master plan (1996), and the De Hoftoren/
Ministry Headquarters of Education, Culture,
and Science for the Hague (2003), to list only
a small fraction of their work. Seattle-based
Callison Architecture, with five hundred
people under a single roof, is the retail
expert of the world, having designed in the
Philippines (Ayala Center Greenbelt), China
(Bank of China, Shangdi Center), Japan
(Seibu Department Stores), India (Gardens
Galleria), Qatar (Pearl of the Gulf), Dubai
(Diera City Centre), and Russia (Ikea stores).

i

19.5 Facade of old building surrounded by scaffolding during restoration

19.6 Heavily urbanized megacity

The St. Louis—based firm Hellmuth, Obata

& Kassabaum (HOK) is another megafirm,
with 2,500 employees worldwide. Its general
style is a clean, professionalized version of
postmodernism, with a flair for color and
design. The Japanese megafirm Nikken
Sekkei, like New Delhi's Morphogenesis, is
more straightforwardly modernist: many of its
buildings are infused with a clean, rectilinear
sensibility; its presentation and designs
predicated on new computing possibilities.
Gensler, NBBJ, RTKL, and Ellerbe Beckett,
now part of AECOM, are other large firms
practicing worldwide. Some of these firms
are so large that they conduct their own
internal annual design awards competition
with external juries, such as the GDEA, the
Gensler Design Excellence Awards.

China has been a big draw since it
opened to foreign investrnent in a massive
industrialization and capitalization program
the likes of which had never been seen
before. By 2020, many of the world’s twenty
largest cities are going to be in China. (India
is not far behind.) During the first decade of
the 21st century, the worldwide price of steel
doubled because of the demand from China,
raising the cost of tall buildings in the rest
of the world appreciably, although Chinese

19.7 Skyline of modern Shanghai

demand has slowed recently. While the
material effects of this transformation were
felt worldwide, another kind of cornpetition
for supremacy is being waged in Asia in the
race to claim the world’s tallest building. In
less than ten years, this title has shifted from
Kuala Lumpur to Shanghai to Taipei and back
to Shanghai. The power of tall buildings as a
global icon was verified by the destruction of
Minoru Yamasaki’s twin towers at the World
Trade Center by terrorists on Septernber 11,
2001. That a handful of fanatical religious
zealots planning vengeance in a remote field
in the middle of Afghanistan could focus

so precisely on these skyscrapers as the
embodiment of the United States testifies

to the continuing hold of architecture as

an icon in the global imagination—as well
as its perishability. New York has recently
completed the construction of another tall
tower at the World Trade Center complex,
designed by Daniel Libeskind and David
Childs of SOM, at a cost of almost $4 billion.


19.8 The new One World Trade Center tower, New York

2

A second way to map architecture at the
global level is to follow the careers of those
who self-consciously infiltrate the global
economy with the principles of high design.
Frank Gehry is the leader in this respect,
designing opera houses, museums, and
institutional headquarters the world over.
These buildings are meant to be high profile
and are readily used in tourist brochures.
They are prestige commissions. This
tendency began after World War II with such
commissions as J@rn Utzon’s Sydney Opera
House (1957-73), but the most recent
examples include the construction in Seoul
of the Leeurn Samsung Museum of Art, with
buildings by Rem Koolhaas, Mario Botta,
and Jean Nouvel. Qatar is being transformed
into a world-class cultural center with the
completion of five new museums, including

the Islamic Museum by |. M. Pei and another
by Santiago Calatrava, the renowned Spanish

architect-engineer.
The global commodification of prestige
buildings should not lead us to dismiss the

potential importance of these buildings in the

history of architecture, for they are places
where architects can experiment not only
with new technologies but also with new
ideas about program and function. For the
public, these buildings are also the most

accessible and visible examples of avant-
garde architectural production. Nonetheless,
these projects are not unambiguous. The
Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao, Spain, has
brought in millions in tourist dollars, and the
advantages and disadvantages need to be
continually kept in mind. But even this is not
anew phenomenon. The “Bilbao effect” is
today what the great international exhibitions
were to the 19th century—economic engines
that promise an enhancement of awareness

19.9 Frank Gehry’s iconic Guggenheim Bilbao, Spain

and knowledge but also extend the flattening
process of capital. The Qatar museums are
specifically aimed at tourists, whom officials
hope will be lured to beach resorts and
expansive desert landscapes—“all in a very
safe environment.” According to one official,
“We expect tourism growth to more than
double in the next six years, from the four
hundred thousand visitors that presently visit
Qatar to more than one million tourists in
2010.”


19.10 Interior view: Santiago Calatrava’s Quadracci Pavilion, Milwaukee Art Museum, Wisconsin 19.11 Quadracci Pavilion, Milwaukee Art Museum

Among the elite designers who work at the
global scale of prestige cornmissions, only
Rem Koolhaas, a Dutch architect, has a well-
articulated theory about the status and future
of a globalized architecture. His 1,376-page
book, S,M,L,XL, written together with Bruce
Mau, Jennifer Sigler, and Hans Werlemann
(1995), combines essays, manifestos,
diaries, fiction, travelogues, and meditations
on the contemporary city. The book's large
color graphics transformed architectural
publishing. One of its themes was “bigness,”
part of an attempt to address the concerns of
scale in the modern, global world. An essay
in the book, “The Generic City,” declares that
the usual differences between architecture,
the street, and the city are things of the

past. Instead, architecture has to embrace
and combine all of these. Furthermore, the
anonymity of the city and its architectural
components is an inevitable consequence of
modern life—and perhaps an ideal to strive
for. In 2014 Rem Koolhas curated the Venice —_19.12 The Office for Metropolitan Architecture’s Central Public Library, Seattle, Washington
Architecture Biennale, in which he dispensed

with the tradition of celebrating the work of

famous architects and instead catalogued the

mundane registers of construction—walls,

flooring, paneling, and the like—that make up

the bulk of the work of architectural design.


19.13 2014 Venice Architecture Biennale

Despite this position, Koolhaas, like others,
has become the favored architect of the
governmental and capitalist elite, or at

least those who want to think fast and
preferably big, whether it be the Dutch for
their ernbassy in Berlin; the Chinese and
their CCTV tower in Beijing; the European
Union and its headquarters in Brussels;
Samsung, with its Leeum Museum in Seoul;
or Prada, with its elegant store in New York
City. The difference between KPF and Rem
colhaas is thus blurry, for both operate

at the intersection of high capital and high
design. Koolhaas, however, has a practice that
seeks to articulate much more strongly than
PF the autonomy of the architect and the
symbolic celebration of the architect's name.
To this effect, Koolhaas founded the Office for
Metropolitan Architecture (OMA) in 1975, a
pure design corporation that in his own words
lends “contemporary architecture, urbanism,
and cultural analysis” and tries to address

the problems associated with contemporary
globalization with truly innovative and radical
solutions. Besides institutional buildings in
Europe, the United States, and Asia, OMA
has designed urban plans for large cities,
proposed a new logo for the European Union,
and even prepared the digital identity for
global high-fashion retail giant Prada.

19.14 Couture by Alexander McQueen (above)
and Frank Gehry’s Louis Vuitton concept model
(below)

The 21st century, in fact, has seen the
increasing intersection of the world of haute

couture and architecture. Not only do several
iconic fashion designers, such as Tom Ford,
have architectural backgrounds, but the design
of fashion shows and flagship stores, such

as those of Louis Vuitton, has emerged as a
distinctive genre in itself. Fashion designers
like Hussein Chalayan and Comme des
Garcons self-consciously refer to architectural
structure in their designs—and, conversely,
some architects, such as Zaha Hadid, also
crossed over into fashion design.

19.15 Vision for Madrid, drawing by Zaha Hadid

Zaha Hadid (1950-2016) occupies a special
place in this spectrum. As a woman architect
born in Iraq, Hadid broke many of the glass
ceilings and stereotypes of architecture
culture. Eschewing the formal shibboleths of
both modernism and postmodernism, she
quickly developed a distinctly individualistic
style that emphasized bold forms and
sensuous lines, which was at first described
as being deconstructivist but came into its
own with the ascent of computer-based
parametric modeling in the 1990s. As a
woman of color, Zaha Hadid gave expression
to the aspirations of women architects
worldwide, including those of earlier
generations such as Eileen Gray of France,
Minnette de Silva of Sri Lanka, and U. E.
Chowdhury of India.

One of the problems with “starchitects” is
that once they retire or die, their work cannot
be sustained, as happened with the firms of
the earlier generation of modernist masters
such as Le Corbusier, Frank Lloyd Wright,
and Ludwig Mies van der Rohe. Benedetta
agliabue’s work at EMBT in Barcelona is a
notable exception in this regard: not only has
she completed and continued the work she
egan with Enric Miralles (1955-2000), she
jas also been able to create a distinctive new
identity for herself that builds on the legacy of
the firm.

19.17 Clichy-Montfermeil Metro Station competition drawings by Benedetta Tagliabue

19.18 A courtyard of Sardarnagar

3
In contradistinction to the approach just
outlined are the architectural practices that
come from the direction of nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) that airn to solve
pressing social and economic problems.
Globally, one in seven people lives in a
slum settlement. By 2020, that number
will increase to one in three. NGOs are an
important part of the solution to this pending
crisis, since they are more flexible than
government bureaucracies and thus often
more capable of identifying problems and
suggesting solutions that are acceptable to
local cormmunities.

Though the idea of the NGO dates
to the early 20th century, the phrase
nongovernmental organization only care
into broader use with the establishment
of the United Nations in 1945, when
provisions were made for the creation of
such organizations. Today, the amount of
unacknowledged work done by NGOs around
the world is staggering. An example is the
building effort undertaken by Kutch Nav
Nirman Abhiyan, a collection of forty NGOs
in Kutch, in western India, which came
together after the devastating earthquake
of January 26, 2000, to undertake a range
of development initiatives in the areas of
social work, primary education, and disaster
management. It has also helped construct

more than twenty thousand dwellings built
by the local communities themselves.

The new structures used reinforcement
techniques to make the buildings more
earthquake resistant. Such work by “barefoot
architects,” as they have sometimes been
called, is the other side of the world of global
capital. Another organization, Architecture

for Humanity, a San Francisco-based

NGO, provides volunteered professional

design services to community groups,
social entrepreneurs, and other not-for-
profit organizations the world over. It helps

underprivileged communities plan and
develop schools, clinics, and sports fields,
among other things.

4

A fourth type of architecture operating at the
global level is produced by local architects
with small firms that, despite varying design
methodologies, advocate a carefully crafted
and well-thought-out relationship between
program and the constraints formed by
climate, site conditions, and materials.
Though explicitly local by orientation, these
architects constitute a global movement due
to their shared ethic of design, which can
be described broadly as one derived frorn
modern architecture. At Atelier Feichang
Jianzhu's Split House near Beijing, for
example, the architect uses rammed earth
not only for its natural thermal insulating

properties but also because rammed earth
has been a part of Chinese architecture in
history. Framed against the backdrop of the
nearby cliffs, it can even be seen through

a Ruskinian ethos as a commentary on the
nature of material and geology. In Adira

& Broid & Rojkind’s F-2 House, volcanic
basalt, a common local material in Mexico
City, is used as a visual and tactile contrast
to the cast-in-place concrete. The aesthetic
is close to that of Marcel Breuer, who helped
create a form of modernism compatible
with the open landscape and the need to
capture the breeze. Both these houses are
therefore high modernist in style—but that
should not be any reason to condemn them.

Designing within the context of “the local”
does not require using or replicating ancient
techniques or falsely aestheticizing local
customs, as is so often done, for example,
by those who reduce the Chinese tradition of
screens to working with metal screens.

The architecture of small firms is
important to the development of architectural
thinking, as small firms can often be more
experimental and open-ended in their
approach. Atelier Bow Wow in Tokyo,
established by Yoshiharu Tsukamoto and
Momoyo Kaijima, made a name for itself
designing unusual structures like the
Mado Building in Tokyo (2006) in the tight
urban environments of Japanese cities.
Anupama Kundoo developed innovative

19.20 Anupama Kundoo’s own house in Auroville, India

design techniques in Auroville, India. In
Barcelona, the mid-19th-century Santa
Caterina Market was remodeled (1997-2005)
by architects Enric Miralles and Benedetta
Tagliabue of EMTB Associates. They added

a wavy wooden roof over the whole building,
practically filling the piazza. The colorful roof
tiles are decorated to emulate the vibrant
colors of the vegetables and fruits in the
market stalls. The structure has brought

new life to the economically depressed

area of Barcelona’s Gothic Quarter. Another
architect, Teddy Cruz, works with the migrant
communities of Los Angeles, as well as the
Mexican communities across the border, to
develop innovative housing solutions.

lrony is particularly remote in today’s
aesthetic and will, sadly, rernain so, given
the penchant for appearing respectful to the
ideologies of tradition and inheritance. For
that reason, we would like to point to a fifth
global phenomenon: architecture produced
locally but by amateurs and architects with
an open sensibility to the potential in ready-
mades—a house in Massachusetts made
completely out of newspaper (including

the furniture), a house in Nevada using
automobile tires, cormplete buildings made
out cardboard tubes, squatter settlements in
Mexico that make use of discarded building
materials, architects who use off-the-shelf
technologies to subvert expectations, and
those who build houses with shipping
containers. This type of architecture burst
onto the scene in the late 1960s with Drop
City in Colorado, which was a center of the
counterculture movement. Since then, it
has expanded into an informal movement
all its own. Sean Godsell’s Future Shack, for
instance, combines a sun-shading device
with a shipping container to design a mass-
produced, relocatable house. The Rural
Studio, developed by Samuel Mockbee
(1944-2001) at Auburn University in
Alabama, is particularly exemplary. Working
with the basic principle that even the poorest
deserve the dignity of good architecture,
Mockbee and his students designed and
built a host of inexpensive and imaginative
structures, advancing the frontier of
architectural practice with such innovations
as sidings made from salvaged automobile
windscreens and license plates.

6

A sixth category of global production revolves
around the question of environment. It was
only recently that mainstream architectural
professionals began to acknowledge the
impact buildings have on the environment.
The production of materials like rubber,
steel, and glass is highly polluting. There are
also issues of how much energy a building
requires for heating and cooling, and the
question of a building's life span. The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency estimates
that architectural debris comprises 25
percent of the nation’s overall waste stream.
This waste often contains materials such as
lead paint, asbestos, fluorescent light bulbs,
light ballasts, treated lumber, and other iterns
that pollute the environment.

The impact of industrialism on the
environment and society began to be
critiqued in the late 19th century. Frederick
Law Olmsted designed parks that were
oases of nature in the urban context, and
Frank Lloyd Wright and others attempted to
integrate the mechanical and the natural.
But it was only with the ecology movement
of the 1960s that environmentalism becarne
a political issue. The slow success of that
movement led to the emergence of the field
of environmental management in the 1980s.
Most of the issues involved law, government,
and industry, and architecture has only
recently begun to find a role within the
debates. Today, some architects specialize in
low-budget design-build projects; others, in
green housing projects, self-sufficient houses,
solar houses, eco-villages, and now, so-called
health houses.

The central term in this movement is
the word sustainability, but it can mean
different things to different groups. In the
context of environmental management, the
issues revolve around questions of politics,
government, law, planning, and banking.
Architectural design, as such, is often left
until the end of the process. But this has
begun to change, and most large firms now
offer a specialization in green architecture.
As a common standard of measurement of
the sustainable character of a building, U.S.
architects now use the Leadership in Energy
and Environmental Design (LEED) Green
Building Rating System.

at

19.21 Commerzbank, Frankfurt, Germany

The LEED system evaluates buildings along
a wide spectrum of criteria but usually favors
more technologically advanced solutions.
Among architects who work with low budgets
is Thomas Herzog in Germany, who combines
conventional methods of environmental
design—high spaces to reduce air-
conditioning costs, for example—with high-
end technology such as specially designed
types of glass and cooling systems. William
McDonough has championed the ideological
imperative that sustainability should have

for the world’s leading corporations. His
headquarters for Volkswagen and his
projected 65,000-square-meter plant, built

on 130 hectares of former rain forest in
Brazil, are just two of his larger commissions.
At the high end of green architecture

is Foster & Partners’ design for the
Commerzbank in Frankfurt, Germany, now
the tallest building in Europe. Interspersed
throughout the tower are sky gardens. There
are now firms that specialize in the greening
of architectural projects, just as there are
firms that specialize in developing green
master plans that look to future needs.

19.22 Cast of pollution from the Louis Vuitton factory in Paris, by Jorge Otero-Pailos

7

A final but increasingly important global
formation centers on the World Heritage
List to preserve buildings and building
environments, created under the auspices
of the United Nations Educational, Scientific

and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) in 1972.

Only forty-odd years old, the list now consists
of more than eight hundred properties in 134
countries. The list is continually expanded,
and even modernist sites like Chandigarh,
India have recently been added to it. The
amount of space worldwide that is now
curated, or under some form of protection,
has increased exponentially since the list’s
inception—entire valleys, villages, and
landscapes are now under protection.

As valuable as this movement for
preservation is, it is the lure of tourist dollars,
as much a need to preserve identity, that
drives the search for heritage. The Dogon
cities of Dienné were inscribed on the
UNESCO Heritage List in 1988, and now a
road is being planned to reach the remote
location. Being “protected” will certainly
be a mixed blessing, given that this is a
living community and not a set of fossilized
ruins. More conventional is the protection of
archaeological sites. More than four hundred
thousand people visit the remote site of

Machu Picchu in Peru every year. A road has
now been built to carry tourists almost to the
top of this remote mountain. In 1994, a new
category was created by UNESCO: “cultural
landscapes” were introduced to broaden the
representation of what UNESCO calls human
heritage, but the delimitations of this term
will become increasingly complex as such
cultural landscapes become increasingly
entangled with politics.
The preservation of the modern
architecture of the world has been
championed by DOCOMOMO, an organization
that started in Europe in 1988 and has
established itself as a major force worldwide.
As most of the world’s modern architecture
is now at least half a century old, it is
increasingly under threat of destruction.
Through publications, awards, conferences,
and local activism, DOCOMOMO’s regional
chapters have sought to make the case
that modern architecture is as deserving of
preservation as the pre-modern architecture
of the world.

Preservation is a global force in the
architectural community today. While it
is largely devoted to fighting imminent
destruction, a more critical approach to
thinking about preservation can be found

in the work of people like Jorge Otero-
Pailos, who made the casting of pollution
into an interrogation of the conventions of
preservation practice.

Global heritage is most certainly a form of
global intermixing. Whether that intermixing
is to be understood as a form of cultural
liberation from the hegemony of the local or
as cultural contamination by the hegemony
of the global is a question that can only be
resolved in each particular situation.

In the last decade, architectural educators
have been asking for a textbook that looks
beyond the Eurocentric approaches of the
past. Ironically, recent decades have also
seen the rising specter of nationalism, which
has become a global phenomenon in its
own right as countries seek to establish their
credentials in global historical narratives. This
new nationalism, though it has played some
role in awakening an awareness about local
realities, has had, and continues to have, a
dampening effect on learning about what lies
over the horizon. The tension between the
global and the national is the fundamental
paradox of our age.


Today we live in a world that is significantly
more static than in centuries before—
boundaries are controlled by international
law and political alliances, UNESCO protects
architectural and urban marvels of the
past, and local and national regulations
govern what can and cannot be built. We
control our actions for the sake of global
tranquility. But inequities and injustices in
the location of boundaries persist, and so,
too, do the tensions that result from inward-
looking ideologies. In this environment,
the maxim “know your neighbor” is all the
more important but at the same time all the
more elusive, since we can all, no matter
our country of origin, easily revel in our
singularity—in the presumed uniqueness of
our history.
This is something we need to guard
against. A global history is not the history of
all the modern nations added up like beads
on an abacus, but neither is it a history that
assumes a universal aspect to mankind and
its productions. For a global history to be
more than just dates and facts, it has to be
rooted in the principle that each of us learns
how he or she is indeed different in the eyes
of others.

19.23 Cast of pollution from Trajan’s Column at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London,
by Jorge Otero-Pailos
